11818 S2684 24497152 27735
❧ Our trust against trouble. Very expedient for the time, composed for our better consolation, and consideration of these crosses of warre, lately attempted, and still intended a∣gainst vs. With diuers speciall prayers and Meditations, very requisite to be remembred of vs, be∣fore, in and after the time of our trouble. By Charles Gybbon. 2. Esdras. 16, 15. ¶ Beholde famine, plague, trouble, and anguishe, are sent as scourges for amendement. Séene and allowed. At London, Printed by Iohn Charlewood, dwel∣ling in Barbican at the signe of the halfe Eagle and the Key, and are there to be solde. 1589.
To the right worship∣full Sir Iohn Heigham Knight, long life and happy daies. THe proofe of your worships good∣will, hath made me presume to present these my paines vnder your fauourable pro∣tection: not doubting, but as your worship is zealous in Religion, conformable in li∣uing, and a supporter of godly enterprises, so you will become a Patron to any good pro∣ceedings. Thus beeing lothe to trouble your patience with any prolixius or tedious dis∣course not omitting my humble duetie, I commit your worship to the tuition of the Almightie. Your worships to commaund. Charles Gibbon.
❧ To the courteous and Christian Reader. IF euery Christian well considereth the course of his life, he shall finde it nothing els but a continuall warre, for the Spirite hath three carnall enemies which daily incounter with it, the flesh world & deuill, what more filthy then the fruites of the flesh. Rom. 8.13If ye liue after the flesh yee shall die what more wretched then the worke of the world. 1. Ioh. 5, 19The whole worlde lyeth in wicked¦nesse, what more detestable then the deedes of the deuill. 1. Pet, 5, 8,As a roring Lyon hee goeth about seeking whom he may deuoure. Now if we will expell these enemies we must vse these remedies. Rom. 8, 13If wee mortifie the deedes of the bo∣die we shall liue. 1, Ioh. 5.5If we beleeue that Iesus is the sonne of God, we shal ouercome this world Iam. 4.7If we resist the deuil he wil flie frō vs.
And no doubt these externall troubles  war (wherewith we were lately visi∣) were sent of God for our good, to tifie vs in this spiritual fight. For he ing the aduersaries readye to pre∣le, did (by the same scourge) put vs  mind of his indignation, because we ginne to faint in so good a fight. We ue liued a long time in peace (the ord be praised for it and still prolong  but wee haue abused this blessing,Psal. 30.6 d saide in our prosperitie (as Dauid d) we shoulde not be mooued. Our ts haue lulled vs a sleepe in security, e fleshe hath followed all sensualitie, e worlde hath bewitched vs with eere vanitie, and the deuill hath nus∣d vs in iniquitie. Insomuch that it as high time for the Lorde to touche  with these troubles, least we had pe∣hed in our sinnes, and although hee th begunne very mildlie, in hope of r conuersion, we may be assured hee ll proceede to punishe vs more ex∣eamelie, if there be no reformation. Therfore now let vs learne to amend
our liues for feare of a further afflicti∣on. Let vs heare the word of God with more dilligence, and followe it in our life with more obedience, and though we liue in the flesh,2. Cor, 10, 3. let vs not warre af∣ter the flesh. Though wee are in the world,1. Cor. 7.31 let vs vse it as though we vsed it not.Ephe. 4.27. Though the deuill dailie followe vs, let vs not giue place to him. Thus by resisting euill, wee shall grow in grace, and so by the meanes of our amendment, we shall pacifie the vvrath of God, and consequentlie ap∣pease the furie of our foes, which GOD graunt. Amen. Yours in the Lord, Charles Gibbon of Bury S. Edmond.
¶ A prayer for the good protection of our gracious Queene and Realme. ETernall good and gracious God, stretch forth thy sauing hand: Let not our sins prouoke thy wrath, but looke vpon this land. In thee we doo repose our trust, as one that neuer faile, Subuert both farre and fawning foes, they neuer may preuaile. Alas what are we of our selues and want thee on our side, But euen as chaffe against the wind, not able to abide. Extend therefore thy heauenly helpe, and though there be but ten, They shall affright ten thousand foes, if thou doo say Amen. Haue mercy on vs all O Lord, For Christ our Sauiours sake Accept our prayers in good part, and present pittie take.
Remember our good soueraigne Prince, thine owne annointed deere, Expell her foes, increase her freends, no hurt may happen heere. Giue to her subiects faithfull harts, to loue her as they ought, In any wise not to rebell, or thinke a wicked thought. Not once to suffer or consent to harme her anie way, As we by duetie all are bound, because she is our stay.
✿ An other godly Prayer verie good and necessarie to be vsed in these troublesome dayes. O Eternall & euerliuing Lord, although we thy wretches (by reason of our ma∣nifold sinnes and offences) are vnworthy to cry or call vpon thee for comfort, in these thy crosses of tribulations come vppon vs: yet seeing (O Lord) thou hast willed vs in our trouble to call vppon thee,Psal. 50.15 and thou wylt heare vs: and in the burden of our sins to come vnto thee, and thou wilt ease vs,Math. 11.28 wee presume to prostrate our humble prayers be¦fore the throne of thy maiestie, beseeching thee of thy rich mercy in Christ, to forgyue our sinnes, by thy daily renuing spirite, to a∣mend our liues, and by thy fauourable pro∣tection, to defende vs in these our troubles, that wee may not bee made a pray vnto the lust of our enemies, wherby we may be made a reproch among those prophane people, and thereby they may triumphe against thee in our ouerthrow, and say. Where is now their God. Confound and scatter (O Lord) these our enemies, in their impious enterprises and proceedings,Gen, 11, 8 as thou diddest those presumptuous people at Babell. Infolde them in the folly of theyr filthy deuises, as thou diddest to Ahithophell.2. Sa. 17.23 Infeeble theyr force, and smite them with thy Angell, as
thou didst the power of Saneherib In theyr terrible and desperat attempts,2. Re. 19.35 let them bee drowned, as was Pharaoh. Intrap & ouer∣take them in their treasons,Exo. 14.16 as thou diddest Absalom. Turne them (if any be to bee con∣uerted) as thou diddest Manasses,2. Sam. 15 7 otherwise let them feele their due punishment, as did Corah and the rest of his conspiratours.Num. 16.31 So we thy people and shéepe of thy pasture, shall prayse thee for euer, and from generation to generation, wee will sette foorth thy prayse. Heare vs O mercifull Father, for Iesus Christes sake, our onely Mediator and ad∣uocate. Amen.
A Shielde for a Soul∣diour. Selected out of the Scriptures, con∣tayning very necessarye Meditations, and prayers to be vsed in the time of trouble. LOrd it is nothing with thée to helpe with many or with no power.2. Ch, 14.11 Help vs O Lord our God, for we rest on thée, and in thy name are wee come against thys multitude. O Lorde thou art our God, let not man preuaile against thée. O our God wilt thou not iudge them,2. Ch. 20.12 for there is no strength in vs to stande before this great multitude ye commeth against vs, neither doo we know what to doo, but our eyes are toward thée. In God doo I trust, I will not bee a∣fraid what man can doo vnto mée.Psal. 56.11. O Lord our God, I beseeche thee saue thou vs out of our enemies hand,2. Re. 19.19. that
all the kingdomes of the earth may know yt thou O Lord art onely God. Psal, 25, 1, 2,Vnto thée O Lorde, lift I vppe my soule, my God I trust in thée, let mee not be confounded, let not mine ene∣mies reioyce ouer mée. Psal. 21.13Be yu exalted O lord in thy strength, so shall wee sing and praise thy power. Psa. 22.4.5Our fathers trusted in thée, they tru∣sted and thou didst deliuer them. They called vpon thée & were deliuered, they trusted in thee & were not confounded. Psa. 25.17.18.19.The sorrowes of my hart are inlar∣ged, draw me out of my troubles, looke vpon my affliction, and my trauel, and forgiue all my sins. Beholde mine ene∣mies for they are many, and they hate me with carnall hatred. Psal. 30.10Heare O Lord and haue mercie vp∣on me, Lord be thou mine helper. Psal. 27.12Giue me not vnto the lust of my ad∣uersaries. Psa. 31.15.16My times are in thy hande, deliuer me from the hands of my enemies, and from thē that persecute me, make thy
face to shine vpon thy Seruant, and saue me through thy mercie. Our soule waiteth for ye Lord,Psal. 33.20. for hee is our help & our shielde, let thy mercie O lord be vpon vs, as we trust in thee. Plead thou my cause O lord with thē that striue with me,Psal. 35.1.2 fight thou against them that fight against me. Laie hande upon the shield and buckler and stande up for my help. Let not them that are mine enemies uniustlie triumph ouer me.Psal. 35.19 Let not them say in their harts,Psa. 35.25 O our soule reioyce, neither let them saie we haue deuoured him. Be mercifull vnto me O GOD,Psa. 56.1.2 for man wold swallow me vp, he fighteth continuallie and vexeth me. Mine enemies would daily swallow me vp, for manie fight against mee O thou most high. Haue mercy vppon me O God,Psal. 57.1 haue mercy vpō me, for my soule trusteth in thée, & in the shadow of thy wings will I trust till these afflictions ouerpasse.
Psa. 60.11.Giue vs helpe against trouble, for vain is the help of man. Through God we shall doo valiantly, for he shal tread down our enemies. Psa. 70.1.2O Lord hast thee to deliuer me, make hast to help me O lord. Let thē be con∣founded & put to shame that séeke my soule, let them be turned backwarde and put to rebuke that desire my hurt. Help vs O God of our saluation, for the glory of thy name and deliuer vs, and bée merciful vnto our sins for thy names sake. Psal 36.1.2. Psa. 79.6.9.Powre out thy wrath vpon the hea∣then that haue not known thée, and vp∣pon the kingdoms that haue not called vpon thy name. So we thy people and shéepe of thy pasture shall praise thee for euer, & from generation to genera∣tion we will set forth thy praise. Psa. 86.1, 2Incline thine eare O lord and heare me for I am poore and néedy. Preserue thou my soule for I am mercifull, my God saue thy seruant that trusteth in thée. Be merciful vnto me O God, for
I cry vpon thee continually. Reioyce the soule of thy seruaunt,Psa. 86, 4, 5 6, 17. for vnto thée O lord doo I lift vp my soule. For thou Lord art good and merciful, and of great kindnes vnto all thē that call vpon thée. Giue eare Lorde vnto my prayer, and harken to the voice of my supplication. Shewe a token of thy goodnes to∣ward me, yt they which hate mee, may sée it, and be ashamed, because thou O Lord hast holpen and comforted me. O Lord heare my prayer and let my cry come vnto thee.Psa. 102.1, 2 Hide not thy face from me in the time of my trouble, in∣cline thine eares vnto me, when I call make hast to heare me. Helpe me O Lord my God,Psal. 109, 26, 27. saue mée according to thy mercie. And they shal knowe that this is thy hande, and that thou O Lord hast doone it. Our help is in the name of the Lord which hath made heauen and earth.Psa. 124, 8. Deliuer me O Lord from mine ene∣mies for I hide me with thee.Psal. 143.
Psal. 144.11 12.And for thy mercie slay mine ene∣mies, & destroy all them that oppresse my soule, for I am thy seruant. Rescue mee and deliuer me from the hands of Strangers, whose mouth tal∣keth vanitie, and their right hande is a right hand of falshood. That our Sons may be as the plants growing vppe in their youth, and our Daughters as the corner stones, grauen after the simili∣tude of a Pallace. Psal. 144.13.14, 15That our corners may be ful, aboun∣ding with diuers sortes, and that our sheepe may bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our streets. That our Oxen may be strong to la∣bour, that there be no inuasion, nor go∣ing out, nor crying in our streetes. Blessed are the people that be so, yea blessed are the people whose God is the Lorde.
❧ Our trust against trouble. ¶ That vvee may the more patientlie, thankfully, and ioyfully carry & ouercome the crosse of tribulation & trouble. Let vs first of all consider who is the Author of it. 1. It is God that sendeth warre. AND that is approoued vnto vs in these words. Beholde nowe for I, I am he, and there is no Gods with me,Deu. 32.39 I kill and I giue life, I wounde & I make whole, neither is there any that can de∣liuer out of my hand. The Isralites con∣fessed all their afflictions to come from God. Come (say they) let vs returne to the Lord:Hosea, 6, 1 for he hath spoyled and hee will heale vs, he hath wounded vs, & he will bind vs vp. &c. So that we may learne by this, two profitable instructions. 1. Albeit the wicked doo make war, wée must not suppose they doo it of thē∣selues, for God doth after a sort vse and
send them as his seruaunts, (and so ve∣rie fitly calleth them) because hee ma∣keth them to serue him by constraint, and that which they doo of malice, hee turneth to his honor and glory, as hee did by Nebuchadnezer, who when he besieged Ierusalem, hee did it not of hys own accorde, for the Lorde had said be∣fore, I will sende Nebuchadnezer my Seruaunt.Iere, 25, 9 &c. 2. Although our enemies attempt to trouble vs, yet this is our assurance, they can procéede no further then God will permit or appoint them, because they are but as instruments to exe∣cute his indignation.Esay, 10, 5, Sith it is God that sendeth warre, we are next to consider wherfore or for what cause hee dooth commonly vse to send it, for he neuer sendeth his visita∣tion in vaine. 2 Warre is sent as a scourge for sinne. And that may appeare vnto vs by this sentence.Psal. 89, 31, If they breake my statutes & keepe not my commaundements, then
will I visit their transgression with the d & their iniquitie with strokes. And may further prooued to vs in ese places. Leu. 26, verse, 17 Deut. 28, verse, 20, 22 2, Chro. 20, verse, 9 The Iewes attributed all their afflic∣ons to their sinnes.Baru. 2, 5, 6 The sins which so prouoke the Lord punish vs, no doubt are these amōgst anie other. use of his worde. ontempt of his Minist. ouetousnes. tortion. Pryde. Whoredome. Drunkennes, and such like. These and such  sins raigned in Israell, Ierusalem, and Iudah. For which sins the Lord did send his worde amongst them, as you may ad at large, in Esay. 28. Eze. 22. Iere. 5. So that wee may obserue in this, bee speciall considerations. That we must not take these trou∣s to come of course, but acknowledg  sins to be the cause, and therby we all perceiue that God by sending thē, th séeke nothing but our good, premo∣hing vs gently, least wee perrish in
our sin securely.2, Esd. 16, 15 Behold famine, plague trouble, and anguish, are sent as scour∣ges for amendement.Pro, 3, 12, For whom God scourgeth he loueth. 2. That if we shew an vnfained con∣fession, and make a true and harty con∣trition for our sins, leading our liues in better obedience of the worde of God, these troubles shalbe taken away from vs. For ye Lorde hath said to those that doo so,Leu, 26.6, 7 I wil send peace in your land, yee shall sleepe & none shall make you a∣fraid, & the sword shal not goe throg your land, yee shal chase your enemies▪ and they shall fall before you vpon the sword, & fiue of you shal chase an hun∣dred, & an hundred of you shal put ten thousand to flight, & your enemy shal fal before you vpon the sword. For th Lord taketh no pleasure in the destruc∣tion of sinners,2, Chr, 12, 12 Ezek, 18, 32 but in their conuersion 3. That if wee still perseuere in ou sins without repentaunce (making  account of this milde correction latel sent vs)Rom, 2, 5 we shall not onelie heape vnt
our selues wrathe against the daie of dgment, but also in this life,Leu, 26, 16 Nehe, 9, 28 procure he Lorde to punishe vs seauen times more according to our sins, and make im giue vs ouer vnto the lust of our e∣emies. (which God defend.) 3. How we ought to remedy and defend these afflictions. In that they come of God and not of an, wee may learne thrée singuler lessons. 1. That we must not altogether de∣ende vppon the ordinary and lawfull meanes as Men, Munition, Worldlie ower and Pollicie, for that is abhomi∣ation in the sight of God, as may ap∣peare by that which is pronounced a∣gainst the Isralites, Woe vnto thē that goe downe into Egipt for helpe,Esay, 31, 1, & stay vpon Horsses & trust in Charrets, be∣cause they are many, & in horsemē be∣cause they are very strong, but they ooke not vnto the holy one of Israell, nor seeke vnto the Lorde. And after∣ward there is produced a reason to re∣prooue
them. The Egiptians are men & not gods,Esay, 31, 3, & their horses fleshe and not spirit, & when the lord shal stretch out his hand, the helper shall fall, & he that is holpen shall fal, and they shal altoge∣ther faile. And ye Prophet Ieremie saith. Cursed be the man that trusteth in mā,Iere, 17, 5 and maketh flesh his arme, and with∣draweth his hart from the Lord.Iudg, 20, 20. The same Isralites trusting in their strength were discomfited by the Beniamites, for it is written.1, Sam, 2, 9 In his owne might shall no man be strong. 2. That as wee must not neglect the instrumental & lawful remedy to with stand the aduersary. So we ought espe∣cially to respecte the efficient cause, (which is God) who sendeth ye enemie, remembring what the Psalmist saith. Blessed is the man that maketh the lord his trust,Psal, 40, 41 Iere, 17, 17 for God can aswel without as with weapon, terrifie & destroy the e∣nemy.2, Chr, 14, 11. Abiiah making war against Ie∣roboam, got the victory not altogether with the multitude of men. But it is
there said, hee did the rather preuaile, ecause he and his staied vpon ye Lorde od of their fathers.2, Chr, 13, 18 Dauid fighting a∣inst Goliah, ye huge Giant, although e did not contemne the Armour King aul put vpon him, yet (because he could ot away withal) hee did not weare it. Notwithstanding, betaking himself to s sling, and committing his trust in God, hée ouercame his enemie, because he Lord will haue his power knowne  preuaile. Assuring vs thereby,1, Sam, 17 51, 54, that  wee fight in faith vnder his defence, e will neuer faile vs. 3. That we must both fight with our ndes and pray with our harts toge∣her, following the good example of our refathers in their afflictions.1, Sam, 7, 8, 9 The Children of Israell did not onelie fight gainst ye Philistims, but requested Sa∣muell (that notable Prophet) to cry vn∣o the Lord for them.2, Ch, 20, 12, Iehoshaphat fight∣ng against his enemies, did withstand with weapon & prostrate his Prayer. Asa warring against the Ethiopians;2, Ch, 14, 11 did
both resist with weapon, and persist in prayer, for as we must not omitte the lawful ordinaunce (God hath appoin∣ted) to defend vs. So we must commit our selues to him, who giueth the suc∣cesse, & submit both to his protection. 4. Howe wee may take comfort in these crosses of trouble. Let vs but consider what moueth the enemy to intermeddle with vs. Surely nothing els but sinister occa∣sions as some of these ensuing. Pretending, 1. To hurt our soueraigne Queene the Lordes annointed. 2. To hinder the free passage of Gods word amongst vs. 3. To destroye the little flocke of Gods folde in this land. 4. To sette abroche all superstition and abhomination. No doubt as their intent is euill, so their successe will be such. Exo, 14, 16Paraoh (that tiranicall rebellor) ma∣king warre against the Isralites (that
chosen people of GOD) could not pre∣uaile,2, Ch. 20, 22 for the Lord drowned him and al his hoste in the Sea. The Moabites & Amonites (that per∣uerse & wretched people) making war against Iehoshaphat ye good King of Iu∣dah) they were so far from ouercōming that one enemy did helpe to destroy an other of his aduersaries. Sanaherib that great blasphemer ma∣king war against Hezekiah that godlie Prince,2, Re, 19, 35. had so good successe in his enter¦prise, yt the Angel of the Lord went out and in one night smote in the Campe, an hundred, fourescore and fiue thou∣sand of his men. Zerah of Ethiopia,2, Chr, 14 12, 13, making warre a∣gainst King Asa, was so farre from gi∣uing the ouerthrow, yt he and his were enforced to flie, & receiue the foyle. Thus we may sée by these examples that although God will sometime pu∣nish his children for their sins, by suffe∣ring the nenemy to assault them, yet hee will not permit the enemy to pre∣uaile
ouer his people, so they repēt and be sory for their sins, & repose their trust in their troubles vnder hys defence. Let vs not be terrified because of the multitude of men, but let vs remēber that notable saying of Asa in his trou∣ble,2, Ch, 14, 11 Lorde it is nothing with thee to help with many or with no power. For no doubt we may say of our enemy (as Hezekiah did of Sancherib, With him is an arme of flesh, but with vs is the lord our God, for to helpe vs and to fight our battels. Let vs pray without dispaire, consi∣dering what the Lord hath said.Psal. 50, 15 Call vpon mee in the time of trouble, and I will heare thee.Exo, 17, 11 When Moyses lyfted vp his hand, Israell preuailed, but whē he let downe his hand, the Amalekites preuailed, teaching vs thereby to pro∣strate and perseuere in our prayers, without fainting, for the Lorde is nigh to all those that call vpon him in fayth.Psal, 145, 18, 5. How we ought to behaue our selues af∣ter troubles for the good successe is sent vs.
We must offer to God the Sacrifice of prayse and thanksgiuing. As the Lorde hath promised in our troubles to heare & helpe vs, so he hath said. Thou shalt praise me. For of him,Psal, 50, 15 Rom, 11, 36, through him & for him are all things, to him be glory. Least if we forgette or neglect to bee thankfull to him for his benefits, he doth further afflict vs. For it is said of Hezekiah, (after God had wonderfully deliuered him from hys enemies) that he did not render accor∣ding to ye reward bestowed vpon him, for his hart was lift vp,2, Ch, 32, 25 and therefore the wrathe of God came against him vpon Iudah and Ierusalem. Therfore that we may the more ef∣fectually offer our prayses to God, let vs obserue two things. 1. Come∣moration. Of the opposite daunger of our enemie with our safe de∣liuerie. 2. Conside∣ration. Of our vnwoorthy me∣rites, with Gods wonder∣full mercie. In so dooing we shall find Gods good∣nes
so superaboundant, and our deserts so repugnaunt, that euery one of vs, in the end of our troubles, shall be enfor∣sed to say as Dauid did,Psalm. 116.12, 13, 17 What shall I render vnto the Lorde for all his bene∣fites towards mee? I will take the Cup of saluation and call vppon the name of the Lord. I will offer to him a sacrifice of prayse. Gen, 14, 19Melchizedeck gaue thanks for A∣brahams victory. Exo, 15, 1, 2Moyses and the Isralites song prayses for their deliueraunce. Iudg, 5, 1, 2So did Deborah, Barak and dyuers others. For if the Lorde smelled a sauour of rest at the burnt offering of Noah, how acceptable wil our praises be, that pro∣céede from a contrite hart, sith ye Lorde himselfe saith:Psal, 50, 23 Hee that offereth mee prayse shall glorifie me.
A tryumphe after trouble. Contayning a prayse or thankes∣giuing, fit for euery Christian to offer and confesse to God, for the benefite of their deliuerance. Collected out of the Scriptures. I Will magnifie thée O Lorde,Psal, 30, 1 for thou hast exalted mee, and hast not made my foes to reioyce ouer me. By this O Lord I knowe that thou fauourest me,Psal, 41, 11, because my enemy doth not tryumphe against me. Thou hast turned my mourning in∣to ioy,Psal, 30, 11 thou hast loosed my sacke & gyr∣ded me with gladnes. Therefore shall my tongue prayse thée, and not cease: O Lorde my God I will giue thankes vnto thée for euer. I will alwaies giue thanks vnto the Lord,Psalm, 34 1, 2, 3, 4 his praise shall bee in my mouth continually, my soule shall glory in the
Lord, the humble shall heare it and be glad. Praise ye the Lord with me and let vs magnifie his name together. I sought the Lord and he heard me, yea he deliuered mee out of all my feare. Psalm, 44, 5 6, 7, 8,Through thée haue we thrust backe our aduersaries, by thy name haue wée troden downe them that rose vppe a∣gainst vs, for I do not trust in my bow neither can my sword saue mee. But thou hast saued vs from our aduersa∣ries, and hast put them to confusiō that hate vs.Psal. 56, 12 Therfore will we praise God continually, and wil confesse his name for euer. Thy vowes are vpon me O GOD, I will render praise vnto thée. Psal, 59, 16,I will sing of thy power and praise thy mercy in the morning, for thou hast beene my defence and refuge in the day of my trouble. Psal, 63, 5, 6My soule shall be satis-fied as wyth marowe & fatnes, and my mouth shall praise thée with ioyful lips, when I re∣member thée on my bed, and when I
think vpon thee in the night watches, because yu hast béene my helper, there∣fore vnder the shadowe of thy winges will I reioyce. I loue the Lorde because hee hath heard my voice and my prayers.Psalm. 116 1, 17, 18, I wil ffer to thée a sacrifice of praise & wyll call vpon the name of the Lord. I wyll ay my vowes vnto the lord, euen now n the presence of all his people. The Lord is my strength and song,Psal, 118, 14, for he hath béene my deliueraunce. Blessed bee the Lorde my strength,Psa, 144, 1, 2 which teacheth my hands to fight, and my fingers to battell, he is my goodnes and my fortresse my Towre & my de∣liuerer, my shield and in him I trust. If the Lord had not béene on our side when men rose vp against vs,Psal, 123, 1, 2 they had then swallowed vs vp quicke, when their wrath was kindled against vs. Praysed bee the Lorde which hath not giuen vs,Psal, 124, 6 as a praye vnto theyr eeth. Amen. FINIS.
