11917 S109863 99845506 10411
¶ A glasse for hous∣holders, wherin thei maye se, bothe howe to rule theim selfes & ordre their hous∣holde ve∣rye Godly and fruytfull. ❧ LONDINI. ❧ In officina Richardi Graftoni. 1542. Cum priuilegio ad impri∣mendum solum.
To the reader. IN this small treatyse is set foorth moste wholsome councell, fyrste beyng a young man & vnmaried howe that ye should behaue your selfe, after that beyng a maried manne and an housholder, howe ye shoulde bothe rule youre selfe and ordre your houstolde, with also an exhortaciō and councell what trade and sorte your occupyeng should bee, y• is to say, y• it may be specially for y• cōmē wealth of the realme that ye are of, and also benefi∣cial and profitable to your selfe, with many other good and wholsome lessone and coun¦selles, whiche whosoeuer folowe, shall not only liue here a lyfe profitable both for hym selfe and all other menne, but also after this life shalbe rewarded with that croune and blisse, that God the father for Christ his sonnes sake hath promysed to theim that are his. *
A glasse for housholders. MY entierly beloued the begynnyng of wysedom is ye loue and feare God, for it causeth a manne to withdrawe hym self from doo∣yng eiuill & maketh hym to dooe good, it is not ynough (my frēde) for to forbeare euil dooinges, but you and I and euery Christyan ought to dooe good, that is to saie perfightly to beleue in God, to cō∣mit our selfes wholy vnto hym, & to thynke verely then that he will not forsake vs but tenderly will prouide for vs all thynges neces∣sary for this life, and will defende vs in all aduersities, he will geue vs strength to resist his aduersa∣ries and oures in his cause, & be∣sides this he wyll doubtles make vs ryghteouse, good, and blessed
he will remitte and forgeue our sinnes, he will make vs the heires of his kyngdom and geue vs the life euerlastyng. And all these he wyll dooe of his mere goodnesse, of his mere grace and mercy, tho∣rowe Iesus Christ our Lord our redemer and sauiour, by y• woorke of the holy goste. And that for be∣cause we beleue in hym, because we be delighted in his lawes and loue his woorde. And because we dooe confesse our selues to be vn∣pure and of a corrupte nature, in∣fyrme, feble and weake, & of our selues apte to do nothyng which is good in his sight, but alwayes readye to fall into eternal damp∣nacion, full of vayne glorye and ypocrisie, vile, wretched, ignoraūt and inconstaunte. And acknowe∣ledgyng so his goodnesse, yt with∣out
hym we coulde not somuche as to thynke one good thought, wherfore, whatsoeuer good tho∣ught commeth into our myndes, & therafter we speake or woorke it commeth of hym, wherfore we are churlishe and vnkynde yf we geue not alwayes thankes and prayses therfore to hym, whyche thynge of dutie we ought to dooe sithe that all oure good woorkes come of hym, and except thei cam of hym, thei were not good. Let vs then of, and vpon faythe in hym, & onely to glorifie him, dooe good dedes with suche goodes & ryches as he hath geuē vs, whe∣ther they bee inwarde riches or outwarde, that is, ghostely dedes of mercye or bodelye. And because you ought to make a great re∣conyng to God, for these worldly thynges
shalbe when the same shal receyue you agayn when ye shall die. And thynke that y• tyme therof might be aswell this daye as to morowe or the nexte daye. Remembre that it is harde for a riche man to bee a good mā, because y• truthe saith that it is more easyer for a Camel to crepe through the eye of a ne∣dle, then for a ryche man to entre into the kyngdome of heauen. And playnly, withoute excepcion true it is, y• saynt Iherome sayeth whiche sayeth, that a richeman is eyther vniust hymselfe, or ye heire of an vniuste man. Greate riches can neyther be eyther gottē or els kepte without synne. Ye muste re∣mēbre & thinke, of how muche bet¦ter ryches thei do robbe you. For they pull away from you the loue of God. Therfore couetousnes is
called ydolatrye of Paule. And Christe sayeth you cannot serue God and Mammon. Mammon is y• deuel, which tēpteth & styreth to coueteousnesse. Therefore yf you haue worldlye goodes, serue theim not, let not them haue your mynde vndre their subiecciō. But be you a maister ouer theim. And remembre y• you ought to bee the seruaūt of God, yt is as a seruaūt to vse these riches to y• glorie and prayse of God the geuer, leaste you be cōdempned of hym as an euel seruaunt, not regardyng his maisters will & pleasure. Thynke that whosoeuer be tāgeled muche with this world or worldly riches hateth the veraye smell and taste of vertue. And whosoeuer setteth his mynde vpon golde, and hath his affeccion and desire therunto
hateth all honest sciēces, his herte shall neuer be quieted with it, but alwayes in trouble, vpon hope to get, or feare to lese. A couetouse persone cannot be satisfyed with golde. The herte of man is so ex∣cellente a thing, that all the trea∣sures in the worlde cannot fulfill it. (I meane the desires of y• herte) he only that made it, maye fulfyll and satisfye it & none other thing And he desireth nothinge elles of man, but that he may dwel in his herte. And where as Mammon is, there wyll not he dwell. Therfore yf you will receiue this gifte, expel Mammon, and thrust hym oute of dores. For Christe hathe with no vice lesse acquayn∣taunce (thoughe he loue none at all) then with couetise, wherfore if you studye to please Christe, and
come into his fauoure, you muste geue vp Mammon, and banishe hym oute of the coastes of youre breste. For Christ and Mammon dwelleth not in one and the same place. Bewise therfore howe you set youre hert to rychesse, certain∣ly yf you set youre herte to theim, you shall euer be poore and voyd of trewe rychesse. He that coue∣teth nothyng, is riche and hathe ynoughe. Yf you haue worldly goodes, know of whom you haue receiued theim. And to the geuer be not vnkinde, but haue y• good∣des to do good, and to be good wt theim. Let not theim make you worse by īordinate loue. Though you had theim not, yet moughte you do good. For doing good cō∣sisteth in ye affeccion of y• mind. As yf you had nothing to helpe your
christen brother, but a cup of cold water. Or if you haue not yt, yet hauyng a piteful and a mercyful mynde, with a good wyll to geue yf you had it, it shalbe acceptable afore God. If it be moued of chry¦sten loue, vpō ye necessitee, pouerte infirmytee, calamitee, & wretched¦nesse, & the aduersyte of my neigh¦bour. And in these thynges, accor¦ding to my power I do helpe him as I wolde that he shoulde helpe me yf I were in lyke condicyon, (as sayth saincte Paule.) Let vsGala. vi. worke good to all personnes, but specially vnto them that be of the housholde of faith. And lyke∣wyse, saincte Paule to Timothe.1. Timo. vi. Charge the ryche menne of this worlde to doo good workes, that they maye be ryche in goodnesse, that thei may gladly reparte their
goodes, that they be curteouse & lyberall. Nowe then doyng good consy∣stethDooyng good, con¦sisteth in ii. thynges. in two thynges. The one yt with lyuyng well and verteously you dooe good to your selfe. And the other to the poore, with repar∣tyng your substaūce with a good will vnto theim. Also yt they lacke not your good counsayl whē you maye helpe theim therwith. This first maner of doyng good, euery man maye haue and exercyse. For euery man that wyll desyre, seke or aske the grace of God maye lyue well and vertuously. The se∣conde onely vse they, to whom is geuen by God a charytable mynde to gather worldelye sub∣staunce. And these persons inces∣santely or contynually wyth thys mynde vseth this doyng good as
longe as god sendeth theim wher with, thinking that they haue the goodes of hym therfore, that is, that they theim selues shuld take therof to satisfye their necessite or nede, and the reste to imparte to the poore and nedy. And by this they doo trewely worshippe God, and the Images of God, and the lykenesse of God is signed vpon theim that thus dooe. For the per¦sone that hathe a full desire to fo∣lowe goodly counsailes in y• scrip¦ture, hath not only the Image of God printed in his soule, but also the lykenesse of God, other deed Images hath nothing commune with these Images but onely the shadowe, wherfore they might be called better tokens or signes of remembraunce. Yf we doo thus vpon liuely faith
we do not only quicken the Ima∣ges of God: but we oure selues, throughe this godly desyre, do re∣present the similytude or likenesse of God. To helpe other for Chri∣stes loue in their nedes, infirmy∣tees, wretchednesse, or to haue a prompte wyll and desyre to helpe are good dedes and godlye. Wherfore the doers of suche, can not but be godlye and holye, and to bee shorte, lyke vnto Christe, which is God. This my beloued, I praye you beare in mynde that you do good vnto other with youre worldely substaunce, and counsayle. And not onely that, but haue a wyll and a feruente desyre to profyte, many moo then you be able, with worde and dede. This aboue al thinges I exhorte
you to folowe, that you firste pro∣fyte your selfe, with the firste ma∣ner of doing good, that is to liue well and vertuously, as it becom∣meth euery chrysten manne. And God sēdyng wherwith, you shuld vse the seconde maner of doynge good, and that you put it in dai∣ly experience. And so doyng, you your selfe shal not only be sure to haue of God euerlastyng lyfe for your rewarde: but in this life also you maye bee assured (if you sted∣fastly beleue) not to lacke suche thinges as are necessary for this presente lyfe. And besydes this, with this your good conuersacy∣on, you shall purchase a sure in∣herytaunce for youre chyldren. For God neuer suffereth the sede of the iuste personne, for lacke to seke his breade.
For because this transitorie or temporal goodes are corruptible & maye decaye, it is to be thought that feare dothe possesse those per¦sones whiche haue suche in mode∣rate loue towardes theim, that they cannot wel vse theim. Wher¦fore to auoyde this peryll, yf God sende you riches, neuer sette your mynde or affection on theim. But by & by, with the same liberalite that God sendeth theim, begyn, begynne I saye and feare not of lacke, auenture vpon it to dispose and to vse theim well. Be not like the toade, whiche hath nothynge els vnder hym but earth, and yet he frayeth to spende of it, least the earth would fayle hym. Thus I saye, not to dissuade you from laboure to gette goodes by good wayes and all honest diligence, &
by all lawful meanes, for the vice of coueteousnesse standeth not in a measurable and honeste desyre to gette and procure for worldlye thinges, for yf a manne haue this desyre wythoute inordinate loue towardes hym selfe, or vniustelye to prouoke hys kynsfolkes or frendes, but desyreth to vse theim well to the glorye of God as is aboue sayde, it is not reprouable. But the roote and croppe of co∣ueteousnesse stādeth in the harde retencion or kepynge of worldlye goodes, and possessynge theim, not to reparte with others, nor to take the good vse of theim, tho∣roughe a disordinate loue towar∣des theim. Wherfore, not settyng youre affectionate loue or delyte vpon ryches, ye maye laboure to gette riches and haue theim. But
see that they haue not you. Pro∣cure to gette theim wyth the loue and feare ot God. And then I doubte not, but ye wyll so vse theim (hauynge a loue to God a boue ryches,) that when pitee or godlye loue shall moue you, ye wyll not stycke, doubte nor, feare to vse of youre goodes to honour God. Suche as laboure to gette goodes after this maner awyse, will not spende theim euill. To desyre to gette and haue goodes, maye not be euell, yf so be you de∣syre, more feruently the vertue of lyberalytee or contempte of theim (as touchyng your synguler com¦modytee) to desyre any thynge to profyte many without carnal af∣fection is good. He that desyreth for ryches purelye, foloweth not theym wyth loue: But who is he,
and we wyll prayse hym? Ye must euer haue Christes worde in re∣membraunce: It is harde for him that hath riches to entre into the kyngdome of heauen. Wherfore ye cannot well possesse ryches (except ye be so strong and stable in faythe, that you esteme theim of a small value,) that ye woulde alwayes for Christ be contente to leue theim. Fynallye, yf you can possesse theim, and not be posses∣sed of theim: desyre and laboure to haue theim. Wherfore in all thynges that you dooe as concer¦nyng your conuersacion and oc∣cupyenge, let this bee a generall rule for you, that is to saye: The commaundement of the lawe na∣turall, whiche is, to dooe as you woulde bee dooen to. If then you occupie buiynge
and sellynge, I desyre you to re∣membre this lawe, that whensoe∣uer any persone for necessitee or nede selleth to you any thyng, or also for his greate neede woulde buy any thynge of you, inconty∣nentlye I woulde youre selfe to thynke in mynde to bee the same persone whiche with greate nede or necessitee buyeth or selleth with you, and to consydre howe you would bee entreated in the same cause, so intreate hym as well in ye pryces as choyse of the ware, as well in the paymente as in any o∣ther thyng therunto belongynge. I would you woulde considre the gaynes or losses of hym that you bargayne with, as your owne, all though parauenture some, yea a greate many would iudge, vsyng byeng and sellyng after this ma∣ner
of wyse, youre gaynes would bee lytle or farre lesse, then it myght be. If you vsed to buy for the least and sell for the mooste ye can, as the commen vse is, thoughe it were so (whiche in dede is not) yet a lytle well gotten to a Christyan shuld be rekened more thē a great deale otherwyse, It abydeth bee∣ter wyth hys owner. And maketh hym to lyue the more merelyer, his conscyence beyng cleane and voyde of pryckes, whyche these thorny ryches are wonte to fasten in a mannes breste. And besydes this, the gaynes shalbe the grea∣ter, whatsoeuer the worlde thyn∣keth. For buiynge and sellynge wyth some lyberalytee, ye shall sell and buy muche more, and of∣tener
then other that bee extreme or harde, and wyll haue the vt∣termooste of theyr wares. The often gayne then, thoughe at e∣uerye tyme were but lytle, maye mounte anone to greater gaynes then otherwyse. Also by this maner of dealyng ye shall auoyde euell debtes and shrewde paymentes, for they that buye wyth gayne dooe seldome paye euill. For euyll debtores and frowarde paymentes com∣meth mooste commenly eyther of eull wares solde for good, other of ouer greate pryce charged in the ware. Also by thys maner of dea∣lynge, you shall alwayse treate wyth loue and pleasure, of all that you haue to dooe wyth,
and lyue withoute variaunce, de∣bates or plees. Whiche, of all thynges oughte to bee excheiued and auoyded. Wherfore my lo∣uynge frende, I praye you to fo∣lowe this ordre in buiyng and sel¦lynge, for then that, whiche you gette shalbe well gottē, and with∣oute charge of conscyence, and doubtles your gaynes shalbe the more, and all with pleasure, loue and quietnes. To commen farther of buiyng and sellynge of marchaundise, you shall perceyue that the right office of a true marchaunt, is to prouyde and brynge to lande or place where he is, all suche wa∣res, as are scarce and vnplenty∣tyfull in ye sayde place, and neces∣sarye for the wealthe of the lande
And also to carye and sende oute all suche wares as are superflu∣ouse and dooe habounde in the places where he is, into places where is scarcenesse or lacke of theim. As here in Englande, be∣cause clothe, tynne and leade, be plenteouse, these wares ye maye sende hence, and not corne, or thin¦ges pertainīg to vitailes, though here were greate haboundaunce. It can not be but hurtfull to lade any oute of the lande. And the retourne of these warys ether, should be in yron, stele, and other metallis, whiche we haue nede of Also in Woade, Alam, Madder, and suche other lyke thynges ne∣cessary for oure clothe makyng. And as for apples, cheries, gar∣like and onions, with other fru∣tes, wynes, spicis, sylke, clothe of
golde and other lyke, myghte be lefte very well. For we might liue withoute these marchaundizes, for thei do rather prouoke men to vices then to temporate liuinge, and good and honeste, sobre and chaste behauoure. And with these marchaundize, I mighte couple furres of greate prices, and very fine clothe, for these are euen so su¦perfluouse as the other, of meane prices are necessary, and behoua∣ble. These maye be named for ex∣ample, for to name all kindes of marchaūdizes necessarie and not necessarie, profytable, and vnpro∣fitable, were to muche. This oughte to be taken hede of, that it is the offyce of a good mar¦chaunte to sende oute of the coun¦tree, the thinges which are moste superfluouse, and to bring thither
thinges moste necessarye. And so shall his gaynes be the more, and better gotten, bicause he doeth it to helpe the necessyte of his neigh¦boures. ¶ Howe ye oughte to be conuer∣saunte with youre elders. AS touchyng your con∣uersacion with your el∣ders, haue thē (I praye you) in much reuerence be gentle and louing to youre e∣qualles. And in no wise, despice youre inferiors. Also reuerence all deuoute persones, in the choise of theim haue none affeccyon to the cloke or crowne nor other such outward tokens only. But where
you perceyue example of vertu∣ouse liuing, pure, chaste, & cleane in worde and dede. Suche a per∣sone haue in honoure and reue∣rence, be he man or woman. And thynke that then you do honoure the Image and very lykenesse of God, yea God in his image, what garment soeuer he wareth. Also se (I praye you) that you be not full of wordes, remembring this sayeng of the wyse manne. * That I haue spoken, I repente then a∣monge. But I neuer repented, that I helde my tongue. If the herte be redy to moue the tongue to speake y• you wold not Saye to youre tongue. Tongue whyther goest thou? Fle frome menne full of wordes, and medle not muche with theim, bicause sin wyll be where muche babling is.
Fle also the company of whispe∣rers and lyers, yf youre presence can not refourme theim. For they must nedes engender anger, and the indignaciō of God. And such as be the louers of God, loue the truthe in all thinges, so y• in sporte nor in earneste it appere that you delight to saye nor heare any lyes or thinges sounding therunto. Also in doyng benefytes or good dedes to other, loue promptnesse, quickenesse and haste. For it is twise geuen, the whiche is gladly and redely geuen. Be not hastye or roughe in denieng any honest thyng that is asked of you, yf ye canne do it. For it is conuenient that whome you can not helpe in dedes, at leest with youre good worde you so dyspatche him, y• he may perceiue, your wil to be good
Fraude and deceite you shulde not onely auoide and not do, but not once consente that any other shoulde deceytie or defraude any manne or woman or childe if you maye lette it. Also haue no enuye at any mannes prosperytee, ney∣ther yet be gladde of any mannes aduersytee. Ponder the gaynes and losses of youre neyghbours, to be gladde and sorye for theim, like as you wolde of youre owne that they maye waye youres in y• same balaunce. Moreouer, see that you dooe nothinge in youre house, that you wolde not to bee knowen in the market place. Thynke that the worste parte of youre seruauntes is the tongue. And thoughe you youre selfe (as alwaies should) feare to doo any viciouse thynge alone, be not yet
witnesse to other of suche dedes. For he that holdeth his tongue, & feareth to rebuke synne for God∣des sake, he feareth more manne then he loueth God, and loueth neyther of bothe, as he oughte to dooe. Besydes this, if youre goodes encrease, you should not only en∣crease in goodnesse & good dedes to the poore and nedeful persons but let youre seruauntes also fele the aduauntage of youre gaines Good reason it is, that they that are parteners of the laboures, en¦ioye parte of the profyte. But yf fortune looke sowerlye vpon you and withdrawe prosperouse suc∣cessyon frome you, lette theim see youre sayles borne after the blo∣wynge of the wynde. Also flee plees and debates, all contency∣on
and strife, though youre cause seme neuer so good. If it be a mo¦ney mater, that thinke very gay∣nes, what soeuer of strife you lose with money. For losse of brawling and strife with money, maye well be rekened gaynes to theim that loue God, peace, and charytee, and contempne money for Chry∣stes cause, leaue strife to theym yt loue more money then peace or charyte. For in the lawe, besides yt you shal stand in dought to haue iustice though your mater be iust yet the tediousnesse or werinesse, y• anger and busynesse to folowe it, the laboure, vexacion, the daun∣syng attendaunce, the disdayne & heuy mindes of the contrary par∣ties, and all other suche inconue∣niences engendred by plees shuld be exchewed what soeuer it coste.
And to auoyde this, haue you al∣wayes (yf you dooe by me) a re∣specte and a good iudgemente of the persones with whome you en∣termedle. And where you maye perceaue one that delighteth and vseth plees, varyaūce or wrange∣lynges, beware that ye contracte not with hym in any wyse, what gaynes soueuer ye might suppose to folowe of his contraction. Encrease diligently the noum∣bre of your frēdes, and kepe theyr frendshippe. And for a iuste cause you maye deuide a symuled frēde from your conuersacion or inter∣medlyng. But see that ye appeare not sodenlye to bee his contrarye let hym learne by euidente woor∣des or tokens that you leaue one∣lye hys euell behaueoure or vice, And because y• he hym self wil not
leaue it, you maye not chose but leaue hym. And also better it is, y• by a lytle & a lytle you leaue your frendship, then sodenly to breake it. So shall he learne that you for sake his symuled frendship, & his noughtye condicions rather then hym, for a symuled frend is worse then an open enemye. Amongeste your louers chose some of the best and moste faythfullest, whō your right iudgement perceyueth to be trewest, moste faythfull and sted∣faste, to whō ye maye shewe your counsell and secretes. As for to fynde many to whō a man maye entierly and vndoubtedly trust, is very harde. I would wyshe you to haue no secretes, which should be daūgerous or perylous to you though thei were openly knowne to all menne. Yet if you finde one
or two of suche clere & pure fayth that ye maye truste aswel as your selfe, yt wyll take euery thyng well and in the beste parte, thoughe it shoulde seme to many otherwyse, loue hym as your soule. Further∣more, though the opiniō of the cō∣men people is seldome approued to be good, yet it is no wysedome alwayes to saye agaynste it. But it shall dooe well to go the hyghe waye as other do, thoughe yt path be many tymes better. The pathe and rightwaye of the Gospell or worde of God, in no condicion be∣yng lefte or forsaken. Also flee all flaterers, vayne boasters & pray∣sers of your goodnesse or vertues let theim see suche flaterye & symu¦lacion to be litle pleasure to you, euen at the fyrste hearynge, that they shewe the countenaūce of it.
Esteme not youre dedes by other mennes sayenges: but entre into your selfe, and betwixte the truthe and youre conscience, seke the exi∣stimacion of youre selfe. Care not what this or that man doeth saie: but what the truth sayth to youre conscience, no man but God and you (excepte ye shewe any manne) knoweth what youre entente or meanynges are. Wherfore, the truthe in your knowledge ought to make you free, mery, restfull, & quiet, agaynst all quarell pykers or false fynders of faultes. Wher¦fore in all blames or prayses, flee to conscience, if amongeste these she speake well Happye are you, mightie & wyse. For it is as pere∣leouse a thyng to be falsely pray∣sed, as falsely blamed.
¶ The gouernaunce of your ser∣uauntes and inferiours. PROCVRE alwayes to subdue theim that are vnder you, rather by loue then wt feare for he that is feared of many, muste feare many. And be not with vnkynde wordes and roughe, light to prouoke theim to wrathe. If you youre selfe be sty∣red to anger, I woulde then that ye woulde cease to saye or do any thynge, vntyll your wrathe bee a layde or slaked, for there is no∣thynge well sayde or done whiche is sayd or done in a furye. Wrath is an euell maistres to gouerne thynges. Putte awaye also wyth spede all cākered thoughtes whi∣che wtout a good remēbraunce of Christes promyse, maye lyghtlye
corrupte youre mynde with inor∣dynate thoughtes, (I meane in gettyng or kepyng your goodes) hauyng youre mynde fastened to Christes promyse with diligēt fo∣lowyng, ye cānot lacke, wherfore beware of to stayte kepyng. And remembre that though ye mighte get al the worldly goodes that be in the worlde in a shorte space, yet by death ye might loose theim in a shorter. Thynke that ther is no thynge comparable to a quyete mynde and a restefull. That is a contented mynde, whiche feareth no losses, nor greatly or gredelye coueteth gaynes. Nothynge is so muche to be abhorred as the af∣fliccion of the spirite, but as I do counsell you to auoyde these phā∣tastical and despayryng myndes: So I do aduyse you to auoyde
negligence & slothe in your busy∣nes, or ouermuch slackenes or dis¦solucion in not sauyng ye which is gottē. For as great faulte it is to lose negligently y• which is gottē, as to procure inordinately to get that whiche of right & conscience ought not to be gotten. With ho∣nest gaynes, be you alwayes con∣tēted in all your buiyng & sellyng so that ye hauyng gaynes y• other partie receaue no losse, as is afore said, for so your gaynes we hym, & his we yours may lōge continue, for he that softely mylketh ye cowe bryngeth forth milke, and he that herdelye and straytely wryngeth the tettes bryngeth forth bloode. Also my dere beloued frende whether you bee maryed, as yet I can not tell redelye, but consy∣derynge youre age, compleccion
or bodely state and worldlye sub∣staunce, I perceaue that ye maye well maynteyne a wyse, wherfore I do aduyse you (yf your ghoste∣ly strengthe be not greatere then ye infyrme & nyce desyre of fleshly ap¦petites) to take a wife: but  choise of her be not ouer hedlyng hasty, or rashe. But with good delibera∣cion endeuoure your selfe to ma∣rye. God is well pleased wt chaste maryage & sobre, which is an ac∣ceptable & holy thyng with hym, and sore displeased with whoredō and adulterye: yea & with dedes of mariage vngodly, abhomyna∣bly & beastely vsed. Mariage is a dede whiche you owe to nature, & to your contrey & to God, yf your infyrmyte be suche ye ye maye not liue chaste out of matrimonie, & if also youre fruite of matrymony
be godly and verteouslye ducated and broughte forthe in the loue & feare of God.  chose a  In the choyse of youre wife, haue onely respecte to her vertue and honestye, whiche forbicause peraduēture it cannot be, by and by, or sone sene in her. Loke to the stocke of the younge braunche, I meane her father: But specially looke vpon the ma¦ners of her mother, for cōmenly the doughter is manered muche after ye mother, yf she be brought vp at home with her parentes, yf in an other place, ioyne her mo∣thers condicyons with her may∣sters and maistresse, & waie theim in a iuste paire of balaunce. You may here ye reporte of discrete per sones of ye vse of her gouernours and her. If she haue bene any space of tyme frome her mothers
company I wolde you dyd count more vpon the vse, and good be∣hauioure of her gouernours then her parentes, for good or euel edu¦tacion or bringing vp, chaungeth nature. Consider also her age, that she be yonger then you. And of her bewtye y• she be in a meane fauoure or bewtifulnesse. For as it is harde to kepe a fayre and a bewtifull woman chaste, whome all menne be moste redy to desire: So it is truely tediouse and loth some to possesse an euell fauored woman or vnfruytefull, whome all men dooe abhorre. Yet mary you a wyfe for youre owne selfe, and not for other menne. Other men ought not to be delighted in youre wyues outwarde beawtie, nor you in theirs. But thus that you laude God in his creatures,
whiche no man dothe by concu∣piscence agaynste his commaun∣dement. So that she be of a good name and fame. For it is not y∣noughe, that a woman be voide of any euell dede or dedes, but I wolde her to be voyde of all euell suspicion. And thoughe I make no difference of mayde or widowe by Goddes lawe, yet I wolde coū¦cell you to take a virgyn or mayd whome you maye forme and in∣structe after youre owne maners And she wyll soner apply to your mind, and more entierly loue you then a wydowe. I make no men∣cyon of the dowrye. If she bringe any substaūce, it is not to be refu∣sed, if not, she shalbe ye eslier gouer¦ned or ruled in exspences, & lowlier or more obediēce to serue you. And whē you mary, I wyl exhorte you
to thinke that you entre into reli∣gion, and that you and your wife should prepare youre selues there after. Not to thynke, as many lightly dooe, that mariage is a li∣cence to lyue voluptuouslye, and vnder the tytle of mariage or ma¦trimony, to fulfyl all their carnal desires. But thinke you after∣warde to lyue more soberlye and temparatelye, more vertuouslye, and honestly, and to geue mo ex∣samples of good liuing, then you did before, remembring that ma∣trimonye is one of the holyest sa∣cramentes that God hath ordey∣ned. And that therfore it shoulde be vsed with all honestye, deuoci∣on, and reuerence. And in the pre∣uy duitie of matrimony, I wolde you and youre wife, so to dispose you, that in youre bodies were al
temparatenesse and sobernesse, & youre mindes and spirytes listed vp to God, desiring hym not only of fruite, but of such fruite, yt may be apte to his seruice. And yf you in this acte be coupled with this minde and desire, no doubte but God wyll sende you suche maner of fruite as you desyre. It is a greate beastlinesse, seing that all menne desire to haue chyldren of good disposicion and helthfull in their bodies, also with good in∣clinacion, and minde to vertue & goodnesse: that at the generacion of theim they haue no considera∣cion to prepare theim after theyr desire. Beleue me chrysten bro∣ther, that yf they that engender, & conceiue be temperate and sober in that acte, and haue their helth the childe shalbee of a good tem∣perature
in bodye and of a good compleccyon. And yf also theyr mindes be lifted vp to God as is aforesayde, the chylde shall also haue inclinacyon to vertue and goodnesse. As the children repre∣sent their fathers likenesse or mo∣thers in the fourme of theyr bo∣dies: Euen so their inclinacion of goodnesse and vertue shall repre∣sent the fathers and mothers dis∣posicyon, whiche they had when the chyldren were begoten or en∣gendered, whiche yf it were not good or godlye, so shall the chyl∣dren be dysposed to be all ye dayes of their lyfe. All vyces then re∣dounde vnto the chyldren frome the father and mother speciallye, then might the father and mother to be well dysposed in bodye and soule, in the acte of generacion, or
elles afterwarde it shall tourne theim to greate displeasure, in the frowardnesse of theyr children. Wherfore I pray you marke wel this admonicion, and put it well in remembraunce, specially, when you be about such businesse wher vnto be you not drawen, as often as Venus wolde. But when you perceyue helthe, sobrenesse, and temperatnesse both in you and in your wyfe, the loue of God & his honour had in your remēbraunce as is abouesaid to dispose of your fruite withoute beastlinesse, whi∣che is onely to accomplishe your owne fleshly pleasure. To cōclude I wolde bothe of you shuld beare chaste Christe conceiued in youre brestys by ye hearing or redyng of his holy worde. And folow Mary & Iosephes matrimony in actes.
And if you wolde (as I truste you wyll) that youre wyfe shoulde be cleane alwaies of her liuing from other men. And thoughe she fo∣lowe not Maries virginite, yet I wold she endeuored to folowe her shame fastnesse in matrimonye. This will your minde be I trust that she alwaies saye and do that thyng whiche becōmeth a lauda∣ble woman or wife to dooe. That she may thus do it, muste be your diligence to enduce her specially in the begīning to loue and feare God. But to bring this about, no wordes are sufficient, no councell or exhortacion, excepte you youre selfe so liue, that she may perforce folowe youre good exsample, and dooe the same. And therfore as I saide before, that when you mary you shoulde reken that you enter
into religiō. Specially in the be∣gynnynge, for where as hytherto any negligence of vertue and of good lyuynge or seruice of God y• was dooe, was dooen onely to youre owne hurte: From hence forthe the euil example shal hurte your wife, your chyldren, & your seruauntes, that is to saye: all the whole housholde. In the begyn∣nynge therfore, specially ye muste induce your wife with your good example, in the loue and feare of God, whiche ones graffed or prin¦ted in her mynde, shall cause that she shal saye, ne dooe any thynge that afterwarde she shall gretly repente. Also I doubte not, but ye would gladly that youre wyfe shoulde loue you, the meane is to cause her so to dooe, that she per∣ceyue playnly yt she is entierly be∣loued
of you. For whiche it suf∣fyseth not, onelye to wythdrawe your mynde from al other wem. But that ye must also, auoide any occasyon, of whiche might bee en∣gendered euyll suspycion of in∣cōtinencye. For yf gelousye entre ones into womēs brestes, ye roote is so vnsauerye and bitter that it cannot choose but brynge forth y• weryshe and lothsome fruyte of discorde, then the whiche there is none so greate a poyson, that cor∣rupteth so muche Christen folkes but specially the man and yt wife. Besydes this, in your cōuersaciō with your wyfe, be ye famylyer & louyng, guydyng her therwith to althynges of your mynd by fayre meanes, and not by rygorousnes crueltie or tyranny. If she be ho∣nest & verteous, your worde shall
suffice, yf otherwyse (whiche God forbyd, leste ye might be ouersene in thynges aforesayde) it maye be done by force moderatly, yet gētle intreatie is better thē cruelty, boy steorusnes or stripes, except there be suche obstinacie in her whiche cā not be helped without enforce∣ment and correcciō, neuer correcte with shamefull rebuke. If there be any such obstinacie, reason you so with her, that she may perceaue her faulte and condēpne her selfe whiche shalbe a good correccion. Menne and wemen are of nature gentyll to be ledde and not to bee drawen, for nature hath made theim wythoute all wepon to vse crueltee or tyrannye, al other bea∣stes, nature hathe armed wyth some defēce, but it bryngeth forth man wtout any weapon, wherfore
nature wold mākynde to be gētle & peaceable aboue al other crea∣tures. I would haue your louing conuersacion and famyliaritee wt your wyfe so myxte with honestie and shame fastenes, that she in no wyse perceyue or see in you any exāple by which y• virginal shame fastenesse whiche she had before youre mariage bee lessed after it. And this aswell secretlye when you are together in your chaum∣bre and bedde, as openlye. For where men wyth shameful hand∣lynges and vnchaste woordes, wt vnclenlye gestoures, sygnes or lookes, prouoke theyr wyues to fleshly luste, whom maye they iust¦ly blame, yf theyr wyues lyue vn∣chastelye but theimselues, as the chefe causers, for wyth suche be∣haueoure they make their wyues
voyde of all shamefastnes, and yt beyng banyshed & gone, chastite maketh hast after. Wherfore now yf you wyl haue your wife chaste she must haue y• example of you, & not onelye that, but ye muste vse her with all clenlynesse, honestye and shamefastnesse. And to allure her to loue kyndnes, honestie and chastenes, you shall apparell or clothe her by myne aduyse so that whersoeuer she besene, she might bee iudged to bee youre wyfe, ha∣uyng not so riche apparell or clo∣thynge to bee iudged some mar∣chauntes wyfe of hier dignitee or some greate mannes wyfe of the courte: nor so poorely, that you be yng of some worldlye substaunce she might bee iudged to bee some poore labouryng mans wyfe, let her go after the same sorte, condi∣cion
or estate that ye are of or shal be of. For the whiche equalitee it shalbe good that ye bothe be clo∣thed of one pece of cloth. Let your garmentes be of the moste honest facion, leauynge iagges and new inuenciōs without profyte or ease to the bodye, to therin that thynke onely gaye thynges to be good, & pleasure better then profyte. Also herein auoyde all occasyons to be enuighed as nye as ye maye, or any occasion where thorough an∣gre or discorde mighte ryse, & not onely in this thynge, but in all o∣ther with your wyfe. But specy∣ally in the begynnyng of your cō¦uersacion, for if before one knowe well the condicions or maners of the other, and also before that any perfyght loue bee well rooted be∣twyxte you, any dyscension or
wrangelyng aryse, it wylbe harde afterwarde to be turned into a cō¦formyte or an vnyte of lyuynge quyetlye together. Specially, yf in suche angre, passe any mysche∣uous wordes or styngyng or prickynge wordes or strypes, loue af∣terwarde is to bee despayred al∣moste for euer, whiche dissencion or wrangelyng, though it happen afterwardes that y• loue betwite you be wel rooted & established ye one knoweth wel the other, ¦gre or discorde can be so gree, but that sone you shoulde re∣tourne agayne into grace and fauoure, into peace and con∣corde.
¶ The gouernynge of a housholde ALSO, the charge of the gouernaūce of y• house, ye maye in maner geue wholly to youre wyfe, & as ye would y• she should not muche entermedle in youre marchaūdise or busynes whiche is done out of y• house or out of her roome: So it is not semyng that you great∣ly busye youre selfe in thynges ol the house longyng to her charge as many womāly men do, whiche wyllynglye withoute comelynes come vnder the subiecciō of theyr wyues. And ioyne to this forsaid charge of the house, some other busynesse and laboure mete for her, so that she maye alwayes be occupied & neuer ydell. Many other thynges myght be sayde as
concerning the conuersacyon be∣twixe the husbande and the wyfe, whiche nowe of purpose I leaue to speake of, leste I shoulde be te∣diouse to you in reading my sym∣ple councelles. Experience hathe and maye instructe you farre bet∣ter then my wytte can expresse, yet somwhat I wyl saye more as con¦cerning youre chyldren. ¶ As concerning children. FIrst, God sending youIt is again nature, tha womē shal not  their owne children. children. Se that none other woman nurse thē than youre owne wyfe. It is a greate vncomlynesse and inconuenience, yea I saye cruel∣nesse that comenly is vsed among menne and women, I dooe not saye beastlinesse, for that they put
forth their yonge children to nur∣sing, yea and som men and womē wyll caste theyr chyldren oute of doores within a. iii. or fouredaies after that it is borne, to a straun∣ger to norishe it. It is to be won∣dered verely what confydence the mother of the childre hathe, speci∣ally forasmuche as she thynkety that a straunge woman wyll suf∣fer the laboure which is requisite in the nurssing of the child, when she that is naturall mother refu∣seth it. They wyll anon saye, that for money a straunger wyll do it well and conueniently, so ye theyr chylde shalbe well noryshed and brought home faire and fatte. I saye though it be faire & fatte, yet it is not so naturallye fayre & fat, as though his owne mother had norished him. And that it is faire
and fatte, it is no more thanke to the mother thē to a Iewe, willing a christian chylde to be noryshed, for his fantasticall loue, and ther¦fore geueth money haboundaunt¦ly to some woman, that wolde not be sene to receyue his money in vayne, but for his money she ge∣ueth her diligent laboure. And ye the childe is fayre and fatte, it cō∣meth more of the loue of the norse that she hath to the chylde within litell tyme after that she hath ge∣uē it her milke, which causeth her to sette lesse of the laboure, or pas∣seth more vpon ye child then vpon the money. But who wyll doubte but the chyld shuld be more helth¦ful a more tēperat in body if it had sucked, his natural lyquore, wher we he was norished ī his mothers wōbe. Who may thinke yt nature
not doo muche more to the helthe and good disposicyon of the chil∣des bodie then money can doo, or euer shalbe able to dooe? Verely it is not like, but the chylde shuld be the helthyer not onely in his in fancye, but all dayes of his lyfe afterwarde, yf the mother wolde playe the mother in norishing the childe. Once in the beginninge, they put the chylde in ieopardy of his lyfe, in taking hym from his naturall milke wherwith he was norished in his mothers wombe. And besides that, y• mother hathe neuer so perfyghte loue to y• child whiche an other woman norys∣sheth, as if she norished it her selfe for whilest she norisheth it not, she remaineth but halfe a mother, for the offyce of an whole & parfyght mother is, to beare chyldren and
norishe them or bring theim forth. Nowe she reparteth the one parte with y• norse. And so also in loue she remayneth but half a mother. They wil saye that their loue can not be diminished towardes their children though other women no rishe them, but it is not so. For thoughe norishing of children be laborious and peynfull, yet it en∣gendreth muche loue betwixte the nurse and the chylde. This loue then whiche is wonte to be engen dered by norishing the chylde, is loste of the naturall mother tow∣ardes the chylde, and is added to the noryshe, wherfore the mother hath lost halfe her loue towardes the childe, and the norse hath and shall fynde it. Likewise wyll the childe deuide his loue into. ii. par¦tes. The one parte to his mother
bearing hym, y• other to his nurse or halfe mother feadyng and brin¦ging him forth. And besides this yf the mother that bare the chyld had noryshed it also, the loue of ye father wold had bene much more to the chylde, because of the nory∣shing of it in his presence. And of this springeth the litle loue or vn¦naturall loue that menne haue to theyr chyldren, speciallye in this realme. Afterwardes when ye child is a. xii. monethes or two yeres of age, it is brought home from no∣rishing, and is brought vp in the house vntyll it be. xii. or. xiii. yeres olde, with litell difference as con∣cerning his profyte betwene hym and the seruaunt. And being of yt age rude and vnlearned, because they theim selues wolde not take paines to induce hym to vertue &
learninge or crafte, they thruste hym out of dores againe to may∣sters to serue withoute any grete consideracyon, whether the perso¦nes be of good and honest dispo∣sicyon whiche shall receyue hym, yea or whyther they wyll profyte greately the chylde to vertue and honestye, oute of dores they caste hym as before at norishyng. If his fortune be to meete wt a good mayster, to whome he might reste more bound then to his father or mother, happy is he, by his good mayster he learneth to helpe hym selfe, whiche he dyd not of his fa∣ther and mother, many fathers & mothers ar not studiouse to helpe theyr chyldren to vertue or lear∣nynge, because they loue money more then theyr chyldren. And bycause they so dooe, they
departe nothing of it to their chil¦dren in theyr lyfe. But yf hys chaūce be not to meete wt a good maister, he is tangled and corrup¦ted with suche vyces, whiche in youth commonly haue domyny∣on and rule, & gooe not forwarde to vertue and honestye: where as a good father shulde then receiue his chylde, and by fayre meanes and fatherly councell amend him and comforte hym in goodnesse, and geue hym some of his good∣des to socoure him. But the vse is cleane contrary, for then he deny∣eth him y• entering into his house then he wyll not name hym, nor knowe hym for his sonne or child denyeth him all fauoure to cause hym dispaire, and caste away the whole purpose to lyue honestlie & trewely. And so desperate and ab∣iecte
absenteth hym selfe from his father and mother, and coupleth hym selfe with light wanton, vy∣cious and naughtye companye, & is made one of theim, where ye vy∣ces, whiche in the begynnynge myght easely haue be amēded are encreased & growen vncorrygy∣ble, and that, because the father & mother dooe not gracyously loue theyr child. If they dyd loue their chyldren to God wardes, that is to saye, to brynge theim forthe in the lawes of God, and wold that they shulde loue and drede God. Thē would they, beyng of power thereto put theim to lernynge in theyr tendre age, cōsyderyng this commen prouerbe: He that in youth no vertue wyll vse, In age all honoure shall hym refuse. ▪Also the saiynge of Salomon:
Looke what waye a younge man or woman taketh in hys tendre age, from that he wyl not departe whē he is old. Also experiēce shew eth that youth wyl lightly folowe y• instrucciōs of theyr elders. The younge cocke croweth like as he heareth the olde. And loke howe a young twygge of an orcheyarde is bowed so he groweth forthe, yf he be stayed to growe vp ryghte, so it groweth, and is bothe profy∣table and pleasaunte. If it growe otherwyse I cannot tell whereto it is profytable, but to ye fyre. Like wyse maye be sayd of young chil∣dren, but the faulte is not in the chyldren, but in the elders or fa∣thers and mothers. The chylde Iesus dyd growe and was com∣forted in spiryte ful of wysdome & the grace of God was wyth hym,
that is to saye: he was a notable good chylde, and so frō a younge man, he grewe to an exceadynge wyse & verteous man. It is mete that suche as be Christen chyldrē should be brought vp after thex∣ample of Christe. He did growe  was comforted by the spyrite and in the spirite. Many menne suffre theyr chyldren to vse ryot & be lost in fleshely pleasures, nor do cause theim to be induced to fayth & ho∣neste lyuyng, by the word of God, Christ dyd growe and encrease in wysedome, many suffre their chil∣dren to encrease in folishnes. And the grace of God was in Christe, but thoroughe the faulte of theyr fathers & mothers it taryeth not with some children called christen chyldren, yet nothyng folowyng Christ, or smell of hym, because yt
Christ dyd growe in the sighte of men and dyd appeare whole per∣fyghte and wonderfull by and by preachyng signes and myracles. It is conuenient or syttynge that lyke manner of wyse oure chyldren bee induced and instructed to de∣uocion, to vertue, & good lyuynge A man wyll not thynke lyghtlye howe much good lyeth in y• bryn∣gyng vp of chyldren. And if there wer not greate vertue and good∣nes in it, who myght thynke that God would so straytly cōmaunde the Iewes yt their chyldrē should be induced, instructed & broughte vp, in the feare of God: verelye he doeth knowe beste of al, that that thyng wyll not lyghtely be lefte in ryper or ferther age, whyche chyldrē haue accustomed in their tendre age. The whiche thyng th
Latyne Poete expresseth & sayth: So greate a thynge it is to accu∣stome a thynge from tendre age. Wherfore God in Deuteronomy the .vi. chapiter sayth: Thou shalt rolle in thy mynde with thy selfe such thynges as I geue ye charge vpon this daye, and thou shalte whette theim vpon thy chyldren, speakyng therof to theim when y• taryeste at home in thy house, or walkest on thy iourneye, when y• goest to bedde and rysest their frō. If thou leaue these thynges in theyr youthe, thou shalte haue muche ado to make theim obeye and folowe when they be of a full age and olde. But nowe ye wyll say, I am no preacher. Therunto with saynt Augustyne I answere the, Looke what a preacher is in the pulpet, suche euery houshol∣der
is in his house at home. And likewyse as it belongeth for ye cu∣rate to make rekenyng & accoūpt for his whole flocke: So the hous¦holder in the general daye of iud∣gemente shal reken and make ac∣coumpte for his wife, for his chil∣dren and for his housholde. Geue ye therfore diligent hede that in this be halfe ye bee not founde negligent, loue your chil∣dren after this maner. And when they be of some discreciō, let them perceyue your loue in worde and worke. And be not so vnkynde as some fathers, whiche for the loue of this worldlye ryches and fo∣lyshe pleasure (whylest they lyue) can not fynde in theyr hartes to departe with theim, though they haue receyued it of the hande of God euen for the same purpose.
Wherof procedeth that many ty∣mes for a veray litle anger or di∣spleasure the father doeth wholly disheryte his sonne, or at least ta∣keth away frō hym a great parte of his inherytauce, wherof also procedeth that men can fynde in their hertes many tymes y• theyr seruauntes should be made dispo¦sers of theyr goodes or theyr fren¦des, rather then theyr children. Al this (as I suppose) procedeth of none other thyng, but of the lytle loue yt they haue to theyr chyldrē: And this litle loue cōmeth of this that the natural mother norished not her owne chylde in the pre∣sence of the father. Wherfore my dere frende and Christen brother let youre owne wyfe noryshe youre chylde, euen though it shoulde seame a newe
thyng and not vsed. Forsoth God and nature hath not wrought bre¦stes and teates in youre wyfe, yea and mylke, healthe and habylytee in vaine, yf these should not serue for her owne chyldren. And besy∣des this she maye not ryghtly be called a mother fullye and per∣fyghtly afterwardes, of her owne chyldren, beynge but halfe a mo∣ther. And hereof procedeth also the coulde loue and smal reuerēce yt some childrē haue in their age afterwardes, to theyr fathers and mothers. For whan the soonne or doughter beyng of age, consyde∣reth howe the father and mother refused labour wyth hym or her  put theim oute to nurse frō theim regardeth theim therafter. And when they be in necessite or lacke, thei thinke thei yt may serue theim
lyke maner. That is to saye, to thruste theim oute of dores, and sende theim to some hospytall to findyng, as they did theim. Be∣sides this, yf the mother were of a good disposicion of bodye and of a verteouse inclinacyon, there is cause geuen to ye childe to grudge agaynste the mother and father, thinkyng that by ye vyce of theim he dranke or sucked malicyouse∣nesse, with the mylke of his nurse being of a farre worse disposicion then the mother was. So nowe yf the naturall mother norished ye childe, you se what commodityes should folowe. The father shuld be sure that in his lyfe tyme and after his death the mother shulde be good to his chyldren & louing. lyke a trewe & a naturall mother, and also bothe the father and mo¦ther
shoulde be sure in theyr age, and alwaies y• the children should haue theim in muche loue feare & reuerence, as trewe children. Also the mother beyng nurse to youre chyld of a good desposicion & tem¦perauncie of bodye and in minde constaunt, deuoute and of a good inclinacion suche as I trust your good iudgemente and dyscrecion wolde chose, you maye bee sure, y• youre childe shall haue bothe ver¦tue and good temperaunce of bo∣dye, whiche he may lightely lacke being norished of a straunge wo∣man. So for all these causes and other that maye be considered, I beseche you folowe that which by these reasons you maye perceyue to be beste. When your childrē can speake and vnderstande, forthwith with∣oute
any delaye put theim vnder some vertuouse persone to learne to reade and write togethers, but specially to learne vertuouse ma∣ners and to serue God. And that he may so doo from the tyme that he can speake, teache hym euery daye some short prayer according to the capacite of his witte or me∣morye. And as he dothe encrease in strength, fede hym with longer prayers, and other fruitefull les∣sons moste worthy memory. And thus do with as faire meanes as you may. As for great chastising and ouer muche feare in teaching yonge childrē is not best after my iudgemēt, for by that the spirytes and wittes of children be dulled & being induced by ouermuch feare in youthe, are neuer afterwardes bolde, nor maye lifte vp their min¦des
and hertes to thinges of ho∣noure, that is to saye, thynges of ghostely strength and vertue, but are alwayes deiecte, peishe, with oute corage or stomake to good & honest thinges. They doo rather applye theim selues afterwarde, when they haue lybertee, to euell then to goodnesse, which bringig vp is naturall & proper to theym that be borne in bondage and to captiues, and not of fre mens chil¦dren, wherfore both you and your childrens mayster shoulde entice and allure your chyldrē with loue and good wordes. Yea, and then amonge with small giftes to ver∣tue and learning, rather thē with feare and force, you shoulde boste and fauoure theym very muche for any lytell thyng that they doo well and conueniently, that by it,
they maye haue corage and herte to doo more so, yet I doo not vt∣terly disswade, but that feare and correccion is necessary, so it be mo¦derate in conuenient time and for a notable cause. I woulde there were shewed to the childe bothe ye apple and the rodde, but more of∣tener ye apple, and more exhorted to deserue the rewarde and praise then the correccyon. And all the tyme that youre childe is in your house frome schole, kepe hym al∣wayes with you in youre presence as nygh as you can. And let hym take his meate at your table, and lye in youre chaūber. For of your maners and behaueoure at the ta¦ble and chaumber, he shall see & heare better communicacyon and learne mo vertuose maners, here more wysdome, and take hede of
more ciuilytee or nurture then in the kechin or stable amōgest your seruauntes. Haue the presence of your child in suche veneracyon that before God and hym be spoken no vici∣ouse wordes, no swearing, no lies no backbiting or slaundering, no cursing, mockīg, or ribauldry, no wordes of fraude or disceite. For the childe can speake but suche lā¦gage as he heareth, and bycause he is mooste, yee alwaies lightely in youre conuersacion he wyll vt∣ter your maners to other folkes. Let hym therfore be ware of hea∣ring suche maner of speches. But beware you muche more, for to you it shalbe rekened double syn, youre owne and youre chyldes, you knowe that of a naturall in∣clinacyon, suche woordes as are,
soundynge vnto euell, are more promptely fixed in theyr myndes then other. And this same exhor∣tacion or monicyon shoulde be ge¦uen vnto youre chyldes mayster, (yf he be honest, he wyll thanke∣fully receiue it) that youre chylde heare nothyng, but that whiche soundeth to vertue & goodnesse. And to cause that youre childe re¦fuse not youre companye or his maisters, bothe you and he muste some time fynde your childe some pointes and instrumētes to playe and suffer hym to vse honest ga∣mes or playes then amonge, for the recreaciō of his spirytes, that he maye be the gladder with you, and loue you and hym with reue∣rent dreade the better. And so shall he with a better wyl applie his learning without trem¦beling,
feare, or inforce. And after this maner, he shall learne more and soner. The women children wolde be broughte vp in all feare and drede, wt litle fauoure shewed theim vntyll they bee of a perfyte age and vnderstanding. For as in men is nothing more reproua∣ble then to be cowardes, fearfull, pekyshe, and of no stomake or co∣rage: So in wemen is the contra¦ry, in whom there is nothīg more laudable then fearefulnesse and gentylnesse of stomake. To the mother youre wyfe, geue charge to doo her dewtye in bringing vp your women chyldren verteously and in the lawe and feare of God as you doo the men children. In the choyse of a mayster for youre chylde, yf you maye haue one bothe well learned and good
and verteous in lyuyng for mo∣ney sake or coste: forsake hym not excepte ye loue money better then vertue & learnynge, euery thynge is as it is loued and estemed. The wyse man setteth muche by lear∣nynge and honeste maners, the rude ignoraunte and folyshe per∣sone setteth lytle by theim, be∣cause he is not acquaynted wyth theim. If he shoulde lacke eyther of these two thynges learnyng or vertue, better it were y• he lacked parte of the learnyng then of ver∣tue. Vertue is more of price then learnyng, for learnynge is but a meane thynge wherby men come to vertue thorough the grace of God. Learnyng is for vertue and not vertue for learnyng. It is bet¦ter to be good and verteous, then learned and worldly wyse. Ther∣fore
rather choyse goodnes & ver¦tue for your chylde and you, then learnynge, yf bothe maye not bee had together: Also with letters, let your child learne musike. Also let hym wtout hurtyng hym selfe learne the vse of weapons or armes, as buckler plaiynge or suche other. The one for recreaciō of his spirites, the o∣ther for the strength of his bodye It shall make hym hable & bolde so that in peace and warre (yf he should be inforced therto) wt coū∣cel and strength he may preuaile. And ioyntly with this he shoulde not be ignoraunte of thynges ne∣cessarye to his lyuynge, wherfore euen frō his yong age, he shoulde haue y• knowledge of the moneye that is vsed & of the valewe of it. And for this it shalbe good to put
some in his power, & to make him buy al thynges necessarye for his owne weryng, from cappe to shoe, at the fyrste & seconde tyme wyth helpe of other, & afterwardes by hym selfe. And after to putte hym in busines of greater charge, with greater summes of moneye, & let hym vse of parte after his owne discrecion, makynge (when you shall cal hym) accompte to you of the bestowyng. The commen vse as me semeth may not be cōmen∣ded, which is, y• men for the moste parte wyll not truste theyr childrē with any of theyr substaunce, nor let theim knowe nor scātely vnder stande y• valewe of money, which thyng causeth yt afterwardes whē they enheryte theyr fathers good∣des, they spende all vndiscreat∣lye as they that knowe not, what
it is, nor the valewe of that they enherite. The cause is that the fa∣ther wyll leaue all to his sonne af¦ter his death and in his lyfe tyme nothyng. But if after the maner aboue rehersed ye vse your childe he shall not onelye for lacke of knowlage myspende his enhery∣taūce, but shalbe more able wher∣soeuer he become to geue a reke∣nyng for hym selfe, and as it is co¦menly sayde, shalbe able to com∣pany with men and to helpe hym selfe hauyng knowlage of y• thyn¦ges necessary for his lyuynge. Yf he shoulde myspende any thynge it were beter he dyd it in your pre¦sence, where by good admonicion and councel he maye be amended & corrected, then after your death when the moste parte of folkes (to haue parte of his exspences) wyll
prayse hym in his lewde spēdyng rather then wt counsell monyshe hym, amēde or correcte hym, nowe ye maye wyth a lytle porcyon of your goodes knowe the proofe of your chyld in your life, and in ma¦ner be sure that he shal wel mayn¦teyne and dispose that you leaue hym afterwardes whan you be∣gone. And seynge I speake of di∣sposynge or distrybutyng of goo∣des by youre chylde, ye oughte to entyce hym from hys chyld∣hode or infancye (yf it might bee) to haue compassion vpon y• poore and to vse to geue some almes, yea for to instructe hym, whatsoe∣uer almes you or your wyfe dooe geue, let it be geuen by his hādes or your other chyldren yf they be in the waye or presente with you at y• tyme. This do you oftetimes
not onely to instructe your chyl∣dren, but because God so instruc∣teth you that by youre example & vse of it he may learne frō his ten dre age euer to helpe the nedye & poore, yf he be of habylitee, yf no, yet he may learne to bee deuoute mercyfull, and pytiefull. But re∣membre y• in this thyng, and in al other goodnes. Lykewyse y• prin∣cypall exāple of vertue profytyng your chylde muste come of youre good example, which he seeth you to do and shewe. For nothynge yt his maister or other persones shal do or shewe hym, can stycke or be so fyxed in his mynde as youre wordes and dedes. Nowe then yf you bryng vp youre chylde after this maner as is here layd before your eyes, there is no doubte, but he shalbe a good manne. Vpon
whiche grounde or foundacion, whether he be enclyned to bee of the clergye or of the other sorte of men, called laye men, whether he woulde be a preast, alwayes a ba∣cheler or a maryed manne, he shalbe an honeste manne. But yf he be dysposed to be of the clergy, one thyng I woulde you counce∣led hym, that in no wyse, he make any maner vowe, nor professyon vntyll he bee thyrtye or nyghe to thyrtye yeares of age. For be∣fore that tyme or nyghe aboute that tyme, none doeth wel knowe hym selfe. Happy is he that doeth then. To saye truthe, it is harde for me here to appoynte hym any tyme, his owne faythe and loue whiche he hathe receyued of God muste bynde hym hereto, remem∣brynge that when Peter promy∣sed
vpon his owne strengthe he could not perfourme his promise but afterwardes when he promy∣sed vpō God, yt he loued his may∣ster Christ, saiyng: Lord yu know∣est that I loue the, he was strōge So in what rype age soeuer your chylde be, and woulde make vo∣wes or promyses to take other re∣ligion then he receyued at Chri∣stendome (an hygher or perfygh∣ter vowe he can not make.) But yf he would promyse the vowe of chastytee, the whyche vowe all Christen menne and women haue professed, because they haue pro∣fessed Christe, whatsoeuer order of lyuyng any persone christened doeth professe, he professeth chasti¦tee euen though he entre into ma∣trymonye as is aboue sayde. But yf he be disposed to liue sole
& chaste, it maye not come of hym selfe, for it passeth mannes infyr∣mite. But doubtlesse if he mistrust his owne strengthe, and thinke & beleue verely, that by the power and might of Christe, and confy∣dence in hym, so that he may saye with a stronge beleue. All thinges are possyble vnto the beleuer, and thynke verely that by Christe he hath and shall ouercome y• world thinkig on Christes worde, which saieth, truste ye, or haue you con∣fydence, for I haue ouercome the worlde, lette hym thinke yt he may do all thinges through hym that comforteth. In hym then and for hym, lette youre chylde make his vowe, if he be so disposed, & doubt lesse hauyng suche, and the same staffe to leane to, he shal not fayle We heare of too manye, whiche
for theyr belies sakes, or for their frendes pleasures onely, whiche are men, haue made their vowes, and be had in derisyon of y• world for the breaking of theim no won¦der that they slyde whiche buylde vpon manne. Lette youre chylde buylde v∣pon God, and he shall stande. For God is able to make hym stande And he wyll dooe all thyng vnto theim that beleue in hym. Warne hym thanne that what soeuer he doothe, he dooe it in the name of God wyth beleue, that God will dooe for hym vnto his owne glorye. If ye mistrust hym not, whē your child is aboute .xxx. yeres of age, he shall haue a good iudgemēt of hym selfe. No man knoweth per∣tyghtelye his owne strengthe, yet
at that age, by youre good endu∣cing, he shall knowe and perceiue what Christe wylleth hym in the Gospell, and soo thoroughe the worde of God and good reason, whiche he is lyke to haue at that age, maye be bolde after Goddes worde to iudge of hym selfe, but chyefely and princypally exhorte hym to kepe the vowe and pro∣mise whiche he made at the fonte of Baptysme, that he renounced and vtterly dyd forsake the deuel and all his workes & all his pom¦pes, yf he tarye onelye vpon these vowes, he shalbe suer to be a good christyan manne. If he beleue in God, the fa∣ther, in Christe the sonne, and in the hooly ghooste, thre in parso∣nes, yet one God in essence. To beleue in God, is to cōmit all
oure whole herte vnto hym, oure thoughtes, wordes, and workes. If he thus beleue, doubtelesse he shalbe saued from sinne, from the deuill and from hell and the euer∣lasting death thoroughe Christes death, by whome he is deed to the worlde and liueth to God, and by whome he shalbe defēded against the deuell and the vnclennesse of his owne fleshe and all wycked∣nesse. He nowe hauyng this loue and charytee to God thoroughe Christe, is suer a good christyan man. What profession can make a manne better? I would to God that other professyons hadde not made men wourse. This vowe of Baptisme exhorte your soonne to kepe, whiche he hath made all re∣dye, and hathe bounde hym selfe to the obseruaunce thereof by su∣reties,
at whiche also were bound with hym his godfathers & god∣mothers. It might be thought to be lytl discrecion or no good coū¦cell to bind him selfe (as he might be perswaded to vowes of greate perfeccion) not diligentlye studi∣eng to accomplishe the vowe that he hathe made all redye. What a wyse man is he, that wyll seke an heuyer burthen, when he percey∣ueth that he is to weake to beare a lighter? Induce hym, that he earnestly and hartely desyre God of his grace, to dooe that whiche Christe willeth hym, and to haue hym in his remembraunce, with vnfayned loue & reuerent dreade where soeuer he be goyng, stan∣ding, riding, or resting. And lette hym beleue that Christ is of such gentilnesse and goodnesse, that he
may haue hym to dwel with hym euen in the inwarde chaumber of his brest, yf he wolde doo so much for his sake, as to expell Sathan with his felowes. God the father of his plenteous goodnesse and Christe his sonne naturall of his mere pitee and mercye thoroughe the worke of the holy ghoost pro∣ceding frome theim bothe whiche thre: The father, the sonne and ho¦ly ghost is one God, wyl be at one with your sōne, yf he wyl seke his fauoure by learning keping & fo∣lowing his holy worde. I wolde you wold say often times to hym, that he shoulde be a good, a iuste and a perfyte christen man. If he coulde beleue certaynly yt Christe were geuen vnto hym for his syn¦nes, but this canne he not beleue
with a corrupte conscyence. If youre sonne be not disposed to be of the clergye, but of the o∣ther sorte (called laye menne) he maye not be of the worlde and a good christian manne togethers. Fauoure him with continual coū¦cell & reparte of suche goodes as God hathe sente you, as is afore∣sayde, y• in youre dayes you maye see hym profete, and be an honest manne, vnto youre greate com∣forte: whiche comforte they lac∣keth that wyll not reparte of their goodes vnto theyr chyldren vn∣tyll they dye. Wherfore theyr chyldren mighte thynke that they were the lesse bounde vnto theym by a greate deale. Consydering that perforce they muste leaue it behinde theim If they myghte kepe it styll, they
wolde. It is a small benefite then of y• father, whiche perforce shuld leaue it to other, leaueth it to his childe. Seing that yf he dyd the contrary, he shoulde put his soule in greate ieopardy, for the defrau¦dyng of his chylde of these thyn∣ges whiche Goddes lawe and na¦ture wolde to be his. Wherfore my louyng frende, thoughe you had some certayne presumpcions that your childe wolde spnde his porcyon of substaunce euell, take not his ryght from hym. Better it shalbe for youre soule y• he spende it euell, then peraduenture an other wolde spende it well. This maye nowe suf∣fyse, as touching your chil∣dren.
¶ The gouernaunce or orderyng of exspences in the house. IN the reste, to speake of exspences in the house, see that youre dayly exspēces be so moderated, y• ye may egually and iustely cōtinue with out ryot, or so greate welfare that it might not endure, or withoute puttyng your selfe in necessyte or nede or grudge of mynde for the largenes of the exspences, or that your houshold should grudge for your straytnes or nygardshpppe. Therfore the order that you be∣gynne kepe constantelye, for any lytle excesse dayly vsed, in processe of tyme groweth to greate sum∣mes. The vitayles for your table should be suche as ye finde moste conuenient for your health, of the
whiche beware of greate dyuersi∣ties, for the dyuersytee of meates engendereth diuersytiees of syke∣nesses. As for the quantitee, as I would not that you did defraude nature with takynge to lytle, so I woulde you to thynke that super∣fluytee of meate and drinke, is the vtter destruccion of nature, loue symple or syngle meates, they be simple that be not mengeled with many dyuerse thynges or com∣poūded with many dyuerse kyn∣des of fleshes, and wyth theim. And with dyuerse fruytes and di∣uerse kyndes of spyces, and all these in one dyshe. And lykewyse some vse dyuerse kyndes of dryn∣kes, whiche all withoute doubte decayeth health, thoughe it be not by and by felt or perceyued, but in processe of tyme they wyl vtter
the selues, & bryng forth death or deathes brother. For of this it cō∣meth that together in māne reig∣neth the feuers, the head ache, the tothe ache, the goute, y• bely ache, the stranguylliā and other disea∣ses out of noumbre, whiche I can not reherse. Wher though of one maner of meate surfet were vsed, or of one maner of drynke, a man shuld haue but one maner of these sickenesse or diseases or none at al yf the excesse wer not great, where throughe yf you neede the vse of medecynes, I would with the coū¦sell of some learned & good phisi∣cion, you vsed symple medycines as nighe as wer possible, fleyng y• composiciō of many drogeries, & not onelye symple but to take of suche medecynes as are of herbe rootes or fruytes of this same lande beynge proued for good,
rather then of suche drogeryes that are brought out of the lande I thynke not, but yf our physycy∣ons were so diligente and labory∣ous to seke thesame thynges that God and nature hath geuē for re∣medyes as the phisycions were y• wrote, whom they folowe partely whiche because they were experte in natural thynges, wrote of these drogeryes that groweth in Affri∣ca, Syrya & Grecia, they woulde not muche vse of these drogeryes whiche are in other countreyes, but suche as God sendeth for re∣medyes in euery lande, whereby they shoulde fynde more naturall remedyes for mannes health. As concernyng the other parte of your housholde or gouernaūce therof (I meane your seruaūtes) I wold you had no mo seruaūtes
in your house, thē ye maye kepe oc¦cupied, and y• none eat their bread in ydelnes, but that they haue la∣bour with meate, and meate with laboure. For as it is crueltye to cause seruauntes to laboure with out meate, so it is veraye noyfull or hurtefull to geue seruauntes meate without labour. For it ma∣keth theym lumpyshe, luskyshe drowsye and slouthfull, vycyous, lecherous and glotons. One ydle seruaunte wyll lyghtlye corrupte al the houshold. If ye haue a true seruaunte & a faythfull, loue hym as youre sonne, let hym knowe your fauoure, that he may bee an example to his felowes. In theyr clothyng and feedynge, let theim vse a meane withoute any excesse, that is, that the clothynge bee not fyne nor curyouslye made, but
course and sufficiēt to kepe theim from colde. And the meate in no wyse delycate, but grosse, suche as wil suffice to kepe theim in health and from houngre. Paye them truely theyr wages without dila∣cion or brydgyng, let theim fynde your wyll more prone and redyer to paye theim, thē you fynd theim to labour for it: yee yf it be so paye them wt the same quyppe or note. But in the meane tyme prouoke theim with many fayre speaches, to do their dutie, yet not alwayes so, remembryng that an easy and a gentle medycyne healeth not al sores, nor y• flaterynge instygaciō, maketh not the horsse go styll: sometymes the spore must be vsed excepte the corage be very lustye, lyuelye and quycke. To make an ende, let God and reason rule you
and after theim rule youre wyfe and housholde. These counselles I would you vsed for youre owne wealth & ho∣nestee, thynkyng that there is no∣thyng better then good counsell. See therfore yt by the euyll coun∣sell of the deuyll, ye suffre no euell cogitacions to engendre and en∣crease in your herte, for they wyll brynge forthe death, not tempo∣rall or bodelye death, but death euerlastyng. From which Ie∣sus our sauyoure saue you in whome lyue & reigne by purenes of cōscy∣ence, world with∣oute end. ❧
¶ This treatyse folowynge, I haue written out of a great clerke S. Barnarde, in some places leauyng his order because of shortnes. NOwe my dere belo∣ued frend, these fore sayde lessons well marked, I truste ye wyll fyrst aboue all thynges order your selfe to our Lorde, seakyng aboue and before all thynges the kyng∣dome of heau, in guydyng your housholde and orderynge youre gooddes, whiche alwayes thynke to haue receyued of God to ho∣noure hym in his poore and nedy persones. And for his honoure se that peace be in your house, and yt al yours agree together with you
or elles all youre goodes maye & wyll sone come to nought. A reche¦lesse persone may sone set on fire, waste and destroie greate goodes Haue therfore a good sight or eye vnto the laboures of your seruaū¦tes, for vnder theym youre sub∣staunce maye soone be wasted be∣fore you knowe of it, if your good¦des beginne to waste or diminishe forthwith diminyshe youre char∣ges. For who that spendeth be∣yonde his facultye, no wonder, wt nede thoughe he greued be. It is good prouydence ofte tymes to compte and compare your good∣des and gaines with your erspen¦ces. Ofte tymes to ouerse youre goodes shalbe very good, remem¦bring, that the eye of the mayster maketh a fatte horse, and the step of the husbande a fatte dungehil,
that is the maisters presence pro∣fiteth much, bie peace wt suffering and you shalbe sure of it. Thynke coste made vpō riotouse persones to be vtterly loste, not so vpon kin and frendes & poore persones Se y• you charge your sonnes dough¦ters and seruauntes to flee gloto∣nie. For y• seruaūt once made a glo¦ton, wyl neuer amēde his maners Glotony is filthy, reprouable and stinking, & will make the vsers of it soone rotten, and shorte lyued. Meane feading with scarsytie, or withoute full belye that is risyng frome meate with an appetyte to eate, profiteth muche bothe to the soule and bodye. Thinke that the vse of delycate foode, wyll soone marre a good seruaunt, as of riot and wastfulnesse. Beware of ny∣gardie, for as riot is a folishe and
vndyscrete waste of the gyftes of god, so nigardie is a foolishe and a nedelesse feare, the mystruste of God, & a liuyng euer in pouertee an heapīg vp of goodes, for whō none cā tel. Be therfore a maister ouer your goodes, haue theim for your selfe and other, not for your heires onely. Feare and loue god and feare hym duely, and thynke that fishes, foules, beastes & wor∣mes be fedde of his liberalytee, & shall you then perishe for lacke If you wishe for derth, you wishe for y• derth of y• poore. Sell better cheape at home thē in the cōmune market, better cheape to your ene¦mye then to other straungers, for by a kind dede, he wil be better o∣uercōmed then by ye sweard. Be ne¦uer at debate wt your neighbours study to bring theim at one ye so be
The loue of youre neyghboures is a surer warde, then a castel thre double walled. A gentyll minde & a noble herte wyll not greatlye be troubeled with wemens bablyng speche or thretenyng: smilyng, or laughyng, wyll soner correcte a shrewe, then sharpe strokes and y• staffe. Wemen may be kept good with gentyll entreatye, they maye not knowe that they be suspecte, but euer muste be coūsayled with louyng maner. An olde woman vncleane of liuyng, were worthye to be buried quicke. For she is not only dead before God, but killeth other. A woman that hath a suffi∣cient apparell, to desire chaunge, is a token of lytel wit or sadnesse. A costely vesture aboue the state or degree of the persone is a signe of lightnesse. Truste hym rather
for youre frende that dothe som∣what for you, then hym that sayth I am youres, in all that I can & maye doo. In wordes you shall fynde greate plentye of frendes, a trewe frende loueth at all tymes and neuer fayleth at nede. Riches maye not be compared to a faith∣full frende, when you geue coun∣cell saye, thus semeth to me beste, not thus you muste nedes do, lest you might rather gette blame for youre councell then thanke, yf it spede not well. If gesters Ioug∣lers, or minstrelles come to youre house, saye that you haue no lod∣ging for theym, or for suche ge∣stoures. If you be once delighted in their vncomely pastymes, they wyll appoint you anone to be ma¦ried to an other wife, whose name is pouertee or beggere, chose you
whether, yf it chaunce you to bee where as they be, I aduise you to make wise yt you herde theim not, nor set by theyr vnchristenlyke pa¦stymes: For yf they perceyue you but once to laughe, they wyll take it for an earnest to crye largesse, & to haue rewarde, wherfore haue not muche to doo with the galow clappers. God is not well pleased with that occupacion whilest they be ministers to synne, and vse sin∣full wordes. If you haue a ser∣uaunt of an highe proude mynde and stoborne stomake (leste he do you and youres harme) put hym away, so doo him y• doeth alwaies (specialli to your face) praise your maners. Thynke yt flaterers and liers be to trewe men enemyes, as they be to y• treweth which is god Euer suspect the flaterer, & thinke
that he speaketh to deceyue bothe hym selfe & you. Make your buil¦dinges rather for nede then plea∣sure, leste for your pleasures sake God wyll not longe suffer you to take profyte of theim. The desire of building for plesure wyl neuer haue ende, vntyll pouertee teache witte somwhat to late. If you bee compelled to sell your landes, sell theim not to greate persones, but rather for lesse, to men of lower e∣state. Better it is to sell, then to borowe by vsury, for vsury maye cause you to vse this worlde glo∣ryously. It wyll shitte you cleane frome the glorye of God. If you bye a bargayne, be not checke fe∣lowe with great states. Dewe tē∣peraunce in an houshold is a thig of an highe prayse, let your wyne rather then ale or bere be holsome
and temperate. Stronge drinkes maketh weake braynes, and feble to be knowen. Sobre drynke is helthfull bothe to body and soule And the sober wyll be contente wt lytle drinke smal and quicke, who that amonge much strong drinke is sobre & not troubled in brayne, maye be called a God vpon earth Wrestle not with it yf you doo by my councel, leste you catche a fall If it shoulde happen to trouble your brayne, gette you out of com¦panye to sadnesse and sorowe yf you wyll not be vtterly ashamed before menne. Before God howe youre conscience shall iudge you it is not in me to iudge, who that by wordes wolde excuse his dron∣kennesse, declareth his owne dis∣ease. The vse of wyne belongeth not to yonge persones. Beware of
dronken surgynes or phisycions lewde and ignoraunt, let hym not learne in you to heale other. Hawkes and hoūdes do spend more then they do get. I dell per∣sons may haue theim to set theim selues a worke to lese time, fooles and neglygent persones and care¦lesse haue many misfortunes, and therefore they accuse and blame fortune, whiche is not to be bla∣med, for it is her nature to deceiue whom wysedome, discrecion, for∣light & learnyng doth not lyght∣lye blame, dilygent warenes and a good foresyght be no company∣ons to mysfortune, but mysfor∣tune, negligence & slothe be light∣ly neuer asōder, they be cater cou∣syns. The sluggarde sayth, God wyll helpe. Yet wyll not he begyn to helpe hym selfe. I maye saye to
hym, that God geueth all thyn∣ges, but yet geueth he not to the, the bull by the horne. Sette thy hande to the carte, and God wyll it vp pull. The wyse man sendeth the sludgarde for example vnto y• pysmyer or aunte to learne to la∣boure. For a man is borne to la∣boure, and the byrde to flye. He y• laboureth not, is not worthy to eat. Let fewe or none ydell persōs therfore be in your house, & take good hede to euery one of theim, specyally that they can saye, oure Christen beleue, called the Crede, and our Lordes prayer called the Pater noster, with the Aue Ma∣ria, and the commaundementes of God. And at euery dyner and supper let one of youre housholde eyther say by herte or vpon booke thesame, that other maye learne
and that they that haue learned maye kepe theim in memorye. If there be any obstinate persone or other, that hath openly offended, let hym be openly punished to the exāple of other, yf ye persone be of a tendre age wt a sherpe rodde. If he be of further age, let hym eate courser meate then hys felowes & that in the myddel of y• hall vpō a stole by him self, or other such like rebuke or shame let hym suffre, and feare not to correcte vice, lest Goddes punishemente wyll cor∣recte you, but correcte for loue and not vengeaunce. Then shall youre seruauntes loue you, and blame theimselues and learne to hate synnes and offences. Spēd as you get, it is no good husbandrye to borowe when you waxe olde, & at al times trust God
better then chyldren or frendes, That you sende before you, you muste nedes fynde. Heauen is a surer keper of treasures then any cofer, castell or towre. Thynke then when y• poore profereth forth his hand, that God apposeth you what you wolde doo for hym, and of the goodes that you leaue be∣hynde you, appoynte euerye per∣sone his parte. It were better to leaue nothyng, then that stryfe & Goddes dyspleasure: shoulde be lefte amonge youres, for youre goodes. Truste theim beste, that beste loue theyr owne sowles. Not theim that wyl say that they wyll doo for youre soule. Make youre Testamente eue∣ry yere, or elles as occasyon shal∣be geuen alter it, and lay it, wher when nede is, it maye be founde.
No man is sure howe to ende his lyfe or when, but well to ende his lyfe, or to dye well, is well to liue, whiche he graunte you and me, and other beleuing people that boughte vs, oure Lorde Ie∣sus Christe oure sauioure redemer, feder, and de∣fender, in whome lyue you and reygne worlde without ende thorough his grace and mer∣cye. A∣men.
