12665 99851810 17102
THE GREAT Impostor, LAID OPEN in a SERMON at GRAYES INNE, Febr. 2. 1623. By IOS. HALL D. D. LONDON, Printed by J. Havilano for Nath. Butter. 1623.
TO THE MOST NOBLE, AND WORTHILY Honoured Societie OF GRAYES INNE: AT WHOSE BARRE This IMPOSTOR was openly arraigned: J. H. HVMBLY DEDI∣CATES THIS PVBLIKE LIFE OF HIS WEAKE AND VNWORTHY LABOVR.
THE GREAT IMPOSTOR, Laid open, out of IER. 17.9. The heart is deceitfull aboue all things. I Know where I am; in one of the famous Phrontisteries of Law, and Iustice: wher∣fore serues Law and Iustice, but for the preuention or punish∣ment
of fraud and wickednesse? Giue me leaue therefore to bring before you, Students, Masters, Fathers, Oracles of Law and Iu∣stice, the greatest Cheator and Malefactor in the world, our owne Heart. It is a great word that I haue said, in promising to bring him before you; for this is one of the greatest aduantages of his fraud, that he cannot be seene: That as that old Iugler Apollonius Thyanaeus, when he was brought before the Iudge, vani∣shed out of sight; so this great Impostor, in his very presenting before you, dispeareth and is gone; yea so cunningly, that he doth it with our owne consent, and we would be loth that he
could be seene: Therefore as an Epiphonema to this iust com∣plaint of deceitfulnesse, is added Who can know it? It is easie to know that it is deceitfull, and in what it deceiues, though the deceits themselues cannot bee knowne, till too late; As wee may see the ship, and the sea, and the ship going on the sea, yet the way of a ship in the sea (as Salo∣mon obserues) wee know not: God askes, and God shall an∣swer; What he askes by Ieremie, he shall answer by S. Paul, Who knowes the heart of man?1 Cor. 2.11. Euen the spirit of man that is in him. If then the heart haue but eyes enow to see it selfe by the reflection of thoughts, it is enough: Ye shall
easily see and heare enough (out of the analogie and resemblance of hearts) to make you both astonished and ashamed. The heart of man lies in a nar∣row roome, yet all the world cannot fill it; but that which may be said of the heart, would more than fill a world: Here is a double stile giuen it; of deceit∣fulnesse; of wickednesse; either of which knowes no end, whe∣ther of being, or of discourse. I spend my houre, and might doe my life, in treating of the first. See then, I beseech you, the Impostor, and the Imposture; The Impostor himselfe, The heart of man; The Imposture, Deceitfull aboue all things.
As deceitfull persons are wont euer to goe vnder many names, and ambiguous, and must be ex∣prest with an [aliàs] so doth the heart of man; Neither man him∣selfe, nor any part of man hath so many names, as the heart alone; For euery facultie that it hath, and euery action it doth, it hath a seuerall name: Neither is there more multiplicitie, than doubt in this name; Not so many termes are vsed to signifie the heart, as the heart signifies many things. When ye heare of the heart, ye thinke straight of that fleshie part in the center of the body which liues first, and dies last; and whose beatings you finde
to keepe time all the body ouer; That is not it which is so cun∣ning; Alas, that is a poore harmelesse peece; meerely pas∣siue; and if it doe any thing, as the subministration of Vitall spirits, to the maintenance of the whole frame, it is but good; no, it is the spirituall part that lurkes in this flesh, which is guilty of such deceit. We must learne of witty Idolatry to distinguish be∣twixt the stocke and the inuisi∣ble powers that dwell in it. It is not for me to be a sticklor be∣twixt the Hebrewes, and the Greeke Philosophers, and Phy∣sitians, in a question of naturall learning, concerning the  of the soule; nor to insist vpon the
reasons why the spirit of God rather places all the spirituall po∣wers in the heart, than in the braine; Doubtlesse in respect of the affections there resident, whereby all those speculatiue abilities are drawne to practise; It shall suffice vs to take things as we finde them, and to hold it for granted, that this Monosyl∣lable (for so it is in many lan∣guages) comprises all that in∣tellectiue and affectiue world which concerneth man; and in plaine termes to say, that when God saies The heart is deceitfull, he meanes, the vnderstanding, will, affections are deceitfull. The vnderstanding is doubly deceitfull; It makes vs beleeue
it knowes those things which it doth not; and that it knowes not those things which it doth: As some foolish Mountebanke, that holds it a great glory to seeme to know all things; or some presuming Physitian, that thinkes it a shame not to pro∣fesse skill in any state of the bo∣dy, or disease; so doth our vaine vnderstanding; therein framing it selfe according to the spirits it meets withall; if they be proud and curious, it perswades them, they know euery thing; if carelesse, that they know e∣nough. In the first kinde; What hath not the fond heart of man da∣red to arrogate to it selfe? It
knowes all the starres by their names; Tush, that is nothing; It knowes what the stars meane by their verie lookes, what the birds meane by their chir∣ping, as Apollonius did; What the heart meanes, by the features of the face; it knowes the euents of life by the lines of the hand: the secrets of Art, the secrets of Nature, the secrets of State, the secrets of others hearts, yea the secrets of God in the closet of heauen; Yea, not only what God hath done, but what he will doe: This is (Sapiens stultitia) a wise folly, as Irenaeus said of his Valen∣tinians; All Figure-casters, Pal∣mesters, Physiognomers, For∣tune-tellers, Alchymists, fanta∣sticke
proiectors, and all the rab∣ble of professors of those ,Acts 19.19. not so much curious as idle Arts, haue their word giuen them by the Apostle, Deceiuing and deceiued; neither can these men make any worse fooles, than their hearts haue made themselues;. and well may that Alexandrian taxe bee set vpon them in both names, whether of actiue, or passiue folly: And (as it commonly fals out, that su∣perfluous things rob the heart of necessary) in the meane while, those things which the heart may and should know, it light∣ly mis-knowes: As our senses are deceiued by distance, or interpo∣sitions, to thinke the stars bea∣mie
and sparkling, the Moone horned, the Planets equally re∣mote, the Sunne sometimes red, pale other some: so doth also our vnderstanding erre, in mis-opinion of diuine things; It thinkes it knowes God, when it is but an Idoll of fancy, as Sauls messengers, when they came in∣to the roome, thought they had the true Dauid, when it was but a Wispe; it knowes the will of God, when it is nothing but grosse mis-construction: so as the common knowledge of men, though they thinke it a Torch, is but an Ignis Fatuus to leade them to a ditch: How ma∣ny thousand Assyrians thinke they are in the way to the Pro∣phet,
when they are in the midst of Samaria? How many milli∣ons thinke they walke fairely on to heauen, when indeed they are in the broad way that leads to destruction? Oh poore blind Pagans, halfe-sighted Turkes, bleare-eied Iewes, blind-folded Papists, Squint-eied Schisma∣ticks, purblind ignorants, how well doe they finde themselues pleased with their deuotion, and thinke God should bee so too; when it is nothing but a mix∣ture of mesprison, superstition, conceitednesse; and (according to the seldome-reuerently-vsed prouerb) whiles they thinke they haue God by the finger, they hold a deuill by the toe;
and all this, because their heart deceiues them. If carelesse, and loth to bee at the paines of knowing more, it perswades them they know enough; that they cry out of more, as he did on the ointment, (Vt quid perditio haec?) What needs all this waste? and makes them as consciona∣ble for knowledge, as Esau was for cattle, I haue enough, my brother, keepe that thou hast to thy selfe; or as contentedly-resolute, as the Epi∣cure in the Gospell: Soule take thy ease, thou hast knowledge enough laid vp for many yeeres. From whence it is, that too many rest simply (yea wilfully) in their owne measure, not so much as wishing more skill in
Soule-matters; applauding their owne safe mediocritie; like the credulous blinde man that thought he now saw a shimme∣ring of the Sunne-beames, when indeed his backe was towards it: Hence it is that they scoffe at the foolishnesse of preaching, scorne the forward bookish∣nesse of others, fearing nothing but a surfet of Manna, and ha∣ting to know more than their neighbours, than their fore-fa∣thers; & thus are led on muffled vp in an vnfelt ignorance, to their graue, yea, (without the mercy of God) to their hell. And as in these things there is a presumption of knowing what we doe not; so contrarily,
a dissimulation and conceale∣ment of the knowledge of what we doe vnderstand; The heart of man is a great lier to it selfe this way; Saint Paul saies that of Pagans, which I may bold∣ly say of Christians, they haue the effect of the law written in their hearts; yet many of them will not bee acknowne of one letter ingrauen there by the fin∣ger of God: Certaine common principles there are (together with this law) interlinearily writ∣ten in the tables of the heart, as that we must doe as we would be done to; That there is a God; That this God is infinite in iu∣stice and truth, and must be serued like himselfe; these they
either blot out, or lay their fin∣ger on, that they may not bee seene, purposely, that they may sinne freely; and faine would perswade themselues they neuer had any such euidence from God: so putting off the checks of conscience with bold deny∣alls; like the harlot of Iericho, (but worse than she) that hath hid the Spies, and now out-faces their entertainment: Wherein the heart doth to it selfe, that which Nahash the Ammonite, would haue done to Israel, put out his owne right eie, that it may not see that law whereby it might be conuinced, and finde it selfe miserable. Thus the vn∣derstanding of man is euery
way deceitfull in ouerknowing, mis-knowing, dissembling; in all which it is like an euill and vnfaithfull eye, that either will be seeing by a false glasse, or a false light, or with distortion; or else wilfully closes the lids that it may not see at all; and in all this deceiues vs. The will is no lesse cunning; which though it make faire pre∣tences of a generall inclination to good, yet (hîc & nunc) in parti∣culars, hangs towards a pleasing euill; Yea though the Vnder∣standing haue sufficiently infor∣med it of the worthinesse of good, and the turpitude of euill, yet being ouercome with the false delectablenesse of sinne, it
yeelds to a misse-assent; Reason being (as Aquinas speakes) either swallowed vp by some passion, or held downe by some vicious habit: It is true, still the Will fol∣lowes the Reason, neither can doe otherwise; but therefore, if Reason mis-led be contrary to Reason, and a schisme arise in the soule, it must follow that the Will must needs be contrary to Will and Reason; Wherein it is like a Planet, which though it be carried about perpetually by the first mouer, yet slily creepes on his owne way, contrary to that strong circumuolution: And though the minde be suffi∣ciently conuinced of the necessi∣tie, or profit of a good act, yet
for the tediousnesse annexed to it, in a dangerous spirituall ace∣die, it insensibly slips away from it, and is content to let it fall; As some idle, or fearfull Mer∣chant, that could be glad to haue gold, if it would come with ease, but will not either take the paines, or hazard the aduenture to fetch it: Thus commonly the Will (in both respects) Water∣man-like lookes forward, and rowes backward; and vnder good pretences doth nothing but deceiue. The affections are as deceit∣full as either; whether in misse-placing, measure, or manner. Mis-placing: They are fiery where they should be coole; and
where they should burne, freeze; Our heart makes vs beleeue it loues God, and giues him pled∣ges of affection; whiles it secret∣ly doats vpon the world; like some false strumpet, that enter∣taines her husband with her eyes, and in the meane time treads vpon the toe of an Adul∣terer vnder the board: That it loues iustice, when it is but re∣uenge; That it grieues for the missing of Christ, when indeed it is but for the loaues and fishes; That it feares God, when indeed it is but afraid of our owne tor∣ment; That it hates the sinne, when it is the person; That it hates the world, when it thrusts God out of doores to lodge it.
Measure: That we loue God enough, and the world but enough, when as indeed the one loue is but as the cold fit of an ague, the other an hot; we chill in the one, no lesse than we glow in the other; when wee make God only a stale to draw on the world; That wee doe enough hate our corruptions, when (at our sharpest) we doe but gently sneape them, as Hely did his sons; or as some indulgent parent doth an vnthriftie darling, whom he chides, and yet feeds with the fewell of his excesse; That we haue grieued enough for our sinnes, when they haue not cost vs so much as one teare, nothing but a little fashionable
winde, that neuer came further than the roots of our tongue; That we doe enough compassi∣onate the afflictions of Ioseph, when we drinke wine in bowles; That wee feare God more than men, when wee are ashamed to doe that in presence of a childe, which wee care not to doe in the face of God. Manner: That our heart loues, and hates, and feares, and ioyes, and grieues truly, when it is an hypocrite in all; That it delights constantly in God, and holy things, when it is but an Ephraims morning dew; That our anger is zealous, when it is but a flash of personall malice, or a superstitious furie; That we
feare as sonnes, when it is as cowards, or slaues; That we grieue as Gods patients, when we fret, and repine, and struggle like franticks against the hand of our Maker. Thus (to summe vp all) the heart of man is wholly set vpon cozenage; the vnderstanding ouer-know∣ing, mis-knowing, dissembling; The will pretending, and incli∣ning contrarily; The affections mocking vs in the obiect, mea∣sure, manner; and in all of them the heart of man is deceitfull. Ye haue seene the face of this Cheater; looke now at his hand; and now ye see who this Decei∣uer is, see also the sleights of his deceit; and therein, the fashion,
the subiect, the sequell of it; from whence we will descend to our Demeanure towards so dange∣rous an Impostor. The fashion of his deceit is the same with our ordinary Iug∣lers; either cunning conueyance, or false semblance. Cunning conueyance, whether into vs, in vs, from vs. The heart admits sinne, as Paradise did the Serpent; There it is, but by what chinkes or cra∣nies it entered, we know not; so as we may say of sinne as the Master of the feast in the Go∣spell said to his slouenly guest, Quomodo intrasti? How camest thou in hither? Corruption doth not eat into the heart as our first Pa∣rents
did into the apple, so as the print of their teeth might bee seene, but as the worme eats into the core, insensibly; Nei∣ther is there lesse closenesse when it is entered; I would it were as vntrue a word, as it is an harsh one, that many a professedly-Christian heart, lodges a deuill in the blinde roomes of it, and ei∣ther knowes it not, or will not be acknowne of it; euery one that harbours a willing sinne in his brest, doth so: The malici∣ous man hath a furious deuill; the wanton an vncleane deuill, a Beelphegor, or a Tammuz; the proud man a Lucifer, the coue∣tous a Mammon; Certainly, these foule spirits are not more truly
in hell, than in a wicked heart; there they are, but so closely, that I know not if the heart it selfe know it; it being verified of this citadell of the heart, which was said of that vast Ni∣niue, that the enemie had taken some parts of it, long ere the other knew it: What should I speake of the most common, and yet most dangerous guest, that lodges in this Inne of the heart, Infidelity? Call at the doore, and aske if such a one host not there; They within make strange of it, deny it, for∣sweare it; Call the officers, make priuy search, you shall hardly finde him: Like some Iesuite in a Popish dames chamber, he is
so closely contriued into false floores, and double walls, that his presence is not more easily knowne, than hardly conuin∣ced, confessed. How easie is it to say, that if infidelity did not lurke in the hearts of men, they durst not doe as they doe; they could not but doe, what they doe not? Durst they sin if they were perswaded of an hell? durst they buy a minute of pleasure with euerlasting torments? Could they so sleight heauen if they beleeued it? Could they be so loth to possesse it? Could they thinke much of a little painfull goodnesse to purchase an eternity of happinesse? No, no, men, fathers, and brethren;
if the heart were not Infidell, whiles the face is Christian, this could not bee. Neither doth the heart of man more cun∣ningly conuey sinne into, and in it selfe, than from it; The sin that ye saw euen now openly in the hands, is so swiftly past vn∣der the board, that it is now va∣nished; Looke for it in his fore∣head, there it is not; looke for it vnder his tongue, there is none; looke for it in his conscience, ye finde nothing; and all this by the legier-de-maine of the heart: Thus Achan hath hid his wedge, and now he dares stand out to a lot; Thus Salomons Harlot hath wip't her mouth, and it was not she: Thus Saul will lie-out his
sacriledge, vntill the very beasts out-bleat, and out-bellow him; Thus the swearer sweares, and when he hath done, sweares that hee swore not; Thus the vn∣cleane fornicator bribes off his sinne, and his shame, and now makes challenges to the world of his honesty. It cannot be spo∣ken how peeuishly witty the heart of man is this way; neither doubt I but this wilinesse is some of the poyson that the sub∣tile serpent infected vs with in that fatall morsell: They were three cunning shifts which the Scripture recordeth of three wo∣men (as that sex hath beene euer noted for more sudden preg∣nancie of wit) Rachel, Rahab, and
the good wife of Bahurim; The first hiding the Teraphim with a modest seat, the second, the spics with flaxe-stalkes, and the third Dauids scouts with corne spred ouer the Well; but these are nothing to the deuices that na∣ture hath wont to vse for the cloaking of sinne; God made man vpright, saith Salomon, but he sought many inuentions: Is Adam challen∣ged for sinne? Behold all on the sudden it is passed from his hand, to Gods; The woman that thou gauest me: Is Saul challenged for a couetous and disobedient remissenesse? the sinne is straight passed from the field to the Al∣tar; I saued the fattest for a sacrifice to the Lord thy God; So the one
begins his sinne in God, and the other ends it in him: Is Dauid bewitched with lust to abuse the Wife? the Husband must bee sent home drunke, to hide it, or if not that, to his long home, in a pretended fauour of his va∣lour: Is a griping Vsurer dispo∣sed to put his money together to breed a monster? hee hath a thousand quirks to cozen both law and conscience: Is a Simo∣niacall Patron disposed to make a good match of his peoples soules? it shall be no bargaine, but a gift: hee hath a liuing to giue, but an horse to sell. And sure I thinke in this wise age of the world, Vsurers and Simo∣nists striue who shall finde the
wittiest way to hell: What should I speake of the secret frauds in contracts, booties in matches, subornation of instru∣ments, hiring of oathes, feeing of officers, equiuocations of an∣swers, and ten thousand other tricks that the heart of man hath deuised for the conueiances of sinne; in all which it too well approues it selfe incomparably deceitfull. The false semblance of the heart is yet worse; for the former is most-what for the smothe∣ring of euill; this is for the iu∣stifying of euill, or the disgrace of good; In these two doth this act of falshood chiefly consist; in making euill good, or good
euill. For the first; The naturall man knowes well how filthy all his brood is, and therefore will not let them come forth, but disguised with the colours and dresses of good; so as now euery one of natures birds is a Swan; Pride is handsomnesse, desperate fury, valour; lauish∣nesse is noble munificence, drunkennesse ciuility, flattery complement, murderous re∣uenge, iustice; the Curtizan is bona foemina, the Sorcerer a wise man, the oppressor a good hus∣band; Absolom will goe pay his vowes; Herod will worship the Babe. For the second; such is the enuy of nature, that where shee sees a better face than her
owne, she is ready to scratch it, or cast dirt in it; and therefore knowing that all vertue hath a natiue beauty in it, she labours to deforme it by the foulest im∣putations. Would the Israelites be deuout? they are idle; Doth Dauid daunce for ioy before the Arke? he is a foole in a Morris: Doth Saint Paul discourse of his heauenly Vision? too much learning hath made him mad. Doe the Disciples miraculously speake all the tongues of Babel? They are full of new wine: Doe they preach Christs Kingdome? they are seditious; The resur∣rection? they are bablers. Is a man conscionable? he is an Hy∣pocrite: Is he conformable? he
is vnconscionable: Is he plaine dealing? he is rudely vnciuill: Is he wisely insinuatiue? he is a flat∣terer: In short, such is the wic∣ked craft of the heart, that it would let vs see nothing in it owne forme; but faine would shew vs euill faire, that we might be inamored of it, and vertue vg∣ly, that we might abhorre it; and as it doth for the way, so doth it for the end; hiding from vs the glory of heauen, that is laid vp for ouer-commers, and shew∣ing vs nothing but the pleasant closure of wickednesse; making vs beleeue that hell is a palace, and heauen a dungeon, that so we might be in loue with death; and thus both in cunning con∣ueyance,
and false semblance, The heart of man is deceitfull aboue all things. Ye haue seene the fashion of this deceit; cast now your eies vpon the subiect: And whom doth it then deceiue? It doth de∣ceiue others, it can deceiue it selfe, it would deceiue Sathan, yea God himselfe. Others, first: How many doe we take for ho∣nest and sound Christians, who yet are but errant hypocrites? These Apes of Sathan haue lear∣ned to transforme themselues into Angels of light; The heart bids the eies looke vpward to heauen, when they are full of adultery; It bids the hands to raise vp themselues towards
their Maker, when they are full of bloud; It bids the tongue wagge holily, when there is no∣thing in the bosome but Athe∣ous profanenesse; It bids the knee to bow like a Camel, when the heart is stiffe as an Ele∣phant; yea if need bee it can bid a teare fall from the eie, or an almes or iust action fall from the hand, and all to gull the world with a good opinion; In all which, false chapmen and horse-coursers doe not more or∣dinarily deceiue their buyers in shops and faires, than wee doe one another in our conuersati∣on: Yea, so crafty is the heart that it can deceiue it selfe; By ouer-weening his own powers,
as the proud man; by vnder-va∣luing his graces, as the modest; by mis-taking his estate, as the ignorant; How many hearts doe thus grossely beguile them∣selues? The first thinkes hee is rich, and fine, when hee is beg∣gerly and naked; so did the An∣gell of Laodicea: The second is poore in his owne spirit, when he is rich of Gods spirit: The third thinkes that he is a great fa∣uorite of heauen, when he is ra∣ther branded for an out-cast; that he is truly noble, when he is a slaue to that, which is baser than the worst of Gods crea∣tures, sinne: Let the proud and ignorant worldling therefore know, that though others may
mocke him with applauses, yet that all the world cannot make him so much a foole as his owne heart. Yea, so cunning is the heart, that it thinkes to goe beyond the deuill himselfe: I can (thinks it) swallow his bait, and yet auoid his hooke; I can sinne, and liue; I can repent of sin∣ning, and defeat my punish∣ment by repenting; I can runne vpon the score, and take vp the sweet and rich commodities of sinfull pleasure; and when I haue done, I can put my selfe vn∣der the protection of a Sauiour, and escape the arrest: Oh the world of soules that perish by this fraud, fondly beguiling
themselues, whiles they would beguile the Tempter. Yet higher: Lastly, as Satan went about to deceiue the Son of God; so this foolish consort and client of his goes about to deceiue God himselfe: The first paire of hearts that euer was, were thus credulous, to thinke they should now meet with a meanes of knowledge and Dei∣fying, which God either knew not of, or grudged them, and therefore they would be stealing it out of the side of the apple, without God, yea against him: Tush, none eye shall see vs; Is there knowledge in the most high, saith the sottish Atheist? Lord, haue not we heard thee preach in out
streets? haue not we cast out Deuils in thy name? sayes the smoothing hypocrite; as if he could fetch God ouer for an admission into heauen. Thou hast not lied to man, but to God, saith S. Peter to Ananias. And pettish Ionas, after hee had beene cooled in the belly of the Whale, and the Sea, yet will be bearing God downe in an argu∣ment to the iustifying of his idle choler, I doe well to be angry to the death. But as the greatest Politi∣cians are oft ouertaken with the grossest follies (God owes proud wits a shame) the heart of man could not possibly deuise how so much to be foole it selfe, as by this wicked presumption:Psal. 94.10, 11. Oh yee fooles, when will ye vnderstand? He
that formed the eye, shall he not see? Hee that teacheth man knowledge, shall not he vnderstand? The Lord knoweth the thoughts of man, that they are vanitie. A rod for the backe of fooles, yea a rod of iron for such presumptuous fooles, to crush them in peeces like a Potters vessell. Ye haue seene the fashion and the subiect of this deceit: the se∣quell, or effect followes; euery way lamentable; For hence it comes to passe that many a one hath had his heart in keeping fortie, fiftie, threescore yeeres, and more, and yet is not ac∣quainted with it; and all because this craft hath kept it at the Pri∣scillianists locke, Tu omnes, te ne∣mo;
It affects to be a searcher of all men, no man is allowed to come aboard of it; And if a man whether out of curiositie, or conscience, bee desirous to in∣quire into it (as it is a shame for a man to be a stranger at home; Know ye not your owne hearts, saith the Apostle;) it casts it selfe, Proteus-like, into so many formes, that it is very hard to apprehend it. One while the man hath no heart, () saith Salomon; Then hee hath () an heart, and an heart,Psal. 12. saith Dauid; and one of his hearts contradicts another; and then how knowes he whether to be∣leeue? And what certainty, what safety can it be for a man to liue
vnacquainted with himselfe? O this vnacquaintance, second∣ly, arises a dangerous mes-prison of a mans selfe, in the nature and quantity of his sinne, in the quality of his repentance, in his peace and intirenesse with God, in his right to heauen, and (in a word) in his whole spiri∣tuall estate. Of this mes-prison, thirdly, arises a fearefull disap∣pointment of all his hopes, and a plunging into vnauoidable torments: Wherein it is misera∣ble to see, how cunningly the traiterous hearts of many men beare them in hand all their liues long; soothing them in all their courses, promising them successe in all their waies, securing them
from feare of euills, assuring them of the fauour of God, and possession of heauen (as some fond Bigot would bragge of his Bull, or Medall, or Agnus Dei; or, as those Priests that Gerson Qui pub∣licè volunt dogmatiza∣rescupraedi∣care popuo, quod si quis audit mis∣sam in illo die non  coeus, nec morietr morte subi∣tanea, nec carebit suffi∣cienti suste∣tatione, &c tax∣es, who made the people beleeue that the Masse was good for the eye-sight, for the mawe, for bo∣dily health, and preseruation) till they come to their death∣beds; But then when they come to call forth the comforts they must trust to, they finde them like to some vnfaithfull Cap∣taine, that hath all the while in Garrison filled his purse with dead paies, and made vp the number of his companies with borrowed men; and in time of
ease shewd faire; but when hee is called forth by a sudden ala∣rum, bewraies his shame and weaknesse, and failes his Gene∣rall when he hath most need of him; right thus doe the perfi∣dious hearts of many, after all the glorious bragges of their se∣curity, on the bed of their last reckoning, finde nothing but a cold despaire, and a wofull horror of conscience; and there∣fore too iustly may their hearts say to them, as the heart of Apol∣lodorus the Tyran seemed to say vnto him; who dreamed one night that hee was fleaed by the Scythians, and boyled in a Cal∣dron; and that his heart spake to him out of the kettle (
) It is I that haue drawne thee to all this. Certainly neuer man was, or shall bee frying in hell, but cries out of his owne heart, and accuses that deceitfull peece as guilty of all his tor∣ment: For let Satan be neuer so malicious, and the world neuer so parasiticall, yet if his owne heart had beene true to him, none of these could haue hurt him. Let the rest of our ene∣mies doe their worst, only from the euill of our owne hearts, good Lord deliuer vs. It were now time for our thoughts to dwell a little vpon the meditation, and deploration of our owne danger and mise∣ry, who are euery way so inuiro∣ned
with subtlety. If wee looke at Satan, his old title is, that old Serpent; who must needs there∣fore now, by so long time and experience, bee both more old and more Serpent. If we looke at sinne, it is as crafty as he; Lest any of you be hardened through the de∣ceitfulnesse of sinne: If at our owne hearts, we heare (that which we may feele) that the heart is deceitfull aboue all things. Oh wretched men that we are, how are we be∣set with Impostors on all hands; If it were more seasonable for vs to bewaile our estate, than to seeke the redresse of it; But since it is not so much worth our labour to know how deepe the pit is, into which wee are
fallen, as how to come out of it, heare rather (I beseech you) for a conclusion, how wee may a∣uoid the danger of the deceit of our false heart; euen iust so as we would preuent the nimble feates of some cheating Iugler, Search him, watch him, Trust him not. Looke well into his hands, pockets, boxes, sleeues, yea, vn∣der his very tongue it selfe; There is no fraud so secret, but may be descried; were our hearts as crafty as the deuill himselfe, they may be found out;. We are not ignorant (saith Saint Paul) of Satans deuices; much more then may we know our owne; Were the hearts of men (as Salo∣mon
speakes of Kings) like vn∣to deepe waters, they haue a bottome, and may be fathomed; Were they as darke as hell it selfe, and neuer so full of win∣dings, and blind waies, and ob∣scure turnings, doe but take the lanthorne of Gods law in your hand, and you shall easily finde all the false and foule corners of them; As Dauid saith of the Sun, nothing is hid from the light thereof; Proue your selues, saith the Apo∣stle; It is hard if falshood be so constant to it selfe that by many questions it bee not tripped: Where this duty is slackened, it is no wonder if the heart bee ouer-run with spirituall fraud; Often priuy searches scarre away
vagrant, and disorderly persons, where no inquiry is made, is a fit harbour for them; If yee would not haue your hearts, therefore, become the lawlesse Ordinaries of vncleane spirits, search them oft; Leaue not a straw vnshaken to finde out these Labanish Teraphim that are stolne, and hid within vs; And, when wee haue searched our best, if we feare there are yet some vnknowne euills lurking within vs (as the man after Gods owne heart prayes against secret sinnes) let vs call him in that cannot be deceiued; and say to God with the Psalmist, Search thou me ô Lord, and trie me; Oh let vs yeeld our selues ouer to bee
ransackt by that all-seeing eye, and effectuall hand of the Al∣mighty. All our daubing, and cogging, and packing, and shuffling lies open before him, and he only can make the heart ashamed of it selfe. And when our hearts are once stript naked, & carefully searcht, let our eyes be euer fixedly bent vpon their conueyances, and inclinations; If we search and watch not, wee may be safe for the present, long wee cannot; for our eye is no sooner off, than the heart is busie in some pra∣ctise of falshood; It is well if it forbeare whiles wee looke on, for The thoughts of mans heart are only euill continually; and many a
heart is like some bold and cun∣ning theefe, that lookes a man in the face, and cuts his purse: But surely, if there be any guardian of the soule, it is the eye; The wise mans eye (saith Solomon) is in his head; doubtlesse, on purpose to looke into his heart: My sonne, aboue all keepings keepe thy heart, saith he; If we doe not dogge our hearts then in all our wayes, but suffer our selues to lose the sight of them, they run wilde, and we shall not recouer them till after many slippery tricks on their parts, and much repen∣tance on ours. Alas, how little is this regarded in the world? wherein the most take no keepe of their soules, but suffer them∣selues
to run after the wayes of their owne hearts, without ob∣seruation, without controle∣ment; What should I say of these men, but that they would faine be deceiued, and perish? For after this loose licentious∣nesse (without the great mercy of God) they neuer set eye more vpon their hearts, till they see them either fearfully intoyled in the present iudgements of God, or fast chained in the pit of hell, in the torments of finall con∣demnation. Thirdly, If our searches and watches should faile vs, wee are sure our distrust cannot; It is not possible our heart should de∣ceiue vs, if we trust it not; Wee
carry a remedy within vs of others fraud; and why not of our owne? The Italians not vn∣wisely pray God (in their knowne prouerbe) to deliuer them from whom they trust; for wee are obnoxious to those we relie vpon, but nothing can leese that which it had not; Distrust therefore can neuer be disappointed: If our hearts then shall promise vs ought (as it hath learned to profer largely, of him that said, All these will I giue thee) although with vowes & oathes, aske for his assurances; if he can∣not fetch them from the euiden∣ces of God, trust him not: If he shall report ought to vs, aske for his witnesses; if he cannot
produce them from the records of God, trust him not: If he shall aduise vs ought, aske for his warrant; if he cannot fetch it from the Oracles of God, trust him not; And in all things so beare our selues to our heart, as those that thinke they liue a∣mongst theeues and cozeners; euer iealously and suspiciously; taking nothing of their word, scarce daring to trust our owne senses; making sure worke in all matters of their transactions. I know I speake to wise men, whose counsell is wont to be as∣ked, and followed, in matter of the assurances of estates; whose wisdome is frequently imployed in the triall, euiction, dooming
of malefactors: Alas, what shall it auaile you that you can aduise for the preuention of others fraud, if in the meane time you suffer your selues to be cozd at home? What comfort can you finde in publike seruice to the state against offenders, if you should carry a fraudulent and wicked heart in your owne bo∣somes? There is one aboue whom wee may trust, whose word is more firme than heauen; When heauen shall passe, that shall stand; It is no trusting ought besides, any further than he giues his word for it. Mans Epithet is, Homo mendax, and his best part, the hearts, deceitfull. Alas, what shall wee thinke, or
say of the condition of those men, which neuer follow any other aduice than what they take of their owne heart? Such are the most; that make not Gods Law of their counsell; As Esay said of Israel,Esa. 57.17. Abijt vagtis in viacordis sui: Surely they are not more sure they haue an heart, than that they shall be deceiued with it, and betraied vnto death; Of them may I say, as Salomon doth of the wanton foole, that followes an harlot;Pro. 7.21. Thus with her great craft she caused him to yeeld, and with her flattering lips she inti∣sed him: And he followed her straight∣wayes, as an Oxe that goes to the slaughter, or as a foole to the stocks for correction. Oh then, deare
Christians, as euer yee desire to auoid that direfull slaughter-house of hell, those wailings, and gnashings, and gnawings, and euerlasting burnings, ke carefully to your owne herts; and what euer suggestions they shall make vnto you, trust them not, till you haue tried them by that vnfaileable rule of righ∣teousnesse, the royall law of your Maker, which can no more deceiue you, than your hearts can free you from de∣ceit. Lastly, that wee may auoid not onely the euents, but the very enterprises of this deceit, let vs countermine the subtill workings of the heart. Our
Sauiour hath bidden vs be wise as Serpents; What should bee wise but the heart? And can the heart be wiser than it selfe?  wisdome of the heart remedie the craft of the heart? Certainly it may. There are two men in euery regenerate brest, the old and the new; And of these (as they are euer plotting against each other) wee must take the better side, and labour that the new man, by being more wise in God, may out-strip the old: And how shall that be done? If we would dispossesse the strong man that keepes the house, our Sauiour bids vs bring in a stronger than hee; and if wee
would ouer-reach the subtiltie of the old man, yea, the old Serpent, bring in a wiser than hee, euen the Spirit of God, the God of wisdome;  would haue Achitophels wicked counsels crossed, set vp an Hu∣shai within vs: The foolishnesse of God is wiser than the wis∣dome of men. Could wee but settle God within vs, our craf∣tie hearts would bee out of countenance, and durst not of∣fer to play any of their delu∣ding tricks before him from whom nothing is hid; and if they could bee so impudently presumptuous, yet they should be so soone controlled in their first motions, that there would
bee more danger of their con∣fusion, than of our deceit. As yee loue your selues therefore, and your owne safetie, and wold bee free from the perill of this secret broaker of Satan, your owne hearts, render them obediently into the hands of God; giue him the keyes of these closets of his owne ma∣king; beseech him that hee will vouchsafe to dwell and reigne in them; so shall wee be sure that neither Satan shall deceiue them, nor they deceiue vs; but both wee and they shall be kept safe and inuiola∣ble, and presented glorious to the appearance of our Lord IESVS CHRIST: To whom
with the FATHER, and the HOLY GHOST e all ho∣nour and glor for euer and euer AMEN. FINIS.
