12815 99854230 19639
THE ENGLISH CONCORD, IN ANSVVER TO BE∣CANE'S ENGLISH JARRE: Together with a Reply to Becan's Examen of the English Concord. By Richard Harris, Dr. in Diuinitie. 2. Tim. 2.16. Stay profane and vaine babblings: for they will encrease vnto more vngodlinesse. AT LONDON, Printed by H. L. for Mat. Lownes; and are to be sold in Paules Church-yard, at the signe of the Bishops head. 1614.
TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT Maiestie; Iames, by the Grace of of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the true, auncient, Catholick, and Apostolike faith: and Supreme Gouernour in all Causes, & ouer all persons Ecclesiacticall within his Dominions. So ordained to be by the Diuine Masestie. Most Gracious Soueragine; THat busie pack-horse Iesuit Becan, maintaining, what in his small power lyeth, diametrall opposition to your Ma∣iesties rightfull & supereminet power Ecclesiastical: To make the same seem ludibrious in the eyes of his adherents, (as King Dauid dauncing before the Arke, seemed to be in the eyes of prophane Michal); in his printed empty pam∣phlet, stiled, Dissidium Anglicanú, brought, as it were, vpon the vvorlds Theatre, fiue English Protestant Wri∣ters, in defence of your Maiesties said Supremacy; namely, the most learned, & Reuerend Bishop of Ely, with his two Chaplaines, Maister Thomson, and Maister Burhill, also Maister Doctor Tooker, and my Selfe; as iarring among our selues, in many and materiall points of the said Supremacy: and therevpon hee concluded, that
your Maiestie hath no iuct cause, to vrge the taking of the Oath of Regall Supremacy vpon your subiects; sith the defenders thereof in writing cannot agree in the main, reall, and essentiall parts of it. Which pernitious proiect of the Aduersarie, caused me, in my most humble dutie, & loyall seruice to your Maiestie, eftsoones to write my booke of English Concord; therein shewing, and prouing the sweet harmonie, whereby all the fore said fiue Writers vtter the rightfull Supremacy of your sacred Maiestie. Now, because some of your Maiesties Popish and English subiects, haue turned the said pamphlet of Becan, out of Latin, into English, thereby to cause that poisonfull canker to spread further, and that Roman leprosie to ouerrun the outward faces, and inward hearts of English Papists, on this side, and beyond the Seas: To countermine that serpentine plot, viz. to suppesse, or at the least, to stay the further pro∣gresse of that running Canker; it seemed good vnto your Maiestie, to commaund the translating of my said booke into English: which was done accordingly. But before it could be printed, Becan had written, and sent to the last Frank-fort Mart, his EXAMEN of my booke of English Concord: which forced me to annex my REPLY, and Refutation of his Examen, in the Interim, in English al∣so, because the other are in English; intending with all con∣uenient speed, to send the same Reply augmented, beyond the Seas in Latin, that this importune Aduersary, may see his reed Examen shaken downe, and shinered all to peeces; and also may behold the English Concord, fully maintai∣ned, and iustified, in euery part and parcell of Regall Su∣premacie. I humbly confesse vnto your excellent Maiestie, that it grieued me at my very hart, to spend so many good houres,
in refuting the Almanack-pamphlets, of this shallow, and in very truth, vnlearned Iesuit; wherein is not to be found any learning, reading, or indicious discourse, fitting a Fa∣ther-Iesuit: but onely boy-like wranglings, about either seeming Iarres, in vvords or syllables; or escapes of the Transcriber, Printer, or Corrector, in some abcedary letters, in numerall figures, in quoting the middle paragraph-word, for the first vvord of the selfe same Canon: vvhereas the very expresse words, or the very substantiall matter, accor∣ding to the meaning of the Author, and the purpose in hand, was faithfully set downe. These trifles, which (with his shamelesse calumniations, vntruthes, and scurrilities, make vp the very bulke of his triobulare booke) though they might well haue been let passe, as things of nought; or buried in silence: yet because wise Sa∣lomon aduiseth, Sometimes to answere a foole in his foolishnes; least my silence heerin, should cause this Iesuit to growe more insolent; or the Popish sort in their vngrati∣ons and rebellious deniall of this Oath, more confident; I haue made this Reply, to giue him more matter to vvorke vpon: It beeing my setled resolution, through Gods assi∣stance whiles I breath, to iustifie in vvriting against this Iesuit, both the rightfulnesse of your Maiesties Suprema∣cie, and also the vniforme agreement of the said Writers therein. The rather, because, though this Iesuit by his sillie scribblings, brings shame and disgrace to the Pope, whose cause he vndertaketh to defend; yet is thought not the vn∣meetest Emissary of his Vnholinesse; for that this Pope∣parasite, with his hard forhead, dare set forth in print, any thing for his Lord God the Pope, & against your sacred Maistie: be it, for the matter, neuer so impiously grosse; and for the manner, neuer soimpudently sourrilous. Wher∣fore,
having tasted of your Highnes most Gracious patro∣nage in my former labours, I am emboldned to present these also vnto your royall view: beeing more desirous of your Maiest: sole iudgement, to approue the lines defending regall iurisdiction; then of a whole Colledge or councell of our Aduersaries. Because such is the desert of your royall minde, and penne, as vvas by Sabellicus attributed to Cicero: Pulchriùs illi multo fuit Latinum sermonem, quàm Romanum Imperium auxisse. So is it more ho∣nour to your excellent Maiestie, (if such a Prince bee capable of accesse of Honour) that you haue by writing pro∣pagated the religion of Christ, then if by battell you had en∣larged your Dominions, and Great Britaines Monarchie: The one beeing the price of the death of Iesus: the other, your most lawfull patrimony, by the death of your royall fore-fa∣thers. Which the Lord graunt you may so long enjoy, as your owne royall heart desireth, and all your louing subiects doe say, Amen. Your Maiesties most humble, and loyall subiect, RICHARD HARRIS.
A PREFACE TO all English Papists who approue not the Gun-powder Treason: aunswering the Preface of BECANE. For as much as Becane hath dis∣coursed of an English Iarre about the Supremacie, I am willing to vse a few words vnto you; but in no case to be troublesome with any tedious Oration. About two yeares since, Becane wrote two Libel-pamphlets touching the Kings Supremacie: th'one against the Apologie and monitorie Preface of our most mighty and gracious Soueraigne, IAMES, King of great Britanne: Th'other, against a booke called Tortura Torti; or rather against the author thereof, the most reuerend Bishop of Ely. The smoaky fumes of which Pamphlet (for they contained no solide matter in them) were dispelled by Dr. Tucker, Mr. R. Tomson, Mr. Rob. Burhill, and by Hainricus Salo-brigiensis. Notwithstanding, Martin Becane abideth conceitedly obstinate, al∣though
there be many things, which might haue cooled his heate, and taken from him all lust of fur∣ther brawling. And principally these: First, the ini∣quity of his Cause. Then, your indifferent equitie. Lastly, the manifolde intestine Iarres and diffe∣rences of Romane Writers, about the Popes Su∣premacie; and our full agreement in the Kings Su∣premacie. What shall I neede to speake of the ini∣quity of his Cause? For it fights against the Church of Christ, in the behalfe of the honour and Soue∣raignetie of Antichrist; after the manner and biasse of Icsuits. And in this case, what one of the fore∣named hath he not iust cause to feare? Againe, your indifferent equitie, wherein (with the Venetians and the Parisian Sorbonists) you detest the Iesuites, who seeke to iustifie their Cause by the imprisonments, bonds, and deaths of Traitors, suffered for their re∣bellions against their natiue Kings; whose hands (vnlesse they were the hands of this Becane) would it not shake, and cause to let fall the penne? whose spirits, though neuer so lofty, would it not depresse, infringe, and dissipate, saue onely of Becane? But, very impiously and impudently doth he apply, to the Gun-powder Traitors, that which Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 4. wrote of the persecuted Saints: viz. You are made a gazing stock to God, to Angels, and to Men. Let them be so, since the Iesuite will haue it so; 1. Agazing stock to God: who, beholding their trecherous and couert conspiracies against their most gracious Soueraigne, his Anointed (as the Ie∣suite here confesseth) laugheth them to scorne; enfee∣bling
their forces, for our victory; and preparing hell fire, for their eternall punishment. 2. A specta∣cle to Angels: who [wondring there be any (so much as stiled with the name of Christians) that tremble not to call the royall Supremacies of Kings in the Church (ordained by God himselfe, grounded vp∣on Scriptures, practised with commendation, by the best, both Kings of Israell, and Emperors Chri∣stian) Potentissimos Inferorum Principatus; The most potent principalities of hell:] reioyce to beholde such infamous and execrable Traitors committed to the safe custody and torture of spirituall wicked∣nesses. Lastly, A spectacle to men: who (being disper∣sed through the whole world, and but hearing of these most inhumane and bloudie Iesuiticall conspi∣racies, more sauage then cruelty it selfe) are infla∣med for the Lords Anointed to vndergo perpetuall combats with all these pestilent Emissaries of Anti∣christ. Moreouer, if you know not with what great varietie, inconstancy, and vanitie of opinions the po∣pish Writers trauell; and with what vniforme con∣sent of all our Writers the Kings Supremacie is maintained; listen and read-ouer (but cursorily) this little Booke which here I present to you: and in it you shall finde particularly expressed before your eyes, wherein and in what heads they differ a∣mong themselues, about the Popes Supremacie; and how we accord in the Supremacie of our King. And heere it much concernes your desire of peace and tranquillitie, to obscrue how gallantly this Be∣cane presenteth himselfe to you, with his counter∣faite
and childish wiles to entrappe you: wherein he playeth his prizes so skilfully and subtilly to cir∣cumuent you, that by his onely cunning hopeth to gaine no small praises. But seeing he is ready for the combat, I will so prouide that he shall not finde me vnprepared; not only to meete with his blowes, but also to repell them, and to turne them backe a∣gaine vpon his owne head. Of which our conflict I desire you to be Spectators. In the meane time I be∣seech the most mercifull heauenly Father to grant you zeale according to knowledge, &c. The most desirous of your saluation, Richard Harris.
Becan: Exam. By the way of a lie and calumnie, you write, that I did vse that of the Apostle: You are made a gazing stock, to God, Angels, and Men; of Traitors: I did not vse it of Traitors; but of those Catholikes, who are with you, imprisoned, banished, spoyled of their goods and fortunes, or also put to death. You knowe who they are. Dr. HARRIS Reply. I Knowe the Iesuite heerein belyeth this State most impudently: by which, none but traite∣rous, or at least, seditious obstinate Cacolikes (& not any one meerly for faith or religion) haue been or are imprisoned, exiled, dispoyled, or executed. 2. The Iesuit here confesseth, that those said trai∣tors were Catholikes; and themselues (euen the Gun-powder-traitors) confessed that their treason was vndertaken for their faith and religion. So trai∣terous and dangerous to Christian States is the Ie∣suited Popery. 3. This Becane in his cōscience thinketh that these words, You are made gazing stocks, were and are most fitly and truely to bee applyed to Garnett, that cunning, but arch-traitour; viz. when hee was dis∣membred, and his head and quarters fixed on high, to be gazed on. 4. The present Iesuited Romish faith, is impious heresie, and Idolatrous blasphemy: the religion is grosse superstition, and open rebellion against God
and the King; or rather an open profession of the lawfull killing of Kings (Gods Anointed) by the meanest vassals of the said Kings, authorized by the Pope to kill them. As it is plainely set downe by Suarez, in his late booke against our King, Lib. 6. chap. 4. imprinted by publike authoritie with pri∣uiledge. Therefore by all lawes diuine and humane, why may not all such Iesuited Cacolikes be most iustly imprisoned, dispoyled, exiled, or executed as guiltie of high treason, for this their traiterous and rebellious faith and religion so stiffely maintained by them? especially, when as by their owne popish doctrine, Hereticall obstinate Schismatikes (such as indeede all those Cacolikes are) may be impri∣soned, and dispoyled of goods, lands, and life it self: and when as so many thousand deare Saints of the Lord, meerely for their orthodoxall faith and pure religion, haue beene in their bloudy Inquisition, and other popish persecutions, most sauagely tortured, euen to death. Therefore with great impudency doth he charge vs with shedding the bloud of Mar∣tyrs for faith and religion; from which wee are as free, as they therein are guilty. 5. No small number of popish Martyrs, so ca∣nonized and enrowled amongst them, were in truth haynous and diabolicall Traitors against the King, Queen, and State heere; and accordingly were here executed: therefore, indeede these words, You are made agazing stock &c. the Iesuite applied to Trai∣tors, to wit, such popish Martyrs. 6. Lastly, the exceeding clemency of our King
towards the now imprisoned seditious and treache∣rous Cacolikes is such, that they fare more delici∣ously and liue more sportfully (I might well haue said, riotouslie) then millions of his Maiesties good subiects doe, who enioy their libertie. This is too too well knowne. And this, forsooth is that hard-hard vsage, and hot persecution, which hath bred this Iesuiticall exclamation. BECANVS Iarre. THE Kings Supremacy in the Church of England is a new thing. It began vnder King Henry the 8. continued vnder King Edward the 6, and Queene Elizabeth: and now vnder King Iames, the same is rent and torne in peeces, with so many domesticall iarres and diuisions, that long it cannot stand. So as Christ in the Gos∣pell said full well, Omne regnum in se diuisum desolabitur: Euery Kingdome, diuided in it selfe, shall be destroyed. But what, and how great these discords be, I will shew in these few Questions following: I. Whether the King of England haue any Primacy in the Church, or no? II. Whether the Primacy of the King, bee Eccle∣siasticall and spirituall? III. Whether the King by this Primacy, may be cal∣led the Primate of the Church? IIII. Whether by vertue of the same Primacy the King may be called Supreme Head of the Church? V. Whether this Primacy consist in any Power, or Iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall?
VI. Whether the King, by reason of his Primacy, can assemble or call together Councels, and sit as President therein? VII. Whether he can make Ecclesiasticall Lawes? VIII. Whether he can dispose of Ecclesiastical li∣uings, or Benefices? IX Whether he can create, and depose Bishops? X. Whether he can excommunicate the obstinate? XI. Whether hee can be Iudge, and determine of Controuersies? XII. From whence hath the King this his Primacy? XIII. Whether he can force his Subiects to take the Oath of Supremacy? In these Questions doe our Aduersaries extreamely differ and disagree; but especially these: M. Doctor Andrewes, in his Tortura Torti; M. William Tooker Deane of Liche∣field, in his Combat, or single Fight with Martin Bucane; M. Richard Tomson, in his Reproofe of the Refutation of Tortura Torti; M. Robert Burhill, in his Defence of Tor∣tura Torti; and M. Henry Salclebridge, in his Refutation of Becane his Examen. Besides these (as opposite vnto them) I will also cite Doctor Sanders, in his booke of the Schisme of England; Genebard in his Chronology; Polydor Vir∣gil in his History of England; Iacobus Thuanus of Aust, in the History of his time; Iohn Caluin in his Commentary vpon the Prophet Amos, and others. English Concord. THe Regall Primacy, in the Church of Eng∣land, is much more ancient then the Popish Primacy in the Romane Church. The
Regall Primacy had his beginning from theDaniel chap. 7. v. 6 Anci∣ent of Dayes, vnder the most ancient Patriarchs: It flourished magnifically vnder the Orthodoxall Kings, Israeliticall and Euangelicall: and now in England it flourisheth most of all vnder King Iames; soundly sounded vpon the rock, and built vpon the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, permanent for euer; so that, by the fall of raines the comming of flouds, and the wine-blasts of any Iesuits whatsoeuer, it cannot be so much as moued; much lesse remoo∣ued; and least of all rent and torne in peeces: But, of the Popish Primacy, rightly saide Christ in the Gospell; Euery Kingdome diuided in it selfe shall be desolate. Now what and how great their Iarres and discords are, I am to shew, in handling these few Questions following. English Concord. BEcane, in his booke of English discord, and in his first Question, demanded, Whether the King of England haue any Pri∣macy or Supremacy in the Church? And I in my book of English Concord, demaunded, Whether the Pope haue anie Primacy in the Church? considering that Saint Cyprian asserteth that Peter did neuer challenge or assume any such thing,Epist. ad Quintum. 71. sect. 3 as to say that he held the Primacy; and that Chrysostome dogmatically writeth thus: Whosoeuer desireth (or affecteth) the Primacy in
earth (as all Popes doe) shall finde confusion in hea∣uen.Homil. 35 in Matth. Whereunto the Iesuite in his late book, entituled Examen Concordiae Anglicanae, The examination of the English Concord, answereth or obiecteth thus: BECAN, Exam. THat they are not the words of Chrysostome,Pag. 92 but of some other author ioyned with him. 2. That these words are against our King, desiring Supre∣macie in earth. 3. That the Author speaketh promiscuously of both the Primaces, Secular and Ecclesiasti∣call; 4. but distinguisheth betweene the desiring and obtai∣ning of the Primacy; referring the one to vanitie, and the o∣ther to the iudgement of God. Dr. HARRIS Reply. 1 I Doe commiserate the seely ignorance of this Iesuite Becane, who knoweth not, that these very words aforesaide, are not onely canoni∣zed, but also expresly fathered vpon Chrysostome, in the Popes Canon law; which the Iesuite dare not affront.Dist. 40. ca. Multi. The wordes of the Canon are these; Also Iohn Chrysostome: Not euery one is a true Priest, which is named a Priest. Many Priests, and few Priests: Ma∣ny in name, but few in work: Take heede therefore bre∣thren, how you sit vpon the Chayre; because the Chayre doth not make the Priest, but the Priest the Chayre, &c. The same Chrysostome: Whosoeuer shall desire Pri∣macy
in earth, shall finde confusion in heauen: neither shall he be numbred among the seruants of Christ, Qui de Primatu tractauerit, Who handleth, or ambitiously speakes of, or challengeth Primacy.De Scrip∣tor. Ecclesi∣asticis. And according to that Canon, the most profound and famously renowmed Canonist (euen by Bellarmine in his late booke) to witte, Henry Cardinall Hostiensis (vpon the 15. Chapter of Penitency and Remission, Cap. Cui Papa) ascribeth these words vnto Chrysostome, as to the Author of them, thus: And so in the Peni∣tentiall Court, the Pope is made lesse, and his Confessor greater: and this Chrysostome insinuateth, Dist. 40. Multi. Wherefore the Iesuite may take from mee, thus cleared, this falsity vnto himselfe: or else hee must returne it ouer; To the Authoritie of their Aposta∣ticall Church; To their authentike and ordinary glosses and explanations of the Gospell; To the de∣crees of the Romane Bishops; To their chiefest Ca∣nonists and Diuines: for in the writings of all those, he may finde sentences written in that Worke, cal∣led the Imperfect Worke, alleaged as out of Chryso∣stom. 2. By the expresse words of the foresaid Canon, it is manifest, that the words of Chrysostō, are by their Canon law referred vnto Priests and Priests onely, who sit vpon the Chayre, in expresse tearmes often repeated. Whereby it appeareth, what a seely and vnmannerly Sophister this Iesuite is, who thence frameth his Argument against our King, drawne thus into form syllogisticall; as indeed from thence
it can be drawne no otherwise. What Priest soeuer desireth Primacy in earth, shall finde confusion in Heauen. The King of England is a Priest desiring Prima∣cie in earth. Therefore he shall finde confusion in heauen. Were this Iesuite in our Vniuersitie Schooles, he wold be hist out, as an absurd Dunse, for arguing. Our gratious King is no Priest, but detesteth their Priests and Priesthood, as Antichristian. Hee is by the grace of God the high and potent Monarch of Great Britanne, France and Ireland; and vnder Christ made of God (without any ambitious desire of his) Primate or Supreme Gouernour ouer all persons, and in all causes Ecclesiasticallor Temporall, within his Domi∣nions; maugre the beard of the Pope, and all his Shauelings. But if the Iesuite will rightly assume out of the Maior proposition, set down in the said Canon law; he must take the triple crowne of Primacy from the Popes head, and wrap it vp in the dust of Confusion, thus: What Priest soeuer (though it were Peter himselfe) doth challenge, or ambitiously desire Primacy in earth, shall finde confusion in heauen. But the Popes of Rome haue, and (now most of all) doe challenge (as their right) Primacy in earth; [Not onely ouer the whole Cleargy (contrary to that Inhibition of S. Peter. 1. Pet. 5. v. 3. Not as Lords ouer Gods He∣ritage) but also ouer Kings: and that not only in Spiri∣tualls, but also in their Temporalls: viz. in their Goods,
Reuenews, Crownes, Kingdomes, liberties and lines; As their chiefest Iesuite Writers, Bellarmine & Sua∣rius, and this meane Iesuite Becane, haue not beene ashamed to dogmatize in their late publike writings: some whereof haue beene euen by State-Papists, in their Parliaments censured and condemned, as sedi∣tious & pernitious against Kings prerogatiues roy∣all, crownes and dignities. And some of them by vs, here lately haue beene purged by fire.] and also most ambitiously haue and do desire and practise to get the Popedome; and being opposed therein, do by all, euen bloudy meanes, endeuour to retaine the same;Onuphr, in Chronie. Rom. Pont. as the thirtie Schismes in the Church of Rome about the Popedom (wherof the last & worst lasted by the space of fiftie yeers together, raysed and con∣tinued by the ambitious desire thereof in the Popes themselues; euen to the shedding of the liues bloud, of two hundred thousand christians, caused by two Antipopes at once) doth more then demonstrate. To instance this ambitious desire in one, but their principall one and chiefetaine, Hildebrand the first, who with brasen face did openly vndertake to de∣pose the Emperour from his Empire: The Car∣dinall Beno, who liued with Hildebrand and knewe him too well, writeth thus of him; Hildebrand poysoned sixe Popes, to make his waie to the Popedoma. Nauclere reporteth that the clergy saide, Pope Hil∣debrand was excommunicated by the Bishops of Italy, as hauing defiled the Apostolike Sea with Simonie, &c. And Abbat Vrspergensis writeth,Anno. Dom. 1080. that the Councell of Brixia censured Pope Hildebrand
as an vsurper of the Sea of Rome; not appointed by God, but intruding by fraude & money. And to speak in ge∣neral, as Mantuan saith, of Rome and Romanists; —Venalia nobis. Templa, Sacerdotes, Altaria Sacra, Coronae: Ignis, thura, preces, coelum est venale, Deus{que}. Where Church, Priest, Altar, Masse, Crowne, for money tolde: Also Fire, Incense, Prayer, Heauen, and God are solde. Where all things come for money, there is no probabilitie, that the Popedom (there more worth then all things else) should come freely without money, &c. Rome is no changeling: of which the Iesuites may read in the Canon law, thus: Roma fundata fuit a praedonibus, adhuc de Primor dijsretinet; dicta Roma, quasirodens manus. Roma manus rodit: quos rodere non valet, odit. Rome was first founded by thieues, and sauoreth still of her beginnings. By th' hand Rome byteth States: and whom shee cannot bite, she hates. If Rome bite all not giuing; sans gifts, shee popes none liuing. Now since the Assumption is so plainely proued, we may thus conclude, Therefore the Popes of Rome shall finde confusion in Heauen. Hence the Popish Antichrist is by the Apostle tearmed fitly, Filius perditionis, The sonne of perdition or confusion.
Moreouer, from the words of Cyprian, is this Syl∣logisme (as canon-shot) directed against the verie heart of the Popes Primacy, thus: If Peter did not, ne could challenge to himselfe Pri∣macy; then the Pope hauing no Primacy, but as Peters successour, cannot challenge Primacy to himselfe: But Peter could not challenge Primacy to himselfe (as Cyprian here saith,De Simple Praelator and else where proueth thus: Hoc erant vti{que}, &c. The rest of the Apostles vvere the same that Peter vvas, endewed vvith like fellowship of Honour and Power.) Therefore the Pope cannot challenge the Primacy. This of Cyprian the Iefuit passeth ouer, dry-foot: and not without cause; seeing hee could get no baulme from Gilead to cure this deadly wound gi∣uen to the Pope, by Saint Cyprians foresaid Canon∣shot. 3. The Iesuite doth here shamefully bely Chryso∣stom, affirming that hee speakes promiscuously of both Primacies, Secular and Ecclesiasticall; where∣as most distinctly hee writeth thus of them: Do∣minus introduxit, &c. The Lorde brings in a diffe∣ference betweene worldly, or temporall Princes, and Ecclesiasticalls: because the Princes of the vvorld are therefore made, that they might rule ouer their subiects, and serue themselues of them,1. Sam. 9 ver. 11. &c. and spoyle them to their owne profit and glory (according to the saying of God to Samuel; This shall be the manner of your King: hee will take your sonnes for his Chariot∣driuers, Captaines, and Husbandmen; and your Daughters for Apothecaries, Cookes, and Bakers:
he will take your fields and vineyardes, and giue them to his seruants, &c.) But the Princes Ecclesiasticall are therefore made, that they may serue their vnderlings, and minister vnto them all things which they haue receiued from Christ: That they should neglect their owne profit, and procure the profit of others: and if neede be, that they should not re∣fuse to die, for the safety or saluation (pro salute) of their inferiours. Therefore if these things be so, there is cause and profit to desire the Secular Primacy; but to desire the Ecclesiacticall, there is neither reason nor cause. For what wise man would hasten vvillingly to submit him∣selfe to seruitude, labour, griefe, and such a danger, as to render an account for all the Church, before the inst Iudge? vnlesse peraduenture, he thinke there is no iudge∣ment of God, or feares it not: as one, abusing his Ecclesi∣asticall Primacy secularly, changeth the Ecclesiasticall into the Secular. Than which words, what could be written more distinctly and plainely, against this lying Iesuite, and his Popes Primacy; to stop the mouth of the one, and to plucke vp the other by the rootes? I meane the Primacy Papall, which is now become the high∣est temporall Primacy in the earth: of which, the Emperours, as vassals, holde their Imperiall crowns, yea their liues; and yet neither of these, but during the Popes pleasure. And this is with them become an article of the Romish faith. Hence it is, that his Maiesties subiects are forbidden by the Pope, in their oath of Allegiance, to sweare, that, what in them lieth, they will preserue the life of their So∣ueraigne,
against the Papall, and all other forrain pow∣er; because (as the Pope hath definitiuely set it down) they should therein deny the faith. Is not this his Ec∣clesiasticall Primacy become Temporall, or rather Dia∣bolicall? Therefore euery good Christian, from Chry∣sostome here is to learne, That the Pope either thinketh there is no God, or Iudgement of God to come; or that the feare of God, and of his Iudgement, is not before his eyes. Surely, if the popish Primacy be that Ecclesiasti∣call, here described by Chrysostome; the Pope will no longer contend for it; he will soon hate it worse than dogge or snake. 4. The Iesuite here either very ignorantly, or ve∣ry impudently abuseth his Reader; whom hee would make belieue that Chrysostome in that Homily, so di∣stinguisheth the Primacy of Honour, to witte Ecclesi∣astical, from the obtaining of that Primacy; as though he misliked the one for vanitie, and approued the o∣ther as a good thing giuen by God: whereas the ex∣presse words of Chrysostome are cleane contrary; thus: Nune scimus, &c. Now vve knowe that a good vvorke is one thing, and the Primacy of honour is another thing; And that it is good to desire a good thing: but to couet the Prima∣cie of honour, is vanitie. To shut vp this point; The Christian Reader may here vnderstand, that the Pope euen by the vertue of this testimony of Chrysostome, set down in, and autho∣rized by, the Canon law, is incapable of Ecclesiasticall Primacy. For if he be no Priest indeede, he can be no Ecclesiasticall Primate indeede. But by this Canon indeede he is no Priest, because he is no Priest Opere, in Priestly work, that is, as S. Paul expounds it, to preach the
vvord in season,2. Tim. 4.2 1. Pet. 5.2 Heb. 5.14 out of season, &c. or as Saint Peter ex∣plaines it, To feede Christs flocke vvith the sincere milke, or strong meat of the vvord: or as Chrysostome here de∣scribes it, To serue his inferiours, by ministring vnto them all that hee hath receiued from Christ: ready not onely to neglect his owne profit, to procure theirs; but also, if neede vvere, to lay down his life for them. The Pope therfore being lesse in nothing then in this work, is, by the ex∣presse words of this Canon, nothing lesse then a Priest indeede; and by necessary ineuitable consequence, no∣thing lesse then Ecclesiasticall Primate indeede. Here is now high time for this Iesuite to lay-vnder his shoul∣ders for support of the tottering Primacy of his Pope, very sore shaken by this Canon law-shot, and ready to fall down into the dust. Wherein, pittiful is the Popes case, who in this conflict, for his defendour, bath so see∣lie a weakeling, and so ignorant a Iesuite, as this Becane is, and hereafter will more and more appeare to be. English Concord. BEcane, in his book of Iarre, & in his second Que∣stion, demanded, Whether that Primacy of the King be Ecclesiasti∣call and Spirituall? And I in my booke of Concord,Page 4. and in my second Question, demanded, Whether that Primacy of the Pope be Secular and Tempo∣rall? Because on the one side, the Pope, Lucifer-like, asser∣teth, All power to be giuen vnto him, as vvell in heauen,
as in earth. Which power Pope Boniface the eightth went about to put in practise, vvhen hee endeuoured to strike a Terrour into Kings, Princes, Nations, and people on the earth; rather then to plans Religion in them. And on the other side, Chrysostome saith: They who belieue not the Iudgement of God, nor feare it, abusing their Primacy secularly, turne it into the Secular. And Christ saith, first vnto Peter; I vvill giue thee the keyes of the kingdome of heauen (not of earth) and then of himselfe; My king∣dom (that is, my Primacie, which to the Pope is in stead of his kingdome) is not of this world.Ioh 18.36 If it vvere of this vvorld, my seruants would surely fight, that I should not be deliuered to the Iewes. And this said diametrall oppositi∣on betwixt the Primacy of Christ, and the Primacy of the Pope-Antichrist, caused Pasquill to write in verse no lesse truely, then eloquently, thus: Christus regna fugit: sed vi Papa subingat vrbes. Spinosam Christus; Triplicem gerit ille coronam. Abluit ille pedes: Reges his of cula praebent. Pauit oues Christus: Petit hic Regna omnia mundi. Pace venit Christus: venit hic radiantibus armis. Christ, worldly kingdoms offered, did eschew: The Pope by force, seeks kingdoms to subdue. A Crowne of Thorne our Sauiour Christ did beare: The Pope a triple Crowne of gold doth weare. Christ vvasht the feet of his disciples all: But all must kisse the Popes feet, great and small. Christ fed his sheepe and lambs most carefully: The Pope to worldly kingdoms casts his eye. Christ to his owne, both milde and meeke did come: The Pope with Armes, the world doth ouerun.
Here is a matter very dangerous to the Popes Pri∣macy: which this shallow Iesuite not daring to denie, and yet not able to answere vnto it; leauing it as it were the body, flyeth onely vpon the shadow, that is, the Citation, as it followeth. BECAN. Exam. OƲs of Gratian,Page 92. Dist. 9. cap. Innocen: you  the Pope, asserting All power to be giuen to him as well in heauen, as in earth: but, falsly. For in Dist. 9. there is no such Canon to be found, Yea, runne ouer all the Distinctions that are in Gratian, yet you shal not finde it. In∣deede there is such a Canon in the second part of the Decree 22. Question 4. which begins thus; Innocens: but there it no menti∣on of those words, which are cited by you. Dr. HARRIS Reply. IS this beseeming the grauitie of Iesuiticall Father∣hood, so childishly to snatch after flyes, that is, Escapes in Citations, either of the transcriber, or composer, or correctour, and sometimes, peraduen∣ture, of the Author himselfe; seeing those escapes are so frequent in most bookes printed? The Glosse of the Canon law, is so accurately and iudiciously written, that the most learned Canonists circ it often for good Canon law, as they doe the very text of the Canon law: and yet the saide accurate Glosse faileth often in the Citations, which it vseth; whereof these two E∣scapes may serue for a taste: viz. Dist. 81. ca. Si qui verb. Emendent: The Glosse citeth Dist. 22. ca. Nullus:
and yet in that Distinction, there is no such chapter to be found. Againe, in Dist. 96. ca. Si Imperator. verb. Definimus; the Glosse citeth, Cause 20. Quest. 3. ca. Quasitum: and yet there is no such chapter or Canon to be found in that third Question, nor in that twenti∣eth Cause. If this Iesuite had written against the Authors of that learned Glosse, he would haue strewed vpon them, (as he hath done vpon me, in like case) these his rheto∣ricall flowers, or rather boyish scurrilities; viz: You cite the Canon falsely. You haue not read the Canon. You vn∣derstand nothing. How ost shall I warne you to cite truly? It irketh mee to warne you so often. I see I doe but lose my my labour in desiring you to cite truely, since I can obtaine nothing, &c. In Page 8. of my English Concord I cited Iewell his Apologie, part. 4. cap. 21. Dinis. 7. collecting certaine reasons to proue that which I there alleaged. Iewell, for proofe of his collections, cited First: 9. q. 3. Ne{que} ab Augusto. Secondly, Dist. 40. Si Papa. Thirdly, Dist. 19. Si Romanorum. For my part, the authoritie, and most profound learning of that reuerend Father, bred such a reue∣rence in mee towards him, that I would not so much as examine the saide Citations, but set them downe, as I found them written in his booke. Now the Iesuite, in his Examination of the saide Citations, finding some small slips in some of them, bestowed vpon the Bi∣shop (through, or by, my sides) these scurrile and dis∣gracefull flowers following: You profit nothing. I vvill teach you once againe. It casilie appeareth that you neuer saw, either the Glosses, or Canons. Such Glossators, out of
England, are of no estimation. Who would not admire the insolency of this Iesuiticall Bragadochio, obiecting ignorance to the incomparablie learned Bishop Iewel? vnto whom, in the indifferent iudgement of any e∣quall and indicious Readers of the writings of them both, Becane is not worthy to holde the candle, or to carry his books after him. This I thought meete (gentle Reader) to signifie vnto thee in generall, because this trifling disputer in his whole discourse following about Citations, dooth nothing else, but misspende the time in such emptie sopperies. As for this Citation in particular, viz. Dist. 9. ca. Innocent; The very truth is, it was onely the fault of the Transcriber: for those very words, D. 9. ca. In∣nocent. written, I expuncted with mine owne hand, before any Iesuiticall censure passed ouer them. The matter comprised in the words which I cited (viz. That all power is giuen to the Pope, as vvell in heauen as in earth) was a thing so well knowne to all papists of any reading, and also acknowledged as an article of popish faith; that for proofe thereof, I set downe no Citation in the Margine of my booke. But now, least this vnlearned Iesuite, hauing read so little (as by all his writings may appeare) in the Canon law, or popish Councells, or Canonists, should imagine that no proofes of the said matter are to be found in them; I will direct him, for his schooling sake, first to the Ca∣non law, Dist. 22. ca. Omnes. Where Pope Nicholas spea∣keth thus: Christ himselfe alone founded the Romane Church, and erected it vpon the rock of faith, when he gaue to Peter, clauiger of eternall life, the rights of the Empire earthly, and also heauenly. What is this else, but more
plainely, translated into English, thus: He gaue to Peter (and consequently to the Pope) all power in heauen and earth. But it may be, the Iesuite would faine see the place, where the very words are written. Therfore, Secondly, I doe direct him to the popish Councell of Lateran vnder Pope Leo the tenth; in which Coun∣cell Stephanus the Bishop of Petracha, spake thus open∣ly, with great applause: In the Pope is all power, aboue all powers, as well in heauen, as in earth. Thirdly, I direct him to the most famous Canonist, Abbot Panormitan; who, super prima primi de Electi∣one, cap. Venerabilem. verb. Transtulit, writeth thus: The Pope may, vpon very great cause, transferre the Em∣pire from one nation to another, because he can doe vvhat∣soeuer God can doe; otherwise Christ had not beene so dili∣gent a father of his family, if he had not lest one on earth in his place, vvho can doe all things that Christ himselfe can doe. By this it is plaine, that as All power in heauen and earth was giuen to Christ: So all power in heauen & earth, is giuen to the Pope. And consequently, it is as plaine, that as Christ is God: so the Pope is God. For better vn∣derstanding of which consequent; I send the Iesuite to that learned and iudicious, yet popish, Writer, Marsili∣us Patauinus, who relateth out of Bernard thus: All things were giuen to Christ, because he was the eternall Sonne of God. And Christ doth challenge to himselfe all things, by the right of creation, and merit of redemption. And vvhosoeuer takes these vnto himselfe, makes himselfe indeede God.2. Thes. 2.4 That is (as Saint Paul describeth him) the popish Antichrist, sitting in the temple of God as God, shewing himselfe that he is God; or rather, exalting him∣selfe
aboue all that is called God, or worshipped. Which may better appeare by Becanes solution of these two Questions following: First, whether, as to Christ and Pope, All power is giuen in heauen and earth; so both Christ and Pope, haue one and the same name giuen to them, viz. The name aboue euery name; that at the name of the Pope,Phil. 1.9. as at the name of lesus, euery knee should bow of things in heauen, in earth, and vnder the earth? Vnto this former questiō, I suppose Becane would say, Respondetur quod sic, that is, affirmatiuely: because in his Examen, pag. 133. he saith, The Pope Peter was receiued into the fellowship of the name and dignity of the indiuiduall vnity, or Godhead. Then the second questiō goes further, thus: whether at the name, yea at the feete, of the Pope, all should not doe more, than bow the knee; since the greatest Em∣perours must fall downe flatte with their faces on the ground, to kisse his feete; and with their necks stret∣ched out, must receiue and entertaine his feete tramp∣ling vpon them; and lastly (as it is challenged at this time) must offer readily their throats to be cut at the Popes pleasure. Before I leaue this Straine, I must set downe that which the Glosse, out of the foresaide Canon Omnes. D. 22. inferreth, viz. thus: Argumentum quod Papa habet vlrum{que} gladium, et spiritualm, et temporalem. This ar∣gueth that the Pope hath both the swords, Spirituall and Temporall. Euen as the Canonists also thence gather the Popes supreme power temporall euen ouer the Empire, to conferre it to vvhom he will, and to transferre it whence, and whither he will. And so the Pope falleth into the iust condemnation of God, and Confusion in heauen:
whereof we heard before out of Chrysostome. Here two great mischiefes are necessarily inferred, pat vpon the Popes head: the former; That he is that Antichrist, and his Primacy Antichristian. The later; That the Pope, by reason of that his Primacy, lieth deepely plunged into hellish confusion. And yet here the Iesuite Becane is as mute as a fish: so miserable a desendour of the Pope is he; even that Becane, who in the Preface to his Examen wished, that he might be the kings valiant Champion to desend his Cause. Now surely his Maiestie should be maincly wel holden vp, through his great store of ignorance; more grosse then euer I perceiued in any Iesuite Writer whatsoeuer. English Concord. BEcame, in his Iarre, Question, 3. demanded, Whether the King, by reason of his Primacy, may be called Primate of the Church? And I in my Concord demand, Whether the Pope, by reason of his Primacy,Anton. de Rosellis. may be cal∣led (as popish Writers call him) King of Kings and Lord of Lords? For example, Boniface 8. vvho in time of solemne supplications vvent apparelled right as the Emperour him∣selfe, Crowned vvith a golden Crowne Caesar like, gliste∣ring in an embroidered gowne, and a naked sword carried before him at his commandement. Can ye,Vide vit, Dond, in Sexco. ô Academicks, (for the Iesuite often speakes to you) beholding this spectacle, forbeare laughing? Vnto this the Iesuite saith no more but as followeth.
BECAN. Exam. YOu cite out of the life of Boniface 8. vvhich is in the sixt booke of the Decretals, these words: Boniface 8. In time of solemne pplication, &c; but, falsery. There is no such thing there, neither yet in Platina, vvho is vvell knowne to have written the life of Boniface accurately. Peraduenture you found some such thing in the English fables; but they, out of that Iland, carry no credit. Dr. HARRIS Reply. YEs: I finde it in the Paralipom. Vrspergensis, page 365. thus: Papa Bonifacius 8. ipso apparatu in Iubilaeo, qui tunc Romae agebatur, se solenniter o∣stentauit: Primo quidem solenni die, in Pontificalibus appa∣rens populo, Apostolicam ill is benedictionem impartitur: postero die, Imperiali habitu, infula Caesarea insignis, gladi∣um ante se nudatum iussit deferri, et sedens alta voce testa∣tur; Ecce duo gladij hic. Boniface 8. in time of Iubile, shewed himselfe the first day in his Pontificall robes: the second day in his Robes Imperiall: to witte, the imperiall Crowne on his head; &c. and a naked sword borne before him, vvith proclamation thus: Beholde here two swords. And there I reade also this exclamation: Vides O Petre successorem tuum: Et tu Salutifer Christe, cerne tuum vicarium: vide quò ascendit superbia Serui Seruorum tuorum. Oh Peter thou seest vvhat manner of successour thou hast. And oh Saniour Christ beholde thy vicar, and see, vvhither the pride of the Seruant of thy sernants hath
ascended. Further, in Auentine, vt ex concilio Vangionum, I finde this written, viz. The Pope vsurpeth both the Em∣pire, and high Priesthood, as Decius, and other vvorship∣pers of false Gods, vvere vvont to doe. The Iesuite mistooke my purpose in that marginall note, Vita Bonif. 8. in Serto: which was not to shew where it is written, viz. that Boniface went in processiō Emperor-like apparelled: but that the Christian Rea∣der might be directed to a writing authenticall, where he might see Pope Boniface 8. pictured out in far worse & more odious colours; namely, at the end of the sixt book of the Decretals, thus: In the yeare 1294, Boni∣face got the Popedome, but not without the crime of ambition, and of other ill feats. He pretermitted nothing vvhich either fraudor ambition could compasse. Hee vvas so proud, that hee contemned all men. There are some vvho vvrite, that hee suborned, and priuily sent certaine men, vvho in the night by a voyce sent downe as it vvere from heauen, entering the Chamber of Pope Caelestine (a simple man) should perswade him to relinquish his Popedome, if hee vvould be saued. This is notorious, that vvhen Prochetes the Archbishop of Geneua, vvas before him on his knees vpon Ashwednesday, vvhereas, according to the manner, the Pope should throwe ashes vpon his head & say: Remem∣ber man thou art but ashes, and to ashes thou shalt returne; Boniface cast ashes into Prochetes eyes, and said: Remem∣ber man thou art a Gibelline, and vvith the Gibellines, to a∣shes thou shalt returne. The same Boniface sent his letter to Philip King of France, first to exhort him, and if that vvould not serue, to threaten him to undertake the Hiern∣salem expedition. Philip commits that Legate to prison; vvhereupon the Pope sends the Archdeacon of Marbon,
to command the King in the Popes name to dismisse his Le∣gat; and if he refused, to tell him in the hearing of all men, That because of his contumacy and violating the law of na∣tions, The kingdo• of France was deuolued to the Church of Rome. But Sarra, sent by King Philip, tooke the Pope pri∣soner, and so brought him to Rome, vvhere vvithin 35. dayes after for very griese of minde, he perished. In this sort dyed Boniface, vvho indeauoured to cast terrour into the hearts of Emperours, Kings, Princes, Nations, and People, rather then to sowe religion among them: who also endea∣noured to giue kingdomes, and to take them awaie, to put in, and to put out, vvhom hee vvould. Learne, all Princes both Secular, and Ecclesiasticall, learne by his example, to rule the Cleary and people, not proudly and contumcliously as hee did. Behold here, gentle Reader, First, how great the igno∣rance of this Iesuite is, who knew not that the Treatise of the life of Boniface set down in the sixt of the Decre∣tals, was made by Platina. Secondly, how vnluckily the ignorance of this Iesuite here is; which hath ministred vnto mee so iust an occasion to publish afresh vnto the world, what a most shamelesse, and odious Tyrant Pope, their most renowmed Pope Boniface the eight was. English Concord. Becane, in his Iarre and fourth Question, demaun∣ded, Whether by reason of his Supremacy, the King may be called the Supreame head of the Church? And I, in my Concord, and 4. Question, demanded,
Whether the Popeby reason of his Primacy, may be called the supreme head of the Church? considering that Gregory the great writeth thus: What vvilt thou answere to Christ the head of the vni∣uersall Church,Lib. 4. Epist. 38 at the tryall of the last iudgement, vvho endeuorest by the name of Vniuersall Bishop (much more by the name of the Supreme head of the vninersall Church) to bring into subiection all his members vnto thee? Vnto this, though it touch the Pope necre, the Ie∣suite, in his Examen, answereth not one word. English Concord. BEcane in his fift Question demanded, Whether the kings Primacy consist in any power, or iurisdiction, Ecclesiasticall? And I im my fift Question demanded, Whether the Primacy of the Pope consist in any power or iurisdiction Temporall? That is, in a dominion tem∣porall and coactiue; considering that Christ saide thus: The Kings of the nations beare rule ouer them, but ye shall not be so: and that Bernard writeth thus, peremptorily:Luke 22.25 Consider. ad Eugn. lib. 2. It is plaine that dominion is forbidden the Apostles. There∣fore presume thou to vsurp to thy selfe, either as a Sone∣raigne. the Apostleshippe; or as an Apostle, the Soue∣raigntie. Thou art plainely forbidden one of them. If thou vvilt haue both together, thou stalt lose both. Otherwise. thinke not thy selfe to be excepted out of the number of those, of vvhome the Lord complaineth, saying; They ruled, but not by mee.
And yet,Martin. Polon. Boniface the 8, giueth the King of France to vnderstand, that hee is chiefe Lord in matters Spirituall and Temporall through the vvhole vvorld: and commands the saide King to acknowledge that he holds the Kingdome of France of him: because it is hereticall to thinke and holde the conrarie. In like manner saide Pope Adrian: The Emperour raigneth by vs;Auentin. 1.6 vvhence hath hee the Empire but from vs? Beholde: it is in our power to giue it to vvhom vvee vvill. And according to their Canon law: Kings and Emperours, by the command and vvill of Christ, re∣ceiue their power from the Pope, asExtran. Joan. 22 Cum inter nonnullos. in Gloss. from their Lord God. Hereunto the Iesuite makes answere as followeth. BECAN. Exam.Page 94. In the 7. Page you cite, ex cap. Cum inter nonnullos, Extrau. Page 22. these vvordes: Kings and Empe∣rours, &c. I knowe not vvhether more falsly or ridicu∣louslie. Indeede falsely, because in that Chapter, there is no such matter. Ridiculously, because, vvhen as in the sixt of the Decretalls, are found these vvordes: Extrauag. Cum in∣ter de verborum significatione; you out of meere igno∣rance and sluggishnesse, sette downe these vvords: Extrauag. Cum inter. Page 22. What, is Iohn and Page all one with you? Truelie, children cannot be more foolish in citing, then thus. Ʋnlesse you profit better, the Doctours of the Canon law vvill neuer admit you to the degree of a Batchelour.
Dr. HARRIS Reply. EXcuse mee (Christian Reader) vttering the truth of this scornefull Iesuite, in more tart manner, here and there, than otherwise is vsuall with me, or fits my disposition. If euer there were, or be, an ignorant slug, trifling lie friuolous, boyish lie scurrilous, & a lying, forsooth, Fa∣ther Iesuite▪ this Becane is one, & among such may bear the bell: as I wil make it appeare before I dismisse him. His boyish scurrilities are two: In the former, hee asketh whether Iohn and Page, be all one with mee? A question fitter to be made by a Petite school-boy to his fellow, then by a Father, Iesuite, to an ancient Di∣uine. In the second, hee would cut-off all my hope to attaine the degree of Batchelour. The Iesuite may knowe that I am a Doctour in Diuinity, of 19. yeares standing; it may bee, as ancient Doctour as himselfe. Howsoeuer that; I dare boldly auerre this; that Be∣cane, in comparison of Doctour Harris, is (in man∣ner) but an Abecedary scholler in the varietie of all good literature diuine and humane; in all the liberall sciences; and in all the learned tongues: as he shal find, to his shame, if therein hee dare grapple with mee. I must confesse, and say with Saint Paul, I vvas a foole to boast my selfe. But the scurrilous disgracings of this seelie Iesuite haue enforced mee. As his scurrilities, so his lies are also two: The former, That I cited out of the Chapter Cuminter non∣nullos,
Pag. 22. whereas in my paper book, it was cited thus in short: Extrauag. 22. ca. Cum inter nonnullos. But the transcriber, corrector, or compositor put-in, Page. And is not this a boyish feather for the boyish father-Iesuite to play withall? As though such ouersights in printing, are not vsuall? This Iesuite himselfe, Exam. pag. 98. will haue, an escape of farre greater moment to passe in the printed books of Tertullian against Praxeas. His second vntruth is; That I cited it so falsly, not of ouersight, but of meere ignorance, and dulnesse. Alas for this feely ignorant, and (here) impudently lying Ie∣suite! vnto whom, vpon pawne of all my books, I will vndertake and performe it, to read Lectures out of the Canon law; in the studie whereof I haue spent more weeks, yea moneths, then this Iesuite hath bestow∣ed houres. His extreame ignorance in the Canon law, is made Here apparant in these 3 points following. First, in that he confoundeth the 6. book of the Decretals, with the Extrauagants; whereas they are distinct parts of the Canon law: which law is diuided into these 6. gene∣rall parts; 1. The Decrees, gathered by Gratian. 2. The Decretals, compiled by Gregory 9. 3. The Sixt of the Decretals, made by Boniface 8. 4. The Clementines, by Pope Clement the fist. 5. The Extrauagants of Iohn 22. 6. The Extrauagants common, made by diuers Ro∣mane Bishops, after the Sixt of the Decretals. The second point of his ignorance is in confoun∣ding. cap. Cum inter. with cap. Cum inter nonnullos: viz. as like as an apple is to an oyster.
The third point, who in his ignorance is apparant is in citing thus: Extrauag. Cum inter Ioan. 22. Dever∣borum significatione. When as the Canon or chapt. Cum inter. is to be found, neither in that Title Deverborum significatione, nor in all the Extrauagants of Ioan. 22. Now therfore the Iesuit is to answere mee, to those fine questions, touching the three points of his verie grosle ignorance in the Canon law heere manifested. 1 Whether the Decretalls & Extrauagants be all one with him? 2 Whether Boniface and Iohn be all one with him? 3 Whether 8. and 22. be all one? 4 Whether cap. Inter. and cap. Inter nonnullos be all one? 5 Whether a chapter of a Title, extant; and a chap∣ter of the same Title, not extant; be all one with him? And then let the indifferent Readr iudge, whether any child could be more foolish in citing, than he; and how vndeseruedly he obtained his degree of Doctor∣ship. The truth is, that place, viz. Extrauag. Ioan. 22. cap. Inter nonnullos in gloss. was cited by mee, to shew, that Kings receiue their power, non simply, of the Pope; but more then so, viz. of the Romish Bishop, as of Their Lord God the Pope. The Iesuit, Eudaemon Ioannes, writing in defence of the Iesuit-traytor-Garnet, saith, he could not find in a∣ny printed booke of Extra. Ioan. 22. those words: Our Lord God the Pope. Yet afterwards finding those verie words, he ingenuously confessed the same. I knowe not, neither doe I much care, whether Be∣cane haue like ingenuitie in him: but sure I am, these
verie words are in that Gloss:Printed in folio at Pa∣ris. Auno 1513. Credere Dominum Deum nostrum Papam, conditorem dicti decreti, non potuisse sta∣tuere proat statuit, hareticum censeretur. To belieue that our Lord God the Popo, &c. Is not this pretie heathenish blaspnemie? The heathen called their Emperour, Our Lord God Domitian. The Papists call their Primar, Our Lord God the Pope. English Concord. BEcane in his Iarre, and sixt Question, demaun∣ded, Whether the King by his Primacie, may call Coū∣cells, and presede in them? And I, in my sixt Question, demaund, Whether the Pope by his Primacie, may call Councells, and prese de in them? I instanced in two generall Councells; the one of Constance, wherein three Popes, Iohn 24. Gregory 12. and Benedict 13. were deposed. The other of Basil, in which, Pope Eugen. 4. was depriued of his Popedom; and another chosen in his roome. But this the Iesuit silently passeth ouer, though it may happely rend the Popes hart-strings in-sunder. English Concord. Becane in his Iarre, and 7 Question, demanded, Whether the King can make Ecclesiasticall lawes? And I, in my Concord, & 7 Question, demand.
Whether the Pope can make lawes Ecclesiasticall, & dis∣annull lawes Temporall? Heerein I produced 4 Ecclesiasticall lawes against the Pope and his Primacy. The first,Dist. 99. ca. Primae. That the Bishop of the first Sea or Seat, be not called Prince of Priests, or high Priest, or any such like; but onely, The Bishoppe of the first Sea: neither let the Bishop of Rome himselfe, be called Vniuers all Bishop. The second;Cyprian in Conclio Carthagi. Concil. Cō∣stantin. 6. cap. 36. Concil. A∣fric. ca 2. That no Bishop should make himselfe Bi∣shop of Bishops, or Papa, that is, Pater Patrum. The third; That the Bishop of Constantinople, should haue equall authority, with the Bishop of Rome. The fourth; That they should not be receiued to the Cō∣munion of any within Africk, who held Appeales lawful to any Iudgements beyond the Sea. Especially to Rome: for this Canon was made purposely, against Appeales to the Bishop of Rome. Concerning the Popes power ouer lawes Secular, I produced a currant generall Axiome of theirs, viz. The fulnesse of the Popes power surpasseth all positiue lavves: And it sufficeth, that, in the Pope, his will stand for reason. And therein I did instance by this sentence of Panor∣mitane, De Constitut. ca. Ecclesia Sanctae Mariae, nu. 9. (which also agreeth wholly with the Rubrike of that chapter). Thus, The law of the Prince, preiudiciall to the Church:or the law of any Inferiors behoueful to the Church: doth not extend vnto the Church, vnlesse it be expresly ap∣proued by the Pope. Then I added thus: The reasons heereof collected out of the Canon law, by Iewell, in his Defence of the Apologie, are these;Part. 4. c. 21. Di. 7. Though the whole vvorld should sentence against the Pope, yet the Pops sentence should pre∣uaile;
because he seemes to haue all lawes,9. q. 3. Ne∣que ab Au∣gusto. or rights, in the closet of his breast. And againe: Therefore that which the Pope allowes, or disallowes,Dist. 19. cap. S Roman, in Glossa. wee ought to allow, or disallow. Whosoeuer then doth not obey the statutes of the Romane Church, is to bee accounted an heretick. Further,Dist. 40. Si Papa in Gloss. That it is a kind of Sacriledge, to dispute of that vvhich the Pope doth. Morcouer, That the Pope hath a coelestiall arbitriment: vvhence it followeth,Extr de trps. Epi. ca. Quinto. in Glossa. that in those things which bee willeth, His will to him for Reason is: Neither is there any vvho should say to him, Sir or Lord, vvhy doe you so? Lastly, That as the Pope by his owne will onely, can cre∣ate a law:Felin de Relcpt. so by his owne will onely, hee can disper vvith the lavv. The Iesuit, in his Examen, answereth nothing vnto the lawes Ecclesiasticall, either of the vniuersall Bishop, or of the Equality bet weene the Bishop of Canstantino∣ple, and the Bishoppe of Rome: and yet those said two lawes, expell the Pope with his Primacy, out of the Church, and shut vp the Church doores against him (as they of Eden were against Adam) to preuent his future re-entrie. But because the Iesuite doth make particular answers vnto most of the remainder; I will set them downe seuerally, and my Reply vnto them; as followeth. BECAN. Exam. YOu cite out of the Councell of African,Page 94. cap. 92. these words: Ad Transmatina indicia &c. Where vpon you gather, that it is not lawfull to appeale to the Bishop of Rome. But I, vnto this day, neuer saw any Councell
of Aftick, cap. 92. vvhich hath any such words. And it is ma∣nifest by the best Authors, that Appcales to the Sea Apesrolicait, were alwates la full and vsuall. See the Councell of Sardica, cap. 3. 4. & 7. and Henorius Emperour, in his Epistle to Arcadi∣us, which is set downe in the first Tome of the Councell, among the Episties of Innocent the first. Dr. HARRIS Reply. WHereas he saith, he cannot find that 92. chap. or the words heere specified; wee haue the Iesuit confessing himselfe guil∣tic of his most palpable ignorance in the Canon law & Councells. Their owne Binnius, whose Edition (as they will haue it) is the last, largest, and best Edition of the Councells; in his first Tome, pag. 643. citeth the 92. ca. Concil. African. sub Coelestino et Bonifac. in these very words: Ite placuit, vt Presbyteri, Diaconi &c. in cau∣sis quas habuerint, si de iudicijs Episcoporum suorum que∣sti fuerint, vicini Episcopi cos audiant, et inter eos, quicquid est, finiant adhibiti ab eis ex consensu Episcoporum suorū. Quod siab eis prouocandum putaucrint, non prouocent nisi ad Africana Concilia, vel ad Primates prouinciarum sua∣rum. Ad transmarina autem, quiputauerit appellandum, à nullo infra Africam in Communionem suscipiatur. If Priests, Deacons, &c. complaine of the iudgement of their Bishops, let the next Bishops heare their causes, &c. If they shall thinke meete to appeale from them, let them not appeale but onely to the Councells of Africk, or to the Primats of their owne Prouinces. But let not him bee receiued of any within Africk to the Communion, who thinks hee should ap∣peale to iudgement beyond the Sea.
These words the Iesuit might haue found in the E∣pitome of Councells, written by their Carranza. Yea in their owne Canon law, 2. q. 6. cap. Placuit vt Pres∣byteri, & 11. q. 3. ca. Presbyteri. Therefore the Iesuit, heere, makes himselfe, together with his ignorance, very ludibrious. Touching the Decretall Epistles, and others mu∣stred among them, they haue beene long since vpon iust demerit, branded as bastards. As for the Coun∣cell of Sardica, Cardinall Cusanus, De Concord. lib. 2. ca. 25. saith; That S. Augustine held not the Councell of Sar∣dica for a Catholick Councell, but rather for a Councell of Arrian hereticks. And further, That the Fathers in the Councell of Africa (in which Councell Saint Augustine was present) in their letters to Pope Coelestin, wrote, that they neuer found this Constitution decreed in the Councells of any Bishops. Wherefore, it may well be doubted, whether this be a Constitution of the Councell of Sardica, or not. This answere may suffice the emptie citing of an E∣pistle, and Canons of a Councell. Wherout when the Iesuit expresseth other matter, he shal receiue a further answere. BECAN. Exam. YOu cite these words of Cyprian, Nemo nostrum, &c. out of the Councell of Constantinople,Page 95. 2. cap. 36. But neither are those words found there, neither was Cy∣prian present at any Councell of Constantinople. E∣nery where you are rude, and a stranger. You haue no knowledge of times or places; and yet suddainly you would be a Maister.
Dr. HARRIS Reply. INdeed, if I were so rude, and such a stranger in the Fathers and Councells, as hee sheweth himselfe heere to be, I might rightly be termed rude and ig∣norant. The very misplacing, and the twice setting downe of the same Canon, and of the same Councell for words so diuerse, might easily haue informed the Iesuit, that it was the Compositors, or Transcribers, and not the Authors ouersight. There is none that knoweth Becane and my self, but presume that I know as well as hee, the times and places of all the Councells put forth in print; and that I could not be ignorant of this, viz. that S. Cyprian was dead, a glorious Martyr, more then 50 yeeres before any of the foure generall Councells (much more before this sixt of Constantino∣ple) was celebrated or called. But, silly Iesuit, can not hee find these words of Cy∣prian vttered by him, in any Councell where hee was present? Can hee cite any Councell but that of Car∣thage, where Cyprian was present? Or is hee ignorant, that Cyprian was present at the Councell of Carthage, and there vttered these words, Nemo nostrum Episco∣pum. &c. If he be so ignorant, let him heare Cyprian in these his owne words. Superest vt de hacipsa re, singu∣li, quid sentiamus, proseramus, neminem iudicantes, aut à iure Communion is, aliquem, si diuersum senserit, amo∣uentes. Neque enim quisquam nostrûm Episcopum se esse Episcoporum constituit, aut tyrannico timore ad obsequendi necessitatem, colleg as suos adigit: quando habet omnis Epi∣scopus,
pro licentia libertatis et potestatis suae arbitriū; pro∣prium, tanquam iudicari ab alio non possit, qui nec ipse po∣test alierum iudicare. Let euery of vs vtter what vvee thinke of this matter, iudging no man, nor excommunicating any, who shall think otherwise then we doe. For there is none of vs, that makes himselfe a Bishop of Bishops; or by tyrannicall feare for∣ceth his colleagues to obey: sith euery Bishop may speak free∣ly what he thinks, iudged of none, as he can iudge none. Doth not the Iesuit knowe euen by the name Papa, that the Pope ambitiously makes himselfe Bishoppe of Bishops, in their popish Canons? and tyrannicallie by oath, enforceth all Bishops to the necessity of obeying him, to say as he saith, in their canonicall obedience? If he know not, let Aeneas Syluius, afterward Pope Pi∣us 2. schoole him in these words: Bishops contradicting the Pope, though they speake the truth, yet they sin against their oath made to the Pope. If this Iesuite were not ignorant that Cyprian spake those words in the Councell of Carthage; what a friuo∣lous Doctor is he, misspending the precious time a∣bout trifling escapes of the Printer, or Transcriber &c. viz. of the word, Constantinople, for the word Car∣thage? as though such escapes were not frequent in the Popes Canon law. BECAN. Exam. YOu cite these words;Pag. 95. Plenitudo potestatis Papae, &c. with this citation; Extra de Constitut. Ecclesi. Sanct. Mariae, numero nono. Againe, falsely and ridiculous∣ly. For neither are those words there, neither haue you cited the place well. Thus you should haue cited it, Extra de Cō∣stitutionibus.
cap. Ecclesia Sanctae Mariae. Yet now at the last liarne somewhat, that you be not alwaies a child, and blockish in citing. Dr. HARRIS Reply. THe Iesuit here vndertaking to be my Schoole∣maister, proues himselfe to be a very blockish, and a ludibrious Teacher. To proue, not as he imagineth, The fulnesse of the Popes power to surpasse all Positiue lawes: but that The temporall lawes, with, or against the Church, extend not to the Church vvithout the Popes expresse allowance; I cited the place rightly, thus: De Constitut. cap. Eccles. Sanctae Mariae. nu. 9. But the Ie∣suit, after the depth of his shallow capacitie, cites it thus: De Constitut. Ecclesia Sanctae Mariae, leauing out these words, numero nono. Whe as those very words, if he had but any smattering skill, in the Commenta∣ries vpon the Canon law, might easily haue informed him, that these words and syllables, viz. Lex praeiudicia∣lis Ecclesijs, &c. were the words of Panormitan, vvri∣ting vpon that chapter, as indeed they are, thus;Paner de Constr ca. E. cl. Sáe marae. nu. 9. Lex Principis, praeiudicialis Ecclesiis, non extenditur ad Ecclesi∣as, nisi expresse approbetur per Papam. Si verò est Con∣stitutio laicorum inferiorum fauorabilis Ecclesiis, non ex∣tenditur aliquo modo ad clericos, nisi sit approbata per Pa∣pam. The lawes of Princes, prerudiciall to the Church, ex∣tend not to the Clergie, except the Pope expresly allow them. Though these words, Lex praeiudicalis &c. bee not in the Canon, but in the Rubrick of the same (and euen
that is enough to make this Iesuit blush) yet the mat∣ter is fully set downe in that Canon, De constitut. ca. Ec∣cles. S. Mariae. And the case was between Iohn de Ar∣chea (who appealed) and the Church of St. Mary, tou∣ching certaine possessions then in contiouersie, before the iudge of appeale: who, by reason of a certaine sta∣tate of Rome, spoyled the Monastery of the said pos∣sersions, and transserred them to the Church of Saint Marie; giuing corporall possession thereof. This cause being brought to the Pope, he sets down this decree: We, considering that layites hauing no power ouer the Church, or Church-men, if they make a law which may restect the good of the Church is of no validity, vn∣lesse it be established by the Popes authoritie; doe make void that vvhich is done in preiudice of the Monasterie and dif∣finitiuely doe sentence, the possession to be restored vnto it. These things beeing thus made plaine to the Iesuit, it is meet now he should answere how those lawes, in∣deed anciently made, but lately reuiued, and reen for∣ced by the Venetians, so exceeding preiudiciall to the Church and Church-men (as the Pope in his late excom∣municating Bull expresly and his two Cardinalls, Bel∣larminus and Baronius particularly, haue set downe) stand still in force, euen to the expulsion, and extirpa∣tion thence of all Icsuits, without any hope of their returne. Whether, because this said Canon hath lost his force; or for that the roating Bull hath lost his hornes, and is now become no more feared, then a braying Asse?
BECAN. Exam.Page 96. OVt of Gratian 9. q. 3. Neque ab Augusto, you cite these vvords: Sirotus Mundus sententiaret, &c. Ri∣chard you presit nothing. Once againe I wili teach you: thus you ought to haue cited; cap. Nemo ludi∣cabit, 9. q. 3. For the beginning of the chapter doth not beginne vvith thes ord; Neque ab Augusto, as you dreame, but with these, Nemo iudicabir. And yet the words cited by you, are not found there. Dr. HARRIS Reply. IT is not I, who (to prooue, that if all the world would sentence against the Pope, yet the Popes sentence should stand) cite 9. q. 3. Neque ab Augu∣sto; but the incomparably learned Bishop Iewell, as I expresly wrote in my Concorde, page 8. Therefore the Iesuit fondly saith, that hee will teach mee to cite better heerin, thus: cap. Nemo iudicabit. 9. q. 3. because the chap. beginneth with these words, Nemo iudicabit, and not with these; Neque ab Augusto. Wherein the Iesuit bewrayeth his incredible rudenels & ignorance, who neuer read citations made in the Canon law, by words after the beginning, the midst, or later end of the Canon, but onely in the beginning thereof. There∣fore heere I must take him to schooling, and read three lectures out of the Canon law (viz. out of the Decrees, the Decretalls, and the Extrauagants) vnto him, thus: In the Decrees, Dist. 12. ca. No decet. verb. Discretione. and Dist. 11. ca. Non nos. verb. quis entm: the Glosle ci∣teth 17. q. 4. §. Qui autem. But those words are not the beginning of any chapter in 17. q. 4.
In the Decretalls, De Electione, & Electi potestate, cap. Venerabilem. verb. Transtulit, The Glosse cireth 24. q. 1.§. Sedillud, and immediatly after, 11. q. 1.§. Sedsi quis: but neither of those chapters begin with those words, Sedillud, or Sedsi quis. In the Extrauagants of Ioan. 22. De verborum signi∣ficatione, cap. Quia quorundam. the Glosse citeth thus: 56. Dist. §. his omnibus. And thus, 14. q. 1. §. Quia er∣go. Whereas the first word of the Canon, is, Episco∣pus. By these lectures, as I suppose, I haue schooled this Becane heerein suficiently: but now falleth the Ie∣suit into a desperat case; for he hauing found out the Canon, he cannot find out these words, Sitotus mun∣dus, &c. I see I must take him to schooling once again, and teach him where he shall find those very words & syllables: viz. in the Glosse, verb. or §. Neque ab omni cle∣ro. The words of the Glosse are these: Argumentum quod concilium non potest Papam iudicare, vt extra. de E∣lect. significasti. vnde sitotus mundus sententiaret in ali∣quo negotio contra Papam, videtur quod sententiae Papae standumesset. vt 24. q. 1. Hac est fides. This argueth that the Councell cannot iudge the Pope. Therefore, if the whole vvorld should giue sentence in any matter against the Pope, the Popes sentence must stand. Now may the Iesuit run & cry , I haue found it; and withall, thanke the learned Bishop Iewell, for his citing of the Canon, viz. not by the first words of the Canon, but by the words following: whereby hee pointed, as with his finger, the Iesuit to the Glosse, where those words are written.
BECAN. Exam.Pag. 96. YOu cite out of the Glosse, Dist. 19 cap. Si Romano∣rum, these vvords: That which the Pope alloweth, &c. Therefore, whosoeuer will not obey the ste∣tutes of the Romane Church, is to bee accounted an heretick. But the Glosse hath not these later vvords: they are added by you, the new Glossator. I know not of what account these new Glossators are in England: I am sure out of England they are of none. Dr. HARRIS Reply. HEere againe, this vnluckie Iesuit shewes na∣ked his great ignorance, when hee saith that those later words (or the substance of them) are not in the Canon law or Glosse, but are of my Gloss: hee would haue said Bishop Iewells Glosse. Had not the Iesuit beene a very vnlearned man in∣deed, the learned Bishop, directing him to the Glosse, verb. Reprobantur, might haue taught him presently to haue found those later words, or the very matter, viz. That it is heresie, wilfully to disobey, or oppose the statutes of the Romane Church. For in that very place, the Glosse citeth 24. q. 1. cap. Haec est fides, where S. Hierom is produced, asserting, That if any shall blame that, quod Papae iudicio comprobatur; vvhich the Pope alloweth; se non atholicum, sed haereticum comprobabit, hee shall proue himselfe no Catholick, but an haeretick. The reason wher∣of the Iesuit may read Dist. 22. cap. Omnes, in these words; Fidem violat, qui aduersus Romanam Ecclesiam agit quae est mater fidei: For he violates the faith, vvho doth against the Romane Church, the mother of saith.
It may be, the simple Iesuit knoweth not, that by their Canon law, the Pope may make new Articles of faith, through his statutes. Let him therfore read, Ex∣tra. Ioan. 22. De verborum significatione. cap. Cum inter nonnullos, in Gloss and these words there: Papa princeps Ecclesiae, Christique Vicarius, potest articulum fidei facere: The Pope, Prince of the vvorld, and Christes Vicar, can make new Articles of faith: and there shall the Iesuit find this case put; The Pope did newly in that Canon, statuere, ser it downe, That Christ and his Apostles had some-what proper, or in speciall. After which it is there thus resolued: That to assert obstinatly, that Christ, & his Apostles had nothing (in speciall) in proprietie, haereticū fore censendum, was to be accounted hereticall, cum De∣cretalis exit, after the Decretall had gone forth, and not before. I will put a few more cases to the Iesuit, to make him vnderstand it better. Admit the Pope (as Nabuchodonoser did by his I∣mage set vp) at the lifting vp of his Idol, the wafer cake, (which hath no moe eyes to see, nor eares to hear, nor hart to vnderstand, then Nabuchodonosers Image had, but wil sooner putrefie then his) should commaund all Nations, kindreds, and people, to fall downe, and wor∣ship it; and three were found, as those three children, who would not fall downe, & worship it, should they not all three be reputed hereticks? Admit that the Pope should statuere, establish, that Doctrine of Diuels, 1. Timo. 4. verse 2. that is, should forbid eating of flesh in the Lent, as vnholie; and one should, as one did, eate wilfully a pigge in Lent, should not that one be, as indeed he was, burnt for an heretick?
Admit, where Christ commaunded euen the lay people to read, and search the Scriptures, the Pope,Iob. 5.39. con∣trary to Christ, that is, in one word, Antichrist, should forbid all laytie to read and search the Scripture; and one layick should be found, either reading the Scrip∣ture, or carrying, about him, the Bible translated into his mother tongue: should not such a one, be estloones carried into the house of slaughter, I meane the house of Inquisition, whence commonly such neuer returne aliue? Admit that the Pope (contrary to the lawes of God and man, the lawes of nature, of Nations) should sta∣tuere, set it downe in his Briefes, that what subiect soe∣uer, should take the Oath of Allegiance (but euen so far, as to swear to maintaine, and defend to his power, the life of his Soueraigne against all forraine power) should sweare against the Catholick faith; and any one vvilfullie opposing that stature made by the Pope, should take the Oath, as law full: should not hee goe for an heretick, vnlesse the Pope dispensed with him to take it? By these palpable instructions, the Iesuit may learn, that those later words afore-said were not my Glosse (as hee saith) of no value; but the capitall Popish doctrine, most pernicious to Kings and States, An∣tichristian, disloyall, diabolicall. By force vvhere∣of, if the Pope (as I said before) should statuere, set it downe, that Becanus the Iesuit, should goe into England, to raise there sedition and rebellion, to contriue, and act a new GVNNE-POWDER∣TREASON, wherin to fold vp in one suddaine de∣struction, the King, Queene, Prince, Nobility, Cōmunalty,
Bishops, Iudges, &c. as a thing meritorious, and the Ie∣luite should wilfully refuse to doe it, as a thing vnlaw∣full; hee would be reputed and punished as an here∣tick; although he should haue lost his life on earth, and hangd his soule in hell, by dooing it. So farre exten∣deth their blind obedience Iesuiticall, to the Statutes and authoritie Papall. BECAN. Exam.Pag. 97. OVt of another Glosse, Dist. 40. cap. Si Papa, you cite these vvords: It is a kind of sacriledge to dispute of the Popes fact. But, as vnfaith fully as before. For the Glosse hath no such word, or rather the contrary; for thus it speaketh expresly: If the Popes crime bee notori∣ous, and he beincorrigible, I belieue that he may be thereof accused. It easily appeareth, that you neuer saw the Canons, or Glosses. You are better seene in fables. Dr. HARRIS Reply. BY this it is manifest, that this Iesuit neuer saw, or ranne ouer cursorily the Canons & Glosses, but is better seene in scurrilities. Otherwise, ha∣uing the 40. Dist. ca. Si Papa before him, in the verie next page of the next leafe to the Canon Si Papa, and there in the Glosse, cap. Non nos. verb. quis enim; with the same view, hee might haue read these words: Sem∣per praesumitur pro Papa, vt 93. Dist. cap. 1. Vnde sacri∣legij instar esset, disputare de facto suo. Vel die quod facta Papae excusantur, vt homicidia Samsonis, furta Haebraeorum, et adulterium Iacob. Vt extra de diuortijs. Gaudemus.
The Pope is presumed alwaies to be good, Therefore it were a kinde of sacriledge to dispute of his fact; vvhose fact, viz. murder, is excused, as those of Samson; and his thefts, as the thefts of the Hebrewes: and his adulteries, as the adultery of Iacob. This stuffe is plaine enough: but it is too too filthy. Therefore with what face, or shew of any little skillin the Canons or Glosses, could the Iesuite deny the Gloss to haue any such vvords, since the very words are there in the Glosse to be found? Againe, considering it was the Bishop Iewell, and not I, (as my printed booke of Concord, pag. 8. shewed) who cited Dist. 40 cap. Si Papa. hee sheweth himselfe to be of proiected impu∣dencie, who durst so basely thinke and write of that most learned Bishop, viz. That hee neuer saw the Canons, or Glosses. If the Glosse write contrary, it writeth contrary to it selfe, and to the expresse words of the Canon it selfe, Si papa; which are these: Papae culp as redarguere, prae∣sumit mortalium nullus, quod cunetos ipse iudicaturus, a nemine est iudicandus; nisi deprehendatur a fide deuius. No mortall man presumeth to reprehend the Popes faults, because he is to iudge all, and to be iudged of none; vnlesse he be found Apostat from the faith. The Gloss, in 22. q. 2. ca. Non liceat, saith plainely (and not, as here, Credo, I belieue or thinke) Nullus mortalium papam possit iudicare. Extra de Elect. ca. Inno∣tuit. Dist. 40. Si Papa. No man liuing may iudge the Pope. Heresie (as the Gloss, Dist. 40. Si Papa: saith well) makes the Pope no Head of the Church. But other Crimes cannot make him no head: and so long as hee is Head of the Church, by the Canon law, he is the Church, and
aboue generall Councels, Emperours, and all mortall men liuing. Therefore saith Innocent the Pope, Dist. 96. ca. Sa∣tis euidenter: It is shewed euidently enough, that the Secu∣lar power can neither binde, nor loose the Pope, plainely cal∣led God, by the godly Emperour Constantine: now it is manifest, that God can not be iudged of men. And in 9. q. 3. Aliorum, he concludeth thus: God vvould haue the causes of other men, to be determined by men: but he hath questionlesse reserued the Bishop of this Sea to his owne iudgement. He vvould haue the successors of blessed Peter to owe their innocencie to heauen only, and to keepe a conscience inuiolate to the triall of the most sub∣tile Discussor. It is manifest, that the faithfull euery where, are subiect to the Pope, vvhen as he is designed Head of the whole Body. This being the maine, and cleare doctrine of the Romish Catholike faith; it is much to be feared, least that the Pope reading what Becane hath here written (viz. That the Pope may be iudged, and if he be incorrigi∣ble, deposed; not for Heresie alone, but also for other noto∣rious crimes) will not onely be much ashamed of him, as of an vnlearned Iesuite, and casheer him, as a mise∣rable defendour of him; but also, excommunicate him as an Heretike, and an Impugner of his Maiesticall Pri∣macy: whose honour will soone bee buried in the dung-hill, If hee may be iudged for his crimes no∣torious.
English Concord. BEcane in his eightth Question, demaunded, Whether the King may conferre Ecclesiasticall Benefices? And I, in my eightth Question, demaunded, Whether the Pope may conferre Ecclesiasticall Bene∣fices? Here I did instance in the Collations of Ecclesiasti∣call Benefices in France, made by the King of France, and not by the Pope: for proofe whereof I produced the Epistle of King Philip the faire, to Pope Boniface the eightth, thus: Philip by the Grace of GOD the french King, to Boniface bearing himselfe for high∣est Bishoppe, &c. Let your greatest fooleshippe knowe that the collation or bestowing of the Church-liuings doe pertaine to vs by our right Regall; and that the fruites of them, during the vacancie, are ours. That the Collations made alreadie by vs, or heereafter to bee made; are of force and validitie: and vvee repute them fooles, and mad men, vvho thinke other∣vvise. Vnto this, the Iesuite, in his Examen, answereth not one word.
English Concord. BEcane in his Iarre, and ninth Question, deman∣ded, Whether the King can create and depose Bi∣shoppes? And I in my Concord, and ninth Question, demaun∣ded, Whether the Pope may create and depose Bishoppes? Heerein I shewed how blasphemously (against Christ, the sole head of the Church) these Popes para∣sites write of Papall Primacy, touching this point. Durand:De Minist. et ordin. li. 2 All Bishops descend from the Pope, as mem∣bers from the head, and of his fulnes, they all receiue. Petrus de Palude: The Church hath not any power of Iurisdiction but from Peter. From Peter after Christ, all spirituall power is deriued. Bellarmine: The Pope alone is, Iure diuino, by Gods word, or right diuine; but Bishops, by the Popes law, or by Papall ordinance. Hereunto the Iesuite, in his Examen, maketh no an∣swere; as though such blasphemies were currant a∣mong them for good Popish-catholike doctrines. English Concord. BEcane, in his tenth Question, demanded, Whether the King may excommunicate stubborn, and disobedient persons?
And I, in my tenth Question, demanded, Whether the Pope may excommunicate, and depose, stub∣borne Emperours, who vvill not obey the Popes vvill, as it vvereDe Tran∣slat. Epist.ca. Quanto. in Glosla. reason it selfe? And here I mentioned the Treatise of Bellarmine, against William Barclay, published Anno 16 11, with this inscription: Of the power of the Pope in matters Temporall. Which said Treatise, by publike edict in France, was first adiudged to be burnt; and so it had beene; but for the restlesse importunitie of the Iesuits: yet afterward by publike edict, was it, vnder a great penaltie, forbidden to be bought, solde, or read; as a Trentise erronious, seditious, schismaticall, and pe∣stilent. This also the Iesuite, in his Examen, is content to passe by; for that belike, he would not stir vp againe that ill sauour of Bellarmines exceeding great disgrace therein. English Concord. BEcane in his Iarre, and eleuenth Question, de∣maunded, Whether the King may be Iudge of Controuer∣sies? And I, in my Concord and 11. Question, demanded, Whether the Pope may be Iudge of Controuersies? For example, these Popes following; Pope Zepherinus (or as some write, Eleutherius) Iudge of Montanisme, of whome Beatus Rhenanus out of Tertullian against Praxeas, noteth thus:
Episcopus Romanus Montanizat. The Bishop of Rome is a Montanist: or holdes vvith the Heretike Montanus. Pope Liberius and Pope Leo, both Arian heretikes iudges of Arianisme: as appeareth by Alphonsus de Castro, in his book of Heresies, and by the Legend of Hillary. Pope Anastasius iudge of Nestorianisme, who as the saide Alphonsus there writeth, fauouredthe Nestorian Heretikes. Pope Honorius iudge of the doctrines of Sergius the Heretike, of whom the Bishops in the sixt Councell of Constantinople, action 13. write thus: Wee haue anathematized or cursed, or excommunicated Honorius, vvho vvas Bishop of olde Rome, because bee followed the opinion of Sergius in all things, and confirmed his im∣pious doctrines. BECAN. Exam.Page 97 OƲt of Beatus Rhenanus, who wrote Annotations vp∣on the book of Tertullian against Praxeas, you cite these words: Episcopus Romanus Montanizat, that is, the Bishop of Rome followeth the heresie of Montanus. I haue often warned you of your deceitful Citations; but all in vaine. Beatus Rhenanus, in his Annotations, hath not those words, but these. Rectissimè egit, &c. The Bishop of Rome did very well, who condemned that fained Prophecie of Montanus. Which words are cleane contrary to those former, vnlesse in your Grammar, to receiue, and to reiect Montanus, signifie the same thing. But I knowe the cause of your errour. The Printer, or some other, (besides the Annotations of Rhe∣nanus) had set downe in the margine of Tertullians booke, cer∣taine short notes, which shew the matters there handled. Therfore in a cortaine place, he put these two words Episcopus Romanus,
The Bishop of Rome: because the Bishop of Rome was there mentioned: and a little after he put apart this word, Montani∣zat, is a Montanist; because Tertullian defended the heresie of Montanus, which the Pope had condemned. You, haning no regard of truth or faith, conioyne those words thus: Episcopus Romanus Montartizat. I am asbamed of this Imposture or deceit. Dr. HARRIS Reply. IF there were but one dram of truth, faith, or mo∣desty in this Iesuite, he would not haue written so falsely, deceitfully, and impudently, as here hee doth: which I wil make most apparant in this Straine, before I leaue him. Tertullian, following Montanus, wrote his booke a∣gainst Praxeas: and in the beginning thereof, he wri∣teth thus: Nam idem (Praxeas) tunc Episcopum Roma∣num agnoscentemiam prophetias Montani, Priscae, Maxi∣millae, et ea agnitione pacem Ecclesiis Asiae et Phrygiae infe∣rentem; falsa de ipsis prophetijs adseuerando, et praecessorū eius auctoritates defendendo: Coegit, et literas pacis reuo∣care iam emissas, et à proposito recipiendorum charismatum concessare. Praxeas compelled the Bishop of Rome (vvho at that time acknowledged, or approued the prophesies of Montanus, and in so doing brought peace to the Churches of Asia, and Phrygia: partly by affirming false things of those Churches, and partly by defending the auctority of the Bishops predecessors) to reuoke his letters of peace, which he had sent, and to cease from his further communicating vvith Montanus. By which words of Tertullian, it is cuident that the
Bishop of Rome did then approue, and by his letters maintaine the Hereticall Prophesies of Montanus. Beatus Rhenanus in his edition of Tertullian, besides his Annotations vpon him, set footh his Marginall notes, ouer against the text, briefely expressing all-a∣long the matters contained in the text; & ouer against these words of the text (The Bishop of Rome acknow∣ledging the Prophesies of Montanus, and so bringing peace to the Churches) he put these two Marginall notes: viz. the former; Episcopus Romanus Montanizat. Because Tertullian saide, The Bishop of Rome approoued Mon∣tanus. The second; Autoritas Romanorum Pontificum. The authority of the Komane Bishops. Because Tertullian said, that the Bishop of Rome, when he did Montanize, by his letters sent, brought peace to the Churches of Asia and Phrygia. And heereto agreeth Rhenanus his Annotation vpon these wordes of Tertullian, Episcopum Roma∣num. Attende summam Romani Pontificis autoritatem, etiam illis temporibus, dum aliquid recipit aut damnat. Obserue here the great authoritie of the Bishoppe of Rome, euen in those times, vvhen hec did eyther receiue, or reiect anie thing. To witte, because once hee recei∣ued Montanus, but afterward reiected him. So that it is most cleare, that those vvordes, The Bishoppe of Rome dooth Montanize, is the verie Marginall note of Beatus Rhenanus, conioyning all those three wordes, Episcopus Romanus Montanizat; without a∣ny separation of them, by comma, full point, or a∣ny the like, at the word Romanus: as is to be seene in the Margine, in all the editions of Tertullian, (euen by
Papists, as namely, in the Edition of Renatus Laurenti∣us de labar, printed at Paris, cum priuilegio, An. 1580.) where those marginall notes are set downe. Their ownc Pamelius, in his late Edition of Tertulli∣an, An 1608. leaues out those three marginal words; Episcopus Romanus Montanizat. And, in his 7. annotati∣on vpon those words, Episcopum romanum, sheweth himselfe griened at, and much disliketh, that those said three marginall words, are extant in all former printed e∣ditions: for thus hee writeth; Quare eo magis improban∣da aduocatio marginalis quae hactenus extat in excusis ex∣emplaribus omnibus; Episcopus Romanus Montanizat. But if those margimall words, Episcopus Romanus, stood alone in the margin so full pointed, because the Bb. of Rome is there mentioned; & then the word Mon∣tanizat, set down in the margin, separate frō the other two foresaid words, because Tertullian doth there Mon∣tanize, as this Iesuit would haue it; Pamelius in com∣mon sense, had no reason either to leaue our, or dislike those three marginall words. Iudge now, gentle Reader, how either pittifully ig∣norant, if hee neuer read those said three marginall words in beatus Rhenanus his edition of Tertullian: or if he did, how shamefully impudent this Becane heere sheweth himselfe to be, casting this aspersion vpon mee, that I deceitfully alleaged those said marginall words, conioyning them which in printed bookes stand se∣parated: and so applying that to the Bishop of Rome, which the marginall note assigneth to Tertullian. A more pal∣pable vntruth could not be vuered. Whereas he endeuoureth to iustific the same, by ci∣ting these words out of Rhenanus his annotations (Re∣ctissime
ergo egit Romanus Pontifex, qui illam confictam Montani prophetiam damnauit. The Bishop of Rome did well, in condemning that fained prophecy of Montanus) & asking me, whether it be all one to condemne & approue Montanus, hee doth manifest to the world, how excee∣ding shallow he is, not knowing whether he writ with, or against himselfe. Tertullian, writing very distinctly of two seuerall times, saith; that the Bishop of Rome at the first appro∣ued Montanus; and accordingly sent letters to the Churches of Asia and Phrygia, signifying his commu∣nion with Montanus, and so procuring great peace to those Churches. Whereupon, Rhenanus marginall note was, The Bishop of Rome doth Montanize. But Ter∣tullian saith againe, that he afterward, by the means of Praxeas, reuoked his said letters, and reiected Monta∣nus, Whereupon, euen on the text word, reuocare, Bea∣tus Rhenanus his annotation is this: Rectissime ergo Ro: Pontifex egit &c. Therefore right well did the Bishoppe of Rome to condemne Montanus. Doth not this shew appa∣rantly, that the Bishop of Rome was once a Montanist; but after, recanted? And doth not the Iesuit feele this his owne weapon retorted into his owne hart? BECAN. Exam.Pag. OVt of the Councell of Constantinople you cite these words: Anathematizari curauimus Honorium &c. You follow the fraud of the Grecians, who, vpon enny, inserted the name of Honorius, when as it is plaine, or certaine, (constat) that Honorius vvas not there condem∣ned, as Bellarmin de Rom. Pont. lib. 4. cap. 11. proueth out of the Library eper, Athanasius, and others.
Dr. HARRIS Reply. IN asserting Honorius to be a Monothelit heretick, I doe follow three generall Councells, viz. the 6. act. 13. the 7. act. the last. and the eight act. 7. And two Popes, Agatho, in his Epistle to Constantine the Emperour, to be seene in the Synod 6. act. 4. and Pope Lco 2. in his Epistle at the end of the 6. Synod. And further, I follow then owne Pontificall of the Popes liues in Leo 2. besides many, as learned Writers as Bellarmine, by whom it appearech manifestly, that Ho∣norius was an Heretick. Our English man Harding, in his booke against Bishoppe Iewell, page 131. of Pope Honorius, writeth thus: Now at length Ma. Iewell, you say that which hath some face of truth; for Honorius in∣deed fel into the heresie of the Monothelits. And this is the only Pope, who may iastly be burdened with heresie. Pope Leo 2. in his Epistle to the Emperour, at the end of that 6. generall Councell, hath these words: We accurse Honorius, who hath not lightened this Aposto∣lick Church, with Apostolick doctrine; but, by wicked trea∣chery hath laboured to subuert the vndefiled faith. In this my citation, I sollow not (as this fulse Iesuit saith) the Greeke fraude; but the edition of Coun∣cells, by their owne Binnius, Tom. 3. thus: Concilium Constantinopolitanum tertium, sextum vniuersale, in quo ducenti, octoginta, et nouem Episcopi, sub Agarhone Papa, & Constantino Pogouato Imperatore An. 680. et 631.Pag. Binnij 67. act. 13. Impia execramur dogmata Sergij, Cyri, Pyrrhi et Theodori, quos Agatho Papa abijcit, vtpote contraria re∣ctae fidei sentientes, quos Anathemati submitti definiuimus.
Cum his verò simul proijci à sancta Dei Catholica Eccle∣sia, simul{que} anathematizari praeuidimus Honorium, qui fuerat Papa antiquae Romae, eo quod inuenimus per scripta quae ab eo facta sunt ad Sergium, quia in omnibus eius mentem secutus est, et impia dogmata confirmauit. We detest the impious doctrines of Sergius, Cyrus, &c. whom we haue accursed; vvith these, we haue also cast out of Gods holy Catholick Church, and accursed, Honorius, who was Pope of old Rome; because vve found by those things vvhich he wrote to Sergius, that he was vvholly of Sergius opinion, and confirmed his impious doctrines. Heere, if I would hunt after Butterflies, as this try∣fling Iesuit doth, I could tax him for his ouer-sight, or ignorance, in putting downe Athanasius for Anasta∣sius. But leauing this vnlearned Iesuit to correct his errors; vnto Bellarmine, hcere obiected against mee, I say, that Anastasius writing of the Popes liues, in the life of Pope Leo 2, setteth downe Honorius among the hereticks who were condemned by the sixt generall Councell. And for further answere, I referre Bellar∣mine vnto Mr. Dr Whitaker, Controuers. 4. cap. 6. and to Mr. Dr. Reynolds his Conference against Hart, ca. 7. Di∣uis. 2. who both, very largely and learnedly, haue refu∣ted all which Bellarmine hath written materiall for the cleering of Honorius. By these Pope-Hereticks, the Christian Reader may learne, what a dangerous thing it is to make the Pope Iudge of all Controuersies. And further, hee may heere obscrue, with what deep silence the Iesuit letteth passe The Pepes, Liberius, and Leo, for Arrian hereticks: and Pope Anastasius for a Nestorian heretick. So worthy a champion defender is Becane of the Popes Primacy.
English Concord. BEcane, in his Iarre and 12. Question, demanded, Whence the King hath his Primacy? And I, in my Concord, Quest. 12. demaunded, Whence the Pope hath his Primacy? Whether of Christ, who said,Ioh. 18. v. 36.1. Pet. 5. v. 3. Ro. 13. v. 1. My kingdome is not of this vvorld: or of Peter, Who forbade his fellow Pres∣byters to dominere ouer the Clergie; much more, ouer Kings. Or rather of the Diuell,Mat. 4. v. 9. Luk. 4. v. 6 who said, I will giue vnto thee, all the kingdoms of the vvorld, and the glory of them: for that is giuen to mee, and I giue it to vvhom I will. And euen so said the Diuels heire, Pope Adrian: Whence hath the Emperour his Empire but from vs? Be∣hold, it is in our power, to giue it to whom we will. By these sayings it is demonstrated, that the Pope hath his Primacie, not from Christ, but from the Diuell. Yet heere the Iesuit hath not one word to answere for his Popes Primacy. English Concord. BEcane, in his Iarre, and 13. Quest. demaunded, Whether the King may compell his subiects to the oath of Primacy? And I, in my Concord, and 13. Quest. demaunded, Whether the Pope may compell his subiects (that is, all Christians) to the oath of Primacy? Because, according to their Canon law,Dist. 81. ca. Siquis. What Chri∣stian soeuer will not obey the Popes precept (euen to kill
his Soueraigne, and natiue King) runnes into the sinne of Idolatry & Heathenisme. Especially the Bishops: who  etyed to the Pope by oath,Aenae Syl∣naus ad Mogunt. That if they gaine-say the Pope, though they speake the truth, yet they sin against their oath made to the Pope. Lastly,De Rom. Pont. l. 4. cap. 5. because Bellarmine saith: If the Pope should commaund vice, or forbid vertue, the Church were bound to belieue vertue to be euill, and vice to be good. BECAN. Exam.Page 99 YOu cite, out of Gratian, Dist. 81. cap. Si quis, these vvords of the Pope: If any will not obey our pre∣cept, &c. You have not read this chapter: neither is the beginning of it, Si quis, but, Si qui. Neither doth the Pope there decree, that hee incurres the sinne of Idolatry, who vvill not obey him in killing his nature King, as you calumniate; but the Priests and Deacons, who after admonition, will not ab∣staine from fornication: and also they, vvho will presume to heare those Priests and Deacons in their publique Ministery, beeing interdicted to enter the Church. Consult with the Canon, and you shall find it. Dr HARRIS Reply. IHaue read that Canon ouer diligently, more often then Becan hath fingers on both his hands; where∣in I find, that if vnrepentant fornicators, Priests or Deacons, forbidden entrance into the Church, wil yet presume to vse their Ministery in the Church, the peo∣ple are inhibited to heare them.
And, whosoeuer will not obey that precept, incurres the sinne of Idolatry, according to that of Samuell; It is the sinne of vvitcherast not to obey, and the vvickednes of Idolatry not to listen, or assent. So farre reacheth that rule particular. Then follow∣eth in that Canon, the generall rule, in these vvords: Peccatumigitur Paganitat is incurrit, &c. Therefore, who∣soeuer saith hee is a Christian, and contemneth to obey the Sea Apostolicall, incurreth the sinne of Paganisme. So that by this Canon, what Christian soeuer diso∣beyeth the Sea of Rome, cōmaunding any thing (good or euill, as Bellarmine hath it) incurres the sinne of Pa∣ganity; he must be reputed an heathē. If the Iesuit knew not, that the Canon riseth ab Hypothesi ad thesin, from the particular to the generall, he shewed himselfe to be a very vnlearned man: if he knew it, in writing thus, he sheweth himselfe to be a brasen-fac't abuser of his Rea∣der. That the Reader may see the truth of this generality (a matter so neerly concerning the crownes and liues of Princes) I wil produce, for proofe thereof, two other places of the Canon law, wherin that foresaid generall rule is thus set down. The former, Clementis de haereti∣cis. ca. Adnostrum. in Glossa. Peccatū; paganitatis incurrit, quicum Christianū;se asserat, sedi Apostolicae obedire con∣temnit. What Christian soeuer disobeyeth the Sea Aposto∣lick, incurres the sinne of Paganisme. Where that Glosse, to proue that generall, citeth Dist. 10. ca. Nulli fas. Nulli fas est, velle, velposse, trans∣gredi Apostolicae sedis praecepta. It is not lawfull for any to be, either willing, or able, to transgresse the precepts of the Aposlolick Sea.
The second place is, Extrauag. Ioan. 22. de verborum significa. cap. Cuminter nonnullos, in Gloss. Haereticus est ille, qui animo superbienti, dispositionem sedis Aposto∣licae, Articulos fidei non infringentis, seruare, et ei obe∣dire contemnit: cum peccatum ariolandi sit non obedire, & scelus Idololatriae non acquiescere, et vitium Pagani∣tatis contemnere obedire. 81. Dist. Si qui sunt. 8. q. 1. Sciendum. Hee is an Heretick, who with a proud mind, contemneth to keepe, and obey, the disposition or order of the Apostolike Sea, not infringing the Articles of faith: sith it is the sin of witchcraft not to obey; and the wickednes of Idolatry, not to harken; and the voice of Paganisme, to contemne to obey. Thus, by the expresse words of the Canon, the ge∣nerality of this is apparant, viz. To disobey the Sea of Rome, commaunding any thing which is not hereticall, (for in matter of manners, saith Bellarmine, the Pope can not erre.) is withchraft, Idolatry, Heresie. Therefore, if the Pope should commaund a Iesuit, or the vilest slaue in a kingdome, to kill the King, who retaineth his crowne after the Pope hath excommunicated him, & depriued him of his crowne: it is vvitchcraft, idolatry, and heresie, in that iesuit or slaue, who vvilfully refuseth to kill that King. The Mysterie of Antichristian iniquitie, as it is now reuealed, proceedeth yet further, euē to the lawfull kil∣ling of Kings, by the vilest vassall, without any com∣maund of the Pope, or of any Superior, not onely after such a King be solemnly depriued of his dominions by the Pope, but without that, after sentence declaratorie only pronoūced; to weet, of heresie, or any other crime of that King, containing the penalty of depriuation.
For that is now an orthodoxall position of the Ca∣colike Romish faith, Printed Cum priuilegio, and ex∣pressely maintained by Suarius in his booke, with this Title, The defence of the Catholike faith, against the er∣rours of the English sect, vvith the answere to the Apologie of the oath of Fidelity, and the Preface monitory to the king, &c. The words of Suarius containing that Antichri∣stian iniquitie, Impietie, Impudency; are these: It is most true,Lib. 6. cap. 4. that the Pope may inflict the penalty of Deposi∣tion, and pronounce the sentence of Depriuation of the King∣dome of any King supreme in his temporals: after vvhich iust sentence so pronounced, vvhereby, ipso facto, hee is deposed of his kingdome; If a priuate man shall kill the king, he doth it not by priuate authority, but in the vertue of the sentence, and consequently, as an instrument of au∣thoritie publike. When a king is deposed, then he is no king, nor lawfull Prince. Yea, if such a king, after, Lawfull depo∣sition of him, persisting obstinate, doth vvithholde his king∣dome by force, in this he begins to be a tyrant, because hee is no lawfull king, neither by any iust title doth possesse his kingdome. This more plainely appeareth in a king that is an Heretike: for by his heresie, forsooth, ipso facto, hee is depriued in some sort, of his Dominion, and the proprietie of his kingdome: because it either remaineth confiscate, or euen by the very law is deuolued to his Successour, if he be a Catholike. And yet neuerthelesse, he may not presently be depriued of his kingdome, but doth possesse, and administer the same iustly, vntill by sentence, at least declaratory, hee be iustly condemned of his crime. But after that sentence giuen he is altogether depriued of his kingdome, so that hee can not with iust title possesse the same. Therefore from that time, hee may be handled altogether as a tyrant, and
consequently may be slaine by any priuate man vvhatsoeuer. Now in the last point proposed, this is to be saide. That af∣ter the sentence condemnatory of the king (for the priuation of his kingdom) giuen by the Pope, or, vvhich is all one, af∣ter the sentence declaratory of a crime, hauing such a penal∣ty by the law imposed on that crime; certainely hee vvhich gaue sentence, or to vvhom he committed it, may depriue the king of his kingdome, euen by killing him; either if hee can not otherwise depriue him, or if the iust sentence extend to the depriuing of him. Marke well, ô yee Christian Princes, especially ô yee Princes Protestant orthodoxall: doe you behold (for it more neerely concerneth every one of you) into what, even the highest, pitch of traiterous impudency and impietie, this Coccatrice broode, and Generation of vipers, to witte, the Iesuites, are mounted? when as in their treasonfull dogmaticall positions, published in print to all the world, and most stiffely by them auer∣red as doctrines of Catholike faith, they teach it to be lawfull for any, the basest villaine of a king to kill the king, being excommunicated, deposed, or otherwise declared to be so and so criminous. Moreouer, they teach, that the saide base vassall or villaine, is, in such case, a more publike person lawfully to kill the king, then the king or his Iudges are, to sentence that villaine Traitor-Regicide. The time was, when Emperours were the soue∣raigne Lords of the Bishop of Rome. Gregory the great, called Mauritius the Emperour, his Lord, and himselfe the Emperours Seruant: but afterwards the case was altered cleane contrariwise; and the Pope became the soueraigne Lord of the Emperour, and the Emperour
the Popes vassall. In the yeare 1133, when Pope In∣nocent the second, had set the Crowne vpon the Empe∣rour Lotharius head, hee caused the solemne manner thereof to be painted on a wall in his Lateran-Palace; and vnder the picture, these verses following, to be written: Rex venit adfores, iurans per vrbis honores: Post homo fit Papae, sumit quo dance, coronain. The king, at Palace of the Pope, sweares fealty; and than, The king, receiuing Crowne of Pope, made is the Popes sworne man. True it is, that by the Popes Canon law, Dist. 63 c. Tibi Domino. et 22. q. 5. de forma in Glossa, the Empe∣rours, as the Popes vassals, must sweare homage to the Pope, as holding their Crownes, and Empires of him: but it was neuer heard of, before these Iesuiticall tray∣tours had so heretically dogmatized, that the Kings and Emperours hold their liues also of the Pope, as the basest villaines that euer were, to witte, at the Popes pleasure. Now iudge, Christian Reader, what noble schoolemaisters these Iesuites are, teaching all Christian subiects the Art of killing their Kings. Saint Iohn in his Reuelation, Chap. 17. vers. 16. prophecied, That the King should hate the vvhore, the scarlet vvhore (died first in the bloud of Martyrs; but now, in the bloud of Kings) and make her desolate, and naked, and should eate her flesh, and burne her vvith fire. If euer there were iust cause presented to kings to doe it, surely now it is giuen them to the full.Prou. 8.15. The
King of heauen, by vvhom they rule, and decree iustice, stirre vp betimes their royall hearts, with vnited for∣ces to constraine the Pope to renounce this his Anti∣christian bloudy claime, or else to pull his triple Crowne from his head, and to lay his Romish Pope∣dome in the dust; choosing another Patriarke (if a Patriarke must needes bee had) and bounding that new one, within the Ecclesiasticall tedder onely. That learned Gerson, in his booke, De Aufeberilitate Papae, of taking the Pope of Rome, cleane away, gaue a good Item for this long since. BECAN. Exam.Page 100 YOu cite out of Bellarmine these words (If the Pope should command vice, and forbid vertue, the Church were bound to belieue vertue to be euil, and vice good.) but most deceitfully. For Bellarmine doth not abso∣lutely affirme that which you faine, but vpon condition: that, grant one absurdity, another will follow. Bellarmines words are these: It can not be, that the Pope should erre, in commanding any vice, or forbidding vertue, because then he should erre about faith. For the Catholike faith teacheth, that all vertue is good, and all vice is euill. But if the Pope should erre, in commanding vices, and prohibiting vertues; the Church were bound to be∣lieue vices to be good, and vertues euill, vnlesse it would sinne a∣gainst conscience. Dr. HARRIS Reply. THis Iesuit makes Bellarmine write farre worse, than as I produced him. For in my Citation, he spake thus: If the Pope should command vice,
or forbid vertue; the Church should belieue vice to be good, and vertue to be euill: but Becane brings him in writing more impudently, and blasphemously, thus: If the Pope should erre in commanding vices, or forbidding ver∣tues, the Church vvere bound to beleeue vices to be good, and vertues to be euill, vnlesse the Church would sinne a∣gainst her conscience. Which is plaine blasphemie, and for which Bellarmine incurreth S. Pauls curse directlie, For hee can not deny, but that the blessed Angels of heauen, and Apostles, were as free from errour, in their Angelicall and Apostolicall doctrines of faith, and ma∣ners, as the Pope is: yet saith S. Paul, Gal. 1. vers. 8: If vve, or an Angell from heauen, should preach vnto you otherwise, than that yee haue receiued, let him be accursed. But Bellarmine thus: If the Pope should preach other∣wise, viz. vertue to be euill, and vice good (according to that of Esay, Chap. 5. vers. 20. Woe be to them, that speak good of euill, and euill of good) the Church ought to hold the Pope so blessed, as that she should sinne, if shee did not belieue him so erring, and erroneously preaching; What is this else, but to giue the holy Spirit of God, the Lie in his face? is here most absurd, in writing thus: Dato  do, sequitur aliud. If vvee grant one absur∣,  followeth another. For grant that one absurdity, that a blessed Angel of heauen should preach errour: should this urditie follow, That the Church vvere bound to beleeue him? No saith Paul; the Church vvere bound to holde him accursed. Further, it is apparantly vntrue (wherewith Becane doth heere charge mee) viz. that I said, Bellarmine did absolutely affirme the Pope to command vice and for∣bid
vertue: or that the Church should belieue vice to be good, and vertue euill: for I cited it in a hypotheti∣call or conditional proposition, thus: If the Pope should command vice, &c. and not by a categoricall, or singlie affirmatiue proposition, thus: The Pope doth command vice, and forbid vertue, &c. It may be, Becanes learning extendeth not so farre, as to knowe when a thing is vttered categorically, and when hypothetically; and so of ignorant simplicitie, he falsely burdened me with it. If it were so, I will the rather forgiue him; but then I would haue him to goe to schoole againe, to learne the principles of Logike: if he knew it, and yet would write thus, he abuseth his Reader not a little. But I will leaue this vnlearned Iesuite a while; and indeede I begin to growe very weary of him: with Bellarmine here would I gladly change a few wordes; and learne of him, whether the Church bee bound in any case, to beleeue errour in faith, or in the necessary precepts of manners? If he affirme it, he shewes him∣selfe to be an Heretike , condemned in his owne conscience: if hee deny it, then suppose the Pope should erre in faith or manners, yet the Church should not belieue him therin. By the rules of the Canō law, If the Pope erre in faith, that is, if he be an Heretike, he should be deposed: but by Bellarmines paralell, If the Pope erre in faith, he must be beleeued. If this be not do∣ctrine hereticall, what can be hereticall? Therefore to the euerlasting shame of Iesuites, let this hereticall position of Cardinall Bellarmine, (which Becane seekes heere to defend, but the very heathen would blush to assert of any) bee ingrauen with a penne of yron in lead or stone for euer; viz. If the Pope should erre in com∣manding
vices, and forbidding vertues, the Church is bound in conscience, to belieue vices to be good, and vertues to be euill. Goe to now ô Pope, and say, Soule thou hast enough: for now, doe but command the bloudy and traiterous crime of Regicide, that is, killing of kings, as a vertue, it is presently good; and the Church is bound in con∣science, to beleeue it to be good. The like is to be said of Adulterie, Incest, Idolatrie, Blasphemy. VVhat needes now the Pope to dispence with these sinnes, seeing that by his commanding of them to be done, he makes them euen vertues? That which Bellarmine affirmeth here to bee an ab∣surditie and impossibilitie; their great learned VVri∣ters, Schoolemen, and Canonists (as, Ockam, Cusan, Antonin. Sanders, Turrecremata, Zabarella, Canus, Al∣phonsus, Hostiensis, and Panormitan) their Popish Councels (as, the 5. Roman vnder Symachus, & Councel of Basill) yea, the very Canon law, Si Papa. Dist. 40. grant, and dogmatize, to weet, That the Pope may erre, not onely in precepts of manners; but more then so, in do∣ctrines of faith, and also be an heretike. Among the syno∣dicall Epistles in the Councels of Basill, thus wee read: Many Popes are saide to haue fallen into errours and here∣sies. It is certain, that the Pope may erre. The Councell hath often times condemned the Pope, in respect, as vvell of his heresie in faith, as of his lewdnesse in life. And touching the Canon law in this point, Panormitan de Electio. et Elect. potest. ca. Significasti, writeth thus: The Councell may condemne the Pope of Heresie, as in Dist. 40. Si Papa: where it is saide, that the Pope may be an heretike, and may be iudged, and condemned of Heresie.
VVho then could haue thought, that Bellarmine would haue beene so shamelesse a flatterer of the Pope, as to write that the Pope can not erre? according to that of Alphonsus against Heresies, Lib. 1. ca. 4. Non credo aliquem esse adeò impudentem Papae assentatorem, vt ei tribuere hoc velit, vt nec errare, nec in interpretatione lite∣rarum sacrarū, hallucinari possit. I do not think, that there is any one so impudent a flatterer of the Pope, as to say, he can not erre, or be deceiued in interpretation of the Scripture. To conclude; I would learne of Bellarmine, what answere he will make to this question of Erasmus, wri∣ting vpon 1. Cor. chap. 7. thus: If it be true which some assert, That the Pope can neuer erre iudiciously; vvhat vse is there of general Councells, or of learned Diuines, or Lawyers in those Councells; vvherefore lyeth an appeale to the Councell, or to the Pope himselfe better taught; where∣fore should there be any Vniuersities; or any in them, to bu∣sie, or disquiet themselues in the questions of faith; vvhen as all men may learne the certaine truth of one man onely? how commeth it to passe, that the decrees of one Pope, are contrary to the decrees of another Pope? And further I wil demaund, why the Pope suffereth so many controuer∣sies to be vndecided? for example, these three: 1. Whether the Virgin Marie vvere conceiued without sinne, or not? 2. Whether the Popebe aboue a generall Councell, or a generall Councell aboue the Pope? 3. Whether the Pope haue supreme power in the Tem∣poralls of all Princes, Kings, and Emperours, Directly, or Indirectly? especially, considering that the most lear∣ned Popish VVriters, bitterly and irreconcileably dis∣sent in these points.
This Iesuit Becane,Page 101. in the winding vp of his most ig∣norantly-grosse, and vniust censures of my false citati∣ons, as he falsely speakes; First tells me, with a lying mouth, and a brasen face, that I neuer read the Authors which I haue cited. But, the Iesuit shall find & feele by this Reply, that I haue read, and diligently perused them. BECAN. Exam. SEcondly, That I may knovv, if I haue read the history, how that moe then 400 false citations were by Bishop Eu∣reux, noted to be in Plessaeus his booke of the Eucharist: and that Plessaeus was publiquely cōnicted of that crime, before Henry 4, King of Fraunce. Dr. HARRIS Reply. I Read that story ouer in French, from the begin∣ning to the end, partially written against Plessaeus: wherein I find but 9 citations, whereof Plessaeus and the Bishop disputed before the King. Howsoeuer Plessaeus at that time (daunted, as may seeme, by the Maiesticall presence of the King, who had then forsa∣ken the Orthodoxall faith, which once hee for a long time professed, and to his vttermost maintained; and whom then, notwithstanding outward shewes of in∣differencie, Plessaeus found indeed, aduerse to him, & wholly addicted to his Aduersary) did not so well iu∣stifie those citations of his, as either himselfe desired, or his friends expected: yet afterwards in his Booke
printed, he hath in particular, maintained his said cita∣tions: vnto the which booke I reerre the Iesuit. BECAN, Exam.Page 102. THirdly, Becane giues me his fatherhoods counsell, to be warned by Plessaeus harms: yet after his Iesui∣ticall lying manner, he tells me withall, That had my booke beene as large as that of Plessaeus, vvhere there vvere 400. false citations in his booke; according to the proportion, there would haue beene in my booke, a thousand. Dr. HARRIS Reply. THe learned Bishop did not tax Plessaeus his ci∣tations, as this friuolous Iesuit doth mine, for the ouersights of the Composer, or Transcri∣ber, mistaking one syllable for another, one word for another, one name for another, or one Canon for an∣other; so that the substance of the matter, according to the meaning of the Author, or truth it selfe, were truly cited. Which graue and learned course, if Becane had kept with mee, he should haue found none, no not any one false citation of that kind; as this Reply doth demonstrate: wherein is iustified the very substance of all, yea the very words and syllables almost of all the citations, set downe in my booke of English Concord. Therefore, with strange impudencie, doth this Iesuit say, that my false citations, in proportion, would haue growne to a thousand: as though none to none had a∣ny proportion. Neuerthlesse; hereafter, because this trifling Iesuit
fowleth for feathers, that is, escapes in printing, throgh the composer, or Corrector; I will be Corrector my selfe, as my weighty busines will permit. In the meane time, gentle Reader, vouchsafe to obserue, what a wa∣rie course this Iesuit in his writings taketh, duly pro∣portioned to his very small learning and reading, viz. to vse in a manner, none, or very few, citations of any kind; but onely to set downe, with his penne, whatso∣euer his empty braines conceiue. After which course, it were no hard thing, to write a booke, as large and as materiall, as commonly his are, euery weeke through∣out the yeere, one. Now the Iesuiticall Syrts are past: heereafter wee shall ride in the calme of apparant vniforme Concord touching the Kings Supremacie; how soeuer this turbu∣lent Iesuit (like those restlesse wicked ones, spoken of by Esay, whose waters cast vp myre and durt) endeuour to trouble the waters, with the myre and durt of his Iesuiticall discord: which, by this Reply following, is returned home, and impacted vpon his owne face. English Concord. IN these Questions, the Aduersaries dissent ex∣treamely: On the one side, Augustinus Triumphus, Aluarus Pelagius, Hostiensis, Panormitanus, Sylue∣ster, Henricus Gaudauensis, Rodericus Sancius, Alexan∣der Alensis, Celsus Mancinus, Thomas Bozius, Francis∣cus Bozius, Isidorus Moscouius, Laelius Zecchus, Cardi∣nall Baronius, & lastly, Alexander Carerius; who in his booke publiquely printed, was not afraid to call Bel∣larmine,
and all who tooke part with him, against the other forenamed; Impious Politicks, and Hereticks of our time. I say, in these points of the Popes Primacy, and at this present time, the Iesuits extreamely dissent from the Sorbonists; and the Venetian and French, from the Romane Papists. On the other side, all Protestant-English Writers, with one vniforme consent agree in the Kings Supre∣macy; as they, who willingly haue taken the Oath of the Kings Supremacy, which is set downe in these ex∣presse words following, viz. I, A. B. doe vtterly testifie, and declare in my conscience, that the Kings Highnesse, is the onely Supreme Gouernour of this Realme, and of all other his Highnesse Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spirituall or Ecclesiasticll things or causes, as Temporall. And that no forraine Prince, person, Prelat, State, or Potentate, hath, or ought to haue, any Iurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Preheminence, or authority Ecclesiasticall, or Spirituall, within this Realme. And therefore I doe vtterly renounce and forsake all forrain Iurisdictions, Powers, Su∣periorities & Authorities: And doe promise that frō hence∣forth, I shall beare faith and true alleagiance to the Kings Highnesse, his heires, and lawfull Successors: And to my power shal assist, and defend all Iurisdictions, Priuiledges, Preheminencies, & authorities, granted, or belonging to the Kings Highnesse, his heires and Successors, & vnited or an∣nexed to the Imperiall crowne of this Realme. So helpe mee GOD, &c. But, by the lawes of England, in these very words & syllables; Supreme Iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall, or Power Spirituall, is for euer vnited and annexed to the Imperiall Crowne of this kingdome. These things then beeing so
certainly and manifestly true; let Becan himselfe iudge, if he will iudge sincerely & ingenuously, according to this oath of Supremacy (taken willingly by all Prote∣stant English Writers, without refusal of any one) 1 Whether the King of England hath not Supremacy, or Primacy in this Church? 2 Whether that Primacy or Supremacy, be not Ecclesi∣asticall and Spirituall? viz. vvhich is in all things & cau∣ses, Ecclesiasticall & Spirituall. 3 Whether the King by his Primacy, or Supremacy, may be called Primat of the Church? to weet, as one is called a King, of his kingdome: a Bishop, of his bishoprick: or a Bailife, of his Bailiwick? 4 Whether by the same Supremacy or Primacy, hee may not be called Head of this Church? that is to say, the onely supreme Gouernour in all things and causes Spirituall and Ecclesiasticall, & ouer all persons Ecclesiasticall. 5 Whether that Primacy or Supremacy do not consist in Power or Iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall? to weet, which consisteth in all things Ecclesiasticall, and ouer all per∣sons Ecclesiasticall; and which is tearmed by the ex∣presse words of the lawes of England, Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction, or power Spirituall; seeing that the Oath of Supremacy, respecteth the Kings authority Ecclesi∣asticall: and the Oath of Fidelitie, his authoritie Ci∣uil. As our King IAMES in his Booke, most accu∣ratly distinguisheth them. 6 Whether the King, by his Primacy or Supremacy, may not call Councells, and presede in them? viz. as the onely supreme Gouernor of this Kingdome, in all things & causes: & ouer all persons, Ecclesiasticall & Spiritual. For do not all Coūcells consist of persons Ecclesiasticall? & are not
things Spirituall & Ecclesiasticall handled in Councels? 7 Whether the King may not make Ecclesiastical lawes? to weet, as the onely supreame Gouernour in all things, & ouer all persons Ecclesiasticall; according to that of Saint Augustine:Contra Crescon. lib. 3. c. 51. Heerein Kings, (as it is from heauen prescri∣bed vnto them) serue God, as Kings; if in their kingdome, they commaund those good things, and forbid those euills, which pertaine not onely to humane societie, but also to Di∣uine Religion. 8 Whether the King may not cōferre Eccle∣siasticall Benefices? As the only Supreame Gouernour in all cau∣ses. & ouer all persons Ecclesiasti∣call. 9 Whether the King may not make and de∣pose Bishops? As the only Supreame Gouernour in all cau∣ses. & ouer all persons Ecclesiasti∣call. 10 Whether the King may not compell his subiects to the oath of Supremacy? As the only Supreame Gouernour in all cau∣ses. & ouer all persons Ecclesiasti∣call. 11 Whether the King, hath not his Supre∣macie by the right of his Crowne? As the only Supreame Gouernour in all cau∣ses. & ouer all persons Ecclesiasti∣call. As for Excōmunication, if the Iesuit meane by it Re∣taining of sins, that respecteth the Iurisdiction internall: and all, both Protestant, and Popish Writers acknow∣ledge, that our King challengeth no such power. But if he vnderstand, the inhibiting frō the Communion & other holy exercises performed by the Minister, and faithfull people in the Church, then in England, where euery, not only Archbishop, but Archdeacon, and his Officiall doe excommunicat, we shal haue (according to Becane his dispure heere) so many Primats of the Church of England, as there be in it Archdeacons, or their Officialls. But heere the controuersie is of one onely Supreame Primat, or Supreame Gouernour. Ther∣fore this Question of Becane, touching the Kings pow∣er to excommunicat, is very idle and riuolous.
As touching the Iudge of Controuersies, all Protestant Writers hold no mortall man to be Iudge of thē. Not∣withstanding, Hainrik Salobrig, and (long before him) Iewell, in his Defence of the English Apologie,Par. 6. c. 13. Duil. 2. out of the Ecclesiasticall Writers, especially out of Socrates, and Cardinall Cusanus, write, That Christian Princes, with good commendation, haue heard, and determi∣ned some Controuersies of faith. According also to these words of Charles the Great, produced by the re∣uerend Bishop of Ely, viz. Wee doe decree, and by Gods assistance haue decreed,Tort Tort. Pag. 165. what is to be firmly holden in that cause, or Controuersie. It was a cause of Faith, against Eli∣phandus, vvho asserted Christ to be the adopted Sonne of GOD. Lastly, who would heere regard the naked names of Sanders, Genebrard, Pol. Virgil, and Thuanus, which Be∣cane doth heere muster? Are these also Aduersaries to Becane? or doe these, as Aduersaries, extreamely dis∣sent touching these Questions. As for Caluin, Tortura Torti a good while since hath answered thus: As Caluin did not allow the Pope to be King, or the King to be Pope:Pag. 379. so vve approue not that in the King vvhich we detest in the Pope. But Caluin vvith vs, and wee with him, thinke, that those things belong to the King, in the Church Christian, vvhich belonged to Io∣sias, in the Church Iudaicall. And we desire no more. Now, hauing passed these Rocks, the remainder of our way is easie; and all Becans Iarres, heereafter ob∣iected against vs, may, as it were with the blast of some few words, bee eftsoones scattered, and brought to nought. For by this which is already demonstrated, it is most manifest, that all our English Protestant Wri∣ters,
doe fully and vniformely agree in the whole sub∣stance or matter of the Kings Primacy or Supremacie; and that Becane, throughout his Iarre, striueth onely a∣bout words or syllables. Against which kind of con∣tention, St. Paul writeth thus vnto Timothy:2. Tim. 2. ver. 14. Protest before the Lord, that they striue not about vvords, vvhich is to no profit, but to the peruerting of the hearers. Vnto all this, in my Concord, from page 12. vnto page 19, Becane in his Examin. answereth not one word. ❧ Becans Iarre. The I. Question. Whether the King of England haue any Pri∣macie in the Church. 1. THE first Iarre or contention then is, concerning the name of Primacy. Many of our Aduersaries admit this Name: but M. Richard Tompson had rather haue it called Supremacy, then Primacie. His reason is, because Primacy doth signifie a power of the same Order. Now, the King hath not power in the Church of Eng∣land of the same Order with Bishops and Ministers, but a pow∣er of higher and different Order from them. Ergo, hee hath not the Primacy, but the Supremacy. The vvords of M. Tomp∣son pag. 33. of his booke are these: Nos in Anglico nostro idio∣mate belliores longè sumus, quàm per inopiam Latini ser∣monis, nobis Latinè esselicuit. Nō enim dicimus, The Kings Primacy, Regis Primatum, sed The Kings Supremacy, Regis Suprematum: Quo vocabulo nos quoque deinceps vte∣mur.
Multùm enim differunt Primatus & Suprematus. Illud enim Potestatem eiusdem Ordinis videtur significare, hoc non item. Wee in our English tongue, doe speake much more properly, then vvee can doe in the Latine speech, through the penury thereof. For wee doe not say, The Kings Primacy, but The Kings Supremacie: which word  For that Primacy and Supremacie doe greatly differ: Prima∣cie seeming to signifie a power of the same Order, but Supre∣macie not so. 2. Out of which words, wee gather two things. The one, that all Englishmen, vvho vse the Name of Primacie, doe ei∣ther erre or speake improperly, if vve beleeue M. Tompson. For if they speake propertie; seeing that the vvord Primacy doth properly siguifie a Power of the same Order; they doe plainely vnderstand that the King hath Power of the same order with the Bishops and Ministers of his Church. But this now according to M. Tompsons opinion, is an error: wherefore either they doe erre, or speake improperly. 3. The other is, that a Coniecture may be made of the thing signified, from the word signifying. The vvord Supre∣macie is a new and lately inuented vvord, vnknowne to the Ancient Fathers, not vsed in Scriptures, vnheard of in the Christian world. Moreouer, vvhat doth it signifie? The Supreme power (for∣sooth) of the King in the Church? Wherefore this is new also. Surely, if the ancient Fathers, either Latine or Greeke, had knowne this power, they would haue found out at least som word, whereby to haue expressed the same properly. But this it seemes none of them did.
English Concord.Page 20 IS Becane the Iesuite become a captious cauiller at syllables, Pri. and Sapre? Our Soueraigue Lord K. Iames, translated the english word Supremacy,Apol. ur. fid. pag. 54 into the Latin word Primatum; and Mr. Thomson translated the same English Supremacy, into his Latine word Su∣prematum. Here is full agreement in the thing it selfe; and will the Iesuit striue about words, or diurs names of the selfe same thing? Certainely, a Christian king, is neither Presbiter Priest: norAugust. Q ex viroq, Testa. mixt. Q. 101 chiefe of Presbiters, that is, Bishop: nor chiefe among the Bishops, that is, Archbishoppe: nor chiefe of Archbishops, that is, Patriarke: nor chiefe of Patriarkes, to weet, Pope; and in that sense he is no Primate, or hath Primacy; but he is the onely Supreme gouernour of all Presbiters, Bi∣shops, Archbishops, Patriarkes, and Popes; within his dominions; whose supreme gouernment, we call in English Supremacy, or (after the Latin word, which our king ved) Primacy; and acknowledge the same, by our oath, thereof taken. But now let vs attend these two goodly consequences which the Iesuite maketh. 1. R. Thomson hath deuised a new Latin name, to ex∣presse the selfe same thing, and the selfe same English name of the same thing: Therefore the thing it selfe is new. The Fathers of the Nicene Councell deuised a new name, , to expresse the Deitie of Christ, or Christ in respect of his Deity. Therefore is Christ his Deitie new? or Christ in respect of his Deitie, new?
Take heede Becane of such a consequent. Thus rather perhaps the sequell would runne more roundly: The name (Iesuits) is new; Therefore de∣seruedly may the Iesuits be called, as blasphemous, so new, sectaries. Indeede, if the ancient Fathers had ac∣knowledged the power of Vniuersall Bishoppe, they would haue found, at least, one word, whereby to haue expressed the same properly: especially considering that (if we will beleeue Gregory the great).Gregor. li. 4. Ep it. 76.78.80. et lib. 7 Epist. 79 To assume that arrogant, profane, sacrilegious, & Antichristian name, of Vniuersall Bishoppe; is all one, and the same, as to be the king of pride: Lucifer, who set himselfe before his brethe∣ren: to be an Apostate from the faith, and the forerunner of Antichrist. In the Canon law, we read thus:Dist. 99 Primx. Let not the Bishop of the first Sea, be called the Prince of Priests, or high Priest, or any the like: but onely the Bishop of the first Sea; but let not the very Bishop of Rome, be called Vniuersall Bishop. Let Becane tell me which of the ancient Fathers, ei∣ther acknowledged the Popes supreme power ouer the whole Church; or in proprietie of speech, and, as proper vnto him, called the same Primacy: touching which, Chrysostom, as hee is cited in the Canon law,Dist. 40 Multi. writeth thus: Whosoeuer shall desire Primacy in earth shall finde confusion in heauen: neither shall he be numbred among the serwants of Christ, who doth handle, or contend for Primacy. His second consequence is this: Mr. Thomson deui∣sed a new word or name, whereby to expresse in Latin more fully and properly (as be tooke it) the English word Supremacy: Therefore whosoeuer doe not call Supremacy, in Latin, Suprematum, speake improperly.
Fy! how hang these together? Forsooth, please it the Iesuites, as scattered broomeshaggs. To conclude. Becane himselfe, Quest. 12. page 43. brings in Mr. Thomson speaking thus: Primacy is a royall good thing, or the Prerogatiue royall, vvhich can not be ta∣ken away by Ecclesiasticall censure: neither is it absurd, that an heathen king should be Primate of the Church. There∣fore, according to Becane his dispute here, They, vvho ascribe Primacy to the king, and call him Primate of the Church, erre not, but speake properly. BECAN. Exam.Page 106 YOu say this strife is about the name. It is so. I vrge no∣thing else. But of they strine, as you say; where is the concord which you promise? In the very beginning you despaire of concord. And of you cannot dissolue the strife about the name, what shall become of the thing it selfe? Dr. HARRIS Reply. I Did not say, our Writers did striue about the namer but I asked the Iesuit, why he would brawl about the name, when the thing it selfe was fully agreed vpon. Here then in the beginning of this Iesuits examination, wee haue him taken in a grosse vntruth. For in my English Concord, chap. 1. I prooued an vni∣forme consent of all, not onely in the matter, that is, the kings Supreme Gouernment, ouer all persons, and in all Causes Ecclesiasticall, or ciuill within his dominions; but also in the very English name thereof, to weet, Su∣premacy:
vnto which selfe same thing, and selfe same name of the same thing, all our Protestant English Wri∣ters haue sworne; and in our publike prayers in pul∣pit, we solemnlie professe our allowance thereof, and our concord therein, as being our Kings most iust title. As for the Latine name Primatus, into the which the English word Supremacy is translated, we all agree therein also. For Becane, Question 12. page 43, brings in Mr. Thomson, calling the kings Supremacy, in Latine Primatum, and the king in respect thereof, Prima∣tem. How hard then is this Iesuites forehead, affirming that I granted discord in the name to be among vs? In∣deede Mr. Thomson in regard of the Papists [who vn∣derstanding no Primacy but Sacerdotall, that is, Episco∣pall (for by their Canon law, all Patriarks are Primates, and all Primates Patriarks, & so all Primates Sacerdotall) clamour that we, ascribing Primatum Primacy to our King, yeeld him Iurisdiction Sacerdotall, that is, Episco∣pall:] to reforme their misconceit therein, wisheth there were made some Latine word, as Suprematus, or the like, to expresse fully our English word Supre∣macie; thereby to cut off all Popish and childish cauills, and to let them vnderstand, that we by Primacie (af∣ter the Latin word, as it is now translated, or Supreme Gouernment of the Church, called in our English tongue Supremacy) meane not Ecclesiastical Supreme gouern∣ment Sacerdotall or Episcopall; but onely Regall. In England our two Archbishoppes are called Pri∣mates, as being superiour gouernours Sacerdotall ouer all the Bishoppes, and other inferiour clergie men,
within their Archbishopriks, in causes Ecclesiasticall: but because our king is supreme gouernour, euen o∣uer those archbishops, and all other persons Ecclesiasti∣call and Temporall, and in all causes Temporall and Ecclesiasticall within his dominions, wee call in Eng∣lish, that his supreme gouernment, not Primacy, but Su∣premacie; as if it were, Supre-Primacy, or aboue Prima∣cie. Therefore I had iust cause, to aske the Iesuite, why his friuolous fatherhood wold contend about names, when there was, and is, so full agreement in the verie thing it selfe? In regard whereof, S. Paul depainteth this Becane (as hee sheweth himselfe here to be) in his orient colour thus:1. Tim. 6.4 He is puft vp, and knoweth nothing; but doteth about questions, and strife of words: vvhereof commeth enuy, strife, rayling, and euill surmising; euerie word falling so pat vpon the Iesuites head, as it S. Paul had pointed him out with the finger. Indeede Becane in asking me, how I vvill concord them in the matter, vvhen I see, and grant varietie of the names, prooueth those words of S. Paul, to fit him well, viz. That he is puft vp, and knowes nothing. For here he knoweth not (which countrey swaynes do know) that there may be, and is, identity of matter, or person, when there is variety of names of that matter, or person. But because I doe commiserate his fatherhoods ignorance herein, I will vouchsafe to teach him this one lesson; taken out of their owne Canon law, which (in Dist. 80. ca. Loca. in the Gloss) schooleth him thus: Idem est Primas et Pa∣triarcha, sicut et dicit lex, differentia tantum nominis est, inter pignus et Hypothecam. A Primate and a Patriarke, is one and the same, as the law faith, the difference is onely in the name of Pignus and Hypotheca, in Latin: in English,
of pledge, and pledge: and so of these two words in La∣tine; Primatus, and Suprematus; in English, (as wee in England vnderstand it) Supremacy and Supremacy. And the saide Canon law, Dist. 99. ca. de Primati∣bus, in the very text it selfe, schooleth him more fully thus: De Primatibus quaeritur, quem gradum in Ecclesia obtineant; an in aliquo a Patriarchis differant? Primates et Patriarchae diuer sorum sunt nominum, sed eiusdem of∣ficy. Primates and Patriarks haue diuers names, but one office: so the kings Supremacy may, in Latine, haue di∣uers names; but it is one and the selfe same Regall of∣fice. BECAN. Exam.Page 106 BVt if Thomson be heard, They who say the king hath Prima, Primacy of the Church, signifie that hee hath power of the same order with Bishops and Pastors. But this is a great errour, not onelie in the word, but in the thing it selfe. Therefore they erre not onely in the word, but in the very thing, who speake so. What answere you to this? you plainely dissemble. Dr. HARRIS Reply. I Answere plainely and truely, first, that Mr. Thom∣son said that the word Primatus did signifie pow∣er of the same order with Bishops, onely in the Pa∣pists sense and vnderstanding; but nothing lesse then so, in the Proestants sense, who meane by Primatus, Pri∣macie, power Regall only and not Episcopall: In whose sense, Mr. Thomson himselfe calleth that Regal power,
Primatum; as was shewed by Becane himself, produ∣cing Mr. Thomsons owne words, Q. 12. Pa. 43. Ther∣fore they who speake so, erre, neither in word, nor in the thing it selfe. Secondly. I answere plainely without dissimulati∣on, that the Iesuites mouth here runnes ouer with a palpable vntruth; since it is most certainely true, that not any one Protestant English Writer, calling the kinges Supremacy, in Latine, Primatum, signifieth, or would haue signified thereby, that the king hath power Sacerdotall with Bishops and Pastors. Indeede, the Papists did, and doe seeke thereby openly to scan∣dalize vs, as though we ascribed to our King & Queen, power Sacerdotall or Episcopall in the Church: which moued Queen Elizabeth, of blessed and famous memo∣rie, in the later end of her Iniunctions, to commaund this explanation following, to be published in Print, with this Title: AN ADMONITION TO SIM∣ple men deceiued by the malitious. Her Maiestie forbiddeth all her subiects to giue eare or credit to such peruerse, and malitious persons, which most sinisterly and malitiously labour to notifie to her louing subiects how by the words of the oath of Supremacie, it may be collected, that the Kings or Queens of this Realm, possessioners of the Crown, may challenge authority and power of Ministery of Diuine offices in the Church: wherein her said subiects be much abused, by such euill disposed persons. For certainely her Maiestie neither doth, ne euer will challenge any other authoritie, then that which was of ancient time due to the Imperiall Crowne of this Realme. That is to say, vnder God to haue the Soue∣raignety
& rule ouer all maner persons, borne within these her Maiesties Dominions & Countries, of what estate ei∣ther Ecclesiasticall or Temporall soeuer they be; so as no forraine power shal, or ought to haue, any superiority ouer the. And if any person, that hath conceiued any other sense of the form of the said Oath, shal accept the same Oath with this interpretation, sense, or meaning; her Maiestie is well pleased to accept euery such, in that behalfe, as her good & obedient subiects, and shall acquite them of all manner pe∣nalties contained in the said Act, against such as shal per∣emptorily or obstinatly refuse to take the same Oath. What could be written more plainly and fully a∣gainst this Iesuit, not onely to stop his mouth heerin, but also to take vp, at once, his whole Iarre following; euen by the very rootes? BECAN. Exam.Pag. 107 THose vvords of mine (Thomson deuised a new name of this thing Supremacy, Suprematus: therefore the thing is now) I did not call a consequent, but a coniec∣ture. Againe, you are contrarie to your selfe, reasoning thus: The name of Iesuit is new: therfore the thing is new. If the consequent hold in this, why not in the other, &c. And further, it is ridiculous to compare one Thomson, with so many Fathers of the Nicen Councell, and to affirme that lawful for him, which was lawfull for them. Dr. HARRIS Reply. HEre haue we the Iesuit lying in his byrdlime: Wherin, the more he struggleth, the worse he is enwrapped; and whence he seeks to go out, by going out of his wits, saying it was his coniec∣ture
from no consequent of reason. As though euery coniecture reasonable, doth not leane vpon some rea∣son probable. If therefore his coniecture was groun∣ded vpon no reason, it followeth, that he with his con∣iecture, was vnreasonable. But with what face (vnlesse hee be extreamely ignorant in the very petite rules of Logick) can hee deny it to bee a consequent, standing vpon two Propositions, reduced by himselfe into forme Enthymematicall. The later (the Conclusion) inferred vpon the former, containing the Medium in it, viz. a new name imposed, with the particle-note of infe∣rence or consequence, viz. Igitur (therefore) & hauing his forerunner-watch-word colligimus (wee gather) gi∣uing warning of a consequent to follow. Now then, draw out this reason into his full syllo∣gisticall forme; it will runne, and can runne no other∣wise, than thus: What thing soeuer hath a new name imposed vpon it, that thing is new. Hence the Iesuit assumed thus: But the Kings Supreme power in the Church, hath a new name, Suprematus, imposed vpon it. Ergo, the Kings Su∣premacy is new. And I thence assumed thus: But Christ, in respect of his Deity, had in the Nicen Councell a new name, , imposed vpon him. Ergo, Christ, in respect of his Deity, or Christs Deity, was then new. The Iesuit, beeing invery great streights, and not a∣ble to beare the stroake of this argument, (for, the for∣mer, or Maior proposition, is his own. The later pro∣position, called the Minor, or Assumption, hee durst not deny. The forme is rightly syllogisticall. To deny
the Counclusion, is against all rules dialecticall. To grant it, is hereticall.) creepeth into a bench-hole, and then laugheth, & saith: It is ridiculous to compare one Thom∣son, a priuat man, vvith so many Fathers in the Nicen Councell, representing the Church; that it should be as law∣full for Thomson, as for them, to impose a new name. Could any man imagin, that Martin Becan, a father Iesuit, and a publique Reader of Diuinitie, should be so vnlearned a slugge, as hee palpably heere shewes him∣selfe to be? Truly, if a Cambridge Sophister had aun∣swered so, he should haue beene either corrected in the Schooles, or hissed out of the Schooles. For, let the like arguments be framed thus: Euery man is a liuing creature. The king is a man. Therefore the King is a liuing creature. And thus: Euery man is a liuing creature. The Kings scullian is a man. Ergo, the Kings scullian is a liuing creature. If any silly fellow vsing Becanes words should with Be∣can answer thus; It is ridiculous to compare the Kings scul∣lian, vvith the King: should he not, as a ridiculous asse, be ludibriously exploded? These, as the other, syllogismes, respect not Quis; who is a man, or who gaue the new name: but Quid; whether hee be a man; whether it be a new name im∣posed. Nay, rather thence the argument runneth vp∣on the Iesuit, with greater force, thus: If the impositi∣on of a new name vpon a thing, by a priuat man, shall inferre the thing to be new; much more shall the im∣position of a new name vpon a thing by publique au∣thority,
conclude that thing to be new. Now it is time that I answere his Question heere proposed, viz. Why I vse that consequent against the Iesuits (thus: The name of the Iesuiticall Sect is new. Therefore that Sect is new.) which my selfe misliked? I answer, If he had well obserued those my words be∣fore going, viz. llud fortasse rectius: hee should easilie haue perceiued, that I misliked that consequence, as it is indeed most childish and ridiculous: yet by the way of Sarcasmus, ironically I vsed it, to thump Iesuits there-withall; because their Sect, & the name of their Sect, is new indeed. BECAN. Exam.Pag. 108. THe name of Iesuits, is as ancient as the name of Chri∣stians. By both those names, one and the same thing is signified. But the name of Caluinists, Hugonots, &c. is new. Heerein peraduenture the comparison is fit, That as those Fathers denised a new word, or name, , to abolish the name , which the Arians vsed: so Thomson deuised a new name, Suprematus, to abolish the name Primatus; which the King, Burhill, and other Academiks vse. And again, as the Nicen Fathers reputed all for hereiticks, vvho vsed the word ; so Thomson should account those to be hereticks, that vse the word Primatus. But what Concord is this? Rather a huge Iarre. Dr. HARRIS Reply. THe vniforme concord, in the thing it selfe, & name of the thing, hath bin heertofore in this booke demonstrated sufficiently. The Iesuits eyes therfore seeming to see heer an huge discord, are, as Samsons foxes; tyed together by the tayles, within his head: but separatly set in his face, looking asquint;
which appeareth the rather to be true, because hee seemes heere to behold things, and like, which are eucry way vnlike. As first, those Fathers did not deuise a new word, for the word  was long before: onely they a∣scribed it as a new attribute to Christ, in respect of his Godhead: but Mr. Thomsons word, Suprematus, is spanne new. Secondly, the Fathers did not giue both those name,  and , vnto Christ: but Master Thomson calleth the Kings Supreme Gouernment of this Church, both Suprematum, and Primatum. Thirdly, the Fathers held them for hereticks, who did vse the word , as Becane heere saith: but Mr. Thomson holdeth our King, the Bishop of Ely, and o∣thers, to be orthodoxall professors, who vse the word Primatus. So that heer at enothing but dissimilitudes, vnlesse it be in this; that as the Fathers deuised a new name,  to abolish that as , which the A∣rian hereticks ascribed vnto Christ: so Mr. Thomson deuised a new word, Suprematus, to abolish the other word, Primatus, as the Popish hereticks doe now a∣scribe it, to the Pope. But what more doe I espy in this Iesuit heere? Tru∣ly, if he be not a very vnskilfull linguist in the Greeke and Syriack tongues, I behold in him Heresie and Blas∣phemy. Heresie in that he holdeth them hereticks, that say, Christ is , consubstantialis, of the same sub∣stance with the Father. For , is vnitas substantiae, the vnity of substance. viz. : and , is consubstantialitas, or substan∣tiae vnitas, consubstantialitie, or vnitie of substance.
. The very identity of substance, vvithout any difference, variance, or distinction. His Blasohemy, in challenging, to themselues, I meane the sect of Ieluits, the name of Iesuits, that is to say, Sauiours from sinnes: which is the most proper name of the Lord Christ; according to that saying of the Angel:Mat. i. v. 21. Thou shall call his name IESVS (in Syriack, Ieshua) for he shall saue his people from their sinnes. And according to that of St. Peter: Neither is there Saluation in any other.A. 4. v. 12. For among men, there is giuen none other Name vnder heauen, vvhereby wee must be saued. Therefore, what horrible and detestable blasphe∣mous caytifs are these Iesuits, to appropriat this name, the name of Sauiours, vnto themselues! Our Lord Ie∣sus, is called Christ, passiuely, because he was annoin∣ted with the oyle of gladnesse aboue his fellowes. So then, in that oyntment, he had fellowes, or partakers. The Oyle was first poured vpon the Sacrificers head: but afterward, it ranne downe to the skirts of his clothing. Therefore saith St.1. Ioh. 2. ver. 20. Iohn, Yee haue an oyntment from that holy One. Then, as our Lord Iesus, our Head, because hee was anointed, was called Christ, that is to say, Anoynted: so his members the Saints, because they also are anoin∣ted with the same oyle, though not in the same degree; are called Christians, that is to say, Anoynted. But our Lord Christ, was called Iesus, or Ieshua, ac∣tiuely, because he should saue his people from their sinnes. And onely he called Iesus, or Ieshua, because There is no Saluation in any other. For that among men, there is giuen none other Name vnder heauen, whereby we must be saued.
Therfore, there is but only one Iesus or Ieshua in name, or in deed, by whom Gods people are saued frō their sinnes; so all the members of Christ, are called people Saued, and not one of thē, Sauiours from their sinnes. But the word Iesuits, according to the Syriack lan∣guage, signifieth in English, Sauiours: as though they were Sauiours of their people from their sins, as Christ is the Sauiour of his people from their sinnes. By plaine narration of which certaine truth, groun∣ded out of the expresse words of the Scripture, euery Idiot may perceiue, how blasphemous this Sect of Ie∣suits is, in assuming vnto all men of their Sect, and to none but of that Sect, the name of Iesuits, that is, Sa∣uiours of the world. Vnlesse it be by way of contrarie∣tie, as Mountaines, because they moue not, are called, Montes, a non mouendo: so they are called Iesuits, Saui∣ours of the vvorld; beeing in very truth, the most noto∣rious, and infamous Destroyers of the world, of Kings and kingdoms, fighting manfully vnder the banner of their Lord God, Antichrist the Pope: who, by St, Iohn,Reue 9. ver. 11. is rightly called . But now, it is high time to see, how this Iesuit, in the profundity of his ignorances, and absurdities, a∣gainst all common sense, reason and diuinity, vvould haue these following Parallells to meet together. 1 The name of Iesuits, but of 79. yeeres standing. The name of Christians, beeing of standing almost 1600. yeeres. Are of the same Antiquitie.
Explication. Ignatius Loyala, the first Author of the Sect of the Iesuits, and the first imposer of the name of Iesuits vpon that Sect (as Becane in his Examen,Pag. 14. confesleth,) did not associat his fellowes, whom hee afterward cal∣led Iesuits, till the yeere 1534. that is, 79 yeeres past; but the Professors of the Gospell,Act. 11. ver. 26. were about the yeere of Christ, 40. first called Christians, viz. 1573. yeeres past. 2 To be anointed, as all Christians are: To be Sauiours, as onely Christ is. Is one, & the same thing. 3 To be called by a name common to all Christians in the vvorld: To bee called by holy a name common to no Christian in the vvorld, but to them onely who are of the Sect of Iesuits. Is all one. 4 To be called by a holy name, imposed by the Apostles, warranted by Scrip∣tures, giuen according to the professi∣on of the publique Christian faith: To be called by a name of blasphemy, im∣posed by that monster Ignatius Loy∣ola, according to their destroying pro∣fession, directly against the Scrip∣ture, which condemneth all Sects, & Sectaries, vvith their Sect names. 1. Cor. 3. v. 3.4. &c. Is euen the selfe same.
5. Sectaries, to take voluntarily, vnto themselues, names and titles of Schisme or Sect; as Dominicans, Franciscans, Iesuits, &c. Orthodoxall professours, by their hatefull and hereticall aduersaries, to be tearmed malignantly in scorne, by Sect-names which they detest: as Caluinists, Hugo∣nots; &c. Is all one selfe same thing. Who euer wrote so vnlearnedly, and so absurdlic, as this Iesuite Became here doth? I much maruaile, that his Superiours suffer him to blurre papers, and to pub∣lish them abroad, in this so learned Age. But before I part here with the Iesuite thus, he mustacknowledge, that [whereas in my booke of Concord, I proued out of Pope Gregory the great, the name, and title of their Popish Primate to weet, Vniuersall Bishop, to be an ar∣rogant, profane, sacrilegious, Antichristian, Luciferian, and Apostaticall name, giuen to him, and taken by him, against their owne Canon law; And whereas al∣so, out of, and by vertue, of their Canon law, I wrap∣ped-vp their Primate in the dust of hellish confusion, be∣cause he desireth, and ambitiously challengeth a Primacie in earth, aboue all Princes, Kings and Emperours vp∣on earth, cuen in their Temporalls, their Crowns, and Kingdomes, and, as the case is now, their very lines] he hath not here one word to say, for his Lord Godthe Pope, in this his desperate case; and in the Iesnits accu∣rate Examination (for so he would make vs belicue) of my Concord book.
Gentle Reader, I haue beene the more prolyx here, in my Reply against the Iesuites Examen, in this first chapter, because it giucth such light to the remainder, as dispelleth the foggy mists, which this Iesuite ende∣uoureth to raise, whereby to make our vniforme agree∣ment, in truth, touching the kings Supremacy, to be a seeming discord. So that a short Reply to all the rest, will be sufficient; with reference vnto this, yea e∣uen to this one distinction of Regall, and Sacerdotall, rightly vnderstood. ❧ Becans Iarre. II. Question. Whether that this Primacy, which the King hath in the Church, be Ecclesiasticall, or Spirituall? 1. THis is now another Iarre. Ʋnder King Henry the 8. and King Edward, this Primacy was alwaies called Ecclesiasticall and Spirituall; as it appea∣reth out of Doctour Sanders, whose words are these: Caluinus Henrici Primatum Ecclesiasticum oppugnauit. Caluin did oppugne King Henries Ecclesiasticall Primacy. A∣gaine: Episcopus Roffensis, quòd Heurici Primatum Eccle∣siasticum nollet confiteri, ad mortem producitut. The Bishop of Rochester, because he denied King Henries Ecclesiasticall Primacy, was brought forth to die, &c. Andagaine: Multi in custodijs propter negatum Ecclesiasticum Regis Primatum detenti. Many were kept in prison, for denying the Kings Ec∣clesiasticall Primacy. In like manner: Henricus mandauit vt
filius in fide Catholica educaretur, excepto Primatus Eccle∣siastici titulo, quem ei reliquit, King Henry commanded that his Sonne (Edward) should be brought vp in the Catholike faith, excepting the title of Ecclesiasticall Primacy, which he left vn∣to him. And yet more: Stephanus Wintoniensis, Edmundus Londinensis, Cuthbertus Dunelmensis, Nicolaus Wigorni∣ensis, & Datus Cicestrensis Episcopi, timide restirerunt pueri Regis Primatui spirituali, imò simpliciter subscripserunt. The Bishops of Winchester, London, Dutham, Worcester, & Chichester, did fearefully with stand the Spirituall Primacy of the Childe King, nay they absolutely subscribed thereunto. 2. Ʋnder Queene Mary that succeeded to her Brother King Edward in the Crowne, this Title of Primacy was taken away in a Parliament held at London, as witnesseth Iacobus Thuanus in the 9. book of the History of his time, in these words: Antiquatus ijsdem Comiths Primatus Ecclesiastici titulus. The title of Ecclesiasticall Primacy was abolished in that Parlia∣ment. The same was againe restored vnder Queen Elizabeth, as testifieth the same Author in his 15. booke &c. 3. But now in these our dayes vnder King Iames this mat∣ter is called into question; Some not daring to call it Primacy Ecclesiasticall and spirituall, but only Primacy belonging to Ecclesiasticall and Spirituall matters: amongst whom is M. Doctor Andrewes, or the Kings Chaplaine, in his Torture of Tortus pag. 90. where he writeth thus: Neque verò quoad spiritalia, alium nos Regi Primatum tribuimus, neque quoad temporalia alium Pontifici detrahimns, quàm debemus. Pri∣or ille Regibus omni iure, postertor hic Pontifici nullo iure debetur. Neither doe we attribute one Primacy, concerning spirituall matters vnto the King, nor doe wee take from the Pope any other Primacy, concerning temporall matters, then vvee ought to doe. The first is due vnto Kings by all right, the later no way pertaineth to the Pope &c. I, vvhen I first read these vvords in the Chaplaines booke, did thinke that hee had taken these two, towit, Primacy spirituall and belonging to spirituall; as also these other, Primacy temporall, and be∣longing to temporall, for one and the same thing. But now it
seemes that the Defenders and Interpreters of the Chaplaine, to wit, M. Tompson, and M. Burhill, do take it otherwise. For so writeth M. Burhill, pag. 55. of his Booke, concerning this point: Non dicit, Primatum spirituatem, sed Primatum quoad spiritualia deberi Regibus omni ture. He (the Chap∣lame) doth not say, that Spirituall Primacy, but Primacu be∣longing to Spirituall, is due vnto Kings by all right &c. And theeag une, pag. 133. in fine: Etsi enim Regi tribuimus Pri∣muth in Ecclesia, non tamen Primatum spiritualent aut Esiassicum ei tribuimus; sed potius Primatum quoad les & personas spirituales & Ecclesiasticas. For although we giue vnto the King Priacy ouer the Church; yet doe wee not gine vnto him Primacy spirituall or Ecclesiasticall; but rathor Primacy belonging to things and persons spiritual and Ecclesi∣asticall &c. And M. Tompson, pag. 31. of his Booke, also saith: Non dixit, Primatum Ecclesiasticum, aut Spiritualem, quasi formaliterintelligat; sed quoad Spiritualia, idest, obiectiuè & materialiter. The Chaplaine said not, the Primacy Ecclesi∣asticall or Spirituall, as though hee vnder stood it form ally; but for so much as it belong eth to Spiritual, that is to say, obiectiuely and materially &c. In which sense the same Author pag. 95. saith. Dicimus Regem gubernare quidem Ecclesiastica, sed non Ecclesiasticè We say indeede, that the King gouerneth Ecclesiasticall things, but not Ecclesiastically. 4. So as if you aske in England, whether the King hath Primacy Ecclesiasticall or no? It will be answered thus: King Henry, K. Edward, and Q. Elizabeth had Ecclesiasticall Pri∣macy: K. Iames hath not Primacy Ecclesiasticall, but onely so far forth, as it belongeth to Ecclesiasticall things. Hath then his Maiestie that now is lesse then they had? So it seemes. Is then the Kings Primacy in England so nipped and pared in so short a space? So they say. Is it then almost decayed, and at anend? I doubt not but it is. What is the cause? Hearben to the common saying: Whats quickly got, is quickly lost: as also to that of the holy Scritture: Si est ex hominibus consilium hoc, aut opus, dissoluetur. Act. 5. 38. If this deuise, or worke be of men, it will be dissolued.
English Concord. THE Primacy, or Supremacy Regall,Page 14 vnder K. Henry 8. K. Edward 6. Q. Elizabeth, and K. Iames, hath been, is, and will be one, and the same: That is to say, Supreme Power Regalin the church,Iewel. De∣fons. par. 6 ca. 9. Duasi. 1. et 2. wherby Kings may, not Burne incense, as Ozias did nor rush vpon Episcopall function, nor preach the Gospell, nor administer the Sacraments to the people, nor bind, nor loose (The which with som of our Writers, spoke of by Be∣cane in this Question, is, to gouerne Ecclesiasticall things, Ecclesiastically:) but execute those things only, which belong vnto them, as kings, to performe that kinglie function therein, which, Dauid, Salomon, Ezechias,Tortura Tort. pa. 381 Iosias, and other of the most noble, and most religious kings, haue done, and which was euer lawfull fora king to doe: or particularly, if you had rather, thus; The right and power by Regall authoritie, to make Church lawes: as, that GOD should not be blasphemedDan. 3. 29 That God should be pacified in a fastIona. 3.7; and honoured in a festiuall dayEster 9.26; and all such, as we read to haue been made, in the Code, Authentiks, and Capitulars, by Constantine, Theodosius, Iustinian, and Carolus Magnus. Moreouer, to delegate such as should iudge of the lawes so made.2. Chr. 19.8 Further to binde his subiects by oath to keep those lawes2. Chro. 15 14. et 34. 32, yeainDeu. 13 10 Leurt. 24.23 matter of religion; and by Regall authoritie, to pu∣nish the transgressors of them. To call Councells of Synods by his authoritie1. Cton. 13.3; for redu∣cing
of the people to Gods worship2. Chr. 19.4, and purifying of the Templepolluted. Touching persons; To administer iustice vnto all, of all sorts2. Chr. 29.5.; who should be (To speake as the Scripture doth) The head of the Tribe of Leuie1. Sa. 15.17, no lesse then of the other Tribes: The king, no lesse of Clerkes, then of Laikes. To depriue the high Priest (if he do deserue) of his high Priesthood1. Reg. 2.27. In matters of Religion; To breake down the high places: To abolish strange wor∣shipExo. 32.10: to breake in peeces the brasen Serpent, which Moses erected2. Reg. 18.4 In matters of Order; To ordaine such things, as pertaine to the comlinesse2. Chro. 24 12 Socrat. lib. 2 ca. 17 of GODs house; and to suppressefriuolous, and vnprofitable questions. These, by Dinine right, are the rights of Regall Primacie. To weet, wherby the king may; 1. Be calledTort. Tort. p. 339, The Supreme head of the Church. 2. Call Councells, and presede in them. 3. Make Lawes Ecclesiasticall. 4. Constitute, and depose the High Priests. 5. Binde his subiects by oath, to keep the lawes by him made. To conclude, hereby may the Aduersaries see that Regall Primacy is founded in the Scriptures, and pro∣pagated from the first religious kings, vnder the olde, to the first religious Emperours and kings, and so to our Soueraigne Lord King Iames, vnder the new Te∣stament; and in that long distance of time, nothing im∣paired, or diminished.
What then, neuer to decay? I doubt it not. What's the reason? Heare it out of Gods booke (not out of tri∣uials Iesuiticall)q If it be of God,Acts 5.39 you can not dissolue it. Goe now Icsuite, and play with your sooleries, and ve∣ry childish questions. In the meane time, let mee aske and answere in your owne words: The Primacy Iesui∣ticall, hath it lesse power in France (for in Venice it hath none at all) than it hath had there, or else where? So it appeareth. Is it then, in so short a time, abated and di∣minished in France? So men say. Is it therefore neere his end? I doe not doubt it. What's the reason? Heare it from the Iesuites triuiall. That which suddainly came (for we know wel the swaddling clouts of Loyola, the Iesuits Syre) is soone gone. BECAN. Exam.Page 112 THE Primacie or Supremacie vnder King Henry, King Edward, and Qucene Elizabeth: was Spiri∣tuall and Ecclesiasticall; but vnder King Iames, it is not so (and what it will be is vncertaine.) Here is a Iarre. Dr. HARRIS Reply. IN my Concord booke I shewed, in generall and in particular, the Regall Primacy vnder K. Iames to be the selfe same, which was vnder K. Henry, K. Edward, and Q. Elizabeth; adding that it so would continue, as certainely it will, during this orthodoxall Religion among vs: which I hope shall continue so long as the sunne and moone endure; though the Ie∣suiticall, and all other Papisticall bowels burst thereat.
I shewod it in general; for that, the Supremacie then was, and now, no lesse, is, The kings Supreme power, in, and ouer, all causes, and all persons (within his kingdom) Spirituall or Ecclesiasticall; and therefore in the selfe same lawes of this kingdome, then, and now in force, called The kings supreme Power Spirituall or Ecclesiasti∣call. In particular, I demonstrated the same, by setting downe the most materiall points, out of the expresse words of Scirpture, wherein the kings saide Supreme power Spirituall or Ecclesiasticall consisteth: in which saide, both generall, and particular points, as there they are set downe, all English Protestant Writers with full consent agree, without any Iarre, or diffe∣rence whatsoeuer. If this shallow Iesuite had had any sound matter in him, in this his Examē, he would haue answered to the matter, especially to those materiall points founded vpon the Scriptures; and haue proued, that either those particular points belong not to the office of Re∣gall Supremacy: or else that wee Protestant Writers, iarre in some one or moe of those said materiall points gathered by the R. Bishop of Ely, and there set downe; as not warranted by holy writte to belong to kings; but this Iesuite passeth them ouer, with Noli metan∣gere, and onely sets before the Reader his twise sodden Ioathsome Colewoorts viz. That Mr. Burhill writeth thus: We doe not giue vnto the king Primacy Spirituall or Ecclesîasticall, but rather Primacy in, and ouer, causes, and persons Spirituall or Ecclesiasticall: whereas Mr. Burhil in his Appendix to the confutation of Eudaemon, Page 283. cuts this Iarre all in sunder, writing thus:
In the 21. chapter of my booke against Becane, I pur∣posely and plainly taught, how the said Regall Primacy may be called both waies, to weet, Primacy Spirituall and Eccle∣siasticall: or, Primacy in matters, and ouer persons spiritu∣all or Ecclesiasticall; and that they who call it spiritual Pri∣macy, meane nothing else then wee; vvho, in regard of the cauillations and calumnies of the Aduersarie (by Spirituall power, vnder standing nothing else, but power Sacerdotall, or Episcopall) call it Primacy in, & ouer causes and persons spirituall or Ecclesiasticall: And that in the very thing, there is no dissent at all among vs. What could be spoken more fully and plainly, to put to silence the lying and iarring lips of this Iesuit? BECAN. Exam.Pag. 114. IT is your priuat fansy: none but you will say, that the King hath, or that himselfe challengeth power, to appoint, or de∣pose summos Pontifices, the highest or chiefest Bishoppes, vvho should rule ouer all the Christian vvorld, and vvho dwell out of his kingdome: as hee hath in his Preface monito∣rie, protested. Dr. HARRIS Reply. BElike the Iesuit hath not read this Question in Saint Augustine, and the answere vnto it: Quid est Episcopus, nisi primus Presbyter, hocest, Sum∣mus Sacerdos? What is a Bishop, but the chiefe Priest? And accordingly, Lactantius (lib. 4. ca. 30.) calleth euery Bishoprick, Supremum Sacerdotium, the highest Priesthood.
If the Iesuit could vnderstand Greeke, I would pro∣duce Ignatius ad Trallianos, putting the question, and making answere vnto it, as Augustine did, thus: . What other thing is a Bishoppe, but one hauing principality and power ouer all men? Belike the Iesuit will be bold with Ruffin, and tax him for calling Athanasius (who was no Pope) Pon∣tificem maximum, the highest Bishop. But then comes in Hierom speaking of euery Bishoppe, and dogmatizing thus: Ecclesiae salus in summi Sacerdotis dignitate pendet. The safety of the Church, dependeth vpon the dignity of the highest Priest. With vs in England, are not only Bishops, but Arch∣bishops also, euen Primats, that is, Patriarks, ouer whō the King in his Supremacy, is Supreme Gouernour: whom, as he may nominat and appoint; so, vpon their deserts, he may depose, as Salomon did Abiathar. In the meane time,1. Reg. 2. ver. 27. the King alloweth not that any Bishop, especially the Bishop of Rome, should rule ouer all the Christian vvorld. This Iesuit, bringing in our King heer denying that hee will meddle with the matters of other men, not his sub∣iects; as on the one side, hee deseruedly commendeth our gracious King therein: so on the other side, he iust∣ly condemneth that busie-body the Pope, intermed∣dling in matters of the King & his subiects, endeuc∣ring impiously and impudently, to auert his subiects frō swearing allegiance vnto their Soueraigne; against the law of Nature, & Nations, against the law of God and man: therein shewing himselfe indeed to be that wicked man, that sonne of perdition, that very Antichrist,
described by St. Paule, 2. Thes. 2; especially, conside∣ring, that neither our King, nor the meanest vassall or villaine of our King, is the Popes subiect. For, by the right and ancient diuision of Prouinces, this Realme of England, was not vnder the Bishop of Rome. Pope Innocent, 400. yeeresafter Christ, confesseth, that he had not sufficient authority to call one poore Britan out of this Realme. The case was this: The Bi∣shops of Africa, prayed Innocentius, cither to send for Pelagius the Britan, or to deale with him by letters, to shew the meaning of his lewd speeches, tending to the derogation of Gods grace: To whom the Bishoppe of Rome answered thus: Quando, &c. When will hee com∣mit himselfe to our iudgement, write I what letters I vvill,See B. Bil. Pag. 320. vvhereas he knoweth hee shall be condemned? And if hee were to be sent for, they may better doe it, that are neerer to him, and not so farre distant as I am. BECAN. Exam.Pag. 115 IF these propositions be equiualent, viz. The King hath not Primacy Ecclesiasticall: The King cannot execure offi∣ces Sacerdotall or Episcopall: then it followeth, that they who deny the King canexecite officas Sacerdot all, deny the King to haue Primacy Ecclesiasticall or Spirituall. And they vvho hold, that the King hath Primacy Spirituall, affirme, that he may execute offices Episcopall. This is rather to increase, then to take away the Iarre. Dr. HARRIS Reply. HEere the Iesuit playeth the wrangling Sophi∣fter: & his Elench is (as the Schoole tearmeth it) A dictosecundum quid, addictū simpliciter.
For, these words, Primaeus Ecclesiasticus, doe not simply (but, secundum interpretationem vel sensum, ac∣cording as some Writers meane thereby) signisie Pri∣macy Episcopall, and not Regall. In which sense, all Pro∣testant Writers deny the King to haue Primacy Eccle∣siasticall. Others, by those words, Primatus Ecclesiasticus, mean Primacy Regall, or not Episcopall. In which sense, all English Protestant Writers, ascribe vnto the King, Primacy Ecclesiasticall: and, as Master Burhill vvriteth, may vvell call it Primatum Spiritualem, Spirituall Pri∣macy. So heere the Iarre is taken cleane away; and the Ie∣suit is sully answered in all objected by him in due place. The rest, which against his owne, and all good method, hee iumbleth heere together, hotch-potch∣wise, as, The King to be no Head, nor to call Councells, &c. shall heereafter, in their due place, receiue also their full answere. ❧ Becans Iarre. III. Question. Whether the King, by vertue of this Primacy, may bee called Primate of the Church. MAister Henry Salclebridge doth absolutely affirme it. For thus be writeth pag. 140. Dico, Regem An∣gliae Ecclesiae Anglicanae Primatem esse. I say, that the King of England is Primat of the Church of Eng∣land.
Nay, he vvill haue this point to be so certaine, and out, of al doubt, that he thinketh, whosoeur should deny it to offend a∣gainst the publike profession of England. For so he saith pag. 177. Angliae Regē Anglicanae Ecclesiae Primatē esse, in professi∣one publica Anglicana Veritasis, sacris liter is nixae, ponitur. That the King of England, is Primate of the Church of Eng∣land, is founded in the publique English Profession of Truth, grounded vpon the sacred Letter. 2. M. Tooker. and M. Burhill doe absolutely deny it. For thus writeth M. Tooker pag. 3. Olere autem malitiam, ac cla∣mitare audaciam tuam illud videtur, cùm Regē Caput Ec∣clesiae, Primatemque consingas. It may seeme to sauour of malice, and cry out vpon your saucinesse, when as you feigne the King Head, and Primate of the Church, &c. And Ma. Burhill, pag. 133, Nec primatem quidem omnino Regem nostrum dicimus; multò vetò minus Primatem Ecclesiasticism, Nei∣ther doe wee at all, call our King Primate; and much lesse Ec∣ctesiasticall Frimate, &c. 3. Heer-hence doe I frame a twofold Argument. One out of M. Tookera words in this manner: Hee that affirmeth the King to be Primate of the Church, is a sausy and malicious fel∣low. But M. Salclebridge affirmeth the King to be Primate of the Church. Ergo, he is a sausy and malicious fellow. The other argument I frame out of M. Salclebridges words thus: He that denieth the King to bee Primate of the Church, doth offend a∣gainst the publique Profession of the Truth receiued in England. But M. Tooker denieth the King to be Primate of the Church of England. Ergo, he offendeth against the publique profession of the Truth receiued in England. So (I wis) one Mule claweth another. 4. But now it may bee demaunded, whether of them doth iudge more rightly in this case, M. Salclebridge, who affirmeth the King to be Primate of the Church, or M. Tooker, that de∣nieth it? This controuersie dependeth vpon another question, to weet, whether these two Names, Primate, and Primacy, are ne∣cessarily connexed, or, as they say, Coniugata? M. Salclebridge thinketh that they are. Therfore, because he hath once affirmed
the King to haue the Primacy of the Church, hee consequently anerreik, that the King is Primat of the Church. For that with him this Argument hath force à Coniugatis: The King hath Primacy, Ergo, the King is Primate. As also this: The Chap∣laine hath a Bishoprick, Ergo, he is a Bishop. 5. Now M. Tooker, hee thinketh the contrarie. For pag. 6. of his booke hee expresty saith: That the King hath the Primacy of the Church; but yet hee is not the Primate of the Church. And contrariwise, The Archbishop of Canterbury hath not the Primacy of the Church; & yet is he Primate of the Church. So as hee denieth these two consequences à Coniugatis, to weet. I. The King hath the Primacy, Ergo, hee is Primate. 2. The Archbishoppe is Primate, Ergo, hee hath the Primacy. And per∣haps hee vvill deny these in like manner. I. The Chaplaine hath a Bishopricke Ergo, hee is a Bishop. 2. M. Tooker is a Deane, Ergo, hee hath a Deanery. English Concord.Pag. 29 WHy should I schoole an Asse? with whom, gently to claw, and curstlie to kick, Mule-like, is all one? Or why should I rubbe your memorie, to recognize these your owne words: Iames, the most renowned & potent King of England,Refut. Apol. & Praef. monit. Re∣gis, pag. 17. in his Apology, and monitory Préface to the Emperour, &c. endeuoureth to proue, that himselfe in Eng∣land, and euery King in his kingdome, is Head, or Primat of the Church. There, you confound Head & Primat, as one thing: heere, by a two-fold question, you sepatate them, as diuerse things. So the Mule scratcheth himselfe. The King doth make no expresse mention of the word Primat: yet, (as you say) hee endeuoureth to
proue, and proueth demonstratiuely, that he is Primat of the Church. Therefore, as the King, wee, and your lelfe, understand it; it is all one, to have the Primacy of the Church, and to be Primat of the Church. Sith then, weeagree in the thing, why doe you wrafig be about the name, heere, of Primat, as before of Primacy? Doctor Tooker, and Maister Burhill, lume openlie professed, subscribed, and sworne, that the King is the onely Supreme Gouernour in, and ouer, all causes, and per∣sons, Eoclesiasticall vvithin his Realine: that is, h Hain∣rick, and Thomson, and your selfe vnderstand it, in one word, Primat. But Tooker, and Burhill, deny the King to be Primat of the Church. They doe so, & that right∣ly: to weet, in your popish sense, of Supreme Primat of the Church Sacer do tall or Episcopall. By which distincti∣on well vnderstood and vsed, it appeareth, that among vs, there is no Iarre at all, touching the Supremacy, or Primat. BECAN. Exam.Pag. 120 YOu call mee an Asse, because I said the English Pro∣testant Writers Iarre in this point. If I be an Asse, by contend you with me? Haue you learned to strine onely vvith Asses? Belike you thought you had to doe, vvith English Predicants. I am not of that Tribe. Neither am I con∣trary to my selfe for I doe not distinguish Primat and Head of the Church; but I shevv the English Writers to dissent in both. And that is very true; because some afsirme, and others deny, the King to be either Primat, or Head of the Church.
Dr. Harris Reply. TO his quest. I answere thus: By Gods grace, I haue learned to dispute, and to grapple with the most learned Iesuit in the bunch. And I am sory that it was my ill hap, to meet with such a slug as this Icsuit is. But sich it fulleth out so, I must take vp this burden, and proceedin answeting (as Salomon saith) a foole in his folly, lest hee be proud. I know by their books, many Iesuits to be very learned: and I knowe many English Preachers, in learning, to be nothing in∣seriour to their chiefest Iesuits. Therefore this Iesuit Becane, without all truth, and good manners, sets the Asses eares vpon so many learned English Preachers: but they will nothing lesse then fit them, hee must re∣sume the eares to himselfe, and carie them about with him, as his owne. Touching his assertion, I did not say that he distin∣guished the Head, and Primat of the Church, as two things diuerse, but that he confounded them as one. Hcere, as one that is at daggers drawing against him∣selfe, hee confesseth, hee did not, nor doth, distinguish them: and yet heere, with two disiunctiue particles, hee separateth them. Indeed, with the Papists, what is the Papall Primat of the Church, but the Supreame Head of the Church? Therefore iustly I found fault with the Iesuit, for ma∣king two questions of one. viz. I. Whether the King bee Primat of the Church? 2. Whether the King be Supreme Head of the Church? and not thus rather, according to
his words and meaning: Whether the king be Head or Primate of the Church; or Head, that is, Primate, &c. But in this his Examen, the Iesuite doth increase (and not lessen) the Iarre with himselfe. BECAN. Exam.Page 121 I Do not inquire what Tooker, and Burhill haue professed or sworne of the kings Supreme Gouernment: but what they haue written of the Primate of the Church. Both of them deny that the king may be called Primate of the Church; Hainric saith be may be so called. There is the Iarre. Dr. HARRIS Reply. TRue it is, in our English tongue, as we doe not call the kings Supreme gouernment of this Church, Primacy, but Supremacy: so doe we not cell the king, Primate Ecclesiasticall, or Primate at all. But in respect that the English word Supremacy, is translated into the Latine word Primatus; as we in La∣tine ascribe vnto the king, Primatum Ecclesiasticum, or Primatum, in omnibus causis, et supra omnes personas Ec∣clesiasticas, Primacy Ecclesiasticall, or Primacy, in and ouer, all Causes, and persons Ecclestasticall: so wee in La∣tine call the king Primatem Ecclesiasticum, Primate Ec∣clesiasticall, to weet, of his foresaid (Regall, not Episcopall) Primacy or Supremacy Ecclesiasticall, that is, in and ouer all Ecclesiasticalls: which Mr. Burhill is so far off to deny, that hee hath expressely allowed them, who assert it. So that here is nothing but empty stri∣uing about words, which the Apostle condemneth. I
will therefore leaue this Iesuite, snatching at syllables, and catching of flics; I say, I will leaue him so striuing, and with are him thus reasoning. BECAN. Exam.Page 121 Doctor Tooker, and M. Burhill disputing against me, who denied the King to be Primate of the Church; doe denie it in that sense, wherein I said the King vsurped the Primacy of the Church. But I did not meane that the King vsurped the Primacy of the Church Sacerdorall: for I elsewhere confesse that the King disclaimeth it, Therefore they, denying the King to haue Primacy Eccle∣siasticall, doe not meane that hee hath not Primacie Sacer∣dotall. Dr. HARRIS Reply. WHo taught this vnlearned Iesuite to dis∣pute from all particulars? Concerning the general, do all disputers, at all times, reason according to the meaning of the Aduersarie, which often times they vnderstand not? Touching the Minor, or later proposition, or As∣sumption of Becane; who would not thinke his mea∣ning to be, that the king by his confession disclaimeth all Primacy sacerdotall, that is, Episcopall, Archiepisco∣pall, or Patriarchall? for all Bishops, Archbishops, and Patriarkes are Priests, and therefore their Primacy E∣piscopall, &c. is Sacerdotall: but this Iesuite meaneth nothing lesse. For by Primacy Sacerdotall, he meaneth
here onely the power of inferiour Priests or Presby∣ters, in Court internall onelie; who haue no iurisdicti∣on in Court externall, as though all our dispute were not of Primates,-and Primacy? As though any inferi∣our Priests, who were not Bishops, haue at any time, bin called Primates? feeling that by the Canon law, Pri∣mates & Patriarks, are all one: as though Primacy with the Papists, doth not respect the externall Court only. These are as plaine, as the nose on Becanes face. There∣fore his face is hard, who abuseth his Reader so grosly. But I'le returne this his argument vpon his owne head thus: If Dr. Tooker, and Mr. Burbill deny the King to be Primate, or to haue Primacy in that dense than Becane saith The King vsurpeth Primacy; and Becane saith The King vsurpeth Primacy Sacerdotall, that is to say, Episco∣pall: Then it followeth that they deny the King to be Pri∣mate, or to haue Primacy Episcopall. But the first is true, according to Becane; viz. That the deny, as Becane meaneth; and Becane meaneth that the King vsurpeth Primacy Episcopall. Therefore the later is true also, viz That Dr. Tooker and Mr. Burhill, denying the King to be Primate, or to haue the Primacy; deny him to be Primate, or to haue Primacy Episcopall, as all Protestants doe. So that here is among vs all, a full and settled Con∣cord; and the Iesuites Iarre, as empty chaffe, is blowen cleane away.
❧ Becans Iarre. IIII. Question. Whether the King, by reason of his Primacy, may be called Head of the Church? THis Title first began to be vsurped of King Henry the 8. as all Authors, aswell our owne as our aduersa∣ries do testifie. For thus writeth Iacobus Thuanus in his first booke of the Histories of his times: Henricus post diuonium, se Caput Ecclesiae constituit. K. Henry af∣ter his diuorce (from Q. Katherine) made himselfe Head of the Church &c. And Polydor Virgil lib. 27. of his History of England, saith: Interea habetur Concilium Londini, in quo Ecclesia Anglicana formam potestatis, nullis ante tempo∣ribusvisam, induit. Henricus enim Rex Caputipsius Eccle∣siae constituitur. In the meane while (to wit after his foresaid diuorce) a Councell was held at London, wherein the Church of England tooke to it selfe a forme of power, neuer heard of be∣fore. For that King Henry was appointed Head of the same Church &c. Genebrard also in the fourth books of his Chrono∣logic hath these words: Henrieusanno 1534. in publicis Co∣mitijs se caput Ecclesiae Anglicanae appellauit. King Hen∣ry in the yeare of our Lord 1534. in publike Parliament, called himselfe Head of the Church of England &c. Also Doctor San∣ders in his booke of the Schisme of England, saith: Exqu li∣cendiformula, primam occasionem sumptamatunt, vt Rex Supremum Caput Ecclesiae Anglicanae diceretur. By which manner of speech, it is said, the first occasion was taken, of calling the King supreme Head of the Church of England &c. And a∣gaine, in the same booke: Proponebantur eis noua Comitio∣rum Decreta, & iubebantur iureiurando affirmare, Regem
Supremum Ecclesiae esse Caput. The new Lawes or Statutes of the Parliament were propounded vnto them (to wit, to the Kings subiects) and they were commanded to sweare, that the King was head of the Church &c. Iohn Caluin in like manner vpon the 7. Chapter of the Prophet Amos writeth thus: Qui tantopere extulerunt Henricum Regem Angliae, certè fue∣runt homines inconsiderati. Dederunt enim illi summam rerum omnium potestatem; & hoc me grauiter semper vul∣nerauit. Erant enim blasphemi, cùm vocarent eum sum∣mum Caput Ecclesiae sub Christo. Those who so greatly did extoll K. Henry of England, were men voide of consideration. For they gane vnto him the chiefe power of all things: and this point did euer gall me grieuously. For that they were blasphemers, vvhen they called him the chiefe Head of the Church vnder Christ &c. 2. The same Title did K. Edward Sonne to King Henry, and his Successour, vsurpe, as it may be seene by his Letters to Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, which begin thus: Edouardus Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae, & Hyberniae Rex, supremum in terris Ecclesiae Anglicanae, & Hybernicae, tām causis spiritalibus quàm tēporalibus Caput; Reuerendo Thomae Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, salutē. Edward by the Grace of God K. of England, France & Ireland, supreme Head on earth of the Church of England and Ireland, as well in Cau∣ses Ecclesiasticall as temporall: to the Reuerend, Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, greeting &c. The same Title also did Bishop Cranmer giue vnto the said King, as appeareth by his letters written to other Bishops subiect vnto him, thus: Tho∣mas permissione diuina Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus, per Illustrisimum in Christo Principem Edouardum Regem sextum, supremum in terris Caput Ecclesiae Anglicanae & Hybernicae, sufficienter & legitimè authorizatus; Tibi Ed∣mundo Londinensi Episcopo, & omnibus fratribus Coepis∣copis, vice & nomine Regiae Maiestatis, quibus in hac parte sungimur, mandamus, vt Imagines ex. Ecclesijs cuiusque dioecesis tollantur &c. We Thomas by Gods permission Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, being sufficiently and lawfully authorized
by our most gratous Prince in Christ, King Edward the , supreme Head on earth of the Church of England and Ireland, do in his Maiesties Name and place, which berein we supply, command von Edmund Bishop of London, and all the rest of our Brethren Bishops; that Imaves be taken out of the Churches of euery Diccesset &c. And Doctor Sanders also in his booke of the Schisme of England saith thus: Quamprimum visum est Henrici octaui mortem diuulgare; statim Edonardus Henrich filius, nonum aetatis annum agens, Rex Angliae pro∣clamatur, & sumurn Ecclesiae Anglicanae in terris Caput, proximè secundum Christum constitutel it &c. As score as it was thought good to diuulge King Henries death, by and by Ed∣ward his sonne, being of the age of nine yeares, was proclaymed King of England, and ordained supreme Head of the Church of England on earth, next vnder Christ &c. 3. Queene Elizabeth, although she were a woman, yet she thought her selfe no way inferiour to her Father or Brother, Shee therefore would be also called supreme Head of the Church of England. For so writeth Iacobus Thuanus in his 15. booke of the Histories of his time. Elizabetha, recep to à Patre & fratre titulo, Ecclesiae Caputper Angliam coepitappellati. Queene Elizabeth hauing receiued the (former) Title from her Fa∣ther & Brether, began to be called Head of the Church through∣out England &c. 4. But now aduyes, vnder K. Iames, this title is put in Repardie. The Chaplaine (to wit M. Doctor Andrewes) doth admit the same in his Tortura Torti: but M. Tooker, and M. Burhill do reiect it. M. Tookers words, which a little before I recited are these: Olere autem malitiam, & clamitare audaciam tuam videturillud, cum Regem Caput Ecclesiae, Primatemque confingas. It may seems to sauour of malice, and try out upon your sausines, when as you feigne the King to be Head and Primate of the Church &c. And in like manner doth M. Burhill pag. 133. reprehend a certaine person of ouer much, want onnes and boldnes, for calling the King, Head, Pastour and Primate of Bishops. 5. In his debate and Iarre then, what shall the King do?
If he admit the Title of Supreme Head of the Church of Eng∣land, M. Tooker, and M. Burhill will no doubt murmure streadly. If he rerect it, what then will the Chaplaine say? Per∣haps this contention may be mollified, if the King, as he gaue to the Chaplaine the Bishopricke of Ely: so he would giue to M. Tooker, and M. Burhill two other Bishopricks. For then, least they might seeme ungratefull, they would easily grant this Title to the King, and farre greater too. English Concord.Pag. 32. THe Head, Regall Primate, and th'alone Su∣preme gouernour in all things, and ouer all persons Ecclesiasticall, in the Church of England; sig∣nifie one, and the selfe same thing: wherein, all our English Protestant Writers doe vniformally accord; and so do openly and publikely profess the Kings roy∣all Title of Supreme Head vnder Christin England. Here therefore the Iesuite contends for nifles. And this hee might haue learned of the R. Bishop of Ely;Tott. Tort. pag. 338. et 339 who doth not only admit that Title, but also foundlie proueth the same by Scriptures, and Fathers, in these words: Now to bring this name of Head vnto the King, from Gregory, or any other, needs no wondrous Art. The Holy-ghost in this word was our guide. The Prophet Samuel speaks thus to his King:1. Sa. 19.17 When thou wast little in thy own eyes, wast thou not made the Head of the Tribes of Israel: of wth tribes, the Tribe of Leny was one. Theriore the K. is head of the leuitical tribe;
in the which Tribe was the high Priest Abimelech vnder the king his head. Wondrous ignorance it is to deny this; not wondrous Art to prooue this. Moreouer: Chrysostom, a Bishop of the. Catholike Church (no lesse godly, and learned then Gregory) called Theodosius, not onely the Head, but also the Toppe, or Crowne of the head, euen of all men vp∣on the earth. I thinke there was then a man vpon earth, who was called the Bishop of Rome. Agreeable hereunto writeth Dr. Tooker,Duel. pag. 4 thus: The Bishop of Ely doth with vs, and with Chrysostom, so ac∣knowledge the king to be Head, and toppe of the Head; that he vnder standeth him to be gouernour of the Church, vn∣der the Primary head Christ. See you not hereby (Iesuite) how impudently you lyed, when you wrote thus: But now this Title of Head, is indangered vnder King Iames &c. Dr. Tooker, and Mr. Burhill will not haue the King to be called such a Head of the Church, as you Papists dreame the Pope to be: viz. Vnto whose motion, (as say the Clementines) all are subiect. From whom, as from an Head, taken vp into the fellowship of the indiuiduall vnity, God doth poure out his gifts in the whole bodyDe Elect. et Elect. po∣test. ca. Fun∣damenta. From whom all Bishoppes descend, as members from the Head:De Minist. et ordin. li. 2 who can doe all things, that Christ can doe:Hoftiens. de Transl. Epi. ca. Quinto. who hath the same Tribunall and Consistory that Christ hath.Abbat de Elect.c. Ve∣nerabilem. But is the Iesuite amongst the Prophets? It may be, among the false Prophets. What, doth hee mea∣sure our Writers (who had rather lose their heads, then, in the Papists sense, to ascribe vnto their King, the Title of Supreme Head) with the met-wand of Pa∣pall parasites?
In that Iarre of Cardinalls, about the Popes Prima∣cy, to vveet, whether it consist in the Temporalties of Kings, Directly, or Indirectly: what will Pope Paul 5. doe? If he admit that Primacy Direct; Bellarmine will murnur: if hee refuse it, what will Baromus, and the Canonists say? If the Cardinalls would bestow the Popedome vp∣on Bellarmine, he would grant vnto the Pope, this, and a farre greater Title Directly. But haue the Papists any greater Title then this papall, to weet, of the Head bf the Church? It seemes so: because according to his Parasits, these following are Catholick Axioms. First, The Pope can dispense aboue right, or law, and can make iustice of iniustice: and can make no sentence a sen∣tence, and can create some-what of nothing.De Trans, Epi. Quan∣to in glosla. Secondly, The Pope is the true (Soueraigne) Lord of Temporalties: so that hee can take away frō one that which is his owne: and that act of his holds for good, though hee sinne. Princes are not Lords, but Tutors, Procurators, and Stewards.Ioh. de pa∣tis. de porest. Pap. et Reg. Thirdly, It is hereticall to beliene, that Our Lord God the Pope, the maker of this and that decree; can not decree as hee hath done.Extrau. loan. 22. ca. Cum inter nonnullos in Gloss. Is there any thing more? Yes, a∣boue God, and power diuine. They haue perswaded the Popes, that. Fourthly, The Popes may doe all things, euen what they list, euen things vnlawfull; and that they are More than God.Francis Zibarell. Which madeIn Poly∣cratico. Camotensis long since vvrite thus: The Popes commaund the Angels: They haue power ouer the dead: They offer violence to the Scriptures, thereby to gaine fulnesse of Power. The Pope is become in∣tolerable: no Tyrant did euer equall him in pride & pompe.
Behold heere the Roman Head, how glorious, pom∣pous, and (if hee had rather haue it so) how tyran∣nous it is. BECAN. Exam.Pag. 128. IF the name, Head of the Church, & Primat of the Church, signisit the same thing; then Tooker and Burhill, who de∣ny the King to be Primat, not onely Ecclesiasticall and Sa∣cerdotall, but also in any other sense what soeuer: deny also in the same sort the King to be Head. Dr. HARRIS Reply. DOctor Tooker (as in my Concord, and in this 4. Question, out of his expresse words vvas shewed) did, together with the R; Bishop of Ely, acknowledge, the King to be Supreme Head of this Church.Pag. 284. M. Burhill, in his Appendix, writeth thus: If any of vs call the King Head of the Church in his kingdom, that manner of speech, hath good reason, and sense ortho∣doxall. I did not reprehend any man as audacious, be∣cause, according to our meaning, hee calls the King, Caput, Pastorem, et Primatem, Head, Pastour, and Primat. The Iesuit told vs before,Exam. pag. 321. that hee regarded not what they haue sworne, and professed publiquely, but what they haue written: let him therefore read this which they haue written, to make him ashamed of his shamelcsse vntruths.
BECAN. Exam.Pag. 128 WHat will you say to the Bishop of Ely, who in his Tortur: Toni, pag. 331. saud: It is a mon∣strous body, that hath moe Heads then one. And pag. 389. The Church is one body, and there is but one Head of one body. That one Head is Christ, & not the Pope. Whence it followeth, that your English Church is more monstrous then ours. For you haue two Heads of diuerse kinds,.i. Sacerdotall, and Regall. Wee, but of one kind, that is, Sacerdotall. You make as many Heads, as there bee Christian Kings ouer their Dominions; but wee, two oncly in all Domini∣ons Coristian. viz. Christ, and the Pope. Dr. HARRIS Reply. THe vnlearned Iesuit, presumptuously heere entreth the combat with the most learned Bi∣shop; a Pigmey with a Giant: but it seemeth he vnder standeth neither the R: Bishop, nor himselfe. The R: Bishop is so farre off from denying our King to be Head of this Church; that hee hath not onely as∣serted it, but also proued it our of the Scriptures, and Fathers, as hath appeared: but hevtterly denieth, that either the King, or Pope, or any other, but the Lord IESVS onely, is Head of the Church, in the Popish sense; viz. such a Head, by whom all the body boing coupled and knit together, by euery ioynt for the furniture thereof,Eph. 4. v. 16. according to the effectuall power which is in the measure of euery part, receiueth increase of the body, to the edifying of it selfe in loue. For suchan Head, Pope leo made Peter, &
so him selfe,Epist. 89. and euery Pope; writing of Peter, as taken vpinto the fellowship of the Indiuiduall vnitie: writing, I say, not onely of God inspiring, but De inspirante Pe∣tro, of Peter inspiring. So that no good thing passeth from God, the fountaine of all good things, but by participation vvith Peter. Asthough he were Emmanuell. Such a Head, as is also the Head of faith; and there∣fore the author of faith: because the head is the author and originall of all sense and motion; which are deri∣ued thence into the rest of the members. Such a Head, vvhose body is the vvhole Church. Such a Head, as is the rocke and foundation of the Church. Such a Head of his Church, as hee is the Bridegroome of his Church. If the Church haue but two such Heads, it cannot chuse but bee a monstrous bodie; as the reuerend Bi∣shop ineuitably hath concluded against the Church of Rome. Where the Iesuit saith, that Christ, and the Pope, are both of one kind; and Christ, and the King, are of diuerse kinds: I answere him, that the King doth re∣semble Christ as Head, much more then the Pope doth. For both the Scriptures, and ancient Fathers, call Kings, Heads of the Church, and Viears of GOD, within their Dominions: but no Scripture, or anci∣ent Father for the space of fiue hundred yeeres at least, after Christ, called the Pope of Rome, as by his pro∣per Title, either the Vicar of GOD, or Head of the vni∣ners all Church. Heere is matter for Becane to worke vpon; or ra∣ther a bone for Becane to gnaw vpon. Yet our Kings, Gods Vicars, and Heads of the Church, doe not take vp∣on them to bee Heads-Bridegroomes: Heads-Rocks:
Heads-Foundations: Heads-Authors of faith: Heads-Originalls of all life, sense, and motion of the Church. They rather detest, from their soules, the Luciferi∣an, and Antichristian pride of the Romish Bishoppe, challenging to be such an Head of the Church. But what will the Iesuit say, to three Popes at onces Had the Church of Rome then but two Heads? It were hard to iustle out Christ, as no Head: and it is no ea∣sie matter, to shape one Head of three Popes (and those Antipopes) shoueled together. Or vvere there so many Pope-Heads then, quot sunt in Mitra Pontifi∣cia coronae, as there be crownes in the Popes Mitre? BECAN. Exam.Pag. 131 YOu cite Clement, asserting all to be subiect to the mo∣tion of the Papisticall head of the Church. Why doe you not adde the place vvhere Clement saith so? I thinke you neuer saw Clement. You make too much hast. And you perceiue not that you cite these vvords in preiu∣dice of your King. Because the vvords, All are subiect to the motion of the Head, signifie nothing but this, that all are subiect to the commaund of their Superiours. Dot you ex∣empt anie from the gouernment and motion of your Head in England? Peraduenture your selfe, and such like Predi∣cants. Dr. HARRIS Reply. I Did not imagine the ignorance of this Iesuit to haue beene such, that, when I had set down the ex∣presse words of the Canon law, so triuiall, as being
notoriously knowen by the meanest students of that law; he could not haue readily found the place where those words are written. But sith I see the case of his ignorance to be so pittiful, I wil supply his want of skil. Let him therfore turne to the Clementines of Pope Cle∣ment the 5. Title 3. De Haereticis. cap. Ad vestrum, and there, vpon the Text-word, Ecclesiae, in the Glosse, (which is cited by the learnedst Canonists for good Canon law) he shal find written these very words and sullables: Omnes igitur sunt subiecti motioni illius (Pa∣pae): et sunt in illo, quasi membra de membro. de Elect. Sig∣nificasti. All are subiect to the motion of the Pope, & are in him, as members of the member the Head. Becane dare not deny this to be catholick and Canonicall popish-doc∣trine: not withstanding, it may be, he further desireth to hear a Text-Canon of another Author of Canons, touching this motion Papall, & the strange subiection thereunto. For this, let him turn to Dist. 40. cap. Si Pa∣pa. There shall he heare Boniface the Martyr vttering these Text Canonicall words; If the Pope, negligent of the saluation of his own sonle, & of others, should draw with him, by heapes, innumerable people, to be tortured with him by many plagues, or hellish torments eternally, they all must be so subiect to that his drawing motion, that hee may not be rebuked of any of them for that motion. Or admit the Popes motion were, to forbid vertue, & to command vice: then (as saith Bellarmine) the vvhole Church, must be so subiect to that motion, as to belieue, that vice is good, and vertue euill, vnlesse they will sin against conscience. Is not this lowly good infernall subiection? Farre be it from any of vs to acknowledge any subiec∣tion to any such motions of our Kings or Queenes.
But why doth the Iesuit presume, to tell the mea∣ning of that Author, whom, as hee heere confesleth, he knoweth not? Let him learne more modestie heer∣after; and in the meane time knowe, that for members to be subiect to the motion of their Head (for example, the Church of Rome to their Pope-Head) is, not onely to obey the commaund of their head (as if the legges should moue, when the head would haue them moue) but to receine the vertue of motion from the head, with∣out which, they cannot moue at all. Hence it is, that in great distemperatures of the head, as Apoplexies, or the like, the members are void of all motion. And so it fareth with the Church of Rome, and their Pope-Head: from whom, as from their Head (so saith their Canon) euen their Head of faith, GOD powreth out his gifts (the gifts of moti∣on) into all the members. Yet in such sort, as that with∣out partaking of the Pope-Head, GOD (saith Leo) powreth no gift or grace into any member. God for bidde wee should acknowledge the King to be such an Head of motion, or wee bee subiect to any such motion. His Maiestie detesteth any such claime: and wee derest all such subiection. So little is the King preiudicated by this quotation. Touching the scornfully obiected exemption of our Predicants from the Kings command: were your po∣pish shauelings borne in England, the Seminary Priests, and Iesuits, as loyall and obedient to the King, as our English Preachers are; the crown wold stand vpon the Kings head with more safety, & his subiects should eate the labours of their hands, and drink the water of their own wells with more security. Were your Priests & Iesuits
or confounded, none vvould hurt or destroy in all the mountaine of Gods holinesse. None would hatch the Cock∣atrise egges, or weaue the Spyders web, of Gun-powder treasons, and milhons of other trayterous complots, and bloudy conspiracies. You, you are they who in very deed trouble Israell, and bring the whole Christian world into combusti∣on. It is a statute enacted in the heauēs, that euery soule, ,Rom. 13. ver. 1. (as saith Chrysos̄tome writing vpon those words) ; be hee an Apostle, or Euangelist, or Prophet, or a∣ny other, Peter, Pope, or whosoeuer: should bee subiect to the higher Powers for conscience sake. But by the Popes statute or Canon, the vilest shaueling Priests aforesaid, are so exempted frō subiection to the highest Powers, Kings, and Emperours, that they are not bound to o∣bey them or their lawes, for Conscience, but onelie for Order sake. Therefore they are not bound to giue, neither will they giue, to Caesar, that which is Caesars, viz. Tribute; for, Tribute belongs to him: nor Custom; yet Custom is due to him. They will not, as Saint Paul did, stand at Caesars iudgement seat, to be tryed there: much lesse will they, as Christ did, present themselues to that tri∣bunall vvhich hath power giuen to it from aboue, to bee condemned there. Some kind of reason they may haue for it; as this: They hold with Antichrist, why then should they follow Christ? Touching the popish Layicks, If (as the Iesuit heere saith) all the Kings subiects vvithin his Realmes, are bound to obey the King; why doe they disobey him, euen in the face (beeing open and professed wilfull Recusants) to
come to Church, there to heare Gods word truely preached, and his Sacraments duely administred? to pray to God, & to praise God in the congregations of his Saints? Why doe they (against the law of God, of Nature, of Nations, and of their King) refuse to te∣stifie by oath their Allegiance to their Soueraigne? Why? vnlesse it be for that they want motion; as ha∣uing no vertue of motion thereunto, deriued vnto them, from their Pope-Head: or else, because they take them selues to be the subiects of the Pope, and not of the King. And this is indeede Preiudiciall to the King, in the highest degree. BECAN. Exam.Pag. 132 YOu cite out of the Canon law, some maimed words, which you read not there, nor vnder stand: That you may vnderstand them, I will cite them whole as they are: The Sacrament of this office &c. They are Pope Nicolas words, and containe these three things. 1. That Christ placed the Sacrament of Preaching the gospell, principally in Peter, when he saw the vessell let downe from heauen, and when it was said vnto him, Rise Peter, kill and cate. 2. That God would haue the vertue, and effect of the gospell, to be powred vpon the Gentiles from Peter, as from a Head. 3. That God tooke Peter into the Jellowship of indiuiduall vnitie, by communica∣ting his name, and dignitie to him, for he would haue Peter cal∣led the rocke, and foundation of that Church, whereof he is the rocke and foundation. What gather you hence against the Pope? nothing as all. Onely you bewray your dulnesse, and ignorance berein.
Dr. HARR IS Reply. I Gather hence, that the Pope is very Antichrist, shewing himselfe as God. The Scripture saith, that, by preaching the gospell,1. Cor. 3.7. Paul may plant, and A∣pollo may water, but this God onely giues the increase; that is the vertue and effect of preaching. But here Peter, to weet, the Pope, is said to giue the vertue and effect of preaching. The Scripture,1. Cor. 3.11 yea the Canon law, saith, that there is no foundation, or rocke of the Church, but onely Christ Iesus. But here the Pope challengeth, not onely the name, but the very Dignity of Christ, viz. to be, as Christ is, The foundation and rock of the Church. God saith,Esay 48.11. Hee will not giue his Glory, or Dignity, to any other: but here it is said, that Peter, to weet, the Pope, is assumpted into the Dignity of the indiuidual vnity. The in∣diuiduall vnity, is our Lord God; but here the Pope is assumpted into the fellowship of the name: and hence it is, that the Papists or Papi-coliks, call that Romish Anrichrist, their Lord God the Pope. Thus haue I gathered, out of the blasphemous as∣sertiōs of this Iesuit here, and out of their Canon law, enough for this one time, and to much for Becane to answere all his life time, against their Pope-Head. But how doth the Iesuit gather, that the Sacrament of preaching was principally constituted in Peter, when, after the vessell let downe, it was said vnto him, Rise Peter, kill and eate? seeing that Christ before his passion, did constitute the Sacrament of preaching, e∣qually
and with the selfe same words, in all his Apo∣stles, saying, Gopreach the gospell to all the world. By ver∣tue whereof, the rest, as well as Peter, did preach the Gospell: but this vision, and this speech to Peter, was after Christs ascension: not to constitute the Sacra∣ment of preaching the Gospell principally in him; but to reforme the errour that was principally in him, viz. that he ought not to preach the gospel to the Gentiles. Therefore by that speech and vision, he was embold∣ned to preach the Gospell to Cornelius a Gentile; but not to kill Cornelius, as Cardinall Baronius expounded those words against the Venetians. If the Iesuite had cited the whole words of the Ca∣non, as he promised to doe, he might haue learned by those words of the Canon, Dexteras Societatis: the right hands of Fellowship; that the Sacrament of preaching the Gospell, was as principally constituted in Paul towards the Gentiles, as it was in Peter towards the Iewes. As touching me, I had read that Canon often: but I purposely cited, out of it, those words onely which shew, what a blasphemous Head the Church of Rome hath, who challengeth to be assumpted into the fellow∣ship of the indiuiduall vnitie, in such sort, that all gifts and graces of God, are powred vpon the Church from him, and through him, as the Head of that his body, the Church. And those words which I cited, were not maimed, but full enough to euince the Pope to be such a blas∣phemous Head indcede. Notwithstanding, I must giue the Iesuite leaue to hold on his course, viz. to wound his Pope, when he seeks to heale him; to disgrace mee without cause, and to bely mee, without blushing.
BECAN. Exam.Page 133 YOu cite out of Durand truely, that all Bishops descend from the Pope, as members from the head. Which is nothing else but this: that they all receiue from the Pope Iurisduction of the externall Court. Which, as English Academicks say, is in lie sort giuen by the king, to the Bishops in England. Therefore here is the Iarre between you, and the Academicks. Dr. HARRIS Reply. IN England, the King doth but nominate some to be Bishops; They are chosen by the Deane and Chapter. The King approueth and ratifieth the Electiò: but they are consecrated Bishops, only by Bi∣shops. And therupon, without any grant therof frō the King, they haue, ipso facto, Episcopall function and Iurisdiction in externall Court. Whereby it is appa∣rant, euen by this Iesuitesinterpretation of the words, that our Bishops doe not descend from our King, as the Romish Bishoppes descend from the Bishop of Rome; who receiue the gifts of the Holy-ghost, and the vertue and effect of their preaching from the Pope; and so descend from him, as members from the Head: which Pope (saith Bellarmine) is the onely Bishoppe iure diuino, by the word of GOD: and all the rest of the Bishoppes, Archbishops, Patriarkes, are but his Curates, iure human, by the wordor inspiration of the Pope. Inspirante Petro (as Leo saith) The Pope breathing on them the Holy-ghost.
All English Academicks would detest such descen∣ding of our Bishops frō the King; who giueth vnto our Bishops chosen and consecrated, their Baronries, and Iurisdiction coactiue by corporall or temporall mulcts (which is Dr. Tookers meaning herein) but not Iuris∣diction meerely sacerdotall or Episcopall; viz. to ex∣communicate, to giue Orders, to confirme &c. And so here is still the Concord maintained. BECAN. Exam.Pag. 134. THE rest vvhich you cite out of Hostiensis, and the Abbat, you neither cite vvell, nor understand. It irketh mee to warne you so oft, and to obtaine nothing. Dr. HARRIS Reply. TRuely I vnderstand, that Martin Becane is a ve∣ry vnlearned, and slugge Iesuite, as shall in this place, manifestly appeare. In the meane time, I pray you Christian Reader to obserue how the case is now altered, touching the Popish Headship, from that it was heretofore: for euen as Antichrist groweth on to his height of impudency, and impietie; so the Headship increaseth. Heretofore the Pope was said to be, not simply, the Head of the Church, as Christ is; but the inferiour-mini∣steriall Head: now hee is growen to be the Supreme Head, equall with Christ, as hauing the same Tribunall and Consistorie, that Christ hath, and being able to doe all that Christ can doe. To proue this, I cited the words
of the two most famous, and iudiciously learned Ca∣nonists, that euer were; Cardinall Hostiensis, and Ab∣bat Panormitane: and in the margine of my booke, I quoted rightly the places where those words were written. The matter you see, to be of the greatest mo∣ment, and most fitting to the dispute of the Head of the Church, here in hand: yet the Iesuite hath no other thing to answere but this; you doe not cite those wordes well, nor vnderstand them. Whereof (Christian Rea∣der) be you iudge, after that I haue produced at large their owne words; which are as followeth: Panormi∣tan. Super prima primi de Electione, cap. vener abilem. verb. Transtulit: Papa transtulit imperium in Germanos Pa∣pa autem hoc potuit facere ex magna causa concurrente: cum possit facere quicquid Deus potest. Alias Christus non fuisset diligens Paterfamilias si non dimisisset in ter∣ris aliquem loco sui, qui expedientibus causis possit omnia facere, quae ipse Christus, Hanc regulam firmauit Hosti∣ensis in cap. Quanto, De Translatione praelatorum; vbi dicitur quod cum Dei et Papae idem sit consistorium, omnia potest facere, quae ipse Christus, excepto peccato. Sed improprie excipit peccatum, quod Peccatum non ca∣dit sub potentia, imò sub impotentia. The Pope transla∣ted the Empire to the Germanes. The Pope might doe it, vpon great cause, because be can do whatsoeuer God can doe. Otherwise, Christ had not beene a diligent father of his family, if hee had not left one, in his owne stead on earth, who, as causes require, can do all, that Christ him∣selfe can doe. This rule hath Hostiensis confirmed in cap. Quanto. de translat: Praelat. where it is said, that seeing there is but one, and the selfe same Consistory of God and the Pope, The Pope can do all things that Christ himselfe
can doe, except sinne. But Hostiensis improperly excepted sinne, because sinne falleth not vnder power, but rather vnder impotency or weakenesse. By these their words thus at large set downe, it ap∣peareth, that I cited the words well, and knew what I cited; euen enough to demonstrate, that the Popish Primate, is a blasphemous Head; and that our King is no such Head. Both which are appatant to any man of reading: but this slugge Iesuite is so vnlearned that hee vnderstandeth nothing, which hath any sound lear∣ning, or iudicious reading in it. ❧ Becans Iarre. V. Question. Whether the Kings Primacy do consist in any Power, or Iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall? HEERE now, is there a great Iaure and debate a∣mongst our English Aduersaries: nor can the same be easily vnderstood, vnlesse it be first well distin∣guished. Ecclesiasticall Power is threefold as the Diuines doe teach. One of Order; another of interiour Iuris∣diction; the third of exteriour Inrisdiction. To the first belongeth to effect or consecrate, and to administer Sacraments: to the se∣cond to gouerne the Church in the interiour Court, or Court of Conscience; and to the third, belongeth to gouerne the Church in the exteriour Court. Now certaine it is, that the King hath not the Power of Order, by reason of his Primacy. For this dooth M. Tooker confesse page 14. vvhere he saith: Re∣ges non ha∣bent potellatem administrandi Sacramenta. Kings haue not
power to administer Sacraments. It is also certaine that be hath not Iurisdiction of the interiour Court, or Court of Conscience. For this in like manner doth M. Tooker confesse pag. 63. Om∣nis jurisdictio (saith be) in foro interiori Sacerdotum est, nulla Regum. All Iurisdiction in the interiour Court (or Court of Conscience) belongeth to Priests, not ance vvaie to Kings, &c. 2. All the question then is, whether the King hath Iuris∣diction Ecclesiasticall in the exteriour Court or no? About this point are the Englishmen at a great iarre and variance amongst themselues: some affirming it, some denying it, others distin∣gnishing. M. Tooker affirmeth it pag. 305. in these words: Qui habet plenissimam & amplissiman iurisdictionmin foro exteriore, potest candem dare & auferre. Rex eam ha∣bet. Ergo potest eandem dare & auferre. Totum hoc liquet ex V. & N. Testamento. Hee that bath most full and ample Iurisdiction in the exteriour Court, can giue and take away the same (at his pleasure.) But the King hath this Iurisdiction. Ergo, he can giue and take away the same. All this is manifest out of the old and new Testament &c. With him agreeth also M. Salclebridge pag. 140. Regesoleo sacro vncti, capaces sunt Iurisdictionis spiritualis. Kings (saith be) anointed with holy oyle, are made capable of spiritual Iurisdictiō &c. And then again in the same place out of the Lawes of Eng. Rex (saith be) est persona mixta, vtpote qui Ecclesiasticā & temporalē iu∣risdictionē habet, & quidē Supremá. The king is a person mixt, to wit, that hath both Iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall and Temporall, & that in the highest degree &c. And yet more p. 144. Perleges Ecclesiasticas in hoc Regno approbatas, vnus Sacerdos duo beneficia habere non potest, nec Bastardus Sactis initiari. Verùm Rex, Ecclesiastica potestate & iurisdictione, quam habet, in vtroque, dispensate potest. By the Ecclesiasticall Lawes approned in this Kingdom (of England) one Priest may not have two Benefices, nor a Bastard be made a Priest. But the King, by the Iurisdiction And Power Ecclesiasticall, which hee hath, can dispense in both &c. 3. M. Tompson, and M. Burhill doe absolutely deny
it: M. Thomson, pag. 80. of his booke writing thus: Primatus Ecclesiae non est definiendus per iurisdictionem Ecclesiasti∣cam, sed per gubernationem supremam. The Primacie of the Church, is not to be defined by Iurisdiction Ecclesisstical, but by supreme Gouernmēt, &c. And againe, pag 95. Diximus, Re∣gem gubernare quidem Ecclesiastica, sed non Ecclesiasticè. Wee haue said before, that the King indeed doth gouerne Ecclesi∣asticall things, but not Ecclesiastically. And why I pray you? Be∣cause, for sooth, be hath not Iurisdiction Ecclesiatically, but onoly Temporall. And heerounto agreath Must. Buchill, pag. 234. granting this negatine proposition. Rex (saith he) nullam ha∣bet Iurisdictionem Ecclesiasticam, nec in foro interiori, nec inexteriori. The King hath no Iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall, nei∣ther in the interiour, nor exteriour Court, &c. 4. Now my Lord of Ely, hee distinguisheth in this case, as may be seene in M. Tookers Booke, pag. 305. in these vvords: Habet Rex omnem iurisdictionem spiritualem, in foro ex∣terioti, exceptis quibusdam Censuris. The King hath all in∣risaction spirituall in the extoriour Court, except is certain Con∣sures, &c. So as now to this question (to weet vvhether the King, as hee is Primate and Head of the Church, haue any Iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall or spirituall in the exteriour Court,) we must an∣were thus: First with M. Tooker, and M. Salclebridge, That he hath most ample, most full, and supreme Iurisdiction. Secondly, with my Lord of Ely, That he hath indeed some, but notall. And lastly, with M. Burhill, and M. Thomson, That hee hath none, no not any one iote at all. English Concord.Pag. 38 THese are the very expresse words of the law of England, which is now in force.Star. 1. El∣zab. That Ec∣clesiasticall Iurisdiction, vvhich was exercised heeretofore, or lawfully might be exercised, by any spiri∣tual
or Ecclesiasticall power, to visit the Ecclesiasticall state & order, also to reforme, & to bring into order, and to correct Ecclesiasticall persons, all errours, heresies, schismes, &c. is for euer vnited, and annexed to the im∣periall Crowne of this kingdome: vvhereby the King of England, through his full power, by his Letters Patents, may assigne & authorise such persons being naturall borne subiects, as he shall think meet, to exercise & execute vn∣der his Highnes, all manner of Iurisdictions, priuiledges, and preheminences, in any wise touching or concerning any spirituall or Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction, within his High∣nesse Dominions. Now all Protestant English Writers, in the Oath of Supremacy which they haue takē,Lorament. Primat. in Apol. Reg. pag. 56. haue openly testified, & in their conscience declared, that they will with all their power, ayde & defend all Iurisdictions, Priuiledges, and prehemieces vnited and annexed to the Crowne of this kingdom. Wherefore, all plainly agree in the thing it self. But that, which the Iawes of Engl. call Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction, & define to be the supreme Gouernmet in all Ecclesiasticall things, & ouer all Ecclesiasticall persons, M. Thomson would rather call, Supreme Gouernment. The R:Tortur. Tort. p. 151 Bishop touching this matter writeth thus: This I vrge, that the Iurisdictiō which Abbesses haue with you, is ordinary spirituall Iurisdictiō. For the Abbat hath ordinary: & in her administration, the Abbess is equalled with the Abbat. And what should let it? Because they can∣not exercise censures, excōmunicate? But excōmunication doth not directly belong to the key of order.In 4. Sentē. Dist. 18. q. 2. art. 2. Aquinas as∣serteth this; Excommunication is no act of the key direct∣ly, but rather of the externall court. And it is a common o∣pinion with you, that he that hath not the key of order, may
excommunicate. Those things which are of order, and the inner court, are denied to women: but things belonging to the outward court, are cōmunicated to Layiks: & of those things there is no reason but that women may be capable; As Stepha. d'Aluin doth stiffly argue for his Abbesses, and therein takes our part: the Sorbon approuing his opi∣nion therein (Although we ascribe not to our King power of Censure) and therein you giue much more to your Ab∣besses, then we to our Prince. Ma. Burhill demes the King to haue any Iurisdiction in the outward court, to weet, Sacerdotall. So the King of England hath all Ecclesiasticall Iuris∣diction, that is, Supreme and Regall (wherof onely our controuersie is): but no Sacerdotall, no, none at all; and yet without any Iarre whatsoeuer. But oh Becane, can you without blushing (if there be but a graine of pudency in you) obstinatly detract frō most religious Kings all supreme Iurisdiction, proper∣ly Regall, when women (of whom St. Paul, 1. Tim. 2. v. 12. I permit not a woman to vse authority ouer the man) with you, are capable,Fran. Steph. D' Aluin de Potestat. E∣pisc. Abbatú Abbatiss. ca. 2.3. 4.11. &c. and partakers of Spirituall Iu∣risdiction, Sacerdotall, or Episcopall? viz. Of power to ex∣cōmunicate Clerks, to absolue, to visit, to institute, to present to Benefices, Prelatures, & dignities Ecclesiasticall: yea of hauing all administration as wel spirituall as temporall, but only of those things of order, wherof a woman is incapable. Lastly, al those things which Salobrigiensis doth heer recite, touching Kings anointed with sacred oyle, &c. Mixt persons, &c. which may dispense against lawes Ecclesiasti∣call, are transcribed out of the expresse words of the common lawes of England: which, in this kind of ar∣gument, might haue satisfied to the full.
BECAN. Exam.Pag. 139 THomson saith expresly, that The Primacy of the Church, is not to be defined by Ecclesiasticall Iu∣risdiction: but the law of England doth so define it. Thomson saith, that The King doth gouerne Ec∣clesiasticall things, but not Ecclesiastically: therefore his Iurisdiction is not Ecclesiasticall. Burhill detracteth from the King all Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction in the outward Court, that is, as you say. Sacerdotall: but Tooker faith, that All iurisdic∣tion of Priests, is in the inward Court. The Bishop of Ely saith, The King hath no Iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall of the outward Court, but onely power of Censure. And saith againe: The King hath not power of censure. But Hainric, and Tooker say, The King hath all supreme Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction. The English law saith, The King hath all manner Ecclesiasti∣call Iurisdiction. The Bishop of Ely saith, Hee hath some Ec∣clesiasticall Iurisdiction, but not all. So the King hath Iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall; with Tooker, Supreme: vvith the law, all manner: vvith the Bishop, some, but not all: vvith Burhill, and Thomson, none, none at all. Is this your English Concord? Dr. HARRIS Reply. THe foole will alwaies be playing with his ba∣ble; some fooles with varietie: but this clay∣witted Iesuit, playes with his downe right re∣petitions of the same things in the same words; wher∣as heeretofore, he hath receiued in my English Concord, a full, cleare, and solid answere, to all, and euerie one of these particular seeming Iarres; but in truth no
iarres at all. Wherein is manifested our good Concord, euen in all those seeming Iarres. In short, thus: Master Thomson denieth the Kings Supreme Church gouern∣ment to be called Primacy, or the King Primat; as Pa∣pists vnderstand it, to weet, Episcopall: but he himselfe calleth the Kings supreme Church gouernment, Pri∣macy, and the King in respect thereof Primat; as the Protestants meane, to weet, Regall. So Dr. Tooker, denied the King to be called Head of this Church; that is, Episcopall, or Papall: but Doctor Tooker acknowledged expresly, that the King is not onely the Head, but also the toppe of the Head of this Church; to weet, Regall. And in that sense, saith Ma. Burhill, they say well, who call the King, Caput,Appendix pag. 284. Pastorē, et Primatem, the Head, Pastour, and Primat of this Church. Doctor Harris saith Ma. Burhill denieth the King to haue Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction in the outward Court, viz. Sacerdotall; that is, in Dr. Harris meaning, not Presbyteriall, but Episcopall (according to that of Lactantius, who called Sacerdotium, summum Episcopa∣tum. Sacerdotall, that is, Episcopall, Archiepiscopall, or Patriarchall.) And Dr. Tooker saith, that all Iurisdiction of Priests, that is, of Presbyters, or lowest Priests, or all Iu∣risdiction Presbyteriall, is in the inner Court. Is heere any Iarre? The Bishop of Ely saith, The King hath power of Cen∣sure, to weet, Regall, and Ecclesiasticall (as plainly ap∣peared, when Salomon deposed Abiathar the high Priest. And againe, he saith, The King hath not power of Censure; that is, Episcopall, as Excommunication. Or in short thus: The King hath some Ecclesiasticall Iuris∣diction,
viz. Regall. And the King hath not all Ecclesi∣asticall Iurisdiction, viz. Episcopall. Dr. Tooker, & Hainric say, the King hath all supreme Ecclesiastical Iurisdictiō.i. Regall. And our English law saith, The King hath, not (as this Iesuit writeth) all manner of Iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall (for that would include both Episcopall, and Presbyteriall, or in Becane his sense, Sacerdotall) but all manner of supreme Ecclesi∣asticall Iurisdiction, that is, Regall. Ma. Thomson saith, The King hath no Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction, or Pri∣macy (for Primacy and Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction, are all one with Ma. Thomson) Episcopall: but Ma. Thom∣son saith: The King hath Primacy, or Supreme Eccle∣siasticall Iurisdiction, Regall. So the King hath all, and all maner Supreme Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction, Regall: and, The King hath not all, The King hath none, none at all Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction, Sacerdotall, or Episco∣pall. The King doth not gouern Ecclesiasticall things, ecclesiastice, that is, Episcopally, or Sacerdotally: The King doth gouerne Ecclesiasticall things, Regally. Is not heere a plaine Concord, and vniforme agreement? The Christian harmony whereof, this Iesuit cannot dissolue, though all his iarring hart-strings would burst in-sunder. But whereas this Iesuit saith, that M. Burhill affir∣meth the King to haue no Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction, none at all, in Court either inward or outward; hee sheweth himselfe to bee past shame, in his grosse vn∣truths: for M. Burhills express words in hisPag. 285. Appendix are these: Quomodo nullam, nullam penitus huiusmodi Iurisdictionem Regiesse aio his verbis; vbi propositionem qua hoc asseratur, falsam esse pronuntio? How do I say, that
the King hath none Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction, none at all, in Court inward, or outward, vvhen I pronounce that proposition to bee false, vvherein this is asserted. So the Iesuit brings in Ma. Burhill affirming that, which hee expresly denith. The particular manner, and materiall points, of this Supreme Gouerment Regall and Ecclesiasticall, are set downe by our gracious King Iames: by Queene Eli∣zabeth: by three of our most learned Bishops, viz. of Salisbury, Winchester, and Ely (as is transcribed in this Reply, & English Concord: but especially, in Hainric Salo-Brigian his Becano-Baculus) with vniforme consent. BECAN. Exam.Pag. 141. IF supreme Iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall, that is, Primacy of the Church, was exercised vnder Queene Mary, and might lawfully be executed by the Pope: then it followeth, that it vvas lawfully separated from the Regall Crowne. For, if it vvere by Diuine right vnited vnto it, it could not bee separated from it, and lawfully exercised. Dr. HARRIS Reply. IF the heauens fall, wee shall haue stoare of Larks∣heads. Wee will as soone grant that the heauens may fall, as that the Pope might lawfully exercise supreme Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction within this king∣dome. If Queene Mary would wilfully & superstitiously re∣nounce that Supreme Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction, which was due vnto her, as Queene of England, by the law
of God, and the law of this kingdom; yet it followes not, that the said supreme Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction, was not by diuine and humane right, vnited to the Crowne. The publique worship & scruice of GOD, was vnder the law, vnited to the persons Leuiticall, & to the place where the Temple was: yet Ieroboam, who made all Israel to sinne (as Quecne Mary, more bloo∣die then he, made all England to sinne) changed both persons, and place, by whom, and wherein, Gods di∣uine publique worshippe was then to be performed. Heere then is nought else, but Becanicall folly, or fop∣pery Iesuiticall. BECAN. Exam.Pag. 145 THat which you cite from the Bishop of Ely, and assert heere your selfe, viz. That we giue more to an Abbess, (namely power to excōmunicat) then you to the Queen, is not true. You ascribe all to the Queen, which you doe to the King, as to haue Primacy, to be head of the English Church, &c. Abbesses with vs, haue not power to excommunicate, as Eli∣zabeth with you, had. Hear what our Canons think of this mat∣ter: It is plaine,33. q 5. ca. Mulierem that the woman is subiect to the dominion of the man (or her husband) & hath no authority. For she cannot teach, nor be a witnes, nor iudge, how much lesse may she commaund, or raigne?De sentent. Excommu∣nicationis cap. De mo∣nialibus. And againe: If Nunnes or Monialls, lay violent hands vpon themselues, their Conuerts, or Clerks: they ought to be absol∣ned by the Bishoppe of that Diocesse, vvherein their Mona∣steries are. Hence the canonists gather, that Abbesses cannot absolue (and therefore cannot excommunicate) their Monialls. And this is obserued in our practise. See Suarez. Tom. 5. d. 2. Sect. 2. et 3.
Dr. HARRIS Reply. THE reuerend Bishop of Ely, asserted, the Ab∣besses with Papists to haue or dinary Iurisdiction spirituall, and therein to be equall with Abbats: and that nothing hindred, but that they might excommuni∣cate, because according to Tho. Aquinas, Excommunica∣tion is not an act of Order, or inward Court, but of the out∣ward: And I, in my English Concord, set downe the par∣ticulars of that ordinary spitituall Iurisdiction of Ab∣besses, viz. (To excommunicate, absolue, visit, institute, conferre benefices, present to Benefices, Prelatures, and Dignities Ecclesiasticall: and to haue all Administration of the Monesteriall Monialls, or Nunnes; as well Spirituall, as Temporall; but onely those things of order, vvhereof a vvoman is incapeable.) ex Tractatu doctissimo, out of the most learned Treatise, of Father Stephen Dr. Aluin, entituled thus: A Treatise of the Power of the Abbats and Abbesses: printed at Parise 1607. authorized solemnly to be printed; and in very singular manner allowed with high commendation, by the Diuines of Parise, deputed for examination of all bookes to be printed there. In my margine notes I directed the Iesuite to the particular chapters of that Treatise, where the said Stephen doth not onely assert those particulars; but also solidly and indiciously proue the same, by the Ca∣non law, and best Canonists writing comment, vpon that law. Notwithstanding, this Iesuite, as though his nose bled, turneth aside from all these (so many words,
so many pressures of him) and saith but this: It is false, Abbesses with vs haue no power to excom∣municate. Did euer any Iesuite so vnlearned as this Becane is, and here shewes himselfe to be, vvrite with penne? Stephen D'Aluin, doth not only say it, but from sound premisses conclude it. The Iesuit, leauing the premisses vnanswered, or vntouched, denieth the conclusion; and sinking vnder the burden of the respondent, will rather play the opponents part, and so obiecteth these two emptie Canons nothing to the purpose.23. q 5. cap Multerem. The former is of priuate women, that they should be sub∣iect to their husbands: and not vsurpe authoritie ouer other men, as, to teach them publikely, to iudge them, to rule, or raigne ouer them, to weet, as the Glosse ex∣pounds it, in temporalls. If this Canon should be vnderstood generally of all women (for Abbesses are not there once mentioned) then Mathilda Countess, of whom the Gloss in L. vlt. cod. de Arbit. maketh such honorable mention, could not command or iudge them, who were her subiects as Countess: nor Q. Mary (so much commended by al Papists) might raigne, as Queen, ouer her English sub∣iects. By what right or law then, did shee shed innocent bloud of so many Martyrs, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, & Laiks of all sorts, Sexes and Ages, exceeding much, till she replenished England, from corner to cor∣ner; as Manasses did Ierusalem? Angel: in rep. quā. cod. de fidei com. et in L. Foeminae F. de reg. iur is. et in L. cum praetor F. de iudic: saith that He saw a certaine Queen, na∣med Ioan, sitting in the Regall seate, and giuing sentence of death, against them of Balso.
The latter Canon saith, that Monialls, or Nunnes,De senten, Excoman.ca. De Monia∣libus. laying violent hands vpon Clerks, should or might be absolued by the Bishop; which is true, when either the Abbess is not exempted, from Iurisdiction Episcopal, as many of them are not: or, when the Pope doth not giue, or deriue from himselfe as Head, ordinary Spiri∣tuall Iurisdiction to the said Abbesses, as to many of them hee doth; for then it is a ruled case, especially a∣mongst the Canonists, (though peraduenture this seely Iesuit be ignorant therof) that they may, by ver∣tue of that ordinary Spirituall Iurisdiction, excōmuni∣cate, absolue, institute, visite, &c. those Ecclesiasticall things onely excepted, which pertaine to the key of order. Indeed the Schoolmen, as Thomas Aquinas. in 4. dist. 19. q. 1. art. 1. et 2. & q. 3. ad. 4. also dist. 25. q. 2. art. 2. & q. 1. ad. 2. And Paladanus Durand. in 4. dist. 19. q. 1. art. 1. Syluester verb. Abbatissa. and Dominicus So∣to in 4. Dist. 20. q. 1. art. 4. deny to Abbesses Eccle∣siasticall Iurisdiction or dinary: yet they acknowledge the same, as delegated vnto them from the Pope. But the Canonists proceede further: for they hold, that the very dignitie of the Prelature, and excellencie of the offices of Abbesses, dooth giue vnto those Ec∣clesiasticall women, to weet Abbesses, Spirituall Iuris∣diction, not only delegated, but euen ordinarie, ouer their Monialls or Nunnes: and this they gather out of the Canon law. De Maior. et Obed. cap. Dilecta. where Pope Honorius 3. commands obedience to the Abbesse of Brubigen: who had suspended Clericos suae Iurisdictioni subiectos, ab officio, et beneficio; The Clarkes vnder her, from their office, and benefice.
This is a more plentifull and sound answere vnto these two Canons, so fondly objected, then the Ie∣suite deserueth, and so we may leaue him here. But be∣cause this point now in hand doth so neerely touch the Kings Supremacy, or his Supreme Iurisdiction Spirituall and Ecclesiasticall; to stifle this Iesuite here∣in, once for all, and euer hereafter, I will proceede to the further declaration, and demonstration hereof; wherein I will obserue this course following: viz. to proue out of the Canon law, or Canonists ancient and moderne, or both, First in generall, that all Laicks, Males, or Females, are capeable of Iurisdiction Spirituall and Ecclesiasti∣call, in the outward Court; euen to Excommuni∣cate. Dist. 32. ca. Praeter hoc. verb. Ducibus. in Glossa: Laicus de mandato superior is, potest suspendere clericos, et excomunicare, quia Excommunicatio est potius Iuris∣dictionis quam or dinis. Ext. de Elect. Transmissam. Dist. 63. c. Adrianus. etc. In Synodo. D. 96. c. Bene quidem. et c. Nos ad sidem. et causis matrimonialibus 35. q. 5. Ad sedem. 2. q. 5. c. Mennam. Io. Hoc tamen videtur alienum a laico, cum de rebus spiritualibus se non intromittat. vt Extra. de. Indi. Decernimus, imo, vt ibt dicitur, prohibe∣tur praelatis, vt talia Laicis non committant: tamen Domi∣nus Papa, qui habet plenitudinem Potestatis, posset com∣mittere vt Excommunicarent. Bar. A laick, (to weet, male, or female, for some of the Canons here cited by the Glosse concerne the males; but others, especially the last, concerne the females directly, as that, 2. q. 5. Mennam) may suspend, and excommunicate clarkes, by command, or commission from the superior, especiallie
of the Pope. viz. by Spirituall power delegated: because excommunication is not of Order, but of Iurisdiction in the outward Court. Dist. 96. c. bene quidem, in the Glosse.§. Praeter. Ro∣manum. Papa quamlibet causam Ecclesiasticam, commit∣tere potest laico. The Pope may delegate to a Laick spirituall Iurisdiction of Externall Court, whereby to heare and de∣termine any cause Ecclesiasticall. More distinctly thus: 1. Of Laik males. Dist. 96. Bene quidem. in gloss. verb. Laico. Non licuit Laico homini, sacer doti anathema dicere, vel excommuni∣care, iure suo; sed ex delegatione Papae, bene. A Laik man, could not lawfully, by his owne right or power, excommu∣nicate a Priest; but by, power delegated from the Pope, hee might well doe it. 2. Of Laik Females. Caus. 2. q. 5. ca. Mennam. in gloss. verb. Arbitrio. De∣legatur hic laico, spirituale negotium. The case was this; Menna a Bishop, was accused before the Pope of cer∣taine crimes, whom (after that by his oath hee had purged himselfe) the Pope dismissed, and absolued: notwithstanding, afterwards, the Pope committed to Brunichilda, Queen of France, full Iurisdiction Eccle∣siasticall, to conuent before her the said Bishop, for the said crimes, to purge himselfe with two other com∣purgator-bishops ioyned with him, by their oathes; so farre forth as she thought good; prouided, that shee did not exceede the extent of Ecclesiasticall Iuris∣diction; viz. to vrge him to his said purgation, or the exact manner thereof, by applying vnto him, hotte burning yron, or the like: for such corporall tortures,
and only such, the Pope in this Canon inhibited. All which is expresly set downe at large in the very text of the said Canon. Secondly, in more particular manner, that both Laik male Abbats, and also Laik femall Abbesses, are capeable of, and may, and doe, execute ordinary Iu∣risdiction Spirituall and Ecclesiasticall, viz. to excom∣municate, absolue, institute, suspend, visit, &c. All wch belong, ad Spirituale forum contentiosum. To the Spiritual Iurisdictiō of outward or contentious court: as appeareth by Extrauag. commun. De Praebendis. ca. Execrabilis. verb. visitare. in glossa. And first for Abbats. Decretal. de Praescriptionibus. Tit. 26. c. Auditis. Tā∣to tempore probantur per testes ab Abbatibus de Heuens∣cham, pleno iure possesse: vt videantur in eis, Episcopale ius legitime praescripsisse. Quod si constiterit, absoluatis Abbatem ab impetitione Episcopi, super Ecclesijs memo∣ratis, adiudicantes ill as Abbati, pleno iure subiectas, et Episcopo super ill is, silentium imponatis. Circa cognitionē quo{que} causarū matrimonialium, et Capellani suspensionē in praedicta villa, et inter dictum capellarū, vos super his, ius Episcopale adiudicetis eidem Abbati. The Abbats of Heuenscham seem lawfully to prescribe Episcopall Iuris∣diction in certaine Churches: if that be so, let the Abbat and not the Bishop, gouerne those Churches Pleno iure, that is, by right of Iurisdictiō, Spiritual, Ecclesiastical, E∣piscopall, euenin causes matrimoniall, suspensions, & in∣terdictions. The glosse of which Canon, §. Ius Epis∣copale; writeth thus: Hic manifeste patet quodiura E∣piscopalia praescribuntur, cognitio causarū matrimonialiū, tantū de iure communi spectat ad Iurisdictionē Episcopi,
quam praescribit Abbas. Hence it is manifest that Ab∣bats may prescribe Episcopall Iurisdiction, &c. Clementin. de reb. Eccle. non alienand. or. Monasteriorū. verb. Proprij. in. gloss: Abbates exempti habent Episcopa∣lem Iurisdictionem. Abbats exempt haue Episcopall Iuris∣diction. et cap. De statu Monachorū. ca. Attendentes. verb. Alia. in gloss. Illa ergo non corriget ordinarius loci, sed Ab∣bas, vel Prior, cui subsunt. In exempt Monasteries, let not the Ordinary of the place, but the Abbat, or Prior, correct faults done there. To be briefe: Abbats, by the Canon law, May Absolue an Excommunicate Monke: (and there∣fore excōmunicate him) Dist. 90. c. Si quis. verb. Prioris. in gloss. Abbas potest absoluere mona∣chum suum, inijcientem manus in monachum suum, vel alterius. May Dispense concerning Orders. 20. q. 4. Monachū. verb. Remittatur. in gloss. Abbas dispensare po∣test circa ordines. May Giue or confer the lesse orders. Dist. 69. Quoni∣am. verb. lect or is in gloss. Abbas minores or di∣nes hodie conferre possit. May Visite his subiects mediat and immediate. extra. commun. de cencibus c. vas. verb. Abbates in glossa. May Bless & cōsecrate Ecclesiastical things & persons. Sexti. de Priuilegijs. Tit. 7. ca. Abbates. Additi∣on. I. in glossa. Et faciunt haec pro Abbatibus qui benedicunt calices, patinas, vestes sacerdo∣tales, cruces et similia. Nam si benedicant per∣sonas, fortius et res.
According to the Canonists, not onely Abbats, but also Priors claustrall, in their absence, haue ordi∣nary Iurisdiction, Spiritual and Ecclesiasticall, as these moderne, Victorinus, Mansus, Auersanus, and Mona∣chus Cassinensis, the Abbat of Saint Sepherine at Naples, cap. 2. de. modo procedendi in Causis. Regula. N. 4. haue largely written and proued. When the Abbat is away, the Prior hath authoritie in Court both secret, and conten∣tious, to heare confessions, to visit &c. Specula. in Tit. de of∣fic. ordin. si. const. per text. in cap. Duo extra. eod. tit. Ab∣bas. in tract. de forma procedendi. in cap. Irrefragabili eod. tit. et in cap. Cum contingat. De foro competen: And is ordinary Iudge there; as Petrus Follerius in the last part of his practik criminall, hath clearely proued and for∣tified. Now touching Abbesses. I. Out of the Canon law. Decretal. de maior. et obed. Tit. 33. ca. Dilecta. verb. Iurisdictioni. in gloss. Abbatissa potest suspendere ab of∣ficio et beneficio, Monach as su as, et clericos suae Iurisdicti∣oni subiectos, secundum quod hic satis innuitur, si inobedi∣entes fuerint. Habet enim administrationem temporalium et spiritualium. Item ratione suae administrationis, post suam confirmationem potest conferre Ecclesias, et beneficia, et constituere clericos in Ecclesijs sui Monasterij, sicut Ab∣bates. Abbesses may suspend their Nunnes, & also clearks vvhich are vnder them, from office and benefice, if they be disobedient; for she hath administration of things spirituall and temporall therein: and by vertue of her administration, she may collate Churches and benefices, and institute clerks in the Churches of their Monastarie, as Abbats may doe. Out of the text of this Canon. Dilecta. Panormitan
noteth, that an Abbesse is capable of spirituall Iurisdiction, and may exercise that Iurisdiction ouer her Nunnes. Decretal. De statu Monachorū. Tit. 35. cap. 8. Ea quae. Haec autem omnia etiam in Monasterijs quae non ha∣bent Abbates proprios, sed Priores: nec non in Monasie∣rijs monialium oad articulos Abbatissis, et monialibus cō∣gruentes praecipimus obseruari. We will haue all these things obserued in the Monasteries of Monks and Nunnes. In which Constitution, because it speakes expresly of administration, as well spirituall as temporall; as well of Abbots, as of Abbesses: by that very extension the Abbesse is equalled with the Abbot, in the admi∣nistration of his Monastery, as well spirituall, as tem∣porall. Whereupon Panormitan noreth, Quod Dispo∣situm in Monachis, et Abbatibus, extenditur ad Abbatis∣sas et Moniales. That vvhich belongeth to Abbats in their Monasteries, appertaines to Abbesses in theirs. The same Panormitan, in Decretal. Tit. 10. De his quae fiunt à praelat. sine consens. capital. ca. Contine∣batur. n. 4. writeth expresly, That an Abbesse hath as free administration of her Monastery, as an Abbat hath. But an Abbat hath ordinary spirituall Iurisdiction in his Mo∣nastery, as all Canonists agree. Flaminius Parisius, De Resig. Benef. 1.3. q. 12. n. 3.5. 8. et 14. proueth at large, That an Abbesse may haue a Praelature, and dignity, with administration, and a right to visit, euen without the Monastery; which right she may al∣so commit to others. And the Bishop Bitontine, very late∣ly holdeth and proueth the same in his works dedica∣ted to Pope Clement 8. See the very Text. Sext. de E∣lect. ca. Indemnitatibus, prouing the same. Barthol. in l. 1. cod. de dign. lib. 12. n. 4. saith that
Abbesses haue dignity, with administration, not onely ouer their Nunnes, but also without, for that they haue Castles, &c. as Abbats haue dignity, with administration. Sext. de Priuilegijs. ca. Apostolicae. And therefore, by a ruled case among the Doctors, grounded vpon ca. Atten∣dentes in Clemētin.de stat. Monachor. they ought to vi∣sit, or to commit the visitation to others. Extra: con.ca. Vas electionis. Out of these, & the like, Steph. d' Aluin, ca. 2. sect. 12. of the power of Abbesses, concludeth; that Abbesses & Prioresses claustrall, by a certaine right, constitutions, and rule of S. Benedict, from whence all the rest, in a manner, are drawne, as also by custome, haue authority and power ordinary, spirituall, and Ecclesiasticall, ouer those that are vnder them. And cap. 3. sect. 8. That Abbesses, & Prio∣resses, ex cardin. concil. 17. cal. 4. bj. cap. Dilecta, and the Gloss.adioyned, haue all administration, as well spiri∣tuall, as temperall, of those monasteriall Nuns; saue only of those things whereof a woman is vneapable, to weet, of Order. Now, touching the power which Abbesses haue to excommunicate. Because Tho. Aqui. in 4. sent. dist. 18. q. 2. art. 2. in corpore, writeth thus; Excōmunicatio non est actus cla∣nis directe, sed magis exterior is iudicij: Excommunication is not an act of the key directly, but rather of external court. Nauarre, lib. quinto, consil. 1. de sentent. Excom. con∣cludeth; that a vvoman by priuiledge, may also excom∣municate. Tabiena and Arnilla, verbo Abbatissae. nu. 3. be∣sides Panormitan, Astensis, and others, That an Abbess may cōmand the Priests, her subiects, to excōmunicate their rebellious & obstinat Nunnes, or to absolue them.
Whereupon, Steph. d'Aluin, cap. 3. sect. 12. conclu∣deth thos: Proinde omnis habens Iurisdictionem Ecclesia∣sticam, et si non habeat clauem ordinis, potest excommunica∣re ex D. Thoma. Therefore all hauing Ecclesiasticall Iu∣risdiction, may excommunicate, according to Tho. Aquin. Now, that they haue Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction, wit∣nes Panormitun, in ca. De stat. Monachor. Iason, con∣sil. l 40. lib. 2. Flaminius, deresig. lib. 3. q. 12. n. 12. say∣ing: Dispositum iur is in Abbate, habere locum in Abba∣tissis. What right Abbats haue, Abbesses haue the same. And againe, Panormitan, Arnilla, & Flaminius write, That Abbesses exempt, haue right or iurisdiction to visit the places, and persons subiect to them; and that they haue Clerks subiect vnto them, Pleno iure, that is, vnder their gouernment, as well Ecclesiasticall, as Temporall. Now say Card. Parisius, and Flaminius: Out of the right to visit, or from visiting by her selfe, or her deputie, followeth her Iurisdiction, to depriue, depose, correct, pu∣nish, and chastise. And to haue them subiect to her, Ple∣no iure, by full right, doth plainely import Iurisdiction, De∣priuation, Visitation, and Correction. To conclude this point: If priuat men and vvomen be capable of Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction; If Abbesses haue and execute the same, in collating Benefices, instituting, su∣spending, depriuing, visiting, iudging crimes, and imposing and receiuing purgations of Bishops; lastly, excommunica∣ting, and absoluing; according to Popish Canons, Canonists, Custome, and practise among them: with what face doth this Iesuit, or any other Papist, scandalize our Kings, or Queenes, for taking, or vs for ascribing vnto them, Su∣preme Ecclesi. Iurisdiction: yet not that, wherby our Kings or Queens may institute Clerks, excōmunicate,
or absolue them: oras King Iames, and late Queen E∣lizabeth haue in their writings published to the whole world. Therefore, most impudently false is the Iesuit heere, asserting that Queen Elizabeth had power to ex∣communicate. Touching Suarez, let this Iesuit know, that Steph. D' Aluin, hath refuted in this point, a farre greater, & better learned man then Suarez is, to weet, Franciscus a Victoria, in his Relect. 2. de potest. Ecclesiae; and shewed the practise of the Church to be, as heere hath beene declared. Christian Reader, I haue beene much heere in this point, because it is of that moment, and so remarkable: for recompence, in replying to the remainder of Be∣canes Examivation, I promise to bee short; the rather, because in truth, it is but froth, not deseruing any o∣ther answere at all, but that which is already set down in my English Concord. ❧ Becans Iarre. VI. Question. Whether the King of his owne Authority can assemble, or call together Councells? 1. NOvv follow the Iarres and debates of our Aduer∣saries, concerning the Offices and Functions of the Kings Primacy, and they are sixe in number, which may be disputed of. The first is, of assembling, or calling together of Synods. The second, of enacting of Ecclesi∣asticall
lawes. The third, of conferring or bestowing of Benefi∣ces. The fourth, of creating and deposing of Bishops. The fift, is about Excommunication. The sixt and last, is about the de∣cision and determining of Controuersies. The question then is, vvhether these offices belong to the Kings Primacy? I will speake a vvord of each in order. 2. First, it may bee demaunded, vvhether the King by ver∣tue of his Primacy, may of his owne authority, call or assemble to∣gether Synods, & therein sit as chiefe & head? This was certain∣ly perswaded that it might be done, in the time of King Henry, K. Edward, and Queene Elizabeth: but now vnder King Iames, the matter is called into question. M. Salclebridge pag. 121. af∣firmeth, that be can dot it, in these vvords: Christiani Princi∣pes in Regnis suis cum laude, propria auctoritate Synodos conuocarunt, Constitutiones condiderunt, causas audierunt & cognouerunt. Christian Princes haue with great praise as∣sembled Synods by their owne authority, in their Kingdoms, haue made Constitutions, heard and examined causes &c. And again, pag. 146. Rex Angliae potest Synodos indicere omnium Or∣dinum Oecumenicas, et in ijsdem praesidere. The King of England, saith he, may assemble Generall Councells of all Or∣ders or degrees, and therein sit as President or Chiefe, &c. And pag. 155. hee saith in like manner, Reges Angliae suprema sua authoritate, deiure, Synodos conuocarunt. The Kings of England, haue by their owne supreme authority, and by right, assembled Synods, &c. 3. Now Ma, Tooker in this point is very variable: one vvhile contradicting himselfe, another while others. And this is manifest out of the diuerse testimonies he produceth. The first is pag. 37. where hee hath these words: A quibus magis aequum est indici Concilia, quàmabillis, penes quos semper fuit au∣thoritas ea congregandi? Cùm autem communiter triplex ponisoleat Concilium, Generale, Prouinclale & Dioecesanū; Concilium Generale solius Papae iussu celebrari vultis, sed nequeillud nisi ab Imperatoribus & Regibus simul consenti∣entibus hodie indici debet. Prouinciale à Metropolitano cum suis Suffraganein. Dioecesanum ab Episcopo cum Cu∣ratis,
Rectoribus, & Clericia Dioeceseos, &c. By whō is it more fit that Councells should be assembled, then by those in whose pow∣er hath alwaies authority beene to call them together? For wher∣as commonly there be three sorts of Councells, Generall, Prouin∣ciall, and of a particular Diocesse: the Generall Councell, you vvill haue to be celebrated onely by commandement of the Pope; but yet not so neither now adayes, vnlesse Emperours and Kings doe agree therevnto also. A Prouinciall Councell is to bee as∣sembled by the Metropolitan and his Suffragans: that of the Diocesse by the Bishoppe thereof, together vvith the Cu∣rats, Rectors, and Clerks of the same Bishopricke, &c. Out of vvhich testimonie vves may gather, that the King of Eng∣land cannot assemble a Councell of kis ovvne authoritie. Not a Generall, because that belongeth to the common consent of Kings and Emperours. Not a Prouinciall, because that per∣taineth to the Metropolitan. Not of the Diccesse, because that belongeth to the Bishopot thereof. What then, I pray you, is left vnto the King? 4. Another testimonie heereof is out of the same Ma. Too∣ker, pag. 41. in these vvords: Abundè liquetex Concilijs ip∣sis, & historia Ecclesiastica, Prouincialia Concilia & Natio∣nalia ab Imperatoribus ac Regibus fuisse congregata. It is aboundantly manifest out of the Councells themselues, and the Ecclesiasticall Histories, that Prouinciall and Nationall Coun∣cells haue beene assembled by Emperours and Kings, &c. This now is plainely repugnant to his former testimony. For there hee affirmeth, that Prouinciall Councells are tobe assembled by the Metropolitans thereof: heere bee saith, that they must be assem∣bled by Kings and Emperours. There, is distinguished onelie a threefold Councell, to weet, Generall, Prouinciall, and that of the, Diocesse: heere now, is added a fourth, to weet, Nationall. 5. His third testimony is set downs pag. 42. vvhere he pro∣poseth this question: Quoigitur iure tantam sibi porestatem arrogat Pontifex solus? Num diuino? By what nighe then, I pray you, doth the Popechallenge vnto himselfe alone so great power? Doth hee doe it by diuine right? &c. And a little after hee addeth: Erat Apostolorum omnium, non vnius tantum∣modo,
& indicere Concilium, & statuere cum verborum so∣lennitate; Visumest Spiritui sancto & Nobis, &c. It belonged to all the Apostles, not to one alone, to assemble a Councell, and vvith solemnitie of vvords to ordaine; It seemes good vnto the Holy Ghost, and vs, &c. As if hee vvould say; That as by di∣uine right, not S. Peter alone, but all the Apostles together with equall power did assemble the first Councell at Ierusalem, and therein decreed that law, about eating of bloud and strangled meates: so in like manner, by diuine right, not the Pope alone, but all Bishops, with equall power, must assemble Councells, and de∣cree Ecclesiasticall lawes. Surely, if it be so, then without doubt it follovves, that the power to call or assemble Councells, doth not belong by the law of God, to secular Kings and Princes, but to the Apostles, and their successors, &c. 6. His fourth testimony is pag. 63. vvhere hee saith: Mix∣tum autem ius, & resultans ex vtroque, & iure Regio & E∣piscopali, est Legum sanctio & Synodorum indictio, & praesidendi in ijs praerogatiua, & controuersiatum decisio, aliorumque actuum, qui his finitimi sunt exercitium: quae ferè ab origine Primatus Regij descendunt, & communi∣cantur Sacerdotibus, &c. The decreeing or enacting of lawes, the assembling of Synodes, and Prerogatiue of sitting therein as chiefe or head, as also the exercise of all other offices in this kind, is a certaine mixt Right, proceeding from both Kingly and Episcopall power: vvhich things doe in a manner come downe, or descend from the origen of the Kings Primacy, and are com∣municated or imparted vnto Priests, &c. This now againe, as you see, is contrary to that vvhich hee said next before. For there bee vvill needes haue the assembly of Sy∣nodes or Coūcells to belong by diuine right to the Apostles: beer, for sooth, hee vvill haue the same chiefely to belong to Kings, and from them to be deriued vnto Bishops. These things doe not a∣gree one with another.
English Concord. HItherto, the contention hath been Gramma∣ticall about words and names: 1. Whether that supreme gouernment of the King in the Church of England, which all our Writers doe pro∣fesse, ought to bee called Primatus, or Suprematus; Primacy, or Supremacy? 2. Whether he that holdeth that supreme gouernment in the Church, of that his Primacy may be called Primate of the Church, or Head of the Church, or the onely Supreme Gouernour of the Church? 3. Whether that Supreme gouernment, or Iurisdiction, which is in all Ecclesiasticall matters, and aboue all Ecclesiasticall persons, ought to be called the Supreme gouernment of the Church, or the Supreme Iuris∣diction Ecclesiasticall? These foolish and vnlearned questions,2. Tim. 2.23. Saint Paul forbiddeth, vnworthy of Diuines: but, as it should seeme, not of a Iesuit. Let Becane tell me ingenuous∣ly, whether these six offices only appertaine to the Pa∣pall Primacy? Or whether there be not sixtie times six which may be called into question? Let him tell me, whether these offices doe properly pertaine to the Pri∣macy of Peter, and so to the Bishop of Rome? Let him shew mee, where it is written; or that Pe∣ter had any Primacy at all: or that this his Primacy is contained or defined within the bounds and limits of these duties? or that euer Peter did exercise such offi∣ces as Primats of the Church: That is to say, let him manifest out of the Scriptures, what Councell Peter
summoned as Primate of the Church; what Ecclesiasticall lawes he made; what benefices hee collated; what Bishops he created, or deposed; of what controuersies hee was su∣preme iudge. These things if the Iesuite cannot shew, he is a pratler and no disputer: for all, yea the meanest of Bishops in the kingdome doe excommunicate; are therefore all those Bishops, Primates and Supreme go∣uernours in the vniuersall Church throughout the whole kingdome? our question is of one only Supreme gouernour of the whole Church in the kingdom. Make exception but of Excommunication alone, and Hainri∣cus by many expresse authentike writings, hath de∣monstrated, that Christian Princes haue with singu∣ler commendation, 1. Called Councells. 2. Made Eccle∣siasticall lawes. 3. Conferred benefices, although this see∣meth too grosse and greasie, whereof to make a part of Primacy. 4. Created, and deposed Bishops. 5. Taken vp and ended controuersies. But so granted, that no mortall man can be iudge of all controuersies, especially of faith. That Christian Princes of their owne authoritie, and with commendation haue summoned Councells; both Hainric and Dr. Tooker do expresly write in plain words. Neither is Dr. Tooker in this point either a∣gainst him self, or against Hainric. When that first coun∣cell was assembled at Ierusalem, whether did raigne Christian, or Pagan Princes? how idle is this? when the question is only about Christian Princes. what; is there no difference here betwixt a Iesuite and a Sophi∣ster? But if Peter was then the sole Primate of the Church, why did he not alone call that Synode? and why did Iames sit President in that Councell? what meane these words? Visumest nobis, it seemed good vn∣to
vs: and not rather it seemed good to Peter; or alone, or with the addition of Primate; or after this manner, it seemed good to our holy father Pope Peter, & after him to the residue of the Apostles and Elders. If Peter, or the Pope, bee Supreme iudge of all controuersies, what meane these words? Visum est spiritui Sancto, It seemed good to the Holy-ghost: and not rather it seemed good to Pope Peter, the Supreme iudge of all controuersies. This is a great mysterie: as if no mortall man but only the Holy-ghost, could be Supreme iudge of all controuer∣sies in the Church. And why may not prouinciall Coun∣cells becalled by the Metrapolitan,Nouel. con∣stit. 123. leg. 13. et 133 Franc. and Dioecesan, by the Bishops by vertue of Ecclesiasticall lawes made by Christian Princes? especially seeing (as Dr. Tooker rightly affirmeth) their indiction primarily appertay∣neth to the King, and from him may be deriued to the Bishops. These things doe excellently agree together. BECAN. Exam.Pag. 152 YOu say our English Writers touching the Kings Su∣premacy, differ only in words or names. An ingenuous confession: whence I conclude, his Supremacy to be verball, and titular only, and not reall. Yet the Bishop of Rochester died for not acknowledging it. And others for the same causes, are imprisoned; which makes you labour so much, to bring asleepe, or to extinguish, this Nominall Iarre. Dr. HARRIS. Reply. I Say, as I haue aboundantly proued in this Replie, and in my English Concord, that all our English-Protestant-Writers doe with full and vniforme consent, agree in the reall, solide, and substantiall Su∣preme
Gouernment of the King in all Causes, and ouer all persons, Ecclesiasticall, or Ciuill within his Dominions, next vnder Christ. Further, that all the said Writers sully agree in the verie name of that Supreme Gouernment, to weet, the English name, Supremacy. Moreouer, that all the saide Writers, in the sense of this reall thing, and of the name of this reall thing, call the same Supreme Gonernment, in Latine, Primatum, Primacy: and Iu∣risdictonem Spiritualem vel Ecelesiasticam; Spirituall or Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction. Againe, that all the saide Writers, call, and ac∣knowledge the King to bee reallie, Supreme Gouer∣nour, in all Causes, and ouer all Persons, Ecclesiasticall or Ciuill vvithin his Dominions, next vnder Christ. And in this sense, all the said VVriters call the King, Supreme Primate and Head of this Church, as hath been shewed expreslie out of their owne writings. Whereby appeaeth, that in very truth, here is no English Iarre among our Protestant Writers, Reall, or Nominall. And so, these figge leaues, wherewith Becane endeauoureth to couer the shameful nakednes of the Popish sort, denying to acknowledge the Kings Supremacy aforesaid, are remoued and taken cleane away. But alas for for this seely Iesuit, who is confined now, in his English Iarre, to Iarre Nominall only, and not Reall: and hath no other twigge to hang by, but this scattered consequent, viz. The Protestant English Writers expresse the selfe same substantiall thing, to weet, the Kings Supremacy, with va∣rietie of names, and phrases.
Therefore the thing it selfe is not reall, but nominall. Our Academian school-boyes, would, & deserued∣lie might, hisse this Iesuite with his consequent out of the Vniuersitie Schools, as exceeding foolish and chil∣dish. Thus rather would the argument proceede; The Iarres of some Writers, about a thing or matter, are Nominal only, and not Reall. Therefore their consent is reall, and the thing it selfe Reall. Touching Rochester-Bishop, inculcated by this Iesuite; our King in his Apology, pag. 121. according to the publike Records, writeth thus: Roffensis in carcerem coniect us est, priusquam in iu∣dicium capitis de Primatu Pontificis vocaretur: idque, partim quòd tardior esset ad successionem Regiae prolis confirmandam, cui iam antea Regni Ordines subscripse∣rant: partim quod implicatus eo negotio tenebatur, quod de sancta Virgine Cantiana ill is temporibus forte incide∣rat, adeo vt propter elatas Pseudoprophetiae illius frau∣des, reus iudicatus sit Maiestatis, ob non detectam coniu∣rationem. The Bishop of Rochester vvas imprisoned, and condemned, not onely for acknowledging the Popes Supremacy: but also, for gaine saying the lawfull succes∣sion of the Kings progeny; and for concealing high treason against the King. And why might not the Bishop of Rochester then, or why may not the Popish ones here now, in like case, be imprisoned or put to death, for treason against their Soueraign? Who can denie that it is treason, for any subiects, to deny their Soueraigne to be their lawfull Prince? But, since euery lawfull Christian Prince, is Supreme gouernour of his owne subiects in
things Spirituall and Temporall, or, which is all one, is Custos vtriusque Tabulae, Keeper of both Tables: to de∣ny that of their Soueraigne, is to deny him to be their lawfull Prince. Assuredly, to acknowledge the Popes Supremacy here, as now it is defined, and conuerted from Spirituall to Secular; is to acknowledge the King to hold his kingdome of the Pope in Chiefe, and that also at his will and pleasure, as it is plaine by their Canon law, and Canonists: yea, to hold their liues al∣so, as Tenants of Life, at the Popes will, by Iesuiticall doctrine, as before in this Reply, and in Becano-Bacu∣lus was expresly shewed, and prooued demonstra∣tiuelie. And what is this else, but apparantly to denie the King, and to assert the Pope to be their Soueraigne Lord and King indeed? And is not this high treason in the highest degree? why then may not such lawful∣ly be imprisoned, condemned, and executed, as Arch∣traitors? At least, why may not our King require an oath (and this saide oath) of his subiects against the Pope vsurping his right:2. King. ca. 11. v. 4 as well as Iehoiada the high Priest did of the men of Iuda, for Ioas their King, against Athalia that vsurped his state? Queene Elizabeth, in her Explanation of the Supremacy, caused these words to be printed, and published to all her subiects, viz. That if any her subiects, would accept the oath of Supremacy, with this interpretation, sense, & mea∣ning; viz. That the K. or Q. Maiesty of England vnder God, is to haue soueraignetie and rule, ouer all manner of persons, borne within her Maiesties Realmes, Dominions and Countries, of what estate, Ecclesiasticall or Temporall, soeuer they be, so as no
forraine Power shall, or ought to haue, any superio∣rity ouer them: her Maiesty is well pleased, to accept euery such in that behalfe, as her good and obedient subiects; and shall acquite them of all manner penal∣ties, contained in the said Act against such, as shall pe∣remptorily, or obstinately refuse to take the same oath. The like interpretation of the oath of Supremacy, holdeth now vnder our K. Iames, & was of force vnder King Edward 6. and King Henry 8: whereby it appea∣reth, that to imprison, or execute any here, for not ta∣king the oath of Supremacy; is all one, as to imprison & execute Traytors for not acknowledging their Kings Soueraigntie; and for acknowledging the Popes Soue∣raignetie ouer their King, in his prerogatiues Royall, Crownes, Kingdoms, and life it selfe. BECAN. Exam.Page 154 YOu aske whether those 6. offices, viz. to call Councels; make Ecclesiasticall lawes, confer Benefices, create & depose Bishops, excommunicate the stubborne, & iudge controuersies Ecclesiasticall; did properly belong to Peters Primacy? or which of whose offices hoe exercised as Pri∣mate? But this is not to the matter. The Question is here, whether your Writers agree that your king, as supreme Gouernor, may do those offices? I say they Iarre therein. Do you help them? Touching the power total Councels, D. Tooker iarres with him∣selfe & with Hainric. For Tooker saith that the calling of Coun∣cels doth primarily belong to Kings, and from them is deriued to Bishops. And yet he saith: That the Apostles called Councels by Diuine right. Therefore not from Kings right. Therfore by Di∣uine right, the Apostles successors, that is, Bishops, and not Kings, haue power to call Councels. And this is against Hainric and Tooker himselfe.
Dr. HARRIS Reply. OVR gratious King Iames in his booke of A∣pology &c. vindicated and proued his right∣full Supreme Power, or Gouernment in all Causes, and ouer all Persons Ecclesiasticall within his Dominions. Vpon that, this Iesuite Becane inferred, That then our King had power to call Councells: To make Ecclesiasticall lawes: To create and depose Bishops: To conferre benefices: To iudge Ecclesiasticall controuer∣sies; otherwise, that he neither was, nor could be Pri∣mate or Head of the Church, because all those were offi∣ces properly belonging to the primacy. Hainric, in his Be∣cano-Baculus, denied that his consequent, as Dr. Harris in his English Concord here doth: because their chiefe Primate, and Head Pope-Peter, did neuer (as Primate) challenge to himselfe, or execute any of those offices; and for that neither in Scripture, nor any Ancient Fa∣ther, is found any of those offices properlie to belong to Peter, as Primate, or Head of the Church. The Ie∣suits forces being too weake to grapple with Hainric therein; Hainric tooke vp Becane his owne description. And thence irrefragably concluded, our King to bee Primate and Head, that is, Supreme Gouernour of this Church. Which is all one, as if he had taken from Be∣cane his owne cudgell, and beaten him soundly black and blew therewith, as became Becano-Baculus to do. Yet Christian Reader, consider what iust cause Hainric had, and I haue here, to vrge the Iesuite, to shew, especially in this particular, what generall Coun∣cell
cell Peter did call, as Primate; or what Scripture or An∣cient Father did attribute to Peter, as Primate, any power to call generall Councells. All the Iesuites in the world, with all the learning and reading they haue, can not shew it. Whence necessarily, by Popish rule, it will follow, that Peter was not Supreme Primate of the whole Church; and consequently, that the Pope is not Supreme Primate of the said Church. On the other side, our Writers haue, out of the Scriptures, and Ecclesiastical Histories demonstrated, that the most religious; both, Kings vnder the Law, and Emperours vnder the Gospell, haue called general Councels, for which they are, generally, greatly, and worthily commended. The Iesuite knowing this to be most true, and not able to answere it, runnes into his starting hole, and saith, that it is not to the matter; when inceed it sticks in the very bowels of the matter, and hangs so fixedly in the Popes liuer, as no Iesuiticall Dictamne can draw it forth. In this one point of Regall Supremacy, the Iesuite can not produce any two of our Writers, who doe not fully agree. As for Hainric and Dr. Tooker, they both write vniformally, that it belongeth to orthodoxall Kings and Emperors, when any such are, to call Coun∣cells. Here therefore the Iesuite, being at a non-plus, and brought to his shifts, faineth a Iarre betweene Dr. Tooker and himselfe. Well, then belike when Bel∣larmine in his writings differeth from himselfe, that is, at least an hundred times, those discords must be sti∣led, Popish Iarres: but how doth Becane proue that Dr. Tooker is in this point against himselfe? Forsooth be∣cause he faith, that the Apostles (viz. when there was
no Christian Emperour) by diuine right, called a Councell. Then the argument runneth thus: All the Apostles ioyntly in time of Persecution, lawfullie called one Councell onely, of some few persons within one Citie. Therfore, in time of Peace, not Christian Emperours, but onely, and all, Bishops in the Christi∣an vvorld, ioyntly must call all generall Councells, throughout the vvhole Christian vvorld. What cable, strong enough, and long enough, can the Iesuit get, from all the Iesuiticall crue, so to tye these together, that the consequence may hold for good? For heere is a manifold Non sequitur; 1. From one particular act of Apostles, to a generall rule of all Bishops. 2. From times of Persecution, to times of Peace. 3. From times when there were no Christian Emperours to call Councells, vnto times when there were some to call, and indeed did call, all & euery one of the most renowned generall and orthodoxal Coun∣cells, to weet, the first six of them. Becane dare not say, that the 4. first generall Coun∣cells (which Pope Gregory the great esteemed as the 4. Euangelists) were vnlawfully, or against diuine right, indicted or called; yet were they all called by Empe∣rours, and not by Popes. viz. The first Nicen Councell, by Constantine the great: The first Councell of Con∣stantinople, by Theodosius the first: The first Coūcell of Ephesus, by the Emperor Theodosius the second: The first Councell of Chalcedon, by the Emperour Martian. Vnto which Councells, the Emperours by their Let∣ters, called as well the Popes of Rome, as other Patri∣archs.
If Pope Leo the first, had knowne any such diuine right, of calling generall Councells to be in him, and not in the Emperour, hee would neeuer have stooped so basely, as suppliant vpon his knees, to entreat the Emperour, and the Empresse, by himselfe, and by o∣thers, to call a generall Coūcell: for what else had this beene, but treacherously to request the Emperour to bereaue him of his Diuine right (as Becane heere calls it) and by usurped power, to be practised by the call of generall Councells, to extinguish that Diuine right, & Popish Primacy. That is, to extinguish their Catholick faith. For now the Papall Supremacie, is the very ca∣pitall and maine point, of their Catholick faith. To shut vp this chapter, & question: Becane sitting vpon his Cathedrall Tripos, should heere determine these two Questions following. First, whether Bishops onely, or Archbishops one∣lie, or onely Patriarches (for these may not bee con∣founded as one and the same) be the Apostles succes∣sors? Or whether Patriarchs be successors of some of the Apostles; and Archbishops of other-some: and Bishops successors of the lowest, or third rank? And whether one kind onely of these successors, or all three kinds, may call generall Councells? Secondly, whether all the Bishops in the Christian world, as the Apostles successors, must ioyntly, as all the Apostles did, call generall Councells? or (because that would now proue too-too troublesome) how ma∣ny of them may serue that turne?
❧ Becans Iarre. VII. Question. Whether the King can enact Ecclesiasticall lawes, or no? 1. It is cleere, that K. Henry the 8. did, as well by himselfe, as by his Vicar Generall (Cromwell) enact Ecclesiasti∣call Lawes. For so saith Doctor Sanders, in his booke of the Schisme of England: His diebus vigilantissimus hic Ecclesiae Pastor Henricus quo in posterum sciretur, quae cui rite nupta eet, legem ediderat perpetuam de Nupt.js, Comitiorum etiam auctoritate confirmatam, qua statueba∣tur, vt si quae personae in Leuitico non prohibitae, solo con∣sensu perverba de praesenti, matrimonium, nulla carnis co∣pula subsecuta, contraxerint: eae verò ambae postea, vel ea∣rum altera nuptijs cum altera persona in Leuitico non pro∣hibita contractis, carnali copula easdom consummauerint, hae posteriores quas firmasset copula, non priores illae, quas solus consensus statuisset, ratae atque legitimae haberentur: adco, vt cùm olim iuris Gentium fuisset Regula,Nuptias non concubitw, sed consensus facit; iam deinceps Henrici regula effe coeperit, Nupttas non consensus, sed concubitus facit. Etta∣men ipse Legis-lator contra suam ipsius regulam vxorem Annam Cliuensem, cuius nuptias, non solo consensu, sed sep∣tem etiam mensium concubitu firmauerat, eo solùm prae∣textu reiecit, ipsaque viuente aliam superinduxit, quòd alteri, nescio cui, consensum antea praebuisse fingeretur. Huius er∣go legis tantopere postea puduit ipsos Potestantes, vt mor∣tuo Henrico, eam ipsi reuocaucrint, atque irritam fecerint, &c. In these daies, the most vigilant Pastor of the Church, K. Henry, that it might be knowne to posterity, what woman vvere
lawfully maried to another, enacted aperpetuall law concerning Marriage, authorizing the same by publick Decree of Parlia∣ment: vvherin it vvas ordained, that if any persons, not prohi∣bited in the Leuiticall law, should contract martage by only con∣sent, and by vvords de praesenti, no carnaell copulation follow∣ing the same; and that the said persons, or either of them should after vvard contract vvith another person not prohibited in the Leuiticall law, and consummate the same by carnall copulation; that then these later contracts, vvhich vvere consummated by carnall copulation, not the former, that were agreed vpon by onely consent, should be accounted for good and lawfull. In so much, that vvhereas the rule of the law of Nations in old time vvas, That consent, not carnall copulation did make the marriage lawfull; now heere after by the law of K. Henrie, it began to be arule, That carnall copulation, not consent did make mariage lawfull. And yet for all this, the law-maker him∣solfe K. Henry, did, against his owne proper rule and law, reiect Anne of Cleeue his vvife, vvhose mariage vvas not onely con∣tracted by consent adone, but consummated also by seauen moneths carnall copulation, vpon this onely pretence, that shee had giues her consent to another before. I know not vvhom; and vpon this fiction he maried another, shee yet remaining aliue. And of this law afterward the Protestants themselues vvere so much ashamed, that after K. Henries death, they recalled, and disannulled the same. 2. Concerning his Vicar generall (Cromwell) thus writcth also the said Doctor Sanders in the same booke. Septembri mē∣se, authoritatesua Vicaria, Canones quosdam Ecclesiasticos quos Iniunctiones vocabat, sigillo Vicariatus sui munitos Ar∣chiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus & reliquo Clero prae∣scripsit; in quibus praeter caetera, iubebantur Parochi sub gra∣uissimis poenis, vt Orationē Dominicā cum salutatione An∣gelica, Symbolum item fidei, & decem Decalogi praecepta, aliaque huiusmodi, Anglicè in posterum in Ecclesijs doce∣rent. In the moneth of Septemb. K. Henries Vicar Generall, by the authoritie of his Office, prescribedcertain: Ecclesiastical Ca∣nons, which he called Iniunctions, signed vvith the seale of his
Office of Vicar Generall, to the Archbishops, Bishoppes, Abbots, and the rest of the Clergie: vvher in among other things, the Pa∣stors of Churches vvere commaundd, vnder most setere punish∣ment hereafter to readin their Churches, the Lords prayer, the Aue Mary, the Creed, & ten Commandements in English, &c. 3. Now, our English Aduersaries, that vvite in these dates of the Kings Supremacy, doc not agree in this poynt. For that some of them say, that the enacting or decreeing of Eccle∣siasticall lawes, doth by diuine Right belong vnto Bishops; others say, that it belongeth to Kings and Emperours. The first apinion holdeth Marster Tooker. pag. 42. of his booke, where be saith, that the Apostles, in the first Councell at Ierusalem did enact this Ecclesiasticall law: Visum est Spiritui Sancto & nobis, nihil vltra imponere vobis oneris nisi haec necessaria: vt ab∣stineatis vos ab immolatis simulachrorū, & sanguine, & sus∣socato. It hath seemed good vnto the holy Ghost, and to vs, to lay no further burthen vpon you, then these necessary things: that you abstaine from the things immolated to Idols, and from bloud, and that vvhich is strangled, &c. And this, saith hee, the Apo∣postles did by diuineright. The other opinion holdeth Master Thomson, pag. 80. where he affirmeth, that Bishops, and Coun∣cells cannot enact or decree any Ecclesiasticall law, which hath the force of lavv, vnlesse Kings and Emperours consent there∣vnto. His vvords are these: Decreta Conciliorum & Pa∣trum, Ecclesiasticis Censuris, &  tantùm stetliIent, nisi legum vim Caesarea auraipsis afflasser. The Decrees of the Councells & of the Fathers, had been held but onely for eccle∣siasticall censures, and penalties, vnlesse the Emperours fauour had imparted the force of lawes vnto the said Decrees, &c. 4. Heere now the Iarre is euident. For without doubt, that ecclesiasticall law, vvhich the Apostles decreed, had the force of a law: for that so mush is gathered out of these vvords; Visum est, nihil vltra imponere vobis oneris, nisi haec neces∣saria. It hath seemed good, to lay no further burthē vpon you, then these necessary things, &c. But this Ecclesiasticall law had not it force frō any fauor of the Emperor, seeing that neither Tyberius, nor Pilate, nor Herod, nor any other secular Prince, which thē li∣ued
did by his fauour, authorize the force of the law; but that it came from the Apostles themselues. For that they, by their Apostolicall authoritie and power, which they had reciued from Christ, did decree, and promulgate that lavv. And the same power and au∣thoritie haue Bishops now adaies, not Kings, nor Emperours. English Concord.Pag. 48. DIstinguish but the times (as St. Augustine tea∣cheth you) namely, the times of the Chur∣ches peace, wherein raigned Christian Prin∣ces; and the times of persecution, wherin Pagan Kings had the Soueraignty) and you shall rightly vnderstand the Scriptures. Of the peaceable times of the Church so writeth Dr. Tooker, pag. 42. It belonged to King Da∣uid, Salomon, Iehoshophat, and Iosias, to giue lawes to the Leuites, and to the whole congregation of Israel. And in the same place he writeth again of the times of persecution: Erat Apostolorum omnium, &c. It vvas not one, but all the Apostles, which both called the Councell, and decreed vvith like solemnity of these words Visumest Spiritui sancto, et nobis. It seemed good to the holy Ghost, and to vs. Ma. Thomson (speaking of this matter) doth not de∣nie that the lame Apostolicall law had any force, with∣out the fauour of Caesar, as though there had neuer beene law in the Church, vvithout the aforsaid ap∣probation of the Emperour; but onely, that with∣out it, they had no force vnder paine of corporall punishment: as is most plaine by the tenor of his vvords.
So that heere is no Iarre or dissension among the English Writers, as hee affirmeth; but onely a drea∣ming dorage of the Iesuit, who childishly sporteth himselfe, with a fallacy of Equinocation; especially, when hee endeuoureth to match in equall ranke, the lawes and Canons of Bishops, with the lacred decrees and Constitutions of the Apostles. Well wrote Saint Augustine:DNur. et Grana. c. 61. I am bound to consent to the holy Scriptures (of the which sort are the decrees of the Apostles) without all refusall. And in another place; Iread other Writers,Epist. 19. ad Hiero. Dist. 9. Egooht. how much soeuer they excell in holinesse or learning; so, as I doe not therefore thinke it truth, because they thought so; but be∣cause they perswade mee by other canonicall Authors, or by probable reasons, not differing from truth. And against Faustus:Lib. 11. ca. 5. We must read this kind of lear∣ning (such as are the writings of the holy Fathers, and Doctors) non cum credendi necessitate, sed cum libertate iudicandi, not as bound to belieue them, but as free to iudge them. And vnto this purpose he writeth in another place: Neither vvill I obiect the Councell of Nice vnto thee,Cont Max∣inn. l. 5. c. 14. neither must thou obiect the Councell of Ariminum vnto mee: let matter vvith matter, and reason dispute vvith reason, out of the authorities of holy Scriptures. The Iesuit, I hope, will not deny, that all the Apo∣stolicall Sanctions vvere giuen by Diuine Inspitati∣on: and dareth hee affirme so much of all Ecclesiasti∣call Canons of Bishoppes, yea though the Popes Ho∣linesse haue breathed vpon them? yea, of the Coun∣cell of Trent? Against which, the Embassadours of the French
King,Anno 1562 who was there present, protested in this man∣ner: Minus legitima, minusque libera, &c. All those Councells vvere euer accounted lesse free, and therefore not so lavvfull, vvhen they, vvho vvere assembled (not ledde by the holy Ghost) spake after the pleasure of some other, to vveet, the Pope. And the Vniuersitie of Paris, Anno 1517. in their appeale against Pope Leo the tenth, and his Councell assembled at Rome, wrote in this sort: Leo Papa dicimus in quodam coetu, &c. Leo the tenth, in a certaine Assembly, in the Citie of Rome, vvee knovve not hovv gathered to∣gether, yet vve are sure not in the holy Ghost. And is Becane the Iesuit ignorant, in what pleasant manner Cardinall Cusan brake this iest vpon Eugenius the Pope? saying:De còcord. lib. 2. ca. 20. Hovv can Pope Eugenius affirme this thing to be true, because hee vvill haue it so, and for no other cause? Ac si inspiratio ipsius Sancti spiritus, &c. As if the mind of the holy Ghost, vvere in the power of the Bishop of Rome; and must then inspire, vvhen the Pope vvill have him inspire. To conclude this Question, I desire the Iesuit Be∣cane, in the behalfe of Ma. Thomson, to yeeld a sound reason, wherefore the Bishops, in the first Councell of Constantinople, did in this humble manner entreat Theodosius the Emperour: Rogamus clementiam, &c. Wee beseech your clemency, that by the letters Patents of your Piety, you vvould confirme, and cause to be ratified, the decree of this Councell.
BECAN. Exam.Page 162 THe Apostles by diuine right might make lawes. Which right cannot be proued to haue bin transtated frō them to Kings or Emperours, but to Bishops, successours of the Apostles, with whom, as with the Apostles, the Spirit of truth remaineth for euer. Therefore the Bishoppes and their Lawes or Canons (euen in England) are no lesse diuinely inspired, then the Apostles, or their Lawes or Canons Aposto∣licall. Which if you deny, the Arch-bishop of Cauterbury, or cer∣tainely the Bishop of Ely, will cause you to be punished therefore. You are abasht to speake any thing of King Henry 8. his law, tou∣ching the lawfull marriages in degrees not prohthited, which car∣nall knowledge followed. Dr. HARRIS Reply. VVHat modest Hearer will not be abashed, and what Christian heart will not trem∣ble, to heare these blasphemies vttered by the Iesuite? The Apostles were Gods chosen pen∣men to write the Scripture, as they were immediately mooued by the Spirit of God,2. Pet. 2.19 21 without possibility of error. They were Gods immediate instruments, either joyntly in Councell, or singularly alone, to set downe Lawes and Canons, Essentiall parts of that Scripture, wherof we read thus: .2. Tim. 3.16 1. cor. 15.15 The whole Scripture is gluen by inspiration of God. The Apostles were such chosen witnesses to testifie Gods truth,Gal. 3.8 that if an Angel from heauen should testifie otherwise than they did, he must be accursed. Are all Bishoppes, or any one, two, three &c.
Gods immediate pen-man to write portions of holie Canonical Scripture? Are all the Lawes and Canons made by Bishops in all Councells, essentiall parts of Canonicall Scripture, giuen by inspiration of God? Are all Bishops God immediate chosen witnesses to testifie the truth, so without all possibility of falshood, that the Churches faith should depend thereon so sure, that if an Angell of heauen testifie other wise, then they haue preached or written, he should be accursed? Then must writings, testimonies, and lawes hereticall, go for Scripture Canonical; and so Diuine Scripture must be hereticall. Is not this blasphemy? And this necessarily follow∣eth from the Iesuite his premisses here, to weet, That all Bishops, and the lawes and Canons in Councells, and other writings made by Bishops, are and were in∣spired by the spirit of truth without errour, as the A∣postles, and their Canons and writings were. Ten seucrall prouinciall Synods gaue consent with the Arian Heretikes. And whereas in the first and most famous generall Councell of Nice which main∣tained or thodoxally Christ his God-head, there were but three hundred and eighteene Bishops; In the he∣reticall Councell of Ariminum, which stood for Arius against the God-head of Christ, there were eight hundred Bishops. Which made Augustine, contra Maximinum lib. 3. cap. 14. write thus: Noc ego Nice∣nam Synodum tibi, nec tu mihi Ariminensem, &c. Nei∣ther may I, by way of preiudice, obiect the Councell of Nice to thee; nor you to me, the Councell of Ariminum: out of the authorities of Scripture, let matter with matter, cause with cause, and reason encounter vvith reason. The spirit of
truth had so forsaken, and the lying spirit of heresic had so possessed in a manner all the Bishoppes in the Christian world; that, as Hierom against the Lucife∣rans saith, Ingemuit totus orbis, et Arianum se esse mira∣tus est. The whole Christian vvorld groaned, and maruai∣led that it vvas become Arian, or holding with that Arch∣heretike Arian. If any Councells; surely the former, and generall with their Canons, were of Diuine inspi∣ration. But saith Augustine against the Donatists, lib. 2. ca. 3. Ipsa plenaria Concilia saepe priora a posterioribus e∣mendantur. The former, and generall Councells, are often times corrected by later and prouinciall. If the Acts and lawes of Popes be of Diuine inspiration: why doe la∣ter Popes dissannul the former Popes Decrees? For so writeth Platina de Stephano, et Romano; Acta priorum Pontificum, sequentes Pontifices aut infringunt, aut omni∣no tollunt. The later Popes vtterlierepeale their predeces∣sours Decrees. For further answere to the Iesuite here, first I say that the aforesaid immediate Diuine inspiration, was personall and proper to the Apostles, and not transi∣tiue or deriuatiue, from the Apostles to Bishops; as in my English Concord by foure seuerall testimonies, out of Augustine the most learned Bishop that euer wrote, I proued directly and expressely: whereunto this emp∣ty prattling Iesuite answereth not one word. To stop his mouth euer hereafter touching this point, I will adde this fift out of his hundred & eleuenth Epistle ad Fortunatianum:: Nequequorumnuis disputationes quan∣tumu is Catholicorum et landatorum hominum, velut Scrip∣tur as Canonicas habere debemus, &c. We ought not to re∣ceiue the disputations of any, be they neuer so Catholike, or
praise-worthy, as we doe the Canonicall scriptures, so that it should not be lawfull for vs, sauing the reuerence to them due, to reproue, or reiect somwhat in their writings, if vve sinde it dissonant from truth. Secondly I say, that those words of our Saniour, Ioh. 14. v. 16. The Spirit of truth shall remaine with you for euer; are meant as well of Pastors and Teachers, as of Bishops: for Christ when he ascended gaue not onely Apostles, Prophets, Euangelists and Bishops; but also Pa∣stors and Doctours for the worke of the ministerie,Ephes. 4. v. 11. c1 14 and the edifisation of his body: that his Church should not be carried about, with enery winde of doctrine and deceits of men. So that Presbyter preaching Pastours and Doctors, as well as preaching Bishops, stand in need of the Spirit to guide them into the heauenly truth. That in Math. 28.20. I am with you to the end of the world: is meant of the Church, and euery member of the Church. For so else-where saith our Sauiour: Where two or three are ga∣thered in my name, there am I in the midst among them. And so saith the Lord by Esaie,Chap. 59 v. 21 My spirit that is vpon thee, and my words which I haue put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of the seed of thy seed, from henceforth euen for euer.2. Epist. 2. v. 27. And so saith Iohn: That anointing teacheth you of all things, and it is true, and is not lying, and as it taught you, ye shall abide in him. Which made Panormitan (De E∣lect. et Elect. potest: ca. Significasti) write boldly thus: Plus credendum vni priuato fideli, quam toti Concilio et Papae, si meliorem habeat authoritatem vel rationem. There is more credit to be giuen to one Priuate lay man, then to the whole Councell and to the Pope, if he bring better authority, and more reason.
Concerning that law of King Henry 8. about validi∣tie of mariages not forbidden in the Leuiticall law, the Iesuit may be abashed to misspend the time with such fooleries; considering that Becane partly hath it but by relation of Sanders, a lying Writer, & malitious aduer∣sary to this State: but especially because he confesseth the said law to be abrogated. Belike, Iesuitical dispute is transcendent, Entium, et non entium, Of things which are, and are not. But hath not the Pope greater cause to be ashamed, by whose De∣cree, as by a law of Medes and Persians which chaun∣geth not, it was lawfull for King Henry the 8. to mar∣rie his owne Brother Arthurs wife, Queene Maries mother, & that after Arthur was solemnly married vn∣to her, and had knowne her carnally? contrary to theLeuit. 18 v. 16. et 20 v. 21 Law and the GospellMatth. 14 v. 4, and contrary to the iudge∣ment of all the famous Vniuersities in Christendome, who condemned the same as an incestuous marriage. Did King Henry the 8. euer decree, that marriages in∣cestuous should holde as lawful? Further, before this Iesuite be hence dismissed, hee should answere direct∣lie, breuiter et rotunde, whether he and his Pope be not ashamed of that Canon 2. q. 7. Nos si incompet. where the Pope, with his breeches let downe to his heeles, stands readie to receiue that correction, which, accor∣ding to his demerites, the Emperour should be plea∣sed to impose vpon him. Lastly; I am in great feare, least the Pope [vnder∣standing that Becane matcheth enery Bishop with his holines, as being alike inspired with the spirit of Truth, so that they can erre no more then the Pope can, and consequently, should make Canonicall lawes & be Su∣preme
Iudges of all controuersies, as the Pope is] will vtterly renounce Becane, and abandon him, as being one, of a bastard and degenerate brood. BECAN. Exam.Pag. 167 You say it is fond to thinke that the lawes of Bishops haue as great force & authoritie, as the Apostles lawes bad. Because the Apostles lawes are set downe in holy writte. So was the Ordinance of Assuerus. Heare me speake as the thing is: Humane lawes (such as the Apostles were) receiue not greater force to binde because they are written in this or that book: but because the law maker vseth greater power, & will haue it binde more. According to these two rules; one of Vipian:Eth. lib. 10 cap. 9 Quod Principi placuit, legis habet vigorem. That which pleaseth the Prince, hath vigour of law. The other of Ari∣stotle: It mattereth not whether lawes be written, or not written. Dr. HARRIS Reply. MY reason to prooue the Apostles lawes and Canons to be of greater force and authority to binde the conscience, was not simply be∣cause they are found written in the Scripture, as the Ordinance of Assuerus is: but because they are set downe there, not only as Canons or Doctrines allow∣ed, but also as Essentiall parts of holy writte and Ca∣nonical Scripture: so neither Assuerus Ordinance was, not any Law or Canon of Bishop, was, is, or euer shall be. According to that of Saint Hierom vpon the 89. Psalme: Quamuis sanctus sit aliquis post Apostolos, quam∣uis disertus sit, non habet authoritatem. No man be hee ne∣uer so holy or eloquent, after the Apostles, hath any au∣thoritie.
The Canons and Doctrines of the Apostles, are the foundations whereupon the Church of Christ is built,Ephes. 2.20 and containe that absolute certainety of Di∣uine truth, that If an Angell from heauen should teach o∣therwise he should be accursed. Agreeable to that of Saint Augustine, Contra liter. Petilian. lib. 3. ca. 6. De qua∣cunque re quae pertinet ad sidem vitamque nostram, non di∣cam, si nos, sed si Angelus de coelo nobis annunciauerit, prae∣terquā; quod in Scripturis legalibus et euangelicis accepist is Anathema sit. Bee it of any thing that pertaines to faith or maners, I do not say, if vve, but if an Angel from heauen, preach otherwise, then is set down in the scriptures Legal & Euangelicall, let him be accursed. But of all other Lawes, Canons, and Writings, Origen in his first Homilie vp∣on Hieremy writeth thus: Sensus nostri, et enarrationes sine his testibus non habent fidem. Our iudgements or de∣crees, and our Explanations, vvithout these witnesses haue no credit. And these witnesses saith Augustine De Pec. mer. et Remiss. lib. I. cap. 22. nec falli possunt, nec falle∣re, Can neither deceiue, nor be deceiued. Therefore when Constantine the great had gathered those 318. Bishops to the famous Councell of Nice; by way of instructi∣on, he gaue vnto them the Apostles Canons and Do∣ctrines, set downe in the Scripture, as their Directorie rule, whereby to make and square their Ecclesiasticall Canons. Theodoret lib. 1. cap. 7. reports the wordes thus: Euangelicae et Apostolicae literae &c. The writings of the Euangelists, Apostles, and Prophets do plainely in∣struct vs, in the vvill and minde of God. Therefore laying aside contention, let vs seeke out of those oracles diuinely in∣spired, the vnsolding of things propounded. Therefore what horrible blasphemy is this in the
Iesuit, to assert first, that the Bishops & their lawes and writings, are of like inspiration, and authority to binde the Conscience, as the Canons and Doctrines of the Apostles contained in the Scriptures? Secondly, that it mattered not, whether those Canons and Doctrines were written in Gods booke or no. Because Aristotle faid of all lawes: Scriptaene sint leges, an non scriptae, in∣teressenibil videtur. Wheras Tertullian saith against that Heretike Hermogenes; Scriptum esse doceat Hermogenis officina. Sinonest scriptum, timeat vae illud adijcientibus aut detrahentibus destinatum. Let Hermogenes shew it written, or else let him feare that curse which is appointed for those vvho adde to, or take from, the Scripture. And touching Philosophers, the same Tertullian in the said book, writes thus in capital letters: Haereticorum Patri∣archae Philosophi. Philosophers are Arch-fathers of Here∣tikes. Secondly, That the Apostles Canons & Doctrines set downe in Scripture, are but humane Canons and Do∣ctrines. Which, then saith Augustine, de vnitat. Eccl. contr. Petilian, cap. 3. were to be taken away. His words be these: Auferantur de medio, quae aduersus nos inuicem, non ex diuinis Canonicis libris, sed aliunde recitamus. Quaeret fortasse aliquis, cur vis ista auferri de medio? Quia nolo humanis documentis, sed diuinis oraculis, Ecclesiam sanctam demonstrari. Away vvith all those authorities that either of vs alleage against the other, but those that are taken out of Canonicall Scripture: If any aske, why I would haue all other authorities put away? I answere, because I vvould haue the Church demonstrated by Diuine Oracles, not humane documents. Plus aliquid dicam, saith Chry∣sostome in his second Homily, vpon Pauls second E∣pistle
to Timothy: Ne Paulo quidem obedire oportet, si quid dixerit proprium, si quid Humanum. I will say more: Paul him selfe is not to be beleeued, If hee speake any thing of his owne, if he speake only as a man. Therefore Saint Paul of his Canons and Writings saith thus: If any man thinke himselfe to be a Prophet or Spirituall,1. Cor. 14.37. let him acknowledge that the things vvhich I write to you, are the Commandements of the Lord. How great is this Iesuiticall impietie and how abho∣minable, too call Diume Oracles, and Gods comman∣dements, Humane documents? But this is not all; The Iesuit addeth out of Vlpian, for a generall rule: That thesole will of the Prince, is sussicient to make a law to be of force, to binde Christians to obey for conscience sake (for of such lawes only we here dispute). Whence this impiety should necessarily follow, that, because Nabuchodonosor the Law-maker vsed all his Monarchi∣call power and authoritie to make a decree, That euery subiect of his should fall downe and worship the golden I∣mage which he had set vp, Sidrach, Mishak, and Abed∣nego, were bound in conscience to fall down and wor∣shippe it. Heretofore we haue found the Iesuit to be very vn∣learned: but in this passage he declares himselfe to be impious also, and blasphemous. BECAN. Exam.Page 169 WHere read you that the fift Councell of Con∣stantinople vvas celebrated vnder Theodo∣sius? You alwayes erre. Indecde the words you cite, are in the first Councell of Constanuno∣ple. viz: We pray your Clemency to confirme the Councells de∣cree
The reason of which words, you saide was this: That alt though those Fathers made a decree, which had force of an Eccle∣siasticall law, and force to compell by Ecclesiasticall censure; yet they prased the Emperour to confirme the decree, by adding a con∣straining force through temporall punishments. If this your rea∣son whereby you defended Thomson, be good, why doe you aske me another? If if be not good, why did you not answere for him better? If Thomson meane, that Prelates may by their owne au∣thority, make lawes Ecclesiasticall, to bind their subiects to the keeping thereof by sures Ecclesiasticall, but cannot vrge them, by punishments Corporall; and that Kings should onely subseruire serue vnder the Prelates as their outward executors, (hangmen, or the like): he consenteth with vs. Otherwise there is no Concord. Chuse which you will. Dr. HARRIS Reply. COncord? What concord hath Christ with Be∣lial? The beleeuing Protestant, with the Idola∣trous Papist? The seruants of Christ, with the sworne slaues of Antichrist? Wicked Nahash the Am∣monite, would not couenant with the Gileadites for peace, vnlesse he might thrust out all their right eyes, and bring shame vpon all Israell: The Iesuit here (more wic∣ked than Nahash) protesteth, that he will haue no con∣cord with vs, vnlesse he may, not only bring shame vp∣on Israel, but quench the light and glory of Israel: to weet, that our Kings casting their Crownes at the Popes, nay at inferiour Bishops, feete; should stand ready to be hangmen, or the like executioners of all their impious and vnrighteous decrees & commands: viz to hang, and burne, whom, when, and where they will.
Chuse vvhich vve vvill? We will chuse millions of Combats with garments tumbled in bloud, rather than to yeeld to the least iotte of this shame and dis∣grace of our royall Monarches, the Soueraigne Lords of all Prelates within their Kingdomes; Patriarkes, or Popes themselues. Although no lines of concord can be drawen be∣tween vs and the Papists: yet here among our slues is full consent. Dr. Tooker saith, in times of Churches per∣secution, the Apostles did, and wel might, make lawes Ecclesiasticall. Mr. Thomson granteth as much, and ad∣deth, that because the authority of Emperours (then heathen) did not breath vpon them, or with them, they wanted the enforcements by corporall punishments, as imprisonments, losse of goods, members, life &c. Dr. Tooker saith, in times of Church peace, the au∣thority of calling Councels, and of ratifying the Ca∣nons and Decrees made in Councels, belongeth to Christian Kings and Emperours. Mr. Thomson with full agreement, saith, in those times of peace, the Bi∣shops and Councels could not make any Ecclesiasti∣call law, which had force of law, without the authority of the King or Emperour. To backe this assertion of Mr. Thomson, I mooued the Iesuite to yeeld a sound reason, why [especially if that be true which Pope Boniface 8. in that last Canon,Extraug. Commun. de Mor. et Obedien. Vnam Sanctam, viz. Vterque gladius spiritualis et materi∣alis est in potestate Ecclesiae: sed ille, Sacerdotis; is, manu Regum et militum, sed ad Nutum sacerdotis, exercendus. Both spirituall and materiall sword, are in the Churches power: but th'one is to be vsed by the hand of the Priest; th'other, by the hand of the King or Soldier, but at the Priests
beck or command.] so many, to wee, 150. Bishops as∣sembled in the first Councell of Constantinople, should be such suppliants, as it were vpon their knees, vnto the Emperour, beseeching, & so earnestly intreating him, to confirme the Councells decree, if that decree had had force of Ecclesiasticall decree, without confirmati∣on of the Emperour. But this empty Iesuit not being able to giue another solide reason, and not daring to yeeld that: runs away from the matter; and leaueth nought else behind him, but the crackling sound of a windie tubbe; answering vnto me nothing but this: If your reason brought to de∣fend Thomson were good, vvhy did you aske me another? If not, why did you not giue me a better? which his answer made in forme of the two horned Dilemma, is thus returned vpon him, with both hornes directly bent a∣gainst him. If my reason were good to accord them; why doth the Iesuit here hold on his prattle of discord? if it were not good, why did not the Iesuit produce a better, and a more solide reason of those Fathers in∣treaty for Imperiall confirmation, to ratifie their decree? considering that the Question, as it was moued and darted by me, strooke the Iesuites Cause through the very heart. As som cannot fish but in troubled waters; so it seemeth this Iesuit can holde no argument, but in mists of confusion. For here he confounds the Coun∣cell and lawes of the Apostles, with Councels and Ca∣nons of after-Bishops. Sic canibus catulos, sic paruis com∣ponere magna: It is belike the fashion Iesuitical, to com∣pare molehils with mountaines. The Apostles in ex∣traordinary manner Diuinely inspired, might, and did make Ecclesiastical lawes to binde the conscience of all
Christians, though not to punish their bodies: But the after-Bishops, in times of Christian Emperors, neither did, nor could meet, specially in generall Councells, to make lawes Ecclesiasticall, for the space of 600. yeers, at least, after Christ, without Imperiall commaund. And when they were mette in Councell, not only the Emperour, but also his officers, the lay Senate and Iudges, sate as Presidents there, giuing-rule and order for making of those Canons, not suffering any to passe for law, without their consent, and confirmation of the Emperour, as Hainric the Salo-Brigian in his Be∣cano-Baculus, hath with great varietie of solide proofs, fully demonstrated; and further hath there produced very many Ecclesiasticall lawes, touching in a manner all Ecclesiasticall matters, and Ecclesiasticall persons, commendably made by orthodoxall Kings and Em∣perours, without Councells of Bishops. Lastly, whereas the Iesuite here slyeth, vpon mee, (indeede not vpon me, but vpon the Compositer) for mistaking the Arithmeticall figure of 5. for 1. and as though I had written fiue at large, the Iesuit sets down (quintū); he sheweth himself to be, in the one a truth∣lesse wrangler, and in the other, a seely fly-catcher. My Compositer, or Transcriber, must be whipt in print, mistaking one letter for another: but he must go scot-free, mistaking one name for another; one man for an∣other, to weet, Tooker for Richard.Exam. page 120. For which I would not taxe him in due place, (and here, constrained I do it) because I would not misspend the Readers precious time, with such empty and childish trifles.
❧ Becans Iarre. VIII. Question. Whether the King by his owne proper authority, may conferre, collate, or bestow Ecclesiasticall benefices? 1. THat the King may conferre Ecclesiasticell liuings, M. Henry Salclebridge affirmeth pag. 121. in these words: Christiani Principes in suis Regnis, cum laude, propria authoritate, beneficia con∣ulerunt. Christian Princes in their owne Kingdomes, by their owne proper authority, haue giuen or bestowed benefices, and that to their praise, &c. And then againe pag. 150. Audin Iesuita, non modo collationes beneficiorum ad Angliae Reges spe∣ctare, fed ad eosdem illos spectare, vti Ecclesiae Anglicanae Primates vel supremos Ordinarios &c. Do you heare Iesuite, the collation of benefices, doth not onely belong to the Kings of England, but also it doth belong vnto them, as they are Primates or supreme Ordinaries of the Church of England &c. And yet more: Rex ratione supremae suae Ecclesiasticae iurisdictionis praesentabit ad liberas Capellas. The King by vertue of his su∣preme Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction, shall be able to present vnto free Chappells &c. 2. Now M. Tooker to the contrary denieth it, pag. 36. where talking of the Kings of England, he saith thus: Beneficia autem curata, vel non curata, non conferunt omnino in quē∣piam, maiora minoraue: multo minus dignitates Ecclesi∣asticas, sine Episcopatus, siue Archiepiscopatus per vniuer∣sum ambitum Regnisui. Eorum certè collatio vel institutio est, quorum est destitutio, id est, Episcoporum Comprouin∣cialium,
qui potestatem habent personas ipsassacrandi. Hoc habetiuris Regia Maiestas, quod minor & ubordinata po∣teslas habet, ius inquam nominandi & paesentandi apud nos &c. Kings doe not at all collate or bestowe vpon any man bene∣fices that haue care of soules, or not care, greater or lesser; and much lesse Ecclesiasticall dignities, vvhether Bishopickes or Archbishoprickes throughout the whole circuits of their King∣domes. For this truely belongeth vnto those, whose office it is to dispose there of, to wit, to the Compreninciall Bishops, who haue power to consecrate the saide persons on vvhome they bestowe them, Indeede the Kings Maiesty notwithstanding hath this right with vs in England, which an inferiour and subordinate power also hath, to wit, right so nominate and present vnto bene∣fices &c. 3. Behotde here a triple Iarre or discord betweene these two Authors, and this in a daily and vulges watter. The first is, that M. Henry Salclebridge saith, that the collasion of bene∣fices belongeth to the Kings of England, in that they he the Pri∣mates of the Church of England. M. Tooker saith to the con∣trary, that it belongeth not to Kings at all, but to Bishops. The second Iarre is, that M. Salclebridge saith, that Kings by their owne authority, haue conferred benefices. M. Tooker saith, that they neuer do, nor haue done. The third is, that M. Salclebridge saith, that Kings by vertu of their supreme Ecclesiasticall I∣risdiction may present  benefices. M. Tooker rrth, that in this point, Kings hauene more right, then their subiects, and other inferiour persons: for so he saith: Hoc habet iuris Re∣gia Maiestas, quod minor & subordinata potestas habet. The Kings Maiesty hath (in this point of conferring beneficer) the same right that an inferiour and subordinate power bath &c. Whether of these two then should King Iames belieue, if he had a fat benefice, or an Archbishopricke now to bestow?
English Concord. HEere is also a Iesuiticall trifling altercation a∣bout words. Hainric by collation of Benefi∣ces vnderstandeth Presentation, Nomina∣tions to Benefices, the very Donation of Benefices: Doctor Tooker thereby concclueth the Institution of Presbyters, and the consecration of Bishops. Dr: Too∣ker acknowledgeth the Kings Presentation, Nomina∣tion, Donation: Hainric, by no meanes, attributeth to the king either Institution or Consecration as both of them being proper go the Bishops. The Kings presen∣thig of his Clearks to the Bishoppe, for institution of them into such Benefices with Cure, as respect the Kings hereditary right of Patronage, is nor much dif∣ferent from the presentations made by his subiects, who haue the like right of Patronage: vnlesse it be here∣in, viz that the King by his writ, may and doth com∣pell the Bishoppe (especially after recoucry by Quare Impedie) opposing himselfe therein, to institute fitte Clarks, presented by his Maiesty, or by other Patrons to the said Bishoppe. But the presentation of certaine Benefices with Cure, after they haue continued void of any Incum∣bent, for the space of 18: Monethes appertaines vnto the King by way of lapse, as vnto the Supreme Ordi∣narie, in his Dominions, or the only Supreme Gouer∣nour of the Church therein; and that by the common lawes of England: as is expresly shewed, in Becano-Ba∣culus, Page 142. 150.
Moreouer, there are certaine Benefices with Cure, called Donatiues, which admit no Institution at all: of these the King by his owne Donation onely, without any either Episcopall Institution, or Archidiaconall Induction, makes the Clearks rightfull possessours. Doctor Tooker knoweth well these triuial and vulgar matters (as Becane here calleth them), and beares in minde our most learned Soueraigne his words in his Monitory Preface, touching the Collation of Benefices, Page 33. How often haue the Kings of France withstood the Pope, in such sort, that they would not yeeld vn∣to him the very Collation of Benefices? And those other words concerning Bishoprickes receiued from Kings and Emperours, Page 29. Euen the Pope also, with all obedience and sub∣mission, did acknowledge himself to hold his Pope∣dom of the Emperour. And Page 31. He that peace∣ably is desirous to know, in what sort the Bishops of Spaine, Scotland, England, Hungary, by ancient In∣stitution, euen vntill moderne innouation, came in, and were inuested by Kings, with quiet possession of their temporals purely, and intirely; he shall finde the same, by searching the liues of the Fathers, and by reading Histories. Walthram Naumburg. lib. de In∣uestit. Episc. Behold then, how a threefold Concord ariseth out of that threefold Iarre which the Iesuit faineth. The first Concord: Hainric saith, that the confer∣ring of certain Benefices belongs to the Kings of Eng∣land by way of lapse, as they are the chief Gouernours of the Church of England: Doctor Tooker affirmeth,
that the Collation of Benefices, lying void of any In∣cumbents aboue 18. Monethes, appertaineth to the King onely by way of lapse: and not to the Bishops or Archbishops; or to any other subiect. The second: Hainric saith, that Kings by their own authority, haue oftentimes giuen Benefices: to weet, Donatiues. Tooker auerreth that the King may giue 40. 50. or moe, within the compasse of one yeare, if so many fall void. The third: Hainric saith, that by the lawes of Eng∣land, Kings, because of their Supreme Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction, present to free Chappels; and that none of their subiects, to weet, Bishoppes or Archbishops, haue authority to visit the said Chappels: Dr. Tooker, instructed by the same lawes, auoucheth that Kings onely haue that authority, and no subiects, but by the Kings grant. Finally, if the hungry Iesuite, (who mindeth onely his meat, that is, far Benefices, or Archbishoprickes) can produce but one little, either word of Scripture, or sentence in Ancient Father, whereby it may appeare that the Collation of Benefices belonged to the Pri∣mate of the Christian Church as Primate; let him haue the victory: But if he cannot, vnlesse hee be more then impudent, let him seale vp his lips, and recognize those words of the Parisian Aduocate, Arg. 11. Page 25. That of Luk. 9. The Sonne of man hath not vvhere to rest his head; is Equiualent, with this: The Church by Diuine right hath no Territory.
BECAN. Exam.Page; 173 SMall Benefices without Cure, may be conferred vpon Clearks, which are neither Priests nor Bishops. Therefore Tooker by Collation, doth not meane Institution, or Sa∣cration. Againe hee saith, that the King of England hath no other right then to name or present; but to giue or con∣ferre, is more then to name and present: you faine Tooker by Collation to vnder stand Instuntion or Consecration. Therefore you dissent from Tooker. Hainric saith, the Collation of Bene∣fices belongeth to the King of England, as Primate of the Church of England: but this you deny: for you bid mee shew out of Scripture or Ancient Father, that the Collation of Benefices be∣longeth to the Primate of the Church. Not I, but Hainric who affirmed it, must shew that. It is my part only to shew that Eng∣lish Writers dissent in this point. This I haue done, let me there∣fore haue the victory. Dr. HARRIS Reply. HEere, the Iesuit is as a chased timorous Hart, which hauing his deadly wound giuen him, flyeth out a while, straggling from his fel∣lowes: but feeling decay of his vitall spirits, and lifes bloud, runs into the brakes to hide his head, and there to perish. Becane in his verball (but in no sort reall) confutation of his Maiesties Apologie and Preface Mo∣nitory, sets down the Conferring of Benefices, as one of the proper offices of the Supreme Primate Ecclesiasti∣call; as hee vnderstood it, Sacerdotall or Episcopall. Hainric in his Becano-Baculus, tolde the Iesuite, that, although by none, either Scripture, or Ancient Father,
it can be shewed that Collation of Benefices belonged, as proper, to the said Primate Ecclesiasticall; yet hee would encounter him therein, and beat him with his owne weapon: as he did soundly, prouing that good Emperours, haue giuen Popedoms, and that accor∣ding to the Canon Law: That Catholike Kings by their prerogatiue Regall, haue giuen, as to this day they giue, Archbishopricks, Bishopricks, and other Benefices. Because Becane the Iesuit, neuer as yet answered, nor euer will be able to answere, Hainric therein: I vrged the Iesuit by Scripture, or Ancient Father to shew, the Collation of Benefices, to belong to their Ecclesiasti∣call, to weet, Episcopall Primate; promising vpon that condition, that we would yeeld the victory vnto him. But this seely Iesuit (not being able for his life pro∣duce the least, either word of Scripture, or sentence of Ancient Father for it) runnes away into the brakes of his clouded ignorance, crying out thus: Let mee haue the victory, for I haue proued an English Iarre. How ridiculous is this Iesuit here? Hainrie, as hath appeared, denied the Collation of Benefices to belong to the Supreme Primate Episcopall; yet supposed that it did appertaine to a Supreme Primate, to weet, Re∣gall; that thereby he might cudgell the Iesuite with his owne weapon, and according to Becane his dispute, proue the King to be Primate, to weet, Regall, because the Collatiò of Benefices belongs vnto him. Therfore not Hainric, but onely Becane was to shew it out of Scripture or Ancient Fathers: which, because he nei∣ther hath, nor can doe, his mouth is to be stopped vp herein, euer hereafter.
Touching the Benefices he speaketh of, the Iesuite cannot name any small Benefices without Cure, con∣ferred vpon Clearkes that are neither Priests, nor Bi∣shops, wch may not by the lawes of this Kingdom, be giuen as well by the King, as by the Bishops, or Arch∣bishops. But what a trifling Sophister is this, going a∣bout to proue, that Doctor Tooker by Collation, did not mean Institution & sacration? when as these his ex∣presse words shew that he meant therby nothing else; Duel. Page 36. Reges Angliae Beneficia Curata, vel non Curata, non conferunt omnino in quempiam Maiora Mino∣raue, multo minus Episcopatus per vniuersum ambitum regni sui, illorum certe Collatio vel Institutio est quorum est destitutio, id est Episcoporum comproumcialium, qui potestatem habent personas ipsas facrandi. In short, and in English, thus: The Collation of Benefices, or Bishopricks, belongs not to the Kings, but to Bishops, whose office is to In∣stitute and Consecrate. Certainely, in the Iesuites sense, the inferiour Bi∣shops doe not conferre, that is, doe not giue Archbi∣shopricks: But in Doctor Tookers sense, they doe con∣ferre Archbishopricks, that is they doe consecrate Archbishops, being nominated, not by Bishops, but by the King, being chosen not by Bishops, but by the Deane and Chapter. Whereby it is most manifest, that Doctor Tooker by Collation meant Consecra∣tion. Collation, as say the Canonists, in the large signifi∣cation thereof, containeth Presentation, Nomination, Donation, and Institution, or Consecration. Hainric, by Collation vnderstandeth Presentation, Nomination, and Donation; all which he proueth to belong to the
King, as Dr. Tooker also acknowlegeth. Dr. Tooker by Collation vnderstandeth Institution and Consecrati∣on; which he, and also Hainric, assert to belong to Bi∣shops, and not to Kings. So that Hainric and Dr. Tooker agree fully in this point, being vnderstood according to their expresse words. My selfe and Hainric also conspire wholly heerin: for Hainric in his Becano-Baculus; and I, in my English Concord, assert expressely, that the Collation or Pre∣sentation of Benefices by way of lapse after 18. Mo∣nethes, belongeth to the King, as Supreme Primate Regall: Therefore, with very great, either ignorance, or impudency dooth the Iesuite obiect any Iarre be∣tween me and Hainric in this point. Both Hainric, and my selfe, auerre that Collation of Benefices cannot be shewed in Scripture, or Ancient Father, to belong to the Episcopal Supreme Primate: But Hainric hath proued it sufficiently, that Collation of Benefices and Bishopricks, did of old belong to the Supreme Primates Regall. Therfore this imputation of a Iarre, between Hain∣ric and Harris: or Hainric and Tooker: or Tooker & Har∣ris; deserueth a whip, or a cudgell for Becane, rather then a garland of victory. BECAN. ExamPage 176 IF, by Collation of Benefices, Hainric and Tooker meane diuers things, then there is a Iarre: If they meane the same thing, then Tooker did not meane Institution and Sacrati∣on. Therefore you dissent from your selfe.
Dr. HARRIS Reply. THe two hornes of this Dilemma, as of the for∣mer, are thus bent directly into the Iesuites face. If by Collation of Benefices, Hainric and Tooker meane things diuers: then Hainric may alcribe Collation to the King; and Tooker may deny Collati∣on to belong to the King, without Iarre: If they mean the same thing, then, according to Becane his dispute here, there is no Iarre between Hainric and Tooker. For if their meaning of things diuers, doth arguea Iarre: their meaning of the selfe same thing, must argue Concord. BECAN. Exam.Page 177 IF, by Collation, Tooker meant only Institution and Sacra∣tion, and yet acknowledge the King to conferre 40. or 60. Benefices in the yeare: then b granteth, that the King doth Institute 40. or 60. into Benefices in the yeare. Euery where you intangle your selfe. Tooker saith nothing of Presen∣tation by way of lapse, nor to free Chappells exempt from Episco∣pall Visitation; but rather the contrary in these words: Hoc ha∣betiuris Regia Maiestas, quod minor et subordinata pote∣stas habet, ius inquam Nominandi et Praesen andi apud nos. The King and his Subiects haue like right to nominate and present their Clearks. Dr. HARRIS Reply. VVHat a clay-witted Sophister is this Mar∣tin Father Iesuit, forsooth Diuinity rea∣der in Mentz? reasoning thus. Tooker
(vnderstanding, by Collation of Benefices, Presenta∣tion, Nomination, Donation, as Hainric doth) ac∣knowledgeth the Kings right to conferre 60. Benefi∣ces, or moe in a yeare, and 10. or 12. Bishopricks in a yeare, as they may fall void: Therefore Tooker ta∣king Collation for Institution and Sacration, granteth right and power to the King, to Institute, and Conse∣crate, so many Priests and Bishops yearely. So boyishly daunceth this Iesuite vnder the net of Equiuocation, easily perceiued, by all, who running, do but cast their eyes vpon him. The Kings different, and supereminent right and power aboue all his subiects, in bestowing of Benefi∣ces, hath in the English Concord beene vnfolded di∣stinctlie, and more sufficiently then Becane deserueth, thus: 1. The King only by his Breue Episcopo, Writ to the Bishop; after presentation in his Maiesties Court, reco∣uered, compelleth the Bishops to institute the Pre∣sentee. 2. The King onely presenteth his Clearks by lapse of time, to weet, after 18. Monethes Vacancy. 3. The King onely (or they only vnto whom that is granted by the King) presents his Clearkes to his free Chappells, exempted by him from Episcopall Vi∣sitation; by his Regall Donation onely, without any Institution or Induction of Bishop or Arch-deacon, giuing his Clearks reall and lawfull possession of such Donatiues. All these three particulars are vulgarly knowen, and ingenuously confessed by Dr. Tooker: which (if hee would vouchsafe this Iesuit an answere) would expres∣lie
appeare in his after-writings, as the like hath beene done in Mr. Burhill his after-writings. But all these three instances of Regall Supremacy a∣boue all his Subiects, Cleargie, or Lay, this vnlearned Iesuite silently passeth ouer: Only as the dogge tur∣neth to his vomit, so hee in his Examen returneth to his loathsome froath and scumme of idle repetition of the selfe same things, matter, sentences, words and syl∣lables, which in his Iarre he had ser forth in print; and which said froath, by the very blast of my English Con∣cord, was vtterly dissolued and scattered, long before this his Examen peeped out. ❧ Becans Iarre. IX. Question. Whether the King can create, and depose Bishoppes, or no? 1. MAister Salclebridge saith, that bee can. For thus he writeth pag. 121. Christiani Principes in su∣is Regnis, cum laude, propria authoritate, Epis∣copos crearunt & deposuerunt. Christian Prin∣ces, have in their Kingdomes, by their owne proper authority cre∣ated and deposed Bishops, and that with praise &c. And then againe pag. 144. Rex Angliae Archidiacono Richmundiae E∣piscopalem concessit Iurisdictionem. The King of England granted Episcopall Iurisdiction to the Archdeacon of Rich∣mond &c. And yet further pag. 155. Reges Angliae suprema sua authoritate, deiure, atquecum laude omnium Ordinum Episcopos elegerunt, ac proinde deponere potuerunt. The
Kings of England of their owne supreme authority, by right, and with praise of all manner Estates, have elected Bishops, and there∣fore they might depose them also &c. And then lastly: Constat, Christianos Principes cum laude Episcopos elegisse, & de∣posuisse, etiam Romanos. It is manifest, that Christian Prin∣ces, haue elected, and deposed Bishops, yea Popes also, and that with their praise &c. 2. Now M. Tooker, hee denies in the place bifore cited that the King can create or depose Bishoppes. For there hee as∣sining  things necessary for the ordaining or creating of a Bi∣shop, to wit, Consecration of the person, and a Bishopricke, addeth, that the King can performe neither of these two. For nei∣there  be confer any benefice, and much lesse a Bishopricke or Archbishopricke; neither hath hee any power to consecrate per∣sons. In so much, that in another place he confesseth, that it is so farre off from King Iames to haue power to create or depose Bi∣shops, that he would rather acknowledge himselfe for one of their schollers and Disciples. For thus he writeth pag. 311. Serenis∣simus ac pientissimus Rex noster Iacobus non habet quic∣quam antiquius & honorificentius, quàm vt cum Valentini∣ano filium se Ecclesiae profiteatur, & cum Theodorico Ita∣liae Rege, se alumnum Ecclesiae, & ciscipulum Archiepisco∣porum fuorum, & Episcoporum libenter recognoscat. Our most Gratious and most pious King Iames doth esteeme or ac∣compt nothing more noble and more honorable, then with Valen∣tinian (the Emperour) to professe himselfe a son of the Church; and with Theooricus King of Italy, most willingly to acknow∣ledge himselfe a foster-childe of the Church, and a disciple of his Archbishops and Bishops &c. 3. This Iarre now, as you see, is of great moment. For if the King cannot create or ordaine Bishops, as M. Tooker saith hee cannot; then it followeth euidently that Thomas Cranmer who was made Archbishop of Canterbury by the King (Henry the 8.) was no true, but a false Bishop; no pastour, but a robber; one that entred not into the sheep fold by the doore; but climbed up some other way. Whereof againe ensue three other markeable points. First, that all other Bishops, who were afterward either
created by Cranmer, or by the King, were lake vnto Cranmer himselfe. Secondly, whatsoeuer was done of them, by Episcopall authority or Iuresdiction, was of no validity or force, Thirdly, that they, so ordaixed, are bound to restitution of all reue newes and prosies which they haue reaped by their Bishopricks. What counsell now is there to be taken in this point? Let your Acade∣micks, I pray you, consider. English Concord.Concord Pag. 58 THat Christian Princes haue with commenda∣tion created and deposed Bishops, yea Bi∣shops of Rome; not only Hainric, but also our most drad Soueraigne Lord Iames, the most learned King vpon the face of the earth, hath manifested, in his monitory Preface, out of the Ecclesiasticall Histo∣ries, in these very words, Page 28. Inperatores arque Reges &c. All these Emperours and Kings which li∣ued religiously and Christianly, were so farre from thinking the Pope to haue any power ouer them, that they themselues haue created Popes, and when they grew irregular, reformed them; and somtimes also deposed them. And Page 291. Sed et per aetates complurimas &c. But for many Ages together, the most assured and inuiolable right of creating the Ro∣mane Bishops, remained with the Emperors. Wher∣in, my principall witnesse shall be the Bishop of Rome; who decreed in a CouncelSigeb. An. 734 Wathr. de Epis. In∣uessat. Mart, Polon. An. 780. of 153. Bishop and Abbats, that right and power of choosing the Pope, and ordaining the Sea Apostolike, should re∣main to the Emperour Charles the great; and more∣ouer, definitiuely ordained that all Archbishops, and
Bishops throughout all Prouinces should take their inuestiture from him:Niem, de Pnuil, et Jur. Dist. 63 ca. Adrian. & that no Bishop should be consecrated, vnlesse he were first commended and inuested by the King. And whosoeuer shall offend against this decree, hew rapped him vp in the bands of Anathema.Mat Paris. in H. Act. 1100. sdem An. 1112 et An. 1119 Page. 34. King Henry the first of that name, after the conquest, gaue the Bishopricke of Winchester vnto William Gifford, and presently in∣uested him, into all the possessions appertaining to that Sea, against the decrees of the late Councell. The same King Henry gaue the Archbishopricke of Canterbury, to Raphe Bishop of London, and inuested him by a Ring and a Staffe.Plat. vit. Pela. 2. et Gregory. Besides, not only Plaina, but other Popish Writers, do witnesse, that the Em∣perours consent, for many Ages, was to be obtained for the choise of the Bishoppe of Rome: which thing Bellarmine wich all his skill,Declericis. could not handsomely auoid. Moreouer, also the Romane Bishops were enioy∣ned to pay vnto the Emperours Exchequer, a cer∣taine summe of current money, for the obtaining of their confirmation; which custome endured for the space of seauen hundred yeares,An. 680. in vita Agatho. Anastas. An. 678 Dist. 63. 1. Agatho. after Christ, as is witnessed by Sigebert Luitprand and other Histo∣rians of the Romane faction. But euery where we shal meet with examples of Emperours, which cut the wings of the Romane Bishops vsurped authority. All these things so substantially manifested, and pithily disputed by our Soueraigne King, in his Apologie for the oath of Alleageance Page 127.128. will Dr. Tooker most willingly subscribe vnto; especially seeing hee demonstrateth the same by sacred text, saying, Sub
veteri Testa:2. Chro. 19 v. 4 reges haud dubiè, gubernatores erant Ec∣clesiae intra fines suos: exauctor auerunt enim summum Pontificem, aliumque in eius locū subrogauerunt:1. Reg. 2. v. 17 Vnder the old Testament, there was no question but that Kings were gouernours of the Church, within their dominions: for they deposed the high Priest, and placed another in his roome. Truely Dr. Tooker affirmeth Regem non Sacra∣re Episcopos. That the King dooth not consecrate Bi∣shops: and as truely that the King is a sonne of the Church, as Valentinian, or with Theodosius a pupill or a foster childe of the Church: yea, a disciple, not onely of Archbishops and Bishoppes; but also of inferiour Priests and Ministers, (whose Sermons he more often heareth) but onely, Quoad officia Ministerialia, re∣specting the proper office of Ministeriall. duties, and not in the Supreme gouernment of the Church. And vnto this purpose writeth Dr. Tooker Page 311. of King Edward the sixt; Titulumet stolam Pontificiam asperna∣batur &c. Although he refused the title and robe of a high Priest: yet notwithstanding he retained the Christia Supre∣macy to himselfe, as the meane wherby he might more safe∣ly aduise the Church, and prouide for it against the time to come. Againe, he verifieth as much of our King Iames and other Christian Princes, Page 312. Sunt quidem reges Christiani &c. Euen now are Christian Kings and other Princes, the highest and Supreme gouernours of all persons whatsoeucr within their Empire and Dominion, and haue euer so beene, from the ancient time, of the purer and Primitiue Church. And Page 312. Non tantum sunt praesules in ordine &c. Yet notwithstanding they are not Prelates in any Priestly order, although they enioy a
Supremacy in the Christian regiment: for vvith great Constantine, they ought to be common Bishops of exterior matters; and with Charles the great, Ludouicus Pius & Lotharius, make lawes, Ecelesiasticall Canons (if neede require) or with King Dauid, Salomon, Ezechia and Ic∣hoshaphat, keepe visitation in the Temple, and giue order to Ecclesiasticall affaires. And why not then, with Sa∣lomon, to depose and disrobe a high Priest, and put an∣other in his place? for which opinion Dr. Tooker wri∣teth, Page 152. Totumhoc quantumcunque est &c. All this how great soeuer, which is as great as may be, is but an or dinary document of pietie, religion and royall iurisdicti∣on. Wherefore this standeth a fir me foundation of our side, that King Salomon out of his ordinary power, might de∣pose the high Priest, and bring him into order. And therefore, vaine is the Challenge of the Romane Bishops, boasting an immunity, as though no secular Prince could remoue them. For it is plaine, that this is practised in sacred Scriptures. Therefore with what face though of brasse, could the Iesuite Becane vtter to the world this low de lye! And from whence doth he in another place con∣fesse, that it is so farre from King Iames, to create and depose Bishops, that hee rather acknowledgeth him∣selfe their foster childe and disciple? As though King Salomon acknowledged not himselfe a foster childe of the Church, and Disciple of the Priests, when hee depo∣sed Abiathar, and subrogated Zadoc in his stead: the Ie∣suite, Sophister like, is alwayes wallowing in a fallacy called Ignoratio Elenchi. Moreouer, Doctour Tooker, Page. 37. writeth, Rex concedit suam regiam licentiam eligendi. As often as it happeneth to any Cathedrall Church to be destitute of a
Bishoppe, then the King by a vvritte, giueth licence to the Deane and Chapter, to elect another person Canoni∣cally. But I will btiefely declare vnto thee (gentle Rea∣der) the whole processe and carriage of this election: for it is common and vulgar euery day. Thus there∣fore it proceedeth: When any Cathedrall Church wanteth his Pastor, the King sendeth foorth his roy∣all Writte Conge Destire, directed to the Deane and Chapter; commaunding them with all speed, to as∣semble and to choose an Archbishoppe, or Bishop, for their Sea: but with this prouiso; that they choose no other, than that person which shall be named by the King, vnder the penaltie of a Praemunire, (which is the greatest punishment among vs in England, ex∣cept death.) And the same Archbishop, or Bishoppe so named by the King, and elected as aforesaide, must be consecrated by the Archbishop, or Bishops, vnder the same penalty. Now consider learned Reader (for I will make thee my iudge) what other thing is this, then to cre∣ate Archbishoppes and Bishoppes? excepting one, lie ceremoniall formalities. But let vs suffer that most blessed Martyr, Archbishop Cranmer, to rest in glory with Christ in heanen. This Iarre and difference is of great momenn, (I meane betwixt the Papists and vs) for if it appeare as cleare as the light, both by the Popes Canon lawes, & also by open Tables of Ecclesi∣astical Histories, as our most drad Soueraine hath most exactly demonstrated, that the Romane Emperor crea∣ted & elected Popes, & set in order the Sea Apostolike:
And if all Archbishoppes and Bishops, through∣out all Prouinces, receiued their Inuestitures from them: (according to the popish VVriters, especially the Iesuits) all those Romane Bishops which haue been so created and elected for many hundred yeares (to omit all inseriour Archbishops and Bishops) Non ex∣titerunt Pastores intrantes per ostium in ouile, sed Praedo∣nes aliunde ascendentes, haue not beene Pastors entring in∣to the sheepefolde by the doore, but thieues and robbers as∣cending another way, that is, false Bishops, Archbishops and Pastors. Out of which I inferre three things. First, that all the Bishops so created by Emperours and Kings (according to the words of Genebrarde) vvere disorderly and Apostaticall, rather then Apo∣stolicall. Secondly, whatsoeuer was done of them by Epis∣copallauthoritie, or Iurisdiction, is of no moment, force or validitie. Thirdly, that the Bishops so ordained, are bound to restitution of all reuene wes and and profits, which they haue reaped by their Bishopricks. Seest thou not (Iesuit) how thou art beaten with thine owne rodde? Quid hic consilij capiendum? What deuise is now to be taken? Let your Academicks, who, now onely (hauing swallowed vp the Sorbonists) will rule the rost, to weet, the Iesuiticall Fathers (if it so may please their God Layola) see vnto it.
BECAN. Exam.Page 181 YOu use three arguments to prone that Doctor. Too∣ker agreeth with Hainric herein, viz. that Kings may make and depose Bishops. i. Tooker embraceth as or∣thodoxall, all things prooued by the King. But that Kings may create and depose Bishops, was soundly proned by the King. Therefore Tooker embraceth it as orthodoxall. Heere first the minor is false: for Tooker denieth that the King can create and depose Bisoops; for hee saith that the institution and destitntion of inseriour Priests, belongs to Bishoppes, and not to, Kings: therefore the King hath not solidly proued it. Secondly, it may thus bee returned: All Academichs willingly approur all things soundly prooued by the King. But the King hath soundlie prooued the Pope to be Antichrist. Therefore the English A∣cademicks willingly erbraec it as orthodoxall. The consequen is faise. For Powell verily belioueth that the Pope is Antichrist. and the King is nor cortaine of it. The Syllogisticall form is goods. therefore one of the premisses is false. Dr. HARRIS Reply. HEere haue we the picture of a very vnlearned Iesuit, whose lineaments are drawn with his owne pensill; and which is depainted with his owne liuely colours. First, ignorantly hee confoundeth as one, a single narration with a double ratiocination; and the institu∣tion and destitution of inferior Priests, with the creati∣on and deposition of Bishops. Secondly, he answereth two Syllogismes, and those produced from his owne forge onely, with denying
the conclusions of both. Thirdly, he reasoneth from one indiuiduall, Doc∣tor Tooker, to all our Vniuersitie Academicks. Lastlie, hee brings in Maister Powell disallowing that, which hee chiefely approueth. The single natration set downe in the English Con∣cord, was thus: Doctor Tooker, reading, and well ap∣prouing his Maiesties solidarguments, especially that from exemplary act of Salomon, commended in Scrip∣tures, viz. in deposing Abiathar, and placing Zadock, chiefe Priests; was so farre from denying the power of Kings to depose Bishops, that he, grounding him∣selfe vpon the said act of Solomon, concluded with the King and Hainric; That Emperours may lawfully de∣pose Popes, and so made vp the harmony of all good concord heerein. The Iesuit transformeth this single narration into a double Syllogisme: the former thus; All which the King hath soundly prooued, Tooker doth not deny, but embrace, as orthodoxall. But that Kings may depose Bishoppes, the King hath soundly proued. Therefore Doctor Tooker doth not deny that Kings may depose Bishoppes. To this hee answereth thus: Doctor Tooker denyeth that Kings may depose Bishops, therefore the King hath not solidly prooued it. Then briefely and plainly his aunswer heere vnto is thus: The conclusion of this syllogisme is false. Therefore the minor is false. Which answer procee∣deth from extreame ignorance in the very principle of Logick. But how proues hee (for hee dare not be Respon∣dent heere) the conclusion to be false? Because Doctor Tooker denieth the institution and destitution of inferiour
Priests to belong to Kings, as beeing proper to Bishops. As though inferiour Priests and Bishops were all one. As though institution and destitution of Priests, were all one with election & deposition of Bishops, or Popes. One Bishop may institute and destitute an hundred Priests: but one hundred Bishoppes cannot choose or depose one Bishoppe, especially an Archbishoppe, or Pope. Heere are some lineaments & liuely colours of this Iesuits grosse ignorance: moe are to be seene in the se∣cond Syllogisme, following thus; All things sound∣ly prooued by the King, all English Academicks ap∣prooue. That the Pope is Antichrist, was soundly pro∣ued by the King: therefore all English Academicks al∣low, as orthodoxall, the Pope to be Antichrist. To this hee answereth thus: The conclusion is false, and the forme good: therefore the maior or minor is false. It skilleth not whether, so that one of them be false. What is this else, but to his vtter shame, to display his intolerable ignorance to the world, and to expose it as ludibrious to the meanest Academick Sophisters: who should be well lashr, or iustly exploded if they would aunswere right formed syllogismes, by deny∣ing the conclusions. But how doth this Iesuit proue this later conclusion to be false? Because Gabriell Powell belieueth this doc∣trine, viz. that the Pope is Antichrist, which the King hath soundly prooued, to be orthodoxall. Wherein, behold the strange blockishnes of this Iesuit, who should haue instauced in one Academick, denying that which the King had soundly proued, viz. the Pope to be Antichrist: but hee brings in Maister Powell allow∣ing
with all his  what the King therein had sound∣ly proued. Moreouer, if the King did not prooue soundlie the Pope to be Antichrist; then the Iesuit takes away the suppositum, and so she weth himselfe to be a frivolous Disputer. If the King did solidly proue the Pope to be Antichrist, why should not Maister Powell belieue it as orthodoxall? The Iesuit saith The King doth not hold it as certaine: Reply first that is nor ad idem; it is no aunswere to the Syllogisme, many part thereof. Secondly, though his Maiestie doth not hold those arguments so certain, which  from that mysticall booke of the Re∣uelation,  his Maiestie solidly evinceth the same, from other places of holy Writ, the meaning whereof is more certaine, cleare, and euident. Thirdly, Saint Paul teacheth the Iesuit, that the spi∣rits of the Prophets are subiect to the Prophers; That the Lord reuealeth some things to one, which he doth not to another. To conclude this straine, the Iesuits maior proposi∣tion of this later syllogisme, doth manifest the great store of ignorance in him, arguing a general of all Eng∣lish Academicks, from the individuall Dr. Tooker. BECAN. Exam.Pag. 184 THe second argument. Tooker asserteth the King of England to haue the primacie of the Church. There∣fore he confesseth that he may depose Bishops. The con∣sequence is not good with you; for some of you asserting the Primacy, dony the power of deposing Bishops. Yo take that ai granted, vvhich should be prooned. What is this, but to begge that vvhich is questioned?
Dr. HARRIS Reply. HEere also the ignorance of this Iesuit sillily mistaketh the meaning of the English Concord in this point. Becan, out of Doctor Tooker, as∣serting the King to be a foster-child, and disciple of the Bishops, doth conclude, that therefore Doctor Tooker denied the Kings power to rule or depose Bishops. The English Concord, to proue the weakenes of that consequence, shewed out of Doctor Tooker, that thogh Kings were not Bishops, but subiect vnto them, in re∣gand of their Episcopall duties, as in hearing the word preached by them, in receiuing of the Sacraments ad∣ministred by them; yet in respect of supreame Eccle∣siasticall government, they were rulers ouer Bishope, and might depose them. As King Edward the sine did, who though he disclaimed Episcopall function, yet he claimed and vsed the primacy. But let the argument runne from the primacie of Kings, to conclude their power to depose Bishops. I say it holdeth good; consi∣dering that all Papists make the power of deposing Bi∣shops, a part of the primacie. And that not one Eng∣lish Protestant Writer, ascribing the primacie to the King, denieth him the power to depose Bishops. Heere is then no begging of that in question, but a solid putting that out of question which is contrauer∣sed; and soundly concluding the power of Kings to depose Bishops.
BECAN. Exam.Pag. 185 YOur third argument is, Tooker writes that Salomon deposed high Priests: therefore the King of England may doe the same. This also is no consequence: for most graue Authors teach, that These, and such like con∣sequences are not good, &c. The Kings in the old Testament had that power: therefore Kings in the nevv Testament haue the same. Dr. HARRIS Reply. THis brew-bate Iesuit, would faine haue made a Iarre betweene Hainric, asserting the Kings power to depose Bishops; and Doctor Tooker. The English Concord sheweth, that Doctor Tooker did not onely assert, but also proue the same by the exem∣plarie act of Salomon, deposing the high Priests. Against this cleare concord, the Icsuit opposeth no∣thing but this, That most graue Authors deny the argu∣ment. Which is nothing to the purpose. For heere the question is not, whether other Popish Writers dissent from Hainric, or Tooker: but whether Hainric & Doc∣ter Tooker dissent heerein. Neither in this case, matte∣reth it, whether this Argument from Salomons act, be good, or not. It sufficeth that Doctor Tooker tooke it to be good. BECAN.Exam.Pag. 12 THese your arguments help not your cause. For either they are sound, or not sound: If sound, they prone Too∣ker to dissent from himselfe; and so there is a Iarre. If not sound, why doe they occupy any paper?
Dr. HARRIS Reply. THis Iesuit is very vnlucky in his Dilemmaes. For, as the former haue been: so this, is thus retorted vpon him. These arguments helpe my cause well; for, if they be vnsound, by Becans dis∣pute, they prooue not Doctor Tooker to dissent from himselfe; and so no Iarre: if sound, what cause hath the Iesuit to dislike either them, or the printing of them? Thus is his whole Examen in this ninth Chapter vtterly dissolued, and brought to naught. ❧ Becans Iarre. X. Question. Whether the King can excommunicate his obstinate subiects, or no? 1. HEere now doe our Adversaries ranke their King amongst ordinary men; & what they granted vn∣to him before, heere now they seeme to revoke. For they say, that the King cannot excommunicate a∣ny of his subiects, & yet himselfe may be excōmunicated by them, and expelled out of the Church of England, whereof himselfe is supreame Head. The former part heere of doth Maister Tooker affirme, pag. 15. in these vvords: Rex non habet potestatem distringendi gladium spiritualem, vel quempiam excom∣municandi.
The King hath no power to vnsheath the spirituall sword, nor to excommunicate any man, &c. And the Chaplaine, my Lord of Ely, pag. 151. saith: Nos Principi censurae pote∣statem non facimus. Wee doe not giue authoritie to our Prince to vse Censures. &c. And againe, Maister Thomson, pag. 83. Excommunicare nullo modo ad Suprematú Ecclesiae per∣tinet. To excommunicate doth no way belong to the Supremacie of the Church. And againe, pag. 84. Omnes fatemur Regem excommunicandi potestarem nullam habere. Wee doe all confesse, that the King hath no power to excommunicate, &c. 2. The later part of the former point affirmeth Ma. Bur∣hill, pag. 137. when he saith: Quod Ambrosio licuit in Theo∣dosium, idem & alijs in Regem simili de causa liceat, &c. As it was lawfull for Ambrose to proceed against Theodosius; so is it lawfull also for others to proceed against the King, in the like cause, &c. To wit (hee vvould say) as it was lawfull for S. Am∣brose beeing a Bishop, to excommunicate Theodosius the Em∣perour; so in like manner it is lawfull for our Bishops (of Eng∣land) to excommunicate King Iames, if hee offend in like man∣ner. And then againe, pag. 242. Supremus Ecclesiae Guber∣nator, potest eijci ex Ecclesia. The supreme Gouernor of the Church, (to wit, the King) may be cast forth of the Church, &c. And pag. 267. Rex etsi iustusimè excommunicatus, non a∣mittit Primatum. The King, although he should be most instly excommunicated, yet hee doth not loose his Primacie, &c. 3. Now I doe not sec, how these things can possibly hang to∣gether, or agree vvith those vvhich hitherto before haue beene attributed to the King. For vnto him is attributed, That hee is primate, and the supreme head of the Church of England: That be is aboue all persons, as well Ecclesiasticall as temporall in his Kingdome: That hee bath supreme, most ample, and ful iurisdic∣tion Ecclesiasticall, no lesse then politicall and temporall. And notwithstanding all this, beeing so great a person, yet can hee not excōmunicate any one of his subiects, either Laicke, or Church∣man, although neuer so rebellious and obstinate. Nay, although hee be so great as hee is, hee may neuerthelesse be excommunica∣ted by his subiects, and cast out of the Church of England, wher∣of
he is supreame Head. I cannot vnderstand this mysterie. 4. Heerevnto will I adde three arguments more, which will increase the difficultie. The first is: He that hath supreme, most ample, & most full Iurisdection Ecclesiasticall in any Kingdom, may exercise all the actions, and offices that belong vnto Iuris∣diction Ecclesiasticall of that Kingdom. But now the King hath supreame, most ample, and most full Iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall in the Kingdome of England, as Maister Tooker, and Mai∣ster Salclebridge doe confesse: Ergo, he may exercise all offices belonging to Iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall in the Kingdom of Eng∣land: Ergo, be may also excommunicate: for that excommuni∣cation which is denounced by sentence, is an act of Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction. Or else contrariwise, if you will thus: Hee that can∣not exercise all acts of Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction in any King∣dome, hath not supreame, most ample, and most full Iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall in that Kingdome. But the King of England can∣not exercise all acts of Ecclesiasticall Iurisdection in his King∣dome, because hee cannot excommunicate any man. Ergo, hee hath not supreme, most ample, and most full Iurisdiction Eccle∣siasticall in his Kingdome. 5. The second argument is this. Hee that giueth to another, power to excommunicate, without doubt hath power himselfe to excommunicate, because no man can giue to another that which hee hath not himselfe. But the King of England giueth power to his Bishoppes to excommunicate. Ergo, hee hath power to ex∣communicate. The Minor is prooued out of Maister Tooker, pag. 304. vvhere hee affirmeth, That the Bishops (of England) doe receiue all their Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction of the exteriour Court, from the King. But now, power to excommunicate be∣longeth to Iurisdiction of the exteriour Court, as the Chaplaine pag. 41. and Maister Tooker, pag. 305. expresly teach vs, saying: Rex habet omnem iurisdictionem spiritualem in fo∣ro exteriori, exceptis quibusdam censuris. The King hath all Iurisdiction spirituall in the exteriour Court, excepting cer∣taine Censures. But now he excepteth Excōmunication, wher∣in you see is to be noted againe a contradiction in Ma. Tooker; for that he referreth Censures (amongst which excommunication
is one) to the Iurisdiction of the exteriour Court. True indeed. But yet he adioyneth two other things, that are contradictorie. The first, that the King can give vnto Bishops all Iurisdiction of the exteriour Court: and the second, that the King hath not all Iurisdiction of the exteriour Court. 6. The third Agument is: That whosoeuer is subiect to an∣other in Ecclesiasticall inrisdiction of the exteriour Court, hath not supreme, most ample, and full lurisdiction Ecclesiasticall of the exteriour Court. But the King is subiect to some other body in Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction of the exteriour Court, to wit, to the Bishop, because he may by him be excommunicated, by sen∣tence, and cast out of the Church, as Maister Burhill doth con∣fesse: Ergo, hee hath not supreme, most ample, and most full Iu∣risdiction Ecclesiasticall in the exteriour Court &c. Or, if your will, contrariwise thus: Hee that is subiect to no other in Eccle∣siasticall Iurisdiction, cannot by any man be excommunicated by sentence. But the King now, if he haue supreme Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction, is subiect to no other in Iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall: Ergo, he cannot by any other be excommunicated &c. I doube not, but you marke well, that these things doe not agree. English Concord.Pag. 68 IN good sooth, by this precedent chapter, I ob∣serue my Aduerlary a bad Disputer; by the good leaue of his fellow Iesuits. For manifesting here∣of let vs first handle the question. You enquire whe∣ther the King may excommunicate his subiects. The worthy Bishop of Ely, pag. 151. Doctor Too∣ker, pag. 15. Maister Thomson, pag. 83. & 84. affirme of all our Writers in these words, Omnes fatemur regem excommunicandipotestatem nullam habere: Wee all con∣fesse, that the King cannot excommunicate.
I pray, tell me, in so full a concord, is heere any dif∣ference? Surely, no English Iarre, except a fained Be∣canicall Iarre: for the Iesuite followeth not the questi∣on, Whether the King can excommunicate; but, whe∣ther the King may be excommunicated, and so pro∣ceedeth (as you see) to discourse of the offices of su∣premacy: that is to say, Whether this be not numbred among the residue, That a Primate may be excommuni∣cated of his subiects. But here, like an idle Sophister, he fighteth without the lists: and first, it is worth our labour, to marke his admirable skill in Logick, wherby he goeth about, out of our most vniforme consent, to wrest an English dis∣cord. This is therefore his first reason; The King can∣not execute all the inferiour actions of Ecclesiasticall iuris∣diction, that is to say, He cannot excommunicate: there∣fore he hath no supreame Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction. I am ashamed of such childish Iesuiticall fancies. Is the Iesuit become ignorant, or forgetfull of the que∣stion? Is not our controuersie about one supreame Gouernour of the Church in all matters Ecclesiastical, and aboue all Ecclesiasticall persons? Yes, wee reason about the office of that one onely supreme Gouernor, as supreme Gouernour; according to Saint Augustine ad Bonifac: Epist. 50. Inhoc ergo seruiunt domino reges in quantum sunt reges, cum eafaciunt ad seruiendum illi quae non possunt facere nisi reges. In this Kings serue the Lord, respecting onely their kingly office: that is, vvhen they doe those things to serue him, which they cannot doe ex∣cept they vvere Kings. Now sir, if excommunication belong onely to the primate or supreame Gouernour (for in our question
they are both one) then it should follow, that all Bi∣shops, and euery meane Archdeacon (for both these haue power to excommunicate) are also supreme Go∣uernours of the Church: and so there must needs bee, by this Iesuits Logick, as many onely supreme Gouer∣nours, as there bee Bishoppes, and Archdeacons. Is any thing more absurd? See you not in what a brake the Iesuit is caught? But for the power of excommu∣nication, vnderstand thus much; The King of him∣selfe can excommunicate no man: yet notwithstand∣ing, by the consent of all the estates assembled in the Parliament, he can make Ecclesiasticall lawes, by force and vertue wherof, this or that obstinate subiect ought to be excommunicated. And besides, it is in the Kings absolute power, to commaund any Bishoppe within his dominion, to absolue any man, whom by appeale hee shall finde to be vniustly excommunicated. Secondly, the Iesuit reasoneth thus: The King gi∣ueth to other, power to excommunicate; therefore he he himselfe may excommunicate. The Iesuit might haue learned out of Bernard (whò they take for a bro∣ther of their owne) the vanitie and weakenesse of this argument: who, though his doctrine heerein be not orthodoxall, yet to infringe this consequent, doth ve∣ry accuratly distinguish thus, writing to Eugenius; Conuerie gladium tuum in vaginam: Tuus ergo, et ipse two forsitan nuiu, etsi non tua manu, cuaginandus, &c. Put vp thy sword into thy sheath (saith Christ to Peter). Then saith Bernard to the Pope, Yea, that sword is thine, yet not to be drawn by thy hand, but at thy direction. Both swords are the Churches, that is to say, the spirituall sword, and the
materiall sword: but the materiall sword is drawn for the Church; the spirituall sword by the Church: one of them by the hand of a Priest; the other, by the hand of a Souldier: but yet, at the pleasure of a Priest, and the commaund of the Emperour. Thirdly, hee argueth on this manner; The King is subiect to the Bishop excommunicating the King, as vvas Theodosius to Ambrose: therefore, hee is not the onelie supreme Gouernour in his dominion, ouer all persons and causes Ecclesiasticall. I aunswere, that if this be a strong argument, then shall not the Pope be Primate of the Church: for the Pope is subiect to a Priest in his act of Confession. So writeth Panormitan; Papatenetur confiteri:Extra. de poenit. etre∣miss. et in illo actu Sacerdos est maior illo: Sacerdos potest illum ligare et ab∣soluere. The Pope himselfe is bound to confesse to a Priest: and in that action, the Priest is greater then the Pope: for he hath power tobinde and loose him. It also appeareth by a Councellat Constance,See the Councels of Coustance and Basil and an∣other at Basil, that many Popes haue beene subiect to Bishops, and by them conuented, iudged, excommu∣nicated, and deposed from their Papacie: according to that of your Canon law; Cum again de fide,Dist. 19. A∣nastasius in glossa. tum Syno∣dus maior est quam Papa: When a controuersie is concer∣ning faith, then a Councell is aboue the Pope. Therefore the Iesuit deceiueth by Elench a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter. Wee teach, that our Kings are not Primats, but priuate men, in respect of Sacerdotall functions; and by that meanes, not onelie are feriour to Bishops, but also to euery other Minister: According to that vvorthy saying of Valentinian the Emperour;
Egosemin sonil Plebis. Eten̄ collocato in Pontisicale solio, cui nos quoque maderatores imperij nostracapita submitta∣mus also an Emperor,Sozome. lib. 6..7. The doe. lib. 4. cap. 5. am like one of the common people. Place such a man in the Bishops throne, to whom we that are managers of the Empire, may submitour necks. The Popes excommunications, of any the meanest subiects of our Kings, much lesse of the King himself, many yeares before King Henry the eight was borne, were of no force by the common lawes of England; as is manifested by Hainric, in Becano Baculus. Where also he hath taught you out of the same lawes, that the King of England, is the supreme Ordinary of his King∣dome; On, as it is in the oath of Supremacy, The onelie supreme Gouernour of the Church of England: And yet wee doubt not, but he may besuspended from the Eu∣charist by a Bishop, to whom hee himselfe hath com∣mitted Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction (as Theodosius was by Ambrose) that is, by resnsall to giue him the holy Cō∣munion; but not in any iudiciall, or cōsistorian form, of citation, appearance, and sentence to be cast out of the Church. The Iesuit is deeply deceiued, if he imagine that the action of Ambrose was solemne and canonicall; or that it was excommunication in a strict and proper sense: which thing I will (when need requireth) con∣vince by many solid arguments. And in the meane season, let him shew mee, whether Theodosius was ca∣nonically cited vnto the consistory of Ambrose? or whether the Emperour did answere for himselfe, ei∣ther in person, or by his Proctor? Or whether the sen∣tence of excommunication was pronounced vpon the Tribunall of the Bishop? Or whether it were canoni∣cally
denounced in the open Church, before hee was forbidden to enter into the Temple? And againe, by whose commaundement, and by what example, did Saint Ambrose alone, without his fellow Elders, or the counsell of other Bishops, excommunicate the Empe∣rour of so many kingdoms, espceially seeing Ambrose was neither Pope nor Patriatch? And let the Iesuit giue some good cause, why Ambrose should am e vpon so humble and godly an emperour, by his ex∣communicating him, who erred onely in one fact; and not once blame or touch Constantius, a most proud, godlesse, and hereticall Arian? Lastly, whether it were the custome at Millan, to excommunicate all murtherers, (or else Theodosius had wrong): for Iassure you, murtherers are not excom∣municated in England; and I thinke, very few are so censured at Mentz, where Becane liueth. BECAN. Exam.Pag. 191 YOu aunswere, that heere is no Iarre; because all your Writers vniformly agree in this: That the King cannot excommunicate. But heere is the greatest Iarre; Be∣cause all English Writers who confesse it doe manifest∣ly differ from themseluss, as these three Arguments proue. First, Whosoeuer hath all mannet supreme, most ample & full Iurisdiction Ecclesiastical in any Kingdome, he may exercise all acts vvhich pertaine to Iurisdiōtion Ecclesiasticall in that king∣dome. And so be may excommunicate, to wit, by a power vnde∣pendant of any man; such as the Pope hath (the rest hauing it from him, who may giue it to them, and take it away). Enen as the King, who hauing supreme, most ample Iurisdiction ciuill in his kingdome, may exercise allciuill acts of that Iurisdiction in his kingdome.
But the Writer's assert the Kings, all manner supreme, most ample, and full iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall. Therefore they assert the Kings power to excommunicate. Dr. HARRIS Reply. HEere is but an idlerepetition of the selfe same Argument; which the English Concord had answered before, by denying his maior Pro∣position. Which deniall was grounded vpon the testi∣mony of Saint Augustine, whereunto this Iesuit an∣swereth not one word. The substance whereof vvas this: That attacts of Ecclesiasticall gouernment (and onely all those acts) which the King alone may doe as King, belong vnto him: but Excommunication be∣longs to euery Archdeacon; therefore that belongs not to the King. The Iesuit beeing put vnto his shifts, hath fansied this new starting hole: viz. That power vndependant of any other, to excommunicate, is proper onely, and to euery supreme Gouernour Ecclesiasticall. Therfore if the King be supreme Gouernour Ecclesiasticall, hee hath that vndependant power to excommunicate. Whereunto Ireply, first, that no Scripture, no, nor ancient Father, for the space of 600. years after Christ, doth assert this vndependant power of excommunica∣ting, to belong to the supreme gouernment Ecclesia∣sticall. Secondly, that the ancient Fathers deny this vnde∣pendant excommunicating power to belong to Pe∣ter; (much lesse to the Pope.) but with one vniforme
consent, dogmatize according to the Scriptures, that all the Apostles receiued from Christ immediatly (not from Peter) power to excommunicate, equall vvith Peter. Thirdly, that the very principall Schoolemen, as Peter Lombard, the Maister of the Sentences, Thomas Aquine, the Doctor Angelicall, Alexander Ales, the Doctorirrefragable, and Iohn Scot, the subrle Doctor, deny the same. First, they all foure define the keyes, by the power to open and shut, to binde and loose. See Lombard, Sent. l. 4. dist. 18. et 19. Alexander Sūma Theolog. part. 4. q. 20. memb. 2. et 5. Aquin as in Sent. l. 4. dist. 13 q. 1. art. 1. Scot. in Sent. l. 4. dist. 19. art. 5. Secondly, Alexander in Summa p. 4. q. 20. memb. 5. et 6. Tho: in 4. Sent. dist. 24. q. 3. art. 2. & Scot. in Sent. l. 4. dist. 19. art. 1. affirme, that the keyes promised to Peter, in the 16. chap. of Mathew, were giuen to the A∣postles in the 20. chap. of Iohn. Fourthly, Bellarmine himselfe denieth this vndepen∣dant power of excommunicating to be proper to Pe∣ter: and proueth by foure sound arguments, the said power to be common to all the Apostles, thus: de Ro. Pontif. l. 4. cap. 23. That the Apostles receiued immedi∣atly frō Christ their Iurisdiction; First, by these words of our Lord, Iohn 20. As my Father sent mee, so send I you. Which place, the Fathers, Chrysostome, & The∣ophylact, so expound, that they say plainly, The Apo∣stles, by those words, were made the Vicars of Christ: yea, and receiued the very office and authority of Christ. Cyrill, vpon this place addeth, that The Apostles by these words, were properly created Apostles, and Tea∣chers of the whole vvorld. And that wee should vnder∣stand,
stand, that all power Ecclesiasticall, is contayned in autho∣ritie Apostolicall, therefore Christ addeth; As my Fa∣ther sent mee: seeing that the Father sent his Sonne, en∣dued with chiefest, or highest power. Cyprian, in his booke of the vnity of the Church, saith; The Lord speaketh to Peter, I vvill giue thee the keyes of the Kingdome of Heauen, and after his resurrec∣tion, said to him, Feed my Sheepe. And although after his resurrection, he gaue to all the Apostles equall pow∣er, and said: As my Father sent mee, so I send you; yet, to manifest vnitie, hee constituted one chayre. Where you see, the same to be giuen to the Apostles, by those words, I send you; which was promised to Pe∣ter by that, I will giue thee the keyes: and after, exhibi∣ted by that, Feed my sheepe. Now it is manifest, that by those words, I will giue thee the keyes, and by that, Feed my sheepe, is vnderstood the most full euen exte∣riour Iurisdiction. Secondly, the election of Matthias vnto the Apo∣stleship sheweth the same. For, we read Acts. I. that Matthias was not chosen by the Apostles, nor any authoritie giuen vnto him; but that his election be∣ing craued and obtained from aboue, he was present∣ly numbred among the Apostles. Surely, if all the Apostles had Iurisdiction from Peter, that ought to haue been shewed most of all in Matthias. Thirdly, it is proued out of Saint Paul, who pur∣posely teacheth that hee had his authority and Iuris∣diction from Christ; and thereupon, proueth him∣selfe to be a true Apostle. For, Gal. I. he saith, Paul an Apostle, not of men neither by man, but by Iesus Christ, and G O D the Father. And, there to shew that he re∣ceiued
not authoritie from Peter, or other the Apo∣stles, hee saith; But when it pleased him, which had sepa∣rated mee from my mothers wombe, and called mee by his grace to reueale his Scnne in me, that I should preach him among the Gentiles, immediatly I communicated not with flesh and bloud, neither came I againe to Ierusalem to the which were Apostles before mee: but I went into Arabia, and turned againe into Damascus. Then after 3. yeares, I came againe to Ierusalem to see Peter, &c. and chap. 2. For they that seemed to be somewhat, added nothing to me aboue that I had. Fourthly, it is proued by cuident reason: for the Apostles were made onely by Christ, as it appeareth Luke 6. He called his Disciples, & chose twelue of them, vvhom he also called Apostles. And Iohn 6. Haue not I chosen you twelue. Now that the Apostles had Iutis∣diction, it is manifest, partly by the acts of Saint Paul, who 1. Cor. 5. did excommunicate, and 1. Cor. 6.7. 11.14. &c. made Canons. Partly also, because the Apostolicall dignity, is the first, and supreme digni∣tie in the Church: as it appeareth, 1. Cor. 12. Ephe. 4. See B. Thomas, in 1. Cor. 12. Hitherto Bellarmine. Vnto these, I will adde the testimony of two other Fathers, to weet, Origen, and Beda. Origen, Tract 1. in Matth. saith: Hoc dictum, Tibi dabo claues regni coelorum, caeteris quoque cōmune est: Et quae sequuntur, velut ad Pe∣trum dicta. sunt omnium communia. This saying, I vvill giue thee the keyes of the Kingdome of Heauen, is common to the rest of the Apostles: and the vvords that follow, as spo∣ken to Peter, are common vnto all. Beda Homil. in Euangel. Quem me dicunt, saith; Po∣testas ligandi et soluendi quamuis soli Petro a Domino data
videatur, tamen absque vlla dubietate noscendū est, quode caeteris Apostolis, data est: The power of binding & loosing, though it seeme to be giuen by the Lord onely to Peter, yet without all doubt, it was giuen also to the rest of the Apo∣stles. By which, it is soundly prooued, that all the Apo∣stles had the full power of the keyes, and most full Iuris∣diction Ecclesiasticall (and in one word) vndependant of any other, to binde, to loose, to open, to shut, to excommunicate & absolue, giuen by Christ, equally & immediatly vnto them, and their successors, as well as to Peter and his successors. But all Bishops are succes∣sors to the Apostles: therefore all Bishops haue most full vndependant Iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall to excō∣municate. And therefore, by this Iesuits argument heere, all Bishops are supreme Gouernors of the whole Church. What then shall become of his Lord God the Pope, and the Popes Primacie? Whose fulnesse of power, must by this orthodoxall position, be distribu∣ted equally amongst all Bishops; not as from Peter or Pope, but as successors of the Apostles. For so Cyrill in Iohn, lib. 3. ca. 20. Apostolis et eorum in Ecclesijs successoribus, plenam concessit potestatē. Christ (not Peter, much lesse the Pope) gaue to the Apostles, and their successors, fulnesse of power. Where-to accordeth Saint Cyprian, de simpl. Praelat. saying: Christus candem dedit Apostolis omnibus pote∣statem: Christ gaue vnto all his Apostles the selfe same power. Bellarmine, to proue the Ecclesiasticall authoritie of Matthias to be vndependant, and not dependant of Pe∣tex, brings in Matthias chosen an Apostle, not by the
Apostles, but by God. And so of S. Paul, chosen an Apostle, not by men, nor of men, but of God. How then can the Pope challenge vndependant Ecclesiasti∣call Iurisdiction, when he is chosen and made Pope, & also vnpoped by men, much inferiour to the Apostles? If the Pope alone haue vndependant Church gouern∣ment, to giue and take Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction, to, and from whom he please; how was the Patriarch of Alexandria made equall vnto him in the first Nicen Councell, Can. 6? And why was the Archbishop of Constantinople, equalled with him in authority, and in all things, except in Seniority; in the first Councell of Constantinople, cap. 3. and in the Councell of Chalce∣don, Can. 28? Certainly, this vndependant supreme gouernment, was not acknowledged to be in Anicetus Bishoppe of Rome, by Polycarpus, who gain-saied Anicetus in the ce∣lebration of Easter. See Euseb. l. 5. ca. 26. Nor in Vic∣tor, who vsurping authoritie ouer the Bishops of Asia, was countermaunded, withstood, and sharply rebuked by Irenaeus, Polycrates, and others, Bishops in France, Asia, &c. See Euseb. l. 5. cap. 25. Touching the Iesuits argument, drawen from the Kings supreme gouermment ciuill, to conclude there∣by his power to exercise all acts pertaining to ciuill Iu∣risdiction. I reply and say, that true it is, the fountaine of all ciuill Iustice vnder God in this Kingdome, is in his Maiestic: That hee alone hath power to constitute ciuill Iudges, and accordingly doth so. But our most learned Lawyers, and reuerent Iudges, will teach the Iesuit, that when the Iudges be so constituted; by the lawes and customes of this kingdome, it pertaineth to
those Iudges, and not to his Maiestie, to iudge & sen∣tence, in matters personall, reall, or of blood, as Felo∣nies, and Treasons, equally between the subiects, and also betweene the King & his lubiects: which cuts in sunder the very hart-strings of this his main argumēt. For, if it pertaine not to the King, to exercise all acts of inferiour ciuill gouernment, though hee be the su∣preme ciuill Gouernour in his Kingdome; a fortiori it followeth, that it pertaineth not to his Maiestie, to ex∣ercise all inferiour acts of Ecclesia sticall gouernment, though hee be supreme Ecclesiasticall Gouernor. The Lord of a Manour, to which belongeth a Court Baron, may constitute a Steward to haue Iurisdiction ouer his Tenants in that Court, in setting fynes, in a∣mercing, &c. yet the Lord of the Manour cannot exe∣cute that Iurisdiction: for if hee set fynes, or amerce, it is voide; though that Court be, and is also called, that Lords Court. BECAN. Exam.Pag. 194 YOu say, that although the King cannot excommuni∣cate, yet with consent of the Orders, or State of the Kingdome in Parliament, hee may wake Ecclesiasti∣call lawes, by force whereof, such and such ought to be excommunicated. What now Richard? Hainric said, the King by his owne an hority might make Ecclesiasticall lawes; and you, ilifying that authority, restraine it to the consent of the Orders in Parliament. Ton detract too much from the Primate & Head of the Church of England. And here you make also a new Iarre.
Dr. HARRIS Reply. WHata malicious & scoffing Sycophant is this? who being perswaded in his cō∣science, that I, euen in this straine, a∣scribe too much to our Primate the King, saith, I de∣tract too much from the King heerein. First, this rude and ignorant Iesuit must be taught, that according to the lawes and customs of this kingdome, though the King be heere immediatly next vnder Christ the su∣preme, Gouernor Ecclesiasticall and Ciuill: yet it per∣taineth not to his Maiestie alone, without consent of the Orders of the kingdom in Parlament, to make any law euen ciuill, thereby absolutely to binde all the sub∣iects of his Kingdom; which all Statutes made by the vniform consent of the said Orders in the Parliament, with the approbation of the Kings Maiestie, doe ma∣nifest. Touching the supposed Iarre betweene Hainric & mee: Hainric, writing generally of the power of all Christian Kings and Emperours, to make Ecclesiasti∣call lawes, asserted that the said Kings and Emperours, laudably by their owne power, made such lawes: which I also auerre. And I, heere writing of the pow∣er of his Maiestie therein, as it is vsed and limited by the lawes and customes of this Land, assert that his Maiestie, by consent of the Orders or States of the Kingdome in Parliament, may make Ecclesiasticall lawes, by force whereof, such and such should be ex∣communicated: which Hainric will averre to be very true. So this seeming Iarte, in the view of the goggle
eyed Iesuit, is in very deed a sound concord. Further I reply, that Queene Elizabeth, of blessed memory, by her own authority, set forth Iniunctions, as Ecclesiasticall lawes. And our gracious King Iames, by his owne authority, confirmed the last Ecclesiasti∣call law-Canons, made in the Conuocation house. Lastly, I say, That by the lawes of this kingdom, his Maiestie, by his owne authoritie and letters Pa∣tents, may authorize any persons, beeing naturall borne subiects to his Highnes, whom he shall thinke meet, to exercise, vse, occupy, and execute vnder him, all manner of Iurisdictions, priuiledges, & pre∣heminences, in any wise touching or concerning any spirituall or Ecclesiasticall Iurisdictions within his Reasmes, to visit, reforme, redresse, order, correct, and amend all such errors, heresies, schismes, abuses, offences, contempts, and enormities whatsoeuer, which by any manner sprituall, or Ecclesiasticall power, authority, or Iurisdiction, can, or may law∣fully be reformed, ordered, redressed, corrected, re∣strained, or amended, to the pleasure of Almightie GOD, for increase of vertue, &c. Will the vile Ie∣suite call this, vilifying of our Ecclesiasticall Gouernour? Questionlesse, it grindeth his hart, that our Church (the true visible Church of Christ Iesus) ascribeth so much vnto his Maiestie. BECAN. Exam.Pag. THat which you adde, is a new Paradox, viz. That Ec∣clesiastic all lawes, made by the King, haue force to ex∣communicate, and yet, that the King cannot excom∣municate. It is the most certaine rule of Lawyers,
that vvhoseuer hath power to make apenall law, hath also power to punish. This common rule holds in matters Ciuill, and Eccle∣siasticall: vvhy exempt you your King from the common rule, & confine him into such straights? Dr. HARRIS Reply. TO an vnlearned Iesuit, plaine vulgar things seeme Paradoxes. Date the Iesuit deny, that Clergie men haue power to make lawes for putting to death of Hereticks, and against such & such erroncous obstinate persons as hereticks? and dare he affirme, that Clergy men may giue the sentence of death, or shed the bloud of any heretick; sith by their triuiall, and vulgarly known popish Canon, they may not sit vpon the bench when the sentence of death is pronoūced by the ciuil Iudges? That most certain rule of his Lawyers, is most plainly false. viz. That whoso∣euer hath power to make a penall law, hath power to punish: vnlesse the meaning be of power to punish, by commaunding such Officers to punish, vnto whom the inflicting of such punishment appertaineth. In which sense, our King also may be said to excommu∣nicate, or absolue: that is, to cōmand Bishops to excō∣municate, or absolue men, according to the lawes pro∣uided in that behalfe. Yea, further, the Kings writ of prohibition, absolueth that subiect of his, which is wrongfully excommunicated by Ecclesiasticall cen∣sure. And this is not to straighten, but to enlarge (much more then the Iesuit would haue it) his Maie∣sties supreme power heerein. Who knowes not, that Christian Kings and Empe∣perours haue made Ecclesiasticall lawes, by vertue
whereof, such and such Priests, should be suspended, depriued, degraded; and others chosen, and instituted into their Benefices? and yet it pertained not to those Emperours to suspend, depriue, degrade, choose or institute the same, in their own persons. And that this rule holdeth not in ciuil matters, was shewed before. BECAN. Exam.Pag. 196 MY second Argument was this. The King giues vnto another power to excommunicate; therefore himselfe hath power to excommunicate: or if he haue not that power, he cannot giue it to another. You deny the Ar∣gument, alleaging Bernard to shew the invalidity thereof. But Bernard rather hindereth, then helpeth your cause: for he reas∣noth as I doe, thus: Peter had no temporall possessions; therefore he could not giue them to another. Hee had care of the vvhole Church; therefore he gaue it to his successor. Bernard saith no∣thing of this consequent, but of a double power of the Pope; the one, temporall indirectly; all offices of which power, Bernard deni∣eth that the Pope by himselfe way execute: the other, his power spirituall directly, vvhich hee granteth may be executed by the Pope himselfe. This Position, viz. No man can giue to another, that which hee hath not himselfe, Bernard and I assert: to which you answere nothing. Dr. HARRIS Reply. THe Iesuit is heere ensnarled by the testimony of Bernard, as one fallen into a quagmire; who the more hee struggleth to get out, plungeth himselfe deeper into it. Bernard asserteth the right and power of both swords, equally to be in the Pope, (for that, of
Directly, and Indirectly, is not Bernards distinction, but the Iesuits vaine and new found fiction) and there∣fore be may giue power to others, ad nutum ipsius, to exe∣cute the Materiall sword: yet by himselfe cannot vse, or draw out the same. What is this else, but that one may giue power to another, to doe that which hee cannot doe himselfe? The Iesuit is intolerably ignorant, if he know not, that by their Canon law, the Pope is made Lord of the whole vvorld in temporalibus: by vvhom Kings raigne, and of vvhom they hold their Scepters. In popish books printed and allowed, They who hold the materiall sword to be in the Pope, not directlie, but indirect∣lie, are censured for Politilian Hereticks, these times-ser∣uers. But what if I should vse the same distinction heere, and say, that supreme Iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall, were it the King indirectly, to weet, in or dine ad custodiam v∣triusque tabulae; to pronide and procure, that all Eccle∣siasticks performe their duties, according to the pre∣script of Gods law: Were not this Iesuits Argument, according to his owne dispute heere, dasht in peeces? For, as the Pope may haue the materiall sword indi∣rectly, and yet haue no power by himselfe to vse the same: so may a King haue supreame Iurisdiction Ec∣clesiasticall indirectlie; and yet not haue power by himselfe to execute the functions of Iurisdiction Ec∣elesiasticall; and so not to excommunicate. True it is, No man can giue that vnto another, which himselfe hath not to giue: yet the King may giue authoritie to another, to doe that, which pertaines not to himselfe to doe, as formerly was shewed.
This is a decided case amongst the Canonists, Decis. 2. Tit. de Praebend. Quia licet Abbatissae aut Moniali∣bus cur a committi non possit, quoad exercitium actuale, ta∣menius potest ipsis competere, vtexercitium faciant per vi∣rum illius potestatis capacem. Vide notatum per Innocent de Praeb.c.Lateran.et per gloss.in ca. Cum et plantare. Though vvomen be vncapable of the cure of soules, as touching the actuall exercising thereof themselues: yet Abbasses, and Monials, may haue right and power, to exercise the same by a man capable of that power. But it is not amiss to obserue some conclusions from the Iesuits Positions heere. First, that the Popes supreme power Ecclesiasticall, is dependant vpon another, that is, vpon Peter. For he asserteth out of Bernard, That (not Christ, but) Peter gaue vnto the Pope, the cure of the vvhole Church. Secondly, that the Pope, as Peters successor, neither hath, nor can giue, any temporall possessions. For so he makes Bernard concluding thus: Peter had no tem∣porall possessions himselfe: therefore he could give no tem∣porall possessions to his successor the Pope. Thirdly, That a man may giue that to another, which hee hath not himselfe. For the Pope, as Peters successor, giues temporall Kingdoms & Empires: and yet the Pope, as Peters successor, hath no temporall posselsions, much lesse Kingdoms, and least of all, Empires. Out of these conclusions, growe these two Quae∣res following; 1. Whether the Pope in giuing Kingdoms, distri∣buting the vastest parts of the earth, the Indians East & West, viz. among the Kings of Spaine and Portugall;
and in translating Empires from one Nation to ano∣ther, (because heerein hee succeedeth not Peter) suc∣ceed not the God of this world? who said vnto our Sa∣uiour Christ, Math. 4. All these Kingdoms, vvith the glory thereof, I vvill giue vnto thee. 2 How the Popes Kingdom in Italy, is Peters Pa∣trimony, if no temporall possessions belong to Peter? BECAN. Exam.Pag. 198. MY third Argument was this: Hee that is subiect to another in Iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall of exteriour Court, hath not supreme Iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall of exteriour Court. But the King is subiect to another, that is, the Bishop, vvho by Iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall of exteriour Court, may excommu∣nicate him, and throwe him out of the Church. Therfore he hath not supreme power Ecclesiasticall of exteriour Court. Your answere vvas, That so the Pope is not Primat of the Church; for hee is subiect to the Priest, to whom bee confesseth, and vvho may binde and loose his sinnes. The Primacy doth not consist in Iurisdiction of the interiour, but exteriour Court. The power of absoluing from sinnes, or the inward Iurisdiction, is gi∣uen by Christ immediatly, to all Priests equally, by force of Or∣der: vvhich Iurisdiction is not greater in the Pope, then in any other Priest. The Pope may be subiect to the Priest in Iurisdic∣tion interiour. Richard, you erre greatly, not distinguishing be∣tween these Iurisdictions, of the internall, and externall Court. Dr. HARRIS Reply. IT seemeth the wits of this Iesuit are much wa∣sted; for he knowes not the way wherein, or the place whereto, hee intendeth to goe.
Amongst vs Writers, who all deny the King hath power to excommunicate, hee said there was a great Iarre; because vvee also held the King to be supreame Ecclesiasticall Gouernour in his dominions. By which Medium, viz. The Kings supremacie, supposed to be true; the Iesuit endeuoured to inferre necessarily, that there∣fore the King might excommunicate. But in this his third Syllogisme, the Iesuit goeth a∣bout to ouerthrowe the supposed truth of the said Medium: namely, to proue, that the King is not su∣preme Gouernour Ecclesiasticall. And what is this to the matter in hand? viz. to proue a Iarre? VVhich answere is more sufficient, then his fondnesse deser∣ueth. Yet, because, hee imagineth this Syllogisme to be invincible, I will answere directly vnto it, & shiuer it all to naught. I deny both the Maior and Minor Proposition there∣of. I say, The Maior is false, & shew it thus; The Pope is subiect to other Bishops, who, in exteriour Court, that is, in Councells, haue not onely excommunica∣ted, (whereof see Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 11. Nicephor. lib. 17. cap. 26. Concil. Constantinopol. 6. Act. 13.) but al∣so anathematized him. Yet saith this Iesuit, The Pope in Court exteriour, is supreame Gouernour o∣uer all Bishoppes, to vvhom hee giueth, and from vvhom hee taketh away at his pleasure, power to excom∣municate. Againe, The Pope is subiect to a Priest, his Confes∣sor, vvho hath power to exercise the keyes against the Pope, viz. to open vnto him heauen gates, and to shut them against him. To binde his sinnes, and to loose them. To throwe him out of that communion of
Saints, whereof wee read in the Creede. To deliuer him to Sathan: and therfore to excommunicate him. The Iesuits starting hole heere is, That the Priest may binde the Popes sinnes in the internall Court, but not in the externall. As though the Court of Conscience, were not the highest Court vnder Heauen. As though that Communion which stands onelie of Saints indeede, and all those Gods Elect, vvere not aboue that Com∣munion, which consisteth of holy ones, and vnholie: of the Elected and Reprobated. For, as by popish Ca∣nons, The Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction is aboue the Temporall: so the Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction inter∣nall, is aboue the externall. If therefore the Priest Confessour bee aboue the Pope, vvhose sinnes hee bindeth; vvhom hee deli∣uereth to Sathan; vvhom hee excommunicateth from that inward Communion of Saints Elect, by ver∣tue of his invvard Iurisdiction; vvhy may hee not much more excommunicate him from the Com∣munion of the righteous and vnrighteous, the Elect and Reprobate, by externall Iurisdiction, vvhich is farre inferiour to the other? But because the Iesuit heere taxeth mee, for not distinguishing betweene Iurisdiction internall, and externall; between the binding of sinnes in Court ex∣teriour and interiour, I answere him, as Tertullian did to another Heretick: Ostendat Hermogenes scriptum, aut vae illi. Let Becan shevv vvhere this distinction is vvritten, or vvoebe vnto him. If he cannot, then let him heare, what the Church of England in her Apologie, the second part, chap. 7.
Diuis. 5. hath orthodoxally, and iudiciously determi∣ned heerein: viz. Seeing one manner of vvord is giuen to all, and one onely key belongeth vnto all, we say there is but one onely power of all Ministers, as concerning opening and shutting. So that if the Priest by this one key shutte out the Pope, that is, binde his sinnes, then he excommunica∣teth the Pope: or if with that selfe-same key, hee open to the Pope, that is, remit his sinne; then heab solueth the Pope. For wherefore is one excommunicated, but because his sinnes are bound? wherefore is one absol∣ued, but because his sinnes are remitted? If it bee not in respect thereof, the King may be said to haue power to excōmunicate; that is to say, to keep men from the Communion, viz. when he committeth some to close prison: where, neither any can speake to them, nor they to any. Now therefore, if the Priest may be the cause of the cause, that is, if hee can binde the Popes sinnes; vvhy may he not be the cause of the effect: that is, why may he not excommunicate the Pope; or, (which with S. Paul is all one) deliuer him to Sathan? According to that of Saint Hierome to Heliodore, of the Eremiticall life: God for bid that I should speak any euill of those, who succeeding the Apostolike degree, make the body of Christ vvith their sacred mouth: vvho hauing the keyes of the kingdome of heauen, in sort iudge before the day of Iudge∣ment. It is not lawfull for mee to sit before a Priest: hee may, if I sinne, deliuer mee to Sathan for the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit may be saued. And so Saint Rasil of the solitarie life, cha. 23. Peter, inquit, Amas me, &c. Christ said vnto Peter, Louest thou
mee? Feed my sheep. And in like sort vnto all Pastors and Doctors hee gaue the same power. A token vvhereof is this, that all binde and loose equally, as vvell as Peter. If euery Pastor and Doctor binde and loose equal∣ly, as well as Peter; vvhy not in Court exteriour as well as Peter, sith the sheep are committed vnto them, as well as vnto Peter? The Minor Proposition I also deny heere, as I did in the English Concord. That is, I deny that any Bishoppe hath power to throwe the King out of the Church, or to excommunicate him, according to canonicall ex∣communication, so properly called and defined. And further I denied, that the supposed excommu∣nication of Theodosius, by Ambrose, was canonicall ex∣communication: yeelding there some reasons thereof. Whereunto (though very materiall) this silly Iesuit answereth not one word; and yet with Iesuiticall, that is, with brasen face, is bold to set before thee (Christi∣an Reader) his loathsome Coleworts, twise, yea, thrise sodden. ❧ Becans Iarre. XI. Question. Whether the King may be Iudge of all Contro∣uersies in the Church? 1. COntrouersies that arise in the Church are of two sorts: some are about faith and Religion: others are concerning Ecclesiasticall affaires. The former of these questions then, is: Whether the King by vertue
of his Primacy, bee supreame Iudge of all Controuersies, vvhich pertaine vnto faith and Religion? Maister Salclebridge saith be is, pag. 163. in these vvords: Sic luce clarius est, Christia∣nos Principes cum laude, Controuersias fidei dijudicasse & diremisse, etiam in vniuersalibus octo Concilijs, &c. So as it is more cleare then the Sunne, that Christian Princes, vvith praise, haue iudged of, and decided controuersies of faith, and that in eight Generall Councells &c. Which is as much to say, in the first of Nice, the first of Constantinople, that of Ephe∣sus, Chalcedon, the second, third, and fourth of Constantino∣ple, and the second of Nice, vvherein diuerse controuersies con∣cerning matters of faith vvere iudged of, and decided; especi∣ally cuncerning the diuinitis of Christ, against the Hereticke Arius; of the diuinitie of the holy Ghost, against Macedonius; of one person of Christ, against Nestorius; of two Natures in Christ, against Eutiches and Dioscorus, and so of others. All these Controuersies, saith Maister Saclebridge, were iudged of, and decided by Kings and Emperours. 2. Maister Tooker now, hee affirmeth the quite contra∣rie, vvho by no meanes vvill haue Kings or Emperours to bee Iudges of Controuersies of faith. For thus hee vvriteth, pag. 3. of his books: Olere autem malitiam, ac clamitare audaciam tuam illud videtur, cùm Regem caput Ecelesiae, Primatem∣que confingas, omniumque causarum & controuersiarum, quae ad sidem & Religionem pertinent iudicem tribuas. It may seeme to sauour of malice, & cry out vpon your sausinesse, vvhen as you faine the King to be head of the Church, & Iudge of all causes and controuersies vvhich pertaine vnto faith and Religion, &c. And againe pag. 50. Rexin suo Regno, omni∣bus superior sit, nullisubditus. Fidei iudex no appelletur qui∣dem. Although the King in his owne Kingdome be aboue all, & subiect to none: yet hee may not be called, in any case, the Iadge of our Faith, &c. And pag. 313. Reges Christiani non sunt fidei ac Religionis Iudices. Christian Kings are not Iudges of faith and Religion. 3. So as, if now in England there should chaunce to arise a dissension or debate concerning any point of Faith or Religion,
as for Example, concerning the reall presence of Christ in the Eucharist; vvhat should your Academicks heere do? To vvhom should your Cittizens, and the rest of the subiects haue recourse? Should they goe vnto the King as Iudge in this point, and aske his sentence & determination? Maister Tooker, you see, vvould not goe to the King. What? should they goe to some other Iudge then? But Maister Salclebridge hee vvill admit no other. What then vvere best to bee done in this case? Truly euen that, vvhich hitherto hath been done in the debate of the Kings supremacy: to vvit, alwaies to braule, and iarre therea∣bout, and neuer end the controuersie. And vvhat's the cause? In very deede no other, but for that some thinke one thing, some another; and they cannot, or rather vvill not finde out the cer∣taine and true Iudge, vvho can decide the matter. And this is the propertie of hereticks. 4. The other Question is, Whether the King be Iudge of all Controuersies, that concerne other Ecclesiasticall affaires? Maister Salclebridge saith, that hee is, pag. 165. in these vvords: Audin', Controuersias Episcopales ab Imperatore diremptas? Doe you not heare Sir, that Episcopall Controuer∣sies haue been decided by Emperours? &c. is hat Ma. Tooker thinketh of this point, is not vvell knowne. For sometimes hee af∣firmes it, as for example, pg. 24 thus: Nemini dubiū est, quin in Primitiua Ecclesia, de rebus & personis Ecclesiasticis us di∣cerent Imperatores. No man can doub: but that in the Primi∣tiue Church, Emperours iudged of matters, and persons Eccle∣siasticall &c. And yet pag. 23. hee seemeth to deny it: Non est Princeps supra res, sed supra personas. The Prince (saith he) is not aboue the matters, but abone the persons &c. And then a∣gaine pag. 49. Rex in suo Regno supremus est, non supra res, sed supra homines. The King in his owne Kingdome is the chiefe or principall, but yet not chiefe ouer things, but ouer men. And thus you see euery vvhere nothing but iarring and disagreement.
English Concord. BOth Doctor Tooker and Hainric, deny the King to be supreme Iudge in controuersies of faith: but in other controuersies, both of them agree, that Christian Emperours haue giuen iudgement vp∣on Ecclesiasticall persons, in Ecclesiasticall matters. Heere then you see is no Iarre, but a full and perfect concord. Wherein the Iesuit is taken guilty of a dou∣ble falsehood. First, when hee blusheth not to write, that Hainric affirmeth, the King, by vertue of his su∣premacie, is supreme Iudge of all controuersies; when on the cōtrary, he deemeth no mortall man, nor King, nor Angel, can be that supreme Iudge: nor Saint Pe∣ter; according to that, It seemed good vnto the holy Ghost and to vs: and least of all, the Pope of Rome. Lastly, hee constantly denieth, that any one of the Fathers euer numbred this dignity, of beeing supreme Iudge of controuersies, among the other duties of Pri∣mate of the Church, or Ecclesiasticall supremacie. Secondly, though Becan saith, Hic vhique dissidium, nothing but iarring: yet in good sooth, [that Christi∣an Princes haue with commendation iudged & taken vp controuersies of faith; out of these words of Socra∣tes, Lib. 5. cap. 10. Theodosius called together a Councell of all Sects: and vvhen the Emperour vnderstood their manifold dissensions, hee commaunded them, that euery of their Sects should put in vvriting the particular articles of their seuerall faith. They put their opinions in vvriting accordingly. Then, when they vvere sent for to the Court, the Bishoppes of each Sect appeared and met together: the
Emperour taketh at their hands the vvritten scroules of their faith. Afterward, he shutteth vp himselfe in his Clo∣set alone, and most earnestly maketh prayer to GOD, that his Maiestie vvould helpe him to finde out the truth. Last∣ly, hee readeth euery confession seuerally, and hauing read them, be condemneth and teareth them all, except the faith of the Consubstantiall: that hee praised and approoued] not onely Hainric, but before him, Ma. Doctor Bilson the most graue & learned Bishop of Winchester, in his book of Christian obedience, printed at London, Anno 1586. and before him, that most excellently learned Iuell, Bb. of Salisbury,Part. 6. cap. 13. Diuis. 2. Pag. 524. in the defence of his Latine Apo∣logie, gathered the same doctrine, and concluded the same opinion: the words are these, pag. 172. in the A∣pology; Theodosius Imperator, vt ait Socrates, &c. The Emperour Theodosius (as Socrates vvriteth) did not onely sit among the Bishops, but was also chiefe at the decision of the controuersie, and did rend in peeces the vvritings of the Haereticks, approouing the faith of the true professing Ca∣tholicks. That which Hainric writeth heere of the contro∣uersies of faith, remembred by the Iesuit in the foure first generall Councells (as for the second Councell of Nice, it was rather a godlesse and trifling conspiracy then a Councell) wherein Emperours sate Presidents, and together with the consent of the Synod, gaue iudgements, and concluded those differences; that did also Bishop Iuell, write long before him, Part. b. cap. 13. b. 1. Pag. 522. out of Cardinall Cusanus, in his third booke De Concordia, cap. 16. whom we will soo∣ner belieue, then tenne thousand Becans: the words are
these; Sciendum est quod in vniuersalibus octo concilys semper invenio Imperatores, &c. This you must knowe, that in the first eight generall Councells, I alwaies find, that the Emperours, and their substitutes, with the Senate, had the supremacie and office of Presidentship: and vvith the consent of the Synode, gaue the iudgements and decisi∣ons. Now Sir, I pray you, what other thing is this, then to iudge and take vp controuersies of faith? and yet the Iesuit turnes Iester in this so serious a matter; as if the gods of his societie had giuen him some great ad∣uantage: saying vpon his former weake inferences; So as if in England there should chaunce to arise a debate, &c. And I will follow his steppes, and turne his owne tearms vpon him in this manner: So as if in Rome there should chaunce to arise a dis∣sension, or debate about any point of faith; as for ex∣ample, about the Popes supremacie, or (which is all one) his beeing vniuersall Bishoppe, what would the Academicall Fathers of the societie of IESVS doe? vvho haue suppressed the Sorbonists. What would the people of Rome doe, or other the Popes subiects? Should they goe to Pope Paul the fift, as their onelle Iudge and desire his sentence & determination? why then Pope Gregory the great (a farre wiser man) vvill stand against it. Should they goe and desire any other Iudge to take vp the matter? Surely, Bellarmine wil not endure that. What were then best to be done in this case? Euen that which hither to hath beene done in the debate of the Popes supremacy. For the Papists haue euer beene at odds, and iarred, and could neuer end this contro∣uersie.
And what's the cause? In very deed no other, but for that some thinke one thing, and some another: and they cannot, or rather will not, finde out the cer∣taine and true Iudge, who can decide the matter. And this is the property of hereticks. Againe, I will touch Becane in one instance, more neerely. If there chaunce to arise a controuersie a∣bout this point, or article of the Popes religion; An si∣des haereticis seruanda, Whether promise must be kept with hereticks, what will the Academicall Fathers of the societie doe? Will they goe to Pope Paul the fift? Becane will not like of that. Will they goe to any other Iudge? Barronius will not endure it; no, nor Ignatius Loyola, the Syre of all the Iesuits (who first inuented the Art of Equiuocation, and so the breach of faith) if hee were aliue. Heere I might boinfinite: but I will confine my selfe in one or two examples. If it chance a dissension or debate to arise about the body of Christ in the Eucha∣rist; as whether it may be broken, or chewed with the teeth of them that care it; according to the Decree Part. 3. dist. 2. cap. 42. What would the Romane Ca∣tholicks doe in this case? Would they repaire to Pope Paul the fist, as Iudge of this controuersie? Berengarius in his Recantation hath giuen warning to the contrary. Would they goe to Pope Nicholas? Bellarmine will not allow of him; vvho in his third booke and tenth chapter of this Sa∣crament of the Eucharist, vvriteth; Christus vere in Sacramento existit, sed non teritur, non roditur: Christ is trulie in the Sacrament, but hee is neither bitten nor chewed.
To conclude, if there arise a dissension at Rome, a∣bout the Reall presence; as for example, Whether Christs body be really present, but without bignesse, as Durand holdeth, in 4. Dist 10. q. 2. or with great∣nesse, but vvithout distinction of parts, as Decam in 4. q. 4. and thirdly, with bignesse, and all distinct parts, as Bellarmine, Lib. 3. cap. 5. De Euchar. what were then best to be done in this case? For the Papists are alwaies at odds & iarre about the corporall presence of Christ in the Eucharist: and the strife can neuer be taken vp. What's the cause? In very deede no other, but for that some thinke one thing, and some another: and they cannot, or rather will not, finde out the certaine and true Iudge, who can decide the matter. And this is the property of Hereticks. But heere obserue with mee in the last place, the guilefull disposition of Becan; Doctor Tooker, pag. 23. affirmeth, that Princes are aboue the persons, and not the sacred things, as the vvord, Sacraments, and spiritu∣all graces of the Church: adding in the same page, Sole ipso, &c I vvill make it as cleare as the Sunne, that the chiefe care of the Prince, must be had for things and causes Ecclesiasticall: and that their supremacy especially consi∣steth in the execution of that function. From hence the Iesuit maketh this collection; The King (by confession of Doctor Tocker) is not aboue some Ecclesiasticall things, as the vvord, and Sacra∣ments: therefore aboue no Ecclesiasticall things, as are the controuersies of Bishops; Against Doctor Tooker his expresse meaning in the same leafe.
BECAN. Exam.Pag. 204. YOu say Haintic and Tooker doe not dissent heerein. Richard, I admire your impudencie. Hainric saith: Christian Princes commendably haue determined controuersies of faith. Tooker saith: Christian Kings are not Iudges of faith. These are vtterly repugnant: there in none so blinde, vvho may not heere see a Iarre. For if they be no Iudges, how can they iudge? And if cōmendably they iudge matters of faith, they must needes bee Iudges of faith. It is cer∣taine, Hainric is of opinion, that the King is supreme Iudge of faith amongst men in this life: or (vvhich is all one) the supreme President of Councels. GOD onely is absolutely the supreme Iudge, or President of Councels. Wee say, The Pope, amongst men, is supreme Iudge. You say, The King, or Emperour. Dr. HARRIS Reply. HEere is nought else, but the empty froath of the selfe-same things reiterated. Doctor Too∣ker saith, The King is not supreme Iudge in controuersies of faith amongst men. Hainric averreth the same. Hainric saith, Christian Kings laudably haue iudged and determined matters of faith: Doctor Too∣ker knoweth and acknowledgeth the same: Impuden∣cie it selfe would hardly say, there were any iarre heer∣in. But the Iesuit cannot conceiue, how one may com∣mendably determine a controuersie in any matter, vn∣lesse he were the onely supreme Iudge euery vvhere, touching that matter. As though Iames did not determine that controuer∣sie of faith in the Coūcell of Hierusalem. Act. 15. v. 19.
And yet the Iesuit will not permit Iames to be supreme Iudge in controuersies of faith. As though Daniel did not commendably iudge & determine the controuersie touching the chastitie of Susanna: and yet Daniel was no supreme Iudge of wo∣mens continencies, or incontinencies. When in the first Nicen Councell, the controuersie amongst the Bishops was, Whether Bishops, Priests, Deacons, or Subdeacons, should sleepe vvith their wiues, which they had maried before they were in orders: And when the rest of those Fathers wold haue made a Canon prohibiting the vse of their wiues; Paphnutius, grounding himselfe vpon that in Scrip∣ture: Mariage is honour able among all men, and the bed vndefiled: determined: . The companie of man and vvife, to be cleanenesse, and chastitie. And therevpon saith Sozomen. Lib. 1. cap. 22. Paph∣nuij sententiam approbauit Concilium, et de hac re, nul∣lam legemtulit, sed eam in cuiusque arbitrio, non in neces∣sitate, poni voluit. The Councell approeued his sentence, and would not make any such Canon, but left it free to the choice of euery one of them. And yet Paphnutius vvas no supreme Iudge of all such matters. The Iesuit would disdaine, to call Hosius, Bishop of Corduba, supreme Iudge in controuersies of faith: yet Athanasius, in his second Apology, writeth thus of him: In qua Synodo dux ille et Antesignanus non fuit? Qua Ecclesia istius Praesidentiae non pulcherrima monu∣menta retinet? In vvhat Councell hath not Hosius beee chiefe, and President? vvhat Church is vvithout some no∣table monuments of his Presidentship?
But why doth not the Iesuit answer vnto Socrates? who writeth the very same that Hainric affirmeth here∣in; and much more in the Proem to fift booke, where hee hath these words: Passim in historia Impe∣ratorum mentionem propterea fecimus, quod exillo tempo∣re quo Christiani esse coeperunt, Ecclesiaenegotia exillorum nutu pendere visa sunt, atque adeo maxima Concilia de e∣orum sententia, et conuocata fuerunt, et adhuc conuocantur. Therefore in this history haue we mentioned the Emperors, because, since they first became Christian, the Churches af∣faires depended vpon them, and the greatest Councels, were and are assembled by their command. Surely, if to bee Presidents in those greatest Coun∣cels, be all one, as to be supreme Iudges of faith; (so the Iesuit heere would haue i) how can it be avoided, but that Emperours were supreme Iudges in those con∣trouersies handled in the said Councels? and so, in controuersies of faith, (for such controuersies vvere handled in them); seeing that, as that great learned man, and Cardinall, Cusanus in his book of Concord, Lib. 3. chap. 16. writeth, (and he writeth as he sound it;) That Emperours, or other Senatours, vvere al∣waies Presidents, and had the Primacie in those said grea∣test Councels. The Iesnit cannot deny, but that Cusanus so wri∣teth: vvherefore then doth hee not shape Cusanus his aunswere? VVherefore? Because a man may as soone expect water out of a Flint-stone, as any indi∣cious learning or reading, from this so vnlearned and shallow Iesuit. If the Pope should be that vniuersall Bishop or su∣preme Iudge of còtrouersies in faith: then, as said Pope
Gregory the great; If he erre in the faith, all the members of Christs Church then liuing, must erre in the faith. Then Hereticks, Apostates from the faith, and the principall Authors of that Apostasie, that is, Antichrists, viz. Popes, may be supreme Iudges of controuersies in faith. Which is impious, and absurd: For, as Lyra in Math. cap. 16. saith; Constat &c. It is certaine that ma∣ny Popes haue beene Apostates from the faith. Therefore we hold no man to be supreme Iudge in controuersies of faith; because All men are lyers. Therefore we say, The Lord alone is supreame Iudge: because, as Augu∣stine (against Cresconius the Grammarian, lib. 21. chap. 2.) saith; Dominus semper veraciter iudicat: Ecclesia∣stici autemiudices, sicut homines, plerumque falluntur. God iudgeth alwaies truly: others, euen Ecclesiasticall Iudges, are most commonly deceiued. BECAN. Exam.Pag. 206 TOOker heerein followeth your King, vvho in contro∣uersies of faith, sendeth euery man to his owne priuate conscience: for so he vvriteth in his Praeface Monito∣tory: Opto vt velitis: I wish you would diligently read ouer the Scripture, to take from thence the rule of faith: and to place the foundation of your faith, in your owne certaine knowledge, and not in the vncertaine opi∣nion of others. Which is all one, as if he had said; There is no certaine iudge in the matter of faith, but euery one is to rest in his owne proper iudgement. Therefore Tooker holdeth vvith the King, but dissenteth from Hainric. You hault on both sides.
Dr. HARRIS Reply. HAinric, in his Becane Baculus, defending this found doctrine, and orthodoxall, which Be∣can heere brings in, set downe by his Maiesty in his Praeface Monitorie; cudgelled soundly this Ie∣suit, for his impious scoffing at that holy & good doc∣trine, as is there to bee seene in many pages: yet this shamelesse Iesuit, dare heere affirme, that Hainric dis∣senteth from his Maiestie heerein. If this be Becans English Iarre, thè is his English Iarre, in truth, the most vniforme Concord. For I dare avow, that not onely Hainric, but all other Protestant Eng∣lish Writers doe embrace, as true, ancient, catholicke, and Apostolick doctrine, that which the Iesuit tran∣scribeth heere from his Maiesties Praeface Monito∣rie. Moreouer, wee may heere behold the footsteps of that old Serpent, wherein this serpentine brond, viz. this Iesuit treadeth. His Maiestie, following his Mai∣ster Christ, aduised Princes, To take from the Scripture (diligently read ouer by them, and so, well vnderstood by them) the rule of their faith: vvhereby they might place the foundation of their faith, in their owne certaine knowledge, to weet, solidly grounded vpon the Scrip∣tures; and not in the vncertaine opinion of others. This pure doctrine, the Iesuit with the aspersion of his leauen, adulterateth thus: This is all one, as if the King had said, There is no certain Iudge in the matter of faith, but euery one is to rest in his owne proper iudgement: wheras his Maiestie cleane contrary asser∣teth,
that GOD hath prouided to euery one of his Saints on earth, a certaine Iudge in matter of their faith, to weet, the holy Ghost, and holy Scripture; the certaine knowledge whereof, as touching matter of faith, the holy Ghost, working together with the sa∣cred meanes of hearing, reading, meditaring, confer∣ring, praying, &c. giueth & sealeth vp in their soules: So that they shall not place the foundation of their faith, in the vncertaintie either of their owne proper iudgements, or of the opinions of others; but in the certaine testimo∣nie of the foresaid Iudge. Of which Iudge, Saint Iohn, 1. Ioh. 2. v. 27. vvri∣teth thus: And the annoynting vvhich yee haue receiued of him, dwelleth in you: and yee need not that any man teach you, but as the same annointing teacheth you of all things; and it is true, and not lying: and as it taught you, yee shall abide in it. So that euery Christian is to rest, not in his owne pro∣per iudgement, for that is vncertaine; but in the cer∣taine iudgement of the forsaid annointing: working in the Saints that certaine knowledge, vvherein to place the foundation of their faith; vvhereof his Maiestie spea∣keth. Constantine the great, and first Christian Emperor, found in himselfe, by gracious effect, the certainty of this said doctrine, heere averred by our King; for thus hee writeth in his Epistle to Sapor, King of Persia, registred by Theodoret, Lib. 1. cap. 24. Marking the diuine faith, I obtaine the light of truth: and following the light of trueth, I acknowledge the diuine faith. The certaine truth of this doctrine, is so apparant, that is bath expresse testimony and acknowledgement
thereof, from the very Popish VVriters themselves, as is to bee seene by diuerse of them, in Beoano-Ba∣culus. Therfore, I will here instance in one onely, and that no meane one, viz. Stapleton, who in his second admo∣nition to Maister Dr. Whitakers, set before his Triplica∣tion, writeth thus: In libro meo 3. Principior ŭ fidei, Spi∣ritus sancti internam persuasionem, ad quodlibet fidei ob∣iectum credendum, ita necessariam, ita efficacem esse do∣cui, vt nec absque illa, quicquam a quoquam creds possit, et∣si milliei Ecclesia attestetur: et per illam solam quodlibet credendum credi queat, tacente prorsus, et non audita Eccle∣sia. In my 8. booke of the Principles of faith, I have taught, that the invvard persuasion of the holy Ghost is so necessa∣rie, and so effectuall for the belieuing of euery obiect of faith, that vvithout it, neither can any thing bee belieued by any man, though the Church testified vvith it a thou∣sand times; and by it alone any thing that is to be belieued, may be belieued, though the Church kept silence, and never vvere heard. Is not the force of this truth great, and must needs preuaile, sith the Aduersaries themselues, write so fully and directly for it? To shut vp this point, and to shut the Pope cleane out, from this supreme Iudgeship, Panormitan the Abbat, in De Elect. et Elect potest. ca. Signisicasti; very iudici∣ously writeth thus: Plus credendum est vni priuato fi∣deli, quam toti Concitio et Papa, si meliorem habeat au∣thoritatem, velrationem. Wee ought to giue more credit to one priuate lay man, then to the vvhole Councell, and the Pope, if hee bring better authoritie, and more rea∣son.
And to the same effect, writeth Picus Mirandula, in the question, Whether the Pope be aboue the Coun∣cell; thus: Simplici potius rustico, et Infanti, et Anicula magis, quam Poncifici maxima, et mille Episcopis creden∣dum est, sisti contra Euangelium, illi pro Euangelio faci∣unt. More credit is to be giuen to a simple plaine Rusticke, to an Infant, or to an old vvoman, then to the Pope, or a thousand Bishops, if the Pope and the Bishops speake against the Gospell, and the others speake with the Gospell. What a silly supreme iudge, and absolute in all con∣trouersies of faith, is the Pope, vnto whom, (as often∣times it may, and hath fallen out) lesse credit is to bee giuen, then to a priuat man, then to a woman, then to an Intant? BECAN. Exam.Pag. 107. I Repeate that vvhich I had vvritten before: If a dissention should arise in England, touching some point of faith, as of the Reall prefence of Christ in the Eucharist; what should the subiects doe? Should they goe to the King as supreame Iudge? Hainrick vvould haue it so; but Tooker would not suf∣fer it: The King himselfe sonds euery man to his owne consci∣ence, and you would hault on both sides. Touching that vvhich you bring out of or discords, touching it. The Pope, as vniuersal Bishop. 2. Faith to be kept with Hereticks. 3. The body of Christ broken, and chewed or grinded in the Eucharist. 4. The Reall presence of his body vvithout quantity: It is false, we dissent not heerein; and though we did, doth it therefore follow, that you dis∣sent not in the point of your Churches Primate? That is most foolish.
Dr. HARRIS Reply. INdeed the Iesuit is heere become very foolish, and childish; and come to this, Repetamus omnia breui∣ter, yet sets him downe in his chaire of pestilence; that is, scornfulnes; with Iesuiticall, viz. the greatest impudencie, scoffing very impiously and ridiculously, our Kings sacred Maiestic, as those cursed miscreants did our Sauiour Christ. They cried, All haile King of the lewes: and this Iesuit, in effect cries, All haile King of England, supreme Iudge there, in controuersies of faith. Touching the Reall presence, there is no discord a∣mongst vs: but therein are discords endlesse amongst the Papists; as in the other points heere mentioned, though this Iesuit with brasen face deny the same. If any man, hauing an honest and good hart, doubt in a∣ny matter of faith, our King hath heere put that man in the King of heauen his high way, to put him our of doubt, viz. by sending him, to the Law,Esay 8. and to the Go∣spell. Thirther flie wee, and not to our King, in con∣trouersies of faith. But miserable Papists, who leaue the law & Gospell, as dead Inke: whither should they flie in their controuersies of faith? To the Pope? be∣like as the Thomists and Scotists did. The case was this: There fell out betweene those two Sects, this odious quarrell, Whether the Virgine Mary were conceiued in sinne, or no. The one side, said yea: The other faction, cried nay. Their factions encreased, the Schooles were enflamed, & the world troubled: No Doctor, no Coucell, was able to accord
them. The Scotists alleaged for themselues the Coun∣cell of Basil. The Thomists said, that Councell was dis∣orderly summoned, and therefore vnlawfull. In the midds of these broyles, Pope Sixtus tooke vpon him, as supreme Iudge, to determine that contro∣uersie in faith between them. When all the world ex∣pected his resolution, desirous to bee satisfied in that question; The Pope commaunded both the Thomists, and the Scotists, to depart home, and to dispute no more of that matter: and so left them as doubtfull as he found them. Could not a Supreme Iudge made of clowts, haue done the office of a supreme Iudge therein, as vvell as Pope Sixtus; that is to say, haue done iust nothing? Lastly, whereas this trifling Sophister, framing his childish argument [Papist Writers iarre in many points: Therefore English Writers iarre not in the poynt of their Kings Primacy] vpon the anvile of his owne fantasie onely; and so framed, would father it vpon mee: let his fatherhood learne by this reply, that my onely scope therein was, in vrging him to the quick, by those obiected iarres, as it were, by so many incisions of his Basilica vaine, to giue a vent vnto that falt, fierie, scoffing humour of his, at our seeming iarrs, which in his plethorick body, was so redundant, and put ifying in him: As also to giue him to vnderstand, how pat those words of our Sauiour Christ fall vpon his head;Math. 7. v-5. viz. Hypocrite, first cast out the beame out of thine owne eye, and then shalt thou see cleerely to cast out the mote out of thy brothers eye. Their Popish Iarres, are Beame-Iarres: our English seeming Iarres, are lesse then Mote-Iarres. In truth,
they are no Iarres, at all, but true Concords. And thus is his froath once againe scattered to nothing. ❧ Becans Iarre. XII. Question. Whence, and by vvhat Title, hath the King his Primacie in the Church? 1. THe sense heereof is, Whether the King precisely in that hee is a Christian King, hath the Primacy of the Church? The former part of this point, Ma. Thomson seemeth to approoue, pag 78. where he saith: Omnes Principes, etiam Pagani, obiectiuè habent su∣preman potestatem in omnes omnino personas suorū sub∣ditorum, & generatim in res ipsas, siue ciuiles sint, siue sacrae, vt in cultu diuino & Religione procuranda, saltem quoad modum & exercitium. All Princes, yea euen those that bee Pagans, haue for the obiect of their supreme power, all manner of persons that be their subiects, and generally all things, vvhe∣ther ciuill or sacred, as in advauncing Gods honour & Religion, at least-wise, so farre forth, as belongeth to the manner and ex∣ercise thereof, &c. And then againe, pag. 94. Primatus est Re∣gium bonum, quod Censurâ tolli non potest. Nec est absur∣dum, Regem velut Ethnicum, esse Primatem Ecolesiae. Pri∣macy is a certaine Kingly right, that cannot bee taken away by censures. Nor is it absurd, that a King, as he is an Ethnicke, be Primate of the Church &c. And yet further in the same place: Rex Ethnicus, cum Christo initiatur, non acquirit Primatú de nouo. An Ethnicke King (saith hee) vvhen as hee is in∣structed in Christ, or the Christian faith, doth not purchase any new primacie, &c. To whom consenteth Ma. Burhill. pag. 251.
thus: Rex titulo Registemporalis potest sibi vindicare, & as∣sumere Primatum Ecclesiae. A King, by the title of a tempo∣rall King, may claime vnto himselfe, and take vpon him the Pri∣macie of the Church, &c. And pag. 267. Rex etsi iustissimè excommunicatus, non amittit Primatum in rebus Ecclesia∣sticis. A King, although he be most iustly excommunicated, yet doth he not loose his Primacy in Ecclesiasticall matters, &c. 2. My L. of Ely now, he teacheth vs a quite contrary lesson, in his Tortura Torti, pa. 39. where he averreth, that the Prima∣cie of the Church doth belong to the King, not because hee is a King, but because hee is a Christian King; and therfore Ethnick Kings haue no Primacy in the Church, so long as they remaine Ethnicks; but doe then receiue the said Primacy, when they are made Christians: and loose the same againe also, when they be ex∣communicated. His vvords are these: An non Regi Ethnico praestare fidem fas? Imo nefas non praestare. In Ethnico e∣nim est vera potestas temporalis, idque sine ordine ad pote∣starem Ecclesiasticam. Is it not lawfull then, to yield Allegi∣ance to an Ethnicke King? Nay rather, not to yield it, is a vvic∣kednes. For, in an Ethnicke there is true temporall power, and that vvithout respect to Ecclesiasticall power, &c. And a little after. Rex quiuiscùm de Ethnico Christianus fit, non perdit terrenum ius, sed acquitit ius nouum. Itidem cùm de Chri∣stiano sit sicut Ethnicus, vigoresententiae amitut nouum ius quod acquisierat: sed retinet terrenum ius in temporalibus: quod suerat illi proprium, priusquam Christianus fieret, &c. Euery King, when as of an Ethnicke, he becommeth a Christian, dooth not loose his earthly right, but getteth a nevv right. And so in like manner, vvhen as of a Christian, hee becommeth as an Ethnicke, (to wit, by excommunication) then by vigour of the sentence, hee looseth that nevv right vvhich he had gotten, but yet notwithstanding he still retaineth his earthly right intempo∣rall things, vvhich vvas proper vnto him, before he became a Christian, &c. 3. So as according to the opinion of Ma. Thomson, and Ma. Buthill, it followeth, that all Kings, vvhether Christians or Ethnicks, or of vvhatsoeuer other Sect or Religion they bee,
are Primates of the Church in their owne Kingdoms. There∣fore all Englishmen and Scots, vvho liue at Constantinople, are (by their sentence) subiect to the Turke in Ecclesiastical matters: as also they that liue in Spaine, are subiect to King Philip; and they at Rome, to the Pope, & so to others, in other places. What now shall these men doe, if the Turke should commaund them to follow the Alcoran? The King of Spaine force them to heare Masse? The Pope to pray for the dead? and some heathen King perhaps compell them to Idolatry? Shall they then obey these Princes commaund? But then should they doe against their con∣sciences. Shall they refuse to obey? Then farewell Primacie of the Church. Perhaps they vvill aunswere, that they vvill obey, vvhen they thinke good. Shall therefore subiects be Iudges of their King? May then the Catholicks in England, say after this manner, If it please your Maiestie, in this point we think good to obey your Maiesties commaund, but in that not? English Concord. IN this place, either the Iesuit is beside himselfe, or else hee hath much forgot himselfe. For euery where in his other Questions, hee affir meth that no King; either Pagan or Christian, hath any Primacy in the Church: and yet heere, hee enquireth from whence, and by what title, hee hath his Primacie in the Church. Therefore, by his owne learning, hee beateth his braines to find the originall of nothing. If he take away this supposition, that the King hath a Primacie in the Church, either precisely as hee is a King, or else, because hee is a Christian King; hee is a foolish Sophister. [For his dispute runnes not thus; The King if he haue Primacy of the Church, he hath it, either as he is a King, or as a Christian King: but
hee hath it in neither of the said two respects: therefore hee hath it not at all.] If hee let that supposition stand; then, because it is manifest, that our most gracious King Iames, is by birth, a King: and by religion a Christian King; he is a brainsick wrangler. For, sith by his supposall heere, The King hath the Primacie of the Church: vvhat matter is it, whether he haue it, as hee is a King, or as hee is a Christian King, if so bee he haue it at all? Wherefore, there is no cause that we should much stand vpon this idle and beggerly question, wherein is onely a shadow of a question. Furhermore, I would haue the Iesuit vnderstand, that this Primacie of the Church hee standeth vpon, is not deriued from the title of a King, but from God himselfe. For Moses was adorned with this dignitie in the Church of Israel. And yet we neuer read, that hee was stiled with the title of a King. But certainly, that you may knowe heere is no iarre or odds among vs, respecting the maine: the worthy Bishop of Ely, in his Tortura, pag. 377. hath soundly, and according to the very truth manifested, That the Primacie of the Church, belongeth not to Ethnicke Kings, as Ethnick: but vnto Kings, as they are Chri∣stian Kings, or Defenders of the Diuine truth. His words are these; Et sunt ista quidem ex Testamento veteri satis solida fundamenta, non quod ad reges infi∣deles Primatum pertinere probent, &c. And those things before related out of the old Testament, are so solid and substantiall grounds, as Tortus shall neuer bee able to shake. Not that they proue this Primacie of the Church to belong to Pagan Kings: no surely, wee in the new Testa∣ment
giue no more vnto such Princes, then vvas giuen in the old vnto Ahasucrus, and Nabuchodonosor. Wher∣fore, in this point, Tortus is beside himselfe: but yet, if Caesar become a Christian, as in Constantine, then pre∣sently he hath the same right ouer the Church of the new Testament, vvhich Iosias had in the old. Reditus sta∣tim fit ad iura regum Israel; there is a present possessi∣on of the ancient rights of the Kings of Israel, as soone as e∣uer they are made Kings of the Israel of God, & giuen vp their names to Christ. Wherefore, this is not our purpose, that the Persecuters of the Church, such as vvere Cains and Tiberius, should be the Gouernours of the Church, (vvho would not receiue that title although a man would giue it them: because they employ their vvhole strength to ruine and roote vp the Church): but let them then take superiority in the Church, vvhen they are vnfainedlie converted to the faith thereof. There are due to Caesar, the things of Caesar: and there belong to the Christian Caesar, vvhatsoeuer duties vnder the old Law were ei∣ther payd or payable by the people of God to their Kings: vnto vvhom were then due and yielded, all manner of subiection and obedience, not onely in the affaires of the co∣uill state, but also of the Church. These things so expressed, are very true and fitting our purpose: for in them we haue learned, that Pagan Kings, as they are Pagans, haue no Primacie in the Church. But what if almighty God so guide and gouern the hearts of Pagan Kings, as that they would stand for the worship of God against error, and make lawes for the same; let the Iesuit tell mee in that case, vvhether God doth not hinde our cōscience to obey pagan Princes?
And let him take heed how he deny it, least Bellarmine fall on his Iack for it, because he hath resolued the mat∣ter, in the very same words, De pont. Rom. lib. 5. cap. 2. But yet if he doubt, lot him resort to Saint Augustine, in his 166. Epistle to the Donatists; who writeth on this manner: Quando Imperatores veritatem tenent, &c. When Emperours stand for the truth, and giue out a com∣maundement for the same against errour; vvhosoeuer shal despise the same, encreaseth his owne damnation. For euen among men hee suffereth punishment: but before God hee shall not dare to appeare, vvhich refuseth to doe that, which truth it selfe commaundeth by the hart of the King. And according to this opinion, our reuerend B. in his Tortura Torti, pag. 381. most truly writeth, Quod∣cunque in rebus religionis, &c. Whatsoeuer the Kings of Israel did in matters of religion, neither did they anything vvithout commendation, vvherein they had power & au∣thority to enact Lawes, as that GOD should not be blasphe∣med: vvhich you will not deny the King of Babel also did, Dan. 3.29. And the King of Nineuch, Ionas. 3.7. that vvith a publique proclaimed fast, God almightie might bee satisfied. Andaccording to this sentence, wrote Saint Augu∣stine many yeares before him, in his 50. Epist. to Boni∣facius the Souldiour. Sed illud propheticum iam im∣pletur, Psal. 2. Et nunc reges seruite domino in timore, &c. But now is the propheticall Oracle fulfilled, vvhich speaketh in the 2. Psalm, Now, ô yce Kings, serue the Lord in feare. And how shall Kings scrue the Lord in feare, vnlesse they prohibite and punish those enormities with religious seueritie and iustice, vvhich are daily com∣mitted against the Lords will and commaundement? And
because hee is a King, he serueth (as a seruant) by making Lawes, vvith force and vigour to commaund things that are righteous, and to forbid the contrarie. Euen as Ezeki∣as serued by destroying the Temples of Idols, and cutting downe the groues. Euen as King losias serued, by dooing the like. Euen as the King of Niniuch serued, by compel∣ling the vvhole Citie to pacifie the Lord. Euen as King Darius serued, by breaking the Idol in pecces. Euen as King Nabuchodonosor serued, by making a godly and laudable lawe, that vvhosoeuer blasphemed the God of Sydrach, hee should be destroyed, and his house razed. In this therefore Kings serue the Lord, in that they are Kings; vvhen they doe those things for his seruice, which they cannot doe but as they are Kings. If therefore the Iesuit, had seriously knowen how to distinguish these things, hee might haue acknow∣ledged, that Maister Burhill, and Maister Thomson, a∣greed with the reuerend Bishop in this point. Especi∣ally, when Maister Thomson, in pag. 78. writeth thus expresly and distinctly; Omnes principes etiam pagani, &c. All Kings, yea, very Pagan Kings (objectiuely) haue supreme power ouer all the persons of their subiects, both in sacred and ciuill things: especially, to attemper their mea∣sure, and permit their exercise: vvhich thing is witnessed by the Chronicles of all Nations. Although the Pagans v∣sed that their power against the Lord: yet vvas it a fault of the men, abusing their power giuen them of God to a good end, and not any fault of the power at all. But yet, by a farre more speciall regard did this power in Ecclesiasticall mat∣ters, of old belong to the good Kings of Israell: and now also to Christian Princes. For they, as bceing of the lewish Synagogue, and these, as beeing of the Church, haue a grea∣ter
and more speciall right in all causes of the Church, then if they were meerely and onely Kings. Wherefore, in one re∣spect it was said to Cyrus; Pastor incusestu: Thou art my Shepheard: and in another respect to Dauid: Tu pas∣ces populum meum Israel; Thou shalt feed my people Is∣rael. Which thing Iremember our reuerend Bishop hath ad∣monished in another place. And speaking to Becan himselfe, pag. 94. hee con∣cludeth with these words; Haec facilia sunt intellectu: & miror te tantum Theologum hic haesisse. These things (saith hee) are easie to be vnderstood: and I cannot but vvonder, that Becane, vvho is magnified by the Papists for so great a Diuine, should faile in a point of such facilitie. Heere you may perceiue (Readers) that there is a constant English concord, and no Iarre among vs at all: wherein these two things offer themselues to bee considered. First, the Logick: and secondly, the plain∣nesse, or rather ignorance of this Iesuit: or, at the least, a Iesuiticall iarre, or the Primacy of Kings, established by the Iesuits themselues. 1. Thus he reasoneth out of Maister Thomsons, and Maister Burhills opinion. All Kings, yea popish and pagan, haue a primacy in their Kingdoms: Ergo, saith the Iesuit, it must needs fol∣low, that all persons liuing in those Kingdoms, are bound to doe all things (though neuer so vvicked) which are by them commaunded. Is this the Diuini∣tie of the Iesuits? Math. 23. 2. Our Sauiour speaketh thus to his Disciples; The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chaire: all things therefore vvhich they commaund you to doe, that obserue and doe. Acts 4.18. There the same Pharisees out of the same chaire, forbid the Apostles, that they
speake and preach any more in the Name of Iesus. There∣fore may not the Iesuit as Logically conclude, that the Apostles are bound to obey them? and then no more teaching in the Name of Iesus. But Peter and Iohn an∣swered them other wise; Whether it be more iust, vvee obey GOD, or man: iudge yee. And after this manner writeth Isidore in the Canon law, Si is qui praeest, 11. q. 3. out of Basil; St is qui praeest prohibet vobis quod a Domino est proeceptum, &c. If hee that sitteth chiefe, for∣bid you that vvhich is commaunded of the Lord; or on the contrary, commaund that vvhich is forbidden of the Lord: let him bee accursed of all them that loue God. and reckoned a false vvitnesse, and sacrilegious person. The Romane Catholiques of Venice, of Sorbona, & many other Noble-menan France, acknowledge the Popes supremacy in the church: but if the Pope should commaund them to become his subiects in temporall things, etiam in ordine ad spiritualia, in behalfe of spiritu∣all causes: or, if hee should authorise the Alcoran, and commaund them to follow it; would they, thinke you, obey his vvill? Then must they doe against their con∣science. If they doe not obey him; then what shall be∣come of the Popes Primacie? I will beate you with the scourge of your owne tongue; Perhaps they vvill aunswere, They vvill obey vvhen they thinke good. Shall therefore the papislicall Ca∣tholiques in France, and in Venice, take vp this saying; Heere, O Pope, wee thinke good to obey your Holinesse com∣maund in this point, and not in that: and then farewell the Popes supremacy. Thus much of the Logicke of Becane.
Now, for his plainenesse, or plaine ignorance; these are the words of the Bishoppe of Ely, in Tortura Torti, pag. 39. Dominia non fundantur in fide, sic infidelitate non euertuntur. Quin rex quinis cum de Ethnice Christi∣anus fit, non perdit ius terrenum, sed acquirit nouum. Go∣uernments and principalities are not founded vpon belie∣uing, and therefore are not ouerthrowne by infidelitie. But vvhen any King is made a Christian, of a Pagan, hee lo∣seth not the earthly right he had before, but acquireth a new right. Thus farre our vvorthy Bishoppe. Now (saith the Iefait) in these words, The Chaplaine teacheth, that Pagan Kings haue no Primacie in the Church; but they receiue it by their conuersion to Christianitie. But I say, that these are not the words of the Bishop of Ely onely, but (before him) of Cardinall Bellarmine, De Roman: Pont: Lib 5. cap. 2. et 3. Dominium non fundatur in gratia aut fide: Christus non abstulit reg∣na ijs quorum erant, &c. Lordshippe and principalitie, is not grounded on grace, or belieuing: Christ tooke not a∣way Kingdoms, frons them to vvhom they belonged, for hee came not to destroy things vvell established, but to perfect them. Therefore, vvhen a King is made a Christian, which vvas a Pagan, hee loseth not his earthly Kingdome, which hee had obtayned by right, but acquireth nouum ius, a nevv right. Which nevv right, if Becane may be be∣lieued, as an Interpreter, or Concluder, or Iudge; is the Primacie in the Church. And so we haue him crying guiltie, confessing the question: let vs sound the victory. For if there be no iarre heere betwixt the Iesuits about this Primacie,
then haue wee plainly confirmed, and euicted them, that Christian Princes haue a Primacie in the Church. For so Bellarmine, expresly and dogmatically, affirmeth, That Ethnick Kings becomming Christians, acquire a nevv right. Which new right, by confession of Be∣cane, is the Primacy in the Church. Therefore Christian Kings haue a Primacie in the Church. But vvhat is the Primacie of Pagan Kings, as Pagans, I leaue it to the Papists themselues to con∣sider. BECAN. Exam.Pag. 212 I Doe not take away the Supposition, out of mine ovvne opinion; for I deny the King to haue Primacie: but out of yours, vvho affirme hee hath it. Therefore, out of your opinion, I might vvell dispute thus: Whence hath hee Primacie? Whether as a King? or as a Christian King? to shevv the discord. For by Thomson, and Burhill, all heathen Kings, as vvell as Christian; By the Chaplaine, onely Christi∣an Kings, are Primates of the Church. This is a great Iarre, compound it, if you can. And vvhere you adde, that it mattereth not how hee haue it, so he hath it: This is a new Iarre. For it mattereth great∣lie, according to Thomson and the Chaplaine. For, if he haue the Primacie because hee is King; hee cannot lose it so long as hee is King: if because he is a Christian King, hee may lose it. If hee may lose the Primacie, hee is not secure: if hee cannot lose it, hee may take his quiet rest.
Dr. HARRIS Reply. HIs first words of the 12. Question, shew that he makes the Suppositum of himselfe, & not out of our Writers opinion; especially Ma. Thomson, and Ma. Burhill, heere named by him. For, hauing set downe the Question thus, Whence, and by vvhat title, hath the King Primacie in the Church? hee saith; The meaning of this Question is, Whether the King haue Primacie as a King, or as a Christian King. But as Becane hath produced Ma. Thomson, & Ma. Burhill, in his 1. and 2. Questions, They both deny the King to haue Primacie in the Church. Therefore the Iesuit heer sets downe the Suppositum as of him∣selfe, and not as out of their opinions. But what meant the Iesuit to say, hee disputed heere, when he onely as∣ked the Question? Do boyes vse to dispute with their Maisters, when they onely aske questions of their Mai∣sters? Indeed, if the Iesuit had disputed, hee should haue disputed as in my English Concord is set downe; and so by his dispute, he had not taken away his ovvn Suppositum, (as heere hee doth) but had disputed out of the opinion of some others, who averre the Kings Primacy. As touching the Iarre; the English Concord, euen out of the expresse words of Ma. Thomson, manifested the agreement between the reuerend Bishop, and Ma. Thomson, in this point, so plainly & directly; that Ma. Thomson himselfe wondred that Becane could stumble at it, as at any Iarie. And now lately comes forth Ma. Burhill, in his Appendix pag. 289. asserting, That an
Ethnick King, vvhiles he is an Ethnicke King, can no more be supreme Gouernour of the Church, then an Ethnick man. vvhile he is an Ethnick man, may be a Priest, of, or in the Church. And so, touching this poynt, & this Questi∣on, heere is made up, a full & vniforme Concord: and the Iesuiticall myst of this supposed great Iarre, vtter∣ly dispelled. But, is this Iesuit well in his wits, affirming, That if the King, precisely as King, haue Ecclesiasticall Primacie; then hee is secure, because as long as hee is King, he can not lose it; but if hee haue it as a Christian King, hee may lose it? vvhen as death, or, (by their Antichristan popish new doctrine) the Pope (by one breath of his mouth, at his pleasure, excommunicating, and thereby pro∣scribing any Christian King) may take away his king∣dome, and so his primacie: but neither Pope, death, nor diuel, can take away his Christianitie. Rom. 3. ver. 35. Note also heere (good Christian Reader) the hor∣rible impudencie of this Iesuit; who ironically affer∣teth, That Kings are sure, and may be secure to enioy their kingdoms; when as Suarius, in his spanne-new Booke, hath made it knowen to all the world, that by Iesuiticall doctrine (most stiffely defended as ortho∣doxall, and now in force) Kings are not sure to enioy, for the space of one moneth, weeke, or day, their kingdoms, liberties, or liues, if the Pope be disposed to bereaue any of them thereof. That is, to excommu∣nicate them; and that is very easily done, euen by the breath of his mouth, wheasoeuer he is pleased to pre∣tendany cause thereof. For then, by their Canon law, because hee is supreme Iudge, whose will stands for
reason, and law is summa ratio, reason: no man must say vnto him, Domine, cur Itafacis? Sir Iudge Supreme, vvhy doe you so? Thus in plaine truth, by these poysonfull miscre∣ant Iesuits, are the liues and kingdoms of all Kings Christian, brought at this day into farre more immi∣nent danger, then are the liucs and liuings of the mea∣nest vassals of the said Kings: and yet (saith this Iesuit) Kings, in respect of their kingdoms, may sleepe soundlie on both sides. Which indeed is nothing else, but to lull them asleepe in the bedde of carelesse securitie; there∣by, with more speed and lesse danger, to cut their throats. BECAN. Exam.Pag. 214 YOu obiect that I should reason thus: According to Thomson and Burhill, Ethnick Kings, as vvell as Kings Christian, haue Primacie of the Church: Therfore, all liuing in those Kingdoms, are bound to doe vvhatsoeuer those Ethnick Kings impiously shall cò∣maund. That was not my inference, but this; Therefore all Scots and Englishmen, liuing in those Kingdoms, are subiect in Ecclesia sticall matters, to those Ethnicks as Primates of the Church. Vpon it, I doe not so much dispute, as demaund thus: What the English or Scottish would doe, if those Kings should cō∣maund them any thing touching the Church, or religion? If they should alwaies in all things obey, they should doe against consci∣ence? if neuer obey, they should not acknowledge their Primacy. If then onely they should obey, vvken they thought good: they should make them selues Iudges of their Primats. To these three they should haue answered; or answere you, if they deny to aun∣swere.
Dr. HARRIS Reply. IAunswere: first, that vvhereas the Iesuit in diuerse places of his Examen, hath professed, that he vvill dispute nothing but about the English Iarres; hee hath heere forgotten himselfe, and endeuoureth the refutation of Ma. Thomson, and Ma. Burhill, touching the Ecclesiasticall Primacy of Pagan Kings, requiring an aunswete thereof, either from me, or them. Secondly, that the Iesuits ignorance in Logicke is such, that he doth not vnderstand when he reasoneth, and when hee reasoneth not. In his English Iarre, chap. 12. Sect. 3. his words are these; According to the opinion of Thomson, & Burhill, all Pagan Kings are Primats of the Church: Therefore, all Englishmen liuing in Constantinople, or Rome, are subiect to the Turke, or Pope, in matters Ecclesiasticall. Therefore, vvhat shall they doe, if the Turke commaund them to follovv the Alcoran? or the Pope, to pray for the dead? Shall they obey the commaund? Then they shall do a∣gainst conscience. Shall they not obey? Then they deny their Primacy. Shall they obey vvhen they thinke good? Then subiects shall make themselues Iudges of their Kings. Heere are fiue seuerall inferences, all tending to e∣vince the absurdities, wich necessarily sollow vpon the supposed opinion of Maister Thomson, and Ma. Burhil. heerein: and yet the Iesuit saith, hee doth not dispute. Moreouer, in expresse words hee concludeth thus; That if the English be subiect to the Tufkish Emperor, as Primate: and the Turke commaund them to follovv the Alcotan; they must obey his commaund: or othervvise,
they vtterly ouerthrowe his Primacy. What is this else, but to conclude thus; If Pagan Kings be Primats of the Church, then all men liuing in their dominions, are bound to doe what they shall impiously commaund: vnlesse the Iesuit will denie, that the Turks commaund is impious, viz. to follovv the Alcoran? And is not this goodly, hellish, Iesuiticall doctrine, practiced by the Iesuits, according to their oath, Caecae obedientiae, of blind obedience; to peruert the faith, & fidelity of subiects, to God, and their King; to destroy Kings and kingdoms: to disturbe the peace of Chri∣stendom, by their combustions tumbling of garments in blond, if their supreme ludge and Primate shl com∣maund them so to doe? Thirdly, that the English Concord, gaue this fondling more sufficient answere then he deserued, to all these his questions, by retorting them vpon himselfe, thus: The Catholick (so called) Venetians, and Sorbonists, ac∣knovvledge the Pope to be their Ecclesiasticall Primate. Then they are subiect to him as Primate. Then, if he as Pri∣mate, commaund them to obey him in temporalls, in order to spirituall things, vvhat shall they doe? Shall they obey him? Then they shall doe against conscience. Shall they not obey him? Then they shall deny his Primacy. Shall they o∣bey him vvhen they thinke good? Then the subiects shall make themselues Iudges of their supreme Iudge. This pinched the Iesuit to the quicke, answering fully his questions, if hee had answered these: but alas, his sillinesse could shape no solid answere thereunto. Fourthly, I answere, That supposing the Turkish Emperour to be Primat Ecclesiasticall in his domini∣ons;
The English liuing therein, are bound, euer to obey him in all things lawfull and honest: and neuer to obey him, in things vnlawfull, and dishonest. Lastly, I aunswere, That Maister Thomson, and Ma. Burhill hold the cleane contrary vnto that vvhich the Iesuit fathereth vpon them heere. For they reach, that Pagan Kings, as Pagan, haue not properly and truely, Primacy Ecclesiasticall; as hath appeared out of their writings: therefore the Iesuit very ridiculously figh∣teth heere with his owne shadow onely. BECAN. Exam.Pag. 215 YOu say, that I confesse the Primacy Ecclesiasticall of Kings Christian, because vvhere Bellarmine vvri∣teth thus: (Quando Rex, &c. When a King of a Pa∣gan becomes a Christian, hee doth not lose the earthlis kingdome, vvhich of right he had before, but he getteth novum∣ius, a nevv right.) I interprete those vvords of Bellarmine, a new right, to be Ecclesiasticall Primacie. I did not interprete the vvords of Bellarmine, but of the Chaplaine, though they seeme to be the same. For, Bellarmine addeth thus: Acquirit¦ius novum ad vitam aeternam: Hee getteth a new right to life aeternall: vvhich new right, not onely Ethnick Kings, but also their subiects, obtaine, vvhen of Pagans they become Chri∣stians. But the Chaplaine meaneth, by new right, Primacie Ecclesiasticall: for hee saith, that the Christian King, by force of excommunication, loseth that new right. Truely, he cannot lose the rightto eternall life by excommunication, but by his owne fault onely. Richard, goe now and triumph.
Dr. HARRIS Reply. THe English Concord, charged this Iesuit with acknowledgement of the Ecclesiastical Prima∣cie of Christian Kings: because [vvhereas the reuerēd Bishop of Ely cited the words of Bellarmine, as out of Bellarmine himselfe; and as fully to Bellarmines meaning, as Bellarmine himselfe doth, De Rom Pont. lib. 5. cap. 2. et 3.] the Iesuit interpreted those said words cited by the Bishop, of Primacy Ecclesiasticall, which Christian Kings obtaine, when of Pagan, they become Christian Kings. Vnto which, this silly disputant hath nothing else to answere but this; That hee did not interpret those words, novum ius, a nevv right, as the words of Bellarmine, but as the words of the Bishop. Which answere is very idle, seeing that the Bishop produced them, as the words of Bellarmine, and not as his own. The Iesuit, to back his aunswere, saith; That Bellar∣mine addeth for explication of those vvords, a nevv right, ad vitam aeternam; to life eternall: vvhich the Bishoppe leaueth out. And further, that the Bishop saith, The new right may be lost by Excommunication; but the right to e∣ternall life, cannot be lost by force of excommunication, but onely by the owne fault of him that loseth it. Lastly, That not onely Kings, but all their priuat subiects, may gaine, by their conuersion, that new right to eternall life. Vnto which, I reply: First, that the words cited by the Bishop, explicat those words, nevv right, to bee meant, of a right to eternall life, as fully as Bellarmines words doe. The very expresse words of Bellarmine,
De Ro. Pon. lib. 5. c. 3. colum. 1077. are these; Quando Rexfit Christianus, non perdit regnum terrenum, quod iu∣re obtinebat, sed acquirit nouum ius ad regnum aeternum. When a Pagan King becomes a Christian King, hee loseth not his earthly kingdome, which by right hee obtained; but hee getteth a new right to the kingdome eternall. The Bishops expresse words in Tort. Tort. pag. 40. 1.1. are these; Rex quinis, cum de Ethnico Christianus fit, non per dit terrenumius, sed acquiritius nouum; puta, in bonis Ecclesiae spiritualibus. Euery King, vvhen of a Pa∣gan, hee becommeth a Christian King, dooth not lose his earthlie right, to vvit, in the spirituall good things of the Church. By which words it is most apparant, that the Bi∣shop, no lesse then Bellarmine, explaneth that nevv right, to ben right to eternall life: vnto which the Chri∣stian Kings are brought by those said spirituall good things of the Church; beeing the meanes which God hath ordained, and sanctified to that purpose. Secondly, I reply, that as Excōmunication groun∣ded vpon no fault of the Christian King, cannot take away his right to eternall life, so it cannot take away his Primacy Ecclesiasticall. Againe, that Excommunication grounded vpon a grieuous sinne of the excommunicated, ioyned with impenitencie and obstinacie; may as well, may rather, cause him to lose his right to life eternall; as it may force him to lose his Primacy Ecclesiasticall. Doth not the perpetuall binding of any mans sinnes, viz. beeing ob∣stinate and impenitent, exclude him directly from his right to eternall life; but that binding, if at all, excludeth him frō the Primacy, indirectly, & by consequent only
Lastly, I reply, That although it be true, that priuat subiects, as wel as their Kings, becomming Christians, or Pagans, get a new right to euerlasting life: yet that is nothing to the purpose, which intendeth Kings one∣ly, (not priuat persons) what they acquire or lose, in becomming Christian Kings. Now, the new right to the Kingdome eternall, is, as their new seruice of GOD is, to the King eternall. But according to Saint Augustine: Heerein Christian Kings, as Christian Kings, serue the Lord; vvhen they do those things to serue him, vvhich they could not doe, but as they are, or in that they are Christian Kings. It is not enough for a Christian King, towards the obtaining of eternall life, or, as Bellarmine speaketh, of Gods eternall kingdome, to serue the Lord, as a Christian King, that is, by executing his Primacy Ecclesiasticall, as hee that is Custos vtriusque Tabulae, The graund or Cause-keeper of both the Tables; and so holding his nevv right to life eternall. According to that of Saint Paul, vnto the same sense, though in another case: 1. Tim. chap. 2. ver. 15. Women, through bearing of children shall be saued, if they continue in faith, and loue, and holinesse vvith modestie: so Christian Kings shall be saued, by well vsing their Primacy Ecclesiasticall, if they continue in faith, loue, and holines. Thus are all these seuerall examinations Iesuiticall, as Potters sheards, shiuered to nothing: thus haue we this Iesuit acknowledging the Ecclesiasticall Primacie of Christian Kings. Why then, vnlesse the Iesuit haue somwhat to say in arrest of iudgement, shold not we, as we haue obtained, so openly proclaime the victory?
❧ Becans Iarre. XIII. Question. Whether the King may constraine his Subiects to take the Oath of Primacy, or no? 1. HItherto haue wee treated of the Iarring and disa∣greement of our Aduersaries, about the nature, offices, & origen of the Kings Primacy. Now there remaineth a certaine practicall question, vvhich toucheth the Conscience to the quick; to vvit, Whether the King may constraine or force his subiects to sweare, that they acknow∣ledge his kingly Primacy, vvhereof wee haue spoken before? Or vvhether they will acknowledge the King as Primate & supreme Head of the Church of England, vnto vvhom, as vnto their Primate and supreme Head, they vvill promise fidelity, no lesse in Ecclesiasticall and Spirituall matters, then in Politick & tem∣porall? This question hath two points. The first, whether the King of England doth defacto exact, or hath at any time exac∣ted such an Oath of his subiects? The other is, Whether his sub∣iects are bound in conscience to take such an Oath, if the King should exact the same? Of both these points seuerally, I mean to speake a vvord or two. The first Point. 2. The first point then is, Whether the King of England doth exact, or at any time hath exacted such an Oath of his sub∣iects? It is manifest that King Henry the 8. did. For so writeth Doctor Sanders, In his booke of the Schisme of England: Lau∣rentius
Cocchus Prior Coenobij Dancastrensis, vnà cum tri∣bus Monachis & duobuslaicis, Aegidio Horno, & Clemen∣te Philpotto, quòd nollent Ecclesiasticum terrent Regis Pri∣matum iuratò confiteri, exclui èterris, ad caelestem aeterni Regis gloriam transmissi sunt. Laurence Coch, Prior of the Monasterie of Dancaster, together vvith three Monks, and two Laymen, Giles Horne, and Clement Philpot, for that they would not sweare to the Ecclesiasticall Primacie of a tempor all King, beeing excluded from arth, vvere translated to a celesti∣all glory of the eternall King, &c. And then againe: Propone∣bantur cisnona Comitiorum Decreta, & iubebantur inrein∣rando affirmare, Regem Ecclesiae supremum esse Caput. The new decrees of the Parliament were propounded vnto them, and they were commaunded to sweare, the King to beesupreme Head of the Church, &c. 3. Now that Queene Elizabeth the daughter, followed heerein her Father K. Henry, it is manifest by the former Oath that shee exacted of her subiects, which is this: Ego A. B. pror∣sus testificor, & declaro in conscientia mea, Reginam esse solam supremam Gubernatricem, et istius Regui Angliae & aliorum omnium suae Maestaus dominiorum & regionum non ninùs in omnibus spiritualibus atque Ecclesiasticis re∣busvel causis, quam temporalibus: Et quòd nemo externus Princeps, Persona, Praelatus, Status, vel Potentatus, aut fa∣cto, aut iure, habet aliquam iurisdictionem, potestatem, su∣perioritatem, praeeminentiam, vel authoritatem Ecclesia∣sticam aut spiritualem in hoc Regno. Ideoque planè renun∣tio & repudio omnes forinsecas iurisdictiones, poesates, superioritates atque authoritates, &c.  A. B. doc verilie te∣stifie and declare in my conscience, that the Queene is the onelie supreme Gonernesse, as well of this kingdom of England, as of all other her Maiesties dominions and Countries, as well in all spiri∣tuall and Ecclesiasticall matters & causes, as in temparall: And that no forraine Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate hath, either by fact, or right, any Iurisaiction, power, superiori∣tie, preheminence, or authoritie Ecclesiasticall or spirituall in this kingdome. And therefore I doe vtterly renounce, and abandone
all forraine Iurisdictions, powers, superiorities and authorities, &c. 4. The very same also doth now King ames, vvho bindeth his subiects not with one Oath alone, but with two; to wit, of Su∣premacie and Allegiance. The former Oath of Supremacy be∣ginneth thus: Ego A. B. palam estor, & ex conscientia mea declaro, quòd Maiestas Regia, vnicus est supremus Guber∣nator hus Regni, omniumque aliorum suae Maieslatis do∣miniorum & territoriorum, tam in omnibus spiritualibus si∣ne Ecclesiasticis rebus & causis, quàm in temporalibus: Et quòd nullus extraneus Princeps, Persona, Praelatus, Status, aut Potentatus habet, aut habere debet, vllam iunsdictioē, poteslatem, superioritatem, praeeminentiam, vel authorita∣tem Ecclesiasticam, siue spiritualem intra hoc Regnum, &c. I A. B. doe publiquely testifie, & in my conscience declare, that the Kings Maiesty is the onely suprewe Gouernour of this king∣dome, and of all other his Maiesties dominions and territories, as well in all matters and causes spirituall or Ecclesiasticall, as in temporall: And that no forraine Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate hath, or ought to haue any turisdiction, pow∣er, superiority, preheminenci, or authority Ecclesiasticall or spi∣rituall within this Kingdome, &c. The later Oath called of Al∣legiance, beginneth thus: Ego A. B. verèt sincerè agnosco, profiteor, testificor. & declaro in consctentia mea coram Deo & Mundo, quòd supremus Dominus noster Rex Iaco∣bus, &c. I A. B. doe truly and sincerely acknowledge, professe, and testifie in my conscience, before God and the vvorld, that our Soueraigne Lord King Iames, &c. 5. Both these Oathes are set downe at large in his Maiesties Apology: and in both of them, his subiects are required publique∣ly and openly toprofesse and acknowledge, that King Iames is the supreme Gonernour, and Lord of all England, not onely in poli∣tick and temporall matters, but in spirituall and Ecclesiasticall also: And that neither the Pope, nor any other forrainer, hath any power or Inrisdiction in, or oner the Church of England. Againe, the former of these Oathes was brought in by K. Henry the 8. as his Maiestie confesseth in his Apologie, in these words:
Sub Henrico octauo primùm introductum est Iuramentum Primatus, sub eoque Thomas Morus & Roffensis supplicio affecti; idque partim ob eam causam, quòd Iuramentum il∣lud recusarent. Ab eo deinceps omnes mei Praedecessores, quot quot sunt hanc Religionem amplexi, idem sibi, aut non multo secus asseruerunt, &c. The Oath of Primacy vvas first brought in, vnder K. Henry the 8. vnder whom Sir Thomas More, and the Bishop of Rochester vvere beheaded; and that partly because they refused that Oath. From him all my Prede∣cessors dow neward, as many as haue imbraced this Religion, did retaine the same Oath, or not much different, vnto themselnes, &c. Novv the later Oath vvas inuented by King Iames him∣selfe. The second poynt. 6. The Question then is, Whether all the Kings subiects in England, are bound in conscience to tabe both these Oathes, as often as the King shall exact the same? Or vvhether they should suffrimprisonments, torments, and death it selfe, rather then sweare? Concerning the former point, the Catholiques doubt nothing, for that they haue certainly and firmly determined ra∣ther to lese their lines, together with the glorious Martyrs Sir Thomas More, and the Bishop of Rochester, then to admit the Kings Primacy, and abiure the Popes. Now, coucerning the la∣ter Oath, there hath been some doubt made these yeares past. For that some Catholicks, who perceied not the force & scope of that Oath, did a little stagger at the beginning, vvhether they might with a safe cōscience sear thereto, or no. Which doubt of theirs notwithstanding did not last long, but vvas soone taken away by Pope Paul the fist, and Cardinall Bellarmine. For the Pope forthwith directed two Apostolicall Breues to the Catholiques of England, and the said Card, vvrote a letter to Ma. Black∣well then Archpriest of this affaire. Both Pope and Cardinall dec deny, that the said Oath may be taken with a safe conscience, and their reason is this: Because no: man with a safe conscience,
can deny the Catholicke faith. But hee now, who should take this Oath proposed by the King, should deny the Catholicke faith, though not generally, yet in part, so farre foorth as belongeth to some one article there of: Ergo, no man vvith a safe conscience can take this Oath. 7. This reason, beeing very sound, all good Catholicks ad∣mit: but our Adversaries doe not. I, in fauour and consolation of the Catholicks, haue determined to adioyne heere vnto two o∣ther reasons, especially against the Oath of Supremacy, which by the Aduersaries cannot be reiected. The first is this: No man is bound in conscience to sweare that which is either apparantlie false, or at leastwise doubt full: But, that the King is Primate, & supreme head of the Church, and for such to be obeyed, not onely in temporall, but also in Ecclesiasticall matters, is either appa∣rantly false, or at leastwise doubt full: Ergo, no man is bound in Conscience to sweare the same. The Maior is cuident of it selfe, for that it is not lawfull to affirme any thing which is either false er doubtfull, and much lesse to sweare the same. The Minor is prooned thus: For that, it is iudged apparantly false, aswell a∣mongst the Caluinists, as amongst the Catholicks, that the King is Primate & supreme head of the Church. But now amongst the Caluinists of England, who adhere vnto the King, the same is called into doubt. For that some of thē affirme, others deny these points following: 1. That the King is Primate of the Church. 2. That he is supreme head of the Church. 3. That he hath Ec∣clesiasticall Primasy oner the Church. 4. That hee hath power and Iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall. 5. That the King by his owne proper Autheritie may assemble Councelis or Synods, and sit as chiefe Head or President therein. 6. That hee can confer bene∣fices, or Ecclesiasticall liuings. 7. That he can creats and depose Bishops. 8. That hee is ludge in Controucrsies of faith, &c. So as truly, if these and the like points be doubtfull and vncertaine, amongst those who adhere vnto, and fanour the King. seeing that some deny them, some assirme them: it followeth necessarily, that the Kings vvhole Primacy is an vncertaine thing. What rashnes then, & impudencie is it, to goe about to binde Catholicks in their Consciences to sweare that, which they themselues doe affirme
some of them to be false, some others to be doubt full? 8. I vvill explicate more distinctly that which I haue said. The Oath of the Kings Primacy, doth containe so many parts as there be, or are thought to be Offices and functions of the Kings Primacy. The Offices then either are, or are thought to bee di∣nerse, as we haue seen before, towit, to assemble Synods, to exact and decree Ecclesiasticall lawes, to confer benefices, to create Bishops, to determine controuer sies of faith, and the like. There∣fore, diuerse are the parts of the Oath of the Kings Supremacie. Of these parts then, let vs take one of them by it selfe, to wit, this: I A. B. doe sweare in my conscience, that I will be faithfull & obedientvnto the King as often, or whensoeuer he shall by his owne proper authority, create Bishops, whom he will. & againe depose from theis office or dignity, whom hee will. &c. If this part onely of the Kings Offices, shoul be exacted of all his Maiesties subiects in England, what, do you thinke, would be done? Would all, trow you, yea they vvho most adhere now vnto the King, sweare this? Let them swear that would; M. Tooker I am sure, if hee be a constant man would not. For that he denyeth the creation and deposition of Bishops to belong any way vnto the King. And if so be, that he, who otherwise acknowledgeth the Kings Primacie (at least in words) would not sweare there unto; how then should Catholicks be compelled to doe the same, who doe in no wise acknow ledge it? And what I haue said concerning this point, the same may be also said of therest. 9. My other reason is this. King Iames doth often protest, that he claimeth no more right or: Inrisdiction oner the Church, then did the Kings in the olà Tistament in ancient times: and therfore that this his Primacy must be coutained within the same lymits, & termes, that theirs was in the old Testament. But the Kings in the old Testament could not compell their subiects to sweare such an Oath as this: I A. B. doe openly testifie, and in my conscience declare, that Ieroboam is the onely supreme Gonernour of this Kingdome of Israel, as well in spirituall as temporall matters: And that no forrayner hath any iuris∣diction, power, superiority, preheminence, or authority in this Kingdom, &c. Ergo, neither King Iames can inforce his
subiects to take such a like Oath. The Maior is manifest out of his Maiesties owne words in his Apologie. The Minor I thus ex∣plicate. After the death of King Salomon, his kingdome (God so disposing) was diuided into two parts: vvhereof one contained ten Tribes: the other two. So as by this meanes, they became two distinct kingdoms afterwards, and therein raigned two distinct Kings, one whereof had no depēdance of the other in temporall go∣nernment. One was called King of Israel, the other, King of Iu∣da: and both of them had successors in their kingdoms. The first Kings that ruled, after the dinision of the kingdome made, were Ieroboam, King of Israel, & Roboam King of Iuda. In either Kingdom were Priests and Leuits. But the high or Chiefe Priest, could not resid-in both kingdoms, but onely in one, and that or∣dinarily in Iuda: yet not withstanding, hee was Head of all the Prusts and Leuites that remained in both Kindoms. Neither could Ieroboam lawfully say vnto his Priests and Leuites: You shall not obey the High Priest, that resideth in the Kingdom of Iuda: but you shall obey me onely: for you are exemp∣ted from his iurisdiction and power, &c. And though he shold haue so said; yet no doubt but he had offended. If now King Ie∣roboam could not exempt the Priests and Leuites of his ovvn Kingdome, from the Iurisdiction and Power of a sorraine High Priest: by vvhat right then doth now King Iames of England doe the same? especially, seeing hee anerroth, that hee claimeth no more right or inrisdiction vnto himselfe oner the Church, then the Kings of the old Testament did? The Conclusion. 1. ALL then that hath beene hither to said, may be reduced into three heads. The first is, that the Kings Primacie in the Church is a nevv thing, and first brought in by King Henty the eight, nor hitherto hath beene beard of, or vsurped in any other place then onely in the Kingdome of England. The second is: that there be so manie Iarres and disagrements of the English Ministry among them selues, concerning this Pri∣macy,
that it is not manifest nor certaine what the said Primacy is, nor what sorce and authority the same hath. The third: that the Oath of this Primacy can neither be exacted by the King; nor may the subtects take the same. 2. Heerehence three other questions which might bee made concerning the Subiects, will easily be solued. There be 3. sorts of Subiects in England. The sirst, as some call them, are Henrici∣ans, vvho both acknowledge and sweare vnto this Kingly Supre∣macy. The second sort are Puritans, orpure Calumists, who in∣deed doe not acknowledge the said Supremacy, but yet doe sweare thervnto. The third are Catholicks, which neither acknowledge it, nor will sweare it. 3. The first question then is, What may bee said of these Henricians, vvhich both acknowledge and swear to the Kings Supremacy? I aunswer: that they doe vnwisely, and inconside∣ratly. The reason is. Because it is folly and rashes, as before I haue said, to sweare a thing that is doubt full & vncertaine. But the Primacy of the King, is a thing altogether doubtfull and vn∣certaine amongst the Henricians, as is manifest by their iarres and dissentions, which hither to we haue shexed. Ergo, to sweare to such a Supremacy, is both folly and rashnes. 4. The second question is, What may be said of the Puritans, or pure Caluinists, who doe not indeed acknowledge the Kings Primacy, and yet if they be commaunded, doe sweare thereto? I answer: that they are periured persons and Politicians. The rea∣son is. Because they beliec one thing, and sweare another. They beliene with Caluin, that neither Kings nor secular Princes, haue any Primacy in spirituall and Ecclesiasticall matters, but onely in temporall; yet neuerthelesse, they sweare Allegiance vn∣to the King (together with the foresaid Henricians) as to the Primate and supreme Head of the Church: and this they doe, to make an externall and politicall peace, vvhich is more esteemed by them, then their faith and Religion; and therefore they are rather to be called Politicks then Christians. Of whom his Ma∣iestie gaue a most vvorthy testimonie, in his Preface Monito∣ry; to wit, That hee had found more truth and honesie in the high-land and bordering theenes, then in that sort of people.
5. The third question is, what may bee said of Catholicks, vvho neither acknowledge the Kings Primacy, nor swcar there∣to. I answere: that they be inst & vpright men, vvho walke be∣fore God in truth & veritie. They be sincere, who professe with their month, that vvhich they thinke in their bart. They are wise indeed, who with good Eleazarus, had rather die, then con∣sent to any vnlaw full thing, no not so much as in outward shew. They be like vnto the Apostles, vvho endeauour to obey God, ra∣ther then men. They be like vnto the Martyrs of the Primitine Church, vvho freely professe themselues before the persecutors, to be such as indeed they are. 6. But you vvill say, they be miserable. For if they refuse the Oath, they are forced to vndergoe impresonments, torments, punishments. Truely they are not therefore miserable, but most happy. For so dd our Sauiour teach vs in the Gospell, Math. 5. 10. Blessed are they, who suffer persecution for ustice, for theirs is the kingdome of heanen. But then you will say: It is a hard thing to suffer. How is that hard which is done with oy and delight? Heare what is said of the Apostles, Act. 5. 41. And they went from the sight of the Councell reioycing, be∣cause they were accounted worthy to suffer reproach for the Name of Iesus. Heare what the Apostle saith of himselfe, 2. Cor. 4. Superabundo gaudio in omi tribulatione nostra. I ex∣ceedingly reioyce in all our tribulations. 7. And from vvhence commeth this ioy? Truly frō a two∣fold gift of the holy Ghost; to wit, Hope, and Charity. Hope of future glory, that maketh vs io full and full of comfort in all ad∣nersities. Rom. 8. 18. The sufferings of these times, are not condigne to the foture glory, that shall bee renealed in vs. And againe; Rom. 12. 12. Reioycing in hope: and patient in tribulation. And, Heb. 10. 34. The spoyle of your owne goods you tooke with ioy, knowing that you haue a better, and a permanent substance. Do not ther fore leese your con∣fidence, which hath a great reward. For patience is necessa∣ry for you, that dooing the will of God, you may receiue the promise, &c. 8. Nor is the force of Charitie lesse: Rom. 8. 35. VVho
then shall separate vs from the Charitie of Christ? Tribula∣tion? or distresse? or famine? or nakednes? or danger? or persecution? or the sword? &c. But in all these things we o∣nercome, because of him that hath loed vs. For I am sure, that neither death, nor life, nor Angells, nor Principalities, nor Powers, neither things present, nor things to come, neither might, nor height, nor depth, nor other creature, shall be able to separate vs from the Charitie of God, which is in Christ Iesus our Lord, &c. 9. Heereto belong the examples of Christ, & of other Saints, vvhich haue great force and efficacy, to stirre vp and streng then the harts of Catholicks, to suffer patiently in this life, prisons, fetters, torments, yea death it selfe. 1. Pet. 2. 20. If dooing well, you sustaine patiently, this is thanke before God. For vnto this are you called, because Christ also suffered for vs, leaning you an example, that you may follow his steppes, who did not sin, neither was guile found in his mouth: who when he was reled, did not rele; when hee suffered, hee threatned not; but deliuered himselfe to him that iudged him vniustly, &c. 10. And, Heb. 11. 36. Others had triall of reproaches, and stripes: moreouer also of bands and prisons: they were stoned, they were hewed, they were tempted, they died in the slaughter of the sword: they went about in sheep-skins, in goate-skinnes, needy, in distresse, afflicted: of whom the world was not worthy: wandring to deserts, in mountaines, and dennes, and in caues of the earth, &c. 11. And againe in the 12. Chapter, and 1. verse. And therefore by patience let vs runne to the Combat proposed vnto vs, looking on the Author of Faith, and the consum∣mator Iesus, who, ioy beeing proposed vnto him, sustained the Crosse, contemning confusion; and sitteth on the right hand of the seat of God. For thinke diligently vpon him, who sustained of sinners such contradiction against him∣selfe, that you be not wearied, fainting in your mindes. For you haue not ytrelisted vnto bloud, &c. 12. And yet more, a. Cor. 11.23. In very many labours, in
prisons more aboūdantly, in stripes abone measure in death often. Of the Ievves fiue times did I receine forty (stripes) sauing one. Thrice was I beaten with rodds, once I was sto∣ned, thrice I suffered shipwrack, night and day haue I beene in the depth of the Sea, in ionrnying often, in perils of wa∣ters, perils of thieues, perils of my Nation, perils of Gen∣tiles, perils in the Citie, perils in the Wildernesse, perils in the sea, perils among false brethren; in labour and miserie, in much watching, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakednes, &c. 13. And yet more in the 12. Chapter and 9. verse, Gladlie will I glory in my owne infirmity, that the power of Christ may dwell in mee. For which cause I please my selfe in in∣firmities, in contumelies, in necesities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ. For when I am weake, then am I migh∣tie, &c. 14. With these, and the like testimonies of holy Scriptures, vvere armed Sir Thomas More, and the Bishop of Rochester, when they rather chose to die, then to take an impions & wicked Oath. With these places vvere others also animated, who fol∣lowed them in their glorious fight. And lastly, with these are they encouraged, who now in England are kept in prisons, bound in fetters, spoyled of their goods and linings, and purpled in their owne bloud. S. Cyprian Epist. 9. Pretiosa mors haec est, quae emit immortalitatem pretio sanguinis sui: Pretions is that death, which buyeth immortality with the price of it bloud. And in the end of the same Epistle. O beatam Ecclesiam nostram, quam temporibus nostris gloriosus Martyrum sanguis illustrat! Erat antea in operi∣bus fratrum candida: nunc facta est in Martyrū cruore pur∣purea.
O happy is our Church, which the glorious bloud of Mar∣tyrs doth in these our dayes illustrate! It was made white before in the works of our brethren: but novv is it made purple in the bloud of Martyrs. And yet more in Epist. 24. Quid gloriosius aut felicius vlli hominum poterit ex di∣uina dignatione contingere, quàm inter ipsos carnifices in∣territum confiteri Dominum Deum? quàm inter saeuientia saecularis potestatis tormenta, etiam extorto & excruciato, & excarnificato corpore, Christum De filium, ersi receden∣te, sed amen libero spiritu confiteri? quàm relicto mundo caelum petisse? quàm desertis hominibus, inter Angelos sta∣re? quàm collegam passioniscum Christo, in Christi nomi∣ne factum esse? What can happen vnto any man, through Gods diune bountifulnesse, more glorious, or more prosperous, then without all feare to confesse our Lord God? then amidst the cruell torments of secular power, to confesse Christ the Sonne of God, with a free spirit, though now departing from the body, yea from the body tortured, tormented, and all to bemangled? then by leaning the vvorld, to goe to heanen? then by for saking the company of men, to be conuersant with Angells? and bee made partaker of the Passion of Christ, in Christ his Name? English Concord. IT is very true, that both the oath of Supremacie, and the oath of Allegiance, are contained in the Kings Apologie: but this is a very false, & plainlie a Iesuiticall lye, that in both those oathes, viz. the oath of Allegiance, The subiects are required, publiquely and openlie to professe and acknowledge, that King Iames is the
supreme Gouernour, and Lord of all England, not onely in politique and temporall matters, but in spirituall & Ecclesi∣asticall also: and that neither the Pope, nor any other for∣rainer, hath any power, or inrisdiction, in, or oner the Church of England. Heere I begin with the Isuit, taking him napping in a grosse falsification of the oath of Allegiance: for there is no such thing contained therein. Which is al∣so testified by his excellent Maiestie, in his Preface Mo∣nitory, pag. 11. Vt certioribus iudicijs per ditam horum cō∣uitiatorū malitiam deprehendere pos sit is, &c. That with more certaine and assured tokens, you may espy the despe∣rate malice of these raylers (as the Pope Paul 5, Cardinall Bellarmine, and Becane) who impudently affirme, that this Oath was deuised to entrap, and beguile, the conscien∣ces of improuident Papists, in matters of faith; I will de∣clare the vvhole passage of the matter in few vvords. As soone as this for me of the Oath of Allegiance vvas conceined, the lower house of Parliament, thought good to insert that clause, vvhereby all power should bee taken from the Pope to excommunicate the King. But I present∣ly caused the same to be razed out; to the end, that it might appeare, that this Oath had no other force or respect, then that the Popes excommunication, should be no iust or law∣full cause vnto my subiects, by secret or open practises, to attempt any thing against my person, or my kingdome; because I thought that this sentence of excommunication, of a spirituall censure, was by vniust vsurpation of Popes, made a secular pretence, and so exorbitant beyond all bounds. With so great care and studie I did auoide, that nothing should be contained in this Oath, but that profes∣sion sion of ciuill allegiance, and temp or all obedience, vvhich
nature it selfe prescribeth to all them, vvhich are borne vnder any kingdom, adding onely a firme promise, wher∣by I demaund of my subiects, ayde, and assistance against the breach of due allegiance, and fidelitie. Wherefore, I faw it appertained to the cause, that I should make an A∣pologie for this Oath: vvherein I haue taken vpon mee to proue, that nothing is contained heerein, but that vvhich concerneth meere ciuill and temporall obedience, such as is due to all soueraigne Princes. And againe, in the 53. page of the Apology, Iura∣mentum primatus excogitatum est ad discrimen facien∣dum, &c. The Oath of supremacy was deuised, to dis∣cerne and put a difference betwixt the Papists, and those of our religion: but the Oath of Allegiance was inuented to distingutsh betwixt the Papists, vvho hold obedience & fidelitie to the King in things ciuill, from those that were indiutdually affected to the Gun-powder treason. Concerning your glorious Martyrs (as you stile Bi∣shoppe Fisher, and Sir Thomas More) you might haue learned out of Tortura Torti, pag. 360. how the wor∣thy Bishop of Ely, stoppeth Tortus his mouth, saying: Dixerat Apologiae author, &c. The Author of the Apolo∣gie said, that it was not any spirituall Primacy, but a carnall matrimony, that brought the supposed Martyr dome to Sir Thomas More, and the Bishop of Rochester: and this he spake not amisse. But then replyed Tortus: Then it vvas a carnall matrimany, that caused holy S. Iohn Baptist to suffer martyrdome, when he freely reproued King Herods mariage. With this example Tortus woundeth himselfe. For tell mee, O Tortus, vvhat was that mariage? vvas it not with his brothers wife? vvas not this the vvord that: cost the Baptist his life? It is not lawful for thee to haue
thy brothers wife. But what was the cause of the death of More, and Fisher? was it not cleane contrary? It is lawful for thee, to haue thy brothers wife; it is not lawful for thee to put her away. So that if Saint Iohn, Christs fore∣runner, died vniustly, they died most iustly: and if hee vvere a Martyr, (as he was) then vvere they some other thing: vvhich I will not tell you. For he dyed, that the King should not keepe his brothers vvife: but these dyed, that the King should not put away his brothers vvife. Hee told King Herod, it vvas not lawfull: they told King Henry, it was lawfull, and hee must not doe otherwise. Could Tortus a∣ny vvaies marre their martyr dome more deepely? So far the Bishop of Ely. And giue mee leaue to adde something more. O glorious Martyrs! who had rather consent together to die, then to confesse the royall supremacy of Kings, established in the Scriptures, vsed and practised by all the most commended Christian Kings; and withall; to establish the Papall Primacy, which Christ himselfe ex∣presly forbad: which the Fathers of the Councell of Ephesus called the smoake of worldly power; and they of Carthage, with all care, and diligence, admonished the Church to beware of, as Typhum saeculi, the arrogan∣cie of this present vvorld. Concerning that notorious fact of Pope Paul the fift, and Bellarmine, (which heere the Iesuit remem∣breth) full of inhumanitie, impietie, and audacious∣nesse; that excellently learned man, Ma. Causabon, in his Epistle to Front Ducaeus, hath taught him, pag. 167. thus: De fidelitatis iuramento, cui occasionem praebuit pul∣ueraria coniuratio, &c. Concerning that Oath of Allegi∣ance, first occasioned by the Gun-powder treason, I maruell
vvhy the English Papists so much complaine. They haue much more cause to complaine of Cardinall Bellarmine, & some fevv others, vvho hardened the hart of Pope Paul the fift to yeeld vnto them, (vvho at the first vvith stood them: for I speake not rashly, but haue good Authours for my assurance) that all the Catholicks in England should heere perish, rather then a matter so iust and equall should be permitted. For, vvhat can be more equall, then that subiects should promise fidelity to their Soueraigne? especi∣ally after a treason so barbarous, and notable, for crueltie? The King in the Common-wealth, is the same that a house∣holder is in his priuate house: and doe you thinke that such a man were well advised, to keepe in his family any ser∣uaunts, of whose fidelity he was not perswaded? or rather, whose disposution hee greatly suspecteth? I thinke no bodie, that is not mad, would grant such a thing. Wherfore, either King Iames hath lesse power in his Kingdome, then a house∣holder in his house, or else these complaints about the sub∣iects Oath of Allegiance, are all vniust, and friuolous. For in good sooth, I haue met with many Papists, both in France and England, and I haue also read the writings of many, vvho deeme this Oath not onely most iust, but also most ho∣lie. Wherefore, many of your side, & some of them Priests, yea, the Arch-priest Black well, haue taken the same with∣out all scruple of conscience, not against their wills: and by their publique writings, learnedly and truly (though sharp∣ly against the Pope and the Iesuits) haue perswaded others to doe the like; (such are Maister Sheldon, and Maister Warmington.) But yet there are some, vvith whom the Popes Bulls, and Bellarmines Letters, preuaile more then the law of God, the law of nature, & of all Nations, or the examples of vvise men. And if the Law run vpon these,
vvhat place is there left for complaint? And you your selues, which call this a persecution of Catholicks, cannot tell, for vvhat cause, and by vvhat example of antiquitie, you so tearme it. It was neuer done, nor heard of, that Chri∣stian people said they suffered persecution, if they vvere commaunded to sweare Allegiance to their Soueraigne. But wee read the contrary in the Councells; vvhere they are ac∣cursed that breake faith to their Kings, vvhich they had voxed to them, for the preseruation of the slate of their Countrey, and of their King. And you know, the fourth Councell of Toledo, declareth all such excōmunicat from the Church. Heere is worke for the Iesuit, let him satisfie these things: and in the meane time let him vnderstand, that that Catholique faith is accursed with all maledictions, as inhumane, impious, sacrilegious, Antichristian, & diabolicall: whereof this is one Article: That Christi∣an people ought not to sweare allegiance to their lawfull So∣ueraigne: to weet, that, which, as hath been declared, the law of God, the law of nature, and the Canons of Councells haue ordained, as most equall, and most ho∣ly. Orelse thus, (to speake after Becans manner) That, for Christian people to sweare allegiance to their lavvfull Prince, is to deny the Catholick faith. And this reason, be∣ing very sound, all good Catholicks admit, saith Becane: but in truth, this reason, as very rotten, is onely admit∣ted by Antichristian Catholicks: but we Protestants, the onely true, and proper orthodoxall, or right be∣lieuing Catholicks, will neuer admit it. And I (saith the Iesuit) will adioyne two other reasons, on the behalfe of Catholicks, against the Oath of Suprema∣cie, which by the Aduersary cannot bee reiected. Hee
should rather haue said thus; And I, for the destruction of my friends, the Romish Catholicks, will adioyne two o∣ther reasons, vvhich may be most iustly refused, & explo∣ded by all our Aduersaries, the Protestants. But hath Martin the Iesuit heere forgotten him∣selfe? were not the reasons of Pope Paul, and Bellar∣mine, lately alledged, expresly brought against the oath of Allegiance, which onely was in controuersie; and will he now dispute against the oath of Suprema∣cie, which is distinct and seuerall from the Oath in question? Martin therefore should rather say thus; I haue determined for the ruine of Catholicks in England, to adioyne two reasons more, nothing differing from the former. Well then, let vs heare these two prettie rea∣sons: his first reason is this; 1. It is manifestly false, or at least doubtfull, that the King is Primate, or supreme Head of the Church, who must be obeyed both in all temporall and Ecclesiasticall matters, as hee that hath 1. an Ecclesiasticall Primacy. 2. an Eccle∣siasticall Iuris diction: first, to call Councells by his ovvne authoritie: and secondly to create, and depose Bishops, (for euery meane person may conferre a benefice, and no mortall man may be supreme Iudge in controuersies of faith: there∣fore these two last rehearsed, are no branches of Eccle∣siasticall Supremacy). Therefore (concludeth the Iesuit) this Oath must not be taken. I answer: The Antecedent of this reason is most false: For all Protestants in England, acknowledge it to be certainly true, & none doubteth thereof: name∣ly, that the King of England, is the onely supreme Go∣nernor, or (as the Papists expound it) Primate and su∣preme Head of the Church of England: vvhom wee
must obey in all causes, both Ecclesiasticall and ciuill; as him, that hath the gouernment ouer all Ecclesiasti∣call persons, and in all spirituall causes: or (as they ex∣pound it) which hath the Ecclesiasticall Primacy, or Iu∣risdiction Ecclesiasticall; and therefore hath power to call Councells, and to create and depose Bishops. All our men, with one consent, thinke, speake, and swear this. And so the Iesuits first reason, with small adoe, and no labour, is put to flight. But yet the Iesuit vrgeth the matter more articulate∣ly, saying; That the oath of the Kings supremacie, hath so many parts in it, as are thought to be distinct offices of the Kings supremacy: and thereupon, culleth out one of them, which hee deemeth most absurd, writing thus: I A. B. doe sweare in my conscience, that I will be faithfull and obedient vnto the King, as often, or vvhensoeuer hee shall by his owne proper authority, create Bishops, whom hee will, and againe depose from their of fice, vvhom hee will, &c. Whom he vvill? Nay, that is the proper speech of popish Antichrists, Stat proratione voluntas:Extrauag. de trans. Episc. quan∣to. My will standeth for a law. But Christian Princes say thus; Idpossumus quodiure possumus: Wee can doe nothing but that which we can doe by law and right. Therefore, any Christian subiect, and by name Dr. Tooker, may sweare in this manner: I A. B. doe sweare in my conscience, that I will be faithfull and obedient to the King, as often, or whensoeuer he shall by his own proper au∣thority, depose Bishops for iust causes, as Salomon did A∣biathar. But let Martin Becane put on the thoughts of an ho∣nest and sober man awhile, and tell me, Whether the
oath of Supremacy containe so many parts, as are sup∣posed to be the offices or functions of the Primacie? He saith, putantur, as are thought, or supposed; vvhat of any triobular or meane Writer of the English, or Romane partie? Fie, fie, who can abide this? Nay ra∣ther, the oath of the Kings Supremacy, comprehen∣deth no more, then those offices of the royall Supre∣macy, which is manifest that the Kings of Israel in ho∣ly Scripture executed with commendation: and so doth the Kings Maiestie write, in the same expresse tearmes. All which offices are articularly, and exactly set downe by him in his Apology, pag. 127. 128. And by the Bishop of Ely, in his Tortura Tort. pa. 377. 378. collected out of, & confirmed by the vvord of God. But heere I would desire the Iesuit to tell me, vvhe∣ther the oath of the Popes Supremacy containe as ma∣ny parts, as are the offices and functions of the said Supremacie, thought to be, by the Iesuits, Canonists, Popes Parasits, & Popes themselues? Then the Pope of Rome, must be Vniuersall Primate and Bishop,in Concil. Constanti∣cs. paral. Vspergen. De∣necessitate salutis; of the necessity of saluation.Extra de Appel. vt de∣bitus glossa. The Ordi∣nary of all men.Harding in Iewel, Def. par. 5. cap. 6. diuis. 4. Whose diocesse is the vvhole vvorld.Lib. 1. Ce∣remon. Who, beeing invested Pope, ruleth the Citie, & the world.Francis. Zabarella. Who possesseth all the rights of all inferior Churches.Durand. de Ordin, et ministris. Of vvhose fulnesse all Bishops receine.Hard. Iew. part. 5. ca. 6. D. 7. Who may not be iud∣ged, either by Kings, or the vvhole Clergie, or the vvhole vvorld.Pet. de Palu. de potest. Pap. art. 4. Who in no case, for any crime vvhatsoeuer, may be deposed, either by the vvhole Church, or by a Councell, or by the whole vvorld.Ioh. de. Parisijs de potest. Regia & Pap. 9. q. 3. Nemo. All vvhose actions (though
as euill in themselues, as theft and adultery) we must so in∣terprete, as done by diuine inspiration. So that,Di. 40. ō nos. glossa. it vvere a kinde of sacriledge to call the Popes fact into question, who is free from all humane lawes. Whose deeds, although euill in themselues, are to be excused; as the murthers of Sam∣son; the thefts of the Iewes in Egypt; and the adulterie of Iacob.Concil. Tom. 1. in purga. Sixti. 9. q. 3. cūta. Whom to accuse, is to sinne against the holy Ghost, which shall neuer be forgiuen, in this vvorld, nor in the world to come: as freed from the law of man. Then is the Pope of Rome, not as a meereDe Elect. et. elect. fun∣damenta in glossa. Et Clē. n pro∣oemio in glossa. man, but Christ.Hard. Iew. pag. 2. cap. 3. Di. 2. The Bridegroome of the vvhole Church. So as (by Panormi∣tan, De Elect. cap. licet) the Pope and Christ make but one Consistory.Herue. de. pot. Pap. ca. 23. Hee is alone the vvhole Church.Felin. de const. statut. canon. A vice-God.Ext. Ioh. 22. cumint. nonnullos. gloss. Our Lord God the Pope.Dist. 96. sa∣tis culdenter. A God.Fran. Zaba. Hard. Iew. p. 5. c. 6. D. 6. More then GOD. t Hauing diuine power, to whom all power is giuen in heauen and in earth.Extra de transl. Epis. ca. Quanto Hostiensis. Who, (sinne onely excepted) can doe all that God can doe.Paschalis Papa De E∣lect. et elect. potest. ca. Significasti. He shall be aboue generall Coun∣cells.Angel. Paris. Hard. Iew. p. 5. c. 6. Diuis. 14. Purgatry.Pet. de Palud. de poest. Pap. art. 4. The whole Church.Nic. Cuan The Scripture.Extra de const. stat Canon Felinus Angels.Cōctl. Lat. sub Leone sessio. All power.De Maior. vnam Sanctam. All things.15. Q 6. Authorite in glossa. So as hee can dispute against the law of nature.16. Q 1. Quicun{que} in glossa. Against the law of God.Panor. de diuortij Against the new Testament.Summa Angel. dict. Papa. And all the commaunde∣ments of the old and new Testament.De translt. Epis. Quanto Hostiensis. So as he can doe as much as God can doe. And I will yet deale more articu∣lately and plainly.Ioh. de Paris. de Pot. Reg. & Pap. Auentinus l. 6. Hee shall be Lord in temporal things thorough the vvhole world, directly, & indirectly.De Maior. Solitae Anto. de Rosl. The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.Dist. 98. Si Imper. in gloss. Extra de foo cō∣petent. ca. Licet. Beeing aboue all Emperours, as his vassalls.De Maior. vnam sanctam. Hauing of his owne both
swords.Auent. in Adriano 4. Anno 1154. Beeing set ouer Nations, and Kingdoms, to de∣stroy, to pluck vp, build and plant.Hard. Iew. p. 5. c. 6. D. 8. From whom alone, all Emperours hold their Empires.Auent. in Adrian 4. In vvhose power it is to giue them, or take them from vvhom hee vvill.Carion de Alexand. 3. Who treadeth the necks of Kings vnder his feet.Caelestinus Papa. Vide Rogetū Ce∣strnsem; et Houenden. And to con∣clude, vvho crowneth Kings with his feet: and vvith his feet againe spurneth the Crowne to the ground.De Maior. Solitae. gl Beeing seuentie times seuen, greater then the greatest Kings. I will yet expresle the matter more articulately.Lyra in Dut. c. 17. Hee shall be so absolute a Iudge of all Controuersies, that if hee shall say the right hand is the left, or the left hand the right: his saying is to bee belieued. And this is the opinion of Bellarmine,De Pont. Po. li. 4. c. 5. If the Pope should commaund vice, and for∣bid vertue: the Church were bound to belieue, that vertue were euill, and vice were good. And they giue this rea∣son thereof;Panor. de Constit. c. 1. The fulnesse of the Popes power, excelleth all Positiue lawes.De transl. Epis. Quan∣to glossa. Hostiensis ibidem. and it sufficeth that the Popes will goe for a law; whereby he can make righteousnes of vnrighte∣ousnesse. And heereupon Philelphus, Decad. 6. Hecast. 9. beau∣tifully describeth the Pope as Antichrist, saying; Non Scytha, non Turcus, non quiterrore Damascum, Aegyptumue tenet, sed maximus ille Sacerdos, E medio templi nostrum emersurus in axem, Antichristus erit, quise canit ore colendum, Pro christo, cuius refer at nomenque, vicemque. Which I English thus; No Tartar grim, or Turk, or feared Saladine, Shall be that Antichrist; but that high Priest, That midst the Temple sits: adored with dread dinine, Who beares the name, & Vicar is of Christ.
I might be infinite in numbring the seuerall offices, which are thought to be the offices of the Romane Pri∣macie: out of which I wil frame this, after Becans ma∣ner. I A. B. doe publiquely testifie, and sweare in my con∣science, that I will be faithfull and obedient to the Bishop of Rome, as often or whensoeuer hee shall by his owne proper authority, directly in temporall causes, create Emperours vvhom hee will, or by the same power, depose vvhom hee vvill. If this part onely of the Popes Supremacy, should be exacted of all the Iesuits, what, doe you thinke, would bee done? Would all, thinke you, yea they which adhere vnto the Pope, sweare this? Let them sweare that would, as Baronius, Triumphus, Carerius, and almost all the Canonists, and many other famous Popish Writers. Yet, I amsure, that Bellarmine, and Becane, if they be constant men, will neuer sweare. For thus writeth Bellarmine, Papa not habet vllam merè tem∣poralem iurisdictionem directè iure diuino, lib. de Pont. Rom. 5. cap. 4. The Pope hath no meere temporall iuris∣diction directly by the law of God. And Becane in his Re∣furation, pag. 18. Acprimum non disceptamus de pri∣matu in temporalibus, illum quisque Rex insuo regno le∣gitimè habeat: Wee dispute not of the Primacy in temporall causes, let euery King in his kingdome, lawfully possesse the same. What then? Is this so sure a ground with Bellarmine and Becane, that they firmely determine to lose their liues, like many glorious Martyrs in this kingdome, rather then to admit the Popes supremacie, & abiure the Kings? For this is thought to be one of the prime offices of the Popes supremacy, That the Pope is Lord of
the whole world, directly in all temporall causes. But, this is vtterly false in the conscience of Becane and Bellar∣mine. Or whether, partly, for preseruation of externall peace and gouernment, which these menesteeme more then their faith and religion: or, partly, that one of them may be made Pope, the other a Cardinall, which good for∣tune may befall them heereafter; will they sweare a∣gainst their owne conscience vnto the Popes suprema∣cie, with all functions which are thought to be parts thereof, and thereof shall be branded as Carerius hath marked them, to be impious Polititians of our time, deser∣uing rather the name of Hareticks, then of Catholicks? Of whom may Pope Paul the fist truly affirme, That he hath found more truth in sauage & wilderobbers, then in these kinde of men, (viz. the Iesuits) which teach & practice the Art of Equiuocation, euen in their so∣lemne swearing. And thus much for the first reason: which I am sure is enough, (if not too much) for Bel∣larmine, and Becane also. His second reason is this: King Iames dooth often protest, that he claimeth no more right or iurisdiction ouer the Church, then did the Kings in the old Testament long a∣goe. But the Kings in the old Testament, could not compell their subiects to sweare such an oath as this is; I A. B. doe openly testifie, and in my conscience declare, that Ieroboam is the onely supreme Gouernor of this king∣dome of Israel, as well in spirituall, as temporall matters: And that no forrainer hath, or ought to haue any iurisdicti∣on, power, superiority, or authority in this kingdom. Ergo, King Iames, &c. And, a little after, hee explicateth his Minor pro∣position thus: After King Salomon, there vvere two
distinct kingdoms, Iuda and Israel, and there vvere two Kings, vvhereof both had their successors. There vvere Priests and Leuites in both, who vvere chiefely ruled by the high Priest, who liued in Ierusalem. And yet Iero∣boam could not lawfully say to his Priests and Leuites, you shall not obey that High Priest resident in Iuda: you are exempt from his iurisdiction, &c. So Becane. I answer: Can any man endure, either in a Diuine so great ignorance, or such malice in a Iesuit? As though the Kings Maiestie did euer belieue, write, or so much as dreame, either, that all those things which the wic∣ked Kings of Israel, (of whom Ieroboam was ring-lea∣der) did practice impiously in Ecclesiasticall matters: or that, all that iurisdiction which those vngodly kings did challenge ouer the Church, doth belong to the King supremacy. Of Ieroboam thus speaketh holy writ, 1. Kings, 12.28. The King made two golden Calues, and said vnto the Israelites, It is too much for you to goe vp to Ierusalem: Behold the Gods that brought you vp out of the Land of Egypt. And hee put one of them in Bethel, and the other in Dan. Also, hee made a house of the high places, and made bim Priests of the lowest of the people, vvho were not of the sonnes of Leui. And Ieroboam made a feast, in the fifteenth day of the eight Moneth, like vnto the feast that is in Iudah, and sacrificed on the Altar. So did hee in Bethel, and offered vnto the Calues that hee had made. And hee constituted in Bethel, the Priests of the high places which hee had made. And you may read in the 13. chapter, That beeing rebuked by a Prophet for this matter, yet hee departed not from his euill way, but turned himselfe, and made him
Priests of the high places, de saece populi, of the dregs of the people; and vvhosoeuer pleased him, hee consecrated him, and made him a Priest of the high places. And againe, 2. Chron. II. chap. 13. verse, And the Priests and the Leuites that vvere in all Israel, resor∣ted to him out of all their coasts, (meaning Roboam, the sonne of Salomon.) For the Leuites left their suburbs, & their possessions; and came to Iudah, and to Ierusalem: for Ieroboam and his sonnes had cast them out from mi∣nistring in the Priests office before the Lord. But thus writeth the King, and his learned Inter∣pretour, the Bishoppe of Ely, in Tort. Tort. pag. 381. Quodcunque in rebus religionis reges Israel fecerunt, nec sine laude fecerunt, id vt et Regi Iacobo, faciendi ius sit atque potestas. Whatsoeuer the Kings of Israel did vvith commendation, in the maters of Religion; the same power and iurisdiction now hath King Iames. Let this therefore be the Proposition, or first part of the second reason, which Becane himselfe acknow∣ledgeth in his Refuration, cap. 8. pag. 124: and then I will assume the Minor. But the Kings of Israel, not without commendation, by their royall authoritie, in matters of Religion, 1. Haue enacted lawes. 2. Delegated of their subiects to iudge of such lawes. 3. Haue bound all their subiects, both Clergie men, and Lay-men, by oath of Allegiance. 4. Haue pumshed the transgressors of such lawes. 5. Haue called as∣semblies or Councells. 6. Haue ruled all estates; as the Heads of the Tribe of Leui, as vvell as of the other Tribes: and vvere as much Kings of the Clergie, as of the Laitie. 7. If any Abiathar, or High Priest, vvexed proud, they bridled him by their censure; and, if there were cause, de∣posed
Abiathar from the High Priesthood. 8. They aboli∣shed all strange worship: as, when they razed the high pla∣ces, brake in peeces the golden Calues, and the brasen Ser∣pent, &c. To conclude, they gaue order for things indiffe∣rent, which appertained to the outward splendour, & com∣linesse of the house of G O D: And by their authoritie cut off idle and curious questions in religion, vvhich were wont to be the mother and breeder of schismes: as the Scriptures expresly witnesse; whereof you may read in Tort. Tor∣ti, pag. 381.382. Therefore I will conclude, that King Iames hath the same power, and iurisdiction; and therfore may binde his subiects by an oath: I A. B. doe openly testifie and de∣clare in my conscience, that King Iames is the oneli su∣preme Gouernour of this Realme, and of this Church of England, &c. (as was Dauid, and Salomon, of the Church of Israel, and Asa, Ezekias, and Iosias, of the Church of Iuda); and that no forrainer hath, or ought to haue, any iurisdiction, power, &c. within this Kingdome, (as they had none in Iuda) and so may lawfully say to the Priests subiects, Obey not the high Priest, which dwel∣leth in any forraine kingdome: but obey me alone, as the one∣ly supreme Gouernour of this Church. You are all exempt from his power and iurisdiction. For so Dauid, Salomon, Asa, Ezekias, and Iosias, might lawfully commaund their Priests & Leuits: and therefore so may King Iames commaund his Clergie. These things (thou maiest perceiue learned Rea∣der) are collected out of the pure fountaines of sacred Scriptures, and so conclude our cause solidly, and be∣yond all exception. But Becane his Sillogisme is a mon∣stor in Logick, running vpon some feet, & yet halteth.
For King Iames speaketh of godly & religious Kings, (and not schismaticall) either of all Israel, or onely of Iuda: and of their Ecclesiasticall gouernment, the very patterne and exemplary primacy, commended vnto Christian Kings in the Scriptures. But Martin the Sophister, that is, the Iesuit, assumeth impious & schis∣maticall Kings of Israel, rent from Iuda; among whō, neuer any one is remembred in scripture to haue hand∣led Ecclesiasticall matters with commendation. And heere I intreat the ingenuous Reader, to ob∣serue the Iesuiticall and serpentine subtilty of Becane; who, to decciue his Catholiques, passeth by all the god∣ly Kings of Iuda, and onely bringeth Ieroboam on the stge, a schismaticall King, the first head of that iniqui∣tic, and the ring-leader of all them that are branded with notes of infamy in the holy booke, as 1. King. 15.29. And Baasa strooke all the house of Icroboam, hee left no soule aliue: because of the sinnes where-with Icro∣boam sinned, and made Israel to sinne. And 2. Chron. 13.5. Ought you not to know, that the Lord God of israel, hath giuen the Kingdome ouer Israel, to Dauid for euer, euen to him, and to his sonnes, by a Coue∣nant of Salt? And Icroboam the sonne of Nebat, the seruant of Salomon, the sonne of Dauid, is risen vp, and bath rebelled against his Lord, &c. Loe, this is that most impious, rebellious, and schismaticall Ieroboam; vvhich must comfort, and confirme the Romish Catho∣liques. But seeing our Iesuit is conuersant among schismes and schismatiques, let him assume, and make his in∣stance, those three Antipopes, who troubled the world about the time of the Councel of Constance. Or
let him take any one of them, and tell me, 1. Who was then the Primate of the Church? 2. Who was then the su∣preme head of the Church? 3. Who had then the Ecclesia∣sticall Primacy? 4. Who did then exercise the supreme Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction? 5. Who could then, by his owne authority, call a generall Councell, and sit therein Pre∣sident? 6. Who had power to conserre that fat benefice of the Papacy it selfe? 7. Who could then create Popes, and depose the Antipopes? 8. Who was then the supreme Iudge of all Controuersies; especially of papall, or po∣pish questions? But I will yet presse the Iesuit more necrely. What if the French (so called) Catholique Church, should create to it selfe a Patriarch, & leaue the See of Rome; seeing the Pope Paul the fist, claimeth temporall iu∣risdiction ouer the King of Fraunce? What if other Kings, both Protestants, & all those which call them∣selues Catholiques, seeing the Pope claimeth iurisdic∣tion ouer all, in a common cause that so much concer∣neth their Crownes and royall dignities, should ioyne hands and harts, and establish a Patriarch in their se∣uerall Kingdoms, who should , take and exercise the same iurisdiction that the old Roman Patri∣arch had, & did practice in his Prouince? which thing (making so much for establishing and confirming the outward peace, and Ecclesiasticall politie of the Christian world) is much desired,Cod. de sa∣cra. sa: Eccl. l. omni In∣no. and hoped for at the next ge∣nerall Councell: as wee read in old time, that the Em∣perour of Constantinople, by his law, did in all things e∣quall the iurisdiction of the Bishoppe of Constantinople, with the power of the Bishop of Rome. Quam legem euertere nunquam potuit Papa omnia conatus, Imperator is
patrocinio tutam: Which law maintained by the patronage of the Emperour, the Pope could neuer repeale, although he assaied all meanes for the same. Liberat. cap. 13. And may not then (I pray you sir) those Kings lawfully say to their Priests; Doe not obey the Bishop of Rome: but obey this Patriarch alone? You are exempt from all Romish power and iurisdiction? If the Iesuit doubt heereof, let him repaire to Ger∣son (De Auferebilitate Papae) that stiffe Patron of the Romane Religion, and hee will teach him thus much. Iohannes de Parisys also, in his Treatise De Pot. Reg. & Papal. cap. 13. writeth thus: Bonifacius obtinuit a Phoca, &c. Pope Boniface obtained of Phocas, that the Church of Rome should be called the Head of all Churches. Whereby we may gather such another argument, That it apper∣taineth to the Emperour, to transferre the Primacy of the Church, and to order Ecclesiasticad affaires. According also with the decrce of the Councell of Chalcedon, cap. 28: or, as it is related by Carranza, Sess. 16. Sedi veter is Romae patres merito dederunt Pri∣matum, quódilla ciuitas caeter is imperaret. And cap. 12. Quascunque ciuitates per literas regis Metropolitico ho∣nor arunt nomine. The old Fathers did worthily giue the Primacy to the See of old Rome, because it then ruled ouer all the residue, and all Cities vvere honoured with the title of Metropolitan by the Kings Letters Pattents. But now at length, I will particularly answere to the obiections of Becane. 1. There were not Priests and Leuites in both the Kingdoms of Iuda; and Israel, as hath appeared out of the expresse words of the Scripture. 2. Ieroboam might lawfully say vnto his Priests, which were not Leuites, but of the lowest of
the people, and by him made and consecrated; You are exempt from the iurisdiction of the High Priest, vvhich is at Ierusalem. 3. If King Iames so often protest, That his Primacy is defined within those bounds and limits, wherein the godly Kings vder the old Testament contained theirs; Then it followeth, that the Primacie of Kings is both godly and certaine, founded on holy Scriptures, and not doubtfull, or false, (as this falsary Martin affir∣meth) nor containeth so many parts, as are thought to be the offices thereof, by Hainric, Thomson, Burhil, Dr. Tooker, or any other Protestant. Secondly, that King Iames may lawfully, and by right, compell his subiects to the Oath of Supremacie. Thirdly, that Pope Paul the fist, Bellarmine; and Becane, resisted King Iames impi∣ously, and against all humanitie, by seeking to avert his subiects from their allegiance, & from taking both the one, and the other, so iust and godly an oath; Af∣ter the same manner, as Elymas did resist the Apostles, seeking to turn away the Proconsul frō the faith. Act. 13.8. Hauing thus satisfied the questions of Becane to the full, and more then was needfull, dispelling their clow∣die mists, and breaking the snares of these Spyders webs; and so made vp into a perfect Concord and har∣mony, all the supposed English Iarres about the Kings supremacy; There now remaineth nothing but the Ie∣suits Epilogue, or Conclusion: which by changing on∣ly the persons, and tearmes, I may most aptly and iust∣ly returne vpon the Papists in this manner.
The Conclusion. ALl then that hath been hitherto said, may be reduced vnto three heads; The first is, that the Kings Supremacy in the Church, is an anci∣ent right, & no new thing, but first ordained by Christ, the ancient of dayes, and was practiced in the old time by the most approued and pious Kings in the old Te∣stament: But the Popes Supremacie was neuer vsed, by any sound and godly Bishop of Rome, before that infamous Emperour Phocas: & thefore a new thing, neuer rightly claimed. The other, that there be so many iarres, and disa∣greements among the Romish Clergie about this Pri∣macie of the Pope; that it is not manifest, or certaine, what the said Primacy is, nor what force, or authoritie the same hath. The third, that the oath of this Primacy, can nei∣ther be exacted by the Pope, nor may any Papist take the same: but the oath of the Kings supremacy, may be exacted by the King, and obserued of all his good subiects. Heerehence, three other questions, which might be made concerning the subiects, will easily be answered. There are three sorts of subiects which liue in those regions where the Papacy beareth sway: 1. The first, are Baronians; who, in truth acknowledge and swear to the Popes supremacy; that is, to his direct supremacy: for his indirect supremacy is directly ridiculous. 2. The second, Bellarminians, or Pope-puritans, who doe not acknowledge this supremacy, and yet sweare
vnto it. 3. The third, are true belieuing Protestants, who neither acknowledge it, nor will sweare it. The first question then is, What may be said of these Baronians? I answere, that they doe vnwisely, and in∣consideratly; The reason is, because it is folly & rash∣nesse to sweare a thing that is doubtfull & vncertaine: as for example, The Popes supremacie; as is manifest by their iarres and dissensions which heeretofore wee haue shewed. The second question is, What may be said of the Bellarminians, or Pope-puritans? I answere, They are periured persons, and polititians. The reason is, be∣cause they belieue one thing, and sweare another. For they agree and consent therein, with the right and or∣thodoxall Protestant; and yet with the Baronians, they sweare allegiance to the Pope, as to the Lord Para∣mount of the whole world in temporall things, (for Pope Paul the fift doth challenge the same). And this they doe, to keepe an externall and politicall peace, which is more esteemed by them, then their faith and religion; and therefore are branded by Carerius, in his publique writings, and authorized to bee impious Polititians, and haeretiques of this time, and not to be called Christians: And of whom Pope Paul the fift may truly assirme, That he had found more truth and honesty in the high-land and bordering thieues, then in this sort of aequi∣nocating people. The third question is, What shal we say of the Pro∣testants, who are the right and true Catholicks? I an∣swere, They be iustand vpright men, who walke be∣fore God in truth and veritie. They be sincere, vvho professe with their mouth, that which they belieue in
their hart. They are truly couragious, who with good Eleazarus, had rather die, then consent to any vnlaw∣full thing, no not so much as in outward shew. They be like vnto the Apostles, who endeuour to obey God, ra∣ther then men. They be like to the Martyrs of the Pri∣mitiue Church, who freely professe themselues, before their Persecutors, to be such as indeed they are: That is to say, much vnlike the Iesuites, who range vp and downe, sometimes like poore Lay-men, & sometimes in the habite of Gentlemen, thrusting themselues into solemne assemblies at banquets and feasting; & som∣times into the Vniuersities: for some of this stampe lie close in the Vniuersities, to peruert inconstant heads, greedy of nouelties. But you will say, They are miserable: for, if they refuse the oath, which Apoc. 13.17. is the mark of the Beast; they are forced to vndergoe not onely impri∣sonments, torments, and punishments, but also death itselfe. Truly they are not therefore miserable, but most happy; for so hath our Sauiour taught vs in the Gospel, Mat. 5.10. Blessed are they vvho suffer persecu∣tion for righteousnesse, for theirs is the kingdome of hea∣uen. But then you will say, It is a hard thing to suffer: how is that hard which is done with ioy and delight? Heare what is said of the Apostles, Acts 5.41. And they vvent away reioycing from the Councell, because they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for the Name of Ie∣sus. Heare also what the Apostle saith of himselfe, 2. Cor. 7.4. I am filled vvith comfort, and am exceeding ioyous in all our tribulation. From whence commeth this ioy? but of the dou∣ble
gift of the holy Ghost, Hope and Charity. Hope of future glory, that maketh vs ioyfull, and full of com∣fort in all aduersity, Rom. 8.18. The afflictions of this present time are not vvoorthy of the glory vvhich shall bee shewed vnto vs. But the Papists say thus; The sufferings of this life, are worthy of the glory that shal be reuealed. Vn∣to the Martyrs (as they say) their sufferings are meri∣torius, and vnto other supererogatorie: according to the old verses of prayer made vnto Thomas Becket, Tuper Thomae sanguinem, quem prote impendit, Fac nos Christe scandere quò Thomas ascendit. Make vs ô Christ vp to ascend by vertue of S. Thomas blood, Which for thy sake he once did spend, to heauens race among the good. And vnto the Heb. cap. 10.34. You suffered vvith ioy the spoyling of your goods, knowing that you shall haue a better, and more enduring substance. But of the Iesuits, it may bee said cleane contrary; You haue receiued plenty of other mens goods, to their vnrecouerable harme, (witnesse the Venetians) knowing, that heere you receiue your reward in this world, and therefore cannot looke for any better, or more enduring sub∣stance, in the world to come. And no lesse is the force and power of Charity, Rom. 8.35. Who shall separate vs from the loue of Christ? Shall tribulation? or anguish? or famine, &c. But in all these things we are more then conquerours, through him that lo∣ued vs. I am perswaded that neither death, nor life, nor An∣gels, &c. nor any creature shall be able to separate vs from the loue of God, which is in Christ our Lord. But the Iesuits call this pious and godly assurance, impious presumption.
And from this forge came that flagitious discourse of Bellarmine, De incertitudine iustitiae; Of the vncertaintie of righteousnes or iustification. Heereto belong the examples of Christ, & of other the Saints, which haue great force and efficacie to stir vp and strengthen the harts of Catholiques, to suffer patiently in this life, prisons, fetters, torments, yea, death it selfe. 1. Pet. 2.20. If you suffer patiently for well dooing, this is thanke-worthy with God. Heereunto are ye called, because that Christ hath suffered for you, lea∣ning you an example, that you should follow his footsteppes, who did not sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth: who, when he was reuiled, reuiled not againe: when he suf∣fered, he threatned not; but committed it to him, that iudg∣eth righteously. But of the Iesuits it may be said cleane contrarily, and most truly: They doing euill continu∣ally suffer impatiently; whose glory is their shame (wit∣nes the Venetian.) For heerevnto are they called: to make of faithfull subiects, rebells and Traytors to their Kings: to sley or poyson Kings (thereby trea∣ding in the manifold, and deeply imprinted, steps of of Antichrist): to commit all most hainous and blou∣dy acts, to their vttermost endeuour. In whose mouth is euer found the guile of aequiuocating, so hatefull and pestiferous to mankind: who reuile, when they are not reuiled,Iude, v. 8. and blaspheme euen such as are in highest au∣thoritie: who threaten, when they suffer not: endeuou∣ring to betray their King and his royall issue; the No∣bles, and states of their owne Nation, assembled in Parliament; to the mercilesse and swist deuouring Gun-powder flames: and so committing their cause to that vniustly iudging Claudius Aquauiua, their prouost
generall, miraculously set oser them. Who taught the Iesuits to commit themselues im, iudging iusily; when he boasted, he could send mo souldrers,Gretzer. ddu. Iesuit. and sooner into the field, to weet, his Iesuits; then any Christian King in the world could doe: and when he promised the Pope, (viz. in time of the Venetians interdiction, & the Popes imminent danger) to send vnto him for his succour, 40000. men; but vpon condition, that as many of them, as were slaine in the battaile, should be canonized Martyrs. And Heb. 12. v. 1. Therfore, Let vs runne with pati∣ence, the race that is set before vs: looking vnto Iesus, the author, and finisher of our faith. But the Iesuits say thus: Therefore let vs, by vnbridled audaciousnes, ioyned with all manner wickednesse, runne the race that is set before vs, striuing against Priests, Academicks, and Kings, looking to Ignatius Loyola, the author and fini∣sher of our Iesuiticall faith. For saith Euerhard; The Ie∣suits are prest and alwaies ready, to vndertake with cheere∣fulnesse and alacrity, and what in them lieth, to perpetrate any flagitious wickednesse enioyned them; because they be∣lieue, that if they die in executing the commaunds of their Superiors, they shall obtaine I know not what crowne, grea∣ter, and more excellent, then that of Martyrs. With these, and other the like restimonies of holle writ, as Heb. 11. v. 36.2. Cor. 11. v. 23. et 12. v. 9. &c. that most reuerend Archbishop Cranmer, and the re∣uerend Bishops, Latimer and Ridley, beeing armed and encouraged, chose rather to suffer death, then to oblige themselues, with that impious Papall Oath. Whom followed very many in that glorious combat, burned in the flames, wherein they shined more, then those said burning and shining flames. Vnto these may be
added, the true catholick Protestants, who in Rome & Spaine, vnder those hellish Furies, the most sauage In∣quisitors (more bloudily cruel, then that infamous Ty∣rant Busiris) are imprisoned, fettered, proscribed, & died purple redde with their owne bloud. In, and of, whom, these following are verified, Psal. 116. ver. 15. Precious in the eyes of the Lord, is the death of his Saints. S. Cyprian, Epist. 9. O blessed Church of ours, which, in our daies, the glorious blood of Martyrs hath made illustri∣ous. Before, it was as white as snowe, by the good works of the brethren: but now it is as red as Crimson by the bloud of Martyrs. And the same Saint Cyprian, Epist. 24. What more happy and glorious thing, from Diuine fauour, can befall a∣ny man; then in the mids of their tormentors, vndaunted, to acknowledge their Lord God? Then in the mids of most cruel tortures, inflicted by secular Power; with a body rac∣ked, mangled, quartered, and hewed in peeces, at their last gaspe, freely to confesse Christ the sonne of God? Then aban∣doning the world, to long after heauen? Then leauing men, to stand among Angels? Then to be made Christs compa∣nion, in suffering with Christ, for Christ his sake? BECAN. Exam. NIL. Dr. HARRIS Reply. THe Iesuit is vtterly exhausted, and come to a Non plus. For vnto all this last, and longest 13. chap. of the English Concord, hanging as an in∣toxicated Dart, in the lyuer of this Iesuit, and of his Lord God the Pope, & other Popelings, he answereth not one word.
The Epilogue. THus (Christian Reader) you haue in this Reply, on the one side, the instification of the English Concord, in all the particulars thereof, of any moment: and on the other side, the vtter ouerthrow, and dissipation, of the whole, and euery whit, of this trifling Examen of Becan, consist∣ing of nought else, but of the frothy repetitions, (ad nauseam vs∣que) of the selfe same things, formerly set downe in his English Iarre; adding onely, some idle taxations of small escapes in prin∣ting, or transcribing, together with his virulent calumniations, and his false and vniust, yet very slanderous, and scandalous im∣putations, not onely against me alone, or the other foure Writers, whose sound, full vniforme, and indissoluble agreament, this in∣fernall torrent Becan, calleth the Concord of English Foxes: but also against all other English, most graue, godly, learned, sin∣cere, and painful Preachers of diuine truth; in that respect, bee∣ing moe, and more illustrious, within his Ma. Dominions, then in all the Christian world besides. These righteous seruants, and great Embassadors of the high God, zealous opposites to all vice, and promoters of all righteousnes, and holinesse: these planters of Gods Vineyard, these builders of his own Temple: these holy Sowers, who by their laborious sowing of Gods immortall seed, to weet, his word preached, in the hearts-ground of his chosen; and by Gods rich blessing vpon their sacred labours, be∣get many thousands sonnes and daughters of the heauenlie Fa∣ther, heires of Gods kingdome, and toynt heires with his onelie begotten sonne: The black mouth of this rayling Rabshekeh-Ie∣suit, blasphemously reuileth, as lying, calumniating and para∣site-ouerthrowers of all faith, religion, and auncient mode∣stie: and the chiefe promoters of all contrary vices, in Eng∣land: resembling them to Crowes here, who pull vp the ten∣der blade, and deuoure the ripe Corne. Whereas their popish, enorme, and impious acts this way, do manifest to all the vvorld, that they are indeed those Harpyes, carion Crowes, and hellish brids of the diuel,Mat. 13.7.19 which catch away that which was sowen in the harts, by those said godly Sowers. And moreouer, those pe∣stiferous
and enuious Enemies of God, and his Saints, vvho in that field of the Lord,Mat. 13. v. 25 sowe their cursed rares, in which, the di∣uine Malessie, by his said sacred Ministers, had formerly sowen his good seed. To conclude; These said holy messengers, and Ministers of the Lord, beeing of conuer sation pure, godly, righteous, and so∣ber: eating those meates which God hath created to be recei∣ued by them with thanks-giuing:1. Tim. 4. v. 3 liuing with their vviues in the holy estate of Matrimome,Heb. 13. v. 4 honourable among all men, (therefore among them): and lying chastly with their wines, in the mariage bed vndefiled,Mal. 2. v. 15 thereby keeping themselues in their spirit, seeking and producing a godlyseed; This vncleane Iesuit, venting the doctrine of diuels, 1. Tim. 4 v. 1.3. to wit, the catholich Romish doctrine, calleth therfore, Mancipia ven∣tris, ac libidinis: Slaues to lust, and belly cheere. Whereas the Popish fasting, is feasting with delicacies: and the cleanenesse of their Popes especially, also of their Cardinalls, Bishops, Abbots, Priests, Iesuits, and other Popelings, is the most filthy and abho∣minable vncleanenes, in their most vnnaturall Sodonietries: most brutish incests, with mother, daughter, sister, neece: and most dishonest whoredoms, & fornications, with masds, and ma∣ried women, who confessing to thē their wanton pronenesse to lust, their libidinous thoughts, desires, words, and deeds vvith other men; are thereby made a pray to their vnlawful lusts, (either for hope of absolution, or feare of punishment, and ire of husbands or parents) to haue their bodies abused by them, at their pleasure; making them, quae semelverec ūdiae limites transilierint, gna∣uiter in pudentes. Lastly, with Nunnes, the most beautiful vir∣gins that can bee gotten from all parts of Christendome, but by those full fed and neighing horses, made most detestable pro∣iected whores. Witnesses so many thousand Infants, the fruits of their wombes, stfled, and buried, in waters, vault-earths, and o∣ther priuie places, to hide their impurities: The Cage-cloysters of which vncleane byrds, were purposely deuised, and erected to that filthy end. For when as these libidinous bond-slaues, percei∣ued, that no one woman, the lawfull wife, could satiate the vn∣bridled lust of any of them: the Mystery of iniquitie tooke a
course to fulfill the same, (though it would be in a manner, infinite) with all manner of varietie, viz. of Stewes of males and females: of open vvhore-Courtizans: of secret whore-Nunnes: of confessed whores, maydes, and married women. And least the soule of any one of them (as Lots righteous soule was) vexed with these mon∣strous, vagrant, & most silthy libidinous incontinencies, should con∣fine himselfe and his desires to one woman, his wife in holy wedlocke, they with incredible, both impudency and impiety, tooke this sorpen∣tine-wise order for estoppell thereof, viz. by Canon vnchangeable, solemnly, absolutely, & peremptorily, without all hope of any dispen∣sation vnto any therein, whomsoeuer, to prohibit any Clergy-mens mariages, as vnlawfull, and vncleane adulteries. Take a view of the present estate this way, of the whole world, not onely of Christi∣ans, but also of Iewes, Turks, and all other insidels: and read ouer the histories of former times, and places; and you shall not finde so many, and so lewdly, yet politikely contriued villanies, for satiating all manner filthy lusts of their Priests, no not in Sodom it selfe, as are found in places, where the Popish Mysterie of iniquity beareth sway. And yet this impure, & impudent Iesuit, dare call the chaste maried Preachers in England, Slaues to lust. Assuredly, there are a thousand popish Priests, for one Protestant Preacher, lust-slaues. Neither are heere to be found (as they be in Rome, and Romish ter∣ritories) open whore Courtizans, or cloystered whore Nunnes, pub∣liquely authorized. Such sometimes, that is, in times of popish dark∣nesse, were heere, and heere infected many: but since the light of the Gospell came in, those fylths are abandoned, expelled, & vtterlie vanished hence. God the author & sanctifier of mariage, hath pro∣nounced the mariages of our Preachers, to bee honorable:Heb. 13. v. 4 but God, the consuming fire, hath threatned to iudge popish Priests, adulterours, and whoremongers: vpon whom hee will raine, snares, stormy tempests, and brimstone of hell fire.Psal. 11. v. 6 This shall be the portion of their cup. Euen the sower sawce, for their sweet lust-sinnes; (without their deep repentance). And heerein, because I cannot erre with Becan, I craue no pardon with Becan. FINIS.
