13135 99856977 22634
An excellent Ditty made vpon the great victory, vvhich the French king obtayned aain the Duke de Maine, and the Romish Revels in his kingdome, vpon Ashwednesday being the fourth day of March last past. 1590. To the tune of the new Tantara. God saue the King. TRiumph good Christians and reioyce, This wondrous newes to heare: Wherein the power of mightie Ioue, So greatly doth appeare. God is the stay and strength of those That in him puts his trust: And what he euer promiste them, He keepeth firme and iust. Let canons rore and Muskets shoote, Let Fife and Ensignes play: Let Trumpets shrill and dubbing drums, Sound forth this ioyfull day. Who knows not how the Duke de Maine, By title from the Gwize, Hath sought to rule  in Fraunce. All ioinde themselues in battaile ray. Vpon firme land in Fraunce, Entending to haue slaine the king, Yet had a worser chaunce. Let canons rore and Muskets shoote &c. Whereby the enemy was that time, Full thirtie thousand strong: The king his power was but weake, To right his open wrong. He had not past ten thousand men, In his defence to fighte, Which was great ods as all men knowes, To put all these to flight. Let canons rore  shoote &c. In valiaunt sorte he cheerd his men, And louingly he saide: God is with vs, our quarrels good, Be therefore not dismaide. My trust is still that as the Lord, Hath me before defended: So he will fighte against my foes, That haue my death pretended. Let canons rore and Muskets shoote &c. My quarrell doth pertaine to God. In whom I put my trust: And in the promise he hath made, I know he wil be iust. Be valiaunt now and fight like men, And God will bee your guide: And I with you will spend my blood, And not once step aside. Let canons rore and Muskets shoote &c. To ther then the Armies went, Which made a wondrous shoe: On eiher side they fought full fierce, Ech sought the others woe. The Canons roard and Muskets shotte, And made a warlike noies: Their Trompets sound and dubbing drūs, Encreaste the souldiers ioies. Let canons rore and Muskets shoote &c. The Fife mde warlike melody, The ensignes were displaied: Oh either side they curredge cride. The king was not dismaied. But like a Souldiour and a king, A standard he did take: And slew the man that bare the same, Which made his enemies quake. Let canons rore and Muskets shoote &c. The Duke de Maine for all his power. Was forste from field to flie: His heeles were better then his hands, He fought so valiauntly. His power was stricken with such feare, That they did flie in haste: Whereby the king did win the field, His enemies were disgraste. Let canons rore and Muskets shoote &c. He and his power did follow them, Full fiue howres in the chase: From eight at morne til toward night. He fought in the enemies face. This victory he did obtaine, Such was his good succes, And many thousand enimies slaine, Report saieth sure no les. Let canons rore and Muskets shoote &c. What tents and furniture for warre, What treasure and iewels rich: Hereby the king and soldiours got, You may suppose was miche. And prisoners taken of account, As you shal: shortly heere, VVho for their reason to their king, I thinke will pay full deere. Let canons rore and Muskets shoote &c. See here the handy worke of God, VVho harmles saude the king. And sent him treasure in great store, And euery warlike thing.
