1323.5 29631001 28042
¶A balade agaynst malycyous Sclaunderers. ¶Heue aud how rumbelow thou arte to blame Trolle into the right way agayne for shame. TRolle into the way / trolle in and retrolle Small charyte and lesse wytte is in thy nolle Thus for to rayle vpon a christen soule Wherfore men thynke the worthy blame Trolle into the way agayne for shame. ¶Thou makest a trollyng hyther and thyther Somtyme thou trollest thou canst not tell whyther But if all thy trollynges were gathered togyther Thy trollynge might trym the and tourne the to blame Wherfore trolle thou nowe into the way for shame ❧Although lord Crumwell a traytour was yet dare I saye that the kynge of his grace Hath forgyuen him that gret trespas To tayle than on dead men / thou arte to blame Trolle now into the way agayne for shame. ❧In that that he the law hath offended By the lawe he is iustly condempned This mortall lyfe / full godly he ended Wherfore to rayle thus / thou art to blame Trolle into the way agayne for shame. ¶For all his offences in euery thyng He asked god mercy and grace of the kynge And of all the wyde world / for his trāsgressyng Thou nor no man can say nay to the same Trolle into the way than agayne for shame ☜Thou takest his treason for thy subtyll defence Which nowe is departed and gone from hence But men spye the pricke of all thy pretence Thy owne sayenges folowyng declare the same Trolle into the way / for fere or for shame ¶Thou sayest he was with the church to quycke Fauouryng none but of the new trycke But nowe thou spurnest agaynst the prycke And thou of force / must confesse the same Trolle into the way agayne for shame ☜For bysshops haue now as they haue had If preestes wold complayne / they were to mad Wherfore thou apperest to be a popysshe lad For vsyng thy popery / thou arte to blame Trolle into the way agayne for shame. ❧For here thou vpholdest both monkes and fryers Nunnes and noughty packes / and lewed lowsy lyers The bysshop of Rome / with all his rotten squyers To buylde such a church / thou arte moche to blame Trolle nowe into the way agayne for shame. ❧May not men thynke now in the meane ceason That thou hast deserued by ryght and by reason As moch as he hath done for clokynge thy treason For he was a traytour / and thou arte the same Trolle away papyst / god gyue the shame. ¶The sacrament of the aulter / that is most hyest Crumwell beleued it to be the very body of Chriest Wherfore in thy writyng / on him thou lyest For the kynge & his counsell wyll wytnesse the same Trolle into the waye / than agayne for shame ☜Although that he of byrth were but bace yet was he set vp of the kynges noble grace Wherby it appereth that thou woldest deface The kynges royall power / dispysyng the same Trolle away traytour / god gyue the shame. ¶Is it thy facyon thus craftely to saye? Let vs for the kynge / and his lordes praye And than at the last / to trolle them awaye With heue and how rumbelow / thy wordes be the same Both written and printed / to thy great shame? ☜Hast thou no man els / thou dronken soll But the kynge and his nobles / away for to troll It were ynough for to cost the thy poll Both thyne and all other / that wold do the same Trolle away traytoure / god gyue the shame. ¶A prety wyse printer belyke he was Which of his printyng / so lytell doth pas To print such pylde poetry / as this same was Lyke maker / lyke printer / two trolles of the game A payre of good papystes / ye be payne of shame ☜God send all traytours their hole desates God send small toye / to all popysshe hartes And euyll hap to as many as do take their partes God send their purpose neuer to frame But trolle them away with sorow and shame. ¶I pray god thou be not fownde one of those That peruarteth the people / as I suppose From redyng of gods worde / that goodly rose Where the counsell commaundeth to occupy the same Thou traytor allurest them this fayre floure to defame. ❧God preserue and kepe the kynges noble grace With prince Edwarde his sonne / to succede in his place God kepe them amonge vs / longe tyme and space Let all his true subiectes / say Amen to the same And they that wold otherwyse / god send them shame. ¶Finis. ☜Prentyd at London in Lombard strete nere vnto the Stockes market at the sygne of the Mermayde by Iohn Gough. Cum preuilegio Ad imprimendum solum O domine in uirtute tua letabitur Rex, &c.
