13359 99839811 4266
Porta pietatis, OR, The Port or Harbour of Piety. Exprest in sundry Triumphes, Page∣ants, and Showes, at the Initiation of the Right Honourable Sir MAVRICE ABBOT Knight, into the Majoralty of the famous and farre renowned City London. All the charge and expence of the laborious Projects both by water and Land, being the sole undertaking of the Right Worshipfull Company of the Drapers. Written by Thomas Heywood. Redeunt Spectacula Printed at London by I. Okes. 1638.
To the Right Honorable Sr. Maurice Abbot, Knight, the Lord Maior of this renowned Metropolis, London. Right Honourable: ANtiquity informes us, in the most flourishing state of Rome, of an Order of the Candidati, so cal∣led, because habited in white ve∣sture, betokning Innocence, and those of the noblest Citizens, who in that garbe wal∣ked the streets with humble lookes, and submisse ge∣sture, thereby to insinuate themselves into the grace of the people, being ambitious after honour and Office. Great Lord, it fareth not so with You, who though for inward Candor and sincerity, You may compare with the best of them, yet have beene so far from affecting such popularity, that though You in Your great Modesty would willingly have evaded it; yet some places by importunity, and this Your present Praetorship hath by a generall suffrage, and the unanimous harmony of a free Election, beene conferd upon You.
Neither can I omit the happinesse of Your de∣ceased Father, remarkable in three most fortunate Sonnes: the one, for many yeares together, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and Metropolitane of all England: another, a reverend Father in God, Bishop of Salisbury: as memorable for his learned Workes and Writings, as the other for his Epis∣copall government in the Church, and Counsell in State. And now lately Your Honour'd selfe, the Lord Maior of this Metropolis, the famous City London: In which, and of which, as you are now Maximus, so it is expected you shall prove Opti∣mus. Grave Sir, it is a knowne Maxime, that the honour which is acquired by Vertue, hath a perpetu∣all assurance: nor blame my boldnesse, if I pre∣sume to prompt Your memory in what You have long studied: The life of a Magistrate is the rule and square whereby inferior persons frame their carriage and deportment, who sooner assimulate themselves to their Lives than their Lawes, which Lawes if not executed are of no estimation. But I cease further to trouble Your Lordship, leaving you to Your Honou∣rable charge, with that of the Poet, Qui sua metitur pondera, ferre potest. Your Lordships in all observance Thomas Heywood.
Londini Porta Pietatis: Londons Gate to Piety. LONDON and WESTMINSTER are two Twin-sister-Cities; as joyned by one Street, so wate∣red by one streame: the first a breeder of grave Magistrates, the second, the buriall-place of great Monarchs; Both famous for their two Cathedrals: the one Dedicated to the honour of Saint Paul, the other of Saint Peter. These I rather concatenate, because as in the one, the Right Honourable the Lord Major receiveth his honour, so in the other he takes his Oath: yet London may be presum'd to be the elder, and more excellent in Birth, Meanes, and Issue; in the first for her Antiquity, in the second for her Ability, in the
third, for her numerous Progeny: she and her Sub∣urbs being decored with two severall Burses or Ex∣changes, and beautified with two eminent Gar∣dens of Exercise, knowne by the names of Artil∣lery and Military. I shall not need to insist much either upon her Extension, or Dimension, nor to compare her with other eminent Cities that were, or are, it having beene an Argument treated of by Authentick Authors, and the laborious project of many learned Pennes, and frequently celebrated upon the like dayes of Solemnity. And although by the space of Tenne yeares last past, there hath not beene any Lord Major free of that Company, yet was there within Twelve yeeres before that sixe Lord Majors of the same. And it shall not bee amisse to give you a briefe Nomination of some Honourable Praetors, and those of prime Remarke in that Company: Sir Henry Fitz-Alwin Draper, was the first Lord Major of this Citie, which place hee held for foure and twenty yeeres together, and upward; and in the first yeere of his Majoralty, Anno 1210. London-Bridge, which was before made of Timber, was begun to be built of Stone. Sir William Powltney was foure times Lord Major; 1337 he built a Chap∣pell in Pauls, where hee lyeth buried, and erected a Colledge neere unto the Church of St. Laurence Powltney, London: He moreover built the Church of little Alhallows in Thames street, with other pious and devout Acts. Iohn Hind Draper, Lord
Major 1405, built the Church of Sr. Swithen by London-stone, &c. Sir Iohn Norman was the first that rowed in his Bardge to Westminster, when hee went to take his Oath: Sir Richard Hardell face in the Judicatory Seate sixe yeares together: Simon Eyre Lord Major, built Leaden-Hall at his owne proper costs and charges: Sir Richard Pipe, George Monox, Lord Major 1515, and Sir Iohn Milborne, were great Erectors of Almes-houses, Hospitalls, &c. and left liberally to the poore: Sir Richard Campion perfected divers charitable workes, left unfinish't by Sir Iohn Milborne before named. Sir Thomas Hayes 1615▪ Sir Iohn Iolls 1616▪ Sir Edward Barkham, Sir Martin Lumley, Sir Allan Cotten, Sir Cuthbert Hacket, &c. To speake of them all, I should but spend Paper in a meere capitulation of their names, and neglect the project now in agitation. The first Show by Water. THe first Show by Water, is presented by Proteus in a beautiful Sea-Chariot: for the better Orna∣ment, decored with divers Marine Nymphs and Sea-goddesses▪ &c. He sitteth or rideth upon a mo∣ving Tortois, which is reckoned amongst the Am∣phibiae, quòd in ambobus Elementis degant: That is, One of those Creatures that live in two Elements, the Water, and the Land; alluding to the Trading of the Right Honourable the present Lord Major, who is a Merchant, free of the Turkey, Italian, French, Spanish, Muscovy, and was late Gover∣nour of the East Indy-Company. This Proteus, or
, that is, Primus, is held to be the first, or most ancient of the Sea-gods, the Sonne of Ocea∣nus and Thetis, who could transhape himselfe into any Figure whatsoever, and was skilfull in Pre∣diction: He was call'd Vertumnus à vertendo, be∣cause he indented or turned the course of the River Tyber, which floweth up to Rome, as the Thames to London; he was a King, and reigned in the Carpa∣thian Island, which because it was full of boggs and marish places, (as lying neere unto the maine Ocean) he had that Title conferr'd on him to be a Marine god: when the Scithians thought to invade him, and by reason of the former impediments could no way damage his Countrey, it therefore increased their superstitious opinion to have him Deified. He was called also Pastor populi, that is, A Shepheard of the people; and is said also to feede Neptunes Fishes call'd Phocae. It was a Custome amongst the Aegyptian Kings, to have their Scepters insculpt with sundry Hiero∣gliphicks, or Figures, as a Lyon, a Dragon, a Tree, a flame of fire, &c. as their fancies lead them, for which that Proverb was conferr'd in him, Proteo mutabilior, that is, More changeable than Proteus. This Proteus, or Vertumnus, or Vesores, reigned in Aegypt some foure yeeres before the Tro∣jan Warre, that is, Anno Mundi, 2752.
Proteus his Speech. PRoteus of all the Marine gods the prime, And held the noblest both for Birth and Time: From him who with his Trident swayes the Maine, And ploughs the waves in curles, or makes them plaine: Neptune, both Lord of Ebbe, and Inundation▪ I come to greete your great Inauguration. They call me Versi-pellis, and 'tis true, No figure, for me, no shape to me is new; For I appeare what Creature I desire, Sometimes a Bull, a Serpent, sometimes Fire: " The first denotes my strength; strong must he be, " And powerfull, who aspire to your Degree. " You must be wise as Serpents, to decide " Such doubts as Errour or Misprision hide. " And next, like Fire, (of th'Elements most pure) " Whose nature can no sordid stuffe endure, " As in Calcining Metalls we behold, " It sunders and divides the drosse from Gold, And such are the Decorements that still waite Vpon so grave, so great a Magistrate. This Tortois, double-natur'd, doth imply (By the two Elements of moist and dry) So much as gives the world to understand, Your noble Trading both by Sea and Land. Of Porposes the vast Heards Proteus keepes, And I am styl'd the Prophet of the Deepes, Sent to praedict good Omen: May that Fleete Which makes th'East Indies with our England meete,
Prosper to all your hearts desires: Their sayles Be to and fro swell'd with auspicious gales: May You (who of this City now take charge) With all the Scarlet Senate in your Barge, The Fame thereof so heighten, future Story Above all other States may crowne her glory. To hinder what's more weighty, I am loath, Passe therefore freely on, to take your Oath. This Show is after brought off from the water, to attend upon the rest by Land, of which the first is, The first Show by Land. A Shepheard with his Skrip and Bottle, and his Dog by him; a sheep-hooke in his hand, round about him are his Flocke, some feeding, others resting in severall postures; the plat-forme adorn'd with Flowers, Plants, and Trees bearing sundry Fruits. And because this Worshipfull Society tra∣deth in Cloth, it is pertinent that I should speake something of the Sheepe, who is of all other foure-footed beasts the most harmelesse and gentle. Those that write of them, report, that in Arabia they have tayles three Cubits in length: In Chios they are the smallest, but their Milke and Cheese the sweetest, and best. The Lambe from her yeaning knoweth and acknowledgeth her Damme: Those are held to be most profitable for store, whose bodies are big∣gest, the fleece softest and thickest, and their legs shortest. Their Age is reckoned at Tenne yeeres,
they breed at Two, and cease at Nine: The Ewes goe with their young an Hundred and fifty dayes. Pliny saith, the best Wooll Apulia and Italy yeelds, and next them Milesium, Tarentum, Canusium, and Laodicea in Asia; their generall time of sheering is in Iuly: The Poet Laberius called the Rammes of the Flocke Reciproci-cornes, and Lanicutes, alluding to the writhing of their Hornes and their Skinnes bearing Wooll: The Bell-weather, or Captaine of the Flocke is call'd Vervex sectarius, &c. The Shepheards Speech. BY what rare frame, or in what curious Vorse Can the rich profits of your Trades commerce Be to the full exprest? which to explaine, Lyes not in Poets Pen, or Artists braine. What Beast, or Bird, for Hyde, or Feather rare, (For mans use made, can with the Sheepe compare? The Horse of strength or swiftnesse may be proud, But yet his flesh is not for food allow'd. The Heards yeeld Milke and Meate (commodious both) Yet none of all their skins make Wooll for Cloth. The Sheepe doth all: The Parrot and the Jay, The Peacock, Estridge, all in colours gay, Delight the Eye, some with their Notes, the Eare, But what are these unto the Cloth we weare? Search Forrests, Desarts for Beasts wilde or tame, The Mountaines or the Vales, search the vast frame Of the wide Universe, the Earth, and Skie, Nor Beast nor Bird can with the Sheepe comply:
No Creature under Heaven, bee't small or great, But some way usefull, one affords us meate, Another Ornament: Shee more than this, " Of Patience, and of Profit th'embleme is, In former Ages by the Heroes sought: After, from Greece into Hesperia brought: She's cloath'd in plenteous riches, and being shorne, " Her Fleece an Order, and by Emperours worne, All these are knowne, yet further understand, In twelve divide the profits of this Land, As Hydes, Tinne, Lead; or what else you can name, Tenne of those twelve the Fleece may justly claime: Then how can that amongst the rest be mist, By which all States, all Common Weales subsist? Great honour then belongs unto this trade, And you, great Lord, for whom this triumph's made. The second Show by Land. THe second Show by land is an Indian Beast, called a Rinoceros, which being presented to the life, is for the rarenesse thereof, more fit to beautifie a Triumph: his Head, Necke, Backe, Buttockes, Sides, and Thighes, armed by Nature with im∣penetrable Skales; his Hide or Skinne of the colour of the Boxe-tree, in greatnesse equall with the Elephant, but his Legges are somewhat shorter: an enemy to all beasts of rapine and prey, as the Lyon, Leopard, Beare, Wolfe, Tiger, and the like: but to others, as the Horse, Asse, Oxe, Sheep, &c.
which feede not upon the life and blood of the weaker, but of the grasse and hearbage of the field, harmlesse and gentle, ready to succour them, when they be any way distressed. Hee hath a short horne growing from his nose, and being in continuall en∣mity with the Elephant, before hee encounter him, he sharpeneth it against a stone, and in the sight ai∣meth to wound him in the belly, being the softest place about him, and the soonest pierc'd: He is back't by an Indian, the speaker. The Indians Speech. THe dignity of Merchants who can tell? Or how much they all Traders ante-cell? When others here at home securely sleepe, He plowes the bosome of each unknowne deepe, And in them sees heavens wonders; for he can Take a full view of the Leviathan, Whose strength all Marine Monsters doth surpasse, His Ribs as Iron, his Fins and skales as brasse. His Ship like to the feather'd Fowle he wings, And from all Coasts hee rich materialls brings, For ornament or profit; those by which Inferiour Arts subsist, and become rich; By Land he makes discovery of all Nations, Their Manners, and their Countries scituations, And with those savage natures so complies, That there's no rarity from thence can rise But he makes frequent with us, and yet these
Not without dangers, both on shores and seas: The Land he pierceth, and the Ocean skowers, To make them all by free transportage ours. You (honourd Sir) amongst the chiefe are nam'd, By whose commerce our Nation hath beene fam'd. The Romans in their triumphes had before Their Chariots borne or lead, (to grace the more The sumptuous Show) the prime and choisest things, VVhich they had taken from the Captive, Kings: VVhat curious Statue▪ what strange bird, or beast That Clime did yeeld (if rare above the rest) Was there expos'd: Entring your civill state, VVhom better may we strive to imitate? This huge Rinoceros (not 'mongst us seene, Yet frequent wheresome Factors oft have beene) Is embleme of the Praetorship you beare, Who to all Beasts of prey, who rend and teare The innocent heards and flocks, is foe profest, But in all just defences armes his crest. You of this wildernesse are Lord, so sway, The weake may be upheld, the proud obey. The third Show by Land. THe third Show by land is a Ship, fully accommo∣dated with all her Masts, Sayles, Cordage, Tack∣lings, Cables, Anchors, Ordnance, &c. in that small Modell, figuring the greatest Vessell: But concer∣ning Ships and Nauigation, with the honour and benefits thence accrewing, I have lately delivered my
selfe so amply in a Booke published the last Summer of his Majesties great Shippe, called the Soveraigne of the Seas, that to any, who desire to be better certi∣fied concerning such things, I referre them to that Tractate, from whence they may receive full & plen∣teous satisfaction: I come now to a yong Sailor the Speaker. The Speech from the Shippe. SHipping to our first Fathers was not knowne; (Though now amongst all Nations common growne) Nor trade by Sea: we read the first choise peece, Was th'Argo, built to fetch the golden Fleece, In which brave voyage, sixty Princes, all Heroës, such as we Semones call: In that new Vessell to attaine the shore. Where such a prize was, each tugg'd at the Oare: On one bench Hercules and Hilas sate, Beauty and Strength; and siding iust with that Daunaus and Lynceus of so quicke a sight No interposer, or large distance might Dull his cleare Opticks: those that had the charge, And the chiefe stearadge of that Princely Barge, Zethes and Calais, whose judgements meet, Being said t'have feathers on their heads and feete: We spare the rest: Grave Sir, the Merchants trade Is that, for which all Shipping first was made; And through an Hellespont who would but pull, Steere, and hoise saile, to bring home golden Wooll?
For wee by that are cloath'd: In the first place Sate strength and beauty: oh what a sweete grace Have those united; both now yours, great Lord, Your beauty is your robe, your strength the sword. You must have Lynceus eyes, and further see Than either you before have done, or he Could ever: having now a true inspection Into each strife, each cause without affection To this or that party: some are sed, To have had feathers on their feete and head. (As those whom I late nam'd) you must have more, And in your place be feather'd now all o're: You must have feathers in your thoughts, your eyes, Your hands, your feete; for he that's truely wise Must still be of a winged apprehension As well for execution, as prevention. You know (Right honourd Sir) delayes and pauses, In judicature, dull, if not dampe, good causes: That we presume t'advise, we pardon crave, It being confest, all these, and more you have. The fourth Show by Land. THe fourth Show by Land beares the Title Por∣ta Pietatis, The Gate of Piety: which is the doore by which all zealous and devout men enter into the fruition of their long hoped for happinesse: It is a delicate and artificiall composed structure, built Temple-fashion, as most genuine and proper to the persons therein presented. The Speaker is Piety
her selfe, her habit, best suiting with her condition; upon her head are certaine beames or raies of gold, intimating a glory belonging to sanctity; in one hand an Angelicall staffe, with a Banner; on the o∣ther Arme a Crosse Gules in a field Argent: upon one hand sits a beautifull Childe, representing Re∣ligion, upon whose Shield are figured Time, with his daughter Truth: her Motto Vincit veritas: In another copartment sitteth one representing the blessed Virgin, Patronesse of this Right Worshipfull Society, Crowned: in one hand a Fanne of Starres, in the other a Shield, in which are inscribed three Crownes (gradatim) ascending, being the Armes or Escutchion of the Company, and her Motto that which belongeth unto it: Deo soli Ho∣nor & gloria: that is, unto God onely be Honour and Glory: Next her sit the three Theologicall Graces, Faith, Hope, and Charity, with three Escutchions, Faiths motto, Fidei ala, Caeli scala: The wings of Faith are the ladder by which we scale heaven. Hopes, Solum spernit qui Caelum sperat: hee hates the Earth, that hopes for Heaven. Loves Motto, Vbi charitas, non est Caritas, who giveth willingly, shall never want wretchedly. A sixth personateth Zeale, in whose Escutchion is a burning Hart: Her word; In tepida, frigida, flagrans: neither luke-warme, nor key-cold, but ever burning: A seventh figureth Humility: Her's In terra Corpus, in Coelo Cor: the body on earth, the heart in Heaven. And last Constan∣cies: Metam tangenti Corona; A Crowne belongeth
to him who persevereth to the end. I come to the Speech. Piety the Speaker. THis Structure is a Citadell, or Tower, Where Piety, plac't in her heavenly bower, Poynts out the way to blisse, guirt with a ring Of all those Graces that may glory bring. Here sits Religion firme, (though else where torne By Schismaticks, and made the Atheists scorne) Shining in her pure truth, nor need she quake, Affrighted with the Faggot and the stake: Shee's to you deare, you unto her are tender, Vnder the Scepter of the Faiths defender. How am I extasi'de when I behold You build new Temples, and repaire the old! There's not a stone that's laid in such foundation, But is a step degreeing to Salvation: And not a Scaffold rear'd to that intent, But mounts a Soule above the Firmament: Of Merchants, we know Magistrates are made, And they (of those) most happy that so Trade. Your Virgin-Saint sits next Religion crown'd, With her owne Hand-maids (see) inviron'd round, And these are they the learned Schoole-men call, The three prime Vertues Theologicall, Faith, Hope, and Love; Zeale all inflam'd with fire Of devout acts, doth a sixt place aspire. The seventh Humility, and we commend The Eight to Constancy, which crownes the end.
A Triple Crowne's th'Emblazon of your Crest, But to gaine one, is to be ever blest. Proceede in that faire course you have begun, So when your Annuall Glasse of State is run, (Nay, that of Life) Ours, but the Gate to blisse Shall let you in to yon Metropolis. There now remaineth onely the last Speech at Night, spoken by Proteus, which concludes the Tryumph. The Speech at Night. NOw bright Hiperion hath unloos'd his Teame, And washt his Coach-Steeds in cold Isters streame: Day doth to Night give place, yet e're You sleepe, Remember what the Prophet of the Deepe, Proteus fore-told: All such as State aspire, Must be as Bulls, as Serpents, and like Fire. The Shepheard grazing of his Flocks, displayes The use and profit from the Fleece we raise. That Indian Beast, (had he a tongue to speake) Would say, Suppresse the proud, support the weake, That Ship the Merchants honour loudly tells, And how all other Trades it antecells: But Piety doth point You to that Starre, By which good Merchants steere: too bold we are To keepe you from your rest; To-morrows Sunne Will raise You to new cares, not yet begun.
I will not speake much concerning the two Bro∣thers, Mr. Iohn and Mathias Christmas, the Model∣lers and Composers of those severall Peeces this day presented to a mighty confluence, (being the two succeeding Sonnes of that most ingenious Artist Mr. Gerard Christmas) to whom, and to whose Workmanship I will onely conferre that Character, which being long since (upon the like occasion) conferr'd upon the Father, I cannot but now me∣ritedly bestow upon the Sonnes: Men, as they are excellent in their Art, so they are faithfull in their performance. FINIS.
