1413 S124187 99836690 974
A SERMON AGAINST SELFE Policy, Preached at White Han nt. 1621. BY ISAAC BAPGRAVE: Doctor in Divinitie; Chaplayne to the Prince His Highnesse, and Pastor of St MARGARETS Church in WESTMINSTER. LONDON Printed by Nicholas Okes, for Iohn Bartlett, and Iohn Spencer. 1624.
A SERMON AGAINST Selfe-Policy: Preached at WHITE-HALL. OSE 10. Verse 1. Israell is an empty Vine, he bringeth fruite to himselfe. IT is the misery of man that since his first fal, no estate can free him from misery, being once tou∣ched with the venome of the tempter, he turnes all things in∣to poyson which hee toucheth, the
very apple of the Tree of Life, is made the ministration of death: all Gods appoyntments for his felicity prooue the meanes of his misery. To de∣monstate this in all mankind, would make too long a Syllogisme, see it here in one for all, Gods chosen inheritance the sonnes of Israell; who though they had for many yeares bin the trea∣sury of Gods blessings, and that the whole Series of the old Testament be little other then the sacred Register of his free mercies toward them: yet now especially in the time of Ose, vnder the raigne of Ieroboam they were in the height of their prosperity. Now were their garners laden with Corne, their bottles swelling with wine, their presses flowing with oyle, their Cof∣fers burdned with the aboundance of siluer and gold; and yet in this ful∣nesse of all temporall blessings, they prooue empty of all spirituall grace, they powre out their wine before Asta∣roth, and their oyle before Baall, they
abuse all these fauours of their Maker, to the setting vp of Idolatry, or the sa∣tisfying of their owne Luxury. Isra∣ell is an empty Vine, he bringeth, &c. The Text in the matter of it is an expression of one mayne sinne in Is∣rael; and this matter is Discouered in a most remarkable forme. First, in a similitude or Allegory: In which wee haue the exemplar or patterne, a Vine: the Exemplatum or Paralell Israel, Israel is a Vine. Second∣ly, this Allegory containes a Riddle, and a Resolution. The Riddle set downe by way of Paradoxe, compo∣sed of two Contradictory Positions, Israel is an Empty Vine. Fruitfull Vine. The Resolution is vnfolded in the last Word, Sibi, to himselfe; This Reades the Ridle, and reconciles the Contra∣diction, for therefore Israel is an empty Vine, because he brings, &c. Such is the monstrous nature of
sinne, that direct simple notions are not able to expresse it. It must bee helpt out with oblique Similitudes and Allegories, what shall I liken to thee Oh Daughter of Ierusalem: Thy breach is great like the Sea, who can heale thee, Lam. 2. 3. Thy mother is like a Vine in the blood, Ezech. 39. Nay, such is the Prodigious forme of sinne, that simi∣lies and allegories cannot yet enough describe it, vnlesse they beheightned by Ridles and Paradoxes. Israel is an emp∣ty Vine, Israel is a fruitfull Vine. Loe this onely haue I found (sayth the wise man) Quod facit Deus hominem rectum, That God made man vpright; but the praeuaricating quality of sinne hath perplexed him with many Ridles and Paradoxes, iust such as this in my text. Which in that regard if it may adde any life to your sacred attentions, (as admiration is the mother of attention, sayth Aristotle.) I may presume to stile it, Textus admirabilis, an admirable text,Metap. . 1. for so Tully from the Stoicks, and the
Schoole-men from Tully, call all Para∣doxes, propositiones admirabiles. And that iustly too, for euery Paradoxe consists of two contradictory positi∣ons: Now the nature of contradicti∣ons being such, that if one be false a∣nother must needes be true, if one true, another must needs be false, if by discourse wee may reconcile these opposites, and prooue them both true, it may well bee called an admirable Text. And sinne with all the Para∣doxiall qualities, and ridling intricacy thereof is not so suttle, but hee that searcheth the heart and the reynes, can discerne and discouer it, for the last word of the Text, resolues the Riddle, and makes that which is strange and admirable, familiar and easie to vs For therefore Israel was an empty Vine, not because she brought forth fruite, but because she brought forth, &c. This sacred Paradoxe, I haue cho∣sen to present to your gracious atten∣tions, as a subiect neither vnfit
for wise, nor great ones. Diuine Plato, thought it no Oyle mispent, to dis∣course of that vulgar paradoxe, Vr, 5 d. rep. non vir percussit auem, non auem, in ar∣bore, non arbore, An Eunuch strooke a Flinder-mouse in an Elder Tree. Maria the Queene of Castile commended to the Interpretation of Tostatus 5 Diuine Paradoxes; concerning the person of Christ and his blessed Mother. The first was, There was a Lyon who was seene and not seene, heard and not heard, taken and not taken, knowne and not knowne This and the three following he interpreted of Christ our Sauiour, who to dissolue the para∣doxe of sinne▪ was made not onely Scandalum but Paradoxon, Not only a stumbling blocke, but a Paradoxe to all humane reason, hee suffered, and suffered not, he dyed and dyed not, he was buried, and not buried, he rose a∣gaine, and rose not againe, sayth Sar. . Saint Ambrose. As he was man God dyed, as hee was God, man was c 1 .
raysed to life, saith S. Austin, All these are admirable yet true propositions, so many paralels to the Text, which as the sin of Israel, had now out growne the Common nature of sinne. So the Holy Ghost in no Common forme of stile blazons the sinne of Israel, by the patterne of a monstrous paradoxi∣call Vine, an empty, yet a fruitfull, a fruitfull yet an empty Vine. Now because such parabolicall transumptions, are to be expounded to the sense not to the letter, and are then best expounded, when all the parts of the paralell agree with the patterne. Israel beeing the Center vpon which all the lines of similitude are proportionably to fall, we'le first, as it were in Puncto, set downe what may be here meant by Israel, Israell is, &c. Wee know that after the flesh there were Ismaelites as well as Isra∣elits, the sonnes of Agar, as well as the sonnes of Sarah. But the sonnes
of the Bond woman were cast out, Saint Paul only the free borne Irae∣lites became Gods proper Inheritance. That happinesse which Iacob fore-saw in his dreame, when hee beheld the Angels ascending, and descending from Heauen, while GOD stood vppon the Top of the Ladder, was but a shadow of that happinesse, which the Israelits for a long time en∣ioyed. GOD their indulgent Father by the Ministration of the Angels, and the Creatures, powring downe the plenty of all both Temporall and Spirituall Blessings vppon them. For to omit their protections, their vi∣ctories, their possessions in the land of Canaan, what higher priuiledge then that which was the proper right of the Iraelits, that to them should pertaine the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Couenants, the giuing of the Law▪ the seruice of God and the promises, of whom are the Fathers, and of whom after the flesh Christ
came, who is GOD over all bles∣sed for euer Amen, Romans 9. vers. 3. Israel according to the flesh thus protected, thus priuiledged, This Is∣rael so fild with Fruite, becomes an Emp∣ty Vine. So sounds the letter of the Text, but is there no spirit in this let∣ter? Are the sonnes of Abraham, onely the seede of Abraham? No certainly, they are not all Israel which are of Is∣rael? Rom 9. 6. It is mirabile magnum, sayth Austi, yet as true as wonderfull. Many which are not the sons of Israel, are Israel; & many which are the sons of Israel, are not Israel. In the flesh the Isma¦lites pertayne to Agar, the Israelites to Sara, in the spirit the Iewes pertaine to Agar, w Christians to Sara: had they retayned the faith and the works of A∣braham, they had stil continued the ions of Abraha, but now they haue lost their progeny, and we haue found it. For of Israel came the Iewes, of them came Mary, of Mary Christ, in Christ we all liue and moue, and haue our being, and
therefore all wee are the sonnes of Israel: Not by nature but by faith, not in the letter but the Spirit, not by the Law but by grace, not carnall, but spi∣rituall Israel. Would you see this yet clearer, looke in the glasse of this similitude, Israel is a Vine, There wee shall finde Tropum in Tropo, Israel vnder the Vine, and our selues vnder Israel. There we shall see that almost none of GODS peculiar mercies to Israel, but are be∣come proper to vs. I pray GOD we may not likewise partake of their sins and punishments. It is the Law of an Allegory, sayth Aristotle, that it haue a true propor∣tion of similitude; and if the words be not consonant to the matter, Error fit non metaphora, it is rather an Impo∣sture then an Allegory, sayth the Schoole. To serueigh this Parable by this Rule. A man sayth Aristotle, is a Tree tur∣ned vpward, hauing his head for the
roote, the rest of his Lymmes for the branches. But among all Trees the Holy Spirit doth most often present the selected Israel of GOD His Church in the likenesse of a Vine, as the fittest embleme both of his boun∣ty to them, and their duty to him. First, sayth Calvin, the Vine bestIn lo speakes his bounty to his Church, be∣cause he giues vs not onely bread, ad vitam, but wine ad Hilaritatem, where∣by we liue cheerefully, for wine glads the heart of man, Gal. 10. 4. Neuer was there Vine so planted, so bound, so spread, so pruned, so fenced by the prouidence of GOD. Iudge yee Oh inhabitants of Ierusalem, betwixt me and my Vineyard, what could I haue done more then I haue done to it. Esay 5. 4. Israel is a Vine, Ergo fratres forte vinea fuit do∣mus Israel & nos non sumus vinea? Hath Israel onely tasted of the bounty ofPsal. 80. 8 10. God, and are not we also the Vine of the Lord of Hosts, hath hee not likewise brought our vine out of Idolatrous Egypt,
hath h not cast out the He hen, an planted i, hath hee not caused it to take deepe , so that it filleth the Land. Nay wile Rebellious Iral are rooted ut of the Vineyard, hauing no King, nor Priest, nor Law, being become Rebels to Heauen, and Vagabonds on earth, are not we in their roome grafted into the stocke Christ Iesus? hath hee not giuen vs a most indul∣gent nursing Father to this prospe∣rous Vine? Hath he not planted vs in the Gospell, pruned vs by the Law, rooted vs in faith, bound vs vp in loue, solaced vs with peace, cherisht vs with plenty, fenced vs with his prouidence by rare and vnheard of protections▪ But let your hearts re¦ioyce in the memory of it▪ Neuer any ▪ any Nation, no not Israel it  hath beene blest with more argu∣ments of Gods bounty, I pray GOD they may not one day prooue so ma∣ny accusers of the neglect of our Dut.
As the Vine cannot flourish with∣out Gods bounty, so secondly, hee will not suffer it to flourish without our duty: He expects fuite from his Vine. As the Vine excells not other Trees in shew or stature but in Fruite, so it is not the glorious shew of Tem∣porall things, but the sauing fruites of the Spirit, with which God would haue his Vine flourish. But of this a∣non more properly. In the meane time, while yee be∣hold this Vine of Israel thus drest and blest by the hand of God: me thinkes like the Figge Tree which Iesus saw, it should moue your appetite to come and seeke for the Fruite. But alas! when Christ came to it hee found no∣thing but leaues: iust so prooues this Vine here; Vitis frondosa, as Ierome, vi∣tis vacua, as Tremelius, and our Tran∣slation a leaffy, vnprofitable, empty Vine. The comparison of Israel to a Vine, had beene rather honorable then odi∣ous,
for a good Vine of all other Trees brings forth the best, and the most fruite, but see now this Allegory growes into a Paradoxe, this Vine in∣to a Monster. An empty, yet a fruite∣full, a fruitfull yet an emptie vine. Now because a Paradoxe is nei∣ther true nor false till it be expoun∣ded. Wee must know that all sinne is , a direct Paradoxe, crossing the Common sentence both of the Law of GOD and Reason, and a∣mong all the Paradoxes of sinne: Hypocrisie is the most exact; an Hy∣pocrite and a Paradoxe haue both the same definition. Qui aliud verbis, aliud sensu ostendunt: They are both one thing in shew, and another in deede. And of all Hypocrites two of the most notable are descryed in this paradoxe, The first, Israel is an Emp∣tie Vine. Here a pure Platonicall Hy∣pocrite, Faith without workes, God in his mouth, the Diuell in his acti∣ons, They say and do not. Matth. 23.
The second, Irael brings forth, &c. Here's a Popish hrasonicall Hypo∣crite, workes without Faith, false charity in their Workes, selfe vayne∣glory in their thoughts, They doe all their workes to bee seene of Mn. Mat∣thew 23. First of the first. When God the Husband man went downe to see how the Vine Flourisht, Canticl. 6. 11. Ecce vitis vacua, Behold, hee found Is∣rael an Emptie Vine. Emptie, sayth Ierome; mispending that fat moisture which it should haue conuerted into Grapes, vppon the vaine ambition of Flowers, and Leaues: mis-employing those eminent graces which GOD had giuen them aboue other Nations, vppon their owne lust, and vayne∣glory. The Adoption, the Law, the promises, their peace, their plenty, with all these, they were full and fat Full of blessing, but empty of thanks∣giuing. Isr waxed fat and kicked, he forsooke GOD which made him,
and lightly esteemed the Rocke of his saluation, Deuter. 23. 15. They glo∣ried to sit in Moses Chayre, and in∣terpret the Law, but they sayd and did not, Matth. 32. 3. They made long prayers, but it was to deuoure wid∣dowes houses, vers. 14. They payde tyth of mint, anise and cummin, but omitted Iudgement, mercy and faith, the weightier matters of the Law, vers. 23. In a word, this Vine bare leaues and flowers enough, but no fruite, no grapes; it was an empty Vine. And I would this Prophecy had ended onely in Israel; but this is seconded with another of Saint Paul, that falls neere our times. In the last perillous dayes, men shall bee louers of themselues, hauing a rme of godlinesse, but denying the power thereof, 2. Tim. 3. VVhy here's a true empty Vine, the shad∣dow of a Christian, the pure Hy∣pocrite of our Church, Moses
Chayre, long prayers, the tything of mint and cummin; all forme but no power of godlinesse; all leaues no fruite, all faith, no workes, all profession, no demonstration. Saint Basil in his time found out the progenitors of these Bastard plants. Vidi ego orantes, iejunan∣tes, praeteritorum paenitentia suspiran∣tes, omne denique fine sumptu pieta¦tem ostendentes, egentibus vero ne obolum quidem praebentes. Our times will well Translate him. Wee may see many among vs, men demure in their lookes, thinne in their ap∣parell, long in their prayers, deepe in their sighes, most deuout in all cheape duties of a Christian, but in the VVorkes of Charity, to bee deuout in them it is meere Po¦pery. CHRIST himselfe may hun∣ger, but the Fig Tree will yeelde no Figges. Those little ones of Christ the poore may thirst, but this
Vine giues no Grapes, it is an emptie Vine. The Church is a Theater, vppon which some act their owne parts, be¦ing alwayes the same that they seeme, and these are all good men, but bad Actors. Others on the contrary do meerely personate, seeming perpetu∣ally what they are not, and these are all bad mn, but good Actors: no∣torious Hypocrites, like Monkies, who imitate humane actions, but re∣mayne Monkies still. Like comple∣mentall Courtiers, all curtesie in pro∣mise, no honesty in performance. They haue the voyce of Jacob, and the hands of Esau. Like the Apples of Sodom, they are fayre to the sight, but if you touch them, they turne to fume and ashes. They are such eminent Histrionicall Mimickes, that in Greeke all Stage-Players are called by their names  Hypocrites. They forme a Platocall kinde of Diuini∣ty, an abstracted sanctity, that di∣uides
Faith from Charity. In a word, they are nothing else, but a meere paradoxe in our Church and Com∣mon-wealth. Vir non vir, arbor no arbor: A Vine and no Vine, a Christian and no Christian, a meere emptie Vine. And as their way, so is their end, their whole Course; as when a Hungrie man Dreames, and behold hee eates, but when he awakes hee is faint, and his soule is Empty, E∣say 29. 8. It is the Fruite that denominates the Tree, thy Fayth makes thee a true Christian, thy workes make thee knowne to bee a true Chri∣stian. As in a Logician, so in a Christian giue mee Demonstrati∣on, thou must Demonstrate thy Fayth by thy VVorkes. There was no Honey vsed in GODS Sacrifice, Leuiticu the 2. Chap. and the 1. verse. Sayth Theodoret, because it was made of Leaues and Flowers onely, and not of Fruite.
Herodotus tells vs that the gods went to chose their Trees Iupiter chose the Oke, because it was strong; Neptune the Cedar, because it was long; but Pallas the Vine, because it was fruitfull. When our GOD, the GOD of all power and Wisedome, calles Israel a Vine, hee calls for fruite, and if wee looke vpon the letter of the Text, hee can but call and haue, for see the next words, this empty vine brings forth fruite. VVhat an empty, and yet a fruit∣full Vine? This will bee worth the examining, sayth the Hebrew pa∣raphrase. Euery Riddle or Paradoxe con∣sists of Contradictions, and it is the rule of Contraries, that Circa idem praedicantur, they both belong to the same subiect, empty or fruit∣full, here is the same Israel, the same Hypocrite still.
There is two kinds of hypocrisie, saith Nauarrus, in words and in works. Faith without workes, and workes without faith, hypocrisie is the ground of all. Our Sauiour in the 23. of Matthew, as hee found some all-sayers and no do∣ers, so others that would out-doe all faith. This emptie Vine will bring forth fructum aceruatum, as the Chalde beares it, whole heapes of fruit. This was and is the Iewes Tenet, that they were able to fulfill the whole Law, and so to worke out their owne saluation. And to this end they spare no labour, they compasse Sea and Land to make a Proselyte. v. 15. they pinch at no cost, they build the Tombes of the Prophets, v. 29. with the Israelites in this Verse, they build many Altars, goodly Images. They doe as much to seeme, as others to be good. Yet all this in the end proues nothing but a mor∣ning cloud, and as the earely dew it goes away, Ose 6. for all this fruit, theVerse 4. Vine is but an emptie vine.
But doe these bastard-plants grow onely in Iury? are there no such Iewes to be found among Christians? Yes certainely, there be those that can out∣doe the Iewes, do more than Gods law requires, they can supererrogate, as much as will saue other men as well as themselues. As for their cost, it is they that sumptuously garnish the sepul∣chres of the righteous. Old Rome it selfe was neuer so glorious with rich shrines and Altars. And for their la∣bour, tis they that compasse Sea and Land to make a Proselyte, that sayle with the foure windes, vltra Garaman∣tas & Indos: Southward to call home Heretiques, Westward to conuert Pa∣gans, and when they haue conuerted them, they make them two-fold more the children of Hell than they them∣selues, Matthew 23. 15. compassing the whole world, they disgrace and scan∣dall the Gospell of Christ, throughout the whole world, dum exigunt sump∣tus lucrosae egestatis, aut simulatae pretium
sanctitatis, while vnder the veyle of re∣ligion, they bring forth fruit to them∣selues. The all-searching Spirit of GOD, makes all good Christians see and know, that all's not gold that glisters, that all this faire shew of workes, is but to be seene of men, Matt. 23. all but so many mists to delude the spirituall eyes of the people, and to catch them as cobwebs catch flyes. These pain∣ted sepulchres so faire without, within are full of dead mens bones, a genera∣tion of Serpents and vipers, who make vse of the workes of Christ, onely to betray the cause of Christ. As the for∣mer are so nice in the poynt of Faith, that they are afraid S. Iames comes too neere Popery, so these so iealous in the poynt of workes, that S. Paul him∣selfe hath runne the censure of being too much a Lutheran. Workes without faith are dead workes, saith Paul. And faith without workes is a dead faith, saith Iames. And the Heathen could
teach vs that dead wine was  vnfit to be offered to the God of life. Medi∣um tenuêre beati. Most happy is the temper of our Church, who as in the rest, so in this, is medium Contradictionis, partaking no more of either extreme, then conduceth to perfect verity. Words are women, deedes are men, say the Italians, wee marry them both together. Prayers and almes, professi∣on and demonstration, Saint Pauls faith, and Saint Iames workes, we ioyne them both together; and this coniun∣ction is like the sacred vnion of the houses of Yorke and Lancaster: so long as these were diuided, our fruitfull vine became empty, and no sooner were they vnited, but instantly our empty vine became fruitfull. The blessed dew of Heauen fall plentifully vpon that royall Plant, in whom both those stockes continue vnited, that vnder the gracious shaddow of him and his, our Vine may flourish to all eternity. In the meane time, let vs indeuour with
words and workes, with heart and hand, to take these Foxes that destroy the vine, these contradictory combi∣ning hypocrites, who, though their heads are asunder like Samsons Foxes, with malicious fire-brands they are ti∣ed by the tayles, they take seuerall paths, but both meet in the end. Heres one word yet in the Text, sibi, to him∣selfe. This makes the Paradoxe to be Orthodoxe, it reades the Riddle, and discouers their hypocrisie. Israel emp∣tie, or Israel fruitfull, they are neyther for God nor his Church, for the King nor the Kingdome. Israel is all for himselfe, and Therefore Israel is an empty, &c. Heres all contradiction, all admira∣tion taken away. The vine of Israel did not want fruit in the kind thereof, they enioyd the blessing of peace, that with which the Vine is so much de∣lighted.Suidas. Their Land was filled with plentie, with the multiplication of Wine, Oyle, Siluer, Gold, Ose 2. But all
this abundance of fruit doth but serue to bring forth the abundance of sinne: for as they had the fruit, so now as if they had had the raine and the dew in their owne power, they contemne God that gaue it them, they turne all the loue of GOD into selfe-loue, all their deuotion and Religion ends in sibi. Euen God and his blessings are made but the instruments of their base lusts, they presently fall to building of Altars; to making of Images. They bring forth, &c. So sweete and so secure is that de∣pendance which wee haue vpon God the first of being, that when wee fall from him, wee fall to nothing, or to that which is worse than nothing, a trust in our selues. Verily all things are vanity alone without him who is vertue alone, no mans thoughts or a∣ctions good, whose end is him∣selfe, and not the chiefe Good. But giue mee leaue with this Prophet to strike at the roote of all euill selfe-loue
and couetousnesse. For either I am de∣ceiued, or else this one word sibi, reads the riddle, and discouers the mystery of the whole Worlds iniquity. Verum illud verbum est vulgò quod dici slet, Omnes sibi male melius esse quàm alteri.Plautas. In the corruption of nature, wee are all borne with this contractiue quali∣ty of selfe-loue and interest. Twas that which made Plato banish meum andMr. 2. tuum out of his Common-wealth. And Aristotle could tell vs that onely , that the wicked man doth all things : hee makes himselfe the end of all his actions, whereas the good man doth all things  not for his owne but vertues sake, and therefore is rather  then , a louer of goodnesse then of himselfe. To loue vertue it selfe, not for vertue, but thy selfe, is the staine of vertue. If wee loue goodnesse for profits sake, wee may be crafty men, but neuer good men, saith Tully: wee may be as1. De Lg. these men in my Text; perfit Hypo∣crites,
but neuer good Christians. Such a one as these may maske vnder the name of Christ, and plead very passio∣nately for faith or for▪ workes; but the truth is, hee hath no faith but in his owne proiects: & esteemes no works but such as worke his owne commo∣dity. Oh this wicked sibi, this selfe∣doctrine, the mother of Hypocrisie, and the nurse of Apostacie! There are some Court-Doctors who teach, that the finis Architectonicus of a Courtier, is this sibi, neither the glory of God, nor the honour of his master, but his fortune, his own commoditie: tis true, hee may couer his owne proiects vn∣der either of these, but hee should serue neither of them, no farther then hee serues himselfe. My noble Auditors, I must hope better things of you, for you haue bin instructed in the know∣ledge of the Spirit of life. Farre be such Amnous and Absaloms from the house2 Sam. 13. 10, 28. of our Dauid. Yee haue the high cal∣ling of Christians, that which must
command and actuate the calling of a Courtier, that which teacheth thee to deny thy selfe, while thou followest Christ, and not in compliment alone, but indeed to lay down thy goods, nay thy life for the seruice of the King. But it were some comfort, if this selfe-accu∣sation lay vpon the Court alone. There, are some, as Posseine and Ribadeyneir that make it fall as heauily vpon our Church and State, as if our ministry ai∣med no farther then our own commo∣dity, and our Religion had no other ambition, but to bring forth fruit to our selues. But if any such Foxes as these be crept into our Vineyard, the fearefull curse of Hypocrisie light vp∣on them to their amendment or con∣fusion. But as for the generall ayme of our Church, I appeale to this Audito∣ry, if euer we aymed at other ends than the glory of GOD, the peace of His Church, and the safety of our Soue∣raigne: if with true exultation of spirit, we doe not dayly reioyce in the forme
of our ciuill gouernement, that after the patterne of Gods vniuersall proui∣dence, we liue in the best of all formes of policy, a Monarchy, and in that piously and peaceably vnder a most religious King. In poynt of Doctrine, we haue the pure word of God for our Iudge, in matter of discipline, Gods im∣mediate Deputie for our Commander, vnder this vnparalel'd gouernement hath our Vine flourished, to the irre∣concileable hatred of those our accu∣sers, and vnder the same may it still gaine vigour and strength, donec Rumpatur quis quis rumpitur inuidia. But if wee would haue past the Alpes for our Diuinity, wee might haue lear∣ned, not from hellish Machiauel alone, for priuate interest to doe things a∣gainst faith, charity, and Religion, but euen those our very accusers, Posseuine and Ribadeynira in their Antimachiuels, would haue taught vs; that it is a poynt of conscience to equiuocate in a poynt of State, and that as against the sting
of Vipers we may vse Triacle; which is made of Vipers flesh: so 'tis Religion, a∣gainst dissemblers to vse dissimulati∣on. And thus Boterus, that common brander of our English and Scottish Na∣tions, and for that happely so much e∣steemed among the Romanists, he hath it among his Capi di Prudenza for a re∣solute Principle, that l. Interesse é quel lo che vince Ogni partito, that all friend∣ship, leagues, affinitie, all bands of cōmunion whatsoeuer, are to be mea∣sured by this Sibi, by the line of our owne Interest and commodity. And what is this, but an absolute forsaking of GOD, to sacrifice in the house of Mammon? This was an excellent Rule for Iudas, who rather than suffer with his Master, to prouide for himselfe, he must betray his Master. These had beene choyse Tutors for Lodwicke the Eleuenth, King of France, who desi∣red his Son Charles the Eighth might learne no more Latine than this, Nes∣cit regnare, qui nescit simulare. What a
rare Disciple in this cursed schoole was Eccbolius, Iulians Gouernour, who with the Emperour Constantius was a Christian? and because his Master was so, an Arian, with false Iulian who succeeded, he turned Gentill, and with pious Iouinian who followed, he retur∣ned Christian, and begg'd pardon at the Church-doore. Heere was one of the Diuels precious Agents of those, qui non Deum, sed purpuram colunt, saith Socrates, who are so wise that they knowe not God, 1 Cor. 1. Oh the powerfull ef∣fects of this hellish doctrine, the sin∣full omnipotency of this wicked sibi! Hence it is, that a good Christian is now no more esteemed but a great Politician, the rule of State hath bani∣shed the rule of Charity, euery Mecha∣nicke is become a Machiauill, Gods Word is forbidden, and Tacitus is be∣come their Bible, more Commenters vpon him than vpon Saint Paul. EightHierolmo da Roe. thousand Maximes of State in one Vo∣lume, and all these squared by the ma∣ster-rule
of selfe-Interest. This is be∣come the maine Canon of all their ho∣ly Orders: for though the Iesuites bee the best Capreoli; the most winding branches of this incroching Vine▪ yet as the Heauens, though all carried about by their first mouer the Pope, yet euery Planet, euery peculiar Order haue their proper motions for their owne Interest and perfection. This is that makes Infants Cardines Ecclesiae, the pillars of the Church. This is that makes the Head of the Church, the Pope. I haue their published Con∣claues to auow it, that Interest of gain, of affection, of reuenge, of faction, are the 4. prime Electors in the Popedome. Nay the top of Iniquity, this Sibi, is a∣ble to make gods: for so Ieroboam, lest the peoples hearts should turne against him, sets vp one Calfe at Dan, and an∣other at Bethauen, and cryes to the people, Behold thy gods, O Israel, 1 Kin. 12. Heere was worldly policy the ground of foule Idolatry; for verily
desire of gaine, deuised the image, Wis∣domeƲerse 16. 14. This made the Israelites here build so many goodly Altars, & Ima∣ges. And thus our friend Boterus ad∣uiseth all Catholique Princes, that no meanes is so prompt to enrich & peo∣ple a Countrey, as to get the fame of some holy Relique, some miraculous Shrine or Altar. Such as Loretta in I∣taly, Saint Michael in France, Guadalu∣po, Montserrata, and Compostella, in Spaine. Heres excellent doctrine for the Deuils Court. They must play with the poore peoples Conscience, to fauour their affaires; and GOD the highest Obiect, with Religion the chiefest act of man, must serue to no other end, but to vsher in wordly po∣licy and ambition. Notorious Anti∣christian Mountebankes, who haue Christ in their fore-heads; and Mam∣mon in their hearts. The sonnes of the Sorcerers, and the seede of falshood, Esa 57. Such as haue Religion for the murder of Kings, and the Interest of
the Church, for the dethroning of Gods Anoynted. Oh let not this ex∣traction of hypocrites, these Dogges and Foxes, come neere the Court of Dauid, nor harbour in the Vine of Iu∣dah. These bastard-plants, that make no vse of Religion but for their owne ends, they may haue the name of a Vine, and beare leaues like it, but are indeed pura labrusca, in stead of grapes, they bring forth wilde grapes, euen those goordes of the sauage Vine that poysoned the broth, 4. King. 4. TheyƲerse 40. are worse than the Vine of Sodom, and the fields of Gomorrah, their grapes are grapes of Gall, and their clusters bit∣ter, Deut. 32. One word in the eare ofƲerse 33 these glorious worldlings, and I haue done. Let not him that is deceiued, trust in vanity: for vanity shall be his recompence. When the euill houre ap∣procheth, wherein thou must enter into the chambers of death, now whē thy soule body, and polluted soule are ready to be distracted, when thy trem∣bling
pue shall strike the Alarum to death, when thy spirits shall faint, thy nerues faile, thy bones anguish, thy limbes sinke vnder thee, and thy heart be forced to resigne the power of life to him that gaue it; now shall thy con∣science turne thy inside outward, and with horrour thou shalt plainely see the fruits of thy former proiects, that they are all miserable vanity. Now shalt thou shake off thy vnripe grapes as the Vine, for the Congregation of Hypocrites shall be dessolate, Iob 15. And at the length, whē the son of man with his sharpe sickle shall gather to∣gether the clusters of the Vine of the earth, then shall hee cast them into the great Wine-presse of the wrath of God, and the Presse shall bee trodden, and bloud shall come out thereof, euen to the Horses bridles, Re. 14. Euen thus shall it be with al those, who abuse the name of God, to bring forth fruit &c. Thus shall it bee with the emptie Vine of Israel. But though Israel play
the Harlot, yet let not Iudah offend. The very Vine it selfe doth teach vs better things. Video vites, quantum ve∣lis prems, stati ad superna conari, saith Tertullian. Behold the Vine, presse it as much as thou wilt, yet naturally it climbes vpward, and seemes ambiti∣ous of Heauen: And wilt thou, O Christian, the proper motion of whose soule is an ascension to God that made it, wilt thou lye groueling in the Ser∣pents way, feeding vpon thine owne earthly proiects, the corrupt dregges of the flesh? Let Pagans pant after the world, and the Iewes still hang in the expectation of their temporall prospe∣rity, shall wee Christians make the world our end, when Christ our Sa∣uiour hath pronounced the poore so blessed? See, the good Vine brings not forth fruit for himselfe, but for vs. Sic vos non vobis. Let this likewise bee our care to bring forth fruit to God, and not to our selues. God, who hath giuen the meanes, hath not lft thee
destitute of ends, whereon thou art to employ the fruits of his grace. The first and chiefe is the maintenance of true Religion: the second subordinate to this end, is the good of thy Com∣mon-wealth: the third, as the band of all Societies, is charity to our Neigh∣bours, that in the pride and prime of our Vine, wee forget not the afflicti∣ons of our brethren abroad; but free∣ly, with heart and hand assist them: for, alas, if wee suffer the deuourer to de∣stroy them, then in the time of thy neede, who shall pray for thee, or who shall haue pitty vpon thee, O Ierusa∣lem, Ier. 15? In a word, let this Tri∣nity of religious obiects, be the ends of all thy pious endeuours, and then the sinne of Israel shall light onely vp∣on the head of Israel, but all the fruits of thy labours shall reflect vpon thy selfe, and thine owne eternall happi∣nesse. Say yee to the Righteous, that it shal be well with them, for they shall eat the fruit of their labours, Esa 3. The
Vine shall giue her fruit, the ground▪ shall giue her increase▪ the Heauens shall giue their dew, and the people shall possesse the Land, Zach. 8. Their happinesse, who onely aymed at them∣selues, shall end in themselues: but as in no Tree nature lasts longer than the Vine; the Vine of the Lord of Hosts shal flourish to al eternity. In the path of that eternall happinesse, conduct vs, O Shepheard of Israel, thou that lea∣dest Ioseph as a Flocke, thou that dwel∣lest betweene the Cherubims, shine forth. Looke down, O God of Hosts, from Heauen, behold and visit our Vine, the Vine which thine owne right hand hath planted, & the branch which thou hast made so strong for thy selfe: Let not the Bore of the wood waste it, nor the Beast of the field deuoure it. Keepe thou still the Keeper thereof: vpon the head of him and his, let his Crowne for euer flou∣rish: so shall Sion be glad, and Ierusa∣lem reioyce in thy Saluation; Euer
attributing to thee, O FATHER, with the blessed Soe, and ho∣ly Spirit, all power, praise, &c. FINIS.
