14655 99836198 454
Certaine Orations and An∣sweres made by Iohn Casimire Countie Palatine of Rhyne, Duke of Bauier &c. and his Embassa∣dours, vnto the French King & his Embassadours in de∣fence of ye maintenance of his Peace, and christian Re∣ligion. ‡ ¶Translated out of French. 1579. ❀Imprinted at London. 1579.
❀The Charge of the Lord of Villiquier as he deliuered the same in vvrighting vnto my Lord the Duke Cassimir. MY Lord, as touch∣ing the request which it pleased your highnes this mornīg to make vnto me, namely yt I should in wri∣ting deliuer vnto you the charge which I haue receiued of my Maister ye moste Chri∣stian King, I am not minded to deny you, , for that by woord of mouth, I haue not opened to you any other then ye trueth, which his Maiestie willeth, and is minded to let you knowe. His Maiestie therfore béeing sory to heare of the deceasse of my Lord the Countie Pa¦latine your Father, dooth neuerthelesse much reioyce and prayse God for that so wise a Prince as my Lord, at this present Elector, hath succeded him in the said E∣lectorall Dignitie, for the visitation of whome, his Maiestie hath now sent mée: commaunding mée by the way to sée your Highnesse, to the end to assure the same
that hée desireth nothing more then to looue you, as in effect he hath alredy, euen to this time giuen, you to vnderstand. Also the more to confirme the goodwill which he beareth you: hée thought good by mée to giue you to vnderstād of his newes togither with the estate of his affaires, which are as followeth. His Maiestie hauing summoned the generall Estates of his Realme vnto his Towne of Bloys, after many and large conferences among them holden within these thrée Months, they haue with one ge¦nerall assent in ful assembly, (whethery self was present) requested his Maiestie no longer to permit within his Domini∣ons any other then the exercise of the Ca∣tholick, Apostolick and Romain Religi∣on, whervnto at my departure his Maie∣stie was determined to condiscend. First therby to discharge ye duty of his consciēce, which mooueth him after the example of other Kings his Predecessors so to doo, whotherby haue peaceably enioyed their estates. Next by reason that hetherto hée hath perceiued that the diuersitie of Reli∣gions haue with them brought into all
partes of his Kingdoome where they haue béen cstablished new, occasions of discen∣tion among his Subiects, yea euen amōg the quietest of them, and haue béen the on∣ly meanes to maintain them in deuisions and perticuler hatred: moreouer that it is to manifest that they haue not so much re∣quested ye exercise of their said pretended reformed Religiō for any satisfiing or con∣tenting of their consciences, as for the maintenaunce of factions, practices, and drifts, ordinarily deuised against ye auto∣tie of his said Maiestie, to whome by all meanes they endeuour to make them sel∣ues in power equall, by dayly more and more fortifying them selues, therby vpon euery occasion and oportunitie to disobey him, and so to shake of the Yoke of obedi∣ence wher vnto naturally they are bound, as the effects in each respect dooth make sufficiēt proofe, notwithstandīg in woords they would showe them selues deuoid of all such matter. As euen of late theire new supplying of la Charitie with fresh men of warre, contrary to the agréement made, to the end wholy to apropriate the same to thē selues doth manifestly declare
as also their seazing vppon sundry towns and Castels, in the Countries of Poictou, Xantoigne, Guyen, Daulphine, and Lan guedoc, togither with diuers murders & cruelties practised against the Catholicks doo showe the same. Againe his Maies∣tie on the other side, settīg before his eyes one thing woorthy consideration, which is, that hauing since the graunt of the last Edict taken all order possible to cause the tolleration of the exercise of the said pre∣tendid reformed Religion in sūdry towns and places within his Dominios, he hath not béen able to bring the same to passe, by reasō of the oppositions of the Catholicks who could not supporte the folly wherwt they haue endeuoured to procéed. And indéed perceiuing by all their déeds and demenures that they sought to en∣crease and multiply them selues to ye ruin and ouerthrowe of them and their Catho∣licke Religion, they haue among them selues made Fraternities, Assotiations, and leagues one with an other for the conseruation bothe of them selues & their said Catholick Religiō, also ye therby they may the better prouide for their owne af∣faires
Also where as it plesed you my Lord this morning to aleadge vnto me, yt in asmuch as the exercise of the afore said Religion was not fréely permitted in Fraunce, it was an vtter breaking, & preuentīg of the Edict of pacification whervnto his Maies∣tie hath so solēnly sworne, I doo aunswere that contrarywise for the satisfiing to one of the Articles therof this assembly of E∣states was summoned, to the end that af∣ter the hearing of the complaints and greeuances of his Subiects, they might be prouided for as should séem requisit wher∣vnto he could not better satisfie then in v∣sing this determination which is corres∣pondent vnto the vniuersall request of the Deputies of the thrée orders of this Realme, namely the Church, the Nobili¦tie & the third Estate, agréeing also with the iudgement of his owne Consience, a∣gainst the which he should think him self dooing otherwise to erre. Wherfore to conclude, this is it which he thīketh may best serue and profit the generall common welth of his Realme and of all his Sub∣iects. Thus subscribed Villiquier.
❀The Answere of my said Lord the Duke, vnto the afore said Chardge. THe Lord Duke Ihon Cassimire hauing heard of the Lord of Villiquier what so e∣uer hee had to say to him in the behalfe of the King his Maister, did request his Ma∣iestie to take in good parte this answere from poinct to poinct, and the same to re∣ceiue with as good a will as the said Lord Duke is affectionate to the aduancement cōmoditie and seruice of his Maiestie and the Crown of Fraunce. First the said Lord the Duke most hum∣bly thāketh his maiestie for ye gréef which he séemeth to perticipate in for the death of his late Lord and Father, assuring his Maiestie that he hath great cause so to doo in respect of the zeale, care and singuler a∣fection whiche he alwayes hare euen to the last gaspe of his life, vnto the ad∣uancement and preseruation of his Ma∣iesties person, togither with the comoditie
and quietnesse of the whole Realme of Fraunce. The said Lord Duke hopeth also that his Maiestie shall finde that my Lord the E∣lector his brother hath succéeded not only, in the Electorall Dignitie, but also in like goodwil and affection, wherin hée the said Lord Duke dooth also assure his Maiestie that for his parte he wil follow the steps of his late Lord and Father, so néere as possible he may, and will alwaise by Gods help professe ye same, not only to his Coun∣try, but also to his Maiestie with as good a wil as euer hée did. Wherfore as his Maiestie dooth the said Lord Duke so much honor, as by the way to cause ye Lord of Villiquire, to visit him and to comunicate vnto him of his newes can hée not also forget as wel moste hum∣bly to thank his maiestie, as also plainly to declare vnto him, that vnderstanding his intent to be such as the said Lord of Villiquire hath both giuen him to vnder∣stand and left with him in writing, is vn∣to him newes indéed. First because that this his Maiesties ple∣sure is vtterly repugnant vnto the pro∣mises,
othes, and assurances, wherwt his Maiestie hath alwaies protested bothe by mouth and wrighting, that he would maī∣tain his Edict of Pacification, concluded, and sealed by the autoritie of his Maiestie the Queene his mother, the Prīces of his blood, and his priuie counsail, at such time as his Maiestie had such store of his pow∣er about him, that easely he might haue doon what he had pleased, and this he did to the end for euer to testifie that hée did conclude, sweare and solemply confirme the same, of his owne pure, méere, frée and liberall goodwil, for the proffit, and quiet∣nesse of his Kingdome, and Subiects, as not onely the said Lady Queene his Mo∣ther, the Princes and other Lords haue by woord of mouth protested vnto the said Lord Duke at the concluding of the said peace, whervnto for the greater cōfima∣tion of the same they also requested the said Lord Duke to subscribe, as indéed hée did: but also his Maiestie him self hath bothe sent him woord and confirmed the same. More ouer this his Maiesties intent sée∣meth so much the more straunge to
the said Lord Duke, as that to his great gréef he therby forséeth the finall perditiō whervnto his Maiestie for the putting of his determination in executiō, dooth hed∣long cast his owne person and whole Re∣alme, wherof togither with the present e∣state of his affaires and the generall ruin to come, the said Lord with the rest of the Princes of Germany who doo wish the pre¦seruation of the French Monarchie, béeing dayly truely aduertised, as the said Lord of Villiquier may by them selues vnderstand, and shall sée the writings bothe written and printed which the said Lord Duke trusteth wilbe sufficient to reuoke his said Maiestie from his resolution, and wherby hée shall perceiue the malice of his Ser∣uāts hired héervnto, who vsurpīg the title of the Estates in ye name of all his subiects haue made this request wherof they neuer receiued commission of his Subiectes, either were by them advowed, as the said Lord of Villequier shall at his return very well vnderstand. The said Lord Duke may (thanks he to God) plainly testifie, that hée hath of moste
faithful and sincere affection aduertised his Maiestie aswel by letters and Emba∣ssadours as by his Maiesties Messenger. First béeīg in Fraunce, hée warnded him of the holy league, the frutes wherof, hée may now euidently perceiue to be vtter∣ly contrary to the faith and reputation of his Maiestie and quietnesse of his Sub∣iects. After being come, home by Prayllon him self (who is now héer present) hée gaue his Maiestie to vnderstand of the true aduer∣tismēts which hee had receiued of ye drifts and practises prepared for prouiding and corrupting in each parte, and bringing to the deuotion of those whome wée doo perceiue, suche as should enioy the ti∣tle of the Estates: that is to say, to pro∣uide that no Estates should be holden frée∣ly▪ lawfully and without respect of Religi∣on, where at might be present (as at all times aunciently they haue béen accusto∣med) the Princes of the blood, togither with all such as haue wherof to complain. Moreouer the said Lord Duke hath true∣ly aduertised his maiestie after what ma∣ner the Edict of peace hath béene executed
nothing is doon: that ye Estates haue béen ordered in such wise as already hée hath béen aduertised: that the Princes of the blood haue thervnto béen called to the end to intrap them. How such men haue béen fauoured, as haue offered to lay houlde vp¦pon their Parsons, and to surprise those Townes where the Edict is lawfully and fincéerely executed, togither with the pla∣ces where those of the Religion haue béen forced to kéep them selues, and not to for∣sake the same by reason of the euil execu∣tion of the Edict. Hée hath béen moreouer truely aduertised of the othe lately made to his Maiestie, the Copye wherof was sūmarely deliuered to ye said Lord of Vil∣lequier, a matter, to say trueth, horrible to be knowen among men, and so straunge that ye said Lord Duke could neuer haue beléeued it, had not the continual and late contrauensions against the Edict moste manifestly declared ye same, & the Kings proposition made by the said Villequier fully confirmed it, as also the said matters doo ioyntly cause the said Lord Duke to beleeue that his Maiesties determination is correspondent to the declaration of the
aforesaid Lord of Villequier. Howbeit the said Lord Duke trusteth that in asmuch as it is a month since the departure of the said Lord of Villequier, God hath otherwise inspired his Maies∣tie and caused him to smel out this poyso∣ned counsail, togither with the vanitie of the offers of these pretended Estates, to the end to put his Maiestie in minde, yea to cause him, euen as it were with his fin¦ger to touch that which héertofore wise∣ly and ripely, hée hath had in woorthy consideration, which also his faithfull and truely affected Seruants and Fréends not only in Faūce, but also through out Chri∣stendome, haue manifested vnto him, which also finally necessitie it self hath gi∣uen to vnderstand, not only to his Maies∣tie, but to his Predecessors, by so much experience when they haue endeuoured (but euer in vain) to root out the reformed Religion, and all exercise of the same by warres, persecutions, and other meanes, euen horrible to be rehersed, which the said Lord Duke could not ouer passe, by reason of the sincere affection which he be∣reth to the conseruation of the mightines
of his Maiestie: And to the end to sée him at peace wt his Subiects, the way is, to set before his Maiesties eyes this litle whi∣ch followeth. First, that it may please his Maiestie to call to minde the coūsail of Gamaliel that against that which commeth of God, no power or practise of man can preuaile: al∣so that whatsoeuer is not of God: waste∣th and perisheth of it self. Secondly yt in matters of estate that is good, which is necessary, wherin his Ma∣iestie may looke in the looking glasse of Germany, Poland, Hungary, Boheme, Suisserland, and the lovv Country, not as things are cloked: but according to the trueth, as him self hath séen, for to com∣pare a Prince of Germany with his ma∣iestie or with all Fraunce is an absurde thing, but to compare Fraunce, with all Germany: is an equall proportion. Thirdly, that his Maiestie perceiueth that all the same Contries doo floorish, be∣cause they haue found meanes to content the consciences of their subiects, by whi∣ch Examples his maiestie may knowe yt not the permission of the Religion, but the
hinderaunce of the exercise of the same, hath engendred the mischéefs and calami∣ties which now he beholdeth through all his Realme. Fourthly, that his Maiestie not béeing able to confirme the laste peace without his Edict of Pacification, and not béeing a¦ble to kéepe that without maintaining the same and putting it in execution: hée may plainly sée that, the maintenance of his Edict is the only fundation, and meanes of peace, yea it is the very peace it self. Fiftly, like as the vpholding therof is a meane of peace and auoiding warres, so is it the only way wherby his maiestie may recouer the obedience of his subiects: for it is a thing most certain ye a King be∣coming Captain of any faction among his subiects, can neuer be wel obeyed, for it is requisite yt hée should shew him self a com∣mon Father to all his Subiects, in endeuo¦ring to reconsile them one to an other. Also sixtly to deale and sweare against ye vpholdīg therof, is the only meane to brīg his maiesties subiects in greater mistrust then before, and so to areare more cruel warre then before time.
Seuenthly to alleadge ye soueraigne au∣toritie of a King for the dooing or swering to such matters, to bring his maiestie vnto a perpetuall rebuke among all the world, wherby he shall be accoūted a Prince void of all faith, lawe, honor and vertue. For his maiestie may call to minde how often he hath bothe by woord and writing pro∣fessed himself to be a true Prince, such a one as wil promise nothing but what he entendeh to performe, yea and mindeth rather to promise nothing, so that no man of honour can otherwise conclude but that either he ought not to haue made the con∣tents of ye edict: or else he ought to obserue it, as his maiestie in his owne person hath vsed to say. For ye eighth especially the Lord Duke assureth him self that his maiesty may wel perceiue that with any man who would ob¦serue the coutēts of their othe, or folow the counsail of these pretended states which is no other then the othe it selfe, notwith∣standing it had neuer béene sworne: it would be vnpossible to haue any trafique, because that neither worde, promise, othe, obligation, seale, or other thing whatsoe∣uer
ordinary and lawfull for the assurance of faith among men, especially betwéen the Prince and his subiects, considering the imbecilitie of the said subiects, would be of any more force, but contrariwise should serue only for nets and snares wherwith to entrap eche other. Ninthly his Maiestie ought to consider that neighbours and straungers cannot assure them selues of that Prince, whose subiects cannot trust him, as they of the Religion, who haue ouermuch béene per∣swaded. For to showe that they began not: we néede no other argument then the pro∣position of the said Lord of Villequier, namely that the King is not minded to ob∣serue the principall point of his Edict. As touching the example of the Quéene of England, it is sufficiently knowen that that Ladyes hart is such, as if shée had a∣mong her subiects found such numbers of Princes, Lordes, gentlemen and others of the Romaine Religion within her domi∣nions, who should as his Maiesties sub∣iects haue doon, so oftē haue requested her, rather than to haue incurred such spoyles, and once onely falsifyed her faith and pro∣mise,
her maiestie would haue permitted them the exercise of their Roomish Reli∣gion. Tenthly that his maiestie should beare at the least asmuch affection vnto his owne Subiects, as he hath shewed vnto the e∣states of the lowe Countryes, in reioysing with them for the determination that they haue taken, for the recouery of their liber∣tie, hauing also béene a mediatour to the saide Estates for the restoring againe of the Countie of Egmonde into his estates and honours, wherin he hath the more to consider of the pollicie of the Spaniarde, who séeketh nothīg but to continue warres in Fraunce, to the end thereby to turne a∣way the tempest from his owne Coun∣tryes after his good and vsuall maner. Finally, whereas his Maiestie allea∣geth that willingly hée would leaue his Subiects the libertie of their consciences: that were much more to be mistrusted be∣cause it is moste vndoubted, that hée who can liue without exercise of his Religion, is vtterly deuoyd of all conscience, so that it is as much as if his maiestie should say, I will graunt my subiects their liues, but
in the meane time he should take frō them their foode, wherein the Papists doo showe a sufficient argument that they cannot liue without Masse, so that the said Lord Duke cannot giue his Maiestie any better counsaile, except that if hée minde to re∣maine a King, and to show him self such a Prince that a man may deale and trafique and trust to his maiestie, that thē he main∣taine his Edict, and obserue his faith in procuring the abuses of these pretended E∣states (wherof his maiestie speaketh) to be refourmed by such meanes as shall be thought reasonable, for the said assembly cannot be taken for true, frée, and lawfull Estates, but rather for traytors to his ma∣iestie & his crowne, neither are they ye per∣sons promised by the Edict, for they should be kept for the maintenaunce and confir∣mation of the peace, but not for the subuer∣ting thereof, to which end they haue moste vilanously béene subbourned, as many times his Lordship hath aduertised his ma∣iestie. The rehearsall of all which things the said Lord Duke could very well for∣beare, were he not constrayned as well by the plainesse of his conscience and honour
which is engaged in the subscription of the peace, as also by reason of the singular affec∣tion which he beareth to the commoditie, aduauncement and seruice of his maiestie, in which minde he will continue all his life time, hauing nothing in more recōmendati∣tion then to bring to the crown of Fraunce, and the tranquilitie of his maiesties sub∣iects, what so euer meanes or counsaile God shall euer giue him without sparing ought, which the said Lord Duke moste humbly desireth his maiestie to beléeue, and for such a one to account him, placing him in the number of his moste faithfull and af∣fectionate fréends and seruants. This is all which the said Lord Duke can imparte to his maiestie, in ought that appertaineth to his person. But as con∣cerning his armie that was in Fraunce, the said Lord Duke, his Colonels, Reystre∣maisters and Captains, hauing héeretofore thought it straunge that his maiestie kept not with them the promises which he had bothe made and so often reitreated vnto them, as well at Francfort as at Stras∣brough touching their payment and ho∣stages, doe now thincke it muche more
straunge, and a matter almoste impudent, that such a Lord as the Lord of Villequier comming into these partes as Embassador for his maiestie, hath not onely not brought any assuraunce of the same: but also not so much as is spoken thereof sauīg by the way yea and which is more, that the effect of his message is vtterly repugnaunt vnto the Obligations and promises of his ma∣iestie. Therfore the said Lord Duke, not in his owne name only: but also in the name of his whole armie requireth his maiestie to haue regarde to his honour and to kéep faith and promise wherby at the next faire at Franc∣forte aswel the said Lord Duke, as also his Colonels, Reistremaisters, and Captaines, may be satisfied, who in the name of the whole armie, will méete at the said Citie of Francforte, there to determine of their af∣faires, according as the Lord Beuterich and the other Captaines sent with him, may more amply aduertise his maiestie. All this dooth the aforesaid Lord Duke moste hartely request the said Lord of Vil∣lequier to let his Maistie, fully, openly, and at large vnderstande, together with
what soeuer he hath aunswerd by woord of mouth, without any circumstances▪ or difficultie, with like plainesse, affection, and good will, as the saide Lord Duke in mak∣ing this answere hath procéeded and desi∣reth euer to pro∣céed toward his Maiestie. ❀Thus subscribed I. Cassimire.
The Oration of the Lord of Bu∣terich Embassadour from the most no∣ble Prince, Iohn Cassimir, Countie Pa∣latine of Rhine, Duke of Bauier, &c. pronounced before the King in his tovvne of Bloys. SIr we haue our commissi∣on on the behalfe of my Lord ye Duke Iohn Cassi∣mire, Countie Palatine of Rhine, Duke of Bauier &c. aswell in his owne name as also in the name of all the Lords, Colo∣nels, Rheystremaisters, & Captains, and generally of all his men of warre, who in his second voyage into Fraunce accompa∣nyed him, after their moste humble com∣mendations, to beséech your maiestie to ful∣fill that which you haue promised, signed, sealed, & oftentimes confirmed, as wel by mouth as letters, touching the pay and as∣suraunce of the said men of warre, whiche is the cause of our ariuall in your Court. Truely it would cause vs to blush if particularly we should rehearse all that is
wanting of the performance of the promises made vnto vs bothe before and after our de∣parture out of this Realme. The place whereof we doo claime our selues, would séeme to make this matter much more odi∣ous, were it not on the one parte the ne∣cessitie, wherevnto we are bound by the commaūdement of them that haue sent vs, and on the other parte the assurance which all they whome this matter concerneth haue conceiued, that your Maiestie know∣ing the ground of this case, how it goeth and what dependeth therof, will take so good and spedy order, that besides the increase of your reputation, we shall receiue such satisfacti∣on, as bothe we doo promise our selues, and ought to hope for of a King of Fraunce, who hath made a solemne promise to a forraine nation, especially vnto ours. First your maiesties Obligation bearing date the 27. of Iuly 1576, doth expressy im∣porte that at the faire of Francfort in Sep∣tember last past, the third, fourth and fifth moneths should haue bene paid. That the 100000. francks which my Lord the Duke Iohn Cassimire lent to your Maiestie for the supplying of the payment of the two
first moneths should at the same faire haue béene discharged. That your maiestie before the same terme should haue sent Commissioners to take order for that which yet resteth due vnto my said Lord the Duke Iohn Cassimir since his first voyage, together with that al∣so which yet is behinde of the voyage of my late Lord the Duke of Deux ponts or two bridges. That your Maiestie would with all ex∣pedition accomplish the promised number of hostages and that before our departure out of Fraunce. These Articles together with many o∣thers are promised and signed by your Ma∣iestie, conter-signed by one Secretary of e∣state, and one Secretary of your treasury and sealed with your brode seale, the effect wherof or accomplishment we haue not he∣therto found. Leauing the reserch of the botome of these matters (as the first agréement which my Lady your Mother made at Chesteau neuf) immediatly after that my Lord had recei∣ued the money of your maiestie shewing in effect by ye law of an C. thousand franks of
his owne for the supplying of the pay of two moneths, how affectionate he was vnto your crown, how he departed with al spéed out of Fraunce (which all Beystres would not haue doon) not minding by way∣ting for the perfect accomplishment of your promises to be gréeuous or trublesō to your people, so that what so euer aduertisment he receiued, as assuredly he had many, and those from the best, that there was some hidden mistery, yet could they not so much win him, as to cause him to shewe any to∣ken of mistrust so much did he assure him selfe in your worde. Afterwarde your Maiestie gaue him to vnderstand by sundry letters, that you could not according to promise satisfie him at the fair of September, by reason of the assembly of the Estates, who (besides the confirmation of the Edict made by your owne absolute and royall power) as we were promised, should entreate vpon some meanes how to discharge your Maiestie towarde straungers, and so to content vs, also that at Christmas this fault should be amended. Immediatly after Christmasse and be∣fore
Newyéeres day, your maiestie sent my Lord woord that the Estates had put a dout and let in the behalf of Castelas, which could not so soone be decided, also that in ye meane time your Maiestie would cause to furnish at the faire of Strasbrough which was hol∣den at the same season, the partes of my Lord the Duke of Lorreine, and my Lord the Duke of Vaudemont. Sir wée are sory to say so much: but the trueth is, there wanteth 250000. which is in manner the one half which yet wée haue not receiued of those two parts, and in the meane time my said Lord was personally at Strasbrough, where were also sundry Colonels, Reistremaisters, Captaines, and Souldiers at the least xv. dayes and more, to their great costs, charges, labour & tra∣uaile, procured by the delay of the said payment. Now is Easter fair, which is to be hol∣den at Francfort at hand, at the which your maiesties promise should take place. First concerning the former dets dewe vnto bothe my Lord the Elector Palatine, next to my aforesaid Lord the Duke Iohn Cassimire.
Item touching the sixt and seuenth mo∣neths pay for the armie. Which articles, we can if néed be, specifie vnto your maiestie. Hauing cōmission and expresse commandement to desire your ma∣iestie to satisfie the same at this next faire at Fancfort, which is to be holden at. Easter next, vnto eche and euery of them, aswel for the time past, as yt which is to come, which amounteth almost to 4. Millions of franks, besides costs and domages. The payment of which sum within such a tearme, would go hard with any flourishing estate, not indet∣ted, turmoyled, or sacked with continuall wars, for the space of xv. or xvi: yéers, wher∣as if all had béene quiet and in reste all things might haue abounded, so that now it cannot be but we must néedes much doubt therof. And that that moste troubleth vs is that before our eyes we sée that you séek not the meanes so to doo, as is euident euen by practise, thereby to frustrate vs of all hope of receiuing any thing out of Fraunce into Germanie, either at this fair or any other, or of long time héerafter, notwithstanding that by your obligation no troubles should im∣peach the effect of your promises, which pro∣cedeth
of I wot not what league. This (to be bréef) is the final breaking of the Edict of pa∣cification, required (say they) by them who ought to buy the firme establishment thereof with their owne blood, which cānot be other then accompanied with the moste cruell and lamentable war that euer was. These vn∣doutedly wil be ye last ciuil troubles of your Realme, we are no French men, this mat∣ter toucheth vs not so néere. We be men and Germaines endewed with humanitie, which moueth vs to compassion in respecte of the slaunder that is like to enfue of this warre, so far are we voyd of any desire to kindle the wars, neither are we much practised in mat∣ters of Estate, and yet doe wée assuredly knowe that there was neuer any league but hath béene domageable to a Monar∣chie, in the estate and among Subiectes. We haue no commission (for your ma∣iestie lately sent vs woord, that it was not your pleasure, although oftentimes your selfe haue requested vs) to deale in your affaires, either in the affaire of your estate, as with any your meanes, either to exa∣mine such dealing as haue past, neither haue we héeretofore doon it without the purchace
and instaunce of those which doo touch your person very nigh, or els at the soliciting of other Kings your predecessors. Well haue we bothe charge and expresse commaunde∣ment to open vnto you the present necessitie of our affaires, and to propounde the ready meanes to reléeue the same, the which are so conioyned with the generall and superficiall consideration of your estate: that we cannot speake of our owne matters, but we must therewithall somewhat touch yours. Séeing therefore that my Lord the Duke Iohn Casimire a Prince and your neigh∣bour, besides all auncient bonds wherwith he is bound to wish the welth of this crown, hath in declaration of his goodnes towarde you, béen honoured with goodly lands, a pen∣tion, a charge of a hundred men of armes, & an estate of Colonel, which dignities he yet inioyeth, he findeth him selfe so much bounde to your maiestie that he thinketh he should doo iniury to his deputie, if he should dissem∣ble the inconueniences like to insue. At such time as Fraunce was replenished with forraine Souldiers, euery one bothe great and small cryed for peace, and such as supposed vs not to be so attentiue thereto, as
in effect we haue declared our selues, saide that the same was the onely way to collect money for our payments, because say they that the charges of war were infinite and incredible, whereby it must néeds followe that the breaking of the peace dooth cut of & take away all meanes of our satisfaction, so as we gather that we haue therin as great interest, or more then many great Lords of your subiects, and therefore that it is our duetie most humbly to exhorte your maies∣tie to the entertayning and assured obser∣uing of the same, yea although neither the duetie of Christian charitie, the simpatie that is in one only faithful body, or our af∣fection to the wealth and quietnesse of your dominions & crown, should driue vs there∣vnto, either the desire yt we haue that your maiesties credite might remaine in his full force among all forraine Princes, and that the confidence which your Subiects ought to repose in your should in no wise be demi∣nished. There is none but knoweth (it is so fresh in minde) what time, labour, & tra∣uail first your selfe my Lord, then my Lady your mother, my Lords ye Princes of your blood, my Lord ye Duk Iohn Casimire, your
Counsaile and others did sustaine and in∣dure, what ruine, yea and how much money it cost before you could attain to this peace. All good Frenchmen wished it, or iudged it most profitable and necessary for your e∣state, your people accepted it and ioyfully receiued it, it was signed, sealed, sworne, and published throughout all the Courts, Bayliwickes, Townes, and places of this Realme, and notified vnto straungers by your Embassadors, vnto the singular con∣tentation of such as wished the wealth of your Estate. Finally no necessary ceremo∣ny was ommitted. We haue, enioy and po∣ssesse the lands, commodities and honours which you haue conferred vnto my said L. the Duke Iohn Casimire, for vnder any o∣ther title, he neither would receiue thē, nei∣ther accept of your hostages, we haue also parte of the iewels of your Crown, & which we estéeme more then all, we haue your royall woord. Now that we should reape the frutes of this peace, and receine that which is pro∣mised & dew vnto vs, also yt all men should congratulate with your maiestie for ye qui∣etnes yt you should finde, we must chaunge
such spéeches into a bewayling of the mise∣ryes arysing of warres. At the least if the destenie of Fortune be such, either of royall and absolute authoritie, either for certaine considerations to vs vn∣knowen, as we yt be Germains are to rude to vnderstand them, and our selues not open i∣nough to comprehend that your maiestie wil not that your subiecte should inioy the frute of the Edict of pacification, then let it remain closed within the boundes of your Realme, and not be dispersed in all corners of Germa∣ny, and in most parte of Svvizerland, for we cannot, but must néedes receiue much gréefe and intollerable damage thereby. This consideration togither with infinite others, which to this purpose might be allea∣ged by such as would enter into the view of your estate, doo to vs séem sufficient to extin∣guish, or at the least suspend this abolishment of the Edict, vntill we be satisfyed, and then might you more iustly alledge that we haue not to doo to meddle therein, for now we deal with that that concerneth our selues, our ho∣nour and credit, togither with the reputati∣on of our whole nation. Yet if it were but a matter of fiue or six
moneths labour, the end whereof we might then finde, and that it might so be easely com∣passed, then were there some hope as touch∣ing our particular interest. But we now are certaine and well assured, that if we be once entred aborde this warre: we be all ready o∣uer olde to see the end. It is no small matter when a man is re∣duced to these extremities, that he wil rather ouerthrowe him selfe and others, then with his goods to loose both Countrie, honour, and life, when a man procéedeth so farre, it is doon, all respect and all duetie of one side, and other vanisheth away. The politike per∣son, and the refourmed, each of them forget∣teth him selfe, whatsoeuer tendeth either to the one or other end séemeth lawful. Such as haue abidden these extremities the space of xv. or xvj. yéeres, will not be daunted with such beginnings, hauing so many intelligen∣ces and good aduertisements from all partes, we know it: for we haue frequented it. There must be a whole storehouse of money, besides the shedding of the French blood. There will ensue a stiffe determination of irreconsilia∣ble war, while in the meane time what will become of our payments, the wayting for
which, will be vnto vs as gréeuous & intol∣lerable, as it wil be harde to send the same into Germany (so long as the warre dooth last) or easy to subdue the Huguenots. What wil our Reystres and souldiers, who are determined to méete at the next faire of Francfort, say. I wil leaue to such as knowe what maner of men they be in mat∣ters touching payments due. What will be the general iudgemēt of our forrain neigh∣bours? The soberest will say that Fraunce which in all ages hath borne away ye price of humanitie towarde straungers, is now become impatible to it selfe, neither able to abide peace, neither to maintaine war. To conclude we doo beséech your maiestie on the part of my Lord the Duke Iohn Ca∣simire, who hath in his owne behalfe togi∣ther with the behalfe of the body of his ar∣my sent, vs hether, to cause to furnish & sa∣tisfie at this next fair at Francfort, the whol contents of the Obligation which we haue of your maiestie, according as is afore set downe, This Sir is (without speaking any far∣ther in your affaires, thē they concerne vs) the effect of all that we are commaunded to showe vnto your maiestie at this present,
whome we doo moste humbly beséech to take the same in good parte. We are Ger∣maines & therfore doo want copie of French phrases. The commandement of those that haue sent vs, dooth lay vpon vs the necessity of acquitting our selues, whereto we hope your maiestie wil haue respect, for it tēdeth onely to our satisfaction, & the peace which mainteineth & preserueth all estates. The hazardes of warre haue often dispearsed, wasted & subuerted in one day, yea in one houre, great Monarchies, how wel so euer they haue béene ordered or established. God for his grace, preserue yours in full perfec∣tion. At Bloys the 23 of February. 1577. ¶This béeing ended he procéeded on this wise. SIr, I am to speke for my Lord the Duke Iohn Cassimire who gaue me perticuler instructions to request your Maiestie in his behalf, that you would not permit your self to be led by such as doo endeuour to procure you to breake the peace whiche was so harde to be made. Also that if there be any
Article conteined therein which troubleth your Conscience, or yt séemeth to rigorous, he wisheth that it might please you rather to procure some tollerable moderatiō of the same, then again to areare warres by the breaking of the saide Edict. To which end he hath commaunded mée to offer vnto you whatsoeuer credit he may haue with the King of Nauarre the Prince of Conde, the Marshall of Anuile and the Churches, wherin he hath sufficiently au∣thorised me to procure any thing tollerable, rather then to subuert all, namely to con∣ferre with ye King of Nauers Deputie: wher¦fore it is in your Maiestie to consult and de¦uise, what I may doo therin wherto I doo moste humbly offer my Person. ❀To the King. SIr I doo most humbly request your ma∣iestie not to mislike that this day may finish and cut of all such slaunders as haue béene sowen and spread throughout Ger∣manie, Fraunce, and other places against my Lord and maister the Duke Iohn Cas∣simire to the great preiudice of his honour and reputation. Namely that the conside∣ration
and respect of his perticular profite held him so intangeled and brideled, that the same was periuditial vnto the publique and particular commoditie of his souldiers which followed him. In respect wherof: his excellencie hath charged me before my de∣parture, to remit into your maiesties hands all such lands and estates wherwith it hath pleased you of late to gratifie him, whiche are the Duchie of Estampes, the nine Lord∣ships situated within the Duchie of Bur∣gundie, the pention, the Captainship ouer a hundred men of armes, together with the estate of Colonell ouer 4000 Reystres. The possession and inioying of all whiche things and of euery of them, his excellency hath and héere dooth renounce, not willing heerafter to pretend any right in the same, neither minding at this present to reape a∣ny commoditie therof. He dooth also render vnto your maiestie, all letters and déedes concerning the same, except such as are de∣pending of the aforsaid lands situated with in the Duchy of Burgundy, the which the chamber of accounts hath deteyned, the ar∣rest wherof is héerunto adioyned. Also in case his excellencie hath reciprokely pro∣mised
or sworne vnto your Maiestie any kinde of duetie, if he hath bound him selfe in any respect whatsoeuer, by woord of mouth, letters, or procter, his intent and purpose is by this restitution to be fully and perfectly discharged, as of matter graunted in consi∣deration of the landes & estates aboue men∣tioned, héerein reuoking all duetie or Obli∣gation whatsoeuer, except of good agréement and neighbourhood, which at all times hath béene maintained betwéene the Kings of Fraunce, and the famelies of the Palatine Princes, besides the earnest zeale which he beareth to the welth of this Crowne, from the which this restitution shall in no wise alienate his minde. I haue no Commission otherwise to dis∣cend to the particular occasions, but to show your maiestie that in case you be any thing desirous to knowe the same, his excellency immediatly after my returne wil not much stick to declare it. In respect of our selues, who vnder the assurance of publique faith and the safe con∣duct which it pleased you to sende vs, are come euen to your Court, I haue expresse charge of his excellencie, moste humbly to
request your Maiestie to giue leaue to two of vs with all spéede to returne into Ger∣manie, and me Buterich to departe into England according to my maisters com∣maundement about sundry his ex∣cellencies weightie affaires of importaunce, graunting vs to the same ende two seuerall Pas∣ports and safe conducts. (?) At Bloys the 7. of March. 1577 FINIS,
