1558 99836888 1181
THE LIVES OF ALL THE ROMAN EM∣perors, being exactly Collected, from Iulius Caesar, unto the now reigning Ferdinand the second. WITH THEIR BIRTHS, Governments, remarkable Actions, & Deaths. LONDON: Printed by N. and I. Okes, and are to be sold by George Hutton at the signe of the Sun within Turning-stile in Holborne 1636.
TO THE WORSHIP∣FVLL, MY MOST honoured PATRONE WILL. STONOVR Esquire. SIr, Quae a primis pubertatis annis ra∣dices egit amicitia eofortius meliusque floret quo fuerit longaevior. By which  boldly inferre an excuse for my presumption, in
presenting unto you the first fruits of a tree so long growing up. It is the na∣ture of some trees not to bring forth fruite untill they come to be provect, and such fruites are ordi∣narily more solid, and not so soone apt to be corrup∣ted. For me to com∣mend the fruite, were to bring my selfe upon the publique stage of ostenta∣tion & folly; neither need I when the pleasantnesse
thereof (viz. the argu∣mēt) is of ability sufficient to commend it selfe. No∣biles nobilia decent, and so the noble Caesars now seek unto your noble selfe for a protection, and to be pa∣tronized as being all brought into the straights of this epitomicke volume: and in entertaining them being in number one hun∣dred fifty six, I hope you will not exclude their Conductour, but reflect
so upon him with a favou∣rable, though a different respect, who was over most studious to honour and serve you, as Yours most obsequious, R. B.
To the Reader. REader, I cannot say with the Poet Ma∣teriam superabat apus, who in a description com∣mended the art and worke-man-ship beyond the matter whereon it was showne, as the statue of Hercules, the matter whereof being but stone, yet for the curiosity of art therein expressed, is held at an inesti∣mable rate and value: no, but the contrary: for here Mate∣ria superatur opus, the workman∣ship,
(stile and language  meane) comes far short of the matter: Yet being iudicious, thou maist portray the whole Hercules having found but the length of his foot: and withal, I having a guesse at thy humor which rather lovest brevity (the minion of delight) than the taedium of pleasure in folio, would rather comply with that of thine, then mine own, and present to thy view great personages to the life, in small draughts and peices, and give thee onely light touches of their vertues and vices: which touches if I have overshadow∣ed with that of brevity, and
thereby have procured thee an appetite of a larger satisfaction, I must of necessity referre thee to the hazard of a taedium: for as some stomackes at the sight of a large table well fur∣nished, instantly loose the edge of hunger, so might thine at the sight of the bulke of a Church-bible. Wherefore I have provided thee a little and dainty, variety and plen∣ty, short and sweete: but not a crumme for that Curre that must be content aswell with the bones as the meate, whose snarles I feare not, nor esteeme his impertinent com∣mendams, but referre me to
thine impartiality, who (if thou art a good fellow) wilt accept a bit with a friend with∣out grumbles and accept his welcome better then his fare: then Reader, Welcome to thy friend. R. B.
A table of the names of the Romane Emperours ADrianus. 36 Antoninus Pi∣us 39 Alexander Severus 69 Arnolphus 294 Aurelianus 27 Arcadius 197 Anastasius 220 Anastasius aliâs Arte∣mius 264 Adolphus 344 Albertus, the son of Ru∣dolphus 347 Albertus, Duke of Au∣stray 371 Aurelius Verus 41 B Bassianus Caracalla 59 C Charolus magnus, Charlemaine 280 Charles 2 290 Charles 3 292 Charles 4 361 Charles 5 377 C. Caesar Caligula 10 Claudius Caesar 12 Cocceius Nerva 30 C. Piscenninus 53 Clodius Albinus 55 Commodus 46 Valens Hostilianus 85 Constantius Clorus 138 Carinus 131 Caelius Balbinus 81 Crispus 156
Constans 162 Constantius 164 Constant Magnus 153 Constantin. 2 210 Constantinus 3 248 Constantinus 4 251 Constantinus 5 271 Conradus 1 298 Conradus 2 310 Conradus 3 323 D Didius Iulianus 50 Diadumenus 65 Decius 92 Dioclesianus 133 Domitian. 28 Decent. 169 E Aemilian, 102 F Florian. 122 Flavius Claud, 113 Fred. Barbarossa 327 Freder. 1 329 Freder. 2 337 Freder. 3 352 Eerdinand. 1 379 Ferdinand. 2 387 G Gallienus 107 Gordianus 77 Galerius 110 Gratianus 185 H Heraclius 1 239 Heraclius 2 245 Heraclion 246 Hen. 1 300 Hen. 2 309 Hen. 3 314 Hen. 4 317 Hen. 5 319 Hen. 6 330 Hen. 7 350 Helvius Pertinax 48 Heliogabalus 67 Honorius 200 I C. Iulius Caesar 1 Iustinus 223 Iustinian. Mag. 226
Iustin. Minor. 229 Iustinian. 2 254 Iul. Verus Max. 75 Iulian. Aposta. 171 Iovinian. 175 L Licinus 149 Lotharius 1 285 Lotharius 2 321 Ludovicus Pius 382 Ludovicus 2 287 Ludovicus 3 296 Ludovicus 4 538 Leo 1 212 Leo 2 215 Leo 3 268 Leo 4 274 Leontius 257 M Martian. 209 Mauritius 234 Maximilian, 1 237 Martinian. 152 Magnentius 161 Maximus 72 Max mian. 136 Maximian. 141 Maxentius 147 M. Ant Gord. 83 Mar. Inl. Phil. 1 87 M. Iul. Philip. 2 90 Mesius Decius 95 Marc. Aurel. 16 Mar. Sil. Otho 19 Maximin. 188 Maximilian. 2 381 Mathias 385 M. Aurel. Carus 127 Marc. Clod. Pupien. 79 N Numerian. 129 Nero. 14 O Oct. Caes. Aug. 4 Opil. Macrin. 63 Otho Magnus 302 Otho 2 304 Otho 3 322 Otho 4 335
P Phil ppus 333 Philippicus 262 Probus 124 Posthumius 111 Phocas 237 Q Quintilius 115 R Rupertus 366 Rudolphus 1 341 Rudolphus 2 383 S Septimius Severus 57 Septimius Geta 61 Salonin. Valerian. 109 Sergius Galba 17 Severus 145 Sigismundus 369 T Tiberius 2 231 Tiberius 3 p. 259 Theodosius 1 19 Theodosius 2 20 Theodosius 3 266 Tacitus 119 Tiber. Nero, Caesar 1 Titus 26 Traianus 33 Trebonian. Gal. 97 V Vespasian. 23 Volusian. 100 Valerian. 104 Valentin. 1 176 Valentin. 2 119 Valentin. 3 206 Valens 132 Vinceslaus 364 Vitellius 20 Z Zeno. 217
THE LIVES OF all the Roman Emperors, being in number 156. 1. Caius Julius Caesar. After the foundation of the City of Rome Anno 706. portrait of emperor Caius Julius Caesar C. CAESAR DICTPERRTVO JVlius Caesar a most noble Roman, was borne after the foundation of Rome 654. He was the first that made him∣selfe sole Emperor: He overcame the
Swissers and Tigurines; hee overthrew the Almans, chasing them out of France; he subdued all France, and af∣ter passing over the Rhene, made him∣selfe Lord of Germany: thence he came into England, (which at that time was unknowne) and added it to the Ro∣man Empire: But at length not obtai∣ning of the Senate what hee often sued for, after he had made himselfe sure of Ariminum, hee went with so great power to the gates of Rome, that Pom∣peius the great much fearing him, and forsaking Italy, was by Caesar utterly overthrowne in the famous battaile of Pharsalia. Hee subjugated Ptolomaeus in Egypt, Scipio in Affricke, and Iuba King of Mauritania, the sonnes of Pompetus i Spaine: In the end supposing  (after much greatnesse) to live in ∣cure peace, was cruelly  the Senate-house, receiving  twenty severall wounds by the hand o
conspirators at his age of 56, the 15 of April, with many prodigies before and after his death. In him it was questio∣ned whether Clemency or the Sword ob∣tained him most honour: For by the first hee ted his potent enemies to be his friends: witnesse his Commentaries every where: But by the Sword hee won the Empire, which before was a Consulate. His saying was usually in judging of mens natures: Baro. pag. 300. Rubicundos a∣o, pallidos timeo: I love the well coloured , but feare the pale: which was pro∣ved in Cassius that gave him his first wound in the Senate-house; but loved Brutus, whom when he saw also to se∣cond Cassius in that Treason, with  tu sili? surrendred his life.
2. Octavianus Caesar Augustus. In the 41 yeere of his reigne our Savi∣our Jesus Christ was borne. portrait of emperor Octavianus Caesar Augustus SER GALBA IMP. CAES. AVG Octavianus Nephew of Iulius Caesar, of the family of the Octavy a Roman, by his Mo∣thers side descended from the race of Kings departed out of Macedonia, and came into Italy upon the immature death of his Uncle, and changing his name, would be called Caius Caesar, the sonne of Caius Caesar; and being arrived
at Rome, he was created Consul at the age of 20 yeeres. He was a Souldier good enough: hee routed Sextus Pom∣peius: he was called Pater patriae, be∣cause he adorned the City with Lawes and Edifices: wherefore there were Temples and Altars erected in his Ho∣nour. He overthrew M. Antonius, he con∣quered Spaine, Hungary, and Slavonia. In the time of his reigne all the World being then in peace, our Lord and Sa∣viour Iesus Christ was borne. Hee go∣verned this Universe absolute Caesar 44 yeeres, and 12 yeeres with M. Anto∣ius: and in the 76 yeere of his age, within one Moneth and five dayes hee dyed at Nola by poyson, to the griefe of all. Macrobius testifieth this of Augustus, Macrobius lib. 2. Sar. 4. that when he heard of the slaughter of the children under two yeeres, which was commanded by Herod, continu∣ing his tyranny almost a whole yeere,
amongst which Herods sonne was one, Augustus said thus, Melius est Herodis porcum esse quàm filium: It is better to be one of Herods hogges, than one of his sonnes. So impartiall is a spirit possessed with cruelty, that as it makes no difference of the act; so neither of persons. He may and is justly called The murtherer of Innocents: and so to keepe his Act in memory, the Church doth keepe the day Festivall, called In∣nocents day, in memoriall of that bloody command.
3. Tiberius Nero Caesar. In the yeere of Christ 16. portrait of emperor Tiberius Nero Caesar AFter the excellent, and of fa∣mous memory Octavianus, An. Dom. 16. suc∣ceeded the wicked and cruell Tiberius: And although that in his pre∣decessors time he had done notable ex∣ploits in Warre, yet he was esteemed as the wickedst man alive. He seemed unwilling to accept or undertake the Empire, the more to endeare them un∣to him which were against it: and ther∣fore
in the beginning of his govern∣ment he carryed himselfe indifferently well: but a while after he shewed him∣selfe againe in his colours, sterne, most cruell, and as one compleate in all un∣speakeable filthynesse and vice: And it was questioned whether lust or cruelty in him were most eminent, or gluttony; all being vices unworthy the name of a Prince. St. Iohn Baptist and our Saviour Iesus Christ suffered in his time. He was no great enemy of the Christians; but he proposed it in the Senat-house, That Christ should be adored as a God. Final∣ly, he dyed neare unto Naples by the Treason of his Nephew Caligula, after he had governed 22 yeeres, and of his age 78: What he was, Seneca expresseth, as Illum â rerum natura editum, ut osten∣deret quid summa vitia in summa fortu∣na possent. Also Dyonisius Areopagita, who lived in his time, seeing the strange Eclipse of the Sun and Moone at the in∣stant
houre of our Saviours passion, said, Tacit Suetonius Dec. vid. ut Deus natura patitur, aut mundi ma∣ina dissolvitur: The God of Nature rely suffers this day, or else the whole orld is dissolved. One Longinus amongst other souldiers,  recorded to have pierced our Savi∣ours side with his Speare, out of whose Wound came Water and Blood: And Authors doe report, that the same Longinus in the very perpetrating of he Act was strucken with blindnesse, nd being recovered to his sight by the aid water & blood applyed to his eyes, id afterwards repent for this cruel act, and was made Bishop of Cappadocia.
4. Caius Caesar Caligula. Anno Domini 39. portrait of emperor Caius Caesar Caligula THe election of Caligula was most pleasing to the Senate; so much the more, An. Dom. 39. because in his first entrance to the government, hee endeauored with great subtilty to gaine and winne the good-will of all men: onely seemingly just, noble, and ge∣nerous; with pleasing carriage and be∣haviour courting the Nobility. He or∣dained sports, feasts, pastimes, Stage-playes,
and other entertainments to ontent the people. But in the processe f his government he fell into such ex∣crable villany and filthy wickednesse, hat he would be called and adored as a God. He plained mountaines, made allies hills, built towers in the deepe ca: and all this he did with such impu∣ity and cruelty, that many would ather murther themselves, than come or stay for the rigour of his sentence. Lastly, being become unsufferable o all the people of Rome, hee was aine by Cherea, receiving 30 wounds n the third yeere, and tenth Moneth of is Imperiall government, aged 29 eeres. He built the Colossus, and other workes of innumerable expences: Spond. His wife Casonia was run thorow with a sword, and her yong daughters braines dasht against the walls. He banished Pi∣late, and would have had Christ adored as a God, but the Senate withstood it.
5. Claudius Caesar. Anno Domini 43. portrait of emperor Claudius Caesar CLaudius Uncle to Caligula, An. Dom. 43. suc∣ceeded in the Empire as it were by meere accident: because the people of Rome being freed from the terror of the times lately past, imagi∣ned to redeeme and keepe their liberty, and utterly to extinguish all the race and family of the Caesars: and some ma∣king a head, and themselves masters of the Capitoll, gave an occasion to Claudius (by nature a fearefull and
heartlesse man) to hide himselfe. But ing found out, and encouraged by a ouldier, and betweene feare and hope as neverthelesse at the last made Em∣eror. In his beginning hee was most ercifull, although he put Cherea to eath. By his command and appoint∣ent the Water-worke called Aqua audia was made: He caused the Lake ucinum to be drawne dry by the day∣ labour of thirty thousand worke∣en within the space of two yeeres. e built the Haven of Ostia: the last rtner with him in the Empire was Agrippina, who through feare of him, ad to secure her sonne of the successi∣n, poisoned him with a dish of Mush∣mes, and so he dyed the 13 of October,  the age of 64, whereof hee reigned 4, and had sepulture at Rome. In the eighth yeere of his reigne hee ustred the City, Baroni. and had to the num∣er of three score and nine hundred and orty foure thousand Cittizens.
In the 6 yeere of his reigne the Virg Mary departed this life at the age 72 yeeres. 6. Nero. Anno Dom. 57. portrait of emperor Nero CLaudius being dead, the Se not onely gave the Imperiall government to Nero, An. Dom. 57. but also swore him fealty. At the first he gave such good satisfaction to all, that they said, He was ordayned for them by the expresse commandement of God: But
proceeding in his government, he fell into much insocy and cruelty. Hee had Seneca the Philosopher for his teacher and instructor, but ill requi∣ed him; for hee commanded him to chuse his death, for dye he must. So∣eca desired his veines to be opened to et out his life. He tooke all the Plate nd Jewels out of the Temples; he cau∣ed his owne Mother Agrippina to be laine, and her body to be ript open, hat he might see the place wherein he y. Hee slew Poppaa his wife with a urne or kicke: he studied Magicke, nd called all the Magitians to his fa∣our: but being deluded by Simon Ma∣gus, that promised that he should flye, e expelled them the Citty. Lastly, forsaken of all men but onely his Spado, whom he had formerly caused to bee ut, so that hee might use him at his pleasure; and onely hee following his Master to the end, in so much that Nero being closely pursued, gave his
sword to his Spado, and bad him di∣spatch him, which he refusing, Ner said, Ergo Nero nec amicum nec inii∣cum habet. Some write that he sell into a vault of a common Jakes, other that he slew himselfe. He set fire on the City, and from a high Tower beheld and laughed at the fire: and in the repairing therof he cau∣sed the Edifices to be called Neroniana. He overcame the Parthians, and sub∣dued the Britans: hee greatly persecu∣ted the Christian name, and besider the putting the Apostle St. Peter and St. Paul to death, he caused also an in∣finite number of Christians to be slaine. He made Warres upon the Iewes, and in the end being insupportable to God and man, amongst the rebellious sediti∣ons of many Provinces, and the Se∣rate having publiquely proclaimed sentence of death against him, and fly∣ing out of the City, stabbed himselfe to the joy of the whole World, in the
32 yeere of his Age, and fourteenth of his Reigne. 7. Sergius Galba. Anno Domini 70. portrait of emperor Sergius Galba SER GALBA IMP. CAES. AVG AFter the wished death of Nero the cruell, An. Dom. 70. Sergius Galba of the City of Rome by birth, was cre∣ed by the Army, and by the Senate nfirmed Emperor: who was no lesse temperate, dogged, and fiercely cru∣ll than his predecessor He was not ig∣norant
in the Arts liberal, and well read in the Lawes. He was much hated of all sorts, and it was a wonder, had he not reigned so short a time, that he lived so long, because every man slew him in conceit dayly, though not in effect; judging him farre unworthy such a de∣gree, giving himselfe over wholly to idle and wicked conceits. In the sedi∣tion of Otho his head was strucke off in the market-place by a Souldier, and his body left in the power of the peo∣ple, and was buried by a slave with∣out any Ceremony at all, at the age of 73 yeeres, having governed seaven moneths, whose death was not lamen∣ted of any, because it was not knowne that ever he did good to any man. His reigne being short and vicious,  no other memory to posterity but com∣memoratives of his detestable cruelty and other vices: who lies ingrav'd  the Imperiall City wherein hee fir drew breath.
8. M. Silvius Otho. Anno Domini 70. portrait of emperor M. Silvius Otho OTho of a very honorable family in Rome, a man of great valour, An. Dom. 70. of an able wit, sonne of Lucius  Consul, succeeded Galba in the pire, and gave great hopes both to  Senate and Cōmonalty by his gra∣us abbearing and carriage of a re∣sse and reformation of former dis∣ts, and grievances given them by his ecessors, which indeed would have
followed and issued so, had not the shortnesse of his government prevented and cut off this hopefull expectation: For at the same time that he was crea∣ted Emperor in the City of Rome, Vi∣tellius was proclaimed Emperor in Ger∣many: And neither willing to give place to the other, resolved to decide and end it in the field: and after many battailes Otho being worsted in de∣spaire of the recovery of his Crowne and Dignity, slew himselfe, to the in∣finite griefe and sorrow of all the Com∣mons, in the yeere after Christ 72, and of his age 38, after the 3 Moneth and 5 dayes of his Empire, and dyed at Veliteme: the brevity of his reigne pre∣scinded many and great hopes of his good government of the whole Em∣pire.
9. Vitellius. Anno Domini 71. portrait of emperor Vitellius OTho being dead, An. Dom. 71. every man con∣verted his applause to Vitellius, which being so in generall, was confirmed by the Senate, and he comes to Rome in great triumph, bravely atten∣ded by his noble Army. This man al∣though he was munificent and liberall, yet he was of a most cruell disposition. Wherfore Vespasian being imployed in the warres of the Iews, was by the army
created Emperor of Rome, and joyning battaile with Vitelliu, tooke him priso∣ner, binding his hands behind him, with a halter about his necke, the souldiers buffetting him about the face, with in∣finite dishonour, disgrace, and scorne was led about in publicke, and at the length with many wounds was depri∣ved of life in that very place where hee had caused Sabinus the brother of Ves∣pasian to be miserably slaine: and toge∣ther with him were slaine his owne son, and his brother, and all throwne into the River Tiber. I find likewise no other notable thing or quality in this man, but much accu∣sed for cruelty, of a slow and dull spi∣rit, and given excessively to gluttony, insomuch that all Gluttons to this day passe under his name. Hee lived 57 yeeres, having reigned little more than 8 Moneths.
10. Vespasianus. In the yeere of Christ 72. portrait of emperor Vespasianus UEspasian a Roman borne, An. Done 72. al∣though he were not of so noble a blood, hee deserved never∣thelesse for his true worth, and excel∣lent qualities of the minde, to be crea∣ted Emperor. And having taken pos∣session of the Imperiall Seate, hee em∣bellished and beautified the City with Amphitheaters, Temples, and Sta∣tues: Hee was in all his actions courte∣ous,
affable, and benigne to all. He raced and utterly destroyed the fa∣mous City of Hierusalem, verifying that Prophesie of our Saviour, which was, That there should not be left one stone upon another. Hee was most temperate in his diet, and very polite, neate, and compleate in his person: Hee made many coun∣tries tributary to the Empire: Not any one vice could be imputed to him but avarce, although hee acknowledged it with this excuse, because that hee found the Empire very bare of monies, by the reason of the extraordinary ex∣cesses of his Predecessors. Hee dyed of a Fluxe in the yeere of our Lord Eighty one, in the Ninth yeere of his Reigne: aged 69. In his time was put to death in Rome Linus, the first Bishop of that See, to whom succeeded Cletus, the first Bishop of that name, and the second of that greatly boasted Succession from Saint
Peter the Apostle. Suetonius records this, that before the death of Vespa∣sian, there appeared a Comet, and as his Friends gave him notice, that it portended his Death: Scipio du Pleix. hee sligh∣ting it, and not any way discouraged thereby, said, That it threatned not him, but the Kings of the Parthians that wore long haire, as the Comet had; yet neverthelesse Vespasian dyed not long after.
11. Titus. Anno Dom. 81. portrait of emperor Titus TItus was of no lesse goodnesse and vertuous morality than his father Vespasian had beene be∣fore him. An. Dom. 81. He was well learned in the Greeke, and Latine tongues, and most excellent in writing: But in Armes hee exceeded the glory of the precedent Emperors, because he tryumphed for the overthrow of the Iewes. In his go∣vernment of the Empire he was so cir∣cumspect,
diligent, and especially li∣berall; that hee was called The Idol of Nations: and hee esteemed that day to be lost wherein he had not done a cour∣tesie: And therefore he said once to his brother, (that conspired his death) That he need not attempt that by sratri∣cide which he without it might obtaine by favour. But because the Romans were not worth (perhaps) so compleate and just a Governor, by the secret judge∣ment of God hee was taken from the world by a maligne Fever, which in few dayes ended his life in the Country neare to Rome at the yeeres of 41, and of his Empire the second, two moneths and twenty dayes. And lies buried at Rome, having by his valour and wise∣dome made the Roman Eagle to triumph over Hierusalem. Iosephus largely describes the Hiero∣solimitan Warres and passages, Append. Iosephus. and af∣firmes that whatsoever thing could bee found of any value, was by him trans∣ported
to Rome. Hee was so amiable and affable to all, that hee was called Amor & delicia generis humani: but as it is thought, he dyed poysoned by his brother Domitian, who succeeded him in the Empire. 12. Domitianus. Anno Domini 83. portrait of emperor Domitianus DOmitianus succeeded the good Titus his brother, An. Dom. 3. who in the beginning was likewise affable, mercifull and juste did not much ad∣dict
himselfe to warres, although he tri∣umphed, and was victorious in all those wars which he undertooke: but tooke great felicity in shooting in a long bow, & became so dexterous in it, that he ha∣zarded thereby the lives of many men, yet never hurting them. But he in the progresse of his government became so cruell, unjust, and covetous, that upon the least occasion hee put many men to death, usurping their wealth, saying, Himselfe was next heire. He was a great persecutor of Christians, because in his time many very holy men were slaugh∣tered with exquisite and new found tor∣ments. In the end by the conspiracy of Stephanus, the Steward of his houshold, and others he was murthered in his Pa∣lace in Rome at the age of 45, and in the 15 yeere of his reigne, and was buried in the way that now leads to the Lateran Church. The second persecution began now against the Christians: Eusebius tearmes him Haeredē Neronianae saevitiae.
And it is not to be wondred that hee should so much be given to shed blood, and devise torments for men, who u∣sed in his study privatly to practise all punishments upon Flies and Gnats. 13. Cocceius Nerva. Anno Domini 99. portrait of emperor Cocceius Nerva AFter Domitian, Dom.  Cocceius Nerva being the 13 Emperour, and the first Italian by Nation, was judged the fittest man to succeed in the
Empire, who was nobly descended, and chosen in the yeere of Christ 99, be∣ing of age 66. This man was so mercifull, benigne, and liberall, that all the world admi∣red him. Hee recalled all the Christi∣ans from exile, and mitigated their troubles: He caused the children of the poore to be brought up, and educated at the publique charge: hee purchased many lands, and distributed them to the poore decayed Cittizens. And to bring these matters to effect, hee was constrained to sell his owne Plate of Gold and Silver, with the rest of his houshold-goods: And reflecting upon his end, hee elected Traianus, a man very nobly descended, and of an anci∣ent family, to succeede him. He dy∣ed in the tenth Moneth, and ninth day of his Reigne, of a conceit hee tooke a∣gainst a Senator called Regulus, to the great lamentation and sorrow of the whole City, which had now lost a true
Patron of the poore, and was buried with all the Ceremonies of the ancient Romans in the Temple of the Goddesse Fortune. The charitable disposition of this Caesar to strangers and poore people, got him not unworthily the title of Pau∣perum Patronus: Charity being then scarce knowne, and little practised of the Heathen Governours.
14. Traianus. In the yeere of Christ 100. portrait of emperor Traianus TRaianus being the first Emperor of Spanish blood, An. Dom. 100. was the ho∣nour as well to his owne Nati∣on, as also to the Emperors precedent. instantly having taken possession & go∣vernment upon him, hee began to re∣orme the corruption of the Lawes, dministring true Justice unto all. Hee was wonderous good to the oore: He caused all the poore mens hild ren both of the City and country
of Italy to be brought and trained up in good Literature and Discipline. In peace and warre he was most judicious and just; but being seduced by the Di∣vell, (although afterwards he became more temperate) hee persecuted the Christians, putting infinite numbers of them to death, and during his reigne was that third famous persecution of the Church. He subdued Dacia, Me∣sopotamia, and made Armenia tribu∣tary: he tooke in Soria, Babylonia, and Chalda. In his returning backe to Italy, being arrived in Cilicia, fell dangerously sicke, and in Selencia  dyed, whose ashes were brought  Rome, and in an Uine placed on the top of a Columne which the Roman Cittizens erected to the memory of him, who so worthily and so long had manag'd the Empire: he reigned twen∣ty one yeeres, sixe moneths, and 15 dayes. In this Emperours reigne the City of
Antioch by an Earth-quake was utter∣ly ruinated. Dio Casilus speaking much in his commendations, dashes them all with an extraordinary affection to Wine and Boyes: but others have clea∣red that aspersion, and doe largely praise this Caesar for his incomparable endowments of minde and habilities of body. And certainly such worthy at∣chievements had their originall from an excellent qualified spirit. But if wee seriously consider his weighty and day∣ly imployments, any will easily con∣fesse, that hee could not spare time for such idle toyes, having all his spirits continually otherwise imployed.
15. Adrianus. An. Domini 121. portrait of emperor Adrianus COod Traianus being dead, An. Dom. 221. A∣drianus his Nephew a Roman, was chosen to succeed, who followed the steps of his Antecessor, and gave great content and joyfull ex∣pectation to the whole City. He visi∣ted in person the whole Empire, and all the warres hee undertooke, succee∣ded fortunate. He was not very severe  the Christians: hee gave him∣selfe
exceedingly to the knowledge of all manner of Arts and Sciences: and any man whatsoever was expert in any knowledge, he called him to Rome, forbidding all that were not Proscssors, to seeme to professe any their Art or Science, unlesse they were Masters in∣deed, and well able fully to instruct o∣thers in them. Falling into an inourable disease, hee attempted oftentimes to kill himselfe, and offered rewards to any man that would kill him; and many times hee sollicited many with threat∣nings to murther him. Finally, the Physitians seeking to give him content, perswaded him to forbeare eating and drinking, and so he did, and dyed at Baiae in upper Gall at the yeeres of sea∣venty two, and five moneths, and sea∣venteene dayes, in the two and twen∣tieth yeere of his reigne, and was con∣veyed to Rome. He continued the persecution against the Christians, and afterwards slacke∣ned
it by a remisse way. Hee builded Temples, and dedicated them to his owne honour: He prophaned the ho∣ly places about Hierusalem, and being tyred with an incurable Dropsie, ho would faine have dyed, but could  Hee suffered for his effusion of Chriffi∣an blood: Lastly, hee dyed through voluntary famine. This being such a tedious and irkesome disease, wrought such a strong impression in his conceit, that death was rather to bee enjoyed, than a life so diseased and miserable.
16. Antoninus Pius. Anno Domini 139. portrait of emperor Antoninus Pius ANtoninus succeeded Adrianus y way of adoption, An. Dom. 139. in which lignity hee lived upright and vertuously. There were not many warres in his time, because by his vigi∣lancy hee made himselfe beloved and feared, keeping all Nations in due subjection. There came Embassadors dayly to Rome from all parts of the world to obtaine graces and priviled∣ges
for their countries, to whom hee gave audience very courteously, advi∣sing them before they speake, saying, Demand that which is iust, and yee shall obtaine: And furthermore, he enter∣tained them all in such sort, that they all continued his most faithfull and obe∣dient subjects. He was called the Fa∣ther of the vertues, because hee was so just, courteous, liberall, and good, and above all, a lover of all good men: nei∣ther was there any one vice found in him. Being at his Villa or Countrey∣house, being of the age of seaventy he dyed of a Feaver, having governed the Empire 23 yeeres. Whose death was lamented of all, the Empire being deprived of such a Governour, and Fa∣ther truely pious. Hee was inurn'd in Rome towards the Easterne gate. The name of Pius was given him, be∣cause when hee came to the Imperiall Dignity, he pardoned all Delinquents,  Non oportet ab his rebus princi∣patus
exordium ducere. In the fifteenth yeere of his Reigne hee by a speciall E∣dict restrained the persecution against the Christians. 17. Aurelius Verus. M. Aurelius. Anno Domini 162. portrait of emperor Aurelius Verus. M. Aurelius AFter the death of Antoninus Pius, An. Dom. 162. Aurelius Verus together with Marcus Aurelius the Philoso∣pher, both being adopted by Antoninus,
began their government. Aurth Verus was the son of Aelius Verus and Comitia Calvilla. This man becoo himselfe to Soria, and was taxed for being extraordinarily addicted to all manner of lust: And returning to Rome, he added to this vice many more, as sports, toyes, deceipts, and so ma∣ny other villanies, that he shewed him∣selfe to the full in all his actions an imi∣tator and follower of Nero and Vitelli. us. All which passages his companion Marcus Aurelius dissembling, because his vices might not publickly be notifi∣ed to the City, very wisely, and to this mans satisfaction, sent him against the Parthians which were now in re∣bellion, whom he overcame with ma∣ny other Countries. Comming backe to Rome he brought with him all sorts of infamous, lewd, and vicious persons, with whom hee betooke himselfe to his Mosque, whom  now called Turkes, have
mitated for this stately sort of buil∣ling, and within a little after dyed ri∣ing in his warlicke Parthian Charriot, o refresh himselfe by the pleasantnesse of the place. These were called Divi Fratres, because they were both a∣dopted by  to the Empire: But because  was the elder bro∣ther, and more faous, he so carried himselfe, as if hee had beene rather a Father than a Brother to his younger Brother Verus: under these a fifth per∣secution was raised against the Chri∣stians.
16. Marcus Aurelius. Anno Domini 162. portrait of emperor Marcus Aurelius MArcus Aurelius a Roman by blood, An. Dom. 162. continued his govern∣ment after the death of his com∣panion Verus, being adopted with him by Antoninus. This man was replenished with so great goodnesse and vertue, that deservedly he was surnamed The Philo∣sopher. In his time there were warres, dangerous Earthquakes, grievous floods  dations, terrible dearths, and
most fearefull plagues. The Church suffered great tribulations by his perse∣cution. Hee was little fortunate in his wife; and although hee knew her to be dishonest, yet neverthelesse hee would not dismisse or divorce her, affirming her dowry to be the Empire, which dig∣nity amongst men was esteemed an un∣valuable portion: And therefore it could be no wisedome in him to goe a∣bout to lose it. This Emperor being in the warres of Germany, dyed of a grie∣vous sicknesse call'd by latter Physiti∣ans the Hemeroids, at Beudbone in Ger∣many, having reigned 19 yeeres; whose death the whole Empire deplored, to which he had beene so good a Mecna, and most excellent Patron; and by the will of some of his Councellors, and as it is thought, by the approbatiō of most of the Senate, had his body in great so∣lemnity brought to Rome, and with al the funerall Rites tryumphantly interr'd close by the Capitoll.
19. Commodus. Anno Dom. 182. portrait of emperor Commodus COmmodus a Roman, An. Dom. 182. wicked and vicious, succeeded his good Father Aurelius: who because he was the sonne of to great a man, was without any difficulty, and with great applause of all in generall proclaimed Emperor. Being in possession hee ad∣dicted himselfe to all wickednesse and vice: Whereupon hee gave occasion to  to conspire against him, which
he discovering, hee made a fresh sub∣ect of exercising his cruelties. He was onderous active of body, and admi∣able in throwing a Dart: Hee dyed ost miserably by the meanes of Mar∣ia his concubine, who having found  booke wherein were written the ames of those which were condemned o dye, and shee finding her selfe a∣mongst the rest, poysoned him: and fter as hee was reaching or striving to omit, as it was appointed by her, he was stabbed in divers places, dying at the age of thirty two yeeres, having reigned thirteene, leaving no notable memory of himselfe to posterity. Hee caused the Sacrifices peculiar to Hercules, to be offered unto himselfe, favouring the Christians, hee unwit∣tingly exercised a persecution upon his owne Gentiles. He led a life most ex∣orbitant and lewd, and to equalize Nero every way, he intended to fire the City of Rome: But being hindered of
his cruell intendments, was in his I∣periall City strangled, as is generally thought, by a Parthian slave, whom formerly he had redeemed from death. He was buried in Rome with Torches by night close by Campus Martius. 20. Helvius Pertinax. Anno Domini 194. portrait of emperor Helvius Pertinax COmmodus being dead, An. Dom. 94. Pertinax a Ligurian by Countrey, al∣though he was meanly descen∣ded
by parentage, yet hee ascended by his valour (which hee chiefly pro∣fessed) to the state of the Imperiall heighth. He was the sonne of a quondā Slave or Libertine, and studying in his youth, he was a Doctor in the Lawes: Afterward hee tooke such felicity and complacency in a military life, that he was noted to be of a more than ordinary wisedome, and infinite valour in all his actions: insomuch that by the conspira∣tors against Commodus (now dead) hee was assumed to the Imperiall Crowne. Hee so behaved himselfe, that envy (which is alwayes the side-mate of ver∣tue) repined; so that a while after some emulous persons distasting his good go∣vernment, desirous of novelties, with many wounds deprived him of life, to an universall griefe, being of the age of 66, who reigned onely 7 moneths, & 27 dayes, with so great benevolence to all, that the Senate determined to annum∣ber him to their Deities, and for his
honour to succeeding ages, with all funerall pompe was buried in the Fane of the Goddesse Ceres, lying close to to the now impregnable Castle of Saint Angelo. 21. Didius Iulianus. Anno Domini 194. portrait of emperor Didius Julianus JVlianus of the Dukedome of Millain by birth, An. Dom. 94. seeing that the Roman Empire was as it were sold according to the will and af∣fection of the Souldiers, had a great de∣sire
concurre or compound with the oone-in-law of the late deceased Em∣eror, making him beleeve, (that which indeede afterwards came to sse) that the Souldiers would not ve chosen Pertinax his some-in-law, at hee might not have power to re∣nge the death of his Father-in-law: d for this cause they chose Didius Iu∣anus, who being confirmed against e will, and in despite of the Senate, d of the people also; he reigned not ng, because Septimius Severus (a an of great valour and power) being  Germany Generall of the Legions, thought himselfe upon this occasion w hee might make himselfe Lord of e Empire; and comming within the hole Army to Rome, was by the Se∣te acknowledged Emperor: Who ing to the Palace of Iulianus, (where  was in great sorrow and griefe) cau∣d him to be murthered, hee having ld the Scepter onely two Moneths,
and five dayes, at the age of fifty six yeeres, in whose Reigne not many actions of worth are recorded, it be∣ing short and troublesome: Hee wa buried in Rome, (not with any grea pompe, because of his Adversari power and malice towards his confe∣derates) as is supposed, in an obsc place on the west side of the City.
22. Caius Pescennius. Anno Dom. 194.This Emperour is not nominated by some, because he was suddainly slaine. portrait of emperor Caius Pescennius AT the selfe same time that Se∣verus was created Emperour, An. Dom. 194. Pescennius of the Province of Thuscany, being in Soria, was by his sol∣iers saluted likewise Emperor: And whilst both were elected, each put imselfe in the best security and po∣wer that hee could to sustaine their
obtained Dignity. Pescennius passed to Constantinople with his Army, and tooke in many Townes and Countries adjacent thereabouts, the better to en∣able himselfe against Severus, who came against him with great forces and power. The Armies both meeting, and giving each other battaile, Pescen∣nius was routed and enforced to flie; and flying disguised came to Antioch, but being at length discovered, his head was taken off, and put upon a pole, and carryed about by his ene∣mies. His sonnes together with their mother were banished, and a few dayes after flaine. This Pescennius was a brave souldier, and excellent, a sin∣gular Tribune, a valiant Captaine, a famous Consul, but an unfortunate Emperor. Hee reigned but the space of one Moneth, and left this life at Antioch, being indeed cut off by the nds of his persecuting enemies, and  conveyed towards Rome by his
sonnes, but they also were slaine by his foes, and his corpse left unburied. 23. Clodius Albinus Anno Domini 195.This Emperor likewise is not nomina∣ted in some Writers, because he never re∣ally had possession. portrait of emperor Clodius Albinus CLodius Albinus a Roman, An. Do 195. a man well experienced in warre, and valiant, for his prowesse deser∣ved
by Commodus to be graced with the name of a Caesar: which title he refusing, was by Severus created the Primus Con∣sul, and not long after was made fellow∣partner in the Empire. But in after time repenting himselfe (perhaps) of his too large liberality and bounty, he sought by deceipts & treacheries, and by most cunning, fraudulent, and subtile strata∣gems to make sure of his partner Seve∣rus: but being not able to bring his fet∣ches about, and compasse his unworthy designes, he discovered himselfe to be his enemy, and with a great army ad∣vances against him: And being now come to handigripes of battaile, after many renewed combats and fights the forces and army of Albinus were wor∣sted much, and routed, and himselfe ta∣ken prisoner. He was presently brought to Severus, who caused him to be be∣headed, and his head carried all about  on a pole, with great contempt , and his body throwne to
24. Septimius Severus. An. Domini 195. portrait of emperor Septimius Severus SEverus the sonne of a noble and powerfull Roman, An. Dom. 195. very conver∣sant both in the Greeke and La∣tine tongues, was created Emperor, with the good liking, and general applause of all men: In the government whereof, over and above the many and great satisfactions which hee generally gave, was this, that hee was peculiarly o∣pen to grant audience to any, and shewed much clemency and good∣nesse
towards them. He had an es∣ciall care that the Citty should be w stored with corne and graine of all so and all necessaries: And being ma times assaulted with powerfull Armi and enemies, hee neverthelesse wi great valour and courage made bra and honorable resistance, remainin alwayes victorious. Hee had an inte to nobilitate the City, and be pleasin to all, although in his time the f persecution of the Church began. H dyed in the Castle of Yorke, whilst hee was in his warres of England, having governed the Empire to the great co∣tent of the world for the space of eigh∣teene yeeres. He had not the name of Severus with∣out a cause; for hee severely comman∣ded 40, or thereabout of the Nobility to be cut off, and many more vlg because they said in way of jest, Ver  &c. He dyed at Yorke (as some  through griefe of his some
Caracallas wickednesse, than of any o∣ther malady; and had a Monument Em∣periall erected to him at Ments in Gor∣many. 25. Bassianus Caracalla. Anno Domini 212. portrait of emperor Bassianus Caracalla BAssianus was the eldest sonne of Severus and Martia, An. D 212. and by the reason he was well beloved in his youth for his vertues, hee was est successor to the Empire. After the
death of his Father, changing his na∣ture, he became so cruell, that like ano∣ther wicked Nero he slew his owne bro∣ther Geta most miserably and cruelly, excusing himselfe to the souldiers, that if he had not providently slaine him, Ge∣ta would have done the like to him. Not content with this, hee put to death a great number of the most repute and greatnesse in Rome, being all friends of his dead brother Geta. In fine finding himselfe to be in disesteeme, yea, odi∣ous and hatefull to all, he left the City, pretending to visite the Empire: in which voyage he did so many base, vile and brutish acts, that he was deprived of his odious life by the meanes of Macri∣nus, having reigned 6 yeeres, in which space all his actions were such, that hee seemed rather a Stage-player than a Emperor. Dio writeth, that when ma∣ny Presages fore-told this Emperor of  at hand, he betook himselfe to  Invocation of devils, there∣by
to avoyd it: and it is to be much ad∣mired, that a man so affected towards all manner of extreames in wicked∣nesse, tempered himselfe from slaugh∣ter of the Christians. 26. Septimius Geta. Anno Domini 218. portrait of emperor Septimius Geta GEta the sonne of Severus, An. Do 218. was borne at Milan: This man be∣cause he was learned, a lover of good and vertuous men, of a mild disposi∣tion,
affable, and courteous to all, was after the death of his father, by the Ar∣my called Prince of the Empire: which Dignity hee managed with so great a wisedome and satisfaction of the peo∣ple, that he was by them reputed as a God. Caracalla his brother, envying this his brothers universall honour and respect, he being a bloody and most wicked man, not enduring him to be in his company and presence, resolved secretly to poyson him, and having u∣sed divers wayes and meanes, but be∣ing not able covertly to effect it, hee slew with his owne hands the innocent young man whilst he was with Iulia his Mother, and Mother-in-law to Cara∣calla, to the great discontent of the whole Empire. Being younger bro∣ther to Caracalla, was but as a Co-em∣peror; but Crownes hardly admit the compartition even of a brother: And this Geta thought to have undertake   life, but by his brother was
deprived of his life, and was interr'd  Pruna, as Levinus Hulseus records. 27. Opilius Macrinas. Anno Domini 218. portrait of emperor Opilius Macrinas OPilius Macrinus an Affricran Negro, An. Dom. 218. having murthered Cara∣calla, was chosen Emperor by e Souldiers, although hee was by irth ignoble: Having taken the go∣ernment upon him, he made prepa∣ration
to goe against Artabanus Kin of Persia, who to right himselfe forth wrongs done him by Caracalla, cam towards Rome, but in the way under standing of the death of his enemy,  came into a League with the Roman This Macrinus was so cruell, fierce▪ and vicious, that he was called of many Of the Latine word Ma∣cellū a shā∣bles, or butchery. Macellinus, his house being a Butchery of men by him murthered upon no oc∣casion at all. At last Heliogabalus by the industry of a crafty old Beldam wa made Emperor: Macrinus being now put to it to defend his Crowne and Em∣pire, was forced to try it out by Armes but being in flight, and shifting for him selfe was murthered by the Souldie together with his sonne Diadumen whom he had chosen companion  him in the government, having reigne onely one yeere, and two moneths, a was interred at St. Denis in Gaule.
28. Diadumenus. An. Domini 218. portrait of emperor Diadumenus BAssianus being slaine by the Army, An. Dom 218. Diadumenus an Affrican succeeds in the Empire, toge∣ther with his father, who was defirous hat this his sonne should take upon him he name of Antoninus, the better to se∣ure him from the Souldiers, and had any friends of the Kindred of An∣ninus Pius who were in great num∣er, and potent in the Citty of
Rome: but his dignity continued not long, because in the warres against He∣liogabalus, having governed and com∣manded his Arme discreetly, and to his best advantage, and fought with fin∣gular testimonies of undanted courage and valour, neverthelesse dyed in the place, together with his father, to the great lamentation of all; because the people highly honoured him, in ex∣pectation of a great future to them, a conformable to the greatnesse of spirit, which they knew and admired in him, grieving the more the losse of him, be∣cause the brevity of his reigne permit∣ted him not to leave any memo  hind him to posterity, having g∣ned one onely yeere together with  Father. He was buried in Panuovia,  as others say, in a place where is now  Monastery erected in Austria.
29. Heliogabalus. Anno Domini 219. portrait of emperor Heliogabalus THe two afore-said Emperours being slaine, An. Dom. 219. Heliogabalus of Roman discent, immediately layes hold on the Empire. Hee was borne in Phenicia of a Concubine of Caracalla's, and being a youth, he was made Priest of the Sunne, and called Heliogabalus, which in that Language signifies Priest: In which dignity grow∣ing on in yeeres, he bettered himselfe
much in wisedome, fortitude, and o∣ther vertues and qualities: insomuch as being created Emperour, by a great slight hee entered into a league with the Parthians: but after hee fell into a life so libidinous, that hee had to doe with his owne Mother. Hee ravisht Vestall Virgins, and in his Palace he kept Wenches and Whores, and men of wicked, lewd, and debau∣ched life, upon whom hee confer∣red the offices of principall note and honour in the Court, with greatest graces and entertainments possibly he could. Finally, a great tumult a∣mongst the people being raised against him, he was together with his impi∣ous Mother, having enjoyed the Em∣pire foure yeeres, slaine at Ratisb in Germany, and buried at Howtingis: and how farre this Emperour ex∣ceeded all his Predecessors in villa∣ Dio and Herodian makes menti∣ large, and Capitolinus affirmes,
he filled the whole Empire with luxu∣ries, turpitude, riotting, pride, and cruelty. 30. Alexander Severus. Anno Domini 223. portrait of emperor Alexander Severus ALexander Severus a Roman, An. Dom. 223. was borne in Soria, and was adop∣ted by Heliogabalus: he tooke upon him the possession of the Empire Anno Domini 223. In his succession
the Roman Common-wealth began to take breath, by the reason that this A∣lexander was very benigne, affable, courteous, mercifull, and a lover of wise and good men, and also of the learned men, and men of quality, by whose hands hee would have publique matters rightly carryed and admini∣stred. In his Warres he was most for∣tunate, beginning them alwayes with good advice and dcretion. He tryum∣phed solemnely for his Easterne Con∣quests, to the great content and satis∣faction of the Romn people. He tole∣rated the Christians to live peaceably, and without molestations, following the words of the Gospell; Doe not that to another, which thou wouldest not ano∣ther should doe unto thee. Finally, at the instigation of Maximinus hee was slaine by the Al souldiers, having his eyes put out, together with his Mo∣  who was also a wel-willer and  of the Christian name) upon
his birth-day, at 29 yeeres of his age, having governed the Empire thirteene yeeres, sixe moneths, and seaven dayes, and his Mother lyes buried at Ratisbone. Mammaa was a wel-disposed Lady, notwithstanding her great care of his instruction and education, yet when he came to the Empire, some of his Tutors (famous men) he put to death, and some he exiled: Shee favoured O∣rigen much, and often sent for him to her at Antioch, that shee might heare from him the Exposition of the Scrip∣tures.
31. Maximinus. Anno Dom. 237. portrait of emperor Maximinus MAximinus a Thracian by blood although hee were ignobly borne, An. Dom. 237. neverthelesse for his agility and nimblenesse he was greatly beloved of many Emperors, and there∣fore was made Tribune, and Captaine of the fourth Legion of Alexanders Army, of which hee was held in such  esteeme and repute, that he was  ultitude of Souldiers created
Emperor anno Domini 237. But after this election hee grew so wicked, that hee unjustly put all the friends of A∣lexander to the sword. After that hee flew upon the Christians, and invented new and unknowne tortures for them. The sixt persecution of the Church of CHRIST began in his Reigne: briefly, hee was so horrible, that whilst he was in the Warres of Germa∣ny, the whole Empire rebelled against him. Last of all, flying with all vio∣lence towards the City of Rome, hee was cruelly slaine by the Roman soul∣diers, together with his sonne, whose heads were carryed to Rome, with incredible joy of all men, hee having reigned 3 yeeres. In his thought hee was perswaded, Appendix. that he could not continue in the Em∣pire but by cruelty: Hee was first a Shepheard, and came to the Em∣pire by force of Armes, and the love of his Officers which then swayed
so much, that none could prevaile a∣gainst them: The Senate was so much in awe and feare of him, that they their wives, and children privatly, and sometime publickly offered Sacrifi∣ces to their Idols, that they might never see his returne to their Citty, whensoever hee was drawne out up∣on any affaires: This Emperors bo∣dy was Inhum'd at Fulda in Germa∣ny, renowned for the famousnesse, of the Abby, with the Bishopricke be∣longing to it.
32. Iulius Verus Maximus. portrait of emperor Julius Verus Maximus BY hereditary right Iulius Verus Maximus succeeds his Father Maximnus in the Empire, and was by nature of so great beauty of per∣son, that very many faire Ladies lo∣ved him in extreame manner, and co∣veted his company, that they might have children like him beautifull: to whose suites he as easily and facily cō∣descending, and enabled by youth, gi∣ving himselfe wholly to vanity, began to oversway better thoughts (perhaps)
with those of brave clothes to set him∣selfe forth, supposing by that way an impossibility of resistance to be made him by any Woman whatsoever, were she never so beauteous. Hee was most temperate in his drinke, but for his belly he was an extraordinary trea∣cher-man, insomuch that he thought himselfe able to convey any Parasite whatsoever into his belly at a meale. Lastly, reposing himselfe with his Fa∣ther, was with him slaine by his owne souldiers at 18 yeeres of age, the soul∣diers saying, that it was not fit one sprigge should be left of such a tree.  as other Authors write, he dyed of a Dropsie, and had funerall rites of se∣pulture performed to him at Quendel∣bourgh, not farre from Fulda, the place of his fathers sepulture.
33. Gordianus. The History makes no mention of the yeere of his reigne, wherefore I affige it not. portrait of emperor Gordianus GOrdianus a most noble Affrican, by the reason hee was very vertuous and temperate in his actions, with great reputation good∣nesse and Justice hee administred all those honourable offices and degrees which the Senate conferred uppon him. This man being Vice-consul in
Affricke, was much against his will created Emperor: Which Election be∣ing heard of all over the World, wa accepted by the City, and in particu∣lar accepted, reverenced, obeyed, and honoured as Emperor all Italy over, to∣gether with Gordian, a sonne of his ve∣ry young. Who upon this their electi∣on, made warre upon other new Em∣perors, in which with an infinite mor∣tality on all sides Gordianus the youn∣ger was overthrowne, and slaine, which the Father understanding, stabbed himselfe to the great griefe of all. He reigne was but of little continuance, ye remarkeable enough, the time and dare of it not exceeding 40 dayes  also departed at Quendelbourgh, a had his obsequies celebrated at Nag∣debourgh, which of late was massacred, and almost subverted by the Imperia∣lists Army under Pappenheim.
34. Marcus Clodius Puppienus. Anno Domini 289. portrait of emperor Marcus Clodius Puppienus CLodius Puppienus was ignobly borne, An. Dom. 289. yet of a Roman extracti∣on, and noble in his actions, and a Souldier of high esteeme and valour; so that he acquired many governments, wherein he carryed himselfe with more than ordinary prudence, Justice, and dexterity. And Maximinus being pro∣claimed an enemy of the Countrey, Clodius was elected Emperor by the
Senate, together with Balbinus, upon this agreement and condition, that Bel∣binus should attend to the government in the Citty, and Clodius abroad with his Army should stand for the service of the Common good of the Countrey. He fought against Maximinus, perfor∣ming singular and admirable service, and remaining victorious he came back to Rome, governing together with Bal∣binus rightly and justly. Finally, each of them intending to goe, the one for the Easterne parts against the Persians, and the other against the Germans, they were both taken by the Pretorian soul∣diers out of their owne Palace, and c∣ryed through the City, and in the way unjustly slaine; and had buriall close to the Quirine Mount in Rome.
35. Celius Balbinus. Anno Domini 239. portrait of emperor Celius Balbinus CElius Balbinus was of an an∣cient family and Nobility, An. Dom. 239. and for his vertues chosen Emperor by the Roman Senate, as  man of singular parts and good∣nesse. Hee shewed great liberality, ustice, and clemency towards all en: he studied alwayes to preserve nd continue the peace of the Com∣mon-wealth, and to the incredible
satisfaction of all men, hee kept the people in quietnesse, whilst Clodius Puppienus fought with Maximinus, in which interim, had not the pru∣dence of Celius prevented it, there had beene a wonderfull mutiny and tumult in the City of Rome, Maximi∣nus having therein such powerfull friends. And Puppienus after that battaile returning to Rome, they both together (as is mentioned before) governed with an universall satis∣faction; but impious fortune envi∣ous at their quiet, so brought about, that they both were slaine by  Pretorians, as the life of Clods ∣stifieth, which is as much concern this, as this him promiscuously.
36. Marcus Anthonius Gordianus. Anno Domini 240. portrait of emperor Marcus Anthonius Gordianus AFter the death of the two fore-men good Emperours, An. Dom. 240. Gordianus a Roman by pa∣ntage, was elected by the Preto∣ans, and the Senate perceiving hey could not remedy these passa∣es, approved this election never∣elesse with great applause, because e was well beloved of all in gene∣all. He had to wife the daughter of
a great learned man, whose advice concerning the Empire was held in great estimation. Hee recovered Thracia from the Gothes; he fought against that powerfull Sapores King of Persia, and came off with great honour victorious: Hee recovered Antioch, and passing further, he tooke in the great Citties of Carr and Nesibo, in which voyage the Grand Counceller his Father-in-law dyed: in whose place he chose Philippus, who became so prou and insolent for the degree and ho∣nour he received, that utterly con∣temning Gordianus, esteeming  now no more Emperor, caused  to be slaine at 20 yeeres of his age and of his Empire the fourth: he re∣ceived his death at Nola, and  buriall at Bambergh.
37. Caius Valens Hostilianus. This Emperor although hee is un∣knowne to some Historians, yet thus much notice is found of him. portrait of emperor Caius Valens Hostilianus OF this Valens Hostilianus be∣cause the Historiographers make little or no mention, it is thought that his Parents were unknowne, and consequently, little or nothing can be said of him: And yet it is true that some affirme, that after the death of Gordianus, there
was a certaine Marcus chosen by the Senate, of whom there is not any essentiall relation found out, but onely this, that hee dyed suddain∣ly, and that in his place this Hosti∣lianus was created by the Senate, and that by a suddaine pride, elati∣on, and conceit of joy falling sicke, dyed suddainly: although some say, the above said Marcus yet living, he was allotted him as fellow Empe∣ror, or partner and collegue in the command, and that Hostilianus was saluted by the Title of Augustus, But it is credible, that both of them dying suddainly as it is supposed, left no great note behind them.
38. Marcus Iulius Philippus. Anno Domini 246. portrait of emperor Marcus Julius Philippus JVlius Philippus an Arabian borne, An. Dom. 246. a man of a coorfe∣spun thread by descent, but in Armes of a finer worth and hue, was by Gordianus made Captaine Generall against the Persians: And by little Gordianus became disestee∣med of the souldiers by this mans meanes, commanding them to kill him, and proclaime Philippus Em∣peror:
And making peace (although much disliked) with the Persians, marched towards Rome, where hee made his son Philippus a Collegue in the Empire. Hee instituted those playes called Saeculares, in the me∣mory of the first foundation of the City. At that time making Decius Generall against the Goths, the souldiers called their Generall Em∣peror; against whom Philippus mar∣ched with a powerfull Army; but being hated of all by reason of his too imperious command and go∣vernment, he was by them woun∣ded at Verona, but dyed at Vtrect Anno Domini 250, and was buried at Spiers a famous Imperiall City in Aquitaine. This Emperor was a Christian, and the first that recei∣ved Baptisme: he reigned 5 yeeres. In his time the famous Cyprian flourished, and was made Bishop rthage. Apollonia the Virgin,
after her jawes were broken, and eeth pulled and knocked our, Josephus. Baronius. Spondanus:) by he command of this Emperor, who id behold the action) would rather oluntarily cast her selfe into the re prepared for her, then speake lasphemy: and after some other ruelties committed by this Empe∣ror, was converted and baptized a Christian.
39. Marcus Iulius Philippus. Anno Domini 246. portrait of emperor Marcus Julius Philippus MArcus Iulius Philppus sonne of Philippus and Severa, An. Dom. 246. was made Caesar and Collegue of the Empire by his Father at seaven yeeres of his age: at which time he became a Christian, being baptized by his Fathers appointment, toge∣ther with a great number of his nea∣st and dearest friends and servants.  holy and salutiferous action be∣ing
performed by the chiefe Com∣manders of the Roman Empire, was an occasion that many came to the knowledge of the truth, and fixed their eyes upon the true light of Ie∣sus Christ our Redeemer. This Em∣peror was by nature so melancholy, that no man living could make him once laugh, although many did their best indeavours by slights and inventions. This youth having reig∣ned 7 yeers, and being at the age of 14, at the report of his fathers death all over the City, by the Pretorian souldiers was suddainly and cruelly slaine: but by his speciall friends, and those that favoured him for his Christianity, his corpse was con∣ducted to Spiers, and there inurn'd, not farre off from his Father.
40. Decius. An. Domini 250. portrait of emperor Decius AFter the death of the Phi∣lips, An. Dom. 250. Decius an Austrian, suc∣ceeds without any resi∣stance or difficulty, but was vi voce elected by the whole Senate, and was called Imperator Augustus, because he was a man endued with great vertue and valour, very wise and prudent, and well experien∣ced in most offices and Magistracies,
discharged by him with singular dexterity and wisedome. Briefly, he was of a goodnesse, that he might worthily have beene enrolled a∣mongst the good Princes, had not the Church suffered so great tribula∣tions and afflictions under him, being an Infidel and non-credent, which was the seaventh perfecution which the Church of God endured. Hee was victorious against the Gothes, and joyning a fresh battaile with them, by the treason of Trebonia∣nus Gallus his Captaine Generall he was overthrowne. And at the re∣port of the death of his sonne Deci∣us, putting spurres to his horse, and giving him the reines, wilfully pre∣cipitated, and cast himselfe into a deepe pit without hope of safety, and to the losse of his life, at the 50 yeere of his age, and of his Empire the second, and anno Domini 252, and buried at Spiers. In the heate of
his persecution hee commanded is certaine young man, a Christi, to be bound, and lye uppon his backe, and an harlot to be sentus him, to provoke him to lust, which hee perceiving, and feating to be overcome with pleasure, it off his tongue, and spit it in her  as shee was kissing him; so that the greatnesse of that paine overcome the sence of lust.
41. Mesius Decius. Anno Dom. 250. portrait of emperor Mesius Decius OF no lesse goodnes & valour than his Father was this De∣cius even in his youth: An. Dom. 250. wher∣fore he was chosen as partner in the Empire, and by the Senate confir∣med Caesar, and successor to Decius his father, with whom (as a brave souldier) hee went to the warres of the Cothes, which was so bloody and terrible, that the greater part
of the Roman Army was slaine, and put to flight, and Decius the youth was mortally wounded by an arrow through his very heart, where in the sight of his Father he suddainly fell downe dead from his horse, moving not onely his owne souldiers, but even his enemies to compassion, ha∣ving reigned two yeeres, together with his father Decius. The which news being understood by the Se∣nate, much afflicted them, not so much for the slaughter and losse of so many vanant and noble Romans, as for the unfortunate end of both the Emperors: his reigne being  absolute, but with his fathers a  bation, the Senate and City lost not onely a good Tree, but also an hopefull fruite.
42. Trebonianus Gallus. Anno Domini 252. portrait of emperor Trebonianus Gallus AFter the great and terrible slaughter of the Roman Ar∣my in the battaile with the Goths, An. Dom. 252. Trebunianus being by birth a Gaule, borne at Delean, by the sur∣viving souldiers was elected Empe∣ror: which when it was understood, the Senate also confirmed the electi∣on, and the title Augustus was gran∣ted unto him. Seeing himselfe now
in this greatnesse, being very desi∣rous to goe to Rome, to the great de∣triment and impairing of the impe∣riall dignity and Crowne, hee con∣cluded a peace with the Goths, ma∣king the Empire tributary and pensi∣onary to them, and as it were in their subjection: For not long after, the Gothes broke the peace, and greivously troubled Asia, and a part of Italy. In these so great cala∣mities Emilianus Captaine Gene∣rall under Gallus, obtained one sole victory against the Gothes, for which hee became so insolent and proud, that he laboured by all meanes to winne the good-will of the south∣ers, insomuch that he was by them elected & sworne Emperor. Which Gallus understanding departed from the City of Rome, together with his sonne whom he had already pu∣lished and declared to be his compa∣nion in the Empire: and comming
to try it out with Emilianus, hee with his sonne were slaine in the se∣cond yeere of his government at Ve∣rona, and was buried in Saxony. The persecution now slackned for a time, so that the exiled returned each to his home: in these times a Plague taking its beginning first in Egypt, was so vehement, that it in∣fected generally the whole world, and lasted for the space of 10 yeeres.
43. Volustanus. Anno Domini 252. portrait of emperor Volustanus CAius Vibius Volusianus was by his Father Trebonianus Gallus made companion in the Empire, An. Dom. 252. and in an excellent warrelike order marched against the Gothes to defend his Fathers dig∣nity now disturbed by Emilianus, who for a notable victory against the Gothes, was by the souldiers e∣lected Emperor in the time of Gal∣lus
and Volusianus. Whereupon the Armies both meeting, and both en∣deavouring to gaine the best advan∣tage of ground to facilitate and se∣cure the victory: In the first assault and brunt being for saken of his soul∣diers, was together with his Fa∣ther miserably slno at Bambergh in Germany, but was conveyed to the City of Lorychium, as is above rela∣ted, in the life of Trebonianus. Wher∣fore wee cannot write any more of him to the satisfaction of the Rea∣der which is a true lover of History, but give him this onely touch in this succinct manner and brevity  ∣ning the lives of them, both  and sonne.
44. Aemilianus. Anno Domini 254. portrait of emperor Aemilianus TO the two precedent Emp∣tors Aemilianus succeed, An. Dom. 254. by birth an Afrcean, bo in Mauritania of an obscure and al∣together unknowne parentage, but raised himselfe by continuall dili∣gence in the services of warre; being growne in some yeeres, he served in divers degrees in the Cavallery, or Horse, and by Decius was made
a Captaine Generall of the confines of Samaria, where he became in so great esteeme with the Souldiers, that by them hee was to the incre∣dible joy of all saluted Emperor, and accepted to be so by the States of the City. Against whom a Gene∣rall of the Army at that time upon the Alpes, Valerianus a noble man, and in great repute and power, not willing to consent that this Aemilia∣nus should enjoy so great a dignity, openly explained and declared him∣selfe, unto whom even the souldi∣ers of Aemilianus adhering, being moved with the great estimation they had of Valerianus, confirmed the election, and with common consent slew Aemilianus in Sapole  his age of 40 yeeres, after the  moneth of his reigne. But concerning the place of his death, others write that it was in a City in Armenia the lesse, and that
this Emperors funerall was kept  Tyre in Greece. 45. Valerianus. Anno Domini 255. portrait of emperor Valerianus UAlerianus the son of Val Flaccus, An. Dom. 255. of a most noble fa∣mily among the Romans, at∣tained to the Imperiall seate by his valour and gracious behaviour, as is above-said, and confirmed Empe∣ror, both within and without the
City with as great an applause  ∣ver any. He had two sonnes, the eldest of them called Galienus, who was by the whole City called Cae∣sar and successor in the Empire; the second, Valerianus by name, was by his father likewise named and made Caesar. The father was a great friend of the Christians, but at the perswasi∣on of a Magician he used them with great cruelty, and his was the alth persocution of the Church. For which sinne it came to passe, that go∣ing with a great Army against Sa∣pores King of the Persians, Valeria∣nus was taken prisoner, and amongst other disgracefull contempes  to him by Sapores, this was a chiefe, that when he was to take horse, he made the Emperor lye downe upon the ground, for the King to set his foote upon his necke. Afterwards his eyes were boared out, and dyed
thereof although some Writers are of opinion, that he was flead alive and lived in that misery and servi∣tude seaven yeeres. Valerianus was held by some lear∣ned men to be that Antichrist which is spoken of in the Apocalyps, he was so wicked and cruell: Saint Lau∣rence suffered under him, Cyprian likewise. This Emperor dyed in Persia, and because he fell into the hands of his enemies, as is to bee thought, not but by divine Justice, he wanted not onely Imperiall sepul∣ture, but also his corpse was hung upon poles in the view of all  owne souldiers, and left rather  scorne than pitty.
46. Galienus. Anno Domini 256. portrait of emperor Galienus GAlienus succeeds his Father Valerianus, Anno Domini 256. who by the Se∣nate was made Caesar, and by his Father Augustus. Hee was yet a youth when hee tooke upon him to governe, yet hee carryed himselfe very respectively, giving singular good examples of behavi∣our and perfection of life and con∣versation. But afterwards, his Fa∣ther
being taken prisoner by the King of the Persians, hee did not onely not endeavour to redeeme him, but (as it were altogether for∣getting him) gave himselfe to a life no lesse carelesse than dishonest, and in all things contrary to his first be∣ginnings, fruitlessely spending his time in banquets; baths, wanton∣nesse, lust, shewes, and Pageants; sometimes bloody and cruell, and sometimes ridiculous and pleasant. By whose life the Republique was not a little debilitated and weake∣ned, and the Empire was  into thirty Tyrannies, to the  slaughter of the Roman Ci And in the end going against Aur∣lus Prince of Sclavonia, hee was slaine in the battaile, having gover∣ned eight yeeres absolute, and sea∣ven with his Father. Claudius being ashamed of Gali∣nus his lazinesse, began to affect the
government, whereby hee might revenge himselfe of the tyrannies of some: which Galienus perceiving, sought him (but in vaine) by dona∣tions to desist. 47. Saloninus Valerianus. Anno Domini 261. portrait of emperor Saloninus Valerianus OF this Emperor there is little or no mention made in Hi∣story, Anno Domi 261. and therefore it may be called none at all; because hee
was murdered being a of ten yeeres of age by the French: not so much for his owne particular cause, (as it is likely in respect of his child-hood not apt to make him odious) but for his fathers, by whom hee was suf∣fected in the place of his elder bro∣ther Cornelius Valerianus, who like∣wise dyed in his minority. Hee was the sonne of Licinius Galienus and Salonia, from whom many would have him take his name: and others strongly affirme, not without good reason, because he was borne in Sa∣lonia. But be it as it will, it imports not much; it sufficeth that nothing i written of him worth the while, but onely this, that by his example the miseries of those times may be re∣flected on, being it was held the greatest infelicity and misery to be an Emperor.
48. Posthumius. Anno Domini 261. portrait of emperor Posthumius BY birth Posthuinius was a Roman, a man really just, An. Dom. 261. and adorned with excellent quality and vertue, of an irrepre∣hensible behaviour and carriage: wherefore hee was by Galienus so highly esteemed, that he gave him the charge of his sonne, and by the meanes of his valour and counsell in Warre, hee overthrew all the Ty∣rants
of the Roman Empire to his glory, and terrour of the whole U∣niverse. After the death of the afore∣said Galienus, he was by the French and the whole Army elected Empe∣ror: In which government his workes and actions were so admi∣rable, that with goodnesse and dex∣terity he gave compleat satisfaction to all. Lastly, when hee thought himselfe most secure in his govern∣ment, hee was by the French mur∣dered, together with his sonne. By whose death those which are too considing to the goods of For, may make usefull consideration be∣cause in the ten yeeres wherein  reigned Emperor, he well experien∣ced the many mutabilities thereof
49. Flavius Claudius. Anno Dom. 269. portrait of emperor Flavius Claudius THe 49 Emperor was Claudi∣us, being a Goth by birth, An. Dom. 269. and the second of that name, who was created Empe∣rour in the yeere of the 262 Olym∣piade, who reigned onely one yeere and 9 moneths, being crowned to the great joy and content of the whole Senate of Rome: And so soone as he was confirmed in the Imperiall dignity, with just
cause, and upon very good grounds he made warre upon the Goths, who had now for the space of 15 yeeres wasted, robbed, pillaged, and sac∣ked all the Countrey of Sclavonia, and that of Macedon a by their wars and inhumane cruelties and having gloriously overcome them, for so remarkeable and famous an act hee deserved to weare a Crowne of massive Gold even in his Palace for his greater Majesty and Magnifi∣cence. After that falling sicke, he dyed suddainly at Smyrua, ii∣lius his brother supplying his pla a man no way inferiour to  valour, wisedome, and goodne. It was not without the Divi providence, that Claudius should finde the Empire so beset with en∣mies, that he might not put in prac∣tice those cruelties which hee inten∣ded against the Christians, wh he hated above all.
50. Quintilius. Anno Domini 271. portrait of emperor Quintilius WEE said that Quintilius was the brother of Claudius not onely in blood; An. Dom. 271. but in his behaviour, valour, and goodnesse; and therefore upon the death of his brother, by the Senate he was de∣servedly called Caesar Augustus to his infinite praise and perpetuall me∣mory. But because Aurelianus was t the same time created Emperour
by the Army, and perceiving him∣selfe to bee in great inequality of force & power to resist the strength and power of so valiant a Comman∣der, (called to that dignity and de∣gree with the generall consent of so many most potent souldiers) fell in∣to so deepe a melancholy and ill conceit, that hee coveting solitude bent his whole intention to what meanes or way hee might preserve himselfe Emperor, and not finding any, he voluntarily after the seven∣teenth of his Empire, opened  veines in Aquileya, and dyed  infinite griefe of those who  ¦lected him: and had his  Rites performed in a glorious ¦ner, according to the custo  the Romans, and was  Smyrna.
51. Aurelianus. An. Domini 271. portrait of emperor Aurelianus AVrelianus was borne in Da∣cia, An. Dom. 271. and succeeds in the E∣pire after the death of Gla∣bus. being a young child, hee was rought to ; where he became o learned, that had bee not beene stained with blood and cruelty,  had not come short, but equalled even the best of his Predecessors in audable memory: because hee was
not onely in learning very knowing but also in Armes most expert  valiant; so that taking the govern∣ment upon him, he made warre up∣on the Gaths; and overthrew the horse and foote. Hee overcame i Asia, and tooke the Queene Ze∣bia. Hee conquered the Catelan and recovered France; and retur∣ning to Rome hee pompously tryum∣phed. After that hee repaired th City-walls, adorned it with Tem∣ples and Altars, and beautified  with edifices. Finally, by ill cou∣cell hee persecuted the Christi with most rigorous execution  ding out Edicts and Prola to that effect all over the world,  an expresse order to appre he  put them to death. Lastly,  laine suddainly in the way betw Constantinople and Hereia. This Emperor would  y Co-partner of the Digniy
periall, but was wont to say, that Herecules was his Co-emperor, as it appeares in an old insculption: Her∣culi Aug. Consorti D. N. Aureliani In∣victi Aug. Respub. Pis, &c. 52. Tacitus. Anno Domini 276. portrait of emperor Tacitus THE Fifty second Emperour of the Romans was Tacitus, An. Dom. 276. and borne in Poland, who after the Death of Aurelianus, tooke upon him the Helme of
vernment, and ruled onely  Moneths. Hee was a singular ma, replenished with eminent sinceri and had as much as could be wished or desired to be in man, and princi∣pally in all Heroicall acts that ought to be in all good Princes that go∣verne their subjects peaceably, and in a way of gaining a love without flattery, and a feare without malice: He being knowne to be thus, was by the common acclaiming consent both of the Senate and people cho∣sen to this dignity. So soone as hee was elected Emperor, reflecting up∣on the deserts of his Antecessor Au∣relianus, he erected him a Statue of Gold, and placed it among their Gods, causing all those to be flaine that were any wayes accessary to the death of Aurelianus. The ∣nate by the election of , thought all things restored, and to be rectified by the exemplar puoim∣ment
of his Predecessors: he caused all persecution to cease. Hee was murthered by the treason of his Souldiers, although some affirme that he died of a Feaver, at the yeares of 66. He reigned 6 moneths. It is found in Flavius Vopiscus, and other Authors, that in Terni their Countrey, which was a Territory of the Romans, famous for Nobility and Gentry, there were Tombes erected to him and his brother Flo∣rianus, and Monuments by the Greekes called Caenotaphia, and by the Latines, Honoraria Sepulchra; whose Monuments were  the gate of Terni, which is  called Spoletina, it having (before) the name of the gate of the three Mo∣numents, heare the suburbane Or∣chards of the Marquesse Castelli.
53. Florianus. Anno Domini 277. portrait of emperor Florianus FLorianus was the brother of Tacitus, An. Dom. 277. being also a Polan∣der by birth, both sprung from the Claudian line, a most po∣tent family and Imperiall: of which linage as ancient recording memo∣ries yet extant doe testifie, one branch extended it selfe into V∣bria, and tooke a roote of residence at the Citty of Terni, which even
to the times of our now Grandsires hath beene the Mother of the most famous and invict Commanders and Captaines. This succeeds his bro∣ther Tacitus in the Empire neither by the election of the Senate, nor by the choice, good liking, or con∣sent of the souldiers, but mera reg∣nandi cupiditate, for the meere de∣fire, nay, greedinesse of the rule and government, as true heire, and so by irreption takes it upon him. But this his greatnesse lasted not long; Mole ruit sua, sinking voluntarily under the burthen: because having heard the newes that Probus (a man for his singular quality worth the Empire) was elected Emperor by the Army, and seeing himselfe not any way able to resist his power, which was irrepugnable, fell into an cutreame melancholy, which proved incurable; but by the open∣ing his veines to let in death: Al∣though
though some say, that he was slaine by his owne Guard neare the City of I harsus, the third moneth of his Empire: And his funerall obsequies were richly solemnized at Rome, but hath a Monument erected at Syrmio he dyed at the age of 23 yeeres. 54. Probus. Anno Domini 278. portrait of emperor Probus IF this Emperor had not had this Nomen of Probus, Anno Domini  being a native Polander, hee might
justly have had it given him as a Cog∣nomen. Hee was the sonne of Maxi∣mus the Tribune: Hee was borne in the City of Sirmio as some affirme, in the Countrey of Hungaria. Hee made most noble impsses in Armes under Valerianus, Decius, and Aurelianus, and for  worth and valour being much beloved of the Souldiers, he was by the whole Orientall Army elected Emperor Anno Domini 278, and lay the S∣  with a general Jbi∣ ioy,  pase of every man: Hee was honoured wi  of Caesar Augustu, and Pater Patria. No sooner had hee entered into the pos∣session of the Empire, but hee reco∣vered France newly over-run and maistrised by the Barbarians. Hee tooke Saturninus which molested the Easterne parts, and Procolas, (men well experienced in Warres) and for those victories tryumphed.
But although hee were a man w∣thy all humane greatnesse, never∣thelesse by his owne Souldiers hee was most cruelly murthered in ∣land his native soyle, in the 75 yeere of his age: he governed the Empire five yeeres, and for the love he get of the Christians, they erected stately Monument in Syrmio to cre∣nall fame. It is thought, that be∣cause hee suffered the Christians so live in peace, God gave him so ma∣ny tryumphant victories against the Barbariaus, of whom he slew in o battaile above 40000.
55. Marcus Aurelius Carus. Anno Domini 282. portrait of emperor Marcus Aurelius Carus CArus was an Illyrian by birth, An. Domini 282. whose admirable valour and for his generall knowledge in Learning and Minary Art, was an occasion for his great honour and repute, that hee was made Prafectus Prat under Pro∣bus, to whom hee succeeded in the Epire in the yeere of Christ 282, and instantly with great rigour re∣venged
the death of his Antecessor Probus, and governing with Chari∣nus and Numerianus his sonnes, he made many noble and marvellous impresses in Armes, to the glory and exaltation of the Roman Empire, and particularly in Mesopotamia: after that hee sacked the great Cities of Seuen and Ctephon: for the which conquests in a short time hee glori∣ously gained the name of Tremendus, (the terrible) having terrified all these Nations which as yet had not beene subdued by him. Finally, by the wound of an Arrow he  the River Tigris in the 43  his age, having governed  pire one yeere and some moneths. Some Authors who lived in h Reigne, write, that he was slaine  Lightning, and inhum'd at the fa∣mous City called Syrmio in Hug∣ry.
56. Numerianus. Anno Domini 283. portrait of emperor Numerianus TO Carus succeeds his sonne Numerianus, An. Dom. 283. being an Illyri∣an; who was both so eminent and excellent a Poet and Orator, that the Senate erected him a Statue in the Vulpian Library. In the wars e was also most valorous; he went with his Father to the warres against he Persians: after which hee was oth by the Army and people of
Rome saluted Emperor anno Domini 283. And his father being dead, as we said before; hee fell into such a bitternesse and depth of mourning, that by the abundance of his teares he lost his fight, whereupon he was brought backe to Rome in a Litter, remaining victorious over all Asia. And supposing himselfe safely arri∣ved (being somewhat comforted with a hope of ruling and governing the Empire, not by eye-sight, but by understanding) by a most unjust stra∣tagem was slaine by his Father in law in his Sedan or Litter, having governed together with his Father and brother one yeere and some moneths, and in the 20 yeere of his age; and was buried by his father the aforesaid City on the East-side in which place his Effigies was set  in Brasse, as it was taken in his life time by the whole Senate and the Consuls for a memoriall to all age
for his sweete Elocution and Lan∣guage. 57. Carinus. Anno Domini 283. portrait of emperor Carinus TO Carus, An. Dom. 283. Carinus was the se∣cond son, being of the same nation, who departing from his Father, tooke upon him the go∣vernment of France and Britany, as also of Italy, and (as it were) of all
the Westerne parts: In which go∣vernment hee defiled his life in such sort with brutish and bestiall enor∣mities, that his father would not ac∣knowledge him for his sonne, and tooke from him the stile of Caesar gi∣ving it to Constantinus. After the death of his father and brother, he fell into a greater licen∣tiousnesse than ever before: and in his time Ruffians and lewd men were possessed and estated in places of greatest dignity and honour. Har∣lots and Jesters, and such like were residenciaries in his Palace: But in the end advancing his forces against Dioclesianus, who was by the Army elected Emperor, and giving him battaile, in the last assault he was ta∣ken in Dalmatia by the souldiers, and brutishly slaine in the prison-house by the expresse command of Dioclesianus, having reigned a small time, and in the eighteenth yeere of
his age, and had little or no funeral Rites bestowed on him, but was buried in Syrmio by night. 58. Dioclesianus. Anno Domini 284. portrait of emperor Dioclesianus DIoclesianus a Dalmatin borne and of a noble Family, Anno Domini 284. a a man of a sharpe wit, and in Martiall affaires very valiant, was by the whole Army chosen Emperour.
Being possessed of the government, with his owne hands hee revenged the death of Varro. He declared and appointed warres in divers places, and remained victorious in all. There were neverthelesse warres made a∣gainst him by sundry Princes, and being of himselfe not sufficient for resistance, he tooke Maximinian to be his Co-emperor: and his ene∣mies multiplying every where, he was at one time molested in the East, in Affricke and in Egypt; wherefore he chose for his better assistance Ga∣lerius and Constantius brothers, as Emperors, giving each of them a charge of defending the places of∣fended. Hee much persecuted the Christians. Lastly, all the Empire being pacified by his industry and quiet, hee voluntarily resigned the Crowne, and retyring him selfe in Salona, he there ended his life by poison, at the age of 68 yeeres, and
had funebriall Rites at Milan in I∣taly. This Emperor had a vertuous La∣dy to Wife called Serena, who se∣cretly professed herselfe a Christi∣stian, and much cherished and favo∣red the Christians, and perswaded those that were her Attendants to be constant to death, but withall pri∣vately: This Emperour caused a whole Legion, 6666 of Thebean Chrjstian souldiers to be decimated, that is, every tenth man cut off, and then by the whole Army slaine, for refusing to sacrifice to the Ido, by the plot of Manimilianus his Ge∣rall.
59. Maximianus Herculius. Anno Domini 287. portrait of emperor Maximianus Herculius AMongst all impious and w∣ked men this Maximia a Polander borne, . was the worst, and a most subtile inventor of mischiefe, and especially in the persecution of the Christians under Diocletianus: But he was in Warre most valorous, and of an exquisite judgement and discourse upon that subject, whereby he obtained many
victories by battailes, for which re∣turning to Rome hee pompously try∣umphed. At the length by the in∣treaty of Dioclesianus hee betooke himselfe to a private life a long time in Milan, where he sojourned in qui∣et and very peaceable tranquility. Afterwards hee retired himselfe to Marselles, where he fell into such a terrible and grievous disease in his entrailes and bowels, that hee could not finde any cure, and by the just judgement of God hee deservedly dyed, being not onely hatefull to himselfe, but even to all men, and was interred at Milan without any funerall ceremonies in the 68 yeere of his age.
60. Val. Constantius Clorus. Anno Domini 291. portrait of emperor Constantius Clorus COnstantius Clorus a Roman borne, Anno Domini 91. was the sonne of ∣tropius a most noble Roman, and of Claudia the daughter of Clas∣dius Augustus; for his noble valour, good behaviour and carriage was by Maximinianus made Caesar. The a∣foresaid Princes being voluntarily resigned the government of the Em∣pire, he considering the greatnesse
of the weight and burthen, refused all other government whatsoever, but onely that of France: Which he furnished with things necessary, salu∣tiferous, good Lawes and customes more than ever any his Predecessors had done: which are yet an orna∣ment, yea, a Majesty to all the anci∣ent Nobility of that Kingdome. He subdued Britany to a then generall content and satisfaction of our Nati∣on: He molested not the Christians, and under his government every man was incredibly content and sa∣tisfied. Finally falling sicke at Yorke, he dyed in the 13 yeere of his Impe∣riall dignity, and at his age of 63.
61. Constantius Galerius. An. Domini 304. portrait of emperor Constantius Galerius ALthough this Galerius were ignoble by blood, Anno Domini 04. being an Hungarian by birth, he was neverthelesse so famous for warlike enterprises, that Dioclesianus adop∣ted and made him Caesar. After his victory gotten against Narseus, he was created Augustus, and he adop∣ted Maximianus and Severus, Caesars: and Severus dying hee gave his suc∣cession
to Licinius. He was bloody nd most cruell against the Christi∣ns: but falling into a dangerous icknesse, he imagined that it came pon him for the martyrizing and annishing of the Christians: wher∣ore recalling them, he carnestly in∣reated them that they would pray nd intercede for him to their God: and commanded further, that no affliction should bee inflicted upon them. Whose prayers (peradven∣ture so was the Divine Will) no∣thing avayled him, but his evill ra∣ther increased, and his torments aug∣mented so, that he dyed like a beast of a most cruell and filthy disease, having reigned two yeeres absolute, and sixteene in the company of o∣ther Caesars. This Constantius shewed himselfe favourable towards the Christians, and had many of his Houshold ser∣vants Christians: Hee told them,
that unlesse they would sacri to the Gods as formerly they h done, they should not serve him, but be gone. When hee saw that they went away, rather then they would forsake their God, hee re∣called them into his service, and turned away his Pagan Servants, as likely to prove perfidious unt him, who preferred honours be∣fore Religion.
62. Maximianus. Anno Dom. 304. portrait of emperor Maximianus MAximianus an Hungarian borne, An. Dom. 304. was Nephew to Galerius, wherefore hee was by him adopted, and after that al∣though hee were ignoble, yet hee became to be Augustus. He was ne∣verthelesse noble in his behaviour and gesture, in vertues likewise; so that he might equally parallell any Soveraigne or Prince whatsoever.
He honoured much the learned, and familiarly embraced them, taking infinite pleasure and complacency in any noble Science or Study. Hee was of a very quiet and temperate disposition, but very amorous, and a great lover of wine, by which be∣ing many times overtaken, he most imperiously commanded, and like a mad-man: wherefore hee deferred matters of state and moment unto audience and Judgement. He great∣ly persecuted the Christians, and the Church at that time suffered no small detriment. Fighting a certaine battaile he was worsted much, toge∣ther with Licinius his Co-emperor; and not willing to come into the hands of his enemies, he strangled himselfe; but as some report, hee stab'd himselfe in Tharsus, having governed 7 yeeres, and had sepulture in Dacia with small ceremonies, be∣ing obscurely buried.
63. Severus. Anno Domini 304. portrait of emperor Severus HOre for the cruelty against the Christians, An. Domini 304. than for no∣bility of descent, or degree of honour, this name agreed to this Severus, his Nation being un∣knowne; having barbarously inven∣ted strange, exquisite, and new man∣ners and wayes of persecutions a∣gainst the Christian Religion, and its humble servants; whose con∣stancy
in the holy faith made the Tyrant amazed, astonished, and mad with himselfe. He was by Ga∣lerius called Caesar and Augustus. Whilest he was President in Affrick and in Italy, the Pratorian souldiers by a seditious mutiny created Max∣entius Augustus, who was the sonne of Maximianus: against whom Se∣verus marching with a powerfull Army, came before the Citty of Rome. But within few dayes percei∣ving his souldiers inclining rather to Maxentius than to him, and que∣stioning his owne person and life he fled into Sclavonia, which being  the souldiers mistrusted, they  tooke him in Ravenna, and by them was there most milerably murthe∣red in the second yeare of his reigne, being respectlesly interred where he was slaine.
64. Naxontius. Anno Domini 306. portrait of emperor Naxontius BY the reason that Maxentius was the son of Maximianus, An. Dom. 306. an Hungarian by descent, he was by the greater part of the Se∣nate elected Emperor: In his go∣vernment hee followed the steps of his Father in persecution of the Christians, yea, even with a grea∣ter rigour he would exceed and goe beyond him, appremiating those
which could propose newest and cruellest wayes of martyrdomes and afflictions. And amongst the rest of his cruelties which hee used, (not by the instigation of any man, but out of his owne invention and and furious braine) this was one: That (being a Necromancer) hee slew Christian women being great with child, and tooke the children yet unborne out of their wombes, the ashes whereof he used in his ex∣ecrable art, to make himselfe grea∣ter in authority and power: All which availed him nothing; because that fighting with Constantinus the Great upon a Bridge, hee was by him throwne and drowned in the ri∣ver Tyber, which happened in the fift yeere of his reigne, having no other sepulture then the River. This Emperor used to joyne the living bodies of men with other dead carcases, and being chain'd mouth
to mouth, hee caused them to bee tumbled up and downe. 65. Licinius. Anno Dom. 310. portrait of emperor Licinius LIcinius a Dacian borne, An. Dom. 310. being a man knowne to be singular and rare in feates of Armes, was by Galerius made Captaine Generall, afterwards Co-emperor. For wretched avarice and bestiality of lust, hee was knowne to be most
dissolute, and hee was so ill bred, and extravagantly drowned in igno∣rance, that he became an enemy of all litterate and learned men, terming them the skum and filth of men, en∣deavouring by all meanes that men should shun and avoid them as a poy∣son or a contagious plague. He grew so insolent and proud for one onely victory which hee obtained in the East, that hee slighted and contem∣ned Constantinus, and began to in∣crease his cruelty and tyranny a∣gainst the Christians: Whereupon Constantinus opposed himselfe, and they both joyning battaile, this Ty∣ger was put to flight in the Countrey of Pannonia, and intending to rein∣force his cause, was in his  campe by his owne souldiers mana∣cred in Thessalonica at the age of 50 yeeres, and of his government  and was carelesly cast into a pit, ha∣ving no other respective funerall.
66. Martinianus. Anno Domini 312. portrait of emperor Martinianus MArtinianus, Anno Domini 312. a Sclavonian by Nation, a man meanely borne, but well experien∣ced in the Art Military, was for that cause made Generall of the Horse. He was created Emperor and Caesar in Bizantium: but in a short time he lost both dignity and life: because being taken in Thessalia with Licini∣us, by the expresse command of
Constantine they were both murthe∣red by the Souldiers; and therefore not having left any memoriall be∣hinde him but this example, that we may see and know, that many were raised to the Imperiall dignity more by sedition, ambition, and in∣terest in their souldiers, than by any their just desert, claime, or title to such a degree. But it is no wonder that in a manner all or most of them died immaturely and unfortunately; being they had neither a meane, or∣der, or regular way of governing themselves, much lesse others; li∣ving for the most part dissolutely, not reflecting on the Proverb, Qua∣lis vita, Finis ita: Live well, dye well.
67. Constantinus Magnus. Anno Domini 312. portrait of emperor Constantinus Magnus COnstantine, An. Dom. 312. a Britan by Na∣tion, a man most valiant, and worthy in a manner of an Empire more than any one of his Antecessors: after the death of his I suppose i is meant Con∣stantian Clor. Father, he was elected Emperor. He overcame all the Tyrants of the Empire, and recovered all rebellious Countries: wherefore hee entered into the City of Rome in wonderfull
pompe. He began to persecute the Christians, wherefore (peradven∣ture by the divine will and pleasure) he was so infected with a Leprosie, that the Physitians left him as incu∣rable. But the heavenly Grace was his assistance; for being asleepe in the night, hee saw a vision telling him, that if he desired to recover his health, hee should recall Silve∣ster the Bishop, and all the Clergy from exile. Which thing he perfor∣ming, and being baptized, he was immediately cured. And increasing in devotion, hee built many Chur∣ches to the glory and honit of God. This Emperor would say in praise of Age, that Age appeared to be best in foure things: Old wood best to burne, old Wine to drinke, old friends to trust, and old Authors to read of. Moreover he said, that there was but this difference be∣tweene the death of old men and
young men: that old men goe to death, and death comes to young men. This Emperour built a City called by his name Constantinople, whither hee after translated the Imperiall seate. And being at the age of 66 yeeres he passed to a botter life, to the great griefe of all, and especi∣ally of the Christians then living, whom he did entirely love and che∣rish. Hee obtained the sole Monar∣chy of the whole Empire, and eve∣ry where restored peace to the Church. He was prolected  in all his wars: he exhorted  to Christianity, but compelle . It was thought that he was poisoned of his brothers at Nicomedia: in Greece, and had pompous sunorals worthy of so great a Man, at the Gi∣ty of Constantinople which hee had lately built.
68. Crispus. An. Domini 314. portrait of emperor Crispus ABritan by birth was Crispan, An. Dom. 14. who by his Father Constan∣tiue was elected Emperour, and honoured with the title of Ca∣sar: hee was a man so proper and compleate in the beauty of person, that Fausta his Mother in law sought by all meanes possible to allure and intice him to her lust: unto whom he by no meanes willing to consent, by
his vertuous obstinacy converted her vicious love into an extreaunity of hatred, insomuch that she accu∣sed him to his Father for a forcible violator of her chastity: To whose words Constantine giving credit, cau∣sed the vertuous young man to be miserably put to death at Pola in Hi∣stria. But not long after, this salla∣cy of the Mother in law comming to light, and the innocency of the chaste young man (worth an eter∣nall memory) being manifestly discovered, the wicked Step mo∣ther sought to excuse the incestuous malice with the pretence of her plot, to wit, That Crispus should not be a hinderance to the honour of her sonnes in the Imperiall claime. But at length by the perswasion of Hele∣na, (who was infinitely grieved for the death of her Grand-child) the wicked step-mother was put into a hot bath, wherein shee breathed
her last, and suffered a death to mild for such an impious and trea∣cherous impurity. This Emperor was taught and in∣structed in Learning, by the famous Lactantius: It is evident that he was singularly qualified, valiant, and fortunately victorious. Helena his Grand mother much lamented his immature death, which was not one∣ly suddaine, but mischievous, and griev'd the whole Empire, who by that meanes were deprived of so hopefull a Governour.
69. Constantinus. Anno Domini 314. portrait of emperor Constantinus COustantine was the second of that name. An. Dom. 314. After the death of his Father Constantine the Great, the Empire was divided in∣to many parts, but that of France, Spaine, the Alpes, England, and Scot∣land did befall to his charge; but not contented with these, hee pre∣tended by hereditary right that also of Italy and Affrick, which here de∣manded
by way of Embassie; but not obtaining his pretended cause, he made Warre upon his brother Constans Commander of those parts. And after many bloody battailes he was alwayes victorious, with a grievous massacre and slaughter on both fides: But at length Constans gathering new forces and supplies, came upon him with a terrible as∣sault, and routed him, putting his souldiers to flight, sword, and pri∣son, most of them cut in peeces: himselfe also was mortally woun∣ded, and falling from his horse, he was slaine neere Aquileya at the  of 25, of the which hee governed onely three. This Emperor by divine assistance overcame the Almans, Britans, and other powerfull Nations: hee recal∣led Athanasius from banishment, and restored him to his Bishopricke of Alexandria, of which hee was for∣merly
deprived. Those Warres which he raised concerning his right unto the government of Italy and Affrick, did mightily oftentimes dis∣turbe his minde: Whereupon hee would usually say to his Comman∣ders of his Armies, Let there be no malice in the prosecution of my cause towards my Brother used: for I grieve when I thinke, that wee whom God and Nature created for union, should by divellish ambition and covet ousnesse be divided. How∣soever hee continued his warres un∣dertaken, though with a great re∣luctancy; as desiring rather to im∣ploy the souldier, than advantage himselfe. This Emperor had a peti∣tion offered him divers times by an old Cittizen of Rome, and still he was answered by the Emperour, That he had no leasure: whereupon the old man said aloud; Why then give over to be Emperour.
70. Constans. Anno Domini 314. portrait of emperor Constans THe division of the Empire being made upon the death of the Great Constantine the Father, An. Dom. 14. Constans, one of the sonnes, takes upon him the possession of ∣ly, Affrick, and all the Isles of Sole∣vonia, Dalmatia, Macedonia, and Achata. He fought against his bro∣ther, and having slaine him, in a short time he made himselfe master
of all France. In the beginning of his government hee was a famous Prince, and just: but afterwards al∣tering his life wholly, changed it in∣to a worse, giving himselfe solely to pleasures and solaces with such disorders, which caused him insup∣portable paines in his limbes, and e∣specially his joynts, whereby fal∣ling into a loathing and detestation of himselfe, and a generall hatred of the whole Empire, a conspiracy was complotted against him: and a certaine Magnentius being created Emperour, some to give Constans content, or (perhaps at his owne request) slew him, but lamentably, as he reposed himselfe in his Pavili∣on at the foote of the Pyrenean Mountaines, neare a place called He∣lena, at the age of 30, and of his government 13 yeeres. He governed after his  Italy, and many other Provin of
the Empire, and after his brother whom he slew, he writ menacing to his brother Constantius, for the resti∣tution of Athanasius, who lamenting the death of the Innocent Crispus, doubted not to terme him a Martyr. 71. Constantius. Anno Domini 325. portrait of emperor Constantius COnstantius also the sonne of Constantinus Magnus and Fausta, An. Dom. 25. was created Caes
the liew of the vertuous and inno∣cent Cispus unjustly slaine as is be∣fore mentioned. Hee was happy in his civill warres, and wonderfully active in throwing a dart. In the di∣vision of the Empire the Ensterne government was assigned him with the Seate at Constantinople. In his time the Arrian Sect much flouri∣shed, whereby he was much assisted; whereupon there was a Councell called and held in Laodicea, whither Arrius came with many of his adhe∣rents, and also many Christians, and many Bishops and Prelates disputing concerning matters of Faith, were confined and punished by this Con∣stantius, himselfe being an Arrian. But by the death of his brothers, hee remaining sole and absolute in the Empire, he governed warily, and with prudence: Neverthelesse by the Roman Senate two Emperours were created, against whom he de∣claring
open waries in battaile over∣threw them, and therefore by the Army hee was entituled Augustus. And being 45 yeeres of age, hee sickened of a bloody flux, and short∣ly dyed, being buried in Constanti∣nople. This Emperor put his Uncles and many of the Nobility to death, sus∣pecting them to have poysoned his Father Constans. He declined to the Arrian Sect, hee caused his Uncles sonnes Gallus and Iulianus to be brought up in good Litterature: hee inhibited Magicke and Idolatry up∣on paine of death, and dyed in the o∣pinion of an Arrian.
72. Magnentius. Anno Domini 350. portrait of emperor Magnentius COnstans the aforesaid E∣perour raised this Magnen∣tius of a youth, An. Dom. 350. a French man by birth; and although he were ve∣meanely borne, neverthelesse hee caused him to bee trained up in the Military Art, inso much that hee made him Generall of his forces in Sclavnia; in which government he was protected from death by Con∣stans,
and in liew of requitall he slew him most ingratefully, and by subtil∣ty creepes into the Imperiall seate anno Domini 350, and comming into Italy, he created his brother Caesar in Milan, and gave him the Alpes in charge to secure France. Magnenti∣us afterwards fighting a battaile a∣gainst Constantius (who thirsted the revenge of his brothers death) was by him overthrowne and vanqui∣shed, with a great slaughter of his men, and mustering up the residue of his Army he fled to Lions, where not finding himselfe secure, his life in hazard, nor any hope of re slew himselfe with a knife at  of 53, and the sixth moneth of his government. This Magnentius was spurd on onely Regnandi capiditate, With the desire of command, and seeing him∣selfe to fall short of his expectation every way despairing, first slew his
owne Mother, then his Brother, and lastly himselfe, (as I said before) and by much soliciting of his friends to the Captaines souldiers, interred at the place of his death. 73. Decentius. Anno Domini 350. portrait of emperor Decentius DEcentius, a French man born, An. Dom. 350. was created Caesar in Milan, as is before mentioned, and
instantly commanded to the Alp, for the defence and tuition of the matters of France which was no toering, and in a manner falling into an open rebellion against the Empire, which perhaps would have so happened, had it not beene cur∣bed and held in action in divers parts at once, which dissipated their forces, and disabled them for re∣sistance and defence. This Erape∣ror either for non performance of a∣ny laudable acts, as for the short∣nesse of his life, hath left not any memorable thing to posterity, but onely this, that having understood the unfortunate and miserable end of his brother, taking it to the heart, and fearing to fall into the hands of the enemies of Magnentis, inten∣ded his owne death, and as a  impatient and surious mad m∣ving not brought to perfection  privated plots and designes,
a garter about his necke, and with∣out the helpe or hand of any man strangled himselfe. 74. Iulius Apostata. Anno Domini 356. portrait of emperor Julius Apostata JVlian being a man most lear∣ned in the Greeke, An. Domini 356. and admi∣rable in the Latin tog, and of a most strong and able memo∣ry, was wondrous affable, courte∣ous,
and liberall to all, and as one as∣piring greedily to honour, prevailed farre with Constantius the Empe∣rour, that hee was made by him Generall of the forces in France, and alwayes remained victorious in all occasions of warre. This man denyed the faith of Christ, and therefore was termed the Aposta∣ta, or Renegate, and renounced his Deaconship: Hee became an Idolater, causing himselfe of his Army to be called Emperour. In which dignity suppressing all ver∣tue and justice, hee impiously be∣gan to persecute the Christians with extreame cruelty, putting them to most intollerable torments, and infinite numbers slaine, and many sent into exile. Moreer he wrote a booke against the Chri∣stian faith▪ Eusebia, the wife of lim Constan∣tius, her selfe being barren, en∣vied
that Tulian should have any is∣sue successive to the Empire, Theodo. lib. 3. Cap. 20. fran∣dulently perswaded Helena his wife to use such things as might cause abortion. But when she had conceived, Spond. and brought forth a sonne at Roan in France, Eu∣sebia by feeing the Mid-wife, cau∣sed the navell of the new borne Infant to be cut more than ordi∣nary, and thereby utterly destroy∣ed it. It is likewise recorded by The∣odret, that as soone as Iubian felt himselfe most miserably and grie∣vously wounded in the left arme with a Persian Dart which was in∣fected with poyson, hee furi∣ously, and in great anger tooke a handfull of his blood, and flung it upwards in the ayre, saying, Vicisti Galilae? meaning our Savi∣our Christ; as if he had said blasphe∣mously, Othou of Galile, hast thou oner∣come
me? and so most impiously dyed, railing against Mars, that having promised him assistance, and failed him: against Apollo, that had deluded him with false and vaine promises: and lastly, against Iupi∣ter, because hee had not his Thun∣der-bolt ready to kill that party that flung that Dart, and slew him; and so he dyed in Mesopotamia, and was intombed at Tharsus in the 32 yeere of his age.
75. Iovinianus. Anno Domini 363. portrait of emperor Jovinianus IOvinian was borne in Panno∣nia, An. Dom. 363. and trained up in a wor∣thy way and manner: and because every man had an estimati∣on and hopefull conceit of him, that at length he would grow great, and valorous withall, being as yet but a youth was made Generall of the Army. After the death of his Predecessor
he was by the whole campe called Caesar Augustus, which titles he ab∣solutely refused, unlesse they would every man become Christian, him∣selfe being first baptized, which was an act most Christian-like: Which the whole Army did also put in ex∣ecution after his memorable exam∣ple: and after that, they promised and swore him fealty and allege∣ance. Hereupon to his incredible joy and comfort hee accepted the Crowne, and redeemed many out of the tyranny of the Barbarians: his common speech was thus, O that I might governe wise men,  wise men governe me. Afterwards hee was enforced to surrender unto Saperes King of the Persians a great part of Mesopotamia, and other pla∣ces. And being now growne to the age of 39, falling into a grievous dis∣ease of the weakenesse of his sto∣mack, he passed to a better life and
dignity, having in all his Reigne continued a professor of the Christi∣an faith, and restored it every where; streightly commanding the Temples of the Idols to be shut up, Baro. and forbidding all manner of Genti∣litious sacrifices. He dyed at Rome, and his funerall obsequies were in a most sumptuous manner celebrated in Pannonia, though he was interred at Rome neere to the Capitoll, on the East side; for they held it most for his honour to be so buried.
76. Valentinianus. Anno Domini 364. portrait of emperor Valentinianus UAlentinian an Hungarian by birth, An. Dom. 364. being Captaine of the Targuetiers. Scutaries in the Citty of Nicea, was by the whole Army created Emperour, really against his owne will or desire; knowing, that he should be as it were a prisoner to his thoughts, as all good governours and rulers ought to be: and therfore would rather enjoy his private li∣berty,
than enchaine it to so great a charge: And therefore he tooke Va∣lens for his Co-partner in the Dig∣nity, (a man whom hee highly e∣steemed) to whō he gave the charge of the Easterne government. Hee was wonderously addicted to Reli∣gion, and highly esteemed of all the Christians, because he favoured them: Hee restored to the Chur∣ches their former priviledges, liber∣ties, and possessions which the o∣ther Emperours had sold, or given away, (as Ammianus writeth, and Sozimus) hee brought under, and kept in subjection all Gallia, Rhetia, Almaine, Saxony, Scots, and Britans, the Affrican Moores, Thracians, and Armenians. Upon his gold coynes were ingraven these words and cha∣racters, a Crosse with the name of Christ cut in it, and the Motto for the Emperour, Reipublicae Restitutor: his saying often was, That Gold was
tryed with the Touch-stone, and men with Gold. Hee also forbad all Ido∣latrous sacrifices by Night, and all Magicians (as Zosimus witnesseth:) he restored all professors of Christi∣anity, (whom Iulianus had forbid∣den to teach or practise before) and recalled them honourably to their places and preferment, and confir∣med it by a Law in these words: Si quis crudiendis &c. If any one that is fit, Bar. in vit. Val. and willing to teach and instruct children and youth, and whose life it good and just, let him get and pro∣cure his Auditory a new, or settle himselfe in his old office. And after a while of his reigne, by the perswa∣sion and intreaty of his wife, hee made his sonne Gratian Emperour. Valentinian howsoever in Armes and Military command, and in all other vertuous worth was very ge∣nerous, and overcame the Burgun∣dians and Saxons, adding them to
the Empire. This Emperour view∣ing over the lives of the former Em∣perours, read the cruelty of Nero Caesar, and amongst the rest, that he had a Boy cut, as if hee would hare transformed him into a Wo∣man, and called him wife: This Emperour answered, It was pitty Nero's Father had not such a wife. Lastly, following on his Warres a∣gainst the Sarmatians, hee sickened of a Flux, or (as others write) of a suddaine passion of anger, and shortly dyed, having governed one yeere, and five moneths, and was interred at Constantinople.
77. Valens. Anno Domini 365. portrait of emperor Valens VAlens was brother to Va∣lentinian, Anno Domini 365. and Uncle to Gratianus, with whom he governed foure yeers, beginning his government An. 365, Hee at first recalled Nazianzen and Bazil from banishment; he was bap∣tizedy by Eudoxius, but turned Ar∣rian afterwards, and persecuted the
Orthodox Bishops of the East, and sent by his Mandat Eusebius into ba∣nishment, as also Pelagius Bishop of Laodicea, and Gregorius Nissenus was condemned by the Arrians, at the command of the Emperour: He also caused 80 of the Christian Em∣bassadors that were then in Constan∣tinople, to be all sent to Sea in one Ship, and then to bee set on fire, which was effected; and not left unpunished, for immediately after a most lamentable Famine raged through all Phrygia, and in Constan∣tinople. He continued the persecu∣tion against the Christians very much, and made a Law, that all the Hermites of Nitria and Thebais should beare Armes in the field, or else to bee most cruelly beaten, which they rather chose to endure voluntarily, than to abandon or for∣sake the desarts. Through the ava∣rice and imprudence of this Tyrant,
the Goths began with great as∣saults and fury to breake in upon the Roman Empire, and remained victo∣rious, having put almost the whole Army to the sword: in which ter∣rible conflict Valens himselfe was mortally wounded, Tempore Gra∣tiani. and escaping with great feare and fright, he made to a little Village with very few of his men, where hee supposed hee might lye hidd with safety: but the Goths comming thither, and hap∣pening on him, burnt him, and bar∣barously like themselves, left him without sepulture, to the prey of beasts and birds but as others write, he was burnt at Adrianople.
78. Gratianus. Anno Domini 367. portrait of emperor Gratianus THis Emperor Gratian being in controversie with another about the time of his electi∣on, An. Dom. 367. sent a message unto him that stood for it, and to some of the Ci∣tizens that did adhere with him, that if they did not presently consent un∣to his desires, hee would bring such huge numbers of men in Armes o∣ver the Rhine, as their horses should
drinke that River dry, that they should be able to passe it, and not wet their feet: which threatning they feared, and with all joy recei∣ved him to be their Emperour, and he began his reigne in the yeere of Christ 367. He was borne in Pan∣nonia, a man singular in Religion, and a brave souldier: for in one bat∣taile against the Tuscans hee slew a∣bove 30000 souldiers, that had wa∣sted and spoyled the Roman Coun∣try and Territories. He expelled out of Italy all sorts of hereticks, and all the people being reduced to the faith of Iesus Christ, he caused all the ruin'd and demolished Churches to be re-edified. But the Gothes a∣fresh renewing their warres against the Romans, the Republick fell in∣to great perplexities and agonies up∣on the outrages and barbarous cru∣elties which the Gothes dayly in∣fested them with: Whereupon Gra∣tian
chose for his Coadjutor in the Empire Theadosius a Spaniard, an ex∣cellent Souldier, who in a short time overcame the Tuscans, and made a League with the Goths, and other Nations. Gratianus in the sixth yeere of his Reigne was slaine at Lyons, and passed to a better life, leaving an exemplar testimony of his worth to the memory of all posterity, and lyes inhum'd at Constantinople, neare the East gate of the City, where there was a Chappell erected for some speciall Festivall dayes and meetings, at the Cities charge.
79. Maximus. This man governed but a very short time in the dayes of Valentinianus, but was a wise and excellent Orator. portrait of emperor Maximus THis Maximus the Great was borne of the most noble race and family of Constantine, by whom hee was made Emperour in England. Brittaine, by the reason hee was well experienced in Warre, and a singular good Commander. His worth being accompanied, or rather
enabled with an Imperiall power, was the cause that hee with a facile easinesse tooke in all France, boun∣teously enlarging it, and honou∣rably augmenting it. After that de∣parting thence, he tooke his journey towards Italy, with a wondrous great Army every where compleat, with intent to take in Rome, the head-City of the Universe: which Valen∣tinian (the younger) much fearing, fled with his Mother Iustina to Con∣stantinople, but finding a favourable and fortunate succour of Theodosius, hee returned back againe over the Alpes: and comming to Rome he found Maximus in a confident qui∣et, whom hee finding without de∣fence, assaulted and slew him in his Palace neare the Capitoll, to the great griefe of all his souldiers, the place of his interment being not cer∣tainly knowne. This Emperour Maximus being
demanded of one, What kind of man he esteemed most fit and wor∣thy to be a King, Such a one (saith he) as neither glorieth in his good for∣tunes, nor is daunted with adversity. At another time, when one complai∣ned unto him, that the City of Con∣stance in Almaine had not free use of their liberties and franchises, hee answered, If they had not great liber∣ty in the Towne of Constance, thou which art one of that City, wouldst not speake unto me so liberally; for frank∣nesse of speech is a signe of liberty. He also said, That as God would be both loved and feared: so should Kings and Princes be: for there can hardly bee any true love, where there is no feare. Moreover, saith hee, There be three degrees of persons who ought to be both loved and honoured; first, God above all, and in all places: Se∣condly, Kings and Princes in their Kingdomes, and estates: and lastly,
Parents and Masters in their private families. 80. Valentinianus Iunior. Anno Demini 376. portrait of emperor Valentinianus Junior THis Valentinian the yonger was elected Co-emperour by his Brother Gratianus, An. Dom 376. and charged with the government and defence of Italy: but being
much in feare of Maximus, (who as some said, had privately wrought the death of his brother Gratian) he fled for ayd to Theodosius, by whose rescue he overthrew and slew Maxi∣mus, and without controversie, with an excellēt judgment, and good go∣vernment every where he held the Empire in peace: after which victo∣ry he would often speak with a mer∣ry heart, I have escap'd the evill, and found the good. This man not long after, to please his Mother, fol∣lowed the most impious Arrian Sect, notwithstanding the good advice of Theodosius to the contrary. Hee persecuted the Christians very severely, not omitting, but taking all occasions of utterly extinguish∣ing them to his possible power. In France he slew Victor the sonne of Maximus lastly, remaining in Vienna (as he thought) secure in se∣rene peace and tranquillity, Eugeni
the Tribune secretly entering his chamber, there strangled him, and was inhum'd at Millan with funebri∣all rites. 81. Theodosius. Anno Domini 379. portrait of emperor Theodosius THeodosius was a man of ex∣cellent parts, An. Dom. 379. for behaviour singular, for vertue rare, for goodnesse to all, admirable, not one∣y loved, but reverenced with feare
by every man; and wonderfully de∣voted to our Saviour Iesus Christ; wherefore he extinguished the here∣ticks, and overthrew the Tyrants. And amongst the rest of his vertues Humility was most eminent in him. Hee governed the Empire al∣wayes with a greatnesse, and majesty convenient for such a state and de∣gree. He would never judge, deter∣mine, or give sentence against any man being in passion or anger, which hindereth the rectitude of sense, and true judgement in any man, but in such cases he went discoursing upon some act of piety and vertue, there∣by to quitt passion, and cleare his un∣derstanding. Moreover, this Em∣perour making preparations for war against Eugenius, expresly for his souldiers to exact of their P∣trons where they were to be bille∣ted, or lodged any more than what came freely from them: and also
that whosoever of them should curse the Emperour, (viz. Theodosi∣us) should not be punished for it: saying, Quoniam si id ex levitate processerit, contemnendum est: si ex in∣sania, miseratione dignissimum: si ab iniuria, remittendum est. Because if it proceedes of levity, it is not to be re∣garded: if of madnesse, it is to be pitti∣ed: if from an iniury or wrong, it is to be pardoned in them. Soz. lib. 7. cap. 25. Sozomenus relateth, that in the yeare 394, and the last of Theodosius, that in Epi∣tus there was a Dragon seene of such a bignesse, that being dead, eight yoakes of Oxen could hardly have drawne him thence. In the 22 yeere of this Emperours reigne there were great losses by Earthquakes in sundry places, as in the Imperiall City of Constantinople, at one time there fell downe 57 Towers of the City-wall, though it was new built up: And not onely
here, but also in other places, as A∣lexandria, and in Antioch, as also famine and ill sents in the Ayre, by which many thousands of peo∣ple and beasts perished. This Earthquake endured sixe Moneths, constantly overthrowing many faire and goodly Churches, and Fortres∣ses in Constantinople, as also in Cher∣sonesus it did swallow up whole Pa∣rishes, it raged by Sea as well as by Land, it devoured many ships, nay, whole Ilands; but it raged most in Bithynia, in Helespont, and Phrygia, and the Easterne Countries. The Citizens of Constantinople, and the Emperor Theodosius, with the Patri∣arch Proclus left the City, and remai∣ned in the fields, praying to God for preservation, as saith Nicephorus. Lastly, this incomparable Prince to his age of 50 governed most ver∣tuously and victoriously, and then to the griefe of his friends, and la∣mentable
moane of the whole Em∣pire, he deceased in Milan in the presence of Saint Ambrose, Arch∣bishop of that See, and was hono∣rably interred according to the Ro∣man manner. 82 Arcadius. Anno Dom. 383. portrait of emperor Arcadius ARcadius began his reigne af∣ter the death of his Father Theodosius anno 383, An. Dom. 383. and
governed together with his brother Arcadius 13 yeeres. Dividing the Empire betweene them, Arcadius tooke all the Easterne part, and Ro∣norius the West, and either gover∣ned his charge with singular pru∣dence, temperance, and modesty, overcomming all those difficulties as are wont to happen to all young be∣ginners in Magistracy; and in parti∣cular they suppressed the arrogant insolency of their Tutors, appointed them by Theodosius their Father, they being as yet very yong, whom they put to death, because they pretended to governe as their fancy served, contrary to equity. Ne∣verthelesse this Arcadius was a Prince so well beloved, and ruled so well and commendably, that the Senate said of him, That it had beene good, either that hee had never beent borne, or that he might never dye. It was alwayes his opinion, never to
enterprize any Warres, except it were upon great necessity; saying, That whatsoever Prince would live in peace and quietnesse, he ought not in any case to entertaine Warres slightly or unadvisedly, for a Sword is soone drawne, but not so soone put up. When∣soever his choler grew to be infla∣med, he would suddainly withdraw himselfe out of company, and be∣ing alone would pronounce over all the Letters of the Alphabet each af∣ter other with leasure, to the intent that in meane time his wrath and an∣ger might waxe cold, and be asswa∣ged; saying divers times to his atten∣dants, That he that cannot subdue his choler by nature, must doe it by art and cunning. Finally, Arcadius having reduced the Empire to a peaceable tranquillity, governing in great quiet, falling sicke passed to another life, to the generall sorrow of all, at the age of 31 yeeres.
83. Honorius. Anno Domini 394. portrait of emperor Honorius AFter the death of the afore∣said Arcadius, nno Domini 4. Honorius takes the Easterne government upon him, and together with his Nephew Theodosius, sonne of Ar∣cadius he governed 15 yeeres. In a very short tie hee overca Con∣stantine the Tyrt in France in the City of Arles, together with a great
number of his Complices ejusdē fari∣nae homines, men of the like cruelty and condition. Whensoever hee ap∣pointed any one to be punished o∣penly, he caused the common Cryer with a loud voice to pronounce this Sentence, Doc not that to another, which thou wouldst not have done to thee. In his time the Empire was infe∣sted with most bloody and cruell warres, in which alwayes (by a dis∣creet military order, & through the resolution of his souldiers) he came off victorious with honour. In the fourteenth yeere of this Emperours reigne, at noone-day a strange fire from Heaven penetra∣ting the great Church of Constanti∣nople, fastened upon the Bishops seate, and consumed it: Spond. in Hon. After∣wards growing up like a Tree, fastened upon the roofe, and de∣voured it: And lastly, passing
through the midst of the people without hurting any, to the great amazement of all, seized upon the Senate-house, and burnt it to ashes. Afterwards the whole Empire be∣ing pacified by this worthy Empe∣rour Honorius, and the Senate-house re-built, hee fell into a grievous sicknesse, whereof hee shortly after dyed in Rome, after the fifteenth yeere of his Imperiall command: He had two wives which dyed both suddainly before the consummation of Matrimony, and Virgins both.
84. Theodosius. Anno Domini 402. portrait of emperor Theodosius HOnorius being dead, An. Domini 402. his Ne∣phew Theodosius tooke upon him the whole Imperiall go∣vernment, and governed with Va∣lentinianus, the sonne of his Aunt Placida 22 yeeres. Hee found the Empire in great disquiet: Hee lost Affrica, and a great part of Egypt: and in Hungaria, in Britannia, and other Countries by treason and frau∣dulent
dealing many Citties were taken from him. And because he fore-saw it at his first entrance to the Crowne, hee therefore gave the West to his Consort Valentini∣anus. He was much puzled in Affri∣ca, howsoever hee by his valour and singular prudence overcame all difficulties, yea, and through his great courage recovered many Countries and Provinces usurped by one Iohn, and confederate with He∣tius, who were a cause that the Hungarians came into Italy, and spoyled it. Moreover, there happened so great a famine in Rome, that of the barkes of Trees they made Bread, and the best Romans were forced to make Bread of Chesnuts; yea, and some gave fifty pence for a pound of flesh: Joseph. and it grew so scarce, that many were famished, and dyed with hunger, and their bodies sold by
their kindred at a high value: inso∣much that the people cryed out to the Emperour sitting to behold the festivall sports at that time of the yeere, that he should impose a cer∣taine rate for mans flesh: his saying was sometimes, That Emperours of all other men were most miserable, because commonly the truth is concea∣led from them: And at this time the ayre being corrupt, The odosius dyed without an Heire.
85. Valentinianus. Anno Domini 426. portrait of emperor Valentinianus UAlentinianus, An. Dom. 426. the sonne of Constantius and Placida, was entituled both Caesar and Augustus by his Antecessor Theodo∣sius, and by him sent to Rome a∣gainst Iohn an usurper of the Empire, for which service he victoriously tri∣umphed. He made truce with Gen∣sericus King of the Vandals: he war∣red against Attila King of the
Huns, and fought it out heare un∣to Tolosh: which battaile was so cru∣ell, terrible, and bloody, that on both sides there fell more than an hundred and fourscore thousand per∣sons, besides an infinite number maimed and wounded; and Attila himselfe fled halfe dead with a very small company that attended him. He slew Hetuis, whose death was boldly revenged by his friends with∣out any respect of persons: For Va∣lentinianus being in Campo Martio at Rome, was set upon by them, wounded and slaine, being not able to make any notable resistance. In this Emperors time that famous & learned Doctor St. Augustine dy∣ed, anno 430. St. Patrick the Patron of Ireland, began to convert that Country to Christianity. In the yeere 446 the Picts invaded Eng∣land, and the same yeere there was such a terrible Earthquake continu∣ing
for the space of sixe moneths to∣gether, insomuch that the people forsooke their houses and Cities for feare of the ruines, and infinite dis∣asters which did happen both by Sea and Land. Galla Placidia, the Mother of this Valentinianus, a singular good Chri∣stian, and a woman of a great and wonderfull solid judgement, dyed neere the Campo Martio in Rome, ha∣ving beene daughter, sister, wife, mo∣ther, and step-mother to Roman Em∣peours.
86. Martianus Anno Domini 450. portrait of emperor Martianus AFter the death of Theodosius, Anno Domini 450. Martianus succeeded in the Empire, (who was supposed to bee a Spaniard by Nation) and governed seaven yeares together with Valentinian. Hee was a good Christian, and singular fautour of them: He married the sister of Theodosius: In the time of his govern∣ment
Alemannia was lost, and Dacia, Spaine and Aquitaine likewise, toge∣ther with Gascoigne, which could never be recovered. In his time St. Vrsula, with eleven thousand Virgins were martyred by Attila's souldiers. In the sixt yeare of his Imperiall sway, Maximia∣nus a noble Roman, married by force Eudosia, which was already wife to Valentinianus, & imperiously began to tyrannize and usurpe the Empire: which being understood by the Van∣dals, they immediatly marched with a very powerfull army, and came to Rome, where they slew him, and cast him into Tiber, and having sacked the City, They returned into Africke; carrying Edosia and her daughter with them, who was the cause of the death of his Emperor. There happened in the fourth yeare of his reigne, so great a famin in Italy, that many slaves and poore
peasants were inforced to sell their children for money to buy Bread, and to pay their tribute: But Valentinian ordered and com∣manded that they might be redee∣med againe at the same rate; like∣wise it was followed with a vehe∣ment pestilence, which destroyed in short space many thousands of people in those parts; it being not within the compasse of humane po∣wer to stoppe or hinder it, because sent from a supreame hand which is unresistable.
87. Leo. Anno Domini 457. portrait of emperor Leo UPon the death of Martianus, An. Dom. 457. Leo (being by Nation a Gre∣cian, of the City of Thebes) was chosen to succeede, being a man indeede worthy of such a degree. About that time the Roman Com∣mon-wealth was sorely perplexed by certaine tyrannicall usurpers, which endeavoured to encroach and arro∣gate
the Throne, and in particular Gensericus King of the Vandals, who came into Italy with a puissant ar∣my to that intent: Which by Leo being perceived, caused him to bee affronted with two severall armyes at once, neare Pupolonia, by whom Gensericus being overthrowne, hee privately retyred in a disguise home into Africa: After this Aspera man very noble and powerful in Constan∣tinople together with his two sonnes complotted, & intended the death of Leo, & to murther him: but the trea∣son not taking effect, with their owne deserved death, they meritoriously suffered that, which to another they intended. In fine, Leo being in peace, with the Ostrogothes, fell sicke, and shortly after dyed at his Imperiall City of Constantinople, and there In∣urnd, leaving his Nephew to suc∣ceede. Marcellinus reporteth Anno 458,
that Vesuvius a burning mountaine of Campania, Carcel. in hron. did cast forth its burnt bowels, and covered the face of Italy, not onely with nocturne darknesse in the day, but also with a small kind of dust and ashes, which bred by the heate of the Sunne such strange monsters, that is almost incredible; such as Gesner an Historian justifies, and makes mention of both by nature and fi∣gure.
88. Leo Iunior. Anno Domini 474. portrait of emperor Leo Junior THis Leo was Nephew to the afore said Emperor, An. Dom. 474. of the same Countrey, but not of the same City, for he was borne in Corinth in Greece: Hee was repleni∣shed with all the qualities necessary for a wel-disposed and good Prince, for which singularity of parts he was so highly prized and esteemed of
Leo his uncle, whom he could not endure out of his sight, in whose goodnes he took such complacency, & pleasure more then ordinary, (as he said) and by him conceived the sole solaces, and contenting recrea∣tions in the interims of the weigh∣ty affaires belonging to an Imperiall Crowne: Whereupon falling sicke, he immediately created this Leo, Au∣gustus and successor. But reflecting this to have been done in his fit, and feeling himselfe sicke to death, with his owne hands crowned his owne Father Zeno, and declared him Em∣peror, intreating that hee would bee pleased to governe the Empire with the greatest integrity, and good ju∣stice, as befitted a just Prince; which Zeno promised: and Leo retired him∣selfe to the private life of a Christi∣an, and vertuous man; and paied na∣ture her debt at Vienna, the Metro∣polis in Austria.
89. Zeno. Anno Domini 374. portrait of emperor Zeno TO the vertuous sonne Leo the discreet father Zeno succeeds, Anno Domini 374. a Graecian of the countrey of Cilicia, a man well beloued and re∣verenced of all men. This good Prince understanding, and having newes of the creation of a new Em∣peror in Constantinople, rather chose to returne to his former privacy, than any wayes disturbe the Repub∣licke
or Common-good by any for∣ces of his. But Almighty God dis∣posed these things otherwise for this dissention: For the Constantinopolitan Burghers or Aldermen, being not able to endure the insupportable in∣juries of the new Emperour Basilicus, (so was he called) betook themselves to Zeno, and confirmed him their Emperor and Governour; who, the affaires of the Empire being compo∣sed to the generall good and quiet of all, confined this Basilicus with his noble family into Cappadocia. Hee overthrew Odoacer which much di∣sturbed Italy: and afterwards he in∣stituted many most wholesome and commodious Lawes. But in the end many turbulent seditions being rai∣sed in Constantinople to him irreme∣diable, he dyed as some report with griefe: Appendix. As others write, after hee had reigned seventeene yeeres and five moneths, hee dyed a death be∣fitting
such a man. For being surpri∣sed with a fit of the falling-sicknesse, which long hanted him: Euagrius lib. 3. cap. 29. Or as Eua∣grius saith, out of an excesse of ea∣ting and drinking, or as dead drunke, and being ordered as a dead man, was buried alive; but when hee was heard out of the Vault to implore his servants and guard most dolefully & lamentably to let him out thence, not to governe the Empire any lon∣ger, but to resigne it, his wife Ariad∣na forbad them strictly to doe it; so he miserably perished.
90 Anastasius. Anno Domini 491. portrait of emperor Anastasius THis Emperour was by Nati∣on of Macedonia in Greece, Anno Domini 491. and having taken possession, the better to confirme himselfe in that esse, combined by a present and speedy course, and by donatives of great value, with Clodoneus King of France, by whose meenes hee wase. stablished in the Dignity and State. He seemed a great lover of the Chri∣stian Religion: but afterwards by
the perswasion of Acatius Bishop of Constantinople, a man tainted with the heresie of Arianisme, began to follow and embrace it: for which being reprehended by Hormisda Bi∣shop of Rome, by the way of Embas∣sadors slighting thē with contempt, and dismissing them, saying, That it belonged to the Emperour to reprehend the Popes, and the Popes ought not to re∣prehend Emperours: and this answer he made with great indignity and su∣premacy. Wherupon as Sūmario delle vite de gl Im∣peratore Roma∣ni, &c. an Italian Author saith, were it for so great an insolency and pride, or other errors, in the presence of his Peeres and all the Court, by the divine judgement hee was wounded with a Thunder∣bolt, and so dyed suddainly after hee had governed 26 yeeres. Appendix. A little be∣fore his death, saith Baronius, Baro. there were seene terrible earthquakes and other prodigies; and hee was often terrified in his sleepe with fearefull
visions, amongst which this was one: A man of a sterne looke, holding a booke in his hand, saying, Ecce, ob perversitatem fidei tuae, annos quatuor∣decim vitae tuae deleo: See, for thy per∣versnesse of beleefe, I put out fourteene yeeres of thy life: And being premo∣nished by the Oracle that he should dye by fire, although hee sought all possible precautions and preventions thereof. Anno 518. 9 of Iuly a most fearefull lightning with a clap of Thunder terrified his very heart so, that he went from chamber to cham∣ber, from couch to couch, and was carried into the heathermost part of his Palace in a cave or cellar, where no light did appeare: yet for all that was strucke dead with lightning at Constantinople, Annot. Misc. 11.15. Zonar. Annot. part. 3 and no substance or moisture found in his body at all, but dryed like a pot-sheard, or a bone burnt in fire.
91 Iustinus. Anno Domini 523. portrait of emperor Justinus IVstinus a Thracian by nation, An. Dom. 523. was called out of bondage to the Empire: He was really a lover and professor of Christian Re∣ligion, and as it were a defender thereof: he opposed all heresie, and banished all Arrians out of Constan∣tinople: Whereupon King Theodori∣cus
a fautor of that Sect, being much disgusted, forced and constrained Pope Iohn with many of the no∣ble men of Rome to goe to the Emperour, to perswade him to re∣store the Arrians, and recall them: otherwise, that hee would doe the like, nay, worse to all the Clergy and Bishops in his Kingdome: which through feare was by the Pope per∣formed. And returning backe with the Roman Barons, the Kings de∣mand being not performed, the Pope was immediately imprisoned, and there starved through hunger. The good Emperour perceiving this, and being now very aged, had no desire of revenge, but dyed with griefe as all Authors report, in his chiefe City of Constantinople, to the great discontent of the Christians, having chosen his Nephew Iustinia∣nus to be his successor. In the eight yeere of his Reigne,
on a Fryday at Constantinople, 5 Ca∣lend Iunij, at dinner-time there was such a suddaine Earthquake, that with it and other strange magicall charmes the Winds blustering eve∣ry where in the house, blowing the Kitching-fires about, bred a double destruction to the people, both of ruines and fire mixing together: Euagr. lib. 4. cap. 5. and Euphrasius, Bishop of that City, ha∣ving at that time his head strucken off by the disaster, was intombed in the fire.
92 Iustinianus Magnus. Anno Domini 527. portrait of emperor Justinianus Magnus IVstiman, An. Domini 527. an Illyrian by Nati∣on, was a very zealous man in the Christian Religion, and of a singular learning and wit rather Angelicall than Humane. Hee redu∣ced all the Imperiall lawes into one volume, and to the Codex hee inser∣ted the Digests and Authenticks, by the which the whole world is direc∣ted for the maintenance and conser∣vation
of States. He overcame the Vandals, tooke the City of Sal, and freed all Italy from the tyranny and cruelties of the Goths. He subdued the Moores which wasted and spoy∣led Affrica, with whose spoiles the famous Captaine Bellisarius built two stately Edifices in Rome, and founded a worthy Monastery in the City of Oreti, and endowed it with sunicient revenues for the mainte∣nance of the religious, as also many famous Churches. By the example of his Captaine Generall this Empe∣rour also in Constantinople famous all over the world in the honour of the most holy Trinity and St. Sophia. And having to his most honorable memory enlarged the Empire, hee fell into a strange disease, and be∣came a starke foole, and so he dyed franticke, and was buried at Constan∣tinople in the yeere of his age 83, and of his Empire 38.
Anno 560, in this Emperors reigne Clotarius King of France, having a sonne Chramnus, who had often flowne out, and after some recon∣ciliation had, having forgotten his former promise and duty to his King and Father, fell into an open re∣bellion against him, and after that received remission: At length hee raised Armes the third time against his Father in the lesser Brittannia, and being taken alive, was by the command of Clotarius shut up in a cottage, together with his wife and children, (by whose instigation hee was spurred on to this rebellion) wherein they were all burnt to death.
93 Iustinus Iunior. Anno Dom. 566. portrait of emperor Justinus Junior QUite contrary to his wor∣thy Antecessor was this most unworthy Iustinus, Anno Domi 566. an Illyrian by nation, and a man most bitter, cruell, avarici∣ous, unjust, perfidious, fraudulent, a contemner both of God and man: he would often utter these words, With whom shall wee live at last? wee kill armed men in Warre, and the un∣armed
in peace: But by the divine Ju∣stice he lived not long in impunity, defiling himselfe with sundry sorts of basenesse, because dietings and the most exquisite nutriments, nor Physicke could afford him any assi∣stance at all, but grew continually from bad to worse. Whereupon be∣cause Sophia his wife (although wise enough for a woman) governed the Empire untill the time of Tiberius the second: but being a woman shee was not much feared, because in her time the Longobards over-ranne and possessed all Italy: but before this Iustinus recovered, he adopted Tibe∣rius as his sonne, and pronounced him Augustus. And (as some say) he built a City in Istria, now called by his name Iustinopolis: Againe falling sicke, his disease fell into his feete, whereof hee dyed at his Im∣periall City of Constantinople, not having any great pompe or state at
his funerall, all being rather glad in his death, than grieving for it; because of his vicious conversation and government. 94 Tiberius. Anno Domini 576. portrait of emperor Tiberius TIberius being adopted Au∣gustus by his Predecessor, An. Dom. 576. succeeds in the Imperiall
dignity according to his worthy de∣serts: He was a Thracian by nation, a man replenished with all splendor of vertues, and all other excellent qualities beseeming a Christian Prince. Hee was most indulgent to the poore, to whom he destributed the whole treasure of the Empire. Wherefore (peradventure) Almigh∣ty God made him so abundantly wealthy, and extraordinarily rich, that very shortly hee became posses∣sor of all the treasures of Nar setes the Eunuch, which were of an inva∣luable esteeme and price. He reco∣vered likewise Persia with many rich spoiles, and ever protected and de∣fended the Roman state from all trea∣cherous annoyances whatsoever: And in particular he releeved it in an extreame famine and dearth. Per∣ceiving himselfe at last hastning to∣wards his last day, by the advice of Sophia his Mother in law, hee left
Mauritius his sonne in law successor in the Imperiall throne, which much advanced his greedy desire of go∣verning, because Tiberius in few dayes after passed to a better life at Constantinople in his Court vsually kept in that part of the City which lies next to the Sea, a place aboun∣ding with all sorts of pleasures, as of exquisite Gardens, Fish-ponds, rare prospects, curious walkes and perambulatories befitting so great a Majesties residence.
95 Mauritius. Anno Domini 583. portrait of emperor Mauritius MAuritius sonne in law to Tibe∣rius, Anno Domini 583. was borne in Cappado∣cia, and in his tender age gave great testimonies of a great spi∣rit, making demonstrations of acts and qualities most Princelike. Whereupon for his magnanimity, greatnesse of courage, and virtues he deservedly ascended to the most
invict degree of the Empire. And having taken possession, to his great honour he recovered Armenia and Persia. Afterwards hee gave him∣selfe over to a bad life, persecuting Gregory the Great, and animating the people against him; and also perse∣cuted greatly the Church. Where∣fore by the Divine Judgement hee suddainly dyed, an Angell having visibly fore-told it in Constantinople, that the Emperour should be slaine with a knife. Mauritius dreamed one night not long before his destruction, Scip. du Pless. that himselfe and all his issue were slaine by one Phocas: and having made di∣ligent inquiry after such a man of that name, found that there was but one so called in his whole Ar∣my, who being but a poore clarke of a band, slighted him. Lastly, his souldiers seeing him in a miserable perplexity, and that hee had not
duely given them their pay, they mutinied, and chose Phocas for their Emperour, who persecuted Mauri∣tius even to Chalcedonia, where he tooke him, his wife, and children before his face, and to aggravate his sorrows, hee slew them, and lastly him in the twentieth yeere of his Reigne, and was intombed at Constantinople, in a Temple (as some report) builded by himselfe with admirable cost and lustre, as well for the materialls, as also for the modell, and largenesse of it.
96 Phocas. Anno Domini 602. portrait of emperor Phocas THis Phocas being by Coun∣trey a Gaule, An. Dom. 602. and but a Centurion, was neverthelesse by the whole Army created Empe∣ror. He was entertained in Constanti∣nople with wondrous joy, and excee∣ding great honour, and to confirme his greatnesse, there was a Statue e∣rected to him in S. Caesarius amongst the former Emperors. But not long
after changing his activenesse into a stupefying sloth, hee became so idle, that Persia revolting was lost, and many other Provinces to King Cosroes, which King sacked and spoiled the City of Rome, impriso∣ning Zacharias Patriarch of Ierusa∣lem. Hereupon Phocas became more cruell, and by that meanes hee lost still more and more. Which the people of Rome being not able to suffer, not without great reason they raised Heraclius against him, who being vanquished, was brought manicled with Irons to Heraclius, who looking upon him, said, Th wretched fellow, hast thou thus gover∣ned the Republick? To whom hee answered, Thou maist governe it bet∣ter: Upon which reply Heraclius speedily apprehended him, and with great boldnesse and courage commanded some of his soldiers to cut off his hands and feete, and then
his members, causing a stone to be fastened to his other limbs, and therewithall to be cast into the Sea: and as some Authors report, the soldiers burned his body in revenge at Constantinople. 97 Hieraclius. Anno Domini 611. portrait of emperor Hieraclius THis Emperour Heraclius, An. Dom. 611. an Affrican by birth, was re∣plenished with Heroicall
qualities, and in particular in Che∣valry, and other military know∣ledge, that all men admired him. Hee had an ardent desire that the Christian Religion should be propa∣gated and enlarged: and to that end he sought to take in Persia, at that time growne a Treasury of all man∣ner of Riches, and there he repai∣red the ruined and demolished Churches. Chosroes the Persian King, after many overthrows hee received by Heraclius, in his last flight finding himselfe ill, and endeavoring to make his younger sonne Mardesas King, Syroes the eldest understan∣ding it, plotted with the Peeres the destruction of his father; and so pur∣suing his Father, at last overcame him, and then put him to extreame usage, loading him with Iron∣fetters, and guives about his necke and legs, putting him into the darke
house which Chosroes had newly built, and so by him tearmed, to lay the money and treasure which hee had got by Christian spoiles: where hee had a very little quantity of bread and water, sufficient onely to keepe him alive; but was almost fa∣mished, that hee did eate his owne flesh off his armes, or as farre as hee could reach with his teeth: And likewise his son commanded these Peeres which detested him, to abuse and kick him, beate him, and spit upon him, bidding him eate his bel∣ly full of that gold and silver which he had taken from the Christians. Lastly, he tooke his younger bro∣ther Mardesus, and all the rest of his brothers, and commanded them to be slaine before his fathers face, and five dayes after caused his father to be pricked to death with needles. This Emperor Heraclius brought the Crosse of our Lord backe againe
to Hierusalem, which had beene vi∣olently, and by force of Armes transported by the Parsians. At which time the feast of the Exaltati∣on was instituted. Returning to Constantinople, he retired him to his study and grave consultations; and in particular hee much delighted himselfe in the study of Astrology; by the too much knowledge therein hee became an Hereticke, and by the divine will Antioch and Hierusa∣lem were taken by the Sarrazons and Arabians: Theoph. lib. 10. Card. 18. Hera. whereupon hee sup∣posing to have lost his reputation, he grew into a fitte of extreame melan∣choly, and so into a Dropsie, and thereof dyed at Constantinople, and was there inhum'd with great so∣lemnity.
98 Heraclius 2. Anno Domini 613. portrait of emperor Heraclius 2 TO Heraclius the father, Anno Domini 613. He∣raclius the forme succeeds, being of the same Nation, was elected and created Emperour y his father Anno Domini 613, and Co-emperor. He was a great lover nd preserver of the Christian saith, man replenished with such graces nd prerogatives as can bee ei∣ther
imagined, or required in a Princely governour, for which hee was universally beloved of all men. But it oftentimes comes to passe, that the good become more hateful than the nocent and culpable: for this man was hated and abhorred by Martina his Mother in law, who sought by treacherous devices to worke his end, and accelerate his fate, but not able to bring it to effect of her selfe, shee acquainted her sonne Heraclion with this her diabolicall intent; who being in∣stigated and spur'd on with the de∣sire of so great a dignity, promi∣sed her to poison him without the knowledge of any man: and so this unjust and impious brother perfor∣med it most cruelly at a great and sumptuous Banquet in Constanti∣nople, with a bunch of Grapes. This villanous and heinous act was perpetrated not without horrour of
conscience in the undertaker, and griefe of the Souldiers. Which most inhumane impiety when it was divulged, or generally knowne, his losse was much lamented of e∣very man, and in the end suffici∣ently revenged by those that af∣fected his government, and loved his person: for seldome have the indignities and injuries offered to Princes, gone long unpunished up∣on the persons that were the perpe∣trators.
99 Heraclion. Anno Domini 641. portrait of emperor Heraclion HEraclion, An. Dom. 641. an Affrican borne, so soone as hee had murthe∣red his brother, hee tooke the Imperiall sway & management upon him, and reigned together with his perfidious step-mother Martina two yeares. Taking the possession hee began to live not like an Emperor, but like a most unwor∣thy
man, crowning himselfe with gemmes of a thousand impieties and bestialities. This being talked and discoursed on by the people man to man, every man wished his death, or at least his deposing, which soone followed: for he handling the Se∣nate and Citizens of Constantinople with too great cruelty, they im∣mediately revolted, and appre∣hending his Mother in law Martina, they cut out her tongue, and his nose, honouring them both in ma∣king them ride as it were in triumph for their indigne memory, they both remaining deprived of those parts, and of the Empire, to the generall content of all.
100. Constantinus 3. Anno Domini 643. portrait of emperor Constantinus 3 THis Constantine the third, An. Dom. 643. an Affrican by Nation, was Nephew to Heracli∣on, not much unlike him in conditions: For he was a wicked and perverse man, an heretick, and a ruiner of the Republicke: hee was most basely avaricious with all men, and prime in all manner of wicked
actions. He made warre upon the Lombardes, by whom he was over∣come, and in desperation came to∣wards Rome with a great number of souldiers; and comming to Puglia with incredible unjustnesse and without all compassion he raced the City Luceria. Afterwards comming thence to Rome, he entred it with 20000 soul∣diers, wasting and ruinating the primest and stateliest ornaments of that most famous City: he also sac∣ked, spoyled, and defaced the Churches. Departing thence, hee went to Syracusa, alwaies accompa∣nied with infinite vices, and in par∣ticular with that of impurity and lust: Wherefore one day being in a Bath, hee was murthered by his owne attendants, having governed 25 yeeres, and was inurn'd in Syra∣cusa that renowned City, where Archimedes practised his rare inven∣tions.
In the twelfth yeere of this Em∣perors reigne, (as is recorded by an ancient writer) one of the seaven Wonders of the World, Spondanus. the Colos∣su, alias the Image of the Sunne, which was placed in the Haven of Rhodes, which was of that huge∣nesse, that standing (as it did) strad∣ling, it was 120 foote high, and being before disjected by an Earth∣quake, was at length broken by Ma∣huvius Prince of the Sarazens, and sold to a Ie, who loaded 900 Ca∣mels with the brasse whereof it was made.
101 Constantinus 4. Anno Domini 654. portrait of emperor Constantinus 4 BY the reason that this Con∣stantine was a good Christi∣an, modest, Anno Domin 654. and repleni∣shed with all morall vertues, suc∣ceedes in the Empire with the bene∣placitum, or good liking of all the Christians: In the government whereof he tooke for his Co-rega∣tore: or Co-emperors. Heraclius and Tiberius his brothers. He re-edifled
many Churches that were defaced and demolished by the Hereticks, and built many other most noble and sumptuous. Hee overthrew the Sarazens which much annoyed and molested the Romans, and made them tributaries and subjects in de∣spight of them to his great honour, and to a general quiet of their neigh∣bours, before much infested and troubled by those barbarous and cruell people. Hee returned after∣wards to Constantinople, to unite the Greeke & Roman Churches. He assem∣bled at the instance of Pope Agatho the sixth Councell: in which it was permitted to the Grecian Ps to contract Matrimony with a lawfull woman. Finally, having lived most Christian-like, he dyed Saint-like in the 17 yeere of his Empire at Con∣stantinople. In the tenth yeere of his Reigne a vehement plague infested not onely
the City of Rome, but many other Cities of Italy for three moneths, Paulus and Anastasius are Authors. as Paulus addeth moreover, that at Rome there visibly were seene of ma∣ny, a good Angell and a bad to goe from house to house: Paul. Diac. lib. Hist. Long. cap. 5. Anast. in Aga∣thum. the bad having a Javelin in his hand, and as many stroakes as he gave at any doore, at the command of the good Angell, so many dyed out of that house the next day. The Divine power hath often imployed Angels to be the ex∣ecutioners of his just commands a∣gainst wicked Cities and King∣domes.
102 Iustinianus 2. Anno Domini 686. portrait of emperor Justinianus 2 JVstinian sonne to the afore∣said Emperour, Anno Domini 686. and of the same Country by birth, was in his beginnings a man very Chri∣stian-like, pious, and liberall: Hee enlarged the Constantinopolitan Em∣pire, and composed many most pro∣fitable and wholesome Lawes, al∣wayes highly honouring the Chri∣stian
Religion. But soone after hee shewed himselfe inconstant and va∣riable against God and man: because hee broke the peace already made with the Sarazens and Hungarians, by whom hee was much distressed. Returning to Constantinople, hee made himselfe odious to all the Comminalty, by endeavouring to disanull the aforesaid decree and order made in the sixth Councell a∣fore-said, which was celebrated in his Fathers time. And likewise hee sought to put Pope Sergius to death; whereupon the whole City arose up in Armes against him, making Leontius Patricius their Generall, who immediately opened all the prisons, and freed all that were condemned by Iustinian, and cha∣sing him out of the Imperiall com∣mand, he caused his nose to be cut off, and banished him into Cersonia, an Island of Pontus. Being on the
Sea in the way to his banishment, and by tempests in extreame perill of casting away, was admonished by a familiar friend of his, that hee should make a solemne vow to God, that if hee recovered his Imperiall Crowne, he would forgive his ene∣mies, which if I doe (said he) God sinke me here in this place, which he performed, having recovered it by entring into Constantinople by an Aque-duct, and every one of them he could light on, found him heavy in his revenge.
103 Leontius. Anno Domini 696. portrait of emperor Leontius LEontius, An. Dom. 696. borne at Constanti∣nople, succeeds Iustinian, and governed three yeeres very peaceably. This Emperour having intelligence that Affrica was revol∣ted, arose from Constantinople with an Army, every man well fix't, com∣pleate, and powerfull: and in the in∣terim of this his expedition and voy∣age, newes was brought him to his
great perplexity, that the Constanti∣nopolitans had elected Tiberius, a man of anancient and very noble fami∣ly, for Emperour: Whereupon hee falling into an outrage and passion, by no meanes would endure this af∣front, but presently retreating, hee mett his Antagonist in the field, where each endeavoured their ut∣most in a pitcht battaile, which was not without great effusion of blood: but Leontius was taken prisoner by Tiberius, and had his nose likewise cut off, as he had done the like to his Antecessor Iustinian, and was con∣fined to a perpetuall imprisonment there to live in misery, and in great contempt, where hee shortly ended his life.
104 Tiberius 3. Anno Domini 699. portrait of emperor Tiberius 3 TIberius the third of this name, Anno Domini 699. borne at Constantinople, was of anancient and very noble family, (as is above mentioned) and through the sedition of the Commi∣alty was made Generall for Affrica, nd by his Army created Emperor Anno Domini 699. Hee did use to weare his Seale of his Armes engra∣ven
in the pummell of his Sword: and he was wont to say, whenso∣ever hee set his Seale to any Let∣ters of Edict, Ordinances, or Com∣missions: See this Sword that shall maintaine my Ordinances, and which shall make Warre against those who shall contradict mine Edicts: His meaning was, that it is not a matter of so great importance, to establish and make good lawes and decrees, as it is to cause them to be kept and observed. This Emperor made his brother Heraclius a Generall, whom he sent into the East against the Agarens with a powerfull Army. He endea∣voured to put Iustinian to death who was now exulant in Cersonia: The same cō∣tradictions I finde in most Authors, as Heliodore, and the Italian Summary. but notwithstanding all his plots to that purpose, he prevailed nothing, not could he bring his intent to any ef∣fect. Whilst hee returned towards. Constantinople, Iustinian was recal∣led
as Emperor, who having un∣derstood that his death was sought, and by all possible meanes wrought by Tyberius, hee suddainly caused him to be imprisoned, and not ma∣ny dayes after, hee not onely depri∣ved him of his Imperiall Dignity, but of his life also; commanding that in the presence of all the peo∣ple his head should be disgracefully struck off, in the seventh yeere of his Soveraignty, his trunke or carcasse being deprived of funebriall solem∣nity and rites befitting the dignity and personage of an Emperor.
105. Philippicus. Anno Domini 712. portrait of emperor Philippicus THis Philippicus, An. Dom. 712. a Constantino∣politan by birth, being the prime Favorite of the grea∣test Potentates of the World, suc∣ceeds in the Empire, because hee was a man of singular courage and wisedome. He confined Cirus the Patriarch into the Isle of Pontus, but with the good liking of all them of
Constantinople: and this he did, be∣cause he followed the orders of the Roman Bishop; in whose place im∣periously and boldly hee placed a yong Abbat, Arrian. a pestilent Hereticke, and sent him to Rome for his confir∣mation. Which moved Constan∣tine the Bishop of Rome to passion, who called a Councell in Rome, wherein hee reprehended all electi∣ons made by the Emperour: and moreover condemning all his opini∣ons, he declared him an Hereticke. Yet this man persevering in his opi∣nions, was by Anastasius chased out of the Soveraignty with great disgrace and contempt, his eyes being first pulled out, he afterwards dyed without any note, and obscure∣ly interred.
106. Anastasius. Anno Domini 715. portrait of emperor Anastasius ANastasius, An. Domini 715. otherwise called Artemius, whose place of birth is not certainely knowne, having pulled out the eyes of his Antecessor, and also out of the Imperiall throne, impatroned him∣selfe in the Orientall government in the yeere of Grace 715. Hee was so good and just in every action, that
hee deserved more than the onely name and title of Emperor. He re∣edified many Churches defaced by the Arrian Hereticks. He wrott to the Bishop of Rome with great humi∣lity and reverence, protesting that his will was ever to continue a de∣fender of the holy Christian faith. Whilest hee had sent a great Army towards Alexandria, many Princes either through malignity or curiosi∣ty turned the same Army upon and against him, creating another new Emperour called Theodosius: where∣upon there grew infinite, trouble∣some, and pernicious seditions in the world every where. Finally, after many insupportable discontents and troublesome tedious passages, hee was by Leo the third murthered, in the first yeere and third moneth of his Empire: but as some write hee was forced to undertake a Monasti∣call life.
107. Theodosius. Anno Dom. 716. portrait of emperor Theodosius THeodosius the third, Anno Domini 716. borne at Constantinople, tooke upon him the administration of the Empire the yeare above-said, but held it one onely yeere. This man was of a very inferiour and meane Family, the servant of a Pagan Scrivener: But having attai∣ned to the Imperiall dignity, he was a wonderfull lover, and zealous in
the Christian Religion; and to make it the more appeare, and as a visible demonstration thereof, hee caused many Images of Saints to be pour∣traicted, and in divers places erected them. But being every way pursu∣ed and persecuted by Leo, he chose a better part, taking Priesthood up∣on him, and living Christian-like, full of charity and Christian duty. After that he retired himselfe into a Monastery, where he lived very ex∣emplarly, and there he continually persevered to his last day at Constan∣tinople.
108. Leo. Anno Demini 717. portrait of emperor Leo THis Emperour, Anno Domini 717. an Isaurian borne, was contrary to his Predecessor, being a man infamous. Seeing that he could not oppose the Bishop of Rome, he ordayned that all his Subjects should pull downe the Images of Saints, and other Statues which were in Churches, alleadging that they were for no other use but
Idolatry: The which command Germanus the Patriarch not willing to obey, hee was by him confi∣ned, and Anastasius an Arrian was ordayned in his place, who by a Councell was deprived, and by the same Councell Leo was exhor∣ted to recant this errour, and not to hinder good and pious men to use their devotions to the Images. But the Emperor would by no meanes consent thereto, but grew more exasperate and contemning: where∣upon Gregory the Pope, and the whole Councell sentenced him to be deprived of the Empire, and hee dyed at Constantinople in the fourteenth yeere of his Empire. Paulus Diaconus, together with Anastasius affirme, that within the City of Constantinople there dyed of pestilence and famine above three hundred thousand persons of all a∣ges and both sexes, Anno. 719.
The Answer of this Leo to one that would be made a Gentleman. This Emperor being at his Palace, a Citizen of Bologna, exceeding rich and wealthy, but of base parentage, presented himselfe before the Em∣peror, saying, May it please your sacred Majesty to make and create me a Gentleman: for I have wealth sufficient to maintaine the state and degree of a Gentleman: The Empe∣ror answered him, I can make thee much more rich than thou art, but it is not in my power to make thee noble: for that is an honour which thou must purchase by thine owne virtue.
109. Constantinus 5. Anno Domini 720. portrait of emperor Constantinus 5 THis man, Anno Domini. 720. being also an Isaurian by birth, fol∣lowing the steps of his Father, persecuted good men exceedingly, and in what hee could, hee destroyed all good lawes and customes, bent himselfe to witchcrafts and enchantments, and to a thousand infamies, and as a
common enemy to Christian Religi∣on, he followed the Arrian sect of Athanasius, Patriarch of Constanti∣nople, by whose perswasion he cau∣sed many Priests to be put to death, with many Monkes and good Chri∣stians: Wherefore the Pope desi∣rous to reforme his errours, and to reduce him to better courses, sent Embassadors unto him, exhorting him to quitt himselfe of that perni∣cious sect: but they and the Popes Embassie were not onely slighted, but contemned and scorned: where∣upon he was excommunicated. Up∣on this he contracted a new League with the King of Bulgaria, a man like himselfe in every quality and condition. This man enjoyed the Empire very happily in respect of his owne person: but when, or where he dyed it is doubtfull: but some doe affirme that hee dyed at Adrianople.
When this Emperor was baptized, he defiled the Font with his ordure: whereupon it was Prophetically conjectured, that much mischiefe would bee by him perpetrated: wherefore hee had the by-name of Copronymus. He was called also Ca∣ballinus, because this Monster of men was so much delighted in horse-dung, that hee wallowed or anointed himselfe in it, and com∣manded his Courtiers to doe the like. Theophanes and Theostriscus in Nicet.
110. Leo 4. Anno Domini 751. portrait of emperor Leo 4 AT this time the Empire was much afflicted, An. Dom. 751. because the Barbarians in this Emperors time possessed all the East: Where∣upon the Romans being much di∣stressed, tyred, and worne out of heart with continuall warres, were resolved to put themselves in the power and protection of the French.
Wherefore Leo intended to march with an Army into Syria: but per∣ceiving the enemies strength to bee great, he retyred with great feare, and in liew of recovering the Pro∣vinces lost from the Empire, he be∣tooke himselfe to lust and idlenesse, inventing every day new fashions of apparrell, in the richest manner pos∣sible to adorne himselfe: but above all, he greatly was taken with Jewels, of which hee made himselfe a Dia∣dem, especially with those which were taken out of the Church of S. Sophia, and wearing it continually, through the weight of it hee dyed with an extreame paine in his head at Constantinople, leaving his wife Hirene to governe the Empire, to∣gether with his sonne, and was in∣hum'd there. One thing that was remarkeable in the time of his Regency, was, Theophanes. that in the second yeere of his reigne, and
in the Summer time, betweene the Cyclades Isles, Thera, and Therasia, there appeared out of the Sea a va∣pour to boyle like the smoake of a chimney for the space of many daies, which by little and little grow∣ing thicke and large, broke out into into a flame: afterwards it cast out whole rocks of Pumice, and trans∣ported great heapes of them all over the lesser Asia, Lesbos, and Abydus, and all the maritine parts of Macedo∣nia in such sort, that the whole su∣perfice of the Sea was covered with them: and in the middest of so great a fire a new Isle grew suddainly up by the heaping of the earth toge∣ther, and joyned it selfe to that Isle, which is now called Sacra.
111. Constantinus 6. Anno Dom. 775. portrait of emperor Constantinus 6 AFter the death of Leo, Anno. Dom. 775. Con∣stantine his sonne, whose place of birth is not proba∣bly nominated, tooke upon him the Imperiall government. His Mother Irene, with whom hee ruled ten yeeres, was a cause that a Councell of thirty and three Bishops was held, in which many profitable lawes were made, tending to the general cōmo∣dity
and benefit. Afterwards his mother perceiving that he would not be correspondent to her expectati∣on and will, being hee abandoned himselfe to debauches and lascivi∣ousnesse, there grew a dissention be∣tweene them, so that hee deprived her of all government, and himselfe governed absolute five yeeres. He was a most cruell man: for he caused the eyes of many noble Citizens to be pulled out, under pretence of their conspiracy and treason against him. The people seeing this, they recalled the Empresse Irene, and taking Constantine they imprisoned him, and in revenge they likewise plucked out his eyes, and so in that extreame misery he concluded his fate, the place of his death or interment be∣ing obscured. In the yeere 780, in this Emperors regency, a certaine man digging in a wall of Thracia, found a stone cof∣fin,
wherein there lay the body of a man, and Letters fastned to the cof∣fin in brasse, which made these words, Christus nascetur ex Virgine Maria: Credo in cu: sub Constanti∣no & Irene Imp. 8. Sotiterum me vi∣debit. Theophanes and all other Greeke and Latine Historians con∣stantly affirme, Anno 793. Mens. Decemb. the River Tyber overflowed the City to the highth of twice a mans depth, so that they were in∣forced to helpe and relieve one ano∣ther by little skiffes and tubs. Anno 797. Theoph. writes also, that for the space of ten dayes the Sunne was darkned, that ships on the Sea could not steere a right course, and that many perished by this strange acci∣dent, being a thing against, and be∣yond nature.
112. Carolus Magnus. Anno Domini 801. portrait of emperor Carolus Magnus TO the name of Magnus the greatnesse of this Carolus was every way correspondent, An. Domini 801. who was a man really vertuous, libe∣rall, generous, and in Armes admi∣rable, being by nation a Frenohman. After the death of his father Pipinus, hee remained coinheritor with his brother Carolus of the Crowne of France, but after the space of
two yeares hee remained absolute in the rule and government, in which he tooke in Aquitaine: Hee over∣threw Desiderius King of the Longo∣bards, and restored againe to the Church whatsoever Desiderius a∣bove mentioned had taken away, and thereupon the Empire was put upon him, by the generall Councell, and the Popes, and crowned with great solemnity and triumph. Retur∣ning into France hee overcame the Saxons, conquered Spaine, hee subdu∣ed the Gascognes, Britans, and many other powerfull Princes, whereby he got such fame, that from all parts of the world Embassadors came with rich Presents, beseeching his graci∣ous favour. At length falling into a feaver, but as some say, of a Plurisie, and other inward paines of his bow∣els, he dyed at Aquisgrane, to the in∣unable griefe of the Universe, and was buried very honorably neere the
Capitoll. Should I here undertai to relate his worth, my unworthi∣nesse would come farre short: wher∣fore for more satisfaction, I refee you to Spondanus, and other Au∣thors. 113. Ludovicus Pius: Or Lewis the godly. Anno Domini 814. portrait of emperor Ludovicus Pius THe Emperor Lewis, Anno Domini 814. borne i France, succeeds the good Charlemaigne, and made
upon the rebellious Gascoignes, and submitted them to the Empire. He ubed the boldnesse of the ∣aines and English-men: and having ell conformed the Empire, he cal∣led a Councell at Aquisgrant, at which hee admitted his eldest sonne Lotharius as Co-emperor, and made ipin his second sonne, King of A∣uitany, and Lewis his third son King f Bavaria. But not long after, be∣ause hee preferred Lewis his youn∣est sonne before the other, there rew a great enmity, dissention, and atred amongst them, insomuch hat they tooke Lewis their Father, nd deprived him of the Empire, ost unjustly imprisoning him: from whence they afterwards repenting heir so grosse and unnaturall errour, larged him, and restored him a∣ine with great reconciliations to former possession. This Lewis was a man wonderous
clement and mercifull, and alway a defender of the Church and Em∣pire. Lastly, he yeelded to fate, and dyed neere Moguntum, and wa buried in the Church of St. Arnolph where his urne is still to be seene. Cedrenus and the Annals of Fran testifie, that Anno 823, sundry and frequent prodigies were both seen and heard by Earthquakes & strange Lightnings, by fires falling fro Heaven, raine of stone, pestilenti∣all mortality of men and beasts: Barron. and it was esteemed as a prodigy also that a young Girle about 12 yeeres of age, lived for the space of a whole yeere without any food at all.
114. Lotharius. Anno Domini 823. portrait of emperor Lotharius LOtharius likewise borne in France, succeeds his Father. Anno Domini 823. Hee made warre against his brothers, and being by them over∣throwne, he fled to Aquisgrane, and even there not resting in safety, hee was enforced with his wife and children to goe to Vienna: where he also was pursued by his enemies, in∣somuch that he only escaped. Sergius
the Pope perceiving this, and being moved to compassion towards him and the Empire, sent Embassadors to reconcile them. Whereupon it was concluded, that this Lotharius should have the government of Ita∣ly, and a part of France called Roma∣nia with the title of Emperour. Final∣ly, finding himselfe aged, and wil∣ling to disburthen himselfe, he re∣signed the Empire to his eldest sonne Lewis to succeed after his decease, and hee taking the habit of a Monke upon him, in a short time departed this life in a Monastery, and was solemnly inhumed at Prunia. Anastasius affirmeth, that An. 848. there was a Basiliske or Cockatrice in the City of Rome, bred in a vault, that by his breath and aspect, or sight slew all that saw him, or came neere the place where he was. Al∣though Pliny lib. 8. cap. 21. will have it, that those Animals breed but in
one place, which he calleth Cyrenai∣ca, in dry places, and not in moist: But when God intends to punish the sinnes of man, all creatures whatsoe∣ver obey him, so that they breed when and where his divine will is. 115. Ludovicus, or Lewes. Anno Domini 855. portrait of emperor Ludovicus LOtharius having retired him to a monasticall life, Anno Domini 855. his son ewis also by birth a French∣man,
grew arrogant, and himselfe came neere unto the City of Rome with a great and potent Army, and to dominere the more, he commit∣ted outrages, rapines, and murthers. The people of Rome seeing this, they besought the Citizens and Alder∣men to goe to meete him without the City-gates, and to entertaine him with all submission. Which be∣ing done, hee was pacified, and im∣mediately hee went to visite Pope Sergius, who granted him in his de∣parture from Rome many priviledges, and solemnly crowned him Empe∣ror. After that, he went to Pavia, and became very much devoted to the Roman Church. He was much mole∣sted with his sonne Charles, who with his many plots of treason, sought the death of his father: for which cause many Lords were put to death in Gallia Cisalpina upon suspic. And having wel composed all things
concerning the Epire, he died in Milan, having governed 21 yeares, was buried in great pompe after the Romane manner in Milan aforefaid. Matheus Westm. writeth that Anno Dom. 870. the Danes comming into England, wasted & spoiled the coun∣try, committing all manner of out∣rages, as ravishing women and maids of all sorts and qualities: amongst the rest Ebba the Abbesse of Collingham Abby hearing of their cōming, cal∣led all her Nuns together, and with a razor cut off her owne nose, and up∣per-lip, perswading the rest so to do, rather then to be abused by the Danes, which they instantly did. The Danes comming thither, and seeing such a strange spectacle of martir'd faces; in aage palpably perceiving themselves deluded, set fire on the Monastery, & burnt them every mo∣thers child. They likewise took king Edmund, and binding him to a tree,
whipped him a long time with cords knotted in a most greivous manner, afterwards shot him full of arrowes, & lastly cut off his head: This hapned in this Emperors time although no∣thing touching him, yet for the satis∣faction of some, I inserted as a thing worthy of memory Spon. in Lodovico. 116. Charles 2. surnamed Calvus. portrait of emperor Charles Calvus An. Dom. 876 CHarles the brother to the a∣foresaid Lewis beganne h reigne in the yeare of grate,
876. Charles the third being called and crowned Emperour Augustus, & this being perceived by the sonnes of Lewis, they took it as an indignity not sufferable; and suddenly with all expedition they levied a great army, and came into Italy with an absolute intent of depriving him both of Em∣pire and life. Now Charles gives or∣der for his defence, and fortifies Ve∣ona with great and inpregnable for∣ifications and strength, by all possi∣le industrie, there to prohibite and oppe the passages of the enemies rces neare the City of rent. But e fell sicke in Mantua, and by an in∣xicated medicine administred unto im by Zedechias his Phisitian a Iew, e suddenly dyed at Mantua. This harles was a very good christian, d very devout: he built many chur∣es and monasteries in divers parts  the world, & enlarged the service  God, to his best possibility and po∣wer.
And with all due funebrial rites, was interred at St. Denis his Church neere Paris where he lies in expecta∣tion of a glorious resurrection. 117 Charles 3 Crassus. portrait of emperor Charles Crassus THis Charles borne in France was surnamed the grosse, Anno Domini 879. h was king of Germany & Fran He was a good Christian, and  a very good disposition, a great e my to malefactors, and very seve in punishing such as transgressed  lawes. He was crowned by Po
Iohn & pronounced Augustus. After ten yeares he made war against the Ormans, and subjected them in such sort, that Rodifrdus their king, de∣manded peace with all submission, promising moreover that he would becoe a christian, with all his court & followers: to which demand Charles easily and willingly conde∣scendes, to his great content and sa∣tisfaction. And the more to confirme his love, he was Rodifridus his God∣father in baptisme. After many tedi∣ous and troublesome wars, he be∣came much impoverished, and was destitute and forsaken of all his nobi∣lity and Peeres, and deprived of the Empire. And being thus abandoned he died miserably, and with smal and no honor he was enterred in a poore sepulchre.
118. Armulfus. Anno. Dom. 887 portrait of emperor Armulfus THis Arnulfus being nephew to Charls and king of Frāce, Anno Domini 887 in which country he was born, took upon him the Empire wherin he governed 12. yeares. So called the beautifull. Formosus be∣ing called to the aide of the Pope came into Italy, and being entred in∣to Bergamo, he slew Ambrose Count of the city. And being come to
Rome, he restored the Pope to his former dignity with great solemnity, and concurse of people of most re∣mote nations. After that the Pope crowned him with great pomp and triumph, and by the reason of the in∣finite number of the people he was enforced to retire into France. He fought with the Moguntius and o∣vercame them. He subdued the Or∣manns which were now rebelled and fallen from the Empire. But at length finding all peaceable and quiet, he gave himselfe over to his pleasure and lust, and became so insolent and proud, that at last he fell from the Church, and rebelled: whereupon peradventure through the divine iu∣stice be fell into a long an incurable infirmity, whereof he miserably con∣cluded his daies at Ratisbona, and was entombed at Hotings.
119. Lewis 3. portrait of emperor Lewis 3 AFter the death of the Ante∣cedent Emperour, An. Domini 901. by the e∣lection of the Swizzer and the French, his sonne succeeds, in the yeere 901, who was also by Nation a French man. About this time the Hungarns made cruell incursions into the cofines of Christendome, and demoished all the Churches in those parts i a most malicious con∣tept and inhumane indignities. To whose violence this just, benigne,
and excellent Prince being wonder∣fully desirous to resist and oppose, he sent an Army against them, who at the first encounter were routed and overthrowne. Afterwards challen∣ging his Fathers Kingdome of Beren∣garius, in a battaile overthrew him with marveilous industry and cou∣rage: But the battaile againe renew∣ed afresh, this Lewis was worsted and taken, and imprisoned at Verona to the losse both o his eyes and Impe∣riall dignity. Lastly, being enlarged, he retyred himselfe into Germany as a private man, overloaden with dis∣grace, and overborne with griefe he surrendered his last breath, and had sepulture at Ratisbone.
120. Conradus. portrait of emperor Conradus THis Conradus borne in France∣nia was a man so great, Anno Domini 912. power∣full, and generous, that he was created Augustus. In the beginning of his governmet he found many Coun∣tries adverse: but afterwards with a strong confidence of his curteous clemency, and mercy of this singular Prince, they voluntarily came in, and submitted without any molestation or mulct. Neverthelesse in the third
Yeare of his Empire, the Hungarians entred into Germany and sacked Ba∣varia with many other opulent and rich Countries. Against whome this Monarch advancing, to the honour of the Empire he vanquished and cru∣shed them. And having performed many notable enterprises, knowing himselfe to be neere his end, assem∣bling may Almain Lords, he exhor∣ted them to live well, and to a fealty towards the Roman-Church, intreate∣ing them to create Henry the son of Otho Emperour; which he having ob∣tained, he laid downe the Imperiall scepter, and after the seventh yeare of his reigne, he departed to another life dying in Germany being with due obsequies entombed at Fulda.
121. Henry 1. surnamed The Fowler or Falconer wherewith he was much de∣lighted. Auceps. portrait of emperor Henry Auceps BY the perswasion of Con∣radus this Henry a Saxon borne, Anno Domini 919. was created Em∣perour, who was a man abundantly replenished with singu∣lar graces, and sublime gifts above all men of his time, and hee became a Monarch so famous, that he was be∣loved, honoured, and reverenced of every man. And although many Dukes and Princes rebelled against him, he neverthelesse with his admi∣rable
prudence pacified them all. He suppressed the Saxons to his great honour and reputation, and recove∣red a world of treasures and wealth from them. Hee subdued many o∣ther Provinces and Cities with little or no difficulty, but rather by his discreete meekenesse and gentle cle∣mency, wherefore hee eternized his name to memory. Afterward being surprized with a grievous infirmity, (as some write) a dead Palfie, lea∣ving all quiet, he left his sonne Otho Emperour, to whom hee recom∣mended true and incorruptible u∣stice in his government; and by little and little hee yeelded unto death at the age of 60 yeeres, and 17 of his government, being with great so∣lemnity and pompe befitting so worthy a man, inhumed at Quendelo∣burg.
122. Otho the great. portrait of emperor Otho the great THis was the first German Emperour, Anno Domini 936 being by birth a Saxon, and crowned by Pope Leo. He was a mar∣veilous Christian-like man, a defen∣der and lover of the Church. Hee overcame Boleslaus King of Bohemia, and Hugo Count of Paris. Hee subdu∣ed the Hungarian, and after so many victories and trophes, perswaded by some Cardinalls against the iniquity
of Pope Iohn, being moved with a godly zeale, he came into Italy with a mighty Army, and tooke Berenga∣rius with his sonne, and confined one of them into Gracia, and the o∣ther into Germany. And being come Rome, hee deturbed the aforesaid Pope from the seate, and by the in∣stigation of the people he made Leo Pope. And for the commodity and good universall hee determined and arbitrated many litigious dissentions. In the end finding himselfe very a∣ged, he elected for his Companion in the Imperiall dignity his owne sonne Otho: and returning into Ger∣many his native Countrey, hee dyed at Vienna, as others write, at Quen∣delburgh, having reigned 12 yeeres in the Imperiall Majesty, and lyeth interred at Magdeburg.
123. Otho 2. portrait of emperor Otho 2 THis Otho, Anno. Dom. 968. by Nation a Ger∣man, tooke the Imperiall Scepter in hand, and follow∣ing his Fathers steps hee was most Christian-like, and an excellent pro∣pugnator of the Church. In Germa∣ny he tooke Henry Duke of Bavaria, and with his owne hands Emperour∣like he dispossessed him of that Sig∣nory. Hee fought against Lotharius King of France, and overcame him
who had spoiled and wasted many countries. He subdued Dalmatia with great valour to his perpetual honour. But afterwards fighting against the Greeks, he was routed in such sort, that he lost his whole army, and him∣selfe fled being disguised, and by sea was transported into Sicilia: where being discovered, he ransomed him∣selfe, by infinite summs of moneys. And being enlarged, of the Sici∣lians he was wonderfully reverenced and honoured by them, they them∣selves attending and conducting him to Rome with exceeding great honor, where shortly after he died, leaving his son Otho to succeed, himselfe ha∣ving governed 17 yeares, and lieth also entombed in Rome.
124. Otho 3 portrait of emperor Otho 3 OTho the third tooke possess∣on of the Empire with great difficulty, Anno Domini 985. because there was a great confusion about him, and Henry Duke of Bavaria: but after∣wards the Electors all accorded to O∣tho, and this their election was con∣firmed by Pope Benedict of those times. He was not any way different from the conditions o his predeces∣sors: for he was a great defender of
the Church. And in all his warres (which were many) he remained in∣vincibly victorious, having alwayes a brave spirit, wherefore he was called the wonder of the world. Finding all in quiet and peace he intended to go in∣to Italy, which he did, and came to Rome, and was crowned by Gregory the fifth with wonderfull solemnity: and being very desirous to returne into Germany, he was poisoned by the Romanes, and died suddenly in Rome, the eightenth yeare of his Empire, committing his body to his sons to be conducted solemnly into Germany, there to be interred at A∣quisgrane, and his ashes to be inurn'd, after the Romane fashion. This Emperour married Mary the daugh∣ter of the king of Arragon, which Mary often entised a young Earle (a man of a singular chastity, as being himselfe al∣so married) to the satisfaction of her lust; but being by him repulsed, she com∣plained
to Otho, that the Earle had forced her to his desire: Wherefore Otho commanded him to be beheaded. The Earles Lady taking up the head of her husband, came and threw it be∣fore Otho as he was at that time in the seate of Iudgement, with many teares and word, charging him, that hee was guilty of innocent blood, which shee proved by taking (before his face and the rest of his company) a red hot Iron in her hand, custome it as among e Romans, at whosoe∣er did take a d hot Iron  his hand, d was not rt, wa held nocent of at act wher∣ he was ac∣sed. which never hurt her: Otho seeing that, and the La∣dy thereupon insulting, promised her his owne life in satisfaction: But the Peeres after much intreaty somewhat pacified the Lady, and the matter be∣ing more seriously sifted, the whole crime fell upon the Empresse, whom Otho commanded to bee burnt, and gave the Widdow 3 Castles, to her and her children for ever. Barro. This Emperour also appointed divers Offices in the Empire, as
Chancellor, Dapifer, Pincerna, and the like; adding those places as ho∣norable to those Earles and Counts, upon whom hee conferred them, thenceforth to be irremoveable for ever. 125. Henry 2. portrait of emperor Henry 2 HEnry the second borne in Ba∣varia, Anno Domini 1001. was by the Electors created Emperor in the yeere of Grace 1001, being at first Duke of Bavaria. Hee was an excellent and Saint-like man, and had a Lady
to his wife, worthy and like himselfe, adorned with all compleat perfecti∣ons. This man by the reason of seri∣ous occupations, concerning the Im∣periall affaires, could not for a cer∣taine space come into Italy: but dis∣patching his businesses of greatest importance, he came to Rome, not in a pompous manner, but with a conve∣niet and due greatnesse, and was by Benedict 8 then Pope crowned Em∣perour. Afterwards he went toward Capua, against the Saxons, and staied them out of Italy, together with ma∣ny Greeks which favoured the Turks. At length having well composed the Empire, and founded the bishoprick of Bamberge, he matched his sister in marriage to Stephen king of Hun∣gary afterwards falling sick, in a short time died; I finde it not recorded where, to the great greife of all men, and lieth enterred at Bamberg before mentioned.
126. Conradus 2. portrait of emperor Conradus 2 NOt without great contention two yeeres after the death of Henry this noble and sub∣lime Prince borne in Franconia, Anno Domini 1024. was lawfully chosen Emperour, who im∣mediately made warre upon Eli∣brand Duke of Milan, and besieged him; although out of his owne cle∣mency and noble minde, and by the intreaty of the Arch-bishop of Colo∣nia he raised his siege. Departing thence hee went to Rome, and by
Pope Iohn was crowned Emperour with great solemnity and triumph. After some dayes departing from Rome, he warred against the Sclavo∣nians, and bravely overcame them. He ordayned many most commodi∣ous and profitable lawes, amongst which this was one, That what Prince soever violated the peace, hee should lose his head. It is not found, nor certainly knowne when, how, nor where this most Christian Em∣perour dyed: Neverthelesse it is credibly to be supposed that a good end concluded so good beginnings, and so vertuous a life; but had in∣interment at Spires. Glaber amongst other Authors re∣porteth, that on the Feast of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, the 29 of June, Anno Domini 1033, at sixe of the clocke in the morning the Sunne be∣gan to be eclipsed, and continued un∣till eight in a very strange manner;
the Suune seeming to bee of the co∣lour of a Saphire, being in the up∣per part like the Moone in the last Quartile: and the countenances of men seemed of the colours of the dead, pale, and wanne; and whatsoever was in the Ayre, seemed of a yellow or Saffron colour, to the terrour of all men: so that the greatest Philosophers and learnedst of those times could not give any other reason, but that it por∣tended mortality▪ and demonstrated a power incomprehensible by humane na∣ture and reason.
127. Henry 3. portrait of emperor Henry 3 AFter the good Conradus, Anno Domini 1039. Henry his sonne borne also in Franconia, succeeded in the Empire: In the beginning of his Reigne hee fought very fortunately against Hurdericus King of Bohemia, and made him tributary, so that he never after disturbed him. He over∣threw the Hungarians, and restored Solon to his Kingdome, of which hee had beene deprived by Ladislaus.
About this time there grew many issensions in Rome amongst the Pre∣ates concerning the Popedome, and e with singular prudence laboured o pacifie them, and caused a Coun∣ell to be called, in which Clemens he second was elected as true Pope, nd by him was crowned Emperor. After wards hee made warres upon he Sarazens. Returning into Germany, he built a ately and sumptuous Church in Samberge, dedicating it to St. Gre∣gory, and obtained it to be a Cathe∣rall, with an obligation of sending certaine quantity of Incense to the Pope, and a white Horse with due Furniture. Bertholdus reports this, That Hen∣y beginning to loath and hate his wife, ho was a most innocent and vertuous oman, committed her to prison, here he compelled many to violate and orce her: he commanded his second
sonne Conradus to doe the like which he refusing, being his step-m∣ther, this Henry denied him to b his sonne; and after some other in∣ward infirmitie besides his Apoplexy, as peradventure iealousie, which many times breeds from a meer, but false sus∣pition, and causeth perpetuall dissenti∣on, and debates, which by continuance, altereth the nature of love, converting it to a loathing and hatred, oftentimes to the ruine of one or both parties. He died in Aquisgrane, leaving his sonne Henry to inherit the crowne imperiall, and had his funerall obse∣quies performed in a most royall and glorious forme, and thus buried at Spires.
128. Henry 4 portrait of emperor Henry 4 TOr the memorable goodnes of the father, Henry the son, An. Dom. 1056. the place of his birth being ot knowne, was elected Emperour, although he were very young, who  the beginning shewed himselfe ery forward to good, and a great e∣emy to vice. He afterwards became roud and insolent, and a contemner f religion, so that he became cru∣l, whereupon sundry Popes roclaimed him heretique. But
recanting at length his errors, he wa received into the bosome of the Church. Not long after being a Pavia, he againe fell from the faith, and laboured to deprive Pope Grego∣ry of his seate. But the Germans per∣ceiving him in such a variable incon∣stancy and malice, deprived him of the Empire, in whose place they chose Rudolphus Duke of Saxony. Whereupon this Henry with great indignation put many both of the Clergy and layty to death, and crea∣ted a new Pope in his owne Coun∣try. In the meane time this Rudd∣phus the new Emperour gathered a great Army, and overthrew Henry and all his adherents: and thus hee dyed, leaving an ill savour behode him, and was buried at Spires.
129. Henry 5. portrait of emperor Henry 5 HEnry, sonne to the former Emperor, An. Dom. 1106. whose place of birth is nor mentioned, by the Divine will having pacified the Empire, hee came with a powerfull Army into Italy, and to Rome, under pretence of peace, and by a wile tooke the Pope Paschalis with all the Clergy, and deprived them of their faculties. Whereupon the people of Rome slew an infinite number of the
Germans and chased them out of Rome, comming another time to Rome, he was crowned by one Mau∣ritius a bishop of his owne making. Paschalis being dead he was excom∣municated by Calistus: Returning to himselfe, with great hmiliation he re∣nounced his former proceedings re∣signing himselfe into the hands of the Pope; and promising thence forth to be a faithfull man. Wherefore the Pope moved to compassion, absolved him, and restored him to his former dignity. Being returned into Germa∣ny, he shortly after surrendred his life at Traiectum in Germany, and lies bu∣ried also at Spires.
130. Lotharius. portrait of emperor Lotharius AFter the death of Henry, Anno Dom. 1125. the Emperour Lotharius was chosen by the Electors, he then being Duke of Saxony, a man of excellent parts, and most prudent in in all his actions, religious and a lover of true iustice. He replaced Innocen∣cius the third, & restored him to the seate, by whom he was with many previledges and great solemnities crowned Emperour of Germany: Re∣turning
into his Countrey with great Majesty and State: he proclai∣med warres against the Bohemians, and with singular valour in a short time hee supprossed their impudent boldnesse. After that hee pacified many dissentions of great impor∣tance in Italy, and of great conse∣quence concerning the Romans. He chased Rogero Duke of Calabria and Puglia out of those parts, which he contrary to all Justice most unlawful∣ly usurped, & he relieved many that were oppressed and distressed. In the end having composed all in qui∣et, he returned home, where hee peaceably resigned his life, and dy∣ed at Verona, having governed e∣leaven yeeres, and lyes buried in Saxony. An. Dom. 1124, the order of the Knight Templers was instituted by this Emperour, and the charge like∣wise defrauded: Their habits were
white, Tyrius lib. 12. cap. 7. and for the space of nine yeers here were no more but nine of them; but shortly after their number grew finite. 131. Conradus. portrait of emperor Conradus COuradus borne in Sweden, Anno Domini 1139. was Duke of Bavaria, and Nephew to Henry the fift, nd was elected Caesar by the entire onsent of the Electors. For his emency and piety hee was great∣ beloved of Saint Bernard, which as an occasion that hee with many
other Christian Princes went very powerfully against the Turkes, and making a stay in Iconium or Gracia, Emanuel the Emperor of the Greeks, promised him necessary victualling for his Army: But the wicked ma shewed his Grecian malice, and mixed the meale which was for the bread of the Christian Army with some pernicious mixture, as chalke grownd into flower, by the which treason and villany most perfidious, an infinite number of the Army dy∣ed, and miserably perished; inso∣much that such a mortality dayly increasing worse, and more vehe∣ment, the good Conradus was en∣forced to surcease his resolutio and impresse, and to march into Thracia: And before his Coronati∣on having done many notable, no∣ble, and famous acts, hee passed to better life, and dyed at Bamb and had his interment at Lorchiu
Anno Domini 1150, acertaine great man called Hugo, built a Castle neare the house of Cluni, but being intrea∣ted to desist, hee with a contempt rejected the request; but sixe yeeres after the said Castle by an Earth∣quake (the Earth gaping under it) was swallowed up, and that place being filled with water, became an abyssive Lake. 132. Fredericus Barbarossa. portrait of emperor Fredericus Barbarossa BY a surname this Emperour was called Barbarossa, Anno Domini 1152. be∣cause he had a red Beard: he
was borne in Swede, and his brother Conradus being dead, he was elected. He cme into Italy with an invincible army, and be caguerd Tortona, and sacked it, he was by the Pope at Rome crowned Emperour of the Germani. Returning thence to his owne coun∣try he atchieved many memorable and worthy acts. But afterwards up∣on some indignity conceived against the Pope, became againe, with a great army before the walls of Rome, and the citizens having man'd the walls for their safeguard & defence, it hapned that some souldiers of the Imperiall army found a Hare, and with a great shout and outcry, which they usually made at their first onsets in warre, coursed her, which ranne di∣rectly towards the citty, the souldiers pursug her. The citty souldiers sup∣posing them to make an assau through feare forsooke their station and retreated from the walls: Which
the Emperour perceiving, presently led on his army, and scaling the walls tooke in the Citty, and sacked it Fitzh. And by the reason he fostered such a Schisme, he was excolumunicated, whereupon he in a rage tooke many things from the Church. He persecu∣ted Pope Alexander the third, of the house of l'andinelli Sanese, taking part with the Anti-popes, and especi∣ally with Iudas Cremascus. Making warre against the Venetians, he was by them overthrowne, his sonne ta∣ken, and himselfe as it were utterly affoibled. He with great submission, by the meanes of the said Venetians was reconciled. He fought valiantly against the Turkes, and gained many notable victories. He conquered Ar∣menia, and in that country swimming his horse over a river, was drowned, & afterwards was taken up, and his funeral rites were performed at Tyre.
There hapned in the yeare 1169. on the fourth day of February such a ve∣hement earth-quake in the whole isle of Sicily, moving the whole Island that it wa perceived in Calabria, and the stately a dealthy City of Catana wa so utterly shattered, that there was not one house lft standing, and there were above fifteene thousand men and women with their children, rt oppressed with the ruine thereof, which was an accident to be deplored and lamented all over the Christian world as an ex∣emplar punition, by the All-powerfull hand of the God omnipotent.
133. Henry the 6. portrait of emperor Henry 6 Henry the sonne of the afore∣said Ferderick borne also in Swede after his election went to Rome in great magnifiscence and triumph, An. Don. 1190. & was there crowned Em∣peror by Pope Caelestinus. He fought with Tancredus, and beleaguered him in Naples, tooke in the citty, and the said Tancredus was slaine by the souldiers, and his sonne William with his two sisters were carried
away prisoners into Germany to the Emperour, who was already re∣moved for feare of a suspected plague. But they together with a great number of Bishops and Pre∣lates were most cruelly murthered: For which outragious cruelties Pope Caelestine excommunicated him: al∣though afterwards upon great sub∣missive humiliation hee was againe restored and absolved, and was made by him King of Sicily. Af∣terwards falling grievously sicke in Mesana, and having recommen∣ded his brother Philip and his owne sonne Frederick to Pope Innocent, hee gave up the ghost in Panorma, and after the Roman custome was richly entombed there. In this Emperours time lived one Hugo Bishop of Lincolne, who in his visitation comming to the Ab∣by of Godstoe, and entring into the Church to doe his devotion, and
beholding a new Hearse covered with funerall ornaments very richly adorned, asked whose it was, an∣swer was made of Rosamunds; hee presently commanded it to be taken thence, and the corpse to be buri∣ed, not in the Church, because shee was an unchaste woman. 134. Philip. portrait of emperor Philip A Great dissention did arise a∣mongst the Electors upon the death of Henry the sixt, Anno. Dom. 1199.
because some stood for this Phillip Duke of Swede, and brother to the late Emperor: an other some stood for Otho Duke of Saxony, who was Grandchilde to Lotharius Emperor. Whereupon Pope Innocentius (in consideration that Fredericke and Henry, the ancestors of this Philip, had beene rebelious to the Church) declared Otho to bee the right and true Emperor: Wherefore Philip being much distasted, by the assi∣stance of Philip King of France, hee made warre against Otho. In the meane while Innocentius excommu∣nicated Philip, together with all his adherents, which either savoured or assisted him. Afterwards there fol∣lowed a pacification, on condition that Philip was declared Empe∣ror of Germany, but hee governed with great perplexity and molesta∣tions: Within a while after he was murthered at Bamberg by Altigra∣nus
Prince of Turigia, and by that meanes there ensued a generall peace and quite: He was conveigh∣ed to Spire, and had a stately fune∣rall celebrated for him, with a mo∣nument there. 135. Otho portrait of emperor Otho IN the yeare 1199, Anno Domini 1199. Otho borne a Saxon, and Duke of Saxony was elected Em∣peror: And having taken an oath not to violate the Church, who
not long after his coronation by Pope Innocentius, he violated his oath, by ransacking many churches, for he was a man more covetous than religious: and immediatly after, he beganne to warre against the Ro∣mans, by whom he was chased out of Rome, and overthrowne: but be∣ing more enraged, he opposed him∣selfe against the Pope, and against Fredericke, sonne of the late Empe∣ror, from whom hee tooe with lit∣tle or no resistance, many lands and places: Which Innocentius understan∣ding, called a Counced in Rome, and deposed him of the Empire, and by the assistance of many Princes against him, in the behalfe of the Pope, hee had such a great overthrow, that he lost all his men. Whereupon the E∣lectors accorded to elect Fredericke King of Siclia Emperor. For Othe returned againe into Germany, there to make all possible preparations for
the defence of his Crowne and dig∣nity. And having mustred up all his power and strength, pitched a bat∣taile against Fredericke, wherein he lost the day, together with his life; being wounded in thirty severall pla∣ces in his body; and was interred at Brunswicke. 136. Fredericke the 2. portrait of emperor Frederick 2 OTho being deprived of the Empire, Anno Domini 1220. Fredericke (a Sax∣on borne) was elected, who
was crowned by Honorius Pope, by whose asistance he was restored to the kingdome of Sicily although that favour was very ill requi∣ted, because he suddenly made o∣pen wars sacking, wasting, and spoi∣ling many places that did belong to the Church, wherefore he was ex∣communicated and deprived of the Empire: but he slighting and con∣temning all the Popes censures, be∣came far more cruell against the Church, and the more to injure the Pope, upon no occasion he slew many Prelates. Afterwards the Parthians, Guelfs, and Gibellines overcomming the countrey of Italy, upon this oacasion, many citties were wasted, sacked, spoiled and razed. After this returning to Fuglia a violent feaver came upon him, and whilest he intented to recreate and refresh his army, he was then by Manfred his bastard sonne
strangled at Taranto, and lyes buri∣ed at M. Regalis. 137. Henry 7 portrait of emperor Henry 7 THis Henry sonne of the afore∣said Fredericke and Constan∣tia was at ten yeeres of age e∣lected and crowned Emperour in A∣quisgrane: and being come to age, An: Domini 120. he married Margaret the Daughter of Leopoldus Due of Austria. And re∣membring his father stood excōmu∣nicated by the Pope, and thinking it was
undeservedly; hee bent himselfe to revenge, and with an infinite num∣ber of souldiers arose against him in open warres: but upon better ad∣vice, and doubtfull peradventure of the successe, turned his forces against Otho: which made his father suspect that he would in time be of sufficient power, (already knowing his bold∣nesse of courage) and apt to deprive him of the Crowne Imperial; wher∣upon hee imprisoned him with a strong guard over him, and with a strict charge of custody, in which misery he at length dyed, having no obsequies at all confered upon him.
138. Rudolphus. portrait of emperor Rudolphus RVdolphus borne at Habs∣burg, Anno Domini 1273. was elected Empe∣ror in Lions, in the time that a generall Councell was there holden in the yeare 1273. He was a man of exquisite valour, and most excellent in all matters, very able of body, of a beautifull re∣semblance, replenished with singular prudence and wisedome. The yeare after his election he went to Rome, there to be crowned; and although
(as some say) the Pope would not condescend or grant him a coronati∣on, neverthelesse he obtained the Imperiall governement of Germany. Anno 1282 an army of French-men being in Sycily in preparation for A∣frick, the Sycilians upon Easterday in the afternoone which fell at that time upon the 30 of March, upon the ringing of the bells to Even-song, set upon the French not dreaming of a∣ny such matter, especially on Easter∣day, and slew them every man, wo∣man, and childe, to the number of 8000 persons: and those women which were with childe by the French, were bowelled, that not a sprigge might sprout from a French stocke: the memory of this is not ex∣tinct, for the French know les vespres de la Sycile The Sycilian Even∣song. Genebrard. Returning backe he moved warre against Agesilaus king of Bohemia
and so subjected him, that he held him in servitude and slavery many yeares: but afterwards willing to sa∣tisfie the world, and expresse his magnanimity, he voluntarily re∣stored him his kingdome againe, giving his daughter unto him in mar∣riage. And having reduced all matters to a generall peace, he fell sicke, and dyed at the age of seventy three at Gemersheym, and was inter∣red at Spires.
139. Adolphus. portrait of emperor Adolphus AFter the death of the good old man Adolphus, An. Domini 1292. Mar∣quesse of Anassona borne n Nassau, attained to the Imperiall dignity in the yeere of the Incarnation 1292, with the unity of consent of the Electors. This man was also adorned with all the riches of vertue, but very poore in wordly estate, and weake in men of Armes. And although he were not crowned
by the Pope, neverthelesse (per∣adventure by advice and councell, or at that time indiscreete, not re∣flecting that impresses of Warre should be performed rather by supe∣riority, (the better to secure the vi∣ctory) than by inconsiderate temeri∣ty and rashnesse hee) laboured with those small forces which he had, to recover some places defected from the Empire. And fighting against Albertus sonne of Rudolphus now Emperour in the Countrey of Spire, although hee behaved himselfe very valiantly, neverthelesse through the small quantity of soldiers he was by the same Albertus overthrowne, and slaine neare Spires, and lyes buried there. In this Emperors Reigne, Anno Domini 1303, the Chaire wherein the Kings of England are crowned at Westminster, was brought out of Scotland by Edward King of Eng∣land,
which the Scots called the fatall chaire: in the yeare 1310. The knight-templers in Germany, France, England, and other countries were all cut off, & many of them burnt alive. Chron. Montford. 140. Albertus. portrait of emperor Albertus ALbertus, Anno Domini 1269. the son of Rudol∣phus late Emperor decea∣sed, borne in Nassau, a man most expert in ares, succeeding in the Empire, demanded divers severall times
of Boniface the Pope his coronation: who being against it, and repugnant, would by no meanes condescend thereto. Afterwards by the rea∣son of jarres and discords betweene Philip king of France and the Pope, he did not onely crowne, and con∣firme him Emperor, but gave him al∣so the kingdome of France, subjec∣ting the king to his Imperiall govern∣ment and command: which was an occasion of infinite slaughters, dis∣cords, intestine and civill warres in Christendome. This man having ever spent and emploied the greatest part of his time in warres and heroicall actions, labouring day and night to recover the secure harbour of tran∣quillity and peace: on a certaine day disembarking himselfe, having passed over the Rheine, he was slaine at Rhe∣inveld in Germany by anephew of his, for certaine dissentions between them which before had hap∣pened
in Arabia, and hath his ashes inurn'd at Keningstadt. In this Albertus his time lived that famous Doctor Ioannes Duns Scotus, who died at Coloyn, being supposed to be dead, having onely an accustomed fit, of a Lethargy, which afterwards was evident, when they that were his friends came, caused him to be taken up again, having found him to be alive, by many bruises on his face, and his flesh eaten off of his armes and shoulders, and many other signes & to∣kens to thegriefe of many a worthy scholler.
141. Henry the 7. portrait of emperor Henry 7 THis Henry was Marquesse of Luxemburghe where he was borne, Anno Dom. 1368. son to Henry and Bea∣trice, & elected in the yeare of grace, 1308, and confirmed by Pope Cle∣ment upon this condition, that at the end of two yeares he should according to the accustomed manner goe to solem∣nize his corontion at Rome, which he persorming was entertained with all pompous manner and jncredible
magnificence by the Cittizens and Communalty, and after that was crowned by 3 Cardinals: and there he appeased many dissentions which were then afoote in the Countrey of Italy, many parts being taken. His re∣turne was by Tuscany, where his sol∣diers did much mischiefe. Being arri∣ved at Buonconvento within 12 miles of Siena he fell grievously sicke, and caused himselfe to be carried to the Bath of Macereto, and that availing him nothing, he returned againe to Buonconvento, where his sicknesse in∣creasing, and the best Art in Phisicke working no good effect within few dayes after hee dyed, and was inhu∣med at Pisa.
142. Fredericke 3. portrait of emperor Frederick 3 The Popes chaire was vacant two yeares, three moneths, and seaventeene dayes. THis Fredericke was Duke of Austria, Anno Domini 1314. where hee was also borne; the sonne of Alber∣tus Caesar, and elected to succeed in the Imperiall Throne. At the same time 2 Emperors were chosen by the Electors, viz. this Frederick & Lewis, and both being crowned, there en∣sued not onely betweene them,
but also all the world over, most cruell and bloody civill warres: And each pretending his cause juridically lawfull, enabled themselves to their utmost possibility, with what forces they could for warre, the better to march whithersoever occasion should call upon them. Matters stan∣ding upon these termes, each of them for his best advantage and security, fortune brought them in processe of time to a meeting, victory hovering over the battaile, which was not without great effusion of blood on both sides. But in conclusion the Ca∣tastrophe fell worst upon Fredericke to his utter ruine; so he falling into a deepe melancholy, was therein in a short time lost, passing to another life, leaving his enemy Lewis to en∣joy the seate Imperiall: he dyed in Austria, expecting his resurrection at Murbach. A Fable of this Emperor Fredericke
propounded to the Embassador of King Lewis the 11. in the 6. yeare of his Reigne. Charles Duke of Burgundy having planted his siege before the City of Nuce, which was succoured by this Emperor, and the Almaines: King Lewis the 11 of France (who sought nothing more than the ruine of the said Duke of Burgundy) sent his Embassa∣dor to the Emperor Fredericke, to pracsise and perswade with him to seize & consiscate into hs owne hands all those lands and signorie which the Duke of Burgundy held of the Empire, and that hee for his part would doe the like for the Country of Flanders, Artois, Burgundy, and o∣ther dependants of the Crowne of France: The Emperor upon this mo∣tion, made the Embassador this an∣swer: Neere unto a certaine City in Almaine, did once haunt a most cruell Beare, which did many mischiefes and
displeasures to the inhabitants adioy∣ning: now (said the Emperour) it hapned that 3 merry companions, (a they were drinking in a Taverne, and having little money to pay their shot) they agreed with their Host to venture upon the Beare, and to kill him, and then make sale of his skinne, and t pay him with the money: and for the performance thereof, they prepared themselves presently to goe and take him: the bargaine being made, and dinner ended, they put themselves in quest of the Beare, and approaching to the cave where hee was lodged, the beare issued out upon them so fiercely, that being surprized with a suddaine feare, one of them fled away backe te∣wards the towne; the second saved himselfe by climbing up a tree; and the third being overtaken by the Beare, fell downe under him as dead: and the Beare (without doing him any other hurt) did often put is mouth to the eares
of this poore fellow, who all this while held his winde, and abstained from breathing: for the nature of the Beare is not to touch or offend any dead body: Now the beare being gone, the man got up and went his way also: after which, hee that was aloft in the tree, came downe, and having overtaken his com∣panion, demanded of him, what it was that the Beare told him in his eare: marry (quoth the fellow) he bade mee that I should never after use to sell a Beares skinne, till the beare were dead: By this the Emperor payed the Embas∣sador with an answere; a if he shd have said Let us first bee sure to take the Dake, and then afterwards let us dispose of his diminions.
143. Lewis the 5. portrait of emperor Lewis 5 AS the more expert in armes this Emperour borne in Ba∣vari, Anno Domini 1327. remained sole posses∣sor of the Imperiall scepter, where∣upon he elated himselfe with selfe∣conceite and pride, causing himselfe to be proclaimed Emperor without any approbation of the Church. In his way towards Rome he Imperi∣ously tooke in the Citty of Milan. Now was he excōmunicated by the Pope Iohn, wherefore he retreatd
into Germany, and there made ha∣vocke of the Priests and Monkes. Not long after that, he resolved a∣gaine for Rome, being accompanied with an infinite number of souldiers, and entred the City, where by Ste∣phanus he was Crowned, thence re∣turning into Germany, where hee found Charles, the sonne of Henry the 8 was elected Emperor: where∣upon they meeting as it were by chance, resolved to trye it out in the field; but Lewis finding himselfe in∣feriour was overthrowne, and by ac∣cident saved himselfe by flight; but in a short time after died with griefe; but as some write, his horse threw and flew him, his interment also be∣ing uncertaine. Anno 1316, there was such a ge∣nerall pestilence and famine all over Europe, that the third part of man∣kinde was swept away, and in Poland the sonnes did not abstaine from
eating their paronts owne flesh, and also carrion. Trithem. a horse artifici∣ally painted with St. George on his backe upon the wall of the Imperiall palace at Constantinople, was heard to neigh by day and by night. Which was like wise heard 117 years before so to do. Cregor. 144. Charles the 4. portrait of emperor Charles 4 CHarles K. Aunno Domini 1346. of Bohemia, borne in Austria, by the wil of pope Clement was elected Empe∣rour.
This man because he was a very good Christian and faithfull to the Church: surprized Nicholas the u∣surper a Trbune of Rome. He depri∣ved Drachinus both of lise and of the Kingdome of Naples: wherefore for his iustice and vertue he was generally beloved and feared of all men. Comming afterwards into I∣taly he was entertained of all Poten∣tates with great honour according to his greatnesse; and according to the custome of his Antecessors in Milan he received the iron-crowne, and from thence advancing to Rome with great triumph and solemnity he was crowned by two Cardinals. He ordained many matters concerning the Church for the Empire, and for every man most commodious and usefull, and afterwards he retur∣ned into Germany. Being growne a∣ged, like a grave and wise man (thin∣king upon his end) he resigned the
Imperiall scepter to Vinceslaus his eldest son, and altogether quitting himselfe of the cares of this world, he betook him to those of his soule, and in a while after he dyed in Bohe∣a, to the general griefe of all men, having his last duties and interment at Prague. The Electors chose Edward the third of England for Emperor, but he giving them thankes for so great an honour, contenting himselfe with his little England, and France, which he had now conquered, refused to accept the Empire, by which means it fell upon this Charles.
345. Vinceslaus. portrait of emperor Vinceslaus VInceslaus borne also in Au∣stria, falsified that Pro∣verbe, Such Parents, such children: because hee in all his actions was very uch unlike his good old Father Charles the 4, being in particular, lazy, ignorant, and without all ordinary prudence and discretion; neither did hee any one action worthy, or beseeming a degree of that Majesty and Great∣nesse
whereunto he was raised, in Ger∣many hee spent his  wholly in idlenesse, sloath, and luxury, en ploy∣ing his all selfe and cares in new fan∣gled cates, exquisite rare delicacies of dyet: whereupon the speculative witts of those times abhorred him, and ge∣nerally all men. Therefore by a com∣mission of Robert Duke of Bavaria for a new election, he was by the E∣lectors deposed, and hereupon he conceived so great a disgust, and fell into such a rage, that he sickned, and and in the space of 15 dayes or there∣about he passed to another life at Prague, disrespectively there inhu∣med. Tamerlaine at first a shepherd, Anno 1397. afterwards became a brave souldier, and growing powerfull termed him∣selfe The wrath of God, tooke Baja∣zeth the great Turk, and carried him about in an iron cage for the space of 4 yeares: at length the Turk beate
his braines out against; he side of the said Cage. 146: Rupertus. portrait of emperor Rupertus RVpertus born in the Coun∣ty Palatine of the Rheine, Anno Demiui 1400. Duke of Bavaria, and Count Palatine, upon the deposing of Vinceslans was created Emperor in the yeare of grace 1400. who for his goodnes, clemency & iu∣stice was without any conditions vo∣luntarily & freely crowned by Pope
Boniface. Anno 9. Bunif. Hee in the assistance of the Florentines marched against Gallet∣to Duke of Milan, by whom hee was overthrowne, albeit he gave incre∣dible testimonies of his owne valour in the battaile. Hee by this meanes falling into these streights, fled to Venice accompanied with some Lords and Nobility, where by the Doge, Cōman∣der of Venice. and by the whole Senate hee was most highly and magnificently entertained, encouraged, and com∣forted; who promised him their as∣sistance, both of moneys and men. From thence he returned into Ger∣many, and applyed himselfe whol∣ly to the government of his Imperi∣all charge. Afterward leaving ano∣ple testimonies of his worth to po∣sterity, he fell into a very grievous infirmity, which deprived him of life at Oppenheime, after hee had go∣verned 10 yeeres, and had his last obsequies at Heydelberg.
In his Reigne a Water-woman or Mermaid was taken in the Lake of Putmer, by those of Embden, naked and dumbe, Annal Flan which being sent to Harleim, was there taught to weare clothes, to spinne, to eate bread, and white meates. 147. Sigismund. portrait of emperor Sigismund THis Sigismund, Anno. Dom. 1411. the sonne of Charles 4, and borne in Au∣stria, was a man of no lesse goodnesse and gentile qualities than
his late predecessor, and his father Charles the 4 King of Bohemia. Hee being King of Hungary at the in∣stance of Pope Iohn was elected Emperor, and by him crowned. This Sigismund by his wisedome and dexterity pacified the Schismes and dissentions then in Christen∣dome. In ohemia he extinguished many heresies: Against him rose up in Armes Zska Captaine of the Hassites having often fortunatly fought, and never foyled Sigismund: as he madly lived, so bee likewise dyed, perswading his souldiers to to take off his skinne, and make a Drumme head thereof, telling them that at the sound of that Drumme their enemies should flye. Aen. Silu. Cromer. This Sigismund had divers warres and conflicts with the Turkes, and al∣waies came off with honourable vi∣ctories. This Emperor was a man of his person very proper and beauti∣full,
and of a generous spirit, able and strong of body, of an aspect, gra∣cious, wise, and a most beneficent ac∣knowledger of vertuous men, and a great maintainer of the Christian faith: he was a severe chastizer of those that transgressed therin. Being in Hungary, and feeling himselfe de∣clining in age, in great tranquillity of heart, surrendred his soule into the hands of heaven, in the 27 yeare of his reigne at Znaien in Moravia, and with due honour entombed at Va∣rasin.
148. Albertus. portrait of emperor Albertus ALbertus Duke of Austria, Anno Domini 1438. where he was borne, sonne in law to his Antecessor by the consent of all the Electors was called to the Imperiall dignity, being a magnaminous man, and of a high spirit; a just, good, and mercifull Prince. In battailes he was bold and forward, and by his valour hee sub∣mitted to the Empire Moravia, Bohe∣mia, and Poland. He understanding
that the Turkes molested and assault, ed many Citties of the Christians moved with a good zeale, went a∣gainst them with a strong & power∣full army: but in the voyage he fell sicke, and thought himselfe unfit to prosecute his intention, or to bring it to his wished effect: wherefore he re∣turned to Vienna, where he found himselfe in small hopes of recovery, his disease daily augmenting, made his last will and testament, and died neere Sergonium in the second yeare of his government, leaving his Lady great with childe, and lies buried at Alba Regalis. Other authors doe af∣firme that he dyed of surfet taken by eating of Pompions.
149. Frederick. portrait of emperor Frederick FRedericke Duke of Austria, Anno Domini 1440. where also hee drew his first breath, was created Caesar by the Electors. Entring into Italy he was entertained with great so∣lemnity and state, and with an uni∣versall applause of all the people. He solemnized his nuptialls with his Lady in the citty of Siena with the greatest triumph and possi∣ble magnificence, as it is the an∣cient custome of that most famous
City upon all occurent occasions, to shew themselves very noble in their entertainments. He was afterwards crowned in Rome, together with his wife. He fought against the Turkes, and obtained many famous and no∣table victories. Afterwards some dissentions growing betweene him and the King of Hungaria, hee was much afflicted, and lost Vienna the chiefe Citty of the German Empire. And being aged, he retired with infi∣nite treasures into strong holds, and places well fortified, and breathed his last at Lyniz in Austria, gover∣ning alwayes with much trouble, but resteth in peace at Vienna aforesaid.
150. Maximilianus. portrait of emperor Maximilianus MAximilian the sonne of Fre∣dericke, Anno Domini 1493. by birth an Austrian, was created Caesar with a ge∣nerall consent, and carried himselfe with such a prudent comportment, that he was held in admiration, fea∣red & reverenced of al the universe: And as he was a man most wise and gracefull, so was hee also in person most perfectly beautifull; and in par∣ticular, there shined such a majesty in his countenance, that hee was by
all men most highly esteemed and honoured. For well ordering an Ar∣my in battailes, none of those times could equall him, especially for on∣slaughts, and taking in of strong Forts. Hee made warres in divers countries, shewing himselfe alwayes of an indaunted courage and heart, and went on, and came off trium∣phantly. Being at length worne out and quite spent in the tediousnesse of his tire some warres, hee yeelded his breath where he first drew it, at Ve∣lise in Austria, in the yeere of Grace 1518, the 33 yeere of his govern∣ment, and 63 of his age, and had so∣emne and pompous funebriall rites performed him at Newstadt.
151. Charles 5. portrait of emperor Charles 5 THe most invict Charles the  of famous memory, An. Domini 1519. by hi father being descended from the ancient Caesars, and by his mo∣ther from the Royall Antiquity o Spaine, but borne in Austria, and fo those respects he was by the Elector chosen Emperour. The Graces, sin∣gular valour, and all vertues in his contentiously strived to imbelli him, and make him appeare (as he was) a man replenished with all Heroicall
qualities. Being at the age of 33 yeeres, hee was crowned in Bo∣logna by Clement 7. Afterwards he began in his Warres to make the whole world to tremble, and he was of a judgement so elevate and sound, that he never undertooke any enter∣prize of what difficulty soever which he brought not with prosperity to ef∣fect, so that hee were not opposed by stormes, windes, and cruell tem∣pests of weather. Hee matched his sonne Philip in marriage, and made him King of Spaine, and his other Kingdomes. He resigned his Scep∣ter to Ferdinand his brother. After∣wards he retired himselfe in Spaine into a religious house, where after he had lived two yeeres, hee resigned his soule into the hands of his Crea∣tor, and lies buried in Spaine, but I finde not the place certaine.
152. Ferdinanud. portrait of emperor Ferdinand FErdinand the brother of Charles, Anno Domini 1558. and Sonne of Phi∣lip king of Castile, was a man well learned especially in the Latine tongue, and also in armes most expert and active, wherefore it was doubted whether he were of more a∣gility in Chevalry, or more eloquent and fluent in the Latin, Italian, Spa∣nish, High-dutch, Hungarian and Bo∣hemian languages. In the time of his Imperiall government the Counsell
of Trent was held, which was so commodious and profitable to the generall good of the world, that it may serve for a certaine rule both of governement of states, and a norme of good life. In which proceedings this Emperor shewed himselfe very forward and a great asistant. After∣wards he sickned in Vienna, and find∣ing himselfe neere to his desired end, he called his sonnes, and gave them grave advices and wholesome ad∣monishments, and giving them the blessing of a loving and pious father, he in great peace and tranquility de∣parted at Vienna, where he expecteth his resurrection to eternity.
153. Maximilian 3. portrait of emperor Maximilian 3 FOr the goodnesse of the late Ferdinand, Anno Domini 1562. the Electors thought good to conferre the Empire upon his sonne Maxi∣milian, and so to the great satisfa∣ction of the Germans and Italians he was created Emperor: Who nothing degenerating or deviating from the steppes and waies of his good Fa∣ther, comported himselfe in all his actions with all convenient humane courtesie, dexterity and justice to∣wards
all men. He was an open e∣nemy to all turbulent men, perfidi∣ous or mutinous persons; and with great rigour he quieted and compo∣sed many intestine and civill wars. Hee was most obedient to the Church, and in the defence thereof, he fought against the Turkes very fortunately: Afterwards falling in∣curably sicke of the Retention and stopping of his urine, hee left Rudol∣phus his eldest sonne Emperor, him∣selfe passing to a better life at Ratis∣bon, about the age of 50, or there∣abouts, to the discontentment of all Christendome, and lyeth entombed at Lintz in Austria.
154. Rudolphus. portrait of emperor Rudolphus THe Imperiall Majesty as it were an inheritance of the noble house and fa∣mily of Austria, Anno Dom. 1576. was af∣ter the death of Maximilian confer∣red by the Electors upon his son Ru∣dolphus King of Bohemia and Hunga∣ry, who was borne in Austria, who also accepting the degree, which de∣servedly suited with his goodnesse, hee alwayes carrying himselfe in his actions as a pious and just Emperour,
and in particular a defender of the Christian faith. Hee ordained in his Diets excellent & holy lawes. Con∣tinually (as it appeares) he laboured to reduce to the bosome of the Church, both by his good example and power in Armes, all those which by their owne deficiency had fallen from it. Hee recovered (what hee could) things usurped by the Impe∣riall enemies and adversaries to the Christian Religion. It pleased Al∣mighty God to grant him alwayes victory, and to heare the prayers of his subjects, and humble honourers of the great worth of this great Cae∣sar in the service of Christendome, and the glory of that eternall Majesty, upon which all others doe depend: but the manner of his death and in∣humation I read not of.
155. Mathias. portrait of emperor Mathias THe Emperor Rudolphus had given an intimation for an Imperiall Diet in Francfort, Anno Domini 1612. with a prepa∣ration to goe thither for an election of a King of the Romans, although he were surprized with sicknesse, and deprived thereby both of Empire and life, having reigned 36 yeares. Whereof Mathias King of Bohemia and Hungary having intelligence, he went from Vienna to Prague, and
there having solemnized the fune∣rall exequies of his late brother, and leaving good order and directions for the interregne, hee went to the Diet, where on the 13 of Iune. 1612. he was by the Electors chosen Em∣peror with a generall applause, and proclaimed, and solemnly sworne in the Church of Saint Bartholmw: where also upon the feast of Saint Iohn Baptist hee tooke the Iron Crowne, to which solemnity he rod with 10000 horse, by the reason of the concourse of so many Princes, & Lords to so famous a spectacle. The next day he caused his wife to bee crowned Empresse. This Mathias the first of that name, was a Prince of a high spirit and a good souldier. He swaid the Empire onely 6 years, 9 moneths, and 7 dayes; and dyed at the age of 63, to the great griefe of all men.
156. Ferdinand 2 portrait of emperor Ferdinand 2 THe Emperor Mathias being departed from Prage to Vi∣enna where his brother the Arch-Duke Maximiliā was. An. Dom. 1619. And now there was a preparation for an Electorall Diet for the electi∣on of the Arch-Duke Ferdinando de Gratz to be King of the Romans, who was already chosen King of Bohemia and Hungary: after which departure the Protestants in the Kingdome of Bohemia rebelled, and upon the 20.
of March 1619 the afore said Mathi∣as departed this life. After that Mora∣via, Slesia, Lusaria, and part of Au∣stria, rebelled likewise through the sway of some powerfull Protestant commanders and Princes, who shrunk out of the coller of obedi∣ence, and refused to performe ho∣mage in vigour of a cession made by Albertus the Arch-Duke, brother to the aforesaid Mathias, (Maximilian being lately dead) so that the rebel∣lion dilated it selfe in the Kingdome of Hungary. Now came on the pre∣fixed time for the Electorall diet to be held a Francfort, where some of the Electors were present for the election of a new Emperor, and Fer∣dinand himselfe as King of Bohemia and Hungarie, one of the seven Elec∣tors stept in although the aforesaid Bohemiā yet persisting in their rebel∣lion, sought what possible they could to prevent him. He was neverthe∣lesse
by three Electors chosen Empe∣rour with an universall applause the 2 day of August, being the festivall day of Saint Austin. Ferdinand the second of that name, was borne the 9 of Iuly, 1578. He was alwayes a stout defender and ob∣server of the Roman Church: and up∣on the 8 of November with a power∣full Army and great slaughter of the adverse party, recovered the City of Prague, which is the Metropolitan City of the Kingdome of Bohemia, whereupon great hopes are concei∣ved of his prosperity of government. FINIS.
