16798 S108817 99844472 9288
THE LAMENTA∣BLE DEATH OF THE EARLE OF BVCQVOY, Generall of the Emperours Army. HAPPENED VNTO HIM IN AN HONORABLE exploit, before the Towne of Newheusel. AT PARIS, Printed by Peter Rocolet. M.DCXXI.
THE LAMENTABLE DEATH OF THE EARLE of BVCQVOY, Generall of the Empe∣rours Army. HAPPENED VNTO HIM IN AN Honorable exploit before the Towne of Newheusel. AFter that the Emperor had reduced the Kingdome of Bohemia with the three Pro∣uinces there∣unto belong∣ing vnder his obedience, and that both High and low∣er Austria were pacified, & made to ac∣knowledge
his Maiesties Soueraignty, and that nothing rested to be subdued but Hungaria. The said Emperour sent the Earle of Bucquoy, his Lieu∣tenant Generall, with an Army of Fif∣teene Thousand men, to driue Bethlem Gabor out of Hungaria, who hauing taken from him the Towne Edemberg, Presburgh, and the Castle, Ostia, Filech, and other places. At the last he planted his Campe before Newheusel, vpon the seauenth of Iune. This place is one of the Forts of most importance in higher Hungaria, well fortified with Souldiers, and of all thinges else that belongeth to withstand a Siege. In the meane time Bethlem (that knewe that the siege be∣fore Newheusel would continue long) went to Buda, there to aduance (as it is thought) the great Turkes ayde, (whose designes he hath promised to execute in Hungaria) and to send 3000. Hungari∣ans and Ttansiluanians to releeue New∣heusel, which by the way were ouer∣throwne
by the Baron de Setchi, & their Ensignes sent to Vianna, The Riuer of Tarose was a great hinderance vnto the Earle of Bucquoy to prepare his battery before the Towne, for that thereon hee was forced to erect his mounts to place his Cannon vpon them. But Bethlem that slept not in his designes knew well that the losse of that place, (wherein a part of Bethlems riches and the treasures of the Lords of Hungary are) would driue him out of the Countrey; hauing receiued a great ayde of Turkes & Tar∣tarians, being part of the Turkes great Army sent towards Poland, resolued by all the meanes that hee could vse to en∣force Bucquoy to raise his siege, and if it were possible, sodainly to surprise him, before he could receaue any ayde from the Emperor or any other of his friends? and to that end caused the Tartarians to march forward, (being a kinde of the most inhumane people liuing vpon the face of the earth, men whom no paines
nor labour can weary, and most ready and prompt in their designes, and much more in their retraicts) who being 6000. men, and Bethlem himselfe following with as many Turks, Transiluanians, and Hungarians, they sodainly set vpon the Emperours army, that besieged New∣heusel on all sides. At which time the Earle of Bucquoy that forsooke not the Campe for feare of the Enemy, (but lea∣uing the signes of an incomparable va∣lour behinde him) perceiuing himselfe to be surprized, aswell as hee could, ran∣ged his men in order of Battaile, being resolued in that extremity not to flie nor yet to bee surprized for want of dexteri∣tie, but rather to Fight till he dyed, for the honour of God against his enemies, and in the Emperours cause against his vsurpators. The courage of this braue Souldier was not abashed at the sight of the Turbans and Turkish falchions, nei∣ther yet at Bethlems forces, but resolute∣ly determined to sell his life deare vnto
them, and that if they tooke it from him, it should not be so good cheape as they made account of, for to flie he saw it was a thing vnworthy and not fit for the courage of such a great Commaunder, (whose heart was seated in a higher place) but resolued rather not to liue, after hee should see the ouerthrow and dispersing of his Army, and so to be∣come a prey vnto his enemies, as also that he could not otherwise chuse, ha∣uing the enemy both before and behind him: hauing in comparison but a hand∣full of men, in regard of the puissant ayde that came with Bethlem Gabor, he defended himselfe with so great valour, that it was not possible to see a more fu∣rious combat, nor a more forcible resi∣stance then then was made on both sides, wherein that valiant Captaine al∣most couered with Arrowes, in the mid∣dle of his Souldiers was slaine, being thrice shot, and so fell downe to the ground. To the great griefe and sorrow
of all his Company, who will neuer for∣get the great courage which that valiant Captain shewed in Flaunders in the face of the Hollanders, In Bohemia to the great domage of the Bohemians, and be∣fore Prague, at the ouerthrowe of the battaile there fought against the Prince Palatine. And lastly in Hungaria, before the Hungarian faces. And although this was a great losse vnto the Emperour, as also the rest of his Army by his Death was ouerthrowne, and put to flight, the Siege before New∣heusel raised, and Bethlem Gabor there∣by tryumphed against them, to the great contentment of the Emperours e∣nemies; Neuerthelesse, the said Lords place is already supplyed by three other great Captaines, the Marquis of Tief∣fembach, the Earle de Fugger, and the Baron de Prenner, who with great ayde from the Emperour and other Christian Princes, hope well to reuenge the death of their Generall. FINIS.
