17297 S103742 99839487 3914
Mappa Mundi▪ Otherwyse called the Com∣passe / and Cyrcuet of the worlde, and also the Com∣passe of euery Ilande, comprehendyd in the same. woodcut Ptholoweus
woodcut woodcut woodcut woodcut
Mappa mundi. THE generall Hysto∣ryes of Rome, and Cro∣nycles, maketh mencion of all Cronycles, of the world. And specially of the .vii. bokes hystoriall, that se Alpheges of castell that was chosen Emperoure for his great wysdome compyled out of the .vij. bokes all the lyfe of Hercules, wt the counsayle of Claudeo Tholomeo that compyled out a C. xxxvi. bokes This Hercules was the sone of Iu∣piter kyng of Sogrece and of Almay¦ne by the quene of Thebes. Also Ty∣toleno that hath breuyed all the an∣nuell storyes of Rome, makyng men¦cyon of the .iiij. powers Emperyall / that ben in the worlde. ¶ The fyrste Empyre. ANd in yt partie, that is to saye in the East partie, of the wolrd
that was the fyrst Empyre in partia in the tyme of Nynus, and of Gynus and of Serses and of Sarys, and of Anthyochus, & of many other great kynges reygnyng in the East partie. ¶ The .ij. Empyre. THe seconde Empyre, was in the North partie of the world, that is to say in Grecia in the tyme of Her¦cules, and of Phelype of Messedon, and of Alexandre, & of Pietus kynge of Pirotis, and of many other great kynges reygnynge in Grecia. ¶ The .iij. Empyre. THe thyrde Empyre, was is the Southe, that is to saye in Au∣fryke, in the tyme of Cola kynge of Libia and of Ase / Rewall / and of Amylkare / and of Ancye, & of Amyl∣kare the yonger, the father of ye great Hanyball, and of Asdrewbal his bro∣ther,
and of many great kyng{is} reyg∣nyyge in Aufryke. ¶ The .iiii. Empyre. THE fourth Empyre, was in the West, that is to saye at Rome & of Italye in the tyme of Romulus / that made Rome, and Marco furra∣nuldo, and of Marco corylyano, and of great Sipion affrecano, & of Si∣pion humantino, and of great Syl∣la, and of Pompio, and of Iulius Cezer, that was the fyrste tyraunte and of Octauian, that was the fyrste crowned Emperour, and of Constan∣tyne the sonne of saynt Elyne, and al¦so of many other great kynges in the west parte. IVlius Cezer was one of the x. worthyes of the worlde, in Armes and Conquestes that he made and wonders
wyse in all thynges. That tyme vsed he in his tyme to enserche and mesu∣re the worlde in length and bredth, & dyd make therof great Bokes, of all the partyes, countres, and prouinces and wonders in them conteyned, and that bokes accorded to Batylmewe and to Marcus paulus, and to Clau¦dius Tholomeus, and to the great Arystotle that went wt kynge Ston∣dynge, and ben proued true, by many dyuers reasonable prouynges, but I haue neyther lust nor leysure to copye all the bokes, but of all the substaūce that melyked best to lerne, & to know for to make shortely mencyon, of all the parties of the worlde, as I vn∣derstande after myne Auctours, that the worlde is rounde aboute, by the Occian see xxiiii. M. myles of assyse of Rome, and .viii. M. myles thwart ouer, and .iiii. M. myles to the mydle there Ierusalem standeth▪ and there
départeth the worlde in .iiii. parties, East, west, Northe, and Southe. ¶ The East quarter. THe fyrst partye of the worlde, is to vnderstand from the North to the Southeest, all aboute by the coastes of the Occian see, by the East partye, and these be the names and prouynces of the East, quarter of the worlde. Ynde maior, Ynde medyan, and the moste partie of Ynde mynor, and Sanre corneto, Ethyopia, Azo∣nas, Greeis, Aponia, Mesapotama, Sacas, Cofides, Mede the moore. Amasona, Albonia, & a great partie of Percia, the countre of Babell. ¶ The South quarter. THe South quarter of the world is from the Southeest, to the Southwest, by the coastes of the Oc¦cian see, on the south party, and these
be the names and prouynces, in the south party of the world. Ynde minor Thert the most meruayles, ben of dy¦uers shape of people, & many great wonders, and it is so burnynge hote / that no man may dwell there, for the great heat of the Sonne, and Geno∣physis, & there ben trees of the sonne and of the Moone, and Brakmana, Meros, Hebrycos, Gysonas, Mer∣dos, Bubogras, there groweth, and in the Ile of Cleophas the people ha¦ue no heedes, & Affricabilia, Babilo∣nia, Neubra, Arabia, Ethiop, and of Barbary, and parte of Suty. ¶ The Westquarter. THe west quarter of the worlde, is from the Southwest, to the Northwest, all aboute the coastes of the Occian see, in the west party, and these ben the names and prouynces of the west partye of the worlde, and
the Maremedian: that some men cal the Grekes see, & that is in the West quarter of the worlde a parte of Ma∣re maior, that lyeth betwixt Turkye and Tartarye, & there lyeth a great parte of Barbary, & of Belmere that is be Southe the streytes Iebaker, and by Northe the streytes Iebale these ben the prouynces. Fyrst Hispa¦nia that is the Realme of Castell, & Lyons▪ Dragone, Cataline, Garnat Portugale, Algarne, Galis, Byshay and Nauerne, and Gallia, is to vn∣derstande Fraunce, Guy a prouynce, amorous, Bretayn, Normandy, Py∣cardy, Turrayne, Lorayne, Buorgon Sauoy, Almayne, that is to vnder∣stand, al the honour of the Emperour from the Occian See; to the mounte Gogarde on both the parties of the water of Rygne. The Cyties of the Emperour aforesayd ben these, Acon Colyne, Mens, Tryre, Frankforth,
Straesbroth, Basell, and Constans. And so forth to the Mountaynes of Almayne, & Bayer, Sweuen, Osten∣ryche, Denmarke, Boeme, Norway, Swecia, Pomar, Pruce, Saxon, Freeslande, Hollande, Gelderlande, Brabaunte, Flaunders, Englande, Wales, Scotlande, Ireland, and the out Iles of Orbenay, Gutlande, Ze∣land, Iselande, Freesland, and many other smal Ilandes, that be ī the par¦tie of other the Occian see, and Ita∣lia is to vnderstand Pymonde, Lum¦bardy, Froyll, & the Markes of Tre∣nysane, Romayne, Tuskane de patri¦mone of Rome. The duke of Splate the marke of Acon, the realme of Na¦ples, and Poyle, Taranter, Calabre, the Ile of Serle, and the Ile of Sar¦dyn, and Grecia, is to vnderstande, Romenay, Tracia, Tessalia, Athe∣nas, Sallydon, Thobas, Aquaya, yt nowe is called, the pryncypalytie of
Murre Abania, & all the Ile of the Archpelago, the Ile of Sipre, Rodes Grece, that nowe is called Candye, Corsu, Chiffolonia, Iacento, Nigre∣pounte, Lango, Calanio, Palamose, Niporey, Ixeo, Metholome, Andre∣stalaūto, and many other Iles with in the Archepelago, that is the Gulfe betwyxt Grece and Turkye, that cō∣meth from the Grekes see, into the great see before Constantynople, tho¦row the brace of s. George. And these be the names and prouinces betwixt Grece and the Occian see. Towarde the Northwest parte, that is to saye, Hungarye, Polonye, Russe, Ramye, Gallaci, Ludwary, Comney, Blylga¦ry, Blagy, Cerny, Slawony, & parte of Turkye, and parte of Surry, and the west parte of the worlde. ¶ The North quarter.
THe North quarter of the worlde is for to vnderstande, from the North west to the Northeest, by the Occian See, on the Northe partie, and these be the names and prouyn∣ces ī the North quarter of the world a parte of Russe lectony, Tartarye, Prty the lesse, Media, Ermenia the more, there standeth yet the Arke of Noe vpon the Mount of Aracke, and Germynia the lesse, that goth to the Grekes see, in the Northe quarter of the world, yt the moste parte of Turky is in, that is to say the realme of Fry¦gye, there the great Cytie of Troye standeth, & the realme of Lydia, and Pompsilia, Cilica pounto, there now dwelleth the Emperoure of Trapa∣sande that is a Greke, & king George sanastopoly, that is a chrysten man / and holdeth of the Bysshop of Rome and his landes ioyneth to Tartarie on the one syde, and with the Empe∣rour
of Trapasand on the other syde at the East ende of the Grekes see. And also in the North quarter is in Asary alismace, and a great parte of Surre / there was Anthyoche the great Cytie, there the prynce of An∣tyoche dwelled. And also the compasse of Englan∣de rounde aboute is .iiij. thousande .iii. C. and .lx. myles. ¶ Venys standeth from Flaunders. East and be south. viij .C. myles. ¶ And nexte course by the see, from Flaunders vnto Iaffe is this, from Sluse to Calys is .lxx. myles. ¶ From Calys to Bewchef .lxxx. my. ¶ From Bewchef to Lezarde .ij. hon∣dreth and .lx. myles. ¶From Lezarde to Capefenester .vi. hondreth. and .l. myles. ¶From Capefenester to Lysbone .ii. hondreth .lxxx. myles. ¶From Lysbone to Cap s. Vyncent
to the stractes .ii. c. xl. myles. ¶From stractes of Iebalter to the Ile of Sardyn .xi. c. myles. ¶From Malfitana in sardyn to In¦alta .iiii. c. and .lx. myles. ¶From Inalta by the course of Sa¦rogogora, and Sysyl to sayle to Iaf in Surry, is. M .viii. c. myles. ¶From Iaf to Baffa in sypre to the castell Roge .ii. c. xx. myles. ¶From the Castell Roge to Rodes, is an hondreth myles. ¶From Rodes to Candy .ii. c. l. my. ¶From Candy to Modon .iii. c. my. ¶From Modon to corsu .iii. c. myles ¶From Corsu to Venis .vii. c. myles ☞The length of the coastes of Sur¦re by the set coastes, is from the Gulfe of Ermonye: to the Gulfe Dalaryse nexte the south, and be West, from Lazarye to Ryse is .v. c. and .xx. myles. ☞That is to vnderstande from La∣zary
in Ermony to Soldyne, that cōmeth from the Ryuer cōmynge from Anthyoche .lxx. myles. ¶And from oldyne to the porte of Lycha next to the south .l. myles. ¶From Lytha to the porte of Torto¦sa south .l. myles. ¶From Tortosa to the porte Try∣poll. south .l. myles. ¶From Bernet to Acres south and be West .lxx. myles. ¶From Acres to porte Iaf, South and be west .lxx. myles. ¶From porte Iaf / to porte Delaza∣ra south southwest .c. xxx. myles. ¶From Damiat Lariza in surre, to damiat in Egypt .c. lxxx. myles. ¶From Damiat / to Babylon Al∣chaer .lxxx. myles. ¶From Damyat, to Alexandre, is. a hondred and .l. myles. ☞The length of Mare maior, is frō the Gulfe s. George in myddes of
the gulfe that is betwyxt Trapa∣sande sanastopoly / vnto the porte of Messembre West from s. Geor∣ge a thousande .lx. myles. ☞ The bredth of the westende, is frō the brase s. George at Constanty∣nople / vpon the Ryuer of Dana∣bes, next the North, from s. Geor∣ge brase is .v. c. lx. myles. ¶ From Pero to Caffa in Tartary Northeest .vi. c. myles. ¶ From Caffa to the stractes of the Tane Northeest .c. myles. ¶ The gulfe of the Tane, is aboute .vi. hondred. myles. ¶ The capte of Caffa is aboute .vi. hondred myles. ¶ From the hed of the Tana to Sa∣nastopoly .iiii. c. myles. ¶ From Sanastopoly to Trapason∣de and by west .ii. c. l. myles. ¶ From Trapasond to synopia, next the south .iiii. c. xxx. myles.
¶ From Synopia to Pero next the west and southwest .ii. . xxx. myles. ¶ From Pero to Messembre next the worthwest .ii. c xxx. myles. ¶ From Messembre to mācro north Northeest iii .clx. myles. ¶ From Mancro castro to Danobia Northeest .c. xxx. myles. ¶ From Danobia to the stractes of Caffa next the East .ii. c. myles. ¶ The Compasse of the Ilandes. THe Ile of Sypre, is aboute .v. hondred myles. ¶ The Ile of Rodes, is aboute an hondred .lxxx. myles. ¶ The Ile of Lange, is aboute .iiij. score myles. ¶ The Ile of Nigrepount, is aboute iij. hondred myles. ¶ The Ile of Cecilia, is aboute .vii.
hondred myles. ¶ The Ile of Sardyn, is about .vii. hondred myles. ¶ The Ile of Mayorke, is aboute .ii. hondred myles. ¶ The Ile of great Brytayne, is a∣boute .ii. M. myles. ¶ The Ile of Irlande, is aboute a. M .vii. c. myles. ¶ The pryncypalytie of Murre is a∣boute .vii. c. myles. ¶ Thus endeth the length, bredth and compasse of the worl¦de. And foloweth howe the worlde is deuyded in thre partes. (?)
¶ Here foloweth howe the worlde is deuyded in thre partes. AL the earth in the world shalbe enhabyted, and shalbe deuyded in thre partes. The fyrst partie is na¦med Assye the great: and is as great as the other two, and this partie du∣reth from Septemtrion by Oryent tyll myddy. The seconde parte is na∣med Ewrape, and dureth from Occi∣dent vnto Septemtrion. The thyrde partie is named Aufrike that dureth from myddy vnto Occident. ☞ And Paradyse terrester is in the fyrste regylyon of Assye legrande to∣warde Orient, and there is no earth¦ly man that may come there, but god or his angles lede him and gyde him thyther. For this Paradyse sythen yt
Adam was cast and dryuen out ther of by an Aungell, anone forthwith it was enuironed al aboute with great fyre, that dureth from the erth vnto the skye aboue, that no man may en∣tre nor come therto. And there is all about Paradyse great wyldernesses where there is also great multytude of many dyuers & peryllous beestes. ☞ And also hell is in the myddes of Affryke vnder the earth, and is set in the myddes of the erth, as a karnell of an apple is in the myddes of the apple, for asmoch earth is there abo¦ue as beneth. And there be the soules that be dampned in great payne and turment with out ende. ☞ And also a man may se openly the waters cōmeth from Paradyse re∣restre, for there is a wel spryng of the whiche .iij. Ryuers cōmeth out of it.
And one of tho .iij. Ryuers goeth by the partyes of myddy towarde Ory∣ent, and falleth into the see of Occy∣dent, and that aryseth out of an hyll againe that is in the parties of Ynde And the other two Ryuers aryseth a¦gayne ī Ewrope of an hyll and there passe by many countres, tyll they me¦te, and then they fall in to the see as nature requyreth. And also a man may se in Affryke openlye two hylles that be souprall of hell, and they cease not neyther daye nor nyght & be euer brēnyg with fiers fyre. ¶ Explicit. ¶
¶ Thus endeth this Mappa mundi Very necessary for all Marchauntes, and Mary∣ners▪ And for all such, as wyll labour & trauey∣le in the countres of the worlde. (?) ¶ Imprinted by me ¶ Robert wyer, dwellynge in s. Mar∣tyns parysshe, at the sygne of S. Iohū Euangelyst, besyde the Duke of Sufflkes places, at tharynge Crosse. ¶ Cum priuilegio, ad impri∣mendum sofum.
woodcut astrological diagrams
Robert Wyer's device ROBERT WYER.
