18507.63 S120107 99855307 20794
THE RELATION OF ALL THE LAST PASSAGES OF THE WARRES in the PALATINATE, And how both Armies haue disposed themselues vnto further ENTERPRISES. Wherein is set forth the vallourous Repulse of Monsieur TILLEY from Heidelberg; with his great losse of men before it. Together with his Iourney into the Marquis of Tourlachs Country; and his plot for the taking in of all the three townes, Heidelbergh, Manheim, and Frankendale; with Generall Veres provision, to hinder that Designe. Moreover The Exployts of Count Mansfeild, and of Brunswicke in Alsatia; and of their Passage thence through Lorraine towards Luzembergh, and Burgundy; with the King of BOHEMIA'S Arrivall at Sedan. And lastly, The Siege of Bergen ap Zoon by SPINOLA. Written from Frankendale the 20. and out of Lorraine the 23. of Iuly. 1622. Stilo novo. Printed this eighteenth of Iuly. LONDON Printed by I. D. for Nathaniel Newbery and William Sheffard, and are to be sold in Popes-head Alley. 1622.
THE RELATION OF ALL THE LAST PASSAGES OF THE WARRES in the PALATINATE, And how both Armies haue disposed themselues vnto further Enterprises. IT was the happie counsell of Scipio, the Noble and vallorous Romane in the graue Senate, for the reco∣very of his lost coun∣try, not to continue a Defensiue Warre against Hanniball in Ita∣ly, but rather to passe with the Armie a∣gainst Carthage it selfe, the fountaine of their troubled Vexation, as that which would be a meanes, at least to draw their enemy from the gates of Rome into Affrica, to de∣fend
their owne Cittie of Carthage; Now of this advise he couragiously vndertooke the performance himselfe, at the com∣mand of the State of Rome; and performed it most succesfully, to the safetie of his Country; and his owne perpetuall ho∣nour. If this pollicy of his hath oftentimes beene accounted worthy of imitation in the succeeding Ages; and alwayes to de∣serue acclamation and prayse; It is no strange matter, nor need we to distrust their courage, or their successe, who at this day follow that course of proceeding in their Warres, and therefore howsoever I doubt nothing at all, but that after the ioyning of Brunswicks Army with the Count Mansfeilds, they might haue oppo∣sed the Enemies in the Palatinate, if it had not tended to the vtter devastation of that poore Country, which hath langui∣shed so long vnder the miserable burthen of so great a Warre; yet for the preservati∣on of that remnant which is left, they haue now happily taken the way, to transport the warre, and consequently, the misery
of it, into the Enemies owne Country, that they also may not be onely spectators of others calamities, but may at length taste of the same Sauce they haue served others withall, by a forced contribution at least of such money, munition, and meanes as for such a populous Armie is requisite; of which its very probable, they had some wants, by reason of the disordered Disastar, which befell the Brunswickers in passing the River of Maine, where as its sayd, much Baggage was lost, and some men. Now, I say, for to furnish themselues againe with neces∣saries, and to reinforce their Armie, by some new supplyes from the Switzers, and other friends; haue they taken their way into Alsatia, and so proceed, as this fol∣lowing Relation doth amply declare. From Frankendale, the 10. of Iuly, The Count Mansfeild after that he had ranso∣med divers Townes and places in Alsatia, where hee recovered a great Summe of Money, he layd siedge to a towne called Zanerice or Elsaszaberen, but it was so well provided that he prevailed not, but rai∣sed
the siedge, and marched away to∣wards Lorraine. Monsieur Tilly hearing of this, who lay before Heidelbergh, raised his siedge likewise, and so marched away in∣to Turlachs Countrey, with the most part of his Armie, having leaft onely 7. or 8, Thousand at Wimpfen: and Don Gonzalo with the Spanish Forces at Landenbergh, which lyeth now over against Wormes. It is sayd heere, That they were so brauely entertained by Syr Gerard Harbert Governor of the Castle, and by the garri∣son in the Towne, that they lost before Heidelbergh, aboue 1500. men. It is thought that Tilly wil make a bridg at Wimpfen, some 3. Leagues off Heidelbergh, over the Necker, hee hath one already be∣low at Landenbergh: and that Don Gonzalo will make one over the Rhine aboue Wormes, and Tilly one aboue Spiers at Yden∣heim, to blocke vp all the three Townes at once. My Lord Generall Vere, hath giuen or∣der to the Governour of Germersheim, to take possession of all the boates that hee possible can, and to burne them, that the
Enemy be not served with them, Turlach hath casseer'd his Armie, and is retyred to his Countrey, his Souldiers are vnder the commaund of the Barron of Helmstat, and entertayned by Generall Vere. Count Mansfeild hath sent backe one Regiment of foote, vnder Waldmanshansen, and 600. horse of Vbertrants band they are put in Garrison at Mainheim and Frankendale. In the sayd places, the Drum is dayly bea∣ten in his Maiesties name, to take vp soul∣diers. From Pont a Mossen, in Lorraine, the 10. of Iuly, Count Mansfeild and the Duke of Brunswicke, haue demaunded passage of the Duke of Lorraine, and obtayned it, so they are entered into Lorraine, and are now within 6. or 7. Leagues of this Towne, all the countrey flying with their goods, in∣to the Townes: Hee is strong 24000. men, what hee will doe is vnknowne as yet: all Lorraine is in Armes likewise, All Burgundy, and all Luzembergh, take Alarum: The King of France hath sent his Brother, with 2000. horse to the Fronters to keepe them.
The King of Bohemia is in Selan, with his vncle. From Brussels, the 13. of Iuly, The Go∣vernour of Bergen ap zoon, having received commandment from his Excellency, the Prince of Orange, to attend him with 2000 men of his Garrison, for accomplishment of some service in hand, was marching to∣wards him, but on the way had notice of the Enemies motion with great forces to∣wardes that Towne, to surprise it on the sodaine in his absence; whereupon ad∣vising well on the businesse, for hee stood in doubt, whether hee should proceede foreward according to the commaund which he had received from the Prince, for by that meanes he might hazard the towne & expose it to the Enemies hands, if the report of their intention that wayes were true, or whether hee should retyre backe, for to safe guard the Towne: but so he might hinder the Execution of some exploit, which would be no lesse prejudi∣ciall to the State: but being confirmed in their resolution who hold it better, certain∣ly to saue that they haue in possession, thē
to adventure it, vpon an vncertaine hope of gaining more to it; hee made backe a∣gaine with all possible speede, and all lit∣tle enough, for about an houre after his entrance, the Enemy shewed himselfe be∣fore the Towne, and so haue proceeded very furiously in the siedge, and haue re∣ceived hitherto as valiant resistance, but beeing already twentie thousand strong, they looke for ten thousand more, with the Marquis Spinola, who arrived here the leventh of uly at night, from Wezell, or Lyn∣berch, he is to depart againe to day to his men, who haue alreadie besieged Bergen ap Zoon, and doe entrench themselues; There are within twentie two Companies, that defend it brauely, and no doubt shall be releeved by the States. FINIS.
