21018 99851184 16448
A SERMON concerning the pu∣nishing of Malefactors. Preached at Paules Crosse, the first of Octo∣ber, by Charles Richardson, Preacher at Saint Katharines neere the Tower of London. Prouerbers 20.26. A wise King scattereth the wicked and causeth the wheele to tread ouer them. EX AVARITIA LONDON, Printed for William Butlar, and are to bee sold at his Shoppe in the Bulwarke, neere to the Tower of London. 1616.
To the Right Honourable Thomas Earle of Lincolne, increase of grace in this life, and assurance of glory in the life to come. Right Honourable, I Am bold to present vnto your Honour, this plaine and homely Sermon, beseech∣ing you to accept it as a sincere (though a poore) testimonie of that most dutifull affection which I owe vnto you, in regard of that great kindnesse, and vndeserued respect, which your Honour hath euer borne towards me, for these many yeares wherin I haue beene knowne vnto you. The greatest Monarches haue vouchsafed, to receiue poore presents at the hands of such, as were not able to afford greater gifts. And I haue had so long and so good experience of your Honours noble disposition that way, as I doubt not, but this gift, how meane soeuer, shall be welcome for the affection of the gi∣uer. I confesse the Doctrine of the Sermon was chief∣ly applyed to the Magistrates of this city, before whom it was preached. But because I knowe, that there is as much need of reformation in the cuntry as here, especially in the matter of the Sabaoth, and be∣cause God hath now aduanced your Honour to a great place of eminencie in the cuntry, I hope it will not be offensiue, that I haue presumed to make you
the Patron of it. I haue long beene a witnesse of your Lordships great zeale in this respect. And therefore I doubt not, but as God hath now giuen you more meanes and greater power, so you will more earnest∣ly set your selfe to reforme those grosse abuses, wher∣by God is so much dishonoured, and his holy name and Gospell so highly prophaned. The Church of God hath had a long expectation of great good from your Honour. Now the time, by Gods mercy is come wherein you may glad the hearts of many of Gods people, by countenancing and supporting the despi∣sed ministerie, and by curbing & repressing the pride of insolent Papists and Atheistes, who daily more and more manifest their impudencie against the truth and seruants of God. But I take too much vpon me. You haue beene so long exercised in godlinesse, as I doubt not, but of your selfe you will bee forward e∣nough to euery good worke. I pray God blesse your Honour together with your most vertuous and reli∣gious Ladie, the hopefull Lord Clinton your eldest, sonne, that right noble Theophilus, and all the rest of your worthy childen. And the Lord enlarge your heart that you may render vnto him according to the reward bestowed vpon you. Your Honours in all humble dutie and seruice, CHARLES RICHARDSON.
A Sermon concerning the punishing of Malefactors. Psalme 101.8. Betimes, or earely, will I destroy all the wicked of the land: that I may cut off all the workers of iniquitie from the Ci∣tie of the Lord. THIS Psalme was penned by the Pro∣phet Dauid, as appeareth by the title, for it is called A Psalme of Dauid. And howsoeuer the time when it was penned bee not expressed: yet the Psalme it selfe seemeth to inti∣mate, that he made it at his first com∣ming to the Crowne. For the argu∣ment of it is a solemne vow, wherin the Prophet bindeth himselfe, to the performance of his due∣tie, in the due ordering and gouerning of himselfe, his fami∣ly, and his Kingdome. Now this vow is first propounded in the first verse, I will sing Mercie and Iudgement, to thee, O Lord will I sing. And then expounded in the rest of the Psalme. Wherein we are to consider, 1. What he promiseth for himselfe. 2. What he promiseth concerning others. For himselfe he promiseth two things. 1. That he will endeauour to doe well, namely, to be an example of good vnto others, both in his publike and priuate conuersation. 2. I will doe
wisely, &c. 2 That he will be carefull to preserue himselfe from euill, both from occasions offered without, by euill obiects & e∣uill examples. 3 I will set no wicked thing &c. And also from oc∣casions within his own heart, where he knew there was matter enough to corrupt him, though there were no outward prouo∣cation at all. 4 A froward heart &c. Concerning others we are to consider. 1 What hee promiseth concerning those that should haue accesse to him. And because he knew, that two sorts of per∣sons would seeke to insinuate themselues into his fauour, such as were maliciously sclanderous, making other mens disgrace a step for them to climbe by: & such as were ambitiously proud, as∣piring to places of honour without desert, therfore he sheweth how he wil cary himselfe towards them. 5 The one he wil destroy, the other he will not suffer, that all other wicked persons might know, what entertainment they were to looke for at his hands. 2 What he promiseth cōcerning such as he was to imploy, either as Counsellors of Estate, in the affaires of his kingdome, or as seruāts in the businesses of his family: where he sheweth. 1 What manner of persons he wil make choice of. Ver. 6. Mine eyes shalbe to the faithfull of the land, &c. 2. Whom he would refuse vers. 7. namely deceitful persons, & such as tel lies. 3. What he promiseth concerning all his Subiects & his whole Kingdome in generall. And because the comfort & peace of good subiects cōsisteth in taking away the wicked, he promiseth to suppres all such to the vttermost of his power, in this verse which I haue chosen. And thus we see how these words do depēd vpon the rest of the Psal. Wherein, for our more orderly proceeding, we are to cōsider foure things in generall. 1. King Dauids iustice & seuerity in pu∣nishing offenders, in these words. I will destroy the wicked, & cut off the workers of iniquity. Wherein we may note. 1. The action which he wil performe, set out in two words, destroy and cut off. 2. The obiect of the action, or the persons on whom he will exe∣cute Iustice in this manner, namely, the wicked, & the workers of Iniquity. Where the latter phraise expoūdeth the former. 2. His equall proceeding therein, he wil destroy Al the wicked & cut off All the workers of iniquitie, without partialitie. 3. His diligence, he will do it betimes, without delay. 4. The end why he will doe
it betimes, without delay. 4. The end why he will doe it, that Ierusalem the City of the Lord, may be purged from euill. I wil destroy. This is not so to be vnderstood, as if the Prophet would inflict a like punishment vpon all offenders, for that were iniustice. For as there is difference of offences, so there must be difference of punishments. All offenders must be pu∣nished, but (as we shall see afterwards) euery one according to the qualitie of his falt. Our instruction then from hence is this; That they that are in authority,Prou. 20.26 are bound to punish the wick∣ed. Solomon saith, A wise king scattereth the wick d and bring∣eth the wheele ouer them. And the Lord commāded Moses, that if any man did fasly accuse his brother, looke what punishment soeuer hee should haue suffered, if the accusation had beene true,Deut. 19.19 21. the same punishment should be inflicted vpon the accu∣ser himse fe. Yee shal doe to him as he had thought to haue done to his brother. Thine eye shall haue no compassion: but life for life, eie for eie, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foote for foote. And in an other place, if a man by due examination of his cause, were found worthy to be beaten,Deut. 25.1.2. Leui. 24.16 the Iudge must cause him to lie downe, and to be beaten before his face. Againe, the Lord gaue a special and a strict charge, that he that blasphemed the name of the Lord should be put to death: all the congregation should stone him to death. So likewise,Num. 5.301 whosoeuer did any thing presumptuously▪ was to be cut off from among his people. I confesse that men at the first are to be allured to obedience by rewards and other gentle courses, but if that will not serue the turne, then seuerity must be vsed,Praemio et paena. Solon. and punishments must be inflict∣ed. Whereupon the Philosopher said, hat the common wealth was vpheld by two things, namely by rewards and punish∣ments. But howsoeuer, if there be not seuerity to keepe men in awe, the common wealth cannot be well gouerned. And therefore it was the commandement of Artaxerxes King of Persia vnto Ezra, that whosoeuer would not doe the law of his God, and the Kings law, he should haue iudgment &c. And there are many reasons which may further confirme the truth of this point. For first if puishment be not inflicted vpō offenders▪ much euill and hurt will follow thereupon as name∣ly, first of all the offender himsefe, and others also are animated
and encouraged in their lewde courses: Their hands are strenghened that they cannot returne from their wickednesse, as the Prophet saith in another sence.Ier. 23.14. Maxima pec∣candi ille cebra impunitatis spes. Cic. Mi∣lone. The greatest prouo∣cation that can bee, is hope of impunitie. Neither is any greater cause of euill, then libertie to doe euill. Because Eli would not correct his sonnes, but rather stroked their heads when they did amisse, therefore they behaued themselues so vilely in their places, as by reason of their sinne, men abhor∣red the Offering of the Lord. And because Dauid did so coc∣ker Adoniah, as he would not displease him from his Child∣hood, to say,1. Sam. 2.17 23.24. 1. Ki. 1.5.6. Why hast thou done so? Therefore there was none more ready to take the Crowne from his Fathers head. As it is in priuate families, so it is in Common-wealthes, when men are not punished according to their deserts, they become more dissolute. And therefore Bernard saith well,Nulla maio mali c usa, quam licentia mali. Cas. Impunitas incuriae sobo∣les, insolen iae mater, tans∣gressionum ut. ix. Ber. de Consid. l. 3. Impunitie is the brood of carelesnesse, the mother of in∣solencie, the nurse of transgressions.Ad pecca∣dum p aecipi tes fn, qui impune pec∣cant. Tract. 1. contra De∣metr. Alex ab Alex. lib. 3 cap. 5.Psal. 10.5.6 Eccles 8.11. And Cyprian, They that sinne without controlement, runne headlong to sinne. Impunitie is the fewell, that feedeth the fury of dissolute and vnbridled persons. And therefore, it was wisely prouided by the Romanes, that their Magistrates should neuer come in publike without their Officers, to beare halberds and rods before them, for the terror of those that should offend. As wicked men deale with Almightie God, so doe they deale with the Magistrate his Deputie. Dauid saith of the wicked, that because his wayes alwayes prosper, and the Iudgements of God are out of his sight, therefore he saith in his heart, I shall ne∣uer be moued, nor be in danger, and, God hath forgotten, he hi∣deth away his face, and will neuer see. And Solomon saith, Be∣cause sentence against an euill worke is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the children of men is fully set in them to doe euill. So when the Magistrate is negligent in punishing offenders, they and others are more emboldened to sinne. We read in the booke of Iudges,Iud. 17 6 & 18 1 & 19.1. & 21 25. of many grieuous abhomi∣nations, that were committed among the Israelites as name∣ly Micahs making of a grauen and a molten Image, and con∣secrating
of a Leuite for Idolatrous seruice: the Danites spoyling their brethren by force of Armes, and sacking of their cities▪ the horrible abuse offered to the Leuites wife &c. And the cause of all is said to be this In those dayes there was no King in Israel there was no Magistrate nor Law to pu∣nish them, but euery man did that which was good in his owne eyes. Secondly, when men are suffered to transgresse without punishment, the wrath of God is prouoked, and publike calamities are pulled downe vpon the land. The Lord tolde the people of Israel, that if blood were shed in the land, and the murderer not put to death,Num. 35.33 the land was defiled and made lyable to Gods heauie displeasure. When Ahab charged the Prophet Elijah, that he was the man that troubled Israel,1. Kin. 18.18. and caused that great famine that was in the land: he answered boldly, That it was he and his Fathers house that troubled Is∣rael, in that he suffered so much Idolatry to be vnpunished. When Achan had stollen the consecrated thing, the wrath of the Lord was so kindled against all the Host of Israel,Iosh. 7.11.12. that they could not stand, but were discomfited before their ene∣mies. Ye, the Lord threatned, that he would be no more with them, vnlesse they destroyed that person from among them. When that villany was committed vpon the Leuites Concu∣bine and the Beniamites would not deliuer those wicked men that had done it,Iudg. 20.12.13. &c. that they might be put to death to put away e∣uill from Israel, the Lord stirred vp the rest of their brethren to make war e against them, till the whole Tribe was almost destroyed.2. Sam. 21.1. So long as the murder committed by Saul vpon the Gibeonites, was vnpunished, the Lord sent a grieuous fa∣mine vpon the land of Israel three yeares together. And whiles Ionah, that had fl d from the pr sence of God,Ionah. 1.4. was in the Shippe, a great winde and a mightie Tempost, raised by the Lord pursued the Ship, that it was like to be broken, and all the Marriners in danger of drowning. On the contrary side, wh  c is executed vpon wicked doers, the wrath of God is turned away, and he is pacified and appeased.
When the wrath of Lord was kindled against Israel,Num. 25.3.4. because he had ioined himselfe to Baal-Peor: the Lord himselfe comman∣ded Moses to take all the heads of the people, and hang them vp before the Lord against the sunne, that the indignation of the Lords wrath might be turned from Israel. And according, when Phinehas▪Ps. 106.30. in an holy zeale, had thrust through the man of Israel and the Midianitish woman with a speare, the plague ceased from the children of Israel. And Dauid relating the same storie said, that Phinehas stood vp and executed iudge∣ment, and the plague was staied. When Achan and all that be∣longed vnto him were stoned vnto death,Iosh. 7.25.26. & 8. tot. the Lord turned from his fierie wrath against Israel, so that whereas before their enemies chased them and smote them,Ionah. 1, 15 now they at∣chieued many great and famous victories. When Ionah was once cast into the sea,2. Sam. 21.9.14. the sea presently ceased from her raging. When the seauen sons of Saul were hanged vp in Gibea of Saul as the Gibeonites requited God was then appeased with the land And in a word,1. King. 18.40.45. when Eliah had slaine the foue hundred faulse Prophets & idolatrous priests of Baal, whereas before there had beene neither daw nor raine for a long time, the Lord presently sent raine in abundance, whereby the former fa∣mine ceased. And therefore, if Magistrates desire, either to preuent the iudgements that are threatned, or hang ouer the land, or to remoue those that are already inflicted, they must carefully looke to the punishing of such as by their wick∣ednesse increase the wrath of God vpon the land.Nehem. 13.18. Thirdly, where wicked men escape vnpunished, yea not onely so,Prou. 28.28 & 29.2. but (as oft it falleth out) are exalted, there the good are grieued and discouraged: yea, as Salomon saith, they are constrained to hide themselues and to sigh and mourne for sorrow. It is a true saying,Bonis nocet qui malis par∣cit. he hurteth the good, that spareth them that are euill. The Apostle insinuateth, that Magistrates ought to prouide, that those that are vn∣der them may leade a quiet and a peaceable life in all god∣linesse and honestie.1. Tim. 2.2. But it cannot bee, that men should liue peaceably and quietly, vnlesse wicked men by pu∣nishments
be restrained and kept in awe, for they will be so insolent, as a man of a quiet disposition cannot dwell by them; but the more he shall seeke for peace,Psal. 120.7. the more will they be bent to warre, as Dauid saith of his enemies. Neither is it posible that godlinesse and honestie should flourish where wicked persons are vncontrouled. For as weedes let grow doe ouertoppe the good corne, and choake it: so lewd per∣sons left at liberty, hinder the growth of pietie and god∣linesse. And as all these euils doe follow vpon the neglect of this duetie: so on the contrary side, much good will re∣dounde to the commonwealth, where it is carefully and di∣ligently put in practise. As first of all, the party delinquent is by this meanes reformed, and brought to liue in better order. For that that Salomon speaketh of children, is true also of elder persons, that foolishnesse is bound in their heart,Pro. 22.15. but the rod of correction shall driue it away from them. And therefore, he saith in another place.& 20.30. The blewnesse of the wound serueth to purge the euill, and the stripes within the bowels of the belly. And hereof we haue an example in the incestuous person, who being excommunicated and de∣liuered vnto Satan, was thereby brought to such hu∣miliation and repentance,2. Cor. 2.6.7 that the Apostle exhorteth the Co∣rinthians to receiue him againe into the bosome of the Church, least he should be swallowed vp of ouermuch heauinesse. And many amōgst vs haue cōfessed, that had it not beene for correction, they had neuer come to good. But if it be so, as sometimes we see it commeth to passe, that a man is so hard∣ned in euill, as that by punishment he cannot be quite re∣claimed: yet he is so curbed and kept in awe, as he dare not sinne so boldly as otherwise he would.Meliores sunt quos di∣rigit amor, sed plu es quos coigit timor For howsoeuer it bee true, that the better sort are directed by loue, yet the greater sort are corrected by feare.Oderunt peccare mali formidine pocnae. And euen the worst that are, will abstaine from euill for feare of punish∣ment. Secondly, by the punishment of malefactors, others
will be admonished to walke more warily. The Lord tolde Moses that when due punishment should be inflicted vpon the false witnesses,Deut 19.19 20. & 21.21 The rest should heare and feare, and should henceforth commit no more any such wickednesse among them. And commaundement is giuen, that the stubborne and dis∣obedient Sonne should be stoned with stones, that all Israel may heare it and feare.1. Tim. 5.20 Prou. 21.11. And the Apostle chargeth Timotheus, to rebuke them openly that sinne, that the rest also may feare. And Solomon saith expresly, that when a Scorner is punished, the simple will be wise.Animaduer∣siones quo no∣toriores, eo plus ad exem∣plum emen∣datione inque proficiunt. Sen. de ira. l 3. And doubtlesse, publicke chastise∣ments and punishments are very profitable for the example and amendment of others.Vt fulnuna pâncorum pe∣riculo cadunt, omiunsme∣tu. sic ani∣maduesiones terrent latius quam nocent. For as the Thunderbolt fal∣leth with the danger of a few, but with the feare of all: so the terror of punishments teacheth further then the smart.Metus ad omnes, poena ad paucos per∣uenit. Cic. pro A Cluentio. Punitis malis fiunt iusti at∣tentiores, et Chrysost. in Ps. 7. For the feare is extended to all men, but the punishment to a few. To this purpose Chrysostom hath a good saying. (d) When the euill are punished, saith he the righteous are made more carefull. For as a sound man when he seeth one that is wounded either feared or launced, is made more care∣full of his owne health: so when a man seeth a malefactor brought to deserued punishment, he is admonished to take heede of such courses. It was a true saying in the generall of the Proconsul to Cyprian at his Martyrdome, though ill ap∣plyed to him in particulerIn sanguine tuo caeteri dis∣cent discipli. In thy blood the rest wil learne discipline. Lust of all, when as by due execution of Iustice dissolute persons are cut off, the whole bodie of the Common-wealth is preserued from infectionCic. in M. Anton. Phil. 8. As in a found body, if there be any thing that endangereth the rest of the body, we suffer it be feared and cut, that some one mebr may rather pe∣rish then the whole body: so in the body of the Common-wealth, that the whole may be preserued, let all that is hurt∣full be cut off.Cuncta pri∣us tentand,sd um dicable vulnus Ense residendum, ne pars sincera trahatu. Ouid Metam lib. 1. All othr courses (s the Poet said are first to be taken; and all other meanes to be vsed, but if the woūd be incurerable, it must be cut off, that the found parts be not
infected.Truncatur  atus, vt lceat reliquis secu∣rum viuere membris. Claudian. And sometimes we cut off a ioynt, that the rest of the members may be without feare. And thus we see the necessity of the performance of this duety: Now for the better effecting thereof, it is necessary that good Lawes be established, and that they bee carefully and duely executed. It cannot be denied, but that we haue in this kingdome as good and as wholesome Lawes, as any nation in Christendome, onely it is to be lamented that the execution of them is so much neglected. It were to be wished that they that haue authority in this case, would be carefull, that the Lawes made with so good aduice, and so great wise∣dome, may not be like an aboriue fruit, dead as soone as they are borne. Lawe, though neuer so excellent, without execution,Leges vel ob∣liuione vel contemptu pa∣bolite, securi orem luuni fecere. Cor. Tacit. Annal. lib. 3. 2. Chr. 34.4 are but like a body without a soule, like a sword that ru∣steth in the sheath, and like a medicine that is not ap∣plied. b And as one saith well, when the Lawes are abo∣lished, either by forgetfulnesse or contempt, they make men more secure and riotous. Now the Lawes will neuer bee well executed, nor abuses reformed, vnlesse the Magi∣strate, as much as lyeth in him, see it done with his owne eies. There is a worthy president thereof in good Iosiah of whom it is said, that when he began to root out idolatry, they brake downe in his fight the Altars of Baalim, and cut downe the Images that were vpon them. Yea he went throughout all the land of Israell, to destroy the Altars, and the groues, and to breake and stampe to powder the images, &c. and then retur∣ned to Ierusalem: hee would not trust his officers with the businesse, but saw it done himselfe.Sabel. Enne∣ad. 5. lib. 4. When the Romanes had nominated Titus Manlius Torquatus to be Consul, he aleadging the infirmity of his eyes, refused the ho∣nour, and said, he should bring in a very euill and pernitious example,. if he should vndertake to gouern the cōmon-wealth with other mens eies. And therefore Homer requireth of a Magistrate, that he haue eies before and behinde that he may
looke euery way. Otherwise, if they referre all to vnder of∣ficers, who it may be, either loue the sinne themselues, or else are many times corrupted with bribes, they shall easily be deceiued. This doctrine doth serue: first, for the reproofe of all those,Vse 1. that being in authority, are not carefull to punish disordered persons. As there are many that are too indul∣gent, and winke too much at those that deserue punish∣ment. Some because they are guilty themselues, cannot with any face punish sinne in others. If the Magistrate be a swea∣rer, or a drankard, or a whore-maister, or a prophaner of the Sabboath, how can he set himselfe to punish these vices in other men? Others, againe there are, that forbeare to pu∣nish malefactors, because they would be counted pittifull and mercifull men, not remembring the old prouerbe, that foolish pittie wareth the citie.Multi ibi no∣men crudelita tis imponunt etc August de bono discipl. Many saith Saint Augustine, call that cruelty, when for loue of discipline, the fault com∣mitted is reuenged by the punishments of the offender: whereas the sentence of him that punisheth, satisfieth the law, and redoundeth to the good, not onely of them that are present, but euen of them also that are yet vnborne.Seueritas v∣tilitate publica rependitur. Cor. Tac: An∣nal lib. 14. So that, the seueritie that is vsed in this case, is recompenced with the publike benefits.Maluit Do∣mitius crude∣lis in animad. vertendo, quam in prae∣ter mittando dissolutus vi∣deri. Cic. in ver. lib. 5. Num. 12.3. Exod. 32.27.28. 1. King. 2.5 6.7.8. It is said of Domitius, that he had rather seeme cruell in punishing, then dissolute in spa∣ring. Moses was a very meeke man, aboue all that were vpon the earth: and yet he batheth his hands in the blood of his brethren, when they had dishonoured God, by making and worshiping the golden calfe. And Dauid that was al his life of so milde a disposition, and so tender hearted, that when opportunity was offered him twice, he would not lay his hands vpon Saul though he were his mortall ene∣mie, yea his heart did smite him, when he had but cut off the lap of his garment, yet at his death hee maketh a bloody will, and chargeth Solomon that hee should cause the gray head of Ioab and Shemei to goe to the graue with blood. Both of them by this cruelty sanctified their heads, whiles they
executed the vengeance committed vnto them by God which otherwise, by sparing they should haue pollunted.Caluin instit. lib. 4. cap. 20. sect. 10. Exo. 32.29 As Moses bad the Isaelites concecrate their hands to the Lord, euery man vpon his sonne and vpon his brother. Others yet there be, that vse too much conniuencie in this case, because they would be thought to be quiet and peaceable. And this is commonly the fault of such as he annuall Magistrates, who because they are not long to continue in place of au∣thoritie, are loath to be too busie and too medling for their time. They desire euery bodies good word, let them that come after them, looke to the reformation of things that are amisse. But they forget in the meane while the Apo∣stles exhortation, who saith, follow peace with all men and ho∣linesse, without which no man shall see the Lord.Heb. 12.14▪ So farre as peace may stand with holinesset so farre a man should labour to be peaceable, but if it cannot stand with holinesse warre is to be preferred before such peace. When Iehoram asked Iehu, Is it peace Iehu? he answeted, What peace,2. Kin. 9.22 whiles the whoredomes of thy mother Iezebel, and her witchcrafts are great in number? So should euery godly Magistrate resolue in a holy zeale, neuer to be at peace with wicked persons, so long as their sinnes are vnpunished. Last of all▪ there be o∣thers, that are ready to speake and write for leaude persons, to rescue them, as it were from, the hand and stroake of the Magistrate. As we see by common experience, that there is none so vile, but one or other will intreate for him, abu∣sing that fauour or credite which they haue with men of authoritie, to the countenancing and bolstering vp of vn∣godlinesse, Well, let all these persons know, that if by any of these meanes they subduce a malefactor from deserued punishment, they make themselues guilty of his sinne. It is a true saying,Iudex dam∣natu, cum no cens absolui∣tur. the Iudge is condemned when the offen∣der is absolued.qui non vo∣tat peccare cum potest iubet Sen. Prou. 24.24 & 17.15. And hee that doth not restraine a man, when it is in his power, doth command him to sinne. A∣gaine, Solomon saith, He that saith to the wicked, thou art righteous, him shall the people curse, and the multitude shall
abhorre him. And in another place, Hee that iustifieth the wicked is abhomination to the Lord Giuing vs to vnder¦stand, that whereas they thinke by this meanes, to winn the fauour and estimation of men, they make themselues odious both to God and all good men. Besides the Scrip∣ture maketh it cleare and euident, that by this remissenesse they make themselues lyable to the wrath of God. When the Lord sent Saul in expedition against the Amalekites, and gaue him a charge to smite them,1. Sam. 15.3 and to destroy all that apper∣tained vnto them, and to haue no compassion on them, but to stay both man and woman,8. infant and sucling, &c. And he contrary to this charge, tooke Aag the King aliue, Samuel was sent to tell him,23. that because he had in that manner cast away the word of the Lord, the Lord had cast him away from be∣ing K ng. And whereas Ahab had by Gods assistance dis∣comfited Benhadad the King of Syria, and had not put him to death,1. King. 20.42. but vpon certaine conditions had let him goe, a Prophet was sent vnto him with this message. Because thou hast let goe out of thine hand a man whom I appointed to die, thy lif shall goe for his life, and thy people for his people. Malefac∣ctors and wicked persons by the law of God are appoin∣ted to die, the Lord hath giuen Magistrates a charge to that purpose, if therefore they, for foolish pity, or any o∣ther respect let them escape, they may iustly feare, that Gods hand will be vpon themselues. And many times we see by experience, that a wicked wretch reserued from due punishment, proueth a continuall vexation to him that hath spared him. As the nations that inhabited the land of Canaan being not cast out and destroyed by the Israelites,Iosh. 23.13. Iud 2.3. as God had commanded them, were made by the iust iudgement of God, A snare and destruction vn∣to them, and a whippe on their sides, and a thorne in their eyes. Secondly, this doctrine doth serue to admonish all that are in authoritie,Rom. 13.4. to set themselues with care and consci∣ence to performe this duetie. The Magistrate must not beare
the sword for naught, as the Apostle saith, he must not be like a Scarre-Croe to let the birds picke strawes out of his nose, but he must draw the sword that God hath put in his hand, to cut off such as will not otherwise bee re∣claimed. And herein he must spare none. If a pecuniary m be to be inflicted,qui non ha∣be in ace, lu∣at in corpore. hee that hath it not in his purse, let him pay it on his skinne. If he deserue a corporall pu∣nishment, the Magistrate must not omit it,Deu. 19.21 his eye must haue no compassion. And herein he hath the example of our Sauiour Christ, who comming to driue the buyers and sel∣lers out of the Temple, doth not prepare his eares to heare them, but a whippe to scourge them.Bern. de con∣sid. lib. 1. Hee maketh no words, nor receiueth any answere, for he sitteth not as a Iudge, but pursueth them as a reuenger. The Magistrate must doe likewise, his zeale must bee inflamed against the generall impudency of the times, he must make vngodly persons afraide of his countenance, so as they shall not dare to come in his sight. As Iob saith, that when he was in prosperitie, his authoritie did so terrifie the wicked of his time, that they durst not shew their heads, they were chased from among men,Iob 30.3.4.5.6. and were constrained to flee into wildernesse  and there to hide themselues in olis of riuers, and holes of the earth, and rockes, where they cut vp nettles by the bushes, and the iuriper rootes were their meate. Yea the least sinne that is must not es∣cape vnpunished. We see by experience, that many times a little itch turneth to a filthie leprosie, that spreadeth it selfe ouer the whole body: so a masse of euill doth often a∣rise of a small beginning. A graine of poyson is enough to take away a mans life, and the least euill is sufficient to spoile a whole citie.Casus in pli And therefore in euils we are not to respect the waight of them, but the danger, not the great∣nesse, but the contagiousnesse. The least mote of euill, as one saith, is not to be neglected. The Magistrate must take heede that by the name of a little eui l, hee bee not dece∣ued with this paralogisme, forgiue this, this is but a small
falt, and forgiue this, this is but a small fault, and so eue∣ry fault shall be accounted small, and none shall be punish∣ed. As in a diseased body, Phisitians labour to leaue no cor∣rupt humour, that may endanger the body: so the Magi∣strate must leaue nothing in the common-wealth, that may be hurtfull to it.Part saepe scinlla neg∣lecta magnum excitauit in∣cendium. Curt. lib. 6. A little sparke not regarded, hath ma∣ny times raised a great fre: so a little euill neglected, hath often turned to a great mischife. But as the Magistrate must punish all sinne in generall, so more especially such as make most to the dishonour of God, as blasphemous swearing, drunkennesse, whoredome, profanation of the Sabboath, and such like. Now herein many Magistrates are much to blame. They are seuere enough to punish the least disgrace that is offered to their owne persons. But let God be neuer so much disho∣noured, and his Sabboathes neuer so greatly polluted, there are but a few that doe regard i. I confesse there hath beene a good beginning made this last yeare, for the reformation of the Sabboath. The right honourable the Lord Maior that now is, and the other officers that assisted him, haue taken great paines in restraining the abuses and disorders, that are in Tarns and Alehouses on that day. I wish the like care may be continued in the next yeare. And therefore I would intreate the Lord Elect that is to succeede, that the example of those that haue gone before him may encourage him to vndertake this good worke of the Lord. He shall finde it an easier matter then it was before, because the yee are al∣ready well broken to his hands, vngodlinesse is already well curbed, it were pittie that by any future remissenesse, it should get head againe. And let me exhort the right wor∣shipfull Sheriffes, that are newly come in place: that as they are famous in this respect, that they are brothers by na∣ture (a thing seldome or neuer seene before in this cittie) so also they would ioine together in brotherly affection, that with one heart and one hand they may set themselues, to the vttermost of their authoritie, to punish and roote out all vn∣godly persons. So shall they transferre a blessed memory of their names to all posteritie, and no doubt the Lord will
remember them in goodnesse for the same. There is another sort of wicked persons, that deserue to be seuerely pun shed. And they are those which foo∣lish people call wise men and wise women: but indeede are wisards and sorceers, very imes of the diuell, that take vpon them by the a of the diuell to helpe men to things that are lst or stoine. These are so odious in the sight of God, as hee can by no meaes endure them. Let none be found among you (saith the Lord that vsth witchcra r is a r garder of times or a sorcerer,Deu 18 10 11.12. or a ker or that ceth with spirits, or a sooth∣sayer or that a eth counsel of the dead For all that doe such things, are bho nation vnto the Lord. And there∣fore e hath giuen expresse commandement, that they shall bee put to death. Thou shalt not suffer a witch, (and and these vpon the point are no better to liue. And a∣gaine, If a man or woman haue a spirit of diuination,Exo 22.18 Leui. 20.27 or soo hsaying a doubtlesse these haue they shall die the death, they shall stone them to death, their blod shall be vpon them. An as Dauid saith of idols that all that trust in them are like vnto them?Psal. 115.8 So all that  vnto these instruments of the diuell, are euery wnt as abomiable to God as themselues are. And therefore hee doth precisely co∣demne all such practses.Leu 19.31. Ye shall not regard them that work with spirits neither sooh sayers: ye shall not seeke to t em o be defiled by them I am the o d your God. And in another pa▪ If any turne af er such as worke with spirits and af∣ter sooth sayers to goe a whoing after them:Leu. 20.6. then will I set my face against that man, and will cut him off from a∣mog his people. And how seuerely th s threatning was execued,  a peae in two fearefull examples. The one is of Ahaziah king of Israel who being hrt with a fall out of a window,2. Kin. 1.2 3.4.16.1▪ sent messengers to enquire of Ba∣azebub the God of kron, that is of the diuell, to see whether he should recouer of his disease or no. But the
Lord sent him word by his messengers, and after caused the Prophet Eliah to tell him to his face, that because he had enquired of Baal zebub, as if there had beene no God in Israell, therefore hee should not come downe off the bed, on which hee was gone vp, but should dye the death. And it came to passe accordingly. The other is of Saul who, s the Scripture saith in plaine tearmes;1. Chron. 10.13 14. died for his trans∣gressions, which hee committed against the Lord, euen a∣gai st the word of the Lord which hee kep not, and because hee sought and asked counsell of one that had a familiar spi∣rit, and asked not of the Lord therefore he slew him, &c. Seeing then this practise is so damnable, and so much displeasing vnto Go, it shall be a worke worthy the care of a Christian Magistrate, by due punishment to restraine the ae. Bu of all other, there are none that doe so much de∣serue to be pu shed with all seueritie, as our traiterous Pap sts tha viperous brood, who being nourished in our bosomes doe most vnnaturally seeke to eate out our bo∣w ls.Cic. in Cat. 4 They that haue so often sought by horrible conspiracies to take away a l our liues, are not worthy for one moment to enioy the benefit of their liues: much lesse are they worthy to partake in the priuiledge of sub∣iectes. It was the Oratours rule against Cataline; and it holdeth in all such as he is thatqui reipub. hostis est s ciuis ste null modo potest, ibid. hee that is an enemy to the Common-wea th cannot by any meanes be a true subect. Neither shall our Magist ates neede to feare to be counted cruell in punishing such seditious and rebellious persons as these. Nay rather, if they bee most seuere in this case, they shall bee thought mercifull: but if they bee remisse and negligent, they shall bee subiect to the imputation of extreame crueltie to their Country and Common-wealth. Now among these, there are none to be pro∣ceeded
against with more extremity, then their Priests and Iesuites, the ringleaders of villeny. But I giue them a wrong name: they deserue rather to be called Iudasites, then Iesu∣ites, for they are farre more like to Iudas, then to Iesus: as Cyprian said of some such as they areNon potest esse cum chri∣sto qui imita∣tor Iudae ma∣l esse quam Christi. serm. 6. de orat do∣minica. he cannot belong to Christ, that had rather imitate Iudas then Christ. Their Church hath long delighted in barbarous crueltyCrudelibus morsibus pa∣sta et Christi∣anorum san∣guine opina∣ta. Optat. lib. 2 Reuel 17.6. Reuel. 18.6. Psal. 137.8.9. it hath beene fed with cruell bits, and fatted with the blood of Christians. It is that scarlet coloured whore which the Apostle Iohn saith, is drunken with the blood of Saints & with the blood of the Martyres of Iesus, and that without any respect either of sexe or of age not sparing the infant in the mothers belly And therefore, it were to be wished, that Christian Magi∣strates, according to Gods commandement would reward them as they haue rewarded vs, and giue them double, accor∣ding to their workes: and in the cup that they haue filled to vs fill them double. They are the children of Babel worthy to be destroyed (as Dauid saith.) And therefore, Blessed shall he be that rewardeth them at they haue serued vs. Blessed shall he be that taketh their children, and dasheth them against the stones. Still these wretches doe thirst for blood, ol that they might once be satisfied: but in that sort as Queene Tomyris dealt with blood thirstie Cyrus, who hauing ouercome him in bat∣tell, caused his head to be cut off and cast into a barrell of blood prouided for the purpose; and then insulting ouer him said.go te san∣guine saturabo Herodotan Clio. Sic pereant et qui moliti ta∣lia per gunt. Psal. 124.6. I will giue thee blood thy belly full. Beloued, we haue cause to giue great thankes to almighty God, who hath so often deliued vs from those apparant mis∣ch efes, which they had intended aainst vs. The Lord hath not giuen vs ouer for a pray vnto their teeth, We may truely say to the glory of our God that preserueth vs. Our soule is escaped euen us a bird out of the snare of the foulers:7 Cic in Cati. 1 the snare is broken and we are deliuered. Suffer not, I beseech you suf∣fer not the safety of the land and kingdome to be any more endangered by their meanes.Iud. 8.20.21. But you that haue authority in∣deede, you that haue strength in your hands, rise and fall vp∣on
them, as Gedeon did vpon Zebah and Zalmunna, wee that be Ministers may crie out against them, and inferiour Magistrates may seeke to punish them, and both be laughed to scorne for our paines. It is you that haue greater power, that must doe the deede.A Gell. lib. 7. cap. 3. Strike therefore, and strike home, that both head and taile, both the great Iesuites and the in∣feriour Priests may be cut off before they deuise any more treason. It is good pollicie, not to recompence benefits and good turnes, before they be performed and done: but is a point of great folly not to preuent intended villenies, but to linger and stay till they be committed, and then to thinke to punish them, when the mischiefe that is done cannot be vndone. How it commeth to passe I know not, but the truth is they haue too much liberty. Euen those of them that be in prison, are little restrained by their imprisonment. They haue the Masses as ordinarie and as common, and there is as great resort of many sorts of people to them, whom they seduce and peruert, as if they were in their owne houses, yea they can at their pleasure goe abroade all the citie ouer. And yet they are not ashamed to crie out of heard and cruell v∣sage, that they are like to bee famished, and I know not what. Indeede I am sorrie for their heauinesse. He that shall looke on the cheekes of many of them, will thinke they are better fedde then taught. They know well enough, that in Queeene Marias time, the poore seruants and Martyres of Christ, endured other manner of persecution at their hands. They were mannacled and fettered, and kept in the stockes night and day,1. King. 22.27. yea not onely their feete, but their neckes al∣so. They were fed with the bread of affliction, and the water of affliction. These men walke vp and downe in their brauerie, and eate of all the dainties that may be, and yet are not plea∣sed. Well let me exhort those that be in authoritie, that if they will not hung them vp vnto the Lord,2. Sam. 21.6 as the Gibeonites said of Sauls sonnes, (which yet I am perswaded would be as acceptable a sacrifice to God as that was, and as plea∣sing a spectacle to all God people) yet they would tie
them shorter, and make their imprisonment a restraint indeede, that they may not haue so much liberty to doe mischiefe. But it may be some will obiect. Will you then deny all mercy vnto those that doe offend. No by no meanes. I know that Solomon saith,Pro. 20.28. The Kings throne shall be establish∣ed with mercy. I would not haue the seate of Iustice to beReorum sco∣pulus. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 3. cap. 5. the rocke of malefactors, as they said of the tribunal of Cassius. I hate the cruelty of Draco, who punished the lightest and smallest offence with death, and therefore was said to write his lawes not with incke but with blood.M lum est delectari sono catenarum Sen de clement. li. 1. cap. vlt. I hold it a filthy thing for a Magistrate to delight (as one saith) in the ratling of chaines and fetters, as a carter that is neuer well but when he heares the lashing of his whippe. But as Dauid saith in the beginning of this Psalme. I will sing mer∣cy and iudgement: so I would haue all those that are to pu∣nish offenders, to temper mercy and iustice together,Vt non faci∣litas authori∣tatem, aut seue ritas amorem minuat. Cor. Tac. in vita Iul Agric. Milis sueri∣tas non disso∣luta clemen ia Plin Sec. in panegyr. that too much leuitie doe not derogate from their authority, nor too much seueritie doe not diminish their loue. TheyTam omni∣bus ignoscere crudelitas est quam nulli. Sen. de cle¦ment. l. 1 c. 2. a Potest poena diluta exigi, non potest ex∣acta renocari. Sen. de ira. l. 2. Sen de cle∣ment l. 1. must vse a milde seueritie, and not a dissolute clemencie, as Plinie said of Tragane the Emperour. As they must not shew mercie hand ouer head, so they must not denie mercie to all. e For it is as great cruelty to shew mercy to all, as to none. And therefore, to the end that the Magistrate may carrie himselfe vprightly in this case, there are diuerse causions to be ob∣serued. First of all, they must not be too headlong, nor too hastie in inflicting punishment. All other meanes, as we haue said before, must be vsed, and if they be despised and contemned, then at the last they must come to punishment. It was a good saying of Seneca.Ne superet medicina mo∣dum. A punishment that is de∣ferred, may be exacted: but if it be once inflicted, it cannot be recalled. Secondly, they must labour by smaller & lighter pu∣nishments to peruent greater. They must not come to capitall punishments at the first, vnlesse the feare of future euill be greater then the present. Death is the last punishment, and therefore there is none will inflict it, but he that hath spent
all his other remedies. Thirdly, they must punish in equity and due proportion, according to the quality of the offence.Nesuperet medicina mo∣dum. The medicine must exceede mesure. And this was the commandement of the Lord himselfe, that if a wicked man were found worthy to be beaten, the Iudge should cause him to lie downe,Deut. 25.2. and to be beaten according to his trespasse &c. And our Sauiour Christ hath taught vs, that he that sinneth of ignorance must be beaten with fewer stripes, then he that sinneth against his knowledge.Luk 12.47.48. That seruant saith he that knew his masters will, and prepared not himselfe, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many wripes. But he that knew it not,Ezra. 7.26 and yet did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes. And this the heathen king e∣uen by the light of nature prescribed vnto Ezra,—adsit Regula pecca∣tis quae poe∣nas ittoget acquas. Ne scutica dignum ho∣ribli sectere flagello. Hora. serm. l. 1. sat. 3. that whoso∣euer will not doe the law of God, and the kings law, hee should haue iudgement, whether it be vnto death, or vnto ba∣nishment, or vnto conffication of goods, or to imprisonment. Where we see, he maketh diuersities of punishments, accor∣ding to he desert of the offender. (b) And vnlesse this rule be obserued to proportion punishments according to the offences, they shall punish that with a scourge, that scarce deserue a wippe. Fourthly, they must consider the nature and disposition of the partie. Some are more flexible and tender hearted: others are more audacious and desperate in their wickednesse. A lesser correction will preuaille more with the one, then a greater punishment with the other. As Solo∣mon saith,Pro. 17.10. & 27.22. A reproofe entereth more into him that hath vnder∣standing, then an hundred stripes into a foole. For though a man should bray a foole in a morter, among wheate, braied with a pestell, yet will not foolishnesse depart from him. A Magistrate must put a difference in punishing of these. There must not bee the like seuerity vsed towards them. Where a pinne will serue to open an vlcer, there needeth not a launcer. Last of all, whatsoeuer the punishment be, mercy and compassion must be vsed in inflicting of it. And therefore the Magistrate must not vse reuiling and reproach∣full
speeches, to the disgrace of the offender. When Ioshua was to proceede against Achan who by his sinne had trou∣bled all Israel,Iosh. 7.19. hee speaketh to him in milde and gentle tearmes; My sonne saith he, I beseech thee g ue glory to God, &c. Neither must he by any cruell course, make his torture greater or longer, then necessitie requireth. For when the delinquent shall see himselfe despised (as Moses saith) in the sight of him that punisheth him,Deut. 25 it will bee a meanes to driue him to desperation. And therefore a godly Father saith well, Euen one that iudgeth aright, must hold a ballance in his hands, in the one end he must beare iustice, in the other mercy. By iustice he giueth sentence against sinne,Per illam reddit peccati sententiam, per hanc pec∣cati temperat paenam. Ibid. by mer∣cy he tempereth and mittigateth the punishment of the sinne. Whereunto agreeth that speech of Saint Augustine.Duo sunt nomina, ho∣mo et pecca∣tor. quod pec∣cator est cor∣ripe, quod ho∣mo miserere. There are two names, a man and a sinner: as he is a sinner punish him, as he is a man pittie him. And indeede, mercy is the ve∣rie eye and light of iustice, without which it is nothing but blinde rage and furie. But aboue all, mercy must be shewed to the soules of Malefactors. And therefore great care should be had, that by their punishments theyPoenitenti∣am quam per∣niciem malun Cor. Tac. An∣nal. lib. 1. may be brought to repentance, and not to destruction. And this was the end which the A∣post e propounded it punishing the incestuous person among the Corinthians, by the censures of the Church. He comman∣ded, that he should be deliuered to Satan, for the destruction of the fl sh that the spirit might be saued in the day of the Lord Ie∣sus The sword of iustice doth continually cut off many wick∣ed persons for their due deserts.1, Cor. 5.5. And as they die a dogges death; so it is to be feared, that many of them the like dogges, for want of knowledge and for want of grace. It is a lamen∣table thing, that in so great a place as this, there is not some godly and sincere Minister appointed to instruct them bet∣ter, and to prepare them for their ends. I confesse this Ci∣tie is famous for many excellent workes of charitie to the bodies of men. The e are many hospitals, wherein a great number of poore orphanes and desolate widowes are libe∣rally
fed and cloathed. No doubt, the loines of many such that are warmed with your garments,Iob 31.20. doe blesse you, as Iob saith. And many sicke and wounded persons by your good prouision, doe recouer the health and soundnesse of their bodies. I beseech you let me begi t at your hands (and who knoweth whether God sent me hither for this purpose or no) that you would adde this worke of mercy to the rest, which is more excellent then they all, that a competent maintenance may be allowed to some faithfull and skilfull Minister, who may take care of these poore wretches. It were to be wished that there were in euery prison such a man maintained. For we see by experience, that they are nurse∣ries of all vngodlinesse, and men that once come in prison, learne more villenie, then euer they knew before. Where∣as if there were a godly minister to teach and instruct them faithfully,2. Chro 33.12. it were to be hoped, that in their tribulation they would humble themselues greatly before the Lord their God, as we reade Manasses did, and so whatsoeuer became of their bodies, yet their soules by Gods mercy might be sau∣ed. But if this be a worke of too great cost: yet let me so farre preuaile with you in this case, that there may be a man of vnderstanding and knowledge, set ouer the soules of them that are appointed to die.Iob 29 13. So shall the blessing of those that are readie to perish, euen in this life come vpon you: and doubtlesse in the life to come,Mat. 5.12. great shall be your reward in heauen. All the wicked.) This is the second thing that was noted in the words, namely the equity of King Dauid, that he would not be partiall. It was not likely that when he had done all, he could vtterly purge the land of wicked men. Yet he promi∣seth so to carrie himselfe in punishing of them, as it should appeare he would doe it without respect of persōs: he would not incline to one more then another. This example doth teach all that is in authority, that in punishing malefactors no partiality must de vsed. All must be punished according to their desarts, one as well as another. Respect of persons is e∣uery
where condemned in the scripture. And first in iudging.  was the Lords commandement vnto Magistrates, ye shall not doe vniustly in iudgement.Leuit. 19.15 Thou shalt not fauour the person of the poore, nor honour the person of the rich, but shall Iudge thy neighbour iustly. Giuing vs to vnderstand, that he that v∣seth partialitie, cannot iudge righteous iudgement.& 16.19. And a∣gaine, Ye shall haue no respect of persons in iudgement, but shall heare the small as well as the great: ye shall not feare the face of man; for the iudgement is Gods. And in another place, Wrest not the law, nor respect any person, &c. A mighty man must not be feared for his greatnesse, nor a meane man must not be despised for his pouerty. And Dauid in the person of the Lord reprouing the corrupt & wicked magistrates of his time saith, How long will ye iudge vniustly,Psal. 82.2. and accept the person of the wicked? And Solomon in diuerse places doth the like. It is not good, saith he, to accept the person of the wicked,Prou. 28.5. to cause the righteous to fal in iudgement. And It is not good to haue respect of any person in iudgement. And againe.& 24.23. To haue respect of persons is not good: for that man will transgresse for a piece of bread. Hereupon the Apostle chargeth Timotheus euen before God,& 18.21. and the Lord Iesus Christ, and the elect Angels, that in execu∣ting the ecclesiasticall censures vpon wicked persōs,1. Tim. 5.21 he should not preferre one before another, and that he should doe nothing partially. Wher he vseth two words of great signification.. The first doth signifie to esteeme highly of some one man in res∣pect of others, which is most intollerable in a Iudge, who must sit in the place of iustice, not to iudge of mens persons, but according to their causes. Beza. The second is borrowed from him that holdeth the ballance, implying that the Iudge must waigh the causes of men that are at variance, as it were in a balance, so as he must incline to neither part, otherwise there can be no right iudgement. Secondly, this respect of persons, and this parcialitie is condemned also in punishing. When the Lord had appointed punishments by way of retaliation, vnto him that had any way hurt his brother, hee addeth in the end.
Ye shall haue one law, it shall be as well for the stranger, as for one borne in the country. The stranger if he deserue fauour, must haue as much sauour, as if he were borne in the coun∣try; and he that is borne in the country, must be punished with as much seuerity, as if he were a stranger. Againe, the Lord commandeth,Deu. 17.25 If there be found among you in any of thy cities, which the Lord thy God giu th thee, man or woman that hath wrought wickdnesse in the sight of the Lord thy God &c. then thou shalt bring foorth that man or that woman vnto thy gates, and shalt stone them with stones till thy . We see here is none excepted. Whosoeuer they be that transgresse, high or low, rich or poore, they must be punished. And therefore in some cases, it were not lawfull for the father or mother to spare their owne sonne, that was borne of their bone, and flesh of their flesh. If any man haue a sonne (saith the Lord) that is stubburne and disobedient,Deut. 11.18 19.21. which will not hearken to the voice of his father, nor the voce of his mother &c. then shall his father and his mother take him and bring him out vnto t e El∣ders of his citie, and then all the men of his citie shall stone him with stones vnto death. Yea there is not any bond of nature or of friendship, that should hinder a man from the perfor∣mance of this duetie, according to that strict charge and precept of the Lord.Deut. 13.6.7.8.9.10. If thy brother the sonne of thy mother, or thine owne sonne, or thy daughter, or thy wife that lieth in thy bosome, or thy friend which is as thine owne soule, entice thee secretly, saying, let vs goe and serue us other Gods, &c. Thou shalt not consent vnto him nor hare him neither shall thine eie pitie him, nor shew mercy nor keepe him secret. But thou shalt eu n kill him: thine hand shall be first vpon him to put him to death and then the hands of all the people,2. Cron. 15.16. &c. And therefore, Asa, king of Iudah is commended in the word of God, for his vprightnesse in this respect, that when Maacha his owne mo∣ther committed idolatry, he would not spare her but pu∣nished her, euen by deposing her from her regency And indeede, it is truely said,Iustitium non nouit pa∣trem, non no∣uit matte n, ventatem vo∣s. that Iustice knoweth neither father nor mother, but onely the truth. As Moses testifieth of Leui,
that he said vnto his father and to his mothe, I haue not seene him, neither knew he his brethren, nor knew his owne children: so must it be with euery good Magistrate. The neerest kinsmen and dearest friends that he hath in the world must haue no more fauour then other men. Besides, the Lord hath entitled and stiled Magistrates by the name of Gods, as Dauid saith, God standeth in the assembly of gods,Psal. 82.1.6 he iudgeth among Gods. And againe, I haue said ye are gods, &c. And therefore, as they communicate with God in his name, so also they should follow his example. Now the Scripture doth euery where teach vs, that God is no respecter of persons. The Lord your God, saith Moses, is God of gods,Deut. 10.17 18. and Lord of Lords, a great God, mighty and terrible, which excepteth no persons, nor taketh reward, &c. And Iehosaphat exhorting his Iudges that he had made, to the due execution of iustice, v∣seth Gods example as an argument to perswade thē therun∣to. Let the feare of the Lord, saith he, be vpon you:2. Chr. 19.7 take heed and doe it, for there is no iniquity with the Lrrd our God, neither respect of persons nor receiuing of reward. And Elihu affirmeth the same in the booke of Iob.Iob 34.19. The Lord accepteth not the per∣sons of Princes, and regardeth not the rich more then the poore: for they be all the worke of his hands. The greatest and the richest are like to finde no more fauour at his hands then the meanest and the poorest,Isa. 11.3. for he made the one as well as the other. And the Prophet Isaiah speaking of the kingdome and dominion of Christ, saith, He shall not iudge after the sight of his eyes, he shall not bee caried with outward respects to condemne or absolue any man without cause. In a word, the Apostle Peter saith,1. Pet. 1.17. that God without respect of persons iudgeth according to euery mans worke. And we see by experience, that the greatest potentates, and mightiest monarches in the world, can no more escape the vengeance of God, then the poorest wretches that liue vpon the earth. Witnesse Pharaoh, Nabuchad-nezzar and diuerse others, whom God brought to confusion notwithstanding all their pride. Neither can the greatest multitude of sinners that are, rescue themselues
from the stroake of his punishing hand, no more then if they were but a few, or but one person, as we see in the old world, in Sodome and Gomorha, and the cities about them, and in the great army of Sennacherib. Yea the Lord correcteth his dearest children, euen as well as those that are his enemies. As the Apostle Peter,1 Pet. 4 17. saith, The time is come that iudgement must beginne at the house of God. And the Lord himselfe saith to the wicked nations Loe,Ier. 25.29. I beginne to plague the citie where my name is called vpon, and should you goe free? And speak∣ing of the children and posteritie of Dauid whom he loued so dearely,Psal. 89.30.31.32.33. as he promised that he would Neuer take his lou∣ing kindnesse from them: saith notwithstanding, that If they forsake his law, and walke not in his iudgements: if they breake his statutes, and keepe not his commandements; he would visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquitie with strokes. Thus should it be with al Magistrates.1. Pet 2.9. They should labour to expresse this excellet vertue of him that hath called them out of darkenesse into his maruelous light. They must suffer nei∣ther great nor small, one nor other to escape deserued pu∣nishment.Cauendum est ne usdem de causis alij plectantur, In e appellntur qudem. ic. of c. li. 1. They must take heede that for one and the same fault, some be not punished, and others not once cal∣led in question.Be. de Con. sid. ib. 2. The magistrate (as Bernard told Euge∣nius) maketh himselfe guilty of no small offence, if he doe respect the countenances of sinners, and doe not rather iudge according to the merit of their causes. As it is said of the law, that it can neither be moued witst fauour, nor weakned with power, nor corrupted with money: so it should be with the Magistrate.Nihil offen∣se, nihil gra∣tie dabitur. Sen. Neither feare nor fauour should diuert him from that which is right. As the Sinne is no other to a a rich man, then to a poore man, but indifferent to all, parching, or refreshing all alike: So must the Magistrate ca∣ry himselfe equally and indifferently to all men in the execu∣tion of iustice. The rich must not be more fauoured then the poore, nor the poore more seuerely dealt withall then the rich. It is reported by trauellers, that in Zante ouer the place of iudgement, where all causes both criminall & iudici∣all are decided, there are two Latine verses written in letters
of gold, on the wall, to this effect.Hic locus o∣dit, amat, pu∣uit, conseruat honorat. Nequitiam, pacean, crumi∣na, iura, bono This place hateth wick∣ednes, loueth peace, punisheth offences, preserueth the laws, honoureth the good. Implying that there shall be no partia∣litie vsed, but euery man shall be proceeded withall according to his deas be they good or euill. At Athens the iudges cal∣led Areopagit did sit in iudgement vpon causes in the night time, that no outward and occasion or respect might worke vp∣on their affections to moue them either to seuerity or to pi∣tie, more thē the equity of the thing required.Cael. Rhodi. lib. 10. cap. 3. And in Cre∣ta the image of Iupiter was made without cares: insinuating that a Magistrate should heare no mans complaint nor peti∣tion, but onely follow that, which the ballance of reason, and the sincerity of vncorrupted iustice did suggest. Here then are all such iustly reproued, as are carelesse and negligent in this respect As we see by common experience, that many hes in place of iustice, there is now much partiality If they be great persons and rich men that offend, they are seldome punished. I pray God it may not be true at this day, which the heathen Oratour obserued of his times.Omnium ser¦mone percre∣bitu, his iudi∣ciis quae nunc sunt, pecunio∣sum hominem quamuis sit no cena, neminem posse damnari. Cic. in Ver. protem. 1. act. It is com¦mon in euery mans mouth, that in these iudgements which are now, o money man though he be an offender, can be cō∣demned.Nihil tam sanctum, quod non violai ni∣hil tam muni∣tum, quod non expugnari pe∣cunia potest. ibid. And indeed there is nothing so pure & holy that cānot be violated, nothing so well fensed that cannot be won & ouercome with money. But the laws must nor be like vnto cobwebs, which catch and hold the h flies, but the great ones break through them. Others there be that suffer them∣selues to be turned out of the way by hundred & acquaintāce and friendship and such like respects. Wherby it commeth to passe, that according to the old prouerbe, some man may bet∣ter steale an horse, then another may looke on. If he be Cousin to we, as the saying is, if he be well allied, let his fact be what it wil be he need not sene, he shall neuer be called into questiō, or if he be, hee shall quickly be discharged. But Magistrates ought to know that there is no nerenes of kindred or alliāce that shold be any patronage for sin. Whē the Lord was wroth with the people of Israel for making the golden calfe. Moses cōmāded the sons of Leui,Exo. 32.27. to put euery man his sword by his side
and to goe to and fro from gate to gate through the host, and slay euery man his brother, and euery man his companion, and euery man his neighbour. They must spare none, how neare or deare soeuer. Hae rogtio∣nes mistam ne¦cessitatem ha∣bent Cacl. Calcag. de rat. iudicandi.There are many also, that for feare of greater persons, are kept from executing iustice. For as hath beene said before, Mightie men will become suiters to inferiour Magistrates in the behalfe of offenders whom they affect. And as one saith well, (a) their request bringeth a necessity with them. For vnlesse their desire be satisfied, and the party whom they commend be absolued, by right or wrong, be his cause ne∣uer so bad, they will be sure to sit on their skirts, and one time or other they will come euen with them. As we reade of Agisclaus, who when he commended a friend of his to the Iudge, he requested him, that if his cause were good, hee would absoule him for iustice sake, if not that he would ful∣fill his desire: but howsoeuer the world went that he would absolue him. By this meanes it commeth to passe, that ma∣ny notorious lewd persons, are subduced from deserued pu∣nishment, and reserued to commit greater villenies, to the dishonour of God, and the hurt of the common∣wealth. And therefore all magistrates are to be exhorted, to la∣bour for equall and vpright dealing in punishing offences. They should shew themselues so inuincible and so impreg∣nable against all affections, as neither by force of money, nor by the feare or fauour of any man whosoeuer, they suffer themselues to be drawne away from the right. Courage is the principall vertue, and the chiefe badge of a Christian Magistrate.Exod. 18.21 When Ithro perswaded Moses to make and appoint rulers vnder himselfe, euer thousands, euer hundreds, euer fifties, and ouer tens. The first thing that he required in them was this, that the should be Men of courage. And when Ioshua was appointed to succeede Moses in the gouernment of the people of Israel. First, Moses called him and said vnto him in the sight of all the people.Deut. 3.7. Be of a good courage and strong.
And after that the Lord aue him the same charge twice for fai∣ling. Be strong and of a good courage  would expell & riue away a I cowardly an fainthe s,Deut. .23 Iosh. 1.1. & cause them manually and strongly to execute iustice, though there be neuer so many impediments to encounter with al. And herein the very hathen men may be our Slemaisters For if Solomon send the Sluggrd to the pismire to learne instructiō, why shold we scorne to earne of pagas who were endued with excellent gifts of nature.Prou. 6.6. Pha∣cion a great Magistrate in Athens when his son in law Charillus was to be endited for extortion, would not so much as be presēt there least his coūtenāce might haue procured him some fauor, assuming that when he tooke him to be his son in law, he hoped he would e a good & an honest man.Plutarch in praecept polit And Cleon when hee was called to be a Magistrate, sent presently for all his friends, and renounced then fdship. And when Simonides requested something of Thostocles, a Magistrate that was not very iust, here H m with this answer. He is not a good Poe that sin∣ge wtout harmony, nor he a good mag strate that sheweth any fauour aast the lawes. ut there is a most famous exam∣ple of all other for this purpose recorded by Aelianus. The sum of it is this. There was a man of the people called Mardi,A han. lib. 1. cap 34. that had seauen sonnes, whereof the youngest being stubborne and dissolute and one that would not be reclaimed the rather taketh him, and bindes his hands behind him, and bought him to the Iudges: & there doth arnestly accuse him, & required that he might bee put to death. The Iudges being astonished at the strangenes of the thing would not meddle with t, but brought the father and the son to Artaxerxes the King. Where the father sti pleaed against the son & craued iustice. The King seeing his eanstnesse, said vnto him. Canst thou then with thine owne ee endure to behold the death of thy son? he answ ed, yea very el For when I shall see him, that wrongeth & disho∣noureth my family, put to death, Land the rest of my children shall liue with eater comfort When the King heard this he highly commended the father, & made him one of his Iudges, affirming, that he that durst so seuerely & so iustly pronounce sentence against his owne childe, would doubtlesse shew him∣selfe
a sincere & incorrupt iudge vnto others. But he pardoned the young man for that time, threatning to put him to a most ho∣rible death if euer e should offend againe in the l ke māner. h that our Magistrates and Iudges would follow thse examples. For if it did once appeare to the world that rich & mighty men should be punished as well as the poore & meane persons and that kinsfolke & friends should finde o more fauur then those that are strangers, it would soone cut off all hope of impue from all kinde of malefactors. And blessed be God, that at this time our eies do see the great care of his Maiesty to haue the ād purged frō bloud, wherwith it hath been poluted, & that there is so strict & so iust proceeding against all that were coeerae in so wicked a fact. nd the Lord strēthen te hart & ā that most worty Lord chiefe Iustice that he ay stil go forward vn∣partially to cut off al those that had any ā in so foul a murder. Wicked.) As all the wicked must be punished without par∣tialitie so none but the wicked must be enda gered. Th y that are innocent and harme esse, must not be mlsted. The Lord, commanded Moses that in the execution o jst ce,Deut 2.1 Prou. 17.15 The righ∣teous should bee iustified nd the wicked condemned And Solo∣mon saith, It is as great abhomination in the sight of od to con∣demne the iust, as it is to iustifie the wicke. And the Prophet pro∣nounceth as great a wo against im that Taketh away the righ∣teous es of the r ghteous from him,Isa. 5.23. as against him That iustfith & absolueth the wick d for a reward The Lord hath pu a sword into the Magistrates hand,Rom. 13 4 but it is to this ed, that he may Take vengean  him that doth euill. And therefore bee abu∣seth his authort, and abuseth his sword, if he turneth edge of it against the godly,Psal 11 2. and smite them that are vpright in heart, as Dauid saith. This is a most fearefull and a most horrible sinne and a sine which God will ost seurely punish. Among those se en things which the Lord hateth and abhor h,Pro 6.16 17 Psal. 9.. this is one, The hands that shed innocent blood And auid saith, that the Lord himselfe wi make inquisition for blood. Sometimes inno∣cent bloo is shed vnder colour o aw But there will be at tme, when the Lord wil ce with a quest of quie to find it out, nd to punish it. And therefore, when the wicked brought
the Prophet Ieremiah before the princes, and would haue had him put to death, he speaketh to them with great boldnesse.Ier. 26.14.15 As for me, I am in your hands, doe with me as you thinke good, But know ye for a certaine, that if you put me to death, ye shall surely bring innocent blood vpon your selues, and vpon this city, & vpon the inhabitants therof. Implying, that God would reuenge his blood, not onely vpon the murderers themselues, but vp∣on the people, the whole land should be guilty of it. When poore Naboth was vniustly condemned and put to death by wicked Ahab, the Lord sent Elijah the Prophet to him with this messag. Hast thou killed & also gotten possession? Thus saith the Lord in the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth shal dogs licke euen thy blood also.1. King. 21.13.19. & 22.38. 2. King. 21.16. & 24.2.3.4 Which came to passe accordingly Manasseh was a cruell murderer, He shed innocent blood excee∣ding much, till he replenished Ierusalem from corner to corner. But marke how fearefully the Lord reuenged this sin in his posterity. In the daies of Iehoikim. The Lord sent against him bands of the Caldees, & bands of the Aramits, & bands of the Mo∣abites, & bands of the Amonites & he sent them against Iudah, to destroy it. Surly by the commandment of the Lord came this vpon Iudah, that he might put them out of sight, for the sinnes of Manasseh, And for the innocent blood that he shed, therefore the Lord would not pardon it. Manasseh was dead & rottē long be∣fore this time but we see the Lord had not forgotten his sin, but the whole land smarted for it in the third generation after him. So likewise Ioash most vnkindly caused Zechariah the son of good Ieoiada to b stoned to death, because he reproued him for his idolatry. But see what followed.2. Chro. 24.21.22.23.24.25. When the yeare was out the host of Aram came vp against him, and they came a∣gainst Iudah and Ierusalem and destroyed all the Princes of the people from among the people and sent all the spoile of them vn∣to the King of Damascus. Though the army of Aram came with a small company of men, yet the Lord deliuered a very great ar∣my into their hands. After this, the Lord somte him with great disseases. And at the last, his owne seruants conspired against him,
and slew him on his bed. And the reason of all these iudge∣ments is giuen there by the holy Ghost, that they were For the blood of the children of Iehoiada the Priest. And to this pur∣pose the Lord did threaten the Iewes,Mat. 23.35 that Vpon them should come all the righteous blood that was shed vpon the earth, from the blood of Abel the righteous, vnto the blood of Zacharias the sonne of Barachias, whom they slew betweene the temple and the altar. When the wicked Iewes were so earnest with Pilate to haue our Sauiour Christ put to death, and he would haue testified his innocencie in the matter, they all with one voice took it vpon themselues,Mat. 27.25 and cried out, His blood be on vs, and on our children. Which fearfull imprecation of theirs the Lord did heare, and auenged his blood vpon them with a witnes. Neither was there any sinne so seuerely punished as that sinne. For the Lord brought an vtter destruction vpon the whole nation, that euen to this day they are despersed and scattered throughout the whole earth, and may euen be ter∣med the common Rogues and vagabonds of the world. And Pilate that wicked iudge, that pronounced that wicked sen∣tence against him, to gratifie and please the Iewes, euen a∣gainst his conscience,Euseb li. 2 c. 7. did not escape the reuenging hand of God. For the Lord brought vpon him such wofull calami∣ties, that to be rid out of his paine, he thrust himselfe through with his owne hands, and so ended his wretched life. In a word, we reade in the Reuelation that the soules of them that were killed for the word of God,Reuel. 6.10. and for the testimony which they maintained, doe crie with a loud voice vnder the altar: How long Lord, holy and true! dost thou not iudge and auenge our bloode them that dwell vpon the earth. By all this that hath beene spoken, we see what a fearefull sinne it is to be guilty of shedding innocent blood. And yet we see it by too much experience, that where wicked men are in authority, they that are most godly, and most religi∣ous, are sure to be most molested. Is it not an ordinary thing with the Papists, where they haue the law in their hands, to punish a man more seuerely, for reading the holy word of
God, for the comfort and education of his soule, at for ea∣ting flesh on a friday, or for breaking any of their supersti∣tious ceremonies, the either for blasmy, or drunken∣nesse, or whordome, of for murer it selfe? For though man bee guilty of these sinnes, hee may haue a dispensa∣tion and a pardon: but if he bee taken ardie in ae of the other, hee is sure to bee burnt at a stake, and to fry a fagot. And others also that are no Papists, at least would be counted none, as farre as their power will stretch, doe most of all manifest their malice against the children of God. I know they are ashamed openly to professe this. But they haue other shifts and other preenses for their procee∣dings. If Haman desire to haue the whole nation of the Iewes destroyed, there shall not bee the least insinuation, that it is because they are the people of God: that were too grosse. But They doe not obserue the Kings Iames,Ester. 3.8. and therefore, It is not th Kings profit to suffer them. If the Iewes conspire the Prophet Ieremiahs death, the quarell must not be, because he is a faithfull Prophet of the Lord and will bold∣ly speake all that the Lord commandeth him to speake: that were too shamefull. But forsooth,Ier. 26.11. He prophesieth against the citie, and therefore he is worthy to die. If flattering Amsiah the Priest of Bethel would bring poore Amos into disgrace with Ieroboam, the pretence and colour of his acusation must be this.Amos 7.10. Amos hath conspired against thee in thands of the house of Israel: the land is not able to beare all his words. When the Iewes were purposed to crusifie our blessed Sa∣uiour the Lord of life,Ioh. 8.46. though they could find nothing in him that was aiss (for there was none of them that could true∣ly rebuke him of sinne) yet this they falsely pretended against him. That they found him peruerting the people▪Luke 23.2. and forbid∣ding to pay tribute to Casar, and that he spake against Caesar in making himselfe a King.Ioh. 19.12 Act. 6.10. When the aduersaries of Saint Ste∣uen sought de the maine quarell was because they were not able to resist the wisedome and the spirit by which he sake. But yet they had another manner of accusation against
him, namely, that he ceased not to speake blasphemous words a∣gainst the holy place, and against the law. In like manner when Ananias the high Priest and the elders went about to put the Apostle Paul to death, they had as farre a cloake or their vileinous intent as could be.Act. 24 1.2 5. They hired a skilfull lawyer to accuse him, to be a p stilent fellow and a mouer of sedition a∣mong all the Iewes throughout the world. And doubtlesse, wick∣ed and vngodly men at this day, are not lesse ingenious, nor lesse malicious, to deuise false accusations agai st those that are most sincere, and so farre as is in their power, to bring them within compasse of law, when as in truth if they would sriue themselues, their owne heart telleth them, that their quarell against them, is no other, then Cains was against his brother Abel,1. Ioh. 3.12. euen because their owne workes are euill and the others good. And therefore, let all those whom this may concerne be admonished,Mat. 27.24 to wash their hands but with a pu∣rer conscience and a cleaner heart then Pilate did) from the innocent blood of all iust persons. Let them take heede, that they haue no hand, vpon any pretence whatsoeuer, not onely in the dead, but not in the vniust molestation, or wrongfull punishment of any that are knowne to bee godly. Betimes.) or early. This noteth his speede and diligence in punishing offenders he promiseth to doe it speedily with∣out delay, diligently without remisnesse, and constantly with∣out intermission. From whence we may obserue, that they that are to punish others, must doe it speedily. This was the commission that was giuen to Ezra,Ezra. 7.26. that Whosoeuer would doe the the law of his God & the Kings law, he must haue iudge∣ment without delay. That which God commandeth to house∣holders and fathers of families: namely, that if they loue their children they must Correct them betimes,Prou. 13.14 & 19.18. and chasten them whil there is hope: is also required of Magistrates and fathers of the coury: that in punishing of sinne they must begin early and betimes, least it tey be e, nd slacke, and remisse, they doe not in time conuenient, and in due season,
meete with those euils that are to bee reformed. So that if Magistrates take heede, that they giue not way to rash and vnaduised anger, and that they bee transported and caried headlong with inconsiderate passion, they cannot beginne soone enough to punish those that doe offend. For as in all other cases, so in this especially delay hath dangers. For by this meanes sin gathereth steth As fire that is not presently quenched, causeth great ruine. So iniquity that is not quick∣ly repssed, breedeth great mischiefe in the common-wealth.Vide ego quod erat primo sanabi∣le vulnus, Di∣latum ogae dmna tu isse morae. Principiis ob∣sta,  to medi∣cina per ur, Cum mala per longas alu∣ere moras. O∣uid. de rem d. amois l b. 1. Et neglecta solent in cen∣dia sumere vi∣res Hrat. l. 1. Epist. 18. 2. Sam. .27 & 20.9.10. As a wound or a disease that is not taken in time, prou∣eth many times inueterate and incurable: so euill that is not preuented in the beginning, spreadeth often to the destructi∣on of a state. If Ioab had receiued punishment according to his desats, at the first for killing Abner, he would not haue growne so audaciously insolent, as he did afterwards, to mur∣der Amasa so treacherously. Againe, it is to be obserued, that the Propet Dauid doth here vse the plurall number. For in the or ginall it is in the mornings. Whereby he noteth his con∣stant stoutnesse in performing of this dutie. Because it were not sufficient for a Magistrate, once or twice seuerely to pu∣nush wicked men, vnlesse he doe constantly perseuere in the same And therefore in a word, not to insist any longer on this point, here is condemned the carelesnesse and remisnes of many Magistrates, who though they see lewd and vngod∣ly persons, to rush ito sine with impudent and shamelesse boldnesse: yet either for feare, or for fauour, doe protract the tim from day to day and dare not or will not punish them. Let them remember that God himselfe hath armed them with a sword,In matutinis Calumn loc. singulis matu∣tis. Tremel. that they should not onely stoutly and man∣fully, but also quickly and speed ly execute his iudgements. And let them know, that if they faile herein in any respect whatsoeuer, they are lyabl to that curse denounced by the Prophet.Ier. 48.10 Curs d he he that doth th worke of the Lord negligent∣ly and cursed b h that when od giueth him a commande∣ment to kill, keepeth backe his sword from blood. Workers of iniquity) er the Prophet expoundeth and de∣clareth
what he meant by those whom he called wicked in the former part of the verse. Which teacheth vs that all workers of iniquity are wicked men. I know men thinke scorne of this and they wil by no meanes endure to heare of it. And indeed it is an odious name, & all that are such are in a fearful estate. But sti l in the iudgement of the holy Ghost, they are all ac∣counted wicked and vngodly persons that doe worke iniquitie. Our Sauiour Christ affirmeth it with as great earnestnesse as may be.Ioh 8.4. Verily, verily, I say vnto you, that whosoeuer commit∣teth sinne is the seruant of sinne.1. Ioh 3.8. And his Apostle maketh the matter yet worse. He that committeth sinne is of the diuell. But here peraduenture it will be obiected,Prou. 2 B. 9. that all are sinners, as Solomon saith who can say, I haue made my heart cleane, I am cleane from my sinne.1. Kin 8.46 1. Ioh. 1.8 And in another place, there is no man that sinneth not. And the Apostle confesseth, that if we say we haue no sinne, we deceiue our selues, and there is no truth in vs. And so by this reckoning all should be wicked men. I answer, that it is true indeede, all men are sinners: but yet there is great difference of sinners. Some are penitent, and some are im∣penitent sinners. But to the end, that wee may conceiue this point aright, we will distinguish of sinners foure seue∣rall waies. First, in respect of the measure. Secondly, in res∣pect of the manner of their sinning. Thirdly, in respect of their continuance in sinne. Fourthly, in respect of the vse that they make of their sinnes. For the first. There is great diffe∣rence betweene the Godly and the wicked in the mea∣sure of their sinnes.Iud. ve. 24. The godly, though they haue in them the seedes of all sinne, yet they doe not commit all sinne:1. Ioh. 3.9. but by the mercy of God they are kept from fal∣ling into many sinnes. The seede of grace and regenera∣tion is in them, and that preserueth them, that they can∣not sinne as the wicked doe. And therefore, the childe of God may speake that sincerely, which the arrogant Pharise spake proudly and vainely:Luk. 18.11. O God I thanke thee, that I am not as other men. I am not giuen to extortion,
to iniustice, to adultery and such like sinnes, as other men are. But the wicked commit all kinde of sinne whatsoe∣uer, if either shame of the world, or feare of punish∣ment doe not restraine them. Their life, is a life of sinne. As the Prophet Ieremiah insinuateth, when he biddeth the people, Amend their waies and their workes.Ier. 7 3. All their waies are sinfull waies, and all their workes are wicked workes, and the Apostle speaking of the wickednesse of the Gentiles, he saith, They were full of all vnrighteousnesse, and then reckoneth vp a long beadrow of vices wherein they liued. And in another place,Rom. 1.29.30 Eph. 4.19 They gaue themselues vnto wantonnesse, to worke all vncleanenesse. They make no bones of any sinne whatsoeuer it be: there is nothing too hot or too heauy for them. Secondly, there is difference betweene them in the manner of their sinning. For first, the godly sinne, but it is sore against their wils.Rom. 7.23 As the Apostle saith of him∣selfe: that The law of his members (that is, his corrupti∣on) rebelled against the law of his minde, and leade him captive vnto the law of sinne. The Apostle sinned then, but it was neither with heart nor good will, as wee say: but hee was hailed and drawne to it forcibly, by the strength of his corruption, and the violence of his ten∣tation, euen as a prisoner is hailed to the gaile. But the wicked, they sinne willingly, voluntarily, and of their owne accord, They fulfill the will of the flesh and of the minde, as Saint Paul saith. Againe,Eph. 2.3. the godly doe but seldome fall into sinne in comparison of the wicked. They are some∣times ouertaken with it, but still the whole course of their life is bent to doe that which God commandeth. As a seruant may sometimes doe a chare for another man, and yet chiefely and principally minde his maisters businesse. And therefore, it is said of Dauid, that hee Did that which was right in the sight of the Lord,1. Kin. 15.5. and turned from nothing that hee commanded him, all the daies of his life, saue onely in the matter of Vrijah the Hittite.
But the wicked sinne continually, they doe nothing but sinne it is their daily practise they make it their ordinary trade and occupation.1. King 21.25. As it is said of Ahab, that he did sell himselfe to worke wickednesse in the fight of the Lord. Moreouer, the god∣ly sinne, but it is with griefe and sorrow of heart, they take no more pleasure nor delight in their sinne, then the horse doth in his heauy loade, or the prisoners in his irons and fet∣ters. And therefore the Apostle crieth out as if he were ouer tyred with the masse of sinne that was in his flesh.Rom. 7.24. O wrt∣ched man that I am, who shall deliuer me from the body of this death.Prou. 2.14. & 4.16. But the wicked sinne with delight and ioy, as Solo∣mon saith, They reioice in doing euill. Nay they ca not be mer∣ry, they cannot sleepe quietly in their beds except they haue done euill. Last of all, the godly sinne with resistance. They wra∣stle and striue against their sinnes by praier, by fasting and all other good meanes.Gal. 5.17. The spirit, that is the generate part, continually usteth and fighteth against the flesh. And this the Apostle sheweth by his owne experience.Rom. 7.15.19. I allow not saith he, that which I doe. And, I doe not the good that I would: but the euill which I would not,25. that I doe. And againe, I my selfe in my minde erue the law of God but in my flesh the law of sinne. The godly then are in a continuall combate and coflict against their sinnes.Heb. 12.4. But the wicked are caried headlong to sinne with full sway, with their whole endeauour and with all en∣forcements that may be.Ier. 8.6. They turne to their sinfull courses, with as great violence as the horse rusheth into the battell. They worke all vncleanenesse euen with greedinesse:Ephes. 4.19 Neither did the hungry fish more eagerly and greedily follow after the baite, then they doe pursue and hunt after the occasions of sinne. Yea, they striue euery one to excell other. Their feete runne to euill,Isa 59.7. 1. Pet. 4 4 and they make hast to shed innocent blood. And they runne into all excesse of riot. Thirdly there is difference in their continuance in sinne. The godly,Prou. 24.16 though They fall seauen times a day, as Solomon saith: yet they rise againe, they renew their acqutance, as oft as they renue their sinnes. That which the Apostle speak∣eth
of anger in particular, that a godly man will not suffer the sunne to goe downe vpon his wrath,Ephes. 4.26. that they practise in all sinne. They will not sleepe in any sinne; but continually breake of their sinnes by righteousnesse,Dan. 4.24. as Daniel exhorted that proud King of Babylon. But the wicked dwell and continue in their sinnes: they he along, yea they wallow, and umble and weltr themselues in them, as the sow doth in the mire, with∣out any thought of rising againe.Psal. 1.1. Rom 2.5. Isa. 5.18 &. 30.1. They sit downe in the seate of the scornfull. They haue brought such an hardnesse vpon their hearts, by the custome and continuall vse of sinning, as that they cannot repent. They are so farre from breaking of the course of their sinnes, as they draw iniquity with cordes of va∣nitie and sinne, as it were, with cartropes Yea they lay or heape sinne vpon sinne, as the Prophet saith,Deut. 29.19 adding drunkennesse to thirst. And being by the iust iudgement of God giuen ouer and left to themselues,Psal. 65.27 they fall from one wickednesse to an∣other. Last of all, they differ in the vse they make of their sinnes. The godly are made more wary and more heedfull for the time to come, and more carefull to auoid all occasions of sinne. And this the Apostle affirmeth, when speaking of the fruites of true repentance and godly sorrow, he saith, that it wrought in them great care, great indignation great feare, great desire, &c. We say in our common prouerbe.2. Cor. 7.10 11. The burnt childe dreadeth the fire. So a man that hath beene burnt in the hand by his sinne, that hath felt the displeasure of God, and the horrour of conscience by reason thereof, will take heede how he falleth any more into sinne while he liueth. But the wicked, the more they sinne, the more bold and audaci∣ous they are to sinne againe.Ier. 3.3. Ier. 8.12. They haue gotten an wheres forehead, they cannot blush. Were they ashamed when hey had committed su h abhominations; saith the Prophet Ieremiah, nay, they were not ashamed, neither could they haue any shame, they were past shame.Isa. 3.9. The triall of their countenance doth testifie against them, yea they declare their sinnes as Sodome, they hide them not. They care not who seeth them. To this
purpose Bernard hath a very excellent saying.Bern. in. Ps l. 91. serm. 2. Ho. interest ier pioum et implorum c,  c. There is this difference, saith he, betweene the fals of the godly and the wicked: that a righteous man is vpholden by the Lord and therefore, he riseth againe stronger then euer he was: but when an vnrighteous man falleth, he neuer riseth againe. Nay he is so farre from rising, that either hee falleth into hurtfull shame, or else into flat impudency For either he ex∣cuseth that which he doth, and that is a shame that maketh a man sinne more; or else he hath an whores forehead, so as he neither feareth God, nor careth for man. A righteous man hee falleth vpon Gods hand, and after a maruellous manner, euen his sinne is turned to his good; according to that saying of the Apostle, All things worke together to the best, to those that loue God. And saith he, doth not that fall make for our good, whereby we become both more humble and more wary? This then doth serue to confute the fond opinion and con∣ceit of them, that thinke it is not lawfull, either for the Minister, or for any other Christian, to iudge any man. As our Sauiour Christ saith. Iudge not, condemne not. It is true, a man must not iudge rashly and vnaduisedly without good ground and sufficient reason. Neither must any man iudge finally of another mans estate. For that belongeth solely and onely to God.Mat. 7.16. But as a man may iudge of the goodnesse or badnesse of the tree by the fruite that it beareth: so by the conuersation of men we may iudge of their present estate. If any man shall presume of another mans finall estate, whether he shall be saued or damned, he goeth further then he hath warrant for, and taketh Gods office cut of his hand. A iury, by the euidence that is produced and by due examination of the cause, may finde a man guilty: but neither they nor a∣ny man els, can say he shall be hanged, because it is in the power of the king to pardon him. In like manner, when we see the wicked life and leaude conuersation of a man, wee may conclude, that for the present he is in a damnable case: but no man may take vpon him to affirme, that he shall be
finally damned, because the Lord may haue mercy vpon him, and pardon his sinne And therefore, to conclude this point, so many as would not be accounted wicked men, let them be admonished to take heede, that they be not workers of in∣iquitie. If thou wilt make a trade of swearing, drinking who∣ring, prophaning the Sabbaoth, &c. it is no breach of chari∣tie at all, to say that thou art a wicked man. From th citie of the Lord.) This the end of all that went before, namely, why the Prophet would be so carefull to destroy the wicked, and to cut off the workers of iniquitie, and that betimes, euen because he would preserue the citie of the Lord from the pollution of sinne By the citie of the Lord,Mat. 5 35. in this place is meant Ierusalem which is also called The citie of the great King, because there the Lord appointed a place for the habitation of his name: as Dauid saith, speaking in the person of God, The Lord hath chosen Zion,Psal. 132.13.14. and loued to dwell in it, saying, This is my rest for euer, here will I dwell, for I haue dilight therein. It is called likwise the holy citie, because it was appointed and consecrated to holy vses, to the exer∣cises of true religion, and the seruice of God.Mat. 4.5. For there was the temple, there was the priesthood, there was the law and word of God. Now the Prophet promiseth to haue a speciall care of this place, because it was a type of Gods Church, and the chiefe citie in the Kingdome. From whence wee are taught this instruction, that as Magistrates must haue a care to reforme euill euery where: so especially, in places that are of greatest note. Great ci∣ties and such like places, are chiefely to bee looked vn∣to. The reason is. First, because such places stand most neede, because there commonly is most vngodlinesse and impietie, by reason of the great consluence that is of peo∣ple of all sorts▪ and of all nations. Secondly, for example sake. For more good or hurt redoundeth to the whole land by the example of such places. The Prophet Ieremi∣ah, speaking of the wicked Priests of his time,Ier. 23.15. said that From them wickednesse was gone forth into, all the land.
As this is true of great persons, so it is true also of great pla∣ces. And this we see by too much experience. For doth not London furnish all the land with pride and vanitie? where are all the strange disguises, and monstrous fashions of ap∣parell inuerted but here? and from hence they are conueied into all the parts of the land. Last of all, sinne is a greater disgrace to great places then to others, because they haue more meanes to make them good.Mat. 11.20 And therefore our Sa∣uiour Christ doth more vpbraide those cities wherein he had most preached, and where he had wrought most of his mi∣racles then any other place besides.21 Wee be to thee Corazin, saith he wee be to thee Bethsaida: for if the great workes which haue beene done in you, had beene done in Tyrus and Sidon, they would haue repented long agone in sackechoath and ashes. And thou Capernaum, which art lifted vp vnto heauen, shall be cast downe into hell, &c.23. This being so, let the Magistrates of this place chiefely be exhorted, to haue a speciall care of reforming sinne in this great cite, least other places by the example thereof be har∣tened and encouraged in euill. It is the corruption of mans nature, rather to be led by the example of others, then by the precepts and rules of the word of God. And this place is euen as a citie set vpon an hill:Mat. 5.14 all mens eyes are vpon it. And therefore, if this citie that should be faithfull become an harlot,Isa. 1.21. Naum. 3.1 if this citie be a bloody citie, full of lies and robberie, if London be disordered and wicked, it will be a priuiledge as it were to all other places to doe the like. And therefore, you that are in authority here, labour to purge this foun∣taine that all the streames in the land may be cleare and pure. Thus, as God hath enabled me, I haue handled the prin∣cipall things contained in this text. There is yet another thing worthy our consideration, which Caluin by way of Allegorie obserueth in this place. Which I will briefely adde for a conclusion of all. The Prophet Dauid, as we know, was a type of our Saui∣our
Christ. And as he promiseth betimes or in the morning to destroy all the wicked of the land: So though Christ Iesus doe with patience long suffer and endure vngodly persons: yet there will come a morning wherein he will arise to exe∣cute iudgement, and Shew himselfe from heauen with his migh∣ty Angels, in flaming fire,2. The. 17. to render vengeance on them that know not God▪ and obey not the Gospell of our Lord Iesus Christ. Then Shall all the wicked be turned to hell,Psal. 9.17. 2. Thes. 1.9. and all the people that forget God. Where they Shall be punished with euerlasting perdition, from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his power. And howsoeuer in the conceit of carnall men, the Lord may seeme to deferre his comming: yet in the end, he will come in a day when they looke not for him,Mat. 24.48 50.51. and in an houre that they are not aware of, and will cut them in peeces, and gi them their portion with hypocrites, where there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Knowing therefore the terrour of the Lord as the Apostle saith.2. Cor. 5.11. Psal. 50.22 I will shut vp all with that exhortation of Dauid, O consider this, ye that forget God, least he teare you in peeces and there be none to deliuer you. FINIS.
