23585 S106181 99841904 6519
THE Sweet Milke Of CHRISTIAN Doctrine: In a plaine and naturall Method, by Question and Answere, for their better vnderstanding, for whom it is chiefly written. 1. PET. 2.2. As new borne Babes desire the sincere milke of the Word, that you may grow thereby. LONDON, Printed by George Purslowe, for Iohn Hodges. 1617.
To my VVelbeloued friends and Neighbours, the in∣habitants and people of Leigh, in Essex; grace, mercy and peace be multipli∣ed, from God the Father, through our Lord IESVS CHRIST. (**) AS there is not anie one thing, whereof he, that is in hand to build any great and magnificent building, should bee more carefull, then that he do lay the foundatiō therof firm and sure; otherwise, he shall not only lose his cost and trauell spent about it, but also endanger his life in it, by the vn∣expected tumbling of it downe vpon his head: so likewise, that Christian, who would so build vp and reare the great and lusty frame of the work of his saluation, that hee may not in the end both lose his labour and charges, and
also himselfe bee crushed vnder it, and vtterly perish by the dreadful fall there∣of; as it befell to him, who built his house vpon the sand:Math. 7.27 hath need to look to lay the foundation thereof certaine, sure, and proportionable in the vndecei∣uable and steady principles & grounds of Christianitie; which doe virtually comprehend and sustaine the huge and weighty burden of the whole building of religion, wherin he doth repose him∣selfe. Which grounds, though they ly low in the building, are not therefore the more to be neglected or dispised of any, but rather the more to be regarded and carefully preserued, for the necessary vse and aboundant profit, which thence doth arise to a sound Christian: for this foundation beeing once well layd and continued, it is a strong fortresse against errour and heresie: for though a man be not so expert in the Scripture, as to know the true and naturall meaning of all the texts thereof, yet may he boidly reiect that doctrine,2. Ioh. 10 which doth not proportionably agree with the frame and analogie of faith,Rom. 12.6 summarily com∣prised in the grounds of religion for the
simple truth comming all from the same Spirit, cannot bee contradictorie to it selfe. Againe, by the knowledge of the prin∣ciples of religion, a good Christian may be both an vnderstanding and iudicious Reader and hearer of the word: for there is not any truth deliuered cōcerning our saluation, which he may not plainly see both to arise from, and agree with some of the grounds and principles of religi∣on, whereunto he may referre it: for the truth is vniforme. Finally, a man furnished with the sound vnderstanding of these grounds,1. Pet. 3.15. 2. Tim. 2.2 is able to render a good and sufficient reason of his faith; and to informe and establish o∣thers in the same things, not confusedly only in some good notes here and there scatteringly gathered, but orderly and with iudgement in the whole frame of Christian Religion, briefly compact in one intire bodie. Further, that these Principles of Reli∣gion should bee set downe by way of Question and Answer, it is without que∣stiō the most profitable way for the sim∣pler sort of people; the which course of catechising, is both largely cōmended by
the learned, and straightly vrged by au∣thority, of which kind of teaching there be models and methods almost infinite: which in my iudgement is not to be bla∣med as a vice, but rather commended as a vertue; when they doe all agree in the same substance of truth, though differ in the manner of contriuing and handling thereof, according to the variety and multiplicity of the gifts of Gods Spirit:1. Cor. 12.4. for therby a more irrefragable testimony is publikely giuen to the truth, when all writings apert, and after seuerall maners, doe all agree in one and the same verity. And whereas the disposition, manners, and opinions of seueral people, in seueral places and ages do differ; for the rectify∣ing thereof, these seuerall and differing formes and methods of teaching are wel (by Gods prouidence) fitted. Now, seeing that after that Catechifme set downe in the book of Common prai∣er, whereby children are prepared for confirmation, wee are not by authority tied only to vse al any one certaine form of Catechism, for the edification of them of riper yeeres: therefore taking the be∣nefit of that common liberty, for the fur∣ther building vp of that part of Gods
Church committed to my charge, I doe by the long and earnest importunity of many of you (my louing friends, to whō I am not onely willing cheerefully to im∣part my trauels,1. Thes. 2.8 but euen also mine owne selfe for your good) suffer this briefe and plaine draight to be wrung from me, to come abroad amongst multitudes of the same nature: not hereby to finde fault with, or disparage any of them, but that thereby with my greater ease I may the better benefit and helpe you, both by ca∣techising and preaching: for when both catechising and preaching come framed out of the same mould, the one orderly agreeing with the other; the one doth both confirme and illustrate the other to the hearers: as when the foundation and walls of a house are both of one propor∣tion, it is most strong and sightly: and also the Church being by this little pub∣like taste satisfied and contented touch∣ing the same doctrine,Gal. 2.9 which you are or∣dinarily taught in priuate, her approbati∣on and allowance thereof, may bee a strong motiue to cause you the more to regard it: for my part, I haue no greater ioy then that you walke in the truth.3. Ioh. 4 Take this as a fore-runner and pledge
of a larger Treatise, which some of you haue much expected, to wit, the body of practicall and case diuinity, which lon∣ger time, by further experience and stu∣dy, must first better perfect and polish. In this method, I haue sought to be both short and plaine, for to helpe the memo∣rie and vnderstanding of the meanest a∣mongst vs; the proofes I haue quoted with the Answeres, the words whereof I pray you to search, for the benefit both of your selues and families: that your faith being built, not vpon mans word but Gods,2. Tim. 1.12. it may remaine sure, knowing whom you haue beleeued. And so I pray you, my good friends, giue all diligence to make your calling and election sure,2. Peter 1.10, 5 by adding vnto your faith vertue, to vertue knowledge, to knowledge temperance, to temperance patience, to patience godlinesse, to god∣linesse brotherly kindnesse, to brotherly kindnesse loue: and so being careful that both you and yours bee fearers of the Lord,Psal. 115.11, 12, 13, 14. you may be assuredly perswaded that God will be your helpe and shield, he will blesse you both great and small, the Lord wil increase you more & more, you and your children, as hee hath done
your vertuous forefathers in this place, who haue proued it true, that Godlinesse is great gaine.1. Tim. 6.6 Now the very God of peace sanctifie you throughout; and I pray God your whole spirit, and soule,1. Thes. 5.23. and bodie be preserued blamelesse vnto the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ. AMEN. Your louing and carefull Minister and Pastor, IOHN SYME.
A PRAYER. WEe doe humbly thanke thee, (O Lord our God and hea∣uenly Father) for thy mani∣fold and gracious mercies continually bestowed vpon vs, for the good both of our soules and bodies; whereof we doe humbly confesse our selues to bee most vnworthy, in regard of our vnthankful∣nes, and manifold and grieuous sinnes, whereby we doe alwaies offend thy sa∣cred Maiesty, and vexe thy holy Spirit: but thou (O Lord) who art the infinite fountaine of mercy, haue pitty and com∣passion vpon vs, poore sinners, to illumi∣nate the blind eyes of our minds, that wee may see our sinnes and wretched e∣state; so soften our flinty & hard hearts, that wee may therefore relent and melt before thee, vnder the sense and féeling of the grieuousnesse of the same: and so to frame our affections, that wée may e∣uer loath and abhorre them. And graci∣ous Father of heauen, forgiue and par∣don
vnto vs our sinnes, saue and deliuer vs from this our miserable condition, through the onely merit and mediation of thy Sonne, our Sauiour IESVS CHRIST: And grant vnto vs a true and sauing faith to beleeue in him, that we may thereby be grafted into him, and may be by his bloud washed from all our sinnes, and cloathed with his righteous∣nesse, that so wee may haue in our con∣sciences the swéete testimony and assu∣rance of thy loue and fauour in him: and giue vnto vs thy holy Spirit, wherby in the vertue of Christ Iesus, wee may growe vp in newnesse of life, that wee may thereby glorifie thée. For this pur∣pose, Lord, blesse vnto vs al good means, that we may know thy wil, that we may remember it, that wee may loue it, and delight in it, and giue vs grace so to ex∣presse the power of it in our liues, in all godly wisdome and discretion, that wée may euer keepe the faith and a good con∣science to the end. Lord preserue and keepe vs from all dangers of soule and body; prouide and blesse for vs al things needfull, and grant vs comfortably to be contented therewith. Lord fit vs for our callings, make vs faithfull in them,
and blesse our trauels and labors therin: Giue vs grace euer to haue our conuer∣sation with thée in heauen, for the which Lord keep vs and prepare vs, and bring vs thereunto in thy good time, that so we may raigne with thée for euer in hap∣pinesse; through Iesus Christ our Lord and onely Sauiour: To whom with thee and thy holy Spirit be all ho∣nour, glory and prayse, for euer and euer, A∣MEN.
THE SWEETE milke of Christian do∣ctrine; in a plaine and naturall method; by Question and Answere. Question. WHat is the chiefe and princi∣pall end of our being, and of the whole course of our liues, whereat we ought al∣waies to ayme, in euery thing which we do or vndertake? Answere, That wee may glorifie God,1. Cor. 10 31. Eph. 1.6. Phil. 2.12 and worke out our saluation in feare and trembling. Q. What sure light, and vnfallible rule are wee to obserue and follow, for our certaine direction and guide, in our choise and vse of that course & meanes, whereby wee may verily attaine and come to that our entended purpose and end?
A. The diuine and sacred word of God only,2. Pet. 1.19 2. Tim. 3.15, 16, 17. contained in the holy Scrip∣ture of the olde and new Testament; containing perfectly and plainely all things néedefull to make the man of God perfect. Q. What things are necessary for vs, that wee may thereby indeed glorifie God, and work out our owne saluation? A. Sound knowledge and holy o∣bedience.Ioh. 13.17 Q. What things are we principally to know? A. God,Ioh. 17.3 2. Cor. 13.5. Iohn 1.18 and our selues. Q. How are we to know God? A. As he hath reuealed himselfe vn∣to vs. Q. How hath he reucaled himselfe vnto vs? A. Hee hath reuealed himselfe vnto vs;Rom. 1.19 20. Iohn 5.39 Heb. 1.3 Ioh. 14.9 first, by his works: secondly, by his word: thirdly, in his Sonne our Saui∣our, Iesus Christ. Q. What is God? A. Hée is a Spirit,Ioh. 4.24 1. Tim. 6.16. Rom. 11.35. Iob. 11.7 Exo. 34.6 infinite, hauing his being of himselfe, in whom is infi∣nit perfection and happinesse, and from whom all things doe flow and procéed, and in him and for him haue their be∣ing:
he is one in essence, three in persons;Iam. 1.17 Rō. 11.36 Mat. 10.29 1. Tim. 2.5 1. Iohn 5.7 1. Cor. 15.47. Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost. Q. How are we to know our seluess? A. We are to know our selues, both as we be of our owne natures, and also as we be by the speciall sauing grace of God. Q. How are we to know our selues as we be of our owne natures? A. We are to know our selues,Eccles. 7.29. as we be of our owne natures, both as we were by nature, vncorrupt in the estate of innocencie, and as we are by nature, corrupt in the estate of miserie. Q. What were wee by nature vncor∣rupt in the estate of innocencie? A. In the estate of innocencie or na∣ture vncorrupt, wee were created by God male & female, consisting of soule and bodie, in Adam and Eue perfect, ac∣cording to the Image of God in wise∣dome, righteousnesse, and true holinesse; enioying all things needful for our hap∣pinesse in that estate:Gen. 2.7 Eccl. 7.29 Gen. 1.27 Col. 3.10 Eph. 4.24 Psal. 8.4. in which conditi∣on we were able alwaies so to haue con∣tinued, but changeable according to our owne mutable free-will, either to stand or fall, as we should choose. Q. What are we now by nature cor∣rupt
in the estate of miserie? A. We are the children of wrath and disobedience, cast out of Gods fauour and protection, through our transgres∣sion in our first parents Adam and Eue; who did,Ephes. 2.3 Esay 59.2 Rom. 5.18, 19. Gen. 3.6 Rom. 2.5. contrary to Gods command, eate of the forbidden fruit, at the diuels perswasion: which miserable condition we haue euer since, by our personall and actuall sins confirmed and augmented. Q. What things doe make vs, in this corrupt estate, to be so miserable? A. Our sinne,Esay 6.5 Pro. 11.21 Rom. 5.12 and the punishment of our sinne. Q. What is sinne? A. Sinne is the transgression of the Lawe of God. Q. Which be the parts of sin? A. The corruption and guilt thereof, Q. What kinds of sinne are we defiled with and guilty of? A. Wee are both defiled with,1. Ioh. 3.4 Rom. 5.14 Rom. 3.23 and guilty of Originall and Actuall sinne. Q. What is Originall sinne? A. Originall sinne, is the common sinne of our nature corrupt, which wee haue from our first conception, in and through our sinfull Parents, by natural propagation and discent; which consi∣steth
first,Psal. 51.5 Rom. 5.19 Iob. 14.4 Rom. 3.10, 11, 12. Gen. 8.21. Gen. 6.5. in the guilt of ye our rebellious act in Adam: secōdly in corruptiō thence lineally deriued, in ful want of al sauing grace, & deprauation of all the faculties and powers of soule & body, and prone∣nesse of the same to all euill continually. Q. What is actuall sinne? A. Actuall sin is our owne personall transgression, continually issuing out of the liuing spring of our originall sinne;Iam. 1.14 Mat. 15.19 Rom. 1.32. Luk. 12.47. 1. Cor. 13.3 and doth consist in doing that which is forbidden; and in omitting, or doing a∣misse what is commanded. Q. What is the reward and punish∣ment due to vs for these our sinnes? A. The certain wages due to vs for our sins,Ephe. 5.9. Isay 59.2 Rom. 1.24 Heb. 3.11 Deu. 28.15 Tit. 1.15 Rom. 2.8. Reue. 21.8 Mat 25.41 Reu. 18.6. is to be forsaken & giuen ouer of God; to be vtterly depriued of grace and happines: and to be wholly in eue∣ry respect subiect to the vengeance and curse of God, both in this life present, & also in the life to com, to ye suffering both of the first & second death, in manner and measure, according to the number and nature of our sinnes. Q. What vse ought we to make of the knowledge of this our miserable estate? A. We ought by ye knowlege therof first, to rouze vp our selues out of our carnall
securitie, and throughly to haue our hearts affected with déep humilitie and contrition, in detestation and loathing of our selues in this wretched conditi∣on: secondly,Ephe. 5.14 Isa. 66.2 Rom. 7.24 Acts 2.37 Iob. 42.6 to stir vp our selues most earnestly to endeuour how we may bee deliuered out of this estate, and bee brought into the speciall grace and fa∣uour of God againe. Q. What are wee by the speciall sa∣uing grace of God? A. We are the children of God, and heires of heauen, by the frée mercy of God,Rom. 8.16, 17. Ephe. 1.5. 2. Tim. 1.9 1. Pet. 2.9 Rom. 5.20. 2. Cor. 4.6. chosen and called out of our estate of misery, into the estate of grace and fa∣uor of God; so made now (by the infinite mercy of God bringing good out of euil) more happy then euer we were before. Q. By whom are wee brought into this so gracious an estate? A. By our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ onely.Gal. 1.4. Ephe. 1.11 Q. What things chiefly are wee to know, touching Iesus Christ? A. We are to know his Person and his Office.Ioh. 17.3 Phil 3.8 1. Cor. 2.2. Q. What maner of person is Iesus Christ? A. Hee is God the Sonne, the se∣cond person of the Trinity, become man
for vs by an vnseparable and vnfused v∣nion of his diuine and humane natures,Rom. 9.5 Mat. 2.17 Ioh. 1.14 and properties, and so is both God and man in one person. Q. Why was it needefull that Iesus Christ should be man? A. It was needful that Iesus Christ should be man,Heb. 10.5 first that he might haue a body of the same nature that had sinned, to offer vp in satisfaction for sinne. Secondly,Col. 1.21.22. that in that body he might doe, and suffer all things needful for our redemption. Thirdly, that we may lawfully claim,1. Cor. 1.30. Ioh. 1.12. and apprehend the benefit of all his me∣rits done in that body, which hee hath common with vs in nature, as perso∣nally our owne. Q. Why is it needfull that our Saui∣our should be God? A. It is néedfull that our Sauiour shold be God, first, that he might be able to ouercome ye powerful enemies,Col. 2.15 & ful∣ly finish the great work of our saluation. Secondly, that the personall vnion of the God head with his humanity might so dignifie the same, that it might be a sufficient and worthy sacrifice for all our sins, and make all the actions and sufferings
of that person who is God,Heb. 7.26 28. Act 20 28.2. Cor. 5.19. Ioh. 6.63 to be of infinite desert and value. Thirdly, that he may euer by his e∣ternall Spirit communicate and apply himselfe and his graces vnto vs; that they may truely be counted ours indéed.Rom. 8.15 Q. VVhat is the office of our Sauior Iesus Christ? A. The office of our Sauiour Iesns Christ is to be the redeemer and head of vs poore sinners,1. Tim. 1.15 Acts 4.12 Col. 1.18 his Elect and chosen people; his Church. Q. VVhat duties doth our Sauiour Christ performe for the due executing of that his office? A. He doth execute the dutie,Heb. 1.1. Luke 1.73 first of a Prophet teaching vs in his truth. Secondly,Heb. 4.14 the dutie of a Priest, by the sacrifice of himselfe reconciling vs vnto his Father. Thirdly,Mat. 2.2. Psalme 2. the duty of a King, by ruling and defending of vs, by the power of his might and Spirit. Q. How may our knowledge of these and all other good things be profitable vnto vs? A. By adding vnto our knowledge holy obedience.Ioh. 13.17 Q. Wherein doth this holy obedi∣ence consist?
A. It doth stand in a voluntary yéel∣ding and giuing vp of our selues to be ordered in all things by Gods holy wil,Mat. 6.10. Gal. 1.16. without further reasoning with flesh and blood. Q. VVhat kinds of obedience are we to performe? A. We are to perform both actiue obe∣dience by our doing of his will,Act. 10.35 1. Pet. 2.20 and also passiue obedience, by suffering his will to be done vpon vs. Q. Which be the kinds of our actiue obedience, which we are to performe? A. Our actiue is both Euangelicall, commanded in the Gospell for vs to do, for ye attaining of Grace, which we wāt:Ioh. 3.18 Ioh. 6.40. Iam. 2.8. And also Legall, commanded in the Law, which we are to do, that we may manifest, and continue in vs, the Grace of God receiued. Q. Which be the parts of Euangeli∣call, or the obedience of the Gospell? A. Faith and Repentance.Mark. 1.15 Mat. 3.2 Q. What is true sauing faith? A. It is a true knowing, sincere ap∣prouing,Ioh. 6.69 Phil. 1.10. Heb. 10.22 Acts 4.12. and certaine relying vpon the gracious promises of GOD in Iesus Christ only, for saluation and happines. Q. Where is the summe of that do∣ctrine
briefly contained, which wee are necessarily to beleeue? A. In the Créede, commonly called the Apostles Creeds. Q. How many Articles doth that Creed consist of? A. It consisteth of twelue Articles, according to the number of the Apostls, the supposed makers thereof. Q. What is the subiect matter of the contents of them Articles? A. It is first of God the Father; in these words: I beleeue in God the Father Almightie, &c. Secondly, of the Sonne; beginning at these words, and in Iesus Christ his only begotten Sonne, &c. Thirdly, of the holy Ghost, in these words: I beleeue in the holy Ghost. Fourthly, of the Church, beginning at these words: the holy Catholike Church, &c. to the end. Q. By what notes may a man certain∣ly know, that he hath true sauing faith? A. A man may know that hee hath true faith:Mark 9.24 first, by the habite and inter∣nall act thereof, by beleeuing, knowing himselfe to beleeue. Secondly, by the inward testimonie
of Gods Spirit to our spirits, according to the outward testimony of his word.Rom. 8.16 Thirdly, by the inward sincere dis∣position and affection of our hearts to goodnesse, and against euill.Psal. 139.21, 22. Fourthly, by the good fruites of our faith, in a conscionable practise of al holy duties, in the whole course of our liues.Iam. 2.17, 18. Q. What benefit and vse are wee to make of this sauing faith? A. We are therby, by beléeuing in our Sauior Iesus Christ, to liue in ye happy estate of regeneration in righteousnes.Rom. 1.17 Gal. 3.11 Q. Which is that righteousnes wher∣in we are to liue by faith? A. It is the righteousnesse both of iustification and sanctification.Rom. 4.5 Tit. 2.12. Q. Wherein doth the righteousnesse of Iustification consist? A. It doth consist in the forgiuenesse of our sins,Rom. 4.7, 8. 1. Cor. 1.30 Phil. 3.9 and in the imputation of Christs righteousnesse. Q. Wherein doth the righteousnesse of sanctification consist? A. It consisteth in the renewing of vs, in all our actions, dispositions, fa∣culties, and powers of soule and bodie,Col. 3.10. 1. Thes. 5.23. Rom. 8.2 sincerely in som measure, by the vertue of the holy Spirit, in the death and re∣surrection
of our Sauiour Iesus Christ powerfully working in vs.Rom. 6.4, 5.6. Eph. 4.22.23.24. Q. What is true repentance, which is the second part of the obedience of the Gospell? A. It is a true change of the whole man from all his former wicked disposi∣tion,Ier. 31.19 2. Tim. 2.25. 2. Cor. 7.10. Acts 2.37. 1. Ioh. 1.9. Ezek. 18.27.28. Iude 23. Esay 59.2. purposes and sins, with godly sor∣row of heart for them, confessing and forsaking them with vnreconcilable ha∣tred of them, especially for that they are offensiue to our gracious God, and doe make diuision between him and vs. Q. What is our Legall obedience commanded in the Law?Iā. 2.8.10. Exod. 20. Psa. 34.14 1. The. 2.12 A. It is the conscionable performance of all that which we are commanded by the Morall Law of God, briefly compri∣sed in the tenne Commandements, the perfect rule of our sanctification; wher∣by carefully auoiding all euil forbidden, and doing all duties commanded, wee manifest and retaine in faith and loue the grace and vertues of God receiued. Q. Into how many tables is this Law of the ten Commandements diuided? A. Into two.Exod. 34.1 Q. What things doth the first Table containe?
A. Our duty to God, in the first foure Commandements, Thou shalt haue no other Gods before me.Mat. 22.38 Q. What is the briefe sum of all our dutie to God? A. The sum of our dutie to the Lord our God is, that wee loue him with all our heart, with all our soule,Mat. 22.37 and with all our mind. Q. What things doth the second Table containe? A. It doth coutaine our duty to our neighbour in the sixe last Commande∣ments, Honour thy Father and Mother. Thou shalt not kill, &c. Q. What is the briefe summe of our dutie to our neighbour? A. That wee doe loue him as our selues.Mat. 22.39 Q. After what manner should we do all these duties commanded in the Mo∣rall Law? A. Wee are to labour to doe them in number,Iam. 2.10 Mat. 5.48. Rom. 14.23 and euery one of them in de∣gree of perfection of faith, and loue, in obedience to God, and care of his glory. Q. Hauing hitherto spoken of actiue obedience, what is now our passiue o∣bedience, which wee are likewise to performe?
A. It is a patient and chéereful yéel∣ding of our selues,Rom. 5.3. Iam. 1.2 Psal. 39.9 1. Pet. 2.20 Heb. 12.5, 6, 7.11. 2. Cor. 1.8 1. Pet. 3.14, 17. 2. Tim. 3.12. without discontent and murmuring to endure and make good vse of whatsoeuer afflictions it shal please God for his glory, and our tryall or chastisement to lay vpon vs; either immediatly by himselfe, or mediatly by any other meanes, how great or vniust and iniurious soeuer it may seem to vs. Q. Touching this course of our Chri∣stian obedience, what dangers are we e∣specially to take heed of? A. Wee should most carefully take heed, that after we yt haue begun in this course, we do not either againe, by the deceitfulnesse of our owne hearts, and temptations of sinne, the diuell, and the world, make apostacie and fall away to sinne:2. Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. Ier. 17.9. 2. Tim. 3.7. or els, through our naturall secu∣rity and sloth, not grow vp and goe for∣warde towardes perfection, in that course of obedience and grace. Q. By what meanes then may wee both stand firme, and grow vp in the e∣state of grace and obedience? A. By the conscionable and continu∣all vse and helpe of the word of God, the Sacraments, prayer and discipline. Q. How are wee to vse the Word of
God, that we may thereby both be kept and built vp?1. Tim. 4.13. Heb. 2.11 Deut. 6.7 Psal. 1.2 Iam. 1.22. Isay 66.2 2. King. 22.19. He. 4.2 2. The. 2.10 A. We are duely to read it, heare it, confer of it, and to meditate vpon it, with a reuerent and conscionable re∣gard thereof, in beleeuing and embra∣cing the same in loue and obedience. Q. How do the Sacraments stay and strengthen vs in this gracious estate? A. They doe it by a more sensible, affectuall and particular signifying, ap∣plying and sealing vp vnto vs, by con∣uenient and fit visible and earthly ele∣ments,Rom. 4.11 our Sauiour Iesus Christ with his benefits, thereby represented and of∣fered, by his owne ordinance in the due administration thereof; than it can bee done by the word alone. Q. VVhat things doe make a Sacra∣ment to be really a Sacrament? A. The words of the institution, and the consecrated elements,1. Cor. 11.23, 24. conioined in the administration of a Sacrament, doe make it to be indeed a Sacrament. Q. Which are the substantiall parts of euery Sacrament, which wee are to receiue? A. They are the earthly visible ele∣ments, the signes and seales: and Iesus
Christ with his graces signifie inuisibly and spiritually offered and sealed vp vn∣to vs.1. Cor. 10.16. Q. Which be these Sacraments? A. They are Baptism and the Sup∣per of the Lord.Mat. 28.19. Mat. 26.26. Q. What is Baptisme? A. It is the Sacrament of our rege∣neration or new-birth, in the due admi∣nistration therof representing, offering, and sealing vp vnto vs, by the outward washing of water purifying the bodie, the spiritual purifying of the whol man by Iesus Christ,Tit. 3.5 1. Pet. 3.21 Heb. 10.22 & his blood shed for vs, & sprinkled vpon our consciences by faith. Q. What is the Supper of our Lord? A. It is the Sacrament of our spiri∣tuall nourishment, in the lawfull admi∣nistration therof, representing, offering, and sealing vp vnto vs, by the eating and drinking of bread and wine, which doth nourish vs to liue this temporary natu∣ral life, Iesus Christ by vertue & merst of his body and his bloud broken,Ioh. 6.53 1. Cor. 11.26. shed, and giuen for vs, and by faith receiued of vs, nourishing vs to liue a spirituall and eternall life. Q. How are we to prepare our selues be∣fore we come to receiue this Sacramēt of the Lords Supper?
A. We are first to examine and trie our selues, that wee may see our great and manifold wants both in knowledge and obedience, and in the conscience thereof to humble and purge our selues by hearty repentance. Secondly, wee are to whet our sto∣make and affections by praier and medi∣tation, that we may come to that spiritu∣all feast with an ardent desire and hun∣gry appetite after the graces there offe∣red,1. Cor. .28. Mat. 5.6. whereof we stand so in neede. Q. What must we be most carefull of in the very act of our receiuing? A. We must be carefull that we doe receiue worthily.1. Cor. 11.27. Q. How may we receiue worthily? A. That we may receiue worthily, wee must first receiue the outward ele∣ments of bread, and with due reuerence and respect of the Lords body and blood,1. Cor. 11.29. whereof they are Sacraments. Secondly, wee must in the same in∣stant act of receiuing the elements, lift vp our hearts, by a liuely saith to ap∣prehend and lay hold vpon Christ and his blessings, then and there verily offered vnto vs with the signes there∣of.
Q. What must wee be careful of after that we haue receiued? A. After that we haue receiued,Mat. 26.30 wee should first with fresh cheerefulnesse be truly thanfull to God for his blessings there giuen to and receiued of vs. Secondly, we should by the vertue of them be strengthened to continue firme∣ly, and to proceed cōstantly in the waies and conrse of godlinesse. Q. How may wee be vpheld and car∣ried on in the course of grace and good∣nesse by Prayer? A. By hauing,Iam. 5.16 Iam. 1.5 1. Tim. 4.5. by feruent, faithfull, and effectuall prayer, all needfull graces bestowed vpon vs, and blessed vnto vs from God, according to his word. Q. How should wee come prepared to pray? A. With hearty and feeling affection of what wee are to pray for; and with faith, that wee shall be therein heard of God. Q. After what forme and manner should we pray? A. We should pray according as our Sauiour Christ himselfe hath taught vs in that forme of prayer,Mat. 6.9 called the Lords Prayer.
Q. VVhat things are wee thereby to pray for? A. Wee are to pray first, for such things as doe immediatly concerne the glory of God;Mat. 6.9, 10 contained in the first thrée Petitions of that Prayer. Sercondly, for such things as doe im∣mediately concerne our owne good, tem∣porall and eternall; contained in the last three Petitions of that Prayer:Mat. 6.11, 12, 13. Giue vs this day our daily bread, &c. Q. How should we behaue our selues before God in our Prayers? A. With attention, reuerence,Iam. 5.16 and zeale. Q. How may wee be kept and built vp in the estate of grace and obedience, by the exercise of discipline? A. By hauing, by the lawfull and conscionable execution thereof,1. Cor. 5.5 1. Tim. 5.20. our sins redressed or preuented; and our vertue maintained and cherished. Q. What things should we principal∣ly bee carefull of, in the ordinary vse of these meanes of the Word, the Sacra∣ments, Prayer, and Discipline? A. We should be most carefull in the ordinarie vse of them, that we doe not vse them only customarily, but conscio∣nably:Luk. 8.18.
and that we doe not put our con∣fidence and rest in the onely very dse of them; but in God, who giueth the bles∣sing by them.1. Cor. 3.7. Q. What profit shall wee haue by a constant preseuering in this estate and course vnto the end? A. We shall thereby certainly bring glory to God,Ioh. 15.8 1. Tim. 4.8. and to our selues eternall saluation and happinesse.
