23528 99856139 21663
A Defence of the Appendix. OR A REPLY TO CERTAINE AVTHORITIES alleaged in Answere to a Catalogue of Catholike Professors, called, An Appendix to the Antidote. VVHEREIN Also the Booke fondly intituled, The Fisher catched in his owne Net, is censured. And the sleights of D. Featly, and D. VVhite in shifting off the Catalogue of their owne Professors, which they vn∣dertooke to shew, are plainly discouered. By L. D. To the Rt. VVorshipfull Syr Humphry Lynde. Eccles 7. v. 30. Solummodo hoc inueni, quod fecerit Deus hominem rectum; Et ipse se infinitis miscuerit quaestionibus. Permissu Superiorum. M.DC.XXIIII.
TO THE RIGHT VVORSHIPFVLL Syr Humphry Lynde. SYR It may be you will take it vn∣kindly to see vnawares your selfe and your papers thus in print. But I was moued to doe it by due cō∣sideration of that which follow∣eth. I receaued them not as se∣cret, neyther do I thinke you gaue them to be con∣cealed. You wrote against a printed Catalogue of Catholike Professors, wherof a deare friend of mine is the Author, giuen you vpon a former Conference which your self procured betweene some other of my Friends and your Doctors, concerning a Prote∣stant Catalogue; which Conference though pri∣uatly intēded, was afterwards victoriously printed. Wherefore writing them as you did, against such a
Booke, and vpon such an occasion, you might easi∣ly thinke they would be answered; and it is not strāge they should come to be printed. As the great opinion which others had of your deepe learning, and your owne profession of your great skill and reading in the Fathers, made me diligently to peruse those authorityes alleadged by you: so hauing well examined them, I thought my selfe diuers wayes o∣bliged to giue a large & full Reply vnto them. And being as you are most extremely, and most vehemēt∣ly distant in opinion from me; no maruell, if to be better vnderstood, I speak so lowd that all the Land may heare me. And for the same cause you must pardon me, if I rather choose to expose both you & my selfe to the iudgment of others, then hauing ta∣kē some little paynes in this matter to make you the only iudge of my labours. The old Maister Buggs be∣ing carried away with Ecce in Penetralibus, thinketh to haue found the Messias in your study, and was wholy transported with those chosen places, and se∣lected authorities contayned in your papers; which tending to no lesse then the losse of his soule, meri∣ted great compassion: the like may happen to others which deserueth preuention. Your owne Doctors haue already adorned the Pageant of their victory with the publication of your Names: Vnto you is giuen the driuing on of the Chariot: and the old Maister Buggs is led in Triumph. Some perchance haue been taken in the net of the Title, and may be freed againe by the net of Christ; which therefore
should not hange in the Riuers of priuate papers, when the other flyeth in the ayre, but should be cast into the Sea of the wide World, to gather and draw togeather all kind of fishes. In this net the Fi∣shers themselues are happily taken, and all they that are not taken, are lost for euer. The other of the He∣retikes is but a net to catch flyes, which though cū∣ningly wrought, must in tyme be swept away to∣geather with the Spiders. They haue printed against vs, and renewed an old Decree against our printing: if no Reply should be made, some of them would thinke, that now they might lye by Proclamation. What greater signe of falshood, thē hauing told your owne tale to seeke to stop the mouthes of your Ad∣uersaries with old Statutes? But the State neuer in∣tended to make a Law against God, his Word will not be tyed. All Princes should serue it, and all printing Presses must be subiect vnto it. Therfore no maruell, if the taking of one Presse do set two more on worke, and that your Doctors by seeking to suppresse the Truth, do presse it forward. You know then what moued me to diuulge your papers giuing the Fathers their due. I haue told you your owne, but sparingly; and if you knew my hart, you would see, and confesse that I had done it friendly, Belieue, and you shall vnderstande, Belieue the Fathers and you shall vnderstand the Fathers, He that hea∣reth not the visible vniuersall Church, is no better then a Heathen, and belieueth neyther Church nor Fathers: but the vnlearned not knowing the doctrine of the
Church and the vnstable forsaking that which they haue knowne, as they peruerte the Scriptures, so al∣so they preuert the Fathers to their owne damnation: from the which I beseech God deliuer you, praying you likewise to thinke no otherwise of me, then as of Your vnfaygned Friend, and seruant in Christ. L. D.
THE AVTHORITIES ALLEADGED BY Syr Humphry Lynde, agaynst the Appendix. Of Myracles. EPIPHANIVS conuinceth not Ebion of false beliefe, because neyther he nor any of his faction had the gift of working Miracles, but because Ebion lykened himselfe to Christ for his Circumcision, and for his Birth: and he answers him, he could not be lyke to God, for that he was but a mortall Man, and was not able to rayse Lazarus out of the graue, nor heale the sicke &c. If he would be lykened to Christ, he bid him to doe those things; the which things, if he had required at Epiphanius hands, I thinke noe man but would haue doubted of the performance of them.— —Read the place at large, and you shall find it hath no such mea∣ning, as is heere alleadged. Myracles were necessary before the world belieued, to induce it to belieue, and he that seeketh to be confirmed by wōders now, is to be wondred at most of all himself, in refusing to belieue what all the world be∣lieueth
besides himselfe. De Ciuit. Dei, lib. 22. cap. 8. in principio. Shewed to be falsified. Now we for our parts, say not, that we must be belie∣ued, that we are in the Church of Christ, because Optatus or Ambrose hath commended this wherein we are, or els because that in all places of the world where our Com∣muniō is frequēted, there are so many Myracles wrought of healing diseases &c. For all these things that are done in the Catholike Church, are approued in asmuch as they are done in the Catholike: And not that it is therfore Catho∣like, because such things are done there. August. de vnitat. Eccles. cap. 16. Tertullian. They will say (sayth he) to excuse them∣selues for hauing followed Heresy: that their Doctours haue confirmed the Fayth of their Doctrine: that they haue raysed vp the dead, restored the sicke, foretould things to come, so as they were worthily taken for Apo∣stles. As if (sayth he) this were not written, that many should come working great Myracles, to fortify the de∣ceitfullnes of their corrupt preaching. De Praescrip. cap. 44. S. Hierome. The Galathians had the gift of Healing, and of Prophesy, and yet they were insnared by the false Prophets; and it is to be obserued, that powers and signes are seene to be wrought in those that hold not the Truth of the Ghospell, which may be sayd agaynst the Here∣tikes, that think their Fayth is sufficiently proued if they haue wrought any Myracle, who in the day of Iudgment, shall deserue to heare this saying: I know you not, depart from me. In Epist. ad Galat. cap. 3. S. Augustine. Let no man sell you fables. Pontius hath wrought a Myracle. Donatus hath prayed, and God hath answered him from Heauen. First, either they are decea∣ued, or so deceaue. In Ioan. tract. 13. Et cont. Faustum Ma∣nichaum. lib. 13. cap. 5. Et de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 20. cap. 19. Answered, Sect. 5.
Of Iustification by Fayth only. THis is the worke of God, that he which belieueth in Christ, should be saued without workes; freely (by Grace only) receauing the pardon of his sinnes. Amb. cap. 1. in Corinth. What is the Law of Fayth? Euen to be saued by Grace. Heere the Apostle sheweth the goodnes of God, who not only saueth vs, but also iustifieth and glorifieth vs, vsing no workes heerunto, but requyring (Fayth on∣ly.) Chrys. Hom. 7. Rom. 3. Basil. This is true and perfect reioycing in God, whē a man is not lifted vp with his owne righteousnes, but knoweth himselfe to be voyd of true righteousnes, and to be iustified by (Fayth only) in Christ. Homil. de humil. Theodoret. We haue not belieued of our owne accord, but being called we came; and being come, he exacteth not purity & innocency of life at our hands, but by (Faith only) he forgaue our sinnes. Coment. 2. Eph. Bernard. Whosoeuer is touched with his sinnes, and hungreth after rightneousnes: Let him belieue in God, that iustifieth sinners, and being iustified by (Fayth only) he shall haue peace with God. Cant. Serm. 22. Answered, Sect. 6. Of Free-will. BEllarmine. Man before all Grace, hath Free-will, not to things morall and naturall, but euen to the works of piety, and things supernaturall. De Grat. & lib. Arbit. l. 6. cap. vltim. Basil. There is nothing left in thee O man, to be proud off, who must mortify all that is thy owne, and seeke for life to come in Christ, the first fruits wherof we haue
already attayned in Christ; owing all, euen that we liue, to the Grace and gift of God. For it is God that giueth both the Will, and the Deed, according to his good pleasure. Ba∣sil. conc. de humil. Bernard. To will, is in vs by Free-will, but not to performe nor will. I say, not to will eyther good or e∣uill, but only to will; for, To will good, is a gift of Grace, to will euill, is a defect. Free-will maketh vs well-willing, from Free-will we haue power to will, but to will well cometh of grace. De Grat. & lib. Arb. Augustine. It is certaine that we are willing when we are so, but it is he that maketh vs so, of whome it is sayd, It is God that worketh the will in vs: It is certayne that we worke when we doe so, but it is he that giueth vs this working power, by adding vnto our will, most effectuall strength, as if he sayd, I will make you work. De bono perseuer. cap. 13. False cited, and shewed to be falsified. Idem. Except God first make vs to be willing, and then worke with vs being willing, we shall neuer bring to passe any good worke. De Grat. & lib. Arbit cap. 16. Idem. We must confesse, that we haue Free-will, both to good and euill, but in doing euill, euery man, iust and vniust is free, but in doing good, none can be free, in Will & Act, vnles he be freed by him that sayd; If the Sonne free you, you are truely freed. De Corrept. & Gra. cap. 1. Augustine. We will, but it is God that worketh in vs to will; we worke, but it is God that worketh in vs to worke, according to his good pleasure. This is behoof∣full for vs both to belieue and speake. This is a true Do∣ctrine, that our Confession may be humble and lowly, and that God may haue the whole: we liue more in safty, if we giue all vnto God, rather then if we commit our selues, partly to our selues, and partly to him. August. de
bono perseuer. lib. 3. cap. 6. False cited. Augustine. Farre be it from the Children of promise, that they should say: Behold, without thee we can pre∣pare our owne harts; let none so thinke but those that are proud defenders of their owne Freewill, and forsakers of the Catholike Fayth: for as no man can begin any good without God, so no man can perfect good with∣out God. Contr. duas Epistol. Pelag. lib. 2. Augustine. Why doe we presume too much of the power of Nature? It is wounded, maimed, vexed, and lost: let vs confesse it freely, and not defend it falsely; therefore let vs seeke Gods Grace, not to forme, but to reforme it thereby. De Natur. & Grat. cap. 35. False cited. Non volentis, ne{que} currentis, sed miscrentis est Dei, vt totum Deo detur, qui hominis voluntatem bonam & praeparat adiuuan∣dam, & adiuuat praeparatam. August. Enchir. ad Laurent. cap. 32. Answered, Sect. 7. Of the Sacrament. CYprian. The Bread which our Lord gaue to his Di∣sciples, not in Shape, but in Substance or Nature, changed by the Omnipotency, of the Word, is made Flesh. 1. The words of Cyprian are, Panis non effigie, sed na∣tura mutatus &c. which you haue translated in Substance or Nature: where there is no word of Substance in Cy∣prian. 2. The Chapter of Coena Domini, where this place is vrged, is none of Cyprians. Extat inter opera Cypriani Ser∣mo de Coena Domini, qui Cypriani Episcopi Carthaginensis esse non videtur (inquit Bellarminus) lib. 2. Euchar. cap. 9. Author
Sermonis de Coena Domini, non est Cyprianus, sed aliquis posterior. Bellarm. lib. de Euchar. 4. cap. 26. Author Sermonis de Coena Domini, est ignotus, inquit Garetius. De veritate Corporis Christi. fol. 181. Cyprian. The Lord in his last Supper wherin he did participate with his Apostles, gaue Bread and Wine with his owne hands: but he gaue his Body to be crucified on the Crosse, to the hands of his souldiars &c. Vt diuersa no∣mina vel species ad vnam reducerentur essentiam, & significantia & significata ijsdem vocabulis censerentur. De Vnctione Chrismatis. Shewed to be falsified. Whereunto you adde, pag 47. in the Margent. Ter∣tullian; Hoc est corpus meum, hoc est figura corporis mei. cont. Marci. lib. 4. Aug. Christus figuram Corporis sui Discipulis com∣mendauit. In Psal. 3. Ambros. de Sacram. lib. 4. cap. 5. Hier. ad verb. Iouin. lib. 2. Aug. in Leuit. quaest. 57. Gelasius cont. Eu∣tichem. Aug. de Doctr. Christian. lib. 3. cap. 16. It is a figure commaunding vs to lay vp in our Remembrance, that his Flesh was crucified and wounded for vs. Answered Sect. 8. & sequent.
A DEFENCE OF THE APPENDIX. TO THE RIGHT Worshipfull Syr Humphry Lynde. Section I. The Fisher freed, and the Catcher catcht. In re∣ference to the first point of the Appendix, shewing the continuall Visibility of the Ca∣tholike Church. YOur owne Doctors in your owne house professed, as you know, The true Church must be able to name Professors in all Ages; & made it the very groūd of their Argument, in that Dispute. Wherefore in all reason, before you went about to answere the Booke, which you receaued of the Catalo∣gue of our Professors, you should haue giuen another, or referred vs to some booke of an other of yours. And that
so much the more, because hitherto such a Catalogue on your side hath byn held impossible to be found, made, or produced. And hauing beene euermore demaunded and required for a hundred yeares togeather, could neuer as yet be seene nor obtayned. Certainly, those your Champions which were chosen by your selfe, and with great expectation vnder∣tooke to doe it, when they came to the Tryall, perfor∣med nothing; and all that they did, was but cunningly to auoyde the Question, giuen in these expresse termes. Whether the Protestant Church was in all Ages visible, especially in the Ages before Luther; and whether the Names of such visible Protestants in all Ages can be shewed, and proued out of good Authors? Wherein euery man may see, there was nothing els demaunded, but a playne Catalogue or Table, of the Names of your Professors in all Ages proued by good Authors. According wherunto, they receaued also ano∣ther paper before the meeting, which there was publick∣ly read, that ech partie should produce their Catalogues out of good Authors, and then interchangably by termes defend them. But this Table or Catalogue of the names of our Professors seemed a Lyon in the way of your Do∣ctors, which therefore they durst not come neere nor be∣hold, but sought by diuers straines to eschew it, and to turne the eyes and eares of the audience from their expe∣ctation of it. As first they sought to make two Questions of the Question propounded; and flying the latter part, insteed of shewing the visibility of their Church, they would haue proued it à Priori (as they tearmed it) without shew∣ing their visible Pastors, which was the poynt demaun∣ded. Secondly, they deride their Aduersaries, for demaun∣ding the Names of their Professors, as if they had imper∣tinently called for a Buttry Booke, of the Names of those,
that euer were admitted into the Church of Christ; irregi∣ously comparing the Histories of the Church wherein the Names of her Bishops, Martyrs, and other holy Men, were carefully recorded, to Buttry Bookes of Names. And for the same cause calling their Aduersaries Nominalls, they boasted themselues to be Realls; as if their Aduersaries had demaunded, no Men, but only Names of Men: or as if the Professors of the true Faith, like Knights Errants, or those of the round Table, had been no reall Men at all, but only names; which is asmuch to say, as that the Hy∣stories of the Church were meere fables. Thirdly, they sought to flinch by propounding sū∣dry tymes, diuers other Questions to be disputed. Which was, as it were, to put vp many Hares before the Hoūds, thereby to conceale the Kennell of that Fox which was then hunted. Fourthly, they endeauoured to diuert the Question, from prouing themselues the true Church, by naming the visible Professors therof in all Ages, which was the thing demaunded; to proue the same by assuming they held the truth, that is to say, in euery particular Controuersie; as for Example, in denying of Transubstantiation, Merits of Works and the like. Which was as plaine a Transition, as if in case the Question had byn about Transubstantia∣tion, their Aduersaries should haue gone about to proue it, by prouing themselues to be the true Church that held it. For both these kinde of proofes by a remote Medium do euidently transferre the Question; the one from a gene∣rall to a particular point, which was your Doctors fault: the other from a particuler to a generall, as in the other Example. Fiftly, being called vpon by the Hearers, and es∣pecially by the Protestants themselues, which were ten to one, and confided much in their owne cause, to giue the Names of their Professors in all Ages; they named only Christ and his Apostles, with others, one or two
more of the first Age alone. Which according to the que∣stion vndertaken, they should haue proued to be Prote∣testāts, by naming Protestants that succeeded them in all Ages following; but seeking euermore to auoyde that Rocke, they would haue stayed there, and before they went any further, vrged to proue the Professors of the first Age to be Protestants, not by naming their Succes∣sors, but by examining their Doctrine; Which againe had been to diuerte from the matter, and to runne from the generall point then in Question, to all particular Con∣trouersies. Sixtly; Therefore when none of these deuises could satisfy the expectation of the Hearers, fearing as it seemed, least, according to the words of the Question and playne intention of that meeting, they should haue byn vrged againe by the Hearers, to set downe a full Catalogue of all Ages, as once before they were importuned to doe, they suddenly brake off, and so departed. Seauenthly; My L. of Warwicke imagining perchāce that this proceeded not so much from lacke of ability, as from want of due preparation, on their behalfe promised a Catalogue within 2. or 3. dayes, which though sought agayne by letter, neuer yet appeared. Eightly; The Answerers themselues repayred the next day to your owne house, agayne offering to deliuer their Catalogue with one hand, so they might receaue yours with the other. Which another stāding by, whome they also tooke to be a Protestant Minister, affirmed to be very reasonable and indifferent. But you answered, You knew their minde for that point, and that they would neuer doe it, before the Names of the first Age were tryed, and so of the rest in order. Ninthly; a printed Catalogue was sent to your selfe in particuler, hoping it might serue as an engine to im∣portune, and as it were to extort another from you, or from your Doctours. But all in vayne, which maketh
many much to feare, that this Catalogue of your Profes∣sors, will neuer be produced, and consequently that your Church, cannot possible be the true Church of Christ. And now no maruell if some of the Hearers, when they saw the Booke of The Fisher catched in his owne Net, writen as it were in triumph of your victory in that Di∣spute, compared it to those other Puritan Bookes, which haue been lately printed of the great victories of the Pro∣testants in their Warres against the Catholiks beyond the Seas: whereas in truth, not the Catholikes, but the Pro∣testants themselues, haue beene alwayes notoriously van∣quished and ouerthrowne. And presuming it came forth from his owne fingers that hath the principall part ther∣in, they spare not to say, that it better deserued to be cal∣led, The feates, and lyes of Doctor Feat-Lye, then the other Title; which in falshood well agreeing with the Booke it selfe in that respect alone, might iustly seeme a fit lace or facing for it. For besides the sundry shifts and slights of the Doctors contayned in it, they accuse it also of many grosse vntruthes without end or number; in relating things out of due place and order, to their owne aduan∣tage; in daubing and amplifying the speeches of D. Featly with much addition, and substraction of matter: As for Example. 1. That M. Bugges, the old Gentleman, who first desired the former Dispute, was sicke, and solicited in his sicknes by some Papists about him to forsake his Reli∣gion: And that it was feared he would haue fallen from his Fayth, if he had not recouered of his sicknes: which is altogeather false. 2. That he was much confirmed in his Religion, by hearing the former Disputation: which vnlesse he did extreamly forget himself (hauing often sayd the contrary) is also false. 3. That you Syr Humfrey, found M. Fisher by chance
in Drurie Lane; whereas you know, you came of purpose to offer him a friendly Conference with D. White. 4. That M. Fisher hauing written the Question, ad∣ded vnder his owne hand, he would answere vpon it ne∣gatiuely, As challenging and expecting Opposers; which was false, for he was first asked by your self, whether he would oppose or answere: wherupon he wrote he would an∣swere. 5. That you Syr Humfrey, tould M. Buggs, if M. Fisher would come with foure, or six at the most, they should be admitted for his sake, whereas it was expressely agreed on, that D. White and M. Fisher, should only bring an Assistant, foure Witnesses, and a Writer, and no more, with each of them, and that the matter should be kept se∣cret, thereby to make the meeting very priuate. Which M. Fisher duly obserued, but when he came he found the house full of Protestants contrary to former agreement. 6. That D. White and D. Featly, being inuited by you to Dinner, and staying a while after Dinner, had notice giuen them (as it were by chance) that some Iesuits were in the next roome, ready to confer with them, and that the Doctors were at last perswaded to haue some Con∣ference with them. As if forsooth they had neuer heard of the meeting before; when the truth is, that some daies before, D. White had receaued the Question, and vnder∣tooke to oppose agaynst it, though afterward for more security he vsed D. Featly for his Champion, and both of them came thither of purpose, to make good the former challenge. 7. The Question was falsely and sophistically prin∣ted, by putting into the midst therof the figure of (2) in fauour of the Opposer, who sought to make it a dubble Question. 8. Before the Disputation began, D. Featly hauing propounded many other poynts of Controuersie to di∣uert the Question, That M. Sweete should answere they
were scholasticall poynts not fundamentall. Which was not so; only he affirmed they were nothing to the pur∣pose. Which he was moued the rather to say, because a little before he had desired two things of the Auditorie. 1. That all bitter speeches might be forborne. And 2. that nothing might be heard or spoken which was be∣side the Question. 9. That M. Fisher being charged to haue slaundred Doctor White in a former Conference, answered no∣thing: which is false, for he stood vp, and solemnely protested vpon his Conscience, that he neuer slaundred him. 10. And againe, that being charged to answere vpon his Conscience, whether he belieued Christ and his Apostles taught the Protestant faith, he refused to an∣swere. Which is meerely false. It is true, that D. Featly before he began to dispute, coniured M. Fisher after an insolent manner, to answere according to his conscience, which M. Fisher accepted, and wished him to doe the like. I omit many other such Feates, which the Hearers when they read, affirmed to be plaine Lyes, from whome soeuer they proceeded. If the Doctors according to their vndertaking, had giuen a sufficient and full Catalogue of their Professors in all Ages, The Fisher had beene taken indeed in his owne Net, and caught in the Question which himself propounded; but contrarily hauing taken more vpon them then they were able to performe, and not being able to set downe the Catalogue, which according to the issue of the Question was then expected, the Do∣ctors themselues were manifestly taken in the Net of the Fisher. Wherein, by professing as they did, that, The true Church must be able to Name Professors in all Ages, they haue so intangled themselues, that howsoeuer they may dance in this Net to their owne shame and confusion, they can neuer get out, vntill they name them.
And now to come home againe to your selfe (endea∣uoring in the meane tyme as you doe to ouerthrow the succession of their Church, and not being able to shew another of yours) what do you get, or what do you seeke therby, but only the ruine and demolishment, both of your Church and theirs, leauing no true Church vpō the earth, which cannot subsist without a visible succes∣sion of Professors to be named in all Ages, as you and your Doctors haue vrged? And by consequence, for wāt of such a visible Church, you leaue no true Fayth at all, nor true Religion in the world. And who is a Naturall, but he that denyes it? Wherefore to conclude this Section, your Doctors with a great deale of noyse, hauing filled the aire with nothing but smoke. If now their Aduersaries should turne their owne Ordinance against them and reason thus, it is not your valor that would be able to defend them. The Church that is Catholike as it ought to be, or the Church whose fayth is Eternall, or the Church of Christ and his Apostles, must be able to name Successors in all Ages. But the Protestant Church is not able to name the Professors of their Fayth, nor the Successors therein, to Christ and his Apostles in all Ages. Ergo, the Protestant Church is not Catholike as it ought to be, nor the Church whose Fayth is eternall, nor the Church of Christ and his Apostles. The Maior is their owne, and publickly produced by thē. The Minor cānot be denyed vntill the Names be shewed. Wherefore vntill this Fort be built, how can you defēd them, or where will you hide them from the power of this Gun-shot? And yet as this worke is plainly impos∣sible to be raysed or performed, so it is no lesse impossible, that the Protestants should be found the true Church, & by Consequence, that any may be saued remayning in it.
Section II. In reference to a second point of the Appendix, shewing their Conuersions in all Ages. HAD you giuen vs such another Catalogue of your Professors, as you receaued of theirs, to make your party good agaynst thē, you should haue shewed the like Conuersions of Heathen Nations to the Fayth of Christ by your Ministers in all Ages; as that Booke hath shewed, by their Apostolicall Preachers. And that especially after those tymes wherin you pretend their Church was fallen, and the spirit of God was departed from them. As for Example, in the third Age were conuerted Donaldus King of Scotland, his Wife, Children, and Nobility. The Court of the Prince of Arabia, pag. 20. In the fourth Age, the Bessi∣tes, Dacians, Getes, and Scythians, pag. 26. In the fifth Age, the Sarazens, the Scots, the Irish, pag. 32. In the sixt Age, the Pictes, the Gothes, the Bauarians, the English, pag. 36. 38. In the seauenth Age, diuers Swe∣uians, the Westphalians, and many of our Nation, Peo∣ple of Teisterbandia, of Westphalia, of Holland, the King and Queene of Persia, with forty thousand Perci∣ans, pag. 42 44. In the eight Age, Saxons, Borucluati∣ans, the Frisians, the Hassits, the Thuringians, the Cat∣ti, the Erphordians, two Saxon Dukes, pag. 48. In the ninth Age, the Danes, Swethens, and people of Aqui∣tania, the whole Iland of the Rugians, the Bulgarians, the Ruthens, or Russians, pag. 52. 54. In the tenth Age, Worziuous the last Pagan Duke in Bohemia, the King of Norway, the Polonians, the Sclauonians, and Hun∣garians, Heraldus King of the Danes, and Sueno his Sonne, pag. 60. In the eleuenth Age, the Prussians, the Vindians, also Pannonians and Transiluanians, the lap∣sed
Hūgarians, pag. 64. 68. In the twelfe Age, the Pome∣ranians, the people of Norway, Magnus King of the Gothes, pag. 70. 72. In the thirteenth Age, the Liuoni∣ans, the Lituanians, innumerable Tartarians, pag. 76. 78. In the fourtenth Age, the Canary Ilandes, the Chu∣mans, the Lipnensians, Bosnians, Patrinians, and other Sclauonian Nations, pag. 84. In the fifteenth Age, Sa∣mogessians, the Kingdomes of Bentomine, Guinaea, An∣gola, and Congo, Zerra Iacob Emperour of the Abis∣syns, pag. 90. In the sixteenth Age, the Kingdome of Manicongo in Africa, the Kings of Amanguntium and Bungo, innumerable Indians, Iaponians, Brasilians, and other Westerne and Orientall people, more Coun∣tries and Kingdomes then all Christendome before. In the seauēteenth Age, the King of Sarra Leaena in the East Indies, with his Brethren and Children, besides many other in China, Iaponia, Persia, and other Nations. This Argument taken from the great increase of fruit which continueth, and abideth among them, Ioan. 15. 16. and from the wonderfull propagation of their Religion, not only in the first fiue hundred yeares after Christ, but also much more in the Ages following to this present tyme; is surely a most forcible and strong perswasion, that they alone among all other sortes of Christians, are the com∣pany, and people whome God had blessed. Haue Ido∣laters been chosen and preserued by Almighty God, be∣fore his owne Seruants, to perswade in the force of his word innumerable people from tyme to tyme, to renoūce and tread vnder their feete the Auncient Gods of their Forefathers, in whome they so much confided; and to receaue him for their true and only God, who whipped and crowned with thornes, was nayled to a Crosse in the sight of the world, and so dyed? Haue all these seuerall Countries and Kingdomes, so extremely different in cly∣mats, in tongues, in affections, in customes, and in na∣tures beene voluntarily reduced to the vnity of one and
and the same Fayth in Christ, and to the obedience of one Pastor vnder Christ, by the followers of Antichrist? Haue the limmes of the Diuell reformed the sauage, bru∣tish, and wicked manners of so many People and Nati∣ons, changing their hartes, and bringing them vpō their knees, to serue their Creator, with piety and humility, and in exercise of all kind of vertue? Then I must needes confesse, it seemeth vnto me, that eyther God himselfe must be in loue with Idolatry, or Christ himselfe must become Antichrist, or the Diuell himselfe hauing forsaken his malice, is now changed to be a seruant of Christ. Neyther do I see how possibly you can deny these innumerable Nations to haue beene con∣uerted by the true Church, recommended vnto vs in ho∣ly Scripture, vnlesse we deny both Church and Scri∣pture. For by these Conuersions of Nations in all Ages, your Aduersaries doe manifestly proue themselues to be that Church which must in the end conuert all Na∣tions, and was therefore surnamed Catholike or Vniuer∣sall. And thereby it cannot be denyed they make it most apparent (the promises thereof in the Law, Gen. 22.17. Gal. 3. In the Psalmes, 2. & 71.6. & 21. & 28. In the Pro∣phets, Isa. 2.2. & 11. & 60. & 61. & 62. Hier. 33. Ezech. 33.22. Dan. 2.44. &c. In the old and new Testament, Matth. 24.14. & 28.19. Luc. 24.47. being so euidently performed by thē) that they alone are the spirituall seede of Abraham, Rom. 4.13. Gal. 3. The inheritance of the Sonne of God, Psalm. 2. & 47. The Mountaine on the toppe of Mountaines, Isa. 60.12. The Mountaine fil∣ling the world, Dan. 2.44. The glorious Citty, Psal. 86. whose gates must be alwayes open, that the strength of the Gentiles & their Kings may be brought vnto it: and the Nation and Kingdome, that will not serue it, must perish, Isa. 60.11.12. That blessed Company Isa. 61.9. whome our Sauiour promised to assist all dayes, or euery day, teaching and baptizing all Nations vnto the end of
the world. Matth. 28. & 24. Heere againe (as in the end the former Section) if they should argue Syllogistically against your Doctors in this manner, though you had the strength of Hercules, I think you would hardly be able to defend them. That Church which conuerted Nations in all Ages, is the true Church of Christ and his Apostles, recommen∣ded vnto vs, in holy Scripture. But the Catholike, and not the Pro∣testant Church, hath conuerted Nations in all Ages. Ergo, the Ca∣tholike, and not the Protestant Church, is the true Church of Christ and his Apostles, recommended vnto vs in holy Scripture. Section III. In reference to a third point of the Appendix, shewing their Religion to haue byn confirmed by Myracles in all Ages. HAd you giuen vs a view of so many Nations reduced to the Faith of Christ by your Professors as he hath named conuerted by theirs, that your Church might not appeare altogeather inferior to theirs, you should haue shewed some points of your Religion confirmed by Myracles against them, as that Booke hath declared many points of theirs in all Ages, miraculously authorized, and as it were subscribed by the hand of God against you; & those so euidētly testified not only by Auncient Histories, but also by the holy Fathers themselues, not liable to any exception, in the first fiue hundred yeares & downewards, as they seeme to enforce all good Christians to belieue them. As for Example, in the second Age, Narcissus Bishop of Hierusalem, turned water into Oyle for the vse of the Church, Eusebius lib. 6. Cap. 8. & 9. S. Balbina and her Fa∣ther restored to health by touching the Chaynes wher∣with
with Pope Alexander was bound, Baron. An. 132. n. 2. Cures wrought by the Bodies and Sepulchers of Mar∣tyrs. Iustin. quast. 28. In the third Age, the Myracles of S. Gregorie the won∣der-worker, & some of thē wrought by the signe of the Crosse, Nissen. in vita Greg. Thau. And S. Basil. de Sp. Sanct. cap. 29. Also Myracles confirming the Eucharist, & Reall Presence. Cyp. ser. de Lapsis. Also S. Cecily shewed to Vale∣rian the Angell Guardian of her virginitie. Metaphrastes and Surius in her life. In the fourth Age, a sicke Woman cured, and a dead Bodie restored to life, by the wood of the Holy Crosse, whē it was first found out by Queene Helen. Ruffin. Hist. lib. 10. Cap. 7. & 8. & Seuer. Sulpit. Hist. sacra lib. 2. Paul. Epist. 11. Niceph. lib. 8. The same myraculously multiplyed to satisfy the deuotiō of all Christiās through∣out the world. Paul. Ep. 11. Cyr. catech. 10. Many other Myracles wrought by Reliques, Chrys. orat. cont. Gentes. By holy-Water, Epiph. haer. 30. By adoration of the Blessed Sacrament, Naz. orat. 11. By prayers to our La∣dy, Nazian. in S. Cyp. By the merites of Martyrs. Ambros. serm. 91. In the fifth Age, many Myracles wrought by Reli∣ques of S. Stephen, Aug. lib. 22. de Ciuit. cap. 8. By the si∣gne of the Crosse, Constantinus lib. 1. cap 22. apud Surium, Tomo 4. by S. German. Also Myracles wrought by S. Hie∣rome, lying on his death bed, and after his decease, the blinde, deafe, dumbe, and sicke were cured: some by touching, some by kissing his Corpes, Eusebius Cremon. Ep. de morte eius. In the sixt Age, Myracles wrought to confirme the Sacrifice of the Masse, S. Greg. l. 4. Dial. cap. 57. and Re∣all Presence, Euag. lib. 4. Hist. cap. 35. Ioan. Diac. lib. 2. de vita S. Greg. cap. 41. To confirme the honour and inuoca∣tion of Saynts, Procop orat. de Edificat. Iustin. Euag. loco it. Greg. de Myrac. S. Martini l. 2. cap. 5. 6. 7. The vse of I∣mages
in Processions, and how by one of our Blessed Ladyes, painted by S. Luke, a contagious Pestilence was dispelled in Rome, Ciac. in Greg. 1. From another Image stabbed by a Iew, issued bloud, Greg. Turon. de glor. Mart. cap. 22. Sigeb. ann. 560. Holy Oyle flowed from a Crosse, and from an Image of our Blessed Lady, curing many diseases. Baron. ann. 564. Thus the Author of the Catalo∣gue you receaued; And the like Myracles he sheweth in the rest of the succeeding Ages. As many more he might haue added aswell in the first fiue hundred yeares as after, but that he thought it not necessary, and therefore spared the labour to recollect them. Which myraculous attestations, we must eyther be∣lieue, and by consequence must also confesse those poynts of Religion confirmed by them, or els we shall not only condemne all Christian Antiquity of lying, and belie∣uing of lyes, but must lykewise reiect all euidence of cre∣dibility founded vpon human testimony; which is no lesse then to destroy the very foundatiōs both of Church, and Common-wealth, and all Society. Wherefore to binde this Burden also on your backe, that it may sit the closser, I will winde it vp in this manner. That Church whose Doctrine hath beene confirmed by Myracles in all Ages, is the true Church of Christ and his Apostles. But such is the Doctrine of the Catholike, and not of the Protestant Church. Ergo, the Ca∣tholike, and not the Protestant Church, is the true Church of Christ and his Apostles.
Section IIII. In reference to a fourth poynt of the Appendix, shewing the Doctrine of the Protestants to haue beene censured, and condemned by the Fa∣thers in all Ages. HAd you likewise confirmed your Doctrine by such diuine Authority, you should haue shewed some one point of their Religion censured by any of the Fathers, or condemned by any law∣full Counsell, as that Booke quoteth aboue twenty of yours notoriously opposed and condemned by them. As for Example; Iustification by Fayth only, and Deniall of Iustice by Workes; condemned in Symon Ma∣gus, Iren. lib. 1. cap. 20. Extrinsecall Iustice by imputatiō only; in the Gnostickes, Iren. lib. 1. cap. 5. That no sinne can hurt them that are indewed with Fayth; in Eunomi∣us, Epiph. haer. 76. Aug. haer. 64. That sinne abideth in the regenerate; condemned in Proclus, Epiph. haer. 64. That Baptisme doth not washe away sinne; condemned in the Messalians, Theod lib. 4. haer. fab. Neglect of the cere∣monies of Baptisme; condemned in Nouatus, Euseb. lib. 6. Of holy Chrisme and the seale of our Lord (which is the signe of the Crosse so called) condemned in Nouatus and his Disciples, Theod. lib. 3. haer. fab. Derisions of Exorcis∣mes, and Exufflations in Baptisme; condemned in the Pelagians, August. de Nat. & concupis. lib. 2. cap. 29. The Absolution of Priests not auaileable, and the abolishment of Confession; condemned in Nouatus and his Disciples, Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 23. Cornel. apud Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 43. Theod. lib. 3. haer. fab. Pacian. lib. aduers. eos. Denyall of in∣ioyned Pennance; in the Audians, Theod. l. 4. haer. fab.
Denyall of the Reall Presence; condemned in Iudas Iscariot, Claud. Xanct. Rep. 2. de Eucha. cap. 14. Chrys. hom. 46. in Ioan. 6. In the Simonians and Saturnians, Theod. Dial. 3. condemned likewyse by Iren. l. 4. cap. 34. post me∣dium. Impugning the reseruation of the B. Sacrament; condemned in the Anthropomorphites, Cyr. ad Calosyr. Denyall of Oblations, and Prayers for the Dead; con∣demned in Aerius, Aug. haer. 53 Epiph. haer. 65. Denyall of Freewill; condemned in Symon Magus, Clem. Roman. Recog. lib. 3. In the Manichees, Aug. lib. cont. Fortunat. Manic. Ordination and Predestination to sinne, and by consequence, that God is the Author of sinne; condem∣ned in the Predestinate, Sigeb. 415. Geneb. in Zosimo. con∣demned likewise in Symon Magus, Vin. Lirin. adu. prop. haeret. nouitat. cap. 34. And in Florinus, Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 20. That Saynts are not to be inuocated; condemned in Vigilantius, Hier. cont. Vigil. cap. 2. & 3. The Images of Christ and his Saynts not to be worshipped; condemned in Xenaias; Niceph. lib. 16. cap. 27. Worship of Saints Reli∣ques to be Idolatry; condemned in Eustachius, Socrat. l. 2 cap. 33. and condemned likewise in Vigilantius, Hier. 161. Impugnation of single life, and vowed Chastity, and that Marriage is equall to Virginity; condemned in Heluidius, and Iouinian, Hier. cont. Heluid. & Iouin. Dis∣allowance of prescript Fasts; condemned in Aerius, Epip. haer. 75. August. haer. 53. and in Eustachius, Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 33. Noe difference of Merits in Heauen; condemned in Iouinian, Hier. lib. 2. aduers. Iouin. Good vse of Riches, preferred before Euangelicall Pouerty; condemned in Vigilantius. S. Thom. opusc. 17. Denyall of one Chiefe Pastor in Earth; condemned in Nouatus, Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 43. Denyall of vnwritten Traditions; condemned in the Valentinians, Tertul. lib. de Praesc. & hist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 16. lib. 3. cap. 36. That the visible Catholike Church, might remaine in one parte,
and perish in the rest of the world; condemned in the Donatists, Aug. cont. lit. Petil. l. 2. cap. 108. & lib. de Vni∣tat. Eccles. cap. 2. & per totum librum. Thus the Author of the Catalogue; whereunto if I should adde out of the Protestāt Apology page 74. and page 127. and pag. 207. how insolently and impiously the most and best learned Protestant-writers doe like∣wise censure, and condemne the Fathers of the first fiue hundred yeares, I know you would be ashamed to reade them. But this may suffice, to giue the Reader iust oc∣casion to admire the little conscience of your late English Doctors, in challenging the Fathers of the first fiue hun∣dred yeares, wherein if their Aduersaries might come to an indifferent and equall tryall with them, the very Ti∣tles of the Fathers Books against them, were sufficient to ouerthrow them. Only in this place I will giue the Rea∣der this short Notandum: for the which if he desire since∣rely to know and belieue the Doctrine of the Fathers, he shall haue cause to thanke me. When any of the holy Fathers, do censure any poynt of Doctrine, taxing it of Heresy, or noteth it as the particuler opinion of some Heretike, or reproueth it very much, or wondreth at it, especially if it be such a thing as euery learned Man may easily know, or was necessary to be taught, and that no other Father did therein oppose himself against him; It is an euident Testimony, that his Doctrine therein was the generall Doctrine of the Church at that tyme; and ought to be so receaued of the Ages that follow. Where∣fore the Author of that Booke, hauing shewed so many poynts of your Doctrine to haue beene so notoriously cē∣sured and condemned by the Auncient Fathers of the first fiue hundred yeares in the Hetetikes of those tymes, besides many other poynts and some of those also con∣demned by Fathers and Councells in after Ages (where∣unto you haue not answered a word) it is for ought I can see, or perceaue, a cleare demonstration, that the Fa∣thers
of those tymes were theirs, and that, eyther your Professors were none at all, or no other then those, that were condemned by them. Thus, all things with them are infallibly certaine, easie to be knowne, and most conspicuous. They fol∣low the streame and current of that Doctrine, which, by many knowne Successions of holy and learned Men, Martyres, and Bishops, as it were by so many Chan∣nells, they deriue from Christ and his Apostles. They follow the fame and greatnes of that Church, which by conuerting Countries and Nations in all Ages, is become eminent and apparent aboue all other sortes of Christians, like a Citty vpon a Hill, aboue the Moale-hills; or like the Little Stone in Daniel, which growing to be a Mountaine, filleth the world with it's greatnes. They follow the security of those Letters-Patents which the hand of God hath signed with his owne Seale, and cōmended to the world, by Attestation of many My∣racles in confirmation of their Doctrine. And lastly they follow the infallible and powerfull Authority of that Body, which by Cēsures of Doctors, & Decrees of Coū∣cells from tyme to tyme hath euer confounded all those that opposed themselues against it; While you in the meane tyme, without any lineall Descente from those whome you pretend to haue beene your Auncestors; without the Progenie of any Gentills conuerted by you; without any warrant of Gods hand, or sentence of his Iudges for you, do still remayne in the darcknes of your inuisible Church, tossed in the Sea of Error, with euery winde of new Doctrine, not knowing certainly whome to follow, nor what to belieue, vntill at the last, euen the wisest of you being wearie of seeking, and despe∣rate of finding that which they seeke, come to hold all opinions probable, which is in effect to belieue nothing. Good Syr, had you produced such a Successiō, such cō∣uersions of Nations, such Myracles and Censures, in the
defence of your Church, as that Booke hath shewed in confirmation of theirs, all zealous Protestants had been bound to haue fallen at your feete, and to haue honou∣red you for euer. But now, on the other side, against such weighty and massie matters, such cleare and con∣uincing proofes as these, not being able to giue in eui∣dence so much as one Professor in euery Age, nor in any Age the conuersion of any Nation, or the testimony of any Myracle, or the Censure of any one Father in fauour of your Religion; who seeth not, that insteed of reason there is nothing but passion on your part; and certainly for the honour of your cause, it were better to hold your peace, then reply so weakely in a matter of such impor∣tance. For besides all that hath beene sayd against many o∣ther most expresse Sentences of the Auncient Fathers, in those very poynts which you haue chosen to touch; you haue only produced a few dribling Authorities, as it were on the Bye, some falsely translated, and some falsely ci∣ted, and some in respect of other expresse words agaynst you, plainely falsified; that, not to accuse you of a bad Conscience, though you make profession to be much versed in the Fathers, yet the Reader must needes think, you neuer saw, or read so much as those few places which your selfe haue cited, but only tooke them by retaile frō others. And howsoeuer, though they were admitted and taken as you giue them vp; yet in my poore opi∣nion, they eyther touch not your Aduersaries at all, or being a little considered, make rather with them, then against them. Which sheweth great want of iudg∣ment in you: and I verily thinke, if you will be plea∣sed to examine them with me, I shall make you see it. Wherefore as in the former Section, soe that you may know in this also, how far you are chargable, I giue you the summe of your accompt in this manner. The Doctrine of that Church which was condemned by the Fathers
of the first fiue hundred yeares, was condemned by Christ and his Apostles. But the Doctrine of the Protestant Church, was condem∣ned by the Fathers of the first 500. yeares, as the most and best lear∣ned Protestants themselues haue also confessed. Ergo, the Doctrine of the Protestant Church, was likewise condemned by Christ and his Apostles. Section V. Myracles defended to be a sufficient Testimony of Truth, and the Doctrine of the Fathers therein declared. WHerefore to begin, as you doe, with Myra∣cles, most certaine it is, that no true Myra∣cle can be wrought, but only by him, Qui facit mirabilia magna solus; and therefore whē∣soeuer any true Myracle is shewed, or sufficiently testified vnto vs, in confirmation of any point of Doctrine; it is an euident proofe of the truth thereof. For a Myracle in that case, is the Testimony of God, who speaketh by workes, as men by wordes (sayth S. Aug. Epist. 49. quaest. 6.) and is the subscription (as it were) of his hand and seale vnto it. And certainly if Myracles were no sufficiēt proofes of true Doctrine, they would neuer haue beene called, Signes and Testimonyes in holy Scripture. God would not haue giuen Moyses power of working Myracles. Exod. 4. That the People of Israel might belieue he had appeared vnto him. Our Sauiour would not haue sayd, the Iewes had not sinned in not receauing him, if he had not done those workes which no man els had done before him. Ioan. 15. And in vayne should he haue promised, that Signes should follow those that belieued, and haue cooperated and confirmed the Do∣ctrine of the Apostles by them. Neyther could he in Iu∣stice
haue commaunded the world vpon paine of damna∣tion, to belieue a thing so incredible, as that Christ being Crucified, was risen againe in his owne flesh, and as∣cended into Heauen, if many other Myracles which the Apostles wrought in confirmation therof, had not made it euidently credible, as S. Austen disputeth in his booke de Ciuit. Dei lib. 22. cap. 7. and in the former Epist. 49. quaest. 6. albeit he well obserued, that this kind of proofe was euer lowdly and extremely laught at, by the wicked Pagans: yet most true it is, which there he also affirmeth, that we should not belieue, Christ to be risen againe frō the Dead, if the Fayth of Christians did feare in this point of Myracles, the laughter of Pagans. Wherefore to answere those places of the Fathers which you obiect, not only agaynst so many of their owne Testimonies alleaged by your Aduersary, but also against Scripture, and against Christian beliefe it selfe, grounded vpon Myracles as hath beene noted; you must further vnderstand, that the world hauing beene once perswaded by myraculous operations and workes of wō∣der to belieue the Doctrine of the Apostles with this fir∣me promise, that it should alwayes remaine with them and their Successors, the visible Pastors of the Catholike Church, vniuersally spread ouer all the world; it ought not to belieue any other Doctrine, or any other Myra∣cles pretended to be done in opposition to that Doctrine which by continuall Tradition hath beene receaued frō them. For as there can be no after-word of God, con∣trary to that which was first preached; soe there can be no latter Myracles contrary to the testimony of those, by which the world first belieued; but rather as S. Paul saith, If an Angell from Heauen should preach otherwise then we haue receaued, we should hold him accursed. This made Tertullian in the Booke you cite de Praesc. cap. 44. to protest against all Myracles supposed to be done against the Tradition of the Church; whereof S. Augustine in his
Booke de vnit. Eccles. obiected by you, giueth the reason yet more plainly, shewing that the Catholike amplitude or vniuersality of the Church, by conuersions of Nations in all Ages, doth more euidently proue it to be the true Church of Christ, then any other worke which is done therein; for it is more manifest to sense and human rea∣son, that the cleare Prophesies of the true Church in holy Scripture are fullfilled and accomplished only in the Ca∣tholike Church, which accordingly in all Ages doth vi∣sibly spread it selfe ouer all the world, then it can possi∣bly appeare, that any worke of admiration is truly a My∣racle surpassing the force of Nature, or power of the Di∣uell; whereof it followeth, that the true Church is more manifestly knowne by the accomplishment of those pro∣mises, then by the wondrous effects of any Myracles; and that Myracles doe not soe well, and cleerly proue any Church to be Catholike, as the Church being visibly Catholike, doth manifest those Myracles to be true, which are approued by it. Whereof it followeth againe, that all Myracles which are done against it, or agaynst the vnity thereof, are as firmely and constantly to be reiected. Which is it that he also teacheth, lib. 13. cont. Faust. cap. 5. and Tract. 13. in Ioan. and lib. 22. de Ciuitat. Dei, cap. 8. obiected by you. And heere by the way I beseech you to note, how much Saint Ansten esteemeth the former Argument of the conuersions of Nations in all Ages, according to the pro∣mises therof in holy Scripture, which he maketh such an euident marke, and such an infallible proofe of the true Church, that he preferreth it before Myracles. And for the same cause, lib. 22. de Ciuit. Dei, cap. 8. he spareth not to say: That he who seeketh to be confirmed by Wonders now, is himselfe to be wondred at, in refusing to belieue, that which all the world (or the visible Church through the world) belie∣ueth. Which your selfe also hauing obserued, you may wōder at your self, both in refusing to belieue, what you
know the visible Catholike Church, for a thousand yeares, through the world, belieued, and (wherin I also wonder my selfe) at your not obseruing, that S. Augustine doth wonder at you in that very place, wherein you suppose he agreed with you, as by and by I shall make it appeare. Adde in the meane tyme to that which hath beene sayd, that the Myracles whereunto the holy Fathers, al∣leadged by you, forbid vs to giue credit, as vnto Argu∣ments not sufficient to proue the Truth of Religiō, were eyther Myracles in apparence only, and such wherewith Heretikes might easily be deceaued, or so deceaue, as S. Augu∣stine speaketh in the former place vpon Ioan: not such as might reasonably induce any prudēt man to belieue thē. As Dreames, and Visions, and exauditions of Prayers, like vnto those of the Donatists, against whome wrote Saint Augustine lib. de Vnit. Eccl. cap. 16. Or such as were Testi∣monies of the Iustice and mercy of God in generall, and not of Doctrine in particuler, as were those whereof S. Hierome speaketh: Or finally such as being wrought by wicked men, exceeded not the power of the Diuell, as S. Augustine obserueth, lib. 20. de Ciuit. Dei cap. 19. & Tract. 13. in Ioan. Or were not sufficiently testified, but rather sayd then proued, which Tertullian lib. de Praeser. derideth and sayth, that the power of Heretiks was nothing like, but rather contrary, to the power of the Apostles; for their vertue was not to rayse the Dead, but rather to kill the liuing, literally fullfilled in Caluin, Bolsec. in vita Caluini, who pretending by his prayer to rayse a coun∣terfaite dead man, being then truly aliue, was thought to be the cause, that he was instantly slaine, eyther by God, or the Diuell. In the same sense also Epiph. lib. 1. de haer. cap. 30. vrgeth Ebion, to rayse some dead man &c. as∣suring himselfe that he could not doe any true Myracle, by meanes of his false Faith, yea though he called vpon the name of
Christ. Not so the Myracles alleaged by your Aduersary, which hauing beene wrought and belieued, and most authentically testified by soe many most holy, most prudent, and learned Witnesses, in confirmation of that Doctrine which is professed against you, need no more to feare the laughter of Protestants, thē the Myracles of former tymes, as S. Austen saith, had cause to feare the laughter of Pagans. And such as belieue them not, may iustly feare to be condemned as Pagans, for belieuing nothing. To deny therefore this Doctrine of Myracles, seemeth noe lesse impious, then to deny Christianity it selfe: and to affirme that myracles haue ceased sithence the tyme of the Apostles, were noe lesse vnreasonable, then to reiect all humane Testimonies, and in particuler the Authority of S. Augustine himsefe, in those very places obiected by you. For in that very place of S. Aug. de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 22. cap. 8. which you alleage against Myracles, That they were necessary before the world belieued, to induce it to belieue: And, That he that seeketh to be confirmed by wonders now, is himselfe to be wondred at, in refusing to belieue that which all the world (or the visible Catholike Church through the world) belieueth: which being well considered, maketh little for you. In that very place (I say) you could not choose but read these other words directly against you; That now also Myracles are wrought in his Name, eyther by his Sacra∣ments, or by the prayers, and memories of his Saints; togeather with the relation of many Myracles done in his owne tyme, and of those in particuler wrought by the Reliques of S. Stephen, which though not necessary after the World had once belieued, as S. Austen there disputeth; yet God in his mercy hath euer shewed them in all Ages, as well to confound the obstinate that would not be∣lieue the visible vniuersall Church, as also to confirme those in their Fayth, that already belieued. In this place
therefore you haue plainely falsified the sense of the Au∣thor, eyther very fraudulently, or very ignorantly, choose you whether. Section VI. Merits of VVorkes defended, according to the Doctrine of the Fathers: and Syr Humphry answered. IN the next place against the Merit of Workes, you obiect many places of the Fathers, but none to the purpose. You know full well, that the Catholikes distinguish betweene works that goe before Faith, & workes that follow. Workes going before Faith, and proceeding only from the light of Nature, or from the knowledge of the law of Moyses (called therefore by S. Paul Rom. 3. The workes of the Law) your Aduersaries doe all hold, neyther to saue, nor to be needfull to saluatio; according whereunto S. Paule also saith; That a Man is iustified by Faith, without the workes of the Law. But that workes following a liuely Faith, formed with Charity, and proceeding from it, doe iustifie, and are needfull to saluation, your Aduersary proueth not only by expresse Scripture, Iames cap. 2. Yee see then how that of workes a man is iustified, and not of Faith only: But also by the lyke Testimonies of all the holy Fathers, noting and con∣demning the contrary opinion of the Protestants as here∣ticall, in Symon Magus, in the Gnostickes, and in Euno∣mius, as hath beene shewed. And further he alleadgeth S. Aug. de fide & oper. cap. 14. testifiyng of the Apostles them∣selues, that because this opinion of Faith only, sprung vp in those dayes, by peruerting the words of S. Paules Epistle before related, the Epistles of S. Peter, S. Iohn,
S. Iames, and S. Iude, were principally written, vt vehemen∣ter astruant, vehemently to vrge, and contest that Fayth without workes doth profit nothing. Agaynst all which manifest proofes, you bring only some Authorityes of the Fathers, shewing that our owne workes and righteousnes (as Basil. hom. de Humil.) or workes of the Law, going before Fayth (as S. Chrysos. with S. Paul. Hom. 7. in 3. ad Rom.) and be∣fore Sinne pardoned (as S. Ambrose) and forgiuen (as Theodoret comment. 2. S. Bernard in Cant. Ser. 22.) doe not iustifie, but only Fayth without them; which is nothing to the purpose because therein your Aduersary agreeth with you. But you bring not a word to proue that workes following Faith doe not iustify, nor are needfull to Sal∣uation; which opinion of yours, your Aduersary hath shewed to haue beene often tymes condemned by the Apostles themselues, & by the Auncient Fathers in other Heretikes that haue gone before you. Section VII. Free-will defended: and Syr Humphry answered. IN the Controuersy of Free-will, you seeme first to suppose your Aduersaries belieue, that Man hath Free-will to performe supernaturall actes and workes of Pietie without Grace, and then you proceed to dispute against them. How can you imagine, they are so absurd as to thinke by the power of Nature alone to doe that which they thēseues confesse to be aboue the power of Nature, wherin there appeareth not only a great deale of passion in you, (which hanges lyke to a Cloud bet∣weene the Eye of your minde, and the light of truth) but also (as it seemeth) great want of conscience.
For you know they hold, that without grace, it is impossible eyther to belieue, or to do any other acte which may auayle, or so much as dispose to Saluation. This also you know to be the Doctrine of Bellarmine eue∣ry where in that whole Booke, out of which you seeme to cite his words in a contrary sense: and the words that immediatly follow in the very place you cite, do plaine∣ly shew, that against your Cōscience you falsify his mea∣ning. His words are these: A Man before all grace hath Free-will, not only to naturall and morall workes, but also to workes of piety and supernaturall, as you faythfully cite them: but then it followeth, Thus S. Augustine teacheth, l. de Spiritu & litera, cap. 33. where he sayth; That Free-will is a naturall and mid∣dle power, which may be inclined to fayth, and infidelity. Thus Bellarmine; whereby it is manifest his meaning to be, that by Grace, Free-will is not made, or giuen vnto vs, but that we haue the power thereof by Nature, which afterward by Grace is inclyned and strengthned to doe those things which by the force of Nature, without Grace, we are not able so much, as to will, or to thinke, much lesse to performe or perfect; according whereunto, in the same place, he citeth also S. August. de Praedest. Sanctorum, cap. 5. teaching, that the Posse, or power to haue Fayth and Charity, is in man by Nature. And in the same Booke, cap. 11. he alleageth S. Augustine againe Epist. 49. quaest. 2. to the same purpose, saying: Free-will is not taken away, because it is holpen (by Grace;) but because it is holpen, therefore it is not taken away. If it be giuen by Nature, and not taken away by Grace, most certaine it is, that still we haue it. In this sense therefore, your Aduersaries not only affirming, that we haue Freewill by Nature, but also teaching that it is so excited and strengthned by Grace, as we cannot so much as thinke, much lesse accomplish or performe any super∣naturall acte without it; they would easily graunt with S. Basil, con. de Hum. that we owe all, euen that we liue, to the Grace and gift of God; but that you falsely translate it.
They graunt with S. Bernard de Gratia & lib. Arbit. That to will Good, is a gift of Grace. And with S. Augustine. That it is God, who maketh that we worke, by adding to our will most ef∣ficacious strength. That vnlesse he make vs willing, and then worke with vs, we shall neuer bring to passe any good worke. And againe with S. Augustine de correp. & grat. cap. 1. That though we haue Free-will to doe good, yet none can be free in will and acte to do it, that is to say, perfectly, or in actu secundo, as the Scholmen speake, vnlesse he be freed by the grace of God. And againe: That all is to be giuen to God, not the first part vnto our selues, & the rest vnto God, as the Pelagians did, against whome S. Augustine disputeth, but all vnto God, and vnto our sel∣ues nothing that is not of God. And againe, That without God we cannot prepare our owne harts. And againe, That Gods grace doth not forme, but reforme our Nature, by giuing it the grace wherewith it was first formed. And finally, Ench. ad Laurent. cap. 32. That of his mercy he prepareth our will to be holpen, and helpeth it being prepared. Whereby (condemning your Aduersaries as you doe, and yet eyther not knowing what they hold, or maliciously mistaking their meaning) you may see at the last, that with a great deale of labour, for want of a little learning, if not for want of Chari∣ty, you haue rather confirmed, then censured their Do∣ctrine. But now that we haue no Free-will to any act at all, in such manner, as it lyeth not in our power to doe it, or not to doe it; and that all things are done necessarily, though willingly, because all things are done by the in∣euitable decree of God, being the point you should haue proued; none of the Fathers you alleadge, eyther thought or sayd, but haue condemned it for Heresie and Error in Simon Magus, and in the Manichees: yea, and because it followeth from hence, that God is the Author of sinne, euen for more then Heresie, in Florinus, vt refert Euseb. l. 5. cap. 20. Heere againe I must friendly admonish you, that negligently or ignorantly being deceaued by others,
you haue falsely quoted S. Augustine de grat. & lib. Arbit. c. 16. Except God first make vs willing &c. And againe, de Nat. & Grat. cap. 35. Why doe we presume so much &c. which wordes with the rest that follow, are not to be found in those place: neyther if they were, would they make any thing for you, as your selfe will iudge by that which hath beene sayd. And againe you alleage S. Augustine lib. 13. de bono perseuer. cap. 6. there being but one single Booke of that Argument, and in that Chapter, those wordes are not found which you haue there alleaged. You cite him also, cont. duas Epist. Pelag. lib. 2. which second Booke hauing 10. Chapters, you quote no Chapter. Will your Reader impute so many imperfect and false quotations only to the error of your pen, and not rather to your ig∣norance, or want of due perusall? But how will you defend your selfe, in alleaging these other words out of S. Austen: It is certaine that we worke, whē we do so, but it is he that giueth vs this working power, by adding vnto our will, most effectuall strength; as if he had sayd, I will make you worke. Whereby you will make your Reader belieue, that according vnto S. Austen we haue no power of Free-will by Nature, but that God giueth it, by adding his Grace; which is not so: for S. Austen doth not say, It is he that giueth vs this working power, by adding strength to our will as you alleage, but that, He maketh vs to worke, by ad∣ding strength to our will (or which is all one) to the power of our will; which therfore proueth, that we haue power of will by Nature, though not sufficiētly able to do any superna∣turall act, before he adde the strength of his Grace vnto it. Againe you finde not in S. Augustine these other words of yours: as if he sayd, I will make you worke; but they are by you fraudulētly foisted in, to cut off, & cōceale the words that follow. For wheras Pelagius, to proue that we are able by Nature without Grace to keepe the Commaundements obiected out of Ecclesiasticus: Si volueris, seruabis mandata, if thou wilt, thou shalt keep the Commaundements: S. Au∣gustine answereth, he knew as well as Pelagius, that they
that will, shall be able to keep them, yet not by Nature as he would haue it, but by Grace, holding it for certaine, that we are able to keepe them, but so as that God is he who worketh in vs both to will and to performe them. The words of S. Augustine are these that follow: It is cer∣taine, that we will when we worke, but it is he that maketh vs to will, of whome it is sayd; It is God that worketh in vs o will; It is certaine that we worke when we worke, but he maketh that we may be able to worke, giuing most efficacious strength vnto our will, who sayd; I will make them walke in my Iustifications, and to keepe my Iudgments, and to doe them. Which last wordes you partly changed, and partly omitted, to conceale the Doctrine of S. Augustine, and his proofes out of Scripture, shewing that by Grace we are able to keepe the Cōmaundemēts, which the Protestants haue euer held impossible. Lastly as if you meant not to be discouered, you cite the former words out of his Booke. De bono perseuer. lib. 13. cap. 6. which are only to be found in De Grat. & lib. Arbit. cap. 16. Let this be ignorance in you, which in another were plaine forgery. Section VIII. S. Cyprian falsly alleaged by Syr Humphry, against the Reall Presence. FInally concerning the B. Sacraments, you only taxe one Authority cited by your Aduersary out of S. Cyprian in his Sermō Of the supper of our Lord, and alleadge another against it out of the same Author, in his Sermon Of the Vnction of Chrisme, which Chrisme (as it is there recorded) was vsually made at that tyme vpon holy Thursday of Oyle and Balsamum (as now also it is accustomed) for the vse of the Church in Baptisme, and
other Sacraments: So hard it is for one of you to alleage any thing out of the Fathers, which one way or other doth not make against you. The words alleaged by your Aduersary are these: The Bread which our Lord gaue to his Disciples, being changed not in shape, but in Nature, by the omni∣potency of the Word, is made flesh. A place so playne for Tran∣substantiation, or change of substance in the Sacrament, that when I read it, it makes me blush at the bouldnes of those Diuines who dare to auouch that Trāsubstantiatiō was neuer known before the Councell of Lateran. Now in this sentence, (forgetting the beame in your owne eye) you seeke a mote in the eye of your Brother, accusing him, because to be vnderstood, he translated the word which signifieth Nature, to signify Substance, or Nature. If you were as good a Philosopher, as you pretend to be a great Diuine, you could not be ignorant that these three wordes, Na∣ture, Substance, and Essence, are all equiualente, signify∣ing the same thing in diuers considerations; that which is called Nature in order to motion, is called Substance in re∣lation to the Accidents, and Essence in reference to the de∣finition of it. And I pray you Syr, there being nothing in Bread but shape and substance, he who sayth, That Bread being changed, not in shape, but in Nature, by the omnipotency of the Word, is made Flesh, what doth he affirme, but that it is changed in substance? Secondly, you accuse him for alleaging those words out of Cyprian, which Bellarmine himselfe lib. 2. de Euch. cap. 9. holdeth to be none of Cyprians; Wherein you must giue me leaue to tell you, that your selfe much more de∣serue to be accused. For first, albeit Bellarmine doth say, he thinketh that Sermon de Coena Domini, not to be S. Cy∣prians, yet he addeth immediatly in the same place, that it is, The Sermon of some auncient, most holy, and most learned Man, as the Aduersaries (meaning Protestants) do confesse; which words (that you might with more shew eleuate, and a∣uoyd the former Authority) were fraudulently concealed
by you. It is the worke of some learned Man of that Age, sayth Erasmus in his annotations vpon the workes of S. Cyprian, In tyme not much inferior to Cyprian, sayth Fulke, in 1. Corinth. cap. 11. Wherefore doe we reuerence the Authority of S. Cyprian, but because he was an Auncient, holy, and lear∣ned Father? If therefore the Author of this Sermon, was a most holy and learned Man, as Bellarmine sayth the Protestants themselues confesse, and of the same Age with S. Cyprian, or in tyme not much inferior vnto him, as I haue shewed that the Protestants themselues doe likewise witnesse, why should any Protestant reiect him? Besides, though Bellarmine thinketh this Sermon to be none of Cyprians, yet many other Deuines of great name Cypriano tribuunt, doe iudge it to be the worke of S. Cyprian, as well for the likenesse of the stale, as for the dignity of the matter, sayth Gaulortius a learned Protestant in his annotations thereupon. Why then may not your Aduersarie follow heerein, the iudgment of many other great Deuines? In fine, your Aduersary may alleage for himselfe in this mat∣ter, the testimony of S. Augustine cont Donat. lib. 4. cap 22. his words are these: From that Theefe to whome, not being baptized, it was sayd, This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise; the same S. Cyprian tooke no sleight document, that passion (or death, or Martyrdome) doth sometyme supply the place of Bap∣tisme. According whereunto both in sense and words in the same Sermon de Coena Domini, it is sayd (and therefore according to S. Augustine, by S. Cyprian) That our Lord &c. deferred not his benefit, but with the same speedy Indulgence he gaue presently aswell a document, as also an example thereof, saying vnto the Theefe; This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise. He had his condemnation and punishment for robery, but his contritiō of hart changed his payne into Martyrdome, and his bloud into Bap∣tisme. Why now may not your Aduersary cite that Ser∣mon as Saint Cyprians, which Saint Augustine himselfe so long a goe alleadged vnder the name of Cyprian? First, therefore heerein you deserue both blame and
shame, insimulating your Aduersary of fraud for misal∣leaging S. Cyprian by the testimony of Bellarmine, and fraudulently cōcealing those words of Bellarmine in the same place; which euen the testimonyes of Protestants themselues do shew the words alleaged by your Aduer∣sary out of Cyprian, to be of no lesse Authority, then the words of Cyprian. Secondly, you deserue the more blame heerein, be∣cause you alleage agaynst it another place out of S. Cypriā, which according to the opiniō of Bellarmine in the same place, in the same Chapter, is none of Cyprians. And plaine it is, that the Sermon of the Supper of our Lord, alleaged by your Aduersary, and the other of Chrisme alleadged by your selfe, are both the Sermons of the same Author; for the whole Booke contayning 12. Sermons, is intituled, Of the Cardinall workes of Christ, and dedicated to Pope Cor∣nelius the Martyr, who liued in the tyme of Cyprian: And therefore he that denyeth the one, hath no reason to af∣firme the other to be the worke of Cyprian. How then out of the same mouth could you breath both hoat and cold? And how out of the same Bellarmine could you proue the Sermon alleadged by your Aduersary to be none of Cyprians, and affirme agaynst Bellarmine the other allea∣ged by your selfe, to be the worke of Cyprian? Thirdly, the like foule fraude cōmitted by you appea∣reth yet more grossely in the words which you cite out of the same Author, who when you take him to be with you, is Cyprian, but not Cyprian when he speaketh against you. The words of the Author are these: Our Lord there∣fore at that Table wherein he made his last Feast to his Aostles, with his owne hands, gaue Bread and Wine: but at the Crosse he gaue his Body to be wounded by the hands of his Enemie; that sin∣cere verity, and true sincerity (being more secretly iminted in the Apostles) might expound to Nations, how the Wine and the Bread was Flesh and Blood: and after what manner t causes agreed with their effects: That diuers shapes might: brought to one
Essence, and the things signifiyng, and the things signified, might be called (and knowne) by the same names. Thus S. Cyprian. But not thus Syr Hūphry, for hauing alleaged the words which seemed to make for him, he gaue Bread and Wine to his Apostles, but his Body to his Enemies, he chopt off with an &c. the words following, That sincere verity, and true sincerity, (being more secretly imprinted in the Apostles) might expound to Nations, how the Wine and Bread was flesh and Blood: which as euery man may see, are expressely against him, and serue to expound the meaning of the Author in the rest of that Sentence; which though otherwise beeing a little obscure, yet being a little considered, may be thus ex∣plained. Our Lord sayd to his Apostles, This is my bodie, which shall be giuen for you, when at the table he gaue to them visibly Bread and Wine, but at the Crosse he visibly gaue his owne Body; that his Apostles thereby might vi∣sibly see, he had giuen them inuisibly his owne Body; because he gaue them the same Body into their owne hands, which was giuen for them, into the hands of their Enemies. 1. That the sincere verity, and true sincerity heereof, being thus secretly imprinted in the harts of the Apostles, they might confidently expound to all Nations, how the Bread and Wine of that table, was truly and sincerely Flesh and Blood. 2. How the causes agreed with their effects, & the words of our Sauiour, which were the causes going before, agreed with their effects, both at the Table, and at the Crosse, that followed after. 3. How vnder diuers hapes of Bread and Wine at the Table, was contained but one & the same Essence, because the same shapes remayning, the Natures of Bread and Wine, by the omnipotency of the Word, were chan∣ged, o reduced into the Nature of his Body; as before you haue heard ut of his former sermon. 4. How the thinges signifying (which were the shapes of Bread and Wine remayning) and the things signified (which were the Body and Blood of our Sauiour) came both to  called by the same names, because the one did signify, exhibit, and coaine the other. By all which it appeareth (the Author hauing his right brought backe againe, and his
owne breath being restored againe vnto him, which you had thought to steale and smother) that he plainely con∣fesseth the Bread and Wine to be Flesh and Blood, and that the Nature of the one being changed into the Nature of the other, they are both reduced into one Essence; which is the same Doctrine, that your Aduersary profes∣seth, and maintayneth against you. Your Aduersaries affirme, the Bread to be made a Sa∣crament and the Body of Christ, by the words of Con∣secration, for the which cause they not only adore it be∣fore they receaue it, but also they haue euer held, that it might be lawfully giuen to Infants, and that which re∣maines thereof they are wonte to reserue to be giuen afterward to the sicke, or to others that come to receaue, as occasiō requireth. You Protestāts affirme on the other side, that it becōmeth a Sacrament, and a Seale of the Bo∣dy of Christ vnto you, without any change in the thing, by the liuely Faith of the Receauers; and consequently you giue it not to Infants, because they cannot receaue it with that Faith which makes it a Sacrament: and that also which remaineth thereof, after the whole Action, you take to be no better then common Bread, and soe you vse it. As custome is the best interpreter of the law, so the practise of the Church is the best interpreter of her owne Doctrine. Wherefore to know what S. Cypriā with the Church of God in the secōd Age after Christ be∣lieued at that tyme, concerning this point of the B. Sa∣crament, there can be no surer way, then to examine what is practized in communicating the same to Infants, and in reseruing of it, to be taken as need required. Which S. Cyprian in his sermon De Lapsis, his owne vndoubted worke, hath not obscurely recorded: for he relateth (Teste meipso) & sacrificantibus nobis; my selfe being witnes, and we our selues offering sacrifice, that an Infant hauing beene fedde with a sopp of wine before an Idoll, and being after∣ward brought to Church, was much tormented during
the tyme of the Sacrifice, and when it's turne came to receaue, it resisted so vehemently, that the Deacon was faine perforce to open it's mouth, and to power in somewhat of the Sacrament that was in the Chalice; but (sayth S. Cypriā) The drinke sanctified into the Bloud of Christ, brake out of her pol∣luted bowels &c. In which Sermon he likewise testifieth: That a certaine Woman when she would with vnworthy hands haue opened her coffer, wherein was reserued the Holy Thing of our Lord, there sprung vp fire from thence, wherewith she was so ter∣rified, that she durst not touch it. And, That another defiled Per∣son presuming to receaue with others, could not eate, nor touch the Holy Thing of God, for in his opened hands (insteed thereof) he found Ashes. By Document whereof (sayth S. Cyprian) it is shewed, that the Lord doth depart when he is denyed. By which Documents of reseruing the Eucharist, and giuing it to In∣fants, they (who will not be obstinate) may also learne out of S. Cyprian, that the Eucharist after the words of Consecration, was belieued to be really the Body of Christ, and not figuratiuely by Fayth only, to him that doth worthily so receaue it. Wherefore to conclude this Dispute, concerning the Testimony of S. Cyprian for Transubstantiation, and Reall Presence, as it was false that your Doctors claymed him in the former Conferēce, so being plaine agaynst them in this point, besides many other of no lesse importance, it was fondly done of you, to say they claymed him.
Section IX. S. Augustine falsly alleadged by Syr Humphry, against the Reall Presence. FYnally against the Reall Presence you obiect other places of the Fathers, affirming the Sacrament to be a figure of Christs body, which your Aduersa∣ries deny not. For they define all Sacramēts to be signes and figures, according whereunto they also holde, that as the Sacrament of the Eucharist is a figure, in respect of the Shape or externall accidents therof, so it is the Body of Christ, in respect of the thing contained in them. But now that the Eucharist is only a figure, or that it is not the Body of Christ, which you should haue pro∣ued against them, or els you proue nothing, none of the places alleaged by you do shew; neyther is it possible in all the Fathers to find so much as one place, that doth sufficiently proue it. While they in the meane tyme (be∣sides many most expresse Scriptures, Matt. 26. Marc. 14. Luc. 22. Ioan. 6. 1. Cor. 11. confuting also your principall obeiction, that the Body of Christ cannot be in two places, Act. 9.5.22.8.23.11. 1. Cor. 15.8.) They, I say, on the other side produce so many superabūdant Authorities from the Fathers & Councells in all Ages, conuincing the holy Eucharist to be the Body of Christ, that I must needs say, they haue discouered more bouldnes (if not impu∣dency) thē learning or conscience, who eyther in bookes or in Pulpits haue pretended to shew, that the Fathers in this point are plainely against them. To make this ap∣peare, it may suffice at this tyme, briefely to set down the beliefe only of those Fathers in particuler, which your selfe in your papers haue produced for you, Tertullian, S. Austen, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome and Gelasius, shewing, how
euidently they teach the cōtrary Doctrine aswell in their writing elswhere, as in those very places which your selfe haue cited. First therefore let vs begin with Saint Augustine; who in his Workes making often mention of the Sacrament, giueth vs these particulers of his Doctrine therein; That before the words of Consecration, that which was offered is called Bread; but after the words of Christ haue beene pronounced, now it is not called Bread, but it is called the Body, Serm. 28. de verb. Domini. That if Children had neuer seene the likenes of those thinges, but only when it is offered, and giuen in the Celebration of the Sacrament, and that it should be tould vnto them with most graue Authority whose Body and Bloud it is, they would belieue nothing els, but that our Lord had neuer appeared to the eyes of Men, saue only in that likenes, lib. . de Trin. cap. 10. That Childrē were wont to receaue it, apud Bedā. in 1. Cor. 10. Who haue not the mouth of Faith to receaue it. That it pleased the Holy Ghost, & was vniuersally obserued that our Lords body enter into the mouth of a Christiā before other meates, in the honor of so great a Sacra∣ment, Epist. 118. cap. 6. which must needes be meant of the mouth of the Body. That we receaue with our hart and mouth the Mediator of God and Man Iesus Christ, Man giuing vs his Flesh to be eaten, and his Bloud to be drunke, although it seeme more horrible to eate Mans flesh, then to kill it, and to drinke Mans bloud then to spill it, lib. 2. cont. Aduersaer. legi & Prophet. That we doe not eate dead flesh dilaniated, and cut in peeces, as the Capharnaites vnderstood it; for this indeed were horible, and would profit nothing; but we eate the flesh of Christ, as it is liuing flesh, vegetated with his Spirit, which is Christ himselfe entirely as he is now in Heauen, Tract. 27. in Ioan. & 63 That no man eateth that Flesh, before he adore it, in Psalm. 93. That the rich men of this World cōming to the Table of Christ do receaue his Body and Bloud, which though they
adore, yet are not filled with it, because they doe not imitate it, eating him that is poore, but contemning pouerty, Epist. 120. ad Honoratum. That the Apostles did eate the Bread which was their Lord, Panem Domi∣num; though Iudas did eate but the Bread of our Lord, Panem Domini, Tract. 59. in Ioan. For our Sauiour was not truly his Lord, because Iudas was not truly his ser∣uant; And if at the day of Iudgement he should say, Domi∣ne, Domine, our Lord would answere, I know thee not. Protestants may well say with Iudas, that they eate the Bread of our Lord, if our Lord did ordaine it to be a figure of his Body, but they cannot say with the Apostles, that they eate the Bread which is their Lord, because they deny it to be their Lords Body. That Iudas Iscariot receaued That (sayth he) which the faythfull know, the price of our Redemption, Epist. 162. ad Glor. That our Saui∣our did literally beare himselfe in his owne hands whē he gaue it, Conc. 1. in Psalm. 33. That Bishops and Pres∣biters in the Church of Christ, are properly Priests, de Ciuit Dei, lib. 20. cap. 10. Which doth infer, that pro∣perly also there are Priests and Sacrifices, & that Chri∣stian Priests doe properly offer Sacrifice vpon Altars. Wherefore making often mention of MASSE, Serm. 91. de Tempore, & Serm. 251. he sayth likewise, that our Sauiour changed the Sacrifice according to the order of Aaron, and did institute a Sacrifice of his owne Body and Bloud, according to the order of Melchisedech, in Psalm. 32. & in Psalm. 39. & lib. 17. de Ciuit, Dei, cap. 20. That he prayed God, to giue him contrition & a foū∣taine of teares, when he assisted at the holy Altar, to of∣fer that marueilous & heauenly Sacrifice, which Christ the immaculate Priest did institute and commaund to be offered, in Manuali. That a Priest of his offered the Sacrifice of the Body of Christ in a house infested with wicked spirits, which was thereby freed, lib. 22. de Ciu. Dei, cap. 8. That he desired all Priests (whome he cal∣led
his Bretheren, and his Maisters) who should read his Booke of Confessions, to remember his Mother at the Altar, where the also desired to be remembred after her death, lib 9. Confess. cap. 13. That it is not to be doub∣ted, the dead are holpen thereby, because the vniuer∣sall Church receauing it from the Fathers, obserued that it should be offered for those, who departed this life in the communion of Christs Body, Serm. 32. de verbis Apostoli. He reckoneth it amongst the Heresies of Aerius, that he denyed Oblations and Prayers for the Dead, Haer. 53. Could any Catholike at this day, or Bellarmine himselfe if he were now aliue, more fully declare his owne Doctrine in this point of the Reall Presence, and of the Sacrifice of the Masse; then doth S. Augustine against you? though in other things you may retaine some dif∣ficulties, yet in this me thinkes you should freely acknow∣ledge, that you are wholy conuinced. Finally, vpon Leuiticus, quaest. 57. in the very place which your selfe haue cited, where there is nothing that may found for you, but only that the figure is sometymes sayd to be the thing figured, (which as I take, it is only in those cases, where it is knowne and presupposed to be a figure) he demaundeth why the people should be so much forbidden from the Bloud of the Sacrifice of the old Law, when as none were forbidden to take for their nourishment, the Bloud of this one Sacrifice, which was signified by all the former; but all that de∣sired life, were rather exhorted to drinke it. Now therefore heereupon, might not your Ad∣uersaries deeply charge you, that you had egregiously a∣bused S. Augustine, and plainely peruerted his meaning?
Section X. S. Ambrose falsly alleaged by Syr Humphry, against the Reall Presence. LEt vs now come to S. Ambrose, who conuerted S. Augustine, that we may see how the Maister & the Scholler agree togeather; he maketh mentiō of the MASSE, and that himselfe sayd MASSE, Epist. ad Sororem Marcellinam. He repeateth a great part of the Canon of the MASSE, which is now vsed: We offer vnto thee this immaculate Host; this reasonable Host; this vnbloo∣dy Host; this holy Bread, and Cup of life euerlasting &c. And we pray thee to receaue this Oblation as thou didst vouchsafe to receaue the gifts of thy seruant Abel the iust, and the Sacrifice of our great Father Abraham, and that which the high Priest Melchisedech did offer vnto thee, lib. 4. de Sacramentis, cap. 6. He sayth: We daily adore the Flesh of Christ in the Mysteries (that is to say, in the MASSE, or Sacrifice) lib. 3. de Spirit. Sanct. cap. 12. He maketh his prayer vnto that Bread, to heale his infirmi∣ty, to come into his hart, to clense both his flesh and his spirit from all that defileth, in his prayer preparatory before Masse. And in his Booke De Mysterijs init. cap. 9. he obiecteth in this manner; Perchance thou wilt say, I see another thing, how dost thou affirme vnto me, that I receaue the Body of Christ? Where∣unto he answereth: How many Examples haue we to proue it, not to be that which Nature hath formed, but that which Benedi∣ction hath consecrated: And that Benediction is of greater power then Nature, because by it, euen Nature it selfe, is changed? And then declaring many Myracles wrought by Moyses, Helias, and Helizaeus, he concludeth: If human benediction were able to change Nature, what shall we say of Diuine Consecration? If the speach of Helias was able to bring Fyre from the Heauens; Shall not the speach of Christ be able to change the formes of the Elements?
If the word of Christ were able to make of nothing that which was not, can it not change the things that are, into that which they were not? For it is no lesse matter to giue new Natures vnto things, then to change their Natures. And a little after he sayth: It is manifest that a Virgin brought forth agaynst the ordinary course of Nature, and the Body which we (Priests DOE MAKE) is of the Virgin: What dost thou require the order of Nature (to be ob∣serued) in the Body of Christ, who was borne of a Virgin against the order of Nature? Could the Doctrine of Transubstanti∣ation, or change of Nature in the Sacrament, be more a∣uouched, or better proued by any moderne Papist? Who likewise lib. 6. de Sacram. cap. 1. thinketh it no blasphemy to say, as he doth, That as our Lord Iesus Christ is the true Sōne of God, not as man by grace (or by Fayth) but as the Sonne of the substance of his Father: so (as he himselfe hath sayd) it is true Flesh which we receaue; That is to say, not by grace, or by Fayth only, but in Truth, and in Substance. Finally in the place which you cite for your selfe, lib. 4. cap. 5. de Sacram. (where there is nothing to be found in your fauour) he hath these expresse words. Therefore before Consecration, it is Bread; but after the words of Christ come to it, it is the Body of Christ. And before the words of Christ, it is a Cup full of Wine and Water; when the words of Christ haue wrought, then it is made the Bloud which redeemed the People. To conclude, our Lord Iesus testifieth vnto vs, that we receaue his Bo∣dy and Bloud; Ought we to doubt of his Fayth and Testimony? Heere if I had concealed the name of S. Ambrose, would not the Reader thinke, the man had liued in our tyme, that wrore so forcibly and vehemently agaynst you? Finally, in the former Chapter of the same Booke he saith againe: The bread, is bread before the words of the Sa∣crament, but after the words of Consecration, of Bread is made the flesh of Christ. And againe in the same little Chap∣ter, as if by often repeating the same thing he meant to vexe or confound euery obstinate Protestant that should reade it, he saith: Therefore, that I may answere thee; It
was not the Body of Christ before Consecration, but after Conse∣cration, I say vnto thee, it is the Body of Christ. And agayne a little after, repeating the same againe, as if he had now conuinced his Readers, he concludeth: You haue therefore learned; that our Bread is made the Body of Christ, and that Wine & Water is put into the Chalice, but is made Bloud by the Con∣secration of the heauenly Word: But it may be thou wilt say, I see not the forme of Bloud. But it hath the likenesse; for as thou hast receaued the likenesse of death, so thou drinkest also the likenesse of Bloud, and not the visible forme of Bloud, that there might be noe horror of Bloud; and yet the price of our Redemption, which is the Bloud of Christ, might worke in vs. Thou hast learned therefore, that thou receauest the Body of Christ. Which you also might haue learned, if you had read him your selfe, and not tru∣sted others that read him for no other purpose, but only to wrest his words against his meaning. Section XI. S. Hierome falsly alleaged, by Syr Humphry, agaynst the Reall Presence. NOW come we to S. Hierome, who thinketh it noe blasphemy to say Epist. 1. ad Heliod. That Priests with their sacred Mouthes doe make the Body of Christ. And, Epist. ad Euag. That his Body and Bloud is made at their prayer. And, in cap. 25. Matth. writeth as fol∣loweth: After the typicall Passouer was ended &c. he taketh Bread and passeth ouer to the Sacrament of the true Passouer, that as Mel∣chisedech the Priest of the most high God had done, offering Bread and Wine to prefigure him; he also might represent the truth of his Body and Bloud. That is to say, as Melchisedech offered Bread and Wine to prefigure him; so he also taking Bread and wine, offered the truth of his Body and Bloud to ful∣fill
the figure. According wherunto, in Ps. 190. speaking to our Sauiour he saith: As Melchisedech offereth Bread and Wine; soe thou also offerest thy Body and Bloud, the true Bread and the true Wine. In that sense, true Bread, as in Epist. ad He∣dibiam, quaest. 2. he saith, that Moyses gaue noe true Bread; And as our Sauiour sayd, Ioan. 6. That his Father gaue them true Bread from heauen. Where also S. Hierome hath these words: Let vs heare the Bread which our Lord brake, to be the Body of our Lord and Sauiour. And he adeth a little after. He sate at the Banquet, and was himselfe the Banquet; he the eater, and be that was eaten. Finally, lib. cont. Vigil. cap. 3. he reprehendeth Vi∣gilantius, for speaking against Reliques in this manner; Therefore (according to thy speach) the Bishop of Rome doth ill, who vpon the Bones of Peter and Paul (which we call venerable, but thou esteemest most vile dust) doth offer Sacrifices to God, and maketh their Tōbes to be the Altars of Christ. According wher∣unto in Prouerb. 11. he also saith; That after this life, small sinnes may be taken away, by paine, by prayers, and almes of others, and by celebrations of MASSE. Lastly in his Booke against Iouinian, which you cite at randome without any number, I find nothing but this that may any way please you: In the type of his Blood he offered not Water, but Wine, lib. 2. cap. 4. This testimony I find alleaged by your Doctours as S. Hieroms, for their meere figuratiue or typicall Presence; wherin they disco∣uer eyther ignorance or desire to deceaue their Readers. For whosoeuer shall take the paynes to peruse the place, will find the aforesayd words not to be S Hieroms but Ioui∣nians, whose discourse against Abstinence from flesh and wine, S. Hierome there setts downe in that Heretike his owne wordes, whereof these are a part, In the Type of his Bloud he offered not water but wine. And S. Hierome afterward cōming to answere this obeiction against drinking of water, and Abstinence from Flesh sayth, that Christ neuer vsed wine nor dainties, excepto mysterio quo Typum suae passio∣nis
expressit, & pro probanda corporis veritate. Where the Saynt tearmes the holy Eucharist a Type, not of the Body and Blood of Christ, as the Hereticke did; but of his Passion, which is represented in the Mystery of the Masse, which is the ordinary Catholike Doctrine and phrase. Notwithstanding, seeing this Heretike, erred not agaynst the Catholike Doctrine of the Reall Presence, his wordes haue a true sense, and make agaynst you Pro∣testants. For you deny, that in his last Supper, he offered any thing at all, and say, that only vpon the Crosse, he offered himselfe once for all, not only suffi∣ciently by his Bloud and Passion, Heb. 2. but also effe∣ctually, agaynst Mal. 2. without any other cleane oblation, for the application of the merit of his Passion vnto vs. This place therefore maketh not for you, neyther is it a∣ny way against them though it were S. Hieroms, for they graunt he offered Wine in type or figure of his Bloud, but he offered also his Bloud, answering the figure in Truth and Substance. As he was Priest after the order of Mel∣chisedech, in Bread and Wine, he offered Bread and Wine in figure: As the offering of Melchisedech was a figure of his offering, he offered also his Body and Bloud, which was the Truth or Substance of that figure. Which to be the meaning of S. Hierome, may sufficiently appeare by that which hath beene sayd, and these other wordes of his Epist. ad Marcellam, doe make it yet to appeare more plainely saying: Melchisedech in the Type of Christ offered Bread and Wine, and dedicated the Mystery of Christians, in the Body and Bloud of our Sauiour.
Section XII. Tertullian and Gelasius falsly alleaged by Syr Humphry, agaynst the Reall Presence. And S. Ignatius absurdly claymed by the Prote∣stant Doctours. THere remayneth behinde of the Authors you al∣leage, Tertullian and Gelasius. Tertullian is cleare for them, who in his Booke De resurrectione car∣uis, to proue that our flesh shall ryse agayne and be saued, vseth these words that follow: The flesh is washed, that the Soule may be clensed. The flesh is annointed, that the Souls may be consecrated. The flesh is fed with the Body and Bloud of Christ, that the Soule may be fatned. Though the Soule may feed on Christ by the metaphoricall mouth of Fayth; yet the flesh hath no such mouth to feede vpon him, and if it had, being only fed metaphorically therewith, no∣thing would follow thereof, but that it might rise and be saued only metaphorically; and so Tertullian should haue proued that which he there impugned. In fine, as the flesh is heere sayd to be truly washed and annointed, so also it must be vnderstood to be truly fed, and not to be fed by fayth only, or in figure. Which Argument to proue the Resurrection, Ter∣tullian seemeth to haue learned of Irenaeus lib. 4. cont. Haer. cap. 34. whome also he calleth Omnium Doctrinarum cario∣sisimm Exploratorem. lib. cont. Valent. prope initium. And therfore because the Doctrine of Irenaeus in that place doth serue very well to confirme both the doctrine of Tertul∣lian, and the Reall Presence heere in question, I will giue you his whole discourse. Quomodo constabit ijs &c. (sayth he of the Heretiks against whome he wrote) How
can they assure themselues, the Bread wherein thankes are giuen, to be the body of their Lord, and (the Cup to be) the Cup of his bloud; if they do not confesse him, to be the Sonne of him that made the world? And how againe doe they say that, that flesh must go in∣to corruption, and not receaue life, which is nourished by the body and bloud of our Lord? Therefore eyther let them change their opi∣nion, or let them cease to offer the things aforesayd. But our Di∣ctrine agreeth with the Eucharist, and the Eucharist againe confir∣meth our Doctrine; for we offer (therin) vnto him those things that are his, (because being the Sonne of God, he maketh thē by his omnipotency his owne Body & his owne Bloud) and consequently we teach the communication and vnity of (his) Flesh, and of (his) Spirit (with vs; (our flesh being fed with his Body and Bloud, and receauing thereby his Spirit to liue for euer.) For as the bread which commeth from the Earth, receauing the vocation (or word) of God, is now no more com∣mon bread, but the Eucharist, consisting of two things, the one earthly (comming from the earth) and the other Heauenly, (the Body and Bloud of the Sonne of God:) so also our bo∣dies receauing the Eucharist (by the communication and v∣nitie of his flesh with ours) are no more corruptible, hauing now the hope of Resurrection. So that according to these aun∣cient Fathers; as we belieue our Sauiour to be the Sonne of God: so must we belieue the Eucharist to be his Body and Bloud. And as we belieue the Resurrection of the Flesh: so must we belieue that our flesh is fed with the flesh of Christ. And eyther you must change your opi∣nion, or els, as now you haue ceased to offer these things, and to feed your flesh with the body and bloud of Christ; so you are also in danger to change your beliefe as well of the Diuinity of Christ, as also of the Resurrection of your owne bodyes. But it may be, the place which your selfe haue ci∣ted, lib. 4. cont. Marcionem, out of the same Author, is no lesse with you thē was the former agaynst you: his words are these: Professing therefore that with a desire he desired to eate
the Pasche as his own (for it was not seemly that God should desire to eate the Pasche of another) hauing taken the Bread, &c. he made it his owne body, saying: This is my body; that is, the figure of my body. But the figure had not beene, vnlesse there were a true body. Whereof citing imperfectly, but halfe the Sentence: This is my body, This is the figure of my body, and changing that, into this, to make it sound more fully for you, you guilefully omit the other halfe; The bread which he tooke he made his body, saying, This is my body: which are euidently against you. The words also which you cite, wherein the Author seemeth to say, This is my body; that is to say, this is the figure of my body, and no more, your Aduer∣saries do clearly shew to haue another meaning. First, because otherwise, he should not only teach that which is directly contrary to his former Doctrine in the place before alleaged, but also should contradict him∣selfe in this very sentence: for according to our expositiō he should not haue sayd, that Christ tooke bread & made it his body, which is false, if it be only a figure of his bo∣dy; but that he tooke bread, and made it the figure of his body, saying: This is my body, that is to say, the figure of my body, and consequently in the words that follow, he should haue sayd, But it were not a figure vnlesse there were a true body; and not as he doth, but there had not beene a fi∣gure, if there were not a true body. For if the figure and the body were both at the same tyme, why should he say of the one, that it had beene, and of the other, that it was? Secondly, your Aduersaries therefore do say, the meaning of those words, This is my body, that is, the figure of my body, to be; This is my body, that is, the figure of my body in the law, now by me fullfilled; Or, This is my body, that is to say, this is the bread which was a figure in the Law signifying my body, and is now fullfilled by me; hauing relatiō to the words of the Prophet Ieremy which a little after he citeth and ex∣poundeth, and sheweth to haue beene then fullfilled by
our Sauiour. As in the like sense S. Iohn Baptist, for ex∣ample, when he saw our Sauiour might haue sayd, This is the Messias, that is to say, The Lambe of God which was the fi∣gure of the Messias in the Law, to signify, that the Prophecy of the Lambe of God in Isa. 16. was then fullfilled in our Sauiour. Therfore that Tertullian meant to say, This is my Body, that is to say, the figure of my Body, now fullfilled &c. your Aduersaries doe plainely proue. First, because it is euident that Tertullian in this place intended to shew how our Sauiour in his Pasche, fullfilled the law, against Marcion, who being an Enemy of the Old Testament, contended that our Sauiour came to dissolue it; and Tertullian ar∣gueth against him in this māner. The Bread of Christ in the law did signifie the Body of Christ, which he pro∣ueth out of Ieremie 11. saying: Come, let vs put Wood on his Bread: that is (sayth Tertullian) the Crosse vpon his Body. But our Sauiour gaue his Apostles, that Bread which he made his Body, saying, This is my Body, therefore he full∣filled the law, in giuing that Body which the law figured in Bread, and was therefore called Bread in Ieremie. In the same manner againe he proueth, that giuing his Bloud in the forme of Wine, he fullfilled the law, because he gaue that which the law figured in Wine, and there∣fore Gen. 49. was called Wine, where it was prophesied of our Sauiour; That he should wash his stole in Wine, that is, (sayth Tertullian) his Flesh in bloud; So sayth Tertullian, he, qui tunc vinum in sanguine figurauit, who then made Wine a figure of his Bloud, now consecrated his Bloud in Wine. Secōdly, your Aduersaries proue the same, because Ter∣tullian vrgeth these former words, to proue also against Marcion, that our Sauiour had a true Body, and not the shadow or phantasme only of a Body as he contended. Which supposing that his Body was (as Tertullian spea∣keth) the figure of his Body then fullfilled; he proueth,
because vnto the figure of a Body to be Crucified, there must answere a true Body: for of a Phantasme (saith he) there can be noe figure. Secondly he proueth the same, Because in the mention of the Cupp, instituting his Testament signed with his Bloud, he cōfirmed the substance of his Body. That is to say: he confirmed his Body to be no shadow, but a substance; for, sayth he, the proof of Bloud, is a proof of Flesh; and the proof of Flesh, is a proofe of a true body. Wherefore hauing giuen Bloud in his Testament, he gaue also a true Body. These Arguments therefore haue place, if according to the sense which your Aduersaries make of the words of Tertullian, Our Sauiour fullfilled the law, by giuing that which was figured in the law. But if according to your exposition he gaue only a figure of his Body and Bloud; he gaue not that which was figured in the law, as Tertullian himself expoūdeth the law; for that which was figured in the law (sayth Tertullian) was that Body which was to be cru∣cified, & by consequence he fullfilled not the law: which notwithstanding was the Heresie of Marcion, there con∣demned by Tertullian. And againe, if our Sauiour had gi∣uen that which was only a figure of his Body, Tertullian could not haue proued thereby, that our Sauiour had a true Body answerable to the figure therof, in the Prophet Ieremie. For if there might haue beene a figure of a figure, there might haue been also a figure of a Phantasme. And if in the mention of the Cup, he had not signed his Testa∣ment with true, but only with figuratiue Bloud, his Te∣stament had not beene true, but only figuratiue; neyther had he thereby confirmed, that his Body was a true Sub∣stance. For figuratiue Bloud, could haue proued but fi∣guratiue flesh, and figuratiue flesh could haue proued but a figuratiue Body. Add vnto this, that if in your sense Tertullian hath sayd, This is my Body, that is, the figure of my Body: Marcion might as well haue sayd in lyke manner: This
is my Body, that is to say, the shadow, or Phantasme of my Body. And so in effect, Tertullian had agreed with Marcion, whose Heresy he there condemned; and had impugned the Truth of the Eucharist, which he there mē∣tioned; for as Ignatius long before obserued the Simonian and the Saturnian Heretikes, did not admit Eucharists and Oblations, because they did not confesse the Eucharist to be that flesh of our Sauiour which suffered for our sinnes, Epist. ad Smyr. vt citatur à Theodoreto Dial. 3. Wherefore if Tertullian had not confessed the Eucharist to be the flesh of Christ, he must also haue denyed the Eucharist and the oblatiō the∣reof; and for the same reason the Protestants denying it to be the flesh of Christ, and consequently denying the o∣blation thereof, it is euident that they admitt not the Eucharist of Ignatius, no more, then the Simonian and Saturnian Heretikes haue done before them; but insteed of the Eucharist which was in his dayes, they haue sup∣posititiously brought in another of their owne inuentiō. This is that S. Ignatius Martyr, the disciple of S. Iohn, thought to be that Boy, who was found to haue the fiue Barly loaues and two fishes which our Sauiour mul∣tiplyed, that thereby the harts of men might be the better disposed to belieue the locall multiplication of his owne body in the dreadfull Mystery. Euen frō thence he tooke a great deuotion thereunto, and was euen then ordayned to be a witnes of the admirable Doctrine thereof. I delight not, sayth he, Epist. ad Rom. post med. in the nutriment of cor∣ruption, I desire the Bread of God, the Heauenly Bread, which is the Flesh of Christ the Sonne of God, and the drinke which is his Bloud, And as he had beene fed with the bread, which was Christs flesh while he liued, so when he came to dye, he desired that his flesh might be grown'd as in a Mill with the teeth of Lyons, that he might be made cleane bread for the mouth of our Sauiour. Where also he sayth: It is not lawfull without a Bishop (that is to say, without orders receaued from a Bishop) to baptize, nor to immolate Sacrifice.
And what Protestant Minister will take vpon him, to immolate Sacrifice? Or what Protestant Bishop, eyther can or will giue him power to doe it? For which cause the Centurists, Cent. 2. cap. 4. affirme those wordes of his, to be incommodious, Col. 55. dangerous, and as it were the seedes of errors, Col. 167. Yet this is that Ignatius of the first Age, whome your Doctors with vnspeakable bould∣nes claymed to be theirs, as you know in the former Cō∣ference; and in their Booke would make fooles belieue, that the Catholikes when they heard him named, much reioyced, taking him to be Ignatius Loyola, the founder of the Society of IESVS. But the truth is, your Doctors might aswell haue claymed the latter as the former. For ī his Religion be tryed by Workes, or Epistles that are ex∣tant, then your Authors disclayme from the former no lesse then from the later. Your M. Wotton being vrged with the saying of Ignatius in the behalfe of Merit, taken out of his Epistle to the Romans, vndoubtedly his, as both S. Hierome and Eusebius acknowledge, yea S. Irenaeus (lib. 3. aduers. haeres. prope finem) doth alleage a sentence of this Epistle yet to be found therein: being I say, pressed with this testimony, your Doctor in his defence of Perkins pag. 339. answereth in these wordes: I say plainely, this mans testimony is nothing worth, because he was of little iudgment in Diuinity. What more could he haue sayd in contempt of the testimony of S. Ignatius of Loyola? But your Grand Maister Caluin yet speaketh more plainely in his Institu∣tions l. 1. c. 14. §. 44. Ignatium quòd obtendunt, nihil naenijs il∣lis quae sub Ignatij nomine edita sunt, putidius. Whereas they produce the testimony of Ignatius, I say nothing is more rotten or corrupted (with Papistry) then those trifling Epistles that go vnder his name. If nothing be more rot∣ten, that is, more Papisticall, and contrary vnto Prote∣stants then the Doctrine of the writings we haue of S. Ignatius the Apostles Disciple, then is he asmuch for vs as S. Ignatius of Loyolae. And the same M. Caluin in his
Booke de participatione Christi in Coena, whereas Westphalus the Lutheran alleadgeth the testimony of Ignatius cited by Theodoret in his 3. Dialogue, out of his Epistle ad Smir∣enses, where he chargeth the Menandrian Heretikes with his Caluinian hereticall Doctrine, Non confitentur Euchari∣stiam esse carnem Saluatoris nostri Iesu Christi, they do not be∣lieue the Eucharist to be the flesh of our Sauiour Iesus Christ; Caluin, I say, not without disdayne frameth this answere: What ingenuity is this to cite the Epistle of Ignatius which euen an ordinary (Friar or) Monke would hardly acknow∣ledge as his owne? They know that haue read those toyes that they contayne nothing but tales of Lent, of Chrisme, of Tapers, of Fa∣sting, and festiuall dayes, which through superstition and ignorāce crept into the Church after Ignatius his dayes. Thus Caluin spea∣kes of the Epistle cited by Theodoret, by Eusebius, by S. Hierome, for the Epistle of Ignatius. So that as I sayd, if the Religion of S. Ignatius the Disciple of S. Iohn, be tryed by his writings, which all antiquity acknowledge as his, he is found, euen by the confession of Protestants, as very a Papist as was S. Ignatius of Loyola, to wit, more then any ordinary Friar or Monke. What desperation then was it of Doctour Featly, & to what a Non-plus was he brought, when he was forced to giue vnto Ignatius and his wri∣tings the first place after the Apostles in the Catalogue of Caluinian Professors? For this Author can no more be coupled togeather with Caluin in the same Religion and Church, then light can agree with darknes, Christ with Beliall. Which (besides what hath beene sayd) may ap∣peare in the Preface of his Epistle to the Romans, by the great Encomium he maketh of that Church, Quae praesidet in Regione Romanorum; which presidence must needs be vn∣derstood of the Church of Rome aboue other Churches. Thirdly, to draw to an end of this point, Tertul∣lian seemeth to proue, that our Sauiour gaue his true bo∣dy, because he professed, That with a desire he desired to eate the Pasche as his owne; for that it had beene vnseemely, that God
should haue longed after the flesh of the Iewish Lambe (or quid a∣lienum) or after any thing els that was anothers. But if he had desired to eate bread with his Apostles, he had not desired to eate his owne, but that of another; and it had beene no lesse vnseemely, that God should haue longed to eate the bread of another with his Apostles, then to eate flesh of another with the Iewes. Lastly, if this sentence of Tertullian be obscure, it must be expounded by the other place before alleadged, where he sayth, without any ambiguity, that our flesh is fed with the body and bloud of Christ. For it were a∣gaynst all reason that the plaine words thereof should be expounded by this other place, which seemeth to con∣tayne two contrary senses, and therefore is often allead∣ged by vs agaynst our Aduersaries, and by our Aduersa∣ries against vs. As concerning Gelasius cont. Eutichem, the last Author that you alleage; I wil be content that Chemnitius a lear∣ned Lutheran, and as great an Enemy of Transubstantiation as your selfe, be iudge betweene vs, whether that place doth fauour it, or doth sound any way for it: his words are these Examen. part. 2. pag. 88. Gelasius sayth, that the Wine and the Bread of the Eucharist, by the work of the holy Ghost, doe passe (or conuert) into the diuine Substance of the Body and Bloud of Christ; and verily these words do seeme to sound very strongly for the establishing of Transubstantiation. For that which passeth into another substance, and that by the working of the holy Ghost, certainely doth seeme, not to remaine in his former Sub∣stance. If you had seene this place, or if passion had not blinded you, had it beene possible you should haue cited Gelasius against Transubstantiation, which by the iudgmēt of such a professed Enemy thereof, doth make so strong∣ly for it?
Section XIII. The Conclusion of this Treatise. THus much concerning the Authories of the Fa∣thers alleaged by you, partly false cited, which may be pardoned; partly falsified, which seemeth to touch your Honour; and all of them eyther wholy peruerted, or far from the matter; which cōming from a Knight sheweth an excusable ignorance in this kind of learning: But against the substance of the booke you receaued, as I haue shewed in the 4. first Se∣ctions of this Treatise, you haue answered nothing. Now therefore, good Syr, if according to your Degree, you will doe your owne selfe Knights seruice, indeed set to your shoulders, and vnderprop your Church, as Atlas was faigned to support the heauens; for as you haue heard and seene in the former Sections, it is so mainely battered with fower such peeces of great Ordinance, that vnlesse it be mightly sustained, the sound of thē alone is sufficiēt to shake it downe and ouerthow it. 1. Their visible Suc∣cession in all Ages. 2. Their Conuersions of Nations in all Ages. 3. Myracles in confirmation of their Doctrine in all Ages. 4. Censures of Fathers and Councells, for the condemnation of yours, in all Ages. For 1. your Doctors did but beg the Question, when they made clayme to Christ and his Apostles, and began at the wrong end, making that their Argument, which should haue beene their conclusion, & was to be proued, by nominating Protestants to succeed them in all Ages, and especially in the Ages before Luther, according to the words of the Question, which they vndertooke, to an∣swere. What foule shame, and extreme confusion is it to your Cause, when being vrged to name or bring forth but one Protestant in 500. or 1000. yeares, before Luther,
you are eyther constrained to answere it is not necessary, or els supposing the ignorance of those that heare you, yow are inforced to cloth your nakednesse, with the raggs of Wyckliffe & Waldo, and other such accursed He∣retikes; all of them holding some points with your Ad∣uersaries against you, and being for other grosse heresies noe lesse detested by them, then condemned by you. Ra∣ther let the bowells of Oxford Librarie be ripped vp, and ransacked from end to end. Or els neuer leaue digging, vntill you haue wrought your selues into those caues where Protestants liued for so many hundred yeares, to find some Volumes, some Commētaries, or some Records of the Actes and Gestes of your Auncestors. If nothing can be found in Europe, recommend the matter to the East Indian Cōpany, or to the Westerne Voyagers, to seeke and search among furthest Nations, for Protestants, line∣ally descended from Christ & his Apostles; which being discouered, were better found then Mynes of gold. For vnlesse by some such meanes, the Professors of your Ghospels may be brought to light, your Church cannot long continue aboue ground, but the former Question alone, will suffice to coniure it downe againe into her auncient darkenes. 2. What can be more vnworthy, thē whē Priests, Iesuites, & other Religious men execute the cōmādemēt & cōmissiō of our Sauiour in carrying his Ghospel to the ends of the Earth, as their Auncestors haue done in all Ages before them, thereby prouing themselues their true Successors, whome our B. Sauiour, according to his promise, Matt. 28. hath euer assisted, and will alwaies accōpany, Teach∣ing and baptizing all Nations, Omnibus diebus, vsque ad consūma∣tionem saeculi, all dayes, or euery day vnto the end of the world: that your wiued Ministers in the meane tyme, fatned with their benefices, should only execute their owne malice in rayling vpon those laborious men, and deprauing their Christian endeauours, thereby shew∣ing
themselues to be that peruerse and bastard generatiō, which insteed of cōuerting Infidells doth labour only to subuert belieuers; insteed of planting the faith of Christ, only indeauor to extirpate that Faith, which they found to be already planted; & insteed of sowing the first corne, only scatter cockle and darnell vpon that corne which was first sowed by others. Rather set forth whole fleets of Ministers, with their numerous families both for the East, and for the West, to bring those miserable Nations vnto the liberty and light of the Ghospell, that haue layne so long captiue vnder the foule bondage and exe∣crable Tiranny of the Prince of darknes. Then it would be quikly tryed whether in those parts the diuells would submit themselues, and fly before them: or, Whether like the strōger party Luc. 11.18. as hitherto in Virginia they haue shewed thēselues, they would be able to keepe in peace the soules and vessells which they haue there soe long possessed; vntill there come others stronger thē your Ministers that may be able to bind them. 3. What can be more impious, then whereas your Aduersaries, like true Christiās confirme their doctrine in all Ages by those signes & myraculous operations, which were promised to follow the true belieuers, Marc. 16.17. you on the other side should haue nothing to answere, but only like Iewes and Pagans to laugh at them, and at the holy Fathers themselues that were so simple, as eyther to testify or to belieue them. Rather ioyne your harts and your hands togeather, that once in your tyme, you may see a Generall Councell from all Protestant Prouinces meete togeather, where out of so many Religions sprūg vp amongst you, hauing chosen one by Lot to be gene∣rally professed, beseech him, who heareth all those that with a true Fayth doe call vpon him, to confirme that chosen doctrine by some ostension in the Sunne, or in the Moone, or with some such notorious signe from Heauen, as might no lesse exceed the former Myracles of the Pa∣pistes
then the wondrous workes of Moyses, confounded the magicall practises of the Egiptian Sages. 4. And lastly, what can be more voyde of shame and conscience, then to clayme those Fathers of the first 500. yeares for yours, that haue so impartially censured so ma∣ny seuerall points of your Doctrine in the Heretikes of their tymes (for the which I refer me to the fourth Sectiō of this Treatise) as he that considereth them, may iustly esteeme the body of your Religion to be almost nothing els, but only a confarcination or bundle of old Heresies, condemned by them. Rather ioyne all in prayer, that if your Cause be true, as Almighty God vouchsafed in his owne person, to iustify Iob, against his friends; so that our Sauiour would be pleased with a voyce from Heauen, to iustify you agaynst the Fathers. But ouer Shooes, ouer Head and Eares, sayth the Prouerbe; accor∣ding whereunto, if being once entred into a bad cause, it be resolued, that still you must needes goe forward; ceasing to falsify the words, and to peruert the meaning of those holy Fathers, least God in his iustice double your punishment, as you double your iniquity, hold your selues to the Scripture alone, and to your owne interpre∣tation of Scripture (with M. Luther, and M. Caluin, and those learned Protestants of your owne Nation for so ma∣ny yeares togeather) not fearing to reiect the Fathers that were but men, and directly refuting their errors▪ for in so doing, though you should want verity, yet God might be pleased at the length, to haue mercy vpon you for your sincerity. O Mercifull God, the Author of all truth! If you be in the truth, why should you defend it by fraud and fal∣shood! And how can it stand with his good will and pleasure, that against so many powerfull Arguments and euident demonstrations to the contrary, you should any longer thus contentiously hold it? And obstinately so continue to professe it?
Certainly those 4. Considerations before remembred and reported more at large in the 4. first Sections of this Treatise, do make it so euidēt vnto me, that theirs & not yours is the only true visible & vniuersall Church orday∣ned and founded by Christ and his Apostles, to teach the world; that I wonder in my hart how any learned Pro∣testant can be so blinde as not to see it, or so voyd of ho∣nesty, as not to confesse it. Neyther if I were now a Pro∣testant should any thing with-hold me from ioyning my selfe vnto them, vnlesse it were only in honor of that Re∣ligion wherein I was bred, to expect a little, Whether the foresayd Catalogue of the Names of your Professors in all Ages, and especially in the Ages before Luther, might be found and produced. The Question is now very happily set on foot; I hope it wilbe soundly followed; and it were to be wished, that no other Controuersy might be imbraced, before this, which is but matter of fact and the key of all the rest, be fully cleared. If Satisfactiō may be giuen in this poynt, you may the better hope to be satis∣fied in the rest. But if not so much as one man can be produced in 500. yeares before Luther, that held not some maine points of Popery against you, or some other grosse errors condemned by you: if when Luther first began, not one Protestant can be named, that did not first fall from the Religion wherein he was bred, or which he had first receaued; then certainly it is not to be marueiled, if thousands and thousands ere it be long, doe renounce & abandone (with prayer for those to come after thē, whom they shall leaue behind them) that vpstart Fayth which was new when Luther began, and none at all before Luther. ALmighty God, inspire the hart of his Majesty, whom it importeth noe lesse then our selues, that whereas the Catholike Recusants were neuer as yet accused of heresy, according to forme of Ecclesiasticall iustice, much lesse sommoned and called to make their answere, or iu∣ridically
condēned; & that their Enemies formerly cēsu∣red by Generall Coūcells according to the Aunciēt Law and receaued custome of the Church, haue notwithstan∣ding, beene hitherto admitted, not only as accusers, but also as witnesses and iudges against them, whereby the people of the Land, being constrained to heare the one party, and restrained from hearing the other, haue been morally compelled to loue the one and hate the other, to magnify the one and detest the other; his Maiesty would be pleased to grāt vnto all his louing subiects, for the sal∣uation of their poore Soules committed to his charge, that now at the lēgth they might be allowed both their eares, to heare both sides indifferently, to weigh and ponder both causes, and well to cōsider of both Religions. Left vnder the plausible name of spirituall liberty, they be cun∣ningly held in miserable captiuity: being flattered with the shew of light, they be insnared in dubble darkenes: & being deluded with presumption of knowlege, they be bound and buried in most dredfull ignorance. A request soe fauorable both in the sight of God and Man, and so agreable to the principles of Protestant Religion, as I thinke it can be vngratefull to none, who doe wish vn∣fainedly, that only falshood may be suppressed, and the truth maintained. For the which all those that sincerely desire to serue God vprightly, shallbe infinitely obliged to pray for his Maiesty; not only as for their Gratious King, but also as for their deliuerer from the thraldome of conscience wherein he found them, and for the Au∣thor of their chiefest liberty wherin he should place thē. FINIS.
