23720 S111343 99846705 11692
THE EPISTLE OF THE LORD, TO HIS BRIDE, VPON her Creation. A SPIRITVAL LEGACIE for the Right Honorable, the Lord STRANGE. WRITTEN, By Augustine Taylor, Preacher, and Minister, at Hawarden in Plint-shire. LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes. 1623.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE IAMES, Lord Strange, &c. The most hopefull Heire, of the Spotlesse, Auncient, and Illustrious House of DERBY. My good Lord: THere is a Royall marriage to beheld, In the Mount Syon (that God loues so well,) It was determin'd in the dayes of eld, And now's at hand, and I am charg'd to tell, Some noble friends, to th'end they may prouide, T'attend the nuptialls of the Lambe and's Bride; To be made members of it: therefore I My office and my seruice, both t'approue Towards God, and you giues this to testifie, In chaines of duty, and vnfained loue, I'm bound so fast (It shall be vnderstood;) I cannot, mooue (except to do you good,)
I come t'inuite your Honor to a feast, That's heauenly, holy, happy, and ne'er ends, You are elected as a proper guest: Nobillity, vertue, honor, are those friends Must grace the nuptialls, the bad must be gone, "Good will haue good associats, or else none. My Lord I know you, and I know y'are stor'd, With wisedome, learning, bounty, beauty, loue, Humillity, piety, grace, a compleate Lord, Your merits vow to build your seate aboue, Your foes on earth with grace; and (sayth the story) Mercy will build your seate in Heauen with glory. I haue a licence from the greatest power, To build a lanthorne for the Kingdomes sight, And vpon stately Lathams eagle Tower, I thus presume to place it, to giue light Vnto the present, and the future time, Of the true worth of Derbyes Prince-like line: Keepe you it in repaire, and you shall proue, I owe you life, although I pay but loue. A seruant, at your Honorable disposition, Augustine Taylor.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL Sr. Iohn Hanmer Knight, and Baronet, &c. Right Worshipfull: EAch other blast brings misery or death, These nether-lands nurse nought but discontent, No good that happens riseth from beneath, Pleasures indeede that are not permanent, Are borne, and buried heare, and perfects sight No more then lightning doth in darkesome night. Now that your ayme may be at better things, I onely ayme, and do beseech you seeke, That Heauenly quire where Dauid sits and sings. The Maister as 'twere in Gods second weeke, Which is an endlesse world to gaine that glory, Obserue these lines, th'are from the sacred story. Your Worships truely deuoted, Augustine Taylor.
Peter Mosse his Lenuoy to the Author. A.T. KInde friend, behold a hopefull misterie, In both thy names inwrapt, there seemes to bee, For as S. Augustine with pious loue, In former time, (mens ignorance t'reproue) Did teach and preach the Gospell and did turne, The hearts of Kings, (faire Brittaines Iles adorne) To become Christians: And behind his deedes In print are left, to helpe vs in our needes. Now I thy friend the boldlier diuine, Because thou art another Augustine, Or rather in the word that strengthn'd lies, Taylor which is, and which so much implyes: For thy discerning iudgment hath discride, Oracles of truth, not ought is left aside; But is produc'd; and for the nuptiall feast Hath shapt this garment, worthi'st for the best, And as it's fram'd all by thy curious hand, Euerlastingly a monument shall stand, That neither time, nor enuy, can deface, Out lasting life, and to thy life a grace. Your most assured, Peter Mosse.
TO THE RIGHT VVorshipfull, Sr. Roger Mostin, Knight, &c. {inverted ⁂} Right Worthy: AS it did please your most religious eares, To heare me lately, I do now intreate Your gracious eyes to view my labours feares And pious passions in me are growne greate, Because I see times barke so fraught with woes, The world is not so full of men as foes. T'auoyd the worst that woes and foes can do, Climbe Iacobs ladder with Caelestiall thoughts Now onely study to ascend vnto The Lambe in Syon that so dearely bought's My prayers shall be for your blis aboue, "And for my seruice, I intreate your loue. Your Worships to be commanded, Augustine Taylor.
IN LAVDEM OPERIS ET AV∣thoris, Amici mei Augustini Taylor. SAint Augustine, thou here dost immitate, Mouing our minds on God to meditate; (Taylor) a Taylor diuine, for th'ast wrought Thy worke so faultlesse, that there is not ought Correction worthy: Not a critticke tongue, Dares belch a word against thy Hymen song, Sung as by Christ, muiting to his feast And Nuptials him, who lists to be his guest. (Reader) our Taylors full reward is this, That to thy soule, his labours adde a blisse; And with a wedding garment faire to cloath thee, That th'Bridegroome say nor, friend begon I loath thee: He seemeth here as'twere to take a measure, Of Heauens high incomprehended pleasure: The worlds obstickles he, here presseth downe, And cankred sinne cuts off; wherefore let none That reads, but cloath his mind, that th'Author know, His workes do make vs more and more to know, Incouraging his free and painefull quill, To pen our more and further profit still; And worthy Author, let this be a meane, That in another haruest we may gleane, This being so lik'd, prays'd, allow'd, grac'd, lou'd, Accepted, honour'd, thank'd, read, and approu'd. IOANNES RVSSELL.
THE ARGVMENT. Isr'ells forgetfulnesse is show'd, Her first estate discry'd; The bounties of the Lord bestow'd, The beauties of the Bride. ONce more, from Heauen to earth, from me to thee, From God to Iacobs great posteritie. Oh that thy greatnesse were with goodnesse mixt? Thy sinnes are so continu'd, that betwixt I see no vertues plac'd, what if there were Of twenty dayes together, no day cleare? But stuff'd with stormy weather? Earth would be Bold to taxe Heauen with meere Tyranie: Shall not I then complaine 'gainst Israell, That spends so many dayes and not one well? It's griefe to me, that I haue vnderstood, So many acts together, and none good: Open thy eares to heare, thy heart to heede, My eyes are full of dew, my lockes doth bleede: Could droppes that night's accustom'd to distill, Vpon dispised louers; yet my will, Wils thee no punishment for this neglect, I onely waite to see thy more respect,
Vnto my patience, for my long attending; My eyes are fill'd with teares at thy offending: I would not see thy faults, I would not strike, Nor shew my Iustice vpon her, I like Vengeance I sent to Egypt, there to dwell, Peace I prepar'd to stay in Israell; Iudgement I doom'd to dye with Caine, in Nod, Mercy I meant should liue with Sem in God: I wish It so, regard, and thou shall prooue, My actions all do manifest my loue; Mans lou's vnstable, like to mans estate, But where I once affect I neuer hate. Thinke on thy past, thy present, thy future tense, And tell me who hath beene thy best defence? Who is it? or who will be? Abram's dead, Isaack and Iacob, left the field and fled, So did thy friends, so did thy father and mother; As death doth fetch one, nature brings another, To keepe earth in repaire, vntill there come, The members of my Bride all knit in one.
Th'art now ship-like, still flitting, restlesse, and Floting in miseries on this nether-land, And cannot anchor yet, but shall land at The Mount aboue th' Armenian ararat. I know thy poore Barke is in danger still, Betwixt the promis'd good, and present ill; My Bethels plenties, and thy Babels wants, Drawes thee as Iron, cast amongst Adamants. Yet know if thou like Lots wife wauer do, Thou'll loose the City and the Mountaine too. Fergetfull loue, I must first send to thee, That thou shewes these signes of disloyalty: I do not take it well, thou art so slow, That thankes for all the blessings I bestow, Is yet vntruely payd. Now I could chide, But it becomes not me to vse my bride Discurteously; I'ld not be angry yet, My loue to thee, commands me not forget My patience; therefore arme thy selfe with hast, The dayes of peace, will soone be ouer-past. Hearken my spouse, I haue some things to tell, Concernes the health and wealth of Israel;
I do remember thee euen from that day, Thou lay vnshapen in a lumpe of clay, Voyd of forme, life, and beauty, I begun, Then to behold the workes that I had done, In number many, and in fashion faire, T'adorne the earth, and beautifie the Ayre: I blest them all with order, then I meant To make some pretious peece more excellent Then all the rest, and to place that aboue, And make that chiefe, and that should be my loue; And that I would preferre, and raise to honor, And that should be my bride, and still vpon her Angels should waite: And this is my decree, What wrongs are done to her, as done to me, Shall be reueng'd. Thou art this Bride I say, "And all I promise I haue power to pay; Let all thy enemies thinke on't, my intent's "That all like faults shall feele like punishments. Thee (pretious peece) when I did meane to make, With care, and loue, I thus in hand did take:
Let vs make man, of other things I sayd, Let there be such, and they were form'd and made; The Earth, the Seas, the Ayre, the Fire and all, That's made in or vpon this neather-ball, The Starres, and Lights aboue, the Moone, and Sunne: I did but speake the Word, and these were done, And they were well done; but when I apply'd, My powre and skill to frame my selfe a Bride, I made thee matchlesse thus, pure, faire, and free, The blessed Heire of Immortalitie: I'ue made thee wise, because true wisedome should, Shew like a Ruby in refined gold, And lodge in Princes breasts: I'ue made thee strong, To vanquish all thy foes, that thou a long, Through Iordans flood to Syloes streame may passe, And that as farre as Diamond doth glasse: Thou may exceede the rest, Truth did entreate, That in thy breast she might possesse a seate, And she shall keepe it, for to, keepe thee free, From flattering, lying, and hypocrisie,
From enuy, error, and the worst, that soe Thy substance may be better then thy showe. The clod I made thee of, was clay, the time When th'earth was in her nonage, in her prime, When water, earth, and ayre, were stor'd with plenties, With seuerall sorts of many seuerall deuties. The place where thou receiu'd thy first estate, Was neere to Eden, yet without the gate: But I did bring thee Inn, and did decree, What I had done should be to honor thee, And thou shall rule as chiefe, thy rule shall stand, I haue commanded all for thy command. Consider, thy state doth all else excell, To haue a being and a being well, Both argues power and mercy in the hand, Of the great worke-man; thou mayst vnderstand, In this last act apparantly doth rest, The difference betweene the man and beast; Powerfull, and pittifull, thou shalt me proue, Sure I thinke, thou thinkes I deserue thy loue,
Do not mistake my loue, 'tis pure and free, And thine's deffectiue both in qualitie, And in condition: If the price were layd, In ballance 'gainst the purchase, 'twould be sayd, That I haue made a loosers match, but still "Power may performe, and want may onely will. What euer faults are thine, if thou repent, My pleasure is in mercy, my intent Intends thy ioy, my loue is setled so, "I had rather giue ten blessings, then one blow. FINIS.
THE EPISTLE OF THE LORD TO his Bride, vpon her Election. A Caelestiall legacy, for the vse of the Honorable Sr. Thomas Sauage, and his noble Lady. Written, By Augustine Taylor Preacher at Hawarden. LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes. 1623.
TO THE HONORA∣BLE, Sr. Thomas Sauage Knight, and Barronet, one of the Prince his highnesse Priuy Councell, &c. AND TO HIS MOST NOBLE Lady, the Lady Sauge, Daughter, and heire to the Right Honorable, the Lord DARCY, &c. Truely Honorable, AS two great riuers, when in one they meete Makes faire and fruitful, all the neighbouring lands, Euen so our Country (when you too did greate) Felt strength and comfort by your clasping hands, Your bounties, plenties, beauties, wit, and loue. Makes both your Honors, to slane wondrous bright, In Court and Country; and me first did mone, At your faire lampes, to giue my candle light. And since you loue the pious life of grace, I'm bold to bring this sacrifice to you: It is diuine and therefore claimes a place, In your great bossomes. Truth sayth 'tis her due,
To lodge in the best roomes of euery brest, Yea euen in Princes, for because it brings, Th'externallioy, and the internall rest, Truths life, and Honor, and rewards makes kings Of meane men; and this part which I present Vnto your Honors, is Iehouahs voyce, Descending to our terrence continent: Vpon th'election of his Bride, (his choyce;) Wonder not why I write, you are the sunne To Chesters neighbours, 'mongst whom I'm a starre: (Though dim) and therefore I should haue begunne, To tender my affection sooner (farre) Since your faire Country is my friendly nurse, I owe this loue vnto your Noble nest, What treasure I entoy, I will disburse, To make both loue and seruice manifest: For you if I can write, or Preach, or pray: Command me freely, for indeede you may. At your Honors Command in the seruice of GOD. Augustine Taylor.
THE ARGVMENT. The Soule's the Bride, and least she swerue, Or erre in any act: The Lord his Syon (to conserue) Doth to his sonne contract. MY dearest loue, Oh that thou had the wings Of true affection! Loue that's fit for Kings Ought to be pure and lasting; then be wise, Prouide to offer, since the sacrifice, I manifest vnto thee, man prouide, Or loose, the honor to be call'd my Bryde: I call'd thee Bride, stay! Did I not mistake? Did I not erre, a man a Bride to make? No, no, I did not, I did fall in loue, With my owne Image, and I must approue My proper seate is in the soule confin'd, My Image in the beauty of the mind, And in the vpright heart did first appeare: Some seeke me in the flesh, I am not there, But in some little measure, for to showe, Man is the principall of things belowe: And whereas other Creatures view the earth, In mourning wise, yet man with ioy and mirth,
Beholds the Heauens, by which it doth appeare, He's but a traueller, and hath no home here. My Image in the soule doth fayrest shine, Thy better part is made a spouse of mine, Therefore my Prophets haue baptiz'd thee thus In Scripture, islia, not filius, For Israels off-spring must a daughter be, A marriage was fore-told 'twixt thee and me; And thou and I must make the match, because No part must perish of my Fathers lawes, But with my will his will shall still be done, I will discharge the duties of a Sonne; It was his will I should wed in the line Of Abraham, and it is onely mine; His gracious eyes delights in lowly obiects, "A King may choose his Queene among his subiects. He hath done so, and anima credentis, Is now created, sponsa redimentis: Reioyce in thy estate, for thou art rich, Thou hath no equall, there's no other such,
Although the Queenes and Concubines be many, And daughters numberlesse; yet there's not any, Can boast to be Iehouahs onely loue, But onely thou, his vndefiled doue. Dauid did thinke it was a matchlesse thing, To be a sonne in law t'an earthly King, Being by birth so meane, by office poore; Hast thou forgotten thy estate before, I made a roome for thee in my affection, My pitty mixt with loue made an election, Of thee 'mongst many millions: I'l tell thee, Thou may not boast thee of thy pedegree, Thy birth was poore, and base, but I'l speake low, I would not haue thy enemies to know: But thus I found thee truely to recite, The wretched childe of a poore Amorite, An Hittite to thy mother, and in thy kinne, No sparke of innocence, but shame and sinne; Thou lay contemned in the field vnknowne, Laught at by strangers, left of by thy owne:
Distilling teares on desolations lappe, No nurse but sorrow from whose cold dry pappe, Nothing but misery issu'd, thou was found Lapt in the ragges of woe, and well-nie drownd, In thy polluted, finfull, filthy blood: Thy friends were fled, and all that stayd but stood, To witnesse thy disgrace, and view thy shame; When I saw this I meant to come, and came, And found thee striuing in a fearefull trance, Sicke to the death of finne and ignorance, And when, I saw thee thou begun to tell, I change thy name from Iacob t' Israel, And promis'd thee preferment, 'tis most true, And though thou euer left vndone thy due, My promises shall stand, in my compassion, A pardon's out to free thee from transgression; I washt thee white, and with the oyle of grace, I fill'd thy heart, and beautifi'd thy face, Thy eares with iewels riche, I did adorne, A chaine of gold about thy necke was worne:
Thy breast with pearles was deckt, thy backe with silke, Thy soule with oyle was cool'd, thy mouth with milke, With finest flower, thou wast most prince-like fed, With purest gold thy head was honored: Thy fame (throughout the spacious world was blowne, Who sought thy ouer-throw was ouer-throwne. And so it shall be still, since I did choose thee, I will not suffer any to abuse thee; For thy aduancement I haue done great things, I'ue Scepter'd Shepheards and vncrowned Kings: My loue haue caus'd all lands t'ring thy renowne, I'ue set vp Lazars, and throwne Caesars downe, To make the heathen know, I did elect, Her that from all their rage I could protect; And can, thou art my choyce, and as 'tis meere, I'l force thy foes to worship at thy feete. The scarlet Ocean shall it selfe diuide, And thou shalt go, where Pharoh cannot ride, That king shall know he hath a King, that shall Command him, and his Aegypt, and his all.
I sayd thou should come home, I meant no lesse, In spite of waters, and of wildernesse, Thou camest, and thereupon a publicke voyce, Fill'd euery eare, and sayd thou was my choyce; Report sayd true, for by my free election, There's noe roome, but for thee in my affection. So graciously I'le vse thee, thou shalt say, "Both Heauen and earth smil'd on our wedding day, Angels shall ioy to thinke on't, Saints shall sing, Such songs as best may please thee and thy King: Consider well how dearely I thee wonne, Remember all my loue and seruice done, That thou in holinesse might kisse my lips, I seru'd (like Iacob) seuerall prentiships, I got my Rachel, Laban tooke his lea And tota pulchraes amica mea: To make thee such consider what it cost, My time and toyle, I know shall not be lost, For thou art wise, the heathen and the rude, Shall beare the burthen of ingratitude.
I told thee what I'ue done, not to vpbraid thee With any benifits, but to perswade thee: I thinke all well bestow'd that I haue giuen, And in my store-house, (by my throne) in Heauen I haue such store, I'le send thee to the earth, To serue thee to thy buriall, from thy birth; And after both (beleeue my sacred story) I'le Queene thee with a Crowne of life, and glory. FINIS.
THE EPISTLE OF THE LORD TO his Bride, vpon her Vocation. A Holy legacy, bequeathed to the Right Honorable, the Countesse of Mountgomery. Written, By Augustine Taylor Preacher at Hawarden. LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes. 1623.
TO THE MOST NO∣BLE LADY, A BRANCH OF the auncient and illustrious house of Oxford) the Right Honorable, SVSAN, Countesse of Mountgomery, Grace, and Glory. Thrice Honorable Lady, VEre euer loued veritas so well, And to all vertues gaue such countenance, That sacred truth for euer vowes to dwell, In your Breast to be safe from ignorance, Enuy, and error; and hath warned me, That where I find vere, challenge there to be A lodging due to her, (I'dmir'd) and then Shee sayd to me (as Christ did to the men He sent to fetch the asse) if they refuse, The fauours I intreate, make thou but vse, Of my name vnto them with mild regard, And thou shalt find my lodging straight prepar'd. Great Lady with great reuerence I present, To your Religious view, and gracious eyes A legacy, a Heauenly or nament, With the Messias pleas'd to sacrifice,
And send vnto his spouse, to moue her, come To warne her, call her, and command her home, Vnto his Heauen; I wish you would accept My loue and seruice, and this offering take, As Princes do Imbassadours respect, Not for their owne, but for their maisters sake I am ordain'd Gods messenger, t'intreat, His chosen number to his Heauenly feast. And you both being truely good and great, Hath a faire seate prepar'd among the blest, Your pious bounties, princely beauties, and Religious wisedome, (which is honors nurse.) Are guides to lead you vnto Gods right hand; And likewise motiues caused me disburse, My loue and seruice in this measure: take it, My worke's Diume, and my free will doth make it A perfect offering, t'helpe gamst death and doombe, Regard this frame, for't will out-last your toombe. Willing and ready to do your Honor the best seruice, that is in the power of Augustine Taylor.
THE ARGVMENT. The Bride is call'd from all the Iles, To come and scape her woe; And heares the curses and the smiles, Belongs to come, and goe. IF my affection would thereto consent, I would be silent, th'art so lewdly bent, And shewes so little reuerence to my word: That iustice tels me silence will afford Me more content; and her it will appeare, That I still speake to her, that scornes to heare. But yet be not too deaffe, least vengeance cloud Descend vpon thee, and then speake so loud: It change thy deafenesse into death, then heare, And if thou canst not loue it's good to feare. Now thy creation and election done, My onely care is to procure thee come: Euen as a wiseman doth, (that wants a wife) Seeke vp and downe where beauties are most rife, And after seeking, finds, and finding loues, And louing, bids her home, and daily moues, Till she be mou'd to come, then suite doth cease, And they together liue in loue and peace:
So I did seeke thee first, and found thee then, And lik'd and lou'd thee woundrous well, and when All this was done I did intreate thee home, And vs'd the meekest meanes to cause thee come; Solemnely I haue bidden thee, do not stay, Arise, my loue, my faire one, come thy way: Remember who inuites thee, he that brings Honor to beggars, and contempt to Kings. Vnto thine enemies, and the heathen foe, A wofull portion fals, a cursed goe: In mercy and loue I come and send to thee, With mildnesse, meekenesse, and much clemencie; I call thee friendly in these dayes of peace, I prethee arme thy selfe, these calmes will cease, And stormes will follow: thou shouldst vnderstand, Pleasure and sorrow still goes hand in hand. The Sunne will leaue thee, and runne out of sight, Warre chaseth peace, as darknesse chaseth light: The time shall come that man and beast shall mourne, Mountaines shall tumble, and the seas shall burne,
The morning shall looke red, as if it woo'd Tell vs the euening should be dyed in blood: The moone shall view thee with a searlet face, Dabl'd in clouds, and stumbling in her pace; The glistering starres shall cease and perish all, For some shall be put out, and some shall fall: The Sunne in sable shall come sadly forth, A greater plague them from the bitter north, God did e're send, shall from each coast appeare Farre worse then Egypt when the plagues were there. These lower-lands shall looke, each blast shall bring, Shot or else powder, towards the ruining Of new built Babel's, for it must be knowne, "Bethel's her owners, Babel's but her owne: She sits aboue now, (thou knowes if thou know her) But all her pompe shall end, none shall sit lower. A time shall come, (come loue before it come) Each harpe shall silent be, each Dauid dumbe; Both Heauen and earth together shall conspire, To send out vengeance lapt in balles of fire,
And they shall bust, and vtter from within, Death and destruction, due rewards for sin. Millions of dayes thy God for mercy made, And in those dayes my care is to perswade, And worke my loues returne, before it be Too late to saue thy selfe, and honor me. One day I haue appointed for to bring, All kindreds of the earth t'a reckoning, The Monarch, and the King, the Prince, and Peere, The Stats-man and the Trads-man shall be there: All sorts and sects I'le call, and bring as farre, As shines the arcticke and th'antarcticke starre, Not one shall faile to come at my command, Whether they dy'd vpon the sea, or land: Yea euery one shall that one day appeare, And 'mongst those all not one shall want one haire; Then I my selfe will come, in th'eyes of man, As like a Lyon, as I was a Lambe, With more attendants glorious and bright, Then Heauen shewes starres in a cleare freezing night,
Then Michaels trumpet shall command the dead, To rise and come, and leaue their drowsie bed, T'appeare before a righteous Iudge, for then, Then he shall fit to Iudge, that can condemne, And iustifie, th'outward, and th'inward man, According to deserts, I will, and can: But these two parts in men do not agree, Therefore they wrong themselues, and iniure me; But I will come, and I will haue regard, To all that euer lou'd me, my reward I will bring with me, and it is most true, I will bestow on all estates their due. Vnlike to earthly Princes; voyd of measure, They deale their bounties onely for their pleasure, And turnes deserts a begging: But looke to't, Peasants now ride, and Princes go on foot, This order I will alter, and I'le giue, All good things vnto all that purely liue. Consider thou must meete a Iudge, that brings Life to wise Beggars, death to foolish Kings:
Come (and thy time to come to please me spend,) O come before the dayes of mercy end: For in the dayes of warre, there's peace for them, That loues my Syon, my Ierusalem; Prouide thy lampe and oyle, for it may be, I'le come at mid-night for to call on thee, It may be at the first, or second cocke, Or in the morning, or at noone, or not Vntill the euening, when I will not tell, It's not for want of loue, I loue thee well; And I conceale this from thee in regard, Thou may expect me still, and be prepar'd: For come I will, and when I will, and how, And sudainely, and gloriously, looke thou T'attend my comming in thy beauty stand, And I will leade thee home with my right hand, And bring thee in, but shut without the gate, All those that lamplesse come, and come too late. I haue collected thee from many parts, From Europe, Asia, and the wild Desarrs,
Of Sun-burnt Affricke, from the plaines and woods, From fields, and vallies, from the seas, as floods, From north, and easterne coasts, from east, and west, From th'hauen of troubles, to the hauen of rest: I haue call'd long, for my loue th'art in debt, Come for it's late, O come! and welcome yet: For feare thou be benighted hast and runne, I do beseech thee, I command thee come: Either for feare or loue I hope to see, Thee seeke in season for my companie; Regard who cals, thy Lord, then do not stay, "A faithfull louer doth dislike delay. FINIS.
THE EPISTLE OF THE LORD TO his Bride, vpon her Preseruation. A Diuine legacy, belonging to the Honorable, Sr. Henry Salusbury, and his Noble Lady. Written, By Augustine Taylor Preacher at Hawarden. LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes. 1623.
TO THE HONORA∣BLE Sr. HENRY SALVSBVRY, Knight, and Barronet, &c. And his Noble Lady ELIZABETH, Sister to the Right Honorable, the Lord Vaughan, &c. Truely Honorable, IF your great bounties toward  may be quit, With loue, and seruice, I haue some such coyne, Impresse thus with you names; make vse of it, It doth the soules of Saints together ioyne; And Syons preseruation doth expresse, And treats of nought but blisse and happinesse. Prophane adulterous plots I do detest, I ayme to please the soule and not the soyle, To call and summon euery Holy ghest, To the Lambs nuptialls, is my pleasant toyle.
My Patrons glory my pen onely seekes, And moues no blushes in most modest cheekes. Right noble Henry, I do know your brest Containes a spirit, that is not cantain'd In ordinary limits; Honor's best, Approu'd and honor'd, and her worth explain'd, Being cloth'd with robes of purity most fit, Lined with mercy, valour, grace, and wit: Y'are Lord of these, I flatter not I know you, And your good parts, I honor and admire, For all your loue and fauours more I owe you; And what I do not do, I do desire, I could do for your good: But I note still, Imperfect acts may rise, from perfect will. And (best deseruing) Lady you haue beene, The Patronesse of my (yet infant) pen, If these more mature workes you do esteeme, And countenance: I'le vrge both times and men,
To keepe your name aliue, free from the dead, So long as English shall be spoke or read: My pen, my sacred muse, and sweetest breath. Shall honor Henry, and Elizabeth. God guide, protect, direct, and loue you still, And send you good, vntill I wish you ill. Your Honors, in all holy duty, and Humaine loue, Augustine Taylor.
THE ARGVMENT. Thelpe Isr'els faults, some good men striues But cannot make amends: Iustice and truth her fall contriues, Then mercy makes them friends. HEare more my choice, and thou shal more conceiue, Go not, for her I loue I would not leaue, Why should we part? no, no, it must not be, And if we euer do it's long of thee, No fault of mine: thou ought'st to vnderstand, I mildly do intreate that may command; But rigour fits not Princes, (hatefull thing,) "Base cruelty did ne're become a King, Milde patience, potency hath euer lou'd, The Monarch would not, Momus will be mou'd, Meeke clemency with Princes euer rides, Dauid's at Musicke, diuellish Doeg chides: So some may do, and may vndoe and doth, "Some things at once are done and vndone both: Compassion should in greatnesse beare great sway, "Mercy in Kings shines like the Sunne in day, My mercy thou hast found, It hath found thee, And brought more blessings then dim eyes can see,
Or hearts of men conceiue, not thy creation, Choosing collection, troublesome vocation, Was all the charges I for thee disburst; Thy limmes were soundest, but thou trauel'd worst; And left my wayes to wander in thy owne, Thy heathen neighbours that haue scarcely knowne, Thy beauties by report, much wonder still, To see so faire a creature do so ill: When I saw thus thou had thy selfe forgot, And other nations that I loued not, Reioyce in th'disgrace, I knew some paine Must be perform'd, to wash thee white againe, So foule was thy complection, some did see, That the whole peece of blacke impurity, Was all Imploy'd to make thy coast; sad Iob Desires to wash thy spotted sinnefull rob In his snow-water, and he brings it in, But 't was not that could send away thy sin: So Iob mistaken his indeauours rest, He's worthy thankes (good man) he did his best,
But could not make thee better, Aaron then, The first and chiefe of (earthly) holy men, Puts on his rich attire, and meanes to bring, A sacrifice vnto his Lord and King: Prouides his alter, and with reuerent feare, Calues, goates, and pigeons, he doth offer there; And to make an attonement for thy good, My priest, and alter, were both di'd in blood, Actions that in some measure did perswade, But there was other off'rings to be made, Of better value and of greater price: Good Dauid friendly brought his sacrifice, And that was Isop water, and with that, His meaning was to wash away thy spot; He did his best, but's best did not remooue Yuy sinne, but onely manifest his loue, Aaron, and Iob, and Dauid, lou'd thee well, Yet notwithstanding they did (partly) dwell At the vaine-labour, their workes went to wracke, "They washt the Moore, and he was still more blacke.
Angels descend and moues Bethesdas lake, And yet the long-sicke man no shift could make, To make his sorrowes cease: these are but toyes, Or rather types of price, of better ioyes: A faire oblation must amend these foule, "A spotlesse blood, must make a spotlesse soule. No other offering can disolue offence, But luke warme-blood of harmeles Innocence; When man had sinn'd, and sinne had wrought the fall Of Adam, Heuah, and their seede, and all Borne betweene the worlds birth and funerall, God granted a Commission to these two, Iustice and Truth, and these should say and do: And in the high Court, on this high Commission, These two were set, and making inquisition, How man that was so good became so ill, And finding that he fell by his owne will, Affirm'd no punishment could be too much For's voluntary trespasse, and begins, "To whip man willingly for willing sinnes;
And by decree in that high Court consents, That wilfull faults, with wofull punishments Shall be rewarded. Is the law so sore, For tasting but one apple mongst such store? "The smallest faults done willingly are great, "Sinnes done at vnawares shall pardon get. Sinnes worthy pardon mournes, and knowes no mirth, And but begins conception after birth. Sinnes worthy death are those that mourning scorne, Those that are first conceiu'd, and after borne, When Truth and Iustice doom'd thy death for sinne, Mercy came sorrowfull and sadly in; Her body trembl'd, and her head hung downe, Vpon her backe she wore a long white gowne, Her hands were lifted vp, her eyes were weeping, Her woes were waking, and her ioyes were sleeping, Her knees were bended begging thy offence, They would iudge hers and with such reuerence, She spoke in thy behalfe (with such respect) That (as I liue) a Tyrant would haue wept:
She had a palme, but bore it very low, And carelesly, because she did not know How she should speede, and humbly thus preferres, Her plaint before the high Commissioners. The iust Commissioners something mou'd to see, So faire a Princesse beg so earnestly, Another pardon: sadly answer'd thus, That one must die, it is decreed by vs: If thou canst make amends for Adams fall, His faults we'll bury at thy funerall: And yet we cannot thus the man forgiue, For if thou should die he cannot liue; But this we'll tollerate if thou can get, A Prince to loose his life for subiects det. Our God is pleas'd to Eden he shall come, And thus the lost sonne may be welcome home. Thinke with thy selfe, speake with thy Prince and try, Thy Prince must fall, or man and men must dye. Mercy being answer'd, sate her downe and wept, And being full of sorrow would haue kept
Her selfe vnseene, I see her stept in, And for her comfort I did thus begin: Sweete Lady be not sorrowfull, I am he, Will pay the debt and end all misery, Be not amaz'd the great Kings sonne am I, A Prince that will not let his mercy die: I'le dye to giue thee life, and thou shall rest, Henceforth for euer, in a Princes brest; And this I'le do to make an end of strife, With my owne death I'le purchase thee a life. FINIS.
THE EPISTLE OF THE LORD TO his Bride, vpon her Redemption. A Spirituall legacy, for the Benifite of the Honorable Lady, the Lady Gerreard. Written, By Augustine Taylor Preacher at Hawarden. LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes. 1623.
❧ TO THE NOBLE Lady Ellenor, Lady Gerrard, wife to the late Honorable, Gilbert, Lord Gerrard, &c. Honorable Lady, VVHen sorrowes nights are ouer-past, There followes ioyfull day, Haplesse extreames can neuer last, But styes and posts away, To bring glad tidings in sad times, I hold it wondrous fit; And so doth all our best diuines, "And you may thinke of it. I do present you with a gift, Fit for a Princes hand: Pray take it, 'tis the meanes to lift, Soules to the holy land; The full redemption of mankind, I offer to your view, A subiect to translate the mind, From th'old man to the new.
I know you seeke Gods holy place, And clothes you for his feast, With pious loue, purenesse, and grace, True zeale, and all the rest, Of those rich garments faire and meete For such a Princes Court; And doubtlesse you shall one day see't, Though now my by report, Imperfectly you are but told, Yet quickly you shall see, In Syons City, (wall'd with gold,) The Lambe in's Maiestie: Aduance your thoughts to heauenly things, And you in the end shall soare Vnto that Court, where's none but Kings, Reioycing euer-more. Your Honors deuoted, in any Christian office, Augustine Taylor.
THE ARGVMENT. The promised Messias birth, Conquers hell, death, and sinne; And t'Eden backe with mickle mirth, Brings Adam and his kinne. IMmortall soule, and my elected Queene, Though hitherto thou hast most carelesse beene T'obserue my will; yet now incline thy neart, Or thou and I for euermore shall part: See this epistle truely vnderstood, Read it with teares for it is writ with blood: A pretious price is found to pay thy det, A sacrifice not ordinary to get, For thou had but one God, God but one sonne, That sonne one life, that life to death was done, To bring old Adam backe to Edens blis, And now learne what it cost to finish this. I (being promis'd) came, man did disdame me, The world was proud and loft to entertaine me: My earthly mother had so poore a kinne, She was deni'd a lodging in the Inne, When night, and paine, and teares, and trauell tooke-her, poore Mary was alone, and all forsooke-her.
Sighing and seeking, to find place for rest, And at the last a stable was the best, That could be spar'd, this I had power to mend, But I came rather like a lowly friend, Then like a maister, and so caus'd it try'd, "I came to shew my loue, and not my pryde: My pathes were plaine, my cradle was a cratch, I had no friends, none shew'd such loue to watch For my arriuall, the worlds loue was small, Mary was mother, mid-wife, nurse, and all: No costly robes, nor silkes, nor cloth of gold, Prouided was to keepe me from the cold, Nothing but poore attyre, and homely things, Thus Princeps Regum terrae (King of Kings) Begun his Lambe-like raigne: yea my pretence, Was onely peace, my armor innocence: I did not many nights in safety nappe, Vpon my louing mothers lowly lappe, But warning came, I must to Aegypt flee, Herod was mou'd, and making search for mee,
And I must runne or die, for his intent's To wash his hands in blood of innocence, The time wherein he did the infants slay, Shall still be noted for a dismall day, He aym'd at my fall, but he fell (we see) And murther'd many to haue metwith mee, But he mistooke himselfe, and miss'd his ayme, And I to Bothlem safe return'd againe; In spite of Herod, prophecies did ring, That Dauids sonne was borne to be a King: I did sustaine temptation for thy sake, Much toyle and trauaile I did vndertake, To make thy burthen light, I dare presume To sweare, betweene my cradle, and my tombe, I knew no perfect rest, I had no bed, Foxes had holes, and birds were furnished With nests and lodgings, but my head had none, Mine was like Iacobs state when he left home, And his old parents, to procure his rest, From angry Esau with his kin in th'east,
He was benighted in a strange land, where He neither found friends nor companions, there His pillow was a stone, his bed was earth, A naturall musitian made him mirth, (Surmis'd the Nightingall) he could not get, Wherein to wrape himselfe from nights could sweat: His vncoth roome was all with greene be spred, And rouing cloudes were curtaines to his bed; His canopy was heauen, where he might view, Millions of Starres fixt in the blackest blew. He went to bed as mildly as a lambe, And slept as moderatly as a man, And rose as earely as a Larke, and fed With more content then e're he went to bed: Then towards his vncles, he doth post amaine, To proue if Rachels loue he may obtaine, And at the last his prentiships and paine, Winnes his faire bride, and he comes home againe, With's Lady in his hand, his slockes before, His seede about him, and his Princely store,
Comes after with his seruants, and thus hee With beauty, riches, health, and dignitie, Comes home attended. I with Iacob may Compare my trauailes, so that by the way, I make some difference, by the difference gather, I left a fayrer home, a better father; To tread strange pathes where I was neuer knowne, I sought for strangers loue, and left my owne: Iacob was neuer in such miscrie, I was both worser cloth'd, and lodg'd then he, I went to fetch my bride, from amongst those, That dwelt farre further off, and were my foes. He payd but loue and seruice for his bride, I payd my seruice, loue, and life beside, He brought his home with riches and renowne, With ioy and gladnesse vnto Sichem towne; And for her mouing tents, he hath her giuen, Faire fixed temples, stately types of Heauen: His bed was on the earth, mine was within, He slept for sorrow, but I slept for sinne,
I rose more earely to prepare thy way, For I saw sun-rise, before he saw day: I'll bring thee home, adorn'd with better things, The power and honor of all earthly kings; (And let their powers together lincked bee, All cannot make one worthy t'waite on thee: I spent my dayes in sorrow for thy good, I sayl'd to th'Cradle in teares, to th'graue in blood; And more then this I was content to doo, My middle time had mickle sorrowes too. I liu'd releeuing poore, healing, and feeding, I wipt those eyes that wept, wounds that were bleeding I cur'd, and car'd for all that were in woe, None can complaine that they away did goe Without a pardon for the great'st transgression, All those that brought repentance found compassion. I haue beene thine, thine both in word and deede, My tongue did preach, and pray, my flesh did bleede, From my fresh wounds the smallest droppe that fell, Is price sufficient to saue Israell:
I promise thee (beleeue my promise then) One drop may saue more worlds then this hath men, It is sufficient: Know I did not come, To plead defficience, and pay halfe the summe; Let him that's poore, and needy, and that must Confesse his pouerty, and take on trust, I haue no such occasion, let him score, That's growne disable, beggarly, and poore. Thy ransome all is payd, and thou art rich, And still within my store-house there's so much, It neuer can be empti'd, do not want, My bounty cannot make my blessings scant: Desire and I will giue thee more, (and more) "Thou canst not make the stocke of mercy poore, Presume not neither, for I will expresse, My Iustice on presumptuous saucinesse; The meeke and lowly I delight to guide, "I owe the greatest punishments to pride, My Israell, my death hath bought thy life, Forget not then the duties of a wife:
The office of a husband I haue showne, In greater measure, then the world hath knowne, The graue is conquer'd, death hath now no sting, All foes are vanquisht by thy Lord and King; And now thy Christ as chiefe aloft doth raigne, And Edens gates are now vnbarr'd againe; The Lambe being slaine, the fity sword, by him Is taken from the angry Cherubin, And my faire bride may come (and welcome) in. FINIS.
THE EPISTLE OF THE LORD TO his Bride, vpon her Sanctification. A Heauenly legacy, properly for the vse of the Honorable, Sr. Richard Mullineux, &c. Written, By Augustine Taylor Preacher at Hawarden. LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes. 1623.
TO THE HONO∣RABLE Sr. RICHARD MVLLINEVX, Knight, and Bar∣ronet, &c. Worthily Honored: THere is a sumptuous feast prepar'd, Vpon Gods holy hill: Of dainties, and of plenties, shar'd Amongst all those that will, With reuerence, and louing feare, Attend to be the ghests: At the Lambs nuptialls, to be there The Lord (by me) requests, Your worthy selfe, therefore prouide, Your wedding garments fit; And you by Gods-sonnes-sacred side, In glories seate shall fit:
Peruse these lines, and though they be, No measures that excell, Yet th'are diuine, and comes from me, That knowes and loues you well: Yet for my knowledge and my loue, Accept it not, but for His glorious name that fits aboue, And is th'all gouernour. I know you'll giue this meete respect, And for your Noble name, Time shall preserue, and still protect, With the sweete lippes of fame: To all posterities to come, When this short life is past, These lines shall liue, and when your tombe Shall perish, these shall last. Your Honors, in the sernice of the Lambe, Augustine Taylor.
THE ARGVMENT. Least nation (rude) should spie some spot. In the Messias Bride, By's spirit and  begot A new, and Iustifi'd. BEcause I'm earnest, and an vrgent mouer, Do not thou take me for a doting louer; Why I'm so loth to leaue thee, thou mayst know, "From her I loue, I do not loue to go? Somethings are wanting yet, the prophet sings That holy men are seru'd with holy things; And know I will be sanctifi'd in all, That shall come neare me euery one that shall, Into my Temple come by my command, Shall put their shooes off, for 'tis holy land: I loue this holinesse, 'tis a kind of beauty, And to expresse thy loue and shew thy duty, Thou mayst do well to learne it, and thou so May be Queene-like in substance and in show, Beauty, or maiesty lookes well alone, But ten times better if these two be one: One beauty's honor'd, seru'd, and praised too, And then for many what would many doo?
They could not do so much, and so I thought, When with so great a ransome I thee bought, Thy spots and freckles all I washt away, And made thee such that there is not one may, Compare to be thy equall, th'art that one, Whom all doth like, but can be-alike none: Each tong tels forth thy praise, each pen thy fame, A peerelesse Princesse, and a matchlesse Dame, Chiefe of thy kind, and fairest of thy sex, A worke that makes admir'd the Opifex: Conceiue thy owne estate, and thou will tell, God is a louing God to Israell. I made thee happy, yea and holy too, For all that earth and earthly kings could do, Thou hath beene carried safe on Eagles wings, To th'prayse of thine, to th'shame of other kings: With blood and water I haue washen thee, Thy spots of sinne, and thy infirmity, Are chang'd for honor, strength, and purity;
And thou so faire in holinesse art seene, Thy heathen neighbours wonder, and do seeme To enuy thy estate, and maruaile so, They make dispute, if thou be flesh or no: Thee of more pretious mettle they define, Some small part mortall, but the most diuine, Thy pleasant beauty countenance and grace, They thinke composed of no peece so base: They know thy beauties from the Heauens are, For th'earth cannot afford a frame so faire: Nature amazed doth her selfe submit, To her owne worke, and loues to worship it, And seekes to find the author of each obiect, And findes but one for all, and that one's subiect She willingly becomes, and doth record Her selfe a seruant, and thy loue her Lord. And thus my grace to sanctifie my creature, Path blest thee with all helpes of art and nature: Hut of thy coate, it is the old mans weare, Filchy, polluted, noy some, gracelesse, geare,
Made of a web, in disobedience frame, Stain'd with the spots of infamy, and shame, 'Twas cut out by ambition shapen by pride, And stitcht together by that Homicide, Impiety, and lin'd throughout with sinne, Vncleane without, but more vncleane within, Butten'd with feare, garded about with woe, And spotted with a thousand plagues; and so By flattery sold, and bought by arrogance, And dayly worne by doating ignorance. The old man weares it, (such a one I say) Whose sinnes are greene, and yet his haires ar gray; I meane him old in vices, him eschew, Old things are worne away, all's become new, And so must thou, the coate that's made for thee, Is cut out of the web of puritie, Made large and long, th'image of excellence, Of colour white betokening innocence, In-layde with ioy, the skirt with safty bound, And with true honor treble-garded, round:
Clasped with comforts, furnisht with content, Ornated with each seemely ornament, Fram'd by desire, perfected with good will, Seame-sow'd with loue and perl'd with holy skill: Set thicke with starres, attended on with day, Compos'd with care, and shall looke fresh, and gay For euermore; I haue thee so attir'd, As thou cannot be equall'd, but admir'd; And it must needes be so, since thou art wife, T'a Lord in comprehensible, thy life Must be incomparable, to expresse, Thy loue is holy, and in holinesse, The seruice he admits of, must be done, Now thou art perfect it were best to come, And seeke a fayrer habitation, for So faire a Princesse me thinkes should abhor, So foule a dwelling: Dauid much laments, That 'twas his lot to dwell in Kedars tents, Those mouing cabins onely but remaines, To Ismaels issue on th'Arabian plaines,
Goodly great buildings I haue made for thee, Where woods, and meades, and springs, and riuers bee, Now seeke thy Lord, thy lodging's furnished, "A holy Bride, should find a holy bed. FINIS.
THE EPISTLE OF THE LORD TO his Bride, vpon her Iustification. A Holy legacy, for the vse of the Right Honorable, William Earle of Northampton, &c. Written, By Augustine Taylor Preacher at Hawarden. LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes. 1623.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM Earle of Northampton, Baron Comp∣ton, Lord President of Wales, &c. Right Honorable, NVrst in the limits of your Lordly power, I line, and therefore boldned to present Vnto your view, this holy newes, this hower, By Heauens King's gracious commandement, Amarriage feast is gloriously begunne, 'Twixt Iacobs Daughter, and Ichouahs Sonne, To call to't noble ghests there's many sent, And I am one, and I am sent to you: Right worthy Earle put on your ornament, Such as may giue the Nuptiall day it due, Your seate's prepar'd, deckt with victorious bayes, And shall stand more yeares, then this world hath dayes, My Lord I'm plac'd vpon the mount of peace, To profit Syons friends and not to please The reeling multitude, such as would ken, The path to paesse to new Ierusalem,
I haue Commission to direct theretoo. With all the remnants, I haue nought to doe: Your honor of that body's a chiefe part, Of which Christ Iesus is the supreame head; Vnto your hand (therefore) withall my heart, I offer this, praying your Honor read, It is the word of truth, and doth afford, The fairest gilding for your Prineely sword. It is the latest Honor great men wish, To leaue their memories in leaues of brasse, Or let, or marble: this meere weaknesse is, Because it shall consume, perish, and passe, Away with ruining time; Therefore I giue This frame to you, where in your fame shall liue, Till men, and time, and English cease: giue mee Your gracious count'nance, and I haue my fee. At your Honors seruice, submissiuely deuoted, Augustine Taylor.
THE ARGVMENT. Pollution, must be layd aside, For holy garments gay, The Lambe hath shapen for his Bride, T'adorne the marriage day. STay! yet more Iewels must adorne my loue, Before she can be fit to fit aboue, Vpon a Princely throne, none shall deride At thine estate, thou shall be iustifi'd: The great Kings daughter must be faire within, "She's blest to whom the Lord imputes no sin, Then blest shall thou be, mine shall be the blame, And I will beare the burthen of thy shame; And I will answere those that railes on thee, They do mistake themselues, and iniure me: If thou find enemies that do beginne To blaze thy faults, and publish all thy sinne, Bid them behold themselues, and learne to mend, Tell them thou hast a father sent a friend, To pleade thy cause, and that Prince is content, To take thy sinnes, and beare thy punishment; Bid them remember in the dayes of old, My Prophets, and Apostles truely told,
That sinners soules should die, and euery one, Should beare the burthen of's owne sinnes alone: So they must do, be mindfull of it will-them, Say thou that I sayd so, so thou may still them. They may obiect then, thou shall answere thine, For God loues right, and will to right incline: He will indeede, for the most pretious summe, Did satisfie for sinne, e're pardon come; That summe I paid, and paid in thy name too, The debt was thine, but who hath ought to do, Against this satisfaction to exclaime, For thou art iust, if I suppose the same, To whom the Lord imputes no sinne, th'are iust, And so art thou, and onely by thy trust: There's other adherent helpes, but faith extends, As the chiefe instruments that apprehend, My satisfaction to be others share, My merits by thy faith thy merits are, Euen as a woman doth that's farre in debt, If she a wealthy husband chance to get
And he discharge it, and then some demaunds, If the bond woman forfeited her bands, Or satisfied them? Creditors ensue, And iustiffies, she payd them all their due. The feast was hers, the charge her husbands lot, "And thus she payd it, though shee paid it not, So thou art iustifi'd, iustice of mine, That's vncreated hath created thine: Thou was the woman, husbandlesse and poore, Millions in debt, and at the prison doore, To be deliner'd to the Iaylors hands, And with thy death thou should discharge thy bands I was the man that spent none of the summe, Yet in my loue thy husband I'd become, Examining my estate, I treasure found, To pay for euery peny debt, a pound: Then I did vndertake to set thee free, And what I did, I counted done by thee; Such was my loue, thou doest thy all inherit From me, and by my mercy not thy merrit.
If any aske what moued me to fill Thy lappe with blessings, say it was my will: I can do what I will, so can no other, Iacocb I'll iustifie, but for his brother Esan, I cannot loue, for it was hee, That first vs'd weapon to contend with thee, And fares the worse for that. Know I haue giuen, All things a being, betweene earth and Heauen: And vnto some a perfect being well, The bad I caused not to fall, they fell By their owne will, I left them, being not tide, To take directions where to choose my bride, The vnderstanding may the rest perswade The maker, is not subiect to the made: Euen as the Potter may dispose of's clay, So the chiefe Lord of all his Creatures may. Thou art my choyce, thou art my (sole) elect, To honor thee I did all else reiect; And in contempt of all thine enemies pride, I'll pleade thee iust, thou shall be iustifide.
And now if Sathan (thy grand-enemy) come, And to affright thee gather all the summe Of thy blacke sinnes together, still affirming Thy sinnes are such he comes to giue thee warning, Thy soule is sicke, and thou art doom'd to die, And that for mercy 't is too late to crie, Iudgement hath past: Beleeue him not, say thus, Thy Lord's a liue, and good, and gracious; And did not the Crosse so freshly bleed, To leaue thee drownd in misery and need: Tell him thou washt (when I was nayl'd on wood,) My feete in teares, and I thy soule in blood, And say I neuer will forgetfull be, Of two such tokens betweene thee and mee: Yet tell him more, that thou art bound to bee At new Ierusalem to suppe with me, Vpon a suddaine warning, then away, And if he moue, or would procure thy stay,
Say th'art warn'd on my pleasure to attend, So loose thine enemy, and come loue thy friend, Yet stay to tell him th'art betroth'd to me, And being so debts that are due by thee To any whosoeuer, I must pay, For so I promis'd at thy wedding day: If he make any claime to thee or thine, Plead ignorance, and say the matter's mine; And he must take my answere, he'll deny, To deale with me because he seekes to try His strength with weaknes, which shews cowardise still, "He makes no combate, but he meanes to kill; And if this serue not to send him away, Tell him thou seuer all times hath heard me say, No suite in law is good against the wife, Whilst it is knowne the husband hath his life, And thine is liuing: testimonies store, Sayth Syons God, indures for euermore:
Then part for euer, since th'art iustifi'de, Trauaile to me-wards, and I'll be thy guide: Thy feete in order in my way I'll set, And I will leade thee safely step by step. From strength to strength forward, from grace to grace, To see thy God in glory face to face. FINIS.
THE EPISTLE OF THE LORD TO his Bride, vpon her Glorification. A Spirituall legacy, for the benefits of the Honorable, Sr. Iames Whitlocke, Knight, Lord Chiefe Iustice of Chester, and of His Maiesties Councell, established in the Principallity of Wales, &c. And Sr. Marmaduke Lloyd, Knight, His Associate, &c. Written, By Augustine Taylor Preacher at Hawarden. LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes. 1623.
TO THE HONORA∣BLE Sr. IAMES WHITLOCKE Knight, Lord Chiefe Iustice of the County Palatine of Chester, and of his Ma∣iesties Councell, established in the Princi∣pallity of Wales, &c. And to the Right Worshipfull, Sr. Marmaduke Lloyd Knight, &c. His Associate. {inverted ⁂} Most Worthy: YOu that sometimes pleasd graciously t'accept, Th'imperfect offers of my tongue, I pray This seruice of my pen you would protect, I wish no more then you with honor may Confirme and grant, therefore I hope to speede, My desire is diuine, and so's my deede. The Law without the Gospell's too seuere, Without the Law the Gospell is too mild:
Therefore I'ntreate you with a reuerent feare, To be the gossips to this diuine child, And in the forehead of it men shall reade, Your names and worth when you are lapt in leade. You that so well affect the life of grace, Are here inuited to the life of glory, The Lambe ands Bride in holy loue imbrace, And of allioyes nam'd in the sacred story, Possesse the fulnesse, thither you are bidden, To share those beauties that from earth are hidden. I'm confident, these poems will come fit For your suruey, at your most proper leasure, I know you dearely loue, both arte and wit, And by a heauenly muse, receiues both pleasure, And holy profit. Thus my loue commands My booke with reuerence t'kisse, your noble hands. At your Honorable, and worthy dispose, in God seruice, Augustine Taylor.
THE ARGVMENT. The world's prou'd worthlesse, and the Bride, The Prince intreates to come, Tells her she shall be glorifi'de And bids her hast her home. MY Royall loue, since I haue shew'd to thee, The pathes of pleasure and of piety, Prepare to trauaile, and to walke in them, They leade to Syon, to Ierusalem, My chosen dwelling, where in loue and feare, Both Saints, and Angels sing, and worship, there A place to be thy rest, I haue assign'd, And if thou will come, thou shall welcome find: Remember life, or death, th'art free to choose, The good I wish thee take, the bad refuse? As Dauid sung thou hast iust cause to sing, Th'art but a stranger vnder a strange king, Farre from thy father house, farre from thy friends, Farre from all true delights, with ioyes that ends, In t'houre they are begunne, th'art poorely fed, Sorrowes are boundlesse ioyes are limitted, Comes but to go againe, who euer could, Protest he knew one, pleasure, one day old,
And did not disconitnue? none can say, Amongst his millions h'ad one perfect day, Wherein he'll swere a minute was not spent, Either in cares, or griefes, or discontent. No ioyes and woes are mixt, and thou hast tride, Like to the swelling waues in a rough tide, They chace each other, to be plaine and short, The worser things are still the greater sort, The earths condition (by mans lewd dispose) "Produceth twenty hemlockes for on rose: View earth at fairest in her springing mornes, "And for ten Lillies, there's ten thousand thornes; Ioyes comes but seldome, and comes slowly too, And winter vndoes all the spring can doo. Contents depart from man and leaues him weeping, Then fearefull death disolues him, leaues him sleeping, And brings him thither whence there's no returnings, Yet ioyfull euenings follow carefull mornings; I haue decreed it so, because that I Will suster thee to faint but not to dye,
Yet death hath made thy bed, and fill'd thy cup, And drinke thou must, and downe thou must, but vp In tune, and time, I'll call thee, thou shall try, Thou shall but sleepe, thy enemies shall die: Thou art on sorrowes seas where dangers frowne. But feare not though thou swim, thou shall not drowne, Thou shall sing in a happy heauenly straine, "Day went, night came, day comes, night goes againe, Remooue thy thoughts, place them on things aboue; Soare to my Syon with the wings of loue, The gates are open, and the guests are comming. Faire trees are springing, and sweete riuers running, My fruites are gather'd, and my wine's abroach, My table's couer'd, and I waite th'approach Of my belou'd, for whom I payd so deare, All things are ready, and all Princely cheare Is there prepar'd, and on thee I'll bestowe, A cup that euermore, shall ouer-flowe: The lampes do burne so bright, blacknesse is banisht, The musicke sounds so loud, that mourning's vanishe:
Thy good old father's anger's past, and gone, And the lost child may come and welcome home, My father sent for's robe, and thou must weare it, He called for a crowne, thy head must beare it, There is shooes for thy feete, rings for thy singers, To please thine eares, there is a quire of singers, And Dauid's maister of them; for thy food, Thy father's calfe, that was both fat and good, Hath suffer'd slaughter: Come, the feast ne'er ends, The brother's pacifi'd, and all are friends; Thy aduersaries hauing plainely seene, In spite of Ismaell, Israel must be Queene: Cease contradiction, and to striue giueso're, Haue sheath'd their swords, and sworne to fight no more These nations that, but wisht to see thy fall, I either turn'd, or ouer-turn'd them all, I'ue made thee Conqueror, and in good time, The combat's ended, and the day is thine; And 'tis a day that's not pursu'd with night, My roomes are furnisht with a lasting light,
That ne'er shall be extinguisht, and for thee, There's seamelesse suites of endlesse puritie: Thy heauenly state from earthly differs thus, Th'hast found my best, and lost thy pessimus, Thy seat's ordain'd and fixed firme and sure, And shall in blis, and endlesse time indure; And empty stayes thy leasure, come in time, These lights below will quickly cease to shine, Seeke those aboue and seeking thou shall find, The ioyes and glory that's for thee assign'd: Vntill thou come (to shew thou meanes to come) Apply thy hand and tongue and be not dumbe, Send dayly sacrifice, thou ought to learne, "Earth should send thankes to heauen for each good turne, It's all I looke for, therefore let me see, Some signes of loue, ascend from thee to mee, And I'll expect thy comming, make it knowne, Th'art wholy now thy owners, not thy owne. Let thy succeeding carriage be so good, That by thy acts it may be vnderstood,
Who is thy Lord; and let there be exprest, In thee those things that fits a Princesse best, From th'hauen of sorrowes, to the heauen of blisse, Vnto my holy hill, from thine abisse, Mount with the wings of loue, and thou shall bee, Partaker of my throne, and royalue, Let all the gracelesle nations grudge and tell, To their great griefe, the daughter of Israell Hath marri'd a Prince, that euer-more shall raigne, Her health, and life, and honor to maintaine: Be not in loue with earth, nor earthly things, Though for a time th'art troubled with the stings Of death, and sinne, and hell, for thy offences, Yet there's a campe wherein is none but Princes, And ioy, and blis, and peace, and to that place, I will translate thee from thy life of grace, Vnto my life of glory: thy protecter, Will giue thy head a crowne, thy hand a scepter, Thy mouth a song to sing, truthes excellence, Thy backe a robe as white as innocence;
Thy soule both life, and comfort, thou shall see, More perfect absolute felicity, In one dayes length, in heauen, then if thou were, To liue on earth a king, ten thousand yeare, Thou couldst obtaine, and therefore in a word, To manifest how Paradise is stor'd: As things beyond thy knowledge, I will leaue, I must conceale, since thou cannot conceiue, That thou mayst fully know them; hast and come, "Millions of blessings waites thy welcome home. FINIS.
THE EPISTLE OF THE BRIDE TO her Lord, expressing her Gratitude. A Spirituall legacy, bequeathed to the protection of the Right Honorable, the Earle of Cumberland, &c. By, Augustine Taylor, Preacher, and Minister, in the Church of God. LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes, 1623.
❧ TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE FRANCIS CLIFFORD, Ealre of Cumberland, Lord CLIFFORD Westmerland, and Vescy, &c. Most Noble: REligion ioyn'd with valour, lookes as well, As a faire Diamond, set in purest gold, These man-like, God-like parts in you excell, And shall to after ages be inrold, In leaues more lasting then the sheetes of brasse, And in the fore-head of my diuine verse, Your name with fame and honor forth shall passe, Into all coasts of this faire vniuerse: I do present to your inditious view, The pistles 'twixt the Lambe and's holy Bride, A very proper present 'tis for you, That weares a sword to cause, her deside,
Strike still in truths defence, and you shall see, Your euening crown'd with glorious victory: Great Lord, my natiue place neighbours your north, Then since my soule inhubits in that soyle, And since my muse bath wing, and will flie forth, She'll tell you of more ioyes then life hath howres, And lookes for welcome, in your fairest towers, Your floods and fords are faire, your swans but few, But if you please with gracious eyes to view, My diuine verse; and therein take content, I'll build your trophies betweene tweed and trent. Your Honors truely obseruant, Augustine Taylor.
THE ARGVMENT. Glad Israels of-spring tunes her voyce, Of gratitude to sing; Accounts her selfe an vnfit choyce, To Queene so great a King. IF earthly kin may send t'a heauenly King, Or if thy greatnesse will heare meanenesse sing, Accept the sacrifice I now bestow, My heart is high, although my voyce be low; And since thou vnderstands my thoughts, before They be transform'd to breath, and passe the doore, Of my vnready lips, my confidence Is that thou will maintaine my innocence, And make my worke according to my will: I know thy mercy and power continue still, And since I share of both, let it be seene, Such qualities as doth become a Queene I doe not want, and then the world so wide, Shall blesse thee for thy bounties to thy Bride My gracious Lord I haue a great desire, To sing thy prayses in the sacred quire, And will vpon condition I may finde, Thy heauenly graces vnto me assign'de,
In so great measure, that I may approue, My bounty, and thy duty, and my loue: Tenne thousand thankes, that it hath pleased thee, With mercies eyes to view my miserie, My griefe's forgotten, and my ioy growes full, My crimson spots are chang'd to whitest wooll, My soule's content my brest can scarce containe, My guilty garment, that was dy'd in graine, Past alteration, is restor'd by thee, From sinnefull red to perfect purity: Thy day dissolu'd my night, thy cares, my feares, Thy drops of blood, hath stanch'd my drops of teares. When I remember my estate at first, Griefes bitternesse threatens my heart shall burst; Feare keepes possession, and that feares leads paine, And paine brings death, and thus I'm partly slaine, With thinking on my miseries. After these, Sad thoughts are past (which I do pay as fees, For my offences) ioy comes in againe, When I consider my king doth remaine,
A glorious conquerour of all my soes, Now that I may my thankfulnesse disclose, Assist me Lord, and lend such grace to me, As may preferre a sacrifice to thee, Lapt in a sacred song, that I'm indu'd, With the poores payment, perfect gratitude, Take this succeeding witnesse: my good Lord, For all thy blessings all I can afford Out of my borrow'd store is onely prayse, It doth become the iust, (thy Prophet sayes? Daily to render thankes vnto thy name, I being iust through thee must do the same, Or shew my selfe forgetfull: I would bee, As farre from that as I wish that from mee. For my creation, that it was thy will, To shew thy loue, and grace, and power, and skill, In making nothing something, and in that Placeing such beauty, as is wonder'd at, By heauen and earth, and that of all, this all Thou hast made me thy Princesse principall,
And to adorne my state made all thy store, I giue thee thankes, and I can giue no more. For my election I do much reioyce, Thou would vouchsafe to make so meane a choyce, And was so mighty, but each Dauid sings, "It fits th'Almighty to doe mighty things: When out of Eden I forsaken fell, (Set in the open fields my shame to tell,) I grew in nature, and in number great, The earth was spacious, yet had ne'er a seate, Wherein the sonnes of Adam neuer sate, Then since it pleased thee t'illuminate All nations, and the best of all to choose, To make thy one, let that one neuer loose The beauty of thy sonne, let me boast euer, Where my Lord, Lord loueth once he looseth neuer; That I am thy elect and that I may, Vnto my enemies, and the heathen say, (As day doth night) my state doth theirs excell, And that my Lord call'd my name Israell,
Crown'd me with Isaacks blessings, did decree Prophanest Edom seruant vnto mee, That this is thus. I can but prayse and pray, "My thankes my Punce is all I haue to pay, I do remember when by thy command I multipll'd, and into euery land, My members were disperst, yea it was I The Caldean Priest beheld so strangly lie Shapelesse, and liuelesse in the valley, sowne As thicke as haile, which some great blast hath blowne, Into the lower-lands, my bones once lay Dis-ioynted, broke, and scatter'd, till the day It pleased thee (most graciously) to make A perfect vnion, for thy chosen sake: For my vocation, that I was by thee Reform'd, and knit in happy vnitie; And call'd by Dauids Cimbals, Aarons bels, Esayes loud trump, th'Euangellists, and cls What musicke men and Angels could deliuer, Sounded so loud, my parts ioyn'd all together,
Earst being dispersed in t'all parts as farre, As lights the arcticke, or th'antarcticke starre, And now collected onely for to bee, A marriage for the Trine-vne-maiestie: By these Caelestiall motions that I am Call'd out of Aegypt into Canaan, I giue thee thankes and it is all I can: My Lord I do remember my estate, When in the open field so desolate, I lay contemn'd of all, when passers by Scorn'd at my life, and laugh'd to see me die; And I do likewise carry in my minde, The great compassion that I then did finde, Flow from thy breast, when I was falne so low, The seas of miseries did ouer-flow, My aiery substance and my earthly show; And when with these sad thoughts my heart is full, Passion comes in and makes each sence as dull As ignorance: then do I'gin t'admite, What was th'occasion such an ardent fire, Of holy loue was kindl'd in thy brest, To me-wards, knowing that in me did rest
No good, I thus my Princes thoughts did measure. My Lord chose not for merit, but for pleasure; I had no beauty, my poore soule within, Was like an Ethiop, wrapt in clouds of sin, My flesh impress'd with vlcers, in worse state Then Lazarus, dispis'd at Diues gate. My wised ome was but folly, and my health Was deadly sicknesse, all my store and wealth, Was store of woes and pouerty, in mee Was the true image of all misery; And what was I (most vile, and wretched thing) That I should be the daughter of a King? What's my discent, or what's my fathers house, That I should we are a crowne, and be the spouse Of Gods eternall sonne? My Lord, my tong Shall still confesse thy mercies, euen among The greatest congregations; I'll make knowne, Th'hast set a beggar, on a Princes throne, And alter'd her condition; and I'll sing "Th'vnworthi'st bride, hath Queen'd the worthi'st King. FINIS.
THE EPISTLE OF THE BRIDE TO her Lord, containing her Thankfulnesse. A Legacy, beneficiall for the Right Honorable, HENRY Lord Clifford, &c. By, Augustine Taylor, Preacher, and Minister, in the Church of God. LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes. 1623.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY, LORD Clifford, Sonne and Heire to the Right Noble, Lord Francis Earle of Cumberland, &c. Worthy Lord: I Must intreate you to prouide Your selfe with proper speede, T'attend the Nuptials of the Bride, Our kin, it is a (greede,) 'Twixt Isr'els of-spring and Gods soone A marriage must be made, And messengers abroad are runne, All good men to perswade, To come, to see it solemmiz'd, And I am one of those, That haue some worthy friends aduis'd, To free them from these woes: That times and men are subiect too, And it's become my lot, By Gods Commission t'inuite you, And I know I shall not
Want audience, nor place, nor time To tell my Embassie: Imbrace it (Lord) for 'tis diuine, And the best legacie I can bestow, I know you are Religious, learn'd, and wise, And noble therefore I shall share, Your fauours, I surmise. Your Lordships in all humble loue, Augustine Taylor.
THE ARGVMENT. Isr'els infirmitte's confess'd, Her gratitude's proclaim'd, The bounties of her Lord's express'd, And her best loue's explain'd. MY Lord I know thou knowes before I speake, What I would vtter: since I'm wondrous weake And of my selfe deficient teach thou mee To publish pious pleasant harmonie, Such as thou wilt vouchsafe to heare that, when My pensiue soule with miseries of men Is guarded round, my voyce to thee may come, And find some grace to helpe the gracelesse sonne, To helpe my sinnefull sorrowfull soule, in time Let the bright sunne, of mercy freely shine Vpon my guiltinesse, that thy bride may, Be white as innocence, and as bright as day: For all thy blessings, though I be but poore, Yet both of praise and thankes I haue such store, As shall record me debtor vnto thee, In songs and himnes to all posteritie: I must confesse, but cannot pay thee due, For my redemption, that thou pleas'd to view
My state so poore with mercies eyes so pure, My soule reioy ceth, and I'm very sure, The price of my redemption's payd so well, Sinne hath no strength, death hath no sting, and hell Hath now no victory: I am not so Blinded with ignorance, but that I know, My selfe both as I am and as I was; As different as the Dyamond from glasse, So is my former, from my latter state, Thou didst repaire what I did ruinate, From gyues and fetters thou hast loosed mee, To tread the pathes of life, and liberty; From hellish endlesse sorrowes thou hast quit, My captiu'd soule out of the lowest pit: Euen as a Lilly ouer-growne with thornes, That is not benific'd by the springing mornes, Vntill the carefull husband doe deuise, To rid the thornes, to helpe the Lilly t'rise; So 'twas with me, my soule suppress'd with sinne, Knew nought but sorrow, till thou did beginne,
To vndergoe my burthen, and since then, I haue found grace with God, and peace with men: For this great freedome, and for all my blis, In esse and in posse I'ue but this Towards recompence, my gratitude's my store; Thankes, 'tis a proper payment for the poore. And yet I'm bound for greater fauours such, For which I cannot manifest so much, Affection as they challenge, therefore still Lord when my action failes, regard my will. Since it did please thee to make me thy bride, It seemes thou pleas'd I should be sanctifide, For that I'm now reformed like to thee, In hollinesse and perfect puritie, And that so inwardly and outward faire, Thou hast made me that I'm without compare; And since my spots and wrinckles are disolu'd, And that in holy white, I'm now inuolu'd, It resteth that I sacrifice my best, And what I offer's but the interest
Of what I owe: I'll thanke thee whil'st I liue, And Lord thou knowes I haue no more to giue; But I'm for more, farre more indebt, yet trust Since thou wilt iustifie me (so vniust) Thou wilt regard my nothing, nothing breedes, "He that possesseth all things nothing needes, That thou accepts my faith for righteonsnesse I can no more do, and I will no lesse, In words and actions then shew thankfulnesse: Since it hath pleas'd thy greatnesse to admit, My poore defectiue impotence, (vnfit) To be a bride for thee, I'll hence forth striue, T'extinguish all my illnesse, and depriue Those vices of their lodgings that haue beene, My welcome guests before I was thy Queene; What I haue beene, I'll cease to be, and frame My selfe to beare the beauty of thy name: True modesty, and loyalty shall rest, To waite vpon thy spirit in my brest: Assist me with thy grace, and thou shall see, All th'ornaments proper for Maiestie,
Prepared for thy seruice, I confesse Thou might'st haue had thy spouse' mongst princesses Of greater honor, and of nobler race I know poore Ruth (my grandame) had no place Whereinto rest, but by permission; yet Because she's faire, and lowly Boaz will let Her gleane amongst his reapers, and withall Strictly commands his seruants that they shall Not offer once to blame her, tels her rather It is his pleasure, that she stay and gather In his, then goe t'an other field, and thus Changes small fauours, into Maximus: And at the last, this fruite his loue doth yeild, Takes her and makes her mistris of the field: Sure she was faire, being honor'd with such store, That lookt so louely, when she was so poore, Euen such was I a Ruth, on whom no Ruth, The word bestow'd, vntill the word of truth Came to suruey his vineyard, and gaue mee, Commission to worke there, and liberty, To claime a sacred peny? and in th'end Supposing that the office of a friend,
Was not grace great enough, he chooseth rather, To manifest th'affection of a father, And builds againe of a poore wretch (vndone) A blessed bride, for his eternall sonne: My Lord I do not vtter this to thee, For thou art sensible, of my miserie, I tell the neighbouring nations; least they ghesse, I'm prone to ill, but too proud to confesse: I know my faults, and betweene griefes and feares, My body's like a barke, that sayles in teares, Made to transport (thy choyce) the soule from th'earth, Towards the faire land of euer-lasting mirth; And on these seas of sorrowes Lord vouchsafe, To be my Pylate, and conduct me safe, Vnto the shoares of peace, and thou shall see, My loue so beautifi'd with constancie, That thou 'll be pleas'd to say, I do approue, The price of life is payd, with coyne of loue. Great Prince I'm very poore, infirme and weake, Disable (without thee) to thinke or speake, The smallest good: therefore I'll still intreate, That as my dignity thou didst create,
Thou would'st maintaine it, though the cause be mine, Thou knowes it honors thee to honor thine, As the Kings honor's made of subiects duties, So are thy glories made of thy Queenes beauties: I take it, such are thine, no I mistake, Thine are thy owne, since thou didst please to make Me free t'inioy them, when I thee adore, I but repay what I receiu'd before: Since by thy bounties I in plenties liue, Giue thou me more, and more, that I may giue To others, that to all it may be seene, Of beauty, and bounty, th'ast compos'd thy Queene, With hands that neuer err'd, blest with the senses Of plenty, the meet'st mettle to make Princes: Lord lend me all thy graces, till I rise From earrh to glory in thy Paradise; In the meane time accept my sacrifice, Which Baptist-like, I send (before) aboue, "My soule flyes after, with the wings of loue. FINIS.
THE EPISTLE OF THE BRIDE TO her Lord, declaring her Confidence. A Heauenly legacy, for the vse of of the Right Honorable, IOHN Earle of Bridg-water, and his most Noble Countesse, the Lady Francis. Written, By Augustine Taylor Preacher at Hawarden. LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes. 1623.
TO THE RIGHT HO∣NORABLE IOHN, EARLE OF Bridg-water, &c. And to his most noble Lady Francis, Countesse of Bridge∣water: The issue of the Ancient, and Illustrious House of Derby. {inverted ⁂} Right Honorable: IF you admire wherefore I bring, This offring to your hands, My reason's this, I saw day spring, The first vpon those lands, That was your birth-plot, and for that My heart and hand this giues, And know your Honor die shall not, So long as English liues: Another reason's, I confesse I liue vnder the wing Of your good mother, Patronesse Of Syon where I sing, And Preach, by Gods commission, I Am sent to call, in ghests To see the Lambe in's Maiesty, Where peace, and plenty rests.
And dearely, humbly I intreate, Your Honors to that place, Where you shall sit in glories seate, And see God face to face. Your Noble dispositions bee, So generally approu'd, That for your true Nobilitie, Y'are both, both prais'd and lou'd: And so God grant you may be still, 'Tis that I wish to see, And if you please t'approue my will, Feare God, and fauour mee. Your Honors to be Commanded, Augustine Taylor.
THE ARGVMENT. The faith of Isr'el's here express'd, Her disobedience done, Humility's by her profess'd, And all her good begone. GReat King of Israell may I be so bold, To speake a few words more? some part's vntold, Of that I meant to vtter, vouchsafe t'heare, My speech preferred, with a reuerent feare, Thy ancient seruants, prudently fore-seeing Him, men deny, or doubt to haue a beeing. They can doe no true seruice, doe expresse, The first good that man doth, is to confesse The being of one God, and Scripture saith, The Honor thou admits, is built on faith: Lord I beleeue, and thou mayst shew thy might, To helpe my vnbeliefe, that in thy sight I may be perfect, and I will approue, My haruest's from the seeding of thy loue: My Lord this is my faith, I sted-fastly Beleeue all things deliuered of thee, 'Twixt th'Alpha, and th'Omega of thy booke, And I'm perswaded all the paines thou tooke,
Tends to my rest, thy promises of grace, Are th'euidence I keepe for glory's place. The poorenesse of thy comming, birth, and kinne, As I conceiue was onely for to winne The loue not prayse of men, thou didst agree, T'ore come temptations, that we might be free: Thou washt their feete, that did attend on thee, (I take it) to teach me humillitie, And as a friend that is to take in hand, A long and dangerous voyage, doth command His kinted, and acquaintance to be fit, To share of's friendly farewell, and being met, They sole mnize it sadly, and then parts, With discontent and heauinesse of hearts; And this last token ties their loues t'attend, Euen so my Lord, my husband, and my friend Did institute a supper, that I might Keepe him (though absent) euermore in sight, And then he tooke his iorney with great paine, But with farre greater Honor came againe.
My Prince I know thy day disolu'd my night, Thy heauy burthen made my burthen light, Thy purple robe di'd red with my offence, Bought me a coate as white as innocence, Thy thorne's my crowne, thy reeds my scepter, and Thy death's my life, (my faith doth vnderstand) Thy blood's the fountaine wash'd my soule from sin, Thy wounds the gates, to let me enter in, And that wound in thy side doth this impart, That thou intends to lodge me in thy heart, And made thy passage ready, the vailes rent, Makes me despise th'earth for I'm consident, Thy cities gates wide open I behold, And who'ill be pleas'd with leade, that may haue gold? My Lord I will not, heauen is my home, And I'll not let thee goe, before I come, To share part of thy glory; I am thine, And my faith tels me that thy kingdome's mine, I know and do beleeue this, and I trust My seat's made, in the mansion of the iust,
And for that place I'm bound, in the meane time, That I, in all my actions may shew thine, I'm furnishing my selfe, and I will ayme, To weare my robes for th'honor of thy name, I'll first put on obedience, and applie, My selfe t'attend vpon thy Maiestie. With dilligence and with religious feare, Thy law I'll study, and thy world I'll heare, Stife-neck'd rebellion I will neuer know, My power shall be bestow'd for to bestow, Loues legacies on thee, at thy command, My inward heart and my externall hand, Shall purpose and dispose, and to thy throne, I'll offer both my owners and my owne: Thy messengers and ministers, I'll giue Their honor and respect, and striue to liue So carefully, and free from all offence, As one that ne're knew disobedience, Although whilst my poore soule is lapt in flesh, It's cloth'd with sorrow, and with sinfulnesse:
Yet with such holy feare, I'll spend my time, Thou 'll please to say, my sinnes are none of mine. They shall be done s'vnwillingly, my flesh I know well is betroth'd to guiltinesse, But not by my consent, I doe much ill, And Lord thou knowest I do't against my will: Sinne dwelleth in me, and muah'ill contriues, T'effect much mischiefe, and (vnkindly) striues, To burthen me Lord, how shall I 't preuent? Since I am both guilty, and innocent. The flesh being mine, the sinnes say so are they, Yet since my will ne'er will'd to disobey Thy ordinances, do thou plead my cause, And if I perish vnder, Moses lawes, Let me appeale to my Messias grace, And there find comfort. I will seeke thy face, But not presumptuously, as Mary came (Poore woman) burthen'd both with sinne, and shame, Into the house where once thou sate to eate, And well considering that her sinnes were greate,
Presum'd not to behold thy face, but kept Behind thy backe, and there kneel'd downe and wept, And for a sinners sacrifice, most meete, Dropt pearle-like teares vpon thy pretious feete, And gladly washt them, and with her heads-haire, Carefully wipes them dry to leaue them faire, And with th'imbraces that best fits a friend, And many louing kisses makes, an end. Euen so my gracious Lord, I come to thee, With many faults, and much humilitie, Knowing my blemish I'm afraid of blame, And being laden both with sinne, and shame, Willing to bide my face, wash, wipe, and weepe, Or any measures sinners ought to keepe; Wishing (with Mary) my release to winne, I craue my loue might couer all my sinne, My Christ, my loue is true, and as it were, Ioyned and mixed with a reuerent feare, To make it perfect, lend thy gracious skill, To make my worke as proper as my will;
Vouchsafe to mend what is in me amisse, It is both for thy honor, and my blisse, The old man's crucifi'd, and I'm new borne, I'ue left my chaffe, and I expect thy corne. FINIS.
THE EPISTLE OF THE BRIDE TO her Lord, containing her Petitions. A Legacy, spiritually composed for the gracious suruey of the Right Reuerend Father in God, IOHN Lord Bishop of Chester, &c. By, Augustine Taylor, Preacher, and Minister, in the Church of God. LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes. 1623.
TO THE RIGHT RE∣VERENT FATHER IN GOD, IOHN, by Diuine Prouidence, Lord Bishop, of Chester. &c. Most Worthy Lord: IF for your gracious fauours vnto mee, My loue and seruice can e're make amends, Both are at your dispose, and you shall see, I'll ranke your name, amongst my noble friends, And no dishonor to your Honor, for I bring not th'offring of a monitor, But of one that wonld be admonished, At your dispose (you are as'twere my head. Learn'd Prince of Preachers, whose celestiall voyce, Contracts a King to willing audience, Accep't these lines, and I'll maintaine my choyce, Is the true Image of true excellence:
'Tis inward ioy to mee, to see men note, Me clothed in a shed of Chester scoate, It is a robe of honor, and maintain'd, By Chesters Lord vnwronged, and vnstain'd, My gracious Lord mistake me not, I do Present with reuerence, and humility, These to your Lordshp, they belong vnto Your Honor onely: Not presumptuously, I eternize your name, but with regard, And your free Patronage, is my reward, Bestow it then, and for your share doth rest, Both all my all, and of my all the best. Contracted to your Lordship, with the bands of true affection, Augustine Taylor.
THE ARGVMENT. As harrowing after sowing fits So the Bride wraps her will, In prayers, and her plants commits, Ther Lord, in Syon hill. LOrd, be not angry that I stay so long. I would (I will) not leaue thee, if I wrong Thee, or my selfe, with troublesome attempts, Since mercies lawes poore weakenesse still exempts From punishment, for commonly we see, Weaknesse acts none, but her owne iniury; Then since she punisheth her owne transgression, To chastice her againe, were meere oppression: Pardon me Lord, for I am forc'd to speake, Channells o're charg'd with water, needs must breake, Into the neighbouring lands, and cooles the plaines, With the moyst land-blood, of their too full vaines: My heart's the fountaine, and my tong's the brooke, Wherein flowes all my passions: Ouer-looke Her fruitlesse inundations I request, Conceiue the baser, but receiue the best, They both proceede from loue, and can loue cire, I know she may, but what man will preferre
Complaints against (vnfained loues) offence, None, for 'twould argue hate to innocence? I know thy nature's gracious, and Intreate, Since thou art better pleas'd to blesse then beate, Say not my sinnes are sinnes, make good of ill, Although they be my workes, th'are not my will, My God thou knowest it well; and since I haue Promis'd thee some good seruice, I must craue Thy fauours to performe it, thou must breede, Th'originall in me of will and deede, For any good, and first I humbly pray Increase my faith, that the foundation may Vphold and honor all the vpper, parts Of all my buildings: thou do'st know my hearts, Desire is onely t'entertaine those things, That my saluation, and thy honor brings, Furnish me so with faith, that my grand-foe, Attempting to effect my ouer-thowe, May faile, and fall, and vanish, giue me that Faith that set Noah vpon mount Arrarat,
That which remou'd Henoch from of the earth, And without death a gaue caelestiall birth: I doe but wish that sword to vanquish sinne, Which Dauid brought gainst th'vgly Philistime. When woes be set me round, and sinne and death, Then let my faith, aduance me from beneath, To thy abiding City'mongst the iust, Lord of thy mercy change my faith to trust, Faith doth confesse Christ but trust doth perswade, The spotlesse offerings that my Iesus made, Were mine, and for my sinne, and soules reliefe, This I beleeue, Lord helpe my vnbeliefe. Another thing I craue, is patience to, Accept contentedly, and vndergo Afflictions that may happen, grant to mee Such store of patience in all misery, That my deserts may cause report to spread, "Iobs dearest daughter liues, though he be dead: Teach me to welcome sorrow 'mongst the rest, Of other passions that possesse my brest,
Make patience power the greatest, that I may Passe the worlds nights, to heauens glorious day: Next furnish me with strength make me of might, To maintaine combate in thy Gospells right, And to my strength, adde valour, for these too, Being diuided can no seruice doo, To merit thankes or prayse, the foes intent, Preuaileth when my valour's impotent, And when my strength wants valour, I am like To loose the field, because I dare not strike: Therefore I sue, for both th'are fit'st for mee, Because I but desire them t'honor thee. Then make a sword of both to cut off strife, Venter thou it, and I will venter life; And yet I venter nothing, for I know I haue nothing but what thou didst bestow, And as thy owne command it, thine I rest, ',The best of seruants can but do her best. Yet gracious Lord, direct me how to make, (Euen for thy passion, and compassion sake,)
My prayers more compleat, because I haue, Great neede of many things, and cannot craue, So as I may obtaine, except the most Powerfull assistance of the holy Ghost, Helpe to preferre my sacrifice: if thou Will some more pacience vnto me allow, To temper all my passions, in such measure That neither sorrowes nor deluding pleasure, Possesse me with excesse: then I shall doo, Thee (soueraigne) honor, and me (subiect) too: To make thy Bride victorious, I do pray, With reuerence, loue, and feare, that I still may, Inioy that pacience, which can bring me past The blew-red vaile, with victory at last, Into thy holiest holy: here beneath, Afflictions, miseries, cares, feares, doome, and death, Fills all my dayes so full of discontent, That till I see that ladder thou once sent,
Vnto my Father Iacob, set for mee, T'ascend I looke for noe felicity, My Lord, by all the gracious promises, Of thine, betweene the first of Genesis, And the Omega, of thy sacred booke, And by the paines that my Messias tooke, By his vnualeu'd merrits, and by all He sayd or did from's birth t'his funerall, Free me from all my sinnes, and now remoue, The clouds of sinne, and vengeance from aboue, That my voyce may come to thy sacred eares, And fetch my pardon, from these cares, and feares, Lord quit me out of hand, and let me see, The glorious state of immortalitie. I'm weary of these nether-lands, and would Come see my dowery, that with purest gold, Thou hast so richly wall'd, and pau'd so faire With Berill, Topaz, and such stones as are,
Most fit in forme, and beauty; I intreate, That as thou hast prouided me a seate In Syon thy most holy, heauenly hill, Thou'll place me in't, O let it be thy will, To helpe me home in hast, that now I may Change my blacke night, for thy bright endlesse day. FINIS.
AN EPISTLE OR A Legacy, for the vse of the Right Reverend Father in God, IOHN, Lord Bishop, of the Isles of Man, &c. By Augustine Taylor, Preacher, and Minister of the Lord, our God, at Hawarden. LONDON, Printed, by Nicholas Okes. 1623.
TO THE RIGHT RE∣uerent Father in God, Iohn by the Diuine Prouidence, Lord Bishop of the Isles of Man, Rector of Hawarden, &c. MY Lord you know a heauenly muse, should bee Esteemed as men prize eternitie, I know your brest containes a muse diuine, And therefore will not vnder-value mine, Of all that liue I dare a fauour claime, But those (whose all shall perish with their name. Right Reuerend Phillips, Phillip the great King Of Macedon did cause a child to bring, Quotidian warning thus, (for him to scan) "Phillip remember thou art but a man: A fairer title, I deliuer can, Phillis consider you are Lord of Man, Both men and man approues it in that Ile, You haue sate graciously, a happy while, Vnto mans makers glory and your prayse, Among'st most reuerent Bishops, all your dayes
Shall be accounted happy: many aime At profitable Lordships, and for gaine, Are Lords of more but baser mettle farre, As farre as doth the Sunne, exceede a Starre: (Men should beleeue it, because God hath sayd) Man doth exceede all workes that e're God made, Stay, man the soyle? no, man the soule is blest, I grant that truth, and then it needs must rest, Y'are Lord of both, others but of the soyle, Their couetous carefulnesse, and temp'rall toyle Affirme; no lesse, whereas your Lordship may, With much content, with Princely Dauid say: "The place wherein my lot to me befell, "Is passing faire, and like me wondrous well. You might haue bathed in a greater fountaine, But a small Dyamond's worth, a mighty mountaine, Some lesser things are priz'd, the great'st aboue, "The quality not quantity breeds loue; Happy was man to haue the man of God Find out her port, he hath remou'd the rod
Of wrath and fury out of all her coasts, And how to call vpon the Lord of Hoasts, In her owne language he hath taught her know, Such benefits good Bishops doe bestow, Vpon their flocke: Now babes and sucklings can, And doe extoll the Lord of Heauen, and man: Pitty't had beene you should haue left the Ile, For your preferment better many smile, Then one, and it is better that one loose, Then many, I haue knowne your Lordship choose, To preferre generall before speciall good, Your pious learned care 'tis vnderstood: Hath truely (newly) setled all the land, And taught the ignorant to vnderstand The holy word of God, and 'tis thought fit, You honor God, your King, and selfe by it, In seeing that establisht yo'aue begune Ioy in it Lord, you haue more honor woone, By making th'ignorant intelligent, "Of God and men, then euer shall be spent.
My friends (the cause I prayse) this Lord's to mee, As neare and deare as Paul to Tymothie. What erst was ruin'd by the great neglect Of's predicessors he doth re-erect, In sumptuous stately wise, and whereas they But onely sought the land to fetch a pray, And hauing found it would be blowne away, If but a side wind came: this doth not soe, But with the hand of bounty doth bestow, Vpon the land what it affords to him, He doth not teach her plenties how to swim, From her, and leaue her poore: a true report Sayth hee hath made a cottage in a Court, That well may lodge a Prince, and seated so Sit on the Towers, and turne thee too and sro, And all the Kings dominions thou mayst see, England, Cambria, Ireland, Albanie, And in his Lordly house hee dayly spends, Great pious plenty among'st all his friends:
Man was a woman (before he came there) And pluckt the fruit forbidden, but now feare Of that sinnes punishment, by him made knowne, Hath set the man vp, and cast the woe downe. Long may Gods blessigs, and my Lord together, Transport from hnce to man, and from man hither; And Lord be pleas'd that I both long and well M'attend the steps of my gamalie. My Lord take this in token of my loue, And when your better part is soar'd aboue, And left the rest for earth, these lines shall last, When earth, and men, and times and Toombs shall wast, Truely affected to see duely effected, my office (vnto your Lordship) in Gods seruice, AVGVSTINE TAYLOR.
TO HIS VVORSHIP∣FVLL, AND WORTHY, Faithfull Friends, and Louers, in the (Episcopall Iurisdiction) Parish of Hawarden, in Flint-shire. {inverted ⁂} Truely beloued: MY faithfull seruice, and my purest loue, Shall waite on you, till loue and seruice failes, (I speake in earnest) next those ioyes aboue, I loue your Syon, loue (od sayth) preuailes To couer many faults, I doe desire, My loue that's kindl'd (now) with holy fire, May purchace your affections, and my best, And all my all, at your dispose shall rest. Yet I beseech you, not mistake me much, If from the first to th'last any one doth Affect me truely my free nature's such, Those shall command my loue, and seruice both: I'll doe my best for all, yea euen for those, (If there be such) that striue to be my foes, I loue, but doth not feare these earthly powers, There is a will aboue this will of owers,
That can doe what he will. It is with him That you and I must reckon for our sinne, And not amongst our selues, true Christians must Indeauour still to make each other iust, And seeke the shame of none, which blessed act Will men together vnto God contract, "Take this it comes from him that still will proue, Yours both in duty, and vnfeigned loue. Augustine Taylor
A VVATCH, COMPOSED FOR, AND DEDICATED to the seruice of the Right Honora∣ble WILLIAM Earle of DERBY, Barron Stanley, Lord Strange of Knockin, and of Man: Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter, Leiute∣nant, and Chamber-laine, of the Counties Palatines of Chester, and Lancaster, &c. By His Honors most obseruant seruant, Augustine Taylor, Preacher, and Minister, at Hawarden, in Flint-shire. LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes. 1623.
THE ARGVMENT. The times are spid'e to go on crutches, and Goes very fast, and therefore very ill: Heauen is prou'd the best hauen where to land, Respect of faithfull friendship's wished still. Honor's examin'd, and those parts made plaine, Which best befits her brest to entertaine, Blacke Enuy's challeng'd, and her force defide, Nobillity rides by Derbyes Loraly side. STay Derbyes Earle and pause a little, for 'Tis fit each Phillip haue his monitor, As duely as his day, onely to know, Himselfe as well in substance as in show: The time meanes mischiefe, and her plots to smother, Promiseth one thing, and pretends another, Gaine sayes the will of the great legislator, And giues to Esau wine, to lacob water, Contemnes the best, and doth the base adore, Feeds the foole fat, and keepes the wiseman poore, Honors the bad, and doth the good disgrace, Lookes vpon merrit, but with halfe a face, Keepes true worth fasting, yet deales out of measure, (But thus) pence for desets, and pounds for pleasure.
T'auoyde the worst, that time and men can do, Mans and times God appoynts vs here vnto, To alter our affections, and remoue them From earth to dwell where's nought but God aboue them. Watch noble Lord, for I feare we shall see, The times so sicke with mutabillitie, They will intreate a purge, and you shall trie, The good shall be restor'd, the wicked die: My Lord we haue a warrant lets vs know, There's many things are done in earth below, And all aut amissi, aut permissi from, A power that ruleth all but's rul'd by none, We are at his dispose, when his decree, Will breake the necke of Casars royaltie, Rome cannot peece it, therefore him to feare, (That is impartiall and that scornes to beare Corrupt affection) 'tis our best (to honor) Grace should haue measure, still to waite vpon her; And constancy, experience makes it knowne, Fauours doe neuer spring, that are not sowne:
Vpon the soyle of merrit: I did dreame, Minnions too mighty makes Monarcks too meane, As sparing graces neuer pravse could winne, So fauours out of measure are meere sinne, The great King giues his graces t'all so true, That none hath lesse, that none hath more then due, And his affection's lasting. Euen so I know you learne at him, since you bestow Your graces vpon goodnesse, doe so still, And blest shall be your actions, and your will: Long may you liue to fill your noble seate, "A few such great men, would make good men great. Therefore I wish your life, and that you may, With much content, tell many a happy day, Of grace, and one of glory t'euer last, That your true honor, ne'er be ouer-cast; And that you euer may stand fast, and faire, A piller vpon earth, a starre in th ayre, Consider what these following lines afford, "The seruant may (sometimes) direct his Lord.
There's one thing necessary it is sayd, And ipse dixit who hath all things made, And that's a summum bonum, where at man Should onely ayme because he neuer can Be satissi'd, vntill haue vnderstood, The glorious fulnesse of this soueraigne good, I know your ayme's at that so let it be, The first foundation of nobillitie, Was faith in God, the building feare and loue; Kings wills are powerfull but that will aboue, Proceeding from Iehouah, all of them That would change vana spe for certam spem, Must reuerently obey: those cutsed bee, That onely trust in earthly maiestie, And you shall see them perish, he that would Reape houor to fetch home pure Ophir gold, Scornes to returne with baser mettle: so He that, to Magnus Rex may freely go, And's promis'd entertainement, doth disdaine To spend's best time and treasure in the traine
Of an Inferiour Prince, man should delight, "In things that yeelds both God and Caefar right Therefore I say it's good, and I'll say still, "It's best serue him that can doe what he will. This dayly duely done, the next you do, Eu'ry attendant that belongs Your Honor, either fastned by the linckes Of loue or duty, wisedome 'twere me thinkes, And pollicy, and honor to respect, All loues and dutyes with such meete respect, As prudence may proportion: some there are Knowes you but by report, that would not spare, Their liues and treasures t'expresse Derbyes worth, To keepe the Eagle famous in the North: Pitty it were that those that loues you best, Should loose their loues, and be regarded least; And pitty 'twere that those that loues you not, Should be respected, and the rest forgot, That peace and loue within your walles may stand, Resolue like Dauid when he tooke in hand,
The gouernment of Israell, these things, He vow'd t'obserue vnto the King of Kings, "Mercy and iustice I will sing to thee, And in my house, with such integrity I doe intend to liue, that men shall tell, The Lord bestow'd his crowne and scepter well. I will attempt no wicked thing at all, The faithlesse and the froward neuer shall, Possesse my smallest fauours: I doe hate, The proud and haughty, and I'll ruinate, The slanderer, the flatterer, and the proud, Neither my court nor kingdome hath allow'd A resting place; all those that maketh ties, And loues deceipt I vtterly dispise: The charitable, faithfull, meeke, and free, Are onely chosen seruants vnto mee. Right Noble Earle, let Dauids Princely minde, Lodge in your Lordly brest, let all those finde, Protection from your Honor, that maintaine, Publike and priuate Stanleys, Stainlesse name.
Do not guild Parasits prayse, it's but a blast, But guild that frame in which your name shall last, Defend those that defend your Honor, and Those that giue you their hearts giue them your hand, Your countenance shining as it ought and may, Comforts your followers as the Sunne doth day. It is examin'd and 'tis vnderstood The Isles are peopl'd with more bad then good, Since enemies doe spring, as thicke as weedes, The shrub's the saffest, 'tis the Cedar needes, Supporting to withstand the furious winds, 'Tis onely my affection that me binds, T'aduise my Lord, although Idare not bet, That super senes intellexi, yet, I know what's fit, to boast I'm not allow'd, "I'm proud of nothing, but that I'm not proud, I'll tell some things I know, and some I doubt, There are some setches, their best treasures out, Of Derbyes Earledome, thence they cloath, and feast, And gaines most by you, and yet loues you least?
Trust but a few let not those that delights, To steale your Eagles feather, t'imp their kits, Steale both your gaine, and Honor. Moses sings, God carn'd Israell once on Eagles wings, From Pharaohs sury, and so did expresse, His power and loue, in seas and wildernesse; Those he lou'd he deliuer'd all the rest, He restlesse left: to learne at him it's best, And charge your Eagle, as she doth respect, The fauours of her Lord that she accept None, neither vnder, nor vpon her wings But friendly ones, that's onely those that brings, Pledges of loue and duty: then shall those That (publicke dares nor) be but priuate foes, To Derbyes Honor quickly proued bee, And this a pious course, and pollicie: Scorne all base mettle, and as Salomon would, Haue all his vessells made of purest gold, And counted siluer base, doe you like him, Shut vp your Lordly brest, and let none in
But choycest, chiefest men, and looke they bee All truely furnisht with some qualitie, Worthy an Earles respect, for sayth the stery, The Moone among the clouds looseth her glory, But if sh'attended be with Starres of light, "Showes as she ment to make a day of night: He his owne goodnesse seales, and's greatnesse saues, "That keepes himselfe vnstain'd with fooles and knaues, Maintaine your state, and those that truely loue it, "And all shall stumble, that would steppe aboue it. For too much lowlinesse and clemencie, None should be blam'd, yet there's some vice we see Proceedeth from these vertues, some repent Their humblenesse, because it breeds contempt, Vertues may be mistaken, blessings vs'd, "Are blessings still, but cursings being abus'd: Your gracious clemency hath beene to all So largly show'd, that my pen freely shall, Record it to the times to come. Who can Not tell and testifie, a noble man
Should be both Lambe and Lyon-like the first To match the best, the last t'ore match the worst, So a Lambs meekenesse, and a Lyons might, In great men claimes a dwelling as their right, Both lodge in you, and I do smell a sauor, Proceed from Derby, both of force and fauour, Which your crest claimeth in your rights defence, Th'Eagle showes power, the child showes innocence: Your spirit's Princely like the Eagles, and 'Tis as the infants meeke, (but vnderstand) Least childishly you construe, I'll tell thee That comprehends not his no billitie, And wonder not th'art not intelligent, The earth is thine, the ayre's his element, He's witty, wise, and valorous, knowes his measure, He smites not Lazarus, and he sooths not Caesar; The good he nourisheth, and the bad he spares not, The lowly he loues well, for the proud he cares not, Mercy did neuer find a humaine brest, Allow'd her better lodging, 'mongst the rest
Of's vertues, Iustice sits (true Princesse like) She will lift vp the sword, but's loath to strike: Because she knowes God list not iustice try, By's threatning Isacke, when the ram did dye. Bounty adornes his hand, and sacred loue, Guids both his words and actions, the white doue Of innocence hath brought him Manna t'eate, And nurst him so well he's as good as greate, If any aske in whom this wealth is stor'd, I say in Derbyes Earle, my louing Lord: They say in Courts men longest keepe their places, If they can patiently receiue disgraces, And tender thankee: but it were better dwell, With Lot in Bela, where no dangers swell, Then in the fayrer plaines, that lyes too low, "Which Iordans streames hath leaue to ouer-flow. The Eagle's wise, and betweene tweed and dee, Inioyes such store of happy libertie, As well might please a Prince, tweed speakes your fame, Ribl's your seruant, mercy knowes your name,
Commands his fruitfull shores, fayre dee doth meane, The treasures, in or by his holy streame, To tender as your due, and as his duty, And in a word examine but what beauty, The North containes, and in loue as 'tis fit, Both are at your dispose, the North and it. God that doth all things well, hath order giuen, To beautifie the earth, (as well as Heauen) Veiwe the aetheriall region, and there see, The glorious frame of that great canopie, Seemes to be nayl'd with starres, and in such wise They are asign'd their places in the skies, By admirable skill, the Heauens expresse About each greater light, millions of lesse, Doe still attend, by loue together knit, Both to adde honor, to themselues and it: Men are so plac'd on earth, th'earth doth afford, Thousands of seruants to attend one Lord; You are made strong by them, they strong by you, If there be any dim lights th'are vntrue,
And meanes to adde no honor to your name, They liue with enuy, and shall end with shame. Now let pale enuy, (whose ill tutor'd tong, Is hourely vtt'ring infamy, and wrong) Spit all her poyson, vpon Derby's name, She cannot adde a spot: the lippes of fame Haue sworne, and kiss'd the booke neither bee Silent, nor subiect vnto flatterie, My Lord my muse did vowe your worth and name, To register, and chose this lasting frame, And hath made truth her witnesse, any come And catch me with a lie, and I'll be dumbe For euer after, know I scorne to proue A parasite, either for for feare or loue: Liue to augment your Honors, still to be Belou'd of God, King, state, land, men, and me. Your Honors already, and onely ready, to be yours, Augustine Taylor.
THE DEFENCE OF DIVINE POESIE, Committed to the Protection of the Right Honorable; William Earle of Pembrooke, &c. By, Augustine Taylor, Preacher, and Minister, in the Church of God. LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes. 1623.
TO THE RIGHT HONO∣rable, William Lord Harbert, Earle of Pembrooke, Barron Harbert of Cardiffe, Lord Parr Roos of Reudall, Marmion, and St. Quintin, Chiefe Chamberlaine of his Maiesties House-hold, Gouernour of Ports-mouth, and Warden of the Stauneries, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and one of his Maiesties, most Honorable Priuy Councell, &c. Most Honorable: KIng Salomon did choose to haue his Throne, Borne vp with Lyons, and admitted none, Of baser beasts that should imployed bee, In office neare vnto his dignitie, Accounting wolues, and asses beasts too base, To be imployd about a Throne of grace. Your greatnesse being goodnesse doth affect, The best supporters, because you protect, Both art, and wit, and grace, I wish to bee Preseruer of your pious dignitie: Great Earle, a Diuine muse vnto you brings, A sacrifice worth the respect of Kings,
Not for my merit, by whom now it comes, But for his merits that hath brought the sonnes Of Adam backe to Eden, giue to mee, Such fauours as befits the ministrie; And for requitall God giue you, I'll pray, Many good yeares, and then one lasting day. Willing to doe your Honor any Christian seruice, in the power of AVGVSTINE TAYLOR.
THE ARGVMENT. The season's poyson'd with abusiue wits, Faire poesi's vs'd to serue the basest vse, Wit guilt with grace, the subiect best befits: No musicke's equall to a Heauenly muse, Wit choosing the best subiects to worke on, Shall find glory with God, and grace with man. OVr Physicke-Doctors say, the times are sicke, But I say no, the times are lunaticke: Yet madnesse is a sicknesse, but I know It is not in their el'ment to bestow Remedy on't, God hath sayd wisedom's mine, They meddle with things carnall, not diuine: If God doe not in time some helpe apply, Vnto these times, both times and men must dye, He that can well conceiue may much admire, To see vnto what hight mens wits aspire, T'aduance the Towers of Babell, and to see So few striue to maintaine the dignitie Of blessed Bethell, base, vile god-lesse, wits Counts it more grace to passionate the fits, Of damn'd adultry, murther, blasphemie, Deceipt and lying, then it is to bee, A carefull student in Diuinitie,
So many breasts sends forth vnhallow'd breath, The very ayre's infected, clouds of death, Are shapen in the skie for vengeance, and Shall be disperst abrode, by the left hand Of God in's anger to kill and condemne Nations, and people, that doe him contemne. I doe wish those that so abuse their times, A dulterers-like conceiuing gracelesse rimes, To humor earth, those that delude the season, With pounds of wit, but not halfe drammes of reason, T'reforme themselues, for better harmonie, And seeming men, be as they seeme to bee. A creature reasonable, God did make man, And he ought dayly to doe all he can, To rayse his glory, and his acts to tell, That gaue him's being, and his being well: Reasonlesse I esteeme, those that doe spend, Their adle braines on idle things that end, In th'houre they are begunne, and doe not prayse The acts of dayes of life, but acts of dayes,
Of death, and desolation pray you scan, There is a man, and a thing like a man, 'Tis plaine, that euery like, is not the same, So some haue th'inward fruite, some th'outward frame, Some haue the substance, some haue but the show, Some bad are set aboue, some good below, Some diuine wits still sings of things aboue, Some (foolishly) breaths nought, but earthly loue, Some loues the temp'rall, some the spirituall food, For some are fram'd for ill, and some for good: Some poets sings of loue, and some of hate, Some loues the common, some commends the state, Some flatters greatnesse, some contemnes the poore, Some men haue fewer faults, and some haue more, But all haue some, and some haue all, for still, Some sparkes of enuy's mixed with good-will: Some loues vnfit speech, some words most meete, Some haue a stinking breath, and some a sweete: Some liues in feare of men, some feares but God, Some seekes the staffe, and some deserues the rod,
Man is inriched both with art and nature, T'expresse the glory of the all Creator, Weapons of Honor God giues man to vse, And with those weapons they doe him abuse: God giues vs arte, and wit, and reason , And grace to will, and likewise grace to do, If we intreate so much, you ne'r find shall, From the first day vnto the funerall, Of this old world did e're deny, His mercy vnto men in misety, If beg'd with faith and meeknesse: whither hath His fond affection led him? T'a wrong path, That he forgets so good a Lord so long, And with's owne weapons seekes to doe him wrong, All mans good parts are sent him from aboue, And man to manifest his makers, loue Should set them all to worke, 'tis vnderstood, God doth require but thankes for all the good That he bestowes on all, regard therefore, His wage is potent, though your worke be poore.
Mans tong should preach and pray, his heart beleeue. The care must heare, th'eyes see, the hands releeue; Each member must remember th'head of all, And all, and each must serue the principall. I'm t'old (and I beleeue it) from aboue, Gifts are descending from the God of loue, Some with some gifts are blessed, some with other, But no man ought his gifts of grace to smother, Or wrong apply them for the Lord hath show'd, Gifts be apply'd to th'end they are bestow'd, Some sings with Dauid, some with Iob laments, Some sinnes with both, and some with both repents, Some fights like Iosuah, and like Iosuah winnes, Some flyes the field when th'honor but beginnes; Some shuns the danger, those loose the renowne, Some beares the crosse, and those shall weare the crowne Some like the chaffe, before the winds are gone, Some like Cedars on mount Lebanon Prosper and flourish, faire, and free, and fast. Comely, and seemely both to like and last:
Some bidden come not, some vnbidden come, Thus some proue wiser (farre) then other some. Some like the driuen dust are parcht and dry'd, Some like the branches by the riuer side, Are faire and fruitfull, and doe cause the streame, Draw beauty and plenty with her siluer teame, Vnto the good all good shall happen still, And vnto th'euill ill, because th'are ill; Such thing desires it like, and so it comes That Caine's at oddes with all his fathers sonnes, For hating's brethren, and contemning's God, He ranne a vagabond to the land of Nod; And liu'd vnlou'd, vnpiti'd, vnlamented, And (some thinke) di'd vntimely, vnrepented, For so shall all that doe the Lord dispise, Or offers him a broken sacrifice. So our lewd poets doe, God makes a poet, And the thing made forgets, or doth not know it: A speciall good God meant vnto the earth, First when he did intend a Poets birth,
Gods perfect image catch it those that can, Is heauenly measures in an earthly man. When Moses troope, had pass'd the scarlet flood, His inward ioy we had not vnderstood, But by his Hebrew song, and onely that, Makes the man prays'd the maister wonder'd at: Iordans obedience at braue Iosuahs feete, When it show'd him a passage faire and meete, When walls of water, stood like walls of glasse, Vpon both hands to suffer him to passe, And bring his army in at Cana'ns doore, The land Iehouah promis'd long before. These things had beene vnknowne, and beene vnsung, But for the musicke of a sacred tongue: With Baraks victory, and Sisraes fall, We had not beene so well acquainted all, But for the heauenly muse of Debora, That Barak wonne the honor of the day, That ancient Kishon washt mount Tabors feete, And all our enemies away did sweepe,
That Heauen sent ayde to earth, and all the Starres, Behau'd themselues like souldiers in those warres, That men intended mischiefe and God crost it, That Iaell wonne the day, and Iabin lost it, We had not knowne, these had been wrong'd with death But that th'are infants of a muses breath. That God doth iustice loue, but mercy rather, And that although man's feeble earthly father Forget him and forsake him, God will not, This had beene vntold, or told and forgot, But that the sacred breath of holy man, Preserueth more then Brasse or marble can: That Iesses sonne was fetcht from following sheepe, An hoast of men to leade defend and keepe, That he once wore a sheepe-hooke in his hand, And then a royall scepter did command, That he sate in the field vpon a stone, And after in the pallace on the throne, That he was capt with wooll against the cold, And after crown'd with purest beaten gold;
That of a Sheepheard God thus made a King, And turn'd his fasting into banqueting, That he that (sometime) llow'd ewes with yong, Did leaue that labour, and apply'd hi tong, To prayse Iehouah in an Hebrew song: Gods greatnesse, goodnesse highneste, workes, and wonders, We know, and had not knowne, but for his numbers, Dauid I meane, he that in word and deede, Both did and sayd, for God and Iacobs seede: Thankes be to Salomon, we are not to search, A sacred muse betwixt Christ and his Church, To sing the nuptials, 'tis already done, By Isr'els King, and Dauids sacred sonne: Asaph and Ethan well deserned thankes, For placing th'Arke of God on Sylos bankes, With triumph and reioyceing, Amos sonne, Seeing his Lord his Vineyard hath beguine Vpon a fruitfull hill, sayd I will sing, To my King; Vineyard, of my Vineyards King;
And so proceed, and all the world yet heares, When great Iehouah fell a dealing yeares, To Hezekiah Iudahs holy King, To gratulate his Lord, no better thing, Had of his owne to giue, then freely trips, A heauenly measure from his princely lippes; Praysing the God of life, death, night, and day, "The scripture warrants what you heare me say, That Maries soule so greatly did reioyce, To heare the tidings by an angels voyce, That she should be a mother and beare a sonne, That should redeeme a wretched world (vndone) We had beene ignorant of these good things, But that glad Mary had amuse, that sings Vnto this day, and by her muse we know Th'humble are set aboue, the proud below. That Simeon in the Temple sung (to all) His Sauiours lullaby and's owne funerall, That his old armes so happy, were t'imbrace, The Prince and heire of glory, and of grace,
His owne tongue testifies; and thus I chuse, The sacred script of many heauenly muse, T'exhort wits that are bearing and doe breede, Choycest inuentions, henceforth to proceede, More regularly, religiously I meane, Leaue Babels partched commons, seeke the streame, That keepes the skirts of Hermon euer greene, The on's a strumpet, th'other is a Queene, And those that striue her beauties to expresse, Shall know her matchlesse, endlesse happinesse; God sayd, all those that sought her honor, should Be fed with Manna, and be cloath'd with gold, And led with Angels, and haue Saints society, Ierusalem to dwell in, and variety Of those delights, and ioyes (both all and some) That God prouided, for the world to come. But Esaus timelesse, haplesse, gracelesse, seede, Shall lucklesse liue in misery and neede, And be in bondage still, a voyce diuine Sayth, "Esau must not drinke of Iacobs wine: Then since there's due rewards layd vp for merits, And like deserts, like punishments inherits,
We'll idolize no more, nor men, nor treasure, Let him that hath a muse can tune a measure, To the worlds eare, bestow it in such wise, T'haue life and honor by his sacrifice, Leaue all rediculous fictions, take aduise, Learne either properly to similize The truth or tell it plainely, you should ken, "What's vnlike truth, should euer dislike men, Make your proceedings perfect, and then proue, By outward actions, your true inward loue: Lasciuious voyces, but makes deafe the season, Th'are stuff'd with mickle rime but little reason, That poesie may be honor'd l'd, and prays'd, And (like to him that ) with glory rays'd, Out of the dust of ignorance and death, Refuse your subiects, and refine your breath, By sucking sweeter ayre, study to bring, Such songs a, Saints may sing before their King: Like towers well built your workes shall last, and then Both purchase grace with God, and loue with men. FINIS.
AN EPISTLE, Dedicated to the Right VVor∣shipfull, Sr. Thomas Smith Knight, Maior of Chester, and High Sheriffe of that County Pala∣tine, &c. To the Right Worshipfull Sr. Randall Man∣waring, Knight, &c: Edward Whitby Esquire, Recorder, William Gamwell, Iohn Ratcliffe, Robert Whitby, William Aldersey, Charles Fitton, Hugh Williamson, &c. Esquires, late Maiors of that ancient and Hono∣rable City; And to the Worshipfull Mr. Nicholas Ince, Mr. Thomas Whitby, Mr. Brereton, Mr. Peter Drink-water, Mr. Andrew Gamwell, Mr. Robert Berry, Mr. Humphrey Lloyd &c. Aldern of the same, &c. All temporall, and eternall happinesse Right Worshipfull: THat I thus Register your worthy names, 'Tis no dishonor, for my gift's Diuine; You are faire Chesters pillers, and maintaines, Her royalties, since you doe all combine,
In such a perfect vnion, that I find Though you seeme many, yet y'haue but one mind, You being at one I would your one proue Accept my seruice, and giue me your loue. Your Worships in Gods seruice, AVGVSTINE TAYLOR.
TAYLORS EPISTLE to the Honorable, and VVor∣shipfull Soieties of the well Gouerned City of West-Chester, &c. GOD that of nothing hath so great things made So many and so glorious may perswade, The created, the Creator intends, Some speciall good, whereto the finall ends, Of euery creature leads, which act discouers, Nothing was made to serue it selfe but others: As nothing made it selfe, it must needs bee, Nothing was made to serue it selfe, we see A power that sends and suffers good, and ill, "The made is subiect to the makers will, The Heauens (it seemes were made) to serue the ayre, The ayre to serue the earth, the earth doth share, Her store to serue the beasts, and foules, which feede (Although to them vnknowne) to serue mans neede: The Sunne doth serue with light, the clouds with raine, The fire with heate, the cooling springs remaine,
To serue the swelting soule, all things that moue, Are tokens manifest the makers loue, Which both submit and serue at mans dispose, The question is man being Lord of those, By lycence giuen him from the onely king, (Let him beare rule) if he bound to bring His seruice as a subiect or if hee, Being seru'd by others may claime soueraigntie And onely seru'd himselfe. I answere thus, God did make all things good, man optimus, Iudu'd wrth reason, onely to expresse, His makers glory and's owne holinesse: But was not made to serue himselfe for God, Teacheth subiection both with staffe and rod, The good the staffe supports, to flourish still, The bad the rod corrects, to punish ill: Man is Gods Image, and in that is showne, God did make man that man shold make God knowne Gods power and prayse, should euery where be spred, For what's not knowne, cannot be worshipped.
Then ayme to do your office, that you may With much content tell many a happy day, On earth of grace, and one in Heauen of glory, Obserue the stature's in the sacred story; Honor the Lord, fight in his truths defence, Cloath you and your in coates of innocence, Euer support the good, suppresse the ill, "This the meanes to keepe your station still: Beleeue, releeue, and as you loue the Lord, Maintaine such ministers as giue his word A perfect true construction, haue a care, The selfe conceipted Schismatickes, that are Not pure in life, but in opinion doo, Not onely wrong themselues, but others too. Since there is but one God, and that one hath, But one truth to direct vs in one path, That leads to endlesse blisse, it fits your place, To giue the Preachers of it so much grace, As bounty, and affection can afford, As you haue grace by the incarnate word,
And promises of glory, euer see Such honor giuen to the ministrie, As God himselfe commanded and mongst all Th'Embassadors made Euangellicall, Cut out rewards according to their merits, And know thus much those that some gifts inherits, Aboue the rest, are worthy more respect, Because those gifts are signes they were elect, By Gods diuine decrees, for we should still Farre more by heauenly then by humaine will, Enter the Temple, th'alter to imbrace, Not with the armes of nature but of grace, Truth should haue trumpets to divulge her will, Not such as sounds too often, but sounds shrill, The Church is iniur'd by a number such, As keepeth silence, or else speakes too much, Truth's sicke, and like to dye, vnlesse she doo, Find speciall friends both good and great ones too, As Naomi is alone, without a Ruth, A sad forsaken widow, such is truth,
Without'n true supporters, be you then, (As you are principals mongst many men:) Of Dauids perfect mind, when he did sing Of mercy and iustice, to his Lord and King; Oh imitate him with a free consent, You are the Cities starres, whose gouerment Commandeth millions, and your houses bee, The Cities schooles where all the rest should see, Peace, pyety, bounty, loue, and decencie, Cherish the vertuous, and all goodnesse grace, Looke on th'offenders but with halfe a face, Banish the bad, and doe the good adore, Fauour not Parasites, rather feede the poore, Seeke for the loue of all, because 'tis prou'd, The strongest man is he, that's best belou'd, What you may do to learne, do not request, But striue to know what will become you best: Your places are both great and worthy, and Vnfit for those that doe not vnderstand,
Your City's free and ancient, and may boast Of better Lawes then those that glory most, Your orders and proceedings, all are such, I know no City that may speake so much Of her owne prayse so iustly; there's not any, Hath had so worthy gouernours, so many So generous, still may faire Chester bee, Blest with such heads, that true prosperity, And peace, and plenty in your wals may dwell, And that your charge you may discharge as well, As Dauids worthies did in Israell, Iacobs good God protect and keepe you still, And make you Citizens on faire Syon Hill. FINIS.
