24258 S120731 99855925 21433
THREE SEVERALL TREATISES CON∣CERNING THE TRVCE AT THIS PRESENT propounded. The first, laying open divers Considerations and Reasons, why a Truce ought not to bee Con∣tracted: Propounded vnto the High and Mightie Lords the States Generall of the Vnited Provinces: By the right Honble the Commissioners and Depu∣ties of the most Hon: authorized Company of West India. In their owne behalfe. The second, discusseth this question very pithily and at large, whether or no it bee lawfull to make Truce with the King of Spaine, with divers fitting Considerations. Lastly, here is added a Remonstrance, repre∣sented to the States theyr Excellencies, In the be∣halfe of the King of Bohemia, which hath a respect vnto the Affaires in Germanie. All truly and faithfully Translated out of the Low Dutch Copie. LONDON. Printed for Nathaniel Butter and Nicholas Bourne. 1630.
Three severall Treatises concer∣ning the Truce at this present propounded. High and Mightie Lords. ALthough wee assure our selues and are confident, that your Excellen∣cies and Lordships both according to your wonted wisedome can, and according to your speciall benevo∣lence and favour towards vs, will take into Consi∣deration; that an especiall duty doth vs all gene∣rally bind, both to the conseruation and increasing of our Company, and to the safetie and welfare of our welbeloued Countrey. Yet neuerthelesse, wee cannot but esteeme our selues particularly obliged, to shew to your Excellencies in all submissiue manner briefly, the chiefest matters which in this particular are to bee considered of. 1 First, ought to bee taken into consideration, with what desire and expectation, the erecting of this Com∣pany hath both by all good Patriots amongst our selues, as also by all welwilling Neighbours and others without our State, been earnestly looked and hoped for. And how at last notwithstanding much opposed, with the Contradictions and gainstanding of some, the same though slowly is brought to good effect.
Secondly, that your Excellencies out of your owne voluntary motions, haue freely afforded ayde and assi∣stance to your Subiects And by forme of mutuall con∣tract, and reciprocall engagement, haue promised in case of Warre to yeeld them all helpe and furtherance and by Contract with forraigne Nations, to maintaine them in their Corporation. 3. Thirdly, that hereupon, the Capitall of this Com∣pany, by the inducements of the Directors thereunto appointed by your Excellencies, hath beene wholly fur∣nished and made compleat, euen by such as your Ex∣cellencies your selues may iudge and perceiue to stand, for the maintainance of the true reformed Religion, & Liberties of our own Country. Insomuch, that diuers euen from a poore stocke, haue largely Contributed. 4. Fourthly, that by reason of this Company, from the first beginning, diuers ships haue both beene built, and bought, and diuers imployed, which otherwise had laine still out of Seruice, for want of Commerce, Tra∣fique, and employment. 5. Fifthly, that by this Company, many and great Ships haue beene built, to the manifest and apparent encrease, of the Nauie and Nauigation. And especially, many faire and swift Pinaces. 6. Sixthly, that the number of our Ships hath from time to time so encreased, that for the present wee can make aboue an hundreth sayle of very faire well rigged
Ships, fit for warlike employment, beeing of seuerall bignesse, and now at Sea, ready for seruice. 7. Seauenthly, that we haue entertained vpon the same Ships a great number both of Marriners and Soul∣diers continually; so that the precedent yeare, we em∣ployed in our seruice about nine thousand men, and now at this present doe employ neare vpon fifteene thousand. Now by this meanes our men are wonder∣fully trained vp to Nauigation. By this meanes are made diuers expert Pilots, and a great number so well exercised, that our Country may now continually find some fit and able men, both to serue for Master and other inferiour offices in their Nauie. 8 Eighthly, that we haue victualed the same ships, some for twelue, some fifteene, some for eighteene, and some for more Moneths. 9. Ninthly, that we haue so furnished our ships with great shot, that the last yeare wee had in our Nauie 264. brasse Peeces, among the which were many De∣miculuerins, and neare vpon 1400. great Falcons; which number this yeare is palpably increased so that now, wee haue aboue foure hundred brasse Peeces, and aboue 2000. Falcons, besides 600. Peeces for stone shot. 10. Lastly, that wee haue prouided and furnished the same Nauie, with a great quantitie of Powder, which was most made heere. So that this last yeare, wee haue bestowed vpon our Nauy, aboue an hundred
thousand pounds of Gunpowder. Out of all which pre∣mises doth plainely appeare, what traffique and tra∣ding our Equipage hath caused amongst vs how ma∣ny men we haue imployed: With what admirable for∣ces we haue enriched your Excellencies Nauy. Where∣by great helpe and furtherance is administred to your Excellencies in time of need and danger. As expe∣rience hath taught of late (without pride be it spoken) when our Company stood this Country in great stead, in their late Broyles and Inconueniencies. And now stands farther to bee considered: What riches and treasure their Ships haue brought into these Countries. First passing by and omitting, whatsoever hath come in former yeares, as Gold, Elephants teeth, Greines, Hides, Skins, Wood, Salt, and the like; (by way of Commerce and Traffique) the Siluer, Coined and Vncoined, which hath beene obtained, by ouercomming the Fleet of Noua Hspania, doth amount to such an infinite treasure, that neuer the like Prize hath beene brought in, eyther here, or elsewhere. Secondly, wee haue these late ensuing yeares depriued our Enemies, and enriched our owne Country, with a great deale of Indigo. Insomuch, that towards the latter end of the last, and begin∣ning of this yeare, aboue foure thousand Cases haue beene brought in. Thirdly, a very great quantitie of Sugar; inso∣much▪ that this present yeare onely hath beene brought in by vs, some three thousand Chests.
Fourthly, a wonderfull great number of raw Hides; especially this yeere, aboue sixe and thir∣tie thousands wrested from the Enemie. Fifthly, such a worthy deale of Cochineel, as neuer came in these Countries before. Sixthly, an vnspeakable deale of Tobacco, which now is become great Merchandize. Lastly, great riches and treasure in all manner of costly lapida silke, silke Wares, Mak, Am∣ber, all kind of Drugs, Bsill Wood, Camperie Wood, and other wares, (which were tedious to relate) so that wee haue alreadie brought into these Countries many millions. All the which Wares, are bought and dispearsed amongst the In∣habitants here; some vsed, others transported, and howsoeuer thereby are your Excellencies Subiects enriched, the decayed traffique increased, and the Convoy strengthened. It may soone bee perceiued what losse our ene∣mies haue hereby sustained. Moreouer wee haue surprised many Galleons from the King of Spaine, which formerly were esteemed as inuincible Ves∣sels; besides many other Warlike ships; passing ouer with silence, aboue two hundreth ships, as al∣so Barques Which we haue afforced to our selues, appropriated to our owne vse, & in part destroyed. The same our Ships haue ouermastred the rich and mightie Citie St. Salvador in Brall, and pos∣sessed for a while, ransacked Portorico, and explai∣ned the way, to command the most enclosed Ha∣uens, and haue destroyed and demolished the Ca∣stle of Saint Margarita.
By which manner of doing, wee haue not onely impouerished the King of Spaine, and emptyed his Cash, but also exposed him to excessiue expences. Wee say, wasted his banckes or Cash. First, withdrawing from him so much siluer, as so much bloud out of a veine. Secondly, in diminishing his Custome and poundage, as well in Portugall as Spaine. But hither∣to, especially in Portugall; because, there at the E∣gresse and returne, thirtie per Cento are to be paid. Thirdly, also in respect of the forenamed poun∣dage, for want of returne thence, his Subiects are disanimated and discouraged, either to ship goods, or send ships, so that the Commerce and Trafique of Portugall and Spaine dayly decreaseth, and their Sugar remaines vpon their hands in extream quan∣titie. In Brasill for want of ships, and feare of our Nauie, so driuen to great charges. Fourthly, because we doe hinder the transpositi∣on of Blackmoores▪ from the which he doth not on∣ly receiue great Custome, but also by them all things are furthered, and so he is put to more ex∣pences. First, because hee must fortifie and secure his Na∣uy, for whereas he durst permit his Treasure to passe with 6. 7. or 8. Galleons▪ hee is compelled to procure thrice as many, and yet dare hardly proceed for feare of our Ships. Secondly, because he was driuen to surprize and re∣gaine the Citie of Saluador, with a Nauy of 60 sayle of Ships, in the which were fifteene thousand men; Which enterprize, although to small successe, cost
him according to the computation of all discreet Iudge∣ments, a hundreth and fiftie tun of treasure: and yet was so frustrated, that he got an emptie place, instead of a Mountaine, a Mouse. Thirdly, because he is forced to entertaine Fortifi∣cations vpon all his Coasts and Hauens (for he knowes not where to expect vs) his Garisons increase conti¦nually, and he sends amunition continually, and in lieu he did receiue now he deburseth money, where it commeth to passe, that his reuenewes waxe small. And by the way might so be opposed that he should haue but a small remainder of the same. And this also might come to passe that we might hinder their Spanish Na∣uie of Terra firma, Hondacus, and Noua Hispania, From arriuing in their due and appointed time, and from wintering in their desired ports (as lately hath beene experienced by our Fleet, vnder the command of the Admirall Adriaem Iss. Pater) to their vn∣expressible expences and dangerous passage, in an vn∣accustomed season, so that his enterprize may be alto∣gether frustrated. Out of all which appeares, that the Kings Chests are emptie, that his credit failes, and all his adhae∣rents are forced to breake, and stoope low, his Ma∣riners here are vnsatisfied; insomuch, that euery one that lookes with an indifferent eye, may perceiue that this our East India Companie hath afforded the King of Spaine an irreparable opposition and damage, and is like to make this breach greater, if her proceedings be but continued, and seasonably seconded. Vnto which premisses serue these subsequent oc∣casions
which neuer yet were incident, nor euer are like to be; to wit, that diuers of his Countries of greatest importance are sore diuided. For the di∣on is among the Spaniards themselues, and there is no small jealousie among the Negroes and ouer∣mstered Barbarians. Vnto which inconueniences, he cannot administer a remedie, by reason of the want of money, yet he wants the beneuolence of all mn there. Which iumpe of occasion we can wait on, and beat him at his owne weapons. We haue now also by our owne losse, and at our owne cost learned this slight, to touch him boldest where hee is weakest. If now the current of this our streame should bee stopped, hee will recouer his strength, and restore all things to a new forme vnknowne to vs. Wee will not expect now that your Excellen: will hereafter, eyther slght or forget the seruice of our Company performed for our Countryes. For otherwise as we haue declared and propounded to your Excel: the benefit and commodity. Which this Country hath enioyed by the proceeding and good successe of our Companie: so could we like∣wise make knowne vnto your Excellen: diuers most euident dammages and losses which wee are like to sustaine, and consequently would ensue, if the kno of this vnited Companie should once bee vn∣tyed. For as the benfit of this worke hath beene great in the successe, which woke we haue brought to perfection with excessiue charges, with great ha∣zard and danger; so all the world may soone per∣ceiue, and all men doe alreadie foresee, that if the
strength and power of this company should be re∣strained by the dissoluing of the same, there would ineuitably follow the dct contrarie, vnto what∣soeuer wee haue deucted for the prosperitie of these Countries. As first. Wee shall not bee able to employ our ships, and therefore he constrained to sell and put off many of them▪ nay the most part at small vnder rates: build no more, hyre no more but whereas now and than, some false knaue or other, doth secretly conuey some ship furniture, amunition, or shp vnto the E∣nemy▪ wee should see our best ships fittest for War, and Nauigation, transported thther before euery mans eyes, without feare or parting backe▪ Secondly, Wee should not bee able to yeeld seruice and employment to our Mariners, which would cause them to flye to the Enemy, and tender him their seruice. Thirdly, it is to be feared that the same our sea-men hauing tasted the sweetnesse of our bootie and Prizes would betake themselues to Pyrates, and so ouer throw the safety of our Nauigation. Fourthly, that (as  the former Truce) men will study and endauour to sal with lesse charges, and so own shot and amuniton, or at leastwse take that which s bu slight and of no value, and so in time of need and common danger, we▪ shall bee to seeke, and found vnprouided. , wee  not procure such abundance of  into our Countries, or at leastwise not so che and at so small charges, considering that all must pass vnder the eauie burden of our ene∣mies
Toll and Custome, so that the Creame wil be skimmed off before the milke come to our hands, whence must of necessitie ensue a decrease in Tra∣ding, and all manner of Trafique. Contrariwise, the K. of Spaine shall by this meanes obtaine and recouer his Gold & Siluer springs and veynes at liberty, get forward againe, waxe strong, redresse and rectifie the great disorder in yonder parts. Reedifie his decayed Fortresses, build new, in stead that now he findes them laid open. He will also then eyther allure the Sauages to himselfe, or otherwise extirpate them, who now doe much in∣cline to vs, In a word, he wil so reestablish all things there, that it will bee in vaine for vs to endeauour that way in future time. That all this is truth, wee shall need no other wit∣nesses to testifie, then common voyces, for the most part euen of those that are afarre off, or of your Ex∣cellencies subiects, who doe vnanimously acknow∣ledge that they haue euer been of that opinion, that nothing can be enterprized more preiudicial to our common Enemy, then to assault him in those parts, whence he doth obtaine with what hee doth curbe all Christendome, and whereby he hath now many yeares aspired to the vniuersall Monarchy. And that therefore according to the beginnings, they doe perceiue themselues not deceiued in their opi∣nion and judgement. Wee doe appeale to our E∣nemy himselfe, who cannot Conceale that there is nothing presseth them so sore, nor vrgeth more to desire a Truce then the weapons of our Company and that if this Thorne were but out of their foot,
they will then giue vs what-soeuer advantage. Insomuch then, the Intrest of a common harme is greater then that of particular copartners, who (as they say concerning the most part) haue aduen∣tured their monies more for loue, then greedinesse of gaine, they could easily endure that losse which should befall them by the dissolution of the Com∣pany, if thereby the common good and publicke weale were furthered. Because by this meanes the party will recouer his strength, take breath, get new blood and vigonr, and to the contrary these Coun∣tries will decay and faint, and straine one of their best points, and (if we might be so bold to say) lame an arme. Also it might come to passe, that this businesse might be vndertaken by some other, and wee stand and be spectators onely, and so neuer come to bee our selues againe in this matter. The most we might expect should bee a Competencie, and Dependan∣cie on others. In Conclusion then. Wee doe most submissiuely request and intreat, that your Excel: (according to your wonted wisedome) would bee pleased to pre∣vent these forenamed Inconueniencies and losses: and not suffer our Companie (as we haue deducted before) to be ruinated by a Truce, and the Spaniard to take breath and gather strength. But rather that it would please) our Excellen: to maintayne our Company in their former right, & incourage, and strengthen them in their good purpose and resolu∣tion, and to suffer them to inioy & reape the fruits of so many dangers, hazards, paines and troubles
as their Capitals and Services haue vndergone and sustained, and the good respect which they haue de∣scrued from this State. Not shuffing and putting frō v, that great blessing which the Lord hath be∣gun to bestow vpon their Countries, by the meanes of this Company. And so wee trust that the same blessing will con∣tinue amongst vs, to the propagation of his name, and honour and inlighting of our owne Countrey. Vnto the which, according to out meane in∣deauours we are and will be still willing to Contri∣bute. And will alwayes bee ready to declare fur∣ther reasons of this our backwardnesse to your Ex∣cellencies, and will euer remaine, &c. Your Excellencies, most humble Servants. The Deputies of the authorized West India Companie. At their Meeting the 19. Was thus Subscribed. REYNIER REAEL. IOHAN DE ZAET. A PIETERSONS. SYMON VERDOES. DIDRICH SCHERF. ALBERT WYFFERINCK. ANTHONY GODU. MARCVS VAN VALI∣KENBVRCH GERRIT. VAN NYBVRG. IOHAN DE MOOR. ABRAHAM OYENS.
Diuers Conscionable Considerations vpon this Question: Whether in Conscience men may contract a Truce with the King of Spaine. BEfore any thing bee vndertaken, it is necessary, that in the first place this question be made, Whether or no it be agreeable to Gods most holy will, & may be performed with a safe conscience. The Prince of Orenge, of blessed and happy memory, When as there was to bee treated at Bourborgh in Flanders, concerning a Peace with the King of Spaine, aswell in the behalfe of the the Queene of England, as on the behalfe of these Countries, did then chiefly pause vpon this point, and to this end called together an Assembly or Synode of Clergie men, to consult of that mat∣ter. It were very requisire that our high and mighty Superiours followed the same steps, and in this Treaty of Truce, did consult with the Mi∣nisters of God, and so take Counsell from his owne Word. But notwithstanding this is vn∣likely at this time, yet will not these few conside∣rations proue vnnecessary and vnprofitable, euen to the satisfying and informing the consciences of those who shal hereafter read and peruse them. My desire therefore is, that they may bee consi∣dered and thought vpon, with vnfaigned loue to∣wards God, in his feare, and for his Truths sake.
The Question here is not, Whether or no wee may with a safe Conscience make war against the King of Spaine, and while he continues war, pro∣ceed and continue ours against him. Wee hold this affirmatiue, and lay it as a ground of truth: For we know that true Maxime receiued of all true Christians, and the higher Powers of these Countries, and indeed is grounded vpon the sa∣cred Scriptures, That the Magistrates doe not beare the Sword in vaine; but for the suppressing and punishing of the bad, and for the defence of the good; for the good of their Subjects; and con∣sequently, not only against priuate offenders, who haue damaged and wronged this and that parti∣cular person, but also against generall and Pub∣licke offenders, who labour to disturbe and ouer∣throw the state of the Land, and the Publicke∣weale: But the Question is this, Whether or no we may cease making warre; or (to be plainer) Whether wee may for a time, or for certaine yeeres, shut vp and stop our proceedings in warre. This Question being thus propounded in gene∣rall in the Thesis or Position, it vnfolds it selfe: For who dares doubt but wee may cease warring with mutual agreement, when the contrary party either requireth, or is willing to doe the same? Therefore the Question propounded in the The∣sis is without difficulty, except it be among such as either are blood-thirsty, or reuengefull, or in∣tend either to enrich or aduance themselues by the booty and prey; such I meane, as would not deale in this matter according to conscience, but their owne beastly and fleshly lusts.
Here lyes the point in the Hypothesis, or condi∣tionall Proposition: that is, when this Question is applyed to our common Enemy, and his state and condition; whether then it may consist with safety of Conscience to contract a Truce with the King of Sptine. And here two things offer themselues to bee considered: First, the Condition of the King of Spaine. Secondly, our state and present condition, and occasions. For the first, it is certaine, and beyond doubt, that the King of Spaine, our enemy, doth not now enter into Treatie with vs concerning a Truce, either out of loue to peace, or loue to our persons. This is manifest and euident in the proceedings of all his warres from time to time, also in his warres continued against vs. It doth appeare that he aymes onely to erect his supposed and imagi∣ned vniuersall Monarchie, and absolute Domini∣on. Remember the warres, whereby he did help the Emperour, for the suppressing and subduing of those that were vnited with vs in religion and loue, euen while he entertained a Truce with vs. Consider the wars which he euen now vndergo∣eth in Italy against the French King, & other parts of the world; and will treate with vs, not concer∣ning Peace, but a Truce. He esteemes vs his Re∣bels, he hates vs as such, wherefore he would ne∣uer acknowledge vs for free Countries, nor neuer will as long as the World stands. He onely dis∣sembles, and conceales his malice for a while, a∣gainst a better and fitter opportunity. How hee
hath continued in his hatred and malice against vs, hath sufficiently beene manifested since our Truce with him hath been expired. What moues him then, and induceth him to this? Nothing but his loue to his owne State, and presupposed and imaginary vniuersall Monarchy. For seeing that it is impossible for him to attaine to that height, through his warres against vs, and that God af∣fords vs in our proceedings of Warre, sufficient meanes, to confirme our State, and debilitate his; hee labours by his Truce to wrest the meanes out of our hands; and so to fortifie and confirme his State against ours, to the end that hee may with more ease and profitable successe, to the in∣crease of our losse, recollect himselfe, and make his war the stronger. If any one oppose thus; How-euer things are, yet in the time of Truce wee shall possesse and enioy rest and tranquility, without Warre and combustion; then ought this to bee considered of; Whether or no this can vndoubtedly bee affir∣med. For if wee can bee assured of rest and peace, what neede so many Souldiers bee kept in seruice, laid in Garrison vpon all the Fron∣tiers? Why doe wee not saue these Charges, and decrease our cost? Hence appeares then, that wee cannot bee secure, and certaine of the fidelity of our Enemy, or of any rest and peace, euen in time of the Truce. This must needes be so; for we deale with an Enemie, who neither stands to his word nor pro∣mise,
although confirmed with his owne hand, seale, and Oath. Those Maximes of your Popish Counsels, that no faith is to bee kept with Heretickes, is knowne throughout the whole World, and the practise of the same is made manifest in all Coun∣tries. These Netherlands haue by wofull expe∣rience tryed and tasted of Spanish infidelity: doe but reade those passages that are past, turne ouer our Histories, and they will abundantly testifie the same. Shall wee say that the Spaniard is by former ex∣perience better taught, and is now of another mind and condition? Who shall assure vs of this? It cannot so soone bee said, but may as soone bee denyed. And the Negatiue is more probable then the Affirmatiue. For this you must grant, that hee is still bound in conscience to the Pope of Rome; and you know that he ascribes to himselfe this au∣thority, that hee can and will free the conscien∣ces of men, from their obligation by Oath, that hee can discharge Subiects from their Oath of Allegiance, made to their Prince and Superiours; that hee hath power to stirre vp and incense Sub∣iects against their Kings and Magistrates, to depose Kings, &c. When now the Pope shall see this to fur∣ther and prooue beneficiall to the Church of Rome, will hee not farre rather haue the power to free the King of Spaine from his promise made eyther by subscription or Oath, to such which he holds for Hereticks and re∣bellious Subiects?
Nay, will he not rather ordaine that for the good & benefit of the Church of Rome, the King of Spaine doe vnawares and suddenly intercept, and fall a∣vpon them. Shall we say, this can be preuented, by entertaining and keeping our Weapons, guarding our frontiers, and being vigilant that they doe not suddenly fall on vs, and so keepe him from his enterprize, and be out of danger? What then will the Truce signifie? which we shall be faine to en∣tertaine in lieu of a defensiue warre? and in the meane while barring our selues from all opportuni∣ty of aduantaging our selues against our enemie? Concerning the second point, namely our state and present occasion: The Lords the States of these Countries doe professe to maintaine the true refor∣med Christian Religion; Thus they declare in their ordaining of their Fasts, they shew in their Demon∣strations to Kings, Princes, and States, they pub∣lish the same in their Proclamations and Ordinan∣ces, and they doe well; so that one of the chiefest Maximes of our State, is the managing of the true Christian Religion. Now let vs examine whether the Truce is intended to that end; 'tis certaine that the Spaniard doth hate vs for nothing more, and for no other cause but this Religion; he also vseth the same for a pretense to iustifie his warres against vs, and to declare and shew that we haue forfeited our Priuiledges. He perceiues now, that he cannot attaine vnto all this by open Warre, he therefore labours to bring it to passe by the Truce. And in very deed hee can  no better meanes: For he knowes how many ctaries here are amongst vs, all enemies to the
same Religion, how many inhabitants in these coun∣tries yet cleane and adhere to Popery▪ how the Priests and Iesuites swarme here, ayming and en∣deuouring to incense the hearts of the Subiects a∣gainst our State and Religion: nay more, euen to seduce and envelop the very hearts of the Magi∣strates and Gouernours. Consider againe, that two sorts of people chiefly doe bend and oppose them∣selues against our State and Religion; the Papists, and Remonstrants; the Papists pleading and hol∣ding, that the Sate of these Countries is an vsurped State, and that the King of Spaine is lawfull Heyre of these Countries. The Remonstrants, because their designe and purpose is dismissed, and their Fa∣ction repressed, euen out of a bitter hatred and ma∣lice against the Religion and gouernment of these Countries, expressing themselues most vilely and violently, yea many times vttering these and the like speeches, That they doe acknowledge the King of Spaine to be the natural Lord of these Countries. Now he knowes how the other Sectaries doe vphold and animate these two sorts of people, and that conse∣quently the true Religion hath as many internall as externall enemies. And that these youthes are now compelled to be still, or at least cannot so well and cōueniētly lift vp their heads in time of war as they would doe in time of truce. Experience hath suffi∣ciently taught in the former Truce, how they did endeauour and striue to suppresse the Religion a∣mongst vs, what power and subtilty thereunto hath beene vsed, how those factious people and enemies of true Religion, did all at once eleuate and bestirre themselues, to worke out their malice and hatred
against the Religion. And had not the Lord him∣selfe wonderfully prouided for vs, in what wofull e∣state had we found our selues? Hence it comes to passe that those that were vnited vnto vs in the same Religion, were in the former Truce thus miserably and earnestly persecuted in Germany, and wofully subdued. This is an vndoubted truth, if our Religi∣on be lost, our Countries are lost: now, how neere it was come to this point with our Religion, in the former Truce, cannot but be palpable, to him who is either of vnderstanding or iudgement. Who doubts, but this proffer of Truce tends to the same scope? Now that the Spaniard hates the Religion, and therfore imployes all meanes, and di∣rects all his actions to extirpate the same, is without and beyond dispute. That all Sectaries within these Countries hate Religion, and do but wait for an op∣portunity to expell the same, needs no proofe. The Spaniard he propounds a Truce, all the Papists a∣mongst vs, all Sectaries, Remonstrants, Bastad-Lu∣therians, Anabaptists, people without any religion, and such we call Libertines, commend it, call for it, are ready to embrace it. Now consider whether this Truce can possibly serue for the managing, maintenance and defence of the fore-named true Religion. The Spaniard expects and hopes that the Sectaries will lift vp their heads, and take an oppor∣tunity to suppresse this Region. The Sectaries they long and desire to obtaine such an opportunity: e∣specially that knowne and noted Faction, who doe trauell, as it were, in labour, with a bitter hatred, till they can by such an oportunity reuenge themselues. This it is that causeth all faithfull Patriots, and true
louers of the fore-named Religion, to bee sensible of the danger, & to apprehēd of this Truce so grieuously. Now let it be duely pondered in the feare of GOD, whether it may consist with a safe conscience, to en∣danger the Countries, to be deceiued, and suddenly and vnexpectedly to be surprized of our enemy; to giue into the hands of our enemies, those meanes which they themselues deeme and iudge to serue for the restauration of their State, and weakning of ours. To yeeld an opportunity to our externall and inter∣nall enemies, which they desire and long for, euen to the end they may suppresse the true Religion: To for∣sake and abandon those that are vnited with vs in the true Religion, in Germany and else-where, and cast off such meanes as God hath yeelded vnto vs for their re∣stitution: To grieue our Friends, ioy and animate our enemies, and all this at such a time, when God doth palpably blesse vs, doth establish our State, and con∣found our enemies; and so vngratefully reiect Gods mercies and blessings, and trample them vnder our feet. These considerations ought we to take to heart, for no reasons with any ground can preuaile against them, vnlesse we could afore-hand be assured, that the Truce is required, with loue to the welfare of these Countries, and that the Spaniard will firmly keep his word: And that by Generall Councell, with consent and approbation of the Pope, that Decree shall be re∣uoked, That no faith is to be kept with Heretickes; and vnlesse he doe resigne the power of dispensing with Oathes. That also the Sectaries shall bee quiet and still, without turbulency, or endeuouring to sup∣presse Religion; and that all Gouernours, aswell in generall as particular, shall vnanimously, with all di∣ligence
and integrity, labour and striue to maintaine and frther the reformed Religion. For as long as we haue not this assurance, the former considerations re∣maine in full force. If question be made, what assurance we haue against this in time of warre, the answer is at hand. Experi∣ence (we know) teacheth vs, that those Armes, which through Gods blessing we beare against our enemies, as it is confest, in time of Truce we must still beare for farther assurance: and whereas by reason of war we are as it were vnited and ioyned together, so that we shall not, like vnto loose brooms, fall asunder: whence will come to passe, that those that are enemies to Re∣ligion, shall not haue opportunity to put in practise their malicious enterprizes. The principall thing that can heere be obiected in case of conscience, is, that war is a cruell beast, and this beast will rest at least-wise in time of Truce. But in this case consider, how much the more furious and cruell she will be, after she shall be rouzed out of her sleepe, and how this hath bin already experienced by those grand Armies which the Enemy did produce after the last Truce, as also his power at Sea. This is a lamentable thing, and a matter of conscience, when so much blood is spilt: But what will it be, when the Enemy, by reason of the Truce, shall, hauing recoue∣red his strength, deuoure vs and our children, accor∣ding to his tyranous and bloody nature, and cruell dis∣position? Shall we then thinke no humane blood bee spilt? And to what end I pray' tends the Truce, but to this designe? When the internall enemies of the Countries, vnto true Religion, shall oppose them∣selues against the defenders and professors of true Re∣ligion,
and then these suppose themselues to haue iust cause to defend them, shall within our selues fall toge∣ther by the eares? Will not this be a wofull spectacle for vs, and pleasing vnto them our enemies? Oh how neere was it come to this push by the former Truce? and had preuailed, if God had not wonderfully proui∣ded. Was it not come to the very height of this spe∣ctacle. But who are those that speake in this wise? are they not Papists, whose qualities we cannot be vnacquain∣ted with? who, as long as the Armes in these Coun∣tries take good successe, they make a faire shew of be∣ing on our side; but as soone as euer the case doth al∣ter, they cannot conceale their villanous malice. Did it not lately appeare, when the enemy was in the Ve∣lewe, and when Amersfort was lost? Are they not Remonstrants, whose partiall mindes and intentions doe manifest themselues in all their speeches, writings, and actions? Are they not other Sectaries, who all alike are linked together, to sub∣uert the true Religion, the safety and glory of our State? Notwithstanding they make a faire shew of Peace, and sparing of humane blood, 'tis to spare the Enemy, and fauour them, and to suppresse the true Patriots of the Countreys. This is Sauls mercie to Agag the King of the Amalechites, who in the mean while vsed all diligence to destroy the vpright King Dauid. Achab the King or Israel fauoured Benhadad the King of Syria, when he beeing in the vtmost ex∣tremity, trusted to this, that the Kings of Israel were mercifull Kings. Such mercy did the Kings of Israel shew vnto the Idolatrous Kings, enemies vnto Israel, and notwith∣standing
they for their parts, cruelly persecuted the Prophets of the Lord, because they did not speake pleasing to their palates. This is the quality of all Hypocrites, and enemies of true Religion; they cry all for mercie, when as wee haue to doe with Idola∣ters, and enemies of God and his Church: But when they haue to doe with the faithfull seruants of God, protectors of his true Religion, then they haue aban∣doned and cast off all mercie. Lay downe therefore this sinister mercie, lest that punishment which was threatned and befell the mercifull Kings of Israel, be∣fall you also. Shew your mercy to the Israel of God, who are persecuted by the Idolater and false∣worshippers: Looke vpon God, and the iustice of our Cause: Labour to further Gods Honour, and to de∣fend the true Religion, to protect our owne Coun∣trie against our Common sworne Enemy. Doe this in holy zeale, in Gods feare, with a confident bold∣nesse and Courage; and the Lord of Hosts bee with you. Amen.
Remonstrance To be shewed and presented, in behalfe of the King of Bohemia, vnto the High and Mighty Lords, the Lords the States Generall of the Vni∣ted Low-Countrie Prouinces. Concerning this present Treatie of ceasing Armes, or Truce. High and Mighty Lords: WHereas it hath pleased Almighty GOD to giue so good a successe vnto the wars of the high & mighty Lords the States of the Vnited Prouinces, aswell by Sea as by Land, so that the Enemy finding himselfe in great extremi∣tie, is constrained to seeke after a Truce and ceasing of Armes, thereby to breathe himselfe: His Maie∣stie of Bohemia, who also is partaker of this happines, and herein doth congratulate your Excellencies, can∣not but (through and for the inseparable loue, which from old time hath bin between His Maiesties House, and is yet maintained in this State, as also in respect of the common interest) earnestly intreate and re∣quest your Excellencies, that in case they should finde and deeme it necessary, profitable, and for the best of their Prouinces, to assent vnto a Treaty of Truce: That they would be pleased not to draw a conclusion, vnlesse the restitution of his Maiestie bee therein ex∣pressely set downe, agreed, and comprehended.
Considering, first, that these vnited Prouinces can∣not promise to themselues, much lesse expect any se∣curity, rest, or peace, as long as Germany, and especial∣ly the Palatinate, doe remaine vnder the suppression of the House of Austria, and Spaine: Considering that by how much more the forementioned House of Au∣stria shall hence-forward chance to eleuate and esta∣blish her fortune and dignity, in the ruine, losse, and destruction of the most Illustrious Houses and kindred of Germany; and aboue all, of the Prince Elector Pala∣tine; by so much the more, meanes and opportunitie will be yeelded vnto them, for the ioyning of the for∣ces together of the whole body of the Empire, and for the bending of all their power against the State of these Countries, in all accidentall occasions whatso∣euer, being proffered and presented vnto them, with∣out taking notice of any treaty or agreement. Wher∣as secondly, to the contrary, the forementioned house of Austria and Spaine, with their adherents, (who hi∣therto, by their vniust and ouerchargeable procee∣dings, haue stirred against them the displeasure and ill will of all the Euangelicall Princes of the Empire) be∣gin now to feare some euill euent, and fearfull alterati∣on, disturbance, and subuersion in their affaires. which feare is much accrewed, through the euident and ma∣nifest Victories of the high and mighty Lords the States generall of these Vnited Prouinces. Thirdly, this being very euident and apparant, that the malice and hatred that the House of Austria and Spaine doe beare to the House of the Prince Elector Palatine, principally doth hence proceed, Because the same House hath euer beene well addicted and affecti∣oned, and hath euer as much as in her lay, furthered
and fauoured the welfare, profit & increase of whatso∣euer did concerne the State of these Low-Countries. For which causes, the Emperour formerly hath shew∣ed and declared vnto the King of Spaine, in his Let∣ters, dated the 14. of Octob. 1621. (which Letters are now in the hands of his Maiesty of Bohemia, and are truely the very originall Letters) that this State of the Vnited Prouinces can neuer be brought vnder the o∣bedience and power of Spaine, as long as the House of the Elector Palatine is not wholly extirpated, and cut off from the Empire. Fourthly, May it please your Excellencies, the high and mighty States generall, to be mindfull, that the Articles of the forbearance, which they contra∣cted with the King of Great Britaine, the 7 of Septemb. 1625. doe comprehend the Palatinate, and whatso∣euer concernes the same, confirmed with very power∣full and expresse words and termes against the House of Spaine and her adherents. His Maiestie confident∣ly reposing, that your Excellencies would carefully be mindfull of all this, and take into consideration the faithfull Seruices, which his Maiesties Predeces∣sors, as namely his Father and Grandfathers, haue done vnto this State. Fiftly, this also is to be held for a certaine, that if the Palatinate be wholly excluded in this Treaty of a Truce, which is now propounded and proffered vnto your Excellencies, this would inforce an irreparable losse and hinderance to the restitution of his Maiesty, and consequently to all the affaires of whole Germa∣ny, which haue their relation and relexe vnto the v∣nited Prouinces. But aboue all & in conclusion, here∣in is not only handled the particular of his Maiesty,
but also the repairing, as also the liberty and main∣ of the reformed Churches, which at this day so eauiy groane vnder the burden and yoake of ; and the which doe incessantly and  intreat the Lord for the welfare and pro∣sperity of these vnited Prouinces. Insomuch, that whatsoeuer your Excellencies shall doe in this par∣ticular, will serue much for the magnifying of Gods glory, and (which is the onely scope or marke to which all our actions ought to bee directed) to the refreshing and easing of many oppressed and di∣stressed hearts; and hereby allure Gods blessing vp∣on your Countries, and gaine immortall praise to your Excellencies, and more and more increase the obliegement of His Maiestie and his Successors to your Excellencies. And your Excellencies may be assured, that His Maiestie and His, being restored to the Inheritance of their Fathers, shall euer bee carefull to tender your Excellencies all bounden dutie and seruice of sincere loue, and euer∣lasting acknowledgment, as often as time, meanes, and opportuni∣ty shall be afforded. FINIS.
