24419 S102050 99837851 2198
The Poore Mans Pater noster, with a preparatiue to praier: Wherto are annexed diuers godly Psalmes and Meditations: Collected out of the sacred Scriptures, by Thomas Timme Minister. Newly Imprinted the se∣cond time by Peter Short, dwelling on Bredstreet hill, at the signe of the Starre, 1598.
The life of a Chri∣stian man. 1 Remember thy maker. 2 Be thankful alwaies to God for his benefits. 3 Loue the Lord thy God with al thy soul, and all thy strength. 4 Beleeue that he is thy heauenly father, for his sonne Iesus Christs sake. 5 Serue him with feare, worship him, and call vpon his holy name. 6 As thou louest God; so loue thy brother al∣so. 7 Let the loue of God in thee, restraine the concupiscence of the flesh, and prouoke thee to good works. Let the loue of thy brother, hold thee backe from dooing iniurie, and pricke thee for∣ward to doo good. And remember alwaies that thou art borne to die.
A Preparatiue to praier. PRaier is a talking (not of the toong, but of a faithfull mind) with God; by when wee aske of him some good thing, either for our selues, or for some others: or else doe giue him thankes for his benefites.
2 When thou commest to pray, first prepare thy minde, that it may bee free from all worldlie cares, and that the affections of thy minde may bee quiet: for the place of the Lorde is not in commotions, but in quiet and rest. Reuerence 3 Remember the maiestie of him beefore whome thou standest: whoe as hee is the maker of heauen and earth, so also is he the mightie soue∣raigne ouer the whole world.
4 Remember that his eye seeth all things, yea euen the actions, & the secret thoughts of thy heart. Deuotion. 5 If thou praye with thy mouth & not with thy minde, thy praier shal be but a temp∣ting of the Lorde, and a sacri∣fice of fooles. Humilitie. 6 Praye in humilitie of minde, shaking off all confi∣dence of thine owne worthy∣nes, and say thus: O Lord righ∣teousnesse
belongeth vnto thee, and to vs open shame. We do not present our supplications before thee, for our owne righ∣teousnes, but for thy great ten∣der mercies. I haue begun to speake vnto my Lord, & I am but dust and ashes. Father I haue sinned against heauen, & before thee, and am no more worthie to bee called thy son. O God be mercifull vnto mee a sinner. 7 Pray not hypocriticallie, to seeme deuout in the eyes of
men: but secretly, and thy fa∣ther which seeth in secret will reward thee openly. Contrition. 8 Pray with a contrite hart and sorrowfull minde, when thou crauest of God remission of sinnes. Fasting. 9 When thou praiest, fast and abstaine from carnall de∣lightes; for thereby thou shalt bee made more apte and fer∣uent in praier. Faith.
10 Pray in faith, and with a sure trust and confidence in God, without the which thou shalt not obtaine. For euerie one that com∣meth vnto God, must beleeue that God is, and that hee is a rewarder of them that seeke him. 11 Lette him that asketh aske in fayth and wauer not, for hee that wauereth is like a waue of the Sea, tossed with the winde: and let not that man thinke that hee shall re∣ceyue
anie thinge from the Lord. 12 Faith is the gift of God, Therefore praye daylie with the disciples of Christ, which said, Lord increase our faith, & Lord helpe my vnbeleefe. 13 The true knowledge of God learned out of his word, will greatlye confirme thy fayth. As when thou shalte knowe that he is louing, kind, mercifull, gratious, long suf∣fering, iust &c. Also that hee is most readie to heare vs and
to grant our petitions. 14 God is omnipotent, therefore hee is able to giue whatsoeuer thou askest. God is mercifull: and therefore hee will giue that which is profita∣ble for thee. 15 God giueth liberallie to those that aske of him. For Salomon craued but wisdom, and had both it, and riches, and honor, in wonderfull mea∣sure. And Iehosaphat which desired onelye water in his ex∣treame thirst for him and his
hoast, had both the same gran∣ted, and victorie also ouer the Moabites. 16 God seeth and know∣eth thy neede before thou as∣kest: yet to shewe thy obedi∣ence by this seruice which hee hath commaunded, and also to exercise thy fayth, thou muste receyue those thinges whereof thou hast neede, by inuocating and calling vppon his name. New obedience.
17 As thou doest professe thy selfe to bee the son of God by praying vnto him, and by calling him thy Father: so shewe thy selfe an obedient sonne in deed, by walking in his commandements. 18 Let thy whole cōuersati∣on be agreeing with thy pray∣ers: for thy continuall wal∣king in sin will make thy prai∣ers abhominable. 19 Pray for nothing con∣trarie to the will of God re∣uealed in his holie worde. For
if thou praye to this ende, to haue the desires of thy fleshe fulfilled, thou shalte not re∣ceyue. 20 That thy principal mark may be the glorifieng of God, Seeke first the kingdome of God, and the righteousnesse thereof, and all other thinges shall be giuen vnto thee. Perseuerance in praier. 21 Perseuere in prayer and bee not discouraged, though at the first thy petition bee not graunted. For the Lord dooth
sometimes deferre and delaie vs, not that hee is vnmindfull of his promises, but to trie our faith: either els the more to stir vp our godly affections, or to make his giftes more sweete and precious vnto vs, as appea∣reth by the woman of Cana∣an, and by Paule himselfe. 22 When our Sauior Christ forbiddeth much babling, hee meaneth not long prayers, but long babling withoute faith and the spirit. For length of wordes ioyned with length
of earnest affection, dooth not displease God. 23 Christ himselfe praied all the night vppon the moun∣taine, and before his death hee made long praiers: & he com∣mandeth vs to pray cōtinually. The force of true praier. 24 Great is the force of faith¦full praier; for therby Abraham obteined life for Ismael: Lot that Zoar might not be burnt in the destruction of Sodome: Moyses victorye agaynste the Amalachites: Eliah
both drouth and raine: Eze∣chias the prolonging of his life fifteene yeeres; and such like 25 Let prayer be thy refuge in all trouble and distresse; Call vppon mee in the time of trouble (saith the Lord) so will I deliuer thee, and thou shalt glo∣rifie me. 26 Hannah beeing contu∣meliously handled by Pennin∣nah, betaketh hir selfe to prai∣er: Sara the daughter of Raguel beeing reproched, entereth into her Chamber, and there
maketh hir praier. Dauid be∣ing persecuted, saith thus; For my friendship they were mine aduersaries, but I gaue my selfe to praier. 27 Praier, thus prepared and practised, will bee a gard for children, an ornament for yoong men, a solace and con∣solation for olde men, and a surpassing beautie for women. It will driue away diuels, It will procure Angelles of de∣fence from heauen: and it will bee a sacrifice of a good
sauour vnto God, pearcing the heauens, and will not returne againe emptie.
The praier of a peni∣tent sinner. O Father of heuen: O sonne of God Redéemer of the worlde: O holie ghost the sweet comforter, O the diuine essence thrée per∣sons and one God, haue mer∣cie vpon me, most vile caitife and miserable sinner. I haue offended both against heauen & earth, more than my toong can expresse. Whither then
may I go, or whither should I flie? To heauen I may be ashamed to lift vp mine eies and in earth I finde no place of refuge or succour. To thée therfore O Lord, do I come, to thée doo I humble my selfe saieng: O Lord my God my sinnes be great, but yet haue mercy vpon me for thy great mercie. The great mysterie that God became man, was not wrought for little, or few offences. Thou diddest not giue thy sonne (O heauenlie
Father) vnto death for small sinnes onelie, but for all the greatest sinnes of the world, so that the sinner returne to thee with his whole heart, as by grace first receyued from thée I doo héer at this present Wherefore haue mercie vp∣on me O God, whose proper∣tie is alwaies to haue mercy haue mercie vppon mee, O Lorde, for thy great mercie. I craue nothing, O Lord, for my owne merits, but for thy names sake, that it may be
hallowed thereby: and for thy déere son Iesu Christes sake. And therfore I continue forth my crie vnto thee from the bottom of my heart saieng; Our father which art in heauen hallowed be thy name, &c. Our Father. TO none doth this name (Father) more truelie be∣long, then vnto
thée O God our father. For both they which haue begot∣ten vs, fostered vs, & do bring vs vp, and also our spirituall pastors which do instruct vs, are called fathers. But thou O Lord, art the father of all creatures which are vpon the earth, whome thou hast made of somewhat (as thou madest man) but of nothing, which none else coulde do. These thou dooest féede and preserue, which else shoulde returne to their nothing againe.
These thou dooest gouerne, teach, and stirre vp to do their seuerall and proper offices. Thou hast made all things, therefore thou art the father of all: but more speciallie man, whom thou hast formed after thine owne similitude and image. Thou dooest rule and gouerne all thinges as thy seruants, but man, as thy sonne. To other liuing crea∣tures thou hast giuen out of thy plentifull storehouse good giftes, but vppon man thou
hast powred them forth with full hande, and hast adorned him with a liuing soule, of all giftes one of greatest ex∣cellencie. Thou doost driue forward al other creatuers, as it were with a certain secret spurre, but thou gently teachest and instructest vs. Other crea∣tures thou dooest violentlie draw, but vs thou doost father¦ly teach and direct. In al these fatherlie properties, we won¦der at thy power, and adore
and worship thy wisedome. But amongst al thy fatherly mercies, there is one which with great delectation wee consider as more profitable for vs, namely our adoption, by which thou hast made vs thy sonnes thorough Iesus Christ, the sonne of the om∣nipotent essence and diuine nature. Wonderfull is this goodnes of Christ, and most swéet is his loue toward vs, who wil not haue vs to be ter¦rified with seruile feare, and
therefore hath not taught vs to cal thee his father, Our lord which is a name of power; but Our father, which is a name of loue. He concealeth thy great¦nes, and setteth forth thy good¦nes, the sooner to allure vs. What man considering right¦lie his vile nature and cor∣rupt will, dare cal thee father except thou command him? What vngratious and in∣feriour seruaunt will pre∣sume to call his king, father, except he be beside himselfe.
But how much greater diffe¦rence is there betweene thée and vs, then betweene a mor∣tal king and a seruant, which do not differ in condition of nature, but onely in state of fortune. We, compared with thee in nature, are most far different. Thou art the es∣sence and the incompresensi∣ble fulnes of all things, which art all in all, and wee are vt¦terlie nothing. And in condition of wor∣thinesse and excellencie wee
being with thée compared, are vnhappie and most mise∣rable bondslaues of sin and the diuell, which is the most vile and execrable state: but thou art the most blessed lord of al. We are ignorance and darknesse, but thou art wise∣dome and light. Thy excel∣lencie is infinit, & our shame and reproch more than can be expressed: mans mind is not able to comprehend the diffe¦rence betwéene thée and vs. But thy onlie sonne hath gi∣uen
vs boldnes to call thee, Our father, that we by adopti¦on might be made partakers of that excellent dignitie to be called sonnes through his fauour and grace, which he a∣lone in right of his diuine na¦ture possesseth. Nowe, howe more néerelie and trulie art thou the father of all those that are baptised in thy name and that are purged and clen¦sed by the bloud of thy sonne Christ, to whome beeing re∣conciled with thee, and re∣ceiued
into thy fauour) thou hast giuen the earnest of E∣uerlasting blisse, the loue of thee, and an assured faith and confidence in thee, and there∣by perfect peace and rest of conscience. Oh, howe often do we féele to our great com∣fort thy fatherlie goodnesse? Thou dooest giue vs light in darkenesse: thou holdest vs vp, when we stumble, and are readie to fall: thou turnest from vs manie wicked euils which hang ouer our heades▪
and changest them into good: and in all goodnes thou doost establish and preserue vs. What dooe our fathers helpe vs, which are onelie fa∣thers in name, by whom wee haue nothing but that which hirelings and seruants haue that is to say; the necessaries of this present life? But this is the true fatherhood, wherof we may rightlie reioyce, by which we haue an euerlasting inheritance. Oh woonderfull clemencie of thy son Christ,
which vouchsafed on vs the dignitie of his proper inheri∣tance. What wilt thou not giue, O father, vnto thy sons now, which thou shalt thinke profitable for them. We haue attained the greatest gifte, that thou shouldest bee called, and be indéed our father: how then can we misse and bee de∣stitute of thy fatherlie affecti∣on and liberalitie towardes vs? And forasmuch as wee all, which truelie are called Chri∣stians,
are knit togither in one knot of loue, and are ther¦fore members of one bodie, and so one thing: therefore that which wee aske for our selues, wee craue of thee, O Father, for our brethren also. And for this cause, wee call thee iointlie togither, Our fa∣ther. Beséeching thée that as thou vouchestsafe to be called of vs Our father, so thou wilt make vs thy obedient chil∣dren, that not with mouth a∣lone, but with heart and mind
wee may truelie feare thée, serue thee, loue thee, and call thee our father, to the honour and glorie of thy holie name, Amen. Which art in heauen. THou art alone, O Lord, and we are not. That being which we haue, is heere in Earth, that is to saie, in the middest of ma∣nie tempestes and floudes
of all manner of calamities, wherewith we are continual∣lie turmoiled. But thou both art, and also art in heauen; that is to say, in a place de∣uoyde of labour and trouble. We do not cal vpon the dead saintes, or vppon such as are not able to helpe themselues when they stand in néed. Wee runne not vnto those which ei∣ther for their care and office in the common wealth, or for their age are called fathers. We make not our petition to
Iupiter, to Neptune, to Mars, or to other vaine gods, which Sathan the enimie of thy di∣uine maiestie hath set vp in the worlde; whome once al∣moste to name is great wic∣kednes, being false gods op∣posed agaynst the greatnesse of thy goodnesse and wisdom. Some thinke their riches in their chest, or bestowed vpon possessions to bee their father, which are subiect to a thou∣sand chances & perils. Some think their power and might
which standeth on the loue and fauour of their subiects, to be their father: then the which thing nothing is more insta∣ble. Other some thinke the grace and fauor of the prince being a man, and by nature mortall, in power weake, and in will mutable, to bee their father. Thus euerie one ma∣keth that vanitie wherein he foolishlie trusteth, to be his fa∣ther. But we vppon whome through thy rich liberalitie, thou hast vouchedsafe the dig∣nitie
of sonnes, lifting vppe our eies vnto heauen doo call thee our Father, and doo beg and craue of thee which arte in heauen: whose presence notwithstanding dooth fulfill the whole world. But the seat of thy kingdome, for the ex∣cellencie of the place, is saide to bee fixed and sette in hea∣uen. This heauen for the forme and beautie thereof, and also for the appointed or∣der, which keepeth continually
a certaine course, dooth shewe foorth the highnesse of thine es∣sence, the greatnes of thy po∣wer, and the immortalitie of thy nature. O miserable men which hauing gotten so great a Father, doo runne as yet to other Fathers, of whom they may bee ashamed: and from whom we receiue nothing but infirmitie, euill and miserie. But from thée the true father commeth power, goodnesse, and felicitie. I am able (sayth thy Apostle) to doe all things,
through the helpe of Christe which strengtheneth me. And in another place complaning of his weaknes, thou spakest to him from heauen saieng, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my power is made perfect through weakenesse. Thou art in heauen for vs, that wee may know there to find thee our Father, and that there a refuge is prepared for vs, of the which we can not be disap∣poynted, neither by deceipt, nor by the force of enimyes.
All thinges are there secure & safe, because thou art there. Thou art a moste mightie king, and omnipotent God. And yet to manie héere on earth, thou art neither a king nor a God. For euerie one maketh a king and a god to himselfe after his owne fan∣tasie. O Father which art in heuen, ye maker of all things, and moste mightie Lorde, hear vs we beséech thee which are héere troubled and tur∣moiled in earth, which are tra∣uellers
and pilgrimes there∣in, not onelie for a time, but for the most part, for a small moment of time. Our Father is in heauen: therefore our inheritance and happinesse is there; why then doo wee seeke it on earth? where there is nothing to be found but the naturall fruits of the earth, as sickenesses, cares, troubles, sorrowes, greefes, and vexations. Make vs (O Lorde) to
séeke thée in the heauens of sempiternall rest, where thou hast prepared for vs all bles∣sedfulnes. Lift vp our hearts, O heauenlie Father, wee be∣séech thee, vnto those heauens and inflame our mindes with the loue and desire of those good thinges, which thou hast there prepared for vs, the greatnes & excellencie where of surmounteth the vnder∣standing & capacitie of man. For the which blessed bee thy name for euermore, Amen.
1 Hallowed be thy Name. THat is the true & proper name be∣longing to euerie thing, by which name the vertue, and inclina¦tion of the same thing is de∣clared: but who shall giue vn∣to thee, O Lord, a conuenient and proper name? the great¦nes
of whose essence, neither the mindes of men nor of an∣gels is able to comprehende. Yet wee vnderstande that to be thy name, by which wee may best comprehende thee. As when in thy worde thou art called Schaddai, that is to saie; All sufficient: Iehouah, that is to saie, Of thy selfe e∣uerlasting. Thou art also cal∣led immortall, the king, the Lorde, and the maker of all things. Thou art called most righteous, moste wise, and
the most mercifull Sauiour: And therefore wee saie with the Prophet in the Psalme, O God, according vnto thy name, so is thy praise vnto the worldes end. Hallowed bee this thy name in vs O Father, that wee maye thinke nothinge more sacred, more holie, and blessed than the same, that we may worship thée, and sub¦mit our selues onelie to thy name.
Sende downe wee beséech thee into our hearts thy hea∣uenlie light of true knoledge that we may call vppon thee alone: that wee may looke to be holpen by thy helpe and aid alone: and that wee put not our trust in other momenta∣nie, temporall, transitorie, and deceyueable helpes, but that we may haue our whole confidence onlie in thee, which alone canst, and wilt, and art wont to helpe. Glorifie thy name, O Fa∣ther,
in vs, by the Gospell of thy sonne Christ, and by the same also finishe the woorke which thou hast begun in vs, that we may perseuere in the way of godlinesse to the ende of our life: that so abiding in thy name, wee may also bee sanctified by thée. Sanctifie thy name so in vs, O heauenly Father, that we may be able to teach others, not onelie in worde, but also in example of godlie life, that thy holie name bee not euill
spoken of among the gentils who séeing our corrupte life, maie take occasion thereby to condemne thy holy gospel, because we which are the pro∣fessors thereof are not hallo∣wed in our conuersation. But make our light so shine before men, that they seeing our good works, may glorifie thee our heauenlie Father. And to the ende thy name may be magnified thorough∣out the whole worlde, make O Lord, all those whom thou
hast chosen, partakers with vs of this felicitie. Spread forth the bright beames of thy light vpon mankind, illu∣mine their mindes, inflame their affections, that all as it is méet, and right, may sanc∣tifie thy name, not in profes∣sion onely, but also in the true loue of godlinesse. For then shall thy name bee hallowed when thy sonne Iesus Christ our onelie Sauiour which is thy glorie, is thus knowne. To whome with thée and
the holie ghost, be all honour and glorie world without end Amen. 2 Thy kingdome come. RAigne thou O lord in vs, rule and go∣uerne vs, wee be∣séech thee: for our subiection to thee is a moste happie fréedome. By the fall
of our first parents, wee are made thrall to sinne, death, and the deuill, the power of whose kingdome wee doo too often féele in vs. But thou hast ordained and appoynted thy beloued Sonne to treade down the serpents head, that thou alone in vs mightest haue the preheminence, and that we might bee made par∣takers of the blessed inheri∣tance of thy heauenlie king∣dome. Of this kingdome thou haste long since spoken
by the mouthes of thy holie Prophets. As, that thou hast set thy king vppon Sion thy holie Mountaine: and that thy throne O God, is for euer and euer, and the Scepter of thy kingdome a Scepter of righteousnesse. To this king¦dome of thy welbeloued son, thou hast translated vs from the kingdome of darkenesse, setting vs frée from the pe∣naltie of sin, and deliuering vs into the glorious libertie of thy sonnes. Who then shall
be able to laie anie thing to our charge. It is thou, O god, which doost iustifie, who shall then condemne? It is Christ thy sonne and our king and Sauiour that died for vs, nay rather, which is risen againe, and sitteth at thy right hande making intercession conti∣nuallie to thee for vs, to bring vs vnto that heauenlie king∣dome. By this kingdome thou hast giuen vs, euen in this life, peace of conscience,
righteousnesse, and reioicing in the holie ghost. Encrease this ioy in vs, O Lorde, that our whole delight may bee to serue thée in holines and righ¦teousnes all the dayes of our life. Keepe vs O Lord, from the poyson of false doctrine, idolatrie, superstition, and incredulitie, by which sathan vpholdeth his tyrannicall kingdome. Mortifie and sub∣due in vs all carnall desires and lusts, by thy holie spirite, and by the same abandon out
of our mindes vncleane thoughts, & breake the snares of sinne, that the whole king∣dome of the deuill may be de∣stroied in vs. Renue thy king¦dome in vs, O heauenly Fa∣ther, we humblie beséech thee, by giuing vnto vs the true knowledge of thée, and there∣by a liuelie faith in thy sonne Christ, and regenerate vs by his holie spirit and word, that by the obedience of faith, wee maie wholelie be subiect vnto thée alone.
Make vs O Lorde, to des∣pise the glorie, pompe and ple∣sures of this worldly king∣dome, which sathan promiseth to the worshippers of him, that we may still desire from our hearts, euen as the Hart desireth the water Brookes, the fruition of thy heauenlie kingdome. The glorie and pleasures whereof are eter∣nall and most delectable. But the pleasures of this life, mo∣mentanie and vaine, and yet mixed with manifolde myse∣ries.
Heere wee are vexed with tyrannies, of beastes, and of men. The earth, the wa¦ter, and fire, as wearie of vs, continuallie warreth a∣gaynst vs. Those good crea∣tures, which thou hast giuen vs, manie times through our sinnes, are hurtfull and noy∣some vnto vs: yea we are dis∣quieted with our own bodies and with our own affections. As menne therefore wearie of this wretched worldlie kingdome, and desiring to
be dissolued from the burthen of the flesh, we heartilie praie thee, that thy celestiall king∣dome may come for our deli∣uerance: where, there is no hunger, no nakednes, no la∣bour, no infirmiite, no sicke∣nesse, no infamie, no hatred, no enimie, no dissimulation, no warre, no sorrow, no moor¦ning, no feare, no death. All thinges are there ioyfull, and full of blisse: saluation and peace are euerie where, and whatsoeuer happines may be
wished for, in such wise as neither the eie hath séene, nor the eare hath heard, nor at a∣nie time hath entred into the heart of man. Let this thy kingdome come, O heauenly father, we humblie pray thée. For all the afflictions of this life are not so grieuous vnto vs, as the ioy of this king∣dome delights vs. Therefore with sighes and groues wee desire that this thy kingdom may come vppon vs, as the reward of our conflict, as the
garlande and crowne of our course, & as the happie hauen of rest, after our tossing on the surging Seas of this world, which thou shalt giue vs for the merits of thy déere sonne Iesus Christ, to whom with thée and the holie Ghost, be all honor, praise and glory world with out end. Amen.
3 Thy will be doone. OUr knowledge, our vnderstan∣ding, and our wil, by naturall cor∣ruption O Lord, is blind, dul and rebellious against thy ho¦lie will: insomuch that the na¦turall man vnderstandeth not heauenlie thinges, nor desireth the participation
of thy euerlasting kingdome, but is an enimie vnto the same. Therefore thy sentence remaineth true, at what time thou saiedst, Man is but flesh, and all the imaginations of mans heart are euill. For this cause we pray as thy beloued sonne hath taught vs héere, that not ours, but Thy will be doone. Thy will is iust, ho∣lie, good, and full of sauing health, euen as thou art the bottomlesse well of all good∣nesse, and righteousnesse it
selfe. And as thou art our lo∣uing and most mercifull Fa∣ther, so there is no cause whie we shoulde doubt of thy good will, which surmounteth the louing kindnesse of all earth∣lie fathers. Thy will O god is omnipotent, and euerlasting, without shadowe of change, thou wilt doo whatsoeuer sée∣meth good vnto thee, and thy will shall stande for euer and euer, and the thoughts of thy hart throughout alages. Giue vs grace louing Father, wee
beseech thée, that as we are ig∣norant of this thy secret will, so we may alwayes humblie like obedient children submit our selues vnto the same, to bee ordered thereby as shall séeme best to thy diuine wise∣dome. But at this time, O Lord, especiallie, wee pray for the execution of thy reuealed will which thy onely begotten son our sauiour hath manifested vnto vs in his most holy gos∣pell, and which at this day is
reuealed vnto vs by the prea∣ching of the same, that wee might bee saued through Ie∣sus Christ, in whom thou hast chosen vs from euerlasting, that wee might bee heires of his kingdome. For this is thy wil (saith our sauior christ) that euerie one which belée∣ueth in the son should haue e∣ternall life. Giue vs fayth therefore (O heauenlie Fa∣ther wee beseech theee) that this thy will may bee perfec∣ted and accomplished in
vs, that wee may tend vnto that end, whereunto thou hast appointed vs That wee may beléeue in thee, feare thee, and loue thee for thy so great and fatherlie mercyes in Iesus Christ our Sauiour, powred vpon vs. Let this thy most holie, and holsome will be ful∣filled in vs, that being iusti∣fied through the merits of thy beloued sonne, and thorough faith in him, we may bee ioy∣ned with thée. Furthermore thy will is,
O god, that they which are re∣déemed by thy sonne, and doo stedfastlie beleeue in him, should shew themselues obe∣dient, thankefull, and readie to walke in his commaunde∣ments: and that wee beeing wholie consecrated vnto him shoulde giue our selues to in∣nocencie and puritie, & should not anie more defile our bo∣dies with the filthines of sins which hee hath made the tem∣ples of the holie ghost. For this is thy will, O God, euen
our holinesse, that wee should abstaine from fornication, & that euery one of vs should kéepe our vessell in sanctifica∣tion and honour: and not to walke in the lust of concupis∣cence, as do the heathen which know not thee. And as thou O father, wouldest haue vs to loue thee aboue all things, so thou wouldest that we loue our neighbours also, not in word and toong, but in deede and veritie. Let this thy will good Father, bee fulfilled in
vs. And we heartilie praie thée that as in prosperitie, we can bee well contented with thy wil, so also whensoeuer it shall please thée, either for the pu∣nishment of our sinnes, either for the tryall and exercise of our fayth, or for anie other cause, as shal séem best to thy fatherlie wisdom to afflict vs with diseases, with langui∣shing sicknesses, with iniu∣ries and reproches, with per∣secutions, or any other crosse
whatsoeuer, we may patient∣lie and willinglie, euen from our heart saie, Thy will bee doone. For if we bee not vn¦der chastisement, whereof all thy children are partakers in this life, then might we déeme our selues bastards, and not sonnes. And séeing thy onelie sonne our Sauiour, in whose mouth there was no guile, for vs miserable and sinfull men, vouchedsafe to stand as a méeke lambe dumbe before the fleecer, and opened not
his mouth, but bearing the chastisement of our peace, in the moste bitter agonie of death, when hee sweat water and bloud, most mildelie sub∣mitted himselfe to thy holie will: wee heartilie praie thee for the same our Christs sake that we may bee appliable to thy will in all thinges, after the example of thy deer sonne and maie without murmu∣ring or grudging vnfeinedlie say, Thy will be done.
Jn earth as it is in heauen. THe celestiall crea¦tures, O God, are prest and rea∣die to obaie thy di¦uine will, and whatsoeuer thou commandest them they doo it speedilie. Among which, are thy angels, who alwaies
stood stedfast in thy truth since the first beginning, and doe still stande in thy presence to serue thee, as ministring spi∣rits, to defend and gard thine elect, These angels doo reioise in heauen for the fulfilling of thy will in the conuersion and repentaunce of sinners, yea, so prompt is their seruice and so willing is their obedi∣ence, that nothing is more pleasant vnto them then when thy will, O God, is
performed and executed. The blessed saints also de∣parted this life in soule and spirit, haue the fulnesse of ioy in thy presence, and the plea∣sures also which are at thy right hand for euermore. This thy wil hath brought to passe. And therfore being frée from the cares and labours of this life, they doo still execute thy holie will, falling before thee which sittest in the heauenlie throne, and worshipping thee which liuest for euermore and
sayeng. Thou art worthie, O Lorde, to receyue glorie and honoure, and power: for thou hast created all things, and for thy wils sake they are, and haue beene created. As the angels and saints doo thus rest on thy will, O God alone, euen so other ce∣lestiall bodies also doo obeie the same. The perpetuall mo∣tion and true course of the hea¦uens: the sunne, the moone, and the stars, do continuallie kéepe their prescribed order
whereunto thou hast appoyn∣ted them. The temperate and flourishing springtide, the hot and dry summer, the fruit full haruest, and the chilling cold winter, haue their times and returnes from yeare to yeare according vnto thy di∣uine will. In the execution whereof they haue thus con∣tinued more than fiue thou∣sand and sixe hundred yeares, and yet in that same remai∣neth and endureth still stable and firme.
Make in like manner, O Heauenlie Father, wee be∣séech thee, our stubborne, dis∣obedient and rebellious wils, pliant, tractable, and obedy∣ent, to thy most holie will. O that this flesh, putting off the olde Adam which is made of earth, might submitte it selfe so willinglie vnto thy will as that inwarde manne dooth which is regenerate and illuminated by thy holie spi∣rite, and therefore with groanes and sighes desy∣reth
to doo thy will. O that it might please thee, to breake in sunder for euer the bandes of sinne, wherewith our spirit is tied, that beeing frée, wee might serue thee continuallie as thou wilt. O Father, wee heartilie praie thee, and for Christs sake humblie beséech thee, disburthen vs of this earth wherewith we are ouer∣whelmed, and make vs hea∣uenlie, that thy name maie bee sanctified in earth as it is in heauen: that wee may de∣sire
thy kingdome to come in earth as it is in heauen: that wee may will thy will to bee done in earth, as it is in heauen: that nowe here in earth wee may begin to bee such, as one day through thy grace and mercy, we shall bee in heauen. Where wee shall for euer praise thee and our lord Iesus Christ, to whome with the holie Ghost, bee all honour and glory world with out end, Amen.
4 Giue vs this day, our daily bread. A prayer for all need∣full thinges, both for the soule and bodie. WE are, O Father, in our selues mi∣serable and néedie beggers; but thou
art rich in mercie to all that call vppon thee. Out of thy heauenlie treasure therefore, wee beseech thee, plentifullie powre downe thy giftes vppon vs: and especiallie giue vs that breade, that hea¦uenlie Manna, the spirituall foode of our soules, thy omni∣potent word Iesus Christ, by whose word and blessed spirit, we are fedde, comforted, and euermore preserued to come vnto eternall life. For thou hast so loued the worlde, that
thou hast giuen thy onelie be∣gotten sonne, that euerie one which beléeueth in him should haue euerlasting life. This foode thou dooest giue of thy meere grace; make vs by faith to take and digest it. And to the end we may be the more able to go forwarde in that state of life, where vn∣to thou hast called vs, helpe O God our infirmities, and sustaine our earthlie bodies, with that corporall food, which from sunne to sunne wee can
not spare. We depende, O Lorde, vpon thy fatherlie pro∣uidence which openest thy handes, and replenishest eue∣rie liuing thing. Thou féedest the yoong Rauens, that call vpon thee. Thou dooest mini∣ster food to the hungrie lions, when they roare after their prey, and thou doost cloth and apparell the lillies and grasse of the field. Therfore we hum∣blie beséech thee, let thine eie attend vpon vs, to féede, cher∣rish, and preserue vs, in such
wise that wee may bee more apt to glorifie thy holy name. Break this bread, O Father, to thy sonnes, and giue it vn∣to them at such time, and in such measure, as is most méet and conuenient for them, so shall it be most swéete, and sa∣uorie, and wholsom for the chil¦dren. Thou onelie canst giue it; thou onelie knowest howe to giue it: & thou onely art woont to giue it, and wilt giue it still vnto thy children in the best
measure. If thou giue it not, wee cannot haue it. For who is he among the sons of men that can make the smallest graine of wheat, or other seed to growe, or the least hearbe to spring without thee? It is thou O Lord that doost make the grasse to grow for cattell, and herbe for the vse of men. It is thou that giuest bread & wine to strengthen, and make glad the heart of man, and Oyle also, to make him haue a chéerfull countenance.
Wee that plant and water, are nothing; Thou art all in all that giuest the increase. Therefore we stand like poore beggers at thy doore, crauing thy dailie almes and saying; Giue vs this day our daylye bread. And also we praie thee, O Father, that as thou makest these creatures of thine, ours, by thy frée gift; so also they may bee ours by our labour and studie, in that vocation whervnto we are called. Giue
vs thy grace wee beséech thee, that wee eate not our breade with idlenesse: that wee take not from our brethren theyr bread, by rapine, theft, oppres¦sion, vsurie, briberie, extorti∣on, and by such other vnlaw∣full meanes: but that wee may receiue from thy liberal and most merciful hands, our owne bread, in the sweate of our owne browes, that wee may bee blessed in the labour of our owne hands. And as thou hast from daie to daie,
all the daies of our life hither to fed vs most liberally, and preserued vs: so wee beseech thee good lord, that forsomuch as this daie, wee doo hunger and thirst, and shall daylie (so long as wee are in this flesh) stand in need of thy goodnesse, thou wilt vouchsafe to giue vs this day our daylie bread. And when thou hast satisfied our mouth with good things, giue vs O Father, conten∣ted mindes, that wee followe not the insatiable lusts of our
flesh, which beeing neuer con∣tented with thy good gifts, a∣buse them intemperatly and deuise and desire new daintie dishes for lust, and cause vs to say with the wanton Israe∣lites, Can God prepare a table in the wildernes? Can he giue bread also, & prepare flesh for his people Represse in vs these carnall delights: giue vs temperance that we maie liue not to eat, but eat to liue. For thy king∣dome, O God, is not meate & drinke, but a reioysing in
the holie ghost. And as for the bellie and the meate thou shalt destroy them both. If therefore it shall please thy goodnesse to giue vs our day∣lie bread in abundance, giue vs also aboundance of thy grace, that we be not proude, intemperate, or luxurious: but that wee maie vse thy gifts to the relieuing of our faint and weake bodyes, to the comfort and helpe of our brethren, and also to the ho∣nour and prayse of thy holie
name. Make vs mindfull & thank∣full, O heauenlie Father, for thy great goodnesse, that wee doo not sit downe at thy table as thy ghestes, to eate thy bread and drinke thy drinke, and then to rise vp to plaie, and so to forget thee, the au∣thor & giuer of all good gifts. Far be this grosse vnthanke∣fulnesse from vs. For the oxe knoweth his owner, and the asse his maisters crib, and shall wee forget thee? The
horse loueth his keeper, and the dog will fight for his mai∣ster. The brute beare, and the fierce Lion are thankefull to them that féede them. And the earth yeeldeth fruite to him that tilleth it: and shall wée so far degenerate, that we shall bee more vnreasonable then brute beastes? Farre be this O Lorde from thy children: Make vs therefore O father, to receiue our daylie breade with thankesgiuing, that ha∣uing thee alwaies before our
eies, which art the giuer of all good thinges, and refreshest the hungrie soule with good∣nes: and considering also our owne néede and necessitie, we may continuallie for our dai∣ly bread ascribe vnto thée, our father, with thy sonne our sa∣uiour, and the holie ghost our comforter, all honour, praise and glorie for euer and euer, Amen.
5 And forgiue vs our trespasses. A praier for remissi∣on of sinnes. WHen wee present our selues, O fa∣ther before thy di∣uine Maiestie, sa∣than our aduersarie, our con∣tinuall accuser, and sworne
enimie dooth trouble vs, and striketh our consciences with the sting of our sinnes, which aforetime wee haue commit∣ted agaynst thée. Howe da∣rest thou (saith hee) miserable man, presume to come into the presence of God with thy praiers? with what face canst thou call him thy father, when as thou at no time hast shew∣ed thy selfe an obedient son? Art thou not ashamed to pray that he will sanctifie and glo∣rifie his name, when as thou
dooest daylie prophane and di∣shonour the same? what rea∣son hast thou to desire him to come vnto thee with his king¦dome, which hitherto hast not submitted thy selfe vnto him, and hast not suffered him to raigne in thee? Also why doest thou praie that the will of God maie bee doone in thee when as thou hatest his will, and willinglie runnest into disobedience? Is it not impu∣dent temeritie that thou as∣kest thy daylie bread of God,
when as thou hast so ledde thy life hitherto, that thou rather deseruest to bee called a dog then a sonne? hast thou forgot¦ten that the Lord hath said, It is not meete to take the childrens bread, and to giue it vnto dogges? These & such like heauie cogi∣tations, O Lord, our enemie dooth assayle our mindes to discourage vs, and to drawe vs away from calling vppon thy name. But we being here taught by thy son Christ our sauior, to make our petitions
to thee, and also he hauing gi∣uen vs boldnesse to haue ac∣cesse vnto thee, and hauing also giuen vs the earnest of his holie spirit, whereby we crie Abba Father: doo repell these gréeuous temptations and fierie darts of the diuell, crieng vnto thee with true re¦pentance. Forgiue O father our trespasses and sinnes: for wee haue sinned in déede a∣gaynst heauen, and agaynst thee, and are no more worthie to bee called thy sonnes, but
haue in our selues deserued the wages of sinne, eternall death. For wee haue all sin∣ned, wee haue all gone out of the waie, and are become vn∣profitable; Wee are, Lorde, conceiued in sinne, and borne in iniquitie: all the thoughts of our hearts are euill euen from our natiuitie: we haue not beene so thankefull vnto thée for the benefits bestowed on vs, as becommeth vs: we haue manie waies abused thy gifts: wee haue not receiued
thy worde with that reuerend regarde that appertained to the same: neither haue wee obeyed thy will therein reuea¦led, yea, in manie things wee offend all. And although wee be renewed by the immortall seede of thy worde, yet the cor∣ruption of our nature, and the dregs of sinne, remaine still in vs, and the lawe of sinne in our members, which holdeth vs captiue against the will of the spirit, & hath place in vs, which is the cause that wee
breake thy holie commande∣ments. We are therefore, O father, in respect of our guilti¦nes inforced to crie vnto thée, Forgiue vs our sinnes: and thou in respect of the punish¦ment which wee, thereby haue deserued must forgiue vs for thy sonnes Christs sake, or els wee shall for euer perish. For if thou Lord doe in extre¦mitie and iustice looke vppon our sinnes, whoe shall abide it? If thou enter into iudge∣ment with thy seruant, what
flesh shall bee iustified in thy sight. Wherefore we appeale to the high throne of thy mercie, humblie beseeching thee, O most louing God and merci∣full Father, according to thy great mercie, and according to the multitude of thy com∣passions, Forgiue vs our sinnes. Wash vs thorowly from our iniquities, and clense vs from all our sins, in such wise that they may no waie preuaile a∣gaynst vs. Cast them into the
bottome of the sea, that they may neuer arise before thee in the daie of iudgement. Let thy wrath, and anger, and hea∣uie displeasure bee turned from vs, which we haue deser¦ued, and take vs into thy fa¦therly fauour againe, that we may be thy sonnes. Shewe vs thy mercie, O Lorde, and graunt vs thy saluation, for thy names sake. It is thou, O god alone that canst pardon and forgiue vs our sinnes; it is thou alone
that doost make vs happie and blessed, by couering our ini∣quities, and not imputing our sinnes vnto vs. It is thou alone, that canst put awaie our transgressions like to a cloud, and our sins as a mist. None but thou, O God alone, can remit so great a debt, as that ten thousand talents we owe vnto thee, Forgiue vs therefore wee beseech thee O most liberall father which art rich in mercies, al our sinnes, not for our merits, but for thy
mercies sake, and remooue them so farre from vs as the east is from the west. Pardon vs we humbly beséech thee for our Sauiour Iesus Christes sake, who hath borne our in∣firmities, and carried our sor∣rowes, who was wounded & broken for our iniquities, on whom thou hast layd the cha∣stisement of our peace, that we might bee healed with his stripes. Purge vs with his bloud from all our sins, & cancel the
hand writing which is against vs, which thy sonne fastened to his crosse, for the full satis∣faction of thy iustice. Him, O Lord, wee oppose with his innocencie, with his holinesse, with his righteous∣nesse, and with all the merits of his sufferings in the flesh, agaynst thy iustice, as our on∣lie sufficient mediatour our peacemaker, and our recon∣ciler to thy heauenly fauour, who by thy will was made sinne for vs, that wee might
be thy righteousnes through him, and also accursed for vs that wee might be blessed for euer. Wherefore vpon sure trust and confidence of these thy great mercies offered to vs in thy son Iesus, being bolde and ioyfull, and also sorrow∣full that euer wee offended thee so louing a Father, wee doo with deepe sighes of heart crie vnto thee, Forgiue vs our sinnes? Remit our offences, and couer our nakednes with
the holines and righteousnes of our eternall Sauiour thy sonne Iesus Christ: and from hence forth kéep vs from pre∣sumptuous sins, and restore in vs the decayed image of thy heauenlie light, that we maie hereafter serue thee in feare, in holinesse and righ∣teousnesse, all the dayes of our life, through our Lorde and Sauiour Iesus Christ, Amen.
As we forgiue them that tres∣passe against vs. A praier for bro∣therlie charitie. AS thou art our hea¦uenlie Father, so O Lord, it is ne∣cessarie that wee should be like thee in mercie, in kindnes, & in loue, shewing mercie,
kindnesse, and loue vnto our enimies, as thou hast loued vs, when wee were thine eni∣mies. And herein wee shall shew our selues to bee led by thy spirit, as thy déere sons, whome thou hast adopted, and therefore assured of remission of sinnes. It hath pleased thy sonne our sauiour Christ, ther∣fore to adde this condition, (As wee forgiue them that trespasse agaynst vs) that wee might bee ascertained of for∣giuenesse to forgiue our bre∣thren,
which trespasse against vs. What greater thing, O Father, can we aske of thee, then forgiuenesse of our sins, whereupon our euerlasting saluation dependeth? For the which thou requirest, nei∣ther gold nor siluer, nor anie laborious worke of the bodie at our hands, but onelie this; that as thou of thy méere grace and fauour hast pardo∣ned vs: so we in like maner shoulde forgiue them which haue offended vs. Expresse
in vs good Father, wee hum∣blie beseech thee this simili∣tude of thy good wil, and trans¦forme vs into thy likenesse, that our soules by the illumi∣nation of thy holie spirite, may bee ioyned to thee, and that the image of thy father∣lie kindnes, mercie and loue, may shine in vs. Stirre vp in vs a desire of brotherlie good will, and Christian charitie, that wee may haue care to helpe one another as mem∣bers of one bodie.
Grant vs grace that our loue may bee perfect, not fay∣ned, false, or hypocriticall, not in word and toong, but in deed and truth. That we may be patient, curteous, long suf∣fering, gentle, méeke, not suspitious, not disdainefull, nor easilie mooued to anger, but forbearing and forgiuing one another through loue. O heauenlie Father take from vs all bitternesse, and an∣ger, and wrath, and cry∣ing, and euill speaking,
with all maliciousnes and in∣flame our mindes, that after thy example wee may vnfey∣nedlie loue euen our verie e∣nemies, and blesse them that cursse vs, doe good to them that hate vs, and hurt vs, lea∣uing reuengement alwayes vnto thee. That thus retay∣ning mercie & loue the bonde of all perfection, and the fulfil¦ling of the lawe, we may de∣clare our selues to dwell in thee, and thou in vs, to the ho∣nour and glorie of thy holie
name, Amen. 6 And leade vs not into temptation: but deliuer vs from euill. A prayer agaynst temp∣tation. O Heauenlie father, and euerlasting God, wee most humblie beseech
thee, protect and strengthen vs weake and feeble men a∣gaynst all euill temptations of sathan, the sworne and mor¦tall enimie of mans saluati∣on: a lyer and our accuser, that great Dragon, the olde Serpent, which is called the diuell, a wicked spirite, a de∣ceyuer, which goeth about like a roaring lion seeking whom hee may deuoure. But espe∣cially in this latter age of the worlde, he knowing his time of raging to be but short and
perceiuing the day of iudge∣ment to be verie nie at hand, rangeth in a deadlie hatred against thy children, and by all meanes séeketh the destructi∣on of all mankinde, and sun∣drie wayes by diuers subtle¦ties, hee layeth snares to en∣trap our soules, bending his whole power against vs, and prieng for anie occasion to break thy commandements, and so at length to plunge vs horriblie into desperation. And because wee of our
selues are naturallie prone to all wickednesse, hauing in vs the seede of sinne, which is concupiscence, hee taketh an aduantage héereof to tempt vs, to wounde vs, or at the least to hurt vs with one pricke or other: hee prepareth baites to take vs and intrap vs in wealth, in pouertie, in pleasure, and in the intice∣ments of the flesh, in griefe of minde, in ambition and de¦sire of glorie: hee maketh vs euill contented with our vo∣cation,
to grudge in our infe∣riour condition; hee troubleth vs with excéeding cares of this life, and maketh vs coue∣tous, malicious, seeking re∣uenge; he prouoketh to pride, and presumption, and woulde feine bring vs to doubt of thy diuine will and prouidence: he taketh great paines to lull vs asléepe in the cradle of se∣curitie. Night and daie, slée∣ping and waking, eating or drinking hee is about vs, see∣king with open mouth to de∣uoure
vs. O Lord our God, who is a∣ble to stand agaynst the mani¦fold assaultes and temptati∣ons of Sathan? vnlesse thou, O most mightie protector de∣fend vs, alas we perish. For thou knowest our weaknesse and how vnable we be to re∣sist so subtill and strong an enimie. But thou hast bru∣sed in péeces that monstrous Leuiathan, and hast brought vnder foote the mightie and strong Goliah which vpbrai∣ded
thine hoast. Thou hast by thy sonne our Sauiour that blessed séed, bro∣ken the hed of the most subtill serpent, who came in the flesh to destroy the workes of the diuell, with whom he encoun∣tred in temptations, & most victoriouslie ouercame him, and on his crosse openlie try∣umphed ouer him, to pur∣chase a crowne for vs. By this thy victorie so ob∣tained, O heauenlie father, wee beseech thee holde him
fast bounde, that he maie not execute his tyrannie vpon vs as he desireth: that although he séeke to sift vs like wheate, yet thorough thy grace wee may bee able to stand. Let vs not be tempted, O Lorde, be∣yond our strength, but in the middest of temptation make a waie for vs, whereby wee may escape with victorie; for thou knowest how to deliuer thy children out of tempta∣tion. Preuent vs, O Father,
with thy heauenly grace that wee take no truce or peace with this our ghostlie enimie, but that wee maie manfullie fight vnder thy standert a∣gaynst sinne, our flesh, the worlde, and the diuell, all the dayes of our life, that there may bee continuall enmitie betwéene the womans seede, and the serpent for euer, that at the last the dreadfull redde dragon may be ouercome by the blood of the lambe. Mortifie this flesh of ours,
O Lord, with thy holie spirit with all the lustes and concu∣piscences therof that we may the better serue thee. Subdue our carnall reason and vnder standing to the obedience of faith, that we followe not our owne fantasies, but may de∣pend wholie vpon thy worde. Giue vs a right iudgement to discerne and iudge of this worlde, that wee may rather hate than loue it, and rather abhor it, than followe the ex∣ample thereof. Turne awaie
our eies, O Lord, that we look not after vanitie: Stop our eares from all alluring en∣tisements and temptations to euil; and refraine our toong from filthie communication, that wee maie speake onelie such things as serue to the e∣dification and profitte of our brethren. Make vs to loue sobrietie in our apparell, and temperance in all our meats and drinkes, that wee being in all our actions euermore directed and gouerned by thy
good spirit, wee may glorifie thy holie name. Giue vnto vs, O heauenly father, all thy armour, that like right soldiours wee maie ouercome in the euill daie, & vanquish our enemie. Gird vs therefore with the truth, put vpon vs the brestplate of righteousnesse, and let vs bee shod to the preparing of the gospell of light. Aboue all things, O God, giue vs the shield of faith, which can ex∣tinguish all the fierie darts of
wicked spirits. Bestow vpon vs the helmet of saluation, and the sworde of the spirit, which is thy word, that throgh thee wee maie encounter va∣liantlie, and gloriouslie at∣taine the victorie. Deliuer vs O Lorde our God, from all euill, that wee may serue thée, and consecrat our soules and bodies, yea all our members to be seruants of righteousnes vnto sanctifi∣cation, that wee maie wholie and trulie serue, honour, and
praise thee, our most louing father, heere in the kingdome of grace, and after this life in the king∣dom of glory, Amen.
¶For thine is thy kingdome, the power and the glorie, for euer and euer, Amen. THou, O Father, art king of Hea∣uen and of earth, and of all things in them contained. For thou hast prepared thy throne in he¦uen, and thy kingdome ruleth ouer all: & as thou hast made
all thinges by thy worde and breath of thy mouth, so thou doost still rule and gouerne all things. Thou sittest vppon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitantes thereof are as grashoppers: thou stretchest foorth the heauens like a cur∣taine, and spreadest them out like a tent to dwell in. Thou makest Pleiades and Orion, and turnest the shadowe of death into the morning, and makest the daie as darke as night: thou callest the wa∣ters
of the sea, and powrest them out vpon the open earth: the Lord is thy name. Thou dooest lighten and thunder from heauen, and doost mode∣rate all the influences of the heauens. Thou art the Lord of hosts, the strong and migh∣tie Lorde of battaile, and the king of glorie. Thou deposest and settest vp kinges at thy pleasure. And although thy seat be in heauen, yet thou humblest thy selfe to beholde the things
that are doone in earth. Inso∣much that thy prouidence ex∣tendeth it selfe to sparrowes, to rauens, to the lillies of the field, yea, to the haires of our head, so that they cannot fall but at thy pleasure. Thou art the father, whose name ought to be sanctified in all things: Thou art the king which ough¦test to raigne euerie where, and in all thinges: thy will alone ought to bee doone in heauen, and in earth: Thou alone dooest féede all thinges
with thy daylie bread: Thou alone dooest forgiue vs all our sinnes, and thou onelie turnest all euill temptations whatsoeuer they be, from vs. Thou alone dooest euermore arme and defend vs from all the trappes, assaultes, and snares of that foule feend and ghostly enimie the diuell, as the onelie and mightie Lorde of hostes, to whome all An∣gels, whether they bee good or bad do obey.
Thou art also omnipotent, O Lord, in this thy kingdom. For thou, O God, art in hea∣uen, and dooest whatsoeuer thou wilt: If thou determine a thing, who shall disanull it? and if thy hande bee stretched out, who shall turne it awaie? All vnder the heuens is thine, and thou art present euerie where. To thee therefore we flie for succour, and to thee wee make our prayers, ascry∣bing vnto thee alone all glorie
& maiestie. For thou Lord art a iealous God, and wilt not giue the glorie of thy name vnto another. Make thy power, O God, knowne to the sons of men, and the glorious renowme of thy kingdome. For thy king∣dome is an euerlasting king∣dome, and thy dominion en∣dureth throughout all ages, euen for euer and euer. We beseech thee therefore O hea∣uenlie father to heare our sup¦plications, and grant that as
thy promises in Christ to vs ward are yea and Amen, that is most certaine and assured, so also our praiers, may with thee, be yea and Amen, that fauourably allowed, and firm lie ratified for thy son Christs sake: to whome with thee and the holie ghost, be all honour, and power, and glorie, worlde without end, Amen.
A Meditation vp∣on the Lordes prayer. O Almightie and e∣ternal God, which dooest vouchsafe that we as it wer heauenlie children, shoulde euerie one of vs call thee our heauenlie father: grant that amongst vs by purenesse and
example of godlie and inno∣cent life, thy most holy name may bee sanctified, that all o∣ther nations beholding our goodnes, and vertuous liuing, maie be stirred to hallow and glorifie thee. Grant, O Lorde, that the kingdome of thy grace and mercie may reigne continu∣allie in our hearts, so that we may be worthie, to bee parta∣kers of thy realme of glorie and maiestie. Grant that vnto the verie
death, we refuse not to follow thy diuine will, and that wee (according vnto the example of the celestiall citizens, agrée¦ing togither quietlie) vnited in spirit) all controuersie in opinions set apart, the lustes of the flesh being subdued, and the flattering assaults of the world and the diuel ouercom, neuer wrastle agaynst thy most holie will, but obeie it in all things. Grant O Lord, for our bo∣die néedfull sustenance, that
we may the more freely serue thée. Giue vs wee beséech thee (O mercifull father) that heauen∣lie bread, the bodie of thy son Iesus Christ, the verie foode and health of our soules: giue vs the bread of thy diuine pre∣cepts, that wee may trulie walke and liue after them. Giue vs the bread of thy hea∣uenlie worde, which is the strong castle and sure defence of our foules, that wee being wel fed & filled with this food,
may worthilie come to the ce∣lestiall feast, where is no hun∣ger. Grant, O Lord, that we patientlie bear and suffer our enimies, and such as hurt vs and willinglie to forgiue the offences committed agaynst vs: so that wee may find thee Lorde, in forgiuing vs our trespasses, milde and merci∣full. Grant, O Lord, that we be not vtterlie ledde into temp∣tation, that thereby we should bee lost: but in all perilles
of temptation, and in the mid∣dest of the stormie tempests of tribulations, let vs thy children receyue and féele thy fatherly succor ready to helpe vs, least that wee ouercome with the craftie deceiptes of the temptor, should be drawn into euerlasting destruction: but when we be well assailed, approoued and purged with the fire of temptation, then let vs finish our course, and so well and valiantlie fight, that wee maie for euermore liue
with thee in that heauenlie ci∣tie, where agaynst thee no manner of temptation can preuaile. Finallie, grant (most mer∣cifull father) that we through thy benigne goodnesse, maie bee deliuered from all euils, present or to come, both of bo∣die and soule: and that at the last the yoke of the foule feend being shaken of, we may pos∣sesse the heritage of thy hea∣uenlie kingdome, which thy sonne, with his pretious blood
bought for vs thy children: and therefore euer to haue the fruition of celestiall delecta∣tion, accompanied with An∣gels and blessed Saints, tho∣rough the helpe, benignitie, and grace of our Sauiour Ie¦sus Christ: to whome, and to thee our Father, and to the holie ghost, bee glorie and ho∣nour nowe and for euer, A∣men.
A praier for the morning. I Render vnto thée (O almightie and most mercifull fa¦ther) most heartie thankes, by thy déerelie belo∣ued sonne Iesus Christ, for that thou hast vouchsafed of thy fatherlie goodnesse and frée mercie, to giue mee this night sweete sleepe, quiet and most comfortable rest;
and for somuch as it hath plea∣sed thee safely to preserue me this night from all perilles, hurts, and dangers: I wret∣ched sinner, most humblie be∣seech thee, that thou of thy gra∣tious goodnesse, wilt vouch∣safe, to shewe the like kinde∣nesse towards mee this daie, in defending, cherishing, com¦forting and gouerning mee, and all my counsels, studies, and labours in such wise, that I may neither thinke, speake or doo anie thing that may be
displeasant to thy fatherlie goodnesse, dangerous to my selfe, or hurtfull to my neigh∣bour, but that I maie euer∣more by thy gratious gouer∣nance so lead my life, that whensoeuer it shall please thée to call mee from this vale of miserie, and soile of sorrowe, I may receiue the crowne of euerlasting ioy and felicitie, which thou hast prepared for thy faithfull seruantes, and them that loue thee: graunt this mercifull god for thy deer
sonnes sake Iesus Christ our Lord, Amen. Another praier to be said in the mor∣ning. O Almightie & most gentle God, I most hartilie giue thee thankes for the swéet sléepe and comforta∣ble rest yt thou hast giuen me this night. And forsomuch as thou hast commanded by thy
lie word, that no man should be idle, but alwayes occupied in vertuous exercises, euerie man according to his calling: I most humblie beséech thee, that thine eyes maie attende vpon me, dailie defend me, in sorrow succour mee, cherish, comfort, and gouerne all my counsels, studies & labors, in such wise, that I may spende this day according to thy wil, without hurt, that I may es∣chew al things that should dis¦please, set thée alwaies before
mine eies, liue in thy feare, and euer work that, that maie bee found acceptable before thy diuine maiestie, vnto the praise of thy most holie name through Iesu Christ our lord, who liueth and raigneth, both now and euer, Amen.
An Euening praier. ALmightie God, who as thou hast made the daie for labour and trauell, so hast thou created the night for rest & refreshing our wea∣ried minds and bodies. Wee most humbly beséech thée that as the night darkeneth and shadoweth all thinges, so thou
wouldest for thy deere sonne Iesus Christes sake, hide our sinnes, remoouing them from thy sight, and putting awaie the memorie of them by eter∣nall obliuion, that as our bo∣dies shall haue the rest of sléepe, so also our mindes by hope of thy mercie, maie en∣ioy the rest of a quiet consci∣ence: and so being wholie refreshed, wee may awake, and rise vnto thy seruice the next day, and all the dayes of our life: as that when death
shall come (from the which it is as easie for thee to raise vs as from bodilie sleepe) wee may rest in hope of the most ioyfull resurrection, wherein our bodies shall awake vnto the euerlasting day, vnto the which, and vnto the kingdome of thy sonne, wee beséech thée bring vs, for the same our Sauiour Iesus Christs sake, Amen.
An other praier for the Euening. THis our mortall bodie, which tho∣row sinne daylie decaieth and dimi¦nisheth, must at the last alto∣gither perish, and become earth whereof it is come and made; and then shall our va∣nitie, which wee through our owne ignorance haue made
vnto our selues, take an end. But most mercifull creator & maker of all things, vouch∣safe so to breake, diuide and dissolue me thy poore creature, who am gathered, knit and made of thee, and grant that I may alwaies haue in mind thy dissolution, and of whome I am knit togither, hauing an eye to what place I must go, to the intent that I not being prepared, be not broght without the nuptiall or bridall garment, before thy iudge∣ment
seate. For like as when the daie is once past, we giue our selues to rest, euen so must wee, this life being en∣ded rest in death. Nothing is more like life than the day, nor nothing more like death than the night, and nothing so like the graue, then the couch or bed. Thus good God kéepe and defend vs from al euil, grant vs now liuing in impotencie and feeblenesse of our selues, that through thee we may bee preserued this night and euer Amen
The confession of our sinnes vnto God the Father. O Merciful and most louing Father, which hast no de∣sire in the death of a sinner, but rather that hee conuert and liue: I acknow∣ledge vnto thy highnesse all mine offences, by mee com∣mitted, which I cannot hide, I consider the vile state, wherto
through sinne I am brought: for thereby I haue worthilie lost thy fauour, and am fallen from thy grace, which while thou withdrawest from me I can doo no good thing, nor thinke one good thought. My sinne causeth thee to put mee out of thy remembrance, and to forget me, delaying to giue me that which is my strength and comfort. But howe long wilt thou forget mee Lorde, for euer? How long wilt thou hide thy
face from mee? Howe long will thou withdraw thy grace from me? Thou knowest my hartie contrition and sorrow, for that I haue vnkindly for∣saken thee, and thy seruice, and serued thine enimies the deuill and sin. But trusting surelie in thy promises made to all men, by the mouth of thy prophet Ezechiell; that is, if the sinner will turne away from all his sinnes that hee hath committed, and keepe all thy commandements, doubt∣lesse
he shall liue and not die, as for all his sinnes he did be¦fore, thou wilt not thinke vp∣on them. I most humblie be∣séech thee, that as my sinnes were the cause why thou did∣dest put me out of thy remem¦brance: euen so let my hear∣tie penitence for them, cause thee to put my sinnes out of thy remembrance. Suffer me not long to re∣maine in this perpletitie of minde, and to take sorrow in my heart from daie to daie:
continuallie fearing the pu∣nishment due to my sinne, and looking still for thy com∣ming into my soule by grace to deliuer me. Hope hath cau¦sed me long to looke for thee, that art my life and my helth. Thy long delaie in comming hath much increased my de∣sire; My feruent desire at length is now turned to a ve∣hement pain: wherfore make hast lord to help my sick soul. Let not mine enimie the de∣uill long triumph ouer mee,
whose propertie is to treade vnder his feete, like a cruell prince, all those that hee van∣quisheth. And that treading is dangerous and terrible: for hee treadeth them downe to the pit of hell, and to eter∣nall death. He did long holde in captiuitie all mankind, vn¦till the comming and passion of Christ for our redemption. And since through his craftie traines, hath brought to vt∣ter confusion, manie of those that professe thy true religi∣on.
Wherefore behold Lord and consider my miserable estate, and heare my humble petition, touching my deliue∣rance out of his danger. Lighten the eie of my hart and vnderstanding, with the light of thy grace and com∣fort, thereby expelling the darkenes of ignorance. Ligh∣ten also one other eie of my soule, which is the light or eie of the affection. The sight of this eie is so dim, that it hath no perfect & true iudgement;
yea it is blinded with the va∣nities of this world, that one thing in appearance, séemeth to be twentie things, like the sight of deceytfull eies of glasse; yea sometime the con∣cupiscence therof is so great, that the eie is cleane put out, and the sight lost. Mankind entreth into such league of a mitie with the diuell, that hee is contented to haue one of his eies put out to win his fa¦uour, as the inhabitantes of Iabes were agreed to haue
their right eies put out, accor¦ding to the desire of Nahas king of the Ammorites, had not king Saule, and the Pro∣phet Samuell saued them there from, and ouercome the said Nahas and his hoast. E∣uen so (moste mercifull Fa∣ther) I beséech thée, saue my said eie of affection, that it be not put out by our enimie the Deuill, that it sléepe not in sinne, which is the cause of eternall death. Manne maie fall by frailetie and
arise againe: yea the custom of sinne maketh a man often to fall. But to lie still sléeping and slumbring in sinne, as dooth the swine in foule mire, ingendreth obstinacie in a∣mendment, and delaie of pe∣nitence till the latter houre: at which houre, who can bee sure to haue thy grace at his pleasure? that is onlie at thy will Lorde, not at our com∣mandement. Wherefore, I most humblie praie thee to send me the light of thy grace
while I haue heere time and space of repentance; that at my latter end mine enimies saie not (reioicing and boast∣ing) that they had the vpper hand ouer me. As the Philistines (the fi∣gure of the wicked spirites) after the death of king Saul in the mount of Gelboe, cut off the head of Saul, and sent it with his harnesse through their country for a shew (they bare it also into the temple of their gods, of a pride and ioy
that they had of his death in such fashion will those cruell enimies that trouble mee, re∣ioice if I be cast downe, or if I doo once swarue from thee, and thy faith, and so die with∣out repentance. They assault mankind by pleasant sugge∣stion to sinne, they wrastle with vs, causing delectation therein. They strike vs and wound vs when wee consent thereto. They foile vs, and bring vs vppon our knees when wee
doo at anie time commit or go about the filthie action of sinne. And by the custome thereof they giue a great fall, with such violence, that wee haue much to doo to rise againe. But if we happen to die ther∣in impenitent; then they haue the victorie ouer vs. Then reioice and triumph they thereat, euen as the con∣querour triumpheth in his newe gotten conquest. Then will they cast vs in a pit & lay
a stone of abstinencie vppon vs, that we shall not arise a∣gaine. And as there is much ioy in heauen, when one sinner forsaketh his sinne, and retur¦neth vnto thee by pennance: in like manner is there ioy∣full triumphing, among the wicked spirits in hell, when one soule forsaking thée dieth in deadlie sinne: but all my trust is in thy mercie O lord. For although thou hide thy selfe in a cloud that my prai∣er
should not go thorough it vnto thine eares; yet are not thy mercies cleane gone, nei∣ther dooth thy louing kindnes cease. Thou art therfore Lord my portion, and in thy mer∣cie still will I hope & in none other creature, knowing for certaine, that (as God) thou onelie maiest helpe mee, and as my louing father, thou wilt helpe me. Wherefore in thee my heart shall be ioyfull and in thy sauing helth, which is thy sonne Iesus our Saui∣our
and redeemer. The Phili∣stins knowing the presence of thine ark to be in the camp of the Israelites, the daie of their battell, were sore afraid, saieng; who shall deliuer vs out of the hand of this migh∣tie God? Much more will I be glad and take sure trust in thee, O Lorde, hauing the presence and comfort of thy liuelie grace. And in token of the victo∣rie which thou hast giuen mee ouer mine enimies, I will
not cease (as I haue good cause) to sing the praise of the Lord, that so louinglie hath dealt with me, and praise the name of the most high all the daies of my life. Another confession of sinnes. I Thy poor creature vnworthie to ap∣peare before thy mightie maiesty, (O moste gracious Lorde)
doo powre downe, euen heere before thee, my sacke that is full with sinnes, which I haue committed euen from my youth. They are great and manie without number. Ne∣uerthelesse, trusting of thine accustomed and naturall pro∣pertie to bee mercifull to all sinners, that beeing sorie for the committing of their offen¦ces, with all their hearts call and turne to thee, & acknow∣ledging and knowing that thou diddest not sende thy lo∣uing
sonne to call those that seeme in their owne conceits to be iust; but to call those to repentance, which confesse themselues to bee sinners. I therfore Lord willing (by the helpe of thy grace) vtterlie to forsake sinne, and to fulfill thy holie will héereafter, de∣sire thee humblie of forgiue∣nes, and to admit me among the number of those that are blessed, and their vnrighte∣ousnesse forgiuen. I will not hide from thee my sinnes,
neither yet excuse them. But I praie thee (gratious Lorde and most louing Father) to hide them in ye bloody wounds of thy Sonne Christ, where they shall bee put in perpetu∣all obliuion. For who so co∣uereth his owne iniquitie, thou wilt discouer it to all the worlde at the daie of iudge∣ment to his shame. Thou wilt then haue him stripped as naked as hee was borne, that is, his shame shall not be hid, but manifest to all men
in that day. Wherfore I will not hide my wound my selfe to the intent, thou my good Surgeon, maiest lay a play∣ster theron to couer it betime that the deuill mine enimie neuer espie where it was.
A praier to be said before the receiuing of the holy Commu∣nion. O Lord, although I be not worthie to receiue thee into the house of my soule, for mine innumerable offences and sinnes doone a∣gainst thy great goodnes: yet trusting good Lorde, in thy
great pittie and infinit mer∣cie, I come to receiue thy bles∣sed bodie, as a sicke creature to thee, that art the health of life, vncleane to thee that art the well of mercie, blinde by ignorance to thée, that art the light euerlasting, néedie of grace, and poore in vertue to thee, that art the king of hea∣uen and earth, naked of good workes, to thée that art the au¦thor of grace. I come as a wretch to thee my Lord and maker, all deso∣late
and comforties, thou that art my helpe and succour, for besides thee there is no con∣solation. I come as a sinner vnto thee, that art the media∣tor, and meane between God and man, I come as a caitife to thee my most mercifull sa∣uiour; I come all sinfull vnto thée, the granter of remission and pardon, dead by sinne, to thee the restorer of life, euill to thee that art all goodnesse, hard hearted to bee relieued by the infusion of superabun∣dant
grace, beseeching and desiring thee most méekelie, to heale mine infirmitie, and sickenesse, to wash and clense awaie all my sinnes and fil∣thinesse, and to lighten my blindnesse, and reduce mee into the right waie, for I am out thereof, to comfort mee being desolate, and without anie one poynt of goodnesse. Haue mercie, on my wicked∣nes, pardon my sinfulnesse, giue mee the light of grace, buried & drowned in sin, yt I
may receiue thee, the foode of angels, the king of glorie, the Lorde of all lordes, with such chastitie of bodie, with such purenesse and cleannesse of soule, with such contrition of heart, and abundance of wée∣ping teares, with such spiritu∣all ioy and gladnes, with such dread and reuerence, with such faith, hope and charitie, with such obedience, and hu∣militie, with such loue and de∣uotion, faithfulnesse & thank∣fulnesse, as it is beséeming
for such a Lord to be receiued and to my soule most expedi∣ent. And bee not displeased good lord, that I a sinner with an vncleane hart, and pollu∣ted minde, come hither this daie to receiue thy precious bodie in sacramentall bread & wine, but remember mer∣ciful Lord, thou that refusedst not the sinfull Magdalen, be∣ing penitent from the kissing of thy blessed feet. And in like wise despise mee not, nor put thou me away as vnworthie
from the receiuing of thy bo∣die in the blessed sacrament, for my sins and vnkindnesse, but grant thou me compunc∣tion of heart, plentie of wée∣ping teares, to wash my sins and wickednesse, so that with a pure heart, and cleane con∣science, I maie this daie re∣ceiue the Sacrament to my soules health, that I may ob∣teine and possesse therby euer lasting life, with all holie saints in heauens glorie, and in this present life to be reple¦nished
with thy holie spirite, and neuer to admit other lo∣uer besides thee. Grant me blessed Iesu, for to receiue the sacrament of bread and wine that I maie be worthie to be counted for a member of thy mysticall body here in earth, and though as yet I bee not anie way worthie to be num∣bred amongest the simplest and lowest of thy seruants, but rather to be reiected and cast out for my simplenes, yet good Lorde, for thine infinite
power thou make me equall and like to the merits of thine elect and chosen seruantes. Come thou Father of the fa∣therlesse, comfort of the com∣fortlesse, come and clense my soule from all contagiousnes of sinne, for it is not conue∣nient and according, there to bee anie vncleannesse, where thou the spouse of virginall chastitie, should come in and dwell. Come & apparell my soule with such ornaments of ver∣tue
and grace, that it may de¦light thée therein to dwel and abide. And as thou disdainest not to touch the sore leapers, with thy holie hande, so good Lorde, vouchsafe to annoint my simple soule with the oint¦ment of remission and par∣don, that in this life by sted∣fast hope, firme faith, and per∣fect charitie, I may so increse in vertue from daie to daie, that I may attaine to the glo¦rious fruition of thy godhed in the kingdome of heauen,
where I may see thée face to face, worlde without ende, Amen. A thankesgiuing after the receiuing of the Commu∣nion. I Thanke thee good Lord, of thine in∣finit goodnes, that thou this day hast fedde mee with thy bodie and
bloud in the Sacrament, de∣siring thee méekelie that this Sacrament, which I haue re∣ceiued, may be to mee a pur∣gation and cleansing of my sinnes, a fortitude and spiritu¦all strength against my frail∣tie, and sure defence agaynst worldlie troubles, a purcha∣sing of grace and pardon, a medicine of life, and a conti∣nuall remembrance of thy passion, so that in the waie it may conduct and guide mee, & when I am out of the way
it may reduce mee, when I stumble it may vpholde me, and when I am fallen it may raise me, so that by good con∣tinuance in thy will, to euer∣lasting glorie, it may bring me, and so to order the tallage and taste of my heart, that I nere féele other swéetnes but thee, that I neuer séeke other loue but thee, nor none other comforter besides thée, so that I care for none other honour but thine. And giue me such a perfect loue towardes thee,
wherewith I may come to as great merit in heauen, as though I had spent all my life in remembrance of thy bles∣sed passion; and gratiouslie deliuer me from all tribulati∣on of bodie and soule, captiui∣tie, anguish, and perils, and all Christian people, Amen.
A Psalme for remission of sinnes. HAue mercie vpon me, O God, after thy great goodnes, according to the multitude of thy mercies doo awaie mine offences. Wash mee throughly from my wickednesse, and cleanse
me from my sinne. For I acknowledge my faults, and my sinne is euer before me. Against thee onely haue I sinned, and doone this euill in thy sight, that thou mightest be iustified in thy saying, and cléere when thou art iudged. Beholde I was shapen in wickednes, and in sinne hath my mother conceiued me. Who can vnderstande his faultes? cleanse me O Lord from secret sinnes.
For mine iniquities are gone ouer mine head, and are as a weightie burthen too hea¦uie for me to beare. My sinnes haue taken such hold vpon me, that I am not able to looke vp: yea they are mo in number than the hairs of my head, therfore my hart hath failed me. Therefore I say, Lord haue mercie vppon mee, heale my soul, for I haue sinned against thee. Returne, O Lord, deliuer
my soule, saue me for thy mer¦cies sake. Wilt thou Lord absent thy selfe for euer, and wilt thou be no more intreated? Is thy mercie cleane gone for euer, and is thy promise come vtterlie to an ende, for euermore? Hast thou God forgotten to be gratious, and wilt thou shut vp thy louing kindnesse in displeasure? O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, nor chastise me
in thy heauie displeasure. I faint in my mourning, e∣uerie night I wash my bed, and water my couch with my teares Haue mercie vpon me O Lord, for I am weake, O lord heale mee, for my bones are vexed. Lord I power my whole de∣sire before thée, and my sigh∣ing is not hid from thée. Remember not the sins of my youth, but according to thy mercie thinke thou vpon me, O Lord, for thy goodnes.
For thy names sake bee mercifull vnto mine iniqui∣tie, for it is great. Turne thy face from my sinnes, and put out all my mis¦deeds. Looke vpon my affliction and trouble, and forgiue mee all my sinnes. Though I haue gone astray like a shéepe that is lost, yet séeke thy seruant, for I do not forget thy commandements. Kéepe my soule and deliuer mee, let mee not bee con∣founded,
for I do put my trust in thee. A Psalme, wherein thou desirest god to heare thy praier. HEare mee when I call, O God of my righteousnes: haue mercie vpon mee, and hearken vnto my praier. Heare my woordes O Lorde, vnsterstande my me∣ditation.
Hearken vnto the voice of my crie, my king & my God, for vnto thee doo I pray. My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken mee, and art so far from my health, and from the words of my complaint. O my God, I crie by day, but thou hearest not: and by night, but I haue no audi∣ence. Our fathers trusted in thee, and thou didst deliuer them. They called vpon thee, and
were not confounded. But I am a worme and not a man, a shame of men, and the outcast of the people. Be not far from me, because trouble is néere, for there is none to helpe me. Hide not thy face from me, nor cast awaie thy seruant in displeasure, thou hast beene my succor, leaue mee not, nei∣ther forsake mee, O God, of my saluation. Let my praier be directed in thy sight as the incense: and
let the lifting vp of my hands be an euening sacrifice. I stretch forth my hands vn∣to thée, my foule desireth after thee, as the thirstie land. Heare me O Lord, and that soone, for my spirite waxeth faint: hide not thy face from me, least I bee like vnto them that goe downe into the pit. O let mee heare thy louing kindnesse betimes in the mor∣ning, for in thee is my trust: shew thou me the way that I should walke in, for I lift vp
my soule vnto thee. Comfort the soule of thy ser∣uant, for vnto thee doo I lift vp my soule. For my soule is full of trou∣ble, and my life draweth nigh vnto hell. My sight fayleth for verie trouble: Lord I haue called daylie vpon thee, I haue stret∣ched out my hands vnto thée. I am wearie of crying, my throat is drie whiles I waite for my God. My heart trembleth within
me, and the terrors of death are fallen vpon me. Heare me, O Lord, for thy louing kindnes is comforta∣ble, turne thee vnto me accor∣ding to the multitude of thy mercies. And hide not thy face from thy seruant, for I am in trou∣ble: oh hast thée, and heare me. Draw nigh vnto my soule and saue it, oh deliuer me, be∣cause I trust in thée.
A Psalme for Gods grace. TEache mee thy waie, O God, and I will walke in thy truth: O knit my heart vnto thée, that I may feare thy name. Turne vnto mee, and haue mercie vppon mee, giue thy strength to thy seruant, and saue the sonne of thy hande∣maid.
O that my waies were di∣rected to kéepe thy statutes. Staie my steps in thy paths that my féet do not slide. Be gratious vnto thy ser∣uant, that I may liue & keepe thy worde. With my whole heart haue I sought thee, let me not wan¦der fro thy commandements. Take from me the way of lieng, and cause thou mee to make much of thy lawe. Incline my heart vnto thy
testimonies, and not to coue∣tousnesse. O turne away mine eies least they behold vanitie: and quicken, thou me in thy way. Let my heart be vpright in thy statutes, that I bee not a∣shamed. Direct my steppes in thy word, & let no iniquitie haue dominion ouer me. Kéepe thy seruant from pre∣sumptuous sinnes, let them not raigne ouer me: so shall I be vpright, and made cleane
from much wickednes. Forsake mee not, O Lord, be not thou farre from me, O my God. Create in me a clean hart, and renue a right spirit with∣in me. Cast mee not away from thy presence, and take not thy holie spirit from me: Giue me the comfort of thy helpe againe, and stablish mee with thy free spirit. Send thy light & thy truth let them leade mee, and bring
mee to thy holie mountaine and to thy tabernacle. Teach me to doo thy will, for thou art my God: let thy good spirit leade mee into the land of righteousnesse. Bowe downe thine care to me, make haste to helpe mee: bee vnto mee a strong rocke, and a house of defence to saue me. So shall I bee glad and re∣ioyce in thee: and I will sing praise vnto thy name, O most high.
A Psalme wherein we pray God to deli∣uer vs from our enemies. DEliuer me O Lord from the euill man: and preserue mee from the wicked man. Which imagineth mischief in their hearts, and stirre vppe strife all the day long.
They haue sharpened their toongs like a serpent, adders poison is vnder their lips. This thou hast seene, O lord, holde not thy tongue then, go not far from me, O Lord. Awake and stande vp to iudge my quarrell, auenge thou my cause, my God and my Lord. Iudge me O Lord my god, according to thy righteous∣nesse: and lette them not tri∣umph ouer me. Let them not say in their
hearts, There, there, so would we haue it, neither let them saie we haue deuoured him. Deliuer me from mine eni∣mies, O god: defend me from them that rise vp against me. O deliuer me from the wic∣ked dooers, and saue me from the bloodthirstie men. Which speake euill of mee, saying; when shall he die, and his name perish? Yea, my familiar friend whome I trusted, which did eate of my bread, hath lifted
vp the heele against me. But thou Lord art a buck∣ler for me, my glorie and the lifter vp of my head. O Lorde in thee I put my trust, saue mee from all that persecute mee, and deliuer me. Thou wilt maintaine my right and my cause, for thou art set in the throne that iud∣gest right. Vp Lord let not man pre∣uaile: let the wicked bee iud∣ged in thy sight.
Drawe mee out of the net, that they haue laide priuilie for mee: for thou art my strength. Let not them that are my enimies vniustlie, reioice o∣uer mee, neither let them winke with the eie that hate me without a cause. Haue mercie vpon me, O Lorde, consider my trouble, which I suffer for them that hate me, thou that liftest me vp from the gates of death.
The Lorde redéemeth the soules of his seruants: and none that trust in him shall perish. A Psalme of trust and confidence in God. HAue mercie vppon mee, O God, haue mercie vpon mee: for my soule tru∣steth in thee, and in the sha∣dowe
of thy winges will I trust, till these afflictions bee ouerpast. Vnto thee, O Lorde, lift I vp my soule, my God I trust in thee, let me not be confoun∣ded. I should haue fainted if I had not beleeued to sée the good¦nes of the Lord in the land of the liuing. But I trust in thy mercie, my heart shall reioyce in thy saluation, I will sing to the Lorde, because hee hath dealt
louinglie with me. I haue set thee alwaies be∣fore mee, for thou art at my right hand therefore I shall not slide. Thou Lord art my fortresse, my rocke and my deliuerer, my God, and my strength, my shielde, the horne also of my saluation. Thou Lorde art my light, and my sauing health, whome then shall I feare? Thou lord art the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid?
In God doo I trust, I will not bee afraid what man can doo vnto me. Yea though I should walke through the valleie of the sha∣dow of death, I will feare no euill, for thou art with mee, thy rod and thy staffe comfort me. Thou wilt send from hea∣uen and saue mee, from the reproofe of him that woulde swallow me vp. They that know thy name
will trust in thee: for thou Lord hast not failed them that seeke thée. Thy Angell pitcheth round about them that feare thee and deliuereth them. Therefore I will laie mee downe and sléepe in peace, for thou Lord onelie makest mee dwell in safetie. A Psalme wherin we pray for the af∣flicted Church of Christ. O God, wherefore art thou absent from vs so long: why is thy wrath so hot against the shéep of thy pasture? O thinke vpon the congre∣gation whome thou hast pur∣chased
and redeemed of old. Thinke vpon the tribe of thine inheritance: and mount Sion, wherin thou hast dwelt. Lift vp thy féete, that thou maiest vtterlie destroy eue∣rie enemie, which hath doone euill in thy sanctuarie. Thy aduersaries roare in the middest of thy congrega∣tions: and set vp their ban∣ners for tokens. They haue saide in their hearts, let vs make hauocke of them altogither: and they
haue defyled the dwelling place of thy name. The dead bodies of thy ser∣uants, haue they giuen to bee meate vnto the foules of the aire, and the flesh of thy saints vnto the beasts of the land. Their bloud haue they shed like water on euerie side of Ierusalem, and there was no man to burie them. Wee are become an open shame to our enimies: a verie scorne & derision to them that
are round about vs. For they haue deuoured Ia∣cob, and laid waste his dwel∣ling place. The wilde boare out of the wood doth root vp the vineyard and the wilde beastes of the field deuoure it. O God, howe long shall the aduersarie doo this dishonour? howe long shall the enimie blaspheme thy name, for e∣uer? Why withdrawest thou thy hand? why pluckest not thou
thy right hande out of thy bo∣some to consume the enimie. Lord how long wilt thou be angrie? shall thy iealousie burne like fire for euermore? Powre out thine indigna∣tion vppon the heathen that haue not knowen thee: and vppon the kingdomes that haue not called vppon thy name. Do thou vnto them, as thou diddest sometime to the Ma∣dianites: vnto Sisera, and vnto Iabin, at the brooke of
Kison. Which perished at Endor: and became as the doong of the earth. Make them and their prin∣ces like Oreb and Zeb, yea, make all their princes like as Zeba and Salmana. O my god, make them like a wheele: and as the stubble before the winde. Persecute them euen so with thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storme. Make their faces ashamed
O Lord, that they may séeke thy name. Let them bee confounded and vexed euer more & more: let them be put to shame and perish. That they may know, that thou (whose name is Ioho∣uah) art the onelie most high ouer all the earth. O deliuer not the soule of the turtle doue into the hand of the enimies: and forgette not the congregation of the
poore for euer. O let not the simple goe a∣way ashamed, but let the poor and néedie giue prayses vnto thy name. O let the vengeance of thy seruants bloud that is shed: be openly shewed vppon the heathen in our sight. O let the sorrowful sighing of the prisoners come before shee: according to the great∣nesse of thy power preserue thou those that are appointed to die.
Helpe vs O god of our sal∣uation, for the glorie of thy name: O deliuer vs, and bee mercifull to our sins for thy names sake. Saue vs O Lord our god, and gather vs from among the heathen. So we that bee thy people, and sheepe of thy pasture, shal giue thée thanks for euer: and will alwaie bee shewing foorth thy praise fro generation to generation. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel for euer and euer: and
let all the people say, So be it Praise ye the Lord. A Praier for the preseruation of our most gratious Soue∣raigne Queene Elizabeth. O Almightie God, King of kinges, and gouernor of all things, I most humblie beséech thee, to con∣tinue
thy woonted fauour, and fatherlie kindnesse, towards thy handmaid, our most grati¦ous Soueraigne Quéene E∣lizabeth, that as shée hath hi∣therto aduanced true religi∣on and the glorie of thy name through the preaching of the gospell of thy Sonne Christ: so she may still perfect and go forwarde in that good course like a louing nurse vnto thy church. Giue her wisdom & vn¦derstanding to do that thing which is acceptable vnto thee,
profitable for vs her subiects, and hurtfull to none. Grant her, O Lorde, a perpetuall time, long life, and continuall felicitie. Protect her as the apple of thine eie, and deliuer thou her not into the handes of her enimies. Giue her vi∣ctorie O God, we beséech thée, ouer all thine & her enimies, and blesse all her godlie acti∣ons in such wise, that all the worlde maie knowe, and the posteritie to come may say, that thy mightie arme hath
raised vp in England a De∣bora, a Iudith, an Hester, and a nourcing Queene for thy Church. Make her to reioyce in thy strength, and mightily to triumph in thy saluation. Grant her the desires of her heart, and denie not the peti∣tions of her lips. Let thy hea∣uie hand, O Lord, light vpon her enemies, and thy right hand find out all such as hate her, and enuy her prosperitie. Saue our Queene, O louing father, from all her enimies,
which either secretlie or open∣lie go about to bring her life to the graue, and her glory to the dust. Let her finish her course, O God, in a good age, an old woman, and of great yeares, to the comfort of thy church, and the glorie of thy name, and to her euerlasting saluation, thorough Iesus Christ in thy heauenlie kingdome, Amen.
A Psalme of prai∣ses and thanksgiuing to God for his be∣nefites. PRaise the lord ye that feare him, magnifie him all ye of the séede of Iacob. For hee hath not abhorred nor despised the affliction of the poore: neither hath hee
hidde his face from him, but when he called vnto him hee heard him. Sing praises vnto the lord all yee his saintes, and giue thanks to him, for a remem∣brance of his holinesse. For who is God beside the Lord? and who is mightie saue our God? Praise ye the Lord with me and let vs magnify his name togither. Thy mercie, O Lord, rea∣cheth vnto the heauens, and
thy faithfulnes to the clouds. How excellent is thy mer∣cie O God: therefore the chil∣dren of men trust vnder the shadow of thy wings. Thou art the father of the fa∣therlesse, and a iudge of the widowes: euen God in his holie habitation. Thou art the god, which hel∣pest vs, and powrest thy bene∣fits vpon vs. Thou art our god, of whom commeth saluation: God is the Lord, by whom we escape
death. Blessed is the people O lord that can reioyce in thée: they shall walke in the light of thy countenance. Thou Lord art slew to an∣ger, and of great mercie. Thou hast not dealt with vs after our sins, nor rewarded vs according to our iniqui∣ties. O speak good of the Lord al ye works of his, in all places of his dominion, praise thou the Lord, O my soule.
Another. MY hart is fixed O God, my heart is fixed, I will sing and giue praise. Vnto thee, O my strength will I sing, for God is my defence, and my mercifull God. For thy louing kindnesse is better than life it selfe: my lips shall praise thée.
As long as I liue will I magnifie thee on this maner, and lift vp mine hands in thy name. My soule shall be satisfied as it were with marrow and fatnesse: when my mouth praiseth thée with ioifull lips. I will alwaies giue thanks vnto the Lord, his praise shall be in my mouth continually. I sought the Lord, and hee heard me, and deliuered mee out of all my feare. Praised be God, which hath
not put backe my praier, nor his mercie from me. Thou hast deliuered me fro my strong enimie, and from them that hate me: and hast drawne mee out of manie troubles. Thou hast giuen mee the shield of thy saluation, & thy right hand hath staied me, and thy louing kindnes hath cau∣sed me to increase. What reward shall I giue vnto the Lord for all the bene fits he hath done vnto me.
I will thanke thée O Lord my God, with all my heart: and will praise thy name for euermore. For great is thy mercie to∣ward me: and thou hast deli∣uered my soule from the ne∣thermost hell. Therfore my praise shall be of thée in the great congrega∣tion: my vowes will I per∣form in the sight of them that feare thee. Thou art my god, and I wil thanke thee: thou art my God
and I will praise thee. Blessed be the Lorde God, euen the God of Israel: which onelie dooeth woonderous things. And blessed be the name of his maiestie for euer: and all the earth shall be filled with his Maiestie, Amen.
A Psalme of bles∣sedfulnesse. BLessed is he whom thou O Lorde, doo∣est elect, and cau∣sest to come vnto thée, he shall dwell within thy courts. Blessed is he, whose wicked∣nesse is forgiuen, and whose sinne is couered. Blessed is the man to whom
the Lord imputeth not iniqui¦tie, and in whose spirit there is no guile. Blessed is the man that put∣teth his trust in the Lord. Blessed is the man that fea∣reth the Lord: and delighteth greatlie in his commande∣ments. Blessed are they that dwell in thine house, they will euer praise thee. Blessed is the man that doth not walke in the counsell of the wicked, nor stande in the
waie of sinners, nor sit in the seate of the scornfull. Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee: & in whose heart are thy wayes. Blessed are they that are vpright in their way, and walke in the law of the Lord. Blessed are they that kéepe iudgement and doo righteous∣nesse at all times. Blessed is he that conside∣reth the poore and néedie: the Lord shall deliuer him in the
time of trouble. Blessed is the man whome thou chastisest O Lorde, and teachest him thy law. Blessed are they that kéepe his testimonies, and seek him with their whole hart.
Secrete Meditati∣ons of the hart to stir vs vp vnto god∣linesse. BY creation, I am a man, made of earth: therefore transitorie & mor∣tall. Yet indued with a minde, that is to say; with vnder∣standing, reason, and iudge∣ment:
by which I may vnder∣stand that most excellent good¦nesse, which is God, and may bee ioyned with him in im∣mortalitie and blessednesse. But my reason, vnderstan∣ding, and iudgement, beeing by the malice of Sathan cor∣rupted, I do neglect this hap∣pinesse. I rather séeke to enioy the delights and pleasures of my flesh. In the most vile & tran∣sitorie things, I occupie my whole minde.
I ouerwhelme my selfe wholie with earth, of heauen∣lie I make my selfe earthlie: and change my selfe from a reasonable man into a brute beast. But god who once loued me in his sonne Christ dooth not forsake mee, but calleth mee still outwardlie by his word, and inwardlie by his holie spirite, and knocketh at the doore of my heart and minde, that I might loue him, feare him, and serue him.
Yet I am deafe, and blind, and being more stonie hear∣ted than flint, dooth féele no∣thing. O vnthankefull wretch that I am, which doo neglect, and despise so great bene∣fites. God gently offereth to lead me by the hande, and I stub∣bornlie turne awaie my face from him. Awake my soule, lift vp thy selfe, and lette vs not
thus wallow in our filthines, stoutlie striue thou agaynst wicked custome: tread vnder thy foote these contemptible and vile delightes, and co∣uet after the most excellent things. Nowe God calleth; I will hearken to him, hee leadeth me, and I will follow him: he offereth himselfe, and I will take the oportunitie, hee she∣weth the waie to euerlasting blessednesse: I will not turne away my face, but will séeke
to attaine. ¶Print these things in thy minde, and let them not be in vaine and in∣effectuall cogitations; but put them in prac∣tise, and thou shalt receiue the fruit. FINIS.
To Jesus Christ. I Iesus my ioy, and comfort onlie good, E Euer to stand and neuer to decay: S Sathan be fel, be fierce and furious wood, V vorld do thy worst, & sin do thou not stay S Speed you to spil, & plie to beare the sway. C Crosse be my share, & carking be my hire H Hartbreak my cōfort, & sadnes my feast R Railing my recōpence, by toongs of fire I Iesus be mine, & these things are he lest S So art thou mine, ful fixed in my thoght, T Trusty O Christ (O) world vile vaine and nought
1598 SVBLIME DEDIT OS HOMINI ¶Printed at London Peter Short, dwellin Bredstreet hill at the signe of the Star.
