24778 99854406 19826
¶ A Christian Instruction, contey∣ning the law and the Gospell. Also a Summarie of the Principall poyntes of the Christian fayth and Religion, and of the abuses and errors contrary to the same. Done in certayne dialogues in french, by M. Peter Viret, somtime mini∣ster of the word of God at Nymes in Prouince. Translated by I. S. Seene and allowed according to the Queenes Maiesties Iniunctions. Imprinted at London by Abra∣ham Veale, dwelling in Paules churchyard at the signe of the Lambe. ANNO. 1573.
To the honorable and vertuous Lady, Eli∣zabeth, Countesse of Lincolne, Iohn Shoute vvisheth encrease of all godly honoure and knowledge. WHEN I HAD TVRNED into English this vvorke, I cōsidered in my selfe, that in aunciente time and also in this our age, men haue accustomed to dedicate their trauayles vnto such vertuous perso∣nages as they haue honored. And I exami∣ning my selfe, vnto vvhome I moughte addresse this little labour of mine, thought good to presume vppon your goodnesse, and to addresse the same vnto your hono∣rable Ladyship knovving this vvorke to be a meet subiect for the exercise of noble spirits, in the which they may see the great mercies of God tovvards mankinde, and learne hovv to be thankfull for the same tovvards his diuine maiestie: It may please you therefore (good Madame) to accepte
this present, at the hand of him, vvho vvi∣sheth vnto you great encrease of spirituall blessings, and that after this momentayne life, you may be one of those vvhich shall euer vvayte on the Lambe in the heauen∣ly Ierusalem, vvhich vvas slayne for the sinnes of man before the foundation of the world was layde, to the end he mought make vs acceptable vnto God, by vvhome vve haue redemption thorough his bloud (euen) the forgiuenesse of our sinnes, according to the riches of his grace. From London the 4. of Ianuary.
To the Christian Reader. SEeing that the chiefe cause for the whyche God created mā, is to be serued and honored by him, our duty is thē to seke to vnderstand how to honor and serue him: and we cānot know howe to serue, honoure, nor obey him, but by his worde: and albeit his worde be suche as it is able to giue instruction both to learned and vnlearned, hauing in it milke for children and strong meate for men, yet is it necessarie to vse for our better instruction, the helpe of the worthy fathers in the study of the same, wherby we may the bet¦ter and more certainely iudge of that whiche we shall reade, by the which meane we may the more easily know our good God his be∣nefites vnspekeable presented to
vs in his deare Christe, and what we are by our Lord Iesus Christ, & what we are of our selues, with∣out which knowledge none can be a true Christian. For if we knowe not that our only saluatiō is foun∣ded by God in Iesus Christ, & that oure eternall life proceedeth onely from the free mercies of god with∣oute any iote of oure deseruings, surely we cannot be saued. For if we will be accepted at the handes of God for his faithfull and obedi∣ent children, we may not presente vnto him any workes of ours for satisfaction for our sins, either in parte, or in al, albeit we ought and are bound to do good works. For if we haue in vs a liuely faith, we cannot but do good works. For as faith is a frute of oure election, so are good works a frute of our cha∣ritie towardes oure neighboure, whiche charitie is a frute of oure
liuely faith, whiche worketh tho∣rough charity, as S. Paule saith: but if we will be acceptable vnto God, we must vtterly cast downe our selues before him, acknowled∣ging our selues worthy of eternall damnation a thousand times, and embrace Iesus christ wholly with all his merites, who hath satisfied the iustice of God for vs, fulfilled the lawe, paid our debte, caried a∣way with him captiues in vnspe∣keable triumph, Sathan, sinne, deathe, and Hell, and hath taken possession for vs of the heauenly inheritaunce, and there sitteth at the right hand of God the father, making intercession for vs cōtinu∣ally. And to the end we may wel knowe howe we do obtayne these inestimable benefites by Iesus Christe, I haue tourned into oure naturall language this worke, in the which are sufficiently and ex∣cellently
handled all the principall pointes of our Christian religion. I haue added to the ende of thys worke, the exposition of Master Viret vpon the preface of the law, which conteyneth sundry excellent doctrines: I haue done it to helpe to aduaunce in the way of their saluation al such as are ignoraunt of the tongues: wherefore I be∣seeche God that they whiche shall reade it, may so profite there∣by, that God may in them be glorified, and their soules edified.
THE SVMME OF the principall pointes of the Christian faith and Religi∣on, and of the abuses and errors contrary to the same. Hovve nedefull it is, that all Christians doe vvell knovv vvhat faith is, vvherby they are made Christians, & vvhat things she doth comprehend. Chap. 1. WHOSOEVER dothe be∣léeue the testimonie whi∣che God in his word doth yelde of his will, holdeth alreadie for certaine, that the saluation of men, by the which God will be glorified in them, resteth in the only faith in Iesus Christe,Rom. 3. d. Rom. 10. b. Ephe. 2. b and that from the heart men beleue to iu∣stification, & with the mouthe men make confession wherby they are saued. Wher∣fore séeing it is so, it is néedfull, not only that euery true Christian do well vnder∣stand what is the nature of the true faith, and which are the principall pointes that
she conteineth (without the which she can¦not be a true and perfecte faithe) but also that he be wel resolued in them. For faith can not be a true faithe, without the true knowledge of the things that she belée∣ueth, so farre as God hath reuealed by his worde, and is requisite for euery man to knowe for his saluation. Wherefore they which know not, nor do vnderstand at all that whiche they say they do beléeue, haue no faith at al, but by imagination and fan∣tasie, whatsoeuer they doe persuade them¦selues to haue. Of the summaries of the faith of the chri∣stian Churche named Symboles. Chap 2. FOr that cause the ancient Church hath comprehended all the poyntes of the Christian faith in certaine Summaries, whiche are called commonly, the Nicene Créede, the Créede of Athanase, and that of the Apostles. This name of Symbole was giuen vnto them, as well for that they did conteyne in summe the principal pointes and foundations of the Christian
doctrine, whyche are more at large ex∣pounded in the holye Scriptures: as also for that they are the true markes and to∣kens of a Christian man, in euery one that beléeueth, and confesseth the doctrine conteyned in them. Wherefore it is re∣quisite, that euery one knowe at the least that same whiche is commonly called, the Créede of the Apostles, which is the most cōmon and most short of them all, accor∣ding to the which, the Church doth daily make publique confession of hir fayth, as followeth. I beleeue in GOD the Father Al∣mightie, maker of heauen and earth: And in Iesus Christe hys onely Sonne oure Lorde: Whiche was conceyued by the holie Ghoste: borne of the virgin Marie: suffered vnder Ponce Pylate: was cruci∣fied, dead, and buried: he descended into hell: The third day he rose from the dead: he is gone vp into heauen, and sitteth on the ryght hande of God the Father al∣myghtie: From thence shall hée come to iudge bothe the lyuyng and the dead. I beléeue in the holy Ghoste: The ho∣ly vniuersall Church: The communion
of Saintes: The forgiuenesse of sinnes: The resurrection of the bodie: The lyfe eternall. Sobeit. Of the vnderstanding of the matters conteyned in these Summaries, and howe necessarie it is. Chap. 3. NOwe forsomuche as it is a hard mat∣ter to be briefe and playne bothe at once, it is certain that the matters contei∣ned in these Summaries, are so briefly comprehended in them, that euery man can not easily vnderstand and comprehēd what they doo import, sauing only such as are wel exercised in the holy Scriptures: And beside that, that ther are few among the common people that knowe the sayde Symboles, vnlesse it be this, which is the shortest of the thrée, whiche the Christian Church doth hold. There is yet this euil, that many haue not learned it, but in an vnknowne toung: wherefore it profiteth them euen as much as if they had not ler∣ned it at al, séeing they do no more vnder∣stand it, than if they had neuer heard spe∣king of it. And as touching these that haue
learned it in their vulgar toung, there are also many of them, that haue onely lear∣ned to pronounce it by mouthe, withoute any vnderstanding of it, as do little chil∣dren, or birdes that are taught to speake: not vnderstanding what they say. There∣fore it is more than necessarie, that that whiche the principall pointes conteyned in the same do import in substance, be ex∣pounded somewhat more familiarly and playnly, to the ende that men may the bet∣ter know, how euery one doth vnderstād them, and whether the faith of the heart do agrée with the confession of the mouth. For manye whiche make that confession by mouth, do oftentymes folow doctrines and religions clean contrarie to that whi∣che they confesse. Wherein they do belye themselues, denying by their works, that whiche they confesse by worde. Of the principall pointes wherevppon the true Christian faythe is buylded: and first of the vnitie of God. Chap. 4. NOwe the first grounde worke and the first article of the faith of a ChristianDeutero. 6. a Iohn. 4. c &. 17. a
man is,Esay. 40.9. Apocalip. 1. d 1. Timo. 1. d Genes. 1. Psalme. 86. e &. 103. a Exod. 34. a Matth. 28. d that he beléeue, that there is one only true God, whiche is a spirite inuisi∣ble and eternall, without beginning and withoute ende, almyghtie, all wyse, all good, all luste, all mercyfull, and all per∣fect, maker of all creatures. Of the Trinitie of persons, in the vnitie of the diuine essence, and of their pro∣prieties, and of the creation of the worlde. Chap. 5. FVrther, albeit that there is but one on∣ly God, in one only diuine essence, this notwithstanding,Genes. 1. Iohn. 1. a. b Iohn. 1. 1. Iohn. 1. Colloss. 1 c Hebr. 1. a Iohn. 14. b d g. &. 15. d &. 16. b Act. 1. a &. 2. a the Christian faith doth acknowledge in that diuine essence, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghoste, ac∣cordingly, as God hath declared himselfe in his worde, the whiche albeit he be di∣stinguished in thrée persons, yet notwith∣stāding those thrée diuine persons are but one only God, in one selfe same essence: in the which, the faith doth cōsider ye father, as the fountayn of all diuinitie, and the Creator of all things, visible and inuisi∣ble: and the Son as the eternal word and wisedom of him, by the whiche all things ar made, ordeined and placed as they are:
and the holy Ghost, as his infinite power, by the which he doth susteyn and gouerne them, accordyng to hys eternall proui∣dence. Of the prouidence of God. Chap. 6. NOwe this prouidence of GOD is so conioyned wyth the creation of the worlde, that it can not be separated. For he may not be Creator, but he muste also be the guyder and the directer. For euen as none other was able to make suche a woorke but onely hée, Euen so none o∣ther is able to guyde and gouerne the same, but onely hée, whiche is the woor∣ker and maker.Iohn. 5. e Hebr. 1. a Ephe. 4. a Psalme. 8. a Matth. 10. d Then this Prouidence importeth, that nothing is done at aduen∣ture: To wit, without the most iust ordi∣nance of God. For his prouidence exten∣deth both in generall and particular, to all things, that are as well in Heauen, as in earthe, in suche sorte, that he hath a care for man, whome hée hathe in spe∣ciall recommendation amongest all his creatures, euen vntoo one verye haire
of his heade, euen as Iesus Chryste doth witnesse. Of the eternall Predestination of God, and of the manifesting of the same, and where wee ought to seeke it. Chapter. 7. Prouer. 16. a Roman. 8. f & 9. b. c Ephes. 1. a Rom. 11. d Esay. 4. c Rom. 10. c Iohn. 6. e &. 17. bTHerfore euen as he hath created all to serue to his glorie, euen so hath he or∣deyned of all men, in his eternal counsel, that whiche hath bene his pleasure to doo, and forthwith the meanes by the whiche he woulde be glorified in them, as wel in his mercie, as in his iust iudgemente, the whiche iudgement can neuer be but iust, although it be incomprehensible to man: and howe he doth manifest this eternall counsell to his chosen in Iesus Christ his sonne, by the preaching of his Gospell, which he setteth forth vnto vs, as the true booke and register of the eternall election of God. Also he giueth them the grace by the very same meanes to vnderstande the same, and to receiue it thorowe true and liuely faith.
Of the author of sinne, and of the incom∣prehensible wisedome of God, which is in his eternal ordinance. Chap. 8. ANd albéeit that nothing may be done neyther in heauen, nor in the earthe,Psalme 115. e Amos. 3 b Lamentation of Hiere. 3. e without the most iust ordinance, and the holie will of God, or otherwyse he should not be God almightie: yet notwithstan∣ding, this ordinance and will carieth with it no constraint to the will of man, in sort that they neuer offend, but willingly, tho∣rough their own malice. Wherfore what soeuer maye happen in the worlde, God may not be holden for author of sin, nor of any euill what so euer: but the diuell only, and the naughtie wil of man, which is alyed with the diuel. Then it followeth that whosoeuer maketh God authour of synne and wickednesse, in so muche as it is sinne and wickednesse, dothe attribute to God that which is propre to the diuell, and dothe blaspheme God horriblye, not putting any difference betwéene his wor∣kes and those of the diuell. For God hath so well prouided for the order of the cau∣ses ordeined by him, the which he would should serue to his glorie, that he can not
ordeyne nor do but iustly, whatsoeuer he ordeyneth or doth, howe wickedly or vn∣iustely soeuer the diuell or man doe. For he is so excellente a worker, that he can very well drawe good out of the euill that the diuell and man doe, and that by hys incomprehensible wisedome, and by his infinite power and goodnesse, to be glori∣fied in the same: and in the iuste condem∣nation of those that shall do the euill whi∣che he hath forbidden, and doe not liue in his obedience, walkyng in the vocation that he hath called them vnto. Of man, and of the creation and fall of him by sinne. Chap 9. Gene. 1. d 1. Corin. 11. b Genes. 3. a Rom. 5 b Iohn. 8 d Roma. 6. c Psalme. 43. a Roma. 3. b &. 5 c.AS for man, the Christian faythe hol∣deth, that he was created to the image of God, in the estate of innocencie, truth, and iustice: and that he béeing fallen from that estate, by his owne sin, and thorough his owne fault, folowing the counsel of ye diuell, he hath yelded himselfe in such sort slaue of sin, by the which he hath deserued eternall death and damnation, by the iust iudgement of God, that he can not of him¦selfe
but sinne, and daily to prouoke more and more the wrathe and cursse of God vppon him. Of the redemption and restoring of man, and of the only mediator Iesus Christe. Chap. 10. THerfore,Iohn. 3. b 1. Iohn. 2. a & 4. b c &. 9. b 1. Timo 2. b Rom. 8. g &. 5. b 2. Timo. 1. e Te. 3. b Esay. 43. b &. 44. a Ierem. 17. a Exod. 30. a Deutero. 6. c &. 10. d Matth. 4. b Luke 4. b. 1. Timo. 2 b Ioh. 14. & 15. a God his creator hauing pitie on him, hath so loued the worlde, that he hath giuen his only son Iesus Christe, for mediator, patron, aduocate, and inter∣cessour betwéene him and man, to recon∣cile them to him, euen when they were his enimies. Wherfore it followeth, that he hath done this, not hauing regarde to any deseruing of man, who neyther had nor could deserue but only eternal death, but hath only regarded his own goodnesse and mercie. Wherfore as there is but one only God, creator, gouerner & conseruer of all things, nor any other sauiour than he, nor in whom man may trust, nor wor∣ship, nor inuocate: no more is there lyke∣wise but one only mediator Iesus Christ, by whom man may haue accesse to God, and finde fauour in his sight, and recouer that whiche thorowe his owne faulse hee hath lost.
Of the true inuocation and prayer to∣wardes God. Chapter. 11. Matth 6. b Luke 11. a. Iohn. 4. c Esay. 29. d Matth. 15. aANd for so muche as the inuocation is an honour which belongeth to GOD onely, and can not be giuen to any crea∣ture whatsoeuer, howe excellent so euer he be, withoute idolatrie, sacriledge, and blasphemie agaynst God our Lord Iesus Christe, himself hath giuen to his church a forme of prayer, the which he hath wil∣led to be obserued in the same, and by the whiche, he hathe willed all prayers and supplications to be ruled and measured. And hathe doone it, to the ende that in steade of honouring of God by them, hée should not be dishonoured, thorow default of praying vnto him, and inuocating his name, in suche sorte as he requireth, wil∣ling to be honoured in spirite and veritie not only with lippes and with hipocrisie, and with outwarde shewe. Of the order of prayer whiche Iesus gaue to his Church. Chap. 12. THat order of Prayer whiche he gaue to hys Churche, is written in these
wordes in the Gospell of S. Mathew. 6. chap. and that of S. Luke. 11. chap. Our father whiche art in heauen, halo∣wed bee thy name. Thy kingdome come. Thy will be doone in earth as it is in hea∣uen. Giue vs this day our daily bread. And forgiue vs our offences as we forgiue them that offende vs. And leade vs not into tem∣ptation. But deliuer vs from the euill. For thyne is the kingdome, the power, and the glorie thorow out all ages Sobeit. Of the principall faultes whiche wee must auoyde when we pray. Chap. 13. SEing then that our Lorde Iesus Christ hath giuen this rule to Christians, who soeuer demaūdeth of God any other thin∣ges than are conteyned in that order of prayer, and by any other meane, and to any other ende than that whiche Iesus Christ hath set forth vnto vs in the same, can make no acceptable prayer to God, but is to him turned into sinne. The lyke is of those whiche pray in an vnknowne toung, not knowing what they saye. For first it is certaine, that their prayer can
not please God, but so farre foorth as it is made in true faith. On the other side, true faith is not without vnderstanding what it is that she demaundeth of God: séeing it is so, then it foloweth wel, that he pray∣eth without faith, that praieth, not vnder∣standing what he prayeth, and by conse∣quent doth mocke and dishonor God. Of the meane by the which men may bee heard of God in their prayers. Chapter. 14. FVrther, as our Lorde Iesus dothe not teache vs by his doctrine, to adresse our prayers to any other than to God his fa∣ther,Ephes. 1. a Iohn 1. b Ephes. 2. d Hebr. 4. d Rom. 8. g euen so we can not assure our selues by true faith, yt he is our father, & that he wil hear vs as his children, but only by ye meane of Iesus Christe, his well beloued son. For it is only he, by whō we ar made ye children of God, by his only grace, wher as of our own nature we are the children of wrath: for that same cause we haue ac∣cesse to the Father, by ye same very mean, as by our true Mediator & aduocate, tho∣row whom it must come to passe that we and our prayers may be agreeable to God the father.
Of the nature of the true mediator, and of the vnion of God and man in him, in one selfe person. Chap. 15. ANd forsomuche as it is necessary, that the mediator by whome it must come to passe, that this agréemēt be made, haue of the nature of both the parties, whiche are to be agréed, & that he haue agréement wt both the parties, or otherwise he shuld haue no meane to agrée them: None may be sufficient to such an office, except he be very God & very man, in the which the di∣uine nature may be vnited with the hu∣main nature in one selfe person, without confusion or chaunge, eyther of the one, or of the other. Of the diuine and humaine nature of Ie∣sus Christe, and of the sanctification made by him. Chap. 16. THerfore Iesus Christe being the very sonne of God, and very God eternall,Iohn. 1. a 1. Iohn. 1. a &. 5. b Esay. 7. c Matth. 1. d and of the same essēce with the father, as concerning his diuine nature, hath taken humain flesh, in the tyme ordeined by the
father in the wombe of the virgin Marie,Luke 1. d Esay 53. b. c 1. Petr. 2. d &. 3 d Galath. 3. b Roman. 3. b Hebr. 9. d Matth. 3. d &. 17. a by the worke of the holye Ghoste: in the whiche flesh and humaine nature he hath born our sinnes, and the wrath and curse of God, the which we haue deserued, and he hath borne it to deliuer vs from it, by the merite of his only death and passion: by the which he hath satisfied for vs, as the only welbeloued sonne, who only was a∣ble to doe it as he in whome onely the fa∣ther hath set his whole delight. Of the errour touching the inuocation of Sainctes Chap. 17. FOr so muche then as there is none o∣ther, but that only Iesus Christe, who hath suffred and endured for our sinnes, it followeth wel, that there is none other but he alone, by whome we maye be sa∣ued, and that is sufficient for that office, and by the whiche we may haue accesse to the Father. If it be so, it is then fully ap∣parant, that none may also take, neyther angell, nor man sainct, nor woman saint, (no not the very virgin Marie, mother of Iesus) for mediatours, patrons, and aduo∣cates
towardes God, nor haue recourse vnto them by praying, or inuocatyng of them, or by making any vowes vnto thē, or to their reliques and images, withoute plainly renouncing Iesus Christ, & with∣out greatly dishonouring, not onely God, but also the virgin Marie,Act. 3. c. 20. d 14. c Apocal. 19. b & al the saintes also in stead of honoring them. For if in their lyfe tyme they haue refused such ho∣nour, and haue confessed and testified by their death, that this honour doth belong to none, but to Iesus Christe only, howe shoulde they approue it after their death, contrarie to their proper testimonie and doctrine, whiche they haue sealed wyth their bloud? Of the vertue of the death and passion of of Iesus Christe, and of the true purga∣torie of the Christians. Chap. 18. BY lyke reason,1. Corin. 6. c 1 Iohn. 1. d Hebr. 5. c & 7. d. 9. d. & 10. d the christian faith doth also holde, that the only bloud of Iesus Christ, and the sacrifice that he hath done vpon the crosse for poore sinners, is so suf∣ficiēt to satisfie the iudgemēt of God, and to clense man of his sinne, that there née∣deth
none other Purgatorie for them: as in déede ther is none other to clense them, neyther by fyre, nor by water, nor by any other meane, neyther in thys world, nor in the other. In lyke sorte, there is none other raunsome nor satisfaction to∣warde God, but onely his. Therfore hée that séeketh satisfaction any where else, be it in his owne workes, or those of other men, or in any kinde of creature, & that in all, or in part, the same he or she refuseth wholly the raunsom and satisfaction made by Iesus Christe. Of the Purgatorie and satisfaction of the Papistes. Chap. 19. THen it followeth, that all the doctrine of the Papists concerning Purgatorie and their satisfactions which they seeke in themselues, & in their workes, or in those of their Priests and Monkes, and in their offrings and suffrages, as well for the li∣uing, as for the dead, are mans inuentiōs, full of blasphemies, and wholly contrary to the worde of God: wherby as much as in them is, they make of none effecte, the
merite and benefite of the death & passion of Iesus Christ, and doe openly renounce the same. Of the cōmunication in the benefites of Iesus Christ. Chap. 20. NOw euē as no mā may fynde saluati∣on, nor life in any but in Iesus Christ only, and by his meane, no more is it also sufficiēt, that he be only presented to mē, if they haue not forthwith true communica∣tion with him, to be partakers of him. Of the faith in Iesus Christ. Chap. 21. THe only meane to attayn to this com∣munication,Roma. 3. . 4. a c. 5. a Galath. 2. d Roma. 8. c 1. Cor. 12. a Act. 15. b Ephe. 2. b is thorough faith only in Iesus Christ, the which is the instrument by the whiche man receyueth the grace that God offereth vnto hym in his sonne Iesus Christe, by the vertue of his holie Spirite, by the whiche hée woorketh in the heartes of men, making them cleane, by the meane of that Faythe, the whiche is a pure gifte of God, propre to his true elected.
Of the iustification by faith. Chapter. 22. Tite. 1. a Roma. 3. d. & 5. a 1. Iohn. 1. c Ephe. 2. a Philip. 3. b Ephes. 4. c Galath. 3. d Psalme. 32. a Roma. 4. aIT is also the cause why Faith is playn∣ly called by Sainct Paule, the fayth of the chosen, and for the whiche Iustificati∣on is attributed vnto it: that honour is gi∣uen vnto it, for so muche as man doth ac∣knowledge himselfe by the same, such as he is of his owne nature: To wit, a poore and miserable sinner, the chyld of wrath, subiect to death and eternall damnation: Therfore spoyling himselfe of his owne iustice, and of all trust in his owne wor∣kes and merites, he dothe imbrace Iesus Christe, to be cladde with his iustice, to the ende that by it his sinnes maye be couered, in sorte, that they come not in coumpt at the iudgement of God, and so that the poore sinner be reputed iuste, as though he had neuer offended: and that bi∣cause the Iustice of Christe is allowed vnto him by faith, as thoughe the same iustice were propre to the man to whome it is allowed.
Of the meane by the whiche God giueth faith to men, and of the manifestation of the word of God, and of the true vse of the same. Chap. 23. SEing then that faith is the only meane ordeyned by GOD to obtaine these so greate benefites,Iohn. 17. a Rom. 10. c. 6. a Matth. 28. d &. 15. b Marke. 16 c Galath. 3. d Esay. 29. c Deutero. 4. a &. 12. d Prouer. 30. a as he onely hath giuen the same to those that he hath chosen ther∣vnto, euen so hathe he him selfe ordeyned the meane to come to the same: that mean is the preachyng and manifestyng of the woorde, by hearing whereof, he bringeth his chosen to his knowledge: And as they obtaine eternall lyfe by that knowledge, euen so do they learne by the same, being regenerate by his spirite, to serue and ho∣noure him, accordyng to hys holie wyll, accordyng to the whyche he will bée ser∣ued and honoured, and not after the will and fantasie of men: for the whiche cause he condemneth all seruice and all religi∣on, that is founded vpon any other foun∣dation, than vpon the only & pure worde: in the which he maketh plain declaration of his good will, wherfore he willeth that all men yeld true obedience to the same.
Of the declaration of the will of God by the lawe, the whiche he hath giuen to men concerning the obedience and the ser∣uice that he requireth of them. Chapter. 24. THerfore to the end that men shuld en∣terprise nothing of their owne head, in such matter, he himself wold giue them a law & rule, by the whiche he hath shewed them, howe they should rule and gouerne all their affections, and all their wordes, and all their works, to frame them all to his obedience. For the same cause he hath declared vnto them in that lawe what things were good or euill, and how much they did eyther please or displease hym, and howe he mought be eyther honoured or dishonored in them. Of the lawe of God conteyning a sum∣marie of the declaration of his will. Chapter. 25. ANd to the end that euery mā mought the better comprehende all these thin∣ges, and imprinte them the more ea∣sily in his memorie, he hath giuen a sum∣marie
declaration by the Law whiche he gaue to the Church of Israell, by his ser∣uant Moyses, in suche woordes. Hearken Israell,Exod 20. a Deute. 5 a. b. c. I am the Eternall thy GOD, who hath drawne thée out of the lande of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. The first commaundement. Thou shalt haue none other Gods be∣fore mée. The seconde Thou shalte make thée no cut image, nor likelynesse what soeuer of things that are there in heauen aboue, nor here in earth beneath, nor in the waters vnder the earth, Thou shalt not bow down thy selfe to them, and thou shalt not serue thē. For I am the Eternall thy God, mightie, iealous, visiting the iniquitie of the fa∣thers vppon the children, euen into the third and fourth generation of them that hate me: and shewing mercie in a thou∣sand generations to those that loue mée, and kéepe my commaundements. The thirde. Thou shalt not take the name of the E∣ternal thy God in vaine: for the Eternal
will not holde him innocente that shall take his name in vayne. The fourth. Remember to kéep holie the Sabboth day, sixe dayes shalt thou labour, and doe all thy worke, but the seauenth day is the rest of the Eternal thy God: Thou shalt do no worke in the same, neyther thou, nor thy sonne, nor thy daughter, neyther thy manseruant, nor thy woman seruant, nor thy cattell, nor the straunger that is within thy gates: for in sixe dayes the E∣ternall made the heauen and the earth, and the sea, and all the things that are in them, and he rested the seuenth day. And therfore the Eternall blessed the daye of rest, and sanctified it. The second Table. Honour thy father and thy mother, to the ende that thy dayes may be prolonged vpon the earth, the which the Eternal thy God giueth thée. The sixth Thou shalte not kill. The seuenth. Thou shalte not committe whoore∣dome.
The eyght. Thou shalte not steale. The nynth. Thou shalt not beare false witnesse a∣gaynst thy neyghbour. The tenth. Thou shalt not couet thy neyghbours house, nor his wyfe, neyther his manser∣uant, nor his woman seruaunt, nor hys oxe, ne yet his asse, neyther any thyng that is his. Behold, these ar the very words which Moyses receyued of the Lorde, ingraued in two Tables of stone: in the fulfilling wherof, he doth not regarde the outward worke onely, but chiefly the affection of the heart, according to the whiche he iud∣geth of the works, be they good or euill. Of the Summarie that Iesus Christe hathe made of the law of God. Chap. 25. ANd bicause that God hath bréefly cō∣prehended in the firste Table of the law, those things whiche he requireth of men, towardes his owne person: and in the seconde, that which he requireth also
of them, towardes their neighboures, for his sake:Matth. 22. d. Marke. 12. c. Luke. 10. e. our Lord Iesus hath made an o∣ther Summarie yet more bréefe, in the whiche he comprehendeth in two points: all that whiche is conteyned in these two tables, in manner folowing, being taken out of the bookes of Moyses. Hearken O Israell: The Eternal thy God is one God only: Thou shalte loue the Eternall thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soule, and with al thy vnder∣standing and mynde. It is the firste and greate commaundement. And the second is like to the same.Deutero. 6. a Leuit. 16 d. Matth. 9. c. Thou shalt loue thy neyghbour as thy self. Of these two com∣maundementes depende all the lawe and the Prophetes. And all that whiche you woulde that men shoulde doe to you, the lyke do you to them. Of the true fulfilling of the lawe of God. Chap. 27. BVt euen as no man can serue God a ryght, according to his will, excepte he be well instructed first in his lawe, and in his worde, euen so it is not sufficiente to
haue bene well instructed, if it be not put in vse. And therefore, the knowledge of the same serueth but to greater condem∣nation, if there be nothing else. And by∣cause that man of his nature is so corrup∣ted thorowe synne, that not onely he can not of himselfe accomplishe perfectly any one of the commaundements of God, but on the contrary, can doe nothing else but continually resist his holy will: Ther∣fore he hath néede of Iesus Chryst, chiefly for two causes. The fyrste to satisfye for man, in that wherein he is not able, to the ende that Iesus Chryst thorowe his obedience,Rom. 5. b. f. 1. Corin. 15. mought recompence the fault that is in man, thoroughe his rebellion. The seconde is, to the ende that manne béeing Iustifyed thorough Faythe in Ie∣sus Chryste, as is alreadye sayde, and so foorthewyth regenerated by hys Spirite, and refourmed to the very i∣mage of GOD, moughte bee the bet∣ter disposed to obey his holie will,Rom. 6. c. Galath. 5. c. d to dedi∣cate and consecrate hymselfe wholly to his seruice.
Of good works which are the frutes of true fayth. Chap. 28. IT is then easy to iudge by these things if they be well vnderstode, that so much is wanting, that the faith in Iesus Christ and the iustification that men obtayne by the same, without their workes, doe abo∣lishe good workes, and the affection of the true and faithfull to the same, that there is nothyng that dothe more establyshe and confirme them, and that dothe more enflame men to do them.Matth. 12 c Iames. 2. c For as the soule can not be without life, nor the fire with∣out heate and light, nor the good trée with∣out bringing forth good frute: euen so faith can not be a true faithe, if she be not a ly∣uing faith: and she can not be liuing, but is dead if she be without good works, whi∣che are the true frutes and the true signes of faith. But to the end that none may be deceyued in the matter of good woorkes, he must vnderstande, that God dothe not estéeme, nor doth allowe for suche, any o∣ther than those whiche are commaunded by him in his worde.
Of the principall pointes conteined in the holie Scriptures, whiche doe summarily comprehend all that which is requi∣red in the true seruice of God. Chapter. 29. THen if we shall speake of the true ser∣uice of God,Psalme. 59. c Exod. 20. a 1. Samu. 16.  we may reduce into foure pointes, all that whiche he requireth in the same, according to the declaratiō whi∣che he hath made in his holy Scriptures. The firste is, that man put all his whole truste in him alone, awayting for all his saluation of him alone, thorowe Iesus Christe. The seconde, that he call vppon him in all his necessities, for all things as well corporall as spirituall, according to the rule which he himself gaue vnto him. The third is, yt he render graces & thanks to him for al the benefites that he hath re∣ceiued, & that he doth daily receue of him. The fourth, that he yelde himselfe obedi∣ent vnto him, in all thyngs that he shall commaunde him, as well in respect of his owne person, as in respect of his neighbor. Of the true seruice of God whiche is spirituall. Chap. 30.
Iohn. 4 c Exod. 20. a Deuter. 5. a 1. Iohn. 1.bANd for so muche as it concerneth the substance of the true seruice of God, séeing that he is a spirite, he requireth al∣so to be serued and honored in spirite and veritie, and not in visible things, such as are material and corruptible, as are ima∣ges, alters, temples, pilgrimages, and o∣ther suche lyke superstitions and idola∣tries inuēted by man. For if his good plea∣sure were, that the auncient ceremonies of the lawe should be abolished in the cō∣ming of Iesus Christ, of whom they were figures to bring men to this true spiri∣tuall seruice, it is easy thē to iudge how he mought endure that men shuld forge new ceremonies, thorow great presumption, according to their owne fantasie, to serue hym after their pleasure, and not af∣ter his. Of the ministerie of the Gospell, and of the principall partes of the same, and of the true vse of the sacraments. Chapter. 31. Matth. 28. d Mark. 16. cFOr that cause he hath ordeyned the mi∣nisterie of the Gospell in hys Churche
to teache all men according to that doc∣trine,Luke. 24. g. Matth. 26. c Mark. 14. c Luke. 22 b 1. Cor. 10. d thoroughe the preachyng of the same. Wherevnto hée hath adoyned his holye Sacramentes for many causes. The fyrste is, that they shoulde be vn∣to vs for greater confirmation of the do∣ctrine, (of the whiche, they are as the sea∣les) and in lyke sorte of the sayth which procéedeth of the same. The seconde cause is, to the ende that they may serue vs for aduertisementes, to bring vs to acknowledge the benefites the whyche we haue receiued of him in Iesus Christ, and to communicate dayely in the same more and more, and to yelde him than∣kes, by the meanes of hys holy Sacra∣mentes, euen as he hathe commaunded. Fynally, hée hathe also ordeyned them to separate vs, in matter of Relygion, from euery assemblie, and from all per∣sons, whiche followe any doctrine or re∣lygion contrarye to hys, and to make common and solemne profession and pro∣testation of the Fayth that wée haue in hym, and of the doctrine and Religion whiche wée follow.
Of the obedience that all men doe owe to the ministerie of the Gospel: and of those whiche doe despise it, and of the prote∣station and profession of the chri∣stian doctrine, whervnto euery one is bound. Chap. 32. Iohn. 8. f &. 17. d Matth. 26. c 2. Cor. 11. cFOrsomuche as it is so, it is certain, that God hath bounde all men to that mini∣sterie, wherfore all they that will be ac∣compted for true Christians, are bounde to yelde themselues obedient to the same, chiefly in thrée thyngs. The firste is, in hearing the doctrine which is sette foorth to the Churche by the meane of that ho∣lye Ministerie. The seconde is, in ma∣king cōfession and profession of the same, by the Communion of the sacramentes, whiche are as dependaunces and as the markes of Christians, when they are administred, according to the order after the whiche they were ordeyned by the Lorde. The thirde is in submitting him selfe to the christian discipline, the which the Lorde hathe ordeyned for the policie, according to whiche he wil that his chur∣che be gouerned, not after the lawes and
traditions of men, but according to hys pure word. The which discipline and pol∣licie is so necessarie, that without it the ministerie of the Church can not be hono∣red and mainteyned as is requisite, but that of necessitie all must be there in con∣fusion. Wherefore all those that will not be subiecte to those thinges, declare them selues to be rebells to god, & to his church, and vnworthie to be accōpted true mem∣bers of the same, and true Christians. Of the number of Sacraments of the true Christian Church. Chap. 33. AS concerning Sacramentes,Matth. 36. & 28. c. 1. Cor. 11. e. whiche oughte to be holden properly for law∣full sacraments, he hath ordeyned two in the Christian Churche, the firste, is Bap∣tisme, the other is the supper. The others that haue bene added to these, by the Pa∣pistes, may not be accompted for true and lawfull Sacraments, for so much as they haue no certayne foundation in the word of God, without the which no Sacrament is lawfull.
Of baptisme, and of the true vse of the same. Chap. 34 AS for baptisme, it is a sacramente, in the which the lord doth represent vn∣to vs our regeneratiō.Matth. 3 b. Whereof the bap∣tisme is as the seale, and as a visible te∣stimonie, whereby he testifieth vnto vs, first, that he receyueth vs into his house, which is his Church, and that he doth ad∣uowe vs to be his children, and to be heires of his kingdome.Galath. 3. d Rom. 6. a Ephes. 5. e. f . Peter. 3. d 1. Timo 3. d 1. Iohn. 1. c. d Apoc. 1. b Hebr 9 d 2. Corin. 6. b. After that he doth testifie to vs also that he hath pur∣ged and clensed vs from our sinnes, by the bloud of his owne Sonne, and that he hath regenerated vs as newe creatures, by his holy spirite, as the water, which is the signe of this holy sacrament, doth te∣stifie and represente in dede. For that re∣presentation is not vaine, withoute the truth & true communication of the things spirituall, whiche it doth represente, to∣wards those that be faithfull, which haue the instrumente to receiue them, to wit, faith, without the which we may haue no communication with Iesus Christ.
Of the baptisme of yong children. Chap. 35. ANd albeit that the little children can not haue faith by the hearing of the word of God, as the great may, yet not∣withstanding, this sacramente doth not apperteyne only to those that are of years and are capable of the preaching of the Gospell, and haue alredy made professi∣on of their faith, or are in age to do it, but it belongeth also to their children, bicause they be comprised in the aliāce,Genes. 17. a. b the which their parents haue with God, thorough the vertue of the promise that he hath made them. Wherefore the Catabaptists and all others that reiecte litle children from baptisme, do them wrong, and do frustrate in that respecte the vertue of God his aliance, for the Children of the Christians are in no worse case thā were those of the Iewes, whome God woulde not haue shut forth from circumcision, in steade whereof the Christian Churche hath now baptisme.
Of the children that are borne dead, and of the true foundation of the saluatiō of all men. Chap. 36. ANd although that this sacrament bée ordeyned to that end, it followeth not for all that, that we must thinke, that the little children whyche dye by the will of God, before they can receyue this oute∣warde Baptisme, be in any daunger of their saluation, only for want of this bap∣tisme, forsomuche as it hapneth not tho∣rowe contempt of this holy Sacramente. For their saluation,1. Corin 13. b. Ephes. 1. a nor that of any man whatsoeuer, is not tyed to the visible sig∣nes of baptisme, nor of the Supper, but dependeth of the onely election and grace of God, by meane of the benefite of Iesus Chryst, and of the vertue of his holie spi∣rite: and then he communicateth this be∣nefite to his electe, in suche tyme, and by suche meanes as please him, and worketh in them at all tymes,Luke. 1. b. Ieremie. 1. b according to his good pleasure. For he may sanctifie them euen in their mothers bellie, as he hathe done many, whereof wée haue apparant wit∣nesse in the holy Scriptures.
Of the administration of the Sacraments and to whom it belongeth. Cha. 37. ANd séeing that the Lorde hathe giuen the charge of administration of the Sacraments, euen vnto those selfe same to whome he hath committed the admini∣stration of his worde, then is it not law∣full for any to administer them, but for suche only, to whom that charge is giuen by iust and lawfull vocation of God, and of his Churche, in the which it is not lau∣ful for any man, to take in hand any thing without lawfull vocation. Of the Baptisme administred by women, and of the errour that therein is. Chapter. 38. WHerfore they are greatly to be bla∣med, and chiefly women, whiche take in hande to baptise children. For the baptism whiche they take in hande to administer, hathe none other founda∣tion but onely vppon the ignorance that is in them, of the true vse of Baptisme, and vppon the superstition wherein they
haue ben nourished. For according to the doctrine of the Papistes, men haue thou∣ghte that the saluation of little children hath ben tied and knit to the outward and visible Baptisme, and not to the inuisible & inward baptisme of the holy ghost, whi∣che inward baptisme is the true substance of the true baptisme, wherof the outward signe is a figure and representation. Of the Supper of our Lorde, and of the true vse thereof. Chap. 39. Mark. 14. c Matth. 26. c Iohn. 9. 1. Cor 11. c 1. Corin. 14. dAS for the Supper, it is also ordeined, first to confirme vs, and as it were to seale vs in the same the remission of sins, the which we obtain by faith in the death and passion of Iesus Christe, and the true and spirituall cōmunion that we haue by the same, with all the giftes and graces of the same. The second is, to yelde thankes vnto him, and to giue testimonie of oure faith towards him, & of our charitie which we haue towards our brethrē, and of the vnion with his Church. The third, to re∣presente to vs by the breade and wyne, whyche are there distributed, the whole and perfecte spirituall nouriture, whiche
wée haue by the meane of the bodie, flesh, and bloud of Iesus Christ, to the end that we maye be spiritually nourished into e∣ternall lyfe, according to the benefit whi∣che we haue already receyued by our re∣generation, whereof the Baptisme is to vs as a Sacramente: in the whiche wée haue in the Supper as it were a guage of oure resurrection, the whiche wée doe beleeue and wayte for. Wherfore euen as the breade and wyne be there giuen to vs visibly and bodily, euen so are the bo∣die and bloud of Iesus gyuen to vs in déed but inuisibly and spiritually, by the mean of faith, & by the vertue of the holy Ghost, for he is the meane by whiche wée haue true Cōmunion, and true vnion with Ie∣sus Christ, and all hys Church, the which is his bodye, whereof all true Christi∣ans are membres. Of the signification of the signes of bread and wyne in the Supper, and of the agree∣mente and difference of them, with the things that they signifie, and of the error of the popish transubstan∣tiation. Chap. 40.
Colloss. 1. d 1. Corin. 13. d. Ephes. 1. dWE then take the breade & the wyne, not for the propre body and bloud of Iesus Christe, and the very naturall substance of them, as if the breade and wyne were transubstantiate and conuerted into that very bodie and bloud, to eate and drinke them bodyly and carnally, or to worship them as Idols, in steade of Iesus Christ, as the Papists doe: no more do wée take them only as common breade and wyne, but we holde them as very signes of that body and bloud, which were giuen for vs to death, and of the whiche we are spiri∣tually made partakers in dede,Example. according to the testimonie which Iesus Christ yel∣deth vnto vs by his word, in this holy Sa∣cramēt: in the meane while the bread and the wine do no more chaunge substance nor qualitie in the same, thā doth the wa∣ter in baptisme, or the waxe wherein the seale of the Prince is imprinted: also as the body and bloud of Iesus Christe are not naturally nor bodily conioyned with them, but only in manner whiche is pro∣per to sacraments, that manner is such, that albeit the signe be not ye thing it selfe, which it doth signifie, yet is it not without
the same, whiche is communicated to the faithful, spiritually in this Sacramente, euen as the signe is administred vnto thē corporally, by the meane which hath bene aboue spoken of. Of the commemoration of the sacri∣fice of Iesus Christ in the Supper. Chap. 41. ON the contrary,1. Cor. 11. e Matth. 26. c Ephes. 5. e Hebr. 5. b 7. d g, d 2. 10. b. Act. 3. d. 7. g. Ephes. 1. d. Colloss 3. a we oughte to be assu∣red, that this holy Sacramente was not ordeyned, to make a Sacrifice, in the which Iesus Christe should be offered a∣gaine, for the redemption of soules, as well liuing as dead, but to make comme∣moration of the sacrifice the which Iesus Christe himselfe hath made once, of hys owne body and bloud, by the whiche he hath once bought and sanctified for euer all the children of God. Wherefore he hath ordeyned this holy sacrament, to re∣fresh our memorie, and to sturre vs vp by this, meane to acknowledge him, and to render him immortall thanks, in waiting that in his last cōming, he may appeare from heauen, where he now sitteth at the right hande of God, vntill the last day.
Of the Supper, and of the Masse of the Papistes, and of the principall pointes wherin it is different and contrary to the true Supper. Chap. 42. SEing then that the institution of the ho∣ly Supper of the Lorde, and the ende for the whiche it was ordeined, is wholly ouerthrown in the Masse & supper of the Papists, it is plain, yt neither the one nor the other, not only can not be accōpted for the Supper of the Lorde, nor celebrated to suche an ende: But ouer and aboue that, who soeuer will be accompted a chri∣stian, and a partaker of the true table of the Lorde, maye in no wyse communi∣cate nor assist, neyther at the Masse, nor Supper of the Papistes, if hée wyll not communicate at the Lordes table,1. Cor. 11. e. Luke. 22. b and at the diuels table altogether. For fyrste, where Saincte Paule sayeth playnelye, that wee must shewe the Lordes death, in his Supper, and that nothing be declared nor sayde in the Churche, but in suche a toung as all men may vnderstand. All is sayde in the Masse and supper of the Pa∣piste, in a toung which the poore people
vnderstande not: And they doe not de∣clare vnto them the Institution of the ho∣lye Supper of the Lorde. The whyche thyng is euen of as greate effecte, as yf there were no worde of God at all, sée∣ing it is not vnderstoode: Without why∣che woorde, the Supper can not bée the Supper. Moreouer, the signes are there so confounded with the things which they signifie, that they be all one thing: where∣fore that is as much as to haue sacramēts without signes. Thirdly, the bread & wine are there worshipped as Idols, and as Gods newly made, wherein there is not one idoll onely, but two, as if the bloude were separate from the body. Fourthly, they be there also offered in steade of Ie∣sus Chryste, in suche sorte as the masse is holden for a Sacrifice made for the redemption of soules: It is holden al∣so for a meritorious woorke, whyche bryngeth Saluation vnto men, as doth the Deathe and Passion of Chryste. Fyfthely is, that albéeit there be a cer∣tayne kynde of Communyon in the common Supper of the people, yet in their Masses there is none at all: For
so much as the Préest whiche saith it, ma∣keth his supper all alone, not admitting a∣ny one therevnto. Wherefore such a sup∣per may better be called an Excommuni∣cation, than a communication. For there is no communication nor communion where nothing is common, and where one man alone taketh all that whiche should be distributed to al men in common. Now then if there were none other faulte in the masse but only these fiue, so muche lacketh it to be accompted the Supper of the Lorde, that not only all the true vse of the same is there wholy ouerthrowen, but also Iesus Christe is therein fully re∣nounced, by those whiche communicate there, or beleue it. And by the same meane the vertue & efficacie of the death and passion of Christe, is there vtterly of none effecte and abolished. Of the proofe that euery man oughte to make of him selfe, to communicate worthily at the supper, and of the things required in the same. Chap. 43. FVrder seing that the holy supper is or∣deyned to suche an ende, as hath bene
alredy declared, none may communicate in the same, but to his condemnation,3. Thing. which cōmeth not with these thrée things following. The first is, a true acknowled∣ging and sorowfulnesse for his sinnes to∣wards God, whiche can not be withoute true confession of the same towards god. The second is a stedfast beliefe of the for∣giuenesse of his sinnes by Iesus Christe, and a true assurance of saluation through him. The thirde is a true and perfecte charitie towardes our neybor.1. Iohn. 1. b 1. Corin. 10. d. &. 12. f. For this holy Sacramēt requireth all these things for so much as it is the sacramente of the agréemēt and vnion that we haue wyth God by Iesus Christe, and with all hys Church and all the true members of the same. Wherefore it must be of necessitie, that euery mā examine him selfe in these points, that he may go to it worthily, and not to his condemnation, according to the doctrine of Sainct Paule to that purpose. Of the penance and sanctification of the Christians, and of the true originall of the same, & of al good works. Chap. 44.
AS concerning the repentance and pē∣nance which is required of euery chri∣stian, the holy Scripture vnderstandeth not thereby, that whiche improperly the Papists call pennance. For they through greate abuse and ignoraunce of the lan∣guage, do call penance, their satisfactions, by the whiche they thinke to satisfie God, by their owne works, and by their Cere∣monies and superstitions. But the worde of God taketh pennance and repentance, for a true acknowledging and sorowe for sinne, the which true acknowledging and true displeasure do procéede of the true feare of God, and of a true reuerence and loue towardes him, conioyned with a cer∣tayne assurance of his goodnesse and mer∣cie, and with a true amendmente of life, by the whiche a christian man doth dedi∣cate him selfe to the seruice of God, as in time before he was dedicated to the ser∣uice of the Deuill, to the end he may serue to iustice and holynesse, where before he serued sinne & iniquitie.Gala. 5 For in this lyeth the sanctification of man, the which sancti∣ficatiō is the very frute of true faith, which worketh thorough charitie, as she is the
originall of euery good worke. Of the true and Christian confession and absolution, and of the remission of sinnes. Chap. 45. AS concerning confession and absolu∣tion, the worde of God doth not ac∣knowlege or receiue any such, as the Pa∣pists do make in the eare of their préests,Esay 4.3 d Psalm 32. b & 103. b. to haue absolution and remission of theyr sinnes by them. For the holy Scriptures shewe vs none other that can pardon sins, but only God. And by consequent they appoint vs none other, to whom we must make confession, for to obteyne absolution and pardon. In like sorte we haue no ex∣ample in all the true seruantes of God, of any other confession and absolution for the remission of sinnes towardes God, the which he giueth not but in his Churche, and to the true members of the same. Of the power of ministers of the Church, to pardon or reteyne sinnes. Chap. 46 AS for the ministers of the Churche, they haue none other power to par∣don or reteyne them, but so farre as they vse the keyes whiche the Lorde hath
committed vnto them, as to the ministers of his Churche, to whome he hath giuen them, and in so doing they do declare by his worde, howe the sinnes be forgiuen to those that beléeue, and reteyned to the vn∣beleuing. This is the true absolution of the Christian Churche, by the which God doth ratifie, and binde or vnbinde in hea∣uen, that which they declare and do binde or lose vppon earth by his worde, and in his name. For this power is giuen vnto them,Matth. 10. b bicause he speaketh by their mouth, and it is he himselfe that bindeth and loo∣seth, and that dothe pardon and retayne sinnes, by that same very worde, whereof they are but ministers. This is the true and lawfull vse of the keyes, the whiche the Lorde hath giuen to his Church: the execution whereof the Churche hath since committed to the ministers, the whiche she hath chosen therevnto by lawfull vo∣cation. Of brotherly reconciliation. Chap. 47. Matth. 18.MOreouer, euen as God woulde that euery man should confesse his faults,
to obteine forgiuenesse, euen so he would that suche as haue offended,Matth. 5 d. Iames. 5. d. either the Churche in generall, or any of the mem∣bers of the same and of their brethren in particuler, should acknowledge and con∣fesse their faulte, so farre forth as the true discipline of the Churche and Christian Charitie do require, and that they recon∣cile themselues with those whome they haue offended, and haue done wrong vn∣to. For such thing is required, to repaire the slander and offence which they haue made, & to entertain the peace, the vnion, and the Christian charitie in the Church. Of the satisfaction towarde our neighboure. Chap. 48. THis reconciliation bringeth with it al∣so satisfactiō of that wherin euery mā is bounde to his brother, so farre forth as he shall be able to do by Christian chari∣tie. For albeit, that there is none other but the satisfaction of Iesus Christe only, that may satisfie for vs at the iudgement of God, yet for all that the same doth not abolish this satisfaction, which is to satis∣fie
vnto men, for so much as it is a frute of the true repentance and of the true iu∣stification and sanctification of a Chrstian man. For it is not a signe that a mā doth in dede repente him of his faulte, and of the wrong that he hath done to his bro∣ther, so long as he shall not recompence him according to the meanes that God shall giue him. Of the Churche and of the foundation of the same, and of hir head. Chap. 49. THis faith and doctrine, is the true faith and doctrine of ye true Christiā church, vppon the whiche she is builded, and by the which she doth communicate of al the benefites of Iesus Christe, of whiche we haue spoken heretofore.a. Cor. 12. d. Ephes. 1. d Galath. 1. d For we vnder∣stande by the Churche, the felowship and cōmunaltie of all the true faithful, which are the members of the body of Iesus Christe, whiche do acknowledge him for their only head, and none other whatsoe∣uer: but do condemne the Pope whiche maketh himselfe the head, as very Anti∣christe. And in like sorte they do also ac∣compt the Church the which acknowled∣geth him for hir head, not for a true chri∣stian
Churche, but for a Sinagogue of Sathan. Of the markes whereby to knovve in thys world, which is the true Church, and who are to be accoumpted for true members of the same. Chap. 50. THe marks whereby men may knowe in this world which is the true church of Iesus Christ, are these, to wit, the law∣full administration of the pure worde of God, and of his holy Sacraments, and the allowing of the same, with true obedi∣ence towards the ministerie the whiche the Lorde hath therin ordeyned. I do com∣prehende vnder this alowing and obedi∣ence, the submission and the discipline, the which Iesus Christ hath ordeyned in his Church, and the pure and full obser∣uation of the same, as it hath bin obserued and practised in the ancient Churche, ru∣led by the doctrine of the Apostles. On the contrary, the marks of the Sinagoge of Sathā, and of the members of the same are the cōtempt & reiectiō of ye holy word,
and of the true vsage of the Sacraments, and of the lawful discipline, which ought to serue as Christiā pollicie, in the church of the Lorde. Of the Magistrate. Chap. 51. ANd as the true Church doth acknow∣ledge the ministers of the Gospell, as the true ministers of God, ordeyned by him. For the administration of spirituall things, euen so doth she acknowledge the magistrates as ministers of his Iustice, ordeyned by him for the conseruation of the publique peace,Rom. 13. a. b 1. Peter. 2. c. 1. Timo. 3. a. and therefore she doth willingly submit hir selfe to them, in all thinges for God. For she knoweth very well that God wold, that euery mā shuld be subiecte vnto them, in all things which are of their charge, and that they whiche resiste the same, resist the ordinance of God, & do set vp themselues against him. Of Mariage. 52. AS concernyng Mariage, albeit to speake properlye, the Christian
Churche accoumpteth it not for a Sa∣crament, as doe the Papists, and in suche sort, as they hold for sacraments baptisme and the Supper: yet notwithstandyng, she accompteth it a holy ordinance ordey∣ned of God, and not of men, and for the lawfull coniunction of the man and of the woman, whereby God hath willed, that mankinde shoulde be conserued and mul∣tiplied. And therfore she doth allowe and aduowe it for an honorable estate vnto al men, of what estate or condition so euer they be, & accompteth the bed vnspotted, and the remedie the which God hathe or∣deyned againste the incontinencie of all those which haue not the gift. Contrarily, she accompteth for vnlawful coniunction, and for abhominable whooredom and pol∣lution condemned of God, all other con∣iunction betwéene man and woman, and dothe condemne as false Prophetes, and Apostates of the faithe, and ministers of Antichriste, all those whiche forbidde any manner of persone to marrie, that is capable, and in what place or tyme so euer it bée.
Of the doctrine of the Churche, and of mans traditions, and of those whiche she doth acknowledge for true or false ministers. Cha. 53. FOr final conclusion, as the Church hol∣deth, receyueth and alloweth for hea∣uenly and diuine doctrine, all the doctrine conteyned in the Canonicall bookes of the holy Bible, as well of the olde as of the newe Testament, and taketh it for the true foundation of hir Faythe: On the contrarie, shée dothe reiect and condemne all doctrine that is contrarie to the same, as diuellishe doctrine, and all traditions of men, whereby they will honour him according to their owne fantasie: For the Churche knoweth by the very testimo∣nie of GOD,Esay. 29. d Matth 15. a Marke. 7. b that hée is serued in vain with the traditions of men: And therfore she can not acknowledge any for true mi∣nisters of the Lorde, but suche as bryng his pure worde, but dothe reiect all those whiche in steade thereof, doe bring to hir the doctrine of men. The ende.
THE SVMMA∣rie of the christian doc∣trine, set foorthe in forme of Dialogue and of Cathechisme. Of the principall cause and ende of the creation of man. Demaunde. WHat is the principal cause why God created man to his image and likenesse?Prouer. 16. a Esay. 43. a Answere. To bée honoured and serued by hin. Of the true seruice of God. D. Wherin lyeth the honour and seruice that he requireth of man? A. In the true obedience towardes his holie will. D. By what meane maye wée knowe what hys will is? A. By the declaration whiche hée him selfe hathe made in his woorde the whiche is sette foorth to vs in the ho∣lie Scriptures.
Of the principall points wherevnto men may applie all the doctrine contey∣ned in the holy scriptures. D. Whiche are the principall pointes whereby God declareth vnto vs his will, in the holy Scriptures? An. We may bring them generally into two. De. Which is the first? An. The law. D. And the second? An. The Gospell. Of the difference that is betweene the lawe and the Gospell. D. What difference dost thou put be∣twéene the lawe and the Gospell? An. I take the lawe,Exod 20. a b. c. Rom. 3. c. d. a. Corin. 5. d for that doctrine by the whiche God doth teache vs wherein we are bound to him, to witte, whiche is the euill that we oughte to flée, and the good which we ought to folowe to please hym according to his holy will. De. And by the Gospell, what dost thou vnderstand? An. The doctrine by the whiche God doth teach vs, by what meane we may satis∣fie that whiche he requireth of vs in hys lawe, and obteyne pardō and forgiuenesse
of the offences which we shall haue com∣mitted, contrary to his holy will. The lawe of God. D. What doth that lawe first conteyne, wherof thou hast made mentiō? An. Har∣ken O Israell: It is I that am the Eter∣nall thy God which haue drawen thée out of the lande of Egipte, from the house of bondage. The first commaundement. Thou shalte haue no strange Gods in my sight. The seconde. Thou shalte not make thée any image, nor likelynesse of any thinges that are a∣boue in the heauen, or here belowe in the earth, nor in the waters vnder the earth, Thou shalte do them no reuerence, and thou shalte not serue them: For I, I am the Eternall thy God, mightie & ielouse, whiche do reuenge me of the iniquitie of the fathers vppon the children, and vpon the children of their children, yea euen to the thirde and fourth line of those same which hate me, and do shewe mercie in a
thousande generations to those that loue mée, and do keepe my commaundements. The thirde. Thou shalt not take in vaine the name of the Eternal thy God: for the Lord God will not accompte him guiltlesse which shall take his name in vaine. The fourth. Remember thée to kéepe holy the daye of rest. Thou shalt labor sixe days, & shalt doe all thy labours, but the seuenth daye is the rest of the Eternal thy God: In it thou shalt do no labour, neyther thou, nor thy sonne nor thy daughter, nor thy man∣seruant, nor thy woman seruant, nor thy cattell, nor the straunger whiche taryeth with thee: For in sixe dayes the Eternall made the heauen and the earthe, and the sea, and all that whiche is in them, and he rested him the seuenth day. And therfore the eternall hath blessed the daye of rest, and halowed it. The fifthe. Honoure thy father and thy mother, to the ende that thy dayes may be long vpon the earth which the Eternall thy GOD doth giue thée.
The sixth. Thou shalt not kill. The seuenth. Thou shalt not committe whoordome. The eyght. Thou shalt not steale. The nynthe. Thou shalt not beare false witnesse a∣gainst thy neighbour. The tenth. Thou shalte not couet thy neyghbours house, nor his wyfe, nor his manseruant, nor his woman seruant, nor his oxe, nor his asse, nor any thing that is his. Of the summe of the lawe. D. What doth it in effect comprehende? A. That which Iesus Christ did compre∣hende in the summarie that he hath made. D. What summarie is that? A. Hearken Israel: The Eternal thy God is God on∣ly, Thou shalt loue the eternall thy God with al thy heart, and with all thy soule, and with all thy vnderstanding. This is the first & the great comaundement: And the secōd which is like to ye same, is: Thou
shalt loue thy neyghbour as thy selfe. On these two commaundementes depend the whole lawe and the Prophetes. Al suche things then as you would that men shuld doe to you, do you euen the lyke to them. For it is the lawe and the Prophetes. Of the corruption of man, and howe harde it is for him to do well. D. Is man able by his owne vertue and power to fulfill this lawe? An. He is so farre from it, that there is nothing so con∣trarie as is his will to the will of God, whilest he dwelleth in his nature corrup∣ted with sin.Roma. 8. b 1. Cor. 2. d Rom. 6. d. De. What is the cause here∣of? An. Sinne, to whome hée is become subiect thorough his owne faulte, and the natural corruption that he hath gotten by meane of the same. D. What may he then deserue towards God, by all that euer he may think, say, or do of himself? A. Death and the eternall curse of God. Of the redemption of man. De Rom. 8. b. Galath. 3. dAnd is there no meane to deliuer him? An. There is none other but that
same whiche is declared by the doctrine of the Gospel, of the which we haue euen now spoken, to ye which the law doth send vs. De. And what meane doth the Gospel sette foorth to vs, whereby to obtayne so great a benefite?Rom. 4. d 2. Cor. 5. d An. It is Iesus Christe the very sonne of God. D. How is he de∣liuered by Iesus Christ? A. By the satis∣faction that he hathe made for man, in the sacrifice of his deathe and passion, and by the perfecte Iustice that he hathe wonne to him. Of the communication or partaking of the benefite of Christ. D. But is that sufficiēt that Iesus Christ dyed for the sinne of man? A. Forsomuch as he hath satisfied the iudgement of God for them, it is requisite that the same sa∣tisfaction bée applyed and communicated,Rom. 3. d Galath. 3. b to all those that would obteyne saluation by the same. D. By what meane maye this same be applyed and communicated vnto them? A. By the only faith in Iesus Christe, whiche onely may make a chri∣stian man.
Of the Faith. De. What vnderstandest thou by that faith? An. A true and certayne trust in the mercie of god, by Iesus Christ. D. Which be the principall pointes that it doth con∣teyne? An. They are bréefely comprehen∣ded in this little summarie, called ye Sim∣bole or gathering of the Apostles, by the which the faithfull do dayly make con∣fession of their faith in the Churche. De. Which is this summarie? The Simbole of the Apostles. An. I beleue in God the father almigh∣tie maker of Heauen and Earth, and in Iesus Christ his only Sonne our Lorde, which was conceiued by the holy Ghost, borne of the virgin Marie, hath suffered vnder Ponce Pylate, was crucified, dead, & buried, he descended into Hel, the third day he arose from the dead: he is gone vp into the heauens, he fitteth at the righte hand of God the father almightie: & from thence shall he come to iudge the liuing & the dead: I beleue in the holy Ghost, I be∣leue the holy vniuersal Church, the com∣muniō of Saincts, ye forgiuenesse of sins,
the rising againe of the flesh and the eter∣nall life. Diuision of the matters conteyned in the Simbole of the Apostles. De. What doth it comprehende in sub∣stance? An. We may bring the whole in∣to two principall points. De. What doth the first conteyne? An. That whiche we beleue of God. De. And the seconde? An. That which we beleue of his Churche. Of the fayth towards God. De What must we beleue of God? An. There are two thinges to consider. De. Which is the first? An. The deuine na∣ture of him. De. And the second? An The works whereby he hath declared himselfe to men. Of the vnitie and Trinitie in the diuine essence. De. What haue we to consider of the firste pointe touching the deuine nature? A. There are againe two pointes to note. De. Whiche is the firste? An. The
vnitie whiche is in the being of God. D. Whiche is the second? A. The Trinitie of persons which is in ye same. D. What doest thou vnderstande by that vnitie and Trinitie in the diuine essence? A. I vn∣derstande that there is but one only God in the vnitie, of the which I acknowledge the father,Deuter. 6. a m. 28. d the sonne, and the holy Ghost, as he hath declared himselfe in hys holie woorde. Of the principall workes of God, by the whiche he hath declared himselfe to men. D. And as touchyng the workes, by the whiche he hathe declared him selfe, what canst thou say? A. There are thrée prin∣cipall, vnto whiche wée maye reduce all the rest.3. Principall works of God. D. Whiche is the first? A. The worke of the creation. D. Whiche is the seconde? A. The worke of the redempti∣on. D. Whiche is the thirde? A. The worke of viuification and sanctification. Of the creation of the worlde, and of the Prouidence of God.
D. What doest thou vnderstande by the worke of creation?Gene. 1. Act. 17. f Psalm. 147. b. c. d. Matth 7 c. d &. 10. e A. I do not vnderstād only that same worde, by ye which he hath made and created all things, but also his eternall prouidence, by the which he doth direct and gouerne them, as wel in gene∣rall as in particular. D. Doe you meane by this, that he whiche is the Creator, is also the directer? A. It can not otherwise bée, but that the worlde must incontinent perish if he had left it forsakē one minute of tyme, without dealing with it. Of Predestination. D. Doest thou comprehende vnder thys name of Prouidēce, none other thing but that which thou hast already declared? A. I do comprehend also vnder the same, the eternall predestination of God. D. What dost thou vnderstande by that predestina∣tion? A. The eternall ordinance of God by the whiche according to his good will and pleasure, he hath ordeyned before the creation of ye world, al that which it hath pleased him to doe with mankynde, to be glorified in them. D. What dothe thys
ordinance comprehende? A. The election of the chosen, and the refusall of the repro∣bate. D. What dost thou vnderstād by the election of the chosen? A. The ordinance by the whiche God hath chosen those in whome it hath pleased him to be glorified through his mercie in his Sonne Iesus Christ. D. What vnderstandest thou by the reprobation? A. The ordinance by the which he hath ordeyned to leaue in theyr iust condemnation, those same in whome it hath pleased him to be glorified through his iust iudgement. Of the incarnation of Iesus Christ and of the redemption had by hym. D. Matth. 1. d. Luke. 1. c. Iohn. 1.. b. Roma. 8.. 2. Cor. 5. d. 1. Peter. 1. c. d. 1. Peter. 2. dWhat comprehendeth the works of re∣demption? A The Incarnation of the sonne of God, and all that whiche he hath done for the saluation of man, in his hu∣maine nature. D. What vnderstandest thou by the Incarnation of the Sonne of God? A. That Iesus Christe being very God eternall was also made man, and hath satisfied the iudgemente of God for vs, in our flesh and nature, vnited with the diuine nature.
Of the vnion of the diuine and humaine nature, in the person of Iesus Christ, and of his office. D. Wilt thou then say, that Iesus Christ,Iohn. 1. a. b. Rom. 9. b. Psalm. 146. 2. Iere. 17. a. is very God and very man, in one selfe person? A. If he were not so, he could not be our sauioure, redéemer, mediatoure and Aduocate as he is, nor yet the true Christ and anointed of the Lorde. Of the vvorks of viuification and sanctification. D. What dost thou vnderstande by the works of sanctification and viuification?Rom. 8. f. Ephes. 1. a. Tit. 2. d. A I take it here in generall, for that worke whereby God doth viuifie and regenerate into newe life, and doth sanctifie and con∣secrate his electe to him selfe and his ser∣uice, bestowing vppon them the benefites of his sonne Iesus Christ, by the vertue of the holy Ghost. D. Dost thou meane, that God doth presente vnto vs, his gifts and graces, by his Son Iesus Christ, and that he maketh vs partakers & capable of thē, by his holy spirit. A. Euen so do I meane,Rom. 5. a 1 Cor. 12. a. b. Tit. 3. b. and that he is the only meane, by ye which we may haue vniō & cōmunion with him.
Of the Churche. D. For so muche as wée haue spoken of God, and of his workes, there remaineth yet, that thou tell me what thou haste to say concerning the Church?Ephe. 5. f. g A. I vnder∣stand the Churche to be the companie of all those whiche are vnited and ioyned to Iesus Christe, thorowe true faith in him, as membres of his body, by the vertue of the holy Ghost, whiche is the true and ve∣ry bande of that vnion and cōiunction. D. Vnderstandest thou that they be the true Church which are sanctified and consecra∣ted to God by true faith, in suche sorte as thou hast euen now sayd? That is the ve∣ry cause, for the whiche she is called holye and the communion of Saintes. Of the things whiche we ought to be∣leeue of the Churche. D. Which be the principall poyntes that we ought to beléeue concerning ye church?2. Cor. 10. d &. 12. b Ephes. 1. d. A. We may well bring them into two. D. Which is the first? A. It is that there is a Churche, that is to say, one such com∣panie and communaltie as I haue euen
nowe spoken of, vnited by the spirite of God, of the whiche all the faithful, which are thorow out the world, are true mem∣bres. D. And the second? A. It is touching the benefites of Iesus Christ, whiche are communicated to this holy companie, by the vertue of the holy Ghost. Of the benefites of Iesus Christe towar∣des his Churche. D. Whiche be these benefites?Rom. 8. c Ephes.  b. Colloss. 3. a. Tite. . d. A. Wée maye againe consider them in two sorts. D. Howe may that be? A. The firste is in the possession of the same, into the whi∣che we doe enter, being euen here in this worlde. D. And the seconde? A. In the full enioying and consummation that we shall haue in the other lyfe. Of the possession of the benefites of Iesus Christ in the church during this lyfe. D. What vnderstandest thou by the pos∣sessiō that we haue alredie in this world?Ioell. 2.  Rom. 1. b 10. b. A. That euen as ther is no saluatiō out of the Church, so al they that are true mem∣bers of the same, do there find perfect sal∣uation,
the which we do fully comprehende in the Simbole of the Apostles, vnder the remission of sinnes. D. For what cause is that done?2. Cori. 5. d 1. Iohn. 2. a. A. Bycause it comprehendith the agrement which we haue with God, and the iustification, by the which we are holden for iust in his sight, from whence then afterwarde procéede the other bene∣fites, whiche are also communicate vnto vs by Iesus Christ. Of the consummation of the benefits of Iesus Christe. D. What vnderstandest thou by the con∣summation of these benefites?Matth. 25. d 1. Cor. 15. g. A. That same eternal and blessed life, in the which we shall liue eternally with him, in the kingdome of God in body and soule, being fully regenerate and reformed to the I∣mage and likenesse of him. Of the frutes and effects of the lawe, and of good vvorks. D. Act. 13. f. 15. & 26. d. Rom. 3. d. 4.Now that we haue spoken of faith, and of the principall points to whiche she hath regard, tell me if this faith be sufficiente,
to saue vs? A. Yea in dede, if it be true,Galath. 5. a Esay. 64. c. Ephes. 2 a. Luke. 17. a Deute. 27. d. Rom. 1. a. 1. Peter. 1. . Psal. 143. Rom. 3. c. d. Philli. 1. d Act. 26. d and not fayned. D. Nede we then not to do good works to be saued? A. Albeit that we can do no workes, of our selues, by the which we may deserue any thing other thā eternall damnation, it followeth not for all that, but that we be bounde to do the good works whiche God requireth of vs. D. Thou art not then of minde that faith doth abolish good workes? A. So farre of is it from abolishing them, that on the cō∣trary, there is nothing that doth more e∣stablish them, but not to séeke mans sal∣uation in them.Iohn. 1 b. Ephes. 2. b D. Howe vnderstandest thou this? A. Euen as faith, which is a ve∣ry gifte of God, is giuen vs, to obtayne by the same, remission of all our sinnes by Iesus christ, she hath also this vertue, that through hir, man is regenerate and made like to the image of God,Tite. 2. d. 1. Pet. 1. a. to obey him ac∣cording to his lawe, where before he hath bin a rebell against him. D. Wilte thou then saye that faith is not true faith, if she be not declared by works which God re∣quireth of vs in his lawe? A. It is fayth,Iames. 1. . as the fire that is without heat and light, is fire.
Of the good workes which God requi∣reth of the faithfull. D. Séeing the matter is so, tell mée then in bréefe what works god requireth of vs in his law, to testifie of our fayth, as well towards him, as towards men? A. Wée may comprehend them all summarily in two points. D. Which is the first? A. The inuocation of the name of god. D. The se∣cōd? A The charitie towards our neybor. Of the inuocation of the name of God. D What things comprehendest thou vn∣der the inuocation of the name of God? A. I do comprehende thrée, in taking it gene∣rally as I take it here.Psal. 50. c. &. c Ephes. 5. d Hebr. 13. c Rom. 10. d 1. Cori. 10. d D. Whiche is the firste? A. The supplication and prayer: whereby we haue recourse to God in all our necessities. D. The second? A. It is thankesgiuing, wherby we acknowledge the goodnesse that wée haue receyued of him. D. The thirde? A. It is the professi∣on and confession of our faith and religiō, by the which he wil be aduowed and glo∣rified in vs towards al men, as our God. Of the sum of the first table of the law.
De. It semeth to me that these thre points conteyne as it were a sūme of all the first Table of the lawe.Roma. 10. A. If we adde there∣vnto faith which is the true fountaine of all these things,1. Corin. 6.  this summarie shalbe full and perfecte. D. How so? A. For that that it shall comprehende the manner, how God will be serued and honored of vs, as well in harte as in word and in outward works. Of the summe of the second Table. D. What doth the charitie towarde our neighboure comprehende? A. We may in like sorte bring it all into two pointes. D. Which is the firste?Exod. 20. Ephes. 6. a. 1. Peter. 2. a 1. Cor. 13. b Leuit. 19. c. Matth. 7. b. A. The honor and o∣bedience whiche we owe to all those that the Lorde hath appointed superiors and gouernours ouer vs. De. The other? An. The care whiche we should haue both in generall and especiall the one of the o∣thers, as of our selues. D. What dost thou vnderstande by this care? A. That we oughte with all our power to procure the honoure and profite of all men, and to let their dishonour and hurte, as wel in soule
as in body, and goodes, and name. D. It seemeth to mée that thou haste agayn here made a little Summarie of all the com∣maundementes comprehended in the se∣cond table of the lawe. A. It is euen so. Of Prayer. D Folowing on the same which we haue sayde of Faithe, and of the workes and frutes of the same, I haue yet to demaūd thée one thing concernyng the inuocation of the name of God. A. What is it? D. It is concerning prayer, and the manner howe to pray, which things we must vse. A We can not followe a more certaine rule in that respect that that which Iesus Christe himselfe hath giuen vs.Matth. 6. b Luke. 11. a. The forme of Prayer giuen by Iesus Christe. D. Whiche is the forme of Prayer? A. Our father whiche arte in heauen: Thy name be halowed: Thy kingdom come: Thy will be done in earth as in heauen: Giue vs thys day our dayly bread: Par∣don vs all our offences, euen as we for∣giue
them that haue offended against vs: And leade vs not into temptation, but de∣liuer vs from the euill. For thyne is the kingdome, power and glorie for euer and ouer. Sobeit. Diuision of the matters conteyned in the Lordes Prayer. D. What doth this forme of prayer com∣prehende in summe? A. We may diuide the whole in two partes. D. Whiche is the first? A. The preface of the same. D. And whiche is the seconde? A. The re∣questes therin made. Of the addresse of the Christians in their prayers, and of their true aduocate in the same. D. What dothe he teache vs in that pre∣face?Psal. 50. c. An. To whome we ought to direct all oure Prayers, and by what media∣tor and aduocate. D. To whom must wée make our prayers? A. To God only,Iohn. 14. b. 16. c. as to our very heauenly father, vnto whom onely that honoure is reserued, and is due. De. And whome shall wée take for
aduocate and mediatoure towards him. An. Him only by whome he is made our father,Rom. 8. g. 1. Timo 2. b 1. Iohn. 2. a. and through whome we may call vppon him as vpon our father. D. Which is he? A. Iesus Christe, his well beloued Sonne, by whome only we are made the children of God, where as naturally we were the children of wrath. VVhat thinges vve ought to demande of God, in our prayers. D. What saist thou touching the request made in that forme of prayer? A. That it is not lawfull for any man, to desire or de∣maunde of God, any other thing than that which is conteyned in them. D. What is it that is comprehended in them? A. All that which man may iustly desire and de∣maunde, as well for the glory of God, as for his owne saluatiō & all his necessities. A diuision of the requests conteyned in the Lorde his prayer. D. Howe many requestes be there in the whole? An. Sixe. De. By what order are
they disposed? A. The thrée firste haue re∣garde chiefly to that which concerneth the glory of God. D. And the other thrée? A. To that whiche is necessary for man, as well for this corporall life, as for his eter∣nall saluation. D. Wherefore did our Lord Iesus Christ in this matter obserue this order. A. To teach vs,Matth. 7. d 1. Corin. 10. g how we ought to frame all oure desires to the glory of God, and that we ought to haue the same in most speciall recommendation, and to submitte vnto the same all those thinges which we require of him for vs. Of the ministerie of the Church, and of the vse of the same. D. Now seing that true faith, is the very foundation of our saluation, and the true fountaine of all good works, tel me nowe, how we may obtayne the same. A. Thou moughtest already vnderstande it, by that whiche we haue sayde, of the viuification and sanctification of the faithfull, by the holy Ghost. D. I vnderstande wel that it is a gifte of God, whiche is giuen to vs by the holy Ghost, but God is the meane by
the whiche the holy Ghoste is serued in this woorke? A. The ministerye of the worde of God, whiche hée hathe ordey∣ned in his Churche to that ende. Of the partes of the ministerie of the Churche. D. Mat. 18. b. c.What conteyneth this ministerie? A. We may make thrée parts of it. D. Whi∣che is the first?1. Corin. 1. b. A. The administration of the pure worde of God. D. The second? A. The administration of the sacramen∣tes ordeyned in the same. D. The thirde? A. The conseruation of the discipline of the Churche. Of the discipline of the Churche. De. What meanest thou by that disci∣pline? A The pollicie which ought to be had in the Churche, to keepe all things in good order in the same, according to the worde of God. D. To what ende serueth that policie? A. It is so necessary in the Church, that without the same, the admi∣stration of the word & of the sacraments, can not there be entertayned & conserued in his right & authoritie, as is requisite.
Of the Sacraments that are in Christes Church, and of the things that ar to be considereed in them. D. What callest thou sacramentes? A. The signes taken of visible thyngs: the whiche Iesus Chryste hath ioyned to his promises,Mat. 26.  28. d. euen as it were to seale vnto vs the truth of them, and to confirme the same vnto vs. Dem. What thinges are there to be considered in them? A. There are thrée things principall. D. Which is the first? A. The worde of God,1. Cor. 11. c. Rom. 4. b. which is the very foundation. D. The second? A. The visible signes whiche are as seales. D. The third? A. The things signified as well by the worde as by the signes. Of the things that are to be consi∣dered in the woorde. D. What is there to be considered in the worde? A. Two things. D. Whiche is the first? A. The cōmandement of God, by the whiche we are bounde to his holy Sacraments. D. The second? A. It is the promise by the which he doth aduertise vs of the grace that he doth offer and bestow vpon vs in them.
Of the vse of the signes. D. To what purpose serue the signes? A. To represente to the eyes, and to the o∣ther corporall senses, the things that are signified by the worde. D. What profite commeth of this? A. It serueth for greater declaration of them, and for a more grea∣ter confirmation of the faith. D. Do they serue to any other purpose than this. A. As God by them on his parte declareth, his good affection toward vs, aduertising vs of the good that he will do to vs. We also of our parte, do set forth and declare our faith,1. Cor. 11. e. 1. Peter. 3. d. and our harte and affection to∣wards him by them. D. The sacraments then by this accoumpte, are as witnesses and solemne othes, by whome wede as it were homage to God, and do make pro∣fession of our faith and Religion. A. It is euen so. Of the number of Sacraments vvhich are in the Chucrhe of Christ. D. How many Sacramentes are there in Christ his Church? A. There are but two whiche may be properly accoumpted for
true Sacraments. D. Which is the firste?Matth. 28. d Matth 26. c 1. Cor. 11. e. A. That of baptisme. D. And the seconde? A. The supper. Of Baptisme. D. What is baptisme?Tite. 3. b Ephes. 5 e. f. Galath. . d Rom. 6. a. A. It is a sacramēt by the which Iesus Christ doth offer vnto vs the remission of our sinnes, and our re∣generation, vnder the figure of the water, as he doth in déede communicate the same vnto vs by his holy spirite. D. Doth it any thing else? A. In like sorte it testifieth to vs that he receyueth vs into his Churche, as true members of the same. D. And of our parte, what do we? A. We testifie in lyke sorte, that we acknowledge him for suche an one as he declareth himselfe towardes vs, and that we beleue that he maketh vs partakers of all his great riches. Of the Supper. D. What is the supper? A. It is a Sacra∣ment by the which Iesus Christ doth pre∣sent vnto vs vnder the signes of bread and wine, the communion that we haue with him, and with his Church. D. Is there no∣thing
else represented vnto vs in it? A. The spirituall nouriture that we haue by faith in his flesh and in his bloud, whiche haue ben giuen for vs. D And as touching the rest, do we not there make the same profession of our faith that we do in bap∣tisme. A. It must be so vnderstood, for so muche as such is the nature of all Sacra∣ments, and one of the principall ends and purposes for the which they are ordeyned of God. To vvitte vvhether the bread & the wine be conuerted into the body and bloud of Iesus Christ in the Supper. D. Dost thou thinke that this bread and this wine that are giuen for signes in the Sacramente, be the very naturall body and bloud of Iesus Christ? A. If they were his very naturall bodie and bloud, they could then not be the signes of it. D. Why not? A. For so much as if it were so, there should be no difference betwene the signes and the things whiche they signifie. D. Is there none other inconuenient? A. There is also this inconuenient, that if it were so this doctrine shoulde be wholly contrary to the articles of oure faith, and namely
to that of the ascention of Iesus Christ in∣to heauen. Of the coniunction of the signes in the supper, vvith the thinges that they signifie. D. Dost thou then thinke that the body and bloud are vnited and ioyned togither naturally and corporally, with the bread and the wine? A. No, especially for two causes. D. Whiche is the firste? A. Seing there is question of spirituall nouriture, in this holy Table, we may not imagine here a materiall meate, which is eaten on the same table, as is bodily meate. D. Which is the second? A. It is that we shal fall into the same inconuenient, whereof we haue euen now spoken, touching the articles of our faith. D. Do we then re∣ceiue ther nothing els but material bread and wine? A. Yes that we do. D. What is it? A. The very body and bloud of Iesus Christ, signified to vs by them. Of the presence of the body and bloud of Iesus Christ in the Supper. D. How may we receiue them, if they be not there, euen as thou saist? A. I sayd not but that they were in dede in the supper,
or otherwise it should not be the true sup∣per of Iesus Christ. D. How dost thou thē vnderstande it? A. Albeit that I denie the bodie and the bloud to be there naturally and carnally, I denie not therefore but that they be there giuen and receyued spi∣ritually in déede, euen as that sacramente witnesseth it vnto vs. D. Thou doest not then denie the presence of the very body and very bloud of Iesus Christ in the sup∣per? A. No. D. What wilte thou then say for full resolution? A. I will only say, that the manner of that presence, is not carnall and materiall, but spirituall and diuine. Of them to vvhome the communion of Sacramentes doth belong. D. Seing then we vnderstande what the true nature of Sacraments is, shewe me now which they be to whome they oughte to be administred. A. It is easie to vnder∣stand by that which hath alredy bin said of the nature of them. D. How dost thou vnderstand it? A. Seing they be as seales of the worde of God, and of the alliance that he hath made with his people, and as
a protestation of our faith towarde the same, the matter is very playne,Rom. 4. b that they belōg but only to those which vouch that doctrine and aliance, and are comprised in the same. Of the proofe that is required of eue∣ry man in the Supper. D. Bycause that the supper is not admini¦stred but to such as are alredy at ye age of discretion,1. Cor. 11. f. shew me how euery man ought to prepare himself for to receiue the same? A. Sainct Paule giueth the rule when he admonisheth euery mā to proue himselfe. D. What meaneth he by that proofe of himselfe? A. That euery man do diligent∣ly examine him selfe, whether he haue in him the things without the which he may not worthyly communicate at the holy Sacramente. Of the principall points vppon the which euery man ought to examine and proue himselfe. D. Whiche be those things? A. There be chiefly thrée, as men maye iudge, by the matters that we haue handled hereto∣fore.
De. Whiche is the first? An. It is true repentaunce, and a true acknowled∣ging of his offences and sinnes, for the whiche Iesus Christe dyed, as he decla∣reth vnto vs by the same holy sacrament. D. Whiche is the second?Marke. 1. b A. True faith in the onely grace and mercie of God, whiche is offered and graunted vnto vs in Iesus Chryst, and by Iesus Chryst, as that Sacrament also testifyeth. De. The thirde?2. Cor. 10. d An. True charitie and vnion to∣warde all the membres of Iesus Christ, as it is represented vnto vs, in that wée there eate all of one self bread, and drink all of one selfe cuppe. Of the ministers of the Churche, and of Magistrates. D. There resteth nowe but one pointe, it is to witte, by whome these sacramen∣tes ought to be administred.Matth. 28. d 16. d A. By those same ministers, to whome the charge to administer the worde of God, hath bene committed by lawfull order, as he hathe ordeyned in his Churche. De. Is it law∣full then for none other? An. As GOD
hath ordeyned that there should be in the common wealth certain Magistrates and officers, for the administration of ciuile and earthlye matters, to the ende there shoulde be no confusion: euen so hathe he willed his Churche to haue hir ministers chosen by lawfull vocation, as his officers for the administration of Ecclesiasticall and spi∣rituall matters,Ephe. 4. b. to the ende that euery thing bée there handled and gouerned by good order. THE ENDE.
A FAMILIAR exposition of the princi∣pall points of the Cathechis∣me, and of the Christian doctrine, made in forme of Dialogue. Of the true seruice of God, and of good intents. The first Dialogue. Of the chiefe felicitie of man, and of the ende for the vvhich he vvas crea∣ted of God. MATHEVV. WHat is that whiche natu∣rally men do most desire in this world? Peter To be happie. M What is it to be happie? P. It is to be exempte & deliuered from all euils, to liue in perpetuall rest and ioy, and to enioy al good things. M. And wher∣in consisteth the true and chiefest felicitie of man whereby he may be happie in such sorte as thou hast declared?Gene. 16.19. b. Prouer. 19. a Esay. 43. a. Ezeche. 36. Peter. It con∣sisteth in that, wherefore GOD hath
chéefly created him to his image and like∣nesse, and hath put him into the worlde.Psal. 115.  Roma. 11. d 1. Cor. 6. d. Colloss. 1. c Deut. 4. b 6. a. 32. a Matth. 1. a Iohn. 17 a Ephe. 1. b. c M. Which is then the principal cause for the which he hath created and placed him in the worlde? P. It is to be glorified in him and by him. M. Whiche is the ve∣rie true meane whereby God maye bée glorified in mā, & by man? P. By the true knowledge of him, which causeth man to honour him as his God and creator, with that honour whiche is due vnto him, and that he requireth of him. Of the true honor and seruice of God. M. What is that honour which God re∣quireth of man?1. Par. 15. a Miche. 6. b Deut. 10. c P. That he doe him ho∣mage, and submit him wholly to him tho∣rough true obedience towardes his holye will. M. By what meane maye a man knowe that will of God? P By the de∣claration that God him selfe hathe made by his word. Of the summe of all the Doctrine con∣teyned in the holy scriptures. M. Whiche be the principall poyntes to
consider in that word reueled by God. P. There be two, to the whiche a man maye applie in general, all ye doctrine that it cō∣teyneth & setteth forth to man. M. Which be they? P. The lawe, and the Gospell. Of the lawe of God, and of the of∣fice of the same. M. Vnderstandest thou by the law those cōmandements only which God gaue to Moyses in two tables of stone? P. I do cō∣prehēd thē vnder this name of law:Exod. 32. d 34. a. 30. Luke. 24. c Deut. 5. Psal. 19. c 2. Tim. 4. d Ro. 3. c. 4. c 5. d. 7. b 2. Cor. 3. b. c Galath. 3.  but I do cōprehend in ye same also al the rest of the doctrine of God, conteined in the holy scriptures: whereby he setteth forth to vs ye very same things that he cōmandeth vs in those two tables. M. Declare the same somwhat more plainly. P. I comprehend vnder the name of lawe, all the doctrine by the whiche God hath shewed vnto vs, the good which he alloweth & requireth of vs, as by right we are boūd thervnto: & in like sort the euil which displeaseth him, & from the whiche he willeth that we kepe our selues for his sake, to ye end that in al things thorowly, wée yelde vnto him that perfect obediēce which we owe vnto him.
M. Hath ye law of God none other office? P. It hath this office also, that by ye same mean it sheweth vs our offēces & sinnes, by the which we stande detters to the iud∣gement of God, and preacheth to vs forth∣with the wrath and curse of him that wée haue deserued in offending of him. Of the Gospell, and of his office. M. What vnderstandest thou by the Go∣spell? P. I vnderstand all the doctrine of the holy Scriptures, by the whiche God declareth vnto vs the grace that he will shewe vs by his sonne Iesus Chryst, and the meanes whereby we are made parta∣kers. M. Doest thou vnderstande that doctrine to be conteyned in any other boo∣kes of the holy Scriptures, than in those of the foure Euangelistes? Pe. I vnder∣stande that it is conteyned in all the holy Bible, and chiefly in the Bookes of the new Testament. Of the difference that is to bee considered betwene the law and the Gospell. M. What difference doest thou then put betwéene the lawe and the Gospell? P. I
take the law as a Proctor fiscall, or a cri∣minall iudge, which doth accuse vs, and maketh our proces before God, in suche sort as it yeldeth vs all condemned before the iudgement of God, as transgressours of all his commaundements: and by that meane, declareth vs all worthie of death and eternall damnation. M. If it be so, the lawe serueth vs rather to condemna∣tion, than to saluation. P. It is true, but it is not by the faulte of the law, but by our fault:Ro. 7. c. 8. a for the law of his nature is good, ho∣ly, and iust: but bicause that of our nature we are wicked, and doe not accomplishe it at all, it dothe in steade of iustifying of vs, condemne vs. M. And the Gospell what newes bringeth it vnto vs? P. Ve∣ry good, and much better for vs than the law, as also his name declareth. M. what then dothe Gospell signifie? P. A message of good,Rom. 3. d 5. c. d 2. Cor. 5. d. Galath. 3. d Heb. 12. c. f. happie, and ioyefull newes. M. Hold me no longer in doubt, but tel them me. P. It sheweth to vs the grace by the which we are discharged and sette frée be∣fore the iudgement of God, and deliuered from that death and eternall damnation, to the which we are iustly condemned by
the lawe, and it declareth vnto vs by and by the meanes whereby wée obtaine that grace, and of whom. Of the couenant and agreement of the lawe and the Gospell. M. Séeing that the lawe (as thou sayest) is to vs a messenger of death and damna∣tion, wherto doth it then serue vs, but on∣ly to condemne vs? P. It serueth vs in such sort to condemne vs, that if it did not condemne vs in this poynte, the Gospell coulde not bring vs so greate wealth as it doth. M. How dost thou vnderstand this? P. If we vnderstande not of oure disease, we wil not repaire to the phisition, which onely may deliuer vs, for we woulde not thinke that we had any neede. Likewyse, if we should not knowe our condemnati∣on, we shoulde thinke we had no néede of grace,Gala. 3. d Hebr. 7. c. 3. b Math. 17. a g. b. Marke. 9. b. 2. c Luk. 9. c. 5. f & therfore we should not demaund it. M. Wilt thou then say, that the law is as it wer a phisition, which sheweth vs plainly our disease, and how dangerous it is, but he can not heale vs, but sendeth vs to an other? P. It is euen so: And for that
cause Sainct Paule saith,Act. 3. d Heb. 12. g. 2. Timo. 6. c 1. c. Apo. 19. c. 1. Peter. 2. d that the lawe is giuen vs as a schoolemaster of little chil∣dren, to directe vs to the Gospell, and by the same meane to Iesus Christ, which is the chiefe and great master, which is also set forth to vs in the Gospell, as the chiefe Phisition. For there is but he only that can heale vs of that deadly disease, to wit, to deliuer vs from that eternall deathe, which the lawe sheweth vs. Of the cause for the vvhich God vvoulde him selfe declare his vvill vnto man by his vvorde. M. I vnderstād now wel, that God would himselfe declare his will vnto man by his owne worde, whiche comprehendeth all the doctrine of the law and of the Gospel, but for what cause hath he done it? P. By∣cause he will not be serued according to the fantasies of men, but according to hys owne only will.Deute. 12. a . 10. c. M. What is the cause of this? P. It is bycause that there is but his will only that is iust and reasonable, and that oughte to be a rule of all reason and iustice vnto mē. For the which cause,
he hath generally forbidden all men,Col. 2. b. d. Deuter. 4. a 12. d. Pro. 30. a. of what estate or condition soeuer they be, to adde or diminish any thing to or fro his lawe and worde, which he hath reuealed as well by his Prophets and Apostles, as by his owne sonne Iesus Christ. Of the good intentes of men that are not gouerned by the vvord of God. M. How thinkest thou then of those which saye, that whatsoeuer is done to the ho∣noure of God, and with a good intente, is well done? P. I denie not but that whiche is done to the honoure of God, doth please him, and that whiche is done with a good intent, is well done: but to the ende that no man deceiue himselfe vnder this faire coloure, I say, that nothing can be done to the honoure of God nor with a good in∣tente, but that which is done according to his word, for the word of God is the very true and only rule of all good intents, and of the honoure wherewith he ought to be honoured. M. But if a man do think to do well, and doth that whiche he doth to none other ende but to honoure God, is not that inough? P. If there were but that required, it had not ben nedeful that God
should euer haue spoken: or that he shuld euer haue giuen a law vnto man, to teach him. M. Wherfore sayst thou so? P For that that it had then ben sufficient to haue let euery man liue according to his fanta∣sie, and that he had only commaūded, that euery man shoulde doe that whiche liked him, without giuing them any other law, where he hath doone cleane contrary,Deuter. 4. a &. 12. a say∣ing: Do not euery one of you that which shall please you, but that onely whiche I commaunde you. Of humaine traditions. M. What thynkest thou then of lawes and of mens traditions, which haue bene set foorth by men,Esay 29. d Matth. 15. a Marke. 7. a contrary to the woord of God, touching his seruice? P I will saye nothing to thee of my selfe, but onely that which god himself hath said by the mouth of his prophete Esay, and that whiche he hath yet afterwarde more confirmed by that of his sonne Iesus Christ. M. What hath he sayde? P. That hee is serued in vayne by the doctrines and commaunde∣ments of men.
Of the seruice of God according to the traditions of men. M. DOest thou thinke by that, that they which serue him in that sort do lose wholly their tyme, and that hée dothe not accept it at their hands? P. They doe not only lose their tyme,1. Sam. 15  Matth. 6. d Hebr. 11. d Rom. 14. a but they doe also greatly dishonor God, and do prouoke his wrath vpon them. M. How so? P. For so muche as whatsoeuer is doone withoute faith cannot please him, but is sinne, whi∣che greatly displeaseth him. Of the difference of the true and false fayth. M. BVt if they which serue God accor∣ding as they haue ben taught of mē doe the same faithfully, may they then do it without faithe? P. It fareth with thys good faith, wherof thou nowe speakest,Iohn. 6. g. 17 b Rom. 10. d Tit. 1. a. Hebr. 11. a as it doth with good intents, wherof we euen now spake. M. How vnderstandest thou that? P. As ther ar no good intēts, but those whiche are gouerned by the only rule of the wil and word of God, euen so is there no true faith, but that which hath certain
and sure foundation in the same worde. M. Shew me the same something more plainly. P. When thou doest any thing at aduenture, canst thou doe it with cer∣taine assurance? M. I confesse that I doe it in dout. P. Thou mayst then vnderstād therby, that thou doest it not in fayth. M. Why not? P. Bicause that faith & doubt are as contrarie as is to be certayne and vncertayn. M. Howe maye that bée? P. Bicause that faith is neuer without true assurance of that whiche it beléeueth and followeth. M. Why may it not be with∣out suche assurance?Ro. 1. d. 8. g. Eph. 3. c. a. c. Philip. 2. a Hebr. 11. a. b. Iam. 1. a. P. Bicause that shée is buylded vpon the sure word of God, by the whiche she is assured of his good will. M. What followeth thereof? P. That she doth nothing at aduenture, but is euer cer¦taine, that that whiche she beléeueth, and that which she doth, is pleasant to God. Of the assurāce of the cōscience by the word of God, and what cōmoditie commeth therby to man. M. WHat commoditie doth this assu∣rance bring to mā? P. The gre∣test yt he could desire. M. Shew me what it is. P. It is not only one, but two, which
are very great. M. Which is the first? P. It is yt man sheweth by the same the reu∣rence that he beareth to the maiestie of God. M. Wherin?Deut. 6. a. 10. P. In that yt he feareth not only to offend him, in yt which he plain¦ly knoweth to displease him, but also in yt wherof he is yet in dout. M. What reue∣rence of God is there in this last point? P. There is this, yt man hath the maiestie of God in such estimation, & beareth him so great reuerēce, yt not only he wil not wit∣tingly offend him, but also he will not put himself in any hazard, nor do any thing at aduenture, whēther is questiō of ye honor & seruice of god.Rom. 5. a. 8.  Ephe. 2. d. Galla. 4. a. Heb. 4. d. And therfore he wil euer be assured of his will. M. Whiche is the other point? P. The quietnesse of a good cō∣science that man hath by that mean, when he is assured that he pleaseth God, by an assurance so certaine, founded vppon the witnesse of God himselfe. Of the Lawe of God. The second Dialogue. Of the manifestation of the wil of God by the law of the two Tables.
M. SEing then that wée muste in euery respect gouern our selues according to the rule of Gods worde,Exod. 20. a 32. d. 34. a. d Deute. 5. a. b & 9. b. folowing the resolution whiche wée haue euen nowe made, shewe me now first of all, what is that he commaundeth vs in his lawe? P. He himselfe hath made vs a bréefe gathe∣ring or collection of the principall pointes that the doctrine therof comprehendeth in his commaundements that he hath giuen to his people, by the hands of Moyses his seruaunt, written in those two tables of stone, wherof thou haste euen nowe made mention. Of the number of the commaunde∣mentes conteyned in the two tables. M. HOwe manye commaundementes dothe the firste Table conteyn? P. Foure with the Preface, which the Lord vsed at the beginning. M. And the secōde? P. Sixe, which being ioyned to the firste foure, make ten in the whole. The first table of the lawe.
M. WHich is that preface whereof thou hast made mention? P. Herken Israel: It is I that am the E∣ternal thy God, who hath drawn thée out of the land of Egypte, from the house of bondage. M. Which is the first comman∣dement? P. Thou shalt haue no straunge Gods before me. M. The second? P. Thou shalt make no image nor likenesse of the things that be there aboue in heauen, nor here belowe in the earth, nor in the wa∣ters vnder the earth. Thou shalt do them no reuerence, nei∣ther shalt thou serue them: for I my self, I am the Eternall thy God, mightie and iealous, who doe venge my selfe of the iniquitie of the fathers vppon their chil∣dren, and vpon the children of their chil∣dren, yea euen to the thirde and fourthe line of those that hate me, and do shewe fauour in a thousand generatiōs to them that loue me and kéepe my commaunde∣mentes. M. The third? P. Thou shalt not take in vaine the name of the Eternall thy God. For the Eternall will not hold him for innocent that shall take his name in vayne. Math. The fourthe? Peter. Re∣member
thée to sanctifie the daye of rest. Sixe dayes thou shalte laboure and shalte doe all thy businesse: but the sea∣uenth daye is the rest of the eternall thy God. Thou shalte in the same doe no kinde of workes, neyther thou, nor thy Sonne, nor thy daughter, neyther thy man seruaunt nor thy woman seruaunt, neyther thy cattell, neyther the straun∣ger which abydeth with thée. For in sixe dayes the Eternall made the Heauen, the Earth and the Sea, and all that which is in them, & did rest in the seauenth daye. And therefore the Eter∣nall did blesse the daye of rest, and sancti∣fied it. The seconde Table. M. REcite them of the seconde table, and shewe me whiche is the fyrste thereof. P. The first of that table, is the first folowing the order of the foure go∣ing before. M. Which is it? Honoure thy father and thy mother, to the end that thy dayes may be long vppon the earth, that the Eternall thy GOD gyueth thée.
M. The sixte. P. Thou shalte not kyll. M. The seauenth. P. Thou shalt not be a fornicatour or adulterer. M. The eighte? P. Thou shalt not steale. M. The ninth? P. Thou shalte not beare false witnesse agaynst thy neyghboure. M. The tenth? P. Thou shalt not couet thy neyghbours house, nor his wife, nor his man seruant, nor his woman seruant, nor his Ox, nor his asse, nor any thing that is his. Of the sum of the lavve. M. WHat doe the commaundements of these two tables conteyne in substance?Matth. 22. d Mark. 12. a. Luke. 10. c P. Iesus Chryste hath gyuen vs the sum, reducing into two poyntes, all the doctrine comprised in them. M. Which is the sum? P. Hearken Israell: the Eternall thy God is God only. Thou shalte loue the Eternall thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soule: and with all thy vnderstanding. It is the first and the greate commaundement.Leuie. 19. d. And the second like to the same is. Thou shalt
loue thy neyghbour as thy selfe:Matth. 7. d. All the lawe and the Prophets depende of these two commaundements: All things then that you would that men did to you, doe you the same vnto them, for it is the law and the Prophetes. Of the diuision of the matters set foorth in the lawe. M. WHat doe these two poynts com∣prehende in effecte? Pet. The first comprehendeth all the commaunde∣mentes of the first table. Math. What do these commaundementes of the firste ta∣ble comprehende in substance? P. All that whiche God requireth of man, especially touching his owne person and maiestie. M. And the second poynt of the sayd sūme what conteyneth it? P. All the commaū∣dementes of the second table. M. What is it that God requireth of man in them? P. That whiche he woulde that all men shuld do one to an other, for ye loue of him. The diuision of the poyntes conteined in the firste table: and of the principall parts of the true seruice of god.
M. WHiche be the principall pointes that he requireth of man, espe∣cially concerning the person and maiestie of God? P. A man may in mine opinion, reduce them all chiefly in two generally. M. Whiche is the firste? P. The faith to∣ward him. M. And the seconde? P. The te∣stifying and manifesting of the same. Of the faith tovvards God. M. WHat requireth he in the first? P. That man holde him for the on∣ly and true God, setting all his harte and all the trust of his saluation in him only, and in no other thing whatsoeuer. M. Is faith then the chiefe and principall foun∣dation of the honoure and seruice whiche man oweth to God? P. It cannot other∣wise be. M. Wherefore? P. For that yt euē as it is impossible to please God without faith, euen so all that which is done with∣out faith, maye be but sinne, as we haue heretofore saide. M. What is the cause thereof? P. It is bicause that faith is the true fountaine of that true and perfecte obedience whiche God requireth of man
towarde his holy will.Deut. 6. d. 10. c. d. 32. f. Wherefore he re∣quireth it foorthwith in the first comman∣dement of his lawe, with the whole harte of man. M. Shew me this somewhat more familiarly.Esay. 43. b. P. I will say in effecte, that God requireth that man do so set all his harte and al his trust in his God, that, he attende from him only, all goodnesse, and of none other whatsoeuer,Hebr. 11. a Rom. 14. b. and that in all thinges he depende of none other but of him only. Of the testifying and declaring of faith, and of the partes thereof. M. WHat meanest thou by the testify∣ing and shewing foorth of faith,Matth. 7. c. Galath. 5. a. Hebr. 11. Iames. 2. c. d. whiche thou hast placed for the other point? Pe. The testimonie whereby man giueth to vnderstande by the frutes that his faith bringeth forth in him, that it is not vaine, fained nor dead, but that it is true, liuely and sounde. M. Which be the frutes that yeld such testimonie? P. We may bring them all into thrée points. M. Which is the first? P. The calling vppon the name of God. M. The seconde? P.
Thansgiuing. M. The thirde? P. The cha∣ritie towards our neyghboure: but this apperteyneth more aptly to the seconde table of the lawe. Of the inuocation of Gods name, and of the true vvorshipping of him. M. WHat meanest thou by the inuo∣cation of gods name? P. I meane a pure affectiō of harte, whereby faith ma∣keth a man to run only to God in all his necessities,Psal. 50. e. 14 4. d. Iohn. 4. c. Deuter. 4. c. Matth. 5.6. a. Esay. 1. d. and to worship him in spirite and truth as he requireth in the secōd and third commaundement. M. What is it to worship God in spirite and truth? P. It is to honoure God with a true affection, pro∣céeding from a pure and cleane harte, and not by Images and other visible and cor∣ruptible thinges, or else by shewes and outwarde ceremonies. Of thanksgiuing. M. WHat meanest thou by thanksgi∣uing, which thou hast set forthe for the second point? P. I meane that euen as God will haue man to call vppon
his name,Psal. 50. c. 116. b. Hebr. 13. c he will also that he acknowled∣ge the benefits yt he hath receiued of him, and that he yelde him thanks in such sorte as he himselfe hath ordeyned, for the glo∣ry of his name, which is also a point that he requireth in the thirde and fourth com∣maundemente. Of the outvvard testimonie of faith, vvhich God requireth of man. M. SEing that God wil be serued in spi∣rite and truth, as thou hast saide, is not he contented, that euen as man in his heart beléeueth in him, that euen so in his heart he call vppon his name, and yelde him thanks? P. That should be sufficiente as towards God.Psalm. 7. e. Iere. 17. b. Act. 1. d. Apoca. 2. f. For so much as he kno∣weth well what is in the heart of man, withoute any néede of other testimonie. M. Wherefore is it then that he yet re∣quireth, that man yelde outwarde testi∣monie? P. He doth it chiefly for two cau∣ses. M. Which is the firste? P. It is to that ende that man deceiue not himselfe, ma∣king himselfe to beléeue that he hath true faith in God, when he hath none at all.
M. How may he know whether he haue faith or no,Mat. 7. d. 13. d 25. a. Iames. 1. d. 2. c. d. Mat. 7. c Iames. 2. c. d. by that meane whiche thou speakest of? P. Euē as the trée is knowne by his frutes, and the workeman by hys worke, and the cause by his effecte. M. It seemeth to me that whiche thou saist, is a better meane to cause others to knowe whether he haue faith or no,Rom. 2. b. 2. Peter. 1. b. Math. 5. b. Iohn. 15. b. Rom. 10. b. 1. Peter. 2. b. then hym∣selfe. P. If others maye knowe it by this meane, there is no doubte but such a testi∣monie whiche he yeldeth to others, may well serue him for a proofe, and greater confirmation of his faith, when he shall sée these frutes himselfe. M. Which is the other reason that thou hast also to thys purpose? P. It is to the ende that God be glorified also before men, by the confessi∣on and testimonie of the faith that is in the heart of the beléeuing man. Of the meanes ordeyned to man by God, vvhereby they may make profession of their faith. M. WHat meanes hath he ordeyned to make confession,Math. 18. c. 28. d. Exod. 10. b. 31. d. and to yelde testimonie? P. The chiefe are the assem∣blies
of the faithfull, in the whiche he doth precide by his holy spirite, and by the mi∣nisterie of his worde, for whose causes he hath chiefly ordeyned the daye of rest. M. What means are there in such asemblies,Deuter. 5. b. c. to make there this confession? P. There are thrée chiefly. M. Which is the first? P. The allowing and confession of Lordes doctrine, whiche is there set foorth by the preaching of the Gospell.1. Corin. 14. c. M Whiche is the second? P. The publique and common prayers of the Churche. M. Which is the thirde? P. It is the communion of the Sa∣cramēts administred by the ordinance of God in those assemblies. M. I would wil∣lingly learne of thée whiche be these Sa∣cramentes? P. It were better that we de∣ferred this matter to an other time, to the ende that we continued the purpose which we haue in hand at this presente, touching the matters comprised in these comman∣dementes of the lawe of God. Of the charitie tovvards our neyghboure. M. WE haue alredy handled two points touching the frutes of faith, tell me
now which is the thirde and last?Leuit. 19. d. Iohn. 13. d. Rom. 13. b. P. It is the charitie that God requireth of euery man one to another. M. Seing that faith hath his proper regarde to God only and to the commandements of the first table, and charitie hath his regarde to our ney∣boure and to the commaundementes of the second table, as thou hast saide here∣tofore. Tell me nowe what agréements there is betwene faith and charitie.Math. 5. g. 1. Iohn. 3. d. 4. c. d. 5. a. P. Se∣ing that faith hath regarde to God, he can not be without perfecte loue of him, ney∣ther the perfect loue towards him maye be, but forthwith it extendeth to all hys children, and to all those that he recom∣mendeth vnto vs. A diuision of the matters conteyned in the second table. M. WHat doth this charitie towards our neyghboure comprehende? P. All the commaundements of the second table of ye law. M. Which be ye principal points of this charitie whereof thou speakest? P. We maye likewise bring them all into two. M. What doth GOD require in the firste? P. The honoure and the obedience that he willeth all inferiors
to yelde to their superiors, whom he hath giuen vnto them for leaders and gouer∣nors, in what estate soeuer they be, euen as the fifth commaundement of the lawe doth conteyne. M. What requireth he in the seconde? P. The dutie wherevnto he hath egally and generally bounde al men one to another, and the honestie and iu∣stice that all men oughte to kepe in theyr conuersation in this world towards their God.1. Thessa. 5. d. 1. Corin. 9. b. M. What vnderstādest thou by that iustice and honestie? P. That man kepe himselfe pure and sounde, as well in hys soule as in his body, to the ende he be not defiled, either by any violence or wrong that he shall do to his neyghboure, in any thing that may be, nor by any whoredome or filthinesse whatsoeuer. Of the points vvherein euery one is bounde to his neyghbour. M. Matth. 22. d 1. Cor. 10. c. 13. b. Philip. 2. a Rom. 13. c. 12 c. d.DEclare to me more exactly what our dutie towards our neyghboure importeth. P. That we haue the same care for all men in generall that we haue for our selues. M. But wherein ought we to
haue this care for others? P. There are two pointes to be considered herein. M. Which is the first? P. That we take héede that we do them no dishonour nor hurte, in any wise, be it in the soule, body, goods, or name. M. Which is the other? P. That we procure their health, honoure and pro∣fite with all our power, in all thinges as the other fiue commaundemēts folowing do declare. Of the vveaknesse & defaulte of povver that is in man to accomplishe the lavve of God. M. AL that is very iust and very reaso∣nable, but is it in the power of mā, to yelde to God so sounde and perfect obe∣dience as he requireth of him?Gene. 6. b 8. d. Iere. 7. b. Rom. 8. b. 1. Cori. 2. d Gala. 5. c. d. P. He hath not only not that power, but contrarily, it is fully impossible for him, to yelde vn∣to God such an obedience. For according to his nature, he hath no pleasure but to resiste against his holy will.
Of the fall and restoring of Man. The third Dialogue. Rom. 6. d. 7. c. Ephes. 2. a. 4. c. Galath. 5. c. Iohn. 3. d.Of mans Freevvill. M. HAth man no frée will, where by he maye doe the good that God com∣maundeth him, and refuse the euill which he forbyddeth him? P. He hath frée will without any power to do good: But on the contrarie, so prompt to all euill, that he desireth not, (neyther can he) any other thing but to do euill, for the tyme that he remayneth in his corrupt nature. Of sinne, and of the nature of it, and what originall sinne is properly. M. Genesis. 3. Rom. 5. b. 7. c. Iohn. 8. d. Rom. 6. c. 2. Pet. 2. d. Ephes. 2. a.WHat is the cause of this vnhappi∣nesse? P. Sinne wherevnto he became subiect thorowe his owne faulte, in such sorte, that he is as a seruaunt and slaue to sinne. M. How is sinne the cause? Peter. Bycause that it bringeth to him two euilles, the greateste that maye be. M. Psal. 51. b. Ephes. 2. a.Whiche is the first? P. It is the wrath and curse of God, whereof sinne maketh
man guiltie. M. Whiche is the seconde? P. It is that corruption of nature where∣of I haue already spoken, whiche maketh man so enclined to euill, that he cannot of himselfe thinke, speake, nor doe anye good, but procure dayly more and more the wrath of God vppon him, by all that whiche he can thinke, speake, or doe. M. That corruption of nature, ought it to be accompted for sin? P. It is properly that which is commonly called original sinne, whiche is the spring and fountaine from whence all the others do procéede. Wher∣fore if there be any sinne that deserueth to be accompted sinne, it is that same. Of the meane vvhereby man maye be de∣liuered from sinne, and from the vvrathe of God, vvhiche sinne bringeth to him. M SEing then that mā can find in him∣selfe no remedie to with-holde him from that bottomlesse pitte of perdition,Iohn. 1. a. Rom. 5.7. d 8. a. Ephes. 2. b. 4. f. where is it that he shal fynd it elsewhere? P. In God only, who only canne reforme hym to his Image, as at the fyrste hee
did,Col. 2. c. 3. b 2. Timo. 1 c Tito. 3. b. Exod 20. e. Deuter. 5. a Hebr. 12.5. 1. Timo. 6. d and formed him according to ye same. M. But by what meane may he obtayne so greate a good thing of God, considering that he hath so greatly offended him, and procured his wrath? P. It is certaine, that no man may haue accesse to God, to ob∣teyne saluation of him, without a media∣toure, by whome he may be made at one with him. Of the causes for the vvhich there is ney∣ther man nor Angell sufficiente to the office of mediatoure betvvene God and man, and of the greatnesse of the vvrath of God against sinne. M. Rom. 3. c. 5. b.ANd who is this mediatoure, which may make this appointmente? P. For so much as all men, are in like faulte and condemnation, there is none among them sufficient for that office, of what ho∣lynesse and qualitie soeuer he be. Mat. Where must he then be sought? Shall it be among the Angells whiche haue no sinne? P. The very Angells can not be sufficiente therevnto.Iob. 4. d. Colloss. 1. b Ephes. 1. b. Deuter. 4. d Nahum. 1. d Exod. 33. d. 34. a Psal. 145. a. Iob. 46. d. 1. King. 8. c Daniel. 6. g. 13. b. Isaye. 40. c. Psal. 146. c. 1. Ti. 6. c. d. 2. Peter. 2. a Iude. . Roma. 5. d. 1. Cor. 13. f Hebr. 2. d. Exod. 34. a. Rom. 3. e. d M. Why not? P. Chiefly for two causes. M. Whiche is the
first? P. It is that the wrath and cursse of God, is so heauie a burden, that there is no creature whatsoeuer he be, neyther in heauen nor in the earth, that may beare it, but that he shall be beaten downe with it vtterly. M. What is the cause there? P. It is bicause that ye offence through sinne committed, is done against God which is infinite, and an eternall prince and king, wherefore it deserueth also paines infi∣nite and eternall. M. Haue we any testi∣monie of the same? P. The angells which haue sinned may be sure testimonies vn∣to vs. M. In what sorte? P. If that they which were so excellent creatures, coulde not themselues beare that which they had deserued for their parte, how may one a∣mongst them beare all that that all man∣kind hath deserued togither? M. This rea∣son is very plaine. But which is the other cause, that maketh that the very Angells are not sufficient to such an office? P. For so much as seing that the offence was cō∣mitted by mā, it must also be repaired in him, & by him. M. For what cause? P. To the ende that God may be founde true and iust, and also mercifull togither.
Of the setting forth of the iust iudgemēt, & of the mercy of god, in the redēptiō of mā. M. Gene. 2. c. 3. c. d. Exod. 20. a. 34. a. Ezech. 18. e Iere. 3. d. Psal. 103. b.HOw doste thou vnderstande ye same? P. If god did not punish mā acording to the desert of his transgression, and accor∣ding to the threatnings that he himself hath giuen vnto him, & the sentence that he hath giuen against him, where should the truth & iustice of God be? M. I vnderstand well this point, but what wilt thou say of his mercy? P. In like sort if he punished man according to his desert, where should then this mercy be, by the which he sheweth forth his infinit goodnesse more than by any other vertue, whatsoeuer that is in him? Of the only & true mediator Iesus Christ. M. Iohn. 3. b. Rom. 8. f. g. Rom. 5. b. 1. Iohn. 4. b. Esay. 9. b. Iere. 23. b. Psal. 45. b. Iohn. 1. a. b. 1. Tim. 3. d. Roma. 9. b. 1. Iohn. 1. a.If there be neyther man nor Angel suffi∣cient to that office, what other mean resteth then, by the which that fault of man may be repaired by him, & in him. P. Bycause that man could not among all the creatures find any, God hath prouided according to the pi∣etie & compassion that he had of him, being moued by his only mercy and inestimable charitie. M. Which is this mean? P. It is yt he hath giuen his only sonne Iesus Christe to do this office. M. And what mean hath he obserued in this worke? P. It is that Iesus
Christ being the Eternal & true God,Math. 1. e. d. Luke. 1. d. Act 3. c. 2. d Esay. 53. b. c 1. Peter. 2. d & of one only essence with the father, toke hu∣main flesh in the womb of ye virgin Marie, by the very ordināce of God his father. M. What néed was there that he should take humain fleshe vpon him to execute that of∣fice? P. It was euen so necessarie to the ende that in the same, he might satisfie the iust iudgement of God for all men. Of the vnion of the diuine and humaine nature in the person of Iesus Chryst, and of the causes of the same. M. Was it necessary that ye same media∣tor should be very God and very man to∣gither, in one very person? P. It is euen so, & chiefly for thrée causes.Rom. 5. d. Hebr. 2. d. M. Which is the first? P. It is, that if he had not bene very man, he could not haue suffred in our flesh & nature yt which he hath suffered, & was to suffer for vs. M. And if he had not suffred ye same, what incōuenience shuld ther haue ben? P. That he shuld not haue born for vs in our nature & fleshe the wrath & curse of God which we had deserued: and then he should not haue satisfied the iudgement of God thorowe his obedience, to put away by the same, in our own flesh and nature,
the rebellion by the whiche we haue de∣serued this iudgemente.Nahum. b. Hebr. 10. g. M. Which is the other cause? P. It is that if he had ben but only man, and that he had not ben vnited with God, being very God and very man in one very person, he could not haue ben able to beare this burden of the wrath of god, which is so greate and so importable, but that he shoulde haue ben swallowed vp, how iust or innocent soeuer he shulde haue ben.Esay. 43. b. Iere. 17. a. Iohn. 6. g. M. Which is the thirde? P. It is that he shoulde not haue ben able also to haue brought saluation and life to man, if he had not had the fountaine in him selfe by meane of his diuine nature. Of the sacrifice and satisfaction of Iesus Christ, and of the vertue therof. M. WHich is then the meane where∣by Iesus Christe hath satisfied for vs in his humaine nature and fleshe?Esay. 53. a. b Math. 27. Rom. 4. d. 5. a. 8. a. 2. Cor. 5. d. Ephes. 5. a. 1. Pet. 2. c. d 1. Iohn. 2. a. Hebr. . c. d P. It is the sacrifice that he himselfe hath made of his owne body and bloud by his passion and death. M. Howe is the sacri∣fice of Iesus Christ of such vertue? P. For two principall causes. M. Whiche is the
first?Phili. .  Hebr. 5. . 9. d. P. The paine the which he béeing in∣nocent hath endured for vs, whiche were culpable, by the which payne, he who had not deserued it, hath deliuered vs from it which we haue deserued. M. Which is the seconde? P. It is the perfecte obedience whiche he hath yelded to God his father, in recompence of the transgression and re∣bellion which was founde in vs. Of the communication in the bene∣fites of Iesus Christ. M. IS it sufficiente that he is deade, and that he hath yelded to God his father one such an obedience? P. If that same were ynough, all shoulde be saued indiffe∣rently, as well infidels as faithfull men. M. What is more required then? P. That the same satisfaction whiche Iesus Christe hath made to God his father, may be communi∣cated and appiled to vs.
THE FOVRTH dialogue, is of the iu∣stification and sanctifi∣cation of man. Of the faith in Iesus Christ, and of the Iustification thereby. MATHEVV. WHyche is the meane whereby to comme to that Communycation, wherof thou hast euen nowe spoken, and by the whiche wée muste com∣municate with Iesus Christ?Act. 13. f. 15. b. Rom. 1. d. 3. d. Galath. 3. d. Rom. 6. a. 8. a. b 2. Cor. 1. b. 2. Cor. 5. d. Galath. 3. d. Ephes. 5. g. 1. Peter. 1. a 1. Iohn. 1. b. c. Pe. There is none other but the only faith in Ie∣sus Christ: For by the same we are iusti∣fied before God, and not by our workes neyther in all, nor in parte. M. What is it to be iustified before God? P. It is to be accoumpted for iust, at his iudgemente, as if we had neuer sinned. M. How maye this be done by the mean of faith? P. By∣cause that the spirite of God, by whome it is giuen vs, doth ioyne vs with Christ, as members of his body, by the meanes
of the same faith, in such sorte that the iu∣stice of Christe and all that euer he hath done for vs, is imputed and ascribed to vs as though it were our owne proper. Of the iustificatiō by faith & by vvorks. M. WHy is this honoure rather gi∣uen to faith than to works? P. Bycause there is no iustice that may sa∣tisfie the iudgement of God, vnlesse it be perfecte as is that of Iesus Christe. M. Why may not that of Iesus Christ be as well allowed vnto vs by our works, as by faith?Rom. 3. d. e. 4. a. b. c. Galath. 3. Galath. 2. d. P. Bycause that they are things altogither cōtrary, to be iustified by faith & to be iustified by a mans owne works. M. What contrarietie is there in that? P. If that man could find iustice in himselfe and in his owne workes, whereby he mighte satisfie vnto God, he should then haue no neede of that of Iesus Christ. Of the satisfactiō tovvards god by works. M. ANd if he may not satisfie in euery pointe maye he not yet at the least satisfie in parte? P. If he cannot satisfie him in the whole, no more can he in parte. M. For what cause? P. Chiefly for two causes. M. Whiche is the firste?
P. It is that God receyueth no iustice for satisfaction, if it be not sound and perfect, and worthie of his maiestie: as wee haue alreadie touched. M. Which is the other? P. It is that man being naught and vn∣iust of his nature, can doe no worke that may be iust (as we haue also sayd) if he be not first made good and iust. Of the works wherby man may satisfie at the iudgement of God. M. DOest thou meane by this, that the good and iuste worke maketh not the man good and iust? P. I doe not alto∣gether denie,Psalme. 14. a. b. Tit. 3. b. Tit. 2. d. 1. Tim. 2. b but that the good & iust work maketh the man good and iust: but I say, that mans worke can not doe this, by∣cause there procéedeth none suche from him. M. Which is then the work that may doe this? P. That of Iesus Christ, wher∣of wée haue spoken heretofore: whiche bringeth vnto vs this commoditie, when wée are made partakers of hym by the meane of Faythe, as wée haue alrea∣die sayd.
Of the causes why iustification is attributed to faith only. M. SHEwe me nowe for full resolution, what is the chiefe cause why iustifi∣cation is ascribed to faith?Rom. . P. Bicause that in stead of bringing to God any thing that is of man, he bringeth him to Iesus christ to receiue of him therby, that whiche hée can not fynde in himselfe. M. For what cause is this done?Rom. 3. P. To the ende that man may be founde iust before God, not by his owne iustice: for he can not but by that of Iesus Christe. Of the satisfaction by faith. M. THy meaning is then yt this iustice of Iesus Christ maketh a man iust,Rom. 3. c. d. 4. d. 1. Cor. 1. d. 2. Cor. 5. d. Rom. 7. a. 8 a. b. Ephes. 2. a. b 1. Thessa. 4. a. b. Tite. 2. c. d. before God, as though he were wholly in∣nocent: forsomuche as GOD estéemeth him for such an one, accepting the Iustice of his sonne Iesus Chryste, for full satis∣faction. P. It is so, and it bringeth yet be∣side that, an other very great commodity. M. What is it? P. It is that where as before hée coulde doe nothyng but euill, this fayth dothe sanctifie him, disposing
him to the obedience of the will of God,1. Peter. 1. a. Rom. 6. c. d. Matth. 1 c. d Esa. 7. c. Luke. 1. c. 2. d. Matth. 3. d. Luke. 3. c. Iohn. 1. c. 3. d. Iohn. 17. d. Hebr. 10. b. Rom. 8. b. c Galath. 5. c. d. Rom. 8. b. e Galat. 5. c. d and to all good works, to the ende that he may serue to iustice & to holynesse, where as before he serued to iniustice and to sinne. M. How is it that faith doth sancti∣fie man according to thy saying? P. There be two things to consider in this sanctifi∣cation. M. Which is the first? P. It is that Iesus Christe hauing taken our owne flesh in the wombe of the Virgin, in the which he was conceiued by the working of the holy Ghost, hath also sanctified it in his. Of which thing beside the testimo∣nie that we haue of the Angell in the ho∣ly Scriptures, the holy Ghost hath yet yelded more ample testimonie in the bap∣tisme of Iesus Christ, when in fourme of a doue, he did descend vppon him, whiche is our head, in whome all his members were foorthwith sanctified. M. Which is the other pointe? P. It is that faith whiche embraceth and receyueth wholly Iesus Christ with al his gifts and graces, is ne∣uer in man without the spirite of him, nor the spirite of him, without his frutes, whiche are altogither contrary to the works of the flesh, to witte, of the corrup∣ted
man that is not regenerate by the spirite of God. Of the true spring of good vvorks. M DEclare vnto me if thou vnderstan∣dest by this, that faith is the foun∣taine of all good works, and the good roote whiche maketh man a good trée, to beare good frute, wher as before he was an euil trée and bare euill frute? P. It cannot bée otherwise. M. I thinke then it is the cause why Sainct Paule, speaking of the true Christian faith, doth call it the liuing and working saith thorough charitie:Iames. 2. c. d. and why Saincte Iames saith that the faith that is withoute works is dead. P. There is no doubte of it. Of the accomplishing of the lavve in Iesus Christ, and of the diffe∣rence that is betvvene the iustification and sancti∣fication of a Christi∣an man. M. SEing then, that man is so refour∣med by the meane of faythe,
thou wilte then saye that he is otherwise disposed to obey the lawe of God, than he was before, whē he was yet in his owne naturall.Iohn. 3. d. Iames. 1. c. 1. Peter. 1. d Rom. 7. c 2. Cor. 5. a. 1. Iohn. 1. d. Psal. 143. a. Rom. 7. d. Phili. 3. b. c 1. Iohn. 2. a P. It is easie to vnderstande by that which we haue already said. M. May we then in no wise obey the lawe of god, excepte that we be first regenerate by his spirite, and refourmed to his Image? P. No in déede. M. If we cā in no sorte obey, we are then farre off from yelding per∣fecte obedience to the whole lawe. P. It is true. M. What is the cause thereof? P. It is for that that our regeneration and re∣formation, is neuer fully perfecte in vs, so long as we are wrapped in this corrup∣table flesh in this worlde. M. What other remedy is there then? P. It is to haue re∣course to the iustification which we haue alredy obteyned thorough the faith in Ie∣sus Christe, by the whiche we do also ob∣taine dayly remission of all our sinnes. For albeit that our sanctification be not yet thoroughly perfecte, yet notwithstan∣ding that same letteth not, but that our iustification is alredy perfecte. M. Doest thou meane that our iustification doth supplie that which wanteth of our sancti∣fication.
P. I can not tel whether thou ta∣kest my wordes, as though I meant that we might satisfie towards God in parte, by our good works, the which we impute to satisfactiō, and that Iesus Christ shuld satisfy only for the rest for vs, by the same that may be on his side being alowed vn∣to vs by the iustificatiō. For if thou didst so vnderstand it, thou shuldest greatly de∣ceiue thy selfe. M. Wherein? P. Chiefly in two points. M. Shew me the first.Esay. 43. b. Act. 4. b. 2. Timo. 1. c. P. It is in that thou shouldest spoile God at the least of a great parte of the honor which is due vnto him, for the saluation which we haue of him, by Iesus Chryste, and the other parte we shall attribute to man. M. In what sorte? P. In that that by this meane he should be our sauioure, but for the one halfe, and wée for the o∣ther. M. Which is the other point?Esay. 54. c. Luke. 17. c P. It is that thou shouldest presente to God, a satisfaction ouermuche imperfecte. M. I confesse, if I should present vnto him but my works: but when I shal present vn∣to him my works for satisfaction, and thē the satisfaction whiche Christ hath made for me with them: What imperfection
then may more remaine? P. If the satis∣faction of Iesus Christ be sufficiente, thou néedest to present none other to God: if it be not sufficiente,Iob. 4. d. Psalme. 130. thou canst not satisfie that whiche maye there wante by any thing that thou canst do. M. Why not? P. Bycause that God can allowe nothing for satisfaction which is not pure, sounde and perfecte as he is. Of the distinction that ought to be had betvvene the cause of our saluation, and the testimonie of the same. M. EXpounde vnto me somewhat more plainly thy meaning in this. P. I will say vnto thée for the firste, that we must put difference in this matter be∣twene the cause of our saluation, and the testimonie of the same, and then after∣warde betwene the sanctification by Ie∣sus Christe whiche is imputed to vs, and that whiche is ioyned to our person. M. What thinkest thou to be ye cause of our saluation?Galla. 3. d. Ephes. 3. d. P. Iesus Christ dwelling in vs by faith. M. What meanest thou by the testimonie that we haue of the same? P. The sanctification whereof we nowe speake. M. Howe doest thou vnderstande
that it is the testimonie of our saluation and of the cause of the same, and not the cause it selfe?Rom. 8. b. c. Gala. 5. c. d. Matth. 7. c. Iohn. 8. c. f. P. For bycause it testifieth that Iesus Christ dwelleth in vs, as the effecte testifieth of his cause. M. What followeth thereof? P. That the cause is there, seing that we sée the effects, to wit, Iesus Christ with all his gifts & graces. Of the difference that must be put be∣tvvene the sanctification by Christ, vvhich is atributed vnto vs, and that vvhich is ioyned to our person, as a qualitie stic∣king to the same. M. ANd what inconueniente were it to holde our sanctification, for the cause of our saluation? P. For the better vnderstāding of al this matter, it is méete that I expound vnto thée yet the differēce betwene the sanctificatiō of Iesus Christ which is allowed vs, whereof I haue euē now spoken, and that which is ioyned to our proper perso, and then the frutes of the same.Luke. 1. d, Act. 4. c. Hebr. 7. d. M. What difference dost thou put therein? P. I do call sanctification properly that, whiche we consider in the very person of Iesus Chryste,
the which sanctification is not properlye ours, as a qualitie cōiuncte to our person, but only by imputation.Gene. 15. a. Rom. 4. a. d. 1. Corin. 1 d. M. What mea∣nest thou by that imputation? P. That it is allowed vnto vs, as his iustice is attri∣buted and allowed vnto vs, by the iusti∣ficatiō which we obteyne in him by faith. Mat. Is that the cause why Sainct Paule saith, that God hath made Iesus Chryste vnto vs wisdome, iustice, sanctification, and redemption? P. There is no doubte of it, but it must be considered, that be∣side this kinde of sanctification,Rom. 6. d. 1. Thessa. 4. b 1. Peter. 1. c. Iohn. 17. c. Hebr. 10. b. that is so imputed and allowed vnto vs, there is yet an other, that is ioyned to our very person, not only by imputation, but as a qualitie sticking in vs, whiche procéedeth from that first kind of sanctificatiō, wher∣of we haue euen now spoken. M. What vertue hath euery of them in vs? P. The firste doth fully sanctifie vs before God, bycause it is full and perfecte. M. The o∣ther, is it not of the same nature and force? P. No. For it sanctifieth vs but in parte.Roma. 7. c. d. Galla. 5. c. M. For what cause? P. Bycause that it is but begonne in vs and not per∣fecte, wherefore it cannot fully sanctifie
vs excepte it be full and perfecte. M. And when shall it be so?1. Cor. 15. f. g. P. When our regene∣ration and reformation to the Image of God shall be.1. Thessa. 5. d. M. It shall not then bée in this mortall life? P. It is true, but it shal be in the life to come,Col. 3. a. 1. Iohn. 5. a. in the whiche our life, whiche is now hiddē in Iesus Christ, shal be shewed, and what we be shall ap∣peare, when we shall be made like to the glorious body of Iesus Christ. Of the cause of the difference that is in these tvvo kindes of sanctification. M. WHat is the very cause of this difference that thou puttest be∣twene these two kindes of sanctification? P. I call the first perfecte.Luke. 1. d Daniel. 9. f. For that that it is the very sanctification not only of the whiche Iesus Christe is sanctified in hys flesh and humane nature, but also by rea∣son whereof he is called the holy one of holy ones. For so muche as by the com∣munication of the same he doth sanctifie all his elected,Ephe. 1. a. 5. f. to make them holy and without blame before God, who hathe chosen them therevnto. M. If it be the
same sanctification wherewith Iesus Christ is sanctified, and doth sanctifie o∣thers, it is very certaine that it cannot be but perfecte.Ephes. 3. d. Col. 2. a. b. Iohn. 1. b. 4. b P. If it be perfecte in him, it is also perfecte in vs, in so much as dwel∣ling in vs by faith, we haue him with all the holynesse that he bringeth with hym, the which we euer drawe out of him, as of his true fountaine, the which we haue is our selues whē we haue Iesus christ. M. If we haue in Iesus Christe the foun∣taine of all holynesse, whereby we are continually and perpetually sanctified: What other imperfecte sanctification may then be in vs?Rom. 7. d. Tite. 3. b. 1. Peter. 1. a. Rom. 6. d. P. That which we cō∣sider in our owne proper fleshe and na∣ture, regenerate and renewed by the spirite of God, which is as it were wate∣red with ye streames of that fountaine of all sanctification, to make vs bring foorth the frutes of true sanctification and ho∣lynesse, in the stead of the frutes of sinne, which it brought foorth in time before,Hebr. 5. b. as the earth, whiche being cursed and bar∣ren, is afterwarde made fertile, and bea∣reth better frutes by the blessing of God.
Of the cause of the imperfection that is in the sanctification ioyned to our person, and of the vvorks vvhich proceede therof. M. THou wilte then saye that this se∣conde kinde of sanctification is not only adherente to the person of Iesus Christe,Roma. 8. b. c. and that it is not only ours by imputation, as is the firste: but that it is also adherente to our flesh and nature, as a new qualitie which Iesus Christ hath put into vs by his holy spirite, whiche maketh our flesh holy in it selfe, to do af∣terwardes holy workes. P. It is euen so.Galla. 5. c. d. Ephe. 5. b. M. Thou wilte then say also, that the ho∣ly works whiche men do, being so sancti∣fied, be the frutes of the same sanctifi∣cation. P. It is euen so: but bycause there remayneth continually muche of oure naturall corruption in our fleshe why∣lest we are in thys worlde, there can procéede from vs no worke so hol∣lye, but that it is founde very foule,Iob. 4. c. Esay. 64. c.
and farre off from that perfect holynesse whiche God requireth of vs in all our works. M. What wilte thou conclude by that? P. That our workes be so farre off from worthynesse to be presented for sa∣tisfaction, and to obteine saluation by thē, be they neuer so holy, that if he shoulde iudge of them according to the rigoure of his iudgemente, he shoulde fynde no∣thing therein but matter of condemnati∣on.Rom. 11. a. 2. Timo. 1. c Ephes. 2. b. Tite. 3. b. Matth. 7. c. 2. Peter. 1. b M. Thou maist not denie for all that, but the good & holy works are very agrée∣able vnto him? P. If it were otherwise, they ought not to be done: but thou must note herein, that they be not acceptable vnto him, as cause of our saluation, but as testimonie of the same. M. Howe vn∣derstandest thou that they be testimo∣nies of our saluation? P. In that that they testifie that Iesus Christe is in vs, and that he there worketh by his holy spirite. Wherefore it foloweth that we be iusti∣fied and sanctified by the iustice and sanc∣tification of Iesus Christ,Rom. 8. b. Gala. 5. d. 1. Cori. 1. d Rom. 7. d. 1. Iohn. 1. d the which God beholdeth, and for the regarde thereof he doth beare with the imperfection that yet remayneth in vs, and doth pardon vs
that wherin we do yet dayly offend him. Of the meanes that vve haue tovvard God, in recompence of the im∣perfections vvhich alwayes dvvell in vs. M. IT séemeth vnto me that thou wilte saye in effecte, by all this discourse which thou hast made, that what regene∣ration and sanctification soeuer there be in our fleshe and nature, we are not yet for all that so pure nor so perfecte, but that we must haue continuall recourse to the iustice and sanctification of Iesus Christ, which is ours,Rom. 4. a. not as a qualitie of iustice and sanctitie sticking and ioined to our person, but only for that that it is al∣lowed and attributed vnto vs, as though it were our owne proper. P. So it is,Iohn. 13. b and therefore Iesus Chryste hath saide to the same effecte, that he that was alredy wa∣shed, had yet néede to wash his feete. M. What meaneth he by that manner of speach? P. That albeit that we be iustified alredy, sanctified and purified of our sins,Iohn. 15. a. by the faith that we haue in him thorough
his worde, yet for all that, for so muche as there resteth in vs alwayes certaine filthynesse and corruption, whyche pro∣ceedeth of oure corrupted nature, whi∣che is not yet thoroughlye well renued and refourmed to the image of GOD: we haue alwayes néede to goe to washe and clense vs of oure filthynesse, in the true fountayne of all puritie, iustice, and sanctification, whiche is ope∣ned to vs in Iesus Chryst: for wée haue no remis∣sion of anye one sinne of ours,1. Iohn. 1. c Act. 15. b but onely in him, by the meanes of the iustifica∣tion that we haue by Faithe in him.
THE FIFTHE dialogue, is of the faith in God. Of the true foundation of Faith, & of the difference that it maketh betweene the Christian religion, and all other religions. MATHEVV. SEing it is so that man re∣ceyueth of God, all these great goodnesses, whereof thou hast made mention, by the meane of the one∣ly faithe in Iesus Christe, it followeth then according to thy saying, that Iesus Christ is the true foūdation of the same.Rom. 5. a. 8. c Galath. 4. P. It is not to be doubted. For we cannot lay hold vpon the mercie of God, nor be assured, that he is become our louing and merciful father, but only in Iesus Christ and by Iesus Christe his beloued sonne. M. Then if it bée so, it followeth, that Man hathe no true faythe in GOD,Iohn. 5. d 1. Iohn. 2. d but that whereby man dothe imbrace hym in Iesus Christ, when he beléeueth
in him. P. It is very true, and therefore that faith is the very point whiche discer∣neth the christian Religion from all o∣thers, and the Christians from all other people.Rom. 10. b. M. But séeing that the fayth is in the heart, wherby man beléeueth to iusti∣fication, how can it distinguishe the reli∣gions? P. I do not here speake proprely of the distinction whiche is made by the outwarde confession whiche men make, but of that whiche lyeth in the true foun∣dation and in the propre substance of the religion, which hath his only foundation in God and in his word,Hebr. 11. a albeit that vnder the name of the faith, I comprehend also the confession of the same. M. Doest thou meane that all other religions which are not grounded vppon the faithe in Iesus Christe, are no true religions, but false? P. If religion maye be religion withoute hauing a God which is honoured therby, they may be accompted for religions, and not otherwise. M. Why sayst thou so? P. Forsomuche as there is no true God, but only he whiche hath shewed himselfe in Iesus Christ,Rom. 1. a. Hebr. 1. a Matth. 10. d no more can he also be kno∣wen nor honoured as God, but in Iesus Christ.
How that all religion is without God, sa∣uing the Christian religion. M. IF that be true, the Iewes, the Tur∣kes, and all other men, which beleue not in Iesus Chryste, nor in the Gospel, haue then no God. P. No in déede, but only by imagination. M. Why sayst thou so? P. Forsomuch as God can be none o∣ther than he is. M. I vnderstand it wel: but what wilt thou conclude thereof?Malach. 2. b Psalm. 102. d Iohn. 1. c Colloss. 1. b Hebr. 1. a. Esaye. 44. c. Psal. 50. d P. That séeing that God can not be knowne suche as he is, but in Iesus Chryste, who soeuer doth not acknowledge him in Ie∣sus Chryste, knoweth hym not at all. Wherfore he forgeth to himself an other God than the true God. M. In what sorte doth he forge him? P. In so muche as he maketh and pourtraiteth God, not suche an one as he is in déed, but such as he hath béen able to imagine hym in his brayne and vnderstandyng. M. Thou then cal∣lest other gods, and strāge gods, the ima∣ginations that men do cōceiue of God in their vnderstāding, wherby they do ima∣gine and estéeme him other thā he is, and did manifest him selfe in his sonne Iesus
Chryste, and in his woorde. Pe. What thinkest thou then that the strange gods are?1. Cor. 8. b. For séeing ther is but one true God only, it followeth then very wel, that al the others whiche men call gods, are not gods at all, but onely by the imagination of men.Ephe. 2. c Act. 4. c. 17. c. Rom. 1. c. M. Is that the cause why Saint Paule did write to the Ephesians, that the Pagans wer without God? P. Ther is no doubte thereof. For albeit they had many by name, and by fantasie, yet not∣withstanding they had none in déede, see∣ing they were ignorant of the true God. Of the summarie of the christian faith, and for what cause it is called the Symbole of the Apostles. M. SEing it is so as thou saist, it séemeth to me then to be wel doone, & very néedfull to consider yet some thing more néere, the principall poyntes, that thys christian fayth doth comprehende, whiche is of so great vertue as thou haste sayde. P. They are conteyned in the fourme of the ordinarie confession, whiche the chri∣stians make dayly, the which is cōmonly
called, The Symbole of the Apostles. M. What signifieth this word symbole? P. It is taken of the Gréekes,Plautus. Terentius in Andriana. of whome the Latines haue borrowed it, to signifie an enseigne of acknowledging, and the part that is gathered of euery mā in any thing, as whē euery man giueth his shot. M. Why is this confession of faythe cal∣led by that name? P. Chéefly for two cau∣ses. M. Whiche is the first? P. It is by∣cause that it conteyneth as chosen and gathered togither into a summe, the chief pointes of the doctrine sette foorth by the Apostles,Iohn. 17 c. c. 22. e Matth. 28. d Marke. 16.  whome Iesus Chryst hath gi∣uen and sent as vniuersall doctours of all the worlde. M. Which is the seconde? P. It is, for that this doctrin is the true mark whereby euery man that voucheth the same, yeldeth certain testimonie that he is a membre of the Christian Churche, as the men of warre declare by the en∣seigne whiche they beare, what prince they belong vnto, and serue. The Symbole of the Apostles. M. WHich is the summe of thys faith the whiche thou callest Sym∣bole?
P. I beléeue in God the Father al∣mightie, maker of heauen and of earthe: And in Iesus Christ his onely sonne our Lorde: whiche was conceyued by the ho∣lie Ghost: borne of the virgin Mary: suf∣fered vnder Ponce Pylate: was cruci∣fied, deade, and buryed: he went downe into hell: the third day he arose from the deade: ascended into heauen: he sitteth at the right hande of God the Father al∣mightie: and from thence shall he come to iudge the liuing and the deade. I beléeue in the holie Ghoste: I beléeue the holie vniuersall Churche: the communion of Sainctes: the forgiuenesse of sinnes: the resurrection of the bodie: and the eter∣nall lyfe. Of the generall diuision of the princi∣pall pointes conteined in the Sym∣bole of the Apostles. M. HOw many articles and principall pointes bée there in this summe? P. Men do commonly distinguish them in twelue: but me thinketh we may reduce them all into two generally, out of the
whiche men may drawe the others after∣warde. M. Whiche be these two pointes? P. The first is touching our faith towards God, the seconde concerneth his Churche which is builded vppon the same faith. Of the faith that a Christian man oughte to haue in God. M. WHat ought we to beleue of god? P. There are first two principal thinges to be considered in this matter. M. Which is the first? P. That whiche he hath declared vnto vs of his diuine na∣ture by his worde. M. Whiche is then the second? P. That whiche we oughte to be∣leeue of his works, by the whiche he hath declared vnto man what was his power, his wisedome and goodnesse, and the other vertues & proprieties whiche are in him, of the whiche we can haue no knowledge but by his works. Of the vnitie and trinitie that is in the essence of God.
M. Deu 6. a. 32. Esay. 44. a. 1. Cor. 8. b. Matth. 3. d. 28. d. Iohn. 14. b. c. 15. d.WHat thinges ought we to consi∣der concerning his diuine na∣ture, according as he hath declared vnto vs in his worde? P. There be two prin∣cipall. M. Which is the firste? P. It is the vnitie whiche is in his diuine essence, whereby we are taughte that there is but one God in whome we beléeue. M. Whiche is the seconde? P. It is the tri∣nitie of persons, that is in that vnitie of the diuine essence, the whiche we do con∣fesse when we saye, that we beléeue in the Father,Galla. 3. d. Act. 20. d. in the Sonne, and in the ho∣ly Ghost. Of the difficultie that is in this matter. M. IT séemeth to me that there is great contrarietie in this matter. Peter. Wherein? M. In that that it séemeth that it is as muche as if one should saye, that there is but one only God, and that there be three. P. We ought not so to take thē, séeing that we confesse but one only di∣uine essence, albeit that we acknowledge in the same, the father, the sonne, and the holy Ghost, in such sorte distincte in pro∣prieties
of persons, that yet for all that these thrée persons are but one only and very God. M. Canst thou expounde the same vnto me something more plainely by some similitude? P. As there is but one Sunne in the world, no more is there but one only God:Iohn. 1. c. 17 d. Act. 17. g. Hebr. 1. a. Iohn. 1. a 1. Iohn. 1. a. Colloss. 1. c. Iohn. 14. b. d. 15. d. 16. b. Act. 1. a. Ephe. 2. a. 1. Cor. 2. a b 1. Iohn. 3. d. 5. b. and as the Sunne sheweth himselfe by his beames, euen so God, as father, doth shewe himselfe by his sonne Iesus Christ, which is his worde and E∣ternall wisedome: and as the Sunne by his heate doth make vs féele his force, e∣uen so God maketh vs to féele his vertue by his holy spirite whiche is his infinite power. Of the principall vvorks of God vvhere∣of mention is made in the Simbole of the Apostles. M. SEing that we haue spoken of the things that we ought to consider in the essence of God, and in his diuine na∣ture, declare vnto me nowe yt which thou hast to say concerning his workes, by the whiche he hath declared himselfe to man suche as it hathe pleased him to be knowen of him. Peter. The Sim∣bole of the Apostles doth comprehende
chiefly thrée, out of the which a man may drawe all the rest. M. Which be they? P. The first is, the works of ye creation of al things. M. And the second? P. The works of the redemption of man. M. And the thirde? P. The worke of vinification, the which we may also cal the works of sanc∣tification. M What dost thou vnderstand by that worke of viuification and sancti∣fication? P. I vnderstande the vertue that the holy Ghost hath to make vs wholly partakers of Iesus Christ, and of all hys benefites. Of the vnion that is betvvene the father, the sonne, and the holy Ghost in their vvorks. M. ACcording to this purpose, the fa∣ther, the sonne and the holy Ghost haue they any thing particuler, concer∣ning their works, or else haue they them all common togither, and chiefly those whereof thou hast now spoken?Gene. 1. Iohn. 5. c. Iohn. 1. a. Hebr. 1. a. Galath. 4.  Rom. 1. a. P. Seing they are but one only God, it is certaine that they can do no worke wherein they may be separated the one from the other.
M. It séemeth to me notwithstanding, that in this summe of the faith, men doe attribute as proper to the Father, the worke of the creation, and to the sonne, that of the redemption, and to the holy Ghost, that which thou callest viuificati∣on, and sanctification. P. That must not be vnderstande as though these workes were done by diuers workers.2. Thes. 2. c. 1. Peter. 1. a Psal. 19. a. Act. 14. c. Rom. 1. c. Hebr. 11. a. M. Howe doest thou then vnderstande it? P. After that we haue firste confessed that we be∣léeue in one only GOD, we then by and by after declare also, howe he is ma∣nifested by hys workes, suche as we haue saide that we oughte to consider him in hys diuine essence and nature, and what it is that we beléeue. Of the moderation and measure that ought to be holden in this matter. M. IT séemeth to me that this matter is very high and harde for mans vn∣derstanding to comprehende. P. There is none more high nor more incomprehen∣sible. M. What is there then to be done in the same? P. Without enquiring of more
than we may vnderstande and compre∣hende,Exod. 33. d. Rom. 11. d. Deut. 4. a. b Rom. 10. d. it oughte to suffise vs that God which in his diuine nature and essence is incomprehensible, is euen so declared in his worde, vpon the which only we must stay and builde our faith. THE SIXTE DI∣alogue is of the creati∣on and of the Prouidence and predestinatiō of God, and of the vocation of man. Of the vvorke of the Creation. MATHEVV. SEing then we beléeue in one onely God the Father, the sonne, & the holy Ghost: What is that that we oughte chiefly to beléeue concerning the worke of the creation? P. As concerning that worke, that the father hath created all things as well visible as inuisible, by his
godly eternall word and wisdome which is his sonne, in the vertue of his holy spi∣rite, which is his infinite power. Of other vvorks of God that are conioy∣ned to the vvork of the creation. M. IS there not some other worke of God comprehēded in that of the cre∣tion?Gene. 1. Psal. 146. b Iere. 32. c. e. Act. 4. e. 14 c. 17. f. Psal. 33. b. Iohn. 1. a 1. Iohn. 1. a. Collo. 1. c. Hebr. 1. a. Gene. 1. a. ohn. 26. d. Psalm. 104. d. Luke. 11. c. Iohn. 15. P. We may ioyne therevnto two at the least, whiche are in suche sorte ioyned with the same, that they cannot be sepa∣rated. M. Which is the first? P. The pro∣uidence of God. M. And which is the se∣conde? P. His eternall predestination, which is a dependance of his prouidence. M. Thinkest thou that we may accompt the prouidence and predestination of God, among his works? P. I sée not why I should make more difficultie of it, than of the others whereof I haue made men∣tion heretofore. For as he hath wrought if the worke of the creation, euen so doth he continually worke by his prouidence in gouerning by thys same, al that which he hath created, & in putting in executiō his eternall counsell, in ye whiche he hath
predestinate man, to that wherein it hath pleased him to be glorified in him. And therefore Iesus Christ hath sayde, my fa∣ther worketh euen to this presente,Iohn. 5. c and I worke also. Of the prouidence of God. M. WHat meanest thou by the proui∣dence of God?Psal. 104. b. 107. c. 147. d. Psalm. 115. a 135. b. P. That euen as he is creatoure of all things, he is also the conseruer whiche doth by his eternall po∣wer and wisdome guide and gouerne thē, and by his soueraine goodnesse, in suche sorte that nothing commeth by aduen∣ture, neyther in Heauen nor in the earth, without his counsell and ordinaunce, and his most iust will, be it in generall or in particuler. Of the eternall predestination of God. M. WHat doest thou also vnderstande by the eternall predestination of God?Ro. 5. c. d. e. Ephe. 1. a. b. c P. I vnderstande hys eternall ordinaunce, whereby he hath ordeyned
before the creation of the worlde, that which he hath determined to doe withall men, to be glorified in them, as well in his mercie, as in his iuste iudgement. M. How is he glorified in his mercie, accor∣ding to that eternall ordinance? P. In shewing the riches of his glorie in the vessells of mercie, whiche are his chosen, the whiche he hath prepared to glorie. M. Howe is hée also glorified in hys iuste iudgement? P. In shewing his wrath,Roma. 9. c. Ephes. 6. c. Rom. 9. c. 2. Thess. 2. c & giuing to vnderstande his power, after that he hath endured in great patience, the vessels of wrath prepared to perditiō. Of the vocation of the elect, and of the degrees whereby God bringeth them to saluation. M. IN what sorte is it that GOD she∣weth the riches of his glorie in hys elected?Rom. 8. f. g. Math. 25. c. Act. 13. g. P. When he calleth them by his Gospell to iustifie them by faith in his sonne Iesus Chryst, to the end that after∣warde he maye glorifye them in the E∣ternall lyfe, the whiche he hathe prepa∣red from the beginning. Ma. Thy mea∣ning
is then that God dothe call, iustifie and glorifie al those whome he hath cho∣sen? P. Sainct Paule doth yelde vs cer∣taine and euidente testimonie, when he sayth, That those whome he before did knowe, those hath he predestinate to be made like to the image of hys sonne, to the ende he shoulde be the firste borne a∣mong many brethren,Rom. 8. f. and those whome he hath predestinate, he hath also called, and those whom he hath called, he hathe also iustified, and those whome he hathe iustified, he hath also glorified. M. It sée∣meth to me, that thou puttest here foure degrées, to wit, predestination, vocation, Iustification, and glorification. P. Thou séest that S. Paule maketh as many. M. Wilt thou conclude by his words, yt all those whiche are chosen & predestinate, are also called, iustified, and glorifyed. Peter. It followeth necessarily, or other∣wyse the Election and Predestination of GOD should not bée certayne, and should not come to that ende wherevnto God pretendeth thereby.
Of the outwarde and inwarde vocation. M. DOth it followe in lyke sorte, that all those whiche are called, are al∣so chosen. P. Thou haste to note vppon this question, that there are two sortes of vocation, to wit, the one outward, and the other inwarde. M. What meanest thou by the outward vocation? P. I mean a common and generall vocation, by the whiche God dothe call by the outwarde preaching, all those to whom the gospell is preached, be they chosē or reprobates. M. And by the inward vocation? P. I vn∣derstand a vocation, whereby God doth not only call man by the outwarde prea∣ching of his worde, but maketh them to féele the power and efficacie of the same by his holy spirite, in such sorte that they doe not only heare it with their outward eares, but doe also receyue it into their hearts by faith, wherby they ar iustified. Of the effectes of the inwarde and outward vocation, and vvher∣vnto they serue.
M. WIlt thou say, that all those whi∣che are called by suche vocation are chosen, and in like sorte that all those which are chosen are so called? P. It must be so vnderstoode. For such a vocation is an effecte of the election whereby a man may iudge of the cause. M. And as con∣cerning those whiche are called of that first calling, which thou callest outward, maye they bée called without béeing cho∣sen?Matth. 20. b P. Thou mayst iudge by that which Iesus Christ sayde: There be many cal∣led, but fewe are chosen. M. Thou mea∣nest then in myne opinion, that the very reprobates maye be called by outewarde vocation, but that it profiteth them no∣thing, except the inward be there ioyned with it.Iohn. 3. e. P. As concernyng them, it ser∣ueth them but to their greater condem∣nation. For it is to their greater condem∣nation, for so muche as the grace of God was offered vnto them, & that they haue reiected it thorowe their ingratitude and vnbeléefe, as though it had neuer ben of∣fered vnto them, yet in the meane tyme, it is not altogether in vayne, M. Wher∣vnto dothe it then serue? P. To declare
better the peruersitie of mē, and to make them more inexcusable at the iudgement of God, and to set foorthe the better hys great iustice in their iust condemnation. M. It then followeth by that which thou haste sayde, that those which are not cal∣led, but only by this outwarde calling, are not also iustified, nor consequentlye glorified? P. It is easye to iudge. For if they were iustified, they should haue also receyued the worde of God through fayth, which only doth iustifie, and with∣out the whiche none can be iustified, as thou haste here before heard. And if they had the fayth whereby man is iustified, they shuld not be only called by that out∣warde callyng, but also by the inwarde, whiche is euer ioyned with faith, of the whiche the faith is a sure testimonie. Of the cause of vnbeleefe, and of Faythe. M. ANd what is the cause that the one sorte thorowe vnbeléefe do reiecte the Gospell when it is offered them, and that ye others receyue it by fayth? P. It is
not to be maruelled at, when menne by their vnbeleef and vnkindnesse reiect the Gospell: but it is maruell when some are founde that doe receyue it by faithe. M. Why sayest thou so? P. For that that man béeing corrupted thorow sinne,1. Cor. 1. a. d &. 2. d Roma. 8. b. is of suche nature, that he doth not onely not vnderstand any thing of Gods matters, nor of his worde: and in very deede he can not, but that which is worsse, he will vnderstande nothing of it, but doth hate and deride it. M. Seing that all men are corrupted by sinne, it then followeth ne∣cessarily, that they be al naturally as per∣uerse and wicked the one as the other, & that they can not nor will not beléeue in God, nor followe his worde. P. It is e∣uen so. M. How is it then that many of contrary nature are found, whiche not only receyue by faith the worde of God, and Iesus Chryst our Lord, but are also readie to lay downe their lyfe, and to a∣bandon the same for the confession of their faith? P. Thou must vnderstande that they which do this,Matth. 16. c. that thou speakest of, are not such of nature, but by the grace of God, by the which they are renued and
transformed into a new nature, and are made newe creatures. For it is not flesh and bloud that hath reueled it vnto them, but the heauenly father. Of the renewing of man, and of the gifte of faith. M. IN what sorte is this chaunge of na∣ture made,Ezec. 11. c. d Hiere. 31. f 32. g Hebr. 8. c 10. c. 2. Cor. 3.  & this renuing by ye grace of God? P. When God by his holy spirit doth chaunge their enhardened hearts of stone, into tender hearts of flesh, and that he doth with his finger write & imprinte his worde in their hearts, to make them to walke after the same, as he hath made promise to his elect by his Prophets Ie∣remie and Ezechiel. M. Seing it is so, man can not then beléeue ye gospel, & be∣leue in Iesus Christe, which is set forth vnto vs in the same, if God giue him not the grace, giuing him faith to beléeue it. P. It is true: and therfore it is written that faith is the gift of God,Ephes. 2. b. Iohn. 6. c. Math. 11. d. and that none can come to Iesus Chryste, if the father draw him not: as also no man can know the Father, but hée to whome hée is re∣uealed by hys sonne Iesus Chryste. M. Wee may not then ascribe the honor
of our saluation to oure fréewill, nor to our humane powers, but onely to the grace of God. P. Thou concludest very wel. Of the causes of election and reprobation. M. BVt séeing that all men are of one very nature wicked and peruerse, what is the cause why God dothe sooner shewe this fauour to some, than to other some?Rom. 8. e. f Ephes. 1. b. Pe. I can yelde thée none other rea∣son, but onely the good pleasure of God, which can be but iust and reasonable, for so muche as hée is the rule of all iustice, the whiche according to his eternall pur∣pose, doth call to this grace those whome he hath chosen, to make them by his only goodnesse and mercie, partakers in hys Sonne Iesus Chryst, in whome he hath chosen them to this effect, before the crea∣tion of the worlde. M. And what wilte thou saye of the others, vnto whome he sheweth not this fauour? P. That he by his iuste iudgement dothe leaue them in their corrupted and peruerse nature,Rom. 9. c. as they haue deserued by ye same, to declare
his wrath against sinne in their iuste condemnation, as he hath declared hys louingnesse and mercie, in the fauoure that he hathe shewed to his chosen. M. Thou wilte then say that al men of their nature haue deserued to be lefte in theyr peruerse and corrupted nature and dam∣nation, and that in so doing, God can do them no wrōg, but only right and iustice, and that it is a speciall grace that he doth to those whome by his mercie he draweth away from suche a corruption and cursse. P. We ought euen so to beléeue. M. Sée∣ing it is so, the reprobates and the wic∣ked haue nothing then wherein they may iustly complaine of God, and accuse hys iust iudgement, by the which they be iust∣ly condemned. P. It is easie to iudge. M. And in the like, the electe haue nothing wherein to glory in themselues, but only in the grace and mercie of God.Roma. 3. b. 11. P. Sainct Paule doth confirme vnto vs that whiche thou saist, when he saith that we haue all sinned, and that we haue all néede of the glory of God, and that he hath enclosed all men vnder vnbeléefe, to the ende he may shew mercie to all men, to witte; to
the ende that all those which are saued, be saued by his mercie, whereof he maketh them partakers in Iesus Christe and by Iesus Christe, and without whome none may obtayne saluation. The seuenth Dialogue is of the redemption and of the person of Iesus Christe. Of the vvorke of the redemption, and of the things that are to be considered in the person of Iesus Christ. MATHEVV. Act. 4. b.SEing it is so that we can∣not finde saluation but in Iesus Christe, nor by none other meane, but by faithe in him, declare vnto me nowe what it is that we ought to beléeue of him, to the ende that our faith may be sounde towards him. P. Thou entrest now into the second worke of God, the whiche we haue called the worke of the redemptiō. M. I vnderstand
it well so. And therefore expounde to me the principall points that we haue to con∣sider in the same. Peter. We haue there chiefly three. M. Whiche be they? P. The firste is concerning the person of Iesus Christ, the seconde concerning his office, and the thirde touching his two com∣mings. M. What haue we to consider touching his persone? P. Thrée pointes. M. Which be they? P. The firste is tou∣ching his diuine nature. M. And the se∣conde? P. Touching his humane nature. M. And the thirde? P. Concerning the v∣nion of the two natures. Of the faith of the Christians concerning the diuine and humane natures of Iesus Christe. M. WHat must we beléeue of his di∣uine nature? P. That he is very God without beginning and withoute ende, of one essence with the father, and that he is his eternall word & wisedome. M. And cōcerning his humane nature? P. That he is very man, hauing a very mans bodie, of our fleshe, of oure blend & bones, & a very humane soule as other mē haue,
and that he was made in euery point like vnto vs, sinne excepted. Hovv the diuine and humaine natures vvhich are in the person of Iesus Christ, do not make two Ie∣sus Christs, but one only. M. Apoca. 1. b. 21 b. 22. c. Prouerb. 8. c. Iohn. 1. a. Rom. 9. a. Iohn. 1. b. Matth. 2. d. Luke. 1. c. 2. a. Galath. 4. a. 1. Timo. 3. d. Philem. 2. a. Ephe. 5. c. Hebr. 2. b. c. 4. d.WHat canst thou yet say of the v∣nion of these two natures, be∣side that whiche thou hast alredy spoken when thou handledst the office of media∣toure of Iesus Christe? P. It is that they be so vnited togither, that they remayne alwayes in their very naturall, in one ve∣ry person. M. What meanest thou there∣by? P. That being so vnited, they make vs not two Iesus Christes, to witte, the one God and the other man, but one on∣ly, whiche is very God and very man to∣gither, in one onely person, euen as the body and soule of man make one onely mā, and one only person, and not twaine. M. This vnion of these two natures thē is very necessarie to oure saluation? P. Thou maist well know that, as well by that which we haue alredy sayd touching this matter, as by the office whiche was
assigned vnto Iesus Christ by his father. For there is no one Iesus Christ, whiche being but only God, coulde haue saued man, nor coulde haue dyed for them: and an other being but only man, might dye for them, but coulde not haue power to saue them, nor to beare the iudgement of God for their sinnes. VVhether the diuine nature be in Iesus Christ in stead of the soule, or else that he hath a very humane soule. M. DOest thou meane by this that the diuine nature of Iesus Christe, is in stead of a soule to the humaine nature? P. If the diuine nature were in stead of a soule to the humane nature, and that Ie∣sus Christe had no very humane soule, he should be no true and perfect man. M. For what cause? P. Bicause that the prin∣cipall parte of man, whiche is the soule, shuld be wanting in him: for this cause, I haue saide heretofore that Iesus Christ was very man, compounded of a very humane body and a very humane soule. How the eternall worde of God be∣came fleslie.
M. THou hast saide heretofore that Ie∣sus Christ was the eternall worde of God.Iohn. 1. b. Now Sainct Iohn saith that that worde whiche is very God eternall, be∣came flesh. Pe. What meanest thou by that? Doest thou thinke that the same worde of God was conuerted into fleshe, in suche sorte that it was no more the e∣ternall worde of God, but fleshe, and that the Sonne of God, which is that word of God, being God before that time, did so become man, that he is no more God, but man only? M. Thou hast giuen me well to vnderstande by that whiche thou hast euen now said of the diuinitie and huma∣nitie of Iesus Christ, that we may not so thinke of him: but bycause Saincte Iohn maketh mention but of the flesh, when he saith,Hebr. 2. d. that that word became flesh, a man might thinke that he spake, but of the bo∣dy and not at al of the soule, but that this worde of God vnited with the body, was to it in stead of a soule. P. If Sainct Iohn had mente so, he wold rather haue said as it is elsewhere said in the holy scripturs, that Iesus Christe had taken the séede of Abraham, to witte our flesh, and not the Angells. M. Why is it then that he ma∣keth
mention but of the flesh, seing that it is the least and most vile parte of man? P. I can yeld vnto thee chiefly two reasons. M. Which is the first? P. It is bycause the holy Scriptures do take oft times a part for the whole.Genesis. 6. b. c Esay. 40. b. Luke. 3. b. Ioel. 2. f. Act. 2. c. Eze. 18. c. Roma. 13. a Esay. 40. b. 1. Peter. 1. d. Iohn. 1. b. And therefore it taketh now the flesh & now the soule, for ye whole man complete. M. Which is the seconde reason? P. It is that when the holy Scrip∣ture doth vse the name of fleshe, to signi∣fie the whole man, she vseth that manner of speach, to admonish men of the infirmi∣ties that are in them, to the end they may vnderstande that they are but men mor∣tall, and not Gods immortall. M. Hath Sainct Iohn had regarde therevnto, whē he said that the Sonne of God was made fleshe? P. There is no doubt of it. But it is in an other regarde. For albeit that Iesus were very god as touching hys di∣uine nature, & that he toke our flesh with∣out any spot of sinne when he was made mā, & that he hath vnited his diuine na∣ture with the humane nature, yet for al yt he was so exempte frō all sin, yt notwith∣stāding he wold be subiect, without sinne, to al ye infirmities and miseries, where∣vnto
men are subiecte bycause of theyr sinnes. M. Thou meanest then, that thys worde of flesh emporteth all that same, and that it doth better expresse in what manner and to what condition and ende the sonne of God did take our nature to him and was made man,Matth. 8. c. 9. a. 11 c. 16. d. 17. b. 18. b. 16. d. 24. b. c. d. 2. e. 26. a. b. c. Hebr. 4. d. than if he had spoken otherwise. P. It is euen so, and therefore he doth also call himselfe so oftentimes the sonne of man, to giue vs to vnderstande that he is not only a very naturall man, descended of the race of Adam, of the which al others are descen∣ded, but also that he made himselfe sub∣iecte to all the miseries and necessities of man, whervnto men are subiect, always excepted any spotte of sinne. Of the conception of Iesus Christ, and of the nature of his fleshe. M. NOwe séeing that that humayne flesh which Iesus Christ hath ta∣ken for vs, is exempte from all sinne, where is then that he toke it? Did he bring it from Heauen with hym, or else did he take it vppon the Earthe?
P. When thou confessest that hée was conceiued of the holy Ghost, and borne of the virgine Mary, thou confessest that he toke it vppon earth, in the wombe of that holye virgin. M. But coulde he not haue passed thorow the womb of the vir∣gin with a heauenly fleshe, withoute ta∣king any thing of hir fleshe? P. If he had brought from heauen that flesh which he hath, and that it were a flesh of a heauen∣ly and diuine nature, which he should not haue taken in the wombe of the virgin, and of the proper fleshe and bloud of hir, we could not say truly that she had con∣ceyued and borne him, and consequent∣ly that he were very man of oure proper fleshe and bloud, whiche we haue of oure first father Adam. VVherevnto the genealogie of Iesus Christe, according to the fleshe, dothe serue vs. M. I Thinke S. Mathew and S. Luke woulde giue vs to vnderstande that whiche thou sayest, when they did wryte the genealogie of Iesus Christ,Matth. 1. a. b the which is broughte foorth by S. Matthewe, euen
from Abraham, and by S. Luke from A∣dam euen to Iesus Chryst. P. They haue had regarde to that whiche thou sayest in déede,Matth. 1. a. b. Luke. 3. g. but they would shew further, that he was the true Chryst, and the true Sa∣uiour and redéemer that was promised to Israell, bycause that hée was descended of the lyue of those of whome the holy Ghoste hathe forespoken by the mouthe of the holy patriarches & Prophetes, that he shoulde descende. Of the woorkes of the holye Ghost in the conception of Iesus Christ. M. Luke. 1. c.BVt if he haue taken his fleshe of the line and of the proper fleshe of men, who are all sinners, howe could he be more without sinne in his fleshe, than other men? P. The angel hath answered this difficultie when he sayd to the virgin that she should conceiue the sonne of God by the power and workyng of the holye Ghost. Mathevve. What meanest thou by that vertue and working of the holie Ghost? P. I meane that the holy Ghost wrought in that conception so by hys di∣uine power, that the fleshe whyche Ie∣sus
Christe tooke of the Virgine Marie, was in suche sorte sanctifyed, that he dyd purifie and exempt it from all sinne, and from all the corruption, whereby the whole nature of man is corrupted, by∣cause of sinne that is naturally in it. Of the true substance of the bodie of Iesus Christe. M. WE may not then imagine in Ie∣sus Chryste, a bodie that is so heauenly and diuine, that it is not a very mans bodye, of verie humane fleshe and substance, but wée must beléeue in déede, that he is of verye humane substaunce as wée are. Pet. Thou concludest verye well: And in lyke sorte also, wée maye not imagine, that this humane bodie of Iesus Christ, is a bodie only in apparance as a fantasme, as some heretikes haue affirmed auncientlye. For if hee hadde not taken a verye mans bodie, wée coulde haue no hope of Saluation by him.
The eyght Dialogue is of the communion betwene Iesus Christe and man. Of the communion of the nature, vvhich Iesus Chryst hath with man, and not with angels, and how necessarie it is to mans saluation. MATHEVV. DEclare to mée the cause, why mā can not be saued, if Iesus Chryste had no cōmunion of nature with him? P. Why are not the angels also which sinned, saued by the deathe and passion of Iesus Christe, the whiche are called diuels in the holie Scriptures, as well as man, who hath sinned, as they haue doone. M. Bicause that Iesus Christ was not sente by the Father to that effecte, and he also came not to saue them, but man only. P. For that cause also he hath not taken the nature of angels,Hebr. 2. d. to haue communication of nature with them, and to vnite it with his diuine nature, to satisfie for them in
their owne nature, as it pleased him to be vnited with man by vnion of nature, to satisfie for them in their owne fleshe, as though they themselues did satisfie in their owne person, the which he hath en∣dured and represented before the iudge∣ment of God. M. Thou wilte then saye, that it was necessarie that the son of God should communicate with our fleshe and bloud, by that same vnion of nature,Hebr. 2.  and yt without this vnion and cōmunication, we cannot be saued and redemed by him. P. If it hadde not ben necessarie that he should haue had such vnion and commu∣nication with vs, to revnite vs, and to cal vs againe into the sauour of God, it had not béen néedfull that he had beene made man. M. God hath then doone vs an ho∣nour, and shewed vs a fauour in the per∣son of his sonne, howe poore and wicked sinners soeuer we be, whiche he hath not doone to the angels whiche sinned? P. In that same we may know howe much he hath loued vs of his owne goodnesse, and howe great and infinite his charitie was towarde vs. Wherefore we should also by the same very meane, well learne to
knowe howe well we ought to loue him on oure parts. Of two sortes of vnion and communion vvhiche Iesus Christe hath with man, without the which no man can obtayne saluation. M. BVt is it sufficient for the saluation of man, that the sonne of God was made man, to beare the iudgemente, the wrathe and cursse of God in their owne nature, and their owne fleshe? Pe. If that were sufficient, al shold be saued indiffe∣rently, aswel the reprobats as the elect, & the vnbeleuers as ye faithful, as we haue alredie touched it heretofore. M. Is there then any other maner of vnion & cōmu∣nion, whereby we must be vnited & ioy∣ned with Iesus Christ, to obtein saluatiō by him? P. Thou mayst iudge by yt which we haue alredy sayd of the comuniō that we haue with him thorough faith, and of the iustification by the same. M. I do ve∣ry wel remember, that thou hast already somwhat touched it: but I woulde very gladly yt thou didst expoūd the same vnto me somwhat more largely. P. The com∣munication of the which we haue nowe
spoken, is natural, and therfore it is com∣mon to al men with Iesus Chryst, in so much as they be of the same nature, & of the same flesh that he hathe taken for vs. Ma. And the other? Pe. It is spirituall, and therefore it is more speciall: for it is not generally common to al, but it is on∣ly propre to the elect and faithfull. Of the spirituall marriage betweene Iesus Chryste and his Churche, and firste of the vnion of nature that is requi∣red in this mariage. M. EXpound to me what this vnion and cōmunion conteineth more thā the first? P. I wil declare vnto thée by simili∣tude of mariage,Ephe. 5. e. wherof S. Paul hath v∣sed to this purpose, in ye epist. to the Ephe∣siās. M. Expounde vnto me then ye simili∣tude. P. Nature doth shew vs & also teach vs, ye aliāce & cōmuniō of mariage coulde not be betwene mā & womā,Genesis. 1. . if they were not both liuīg creatures of one very kind, and of one very flesh & nature. M. Albeit that the brute beasts haue ben created of the same very matter, whereof man and woman ar created as concerning the bo∣die: yet for al that, I know wel that there
is greate difference touching the kindes, and that man and woman haue a farre o∣ther vnion and communion of fleshe and nature together, thā wc other liuing crea∣tures whiche we do call beastes. P. And therfore after that god had created Adam, and that his pleasure was to giue him an ayde in mariage,Gene. 1. d &. 8. c. d Ephe. 5. g Matth. 19. d he woulde create thys ayde, whiche is the woman, of the verye flesh and substance of Adam himselfe, to the ende that they shuld be one very flesh and one verie body: as in déede Adam did right wel know when he saw the womā immediately after that she was so crea∣ted. Wherfore he sayd: This here is flesh of my fleshe, and bone of my bones: and therfore man shall leaue father and mo∣ther, and shall sticke to his wyfe: If ther be great difference betwene the nature of the man and of the woman, and that of other liuing creatures cōcerning the ve∣ry bodie, the difference is yet much more greate concerning the soule, forsomuche as the other lyuing creatures were not created to the image and lykelynesse of God,Geue. 1.8. c. d 1. Cor. 11. b. as man was, wherefore they haue not a soule of a heauenly and diuine na∣ture
as he hath. P. Thou séest then alredy here the vnion and communion of Na∣ture that man and woman haue togither as well of body as of soule,Gene. 1. d. 8 c. d. 1. Cor. 11. b and the diffe∣rence that is betwene them and all other liuing creatures in all these two pointes. M. I do nowe vnderstande well this vni∣on and communion of nature whiche is betwene man and woman withoute the whiche they coulde not be allied togither by marriage as man and wife. P. Thou oughtest in like sorte to vnderstande, that we maye haue also no communica∣toin with Iesus Christe, if we haue not first the same communion of nature with him, whereby he was made man lyke vnto vs, as touching the nature and sub∣stance of the flesh. M. I haue well vnder∣stood that which thou hast alredy sayde to that purpose,Hebr. 2. d. concerning the communion of nature, the whiche he hath of nature with vs and not at all with the Angells. Of an other more speciall vniō and con∣iunction which is proper to marri∣age, vvhich is betvvene Iesus. Christ and his Churche.
M. NOw it is not inough to be vnited & ioyned togither by mariage to be of one very humane nature, & that ye one be masle & the other femasle, but it is also requisite, that there be a more neare and a more speciall vnion and coniunction.1. Cor. 7. a. M What is that other coniunction? P. It is a coniunction which is made by aliance, by the whiche the man and the woman that are vnited & ioyned togither by the same, haue a speciall communion betwene thē, the which the husbande hath not with o∣ther women, nor the woman with other men. M. I do wel vnderstand that ther is no suche coniunction and communion of body and goods and of al things among al other men and women that are not mar∣ried togither, as ther is betwene the man and the wife, by the alliance and coniunc∣tion of marriage that is betwene them. P. It is very true. For this vnion and cō∣munion is suche, that the husbande hathe not power of his owne body, but ye wife, as also the wife hath not power of hirs, but the husband. M. If there be such com∣munion and coniunction of body, there is no doubte but it is also of all good & euill
that may happē vnto thē togither. P. It is euē so by ye special cōmuniō which Iesus Christ hath with ye faithful, & that ye faith∣full haue wt hym by the power of the holy ghost which ioyneth thē wt him, by true & lyuing faith. M. Thou meanest then that there is so great differēce betwene the cō∣muniō yt is betwéen Iesus christ & ye faith∣ful, in respect of ye vnfaithful as is betwen yt which is betwene the mā & the wife, in respect of other mē & womē? P. It is euen so. For ye only cōmuniō of nature maketh not cōmuniō of body & goodes betwene al men and women, as doth the coniunction of marriage, the whiche the husband & the wife haue togither. M. Thou wilt thē say in like sorte that the communion of na∣ture the which Iesus Christ hath commō with all mē, doth not carie wt it such com∣muniō of al things, as doth that which he hath special wt the faithful, by means of ye faith which thei haue in him. P. the vnbe∣leuers haue nothing cōmō wt Iesus christ but yt thei ar mē of ye same human nature: but ye faithfull haue this more, which is ye principall, that all that they haue is com∣mon to Iesus Christ with them, and that whiche Iesus Christe, hath is common
to them also. M. What is it that Iesus Christe may take of them, forsomuch as they be all none other than poore and sin∣full men? P. He taketh vppon him their sinnes,Psal. 33. b. c. 1. Pet. 2. d 1. Iohn. 3. a and the paine whiche is due vnto them, as though he himselfe had commit∣ted them, and that he were guiltie, to dis∣charge and delyuer them. M. He taketh then nothing of vs, but onely the euill whiche is in vs? P. What other thyng may he take, séeing that there is none o∣ther thing in vs? But the nature of the alliance and communion which we haue with him thorough faith, bringeth it: for otherwise, ther should be no perfect com∣munion, and so the alliance shoulde not be full, if there were no participation of good and euill, suche as it shoulde and oughte to be among those whiche be al∣lyed. M. Then on the contrary it muste be, following the nature of this commu∣nion and alliance that wée receiue of Ie∣sus Christe, the good things which are in him, as he doth the euill yt is in vs? P. It is so to be vnderstode. M. Behold a com∣munion and alliance which is greatly to our aduauntage. P. It is wholly to oure
aduantage, and therfore it should so much the more inflame vs in the loue of God, and rauishe and carrie vs away in admi∣ration of his goodnesse, & of Iesus Christ our Lord, and of that most excessiue loue wherewith he hathe loued vs. M. That same communion, is it the same that is in the Symbole of the Apostles, vpon the whiche we are at this presente, the com∣munion of Sainctes? P. It is the verye same: And bicause it is made by the po∣wer of the holy Ghoste, we will speake more largely of it, when we shal speake of the holy Ghost, and of the Churche. How that Iesus Christe can not be the sa∣uiour of mankinde, vnlesse hee haue as well an humane soule, as an humane bodie. M. I Vnderstand now well by that whi∣che thou hast expoūded vnto me con∣cerning ye humane nature of Iesus Christ that wée could haue no saluation by him, if he had not a verye bodie of oure fleshe and substance, and that we were fleshe of his fleshe, and bone of his bones: and except we had suche alliance with hym,
as ther is betwene the husbād & the wife. But I would gladly yt thou diddest shew me somthing more plainly the causes for ye which it is also requisite for our saluati∣on that Iesus Christe haue an humane soule as wel as an humane body. P. Euen as we could not be saued if he had not suf∣fered in our humane fleshe, and borne the paine for vs whiche we haue deserued by our sinnes, it is euen the like concerning the soule. M. For what cause? P. For bi∣cause that if he had suffred but in our bo∣die & in our flesh, he should not then haue satisfied but in our flesh and in our body, and for them only, and not for the soule: And so shoulde it haue come to passe, the bodie should bée saued, and not the soule, from the whiche, sinne cheefely doth pro∣céede. For the bodie shoulde not sinne at all, if sinne were not firste in the soule. M. Why sayst thou so? P. Forsomuch as the body is but as it were the instrument of the soule, by the whiche she worketh, and dothe hir workes: wherfore if there be faulte in the worke, the faulte maye not be attributed to the instrument, but rather to the woorker whiche worketh,
or else if there bée faulte in the instru∣mente, it is greater in the woorker, whiche woorketh euill. Mathewe. Thou wilte then conclude that it was necessa∣rie, that Iesus Chryste shoulde suffer for vs, not onely in bodie, but also in soule? Peter. He hathe righte well declared it, when he sayde: My soule is heauie,Matth. 16. Luke. 22. c. e∣uen to deathe: and when he did sweate bloud in great abundance, euen for very sorrowe and anguishe that he felte in his soule, in the whyche hee hathe suffered, more than in his bodie, for so muche as he bare the iudgemente of God in the same chéefly, whyche the bodye coulde not apprehende, but in as muche as the féeling of it is come to it by the meane of the soule. Mathew. The passage whiche thou haste euen now alledged, séemeth to me very cleare and plaine, against those whiche estéeme the Godheade of Iesus Chryste to bée in steade of his soule. Peter. Iesus Chryste hym selfe hathe yet more confirmed that which thou say∣est, when he yelded vp his spirite vppon the Crosse, and that he sayde:Iohn. 19. c Matth. 27. f Father I commende my soule into thy handes.
M. Luke. 23. f Matth. 1. d.This passage sheweth playnely, that by the death of Iesus Christ, there was a very separation of spirite and bodye, and so consequently of the soule, for so muche as the spirite is also taken for the soule. P. The matter is very plaine. For if the diuinitie of Iesus Christ had ben in stead of his soule, without a very humane soul, he could not haue died of a very humane death, forsomuch as it can not dye, except there be very separation of bothe bodye and soule in man. The nynth Dalogue is of the offices of Iesus Christ. Of the signification and exposition of the name of Christ, and of his offi∣ces, the whiche that name doth comprehend. MATHEVV. I Do now wel vnderstād all the matter which thou hast nowe handled: ther resteth that thou expounde vnto me that which
thou hast to say yet concerning the office of Iesus Chryste. P. Forsomuche as we haue alredy spokē largely inough, when we did speake of the meane by the which man is deliuered from sin, & made agréed with God:Luke. 23. f Matth. 1. d Luke. 1. c. &. 3. c that whiche we haue already sayd, may serue vs much to that whiche yet resteth to be spokē of. M. What wilt thou then say more? P. We haue nothing here to consider, but only that whiche the name of Iesus Christe doth importe. M. And what doth it import? P. First he is called by the name of Iesus, which signi∣fieth Sauior, to admonish vs that he was sent vnto vs from the Father to saue vs,Act. 4. b. and that we may haue saluation by none other, but by him only. M. And what im∣porteth the name of Christ? P. Thrée offi∣ces whiche belong vnto him, for whose cause he is called by that name. M. Whi∣che be these offices? P. The office of a prophet, of a king, and of a Sacrificator. M. What signifyeth then the name of Christe, whiche comprehendeth so many things? P. It signifieth anointed, and bi∣cause that in the auncient Churche of Is∣raell, the Prophets, kings,1. Sam. 10. a &. 15. c and sacrifica∣tors
were annoynted by the ordinance of God,. Kings. 19 c. in testimonie of their vocation and office they were called by that name, and in like wise bycause they were true fy∣gures of the very anoynted of the Lorde,Exod. 40. b. Leuit. 7. b. Psalm. 133. Luke. 2. d Esay. 6. a. Iohn. 3. d. Psalm. 45. b which is the very sonne of God whyche was anoynted by the holy Ghoste, who was giuen to him withoute measure, a∣boue all other men. M. Thou wilte then say that Iesus Christ is also named with that name, aswell bycause of the same vinction, as bycause that all those offices were enioyned to him by the father? P. It is euen so. Of the office, of a Prophete of Iesus Christ, and of the per fection of his doctrine. M. SHewe me nowe what euery one of these offices importeth, and begin by his office of Prophete. Peter. As concer∣ning hys office of Prophete, hée is not onely a Prophete, as those whiche in the Scriptures are called by that name, but of an other sorte muche more excel∣lent. M. What is the difference that thou
there puttest?Hebr. 1. P. I finde there difference chiefly in two points. M. Whiche is the firste? Peter. It is that God hathe not spoken in his Church in the person of Ie∣sus Christe onely, in the manner that he hath heretofore spoken by his Prophets, in sundry sortes more couert and darke:Iohn. 1 c. 7. b. Math. 17. a. 2. Cor. 3. d but hath spoken by his owne Sonne, plainly and with an open face, and hathe shewed vnto vs by him ye doctrine of sal∣uatiō, so fully and perfectly, that we may not attende any other perfection in thys worlde, as touching that pointe. M. Thy meaning is then, that seeing Iesus Christ is come vppon earth, he hath brought the doctrine requisite in his Churche, so per∣fecte, that no man may adde any thyng more therevnto, and that none ought frō that time foorth to loke for any more am∣ple and perfecte reuelation and manife∣station of the wil of God. P. Sainct Iohn doth witnesse it vnto vs, when he saithe that no man euer sawe God, but the sōne which is in the bosom of the Father, hath declared him vnto vs. For this cause Ie∣sus Christe him selfe hath saide that he hath declared to his disciples,Iohn. 1. c. Iohn. 15. c. all that whiche he hath hearde of his Father.
Of the povver and efficacie of the mini∣sterie of Iesus Christ, and of that vvhich he giueth to the ministerie of others. M. WHiche is the other pointe that thou hast yet to expounde con∣cerning the difference whereof thou hast made mention, touching the office of pro∣phet of Iesus Christ? P. It is that Iesus Christ is not a Prophete, hauing none o∣ther power but to shew foorth the worde of God by mouth, as the other ministers of the same do.2. Cor. 3. a But beside that, he hathe the power to imprinte the same in theyr hartes by the vertue of his holy spirite, and to giue it vertue and efficacie in thē. M. Thy meaning is then that the other prophets and ministers of the worde of God haue not that power. P. Not of them selues, but so farre foorth as Iesus Christ doth worke in them and in their ministe∣rie, by the diuine power of his holy Spi∣rite. And therefore, when he commanded his Apostles to go and preache the Gos∣pell, and did giue vnto them power to pardon & retaine sinnes by him, he foorth∣with
gaue vnto them the holy Ghost bre∣thing vppon them in token of the same,Iohn. 20.  Act. 2. a 1. Cor. 3. b. and afterwarde did send him to them vp∣pon the daye of Pentecost, after that he was ascended into Heauen. M. I thinke that that whiche thou saist, is the cause why Sainct Paule sayd, he that planteth and he that watereth, are nothing, but God whiche giueth the encrease. P. It is true. And for that cause in somuche as he is man, he hath planted and watered by his outwarde ministerie, but in that that he is very God, he hath also power to giue the encrease, and doth dayly giue it by the ministerie of his seruāts. M. In so doing, he doth there dayly the office of prophet. P. If he did not so, all the rest, as well Prophetes as Apostles, and all the ministers of the worde of God, shold tra∣uel in déede in vaine. M. Doth he also the like in the administration of the Sacra∣mentes?Math. 3. c. Luke. 3. d. Act. 1. a. P. Thou maist easily iudge by that which Saincte Iohn Baptiste sayde, that as for him, he baptised but with wa∣ter, but that there shoulde be an other, to witte, Iesus Christe, whiche should bap∣tise with the holy Ghoste and with fire.
M. It semeth to me that this passage whi∣che thou haste euen nowe alledged, doth confirme all that whiche thou hast alrea∣die spoken of the power of the ministerie of Iesus Christ. P. It is very certaine: For as he giueth vertue and efficacie to the Sacramentes, euen so dothe hée to the worde, and to the preachyng of the same, and in like sorte he doth in the Sa∣cramentes, as in the administration of the worde, for the reason is lyke. Of the office of Kyng of Iesus Chryste. M. I Doe nowe well vnderstande this poynt concerning the office of Pro∣phete of Iesus Chryste: continue the o∣thers whyche also concerne his office. Peter. The seconde poynte is touchyng hys office royall. Math. What dothe it importe? Peter. That he is the true and eternall King of the people of GOD, whiche he hathe boughte with his bloud,Psalm. 2. b Act. 20. f 1. Peter. 1. d and deliuered from the captiuitie and ty∣rannie of the diuell, to sette them in full spirituall libertie, and to leade and go∣uerne them as a spirituall king, and to
make them partaker wyth hym of hys heauenlye kingdome. Is thys the cause why he is called our Lorde? P. It is cer∣taine that this name and title is proprely giuen vnto him in respecte of the worke of the redēption,1. Pet. 2. b by ye which he hath woon vs to himselfe, and for the whiche cause, his people is called the woon people. Of the office of Sacrificer of Iesus Chryst, and of the parts therof. M. LEtte vs nowe come to the thirde point of the office of Iesus Christ whiche is touching his office of Sacrifi∣cer. P. It is an office whiche dothe also comprehende thrée very excellent things the whiche Iesus Christe hath fully ac∣complished in perfection. M. Whiche be they? P. To teache, to pray, and to offer sacrifice. Of the office to teache. M. THe auncient Préests of the lawe, had they all these offices? P. It ap∣peareth that they had ye office to teach,Malach. 2. b by yt which is writen in Malachie. The lips of the Sacrificer do kepe knowledge, and
men shall require the lawe at his mouth. For he is the Ambassador and messenger of the Lorde of hosts. M. Touching thys pointe, Iesus Christe hath very well dis∣charged himselfe, for he hath not spared to teach the people, yea in his owne per∣son. P. No man may doubte thereof. Of two most principall partes of the preestly office of Iesus Christ. M. BVt it séemeth to me that this point is alredy comprehendid vnder the office of Prophet.Psalm. 10. b Hebr. 5. b 7. c. Hebr. 5 a. P. It is true, and there∣fore he is called properly the Eternall préest after the order of Melchisedech, by∣cause of the prayer and of the sacrifice by which he hath bin intercessor for vs, and hath made our attonemente with the fa∣ther. M. The auncient préests of the law had they also that charge to praye and to sacrifice? P. The holy Ghoste doth tell it vs plainely in the Epistle to the He∣breus, not only that this office did apper∣taine to the anciente préests of the lawe, but it doth also declare vnto vs the cause why it was necessarie yt this office should be assygned to Iesus Christ. M. What is
it then that is mente by it? P. That euery préest was ordeyned to pray first for hys owne sinnes, and then for those of the people, and in like sorte to sacrifice, to the ende that God should be reconciled vnto him. Hovv that none may be a perfecte sacri∣ficer but Iesus Christ only. M. ANd if the préests of the lawe were ordeyned by God therevnto, what néed was there then that this office should be assigned to Iesus christ? P. The passage which I alledged to thée euen now, dothe giue plaine matter to the solution of thy question, with that whiche we haue alre∣dy handled heretofore to this purpose. M. How? P. For somuch as the préests of the lawe had néede to pray, not onely for the sinnes of the people, but also for theyr owne, the same maye giue thée to vnder∣stande, that they could make no sacrifice to God, which should be sufficiente to ap∣pease his wrath towarde his people. M. Why so? P. I haue alredy shewed thée heretofore that there is no man that may do any worke which may be acceptable to
him, if first the person whiche doth it, be not acceptable to him. Now sinne, of hys nature, deserueth the wrath of God, and not his loue and fauour. M. Doest thou then meane, that bycause al men are sin∣ners, there are none which are agreable to him? and if their persons be not agrée∣able to him, no more can their workes please him? P. No, so long as he doth con∣sider them in their owne nature, without his grace in Iesus Christ, by whome on∣ly man is made agreable vnto him. For vvhat cause no sacrifice nor any other vvorke of man vvhatsoeuer it be, may be able to make satisfac∣tion to God. M. IS there yet any other reason than yt which thou sayst? P. Euē as God is perfecte so is there no worke that can be plesant vnto him, except it be perfect. M. Doest thou then meane that there is no worke of man, be it neuer so perfecte, whiche is not imperfect in his sighte? P. I haue sufficiently shewed it them hereto∣fore. Wherefore it followeth, that there is none that may fully satisfie him. M. I
haue very well vnderstoode already that thou hast sayde, that there was no worke that mighte satisfie him neyther in parte nor in all, but I do not yet well vnder∣stand, what reason there is in it. P. And yet notwithstanding I haue alredy decla∣red it to thee. M. It is true, but I am not yet wel satisfied. For if a debter cannot pay the whole summe that he oweth, and if he pay parte, is there not alwayes so much rebated and diminished of the prin∣cipall summe? P. Albeit that that whiche thou saist hath place among men, yet not∣withstanding, he that hath not satisfied the whole summe, standeth still bound euen according to the contracts of men, for she rest which he oweth & is not cléerely dis∣charged, vntill he haue paide all, vnlesse that of fauour ye creditor wil acquite him, otherwise if he wil kepe him prisoner vn∣till he haue paide the last mayle, he maye as well do it for a little summe, as for a great, and for a parte as for the whole. Mathevv. I graunte the same. But in the meane time thou must confesse, that the debter is lesse bound than before. Wher∣fore is it then that this hathe not as
well please with God as with men, and that he doth not alwayes accoumpte that which is payed, and go in hande to rebate so muche as hath bin payde vnto him? P. There be thrée pointes to consider in the same. M. Which is the firste? P. It is that he whiche is faultie in one pointe of the lawe, is faultie in the whole. M. And whiche is the second? P. The impuritie of the works of man. M. And the thirde? P. The obligation by the which they are al∣redy of right by their nature boūd to god. VVhy one only sinne maketh a man guiltie of all the lavve and of damnation. M. I Do well vnderstand thy meaning. For firste, it séemeth to me by thy words, that it should folow, that he who hath committed but one sinne is as guil∣tie as he that hath committed many, or hath committed all. P. Saincte Iames, whose opinion I haue followed,Iames. 2. b saith not so. M. What saith he then? P. Who soe∣uer breaketh one pointe of the lawe, the same committeth high treason againste God, from whence it followeth, that by
the same he deserueth eternall damnati∣on, albeit he had committed but that one only. M. Howe vnderstandest thou it? P. Séeing that God is an eternall Prince and king, euery sinne committed against his maiestie, whiche is eternall, doth me∣rite also eternall punishmente. If those vvhiche haue most sinned shal be most punished by Gods iudgemente. M. IF he then be also damned that shall haue committed few sinnes, as well as he that shall haue committed many, it is then as good for a man to excéede as it were with the raines layde on his necke, as to refraine and abstayne from many, from the whiche a man might kepe hym selfe. P. That followeth not. M. What reason can you alleadge to the contrary?Rom. 14. b. Luke. 12. f. Matth. 10. b. Luke. 10. b. P. It is, that albeit, there be eternall dā∣nation for all the reprobates, yet not∣withstanding, he that shall haue moste sinned, shal not faile to be most punished, for so muche as it is written, euery man shall receiue his hire according to hys works. M. Haste thou none other passa∣ges of the Scriptures more euidente, to proue that whiche thou sayest? P. Iesus
Christe him selfe doth saye to that same purpose, that the seruant which knoweth the will of his master, and doth it not, shalbe beaten with mo stripes, than he that hath not done it, being ignorante of it. M. This passage is very playne. Pet. Thou hast also that which Iesus Christ himself hath said, that those of Sodome & Gomorre shal be more softly delt wt at ye day of iudgement, than these which shal haue cast off the Gospell from them. Of the impuritie of mens vvorks, and hovv God iudgeth of them. M. I Do now vnderstand this point wel, wherefore thou maist proceede to the other, which is concerning the impuritie of mens workes. P. That is, that séeing men are corrupted by sinne, there cā pro∣céede from them no worke whatsoeuer it be, haue it neuer so faire a shewe before men, whiche is not so foule as nothing may be more. M. It followeth then that they cā do no good work, and the best that they can do are all euill of their nature, if God will examine them according to the rule of his iustice and perfection. P. Thou saist very truth, wherefore so farre is it
off frō being able to apease Gods wrath, but yt they dayly prouoke ye same more & more, so lōg as he beholdeth them such as they be of their nature, for god iudgeth not as mē do. M. What differēce is there then? Doth he not iudge that to be good which is good, and euil that which is euil? P. If he should iudge otherwise, he should not be iust nor good, but bycause he is a good & iust iudge, he iudgeth of mēs works as they ought to be iudged of in déede, and not as men, which do not iudge but acor∣ding to the outward apparance. M. What is the cause thereof? Pe. There be two. The first is that they cannot knowe and found the harts as God can. The other is also bycause that they be so blind in theyr owne workes:1. Samu. 16. b. Ieremi. 17. b. Act. 1. d. Psalm. 7. c. 1. Chro. 28. b wherefore they cannot sée in them that whiche God séeth in them, bycause they do not consider their natu∣rall corruption as they oughte to do, ney∣ther do they know it as it is requisite. Of the obligation vvherby mā is bound to God, and for vvhat cause he cannot make recompence by the good vvorks vvhich he doth, for the euill vvorks vvhich he hath committed.
M. COme nowe to the third pointe, which is concerning mans obliga∣tion towardes God. P. Euen as men are bounde not to do that which God forbid∣deth, euē so be they boūd to do that which he commaundeth them. M. What follo∣weth of that? P. For somuche as there is double obligation, the one cannot abo∣lish the other. For if I do one parte of that which God commandeth me, I remaine alwayes yet bounde for that which is yet to do. M. But in the meane time the same is alredy done, and in that respecte thou hast alredy satisfied for that parte. P. Al∣beit that my harte were so perfecte that there were nothing in it to be blamed be∣fore God, that notwithstanding, it coulde not serue me for satisfaction, for bycause I remaine a debter, séeing that I oughte alredy yt which I haue payed. M. I graunt thée that. P. Now if the good works done may not satisfie for those which be vndon, how shal they satisfie for the euill works which I shal haue done against ye expresse cōmandement of God? M. I haue no more to replie. For I sée well that I cannot re∣compence an euill worke with a good:
and that for two causes: The firste, bi∣cause that I can not do any which is ve∣rily good: The other, bycause I owe the good whiche I shoulde doe, and yet I am still guiltie for the euill whiche I haue committed.Luke. 17. c. P. And therfore Iesus Christ hath sayd: When you shall haue done al that whiche is commaunded you, say ye: We are vnprofitable seruantes, we haue done that whiche we ought to do. For what cause there is nothyng but the only sacrifice of Iesus Christ, which may satisfie at the iudgement of God. M I Do nowe knowe more manifestly what thou wilte conclude by thys whole discourse, and by that whiche thou hast alreadie sayde concerning this pur∣pose, that there is none but Iesus Christ which may do sacrifice, or any worke ac∣ceptable vnto God. P. If that mē mought doe it of themselues, he then should haue ben giuen to vs in vaine by the Father, to doe that whiche an other mought haue done, beside him.Galath. 2. d. For as Saincte Paule sayeth, he should haue died in vayn, if we mought haue ben iustified by the workes
of the lawe. M. Thou wilte then saye in effecte, that there is none other true and perfecte sacrificer, which may offer vnto God perfecte sacrifice to make an agrée∣ment betwene him & mankynde, but Ie∣sus Chryst only: forsomuch as he is per∣fect and without sin?Note. P. Beside this rea∣son, thou haste yet to note, that which we haue alreadie heretofore said: that euen as the paine due to our sinnes is infinite, euen so the sacrifice of Iesus Christe, is of merite and vertue infinite. Math. And what is the cause therof? P. It is not on∣ly bicause he is without synne, and with∣out spotte, as wée haue alreadie hearde, but also bycause hee is the true and natu∣rall Sonne of God, and that his humane nature is ioyned to his diuine nature, which is infinite, of the which ye humane nature taketh his vertue. Ma. If this di∣uine nature were not ioyned with hys humane nature, coulde it not giue lyfe of it self, except it tooke it of the diuine na∣ture? Peter. Thou haste alreadie hearde howe that his diuine nature is the foun∣taine: And therfore Iesus Chryste hath sayde:Iohn. 6. g. The fleshe profiteth nothyng: to wit, if it be considered as separate from
hys diuyne nature, and from hys holye Spirite, but it is the Spirite whiche gy∣ueth lyfe. M. What meaneth hee by that spirit giuyng life?Colloss. 2. b 2. Cor. 5. b Pe. It is ye God dwel∣ling in Iesus Chryste corporally as S. Paule sayeth, to witte, really, and in déede, reconciling the worlde to himselfe. Of the perfecte obedience of Iesus Christe, vvhiche maketh his office so perfecte. M. WHiche is the principall cause that maketh thys Sacrifice of Iesus Chryste so perfecte, in suche sorte as it hathe power to reconcile vs vnto God, and to satisfie fully for vs at his iud∣gement? Pe. The perfect obedience whi∣che he yelded to God his Father in the same, the whiche is muche more greate and infinite,Phil. 2. than the rebellion and trans∣gression: in recompence wherof, he hath yelded to GOD so perfecte an obedi∣ence. Math. When was it that he made this sacrifice, whereby hée hathe yelded suche obedience vnto God his father? Peter. When by the Eternall Spirite he offered himselfe vppon the trée of the Crosse, in the whyche hée hathe borne
the cursse and iudgement of God, which we had deserued by oure sinnes,Hebr. 9. d. Galath. 3. b. Ieremi. 17. a. Galath. 3. c. and he hath turned that cursse to vs into a bles∣sing, bicause it is the séede of Abraham, by whome GOD hathe promised bles∣sing to all the nations of the earth. M. Is it then the cause why we confesse that he hath suffered vnder Ponce Pylate, and that he was crucified, dead, and buryed? P. It is euen the same. Of the office of intercessor, and of Ad∣uocate of Iesus Chryst, and of the vertue of the same. M. ANd when he offered vp this Sa∣crifice, did he also then the office of intercessor, praying the father for vs? P. The one of the workes is not with∣out the other. For he became not pledge and suretie for vs, but forthwith he was also oure aduocate, and did fully handle our cause, to obtaine for vs pardon of our sinnes of his father, whereof he had no néede for himselfe. And therfore he hathe demaunded that pardon for vs, the whi∣che is not only graunted vs, but also his iustice, his innocencie, his obedience and
satisfactiō are accompted ours, as though they were ours, and as though they pro∣céeded frō vs.Rom. 8. M. Doth he at this present that office of mediator and aduocate? P. Thinke not that he hath done it only for one time, but thou oughtest to vnderstād, that he maketh intercession withoute cease for vs. M. That notwithstanding he was sacrifised but once, and can be no more, euen as he coulde but once dye. P. It followeth not therefore, but that the vertue of his sacrifice which he hath once offered for vs, and also his prayer which he made in the same, be such, considering they be infinite, that they do extend from the one end euen to the other ende of the worlde,Hebr. 13. b. and from the beginning euen to the ende of the same. For Iesus is before yesterday and to day, and for euer. M. If Iesus Christ do make incessantly inter∣cession for vs, in such sorte as thou sayst, it is then requisite that he be perpetually in Heauen before the Father, not onely in hys diuine nature, but also in his hu∣mane nature, in the whiche he hath satis∣fied for vs, and for whose cause he is our intercessor, mediatoure and aduocate. P.
If he were not risen againe and ascended into Heauen, we mighte not onely not hold him for our mediator and aduocate, but also we mought not accompt him for oure lorde and oure king. M. For what cause? P. For that that he shoulde not haue ben victorious of our enimies, whi∣che are the world, the fleshe, sinne, death, the diuell, and hell, and shoulde not haue deliuered vs, but shoulde himselfe haue ben vāquished by them. M. We are then assured of this victorie wherof thou spea∣kest, by the resurrection and ascention of Iesus Christ. P. We ar not only assured, but also ye victorie is the frute which com∣meth vnto vs by that resurrection and as∣cention, as also the perpetuall intercessi∣on by the whiche wee are assured, that we haue the sonne of God in Heauen for our intercessor and aduocate. Of the two commings of Iesus Christ. M. HAue we yet any other pointes to cōsider vpon the work of redemp∣tion done by Iesus Christ? Pet. We haue also therin to cōsider the two commings of him. M. Which is the firste? P. It is this same whereof we nowe speake, in the which he toke our flesh to accomplish
in the same all the workes whereof wée haue spoken vntill this presente. Math. Whyche is the seconde? Peter. That wherein he shall come, not in the base∣nesse and infirmitie of the fleshe to suffer for vs as he did in his firste comming: but in glorie and maiestie, to glorifye with him all those whiche thorough saith shal haue receyued him for their sauiour and redemer, when he was set forth vn∣to them by the Gospell: & condemne as iudge of the liuing and of the deade, all these whiche woulde not haue receyued him, & acknowledge him for such an one, and to make al his enimies his footstoole. ¶ Of the person of the holie Ghost. The tenth Dialogue. Of the vvoorke of viuification, and of the principall pointes to bee considered concerning the holie Ghoste. MATHEVV. WHat is there now to be doon in the matters that we haue yet to hādle folowing those whiche wée haue already
heretofore hādled. P. Seing that we haue alredy sufficiently spoken of the work of redemption, we may now speake of the worke of viuification and sanctification, whiche is properly attributed to the holy Ghoste. M. Whiche be the principall points to consider in the same? P. There be chiefly two. M. Which is the firste? P. It is concerning the person and the na∣ture of the holy Gost. M. And the second? P. Concerning his gifts and graces, and the distribution of them. Of the diuinitie of the holy Ghost, and of the proprieties ascribed to all the persons of the Trinitie. M. WHat haue we to consider of the person and nature of the holy Ghoste? Pet. That he is very God of one very essence and diuinitie with the Fa∣ther and the sonne from whome he pro∣céedeth. M. How vnderstandest thou that the holy Ghost procéedeth from the father and the sonne, considering that he is one very God, and of the same nature and es∣sence with them? P. Thou must euer re∣member, that we consider in the nature
and essence of God the father, as begin∣ning of al diuinitie: the sonne as his eter∣nall word & wisedome, whereby he doth manifest himselfe: and the holy Ghost, as the vertue of the father and the sonne, by the which he worketh in vs, to make him selfe known such as he declareth him in his sonne Iesus Christe, and to make vs partakers of all his treasures, graces, and heauenlie riches, the whiche the father hath opened vnto vs in him. If there be any beginning in the diuine essence, and hovv the holy Ghost proceedeth from the father and from the sonne. M. If the sonne & the holy ghost be one very god with ye father, in mine opy∣nion they be also eternall, and withoute beginning and without ende, as he is. P. It is not to be doubted. M. And yet for all that it séemeth to me, that firste thou im∣putest beginning to the father, and after that thou placest the sonne, whiche follo∣weth afterward, as though he had the fa∣ther for his beginning and then the holy Ghost as following thē after, and hauing
two beginnings, of the which the seconde dependeth of the first, to witte, the father and the sonne. P. When I speake so, thou must thinke that I admitte no beginning neyther in the father, the sonne, nor in the holy Ghost, as if they were creatures, cō∣sidering that I confesse that they be one only God, and that there is in God ney∣ther beginning nor end. M. I do well vn∣derstand that. P. In like sorte thou mayst not thinke that I put the one before the other, as though the one were the begin∣ning of the other, in respecte of time, in such sorte that the father should be before the sonne as touching time, and then the father and the son before the holy Ghoste, in such sorte that the father should be the first, and the sonne the second, and the ho∣ly Ghost the third and last. Hovv vve ought to vnderstand the order vvhiche is in the persons of the Trinitie. M. IT séemeth to me for all that that thou saist so, and I cannot otherwise vnderstād it, if thou do not better declare
vnto me thy meaning. P. Thou must vn∣derstande that a thing maye be called firste or laste in diuers sortes, and ac∣cording to dyuers considerations. Ma. What meanest thou by this? For the firste, a thing is called firste in respecte of tyme when it is before an other, and more aunciente than the same. Mathevv. Thou haste declared vnto me that I must not so take it in the dyuine essence and nature, for so∣muche as in the same all is there eter∣nall withoute beginning and withoute ende. Peter. It is true, but for the se∣conde, a thing maye bée before an o∣ther in honoure and dignitie, albeit that it be not firste in time, as a king or prince shall be first in dignitie amongst his sub∣iects, albeit many of them may be more aged than he. M. Dost thou say that the fa∣ther is before the sonne, and the father and the sonne before the holy Ghoste in this manner? Peter. No. For in the di∣uine nature there is nothyng of more or lesse, but there is equalitie in all thinges. M. Thy meaning is then that
no one person of the Trinitie which is in the vnitie of god, is more worthy or more great than the other. P. We may not o∣therwise vnderstande it, for if it were o∣therwise, eyther there shoulde not be one very essence and diuinitie, but sundry, and consequently sundry Gods, of which some should be greater, and some lesse: or els it must néeds be that God should be greater and more worthy than him selfe. M. All these cōsequences would be very strāge. P. There is no doubt. For if they were sundry Gods, they should be no Gods, no not at all. For God cannot be but almigh∣tie, all perfecte, and all infinite. M. Thy meaning is then that he must necessarily be all alone. P. Thou maist so very well vnderstande it, for sundry cannot be all mighte, all perfecte, & all infinite. M. I do well vnderstand all that. P. There is al∣so a third maner whereby one thing may be before an other. M. What is it? P. It is when a thing is of suche nature, that it may be without an other, the whiche not∣withstanding cannot be without it. M. I cannot well vnderstand what thou sayst vnto me, vnlesse thou declare it more
plainly vnto me by example. P. One is before two, for somuch as two cannot be, but one must be firste, séeing that two are but a double, to witte, twice one. But one may very well be without two. M. Thou wilte not say yet that the father is before the sonne and before the holy Ghoste in such a manner? P. No. For the Father cannot be without the sonne, and the ho∣ly Ghost, as the sonne and the holy Ghost cannot be without the father. M. Shewe me then in what other sorte the father is before the sonne, and the father and the sonne before the holy Ghoste. P. Thou must fourthly note, concerning thinges that be equall of time, of dignitie, and of nature, that for asmuch as a man cannot consider and comprehend them all at one time or instante, we do consider them the one after the other, and we place the one before the other, euen as we com∣prehende and dispose them in our vnder∣standing. And euen so, that whiche wée firste consider and comprehende, or that which firste is shewed vnto vs, is firste in order in respecte of vs, albeit that it be equall to the others, of time, of dignitie,
and of nature. M. In so doing that whiche we place firste or laste, is neyther firste nor last in it selfe, but only in our vnder∣standing and in regarde of the same, whiche bycause of hys weakenesse, is en∣forced to departe that whiche is ioyned togither, and to deuide that which cannot in it selfe be separate, to the ende that hée may the better comprehende by partes that whiche he cannot wholly at a time comprehende. P. Thou sayest very well. Mathevv. Is it then thy meaning, that in this sorte we please the Father as the first in the diuine essence, and the sonne as the second, and the holy Ghost as the thirde, albeit that all these thrée diuine persons be in one very essence and equall in all and by all, both in time, in dignitie, and in nature, and in all things which be∣long to the nature of God? P. We maye very well take it so. But there is yet a fyfte manner, whiche is also very agrée∣able to the pointe vppon the whiche wée are, the which hath a certaine agréement with that before cited. Mathevv. Whiche is it. Peter. It is among the thinges that are in suche sorte of one very nature, that
the one cannot be withoute the other, and yet for all that the one is as the spring of the other, and the other as a dependaunce of the same. Mathevv. Gyue me an example of the same. Peter. The lighte and the shyning or brightnesse, cannot be the one withoute the other. For the lighte doth engender and bring foorthe the shyning. And albeit that the one be not before the other, yet we gyue the lyghte the firste place, as though it were before the shyning as the mo∣ther of it, euen as also we consider the sunne before his beames and his heate, albeit they be all at once. Mathevv. Thou meanest then that God hathe so declared himselfe to vs in his workes and in his worde, and by such meane, and in suche order. Pet. It cannot bée o∣therwise vnderstoode without ouerthro∣wing of al that which is set foorth to vs in ye holy scriptures of ye vnitie of god, and of the Trinitie of persons, in ye essence of ye same. P. Séeing that it is so, ye which thou saist agréeth alway wc yt which I euē now said, to wit, ye that whiche we place firste, second, and thirde, amongst the persons
whiche are in the diuine essence, is more in respect of our vnderstanding, than of the diuine nature, wherein, to speake pro∣perly, there is neyther firste, seconde nor thirde, seing there is no difference, ney∣ther of time, nor of dignitie nor of nature: but only in the order according to the whiche God hath manifested himselfe to vs in his word, according as our capaci∣tie may best comprehend him. P. Seeing that God is eternall and infinite in hym∣selfe, and that we cannot comprehende him in that infinitenesse and eternitie, it hath pleased him so to shewe himselfe to vs, making himselfe méete, as thou haste alredy said, to the rudenesse of our vnder∣standings. And therefore he will that we know him, and that we speake in suche sorte in the whiche he hath declared hymselfe to vs by his worde and by hys works, and not otherwise. Of the difference that must be put betwene the essence and the giftes of the holie Ghoste.
M. I Do now sufficientlye vnderstande thy meaning touching this poynte, of the nature and diuinitie of the holye Ghoste: come to the other which is con∣cerning his giftes. Pe. Thou hast to note firste, that bycause the Father doth com∣municate to vs by the vertue of the ho∣lie Ghoste, the graces the whiche he doth offer and present vnto vs in his Sonne Iesus Chryst, these graces are called by the name of the holy Ghost. And therfore in the Scripture it is spoken of the holie Ghost, as thoughe there were sundry of them. M. Giue mée an example of that which thou sayest. Peter. Esay,Esay. 11. a, speaking of the graces whiche shoulde be in Iesus Chryst, and of the excellent giftes of god, wherwith he should be indued in his hu∣mane nature, hath sayde: The spirite of the Lorde shall repose vpon him, the spi∣rite of wisedome and vnderstanding, the spirite of counsell and of force, the spirite of knowledge and of feare of the Lorde: There is also mention made in other places of the holie Scriptures,Rom. 8. c. 1. Cor. 12. a. b. 2. Cor. 4.  and chief∣ly in the Epistles of Sainct Paule, of the Spirite of adoption and of faythe, and of
prophecie, & of other such like gifts, whi∣che we must vnderstād not of the essence of the holy Ghost,1. Cor. 5. d but of his workes and effects. M. Thy meaning is then, that we must distinguishe betweene the nature of the holy Ghost, and his gifts & graces? P. We must so vnderstand: For when wée say, according to the testimonies of ye ho∣ly scriptures, that the holie Ghost dwel∣leth in vs, we do not mean that he dwel∣leth in vs in his nature and proper per∣son vnited with vs, as the diuine nature was vnited in Iesus Christe with the hu∣mane: but that he there dwelleth by his vertue, & by his gifts and graces, wherof he makech vs partakers. The eleuenth Dialogue is of the gifts of the holie Ghoste, belonging to the only elect. Of the number of the gifts of the holy ghost, & of the distributiō of them. MATHEVV. HOwe manye be the giftes of the ho∣ly Ghost? P. If then couldest number
all the graces whyche God giueth vnto men, thou moughtest also number al the gifts of ye holy ghost. M. It foloweth then that there is no number certain. P. No in deede, excepte we wil presume to number that which is infinite. M. That notwith∣standing, it seemeth to me that the Theo∣logians accompte ordinarily seauen gif∣tes and graces of the holy Ghoste. Peter. These Theologians of whom thou spea∣kest, are Papisticall Theologians, whi∣che knowe neyther what is the holye Ghoste, nor yet his giftes, and therefore lesse the numbre of them. But bycause they haue read neare suche a number of giftes of the holie Ghoste, in the passage of Esaiah, which I euen nowe alledged, they haue concluded, that they were all comprehended in that number, or at the least they saye so. M. Thou hast yet for all that a number of others, whiche are not there comprehended. Saincte Paule speaketh yet of many others chéefly in the Epistles written to the Romans,Ro. 12. b. c 1. Cor. 12. a b. & to the Corinths, which ar not comprehended in this nūber, as ar ye gifts of tōgs, of prophe¦cie, of healing, & suche like, which he saith
are all of one selfe spirite, whiche giueth and distributeth to euery man according as is expedient for him. M. He dothe not then distribute them all to euery man. P. Séeing he dothe distribute them accor∣ding as it is expedient, it followeth, that he distributeth to euery man so much as is necessarie. Of the diuersitie of the giftes of the holie Ghoste, and of the diffe∣rence of them. M. SEing hée distributeth them not to all, it followeth then that they bée not all necessarie to mans saluation. For if they were all necessarie therevnto, no man coulde be saued, except he had them all. P. Thou hast here to note, that albeit there is but one onely and one very spi∣rite of God, whiche distributeth all hys giftes, yet notwithstanding his giftes bée diuers. Wherefore there muste be diffe∣rence put betwene them. M. How takest thou this difference? P. In that that ther be some that are so necessarie to euerye mans saluation, that no man can be sa∣ued except he be made partaker of them
in his proper person. M. Be there others without the whiche we may well be? P. There is none but they be verye profita∣ble and necessarie to the Churche. For if they were not profitable and necessarye, they shoulde be superfluous and vaine: whiche thing we may not thinke of god. For he hath not doone and ordeyned any thing without good and iust cause, with∣out necessitie or greate profite and com∣moditie. M. I doe well vnderstand it so. P. And therefore we must here consider, that a thing may bée profitable and ne∣cessarie in two sortes. M. Whiche is the first? P. I wil giue thée example touching the giftes whereof wée speake: For there be some whiche profyte nothing, but on∣ly to those which haue them in their own person, and withoute the whiche none may be agréeable to God nor saued. Ther be others whiche may profite those whi∣che haue them not, and not those whiche haue them, albeit they haue them not in their owne persones: and the Infidells may haue them, and they not serue them but to their condemnation.
Of the giftes of the holie Ghoste ne∣cessarie for euerie man to ob∣tayn saluation therby. M. GIue mée example of the one sort, & of the other.Rom. 3.4. a &. 5. a Gal. 2. a. Rom. 8. c P. For the first, séeing that none can be iustified nor be made the Sonne of God but onely by fayth in Ie∣sus Christe, it foloweth well, yt none can be saued without this gifte of faith. And therfore S. Paule doth call this gift and grace of God, the spirite of adoption, by the whiche hée adopteth vs for his chil∣dren in Iesus Christe, by the meane and worke of his holie Spirite. Mathevv. What vnderstandest thou by that adop∣tion? Pet. Thou knowest well that men doe call children adoptiue, those whiche be not naturall children to them whiche doe choose and accepte them for their chil∣dren: but they are it onely by the loue and fauoure of him whiche taketh them for his children, and giueth them suche righte as he mought giue to his naturall children. M. Sayest thou then that the lyke is with vs towarde God?Ephe. 2. a Iohn. 1. b. Ephe. 1. b. P. Séeing that of nature wée be the chyldren of wrathe, it dothe then folow that wée bée
not Gods naturall children, but that hée maketh vs his children, and accompteth vs for such by his onely grace, which hée sheweth vs bicause of the loue wherwith he hath loued vs in his welbeloued Son Iesus Christ, without any of our deser∣uings, but wholly the cōtrarie. M. Thou callest then that grace & that gift of God, Spirite of adoption? P. S. Paule calleth it so, for those causes which I haue alre∣die declared vnto thée. M. Séeing it is so, there is no one of all the elect of God whyche is not made partaker of thys gifte.Rom. . f P. Forsomuche as God hathe pre∣destinate all his chosen, to make them lyke to his sonne Iesus Christ, and enhe∣ritors of his heauenly kingdome wyth him, ther is no doubt but yt this gift is so ioyned wt the eternal election of God, yt it may in no wise be separate, no more than the effect from his cause. M. It foloweth then yt this gift is cōmon to al the elect of God, and propre to euery of them, & that on the contrarye, all the reprobates are cléerely shutte from it. It is certaine that the reprobates are neuer made parta∣kers of thys gyft: For if they were made
partakers, it should be a very sure testi∣monie that they were of the elect, and not of the refused: forsomuche as it is writ∣ten, that they whiche are chosen, are cho∣sen to be afterwarde called,Rom. 8. f iustified, and glorified, and to be made fully lyke the Sonne of God. M. Wilte thou saye the lyke of the gifte of fayth? P. Not only of the gift of faith, but also of the gift of cha∣ritie, of hope, of the feare of God, and of perseuerance, and other such lyke, which are in suche sorte propre to the electe of God, that none others are made parta∣kers of them. VVhether charitie iustifie with faithe, or else faith onely, and what difference there is betwene faith and cha∣ritie in suche a case. M. IF it be so as thou sayest, we are not then saued onely by faith, but also by charitie, and consequently by works, and by all the other vertues which thou haste nowe named. P. Why sayest thou so? M. Bicause that thou haste placed those same vertues among the giftes of the spirite of God, which are necessarye
to saluation. P. In this thou hast to consi∣der, the difference that is betwene the cause and his effects. M. I vnderstand not what thou wouldest say.Rom. 8. e. P. I wil say that the gifte of faith is necessary for our sal∣uation, as the gifte which Saincte Paule doth call the spirite of adoption, bycause that faith is the meane whereby me doe communicate of the iustice and of all the benefites of Iesus Christ, as we haue de∣clared heretofore. And therefore the holy scripture doth ascribe vnto it iustificatiō. M. What sayest thou then of charitie? P. I say that it is a gifte which dependeth of the gifte of faith, as the effect of his cause, and as the frute of the frée which bringeth it foorthe. M. But for somuche as charitie cannot be separated from faith, if faythe be true faith, it followeth then, that if we cannot be iustified without faith, no more may we then also without charitie ney∣ther consequently be saued withoute the one and the other, séeing that our saluati∣on procéedeth of our iustification. P. It séemeth at the first sight that thy conclusi∣on is rightly framed, but it is farre wide. M. Shew me then the fault that is in it.
P. Shouldest thou conclude well, if thou diddest conclude in this sorte: The light of the fire cannot be separated from hys heate, it followeth then that the light cā∣not shyne withoute heate, and that the heate doth shyne as well as the light? M. Me thinketh if I did so conclude it were not muche amisse. P. That notwithstan∣ding in making suche a conclusion thou shouldest confounde the things which are distinguished. For albeit that the lighte and the heate be in the fire ioyned togi∣ther, as they are also in the Sunne, yet thou séest plainely, that the office and pro∣pertie of the light is other than that of the heate, and that of the heate other than that of the light, and that the effects also be di∣uers. M. It is true. P. And therefore, ey∣ther they must be distinguished the one from the other, without separating of thē notwithstanding, or else they must bée so confounded togither, that it must be one very thing, to witte all light or all heate. M. Thou meanest in myne opinion, that albeit that faithe can not be separated from charitie, yet for all that it is so di∣stinguished from the same, that it hath an
other office and an other proprietie, than hath charitie. P. It is easie to sée. For the office of faith is to present vs before God all naked and voyde of all iustice, and in his promises to take holde of his graces and mercie, the whiche he offereth to vs in Iesus Christe his sonne, by whose meane we haue communion with hym, and are made partakers of all his bene∣fites, as we haue already declared. Ma. Thy meaning is then that charitie hathe not that office. Peter. It is true. For al∣beit that faithe cannot bée withoute cha∣ritie, yet faithe goeth before it in order, the whiche doth engender it afterwarde. Mathevve. How so?Iames. 2. d Peter. After that we are made partakers of the benefites of Iesus Chryste thorough faythe, af∣ter that GOD by the same hathe iustified vs by his holye Spirite in Iesus Chryste oure Lorde, he dothe also sanctifye vs, communicating vn∣to vs his gyftes and Graces whyche are the frutes of Faythe, to the ende that we shoulde bée dedicated and con∣secrated vnto hym all the dayes of our lyfe, to serue and honour hym as hys
childrē, regenerate by his holy spirite in∣to a newe life. Ma. Thou doest reporte faith to iustification, and charitie to the worke of sanctification whiche are both works of the holy Ghost. P. Thou maiest vnderstand it by the discourse whiche we haue already made of iustification and sanctification. In vvhat sorte charitie is necessary to saluation. M. CHaritie is not then necessarie to saluation, nor other like vertues, but faith only. P. It is necessary there vn∣to and not necessary. M. I do not well vn∣derstand this speache, for it is contrary in it selfe. P. I say yt faith is necessary there∣vnto as cause of saluation, withoute the whiche we cannot obtayne it, for the cau∣ses which I haue alredy declared. For so∣much as it is the instrument the whiche the holy Ghoste giueth vs wherewith to receiue him, when he is offered vnto vs by Iesus Christ, and the meane whereby he doth communicate him to vs in hym and by him. But charitie is not there ioy∣ned as a cause of saluation, without the
which we cannot be partakers of it, but as a thing ioyned vnto it, the whiche fol∣loweth faith in suche sorte, whiche is the true cause of saluation, as I haue already sayde, that she cannot be separate, no more than the heate from the lighte, or the mouing or féeling from the life and from the soule. But yet notwithstan∣dyng we haue not saluation thereby, no more than brightnesse by the heate, the whiche we haue of the lighte, or else life by the motion and féeling. M. Chari∣tie then and good workes may not be ta∣ken for causes, by the which, or by whose meane we obtaine saluation, but onely so farre as they cannot be separated frō true faith,Iames. 2. d by the which we ar made par∣takers of it. P. It is euen so. M. Thou hast here opened vnto me one point that was very harde to vnderstande, the whiche séemeth to me very well worthy to be diligently noted. For there bée fewe whiche do well vnderstande it. Peter. If all men did well vnderstande it, there woulde be no more differente betwene the Christians touching iusti∣fication, and touching faith and workes,
and grace and merites, and the causes of oure saluation for that whiche we haue sayde of charitie, is also vnderstoode, of all the other vertues and workes of the regenerate man, as I haue alredy sayde, whiche are the frutes the which Saincte Paule doth call the frutes of the spirite,Galath. 5. c.d. and the which he doth oppone to ye frutes of the flesh. Of the regeneration of a Christi∣an man. M. SEing that thou arte lighted vppon the pointe of regeneration, me thin∣keth that it should be also comprehended among those giftes of the holy Ghost, the which thou sayest do belong but to the e∣lect of God, and be so necessarie to salua∣tion, that none may attayne vnto it with∣out them. P. It must be so vnderstoode, for it is of the chiefe of them, and in very déede it is the principall pointe whiche maketh vs to vnderstande the cause, why we do cal worke of viuification and sanc∣tification that thirde worke of God, whereby we say that God hathe declared
himselfe vnto men. Ma. Expounde the same to me somewhat more plainely. P. Thys worde of regeneration, as thou mayest well vnderstande, emporteth as muche, as a man moughte saye newe birth, as if after that we are once borne, we are borne yet agayne. Mathevve. I sée well that the worde of regeneration, importeth euen so. Peter. And therefore it importeth foorthwith a reformation of the man, whiche is a rising agayne from the deade, whiche is wroughte in the Spirite, as the last resurrection shall be wroughte in the fleshe. Mathevve. What meanest thou by that resurrec∣tion of the Spirite? Peter. Séeing that thorough sinne man is deade of spirituall death, whiche bringeth afterwarde death of the body, he is as it were risen from that deathe, when by Iesus Christe he is in suche sorte delyuered from sinne, that he is by the vertue of hys holye Spirite made as it were a manne thoroughly newe, or as a manne who hauinge béene deade shoulde haue recouered hys lyfe, and shoulde bée raysed agayne. Mathevve. Thou
puttest then so great difference betwene the man whiche abideth still in his firste nature corrupted through sinne, and hée which is deliuered from the same corrup∣tion, and is quickened and regenerated by the holy Ghoste, as thou puttest be∣twene a dead and a liuing man. P. There is no difference, but in asmuch as the spi∣rituall death is much more worthy to be called death, than is the corporall death, and that the estate of the man dead tho∣rough sinne, is much more perillous and daungerous than is the estate of the man which is dead but bodily. Of the life of the regenerate man. M. Séeing that man is as it were risen from death and borne a new, when he is regenerate by the holy Ghost, it fol∣loweth then necessarily that he do other works, after that he is regenerate, than he did before his regeneration. P. Thou mayest wel vnderstand that if there be so greate differēce betwene the mā regene∣rate & the not regenerate, as is betweene a dead and a liuing man, it must also ne∣cessarily come to passe, that there bee as
great difference betwene the workes of the one and the other.Iohn. 3. M. I do euen so vn∣derstand it. P. And therfore Iesus Chryst hath sayd, that what is borne of fleshe is fleshe, and what is borne of the spirite is spirit. For euen as a dead bodie can bring forth but infection and corruption, euen so on the contrary, a liuing body doth the works of lyfe, bicause of the liuing soule that he hath more than hath the dead bo∣die. M. It foloweth then, that the faith wherby man is viuified and regenerate, is vnto him as the soule, which bringeth to him spiritual life, and that the vnfaith∣ful, and not regenerate man, is as a body without a soule.Abac. 2. a Rom. 1. b P. S. Paule following the prophet Abacuk, giueth thée playnly to vnderstand that it is so, by that whiche he sayth: The iust man shall liue of his faith. Wherefore if the iust man do liue of his faith, it followeth then, that Faith is to his soule, to giue it spirituall lyfe, that whiche the naturall soule is to the bodie, to giue it corporall lyfe. Mathevv. There are then two things to be consi∣dered in the regenerate & spiritual man: to wit, Faith which is in him as the soule
whiche giueth him spiritual lyfe, euen as the soule naturall which giueth corporall lyfe to ye body, & then the workes of ye spi∣rite are ioyned to it, which are the works of faith, which is the spiritual soule, euen as the works of life, procéeding from the soule are in the liuing man. Peter. Thou mayst well iudge, that as the liuing man hath not onely lyfe, but also mouing and féeling by the power of the soule that is in him, euen so the mā regenerate by the spirite of God, is disposed by the same to doe spirituall works, which are the wor∣kes of lyfe, where as he did the works of death, whilest he was dead thorow sinne not being regenerate by ye spirite of God. The twelfth Dialogue is of the giftes of the holie Ghost, whiche are common to the elect, and to the reprobates. Of the gifts of the holie Ghost which mē may haue & not be chosen of god, and without the which the elect may be saued touching themselues.
MATHEVV. I Doe nowe better vnderstande than before, why thou doest call the thirde worke of God, the whiche thou attributest to the holy Ghoste, worke of viuification, and for what cause the holie Ghost is cal∣led the quickning spirite. There resteth nowe that we speake of other of his gif∣tes, whiche thou haste sayde maye serue to the Saluation of them whyche haue them not, withoute seruing at all them whiche haue them to their saluation. P. I will shewe thee by example that whiche thou askest, we maye place in this ranke the gift of toungs, the gifte of prophecie or preachyng, the gifte of miracles, and suche other lyke. Math. Dothe GOD sometyme communicate these guifts vn∣to the reprobates and vnfaythefull? Peter. Thou doest not doubte but that hée dothe distrybute them to the electe and the faythfull when it pleaseth him. Math. I may not doubt thereof, séeing I haue the examples of the prophets and of the Apostles whiche witnesse it vnto me.
P. But albeit that these gifts be commu∣nicate to diuers of the elect and faithfull, yet they are not giuen generally to all, neither to euery one specially, and as the others wherof we haue alreadie spoken: and on the other syde, they be not giuen in equall and one measure to all those to whome they be giuen. For the one sorte haue them in greater number and grea∣ter abundance than the others. M. Giue me example of that whiche thou sayst. P. Saint Iohn Baptist was so excellente a Prophet,Matth. 11 b Luke. 7. d that he was by Iesus Chryste preferred to all the other Prophets whi∣che were before him: and yet wee reade not that he had the gift of tongues, as the Apostles had. M. It séemeth also to mée, that it was not necessarie, forsomuche as he was not sent but to those of his owne nation. P. And therfore I say with Saint Paule, that the holy Ghoste distributeth his giftes to euery man, as is expediente for him. But to come againe to S. Iohn Baptist, no more had he the gifte of mi∣racles. For it is written of him playnly, that he did none at all. M. I thinke also, that there were many of the Prophetes
which had but the gift of prophecie, with∣out the gift of eyther miracles or toungs, forsomuche as they did prophecie but in the Churche of Israel,Iohn. 10. g Exod. 7.8.9.10. 1. Kings. 17. d 2. King. 1. c.d 2. a. 4. f.g. 5. c. d. 6. c and among people which vnderstod their natural speach M. We fynd not many prophets yt haue had the gift of miracles, as had Moyses, Elie, and Elizee. But the Apostles hadde bothe the gifte of prophecie, miracles, toungs, and suche lyke. Of the giftes of the holy Ghoste gi∣uen to the wicked. M. I I knowe nowe well by these exam∣ples, in what sorte these giftes hée distributed to the faithfull, albéeit they be not distributed to euery one in verye number and portion, euen of those which are made partakers of them: but thou haste not yet proued how these giftes are also somtyme bestowed vpon the repro∣bates and vnfaithfull. P. I wil shew thée first the testimonie of Iesus Christ which sayth,Matth. 7. d These are cō∣mrers, sorce∣rers, and suche lyke, that many shal say vnto him at the later day, Lorde, Lorde, we haue prophe∣cied, and driuen out diuels, and wrought great effects in thy name: vnto whom he
shall saye: I know you not, depart from mee ye workers of iniquitie. M. Perad∣uenture they shall boast them selues fals∣ly of that whiche they neuer did. Pet. To resolue this difficultie, thou hast beside it the examples,Numeri. 23. a 6. a. 24. a 2. Pet. 2. d 1 Sam. 19. a hn. 11. g Matth. 10. a Luke. 9. a not onely of Balaam, of Saule, and of Cayphe, whyche haue prophecied, but also of Iudas, vntoo whome not onely the gifte of prophecie and office of Apostle was giuen, as it was to his other fellowes, but also the gifte of miracles. M. Howe mayst thou knowe for certayne if that Iudas hadde the gift of miracles? Peter. Bicause that when Iesus Chryste did giue it to hys Apostles, Iudas was not put out of the number, but was comprised in the num∣ber of twelue, vnto whiche the Euan∣gelistes witnesse, that this gifte was gi∣uen by Iesus Christe. Math. That whi∣che thou sayest, hath some apparance. Peter. And on the other side, thou mayst not fynd it strange, that the gift of mira∣cles was giuen vnto him, whiche is far lesse necessarie to the Churche than the gift of prophecie and office of Apostle.
For vvhat cause God sometime dothe cō∣municate to the wicked of the giftes of the holie Ghost, the which he doth not cōmunicate to the electe. M. SEing that these gifts be so noble & so excellēt, it abasheth me that God somtime distributeth them to ye vnfaith∣ful & reprobate, rather than to the faith∣full & elect. For albeit that in the time of Balaam, Saule, Cayphe, & Iudas, many of the faithfull and chosen were endowed with these gifts, yet notwithstanding the greatest nūber of thē had thē not at al, but had only those gifts which are proper and cōmon to al the elect and faithful. P. It is true: but thou muste note that God will haue it so, chiefly for two causes. M. whi∣che is the first? P. It is that he will giue vs to know what difference we ought to put betwene these gifts, to the ende that his elect mought know which ar the most excellent, and what fauour he hathe she∣wed to them more than to the others, in communicating them vnto them. Math. Whiche is the other reason? P. It is that God will shewe howe passyng excellent
a woorker he is, whiche can vse al instru∣mentes bothe good and bad, yea the very diuels to make them serue to his glorie, and to the edification and saluation of his Churche when it pleaseth him. But see∣ing that he may well do by his elect that whiche he dothe by these wicked instru∣ments, why dothe he not rather this ho∣nour to his children than to his enimies. P. He dothe no dishonour to his children, but doth them great honor, when he con∣strayneth the very wicked to serue them will they nill they. M. There is a point wel worth the note. P. On the other side he honoureth the enimies the more, but putteth them to greater confusion, and maketh them more inexcusable, in so muche as thorough their owne fault, they haue abused his giftes. Of the giftes of God which are moste ex∣cellent and most to be desired. M. FOr so muche as I can vnderstande by thée, thou estéemest the first gif∣tes whereof thou spakest, to bée muche more excellente and necessarye to eue∣ry one in his particular, than the others
wherof thou spakest in the seconde place. P. Thou mayest well thinke, that the gifts which God hath chiefly prepared for his elect, are the most principall, and those whome he most estéemeth, and of the which also he willeth that we haue most care, & namely for two causes. M. Shewe me the firste. P. It is, that these giftes make vs more like to God than the o∣thers do. For we are refourmed in déede to his Image by them: Mat. Shewe me something more plainely what thy mea∣ning is. P. Albeit that all vertues are in God in all excellencie and full perfection, yet notwithstanding the chéefe vertue that he will haue acknowledged in hym, and by the which he will chiefly be glori∣fied, and that also whiche maketh him to vs most amiable, and whiche is most con∣uenient and necessarie for vs, and whiche doth best declare vnto vs his true nature, it is his goodnesse. M. Wilte thou also cō∣clude thereby, that he doth more estéeme those giftes whiche make good those who haue them, than the giftes which may bée in men withoute making them good, and yelding those better which are partakers
of them, albeit they mought serue others, to bring them to the communion of these other more excellente gifts. P. It is so. Hovv the gifte of prophecie may serue to the saluation of those vvhich haue it not, and not of them vvhiche haue it. M. THy meaning is, so farre as I can vnderstande, that a man may haue the gifte of prophecie, by meane whereof God will call his electe to his knowledge, and notwithstanding he by whome he shall call them, shal not himselfe haue the same true knowledge wherewith God maketh himselfe knowen to his elect, and by the which he maketh them like to him selfe, and are broughte to honoure him. P. I do so vnderstāde it. M. But how may a man giue that whiche he hath not? P. How may a whetstone make sharpe an yron, séeing it is but a stone and it selfe cannot cut? And how may a bell call and cause people to come to the sermon wher∣vnto it selfe goeth not, nor may go. M. Is it the like of the matters whiche we now handle? P. Thou hast two point is to le
in this. M. Whiche is the firste? P. It is that the ministers by whome God is ser∣ued, doe not communicate the giftes of God, but as instrumentes, but it is God himselfe whiche doth communicate them by them, as he which is the Lord and ma∣ster, which hath them in his power to di∣stribute and retaine at his pleasure. M. I thinke in déede if these giftes were in the power of the ministers and instruments wherewith God serueth himselfe, al those whiche shoulde heare their doctrine, and which should receiue of thē the outwarde Sacramentes, whiche they administer, should be made partakers of the giftes of God whereof they be ministers and dis∣pensators so farre as toucheth their mini∣sterie. P. Experience teacheth vs yt which thou sayest. Yet notwithstanding we may not contemne the ministerie of man, whē it pleaseth God to serue himselfe with thē whatsoeuer they be, prouided that we bée assured that they set foorthe to vs purely the things of God. Of the true knovvledge of God proper only to his elect, and of the generall vvhich is common to all men.
M. WHich is the other point that thou sayest I had to note vppon thys matter? P. It is that we must consider the knowledge of God in two sortes. M. How is that? P. There is one knowledge of God whiche causeth men as soone as they haue it, to glorifie him as belongeth vnto him. That is the true knowledge of God whiche deserueth suche a name, and which is proper to the only elect of God, and is neuer separate from true faith in him. M. What other sorte of knowledge is there yet? P. There is one generall and common to all as well faithfull as vn∣faithfull, the which is sufficient inough to condemne all men before God, but not to saue them. M. Howe doest thou vnder∣stande that it is sufficient to condemne, and not to saue? For it séemeth to me that it were better not to haue suche a know∣ledge than to haue it. P. It is the know∣ledge of God, whereof Sainct Paule spe∣keth in the beginning of the epistle to the Romaines, the which condemneth men, in somuche as they haue sufficient know∣ledge of God to know that they oughte to honoure and glorifie him, and yet not∣withstanding,
they neyther honoure nor glorifie him according as he hath declared himselfe to them, and as they know him:Rom. 1. c wherein they shew their malice, peruer∣sitie, and ingratitude, the whiche maketh them wholly inexcusable. M. But séeing that this knowledge is not so greate that it can induce vs to glorifie God as is méete, is there at all no excuse for them? P. If they did glorifie him according to the measure of their knowledge, there shuld be yet some apparance in that which thou sayest, albeit that ignorance shall excuse no man, forsomuche as it procéedeth of sinne, whereof the faulte cannot be im∣puted but to man. But they shew theyr naturall peruersitie and malice in the same, that they make none accoumpte to glorifie God as God, accordingly as they know him. Hovv that the vvicked vvhich prophecie do vnderstand or not vnderstand, their ovvne very prophecies. M. THy meaning thē is, that they whi∣che haue the gifts of God, wherby
they may serue to the saluation of others and in the meane time do not profite thē∣selues, haue euen suche a knowledge of God, as is that whereof thou nowe haste spoken. P. There are yet diuers conside∣rations vpon the which thou concludest. For there are some whiche haue prophe∣sied of things which they themselues wel vnderstoode, and there be others whiche vnderstoode not their owne prophesies. M. Gyue me example therof. P. Balaam did well vnderstande that whiche he pro∣phesied of the children of Israell. For he well did know that people to be blessed of God. But Cayphas prophesied not vn∣derstanding what he sayde, for he ment of one, and the spirite of god who made him to speake so, made him to speake an other which he vnderstood not himselfe. M. Cai∣phas was then the mouth of God and the mouth of the Deuill all at once. P. He was the mouth of God, in so muche as God made him to say, that his people coulde not be saued but only by the death of his sonne Iesus Christe, but he was the mouth of the Deuill according to hys intente after the whiche he so spake. For
he did not speake according to the mea∣ning of the holy Ghost, but as a murderer an enimie of truth, pretending the deathe of Iesus Christe, bycause of the hatred which he had toward him. Hovv that the true knovvledge of God comprehendeth both the vnderstan∣ding and the vvill. M. IF Cayphas vnderstoode not his pro∣phesie, I do not greatly maruell al∣though it profited him not. But I do more maruell of Balaam, that he did not bet∣ter proffite by his, than he hathe done, forsomuche as he hath had sufficiente vn∣derstanding to leade him rather to follow the people of GOD than his enimies. Peter. There are yet two poyntes to be noted herein, by the knoweledge whereof thou mayest vnderstande the better the cause which letted Balaam to proffite better by hys prophesie, and by the knowledge of God whiche he had. And in like sorte thou mayest iudge of all others like. M. Whiche are those two pointes? P. A man cannot well honoure God, if firste he knowe hym not as
he ought to know him, & he cannot know him in such sorte excepte he be first deli∣uered from two great euils which are in him by the meane of sinne. M. Whiche are these two great euils? P. The one is the ignoraunce that hath possessed his vn∣derstāding. M. And the other? P. The ma∣lice whiche hathe corrupted not only his vnderstanding, but also his whole will, and consequently all the affections which are in him. M. Doth the true knowledge of God comprehende the vnderstanding and the will of man? P. If the true know∣ledge of God doth cause man to honoure him, it muste then necessarily come to passe, that thereby manne is refourmed as touching his vnderstāding, harte, will, and all other his affections, séeing that he cannot well honoure God,Deuter. 6. a. Matth. 22. d Luke. 10. c. if he loue him not with all his vnderstanding, and with all his harte, and with all his soule, and with all his power and forces. Of the true and full reformation of man, and of the partes thereof. M. BY what meane may a man be so perfectly reformed as thou sayest?
P. After that the vnderstandyng of man thorow sin hath ben blinded by the dark∣nesses of error and ignorance, the which it hath brought to himt, he vnderstāding, can not be well reformed, if God by his heauenly light doe not dryue awaye these darknesses, and the ignorance that there is, to giue him true knowledge of God his Creator. M. In what sort also is the wil reformed? P. When God hath chan∣ged it from euill into good, and where it is rebellious to his, he maketh it lyke vn∣to the same. M. Wilt thou then say that a man is not fully regenerate if his will and vnderstanding be not also reformed? P. Hée can not be fully, if that all that which hath ben corrupted in him thorow synne, be not repaired and restored by the grace of God. Hovv that ignorance and malice are con∣trary to true regeneration and reforma∣tion, and hovv there is either more or lesse ignorance and malice in some than in other some. M. BVt if a man be not thorowly rege∣nerate & reformed of all these two
partes, may he not at the least be of one of them? P. If he be not of them bothe, we maye not proprely call him regene∣rate and reformed. And yet notwithstan∣ding, I confesse that among them whiche are not regenerate and reformed by the spirite of God, some haue more malice than ignoraunce, and others more igno∣rance than malice, whiche are the two vi∣ces the most contrarie to true regenera∣tion and reformation that may bée, whi∣che comprehende the vnderstanding and the will. For ignoraunce is proprely re∣ported to the vnderstanding, and malice to the will. Of those vvhiche offende more thorow malice than by ignorance. M. SHew me by exāple what thy mea∣ning is. P. Lette vs take againe in hand ye example of Balaam. Thou mayst wel know by what he hath sayde & done, that he was more malicious than igno∣rant. For he knew well inough the way that he ought to walk: but couetousnesse wherewith he had his hearte filled, did let his will not to agrée with the know∣ledge of God which he had. M. If I haue
well vnderstode that whiche thou haste alreadie said of the knowledge of God, it seemeth to me, that a man maye not call that of Balaam true knowledge of God, forsomuche as it was not suche that hys vnderstanding was so well lightened by the spirite of God, that he did foorthwyth drawe and guyde hys hearte and wyll to glorifye GOD as hée oughte. Pet. That which thou sayest is true: And therefore I did not cleane exempt Balaam of igno∣rance, when I sayde, that there was in him more malice than ignoraunce, but I would giue to vnderstand that ther was ignorance in him, albeit the malice was the greater: For if hée had knowne God as he ought to haue done, he hadde forth∣with loued him, and woulde haue ende∣uored himselfe rather to please him than the king Balaac, and woulde not haue preferred the worldly honour and profit which he loked for at his hand, to ye honor of God, and to his giftes and graces. M. Giue mée yet some example to thys pur∣pose, by whiche I may better vnderstād this matter. P. Take Annas, Cayphas,1. Cor. 2. b Act. 3. c. ye Scribes and Phariseyes, and suche lyke.
For albeit they did not truly knowe Ie∣sus Christ as ye apostles & the other faith∣ful did, yet had they knowledge inough to cōdemn them bicause yt their own ma∣lice did more let thē to acknowledge & re∣ceyue him as their Sauiour,Matth. 12. b Iohn. 5. g . g. than did the ignorance that was in them. Of those whiche sinne more through ig∣norance than through malice. M. I Am satisfyed wyth the examples that thou haste alreadie alledged of those which sinne more of malice than of ignorance, Giue me now examples of the others whiche offend more of ignorance than of malice. P. Séeing we haue spokē of phariseys, thou haste an euident exam∣ple of S. Paule,Act. 8. a. 9. a 1. Tim. 1. c if thou do cōsider whē he was a pharisey and a persecuter, before yt he was conuerted to the Gospell. M. I know wel that he was then a greate per∣secuter of the Christians. Pet. Hée dothe playnly confesse it himselfe. But he did not persecute them with so euill a con∣science as the Scribes and Phariseis did persecute Christ and his apostles For he did more of ignorance than of malice, as he himselfe dothe witnesse.1. Tim. 1. c M. But was
there also no malice in him? P. As I doe not cléerely exempt from ignorance those which offend more of malice thā of igno∣rance, euen in like sort do I not exempt cléerely from malice those which offende more of ignorāce thā of malice. M. Thou meanest then that bothe sorts haue both ignoraunce and malice in them, and that there is no difference betwéene them, but only in the muchnesse or litlenesse of the ignoraunce and malice of eyther sorte. P. Thou moughtest well vnderstande it by that which I haue sayd: And therfore we say, that they whiche offende more of ig∣norance than of malice,Rom. 10.  offende by zeale without knowledge, and the others whi∣che fight against the knowledge whiche they haue, do sinne and fight more open∣ly against their owne conscience, and in very déede oftentimes go so far, that they sinne agaynst the holie Ghost,Matth. 12.  the which as Iesus Christe wilnesseth, shall neuer be pardoned of God, bicause that he figh∣teth openly against the grace and the gif∣tes of the holie Ghost, without the whi∣che no man may euer obtaine pardone. M. I woulde gladly that thou diddest ex∣pounde
vnto me some thing more fami∣liarly what this sinne of the holy Ghost is: for there be verye fewe that are fully resolued therin. P. I woulde shewe thée myne opinion, but the matter would be too long for this present, wherfore let vs folow our purpose which we haue begon. Of the comparison betwene those which offende of malice, and those whiche offende through ignorance. M. I Iudge these last which offēd of ma∣lice to be much worse than the first, and further off frō the kingdom of God. P. Thou iudgest right well: For ther is yet better séede of Religion and greater testimonie of the feare of God, and of loue toward him, in those which sin of ig∣norāce and thorow zeale, without know∣ledge, than in them whiche sin as of pur∣pose determined, and against their owne conscience, which testifieth vnto them of the good which they will not folowe, and condemneth the euil which they do. M. It séemeth to mee also that they whiche of∣fend more of malice than of ignorāce, be further of from the nature of God, & that
they haue more of the nature of the di∣uell than the others. P. It is euen so: for the diuell hath muche more malice than ignorance. M. I thinke in déede that he doth not often offende of ignorance, but only of malice that is in him. P. And ther∣fore I said heretofore that there was no∣thing wherein man didde more resemble God, and wherein he did better expresse his image, than in goodnesse. For it is a vertue the whiche God doth neuer com∣municate but to his elect. Of the difference which God vseth in the dispensation of his gifts betwene the e∣lect and the reprobates and how the wicked corrupt and abuse the giftes of God. M. ANd doth he communicate his o∣ther vertues to the reprobates? P. To speake proprely, God doth not cō∣municate his vertues to the wicked and to the reprobate: For albeit he bestowed vpon them of his gifts and of his graces, yet are they not vertues in their person, as they be in God and in his electe. M. Why so? P. Bycause they doe abuse
and peruert them as dothe the diuell, in such sorte that whereas they should serue to the honor of God, it is no thank to thē that they dishonor him not by them: And on the other side, bicause they do so foule thē, not reporting thē to the glorie of god as they ought to do, but do cleane contra∣rie, they do infect and enpoyson them, as muche as in them is, by the venim which the diuell hath put into their heartes and vnderstandings, in suche sorte that they be in them, so farre as concerneth theyr person, as a meate, whiche of his nature béeing good, mought be corrupted by poy∣son. M. Declare this to mée some thing more easily, and giue mée some exam∣ples. P. We consider in God chiefly his power, his wisedome, and his goodnesse, whiche are thrée excellent vertues, to the whiche all the others may be referred. Nowe if his goodnesse were not ioyned with his power, and his wisedome, his power should be tyrannie, and his wise∣dome cautele & craft, as it is in the diuell. But the goodnesse that is in him, is the cause that hée neuer abuseth his power & his wisedome, but maketh it alway to
serue his iustice and clemencie, his mer∣cie and charitie, and all his other like ver∣tues which procéede al from that infinite goodnesse whiche is in him, whiche is the fountayne, and which is goodnesse it selfe. M. Wilte thou say by this that God doth communicate of his power, of his know∣ledge, and of his wisedome to the wicked and reprobates? P. I say more than that, for I say he communicateth of it ouer to the very deuilis: but not of his goodnesse nor the true vertues which procéede of the same. M. How vnderstandest thou it? P. We cannot denie but that the deuills he maruellous strong and mightie, & muche wiser than are all men. No more may we in like sorte denie but that they haue re∣ceyued this power, knowledge and vn∣derstanding of God, wherefore we maye call them mightie, and wise in the sense that men take these names. M. It séemeth to me that we may saye the like of Ty∣rants and of many other men, of whome the one sorte are mightie and strong, & the others skilfull, wise & graue according to the world: & an other sort haue both these qualities togither, and yet for al that they
be not honest and vertuous men, but vi∣cious and wicked. P. It is bycause they do abuse these giftes of God, and therefore their power is violence and tyrannie, and their wisedome and vnderstanding cau∣tele and malice. For the true power and wisedome maye neuer be separate from goodnesse and other vertues. VVhat cause men haue to glory of the gifts of God, and of vvhat qua∣litie, and vvhiche be those men that ought to be most esteemed. M. I Sée nowe well that men haue no greate occasion to glory in the giftes of God which they haue receyued, if they haue not receyued those same, whereby they may be made the children of God, and made like to him, in goodnesse, iustice and holynesse, and by whose meanes they are fashioned and framed to make all the others to serue to his glory, who hath gi∣uen them vnto them, cōsidering that they serue them not but to greater condemna∣tion, if that they haue not those which are the principall. P. There is yet this more,
that withoute these giftes whereof thou speakest, the most excellente and most of estimation in the world may not greatly glory in any thing whatsoeuer, wherein the deuill hath not more iust occasion to glory than they, yea verily, if they should prophecie or shoulde do miracles. M. And yet mē do muche more estéeme those same gifts, and power, knowledge, wisedome, eloquence and such like gifts, than they do goodnesse, iustice, holynesse, innocencie, & such other vertues which followe and ac∣companie them. For if a man be but an honest and vertuous man, not hauing those other gifts which are of more great shewe before men, and whiche men haue in greater admiration, he shall not bée estéemed, but shall bée contemned as a poore vile and abiecte man. On the con∣trarye if a man haue these other giftes, althoughe he bée otherwyse vyciouse and wicked, yet shall hée bée euermore estéemed and aduaunced among men. Peter. I confesse that whiche thou sayest. And so by the same verye meane the Deuyll myghte bée preferred vnto the honestest manne of the worlde. For as
I haue alredy sayd, he is more excellente than any man in all those thinges wherof the most braue and most excellente of the world may glory and vaunte them. M. I sée well they do greatly deceiue thēselues therein, & that an honest man, which hath the true feare of God and liueth holy, is much more to be estéemed, than al ye most mightie, skilfull, wise, experimented and discréete, and all the most excellent that a man mought finde in all things, if ye feare of God, goodnesse, iustice and holynesse be wanting. P. Thou concludest very well. And therfore Iesus Christ sayd to hys A∣postles, whiche did glory bycause the de∣uills were subiect to them, by meane of ye gifte of miracle which was giuē to them: Reioice not,Luke. 10. d saide he, in that that, the spi∣rites are subiecte to you, but reioyce in that that your names are writtē in Hea∣uen. M. What meaneth he thereby? Pe. That they should much more estéeme the fauoure whiche God had shewed vnto them in that that he had chosen them to bée his children and heires,Iohn. 17. b. and that hée had made them partakers of the giftes, by meane whereof they haue obtayned such
a benefite, than in that that he gaue them the gifte of miracles, yea indéede, than in that that he made them Apostles. For Iudas was chosen an Apostle, and had the gifte of prophecie and of miracles, as we haue alredy sayde, but for that he was not of the true chosen which were chosen to be the children of God, the gifts which he had receiued of him serued him not but only to more greiuous condemnation. And therefore Iesus Christe did call hym Deuill, bycause he had not those other more excellente giftes of God,Iohn. 6. g. by whiche he moughte haue béene reformed to hys Image as the other Apostles were. M. Thou touchest here thinges whyche doo well deserue to be noted, to the ende that we please not our selues nor glory at all but in the grace that God doth shewe vs in Iesus Christe. Peter. For that cause Saincte Paule dothe also witnesse, that if a man had the gifte of tongues in so great perfection that he could speake the very language of Angells,1. Cor. 13. a and although he coulde by the gyfte of miracle remoue mountaines from one place to an other, yet notwithstanding it should be nothing
if he had not charitie, the which doth testi∣fie, that there is true faith in the man that hath it, but also maketh the man like vn∣to God,1. Iohn. 4. b. insomuch as Sainct Iohn saith, he is charitie it selfe. The thirtenth Dialogue is of the Churche, and of the ministerie of the same. MATHEVV. I Do now well vnderstande the difference that thou puttest be∣twene the giftes of the holye Ghost, and how much some are more excellent and more necessarie, and more to be desired than others: And therefore if thou haue no more to saye at this presente, neyther concerning his person, ne yet his gyftes, it séemeth to me, that it shall be good that we speake nowe of the Churche, whereof wée haue not yet spoken. Peter. It is one of the chiefe pointes, whiche we haue yet to handle.
For the Churche is the same wherein God dothe open all the treasures of hys graces and gyftes, whereof we haue euen nowe spoken, and for whose sake he giueth them, to whome he giueth them. Mathevv. Shewe me then what the Churche is. Peter. If wée take the name of the Churche in generall, it signifieth assemblie or companie,Iohn. 17. . Ephes. 5. . but when we speake of the Churche of God, we take it not only for an assemblie and companie of all sortes of people, but for a companie and assemblie of men, the whiche GOD hathe cho∣sen from others, and hathe consecra∣ted and sanctifyed them vnto himselfe in his Sonne Iesus Chryste by hys holye Spirite. Mathevve. Is that the cause why she is called holye? Peter. Yea, and why she is also called the Communyon and Communaltye of Sainctes.Ephes. 2. b. d. 5. c. Collos. 2. d. 1. Cor. 6. e. 12. d. For there is none other communaltie or companie whiche is holye, and is gouerned and guyded by the Hollye Ghoste, but onelye thys, whyche dothe acknowledge Ie∣sus Chryste for hir onelye Heade,
King,Iohn. 9. f. Iohn. 17. c Rom. 1. a. 1. Cor. 2. a. 2. Cor. 1. a. Ephes. 1. a. 2. a Sauioure and redéemer. M. Which be those Sainctes whereof she is called the communion? P. They be all the true faithfull whiche by faith are made mem∣bers of Iesus Christe whiche is the holy one of holy ones, the whiche hath giuen his holy spirite to his Churche to sancti∣fie it. And therefore Saincte Paule dothe call all Christians Saincts. Of the sanctifieng of the Church, and of the members of the same. M. Ephes. 2. d. 4. b. c. d. 2. Cor. 1. d. Rom. 6. b. 8. bBY what meane is it that God dothe sanctifie hys Churche to hymselfe by his holy Spirite? P. By faith in hys Sonne Iesus Christ, by the whiche she is vnited and ioyned to him as is the body to his head. Wherefore she is also a par∣taker of the same very soule which is in the head, the whiche giueth it corporall life. For the head liueth not by one soule, and the rest of the body by an other, but do lyue bothe by one very soule, forso∣muche as the head and all the members of the body are but one body and not sundrye. Mathevve. Séeing it is so, none maye then bée of that holy com∣panie
and assemblie but those which haue true faithe in Iesus Christe, and whiche for that cause are called faithfull. Peter. It is easie to vnderstand. M. Séeing that they haue faithe, they are all then also made partakers of the giftes of the holie Ghost, the whiche thou hast sayd are pro∣per to the only electe of God, and with∣out the which men maye not be accomp∣ted for gods children, and be heires of the heauenly glorie. Pe. Thou mayst thereof iudge by that whiche we haue alreadie heretofore sayde to this purpose: and by consequent thou mayste also iudge what is the estate of such, which by their incre∣dulitie are withoute, and shut from that holie assemblie and companie. Of the ministerie of the Churche, and of the gifts necessarie to the same. M ANd which is the meane to attaine to that faithe, by whiche the faith∣ful are receiued into that holy companie, and be in the same incorporate into the body of Iesus Christ, as mēbres of him?Rom. 10. c. d P. It is by the ministerie of the word of God, according to the saying of Saincte Paule, that faith is giuen by the hearing
of the same. M. Is that the cause why the same Apostle sayde, that God hath giuen to his Church,Ephes. 4. b some Apostles, some Pro∣phets, others Euangelists, and others pa∣stors and Doctors, for the establishment of the Saintes to the worke of admini∣stration for the buylding vp of the bodie of Chryst, vnto the tyme that wée come all into the vnitie of the faith and know∣ledge of the Sonne of God, to be a perfect man, according to the measure of the full age of Chryste? P. Beside that whyche thou sayest, thou hast yet to note, that S. Paule meaneth not by these words, that Chryst giueth only men to his Churche, whiche maye haue these offices, but also that he giueth them gifts méete for them, wherby they may wel exercise them. M. Séeing it is so, these guiftes of the holie Ghost which thou hast sayd, that God did distribute, not only to the faithful, but al∣so oftentymes to the vnfaithfull, are ne∣cessarie for his Churche. Peter. There be of them that are so necessarie vnto it, that the Churche can not be a Churche without them, and therfore they be euer in hir. But there be others without the
whiche she may better bée: And therfore god hath not giuen vnto them hir but for a certaine time. Hovve that the gifte of preaching is at all times necessarie in the Church, and of the ordinarie ministe∣rie of the same. M. DEclare to me more familiarly by examples thy meaning. Pe. Sée∣ing that the Church can not be a Chur∣che but by the meane of Faithe in Iesus Chryst, and that the meane whereby the faithfull whiche are the membres of the same, are called to the faithe,Rom. 10. c. d is the prea∣ching and hearing of the woorde of God, it followeth well, that necessarily, this word be euer there taught, and that the Churche be first assembled togither, and afterward augmēted, entertayned, & con∣serued by ye same. M. I do so vnderstād it wel. P. Now this word cānot be there set forth & entertained but only yt ther be mē which haue this gift of the holy Ghost to know how to set it forth in such sort as it is méet, as true {pro}phets & ministers of god as the Lord hathe also promised vnto it, when he said by Moyses, and after by E∣say,
that he wold giue to his people, a pro∣phet, in whose mouth he would putte his word, and that it should neuer depart frō the mouthe of the séede of his people, and that his spirit also shuld neuer be separate from it. M. I thinke that that prophecie which thou hast now alledged of Moyses ought to be proprely vnderstode of Iesus Christe. P. Sainct Peter and S. Steuen doe also applie it to his person,Act. 3. d. 7.  as to the head and prince of all prophetes and mi∣nisters, whiche giueth power to the mi∣nisterie of all others. But that exposition which is very certaine and very wel ap∣plied, doth not let at al, but that this pas∣sage of Moyses may be taken for the or∣dinarie ministerie which God hath esta∣blished in his Church, as the circumstāce of the place dothe sufficiently declare it, the which ministerie hath euer ben foun∣ded in Iesus Christ, whiche is the foun∣dation of the prophets and Apostles. M. Doest thou vnderstand then by this gifte wherof thou hast nowe spoken, the gift of prophecie? P. We doe commonly call it by that name, following the manner of speach which S. Paule hath vsed to that
purpose in the first epistle to ye Corinths.1. Cor. 12. b 14. a.g For albeit that all the ministers of the word of God haue not all the gifts which the aunciēt Prophets had, which are spe∣cially called by that name, yet notwith∣stāding they are called Prophets in all ye holie Scriptures, in as much as they bée the mouth of the holie Ghost, as wer the auncient prophets, by whom God spake to his Church, and doth set foorth to hir the same doctrine, whiche he hath hereto∣fore declared vnto hir by his aunciente prophets. M. We may then say the same of the name of Apostle and Euangelist, and of al other such lyke names and offi∣ces whiche appertayne to the ministerie of the Churche. P. It is true: For albeit that the name of apostle and Euangelist do import more thā the name and office of a simple pastor and minister of the go∣spell, yet for all that none may be a pa∣stor and minister of the Gospell, vnlesse he be also as an Apostle and an Euan∣gelist, in respecte of the doctrine whyche he beareth, for the verie same reason for whiche he may also be called prophet, as I haue euen nowe expounded.
How that the ministerie of the worde of God is perpetually necessarie to the Churche in this worlde. M. I Do now well vnderstand the cause not only wherfore this gifte of pro∣phecie is necessarie to the Churche, but also for what cause it is necessary that it be perpetual in it. P. Séeing that the per∣petuall ministerie of the worde of God is necessarie, this gift of prophecie is al∣so necessarie, forsomuche as without the same this ministerie can not subsiste and stande, nor be ministerie of the Churche of Christ. M. It then foloweth, that euen as this ministery can not be without this gift of preaching, euen so the Church can not be the Church of Christ without this ministerie, no more than it may be with∣out faith, the whiche she can not obtayne but by the meane of the word of God, set foorth by this ministerie. P. God may wel inspire his faithe to his chosen by other meanes if it please him: but seeing he hath ordeined this, he doth it not ordinarily by any other, neyther is it lawfull for vs to séeke for any other, but must holde vs to
this same wherevnto God hath bounds vs, notwithstanding that it standeth al∣waye in his libertie, to communicate his giftes and graces as pleaseth him. Of other giftes of God whiche are not so necessarie for the Church as the gift of preaching. M. I Do now wel vnderstand this point, but thou haste not yet giuen me ex∣ample of the other guiftes of the Holie Ghoste, the whiche be not so necessarie for the Churche as is the gifte of prea∣ching: And therfore also they be not per∣petual in hir. P. Thou hast amōg others, the gift of tongs, and the gift of miracles and suche lyke, the whiche God gaue to his Churche but for a certayne tyme, and to certayne persones, as hée maye yet gyue them when it shall please him. And when he hath giuen them, he hathe yet done the same, to the ende that hys gifts shuld serue to the ministerie of his worde, to the ende it should be the better receyued,1. Cor. 14. g and that the infidels shoulde be the more mightily vanquished, & the most weak ones ye better fortified. M. I do wel
vnderstand it so.. Cor. 14. g P. And therfore Saint Paule speaking of these gifts, exhorteth the faithfull to endeuour themselues, and to trauayle rather for the gift of prophe∣cie, whiche comprehendeth the true vn∣derstanding of the Scriptures, as more profitable and more necessarye to the Church, than the others, wherof we haue euen nowe spoken. Howe the Lorde taketh the ministers of his Churche of his verie people, and not of a strange people. M. WHen thou diddest alledge the promise which god hath made to his Church of the perpetuall gift of prea∣ching, and of the ordinarie mynisterie whiche it pleased him to appointe in the same, it séemeth to me that thou saydst that he hathe promised to put his worde into the mouthe of the very séede of the Churche:Esay. 59. d by the which séed, I vnderstand the children & the membres of the same, and of the people of God. P. Thou takest it verie well, and therfore the Lord hath playnely sayde by Moyses,Deut. 18. d that he will rayse vp out of the middest of his people,
those Prophets the whiche he will gyue vnto hir, to teach hir, to the ende that they shall not go foorthe of his Churche to séeke them. Howe agréeth this then with that which thou hast heretofore sayde, that the gifte of prophecie and suche like, were as well communicate to infidells and repro∣bates, as thou hast very well proued by testimonies and examples of the holy Scriptures? P. That maketh not at all a∣gainst that whiche I haue now sayd. For albeit that God at times doth bestowe of his gifts vppon the vnfaithfull, the which in deede he doth not bestow vppon euery faithfull man, yet for all that it followeth not but that he doth cōtinually chose some in his Churche, to whome he giueth thys gift & this office, albeit he doth it not euer after one sorte. For he sendeth either moe or fewe, according as it is néedefull, and according to the fauoure that he wil shew vnto it, be it secretly or publiquely accor∣dingly as he will make himselfe knowen to his. M. But can it not well come to passe also that very those whiche are cho∣sen in his Church, may be Hypocrites and rather woolues and hierlings thā good pa∣stors?
P. That commeth often times to passe, and the example whiche thou hast in Iudas, doth confirme sufficiently vnto vs that which thou sayest, if in déede wée had none other. But when the Churche knoweth them to be such, she should pro∣uide for: it by the meanes that God hathe giuen hir in that behalfe. M. And if they be only mercenaries, and not apperante wolues, may she endure them? P. If they be wolues, she cānot endure them, for so∣much as they be of false doctrine. If they be onely mercenaries, and if she cannot easily knowe them, or that she haue not the meanes to ridde hir from them and to haue better, she may beare with thē, pro∣uided that ye doctrine which they set forth be not false, albeit that in the rest they do not discharge the office of a pastor as they ought to do. The fourthtenth Dialo∣gue is of the preaching of the Gospell. Of the principall partes of the ministerie of the Church.
MATHEVV. NOwe séeing that weare come vnto the mynisterie of the Churche, de∣clare vnto me what it conteyneth in ef∣fecte. P. We maye deuide it into thrée principall partes. M. Whiche be they? P. The administration of the word & Sacra∣ments, and of the ecclesiastical discipline. Of the administration of the vvorde, and of the principall points that therein are to be considered. M. WHat haue we to consider vppon the administration of the word? P. There be chiefly two pointes. Math. Whiche is the first? P. That it be purely set foorth as God hath reuealed it vnto vs in hys holy scriptures. Mathevv. Which is the seconde? P. That it be set foorthe in that order whiche the Lorde hath or∣dayned that it shoulde be, and to the edifi∣eng of all men. Of the points that are required to set foorth purely the vvorde of God.
M. WHich points be they that are re∣quired in the pure setting foorthe of the word of God, in suche sorte as thou sayest it oughte to be set foorthe? P. They maye be all comprehended in two. M. Which is the firste? P. It is that none set foorth any other doctrine, than that which is conteyned in the holy Scriptures, and that is fully agreable to the same, with∣out adding any thing to it, or diminishing any thing from it, and without mingling with it of any thing of the doctrines and traditions of men. M. Whiche is the se∣conde? P. It is not ynough to set foorthe that word, accordingly as it is conteyned in the holy scriptures, no in déede althogh men vse none other words than those ve∣ry same whiche the holy Ghost hath vsed in them, if the word be not foorthwith set foorth according to the meaning of the spi∣rite of God, by the whiche the same hath bene reueled in such sorte, as all the pas∣sages and testimonies of the same do a∣gree so well togither, that there is no cō∣tradiction, but that the one passage is an exposition to the other. M. Thou touchest here two points which are wel worth the
noting. For there be some that in stéede of the worde of God do set foorth whatsoe∣uer commeth in their minde, and pleaseth them. There be others, that although they set foorth the very testimonies of the holy Scriptures, yet for all that they corrupte the sense of them by their false vnderstā∣ding and exposition, and by the applicati∣on which they vse,Matth. 4. a. Luke. 4. b. and cōsequences which they drawe. P. The Deuill hath also al∣ledged the expressed worde of God when he tempted Iesus Christe, but that is not to alledge the worde of God, but it is to abuse the language of the holy Ghoste, to corrupte and peruerte it, and to couer lies with truth, as charmers and enchaunters do make the wordes of holy scriptures to serue to their sorceries and charmes. Of the principall pointes of Gods worde, vvhich oughte to be set foorth by the preaching of the same, & what order there ought to be obserued in setting of it foorth. M. I Vnderstand well that the worde of God may not properly be called the word of God, if it be not purely set foorthe as God hath reuealed it, and according
to the true meaning of the holy Ghost, by whome he hath reuealed it. But I would gladly that thou diddest touch in briefe the principall pointes which are contey∣ned in that worde, and in what order it ought to be set foorthe and taughte. P. As touching the principall points of the same we haue alredy hādled the greatest parte.Summarie of the Gos∣pell. Thou shalte heare afterward the reste which we haue yet to handle. But séeing thou desirest as it were a summarie: Ie∣sus Christe hath comprehended all the preaching of the Gospell in two princi∣pall points, when he commaunded his A∣postles to preach in his name repentance and forgiuenesse of sinnes to al people.Luke. 24. g M. Folowing then the diuision which Iesus Christ hath made of the doctrine whyche oughte to be preached by the Gospell, it then shoulde followe that we must begin by the preaching of repentaunce, and thē to come to the remission of sinnes. Peter. Séeing that Iesus Christe himselfe hath shewed that we must kéepe that order there can be no better had.
Of repentaunce by the vvhiche the preaching of the Gospell must be begonne. M. SHew me now what repentaunce is properly. P. It is a very displeasure which man hath in his harte of his sinne, the whiche engendreth in him an hatred against sinne, and a desire to liue better in time to come, refourming his life to the will of God. M. Séeing it is so, man may not then haue true repentance, if he know not first his sinne, and how muche it displeaseth God, and in like sorte doe chaunge his manner of life, to witte from euill to good, and from good to better. P. It is easie to vnderstande. Hovve that true repentaunce cannot be vvell preached vvithout ioyning of the doctrine of the lavve and the Gospell togither. M. ANd by what meane maye a man come to this knowledge of hys sinne? P. By the law of god,Rom. 3. a. 4. c. ye which doth not only make them manifest to mē, but doth also shewe vnto them the wrathe of God against them. M. There is then no minister that may wel preach repentāce.
withoute preaching the lawe of God. P. It cannot otherwise be done. But it is not ynough to preach the doctrine of the lawe if that of the Gospel be not foorthwith ioy∣ned vnto it. M. For what cause? P. For that that the lawe settethe foorth but the wrath of God against sinners, the shoulde bring men rather to dispaire than to true repentaunce, if there were no promise by the Gospell, of the grace and mercie of God whiche is offered to them in Iesus Christ, to obtayn remission of their sinnes in him, and by him. M. Giue me an exam∣ple of that which thou sayest. P. We haue one very euident in Iudas and S. Peter. M. Math. 26. g. Luke. 22. g. Matth. 27. aIt séemeth to me that it is written in the Gospel, not only that S. Peter did re∣pente, that he had denied Iesus Christe, but also Iudas, that he did betray hym. And that notwithstanding the repentance of Iudas letted him not from desperaci∣on, the whiche thing happened not to S. Peter, but wholly the contrarie. Peter. That happened to Iudas for the cause that I haue already cited, to witte, for that he layde houlde onely vppon the Iudgement of God set foorth in hys lawe,
without laying holde vpon the grace and mercie of God set foorth in his Gospel to all repentants and faithfull, as S. Peter did apprehend it, after that he had renoū∣ced Iesus Chryst. Howe that true repentance can not be without faith. M. IT followeth then that true repen∣tance can not be withoute true faith. P. It is very certain, that if a man haue not true faith in the word of God, for the first he shall make none accompt of the lawe, ne yet of all the threatnings of his iudgement conteyned in the same, but shall mocke at it onely as doe the A∣theists, and all men whiche are withoute God, without lawe, and without faithe, doe scoffe at all the holye Scriptures. M. If they haue no faith in the word of God concerning his lawe, there is no appa∣rance that they haue any more cōcerning the Gospell, and the grace and mercie of God promised in the same. P. That not∣withstanding, this fayth in the Gospel is the principall pointe that is required in true repentance. For albeit that a man
haue faith, in all that which the law de∣clareth, so it is that this faith can not let him to dispaire as Iudas did, if he passe not further to the Gospell, but suche a faith shal cause him to despaire the more. M. How may that be? P. Forsomuch as suche a faithe is not full, in as muche as shée leaueth the principall whereuppon the true faithe is founded, to witte, the promises of the grace of GOD in Ie∣sus Chryst. Of the true and false faythe and repentance. M. WHat doest thou then proprely call true faithe? P. A certaine assurance founded in the promises of god by the which man holdeth himselfe assu∣red of God in Iesus Chryste and by Ie∣sus Chryst. M. Why sayst thou that the faith which hath not this assurance, lea∣deth the man which regardeth but onely the lawe, rather to despaire than to hope of saluation? P. For bicause that so much the more man is assured, that God is au∣thor of his lawe, and that that whiche it
conteyneth, is true, euen so muche the more is he afrayd of the iudgemente of God, and can not fynde rest in his con∣science, bicause there is nothing without Iesus Christe, wherein to be assured a∣gainst the wrath of God. M. There is then by this reckening two sortes of pe∣nitence, to wit, one true & an other false. P. Euen as also there be two sortes of faith, for euen as they haue not full faithe which beleue not all the worde of God, and chiefly the word of the Gospel, euen so haue they no true repentaunce, whiche ioyne not togither the wrathe of GOD with his mercie, nor the mercie with the wrath. M. Euē as it is not inough to ap∣prehende the wrath of God withoute his mercie to haue true repentance, is it al∣so no more sufficient to apprehende his mercy without his wrath? P. Thou maist easily vnderstande, that none may well apprehende his mercie, if firste he doe not apprehende hys wrathe. For he that knoweth not the wrathe of God againste sinne, cannot tell nor vnderstande howe muche hée néedeth hys mercie,
and what mercie he sheweth him, when he receyueth him to mercie. Math. Thou sayst well. Peter. Moreouer, euen as they fall to dispaire whiche conceyue only the wrath of God withoute his mercie, euen so those whiche consider only his mercy, without hauing first conceyued what his wrath is, doe not estéeme sinne to be such as they ought to estéeme it: and in lyke case can neuer vnderstande what mercie is, nor howe greate the goodnesse of God is towarde them. M. I note wel al these pointes, that the very wicked and repro∣bate, may well attaine to suche a Faith and repentāce as was in Iudas, but they haue not at all the true faith and repen∣tance by the whiche the true children of God doe obtaine forgiuenesse of their sin∣nes. P. Thou muste also note, that there be some whiche accompte the mercie of God but of small price, bicause they doe not apprehend at al the wrath and iudge∣mente of God as they ought: And ther∣fore the repentance of suche persones is none other than a verye disguysing and faynednesse.
Of the forgiuenesse of sinnes, and of the assurance of the conscience by the same. M. THou wilte then say, that true re∣pentaunce beateth downe the sin∣ner in himself by the féeling of his sinnes and of the wrathe of God against them, and then directeth him to Iesus Chryste, to assure his conscience so beaten downe against the feares of the iudgemente of God. Pe. It is euen so. But to assure it as thou sayst, we must come to the other point, the whiche Iesus Chryste hath cō∣maunded to preache in his name wyth true repentance, whiche is the remission of sinnes, the whiche proprely belongeth to the Gospell. M. I doe well vnderstād that the sinner which féeleth himself faul∣tie before God by meane of his sinnes, is as a traytour and wicked doer, whiche can not be well assured of the punishe∣ment that he hath merited by meane of his faults that he hath committed, if first of al he be not assured to haue his grace & pardon of his prince and of his iudge. P. That same is also the cause why that af∣ter we haue made mētion of the church,
which is likewise called the communion of Sainctes, we do also confesse that we beléeue that the remission of sinnes is in hir, by meane of the communion that it hath with Iesus Christ, of the whiche we haue heretofore sufficiently spoken. Of the cōmunion of saincts, & hovve the church entreth into the same by meane of the ministerie of the Gospell. M. I Do well remember that when wée speake of that communion, thou hast sette me and put me againe vppon thys pointe, to declare vnto me the reste, the whiche thou hast not yet expounded vnto me. P. According to that whiche we haue already sayd, the Churche doth not only obtaine this remission of sinnes, whereof we nowe speake, but also the victorye a∣gainst sinne, death, hell, and the Deuill, and likewise eternall life, the whiche Ie∣sus Christ hath wonne for it, bycause that she is the spouse of him, and that she en∣treth into communion of all his goodes with him, by meane of this spirituall ma∣riage, by the whiche she is conioyned to him as a chast virgin by ye vertue of faith in him. M. Seing it is so, ye ministerie of the gospel is then a meane by the which
this holy aliance of marriage is made, that is betwéen Iesus Christ & his church, for the which cause there is such cōmuni∣on betwene Iesus Christ the husbande & the Church his espouse. P. Thou conclu∣dest very wel. For the Lord vseth ye same meanes in this spirituall mariage, yt men haue accustomed to vse in their ordinarie mariages. M. Which be those meanes? P. Thou doest firste wel vnderstand yt no mariage can be made except the husband and the wife do giue the faith of mariage ye one to the other, ye which emporteth all that which belongeth to true mariage. M It must néedes be so. For the true foun∣datiō of mariage lyeth in ye faith which ye husbād & the wife do giue one to ye other. And therefore men say that they whiche haue so giuen their faith, are assured by promesse. P. Now thou sayest that ye hus∣band & the wife cannot so giue their faith the one to the other, but that there is pro∣messe on both partes, the which cānot be done but by wordes by the whiche the husbande and the wife declare their will and consente. Mathevve. Albeit that the promesse be sufficiente for ye assurāce
and confirmation of the marriage, not∣withstanding, the custome is yet that the husbande giueth ordinarilye to his wyfe some gift, for more assurance and confir∣mation of their marriage, and also of the mutuall obligation that they haue made the one to the other. P. Euen the lyke is done by the ministerie of the Gospell be∣twéene Iesus Christe and his Churche. For there is the promise whyche Iesus Chryst made vnto hir: and then that is there also: wherby the Churche accepteth that promise of hir husbande, and by the which she giueth hir selfe to him, euen as he hath giuen himselfe to hir: And then the sacraments are as rings and iewels and such other gifts, which the husbands are accustomed to giue to their wyues for the more cōfirmation and approuing of their mariage. M. Séeing then that it is so, the ministers of the Church are in maner like, touching the spiritual mari∣age, to those whiche make the assurance betwéene the husbande and the wyfe, and do declare vnto them the promises, by the which they ought to bynd themselues the one to the other, and giuing them to
drinke or some other suche like token in the name of mariage. P. Thou doest not take it amisse, and therefore Sainct Iohn which was sent by God to bring to Iesus Christ by the meane of his ministerie, the Churche his espouse, is called the friende of ye bridegrome.Iohn. 3. d. 1. Cor. 11. a. And Sainct Paule hath written to the Corinthes to the same ef∣fecte: I am iealous of you, with a godly iealousye, for I haue ioyned you to an husband, to presente you a chast virgine to Christ. By vvhat meane men attayne to eternall life, and of the benefites comprehen∣ded in the communiō of Saincts. M. SEing that the communion of saincts comprehendeth al those good things whereof thou hast euen now made men∣tion, is that also the cause why that after the remission of sinnes, we confesse in like sorte the resurrection of the fleshe, and the life eternall? P. It is euen so. For to at∣taine to that felicitie, which is our ful cō∣solation, God doth graunt vs the forgiue∣nesse of our sinnes, without the which we cannot attaine to that happie life. M. Se∣ing
then that this communion of saincts with Iesus Christ, ye which is his church, bringeth with it so greate good thinges, whiche are the greatest that man maye wish and obtaine, surely they are thē ve∣ry happie which are comprehended in the same, and they very vnhappie which are shut from it. Pet. Euery man maye well knowe that. For séeing that the Churche is the kingdome of God whereof Christe is the chiefe king, there is no doubte, but that all those which are strangers & shut out of the Churche, be also shut out and banished frō ye companie of Iesus Christ, whiche is the chiefe and king thereof, and so consequently of the happie and eternall life. M. Who is the cause thereof? P. It is forsomuch as if there be no man that may enter into this communion, but by the meane of Iesus Christe, euen so Iesus Christ cannot be vnited to any mā, which is not a member of his Church, no more than a heade maye be vnited to another body than his owne, and his members, and cannot be separated, but all the body dyeth.
Of the excellencie of the ministerie, and of the other two partes of the same. M. SEing thē that the ministerie of the word of God is vnto vs as a way to bring vs to true repentaunce and to true faith, to the ende that afterward we may come euen to Iesus Christ, and the com∣munion of all his riches, me thinketh we ought to haue that ministerie in great re∣uerence and in great price.Esay. 52. b. Rom. 10. e. P. Esay dothe very well set it foorth, when he saith that the féete of those are faire whiche declare peace, and the good things whiche he doth and will bestowe vppon his Church. M. Thou hast hithervnto spoken of the ad∣ministration of the word, the which is ad∣ministred by this ministerie, but thou hast yet sayde nothing of the administra∣tion of the sacramentes, nor yet of the dis∣cipline of the Church, which are the two other partes of the ministerie, whereof thou hast made mention. P. Al these two administratiōs depēd of ye first. For ye Sa∣cramēts are as dependances of the prea∣ching of the worde of God. M. And what is the discipline? P. It concerneth the or∣der and gouernemente of the Churche, which hath respecte to the good prouision
for the same according to that worde, to the ende that all be done in it by so good order, that the word of God and the Sa∣cramentes be so administred, receyued, and honoured as is méete, and that all that which might hinder the true seruice of God, and the edificatiō of the Church, be there taken away. The fiftenth Dialogue is of the sacramēts of baptisme, and of the Lords Supper. Of the Sacraments and of the number of them. MATHEVV. Rom. 4. b,SEing that we are come vp∣pon the matter of Sacra∣ments, shewe me now for ye first, what thou meanest by Sacrament. P. A visible signe ordeyned of Iesus Christ as a seale, to confirme vs the bet∣ter in the saith of the promises, the which god hath made vs, of our saluatiō in him. M. How many Sacraments hath he or∣deyned?
P. There are but two which may be called properly by that name, and that may be accoumpted for common Sacra∣mentes, generally of the whole Churche, as the true nature of the Sacramentes of the same requireth. M. Whiche be these two sacramentes? P. That of baptisme and the supper. M. For what cause did Iesus Christe ordeyne neyther moe nor fewer? P. Thou must vnderstande that if Iesus Christ had ordeyned so many Sacramēts as we receiue benefits and graces of him, to represente the same vnto vs by them, their number shoulde be infinite, and in that sorte should he engender confusion in mens vnderstanding, which are rude and grosse. And therefore he was contented to ordeyne a small number, by the which it hath pleased him to represent vnto vs his principall benefites, vnder the which mē may comprehende and bring all the rest. M. Seing there is suche daunger in it as thou hast sayde, coulde not he well haue comprehended in onely Sacrament that which he hath cōprehended in two? P. He could well haue done it, if it had so pleased him. But as he woulde on the one
side prouide for the rudenesse of our vn∣derstandings, in sparing them in that that he would not lode them with great num∣bers of Sacramentes, euen so woulde he succoure our infirmitie by the small nū∣ber which he hath ordeyned for vs, to the end that we mought more specially know in two Sacramēts yt which we could not so easilie & so properly cōprehend in one. Of that vvhich is generall and common to all Sacraments. M. SHew me thē which be those diuers benefits and the sacraments which represent them. P. For more plaine vn∣derstanding of that whiche thou demaun∣dest, we haue first to consider that whiche is commō and generall to all the Sacra∣ments: and then we will come to that whiche is proper and speciall to euery of them. M. What is that then which they haue common to them both? P. There be chiefly three points. M. Which is ye first? P. It is that God on his part doth declare and testifie the good will which he hathe toward his faithfull, & the fauoure which he wil shew thē in his sōne Iesus Christ. M. Which is the second? P. It is the con∣fession
of faith and the homage whiche he also requireth of the faithful, by the which they confesse and acknowledge him to be theyr God, and Iesus Christ to be theyr true sauioure & redéemer, by this meane declaring the faith that they haue in hys promises, as though they made a solemne oth to Iesus Christe, as to their king and true Lord and sauioure. M. Which is the thirde? P. It is an aduertisement whiche we haue in all the sacraments of the du∣tie of Christians, and of the life that they should lead, folowing the professiō which they make when they do receiue thē. M. Declare vnto me nowe by examples all these points, and thē shew me foorthwith what it is of euery sacramēte in his par∣ticuler, and what euery one of them hath proper and speciall. P. For the firste, sée∣ing that all the Sacraments do send vs to Iesus Christe and to his deathe, they are witnesses and seales of the forgiuenesse of our sinnes & of the agremēt & cōmuniō which we haue with god by Iesus Christ. M. They serue vs then as an acquittance of that wherevnto we are bounde at the iudgemente of God, and as a letter of
fauoure authorised, and well signed and sealed with ye seale of ye soueraine prince. P. It is euen so. And as God on his parte dothe assure vs of his pardon and of oure saluation, we also on our parte doe owe vnto him that honour, that we hold him true in his promisses, and that wée ac∣knowledge him for oure onely God, and Iesus Chryst his sonne for our only sa∣uiour: and that wée renounce all other gods and idoles, and all false religions, and that we will followe none other but his only, suche as he hath set foorth vnto vs in his worde. Of Baptisme, and of the signifi∣cation of it. M. SEing that all Sacramentes haue that in common, declare to me now in speciall what baptisme is, and what is propre vnto it, and wherein it differeth from the Supper? Peter. Baptisme is a Sacramente of repentance, in the which GOD dothe assure vs by hys promisse of our regeneration, which hath the sign of the water as his seale for the confirma∣tion of the same. Ma. I doe not here aske
thée what Regeneration is, bycause that thou hast sufficiētly declared it here∣tofore: but I doe aske thée if the Supper be not also a Sacrament of repentance, and of our regeneration? Pe. Thou haste here to consider, that forsomuche as thys benefit of regeneration the which we ob∣taine by Iesus Chryst, is one of the most excellente fauours that God sheweth vs, it hathe pleased Iesus Chryste to declare the same vnto vs by certaine signes, and by a speciall Sacramente among others. For hée comprehendeth also the benefite of iustification and sanctification, of whi∣che we haue sufficiently and fully hereto∣fore spoken. Of the agreement and difference that is betwene baptisme and the supper. M. ANd what sayst thou of the supper? Pet. Thou canste not well vnder∣stande what the Supper is, if thou doe not first know what baptisme is. M. Hast thou any thing then yet to say concerning baptisme? P. For so muche as regenera∣tion emporteth renewing of lyfe, as if we were borne again in the house of GOD,
thou knowest well that a man must first be borne, and then nourished after that hée is borne. M. Wilte thou then saye that Baptisme is to vs a Sacramente of oure newe and spirituall birthe, by the whiche we are borne againe children of God in his Church, and that the Supper is to vs an other Sacrament of the spiri∣tuall nouriture, whiche is necessarie for vs, to entertayne vs in this new and spi∣rituall lyfe, of the whiche baptisme is to vs a sacrament? Pet. Thou haste herein to note, that God will first assure vs, that hée accompteth vs for hys children, be∣gotten by the incorruptible séede of hys woorde, in the vertue of the holy Ghost into his Churche, whiche is the espouse of his sonne Iesus Chryste: and therfore hée will witnesse vnto vs by thys Sa∣cramente of Baptisme that he receyueth vs into his house, and dothe aduowe vs for his lawfull children, whiche he hath adopted to hym selfe in his sonne Iesus Chryste, whiche he will as it were enroll in the booke of his housholde, as his true children and enheritours.
Of the proprietie of the water of Bap∣tisme to represent the graces of god whiche are communicated vn∣to vs by the same. M. FOr somuche as it is so,1. Cor. 5. b Heb. 9. d Apocal. 1. a Esay. 12. b Ezech. 34. c Zach. 13. a Iohn. 3. a. 7. f 1. Cor. 15. e Ephe. 4. c. Colloss. 3. b Rom. 6. a what pro∣prietie hath the water to represent vnto vs all that thou sayest? P. It hathe great proprietie. M. Whiche is the first? P. Forsomuch as ye nature of it is to wash and to clense, it is verie proper to repre∣sente howe we are washed and clensed in the bloud of Iesus Chryste, and by the water of lyfe, which is the holy ghost wherewith wée are watered and wa∣shed by the vertue of the same: and ther∣fore the holy Ghost is often signified in the holy Scriptures by water. M. Are there yet any other proprieties? P. Wée can not vnderstād our regeneration into a new creature to be made new men, ex∣cept wée vnderstād also the mortificatiō of our old nature, which is our old Adam, and our old man: And therfore S. Paule sayth: That by baptisme we ar dead and buried, & risen agayn with Iesus Chryst. M. Is the water propre to signifie ye deth & burial of the old mā, & ye resurrectiō and
renewing of the newe? P. The water a∣lone doth not represēt vnto vs only these things, but also the maner in the whiche it is administred in baptisme. M. Howe may that be? P. Thou séest that cōmonly it is poured vpon him that is baptised, in token that our old Adam is drowned and dead in Iesus Christ,Exod. 14. f. g 1. Cor. 10. a as the olde Pharao and the Egyptians were drowned in the redde sea. And therfore Saint Paul com∣pareth baptisme to the passage thorowe the red sea. M. And what signifieth thys that they doe but poure this water vpon him that is baptized? P. The same signi∣fieth vnto vs, howe that of ye death of the olde man the newe riseth: as if our olde Adam after that he were drowned were risen againe a newe man, and that all his olde filthines were drowned by the wa∣ter of grace in the which he was plunged: which is the bloode of Iesus Christe, the true washer of regeneration. M. I doe nowe vnderstand all this very well: but is there any other proprietie to consider touching the water? P. If we shuld make comparisō of all the other properties that it hath with the holy Ghost, which it doth
figure in Baptisme, I could giue thée ma∣nie others, from which I doe abstaine at this present, seing that that which I haue said, may suffice thée for the vnderstāding of the matter of Baptisme. Of the admonition and figure that the faithfull haue of a Christian life in Baptisme. M. HAst thou yet any thing to say tou∣ching this Sacrament? P. I haue nowe to shewe thée what pattern and ex∣ample wée haue there of a Christian life, and of the dutie of a Christian, and of true repentance, which ought to be in him all the time of his life. M. Expound all these to me. P. Séeing that baptisme is to vs ye Sacrament of regeneration of penaunce and of mortification, wée are admonished by the same of the perpetuall penance that ought to be in vs,Tite. 3. b Luk. 3. c Colloss. 3. a Rom. 6. d & of the mortifica∣tion where by we ought to mortifie our earthly mēbers, to the end that wée being dead to sinne, may liue to God in iustice. Of the Supper, and why Iesus Christe did ordaine two signes for the same.
M. Matth 26. c Mark. 14. c Luke. 22. b 1. Cor. 11. c. f.IT séemeth to mée nowe that I doe sufficiently vnderstand that matter of Baptisme, and therfore lette vs pro∣céede to the Supper. P. The Supper is a Sacrament in the which Iesus Christ representeth to vs by the signe of breade and wine, howe he hath giuen his bodie and his bloud to the deathe, that hauyng reconciled vs vnto God, he moughte bee our spirituall nouriture, and mought cō∣firme vs in the faith of the promisse whi∣che he had made vnto vs. M. For what cause hathe he represented his bodie and bloud by the bread and by the wyne? P. To signifie vnto vs, that euen as breade and wine are giuen to vs by God for our corporall nouriture, euen so the bodye and bloud of Iesus Chryste is giuen vn∣to vs for spiritual foode. M. And for what cause did Iesus Chryste ordeyne two si∣gnes in the supper, & but one in baptism? Mought not the bread or the wine onely haue ben sufficient to represent this spi∣rituall life, without adding both of them? P. As he hath ordeined the signe of ye wa∣ter whiche is very méete to represente that whiche in Baptisme he woulde re∣present
vnto vs, euen so he hath chosen for the Supper those signes that were most méet to signifie that which he wold haue signifyed in the same. M. I doubte not at all of that. P. And therfore albeit that by one onely signe as in Baptisme he coulde haue done all that whiche hath pleased him to do by two, yet he woulde giue two for the better expressing of that whiche it pleased him to giue. Of that whiche is speciall in the Supper, wherein it differeth from baptisme, and howe that all that is verye well represented in the bread and the wyne. M. DEclare vnto mée then the proper∣ties whiche the breade and wine haue agréeable to the things, the whiche they represent in the supper. P. For the first, thou must note and remember that whiche I haue alreadie touched, that the supper hathe this proper vnto it, yt euen as baptisme is to vs a testimonie of our spiritual birth & life, which we obtayn by Iesus Christe, euen so is the supper a sa∣crament and testimonie, howe that God wil continue in vs that benefite whereof
baptisme is to vs a Sacrament, and will nourishe and entertayne vs in the same spirituall lyfe, the which he signifieth vn∣to vs therin, vnto the tyme that we haue the full enioying in heauen with Iesus Chryst. M. I thinke than that to be the cause why Iesus Chryste would signifie those things to vs by the eating and drin∣king, and by those things which are pro∣pre to nouriture. P. It is euen so: and for somuche as man can not lyue by meate only or drinke only, except he haue them bothe togither, no more is Iesus Chryst contented to ordeyne only the breade, or only the wine, for signes of the spirituall nouriture, whiche wée haue in his Sup∣per, but would ordeine those two, to giue vs to vnderstande, that euen as he which hathe meate and drinke, hath his whole nouriture, euen so the faithefull haue in Iesus Chryst fully all that whiche is ne∣cessarie for the spiritual lyfe. M. Is there yet none other reason why Iesus Chryst did ordeyn those two signes? M. Yes, for Iesus Christe hathe also by these two si∣gnes better expressed, howe that he hath giuen his bodie and his lyfe to the deathe
for vs, thā if he had ordeined but one only, in so much as he hath giuen one particu∣ler signe to signifie his body and an other to signifye his bloude. M. What further signification hath it? P. To set the better before our eyes, howe that he is in déede dead for vs,Iohn. 3. b. Rom. 5. a. b. in so much as his bloude was separated from his body, and consequent∣lye his life, and that he hath so loued vs that he hath not spared it for vs. How we must eate the body and fleshe of Iesus Christ, and drinke his bloud in the Supper. M. BVt séeing that the breade represen∣teth vnto vs in the Supper ye fleshe and bodie of Iesus Christ, which is there gyuen vs for meate, and that the wine re∣presenteth the bloude which is there gy∣uen vs for drink, must wée there also eate the body of Iesus Christ and drinke hys bloude, in the same sorte as wée eate the breade and drinke the wine which repre∣sent them vnto vs? P. If there were none other reason, but that which may be ga∣thered of that which I haue euē now spo∣ken, it mought suffice vs to discharge our
heads of all such imaginations. M. I doe not well vnderstand yet what thou mea∣nest herein. P. Seing that Iesus Christe hath ordeyned one seuerall signe to sig∣nifie his body, and an other seuerall signe to signifie his bloud, and that it hath plea∣sed him so to discerne them the one from the other, ye better to represent to vs how his bloud was separated from his body for vs, in such sorte as his life and soule was separated likewise, it should also followe, that his body must be eatē a parte, as we there eate the breade, and there drink the bloud a parte as we there drinke ye wine. M. If it were so, we shoulde not haue in the Supper the liuing body of Christ, but dead and other thā he is raigning in hea∣uen, where his bloud is not separated frō his body. P. Thou sayest truth. But thou hast yet to note, that if the body and bloud of Iesus Christ were giuen vs to nourish and mainteyne vs in this corporall life, as is bread and wine, we shoulde then al∣so eate the body and drinke the bloude of Christe corporally, as we doe eate and drinke the corporall breade and wine. But forsomuche as they are giuen vs for
spirituall nouriture, we must eate and drinke them spiritually. M. What doest thou call to eate and drinke spiritually? Peter. To speake properly, to eate and drinke is vnderstoode of the body and of the bodily meate and drinke, but when we speake of spirituall thinges, we take those wordes for a figure, by the whiche we declare the spirituall thinges by the bodily thinges, bycause of the similitude and agremente that they haue togither. M. Why is that done? P. To the ende that by the similitude and compari∣son of corporall thinges, we moughte the better vnderstande the spirituall things. Of the true spirituall eating and drinking. M. DEclare this to me yet somewhat more plainely. Peter. Thou may∣est well vnderstande that the soule and the Spirite do neyther eate nor drinke corporally and materially as dothe the bodye. Mathevve. I doe well vnder∣stande at the leaste, that they haue
neither mouth, nor téeth, nor stomackes, nor bellies corporall whereby they may do ye same. P. And therefore it must néeds be that if the soule and the spirite do eate and drinke, they eate and drinke in an o∣ther sorte than doth the body, the whiche is proper and agreable to their nature. M. There is reason in that whiche thou sayest. P. And on the other side thou may∣est well knowe also, that the flesh of Ie∣sus Christ is neyther eaten nor chawed, neyther is swalowed downe into the sto∣macke and bellie, neyther is it digested, as is the corporall and materiall meate. M. For what cause is it then that Iesus Christ hath vsed that manner of spéeche, saying, he that eateth my flesh and drin∣keth my bloud,Iohn. 6. f. hath eternall life? P. It is to giue vs the better to vnderstande the communion and coniunction whiche we haue with him, and how that his flesh and his bloud do the very same towarde the soule, and also toward the body touching the spirituall life, being receiued with a true and liuing faith, as do the bread and wine towards ye body touching the bodily life, whē they are bodily eaten & dronken.
The sixtenth Dialogue is of the transubstātiation & cō∣substantiation, and of the true presence of Iesus Christ in the Supper. Of the error of transubstantiation, and hovv the Supper cannot be a Sacramente, if the bread and the vvine do not there remayne in their proper substance. MATHEVV. HOw is it that men do eate the flesh of Iesus Christ, and do drinke his bloud, as thou hast euen nowe saide? It is to bée vnderstoode that the breade and the wine be transubstantiate and conuerted into them, or else that they be ioyned and vni∣ted with the bread and the wine. P. For the firste, there is no reason eyther to thinke or saye, that the breade and the wine be conuerted or chaunged into the body and bloud of Iesus Christe. M. For what cause. P. Bycause that if the bread & the wine did not remayne still in the sup∣per, bread and wine, in their proper sub∣stance,
they shoulde not be the signes of the body & of the bloud of Iesus Christe, but if they were conuerted into the same, they shoulde be the selfe same thing, the which they oughte to signifie and repre∣sente vnto vs. M. What inconueniente should there be in that? P. There shoulde be this inconuenient in it, that the supper should be a Sacramente withoute signe, and so shoulde it haue no Sacramentall signe, without the which the Sacramēts may not be Sacraments. Of things vvithout the vvhich the sacraments cannot be sacramēts. M. HOwe vnderstandest thou that? P. Thou must note that a Sacra∣mente, cannot be a Sacramente excepte it haue at the leaste thrée things, whiche are of the proper substance of all Sacra∣mens. M. Whiche are these thrée things? P. The firste is the worde of God, which is the foundation of all the Sacraments. M. And the seconde? P. The visible and materiall signes such as God hath ordey∣ned by that very word. M. And the third? P. The thinges signified aswell by that
word as by the signes. Of things vvhich are to be considered in the vvord of God in all Sacraments, and in the signification of the same. M. DEclare vnto me that whiche thou sayest by some similitude. P. Sée∣ing that we be vppon the matter of the Supper, thou hast firste the worde of Ie∣sus Christ, in the which thou hast to note two pointes. M. Whiche be they? P. The first is the commandement which Iesus Christe there giueth, to take and to eate the bread, & to drinke the wine, which are giuen in the same. M. Which is ye secōd? P. The promise, whereby he declareth what it is that this bread and wine do si∣gnifie, and for what cause he hath ordey∣ned and commaunded to receiue them, and what frute we must looke for of them. Math. Wherevpon takest thou thys promise?Matth. 26. e. Marke. 14. Luke. 22. b. 1. Cor. 11. e. f. Pe. Vppon that whiche is saide of the breade. This same is my bo∣dye whiche is broken for you: and in like sorte vppon that whiche is spoken of the wyne. Thys cuppe is my bloude,
or the newe Testamente in my bloude, whiche is shedde for you: doe this in re∣membraunce of mée. Math. Muste wée vnderstande the lyke of all the other Sacramentes, to witte, that they haue commandemēt and promisse from God? Peter. There is no doubte thereof. Ma. What is there more yet to cōsider cōcer∣nyng the worde of GOD? P. There is nothing more to be consydered concer∣ning that same exteriour worde, whyche is pronounced by the mouth of the my∣nisters. Math. What resteth there yet more? Peter. That which is signified by the woorde, the whiche doth also declare the signification of the signes, how God doth accomplishe by effect that which is signified as well by the worde, as by the signes. Of things to consider in the signes, and in the signification of them, in all Sacramentes. M. WHat hast thou yet to saye of the sygnes, and of their significa∣tion? Peter. Thou séest how that Iesus Chryst was not contented with the wor∣des only in the Supper, but he added also
therevnto the signes of the breade and of the wine, as is that of the water in bap∣tisme. M. I demaund thée nothing of their signification. For thou hast alredy decla∣red it vnto me. P. Thou hast only to note that these signes are not true signes with∣out the things signified by them. VVhether Hipocrites and Infidells do as vvell communicate in the Supper, of the things signified by the signes as they do of the signes. M. IF it be so that ye signes be not vaine neyther in the supper nor yet in the other Sacraments, without hauing with them the things which they signifie, it thē followeth that whosoeuer receyueth the signes receyueth also the things signified by them, and by that meane the infidells which are hypocrits, do no lesse part take of the whole Sacramente than do the faithfull. P. Thou concludest not well. For when I say that the signes are not in the Sacraments, without the thinges by them signified, thou must vnderstād that on God his parte, for he dothe not sette
foorth his worde and sacraments to men, without presenting vnto them also the things wherof he doth admonish them by the same. Ma. How commeth it then to passe, that all do not communicate alyke? Pe. Bycause that all they to whome the gyftes of God are offered, do not receyue them. M. What is the cause that they do not receiue them? P. Bicause they bring not fayth with them, without the whiche no man can receiue them. M. Thou wilt then say, that they shut themselues from it by meane of their vnbeléefe, and that it is not sufficient that the gifts of God bée presented vnto vs by his worde and hys sacraments, if that forthwith they be not receiued, and they can not be receiued but by meane of Faith, which the infidels and hypocrites haue not. P. Thou oughtest here to vnderstād that Iesus Christ may not be separated from his sprite, séeing that it is so, as none can receyue him but by his spirite, euen so can hée not be receyued, excepte he forthwith gyue hys holy spirite with him, and doe make par∣takers of all these guiftes and graces, all those whiche receiue him. Mathevve.
Thou haste here yelded a greate reason. Peter. If it were not so, there should be no difference betweene the faithfull and the infidell in the communion of GOD his Sacramentes and guyftes. M. Yet thou confessest that notwythstandyng, they may communicate of the outwarde signes as well as the other, albeit they can not communicate of the thyngs sig∣nifyed by the signes. Peter. They maye there communicate well, forsomuche as no mā may let them, so long as they offer themselues as faithfull, and that they be not discouered to the Churche for suche as they bée, in sorte that they mought be vanquished of their vnworthinesse, to se∣clude them wholly. For if the things sig∣nified by the Sacramentes do not belong to them, no more also doe belong the si∣gnes whiche signifie them. Math. If they were then knowne of men to bée suche as they be before GOD, they shoulde bée excommunicate, to the ende they shoulde not approche. Peter. It is cer∣tayne. And bycause that they are not knowne, yf they were well aduysed they woulde of them selues forbeare,
for so much as they can not communicate of the very outward Sacramentes, but to their condemnation, bycause they are in no respect capable thereof, wherfore they do but dishonour God and his Church, & prouoke daily more and more the wrath of God vpon them. VVherfore are the breade and wyne cal∣led by the name of the body and bloud of Iesus Christ, if they be not that body and bloud. M. I Am satisfied touching that poynte, but I haue yet some difficultie con∣cerning that which thou hast said, that the bread and the wine are not the body and bloud of Iesus Christ in the Supper: and yet it séemeth that Iesus Christ saieth the contrarie cleane. For he calleth them his body and his bloud by his owne wordes which thou hast euē now alledged. P. But he meaneth not thereby that the breade & wine are his body and bloude in proper substance, in suche sort as their substance is cōuerted into the substance of his bodye and bloud. M. For what cause then vseth he that maner of speache, and hath not
rather vsed some other more playne? P. There are chiefely two reasons not only for that he vsed it, but also why that ma∣ner of speache is more proper and more plaine in that matter than any other. M. Which is the first of these reasons? P. It is that when the holy scripture speaketh of Sacramentes, it doth willingly name the signes with the names of the thinges whiche are signified by them. And therfore Iesus Christ would accōmodate himselfe to that speache which the holy Ghost hath alwaye accustomed to vse in the Church, bycause that it is familiar and easye to vnderstand to God his people with whō he hath to doe, and vnto whom he doth ad∣dresse his doctrine. M. And why is it yt the holy Ghost speaketh rather this lāguage than otherwise? P. Bycause it is more agréeable to this matter than any other. M. For what cause? P. For so muche as the Lorde will giue vs to vnderstand by suche phrases of speache, that albeit that the signes of the Sacramentes be not the very same thinges which are signified by them, yet notwithstanding they are not without them.
Of the manner in the vvhiche the bodie and the bloud of Iesus Christe are pre∣sent in the supper, and are commu∣nicate to the faithfull as vvell as the signes vvhich repre∣sent them. M. IN what sorte then are they there, if the signes remayn stil in their own substance. P. Albeit they be not there by a naturall, corporall & materiall presence as the visible signes whiche are there gi∣uen to vs: that notwithstanding they be thereby a diuine & spirituall vertue and maner, wherby God, by the vertue of his holy spirite, doth make partaker of them all suche as by true and liuely faithe, doe receiue his word and his sacraments, by which he cōfirmeth the same in our harts. Of the substantiall and naturall coniun∣ction of the bodie and bloud of Iesus Christ, with the bread and vvith the vvine of the Supper. M. BVt if the breade and the wine doe not chaunge their substaunce, and neyther be transubstantiated, conuerted nor changed into the bodie and the bloud of Iesus Chryste, may not then the bo∣die
and bloud of Iesus Chryste be well ioyned to them in their owne proper sub∣stāce & nature? P. Ther are among those which reiect the false doctrine of transub∣stantiation, by the whiche we haue bene sometyme taught, that the very substāce of the bread and of the wine was chaun∣ged into the very substance of the body & of the bloud of Iesus Chryst, which ar of the opinion yt thou now settest forth. M. And why do they rather folow yt opinion than ye other? P. Bicause that they know well yt opinion to be too grosse. And ther∣fore they haue recourse to that other ma∣ner of presence of the bodie and bloud of Iesus Chryste, in the Supper, whereof thou haste now made mention. M. And what inconueniente fyndest thou in that opinion? Peter. I fynde not muche lesse therein than in that of Transubstantia∣tion. Math. Thou canste not saye at the leaste but that they whiche followe it, doe take from the Supper the signes of the breade and of the wyne, for so much as they ioyne them wyth the bodie and the bloud of Iesus Chryste, the whiche they signifie. Peter. No more are they al∣so
so greatlye different in other matters to them that mayntain transubstantiation, And therfore may we lawfully call the opiniō of such men, cōsubstantiation. M. What vnderstandest thou by this word of Consubstantiation? P. As they which haue forged the transubstātiation do vn∣derstand by the same, a changing of sub∣stance into an other, euen so by the name of consubstantiation, a man may vnder∣stande the coniunction of diuers substan∣ces togither. Of the agreement that is betwene this o∣pinion & that, of transubstantiation. M. DEclare vnto me then wherin they do agrée, and wherin they doe dif∣fer. Peter. For the first, if they doe vnder∣stande that the bodie and the bloud of Ie∣sus Christe bée wyth the breade and the wine, in their own nature and substance, and by a naturall, corporall and materi∣all maner as the bread and the wyne are there, they agrée therin with the erroure of transubstantiation. M. It séemeth to mée that they drawe well to one poynte, sauing that they make no transubstantia∣tion
nor chaunge of the breade and of the wine, into the body and bloude of Iesus Christ. P. Thou séest it plainely, & by that whiche we haue alredy sayde, thou may∣est well vnderstand, that such a naturall and corporall presence of the body and of the bloud of Iesus Christ in the Supper, should be cleane contrary to the nature of a spirituall nouriture, the whiche is there set foorth vnto vs, and likewise to the mā∣ner of eating of the body and the flesh, and the drinking of the bloud of Iesus Christ, according to the whiche they may be eatē and dronkē for spirituall meate & drinke. The seauententh Dialo∣gue is of the communication of Iesus Christ as wel in Bap∣tisme as in the Supper. VVherevnto baptisme and the significa∣tion thereof may serue to giue vs to vn∣derstand in vvhat sorte it behoueth vs to be nourished by the body and bloud of Iesus Christ.
MATHEVV. I Haue well vnderstoode that thou hast sayde that we must be nourished with spirituall meate and nouriture into eter∣nall life, and that by a spirituall maner, agreable to the spirituall birth and life, into ye which we are regenerate by bap∣tisme, and according to the testimonie of God which is set foorth vnto vs in ye same concerning our regeneration. P. That whiche thou sayest maye serue vs very much to the vnderstanding of the matter which we now hādle. For thou doest wel know that we are not regenerate in bap∣tisme, by any corporall or material séede of the body and of the bloude of Iesus Christe, nor by any naturall manner, as we are naturally begotten by our fathers & mothers. M. I know well also that we may not enter againe into our mothers womb,Iohn. 3. a. as Nicodeme said to Iesus christ, to be borne a new once more, as we are already once borne. P. And therefore I doubt not but that thou doest well vnder∣stande that that regeneration and newe birth is wrought by a séede incorruptible, spiritual and diuine, by the which we are
begotten into the Churche by the vertue of the holy Ghoste, by whome we are re∣generate into a new life. In vvhat sorte vve do communicate of the body & bloud of Iesus christ in baptism. M. IT is not also said, that Iesus Christ doth giue his body and his bloud in Baptisme, as he doth in the supper, like wise the water is not called therein the body and the bloud of Iesus Christe, as Iesus Christ doth in the Supper call the bread & the wine by the name of them. P. Albeit ye the water be not there called in baptisme by that name, dost thou thinke for all that, that the body and bloude of Iesus Christ be not there distributed and communicated vnto thée in the same, as well as in the Supper? M. I do not so vn∣derstand it. P. Thou wilte then ordeyne a Baptisme withoute Iesus Christe. M. Wherfore? P. Bycause thou cāst not haue Iesus Christ, except thou haue him who∣ly, and very God and very man, and that thou haue true communion with his bo∣dy & with his bloud, not only in ye supper, but also in baptisme. M. Shewe me the cause thereof. P. It is bycause yt the Bap∣tisme doth no lesse sende vs to the deathe
and passion, and to the body and bloud of Iesus Christe, than doth the Supper, for somuch as that is proper to al sacramēts. VVhat difference there is betvvene the baptisme and the Supper, touching the communion of the body and of the bloud of Iesus Christ. M. IT séemeth to me that thou speakest against that whiche thou hast sayde heretofore, touching the difference which thou hast put betwene baptisme and the Supper, for it séemeth that thou spea∣kest now, as though baptisme & the sup∣per were one very Sacramente, and that there were no difference betwene them. P. Thou makest an euill conclusion. For albeit that we doe as well participate of the body and of the bloud of Iesus Christ in baptisme as in the Supper, yet not∣withstanding, there is difference in the participation and in the manner thereof, in respect of the benefites of Iesus Christ, whiche are signified and communicated vnto vs as wel in ye one of the sacramēts as in the other. M. I haue not thē wel vn∣derstoode thée yet heretofore, and therfore declare vnto me more easily that whiche
thou now speakest of. P. Although the bo∣dy of Iesus Christe be not giuen vnto vs in baptisme as for spirituall foode, as it is in the Supper, that notwithstanding it is there giuen vnto vs in very déede, as a garment of innocencie, of Iustice and of holynesse to couer all our sinnes before God. And therefore S. Paule saith, that all those which are baptised, haue put on them Iesus Christ. M. And of the bloud,Galath. 3. what sayest thou? P. Albeit that it be not giuen vnto vs in Baptisme, as for drinke as it is in the supper, yet notwithstāding it is there giuen vnto vs for a spirituall washing of our soules and consciences, whereby Iesus Christe dothe purifie and clense his Church in this lauer of regene∣ration, to the ende that he may make it pure, cleane, withoute spotte or wrinkle and a holy and glorious Churche. M. I did neuer yet so well vnderstande these two pointes, nor yet the diuersitie and difference that thou hast made betwene the benefites of Iesus Christe, and the Baptisme and the Supper whiche are Sacramentes, as now I do vnderstande all these things.
In vvhat sorte the faithfull in baptis∣me do put on Iesus Christ, and are vvashed vvith his bloud. P. WHen I tell thée that the baptisme declareth vnto vs howe that Ie∣sus Christe is set foorthe vnto vs in bap∣tisme, for a robe of innocencie, Iustice, & holynes, and that we cloth our selfe with him by meane of ye same, I do not thinke thée to be of so grosse an vnderstanding, to thinke, that the faithfull do put on Ie∣sus Christ naturally and corporally, as a man putteth on a garment or a cloke. M. I should be very grosse if I so vnderstoode it. P. How doest thou then vnderstand it? M. That euen as a garmente or a cloke do serue to couer the body, euen so do the innocencie, iustice and holynesse of Iesus Christe serue vs to couer our sinnes at the iudgemente of God, to the ende that there appere no one spotte of them in his sighte. P. And touching the bloude of Ie∣sus Christe, doest thou thinke that oure soules and consciences be washed and made cleane in Baptisme, as one would with water wash a body in a bath or ry∣uer,
or else shéetes in a bucke? Mathevv. Thou makest here with me goodly dis∣courses: I thinke there is none so beast∣ly, whiche doth not well knowe that the bloud of Iesus Christe is called the wa∣shing of soules, and of consciences, not as though they must be washed and dipped in the bloud of Iesus Christe, as one woulde wash and dippe a body, that he woulde washe and make cleane, or some other suche like thing, but that the holy Ghost speaketh so, to giue vs to vn∣derstande that whiche thou hast sayde, to witte, what the water of baptisme signi∣fieth, concerning the washing and pu∣rification of our soules and consciences in the bloud of Iesus Christ. VVhat greater reason there is to commu∣nicate corporally of the body and of the bloud of Iesus Christ in the Supper, than in Baptisme. P. THow doest aunswere me verye well, but if thou find it strange that a man shuld say, that they which are bap∣tised
haue put on Iesus Christ bodily as a garmente, and are washed with hys bloud as with a materiall bath, why shouldest thou not finde it as straunge or more straunge, that a man should say that the body and the bloud of Iesus Christe are naturally and bodily eaten and drun∣ken in the Supper, as are the bread & the wine which are the signes? M. Thou makest me to consider somewhat more déepely of this matter, than heretofore I did. P. It is a matter well to be thoughte on. For if that in Baptisme we haue no carnall communication with the body and bloud of Iesus Christ, but only a spi∣ritual, I sée not what greter reason there is, to haue rather in the Supper a carnal communication with him, than in Bap∣tisme, considering that the supper depen∣deth of baptisme, and that it is as a more ample confirmation of the possession of the benefites of Iesus Christe, into the whiche wée beginne to enter by Bap∣tisme, and doe continue by the Supper. M. I finde thy reasons very good. P. Thou shalte finde them yet better, if thou do consider how muche that grosse
and carnall opinion doth disagrée as wel with the nature of the body & of the bloud of Iesus Chryste, as wyth the faith that we oughte to haue in his ascention into heauen, and of his seate at the right hand of God, and of his spirituall and diuine presence and vertue, by the whiche he is euer present in his church, and doth guide and gouerne it eternally. Hovve the corporall and carnall presence of the bodie and of the bloud of Iesus Christ in the Supper greeth not with the true nature of them. M. EXpounde this same vnto me some∣what more at large. P. For the first, to what purpose is it to thinke, that the bodie of Iesus Chryst is chewed and eaten and sent into the stomacke, and frō thence downe into the bellie, as is the bread whiche signifieth it in the Supper: and that his bloud is also drunken as is the wyne which is the signe? For bée it that thou vnderstand that the breade and the wyne be conuerted into the substance of the bodie and bloud, or else that the bo∣die
be eaten with the bread, and the bloud drunken with the wine, yet is there still greate absurditie, cleane contrary to the nature of the bodie and bloud of Iesus Chryste. M. What contrarietie fyndest thou therin? P. Séeing that Iesus Christ hath a very true naturall bodie in euery respecte lyke vnto oures, as touchyng the corporall substaunce, sinne excepte, it is certaine and true, that hée is not bodily and naturally not only in the heauen, and in the earthe at one tyme, but also ney∣ther in infinite places. For he hathe not a bodie whiche filleth the heauen and the earth as dothe his diuinitie, but hathe a bodie whyche can not be a true and ve∣rie bodie, if hée be not in some certayne place agreeable to his nature, to his glo∣rie and celestiall maiestie. Hovve the glorifying of the bodie of Ie∣sus Chryst, doth not chaunge at all the substantiall nature & propre sub∣staunce of the same. M. THou speakest of the bodie of Ie∣sus Chryste, as though he were in euery respecte like vnto oures, and that
he were not glorified at all, as ours shall be also after the Resurrection of our bo∣dies. P. Albéeit that the bodie of Iesus be glorifyed by his Resurrection and As∣cention into heauen, yet followeth it not for all that that he hath lost the proprie∣ties of his humane nature, and that his corporall substance is chaunged in suche sorte that it is conuerted into diuine na∣ture, or that he is in suche sort transfour∣med, that he is infinite, to be in euerye place: or that he is so multiplied, that for one bodie he hath many, or an infinite number, as necessarily it must be, if the errour wherof wée nowe speake, shoulde haue place. Of the contrarietie that is betvvene the corporall presence of Iesus Chryst in the Supper, and his ascen∣tion into heauen. M. BVt they which maynteyn thye o∣pinion, say that these things maye not be considered naturally, but super∣naturally, and that they do surpasse the capacitie of all mans vnderstanding. P. I graunte them all that. But why is it then that they forge vs a corporall and
naturall presence of the bodie and bloud of Iesus Chryste in the stéede of a super∣naturall and spiritual presence. M. They say that the same corporall and naturall presence doth not at all hinder the super∣naturall and spirituall. Pet. Albeit that they saye it, it doth not therfore followe that it is so. And on the other syde. I sée not howe they will agrée their opinion with the articles of oure faythe, by whi∣che wée doe confesse, not only that Iesus Christe is gone vp into heauen, but also that he is there sette at the ryght hande of the Father, and that from thence hée shall come in Iudgemente by a visyble and corporall presence, euen as he went vp visibly & corporally,Acts. 1. b. 3. d. according to the verie testimonie of the Angels, and al∣so of Sainte Peter, who hath sayd, that the Heauen muste néedes receyue hym, vntill the tyme of the restoring of all thyngs, wherof God hath spoken by the mouthe of all his Pro∣phetes since the beginning.
The eightenth Dialogue is of the presence of Iesus Christe in heauen, and in the supper and in his Church. VVhether the ascention of Iesus Christe be a true ascention or no, or else if he made himselfe only inuisible. MATHEVV. IT séemeth to me that all that whiche thou hast spoken of the ascētion of Iesus Christ, is no∣thing against the opiniō of those against whom thou hast so long disputed, for they denie not that Iesus Christe is gone vp into Heauē, neyther that he shall come visiblie and bodily to iudge the li∣uing and the dead, euen as thou hast said. P. How do they then agrée their doctrine with this confession? M. They alleadge two things vppon this pointe. The firste is, that the heauen and the right hand of God where Iesus Christe is, do stretche ouer all. The other is, that the comming of Iesus Christ which is made by the sa∣crament,
the Supper is inuisible: wher∣fore albeit that he bée there bodily in the propre substance of his bodie & bloud, yet is he not there visibly, but inuisibly. P. If they make no space betwéene the earth and the heauen, and that they will stretche out the heauen euen to the earth in suche sort that Chryst hath not absen∣ted him from the earth, as touchyng his bodie, and that he didde retire himselfe, when he went vp into heauen, it may not then be sayde, that he is ascended as the Scripture witnesseth, but that he hathe alwayes remayned vppon earthe, with∣out departing from thence, agaynst that whiche he himselfe did prophecie to his disciples. It muste also be sayde, that hée should then haue made hym selfe inuisi∣ble to them, and that he were stil yet on earth, not visible, but inuisible. Hovve that the presence corporall of Iesus Christ in the Supper may haue no place excepte he haue an infinite bo∣die, or manye. M. I Know not what to say to thée here∣in: For if it were so, then shoulde there be no true ascētion of Iesus Christ
into heauen. P. Albeit that it were so, yet must it néedes be, that he haue a body in∣finite to be in so many places at ones: or else that he haue an infinite number of bodies to be in so many places at once, as they wold haue him. M. I vnderstand well, that if Iesus Chryste had suche a bodie, & that his humane nature wer infi∣nite, as is his diuine, it could be no more an humane nature, nether could there be any differēce betwene ye one & the other. Of the inuisible comming of the body of Iesus Christe. P. AS cōcerning that which thou hast sayde of the inuisible comming of Iesus Chryste, where is it in the holie Scriptures that they fynde suche a com∣ming, in the which Iesus Chryst cōmeth from heauen inuisibly in the proper sub∣stance of his bodie? M. I can not tell, for as thou haste alredy decelard in the arti∣cles of faith, we speake but of two cor∣porall commings of Iesus Chryst. Of the spirituall comming of Iesus Christ. P. I Wil grant them that there is an in∣uisible cōming of Iesus Christ by the
whiche hée commeth dayely inuisibly to all. But that is not in the proper and naturall substaunce of hys natural bo∣die, but by his diuyne vertue, whereby notwithstandyng hée maketh vs in deede partakers of his bodie and of his bloud, and doth nourish vs, as he doth testify the same vnto vs in his holy Supper, & doth the same by the vertue of his holy spirite, the whiche ioyneth vs vnto him without being néedefull that Iesus Christe des∣cend or ascend in his owne body, to make vs partakers. M. But howe may this be done, forsomuche as the body of Iesus Chryste is in heauen, and that wée be on the earth, and that ther is so great distāce betwene the one and the other? P. Seing that this coniunction is not naturall nor carnall, but supernaturall and spiritual, it is not at all harde for the holy Ghosts in such sort to ioyn the earth and the hea∣uen together, and to drawe vp our hearts into heauen, euen to Iesus Christe. M. I know well that there is nothyng harde nor impossible to God. P. In lyke man∣ner is it not harde for Iesus Chryste, to make the vertue and efficacie of his bo∣die
the sacrifice of the same which he hath of∣fered for vs, to come euen to vs, without being néedefull that he descende bodily from heauen, to come to vs. M. I graunte to thée all that. Hovve that the corporall presence of Ie∣sus Christ in the supper, is contrary to the diuine vertue that is in him to communicate his gifts and graces to his Church. P. IT must necessarily be that it be so, for if he coulde haue no communion with vs, and communicate himselfe to vs, without comming downe from heauē bodily, and without that he were with vs corporally presente, his vertue shuld not be so great as it is, nor should it be so wel set foorth, nor in so great effect. M. Is that the cause why he saide to his disciples, it is expedient that I go, for if I go not,Iohn. 16. a the comforter which is the holy Ghost, will not come? P. It is certaine that by these words, he would giue his disciples to vn∣derstand two things. M. Which be they? P. The first is, that his corporal presence did holde them still fixed in the earth, and
did hinder them by the meane of their in∣firmitie & rudenes, to cōprehend & vnder∣stand, that his kingdome was spiritual & not carnall, as they thought it to bée. M. Which is yet the other pointe? P. It is yt he was not come vppon earth, there to raigne by a corporall presence, but to re∣tire his body into heauen, & that he would raigne by his holy spirit & by his spiritu∣all & diuine vertue among his, according to the promise which he made them, whē he said, when you shall be gathered toge∣ther two or thrée in my name. I am in ye middest of you.Mat. 18. c. 28. d. And againe, I am wt you euen to the consummation of the worlde. Of the spirituall and diuine presence of Iesus Christ in his Church, and of the vertue of the same. M. THou vnderstandest then these pas∣sages of the spiritual & diuine pre∣sence of Iesus Christ in his Churche. P. No man may otherwise take them. And therfore Iesus Christ hath said, to shewe that great power which he had. Al power is giuē me,Mat. 28. d. Ephe. 4. b. 1. d. both in heauē and in earth. S. Paule in like fort hath written that he is ascended aboue all the heauens, to ye ende
he mought fill al things, & that he mought fulfill all in the same. M. Doest thou vn∣derstand that he doth accomplishe and fill all things, not by his corporall presence, but by his spirituall & diuine presēce and vertue? P. We may not otherwise vnder¦stand it, if we do beleue that Iesus christ hath a very natural body, & that he be in déede gone vp into the heauens. For as we haue alredy said, as ther is no reason to giue him many bodies, to be in manye places at a time, euē so is it ouer strange, to giue hym a bodye which may fill the heauen and the earth. Hovve that the corporall presence of the body and of the bloude of Iesus Christ is contrary to the true communion of them in the Supper. M. I Doe now remember that thou hast alredy said that the body & the bloud of Iesus Christ could not be separated frō his spirit, frō whence I do conclude that the body and bloud of christ Iesus cānot be receiued but to the saluation of them which doe receiue it. P. None may doubt thereof. M. It followeth then further
that infidells cannot receiue them, forso∣much as they cannot receiue them except they receiue their saluation, the whyche they cannot obtaine without faith, wher∣of they are void. P. This which thou say∣est dothe yet confirme more and more all that whiche we haue handled hereto∣fore concerning the corporall presence of Iesus Christ in the Supper. M. It is also the cause why I did againe set foorth thys matter. For if the body and the bloude of Iesus Christ be corporally in the supper, in suche sorte, that whosoeuer receiueth bodily the bread and the wine therein, re∣ceiueth also the body and the bloud of Ie∣sus Christ corporally: there shall follow thereof many things, which séeme to me very contrary as well to the office of Ie∣sus christ as to the nature of this Sacra∣ment of the Supper. P. Thou sayest ve∣ry truthe, and I am very glad to here of thée that which thou thinkest. M. For the firste we shall be constrayned to confesse that a man maye in the Supper receiue the body and the bloude of Iesus Christe without faith and without his spirite, for the vnfaithfull whiche shall receiue the
bread and the wine, shall no lesse receiue the body and the bloud of Iesus Christe, than the faithfull. P. Beholde there a very straunge consequencie. M. Moreo∣uer, if a man may receyue them without faithe, they whiche shall receiue them in such sorte, shal receiue thē either to their saluation or condemnation, if they re∣ceiue thē to their saluation, it must néedes followe that a man maye obtaine salua∣tion without faith: if they do receiue thē to their condemnation, it must then fol∣lowe that the body and the bloude of Ie∣sus Christe do bring in this Sacramente against their nature, deathe in stéede of life, whiche is also against the nature of the Sacramente, for it was not ordeyned to bring death to man, but life. VVhether a man maye conclude of the vvords of Sainct Paule, that a man may receyue the body and the bloud of Iesus Christ in the supper, to condemnation. P. THou concludest very well, but they which houlde the opinion againste the whiche we dispute at this presente,
make no difference to affirme that the in∣fidels receiue in the supper the body & the blud of Iesus Christ, & that they receyue thē to their condēpnation. For they build themselues vpō that which s. Paule hath saide. That who so eateth in the supper the bread & drincketh the wine of ye lorde vnworthily,1. cor. 21. f. g doth eate and drinke his con∣dempnation. M. I know well that those mē affirme that which thou saist. But I cannot well agrée their opinion with the matters the which we haue alredy hand∣led. And as touching that which they al∣ledge of S. Paule, he sayth not, who so shall eate the body and drincke the bloud vnworthily, shal receiue his condempna∣tion, but he saith, he that shall eate of this bread & shall drinke of this cup. P. Thou hast also to note beside this, that there is difference betwene receiuing the supper vnworthily, & to receiue it without faith, and as touching the word of condempna∣tion, it may be also taken in diuers ma∣ners, but wée will now no longer dwell vpon these two pointes. It is sufficient for vs to knowe that the bodye and the bloud of Iesus Christ cannot bée truely receyued but by the faythfull.
Of the principall difference that maye be betvveene the transsubstanciation of the bread and of the vvine into the bodie and the bloud of Iesus christ and the bodily coniunction of them together. M. I Do well vnderstand by all the rea∣sons & testimonies which thou hast brought out of ye holy scriptures, that we may seke no corporal nor carnall presēce of Iesus christ, neither in the supper, nor yet in all thys visible worlde, but only a spirituall and diuine presence. Wherfore whē I haue well considered the whole, I finde no great difference, betwene them that affirme, yt the bread and the wine be conuerted & transubstanciated into ye bo∣die & blud of Iesus christ in the supper, by the vertue of the sacramentall wordes, & those which affirme, that albeit that the bread & the wine remayne still in their owne substāce, yet notwithstāding, ye bo∣dy & blud of Iesus christ be there also pre¦sent with thē, in their proper and natural substāce, not only spiritually, but also cor¦porally & substancially, as are ye bread & the wine. P. There is no great difference but in yt that ye one sort thinking to auoid
the absurdities which follow the opinion of the others, do fall into other absurdi∣ties which are nothing lesse, of the which we will no more speake here, bycause the matter woulde be to long, whereof we haue alredy sufficiently spoken. Of the vnion that is betvvene Iesus Christ and his members, signified by the breade and the vvine in the Supper. M. I Am very well contented for thys time with that which thou hast said, and therefore shewe me now, what pro∣perties the bread and the wine haue yet, which are agreable to this Sacramente of the Supper, beside that whiche thou hast already said. P. I haue already sayd that those signs were agreable to this sa∣crament, bycause they be apte to repre∣sent the spirituall nouriture by the bodi∣ly. M. I doe very well remember thys pointe. P. Thou hast also to note vppon the same, that as one lofe and one vessell of wine are made of many graines ga∣thered togither, euen so doe they in the Supper represente vnto vs, how that al the children of God which are dispersed,
are gathered & broughte togither in one, and vnited with Iesus Christ their head, by his deathe,Iohn. 11. g as Saincte Iohn doth wit∣nesse. M. Thou wilte then saye, that that vniō which is made of many graines, in one lofe or in one wine, doth signifie vn∣to vs the vnion that is betwene Iesus Christ and his Church, to witte, betwene the head and the mēbers. P. It signifieth not only the vnion which is betwene Ie∣sus Christ and his members, but also the vnion which is and ought to be betwene all the members of his body, which can∣not be vnited with their heade Iesus christ, nor haue him for their head, if they be not vnited among themselues, the one with the other: for Iesus Christ may not be deuided. And therefore Sainct Paule hath saide to the same purpose, that we are all one bread, and therefore we do al∣so euery of vs part take of one very bread and one very cuppe. Hovv the supper is the sacrament of vnion and of charitie, and of the admoniti∣on that vve haue in the same. M. SEing it is so, it followeth then that the supper is vnto vs a Sacrament
of the vnion & charitie, yt all the faithfull ought to haue the one with the other? P. That is not to be douted, & therfore thou must note, yt euē as baptisme doth admo∣nish vs of ye perpetual repentāce & morti∣fication which ought to be among vs al ye time of our life: euē so hath ye supper this propre vnto it, yt it putteth vs in mynd of the vnion & charitie wherby we ought to be ioyned the one with ye other, wtout the which we can not be christiās, forsomuch as Iesus Chryst setteth it foorth vnto vs for a marke wherby his disciples shuld be knowne. M. Seing it is so, I think assu∣redly also that we cānot communicate at this holy sacramēt of ye supper, but to our cōdemnatiō, if we haue not this charitie & vnion amongst vs. P. It is easie to iudge. The 19. dialogue is of the proofe that euery man ought to make of himselfe before the supper. Of the principall points vvhich are requi∣red in the proofe that is required of euery man before he go to the Supper.
MATTHEVV. M. SEing that we be lyghted vpon the matter of thīgs required wherwith worthily to communicate in the supper, declare vnto me now in what sorte wée ought to proue oure selues, according to the doctrine of S. Paule, to the end wée receiue not this Sacrament vnworthily and to our condemnation. P. Thou maist wel know by the matters which we haue alredy handled, what it is to receyue the Supper worthily or vnworthily, and to saluation or condemnation, and how eue∣ry man may proue himselfe, to commu∣nicate thereat as he ought. M. I graunte that which thou sayest: but I shall vn∣derstande and comprehende it better, if thou doest declare vnto mée briefly the principall pointes whiche are chiefly re∣quired in this proofe. P. Seing that Iesus Christe is dead for oure sinnes, and that therfore, all Sacraments doe sende vs to the same death, to obtaine forgiuenesse of the same: it followeth well, that we can not communicate worthily at the Sup∣per, except we acknowledge first our sel∣ues to be sinners suche as we are, and do
confesse that we haue deserued by meane of our sinnes, eternall death and damna∣tion, and that wee can not be deliuered from them, but only by the death of Iesus Chryst. M. I doe well vnderstand alre∣die this poynt. P. If thou do well vnder∣stand this, thou vnderstandest well also, that that acknowledging & cōfession, can not be in vs without that true repentance wherof we haue alreadie spoken, whiche can not be without true amendement of life. M. I vnderstand wel also that other pointe. P. Thou haste well vnderstoode how that true faith can not be separated frō true repētance. For the knowledge of our sins should serue vs to smal purpose, if it were not ioyned with a sure trust of forgyuenesse of the same. M. That is playne. P. Nowe séeing we can not ob∣tain that remission, but only by the death of Iesus Chryst, and that the Supper is ordeyned to witnesse vnto vs, and to as∣sure vs more fully, it is therfore easy to iudge, that none maye communicate at this holy sacrament without true faith, by the which he holdeth himself assured to obtaine the grace which is promised &
witnessed vnto him in the same. M. Thou wilt then say in effect, that it is néedful for those whiche dispose themselues to com∣municate at this sacrament, to note dili∣gentely whether they haue true repen∣tance and true faith in Iesus Chryste or no. P. To the ende that the proofe may be the more full and perfect, thou shalt ioyne also to these two pointes, charitie, of the which we euen now did speak, by meane wherof, all the faithfull are vnited and conioyned the one with the other: euen as they be vnited & conioyned by fayth with Christ Iesus their head. For euen as true repentāce can not be without true faith, euē so true faith cānot be wtout true cha∣ritie, as wée haue sufficiently alreadie declared. M. I vnderstand wel also, sée∣ing the Supper is a Sacrament of vnion and charitie, as thou hast alreadie decla∣red it, that he is not capable of the same, that hath not true charitie. P. Beholde, they are ye thrée points, to wit,Three pointe a required in the proufe. repentāce faith, and charitie, whiche comprehende all the rest that maye be required in the proufe of any man.
VVhether it be requisite that euery man haue perfecte repentance, faith and charitie, before he go to the Supper. M. NOwe I haue yet one difficultie vppon these thrée pointes, the whiche thou sayst are chiefly required in the proofe of those which will communi∣cate at the Supper. P. Shew me that dif∣ficultie. M. Tell me firste, if there be any man that in this mortall life may haue perfecte repentaunce, perfecte faithe, and perfecte charitie. P. If we could haue those vertues so perfecte, that nothing coulde be more added therevnto, then were wée no more mortall men, and shoulde no more néede, neyther the preaching of the Gospell, nor yet the Sacramentes. Mat. Why so? Bycause we shoulde then haue all the things, for the which al the mini∣sterie of the Churche was ordeyned of God, and shoulde be already like to the Angels, in such sorte as we shall be after our resurrection, when we shall be fully refourmed to the image of Iesus Christ, and fully glorified with him. M. And yet thou sayest that we cannot worthily com∣municate
at the supper, except we bring wt vs true repentāce, a true faith, and a true charitie. Pet. That same is not at all a∣gainst that which I haue nowe sayde. VVhat differēce ther is betvvene true & perfect repentance, faith, & charitie. M. IT must néedes be then, yt thou put differēce betwéen true & perfect repē¦tāce, & true faith & charitie. P. Euē so thee is differēce. M. What is it? P. To make thée ye better to vnderstād it, I wil shewe thée it by exāmple. M. I like well ye maner of declaration. P. Take then for exāple a yong chyld, wilt thou say yt he is a perfect man? M. No, till such time as he be come to ye age in which men do accōpt the per∣fection of man. P. But wilt thou denie yt he is a very mā before he be come to that age? M. I am not yet wel resolued howe to answer thée to this demaūd. P. It shal be easy for thée to resolue, if thou cōsider what it is to be a man, & what is his na∣ture: for thou canste not denie, yt who so hath an humane body & a soule participāt of reason & vnderstanding, is a man. M. I graunt it. P. No more canst thou denie, that a chylde, howe yong soeuer he be, is
compounded of suche a bodie and suche a soule, notwithstanding yt men do not yet sée in effecte in him, so great a perfection of the bodie, and of reason and vnderstan∣ding, and of other gifts, as wel of the bo∣die as of the spirite, as in a perfecte man. M. I do wel vnderstand yt thou wilt say, that albeit a child may grow both in big∣nesse, force, discretion, prudence, know∣ledge, & in such like vertues, therby to at∣taine to greater perfection, yet notwith∣standing this same letteth not at all, but that he is alreadie a very man. P. No, for somuche as he hath in him all the partes that make a verie man, and the séedes of all things required in mans nature, notwythstanding that the frutes as yet appeare not, for albéeit that a thing be∣gone, be not yet fully perfected, it follo∣weth not for all that, but that the be∣ginnings are true and sounde, and that it is true and perfect, forsomuch as is al∣readie of it. M. Thou wilt then saye in lyke sorte, that albeit that repentaunce, faith and charitie, be not in vs so greate & so perfect, that no more may be wished for, yet for all that they leaue not to be
true and whole, prouided that wée haue the true séedes therof in vs, and the true beginnings of all the partes required in the same. P. Thou hast very well cōpre∣hended that whiche I would haue saide. And forasmuch as all these things are al∣redy begon in vs, by the grace of God, we do dayly continue the reading of the Gos∣pell and the administration of the Sacra∣mentes, to the ende we may daily growe more & more, in that which is alredy be∣gon in vs, and that we may be dayly the better confirmed, to witte, in true repen∣tance and true faith & charitie,Ephes. 4. c. and in all the other gifts of god, euen vntil the time that from the infancie in the whiche wée now are cōcerning these gifts and graces, we do come euen to ye age of a perfect mā, and that we do therein dayly profite as the childe dothe dayly growe vntill the time that he be a perfect man. Hovv greatly necessarie the ministerie of the Church and prayer is for al men during this life. M. I Am now wel resolued touching this pointe, whereby I do conclude that there is in the world no man so perfecte,
who hath not alwayes néede of the mini∣stery of the church, & of al the partes and things the which it comprehendeth. P. I haue yet forgottē to tel thée that with the diligence that we ought to vse in the stu∣die of the holy scriptures & communiō of the sacramentes, to the end the graces of god may be dayly encreased more & more in vs: we haue also the inuocation of the name of God, & prayer, the which serueth vs greatly to yt ende: wherfore we ought therein to be very attentiue & continuall. M. Seing yt thou art now come vpon the matter of inuocation & prayer, mée thin∣keth it were good yt wée dyd speake som∣what amply of it. For it séemeth to mée yt we haue spoken very litle of it, as in pas∣sing it ouer, when that thou gauest me as in briefe, ye exposition of the commaunde∣ments of ye law, vpō the which thou didst briefly declare vnto mée, how that those of the first table did comprehend faith & the inuocation of the name of god, which procéedeth from the same, as ye true frute and true witnesse of the Faith. Of the discipline of the church, and of the principall partes of the same.
P. I Had determined to haue spokē som∣what more fully, for so much as Ie∣sus Christ hath giuen a certaine forme & rule. But bicause wée haue yet to speake of the discipline of the Church, & that it is so ioyned with the ministery of the same, that it cānot bée wel ruled nor conserued without yt discipline, wée wil first speake so farre as the matter that wée handle nowe requireth it, and then afterwarde we will conclude the whole by the inuo∣cation of the name of God, and by praier. The. 20. dialogue is of the discipline, censures and consisto∣ries of the Churche. Of the discipline of the Church, and of the principall partes of the same. M. SEyng wée are come to the point of the discipline of the church, declare vnto mée then what thou meanest by the same. P. I vnderstande the gouer∣nement and the rule, by the whych God will that his Churche be gouerned
according to the order which he hath or∣deyned in it by his word, to entertaine it in true religion and to take away slaun∣ders. M. What is that rule and that or∣der? Pe. There be chiefly thrée pointes to consider. M. Which is the firste? P. The regard that must be had to the doctrine & assemblies of the Church, to the end that the worde of God and the sacraments be administred as they ought to be, & aboue al things that do appertaine & are requi∣site to the seruice of God. M. Whiche is the secōd point? P. The regard that must be had to the life and manners of euery man. M. Which is the thirde? P. It is not altogither of so greate importance, for it concerneth only certaine exercises, which sometime are required in the Church, as are fastings & other certaine ceremonies the whiche, according to the necessities and circumstaunces of times and of pla∣ces, may serue for the better making of men to do their dutie and office to God. Of the chiefe things vvherevppon the discipline of the Church ought to vvatche.
M. SEing that thou sayest that the two first pointes be the most necessary, declare vnto me the things, the which are most to be considered in them. P. Forso∣muche as the word of God is ordeyned to teache, admonishe, comforte, exhorte, re∣buke, and to correct euery man, as it shal be néedefull, it is necessary that there be censures and watches in the Churche, to watche and to take héede how euery man doth behaue himselfe, as well in respecte of doctrine as of life, and whereof euery man hath néede, to prouide for the same as the word of God doth require. Of the censures and ancients of the Church, and of the maner of the policie of the same. M. AL that whiche thou sayest, doth it not belong to the office of the pa∣stors and ministers which haue charge of the administration of the worde of God and of the Sacramentes, and of all the Church? P. I graūt it. But there are chie∣fly two causes, why it is néedefull yt they haue helpers with them, whiche may be called censures or ancients of the church,
as they are called in the holy scriptures, to helpe them in that that I haue said. M. Which is the first of these two causes? P. It is that the ministers are not ordina∣rily so many, that they maye sée in euery place: and on the other part all are not so carefull, so diligent, and so perfect, to loke to all things, as it were to be desired. M. Which is the other cause? P. It is that all be it they could doe it, it is good that there be others of the Churche, which may bée ioyned vnto them, to giue to vnderstand, that the Church, in respect of the policie and discipline ye Iesus Christ hath there appointed, and of the gouernment which he hath giuen to men, is not as a Monar∣chy, or some other temporall lordship, in the which certaine princes haue all abso∣lute authoritie: but it is an holy and frée communaltie, which for that cause is called the communion of Saintes, to the whych Iesus Chryst hath gyuen in ge∣nerall and not to any one in particular, all the power and authoritye that there is, to vse for edification, and not to de∣struction.
Of the true head of the Church and of the power giuen to the church by Iesus Christ to chose those vvhich haue publique office in the same, & hovv requisite it is that that order be there obserued. M. BVt in taking it so, it séemeth to me that there is no order at al, but ra∣ther great confusion. For if there be no certaine head, euery man wil there bée a maister, & the one as great as ye other. P. It doth not so folow of that which I haue saide. For first of all, she is not without a head, for so much as it hath Iesus Christ for hir head. Afterward, al be it yt the po∣wer & authoritie be giuen to the whole cōmunaltie of the faithfull, as it is in the hands of the people in a popular estate, ye which mē haue aunciently called Dimo∣cracie: yet for al yt it hindreth not at all, but yt the church by a cōmon consent may chose out of the body of this holy commu∣naltie such certaine persons, as may haue ye special charge, to exercise & administer the publique offices which are ordeined of God in ye same, as they do in a frée citie in ye which ye choise of publique offices is made by the burgeses & citizens of ye same
whiche are all of one very communaltie. M. Thy meaning is then, that all the au∣thoritie and power of the rule and go∣uernement of the Church, is giuen in ge∣nerall to all the Churche, and that there∣fore it belongeth to the same, to choose ac∣cording to the word of God those whome she knoweth to be most méete to exercise therein the publique offices, and to whōe God hathe distributed the most of hys gifts, to execute the same faithfully. P. In all the time that the Church was wel ru∣led according to the worde of God, and that she was not oppressed by tyrannie, she euer vsed that order. And therfore it is more than necessarie yt she holde alway hir right, hir power, and authoritie, such as she hath receiued of god, to the end that there be none of the members of ye same, be they either ministers of ye same or else the magistrates, or ye cōmō people, yt may take in hand any thinge in this spirituall rule & gouernmēt of their owne authori∣tie, but that euery one of the flocke con∣tent himselfe with the charge that shal be committed vnto him by lawful vocation.
Of the office as vvell of the ministers as of the other auncientes and Censures of the Church, and of the regard that chie∣fly must be had vnto them. M. SEing it is so, shew me thē what is ye office as wel of ye ministers as of o∣ther censures and ancients which may be ioyned vnto them in this Ecclesiastique discipline. P. It is first of all to sée careful∣ly that the doctrine of the lord be not on∣ly truly set foorth in the Church, but also that it be receyued with all honoure and reuerence, and practised as it is méete. M. It is then méete that they which haue the ouersight & publique charge in ye churche, do watch not only ouer the people, but al∣so ouer the ministers. P. But it is ouer ye ministers chiefly, that first héede must be taken, for if their doctrine and life be not such as their office requireth, they shal be a greater slaunder and a greater ruine to the whole Church than any other, & God shall be more dishonored in them than he shall in all the rest that be vnder theyr charge. M. And who shal haue the super∣intendance ouer them, considering that they be the chiefe gouernours and lea∣ders,
which must leade and gouerne all the rest that are cōmitted vnto them. P. If they must in déede watch ouer others, and correct them, they must chiefly looke vpon themselues, according to the aduer∣tisement whiche Saincte Paule giueth them,Act. 20. f and they must correct the faultes that bée among them, by the discipline which they should haue togither. M. But if they doe it not, but doe beare the one with the other, or if there be such faultes eyther in their doctrine or lyfe, which de∣serue greater censures, or in déede open rebuke, what remedie is there for that? P. Then muste the Ecclesiastique consi∣stories whiche are ordeyned by and in the name of the whole Churche, prouide for the same, whervnto the other aunci∣ents and Censures of the Church, do as∣sist with the ministers to remedie all of∣fences, whiche may be eyther in the doc∣trine or lyfe of any man, be he minister or other. M. Shal not the coūcels prouide for that? P. That is a later remedy wher∣vnto men may haue recourse when ne∣cessitie requireth it, prouided that they be lawfull. M. Then muste the lyke be vn∣derstode
of al the rest, which are appoin∣ted in these Consistories, as Censures and Senators, and ecclesiasticall iudges. P. Thou mayste well vnderstande, that if they whiche are appointed to correcte others, doe not first correct themselues a∣mōg themselues, they shal haue no great authoritie to correcte those whiche they ought to correcte, neyther may they doe it without their greate shame and confu∣sion, and without giuyng great occasion of murmure, slaunder, and scattering of all the Churche. M. And if they whiche haue speciall charge in the Churche, doe bear the one with the other, and be them selues the cause of slaunders, and scatte∣ring of the same, hath not then the whole Church together power to correct them, and to prouyde for and remedie suche faultes? P. Séeing that the power wher∣of we speake, is giuen by Iesus Chryst, to his whole Church, who hath power to take it from hir? May they take it from hir to whome shée hath giuen it? M. No, excepte they be tyrauntes. P. Thou sayest truthe.
The .xxj. Dialogue is of brotherly correction, of excōmunicati∣on, & of particular instructions. Of the order that must be holden in the correction of euery mans faults, accor∣dyng to the nature and quali∣tie of the same. M. SEing that the Discipline of the Churche is ordeyned for the cor∣rection of euerye man of what e∣state or degrée soeuer he be, tell me what order there must be kept in the Ecclesia∣sticall iudgements towards all those to∣wards whom they are quired. P. First of all, there must be diligente héede had to the nature and cōdition of the faults and vices whiche deserue iudgement and cor∣rection. For some there be which require but simple admonition: others there are whiche require reprehension and correc∣tion: the one the more softe, & the others more sharpe, according as men deserue, and as tyme and place requireth, and as the offences may be either greater or les∣ser. M. And in what sort must men there
procéede? Muste these censures and cor∣rections be done secretely or publiquely? P. Here muste againe be considered the condition of the faultes. For if they bée small and secrete, a secrete censure and correction maye suffise? M. But if they be of great importance, and open? P. It shall also be néedful that the censure and the correction be the more notable, & that they whiche haue offended openly, be re∣buked openly, accordingly as S. Paule commaundeth. M. And if one haue com∣mitted a great fault openly, muste it be published for the first? Pe. If it be open, it is alreadie published: Wherfore it is also néedful, that the correction be in pub∣lique, to the ende that the offence be al∣so amended openly, to serue to others for an example: or otherwise the fault could not be well amended, to satisfie the chur∣che, according as the discipline therof re∣quireth. Of excommunication, and of the grea∣test rigour of the same. M. ANd which is the greatest correcti∣on that the Churche may vse, ac∣cording to that discipline which is gyuen
vnto hir by Iesus Christ? P. It is excom∣munication. M. What doth this excom∣munication emport? P. The name therof declareth sufficiently vnto thée that it is an Ecclesiastique correctiō, wherby it is declared that they shoulde be at the least shut from the communication of the Sa∣craments which are worthy of such cen∣sure. M. Emporteth it nothing els? P. yes in déede, if it be taken in his extreme ri∣gour. M. What is it then that this ex∣treme rigor importeth more yet? P. It importeth acording to the expresse word of Iesus Christe, that they which haue deserued it are holden and estéemed a∣mong Christiās, as pagans and infidels, in suche sorte that they are not only not receyued to the communion of the Sa∣craments of the Churche, but that also the faithful and true Christians do with∣drawe and separate themselues from all familiar conuersation with them, to the ende they maye learne to be ashamed of their faultes, and to acknowledge them the better, to the ende they may attayne true repentance, to reconcile and agrée themselues with the Churche of GOD,
whome they haue offended. Of the force of laufull excommuni∣cation, and of the povver of the keys giuen to the church. M. THey are not then shut foorth from the communion of the Sacramen∣tes of the Churche, to the ende they shoulde alwayes remayne oute of the Churche. Pe. If they continue obstinate in their sinnes, not shewing apparaunte testimonie of repentaunce, nor reconci∣ling them to God and to hys Churche, by the meanes therevnto ordeyned, they doe not onely remayne shut foorth from the Communyon of the Sacra∣mentes, and from the companye of the faythfull, but also from the kingdome of heauen, and from eternall lyfe. Math. Excommunication is not then a matter of small censequence: but is much more to be feared than is a corporall punishe∣ment. Peter. It is certaine, if it bée law∣fullye doone, for so muche as Iesus Chryste hathe giuen to hys Churche the keyes of the Kyngdome of Heauen,
with suche power, as what so euer shée should loose or bynd in earth, according to his word, shuld be also bound or vnboūd in heauen. M. But if the sinner acknow∣ledge his faulte, and yelde a true signe of repentaunce, and desire to be reconciled and at one with the Churche: it is gran∣ted vnto him? Pe. Euen as the Churche hath power to bind the obstinate, so hath she power to loose the penitent, and euer according to the worde of God, prouided that they accomplishe that whiche true repentaunce and the true discipline of the Churche doe require. M. And when the Churche hath in such sort either boūd or loosed any one, by the censure of excō∣munication, wilt thou conclude that God also holdeth him for bounde or loose? P. Euen as the Sacraments are not playes for little Children, nor playes fained of pleasure, but are ordinances and testimo∣nyes of God which represent by exterior ceremonies the spiritual things which in déede are communicated to the faithfull by them. So is not excommunication a vayne ceremonie as a iuggling, but a sure testimony of God, which he hath or∣dained,
to signifie and declare which they be that he auoweth for members of hys Church, or els that he holdeth for rotten members, cut of and cast out of the same, and consequently from the kingdome of heauen into the which none maye enter excepte he bée in déede first a member of the Churche, and by the meane of the same. If excommunication may extende further than to the disobedient. M. SEeing then that excommunication belōgeth properly to the disobediēt, may they then excōmunicate those which acknowledge their fault, how great so e∣uer it be, and do giue testimonie euident inough of their repentance before they be excommunicated? P. Thou must vnder∣stande that all disobedience deserueth ex∣communication, and chéefly when a man hath bene admonished thrée times (accor∣ding to the order giuen by Iesus Christe concerning the same) and doth not amēd his faults, when they be offensiue and of euill example, and that they be not onely little infirmities and ignoraunces, the
which men may not as easily correct as they would, but are great offences. M. I do well graunte thée that, fo rebellion and contempt of admonitions and war∣nings, is a very great fault, and a very euill exāple in the Church of God, which ought not there to be endured. P. Thou hast also to note, that albeit a sinner doe acknowledge his faulte at the first or se∣cond admonition and warning that shall be giuen him, yet for all that, it may be suche, that for example the sinner may deserue to be at the least suspended from the communion of the sacraments for a time. M. Why so, if there be no manifest rebellion? P. In part, to proue the better the repentance of the sinner, and in time the better to iudge whether there be fay∣ning in it or no, and apertly to giue ex∣ample to others, to the ende they may he the more afrayde to offende, and that al togither they may learne the better to honour the Sacramentes, and to take heede howe they contaminate and pro∣phane them by their slaunderous vyces. For as it is to be fered that by ouer much igor the poore sinner may be caste into
desperation: euen so on the other syde, héede is to be taken, least that through ouer muche facilitie, and by defaulte of moderate seueritie, men giue not ouer∣much licence to the vicious, and that they nourishe not nor mayntayne slaunders & offences in the steade of correcting and abolishing of them. Of the difference that ought to be had betvveene excommunication and suspen∣sion from the Sacraments: and hovv that the Sacraments may not be administred to all those to vvhom the doctrine of the same is set foorth. M. IT séemeth to mée to heare thée speake, that thou puttest some diffe∣rence betwéene excommunication and suspension touching the communion of the Sacraments. P. It is also requisite to distinguishe them. For many de∣serue to bée suspended for a tyme from the cōmunion of the sacraments, which deserue not at all to be excommunicated,
and namely in that extreme rigor, wher∣of thou euē now spakest. M. Giue me an example of that which thou sayest. P. For so muche as the Sacraments are seales & confirmations of the doctrine, thou dost vnderstand already, that they belong but onely to those which are first sufficiently instructed, at the least in the principall points of the doctrine wherof they be Sa∣cramēts, & without vnderstanding wher∣of none may communicate but to his con∣demnation, in mocking of the ordināces of Iesus Christ, and of his Church. M. I do well vnderstand that. P. And therfore men may lawfully set foorth the doctrine to the most ignorant of the world, and to those in déede which neuer heard speake of it. For it is ordeined to teach such men. But the sacraments may not be admini∣stred but to those which first are suffici∣ently instructed, in suche sort, that they vnderstande as muche as is required for their saluation, of the mysteries contey∣ned in the same. Hovv necessarie particuler instructions are in the Churche.
M. BY this reckning then, all those that can not yéelde an accompt of their faith, must be shut out from the cōmuniō of the sacramēts, if at the least they be not able to declare by some meane that they vnderstand that which behoueth them to vnderstande, to be founde capable of the Sacraments. P. It is also the cause why that in the well reformed Churches there is not onely Cathechismes for the instru∣ction of yong children, but also familiar & priuate instruction for suche as be of age, beside the preachings and the other pub∣like Cathechismes. There are also par∣ticuler examinations, wherby they cause all suche to yelde reason of the fayth, which haue not as yet at all yelded any certayne reason of their fayth, to the ende that they may the better knowe which they be that ought to be admitted to the communion of the sacraments, & which not, to the ende that they be not propha∣ned and polluted neither by the ministers which distribute them, ne yet by them which receiue them at their hands, aswel to the condemnation of the one sort as of the other.
In vvhat sort the ministers may be faultie or no, of the pollution of the Sacra∣mentes, if they do administer them to the vnvvorthy. M. IF they which receiue them, receiue them vnworthily to their condem∣nation, the ministers which distribute them vnto them are they faultie also on their parte? P. Thou mayest wel vnder∣stande that they can not prophane and pollute the holy things without yéelding them selues greatly culpable of such pro∣phanation and pollution, for so muche as it is expressedly forbidden them, to giue the holy things to the dogges,Math. 7.2. and to cast pearles & precious stones before swine. M. And what if they knowe not which be the dogges & the swine, or the shéepe, and the worthy or vnworthy, shall not their ignorance excuse them? P. No, if it be through their default. For they ought as shepherds diligētly to enquire of their shéepe. M. And what if after they haue diligētly enquired, the hipocrites deceiue them, faining them selues to be shéepe, and lambes, where they be not onely
swine and dogges, but a also cruel wolues: shal they be culpable of the pollution and prophanation of the Sacraments, if they administer them to suche men, hauing a faire shew to be christiās? P. Séeing they be not iudges of the heart, of which thing God hath reserued to him selfe onely the iudgement, they are without blame on their parte, in as muche as the fault pro∣céedeth not of their negligence, and that God hath not as yet discouered vnto thē the hypocrisie of hypocrites. For the Church can not iudge but of that which is apparant vnto them, and not of hidden and secret things, which God hath reser∣ued to his knowledge onely. Of the ecclesiasticall iudgement re∣quired before the excommu∣nication. M. IT followeth then on the contrary, that they be without excuse, when they receyue to the communion of the Sacramentes, them which they knowe manifestly to be vnworthy? P. Who may doubt that, prouided that they haue the mean to proue to thē their vnworthines?
M. Is the same first required? P. Yea, for must néedes be that iudgement go before sentence and condemnation, and that this iudgement be had by the Church, accor∣ding to the rule and discipline of the same, and not by the ministers onely. M. Why so? P. Bicause that the ministers may not attribute to them selues alone the power the which God hath giuen to the whole Church, but so far foorth as they be execu∣tours in the name of the same, when that the iudgement of the same hath gone be∣fore: which also can not be done but by the worde of God. M. This poynt is well to be noted, to the end that wrong be done to none, and that the ministers do not set vp tyrannie in the Church, and that they make not the discipline of ye same to serue their affections. P. The same serueth thē well to discharge them of such sclaū∣der if they be true ministers. Of the means that the ministers ought to vse, if they may haue no discipline in the Church, nor yet administer the Sacra∣ments in the same vvithout pro∣phaning of them.
M. BVt if the ministers may in no wise obtayne that order & that discipline in the Churche, what should they thē doe▪ shal they be culpable if they do afterward administer the Sacraments indifferently to all commers? yea in déed to those which shewe themselues vtterly vnworthie. P. They can neuer haue sufficient excuse, what soeuer they doe alledge, if they doe wittingly pollute and prophane the holy things. M. It must thē come to passe that they forbeare vtterly the administration of the Sacraments, or els that thei diuide the shéepe and the lambes from dogges, swine & wolues. P. The one or the other must be done. For they may not lawful∣ly accompt for the true Churche and the true mēbers of the same, those which will not range thēselues vnder the discipline of Iesus Christ to giue glory to God by the same as is requisite: but should be ac∣compted as mutines and rebelles against God & his woorde, as themselues doe ma∣nifestly declare.
Of the difference that must be put be∣tvveene the ignorant, and vvhich they are of them that ought to be hol∣den for dogges and svvine. M. SEyng thou hast sayde that the Sa∣cramentes belong but to suche as are already sufficiently instructed in the Christian doctrine, doest thou thē thinke that the others whiche are not as yet suf∣ficiently instructed, ought to be admitted to the communion of them, & those which haue not yéelded reason of their Fayth, nor yet are able to doe it? P. Thou mayst well vnderstand by that which wée haue already sayde, whether such men be ca∣pable or no, and whether they ought to be admitted therevnto, if they be not ca∣pable. M. They must then be excom∣municated. P. Yf it be requisite to sus∣pend them and to put them from the ad∣mission, vntill such time as they be more capable, it foloweth not therefore that they muste be excommunicated except it come to passe that they declare thēselues openly to be dogges and swine. M. Thou doest not accompt then for dogges and
swine all such as are not yet sufficiently instructed in the Christian doctrine as is meete. P. Yf there be but simple igno∣rance, & good will to learne, I holde them rather for shéepe than for dogges and swine, albeit that they may not as yet be receiued so farre forth in the shéepefold as the others which are already sufficiēt∣ly instructed: yet may they not be vtterly shutte out, but may be at the least admit∣ted to the communion of the doctrine and prayers. For Iesus Christe hath many sheepe scattered here and there which are not as yet all gathered into the folde, but he bringeth them thither in time. M. Whiche are they then whome thou ac∣comptest for dogges and swyne. P. In re∣specte of the doctrine, I accompt such all those whiche are not onely ignorant of the same, but that whiche worse is, they will be ignorant of purpose, & they scoffe at it, reiect it, and blaspheme it, yea and oftentimes doe persecute it, and them also whiche teache it vnto them. M. These men are woorthy to be accompted dogges and swyne, séeyng they so treade vnder theyr féete the holy doctrine of GOD,
and that they turne againe vpon his ser∣uants which set it foorth to them, to rente in pieces and deuowre them. P. Thou hast touched the very markes, the which Iesus Christe hath giuen of dogges and swine, & therefore these men deserue not only to be cast forth from the communion of the Sacraments, but also from the cō∣munication of the doctrine, & to be clearly shut from the assemblies of the Church. Of those that declare themselues svvine and dogges in their liues. M. THou haste nowe spoken of them which declare themselues dogges & swine touchyng the doctrine: but thou hast not spoken of them yet who declare themselues such by their wicked life. P. Thou mayst place in this ranke, all such as leade licentious liues, and make none accompt of amendement what admoni∣tion soeuer be giuen vnto them, but doe contemne or rather outrage those which doe admonish and blame them. M. Giue me some examples wherby I may iudge of others such like.1. Cor. 5. d . Thess. 3. b. P. S. Paule dothe not only forbid to receiue to the commu∣nion
of the Sacraments, whoremasters, couetous parsons, idolaters, euill spea∣kers, drunkerdes, spoylers, idle parsons, and such as liue disordinately, & will not be content with their owne place among others, and yet beare the name of Chri∣stiās, but forbiddeth also to eate or drinke or to vse any familiar conuersation with them. M. If these men deserue to be so reiected not only from the assemblies of the Churche, but also from all other good cōpanies, I doubte not but the like must be done to all those which ar spotted with vices and faultes, whiche are as great or greater than are these. P. That is easie to vnderstand. Whether the discipline ordeyned by Iesus Christe be necessary in the Churche or no. M. DOest thou thinke that this disci∣pline is so necessary for ye Church that it cannot in anywise be without it? P. She may be without it if she may be without the administration and the vse of the Sacramentes and of the woorde of God, in so much as the woorde and the
Sacraments cā not there be duely admi∣nistred without the same. M. I haue not∣withstanding heard many which accōpte it among the indifferent thinges, affir∣ming that men may wholy omitte it, or els vse it accordyng to euery man his libertie. P. Albeit that these men speake openly against the expressed word of Ie∣sus Christe, yet are they not so vnreaso∣nable as those whiche condemne it & vt∣terly reiect it. M. This last sort do shew themselues too much vnworthy to be ac∣compted Christians. But why sayst thou that the first haue no good foundation for that they say? P. Doest thou thinke that men may accompte among indifferente things, those whiche are expressedly com∣maunded or forbidden of God? M. I doe not sée that it is in the power of man to dispence with any thing that God hath either commaunded or forbidden. But is there expressed cōmaundement touchyng this discipline? P. Neither more nor lesse than to preach the Gospell & to admini∣ster the Sacramētes. For hath not Iesus Christ cōmaunded not only to admonish & rebuke,Math. 18. b. c. 1. Timo. 5. d. & to correct those which should
sinne and be offensiue: but to excommu∣nicate them accordyng to the rule which he hath expressedly ordeyned for ye same, when that naughty and vicious persons should deserue it? M. I doe not agayne say that. P. I would very gladly then that these temporisers whiche doe so scoffe at the expressed ordinance of Iesus Christe, and that declare themselues to be so har∣dy to dispence with his expressed cōman∣dementes, would shew me by what pas∣sage of the holy Scriptures it is permit∣ted them against the expressed forbidding of Iesus Christe, to giue the holy things to dogges, and to cast the pearles before swyne, and to receyue into the commu∣nion of the Churche, and of the Sacra∣mentes, those of whome Iesus Christe sayeth playnly, that they must be holden for Heathens and Infidelles, which must be deliuered to Sathan,1. Cor. 5. b. 1. Tim. 2. d. as S. Paule deliuered the incestuous Corin∣thian, and Alexander, and Hymene, according to the rule of Iesus Christe.
Of the Baptisme of little children, and of brotherly con∣fession and Reconciliation. The .xxij. Dialogue. If litle children should be shutte out from Baptisme bicause they be not yet in∣structed, and of the difference that is betvvene Baptisme and the Supper in that point. MATHEVV. I Am sufficiently resolued con∣cerning all that whiche thou hast sayd touchyng the disci∣pline of the Church: there wā∣teth now but one point whiche yet doth concerne the doctrine. P. Which is that point? M. Whether we ought to receiue to the Communion of the Sacramentes, none but such as are already so instructed in the Christian doctrine, that they haue sufficiente vnderstandyng of the things signified by the Sacramēts, & are able to yelde good reason of their faith: it séemeth to me yt a man may gather of thy woords
that not only they oughte not to receyue litle children to the Supper, but also they ought not to baptise them, vntill the time they come to the age in the whiche they may yelde reason of their faith, and vn∣derstand what their baptisme doth signi∣fie. P. Thou hast here to note, that there is difference betwene receyuing of chil∣dren to baptisme, and receyuing of them to the Supper. Mat. What difference fyndest thou in it? P. In that that Saincte Paule doth require of those which wolde communicate at the Supper, that they shoulde proue them selues, to knowe whether they be méete or no, and that they be disposed to receyue the same, accordingly as thys holye Sacramente doth require, whiche thing is not so re∣quired in Baptisme. Math. What wilte thou conclude thereby? Peter. That if it must be that euery man proue himselfe before he go to the Supper, it followeth then that they are not yet capable of that proofe whiche are not so farre foorthe in∣structed, as they may proue and examine themselues, as is méete.
Of the principall foundation of the Baptisme of litle children, and of the vertue of the aliance vvher∣vppon it is grounded. M. I Vnderstand by that which thou hast heretofore saide, that none can well proue and examine himselfe, to commu∣nicate worthily at the supper, except that first he vnderstand what misteries and se∣cretes this Sacramente conteyneth, and for what cause it was ordeyned. But for∣somuch as Baptisme is also a seale of the doctrine, the which it doth confirme, is it not therefore also néedefull that he which shuld be baptised, be first instructed in the doctrine whereof it is a Sacrament, and that he may yeld reason of it? P. If the person be of that age, that it be capable of the doctrine, that whiche thou saist is re∣quired. But there is other consideration in the person of litle children, borne of faithfull parents, which are alredy recei∣ued into ye Church. M. But bycause these children are no more capable of the pro∣mise made in baptisme, than the children of infidells, what reason is there rather to
baptise the one than the others. P. If the children of the faithfull were no more ca∣pable, than those of the infidells, there were reason in that which thou saist. M. I sée not wherein the one sorte are more capable thā the others, vnlesse thou shew it me more plainly. P. Thou must vnder∣stād that ye promise which God hath made in Baptisme,This say∣ing is of great quan¦titie. conteyneth the promise of the aliance, ye which God hath made with his people, in the which he comprehēdeth not only the faithfull whiche thorough faith are admitted into this aliance, but also their childrē and the children of their children. M. Wilt thou then say, that the baptisme of children which haue faithfull parēts, is founded vpon that aliance, and vpon the faith of their parents? P. Seing that the promis is made, not onely to the faithful parents, but also to their childrē, the Parentes haue iust occasion to pre∣sent their children to Baptisme, to the end they may haue thereby confirmati∣on of the promise whiche is made as well to their childrē as to themselues, to ye end that both they & their children may be the
more assured and comforted. M. Thys Baptisme serueth then better for them than for their children, forsomuche as the children knowe not yet what it is. P. It serueth the one and the others. For al∣beit the children be not able as yet to vn∣derstande what Baptisme is, bycause of their age, yet are they capable (not∣withstanding) already thorough the good pleasure of God, of the aliance wherof it is a Sacramente, and on the other side besides that whiche God worketh by hys holy Spirite, as it pleaseth him, as well in litle children as in the greate, there is also prayer made in Baptisme for the litle children founded vppon the same a∣liance, whiche is not vayne, but bringeth foorth his frute in his time. If it be lavvfull to Baptise the children of infidels, and what conditions are required in them vvhich do present them. M. SEing then that Baptisme of chil∣dren is founded vppon that aliance, it is not lawfull to baptise a childe, if he
be not borne of faithfull Parentes. Pet. Thou hast herein to consider, that there must be héede taken not only to the Pa∣rentes of the children: but also to those which presente them to Baptisme. For albeit that a childe be borne of faithfull Parentes, yet shoulde it not be lawfull to receyue hym to Baptisme, if he were not presented by faythfull men, whyche moughte be bound for them, vnto that wherevnto Baptisme bindeth the faith∣full, and that they shoulde be sufficiente to accomplish the promise whereby they binde themselues to the Churche concer∣ning the children. M. And if that faithfull men should presente the Children of In∣fidells, and that they should binde them selues for them, taking vppon them to instruct them in the Christian religion, as if they themselues were their very Parents, shoulde it be lawfull to baptise such children? P. I wold make no difficul∣tie therein, prouided that the Parents did agre therevnto, chiefly for two causes. M. Tell me the first. P. It is that forsomuch as there is faithfull suretie, the minister
who is to administer the Baptisme, hath alredy a good foundatiō. For such suretie is in place of the Parentes, prouided that they do not mislike of it, but haue giuen thē charge to do what they do. M. Which is the other reason? P. It is that when God made the aliance with his people, he did not only promise to shew fauour and mercie to the parents and children,Exod. 20. a. Deut. 5. a. euen to the seconde and thirde generation, but euen to a thousand generations. Where∣fore, albeit that the néerest parents of the childe were infidels, yet notwithstanding their infidelitie may not shut their childe from his righte, that he may haue in the aliance of God, by the meane of his aun∣cient fathers and predecessors. M. But seing it is so, according to the true disci∣pline of the church, none may thē receiue a man to presente a childe to Baptisme, if that he himselfe be not receiued into the companie of the faithfull, and be not suf∣ficient to be pledge for the childe which he presenteth, & to fulfill the promise whiche he maketh for him. P. It shuld be to mock God and his Church, who so should do o∣therwise.
For mē haue not accustomed in mater of much lesse importāce to receiue a pledge, if he be not of such qualitie as is required. M. That is an ordinarie mater. P. What reason shuld there be thē to re∣ceiue in mater of so great importāce, any other pledge thā such an one as wer méet, in ye which mater ther is a very solemne obligation, & as it were a solemne oth be∣fore god & his Church? M. Is there ye like reason for those which be excōmunicate, as there is for those which are as yet hol∣den for infidells, or at the least haue made no professiō of the christiā doctrine? P. Yes vntill that they be recōciled to the church and receiued into the same in such sort as we haue heretofore saide, and as it is be∣houefull to be done in suche a case. M. I woulde aske thée also for what cause chil∣dren are not to be as well admitted to the supper as to Baptisme, by meanes of the aliance made with their parentes, in the whiche they are comprehended? but I knowe that thou wilte aunswere me in such sorte as thou hast hertofore done, cō∣cerning the proof which is more specially
required in the supper than in Baptisme. P. Thou séest wel that the reason is ther∣in sufficiently apparant. M. Now seing it is so required that euery one proue him∣selfe before he come to the Supper, and not that other men proue them, may not the ministers committe it to the cōsciēce of euery one which present themselues to them, to receiue this sacramente without making any other profe or inquisition? P. Albeit that it be required that euery one particularly do proue himselfe, yet not∣withstanding, that particular examinati∣on, doth not let the examination and the proofe, whiche the ministers and pastors oughte to make of their flocks, to knowe not only which be shéepe and which not: but also what is the condition and estate of euery one of their shéepe. For if they know them not, what accoumpt shal they yeld? M. That is a good apparāt reason. P. On the other parte if there be doggs and swine which will thorough their rashnes put forth themselues, to the greate con∣tempt of God and of his church, to thrust in their poluted and filthy snoutes vppon
the lords table, to infect it with the same, shall the minister be without blame if he permitte it, and do not at the least his en∣deuoure to shut out suche doggs & swyne frō the table of the Lorde? M. There may be also many which although they do not deserue to be accoumpted dogs & swyne, but only for poore ignorāt and séely ones, whiche mought notwithstanding go and thrust in with the rest, either of custome, or else thinking to do well, and yet should go to their owne condemnatiō. P. I wold also adde herevnto this point, and in such a case the ministers shuld not be without blame of the faulte whiche those shoulde committe, and of the perdition of them, if that they had not firste done their inde∣uoure towardes them, accordingly as they are bound. Of confessiō & of brotherly recōciliatiō. M. I Would gladly vnderstande of thée, if that after that a man haue proued himselfe in such sorte as thou hast alredy declared, he haue no néede to cōfesse him∣selfe yet to some minister of the Church. P. If he be confessed to God as he ought,
and be reconciled to such as he may haue offendid, and with whome he may be at strife and enmitie, he néedeth none other confession. M. The proofe whereof thou hast spoken, doth it conteyne all that? P. Thou maist iudge by that whiche thou hast heard, for the true repentaunce, and faith and charitie cannot be without true confession and reconciliation towardes God and our neyghboure. The. 23. Dialogue is of Supplication & of Chris∣tian praier. Of prayer, and hovv it belongeth to none but to the faithfull, and may not be addressed but to God. MATHEVV. I Haue no more now to propone to thée concerning the pointes which we haue alredy handled. There resteth nothyng now, but that thou tell me yet that which thou hast to say touching prayer. P. For somuche as prayer is a frute of faithe, whereby the faithfull do homage to god,
and make request vnto him for all things which are necessarie as well for their bo∣dy as for their soule, men yeld thanks vn∣to him for all the good things which they haue alredy receyued of him, it followeth then well that it is an honoure which be∣longeth not but only to God, and cannot be yelded vnto him but by the faithfull. M. It followeth then of that which thou saist, that it is not lawfull to call vppon or pray to any other than to God. P. No at all if we will not giue the honoure which belongeth to him, to creatures,Esay 42. b 48. b. and his glory to others against his expressed cō∣maundement. M. Is it then Idolatrie to call vppon and to pray to any other than to God? P. It is neither more nor lesse than to worship an other than he only. Hovv that our prayers cannot be agre∣able vnto god vvithout a mediator, and by vvhat mediator it behoueth vs to present them. M. BVt seing we are all faultie before his maiestie, may we haue accesse vnto hym withoute mediator or aduo∣cate?
P. In no wise. M. Why shall it not be lawfull for vs then to take one amōg the Saincts whiche raigne with God? P. Forsomuche as we cannot haue accesse vnto him without a mediator & aduocate, it is not for vs to chose him at our plea∣sure, but for him to giue such an one as he himselfe hath chosen and appointed. M. He may very well know better than we, what mediator and aduocate we néede, and whiche is most agreable to him and most méete for vs. P. And therefore it is very reasonable yt therin we be gouerned by him. Now thou hast alredy vnderstood heretofore how he hath giuē vs his owne sonne to do that office, in whome only we must repose, if we wil not fully deny god, and prouoke him to anger against vs in stead of appeasing him, and reiecte Iesus christ his sōne, the which he hath giuē vs. Hovv that none other aduocate nor mediator may be ioyned to Iesus christ, vvithout greatly disho∣noring of him.
M. BVt what inconuenient is it if that we take Iesus Christ for the prin∣cipall mediator and aduocate by whome we are made at one with the Father, and that then we take either mā saint or wo∣mā saint, which raigne alredy in Heauen with him concerning their soules and spi∣rites, to be also our mediators and aduo∣cates with him, or else towards himselfe bycause of our vnworthinesse? Pet. The same cannot be done without taking frō him the office whiche belongeth onely to him. M. Why so? P. Forsomuch as either he is sufficient for the office which the fa∣ther hath appointed him, or else he is not sufficient: if he be sufficient, then néedeth it not to appointe him a fellowe: if he be not sufficiente, he is not then the true an∣noynted of the Lord, and the office which is appointed vnto hym, belongeth not to him at all. Mat. This were an horrible blasphemie, not onely to speake suche wordes, but to thinke them. P. And ther∣fore if we had none other reason but that that we haue not in all the holy Scrip∣tures neyther commaundement nor ex∣ample,
which doth commaund and teache vs, we ought to take any other mediator and aduocate than Iesus Christ towarde the father, but it is forbidden vs expres∣sedly to take any other: that same shoulde suffise vs, seing that there is neither in∣uocation nor prayer that can please god, if it be not made in faith. Now there can be no faithe where there is no certayne word of God, nor commaundemente, nor promise of the same to ground it vppon. Of the commaundemente vvhiche the faithfull haue to pray one for ano∣ther, but not to addresse them selues to any dead sainte. M. IF it be so as thou sayst, it shall not then be lawfull to require that any man pray for vs, not in déede among the liuing. For somuch as we take as for ad∣uocates and mediators those same vnto whome we giue suche charge to pray for vs. P. Thou must in this put difference betwene the liuing saints and those that are dead. For we haue expressed cōman∣dement of God to pray in this life the one for the others, and sure promise that our
prayers shall be heard, not only when we shall pray for our selues, but also for our brethren. M. Haue we no such comman∣dement nor promise touching the praiers of dead saints? P. Not at all in all the ho∣ly scriptures which are giuen vnto vs for a rule in all thinges whiche concerne the seruice of God. Wherefore we may not addresse vs to dead men or women saints to call vppon them or to pray vnto them, to the end they may be our intercessors, and that they maye praye for vs, as we may addresse vs to the liuing, and require their prayers for vs. VVhat regard the faithfull haue the one for the others in their prayers. M. IT followeth then by thy saying, that if we maye not haue the deade Saintes for our aduocates and interces∣sors, yet maye wée haue among the ly∣uing, prouided that they be faithfull. Pet. Albeit that God doth binde vs by the cha∣ritie which we owe the one to the others, to pray in this life the one for the others, it followeth not for all that, that we must
take for our mediators and aduocates in the stéede of Iesus Christe, or towardes him, those same whose prayers we do re∣quire, and that do pray for vs, as the su∣perstitiouse and Idolaters, do take for their mediators and aduocates the deade saincts. M. What difference is there then touching this point? P. If there were non other difference, but that we haue the ex∣pressed worde of God for the one, and not for the other, it were sufficient: but there is yet this more, that when the superstiti∣ouse and Idolatrous sorte do take for their aduocates the dead saincts, they put thē in the place of Iesus Christ, as thogh he alone were not sufficient, or else at the least they take them as mistrusting that they should not be hard, neyther towards the father nor yet towards Iesus Christ, if they haue none other mediators & ad∣uocates by whome they may haue better accesse, as well to the father as to Iesus christ. M. And they which desire the prai∣ers of the liuing, do they not the like? P. If they do it to that ende, they committe great faulte, for God doth not only com∣maund
vs to pray one for another, to giue vs to vnderstand, yt he will not heare vs at al, whē we shal our selues cal vpō him in faith, if there be not also other fayth∣full ones, which may pray vnto hym for vs, bée they more holy or more perfecte than wée, or no. For vvhat cause God hath commaunded vs to pray one for an other. M. IF then God doe heare vs when wée our selues pray for vs, whervnto do the prayers of others serue vs? P. There be chiefly two points to consider in that. M. Which is the first? P. I haue already touched it as by ye way, yt god cōmaūdeth vs to praye one for another as an exercise of our faith towards him, & of the charitie which we ought to practise ye one towar∣des the others. For he is greatly pleased when we do declare by effect yt we haue care for our brethren as we haue for our selues, & yt we recōmend thē by these our prayers, as oure selues, knowing yt they be aswel theirs as ours, & that wée haue this confidēce in him, yt he wil heare the praiers which we make for thē, as he wil doe those which wée make for our selues.
M. Is not the case lyke concernyng the Saintes whych are alredy departed? P. Thou maist well knowe no, for so much as they haue alredy ended their course, & that we haue no conuersation among thē nor they with vs. M. Doth that hinder that they may pray no more for vs? P. If that in déede we were well assured, that they did know our estate, and our harte, and that they should pray for vs without cease, yet should it not be lawfull for all that for vs to pray vnto them & to cal vp∣on thē, for so much as wée haue no word of God, as we haue alreadie saide, which teacheth vs so to doe, nor that doth assure vs that our prayers made to them bee a∣gréeable to God. M. Which is yet the o∣ther poynt wherfore God is better plea∣sed that the lyuing praye for the lyuing, and that they doe require the prayers the one of the others, than to addresse them to deade Saintes? P. It is that god requireth to bée called on by many, and that thanckes also bee yéelded to him by many, not onely for the things which in particular touche our persons, but also for all those which concerne his Church.
M. It is more than reasonable. P. More∣ouer he wil also that we do communicate with prosperities, with aduersities, with afflictions, and with the quietnesses and with the guiftes which god sendeth to his faithful, bicause of ye cōmuniō which they haue among thē, the which we haue here to fore, called the communion of saintes. Of the forme of praier which Christ gaue to the Church, and of the parts therof. M. I Am as now sufficiently resolued as concerning this point. For so much then as I knowe to whom wée ought to make our prayers, and by what media∣tor and aduocate wée maye haue accesse towardes God, to assure vs that they bée heard of him, tell mée nowe what things wee should demaunde of him, to the ende that our prayers may be conformable to his wyll, and that wée doe not prouoke him against vs by those same, where as wée should haue him fauourable to vs. P. Wée can no more fayle in that respect, than in all the others, if we follow ye rule which Iesus Christ hath giuē vs concern∣ning that matter, in the forme of prayer which he hath expresly giuē to his church
to direct hir in all hir praiers. M. Recite mée that forme of prayer. P. Oure father which art in ye heauēs. Thy name be ha∣lowed. Thy kingdome come. Thy wil be done in earth, as it is in heauen. Gyue vs this day our daily bread. And pardon vs our sinnes, as we pardō them which of∣fend vs. And lead vs not into temptation: but deliuer vs frō the euil one. For vnto thée belongeth ye raigne, the power, & the glory eternally. So be it. M. Shewe mée what this praier cōteineth in sūme. P. It doth conteine first a briefe preface, & then sixe requestes, in the which Iesus Christ hath comprehended all the things which men maye iustlye demaunde of God, as well for his honour, as for their saluati∣on, and all their necessaryes aswell cor∣porall as spirituall. Of the pointes of the doctrine con∣teined in the preface of the Lordes prayer. M. WHat dothe hée teache vs in the preface? P. Fyue things euery
one well woorthy to be noted,Note these pointes. and so re∣quisite in the prayer, that without them it coulde not be a true prayer. M. Which is the firste? P. By that which he teacheth vs to call God father, he teacheth vs also that wée maye haue no accesse to hym, which trust to be heard of him, if fyrst he be not agréed with vs, in suche forte as he accompte vs for his children, and that we also accompte him for our father. M. Which is the thirde? P. It foloweth after thereof, that wée maye haue no accesse to him, nor yet our prayers, if wée take not his sonne Iesus Christ for our mediator and aduocate, towards him.Iohn. 14. 1. Tim. 2. b. 1. Iohn. 2. a. Ephe. 1. b. M. How doth it folow of that which thou hast saide? P. For so muche as God cannot be our Fa∣ther but by the meane of Iesus Christe, by whom he hath adopted vs for his chil∣drē, as we haue also expoūded heretofore. M. What haste thou yet to saye for the fourth poynt? P. That wée shoulde not feare at all to direct our prayers to God, and not to mistrust but that they shal be heard, for so much as he is our Father, and that wee haue Iesus Christ for our
aduocate towards him. M. Whych is the fyfte?Iames. 1. a P. That euen as wée shoulde not doubte at all to be heard, on the contrary wée may be well assured that wée shall not bée hearde, if wée doubt, and that wée haue not assured trust, that euen as God is become our Father by Iesus Chryst, euen so doth he receyue vs for hys chyl∣dren in all oure prayers and requestes that wée make vnto hym in the name of hys Sonne, as he hath promysed vnto vs. M. That preface contayneth great doctryne. P. Thou mayst also adde vn∣to it, that Iesus Christ teacheth vs in the same, that euen as wée shoulde not doubt of the good wyll of GOD towardes vs, séeing he is become our Father, no more may wée doubt, that he is wise and migh∣tie ynough to graunt vs all thinges that wée shall require of him. For séeing that he is in heauen, wée are therby assured, that as he is aboue all creatures, euen so be they all in hys power, and knoweth and vnderstandeth al things, both in hea∣uen and in the earth, and hath also in his hande all the meanes to prouide for the same as it pleaseth him.
Of the content of the three first requests of the Lordes prayer. M. IT is maruellous that Iesus Christ did comprehend so many thinges in so fewe woords: let vs nowe come to the requests conteined in this forme of pray∣er. P. The first thrée of the sixe, do teache vs to demaūd of God those things which belong onelie to his glory and maiesty, & to the honour which we owe vnto him: & doe teache vs forthwith not onely to de∣maunde these things first, but also to di∣rect and frame to that end, all the others which we shal demaunde for vs. M. The same séemeth to mée to agrée verye well with that which Iesus Christ hath saide, séeke firste the kingdome of God and the iustice therof, and all the other thynges,Mat. 6. d. shall be added vnto you. Of the content of the three last demaūds, and what things we ought to demaund of God, and to what ende. P. IN the other thrée requests folowing Iesus Christ hath comprehended all the things, that we may demaund of god for our selues. M. Is it not lawfull to de∣maunde him any other thing, but onely
that which is conteyned in that forme of praier? P. No. For albe it that it be short, yet Iesus Christ hath made it wyth so great wisdome, & so perfect arte, yt there is no good thing which a man maye aske of god, which is not comprehended in the same. M. It foloweth then on ye contrary, that no mā may iustly pray for any thing which is not conteined in ye same. P. The one foloweth of the other, whervpō thou hast yet to note, yt it is not sufficient not to demaund of god,The glory of god must be chiefely regarded in all our prai∣ers. any thing that is not good of it selfe: but also it is required that wée aske it him, hauing euer regarde to his glory, & that all that which we aske of him may serue to the same. M. Thou wilt then say that wée may offende him in de∣maunding those same things, the which Iesus Christ hath taught vs to demaund of him for our wealth, if wée haue no re∣garde but to our selues, to witte, to the ende that wée maye liue the more at our owne pleasure, and not to the ende that wée may the better serue to his honour. P. It is euen that whych I woulde haue saide.
Of the deuision of the things vvich we aske of God and first of things corporall. M. TEll me now whiche be the things that we shoulde demaunde of him for vs. P. There be of two sorts: For the one sorte are corporall and temporall, and do belong but to the course of this life: and the others are spirituall, and haue also regarde to the eternall life. Ma. What doest thou vnderstande by these corporall and temporall thynges? Pet. All those whyche are necessarie for this poore earthly bodie, and for the en∣tertainement of this lyfe, to accomplishe in the seruice of God the course whiche we haue to runne in thys worlde, euen to the tyme that we be come to the estate in the whiche we shal sée all that accom∣plished whiche wée firstly demaunde, to witte, the sanctification of his name, the accomplishemente of his kingdome, and perfect obedience towards his holie will, as the heauenly Angels do yelde it vnto him. M. In whiche request dothe Iesus Chryst comprehend all those things? Pe.
It is vnder the name of the dayly bread, the which we aske of God our Father as his children, to employ our selues in his seruice, forsomuch as it is he that nouri∣sheth vs. Of spirituall thinges which we aske of God for vs. M. ANd the other requests which are for spirituall things what do they conteyn? P. A confession of our offences and sinnes, by the which as we confesse our selues to be poore and wretched sin∣ners, euen so do we daylye demaunde and obtaine by Iesus Christe our Lorde forgiuenesse. M. Is there yet any thing else? P. Finally wée require the ayde and assistance of God our father against the malice of the deuill, and again all the assaultes whiche he may giue vnto vs, and all the tentations which maye come vnto vs, to the ende we may obteyne a ful victorie, to triumph once in the king∣dome of God, with our true king & cap∣tain, and our very Sauior and redéemer Iesus Christ. M. This good God and Fa∣ther, giue vs the grace, the whiche I hum∣bly desire in the name of his sonne Iesus
Chryst, that it may please him so to im∣printe in our heartes all that doctrine by his holie Spirite, that we may well put it in vse, to the glorie of his holy name: and to the edification of all men. P. This good God giue vs the grace, and not to vs only but also to all the people of the earthe, to the ende that euen as he is God only, and that there is but one onely mediator Ie∣sus Christ, and one lawe and one Gospel, and one Baptisme, and one Church, euen so that al may be vnited in him by his ho∣ly Spirite, to serue and to honoure him in truthe, and in Spirite, euen as to hym only all honour and glorie doth belong for euer and euer. Sobeit. The ende. ¶The Printer to the Readers, greeting. FOr somuche as many good men desire to haue the copie of the prayer, whiche the Author of this booke hath accustomed to make at the beginning of his sermons,
so haue I thoughte it no inconuenient to printe it here, to the ende that all suche as woulde, mought vse it to the aduance∣ment of the glorie of God, to whose grace I commende you. The Prayer. ACknowledging oure faultes and im∣perfections, and that of our selues we can haue no good thyng if it be not gi∣uen vs from heauen, wée will humble our selues before the high maiestie of our good God and Father, full of all goodnesse and mercie, beséeching him that he will not enter into Iudgemente wyth vs, to correct and punishe vs in his anger and wrath, hauing regarde to our sinnes and iniquities, but that he looke vpon the in∣nocencie, iusties, and obedience of hys sonne Iesus Chryst, whom he hath giuen to death for vs, for whose sake if maye please him to receiue vs al to mercy, and by his heauenly lyghte to driue oute of our heartes all darknesses, erroures, and ignorances, and to fill vs with his graces and ye graces of his holy spirit, which may
bring vs to the ful knowledge of al truth, and may open to vs the true vnderstan∣ding of his holy word, to the ende that it be not corrupted by our carnall sense and vnderstanding, but that he may giue vs the grace, as he hath spoken by his holy Prophetes and Apostles, that being go∣uerned by one very Spirite, we may de∣clare it to his honoure and glory and to the edification of all men: and that we do not heare it only with our carnal eares, to oure iudgemente and condemnation, as the Infidels and hypocrites doe: but that we maye receyue the same into our hartes as true children of GOD, tho∣rowe true and lyuely Fayth, the whiche may be effectuous and working thorowe charitie: learning thereby to renounce oure selues, all Idolatrie, all wycked superstitions and carnall affections, to put wholly all oure trust in hym, and to consecrate and conforme oure selues wholly vnto hys holy will, to the ende that our lyfe and conuersation may bée to his honour and his praise, and that for our Lord Iesus Christs sake, we may be found without blame, and without spotte
before his face: the whiche things wyth all others, whiche this good GOD and Father doothe knowe to be necessarie for vs, wée will demaunde them of him, as this great Sauiour and Redéemer Ie∣sus Chryste his deare Sonne, our Soueraigne mayster hathe taughte vs, saying all with one heart: Oure Father whiche arte in Heauen. &c.
The Exposition of the Preface of the Law, set foorth by maister Peter Viret, Mini∣ster of Gods worde. I Am the Eternal thy God, which haue brought thée out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage. Questions concerning the presence of God in the mountayn of Synai, and of his voyce, and of the lawe gi∣uen by the Angelles. TIMOTHE, DANIEL. BEfore that we enter into the Exposition of the Cō∣maundements conteined in the Law, according to our agréement, I woulde gladly vnderstande two litle poyntes of thée, which Moyses ma∣keth mention of.Iere. 23. Exod. 19. Iohn. 4. Luke. 24. Daniel. What are those pointes? Timothie. The first is, howe that God whiche is in all places, and doth fil both heauen and earth, and is infinite,
did descende into the mountayne of Sy∣nai: for was he not there before? The other, howe he spake in proper person, for somuche as he hathe neyther bodye, mouth, nor voyce like vnto mans voyce, if we doe consider him in his béeing and diuinitie.Act. 7. Gal. 3. On the other syde, S. Paule, and S. Stephen doe playnly testifie, that the lawe was giuen by the Angels. Of the presence of God in general, which is common to all men and creatures, and of his speciall presence to∣wardes his seruantes. D. THere is no greate difficultie in these questions. For albéeit God doth fill bothe heauen and earth through his diuinitie, yet notwithstanding for so muche as he doth not alway declare his maiestie, his power, his wisedome, and goodnesse so manifestly and familiarly in one place as in an other, the holie scrip∣ture, to condescend and agrée to our gros∣nesse, doth oftentimes attribute that vn∣to God whiche is proper to man, to de∣clare vnto vs the more plainly and fami∣liarly his presence and assistance. There is no dout but that God was alreadie in
the mount Sinai, before the time that he gaue his lawe, as he was throughout the whole worlde, and euen as he is at this day: but he did not shew him selfe in such sorte as he did then there shewe him selfe to his people,Genes. 18. wherefore the Scripture sayth, bicause of such a shewyng of his presence, that he did there descend. Of the voice of God vvhich vvas heard by men, and of his lavve giuen by the Angels. T. ANd what sayest thou concernyng the other pointes? D. Albeit that God haue no body as concernyng his di∣uine essence or beyng, nor voice like vnto the voyce of man, so is it (notwithstan∣ding) an easie matter for him, to whome nothing is impossible, to make him selfe a voyce, and to take such forme and like∣nesse as pleaseth him, to cause him to be heard and knowen,Math. 19. Luc. 18. so farre sorth as is méete for the saluation of man, & the in∣firmitie of mā may endure. And also there is no inconuenient, to say that the lawe which God gaue, was giuen by Angels, for so much as God was serued by their
ministerie in the giuing of it, and that his maiestie was not there shewed, but being accompanied with his Angels,Hebr. 1. Psalm. 96. which are alwaies prepared & ready to serue him, wherefore both the one and the other is true, to wéet, that God himself did speake & giue his lawe, and that it was giuen by the ministerie of his Angels. Of the preface of God in his Lavve, and of the titles vvhich he giueth to himself in the same: and of the poynt that is chiefly required in that Lavve. T. BEfore that God did take in hand to giue his cōmaundements, he doth first vse a Preface, whiche semeth to be∣long onely to the children or people of Israel, as though he gaue his lawe but to them onely: the whiche notwithstanding (euen as it hath bene sayde heretofore) doth no lesse belōg to vs than to that peo∣ple. Wherfore I would gladly vnderstād the meaning of it, and the causes and rea∣sons for the which God did so set it forth, & wherein it belongeth to vs. D. You doe
know well that when Kinges & Princes make any Lawes, and doe cause any sta∣tutes or ordinaunces to be published in their name, they doe accustome to put some preface to it, cōtayning their name, and the titles wherby they declare what their Maiestie, Lordship, & power is.1. Tim. 6. Se∣ing then that God, whiche is the chiefe King & Prince of al creatures, would pu∣blishe his Lawe, was it not then méete that he shoulde declare that he was the Lawmaker, and what was his maiestie & power. And therefore did he say,Prouer. 25. Genes. 21. Exod. 20. Deut. 5. I am the lorde thy God whiche haue brought thee out of the lande of Egipte, from the house of bondage. Then is it requisite before all other things, to knowe in this lawe who is the true God, and by what meanes he may be knowen and discer∣ned and seperated from false Goddes, & that this knowledge goe before all the cōmandements folowing. For who shall call vpon God, who shall feare him, who shall loue him, who shal put his truste in him, if that first he do not know him? and not in such sorte as the heathen doe, who although they had a certayne opinion
that there was a God vpon whome it be∣houed them to call, to feare, to loue, and to honour: yet for all that they did not know who he was, nor where to finde him. And for so much as wée can not sée him, nor discerne him with eyes, nor with any other corporal sense, yet notwithstanding wée must beholde him, embrase him, and speake vnto him from the harte and frō the spirite. Of the name Eternal vvhich is Jehoua in Hebrevve, giuen to God. T. WHerefore dothe he first call him selfe the Eternal? D. He dothe declare in the Hebrewe tongue, in the which Moyses hath writtē these things,Genes. 1. by the woorde of Iehoua the which we do so translate, what is his beyng & his na∣ture, & that he is the Creatour of al crea∣tures,Iohn. 1. the first & the last, without begin∣ning and without end, and hath his being of none other but of him self: & of him all things haue their beyng,Act. 14. Esaie. 44. Apoc. 1.22. Act. 17. Exod. 3.7.23. & are come from him, and doe returne into him. It is he by whom we liue, moue, & are. Thē may he lawfully say, I am, the whiche none els may iustly say. Wherefore, seyng that he
is our Creatour,Gen. . 28.35 Esaie. 47. Exod. 3.13. 1. Cor. 4. Deut. 6. Math. 22. Gene. 2. & so by consequent our guide & gouerner, & that we haue of him our soule, body, and goodes: is it not méete that we doe acknowledge him to be our King, Prince & Lord, & render to him the homage of soule, of body & goodes, & of all things els that we haue receyued of him, to yelde vnto him perfect obedience? For this cause ye holy Scripture putteth vs in minde oftētimes of these things, & giueth to God the title of maker of heauen and earth. Wherfore it must néedes be graū∣ted that none other be our God but onely he vnto whom this name and title belon∣geth, which is that Eternall essence that can doe all things, and is the beginning, the conseruation, & the end of all things. In vvhat sorte God is generally called the God of all men, and chiefely the God of his chosen people. T. WHerefore doth he also say beside that, Thy God?Apoc 10. Ionas. 1. Ezech. 18. D. Bicause that this first benefite is cōmon to all men, & to al creatures according to their nature, in as much as he is creatour of thē all, he addeth vnto it also this title, to make him more amiable and fauourable vnto vs: to
the end that by that meane he may make his doctrine more acceptable vnto vs, & that he may make vs ye more willing to receyue it as the doctrine of our father,1. Tim. 2. who by the same procureth nothing but onely our cōmoditie and saluation. And therefore he doth not onely say God, but thy God: which is a maner of speach, that according to the phrase of the holy Scri∣pture, carieth with it fauour & grace. For first, the name of God, the which Moyses here doth vse, doth signifie in Hebrewe, force, & forces, to declare vnto vs that he hath the power to aide and helpe vs, and that he is not onely God for him selfe, to witte, that he will kéepe in him selfe the good things that in him are, and not to be∣stow & distribute them: but that his very office is to bestow thē vpō men, to shewe him self gratious & fauourable towardes thē. When he doth ye contrary, being pro∣uoked thereunto by their frowardnesse & wickednesse, he doth by his prophets call that worke,Esaie. 28. a straūge worke. Wherefore when he calleth him selfe the God of any people, he declareth therby that he is not only their God, as he is generally ye God
of all creatures, as Creatour of them: but yt he is their God, not seuere & rigorous, as a iudge toward euill doers: but cur∣teous, louing, fauourable & merciful, as a good father to his childrē. When then he sayeth, Thy God, he doth then put thē in minde of that which he spake before, that he had chosen this people as his own en∣heritance, & as a precious Iewell among all the rest.Exod. 34. Num. 1. Psalm. 12.10 Gene. 25. And therefore it is not with∣out cause sayd by the Prophete, he hath done so to none other nation. And there∣fore he sayth by Esaie, And now saith the Lord thus, which hath created thée Iacob, & who hath fashioned thée Israell, feare not, for I haue bought thée,Deut. 4. Exod. 19. Psalm. 147. Esaie. 4.23. I haue named thy name, Thou art mine. When yu shalt passe by water, I will be with thee, & the floudes shall not swallow thée vp: When thou shalt passe through ye fire, thou shalt not be burnt: For I am ye Lord thy God, the holy one of Israell, thy Sauiour, &c. T. There is a goodly declaration of that which thou hast now spoken, and a very apparant testimonie. D. It is euen so. For thou séest that after that he calleth him self the God & the maker & fashioner
of Israell, & the Eternall, he addeth vn∣to it immediatly, Thy Sauiour, whiche haue redéemed thée. For vvhat cause God doth make expresse mention in the preface of his Lavve, of the deliuerance of Israell out of Egipte. T. ANd why doeth he adde yet, which haue brought thée out of the lande of Egipt? D. To put thē in minde of the great benefite, the which not long before they had receiued of him, and whereby he had plainely declared vnto them, that he was their God,Deut. 7.14. Math. 19. and that he esteemed them for his people, in an other sorte than he did the Egiptians, wherefore they had good occasion to thinke that so good a God and so louing a father would not set forth vnto thē any doctrine, but such as should be greatly for their profite, and that they ought most willingly to receyue and em∣brace the same, as well for the great good will and frendship that God did beare to∣warde them, and had declared vnto them, as for the right of Lordship which he had double ouer them: of their owne parte,
bicause of their creation: on thother, bi∣cause of the deliuerance, which was as a newe conquest, by the which he had as it were conquered them a new, deliuering them from the subiection of a most cruell tyraunt, to make them a well beloued people to him selfe, and as the first borne of all people. And therfore he doth plain∣ly say, which haue brought thee out,Osce. 11. Exod. 4. Deut. 9. and none other, by my only power & strēgth, and not by thine owne, nor of any crea∣ture else, and to make them yet more willing, as of right they ought, not béeing contente to haue made mention of the countrey of Egypte, but he addeth vnto it, from the house of bondage,Exod. 5. to put them in minde of the great trauels wherwith they were oppressed, and to giue them to vnderstande that they had béen holden as a slaue in harde and cruell bondage, li∣uing in the bitter and tyrannous subiec∣tion of an other, without hauing any shewe or fashion of a people, in respect of yt which was afterward giuen thē by the lawe and pollicie which the Lorde gaue vnto them. T. That is worthy to be no∣ted.
Hovv that this remembraunce of the go∣ing foorth out of Egypte, is a marke to separate the true God from the false Goddes. D. ON the other side, this remēbrance of the going foorth of the people out of the lande of Egypt, doth compre∣hende not onely the benefites which this nation did at that time receiue at the hād of God, when they were brought out of Egypt by his power and vertue: but also all the other works and wonders which he did among them, and by the which he did declare and shewe him selfe not only to be the true God, but also to be the guid and gouernour of this people. And there∣fore, for so muche as he can not be séene nor vnderstoode by any bodily sense, it pleased him to giue these visible witnes∣ses and testimonies of him selfe, wherby he may be certenly séene in spirite and fayth, and discerned from false Gods: and chéefly in Iesus Christ our Lord, in whō he hath yet more familiarly and plainly shewed him selfe. Wherefore we are as∣sured, that when we direct our selues to this God, which brought the people of
Israell out of Egypte, which is also the very same which hath shewed him selfe in Christe,Num. 14.23. Psal. 78.106. we do not direct our selues to any Idoll, nor yet to a false God, but to the true God, who hath so declared hym selfe by his works. For what people is it that may say of the Goddes which they worship, that which we may say in déede of our God, the true God of Israell, and father of oure Lorde Iesus Christe? And for so muche as men be so vnkinde to∣warde God, and that there is nothing more ready and common among them, than to forgette his graces and benefites, as the spirite of God doth oftentimes lay to the charge of this people,The paschall lambe, the sp∣per, all one in effect. he gaue vnto Israell the sacramente of the Paschall Lambe, and vnto vs that of his supper, to make vs mindefull. Of the sundry tytles which haue bene gi∣uen to God in the holy scriptures, as well before the going foorth out of Egypt, as after, and cheefly sithe the comming of Christe in the fleshe, and for vvhat causes they haue bene giuen.
T. THis poynt that maketh mention of the going foorth out of Egypte, is euen the most harde of all the Preface. Wherfore I would gladly vnderstande for what cause God did so expresly take to him selfe this title, and that he did not rather take some other which was more common to all nations,Galath. 3. séeing that that lawe should serue vnto all. D. God might well haue taken greater & more redoub∣ted titles, but it pleased him rather to vse those that were more fauourable and lesse fearfull,Mark. 13. which do set him foorth to vs more gracious and mercyfull, than sharpe and rigorous: to the ende that he would not make vs to flée from him, fea∣ring vs with the greatnesse of his ma∣iestie, but rather that he would drawe vs vnto him by the swéetenesse of his mercy.Exod. 19. Deut. 32. On the other side, he hath also taken the names and titles, according to the tyme, the places, and people, vnto whom he she∣wed him selfe, and according to the ma∣ners and fashiōs that he vsed: and bicause that he would declare him selfe more fa∣miliarly, he did take those titles that were moste speciall, to make him selfe
the better knowen vnto vs, to the ende we should not be ouermuch discouraged, if he had left vs in an ouer-large contem∣plation of him selfe, without giuing any terme or ende to our spirite, to cause him selfe to be knowne to it by some benefite more particular, and more worthy of his louing kindnesse.Exod. 3. Before that departure Iacob, bicause of the promise and aliance the God of Abraham, of Isahac, and of out of Egypt, he was oftentimes called made with them: wheras before he was commonly called the maker of heauen and earth. And from the departure out of Egypte, he hath taken this title, euen to the comming of Chryst, of whom it was sayde by the Prophets, that he should no more be called, the God whiche hath brought vs out of Egypt, but, the Lorde which hath drawen vs out from al parts and countreys wherein we were disper∣sed,Ephe. 1. euen from the time that he was cal∣led God, Father of Iesus Christe, who hath blessed vs with all spirituall blessing and heauenly things in Christ, and hath redéemed and deliuered vs from all euill: which thing was not done without good
and iust cause. And also we muste beside all this consider that which hath bene al∣ready spoken, to wit, that that cōmemo∣ration of the deliuery out of Egypt, is ta∣ken for a rememberaunce of all the be∣nefites of God towarde his people, bi∣cause that it was the beginning, wherby he did more excellently and more appa∣rantly declare what care he had for hys people, & dothe helpe them in a more au∣thorised and authentike maner than he did before, and afterwarde he hath al∣wayes continued his mercy vpon them, and vpon all those which by Christ haue ben woon & ioined to this people. Wherin Moyses did vse a maner of speach which was very cōmō to him, which was to sig∣nifie & cōprehēd ye whole by a part therof. Of the true knovvledge and manifestatiō of God, and to vvhat ende the titles serue vvhich are giuen to him to guyde and leade vs to the same. T. DEclare this to me more plainly. D. Thou must know that it is not suf∣ficient for a man to haue a certen gene∣rall conceite or imagination, or opinion and knowledge of God in his vnderstan∣ding,
but it is méete that he do know him to be such a one as he hath declared him selfe by his word, & chéefly in Iesus christ his sonne: or else he shall wander in the vanitie of his imaginations, & shal be wt∣out God. For séeing that God can not be knowen nor comprehended in his diuine essence, nor in his maiestie, if we will haue such knowledge as is necessarie to our saluation, it is requisite that we goe and séeke him, & behold him there where it hath pleased him to declare and reueale him selfe vnto vs, and that by those meanes which he hath giuen vs. For if we do otherwyse, we do then forge him to be suche a one as the vanitie of our vn∣derstanding may imagine him and from thence it shall come to passe, that in the steade of him we shall make vnto oure selues straunge gods, which shall be no gods, but thinking to serue God, we shall serue ye diuell. Wherfore it is not inough that we beléeue that there are gods, but that there is one only god. And yet for al that this is not inough so to do, but yt also we do beleue yt this god, which is the on∣ly true god, is maker of heauē & of earth,
and of all creatures visible and inuisible: which thing all those that do beléeue that there are Goddes, do not beléeue at all. Moreouer, for so muche as man is fallen through sinne, and that he hath néede to be restored, it behoueth vs to know also how that same God which hath created vs, is also the very same God that hath restored & saued vs, and by what meane he hath done the same, to the ende that we shoulde acknowledge him to be our onely maker and leader, father, sauiour, and redéemer, and none else: and that we should acknowledge in him the benefite of our creation, which signifieth also his prouidence, and our restoring and redēp∣tion. It is then the very cause why he hath chosen to him selfe a certen people, vnto whom he would declare him selfe in the shape of man, in his sonne Iesus Christe, to open his knowledge through∣out all the worlde. Wherfore whosoeuer doth know the God of Abraham, of Isa∣hac and of Iacob, and the God which hath brought the people of Israell out of the lande of Egypt, he knoweth God the fa∣ther of our Lorde Iesus Christe, and is a
true Israelite,Rom. 4. & the very sonne of Abra∣ham the father of all beleuers, put in and ioyned to the true people of God. How the deliueraunce of the people of Is∣rael out of Egipt, was a shadow and figure of the deliuerance which is made by christ Iesus, and howe the Christian people are comprehended in the people of Israel, and their deliueraunce also in the deliueraunce of that people. T. BY this meane the Christians shall then be one people with the people of Israell. D. There is no doubt therof, for séeing that people was chosen of God to bée as the keeper and treasurer of hys worde & of his promisses, to the ende that by that same meane they shold come euē to vs, and be fulfilled in vs, & that it was the shadow & figure of true things which were brought vnto vs by Iesus Christ, there is no doubt but that wée are com∣prehended in the same. And séeyng that this delyueraunce from the tyranny of Egypte was a figure of thys other and great deliuerāce which wée haue through
Iesus Christ our Lorde: there can be no mention made of the firste, but that wée ought to haue the second in remēbrance, and to giue vs to vnderstande, that if the people of Israell had great occasion to embrace the lawe whych was gyuen to them by God, and to endeuor them to o∣bey him accordyng to the same, for the causes heretofore alleged: for one occasiō that they had so to doe, wée haue a thou∣sand, for so much as GOD hath shewed himselfe by thys delyuerance, which he hath wrought for vs by his Sonne Ie∣sus Chryst our God, muche more fauo∣rable without comparison, than euer hée dyd shew himselfe to the Israelites. For albeit that both they and wée haue but one Christ Iesus, and one verye meane of saluation through hym, yet for al that, thys saluatyon hath beene muche more playnely declared vnto vs, and muche more excellentlye wythoute shadowes and fygures, and muche more familiarly and in farre greater power of the spirite of GOD than euer it was to them. Wherefore séeing the spirituall Israe∣lites, and the true Chrystians are but
one people, wée muste knowe that that whych hath regarde and pertayneth vn∣to the one, hath regard and doth pertaine to the other, in that which doth concerne the true spirituall seruice of GOD, the which God requireth, as well of the one as of the other. Of the order and meane that God dyd kepe in gyuing of his law, and of the great doctrine contained therein: and what agrement it hath with the forme of prayer which was gyuen by Iesus Christ. T. I Am wel satisfied in thys poynt, and of all that which is conteyned in this preface. Wherefore let vs nowe come to the declaration of the commaunde∣mentes gyuen in the lawe. D. Before wée doe procéede anye further, it shall be well done that wée doe consyder what manner and order GOD dyd vse in gi∣uing of these commaundementes, for he hath done nothyng wythoute good and iust cause, the which being knowen, shal greatly helpe vs toward ye vnderstāding
of the matters that wée haue to entreate. T. I would gladly vnderstand it. D. God hath in thys done in manner the verye lyke, in giuyng of thys lawe by his ser∣uaunte Moyses, that hée dyd by his sonne Iesus Christ, when he gaue vnto vs the forme and order of prayer. T. How so? D. The forme and order of prayer the whych wée haue receyued of our Lorde Iesus Chryste, doth it not séeme to thée very shorte? T. In déede it is not verye long. D. Yet notwithstandyng in thys briefenesse of woordes, our Lorde Iesus Christ hath comprehended al the vowes, all the wyshes and desyres, and all the demaundes and iust and reasonable re∣questes that man maye make to God, the which doe belong aswell to his glo∣rye, as to the profite and saluation of man: and forthwith doth teach vs of whō we ought to demaunde them, & how and to what ende, and by what meanes wée may obtaine them. T. There is very good doctrine and in few wordes. D. So much the greater and more maruellous is the wysedome of our sauiour Iesus Christe declared. And besyde that, in setting
forth these thinges, hée hath deuided thys whole forme of prayer, into two partes, whych doe euery of them contayne thrée demaundes or peticions, whych are syxe in the whole, the two partes beyng put together: of the whych the thrée that are conteyned in the firste parte, are as it were the foundation and rule of the o∣ther thrée folowyng, & doe shew to what ende they oughte to tende. For in the fyrst place hée hath set those which haue regarde directlye to the glorye of God, wythoute anye speciall consyderation of oure selues, or of anye other creature: and afterwarde hée addeth vnto them, those whych doe concerne more specially oure persons: the whych hée wyll also that wée doe direct to God for the obtay∣nyng of the thynges that are contayned in them, so farre forthe as shal be requi∣site to make them to serue to that which is conteined in the first: god hath done euē the like, when he gaue that lawe which is called by ye Hebrewes, the ten words,Deu. 4.10. folowyng the Phrase of the speache of Moyses, whych dyd so name it, bycause that it dyd contayne in summe ten com∣maundementes,
which ought to serue vs in this respect, as ye ten predicaments do serue ye Logiciens, for their part. Wher∣fore it is not so requisite that the scholers which studie Logique, should knowe at the fingers endes their predicaments, as it is requisite that all those which wil bée accompted of the number of the people of God, doe knowe this lawe, and the com∣maundementes conteyned in the same. For that same very cause is it also called by the Gréekes the Decalogue, and by vs ye ten commaundements of the law. For first, it doth containe in fewe wordes all that euer man is able to doe, say, or think either of good or euyll, and all that doth please or displease him, and that he doth alow or disalow in all ye thoughtes, affec∣tions, words and workes of men: and al∣so al that, which not only al the lawes of man & al the volumes of ye philosophers, Poetes and Orators doe contayne, con∣cerning the manner howe to lyue well: but also all that is contayned as well in the bookes of the prophetes as of the E∣uangelistes and Apostles, concerning ye seruice of God, & the good manners, & the
order howe to rule & leade his lyfe accor∣ding to his will. Wherefore, the bookes of all the Prophetes, Euangelistes and Apostles, are in a manner as commenta∣ries and expositions of that law, as well to declare vnto vs the doctrine contained in the same, as to make vs to knowe him to whom this law will direct vs through the knowledge of our owne infirmitie, to finde in him the fulfilling of the same. T. That lawe is then vnto vs an eternall and vnchangeable rule, to know the dif∣ference that is betwene good and euyll, and betwéene that which oughte to bee done, or left vndone, in all things. Of the testimonyes that God in his lawe gyueth vnto vs of himself, and of his nature, and of the nature of man, and of the redemp∣tion of him. D. BEside al that, thou oughtest to note that God in the same doth gyue vs a certayne testimony, that he is one true God, and that he is wise, good, iuste, true, sound & perfect. For it is manyfest, that
the order which hée hath set forthe vnto vs in that lawe, and that the difference yt is set forth thereby betwéene the good & the euill, the vertues and the vices, are not done at aduenture, but by a certayne counsell & prouidence of God. Afterward, he declareth vnto vs also that he is a iust Iudge, which will not suffer the iuste to bée ouerthrowē, nor the wicked to be vn∣punnished, and that he will no iniquitie. Moreouer, in declaring vnto vs by hys law what an one he is, he doth also shew vnto vs what mans nature ought to be, and to what end it was created, and how much it is fallen away from that perfec∣tion wherin it was first created, and how farre of it is from the will of God, to the which it ought to be agréeable, and to an∣swere and serue to that ende for ye which it was created of GOD. On the other side, hée doth playnely gyue vs to vnder∣stande by that same meane, of the sal∣uation whych he hathe prepared for vs in Iesus Chryste by the meane of the Gospell. For as hée hathe not crea∣ted mankinde, to dampne them all in generall: no more hath hée gyuen that
law in vaine, but only to condemne man, as in déede it shoulde haue come to passe, if hée had not ordeyned an other meane for their saluation. Hovv that the lavve of God conteyneth much more in substance than the wordes seeme to signifie at the first sight, and hovv they ought to be vnderstood according to the nature of the Lavv maker T. IT must néeds bée then, that the wor∣des conteyned therin, do import and declare muche more than they séeme to shewe at the firste. D. They do conteyne as muche as I haue sayd. T. There are then many whiche doe not know nor vn∣derstand them so well as they think that they doe. D. But I thinke for my parte that there be none other but such as thou speakest of: For they that mought well vnderstande and knowe them, moughte also vnderstande and knowe all the wri∣tings of the prophets and Apostles. The matter that is spoken of in the law, may not be measured, according to the shorte∣nesse of the wordes, by the whiche it is set foorth and declared, but according to
the substance that is therin conteined, and the nature and maiestie of him that spea∣keth and setteth foorth the thing. For sée∣ing that it is God, wée maye well knowe that his spéeche and phrase is framed in a maruellous high knowledge and wisdom, and that there is no woorde nor syllable, but that it is of greate weyght and effecte, and doth importe very muche. And fur∣ther, séeing that God is a spirite, and a spi∣rituall and eternall essence, without be∣ginning and ending, and will bée serued in spirite and in veritie, with such seruice as is agréeable with his nature and maie∣stie, wee may then well know, that there is great difference betwéen the nature of hys law, whych is diuyne, & that of mans lawes: and that hée is not contented to haue it in suche sort obserued, as men are contented to haue theyrs obserued. Of the difference that is betvveene the lawe of God and the lawes of man, and the things required in these same and of the iudgement of God, and the iudgemēt of men concernyng the same.
T. SHew me then what is the difference. D. Men are contented, if that by out∣warde workes their commaundementes bée obserued, and that there appeare vnto them nothing to be done against them: but they can not deale with the iudgement of the heartes, of the affections and though∣tes, bicause they are vnknowne to them, sauing in as muche as they be declared outewardely. On the other syde, albéeit that they are declared outwardely, yet notwithstanding, they doe not condemne them and punish them cōtinually, nor ma∣ny outward works also, although they be very wicked. T. Howe maye that bée? D. As well bycause that men for the moste parte, are contented to entertayne the so∣cietie of man in a certaine worldly peace and tranquilitie, as also that they thynke not oftentymes that to be euyll which is euil: or yf they estéeme it to be euyll, they think it not to be so great as it is: or if they thynk it to be great, they do mainteyn it. T. And from whence cōmeth thys fault? Daniell. It dothe partely procéede of I∣gnoraunce and blyndenesse that synne hathe engendred in the vnderstandyng
of man, which is the cause that he cannot so well discerne the good from the euill, nor iudge of the one and the other, as he should haue done, if he had continued in the state of innocencie and grace, in the whiche he was created: beside that, there is this other greate mischiefe, that man doth willingly supporte that wherin hee would himselfe be supported, and that he neuer hath so great care for that which concerneth the honoure of God, as for that whiche concerneth his owne bodie: It is the cause why men doe rather pu∣nishe, yea and that more gréeuousely, those faultes whiche touche their honor or dishonor, or their profit or hindrance, than they doe those whiche make warres directly against the honour and maiestie of God: but it is not so with God: for he is not contented with the only work that appeareth outwardly, but he requireth the hearte, and beholdeth the fountayne from whence the woork springeth: which can not please him, howe faire a shewe so euer it haue, but only so farre foorth as it procéedeth from the heart, and that the heart doe please him: the whiche in déede
can in no wise please him, but so farforth as he doth drawe néere to his nature, and that he is reformed and made new lyke to his image, and regenerate by his holy spirite: For there is no worke good nor pleasant to God, but that whiche procée∣deth from him, and that he himself doth:Matth. 1. Iames. 4. Iohn. 4. for euen as there is none good but onely he, so is ther no good thing but that which procedeth frō him alone therfore ye work which procéedeth from vs, can not please him, but so farre as hée worketh in vs by his holy spirite, and that our spirite is gouerned by his: For he whiche is a spi∣rite, is then serued by his like. In vvhat sorte the vvordes of the lavve of God ought to be vnderstode: and hovve that God dothe not onely beholde the outvvarde vvorkes, but the origi∣ginal of them also, & vvhat be the things that God doth al∣lovv or cōdemne in man. T. SO farre foorth as I may vnderstand by thy woordes, that lawe doth well deserue to be otherwyse weyed and con∣sidered of, than it is, D. It is euen so. For when God dothe require of vs a thing
that séemeth to belong to the outewarde woorke, wée oughte to vnderstande the whole by a parte: and the cause by the effecte: and the roote, and the whole herbe by the fruict: and the woorkeman by the woorke: and all the circumstaun∣ces and dependances of the one and the o∣ther.Note. And when he forbiddeth a thyng, we muste also knowe that he commaundeth his contrarie: and likewise when he com∣maundeth, hée forbiddeth the contrarie of that whiche he commaundeth. For he be∣holdeth man thorowly, both endlong and ouerthwarte, and dothe sounde the hearte and all the thoughts and affections of him, and alloweth nothyng in hym, but that whiche he fyndeth to bée his, and hathe himselfe commaunded: and disalloweth nothing but that which man hath receiued of others than of him, & that which he hath forbidden him: Wherfore he doth not on∣ly condemne that worke whiche séemeth outwardly to bée euill, but also the spring from whence the same procedeth: & doth not onely condemne it when his frute is come to light, but he doth alwais condemn it, albeit that it doe continually lie hidde
in secrete in the darke bottomlesse pittes of ignoraunce of the hearte of man,Psalm. 13. vn∣searcheable to man, but knowne and o∣pen to GOD. Therfore Dauid sayeth, thou haste proued and knowne mée: thou haste knowne mée sitting and standing, going and commyng, within and with∣out. For howe may it be that the worke∣man which made man shoulde not know him, whiche did know him before he was begotten and made? Shall not the work∣man know his worke? T. Who shoulde then know him, if he should not? Of the consideration of those things which in dede displease God in man, and first of all in his vvorke: and in vvhat sort it ought to be cōsidered, as com∣maunded or forbidden by God. D. SEeing then that hée whyche is the workeman, and hath framed & made the substance it selfe wherof he is fashio∣ned, and that he him selfe is the giuer of the fashion, it is not to bee doubted but that hée doothe verye well knowe all that euer is in hym, and that why∣che hée hath of his owne put into hym,
and what man hath of others to destroy his worke. Wée must therfore note here that there are in vs foure things that can not please God, and euery of them dothe in his behalfe deserue death and eternal damnation. Nowe if any one of them be∣ing taken aparte (if it were possible to separate them the one from the other) be so abhominable of his owne nature, and worthye of so gréeuous punyshemente, what may it then be when they are all ioyned togither? T. There must néedes be muche filthinesse: but which be these things?Foure hor∣rible things in man. D. First there is concupiscence: for the seconde, the affection begotten of him: for the third, the consent of the wil to this affection: for the fourthe, the exe∣cution of the same by déede. But I will begin my declaration by this last, which is to say, by the work that apeareth out∣wardly, to the ende that by the same wée maye haue the better vnderstanding of the other thynges that doe goe before, which are more hidden and more secret. In this poynt I will begin by the moste apparaunt and open frute, whereby wée easily iudge of the nature of all trées.
For in setting foorthe firste the worke, the workeman shal not only be knowne ther∣by, but also the forge and shoppe wherein that worke hath bin wrought. As concer∣ning the worke, we oughte to consider it first two wais. The one as commaunded of God: the other as forbidden by hym. That which is commaunded by God, can neuer be euill, being vnderstoode in that sense and meaning that he hath cōmaun∣ded it, and being applyed to that end that it oughte to bée. On the other side, that which he hath forbidden, being weyed in the same sorte, may neuer in any wise be good. By what rule the vvorks of men ought to be examined, and hovv daungerous a thing it is to follovve the iudge∣mente of mans reason. T. WE ought then to be well aduised and to take good héede how we do establish iudgement vppon mans rea∣son, and vpon the opinions of men in such matters. D. It is very true. For it is of∣ten times séene that men iudge that good
which is euil, and do disalowe that which God aloweth, and alowe that whiche he disaloweth, for the causes before mentio∣ned. For in the iudgement of god the sen∣tence shall not be giuen according to the iudgement of mans reason, and of the o∣pinions of men: but according to the pro∣nuntiation whiche God hath alredy pro∣nounced by his worde and by his lawe, which shall be the weights, the ballaunce and the rule, wherein and whereby al the thoughts, words and works of men shall be weyed and measured, Hovv that the lavv of god is transgres∣sed not only in doing that vvhich is for∣bidden by it, but also in leuing that vn∣done vvhiche is therin commaunded, and hovv that those good vvorks which vve do, are not able to satisfie for them vvhich vve ought to do, and do not, ne yet for those vvhich vve do against the vvill of God. T. THen doth it follow that whosoeuer shall do that whiche shall be forbid∣den of God, or shall leaue vndone that
which he doth commaund him, the same deserueth condemnation. On the other side, he that shall absteyne frō that which he hath forbidden, and shall do that which he hath cōmanded, the same shall receiue the prayse and commendation of a good & faithfull seruaunt.Two pointes of great effecte. D. These two pointes that thou touchest, are right well worthy to be noted. For there be some that thinke that they haue sufficiently fulfilled the lawe of God, if that they haue refrayned frō those things which are therein forbid∣den, yea and if it haue bin don but only in outward apparance, withoute laying of handes with a prompte courage to those thinges whiche are commaunded them. On the other side, there be others whiche think that they may ye more lawfully dis∣pense wt thēselues to do many things that be forbiddē in the law, whē they haue don some litle porcion of those whiche are commaunded, and thinke these to be a re∣cōpēce for the others. But we must nedes walke in all other manner of simplicitie before god, & must put in vse yt which Ie∣sus christ hath said: it behoueth to do this,
and not to leaue the other vndone,Matth. 23. Note this place. for here it ought to haue better place, than in any where else. It behoueth to do that whiche is commaunded, and to refrayne from that which is forbidden. For he that commaundeth and he that forbiddeth, is alway one Lord, who will not suffer hys maiestie to be more dishonored of the one parte than of the other. Therefore, when thou dost some part of that which is com∣maunded thée, thinke not by that litle wel doing whiche thou hast done on the one side, to haue recompenced the greate euill whiche thou hast committed on the other side. For if thou haue don any thing wel, thou hast done thy dutie, and hast done nothing else, yea and that which more is, thou hast not done all that: howe mayest thou thē recompence the euill which thou hast committed, in doing that which was forbiddē thée, by this litle good which thou hast done, when that same it selfe is not sufficient to satisfie for the faultes whiche thou haste committed, in the leauing of that vndone which thou oughtest to haue done? T. I do know that very well.
Hovv that it is not sufficient to do out∣vvardly the vvorks vvhich God com∣maundeth, if that they be not done to the intent and to the very same pur∣pose for the vvhich God doth commaund them, & hovv greatly hypocrisie dis∣pleaseth God. D. ON the other parte,Note this counsell thorough out. when thou do∣est the worke which god comman∣deth, thou must take good héede to what ende thou doest it, and with what minde. For if thou do it more for thine own glo∣ry and profite, & for thine owne behoofe, than thou doest for the honoure of God, and for the loue thou bearest to him, or to thy neyghboure for his sake: thou makest of a good worke an euill worke, and doest greatly offend him thorough thy hypocri∣sie, abusing his name, & making a maske of his lawe, to serue thée and thy wicked affections. And therefore such a worke is no more a worke of the spirite of God: for so muche as it is not done in truth, but in lies. For al hypocrisie is lyes, for somuch as it is nothing else but falshod, fayning,
and dissimulation, whiche hath an other shewe outwardly, than the troth of the thing hath inwardly. Now al lyes procéed from the deuill. The worke then which is done in lyes, is of the deuill, and not of God. Wherefore it cannot muche better please God, than doth the troth which the deuill speaketh to couer his lies with, and to transfigure himselfe into an Angell of light: and that all the works do that euer he doth, howe faire a shewe so euer they haue, although God do make them serue to his glory. For his intente is alwayes wicked, forsomuch as he neuer doth thing but for himselfe, and hath regard neyther to the honour of God nor to the profite of any creature, wherfore he is neuer more perilous, than when he hath the greatest shew of well doing, for then it is that hée doth most dishonor god, and doth greatest hurt to men, bycause he is more couered and disguised, & more harde to be knowne and to be taken vpō the sudden: wherfore those whiche call this deuill that is so dis∣guised, a white deuill, are not voyd of rea∣son. Therefore the false Prophets are ne∣uer
more dangerous, than whē they haue the greatest shewe of holynesse, & do most counterfaite the true seruauntes of God: the like is of al hypocrites. The good work whiche he semeth to doe,Math. 23. Luke. 10. is often tymes worse than thogh it were set forth plain∣ly suche as it is. It is the very cause why Christe did condemne the almes, prayers and fastings of the Scribes and Phari∣sies, and all their other works, forsomuch as they did them only to be séene of men. VVhat good or hurte the vvorke doth that is outvvardly done, & not vvith a good hart, & vvhat it may bring to the vvorker of the same, & also to others, and vvhether it be better that it be done or vndone. T. IF the matter be such that the worke it selfe which God commaundeth cā∣not please him, if it do not procéede from such a harte as he requireth, but doth ra∣ther displease him, it followeth then, that if a man haue not such an harte, he dothe not onely léese his time in doing of suche a worke, but he doth also purchace to
himselfe a more greater iudgemente. D. There are also two pointes to be conside∣red in this matter: if that the man that doth this worke, doth it thoroughly of a very malice and to suche ende as the De∣uil doth his, to witte, to dishonor God, and to deceiue mē, and to hurte his neyghbor, it were much better that he did nothing at all, for his worke can do but hurte, and more to himselfe than to any other: if hée do it not in déede for so euil a purpose, but onely to haue some worldlye honoure or profite, the worke is then yet somewhat more profitable in sundry sortes, as well to himselfe as to others, according to the circumstaunces of the same, than if it had not bin done at all, or else if he had done those works whiche God hath forbidden. For first of al, those that sée such a worke, are edified, in somuch as they sée it to bée good of his owne nature, and doe thinke, that it procéedeth from such an harte as it sheweth for outwardly: on the other side, if it be a worke whereby thy neyghboure receyueth any comforte or helpe in hys person, it is then so muche the more pro∣fitable.
Wherefore, albeit that the worke be not such as God requireth: yet forso∣much as it serueth somewhat to the glory of God, and to the edification of our ney∣boure, God is so good that he will not suf∣fer it to be vnrecompenced. T. What re∣compence will he then giue him? D. That whiche the worker requireth: he desireth glory among men, and his particular cō∣moditie, which things he doth often times receiue for his hire, which extend no fur∣ther than his life: for he hathe no further regard at all.Matth. 6. T. By this accoumpte then thou wouldest conclude that it were bet∣ter yet that a man should assist the worde of god and his Church, and also the poore, and that he should do such like works, al∣though that his harte were not through∣ly such as it ought to be, rather thā to do nothing at all, or to the contrary, so that he do it not in any wise to the intente to dishonor God, and of a determinate pur∣pose, or else rather to hurte his neyghbor, than to profite him. D. It is true, for we haue in the holy Scriptures many exam∣ples, whiche declare that God hath often
times in this worlde done greate good to many that haue not had suche hartes as they ought to haue had, bycause that their workes did serue somewhat to his glory, and to the reléefe of his people. In vvhat sorte the harte of man maye fulfill the lavve of God or no, and may be condemned, or absolued by the same, vvithout the vvorks which god requireth of him in the same. T. SEing that the worke which séemeth to be good, cannot please God, but so farre foorth as the hart from whence they do procéede doth please him, and that the harte doth make the worke to be accepted or refused at his hande:Foure de¦maunds. I do firste aske thée, if GOD can contente him selfe without the worke with the harte alone? The other is, if the worke which of him selfe is euill, may please him, or else may be suffered by him, when he that doth it, doth it not for any euill purpose, but doth it of force against his harte, or else bicause
he thinketh it not to be euill? The thirde, to know in déede if GOD do condemne the wicked thoughte, although it be not put in execution, and whether it doe as muche displease him as if the effect were ioyned with it. D. As touching the firste, it is sure that if God haue the harte of man, he hath the whole, therefore it can∣not be but that the harte doth offer and presente vnto him the worke that he re∣quireth of hym, wherefore the worke may not be separated from the harte, no more than the frute from the trée:Psalme. 1. Matth. 12. for euē so as the good trée neuer fayleth, to bring foorthe hys frute in his due time and sea∣son, so doth the good harte at all times and in all seasons that GOD requireth it, if he do it not, the cause is for that hée wanteth meane to do it, and also power, or else that he hath not a will to do it, if he haue a will, and haue no power and meanes to do it, that wyll béeing good, God dothe accepte, and estéemeth it as well as if the facte were done. The lyke dothe hée also, if the wyll be wicked,
albeit that it haue not ye power to put his wicked thought in execution. Wherfore the wicked worke doth not only displease God, but also the wicked will and affecti∣on, in sorte that if it do procéede so farre that it is not long of hir that she doth not execute hir euill purpose, and that there is nothing doth hinder it, but want of po∣wer, there is no doubte but that God ac∣compteth the wickednesse done. For that cause our Lord Iesus Christ, and Sainte Iohn following his doctrine,1. Iohn. 3. Matth. 5. doth com∣pare to a murtherer him that hateth hys brother, and estéemeth him an adulterer that behouldeth an other mans wife, co∣ueting hir. We must vnderstand the like of all other vices, according to the inter∣pretation that oure Lorde Iesus Christe himselfe, and after him his Apostles, gaue vs of the lawe of God: but if the hart had the meane & the power to do that whiche was commaunded him to do, and hathe not only lefte it vndone, but hath also not employed him selfe by al meanes possible to vse those occasions wherby he mought do them, it is a certaine testimonie and an
assured signe that it is not good, and that there is no good will in it: for if it were good, & that the will were such as it ought to be, it should not be more desirous of a∣ny thing, than to yeld vnto God that obe∣dience, honoure and seruice, which is due vnto him, and that he requireth of hym, wherefore God cannot be pleased wyth such an hart, for it is fayned and vntrue. Hovve that men do glory in vayne of their good harte and of their faithe, if their vvorkes beare not vvitnesse of it, and for vvhat cause the iudgement shal be giuen by God according to theyr vvorks, and vvhy the Prophets do so ernestly require them, exhorting the people of God to repentaunce. T. WE do then in vayne glory of the hart, if the worke beare not good witnesse of the same.Iames. 2. Here must be greate iudgemente vsed. D. Yea as well as of the faithe. Wherefore we may well here saye with Saincte Iames: shewe me thy harte and thy faith, by thy workes, for as the faith that is without works is not a
true faith, but onely a vayne and fayned faith, and dead, and a false shewe of faith, hauing nothing of true faith sauing only the name without the effect: no more doth the harte liue to God, nor is dedicated vnto him, that doth not declare himselfe by good works. For the fire, how litle soe∣uer it be, cannot be without light & with∣out heate, and at the least without some litle smoke, for this cause, in the manner of Gods iudgement, which is set foorth to vs by our Lord Iesus Christ, there is in manner no mention made, but onely of works by the which euery man is iudged forsomuch as they shall beare witnesse of the harte and faith of euery man. Like∣wise when the Prophets exhorte men to true repentaunce, they doe euer prayse works, and namely suche as do concerne our neyghboure, forsomuche as hipocrisie may least be therein cloked, and that mā doth declare by that whiche he doth con∣cerning the commaundements of the se∣cond table, and toward his neyghboure, what harte he beareth toward God, and in what reuerence he hath the comman∣dements
of the first table, for it is an ea∣sie matter for a man to boast himselfe to haue a sound and perfecte harte towarde God, and to make a shew by the obserua∣tion of the outward ceremonies, but whē he must in déede lay hande to the worke, which is to say, to the true charitie, which is the ende and fulfilling of the lawe,Timo. 1. and to the workes of the same, whiche are the chiefe that god requireth:1. Ioh. 3.4 thē is the hypo∣crisy of the hart séen. For that very cause S. Iohn saith, yt mā which hath the goods of this world, & shal sée his brother in néed & shal shut vp the bowels of his cōpassion frō him, howe dwelleth the loue of god in him? And agayn, if any say, I loue God, & yet doth hate his brother, the the same is a lier: for he yt loueth not his brother whom he hath séen, how may he loue god whom he hath not séen? And we haue this com∣mādemēt of him yt he which loueth god do loue also his brother. S. Iohn doth declare plainly by these words, that a mā may in no wise better know of what affectiō the hart of mā is toward god, thā by ye which he sheweth toward his neybor & brother, which is ye child of god & bereth his image
as he doth, and that there is not a meane more méete to discouer the hypocrisie and dissimulation of mans harte, than it. For a man may by the good will that is borne to the father, iudge what good will there is borne to the sonne. And therefore, the Prophets do often times vse these argu∣ments, to vanquish the wicked hipocrits: and also our Lorde Iesus Christe, in that forme of iudgemente, whereof we haue alredy spoken, declareth that he estéemeth all that to be done to himselfe, that hathe bin don to his, be it good, or be it euill. And by this maner of procéeding, he doth right well declare that whereof we haue al∣redy spoken, for when he doth rebuke and reproue the hypocrites & the reprobates,Matth. 25. that he hath bin forsaken and euill han∣dled by them, they answere forthwith, and aske when that was done, as though they did not know of it: Wherein they do plainely declare that they wold haue the name to beare a great good will to Iesus Christ, and to do their duty toward him: but he doth vanquish them of the contra∣ry, by the tokens which they haue shewed
towarde his poore members, in whose person he complayneth to haue bene for∣saken and euill handled: as he doth com∣playne that he was persecuted by Saule,Actes. 9. in the persecution which he vsed agaynst the Christians. Hovv that the dissimulation and fayning of mans harte is declared by the trans∣gression of the Lavve of God: and hovv there is neither ignorance, nor con∣straint, nor any reason, vvhat so euer it be,No. that can ex∣cuse him. T. I Thinke also that this be one of the principall causes why God doth set foorth rather the worke than any other thing in that lawe, to the ende that we should not be deceiued vnder the cloke of our heart. D. The matter is playne. For as the heart can not be boasted of to bée good, excepte the mouth confesse it, and that he do declare by works the faith and charitie whereof he will so glory, it can not be execused, but that it is wicked and by consequent displeaseth God, when he doth a wicked worke that is forbidden
by God, for either he doth it through igno∣rance, or else of a certen knowledge: if he do it through ignoraunce, it is an assured signe that the heart of his owne nature is wicked: For if it were not wicked, it could not beare suche fruite by any meanes, nor also could it by by any meanes ignoraunt of the will of God, for the ignorance is a witnesse of the darknesse which sinne hath engendred in the vnderstanding of man, and of the contempt of god, and what neg∣ligence there is in man in searching to know the wil of God, as it hath bene alre∣dy more largely touched in an other place. If he haue done it of knowledge, what can he alleage? May he alleage that he was enforced to do it, and that he did it by com∣pulsion? But by what compulsion? If this reason were sufficient to excuse the sinne of man, there should be no sinne but should séeme worthy of excuse: for so muche as it séemeth that there is none but it is cōmit∣ted by constrainte, considering that man is so corrupted by the meanes of sinne, and so made subiecte to the diuell through the same, that of his nature he can do no∣thing but sinne. Wherefore sainct Paule
dothe say,Rom. 7. that he can not do the good whi∣che he woulde doe, but he dothe the euyll which he woulde not doe, bicause he is a sinner, and slaue to sinne, and solde vnder the same, which doth engēder in his mem∣bers a lawe, repugnant to the law of god. For the like also sayeth our Lorde Iesus Christe, he that sinneth,Iohn. 8. is seruaunte to sinne. Hovv sinne can not be but voluntary, and hovv difference must be put in this matter, betvveene constraint and necessitie, and in vvhat signification they ought to be taken in this case. T. BY this accompte sinne shoulde then be no sinne, for it should not then be voluntarie. And it is commonly saide, that euery sinne is voluntary, or otherwyse it séemeth that it shoulde deserue no pu∣nishmente. D. There are many thinges to be considered in this matter. The first is, that it behoueth to put difference be∣twéene necessitie and constraint. For by wanting this distinction, many doe very filthily erre in the matter of frée will, and of predestination, and in the consideration of the nature of sin. For to speke properly,
we may say that we do all sinne of ne∣cessitie and not by constraynt. T. What difference puttest thou then betwene ne∣cessitie and constraynt? for they séeme to me to be both one. D. Yea, but there is notwithstanding great difference, but it is requisite for the better vnderstanding of it, that we doe firste well consider in what meaning and in what signification these words ought to be taken. First of al, this worde of necessitie, is commonly for want of some thing whereof we haue néede, in such sort that we do oftentimes take it for lacke, pouertie and miserie, but we do not properly take it in that sense, when we do speake of the necessi∣tie whereby man is brought to sinne by meane of the naturall corruption that is in him: but so farre foorth as we may say that he sinneth by necessity, that is to say through defaulte and lacke of goodnesse, iustice, innocencie, holinesse, and other vertues and giftes and graces of God, wherof he hath ben spoyled through sin, vnto whom he was made subiect. T. In what signification doste thou then take this worde in this matter? D. I do take
it for a necessarie consequent which fol∣loweth of causes that are ioyned togither with their effectes, which can not be o∣thers, but such as are agreable to the na∣ture of the causes and things which are so ioyned togither, and do depend the one of the other. T. Giue me an example of this that thou speakest of. D. Behold the Sunne, his nature is to shine, and by his light to make the day for vs, I say then, the sunne shineth, it is therefore day of necessitie, that is to say, it must néedes be day, and it can not be otherwise, for such is his nature, and therfore of necessitie he muste bring foorth suche an effecte of his owne nature, without any constraynt or violence at all, bicause that he hath that cause naturall in him selfe. But there where constraynt is, there is some force and vnolence that commeth from else where, than from the thing that is en∣forced and constrayned: as if a woman be violated by force, she ought not to be accounted a whore, in suche sorte as we doe accounte hir, who willingly consen∣teth to the whore master: we doe then sinne all necessarily and of necessitie, in
so muche as it is not possible that of our nature it shoulde doe otherwyse, it beeing corrupted as it is, and béeing not rege∣nerate by the spirite of God: and that by meane of the naturall corruption which sinne hath engendred in all mankinde. And yet for al that, none constraineth vs but onely our owne malice and wycked will, which béeing wicked, can applie it selfe to nothing but to euill. Therefore it is not without cause saide:Osee. 13. thy perdition is of thy selfe, O Israell, but thy saluati∣on is onely by me. It dothe then followe that our wicked will dothe euill of neces∣sitie, for so muche as it is of a wicked na∣ture, that can doe none otherwise, as we say, that an euil trée doth necessarily bring foorth euill fruite, bicause that his nature is suche.Matt. 7.12. For as it is written: that which is borne of the fleshe, is fleshe, and that whiche is borne of the spirite, is spirite. But nowe the will should not be a will, if it did not willingly,Iohn. 3. and not by con∣straynt, for will and constraint are con∣traries, wherfore wil ceaseth where con∣straint hath place: yea and it is not pos∣sible that will may be constrayned: it
may in déede be corrupted and chaunged from good into euill, or else from euill to good. Wherefore euen as a good will dothe necessarily that which is good, by∣cause it can not otherwyse doe, béeing good, as the good trée of necessitie bringeth foorthe good fruite, and yet doth she it not by constrainte, but voluntarily: euen so dothe the wicked will, for so muche as it is wicked, necessarilie the euill, bicause that his nature is suche as can not other∣wyse doe, and yet dothe it not at all by constraynt, but voluntarily, for there is no force nor violence from any where else that dothe constrayne hir agaynst hir owne disposition or inclination, but one∣ly in so much as she hath in hir the spring and the cause from the which the euill which she dothe, procéedeth. Examples and similitudes for declara∣tion of the difference that is put betweene Necessitie and Constraint.
T. I Can not yet throughly well vnder∣stand that difference. D. I wil make the matter more playne vnto thée by ex∣amples and comparisons. The fire doth necessarily warme and giue light, bicause that it can not otherwise do, in so muche as the nature of it is suche: and yet is it not constrayned so to do. The water on the contrary, abiding in his natural, doth refresh and make moyst. By the like rea∣son, a liuing body hath breathing and re∣spiration, mouing and féeling, and can not otherwise be. On the contrary, a dead body is depriued from all these things, and may necessarily engender nothing but corruption: and yet for all that is there no constraint, neither in the one nor in the other, onlesse we do cal the nature of any thing constraint. T. For so much as in maner all these similitudes are gi∣uen of things that haue no will, shewe me some others more méete for our pur∣pose. D. I will so do. We may not doubt but that God is necessarily good, iuste, wise, holy, almightie and perfecte, for he can be none other, nor do any thing but that which is godly, iustly, wisely and
holily done, and yet can he in nowise be constrained. In like sorte the Angels, for so much as they be Angels, and doe con∣tinue still in that nature, wherein they were created of God, they can not neces∣sarily doe any other thing, but prayse God, and serue to his glory: for if they did the contrary, they should be no more An∣gels, such as they were created by God, but they should be Diuels, like vnto their felowes, which are fallen from their first state: And further, if they did that which they do by constraint and not willingly, thē should they haue no praise with God, nor should be any more accepted, than is the Deuill, for the good which he is con∣strained to doe, for so much as God dothe turne will he nill he, his wicked will, & also his wicked workes, making them to serue to his glory: on the other side, the Deuill being suche as he is now at this present, fallen from the Angelicall state, wherein he was created of God, can ne∣cessarily doe nothing but euill, and disho∣nour God, for if he should doe otherwise, he should be no more a Deuill, and yet surely he doth not that which he doth of
cōstraint, but volūtarily: For who should constraine him to do euill? should God so doe, who hath forbidden & condemned it, & can doe nothing but that which is good? it is very true that there is none other cō∣straint, but only of his owne wicked wil, whiche hath as great delight in doing e∣uill, as that of the Angels of heauen hath in doing well: But the like is not in the doing of the good that he doth: for in that he doth nothing but by cōstraint, and that whiche is alwaies euill, in so much as it procéedeth frō him: & cā not be good, but so farre forth as God through his power & infinite goodnesse, will he or will he not, doth draw out goodnesse of it, & maketh it to serue to an other end, thā to that wher∣vnto the Deuill did pretēd. T. I do now begin already to discerne more perfectly in this matter, than I did before. Of the free necessitie to do vvell, that vvas in man before sinne: and of the necessitie to doe euill, vnconstrayned notvvithstan∣ding, into the vvhich he is fallen through the same, and in vvhat meaning this vvord of necessitie ought to be taken, vvhen it hath regard to good things.
D. WE may easily vnderstād by these exāples, what we may iudge of mā, cōcerning this matter wherof we doe now intreat. For after yt mā was created by God, in so much as he was created of God, good, iust, & holy, he did necessarily & willingly all yt wherfore God had crea∣ted him: For seing yt God had created him good, as he did all his other creatures, it was naturall for him to do well, & conti∣nuing in the same, being ioined to God: & hearing his voyce, he coulde none other∣wise do. For in as much as his will was good, he could not will, nor yet do, folow∣ing that good will, but yt which was good: but when he once gaue eare to the coūsel of ye deuill, & chaūging both his will & na∣ture, by folowing of him is fallen into an other necessitie wholy cōtrary to ye first: For in the stead yt before he did necessari∣ly good, & was wholy giuen to God, for that of his nature he coulde not then will nor do otherwise, through constraint, ha∣uing changed both nature & will, he can not but folow his nature: wherefore this necessitie of wel doing, did not procéede of any wāt yt was in him, as it séemeth vnto
vs that the woorde doth signifie, for when wée speake of good things, we doe not in that behalfe take necessitie, for néede or lacks, but for a dispositiō of things which cā not be other but such as she is hir self, according to the declaration that hath bene already made: if wée speake of euill, wée may well then say that the necessitie whereof wée speake, is ioyned with lacke of goodnesse, contrarie to this euill. For the euill which man doth, is not done but for wante of goodnesse which ought to be in him in the steade of the euill into the which the good was chaunged: the which euill of his nature engēdreth euill, where as the good engendreth good: Wée sée the like againe of this in some other thing, as in the darkenesses whiche the night doth bring vnto vs, & in that which foloweth: for what is the cause of the night, but on∣ly the shadow of the earth whiche taketh from vs the light of the sunne, & bringeth vnto vs darknesses, cōtrary to that light? by meanes whereof we haue the day tur∣ned into night, and then when we are co∣uered all ouer with the night, we can not doe that which we doe in the day, nor go
forth right but clean contrarie: and that, bicause that wée haue darknesse in the steade of light, without the which we can not walke directly, & yet all this while, is the necessitie without constraint: For al∣beit that the lacke which may be in a mā (the which we cal necessitie) be by chaūce an occasion to make him to steale, yet notwithstāding he cannot iustly say that he was constrained to steale, for if he had bene an honest man, and not a théefe, he would rather haue endured all kinde of miseries & necessities, than to haue sto∣len: but for so much as he had rather liue at his ease, than he would endure paine & misery according to the will of God, he had rather steale than to obey God. Hovv that the necessitie that is here spo∣ken of, is free and commendable in good things: and hovv it ought to be othervvise conside∣red in God than in Creatures. T. THen by as much as I can vnder∣stand of such matters, if this neces∣sitie be sound in a good thing, it is cōmen∣dable
& ioined with great libertie. D. We doe sée it in the nature of God, as it hath bene already touched. For yt which God can not bée necessarily but all mighty, all wise, all iust, all good, & al perfect, infinite, eternal & immortall, doth not carrie with it a necessitie of lacke, nor constraint, nor yet doth in any respect diminish ye power, the glory, & maiestie of him, but on the cō∣trary it doth magnifie & declare the great excellencie & perfection of his nature. For it is not a true libertie & cōmendation to be able to sinne & to doe euill: but it is a token of an excellent nature to be so per∣fect in goodnesse, that it doth holde in it cō∣tinually that goodnesse which it naturally hath, in such sorte that it cā not by any ac∣cident whatsoeuer it be, be chaunged, di∣minished or abolished, it is as if we shold say, that it is impossible that God should not be God, & good, and iuste. Who would not cōclude thē by that same, that God is not all mighty, & that there is something impossible to him. Are we more stronge than he, bicause we may be wicked, vn∣true, vniust, & liers, ye which he cā not be? For goodnes is in him a thing which hath
subiect & substāce, & the accidēts agreable to the same, as we do sée in the sunne & in his light, which doth light all the world: for the euil is nothing els, but a priuatiō, lacke & want of ye good which ought to be, euen as the darkenesses are nothing els than priuation & lacke of light. Or if thou haddest rather to haue it spoken in other termes: it is nothing but a corrupted qua∣litie & a vicious accident, which are come vpō a good substance & creature of God, & haue corrupted it: the faute whereof may not be sought in God, albeit that nothing cā come to passe without his prouidence & his eternal counsell: but it must be sought in causes more neare vnto vs, leauing a parte the secrete counselles & iudgments of God, which is in such sorte the cause of causes, yt no fault may be imputed vnto him, or that he cā do any thing other than iustly. For he hath in such sort disposed ye secōd causes, that when ye euil is a doing, the wicked will either of the Deuill or man, cōmeth betwéene, in such sorte that that fault resteth in thē, albeit that God doth cause their wicked worke and will to serue him, and make the worker good,
in so much as God is serued therewith. As touching the reste, thou oughtest to note, that there is none which of his own nature is of such an vnchaungeable and infinite goodnesse, but God only, which is onely vnchangeable, and the most frée of all others, and doth giue a law to al crea∣tures, & is aboue all lawes, himselfe be∣ing a lawe to all creatures. For the same cause our Lorde Iesus Christe hath saide that none is good,Matth. 19. but the onely God: bi∣cause that goodnesse is to him naturall, essentiall and substantiall, and it is inse∣parable with him, and not accidentall and separable, which may be ioyned vnto him, or taken away from him by any manner of meanes: But the like is not of creatures how excellent so euer they be: as we may sée first in the Angels, and af∣terwarde in man. T. I shall also very gladly vnderstand this point. Of the creation and fall of the Angels, and hovv that God in the same hath declared the difference that is betvveene the Crea∣tor and the Creature, and hovv it is onely he that is perfect and vnchaungeable.
D. WHen he did create the Angells he created them all good: for he could make them none other, for somuch as he is in suche sorte good, that he can do nothing but well: otherwyse he shoulde not be God. Wherfore we may not ima∣gine two Gods, with the Manichees, the one good, and the author and Creator of good things, and the other euill, and the author and creator of euill: For the euill can not bée God, nor any other than the deuill himselfe, which is a creature, and not a Creator, although he be the author of all euill: who notwithstandyng was not created suche an one of God, but is become suche of his owne malice, when he turned away from God, and renoun∣ced the goodnesse that he receyued of him. Wherin he hathe shewed the difference that is betwéene the creator and the crea∣ture, and betwéene the nature and good∣nesse of the one and the other. For if God had created the Angels of such perfection as he is, and of a goodnesse so vnchange∣able of his nature, that it coulde neuer haue ben changed into malice, no more thā his own nature & goodnesse mought,
what difference should there be betwéen God & his angels? The creature by this mean should be no more a creature, if his nature wer such as is ye nature of his cre∣ator, but he should be very God, which it can not be. For ther is nothing yt may be both maker & creature, vnles we will at∣tribute ye same to our lord Iesus Chryst, who béeing very God & very man in one only person is both maker & creature togi¦ther:Iohn. 1. Luke. 1.2. Matth. 1. Maker, inasmuch as he is God eter∣nal: & creature, in that yt he is mā, which was cōceiued in ye wombe of the virgin, & born in his time ordeined by god: but this belōgeth vnto him by sundry respects, by meane of the two diuers natures yt ar ioy¦ned togither in one person in him. Wher∣fore, although he be both the one & the o∣ther in one very person, yet is he not so in one nature, but creator, by reason of the one: & creature by mean of the other: but ye like is not of angels: for as they haue but only one nature, so may they be therein but very creatures, greatly differēt from their creator, as the fall of those yt are fal∣len, hath plainly declared: For in falling frō the state wherin they wer, they haue
shewed in déed that they were not such of themselues, nor Gods vnchaungeable of their owne nature, & that they could not so continue of their owne power. Of the maruelous counsel of God vvhich was declared in the fal of the angels, which are fallen from their first estate: and in the preseruation of those which did continue firme and stedfast, and how he hath de∣clared the iustice of his iudgement towards the one sort, & the riches of his grace towards the others. T. IF the men which ar so troubled with the doctrine of Predestination, did well consider that which thou sayst, they should not haue, in my opinion, occasion so to trouble themselues▪ for these things wherof thou speakest, did not come to passe withoute the knowledge, counsell, foresyghte, and ordinaunce of GOD. What wil mans reason say then therof, wil it say, that God hath done wrong to those that are falne, bicause that he did not sustain & confirm thē as he did the others? but if that had bin done, this wherof thou
speakest, had not ben so manifestly decla∣red, nor yet the nature and the maiestie and the excellencie that he hath ouer all creatures, yea the most noble and moste excellent that are, shoulde not haue ben so well set foorth. D. It is very true: On the other syde, if they had all fallen in∣differently, the excellencie of the nature wherin god had created them, nor yet the power wherby god did make them, shold not haue ben so well knowne, nor yet his grace toward them, as it is knowne. For in considering the difference that is be∣twéen the diuels & the Angels of heauen, we sée how excellent the nature of An∣gels is, & also that which they haue recei∣ued of God in his creation: we see on the other side in the deuils what it is that the creature can do of himself, how excellent soeuer it be, except it be preserued by god, who hath created it: on the contrary, wée sée in the other angels, the double grace that God hath bestowed vpon them. The first in their creation which they had cō∣mon with the rest that are fallen, before they did fal. The second is, in the conser∣uation of the nature whiche was first gi∣uen
vnto them, & in the confirmation in the same through his grace, which the o∣thers wanted: which is the very cause of the diuersitie that now is betwéen them: which diuersitie doth not let notwithstā∣ding but that the diuels do continue still angels in the same substaunce that they were created in: but the difference is great in the qualitie, that is to say, in that that the one sort are not only angels, but are good angels, perseuering in the firste goodnesse that they receiued of God in the beginning, in their creatiō: frō which not∣withstanding, they mought as well haue fallen as ye others, if yt God by his special grace had not sustained them, & had not o∣therwise disposed & ordeined: Wherfore it is not writtē without cause,Ephe. 3. Colloss. 1. yt all is re∣stored by Iesus Chryste, aswel in heauē as in earth, & that all consist by him & in him. The other on ye other side are called not only angels, but wicked angels & de∣uils, bicause that they did not perseuere in ye first goodnes, wherin they were cre∣ated, but turning from him frō whence ye same proceeded, they were put frō it: & in the stead of the same, malice & wickednes
is come in place, whiche is nothing else but lack & priuation of goodnes, which is changed into an euil qualitie, which doth corrupt the creature yt was created good, & maketh the natures contrary, which wer before like.Iohn. 8. For ye same cause Iesus christ hath sayd, that the diuel is a lier from the beginning: that is to say, euē frō the time that he was first a diuel, and not fom the time yt he was first made an angel, & that when he doth speak lies, he speaketh that which is his own. And therfore he addeth vnto it, that he did not abyde still in the truth: for he hath nothing of God which is truth, but that whiche he now hath of euill, is of himselfe. Howe that the diuel may not impute the fault and fall of his damnation but to him selfe, and how it is manifest by that fal that ther is no vnchangeable veritie nor constancie but in the na∣ture of God. T. THen is there no faulte that procée∣deth from God in the fall of the an∣gels, nor any thing therof which is appa∣rant
to men, out of his eternall coūsel: but that when the diuel wold turne from him of his own proper motion, God who had not created him vnchaungeable, did suffer him to change & to folow his wil, and per∣mitted him to fall, & did not let him, hold him, nor pluck him back: which thing not withstanding he could wel haue done, if his good will and pleasure had ben suche, and that hée had not otherwise determi∣ned in his eternall counsel, for good & iust causes, for the which he is not bounde to giue vs an accompte, the which he dothe know better than we doe: But he hathe not thrust him forward, nor constrayned him of force so to do, albeeit that it is not done without his prouidence and eternal ordinaunce. Wherfore he may not attri∣bute the faulte of his euill acte to any o∣ther than to himselfe, whiche thyng wée must séeke (as thou haste alreadie sayd) in the seconde and nearest causes, leauing the iudgement & consideration of the first to the secrete counsell of God, whiche is to vs vnknowne. Dan. It is true. And to come againe to oure purpose, the Diuell biing depriued from thys goodnesse, the
which he hath lost, can be none other thā he is, nor haue any other wil thā wicked: But yet notwithstanding, it is stil a wil: & that which he doth, is doon voluntarily. Ther is no difference in this matter, but in stead that before his wil was good, and did willingly that which was good, by the same: now is it euil, & doth willingly that which is euill, & that which he can not o∣therwise doe, procéedeth not but onely of that that he can haue of himselfe none o∣ther wil but that which is wicked: ye fault whereof maye be imputed to none other but to him: For if he haue bin vnthākful toward God, & hath through his vnkind∣nesse and pride contemned that which he hath receyued of him, God is not bounde to giue him that whiche he thorough his own fault and vnkindnesse hath lost: nei∣ther doth he him any wrong to leaue him in yt state, into the which he hath brought himself: for if he were not bound neither to create the Angels, nor yet to preserue & to confirme thē in their estate, but hath done what he hath don, of his méere good∣nesse & liberalitie, what dutie oweth hée else to repaire & restore those yt are falne,
vnlesse it please him, and except he think and know it to be agréeable to his glory & maiestie, which he declareth in shewing himselfe a iust iudge, in punnishing so greuously such a pride, and such an arro∣gancie and ingratitude: and likewise hée doth shewe his great glorye and power, declaring in a creature so excellently by him created, what difference there is be∣twene him that is the Creator, and the creature: and betwene dwelling in hym and abandoning or leauing of him. And by the same meane he doth also giue vs the better to knowe the great grace that he hath bestowed vpon the other Angels the which hée conserueth in their fyrste estate. For they may vnderstande by that which happened to their felowes, that which mought also haue happened to thē, if that God of speciall grace had not hol∣den them vp and conserued them: consi∣dering that they were created of one ve∣ry nature, which is now of an vnchange∣able goodnesse, through his grace, without the which it mought be chaungeable, as well as that of the others. And therfore it is not without cause writtē in the booke
of Iob, that God hath founde no prayse nor perfection in his very Angels. For if we shuld compare God, and ye perfection of him with yt of his Angels, it shuld fare as it doth wyth the starres, whych loose their light in the presence of the sunne: or as it doth with a candle that is lighted at a faire noone tyde. On the other syde, we may not properly call true, firme and constant any: but only he that hath hys being of himselfe,Exod. 3. & may say, I am: to wit God vnto whom this same belongeth. Of the comparison and agreement of the first estate, and of the fal of man, with that of the Angels, and their first estate: and in to what necessitie man hath brought himselfe throughe his sinne. T. J Vnderstand wel by that which thou hast said, what the nature & wyll of man should haue byn, if he had continued in the first estate in which God did create him. For as concerning his wil, it should necessarily haue byn ruled by the will of god, as that of the Angels which haue re∣mained
stedfast, is at this pesent: in such sort that he shold haue byn no more able to sinne than they: and so should not at al haue loste the libertye of his wyll, nor done anye thyng by constrainte. And e∣uen so shoulde hée haue béene in a good necessitye, whych shoulde haue procéeded from the riches of the goodnesse and grace wherewith GOD had endued him and made him a part taker of it. But when he turned from this way, it came to passe wyth hym as it dyd wyth the Angels, when they turned from GOD, and hath declared thereby, that hee was in suche sorte created of GOD, good and iuste, and of a good and holy will, and yet was he notwythstandyng not so created that he shoulde or mought bée vnchange∣able of hys own nature and force, for the causes which haue bene already alleged, which in their behalfe doe as much per∣tayne to man as to the Angels. Where∣fore séeyng that manne throughe the in∣tycing and counsell of the Deuil, which was the fyrste trangessor, is turned a∣waye from the wyll and obedyence of GOD hys Creatour, and dyd make
an aliance with the firste offender, who made himself enimy to God through his pride and ingratitude, he hath ben parte taker of his iniquitie, with whome hée made an aliance. From whence it fo∣loweth, that his good and holye nature & will hath bene corrupted and peruerted, and made like to the same, of him to whō he hath ioined himself, & that he hath takē hym not onely for his felow, but for his guide, his leader, his maister, & his Lord. Wherfore, euen as before, abiding vni∣ted and ioyned to God, and hauing God in him, and being gouerned by hys holie spirit, he could do nothing but good, and yt without enforcemēt or constraint: euē so by ye contrarie being separated frō god, & ioyned with the deuill, being lead and gouerned by him, he can doe nothing but euill, and doth it of his owne wyll, with∣out conconstraint of any but only of him selfe, onely bycause his nature is such, by reason whereof he taketh as great plea∣sure in doyng of euill, as he did in well doing, when he was in his firste state of innocency. Now this necessity is greatly different from the first. For in steade that
the first did procéede from the aboundant riches of the grace of god, this other pro∣céedeth from the lacke and faulte of the same. Wherefore that is as wicked, as ye firste is blessed. It séemeth to me that I haue touched the very same thing yt thou woldest haue concluded vpō. D. Yet shalt thou more plainly vnderstande it by the comparison of a whole man, and a sicke man. Note well a man that is whole of body and minde, bicause that he hath his appetite sound, and not corrupted by any naughty humors, he doth couet nor desire to eate & drinke any thing but that which is good, and agréeable to hys nature and health, and in such qualitie and quantitie as his nature and health doth require, by∣cause he is so disposed. Consider againe the same being sicke, he will do al things contrary to that which he did being hole, bycause he is wholly otherwise dispo∣sed: That will he moste couet and desyre which is most contrary to him, and can not refraine from the vse of it, and the more the thing shalbe contrary and hurt∣full for him, and the more straitly that he shall be forbiddē it, the more earnestly
shal he desire it. And yet may he not com∣plaine and saye that he was constrained so to doe, either by the phisition, or others which haue forbidden him the same, and that his will was inforced by anye other than by himself which perisheth willing∣lye, for that he is so delicate, that he can∣not vanquishe his affections, & his corrup∣ted nature. T. The matter is plaine. Of the maruellous counsel of God which is declared in the fall and the restoring of man: and wherin it is different, or like to that which he hath declared in the fall of the euill Angels, and in the conseruation of the good. D. THat which thou saiest is true: and there is no doubt but yt man shold haue bene euen like vnto the deuill, vnto whom he did ioyne himselfe, if God had cleane left him and forsaken him in that estate, wherevnto throughe hys ingrati∣tude and rebellion hée had brought hym∣selfe, as he dyd leaue and forsake the de∣uell. But GOD hath agayne in thys
vsed a maruellous counsell and meane, he dyd not suffer in the nature of Angels that he had created, that al should fall, but dyd preserue a parte, in suche sorte that they dyd not part take of the transgressi∣on and corruption of the others. And as hee doth so conserue those which doe contynue in their fyrste estate, that they can not fall: euen so hathe hée in suche sorte lefte the others which are fallen, that neuer after they were able to rise a∣gayne, nor neuer shall.1. Peter. 2. Mat. 26. Rom. 5. 2. cor. 15. On the other syde, he hath suffered all mankynde to fall and bée corrupted, and all the nature of man in the firste man that hée made, which is to saye in the spring of the same. But on the other side, hée hath vsed such moderation, that hée hath not willed not withstanding that all those whych were comprehended in this fall, shoulde pe∣rishe eternallye as shall hée that was the firste cause thereof, to witte the Deuill, who dyd drawe the fyrste manne into suche perdition wyth hym. But as soone as the faulte was commytted, throughe the Deuylles intycing, God foorthe wyth dydde fynde remedye for
this great mischiefe, and a meane to re∣pare his worke and his creature, which his aduersarie had destroyed The which remedy he had already prepared through the eternall counsell and firme purpose of his election, through the which he dyd chose & prepare in his sonne Iesus Christ the vessels of mercie, not onely before ye wounde was giuen to the whole bodye & person of all mankinde, but also before the creation of the worlde: wherein hée sitteth forth the iustice of his iudgement, and his grace and mercy together, & how that he is the author of all goodnes, euen as his aduersarie is author of al euil. For if God shoulde haue restored the nature of the Angels whiche was fallen, as hee did repare the nature of man, it mought haue bene thought yt the Angels which were fallen, had raised vp themselues a∣gaine: or els that their fall had not ben so great and horrible as it is, nor the offence so odiouse and so detestable before God. Also his iustice, his grace and his mercy had not bene so wel declared. For it was requisite that the Angels which dyd of∣fend, should carry vpon them a perpetual
testimonie, of their transgression and re∣bellion, and that they shoulde know howe good a thing it was to dwell vnited with God, and how euill to be separated from him. Afterwarde man maye iudge what force and power he may haue of himselfe to raise vp himselfe, and to saue himselfe, cōsidering what the burthen of the wrath of God is, that the Deuills beare. For if these creatures which were created so ex∣cellent, cannot beare such a burthen, nor of themselues discharge them of it, but that they must be swallowed vp euen in∣to hell, how shall man then beare it that is but a worme of the earth,2. Peter. 3. and how shal he deliuer himselfe? Further if that God haue not spared that Angelicall nature, and those heauenly creatures, how doth he thinke to escape his iudgement, if it be not only through his grace and mercie? On the contrary, if he had as well suffe∣red the one sorte as the other to fall, and had lefte them all in like damnation, his grace, his power, and his mercie shoulde not haue bin so knowne as it is, and if he shoulde haue restored the one sorte and
lefte the other, it moughte haue séemed that he had wanted power to conserue his creatures in that estate wherein he had created them: or else that he had not had so great a care for them, that he would so do, if he should haue done the like in man: it shuld haue séemed on the other side, that it had not bin in his power, or else that he had not had the care and the will to re∣pare the creature that should haue offen∣ded, but only to haue cōserued and main∣teyned him in his first estate so long as he should perseuer in the same. But he hath declared by the meane that he hath obser∣ued, all these things togither. The firste, that there is no creature whatsoeuer he be that can of himselfe be mainteyned, how excellēt so euer he be. Further, that he hath alway power to preserue them al in their estate, if it please him, and to re∣store them althogh they had offended and transgressed, the whiche can be done by none other meane, but by his only power and grace. Then, euen as mā may be re∣couered and restored to his firste estate, through his grace and mercie, euen so on
the contrary, abiding still in his nature, suche as it is at this presente, he may by meane of his wicked will do nothing else but euill withoute any constrainte, other than of his owne malice. Hovv that al that vvhich hath bin don as vvell in the fall and conseruation of the Angells, as in the fall and restoring of man, tendeth to the glory of God, and hovv that same only reason ought to content vs in the do∣ctrine of predestination. T. BY that whiche I may vnderstande, all that which was done in all these thinges, tendeth still to the glory of God, to the whiche we must referre all the or∣dinaunces of his prouidence, as to ye prin∣cipal end, whervnto he hath chiefe regard aboue al, in all his works, & wherevnto it behoueth to frame all other purposes. D. Thou hast wel vnderstood it & wel cōclu∣ded. Therfore it is writē, yt the Lord hath made all thing for himselfe, yea ye wicked for the euil day: & S. Paule speaking of ye eternall election of God, saith,Proue. 16 Ephe. 1. who hathe before ordeyned vs for to be adopted vnto
himselfe through Iesus Christ, according to the good pleasure of his will, to ye praise of the glory of his grace, wherewith he hath made vs accepted in the beloued. Se∣ing it is so, what iust occasion maye men haue of offence in the doctrine of predesti∣nation, for ought not the glory of God to be preferred to all creatures? And if that al the creatures should perish, wherefore should we thinke it straunge, if god were glorified in their perdition, and that it did so please him? T. No man ought to finde that straunge, excepte he do more estéeme the creature than the Creator. D. There∣fore it is playne that this offence whiche many giue vnto themselues in the mat∣ter of reprobation of the reprobates, pro∣cedeth not but from a maruellous greate pride and arrogancie of the flesh, whiche estemeth itselfe more than it ought to do, for if it had so small an estimation of it selfe as the worthynesse therof requireth, and did estéeme God & his glory so muche as it ought to do, he should not onely not finde it straunge to knowe that god hath ordeyned to be glorified in the damnati∣on
of some: no, although it should be done with his owne person, he shoulde glorifie God in his iust iudgement, he would not murmure against him to wage the lawe with him, and to play the lawyer, and to pleade againste him, to mainteyne the cause of the reprobates, accusing hym as though he should do them wrong: but ra∣ther, he would desire himselfe to be dam∣ned, as Saincte Paule desired for his bre∣therne the Israelites, if it were possible,Rom. 9. that it moughte be done, and that God mought be the more magnified and glori∣fied therein. From whēce then come these cōtrary thoughts, but only of the horrible pride that is in our corrupted nature? for what are we? from whence came we? what wrong may God do vnto vs? wher∣in are we able to accuse him, or attribute vnto him the faulte of our offences, and of oure damnation, and to set him in the place of the Deuill author of sinne, consi∣dering that what determination so euer he haue made of vs, we cānot complaine that we haue any other force, violence, & constrainte to do euill, but onely of oure
owne wicked concupiscence, vnlesse that happily we would complayne in that that he hath not made vs suche as coulde not sinne, or else hauing sinned, that he dothe not bestow vppon all like grace, and that he dothe not saue all, forsomuche as he moughte if that he woulde, otherwise he shoulde not be God, nor almightie: but it hath pleased him, & that not without good and iust cause, the whiche is continually such, albeit that we cannot vnderstand it. Therefore we must continually say with the Prophete, that oure damnation is of our selues,Ose 13. Rom. 9. and our saluation of God on∣ly, and say with S. Paule. But o thou mā what arte thou that pleadest against god, shall the thing that is fashioned say vnto him that fashioned it, why hast thou sha∣ped and made me thus? The potter hathe he not power of the clay to make of one very lumpe, one vessel to honoure, and an other to dishonor? And what if God wold to shewe his wrath, and to make his po∣wer knowne, suffer with great pacience the vessells of wrath prepared to perditi∣on? and to shewe the riches of his glory
vppon the vessells of his mercie,Rom. 1. which he hath prepared to glorye? and agayne. O ye déepenesse of the riches of the wisedome and knowledge of God: his iudgementes are not to be searched out, and his wayes are impossible to be found.Esay. 40. For who is he that hath knowne the Lordes intente? or who hath bin his counsellor? or who is he that gaue to him firste, and he shalbe re∣compenced. Hovve that the vvill of man cannot by any meanes be constrayned, no, not by the deuill himselfe, but on∣ly of his ovvne vvickednes. T. FOr my parte I graunte to all that which thou hast sayde, but yet canst thou not denye, but that mā is yet often∣times constrained to sinne by meane of ye temptacion and soliciting of the deuill. D. This constraint wherof thou speakest, is cōstraint without cōstraint, for it is not in the power of al the deuils nor of al ye crea∣tures that are, to constraine the will of one mā. Wherfore, what temptatiō or so∣licitatiō so euer happē vnto him, if he did
not willingly consent therevnto, he could not be induced to do any kinde of thyng against his will. But it fareth with hym as it doth with a harlot: for if she be soli∣cited by bawdes and whoremasters, she will giue ouer hir selfe vnto them, which thing an honest woman will not do, but will resist all suche temptations and pro∣curements, & wil ouercome them. Ther∣fore albeit that the harlot may impute some parte of the cause of the offēce that she hath committed, to those that did en∣tise hir and procure hir therevnto, yet notwithstanding she may not say that she hath bin constrayned so to do, nor may by that meane excuse hir selfe, for if she had not agréed therevnto of hir owne will, she had not at all playde the harlot, but bycause that she was already naturally thervnto enclyned, these procuremēts did serue hir as it were matches, oyle & wood throwne into the fire, which would kindle nor slame neuer the sooner nor the more, if it were not naturally enclyned and prompte therevnto. In like sorte is man broughte to euill thorough his owne con∣cupiscence,
the which being wakened and sturred vp by the diuell,Iames. 1. dothe the more declare it selfe, and sheweth more plaine∣ly what his nature is: wherfore thou séest here howe that man dothe continually sinne of his owne will, and if he will saye that he hath bin constrayned to do any kind of worke the which he knoweth ma∣nifestly to be against the will of God, it must be considered wherein he hath bin enforced and cōstrayned, if he haue in a∣ny wise bin enforced by ye force of others, so that he could not be in any wise master of his members, although he did resist it by all the meanes that he coulde, and dyd declare by his wordes and actes that hys harte and will did in no wise consente thervnto, he may be excused as an honest womā may that hath bin takē of force, the which notwithstanding hath cried and re∣sisted by all meanes possible against the whoremaster, and hath bin as willing to lose hir life as hir chastitie: but if thou do∣est an euill worke, either to please men, or else for feare that thou shouldest fall into their displeasure or indignation, and re∣ceyue
any dishonor or wordly hindrance, thou maist in suche a case alledge none o∣ther constrainte but only that of thy wic∣ked wil: no more than Pilate might whē he condemned Iesus Christe,Matth. 27. Iohn. 29. enforced by the constrainte of the Iewes. For if thou didst loue God with al thy harte, and bet∣ter than thy selfe, and didst more estéeme his glory than thine owne, and thy soule, than thy body, and the heauen more than thou doest the earth, thou moughtest be frée from losing, that whiche thou fearest to lose,Matth. 10. Iohn. 13. and shouldest not lose it at all, but shouldest gaine it double. For as Iesus Christ saith, he that shall loose his life for my sake, the same shall finde it, and he that feareth to loose it, the same shal loose it, and therefore thou wouldest not leaue God for any creature, nor woldest change the inheritaunce whiche is prepared for thée in heauen, for no earthly inheritance, nor the blessing of God thy father, for a messe of potage,Genes. 2.25 Hebr. 11. as did Esau, but woldest rather loose thy life which ought not to be so deare vnto thée as the honoure of God, and the saluation of thy soule.
Of the contrarietie vvhich semeth som∣time to be among the commaunde∣ments of God, and vvhat consideration is required in the same, and of the de∣uision of the vvhole lavve into tvvo tables, and of the order of the matters that are dis∣posed & cōteined in thē. T. I Do knowe righte well now by that whiche thou saist, that all suche clo∣kings cannot excuse vs before God: but from whence commeth it, that God som∣times dothe allow workes, whiche he see∣meth to haue forbidden? he commaun∣deth to honoure father and mother, and to obey the magistrates, and yet notwith¦stāding he doth often times greatly com∣mend those which do not obey thē at all. He forbiddeth murther, and yet some∣time he commendeth those that do com∣mitte it. D. That diuersitie cōmeth of the nature of the commandementes of God, and of the order whereby he hathe dis∣posed them in his Lawe, for he hathe broughte and deuided the whole into two Tables, in which he hath written & dispo∣sed
his commaundementes, according to the order & worthynesse of the thing that euery one of them cōteyneth. T. Declare that order vnto me. D. In the first he hath written foure, which do properly and di∣rectly concerne his glory without speciall consideration of any other than of him, as the three first requests which are written in the prayer of our Lorde Iesus Christe. The second conteyneth sixe, which do con∣cerne those things that do belong to oure neyghboure, which must be measured by the first foure, of which they do depende, and to whose ende they oughte alway to haue regard: as the thrée last requestes of ye prayer of our Lord Iesus Christ,A lesson of gret weght ought alway to be referred to that ende where∣vnto the thrée first do pretend, wherefore, if any thing do happen, for the which any commaundement of the firste table must be broken, to accomplish any of the secōd, it behoueth them in suche a case that the seconde giue place to the firste, and that it haue recourse vnto the same, to haue the true vnderstanding and the true vsage of that which it doth conteyne.
Of the manner hovv to accord and agre the passages and sentences of the lavve and of the holy Scriptures, vvhich seme to disagree, set foorthe vppon the com∣maundement giuen to honoure father and mother, and vvhat loue or ha∣tred he vvould that we shuld beare them. T HOw may this be? hath God giuen a lawe which is contrary to it selfe and doth conteyne commaundements which cannot be obserued without trans∣gression of others? D. No, if the lawe bée well vnderstoode in that meaning & sense, for the whiche it was giuen by God, and for the better vnderstanding of all thys difficultie. I will declare it vnto thée by certayne examples which are very fami∣liar: God commaundeth me to honoure my father: to what ende is this comman∣ded me? To the ende that God moughte be honoured, in the honoure that we giue to our fathers, acknowledging the good∣nesse that we haue receyued of him by them, who haue bin the instruments and ministers of his louing kindnesse toward
vs. D. Thou hast well aunswered: thou doest then see here howe that this com∣maundement hath his foundation in the firste table, in such sorte that if thou disho∣nor thy father, thou doest not only disho∣nor that man which is thy carnall father, but in him doest thou dishonor God thy e∣ternall father, of whome the carnall fa∣ther is nothing else but an Image or in∣strumente, towarde whome thou decla∣rest of what affection thou arte towards him whome he representeth, and the more neare that this image is to thée, and the more neare thou drawest to the nature of it, and that God doth more familiarly and more plenteously communicate vnto thee his louing kindnesse by this instrument, and the more that he maketh his image to shyne in him, so muche the more is thy wickednesse & iniquitie the greater, but if it should so come to passe that thy father shuld be vntrue toward god, & should re∣quire of thée a thing, wherin thou couldest not obey him, vnlesse thou shouldest diso∣bey God, thou arte not at all in any thing bound vnto him in such a case, for in such
a case thou arte dispensed with in the first table, & by the interpretation & true mea∣ning of the same. For seing that the ho∣nor which thou owest to thy father, dothe comprehend the honor of god, & is groun∣ded vpō the same, it is certayne that if god be dishonored in that which thy father re∣quireth of thée, thou doest not honour him at al in such sorte as thou arte commāded by god to honour him, if thou do it in such sorte as thy father requireth thée to do, for thy father cannot be truly honoured, in yt wherin god is dishonored, but is dishono∣red in that wherein god is dishonored, al∣though that men cannot alwayes vnder∣stand & know it. Therefore when thy fa∣ther doth commaund thée any thing, thou oughtest to haue good regard to ye nature of the thing whiche he commaundeth thée to doe, if it be a thing that thou maist doe without offence towarde God and thyne owne conscience, séeke by all meanes pos∣sible to please him, for the honoure of him that dothe so commaunde thée, howe harde soeuer it be to doe: if it bée other∣wise, in suche a case acknowledge
him not at all for thy father, bycause that the deuill doth require by him that thou shouldest yelde him in thy father that ho∣noure which thou owest to thy only God, and that he will make thy father his in∣strumente, but leaue that Sathan trans∣figured into the likenesse of thy father, and say vnto him that thou hast no father for whome thou mayst refuse and leaue God thy heauenly and eternall father. For if a father should require his daugh∣ter to giue ouer hir selfe vnto him, that he mought make hir a harlot, or else that he himselfe moughte abuse hir, or other∣wise that he shoulde deliuer hir to anye whoremaster, ought she to acknowledge suche a father for hir father? and were she bound to obey him in suche a matter? T. There is no man if he haue so muche as one sparke of good iudgement, but would iudge hir worthy of greate blame if she should do it: and worthy of great prayse, if she did rather choose to die than to please hir father in such wickednesse, for by such meanes she should not obey to hir father, but to a bawde, a whoremaster and an
horrible incest, and to a very Deuill. D. Thou hast saide well. Then if it be not lawfull for a daughter to giue ouer hir body to hir owne father, to abuse it in a∣ny kinde of villanie, how much lesse law∣full is it then for the soule, whiche is much more precious than the body, to giue ouer it selfe to any creature whatso∣euer he be, whereby it may be ioyned to the Deuill? Then if thy father will be an idolater, and will haue thée to be such an one with him, and will haue thée to leaue Iesus Christ to please him, thou oughtest than to haue recourse to the interpreta∣tion that Iesus Christe dothe make of this cōmaundement, of the honor whiche is due to father and mother, founded in the first Table: as it shalbe more am∣ply declared when wée shall come to the exposition of the fifte commaundement. T. Of what interpretatiō meanest thou? D. Of that where he saithe:Luc. 14. Matth. 10. Whosoeuer doth not hate his father and his mother for my sake: whiche is to say (as he doth expounde it by an other Euangelist) he that shall loue them better than me, is not worthy of me, nor may be my disci∣ple:
beholde this interpretation is very plaine, whiche declareth vnto vs that it is a great vertue, and worthie of com∣mendation, to contemne father and mo∣ther in time and place, which is to say, in such like cases as wée haue already spo∣ken of: for such a contempt of them, is not a contempt, to speake properly, but onely in the iudgement of man, no more than the hatered whiche Iesus Christe willeth vs to beare them for his sake, is a hatered, but a very true loue, founded in the loue of GOD. For wée must ra∣ther iudge of thinges according to their effectes, than according to the affections of men, in whom we doe consider them, as in diuers other like passages of the Scripture: It is written in the Pro∣uerbes, in the which Salomon speaketh in the person of wisedome:Prouerb. 8. All those that hate me, loue death. There is none but he hateth and abhorreth death: and yet for all that, seyng that he whiche despi∣seth and hateth wisedome, doth purchase his owne death, and ruine, doth it not then seeme that he loueth it, and that he desireth it? and what coulde he more doe
if that he desired it? It is also written,Prou. 29. he that dothe take parte with the théefe hateth his soule: Moreouer,Prouerb. 13. he that spa∣reth the rodde hateth his childe, yet not∣withstanding there is no man that both this for any hatered that he beareth ei∣ther to his soule▪ and his life, or to his childe, but rather for loue, if wée doe con∣sider the affection of the person: yet not∣withstanding the truth is euen suche as the spirite of GOD hath spoken in déede, as the effect dothe right well de∣clare. Then, as he hateth in deede, whiche dothe folishly loue, and otherwise than he ought to doe: euen so dothe he truly loue, whiche hateth as he ought to hate, and that same whiche he ought to hate. The like is of the honour and dishonour: but it is not néedefull here to speake any more of this matter, considering that it shall haue more apte place in the exposi∣tion of the Cōmaundement of the which wée haue now spoken. Therefore I haue spoken this but onely for an example.
An example to the like purpose, vpon the commaundement giuen of the obedience due to Princes, and vpon the com∣maundement giuen against murder. T. WE also may in mine opiniō, say the like of Princes & Lords. D. S. Peter & S. Iohn doe teach vs by their example what we ought to thinke there∣in: For did they transgresse the com∣maūdement which cōmaundeth to yelde obedience vnto Princes & Magistrates,Actes. 3.4.5. when they did contemne the forbidding of the counsell of Ierusalem, which was contrary to the commaundement of God: and did answere them, that it was better to obey God than man? T. No, but did much better fulfill it than if they had o∣therwise done, and did truly declare it. D. Numbr. 25.Phinees in like sorte was greatly cō∣mēded by God, for the whore & the whore master which he did slea, and was not re∣buked as a murderer, for so much as he did it not of hatred, nor of any blouddie affection, but onely for the dutie and obe∣dience whiche he ought to God, who had bene greatly dishonored, if that suche a
villany had not bene punished & reuenged by him with such a zeale. Thou maist thē know by al these examples, how that the worke whiche may seeme vnto men to haue some shew of wickednesse, and to be contrary to the cōmaundements of God, is not at all wicked in ye sight of God, nor in the iudgmēt of those which take ye law of God in his true meaning, & doe know how to rule the secōd Table by the first, but is pleasant & agreable to his will. Of the hidden sinnes that are in the con∣science and vvicked vvil of man and hovv that concupiscence is a sinne vvorthy of damnation in the sight of God, and hovv greatly it doth dis∣please him, and for vvhat cause. T. IT séemeth to me that this matter of workes hath bene sufficiently, fully, and familiarly entreated of: where∣fore let vs procéede to the rest. D. If that which hath bene sayd of workes be well vnderstoode, the reste shalbe easie inough vnto vs: for wee may by the very same meane, iudge of the wil, & of the affectiōs,
according to which God doth iudge of the worke. If then thou be stirred vp to euill, by any wicked affection, & thy will doth consent and agrée therevnto, in such sorte that there wanteth nothing but the onely meane to execute it: Behold the wicked∣nesse is already accōplished before God, thou knowest by that which hath bene al¦ready spoken, how God will iudge. If on the contrary; there be any resistance in thee, & that thy spirite & thy wil in no case will agrée to that cōcupiscence which cō∣tinually doth procure thee, but dee resist and repulse it as farre from them as they may, it is certaine that the iniquitie is not so great: albeit that such a concupis∣cēce, what resistance soeuer there be, can not be without sinne, by reason of the corrupted and wicked spring frō whence it procéedeth. For that is a sure testimo∣nie, that there is much poison and corru∣ption there, where such fruite doth budde forth: although that it finde hinderances which will not permitte and suffer their buddes and fruites to come to their ripe∣nesse. Now such a corruption can not be but very displeasant to God, considering
that it doth procéede from his aduersarie, and that it is contrary to his holy maie∣stie: as wée sée it proued and euident in litle children: yea euen in those whiche are not onely not in age to put any euill acte in execution, but also haue not discre∣tion to iudge neither of good nor euill,Rom. 5. wée see how death hath power ouer them, and taketh them out of the worlde: which he could not do except that there were sinne in them. For seyng that sinne did begette death, and that it is a frute of his curse, it is a thing certaine, that there where sinne doth not raigne, death also can haue no power, as S. Paule doth very well conclude. Hovv that by reason of that concupis∣cence vvee are iustly vvorthy of death and damnation, euen from our mo∣thers vvombe. T. WHat sinne is that then in little children, that doth so displease God, that it doth not make thē only sub∣iect to bodily death, but also to eternall death, and maketh them the children of
wrath and of the curse, euen before they haue the vse of reason: to know & discerne either good or euill. D. It is that naturall corruptiō whereof Dauid speaketh, say∣ing:Psalm. 51. I was conceyued in sinne, & my mo∣ther did beare me in sinne: nowe if wée would haue the meaning of the words of Dauid expressed according to the signifi∣cation that they haue in the Hebrew, we must thē say: And my mother hath war∣med me in sinne, or with sinne, whereby he giueth to vnderstād that he hath bene begotten, conceiued, and nourished, in his mothers wombe, with the sinne, euen as if he & sinne were brothers, twinnes, be∣gotten, conceyued & nourished togither in the wombe of one very mother: it is then easie to vnderstand how natural sinne is now to man, being in this corrupted na∣ture, wherevnto he is fallen by meane of his transgression: for that whiche Dauid speaketh of himselfe, doth appertaine to the whole race of man. Wherefore that conception whereof he speaketh in this passage, is common to vs all. Then euen so as a litle Serpent doth offend vs, not only as sone as he is brought or hatched,
but béeing in his egge, or in the belly of his dame: euen so do we in déede displease God from our very mothers womb. And what is the cause that this little serpent doth so muche offende vs? by meanes of the venemous nature that is in him. For all be it that he haue not yet shewed it, yet notwithstanding it is still abiding in him, and doth not let to shewe it, but on∣ly bicause it wanteth the meane: but it shall be sufficiently shewed in his tyme. T. Is it the like of man? D. There is no doubt of it, for experience doth so plainly declare it: for sith the time that our first father was poysoned with the venime of the olde serpent, he coulde beget no chil∣dren but suche like as he him selfe was, and little serpēts of the same nature that he was, and infected with the same ve∣nime, the which albeit that it doth abyde hidden for a certen time in vs, doth not let for all that to shewe it selfe foorthwith at the first occasion that it may finde. This is the first spring, the first founda∣tion, and the first cause, as muche as doth pertayne to man, of all the sinnes that he may cōmit. Nowe if that wicked spring,
how secret or couert soeuer it be, dothe so muche displease God, that it hath already deserued eternall damnation, before that it hath so muche as once budded foorthe: howe muche more shall it displease him with his buddes, his braunches, and the whole trée and his fruit? T. That is very easie to iudge. D. So easie as nothing is more easie. Of diuers degrees of sin, and of the roote and fruites, and of their begetting and consummation. T. IT séemeth to me that we may easily discerne and extinguishe by the de∣ductiō which thou makest, all the degrées of sin. D. It is easie to do. This same first spring & natural corruption, with that in∣clination & nature which is alway giuen to euill, is the same which we do proper∣ly call originall sinne, which of it selfe is wholly damnable, & can not be ouercome by man, but only in that that he is deliue∣red, and that he is regenerate by the only grace and spirite of God. Afterward, that same concupiscence which watcheth con∣tinually in man, and procureth him to e∣uill,
is as it were, the budde of that rotten roote, and of that cursed spring, which is neuer without casting foorth some suche bud, how generate soeuer a man be, du∣ring the time that he is in this worlde wrapped in this body of sinne, and in his outwarde man, and in his olde Adam. Therefore it followeth that there is no man liuing, howe holy so euer he be,1. Iohn. 2. but that he is a great sinner before God, yea although he had no more faulte but thys same, and hath good occasion to say con∣tinually wyth the whole Churche: And forgiue vs our offences. But if this budde come once to determination,Math. . Luke. 1. and to bring foorth the consent of the wyll, then dothe the rebellion continually de∣clare it selfe to be the more great, and the sinne dothe growe one degree more, and is more encreased than before. Nowe when manne is come to this degree of wickednesse, and doth acknowledge hys fault, and before he procéede any further, he refrayneth from it, and asketh pardon of God, he dothe lesse offende, than he that proceedeth to the putting of his wic∣ked purpose in execution, or bothe
perseuer in the same, although he haue not meane to accomplishe it, beeing sory that he can not put it in execution. And he that doth finde ready resistance in his cō∣science, agaynst the euill that doth conti∣nually prouoke him, and notwithstan∣ding despiseth the admonitiōs which God giueth him in his owne conscience, and of a set purpose doth followe his wicked af∣fection, the same is muche more faultie, than he that hath bene taken sodenly, ei∣ther through ignorance or weaknesse. Of the names of sinnes, according to their degrees and proper kinds, vvith their generation. T. WHat names may wée giue to these sorts and sundry degrees of sinnes, to distinguish them from the same first spring which thou hast called origi∣nall sinne? D. Albeit that we doe com∣monly call those actuall, whiche come to the acte and outwarde execution, yet not∣withstanding we may well call by the same name the other degrees, for so much as all the fault that proceedeth from that wicked originall spring, proceedeth foorth
to the acte and effect, although not in the sighte of men, yet in the sighte of God. There is no differēce but only of more or of lesse, which doth either aggrauate or diminishe the sinne, or the heinousnesse therof, according to the degrées whereby it proceedeth, from whence it commeth to passe that the one sorte are accompted veniall, and the others mortal, according to the disposition of the persons towards God, concerning their fayth or vnfayth∣fulnesse. Of deadly and veniall sinnes, and of the difference of them: and in vvhat mea∣ning vvee oughte to vnderstande the sinnes to be veniall or mortall. T. THou hast nowe touched one point the which I would gladly vnder∣stande: which is to say, what sins they be that be veniall, and which they be that be mortall: and what is the cause of that dif∣ference. If thou wilte consider sinne in his owne nature, there is no sinne but it is deadly, to witte, it bringeth with it death, not onely corporall, but also eter∣nall,
and doth right well deserue it. For if this naturall corruption whereof we haue already spoken, be in the fighte of God worthy of such punishment, if there were no other thing in man, we may wel thinke what it is that the other sortes do deserue, which do daily aggrauate ye euill and encrease it more continually. Wher∣fore this originall sinne ought not to be estéemed a smal sin, no more ought these buddes of concupiscence, and the wicked affections, as many do accompt them, and chéefly the Papistes. For the maiestie of God is so great, that there is no rebellion what soeuer it be, nor roote of rebellion & wickednesse, but it is a crime of treason agaynst the maiestie of God. For God hath not only forbidden the act & consent to euill, but also the very concupiscence it self, although that it do not procéede so far as to the consent: as it appeareth by that which he sayd, thou shalt not couet, which shal be more plainly declared in his place. Now it is méete that ye punishmēt be giuē according to the nature of ye sinne, wher∣fore seing yt God, against whose maiestie the fault is cōmitted, is eternal, it is certē
that there is no pain whatsoeuer it be that is sufficient for the punishmēt of an offēce cōmitted against the maiestie of suche a prince, nor may satisfie for ye dishonoring of the same: for the case stādeth not with god, as it doth wt mā, for so much as mā is mortal, how gret a prince soeuer he be, he may stretch & extend his auctoritie no fur∣ther thā vpō the earthly goods, or body of the offender: and according to ye faulte by him cōmitted, he taketh either his goods or his body: & if the worst fal, he can take frō him but his body & temporall life, for so muche as his power extendeth no fur∣ther but to this life, and that ye fault tou∣ching either his person or his office, is but temporall as he is: but God hath a reigne & power which stretcheth further, for it is eternall as he is. And therfore the faults which are cōmitted against him, are worthy of eternall punishment. And therfore our sauiour Iesus Christ sayth, that God hath not only power to sley the body, as men haue: but he is able also to sley both body and soule, and then to cast bothe the one and the other into euerla∣sting fire, which is ordeyned for eternall punishments.
Of the opinion of those which say, that none shall be damned: and of the abuse of the mercy of god, and of the greatnesse of sinne, and of the paine due to the same, and of the wrath of God against it, decla∣red in the death of Iesus Christe, and of the meane whereby to be deiluered from it, and in what meaning we ought to vnderstand that God hath made no man to destroy or damne him. T. THat which thou sayest is farre off from the opinion of suche as say that none shal be dāned, and that in very déed the diuels shal once be saued. D. The worde of God shall then be false, whiche speaketh the cleane contrary. T. They do ground them selues vpon the mercies of God, saying that God hath created no man to destruction, and that it shall be a great crueltie in him, and contrary to his mercifull nature, to punish so gréeuously a temporall sinne, to witte, with euerla∣sting payne. D. Suche men doe greatly abuse them selues, and doe declare plain∣ly that they knowe neither the nature of sinne, nor yet the maiestie of him against
whome it is cōmitted. For do they thinke the contempte of such a maiesty ro be no∣thing, according to ye which the greatnesse of the sinne must be measured, & not only according to the thing wherin it hath bin committed: wherfore if that god shuld pu∣nish with eternall death all the men that euer were, are, & shalbe, he shuld do them no wrong, but should do them iustice and right. Therefore in yt that he saueth those which haue recourse to his mercie, ye same commeth of his méere grace, wherein in déed he declareth vnto vs what punishmēt we haue deserued. For seing that it was expediēt that his owne sonne shuld beare the payne which was due to the sinnes of them vnto whome he would shew mercie in him & by him, he hath right wel decla∣red by the same, that there was no payne whatsoeuer it was, that was able to satis∣fie his iudgemente, but that of his sonne, who by reason of his great innocencie & perfect obedience, was only sufficient for such a satisfaction. For if man could suffer any paine, whereby he mought satisfie the eternall iustice of God, there should then
be no hell, nor eternall damnation, for the paines should once haue ende. But forso∣muche as they do neuer ende, they do de∣clare thereby that they are not sufficiente for such satisfaction: and on the other side, that it must néedes be, bycause that they may in no wise be sufficient, that they be eternall, sauing only to suche as haue re∣reyued Iesus Christe by faith, who hathe borne the wrath of God, and the paynes due to their sinnes, to deliuer them, as it is written:Iohn. 3. he that beloueth in the sonne of God, the same hathe eternall lyfe: He that beléeueth not in the Sonne of God, the wrathe of God abideth still vpon him. And as concerning that which thou hast said, that God hath made no man to be damned, I do cōfesse it, if it be well vn∣derstood, but not in that sense that they do take it which aledge that texte or passage of the scripture to abuse the grace & good∣nesse of God.Prouer. 16. It is very true that God hath made no creature to that only ende that he should be damned, for he hath cre∣ated all thinges for his glory, & hath minde all for him selfe, yea the wicked for the e∣uill
day. That is the principall ende of all his works, notwithstāding he leaueth not to punishe and to damne with eternall death those which contemne his law, and his holy word, forsomuch as their damna∣tion doth serue to his glory, for the which they were created. For his glory doth not only consist in that that he sheweth mer∣cie to his, but also in that that he execu∣teth iugemēt, and doth declare his iustice vppon his enimies. Let vs therefore take héede that we mocke not with him, nor se∣duce oure selues: for albeit that by hys great power and wisedome he can drawe goodnesse out of the euil which the wicked committe, and can tourne it and make it to serue to his honoure and glory, and to the health of his chosen people, whereas the wicked ones do tourne his good crea∣tures and his good works into euil, he lea∣ueth not for al that to hate still that which is euill, in somuche as it is euill, and the abuse of his creatures and of his giftes and graces, and to condemne and punish those whiche committe suche offences, if they haue not forgiuenesse by his grace & mercie in Iesus Christ.
Hovve that euery sinne is of his ovvne nature damnable, and hovv that notvvithstanding, it is not able to damne the faythfull. T. SO farre forthe as I maye iudge by thy words, it semeth to me that thou concludest that euery sinne is mortall, which is to say damnable, t al ye vnfaith∣full and reprobates, and that they are ve∣nial, to witte pardonable, to the chosen & faithful peple of god D. If thou do vnder∣stand by damnable, sufficient to damne, & by venial, worthy of pardon: it is certaine that there is no sinne of his owne nature worthy of pardon, but is able to damne. But if thou vnderstand by damnable, the sinne that damneth, and by venial, that whiche receyueth pardon, it is very cer∣taine yt in this meaning there is no sinne that may damne the elect and faithful, but it is pardoned vnto them by reason of the merite and satisfaction of Iesus Christe,Rom . for the whiche cause S. Paule saith, that there is no condemnation to those that be
in Iesus Christe, which do not walke af∣ter the flesh, but after the spirite. T. Then are they happie whiche beleue in Iesus Christ. D. There are none else blessed but they only. Therfore Dauid saith:Psalme. 32. Rom. 4. Blessed are they whose offences are pardoned, & whose sinnes are couered, Blessed is the mā to whom god imputeth not his sinne: he doth not say blessed is the mā that is or shalbe foūd without sin, for there is none such, nor neuer was, nor neuer shalbe, but only Iesus Christ very god and very mā. But he calleth that man blessed, who not∣withstanding that he be a sinner, he hathe yet found grace and pardon for his sinnes in the sight of God. In the meane while, we must take good héed, if we will be par∣takers of this blessednesse, that we do not abuse that grace of God which is giuē vs in Iesus Christe, least that where oure sinnes should be but venial, we cause thē to be twice mortall.
VVhat meane it behoueth to kepe to fight against sinne and to resist it, and to be deliuered from it, and how euery mā ought to feare least he shuld be hardned therin, and should fight against his ovvne conscience, to the ende that sinne be not to death. T. SHewe me thē what remedy we may finde to auoide this great mischiefe. D. If we do walke acording to the spirite, and not according to the flesh, immediat∣ly as soone as our cōcupiscence doth pricke vs, we must resist it by the spirite of God, if we do not resist it, it is a token that the spirite of God dwelleth not in vs, which is a sure token of the vnfaithfull who folow their concupiscence withoute any lette, without any feare of God at all, if we do resist it, and that oure concupiscence and infirmitie doth ouercome vs, the next re∣medy is not to suffer the wicked will to procéede any further: if that the violence of the wicked wil and our infirmitie be so great, that it breake foorth to the outward worke, the other nearest remedy is, not to ake an occupation of it, nor to retourne
any more to it, nor to continue any lōger therein, but by true repentaunce, to cor∣recte all suche faults, as well inwarde as outward, and to lead a good life. If it hap∣pē vs to fall againe into any at any time, let vs take heede that we sléepe not in it, nor yet perseuer in it, least that God doe leaue vs, and do harden our hartes, & cast vs off into a reprobat sense, to punish our vnkindnesse and frowardnesse in suche sort, that in the ende we come to resist the spirite of God,Rom. 1.9. Matth. 12. 1. Iohn. 5. 1. Cor. 12. Rom. 8. Genes. 3.9 Exod. 88. Rom. 9. 1. Sam. 15. Matth. 26. Psalm. 51. Luk. 7. Actes. 9. 1. Timo. 1 & being vanquished by him in our owne harts, we come to blaspheme him, as it doth often times happē to those which do contemne the admonitions that are given vnto them, and the remorse of their cōsciences, & do assure them in their wickednesse, for such a sinne is without re¦mission, & is called by S. Iohn, the sinne vnto death. For somuch as he yt sinneth a∣gainst the holy Ghoste, dothe cast of him without whome he can neyther aske nor obtayne pardon, nor be partaker of Iesus christ, which only is our way & our helth. Let vs then take héed yt we folow not the example of Caine, of Pharao, of Saule,
of Iudas, of the Scribes, of the Pharises, who abode still hardned and obstinate in their sinnes, but let vs folow the example of Dauid, of the woman sinner, of S. Pe∣ter, of S. Paule, and such like seruants of God, who haue acknowledged and forsa∣ken their faultes, and retourned to God with all their whole harte. T. This decla∣ration and admonition is very well wor∣thy to be noted. Now I am very well cō∣tented and satisfied in all those matters that haue bin handled betwene vs, whereby I do know the diffe∣rences of sinnes, and how God doth iudge, & how we ought to vnder∣stand his law, and that by our frée wil we may be well lost and damned, & that there is none but God only which can saue vs thorow his grace & mercie. FINIS.
