3380 99851413 16684
❧: A COM∣pendyous Regyment or a Dyetary of healthe made in Mount∣pyllyer, by Andrewe Boorde of phy∣sycke Doctour, newly corrected and imprynted with dyuers ad∣dycyons Dedycated to the Armypotent Prynce and valyent Lorde Tho∣mas Duke of Northfolke.
¶ The preface or the proheme. ☞ To the armypotent Prynce and valyent lorde Thomas Duke of Northfolke Andrewe Boorde of physycke doctor r dothe surrender humyle commenda∣cyon with immortall thankes. AFter the tyme that I had tra∣uelled for to haue the notycyon & practes of Physycke in diuers re∣gyons and countres & returned in to Englande and requyred to sary and to remayne and to cōtynue with syr Ro∣bert Drewry knyght, for many vrgēt causes. Your grace heryng of me dyd sende syr John̄ Baruyngham nowe beynge knyght to me to come to youre grace to haue my counsell in physycke for your infyrmytes. The mesage done, I with festynacyon & dylygēce dyd nat prolonge the tyme but dyd come to your gra∣te accordynge to my deuts. The whiche was in the tyme, whan lorde Thomas Cardynall Archebysshop of Yorke was cōmaūded to go to his see of Yorke. And after my cōmynge to you and felynge the pulses of your herte: the pulses of your brayne, and the pulses of your lyuer, and that I had lene your vryne & your egestyon I durste nat to enterpryse or me∣dyll with out the counsell of Mayster doctor
Buttes, the which dyd know nat onely your cōplexcion & infyrmite but also he dyd know the vsage of your dyete. And the imbeyllyte and strength of your body, with other qualy¦tes exuedyent & necessary to be knowen, but brefely to conclude your recuperatyng or re∣couering your health. And for synguler trust and hygh fauour the which the kyng had to you was compocated to be in the presence of his magesty, I than dyd passe ouer the sees agayne and dyd go to all the vnyuersytes and great Scloles the whiche be approbated with in the precynet of Thrystendome for to haue the practes of physycke, I seynge many expedyent thynges in dyuers regyons at the last I dyd staye my selfe at Mountpllyoure which is the hed vniuersite in al Europe for the practes of physycke & surgery or thyrmig I beinge there. And hauyng a cotydyal remē¦brance vpon youre bountyfull goodnes, dd consulte with many egregyous Doctours of physycke what maner that I mghte wryte the whiche myght be acceptable for the con∣seruacyon of the health of youre body. The sayde doctors knowynge my zele and true in¦tencyon had to you, dyd aduertyse me to ma∣ke a boke of dyete nat only for your grace but also for your noble posteryte and for all men lyuynge wherfore I do nomyaate thys boke The Dyetary of health, the which doth per∣tract howe a man shuld order him selfe in all
maner of causes partenynge to the health of his body, yf your grace or any man wyl haue forther knowledge for dyuers infyrmites let him loke in a boke of my makynge named y• Breuyary of health. And where I haue dedy¦cated this boke to your grace. And haue nat ornated hit with cloquence & retorycke ter∣mes, the whiche in all maner of bokes and wryttynges is vsed these modernall dayes. I do submytte me to your bountefull goodnes. And also dyuers tymes in my wrytynges I do wryte wordes of myrth, truely it is for no other intēcion, but to make your grace mery for myrth is one of ye chefest thynges of phy¦sycke the which doth aduertise euery man to be mery, and to bewere of pentyfulnes, tru∣stynge to youre affluent goodnes to take no displeasure with any of the cōtentes of this boke, but to accept my good wyll & dylygent labour. And forthermore I do truste to your super abundaunt gracyousnes, that you wyll consyder the loue and zele, the which I haue to your prosperyte, and that I do it for a com¦mon weale, the which I beseche Jesu chryst longe to continue to his wyll and pleasure in this lyfe. And after this transytory lyfe to remunerate you with celestyall ioye and eter¦nal glorye From Mountpyller. The fyft daye of Maye. The yere of our Lorde Jesu Chryste. M. CCCCC. XLVII.
☞ Here foloweth the Table of the Chapiters. THe fyrste Chapyter doth shewe where a man shuld cytuat or set his mansyon place or house, for ye belth of his body. ¶ The seconde chapiter dothe shewe a man howe he shuld buylde his house, and that the {pro}spect be good for ye conseruacyon of health. ☞ The thyrde chapyter dothe shewe a man to buylde his house i a pure and a fresshe ayre for to lengthen his lyfe. ¶ The fourth Chapiter dothe shewe vnder what maner a man shulde buylde hys house or mansyon in eschewynge thynges yt shulde shorten his lyfe. ¶ The. v. Chapiter doth shewe howe a man shuld order his house concernyng the imple∣mentes to comforte the spyrytes of man. ❧ The. vi. Chapiter doth shewe a mā howe he shulde order his house and housholde, and to lyue in quyetnes. ¶ The. vii. chapiter doth shewe howe y• hed of a house, or a householde shulde excercyse hym selfe for the health of the soule & body. ¶ The. viii. chapiter doth shewe howe a mā shulde order him selfe in slepynge, and wat∣chynge, and in his apparell wearynge. ¶ The. ix. chapiter doth shew ye repleccion or surfetyng doth moch harme to nature, & that abstynēce is ye chiefest medison of al medyson
¶ The. x. charpiter treateth of all maner of drynkes, as of water of wyne, of ale, of vere, of cyder, of meade, of metheglyn, & of whay. ¶ The▪ xi. chapiter treateth of breade. ¶ The▪ xii. Chapit treteth of potage, of sewe of stew pottes, of grewel, of fyrmente, of pese potage, of almon mylke, of ryse potage, of caudels, of culleses, of alebrues, of hony sop∣pes, and of all other maner of brothes. ¶ The. xiii. Chapit treateth of whyte meate as of egges, butter, chese, mylke, crayme, po∣settes, of almon butter, and of beane butter. ¶ The. xiiii. chapyter treateth of fysshe. ¶ The. xv. chapiter treateth of wylde foule of tame foule, and of byrdes. ¶ The. xvi. chapiter treateth of flesshe, wyl∣de and domestycall. ¶ The. xvii. chapyter treateth of pertyculer thynges of fysshe and flesshe. ¶ The. xviii. chapit treateth of roste meate of fryde meate, of soden or boyled meate, of bruled meate and of beaken meate. ¶ The. xix. chapiter treateth of rotes. ¶ The. xx. chapiter treateth of herbes. ¶ The. xxi. chapyter treateth of fruytes. ☞ The. xxii. chapiter treateth of spyces. ¶ The. xxiii. chapyter sheweth a dyete for sanguyne men. ¶ The. xxiiii. chapiter sheweth a dyete for flematyke men. ¶ The. xxv. chapyter sheweth a dyete for co∣lorycke
men. ¶ The xxvi. Chapiter dothe shewe a dyete for melancoly men. ¶ The. xxvii. chapiter treateth of a dyete & of an order to be vsed in the pestyferous ty∣me of the pestilence & the swetyng syckenes. ¶ The. xxviii▪ Chapyter treateth of a dyete for them the whiche be in an ague or a feuer ¶ The xxix. chapyter treateth of a dyete sor them the whiche haue the Ilyacke, or the co∣lycke and the stone. ¶ The. xxx. Chapiter treateth of a dyete for them the whiche haue any of the kyndes of the gottes. ¶ The. xxxi. chapyter treateth of a dyete for them the which haue any kyndes of lepored ¶ The. xxxii. chapiter treateth of a dyete for them the which haue any of the kyndes of ye fallynge syckenes. ¶ The. xxxiii. chapiter treateth of a dyete for them which haue any payne in theyr hed ¶ The. xxxiiii. Chapiter treateth of a dyete for them the which be in a consumpeyon. ¶ The. xxxv. chapiter treateth of a dyete for them the whiche be asmatycke men, beynge shorte wynded or lackynge breath. ¶ The. xxxvi▪ Chapyter dothe shewe a dyete for them the whiche hath the palsy. ¶ The xxxvii. Chapyter doth shew an order and a dyete for them that be mad and out of they wytte.
¶ The. xxxviii. Chapiter treateth of a dytte for them the which haue any kynde of dropsy ¶ The. xxxix. Chapyter treateth of a general dyete for all maner of men or women beinge sycke or whole. ¶ The. xl. Chapiter dothe shewe an order or a fasshyon, howe a sycke man shall be ordered in his syckenes. And how a sycke man shulde be vsed that is lykely to dye. ☞ Here endeth the table. And here foloweth the Dye∣tary of health.
☞ The fyrste Chapyter dothe shewe where a man shulde cytuate for set his mancyon place or house for the health of hys bodye. WHat mā of honour or wor¦shyp, or other estate, the which dothe pretēde to buylde a house or any mansyon place to inha∣byte hym selfe. Or els doth pre¦tende to aulter hys house, or to aulter olde buyldynge in to cōmodyous and pleasaunt buyldynge, nat onely for his owne proper cōmodyte, welth, and health, but also for other men the which wyll resorte to him: hauynge also a respect to hys posteryte. ¶ Fyrste it is necessary and expedyent for him to take hede, what counsel god dyd gyue to Abraham, and after that to take hede what councell god dyd gyue to Moyses, and to the chyldren of Israel, as it appereth in the. xiii. chapyter of Exodi. & the. xx. chapyter of Nu∣meri, & the. vi. chapyter of Deutro. And also in the boke of Leuites, sayinge fyrst to Abra∣ham. Go thou forth of thy coūtre & from thy cognacion or kynred. And come thou into the countrey the which I wyll shewe to the, a countrey abundynge or plentyfull of mylke and hony. ¶ Here is to be noted that where there is plenty of mylke, there is is plenty of pa¦sture
and no skarsite of water, & where there is plentye of hony there is no skarsyte but plentyfulnes of woodes, for there be mo bees in woddes, and so consequently abundaunce of hony, than there be bees, or hony, or waxe in the hyues in gardyns or orchardes, wher∣fore it appereth that whosoeuer wyl buylde a mansyon place or a house, he must cytuate and set it there where he must be sure to haue both water and woode, except for pleasure he wyll buylde a house in or by some Cytye or greate towne the whiche be nat destytute of such cōmodytes. But he the which wyll dwel at pleasure, and for profyte. and helth of hys body he must dwell at elbowe rome hauynge water & woode anexed to his place or house, for yf he be destituted of any of the pryncipal les, that is to say fyrst of water for to wasshe and to wrynge, to bake and to hrewe, and dy∣uers other causes specyally for parrel yt whi∣che myght fall by fyre were a great discōmo∣dyous thynge. And better it were to lacke woode than to lacke water the premysses cō∣sydered, althoughe that woode is a necessa∣rye thynge, nat onely for fewell, but also for other vrgent causes, specyally concernynge buyldynge and reparacyons. ¶ The seconde Chapyter doth shewe a man howe he shulde buylde his house or mansyon, that the prospect be fayre and good for the coneruacyon of helth.
AFter that a man haue chosen a conue∣nyent soyle and place according to his mynde & purpose to buylde hys house or mansyon on, he must haue afore cast in his mynde that the prospect to and fro the place be pleasaūt, fayre, and good to the eye, to be∣holde the woodes, the waters, the feldes, the ales, the hylles, & the playne grounde. And that euery thyng be desent & sayre to the eye, nat onely within the precyncte of the place appoynted to buylde a mansyon or a house to se the cōmodites aboute it, but also it may be placable to the eyes of all men to se & to be∣holde whn they be a good dystaunce of from the place, that it do stande cōmodyously. For the commodyous buyldynge of a place dothe nat onely satysfye the mynde of the inhaby∣tour, but also it doth comforte and reioyseth a mannes herte to se it, specyally the pulcruse prospecte. For my cōsayte is suche that I had rather nat to buylde a mansyon or a house, than to buylde one without a good prospecte in it, to it, and from it. For and the eye be nat satysfye, the mynde can nat be contēted. And the mynde can nat be contented the herte can nat be pleased, yf the herte and mynde be nat pleased, nature dothe abhorre. And yf nature do abhorre, mortifycacyon of the vytal, and anymall, and spyrytual po∣wers do consequently folowe.
¶ The thyrde chapyter doth shewe a man to buylde his house in a pure and a fresshe ayre to lengthen his lyfe. THere is no thynge excepte poyson that doth put ryfye or doth corrupt ye bloude of man, and also doth mortyfye the spy∣rytes of man, as dothe a corrupte and a cōta∣gyous ayre. For Galyen terapentice nono sayth, whyther we wyll or wyll nat we must graunt vnto euery man ayre, for without the ayre no man can lyue. The ayre can nat be to clene and pure consyderynge it doth com∣passe vs rounde aboute, and we do receyue it in to vs, we cā nat be without it, for we lyue by it as the fysshe lyueth by the water. Good ayre therfore is to be praysed. For yf the ayre be fryske, pure, and clene about the mansyon or house it dothe conserue the lyfe of man, it doth comfort the brayne. And the powers na¦turall anymall and spyrytuall ingendrynge and makynge good bloude, in the which con∣systeth the lyfe of man. And contraryly euyll and corrupte ayres dothe infetc the blode, & doth ingendre many corrupte humours, and doth putryfye the brayne, and doth corrupte the herte, & therfore it doth brede many dyse ases & infyrmytes thorowe the whiche mans lyfe is abreuyated and shortned. Many thin∣ges doth infect, putryfye, and corrupteth the ayre, as the influente of sondrye sterres, and standynge waters, stynkynge mystes, & mar∣shes,
caryn lyinge longe aboue the grounde, moche people in a smal rome lying vnclenly, and beyng fylthy and sluttesshe, wherfore he that doth pretende to buylde his mansyon or house, he must prouyde that he do nat cytuat his house nyghe to any marshe or marysshe grounde, that there be nat nyghe to the place stynkynge and putryyed standynge waters, pooles, pondes, nor myres, but at lest wyse that suche waters do stande vpon a stony or a grauayle grounde myxt with claye, and that some fresshe sprynge haue a recourse to nury she and to refresshe the sayde standynge wa∣ters. Also there muste be circumspection had that there be nat about the house or mansyon no stynkynge dyches, gutters, nor canelles, nor corrupte dunghylles, nor synkes, except they be ofte and dyuers tymes mūdyfyed and made clene. Swepynge of houses and cham∣bers ought nat to be done as long as any ho∣nest man is within the precynct of the house for the dust doth puttrify the ayre making it dence. Also nygh to the place let nat her flaxe nor hempe be watered, & beware of the snoffe of candelles, and of the sauour of apples for these thynges be contagyous and infectyue. Also mysty and cloudy dayes, impetuous and vehement wynde, troublous and vaporous wether is nat good to laboure in it to open ye pores to let in infectious ayre, Furthermore beware of pyssynge in draughtes, and permit
no cōmon pyssynge place be aboute the house or mansyon, and let the cōmon house of ease∣ment be ouer some water, or els elongated from the house. And beware of emptynge of pysse pottes and pyssyng in chymnes. so that all euyl and conragyous ayres may be expel∣led, and clene ayre kept vnputrysyed. And of all thynges let the buttery, the eller, the kyt¦chen. the larder house, with all other houses of offices be kept clene, that there be no fylth in them, but good & odyferous souours, and to expell & expulse all corrupt & contagyous ayre, loke in the. xxvii. Chapyter of th{is} boke. ☞ The fourth Chapyter doth shewe vnder what maner and fasshyon a man shulde buylde his house or mansyon, in exchenynge thynges that shorteneth mans lyfe. WHan a man doth begyn to buylde his house or mansyon place he must puyde (sayth Jesus chryst) before that he begynne to buylde for all thyng{is} necessary for the performacion of it, lest that when he hathe made his foun∣dacyon, and can nat fynysshe his worke that he hathe begon, euery man wyll deryde hym sayinge. This man dyd begynne to buylde, but he can nat fynysshe or make an ende of hys purpose, for a man muste consyder the expence before he do begynne to buylde, for there gothe to buyldynge many a nayle,
many pynnes, many lathes, and many tyles or slat{is} or strawes, besyde other greater char¦ges, as tymber, bordes, lyme, sande, stones, or brycke, besyde the workmanshyp and the im∣plementes. But a man the whiche haue pur∣uyd or hath in store to accomplysshed his pur¦pose, and hath chosen a good soyle and place to cytuat his house or mansyon, and that the prospecte be good, and that the ayre be pure, fryske and clene. Then he that wyll buylde, let him make his foundacyon vpon a graualy grounde myxte with clay, or els let him buyl∣de vpon a roche of stone, or els vpon an hyll or a hylles syde. And ordre & edyfye the house so that the pryncypall and chiefe prospectes may be East and weest, specyally North east, South east, and Southweest, for the merydy all wyndes of all wyndes is the moste worst, for the South wynde doth corrupt and dothe make euyl vapours. The East wynde is tem∣perate, fryse, and fragraūt. The weest wyn∣de is mutable. The North wynde purgeth yl vapours, wherfore better it is of ye. ii. worst that the wyndowes do open playne North than playne South, althoughe that Jeremy sayth, from the North depēdeth all euyl. And also it is written in Cātica cantico{rum}. Ryse vp North wynde and come thou South wynde and parfyat my gardayne. Make the hall vn∣der such a fasshyon, that the parler be anexed to the heade of the hall. And the butterye and
pantry be at the lower ende of the hal, the sel ler vnder the pantry set somwhat abase, the kychen set somwhat a base from the buttry & pantry, cōmyng with an entry by the wall of the buttry, the pastry house & the larder hou∣se anexed to the kychen. Than deuyde the lod∣gynges by the cyrcuyte of the quadryuyall courte, and let the gate house be opposyt or agaynst the hall dore (nat dyrectly) but ye hal dore standynge a base, and the gate house in the mydle of the front entrynge into the pla∣ce, let the pryue chambre be ane red to ye cham¦bre of a state, with other chambers necessarie for the buyldynge, so that many of the cham∣bers may haue a prospecte into the Chapell. If there be an vtter court made, make it qua∣dryuyal with houses of easementes, and but one stable for horses of pleasure, & se no fylth nor donge be within the courte, nor cast at ye backe syde, but se the donge to be caryed farre from the mansyon. Also the stables and the slaughter house, a dery yf any be kepte shul∣de be elongated the space of a quarter of a myle from the place. And also the bake hou∣se and brewe house shulde be a distaunce from the place and from other buyldynge, whan al the mansyon is edyfyed and buylte, yf there be a woote made aboute it, there shulde some fresshe sprynge come to it, and dyuers tymes the moote ought to be sowered and kept cle¦ne from mudde and wedes. And in no wyse
let nat the fylth of the kychen descende in to the moote. Forthermore it is a cōmodyous and a pleasaunt thynge to a mansyon to haue an orcherd of soundry fruytes, but it is more cōmodiouse to haue a fayre gardayn repleted with herbes of aromatyck & redolēt sauours In the gardayne maye be a poole or two for fysshe yf the pooles be clene kept. Also a par∣ke repleted with dere & conyes is a necessary and a pleasaunt thynge to be anexed to a man syon. A doue house also is a necessary thynge aboute a mansyon place. And amonge other thynges a payre of buttes is a decent thynge aboute a mansyon, & other whyle for a greate man necessary it is for to passe his tyme with bowles in an aly, whan all this is fynysshed and the mansyon replenysshed with Imple∣mentes. There must be a fyre kept cōtynually for a space to drye vp the contagyous moy∣sters of the walles, & the sauour of the lyme and sande. And after that a man may lye and dwell in the sayd mansyon without takynge any inconuenyence of syckenes. ¶ The. v. Chapyter doth shewe howe a man shulde ordre his house concernynge the Imple∣mentes to comforte the spyrytes of man. WHen a mā hath buylt his mansyon, & hath his houses necessary aboute h{is} place, yf he haue nat houshode stuffe or implemēt{is} the which be nedeful, but must
borowe of his neyghbours, he than is put to a shefte & to a great after deale, for these men the which do brew in a botyl & bake in a wa∣let, it wyl belong or he can bye Jacke a salet yet euery thynge must haue a begynnynge, & euery man muste do after his possessyons or abylyte, this natwithstādinge better it is nat to set vp a householde or hospytalyte than to set vp householde lackyng the performacyon of it, as nowe to ron for malt, and by and by for salt, nowe to sende for breade, and by and by to sende for a shepes heade, and nowe to sende for this, & nowe to sende for that, and by & by be doth sende he can nat tel for what, such thing{is} is no prouysion, but it is a great abusyon. Thus a man shall lese hys thryfte, and be put to a shefe, hys goodes shall neuer increase, and he shall nat be in rest nor peace, but euer in carcke and care, for hys porse wyl euer be bare, wherfore I do counceyll euery man, to prouyde for hymselfe as soone as he can, for yf of implementes he be destytuted, men wyll call him lyght wytted, to set vp a great house, & he is nat able to kepe man nor mouse, wherfore let euery māloke or he lepe for many cornes maketh a greate hepe. ☞ The syxte Chapyter dothe shewe howe a man shulde ordre his house and householde, and to syue quyetly.
WHoso euer he be ye wyl kepe an house, he must ordre ye expenses of his house accordinge to the rent of his landes. And yf he haue no landes he muste ordre hys house after his lucre wynuynge or gaynes. For he yt wyl spēde more in his house, than yt rētes of his lādes, or his gaynes doth attayn to be shal fal to pouerte, & necessite wyll vrge cause & cōpel him to sel his lande, or to waste his stocke, as it is dayly sene by experyēce of many men, wherfore they be yt which wyl ex∣chewe such digalyte & incōuenience, musie deuide his rētes porcion & exspēces, wherby yt he doth lyue into. iii equal porciōs or {per}tes. ☞ The cyrst part must serue to prouyde for meare and drynke, & all other necessary thyn∣ges for the sustencyon of the householde. ¶ The seconde porcyon or parte must be re∣serued for apparell, nat onely for a mannes owne selfe, but for all his householde, & for his seruauntes wages, deductynge somwhat of this porcyon in almes dede to pore neygh bours and pore people, fulfyllynge the. vii. workes of mercy. ¶ The thyrde porcyon or parte muste be reserued for vrgent causes in tyme of nede, as in syckenesse. reparacyon of houses, with many other catydyall exspen∣ces, besyde rewardes & the charges of a mans last end. If a mā do exsyde this ordre he maye soone fall in det, the which is a daungerous thynge many wayes besyde the bryngynge a
to man trouble. And he that is ones behynde bande and in trouble, he can nat be in quyet∣nesse of mynde, the whiche doth perturbe the herte, & so consequently doth shorten a man∣nes lyfe, wherfore there is no wyse man but he wyll exchewe thys inconuenyence, & wyl cast before what shall folowe after. And in no wyse to sette vp a householde, before he hath made prouysyon to kepe a house. For yf a man shall bye euery thynge that belongeth to the keping of his house with his peny, it wyl be longe or he be ryche, and longe or that he can kepe a good house. But he is wyse in my conceyte that wyll haue or he do sette vp his householde. ii. or iii. yeres rent in hys coer. And yf he haue no landes than he must {pro}uyde for necessary thynges or that he begyn house holde, lest yt he repēt him selfe after, through the which he do fall into pencifulnes, & after that in to syckenes & dyseases, lyuynge nat quyetly, wherby he shall abreuyate hys lyfe. ☞ The. vii. Chapyter doth shewe howe the hed of a house, or a householder shulde exersyce hym selfe, for the health of the soule and body. AFter that a man hath prouyded al thin¦ges necessary for his house and for his householde, expedyent it is for hym to knowe, how he shuld exercyse him selfe bothe bodely and ghostly. For there is no catho∣lycke
or chrysten man lyuyng, but he is boūd in conseyence to be more circūspecter aboute the welth of his soule then the health of hys bodre. Our sauyour Jesus Chryste sayth, what shall it profyte vnto man yf he goat all the worlde and lese him selfe, and bryng him selfe to a detrimēt, wherfore it appereth that a man ought to be circumspecte for the helth and welth of his soule. For he is boūde so to lyue, that nyght and day and at all houres he shulde be redy and whan he is called for to de parte out of thys worlde, he shulde uat feare to dye, sayinge the wordes with saynte Am∣brose. I feare nat to dye, bycause we haue a good god, whā a man hathe prepared for hys soule, and hath subdued sensualyte, and that he hath brought him selfe in a trade, or a vsa¦ge of a ghostly or a catholyke lyuynge in ob seruynge the cōmaundementes of God, than he must study to rule and to gouerne thē the which be in his householde, or vnder hys cu¦stody or domynyon, to se yt they be nat ydle, for kynge Henry the eyght sayd whē he was yonge, ydlenes is chiefe maisters of vyces al. And also the heade of a house muste ouer se that they whiche be vnder hys tuyssyon ser∣ue god the holy dayes as dylygently, yee and more dylygentler than to do theyr worke the seryall dayes, refraynynge them frome vyce and synne, compellynge them to obserue the cōmaundementes of God, specyally to pu∣nysshe
swerers, for in all the worlde there is nat suche odyble swearynge as is vsed in En¦glange, specyally amonge youthe & chyldren, which is a detestable thing to here it, and no man dothe go aboute to punysshe it. Suche thynges reformed than maye a householder be glad nat cessynge to instruct them the whi¦che be ygnorant, but also he muste continue in shewynge good example of lyuynge, than may he reioyce in God and be mery, the whi¦che myrth & reioysyng doth lengthen a mans lyfe, and doth expell syckenes. ¶ The. viii. Chapit doth shewe howe a man shulde order him selfe in slepynge and in e∣rynge his apparell. WHan a man hathe exercysed hym¦selfe in the day tyme as is reher∣sed, he maye slepe soundely and surely in god what chaunce so∣euer do fortune in the night Moderate slepe is most praysed for it dothe make parfyte di∣gestyon, it doth nurysshe ye bloud, & doth qua∣lyfye ye heate of ye lyuer, it dothe acuate, quyc¦ken & refressheth ye memory, it dothe restore nature, & doth quyet al ye humours & pulses  man, & dothe anymate, & doth cōforte all ye na¦turall & anymall & spyrytual powers of man. And such moderate slepe is acceptable in the syght of God the premysses in the afore∣sayde Chapiter obserued and kept. And con∣traryly
immoderate slepe and slugglysshenes doth humecte and maketh lyght the brayne, it doth ingendre rewme & impostumes, it is euyl for the palsy whyther it be vnyuersal or partyculer, it is euyl for ye fallynge syckenes called Epilencia, Analencia, & Cathalencia, Appoplesia, Soda, with all other infyrmy∣tyes in the heade, for it induceth and causeth oblyuyousnes, for it doth obfuske and dothe obnebulate the memorye and the quyckenes of wyt. And shortly to conclude it dothe per∣turbe the naturall, and anymall, and spyry∣tuall powers of man. And specyally it dothe instigate and leade a man to synne, and doth induce and infer breuyte of lyfe, & detestably it displeaseth God. Our lorde Jesu Chryste dyd nat onely byd or cōmaūde his dyscyples to watche, but dyd anymat them and al other so to do saying. I saye nat onely to you wat∣che, but to all men I say watche. And to Pe∣ter he sayd, myghtest nat thou one houre wat¦che with me, althoughe these holy scryptu∣res with many other mo the which I myght allygated for me, be nat greatly referred to thys sence, yet it maye stande here with my purpose and mater without reprehensyon. These maters here nede nat to be rehersed, wherfore I do retourne to my purpose, and do say that the moderacyon of slepe shulde be mesured according to the natural cōplexcion of man, and in any wyse to haue a respecte to
the strength and the debylyte to age & youthe and to syckenes & helth of man. ¶ Fyrste as concerning the naturall cōplexcyon of man, as sanguyne and colorycke men. vii. houres is suffycyent for them. And nowe consyde∣ryng the imbecyllyte and wekenes of nature a flematycke man may slepe. ix. houres or mo¦re. Melancoly men may take theyr pleasure, for they be the receptacle & the dragges of al the other humoures. ¶ Secondaryly youth and age wolde haue temperaūce in slepynge. ¶ Thyrdly strength may suffre a brounte in watche, the which debilite and wekenes can¦nat. As I wyll shewe by a famylyer example. There were two mē set at the dyce togyther a day and a nyght & more, the weke man sayd to him I can playe no longer. The stronge man sayde to him fye on the benchewhystler wylt thou sterte away nowe. The weke man to satysfye the strounge mannes mynde, ap∣pyted & desyre, playeth wt his felow, throghe the which he doth kyll him selfe. The stron∣ge man doth him selfe lytle pleasure al thyn∣ges consydered, the whiche I do passe ouer. whefore I wyll retourne to the sycke man, whiche maye slepe at all tymes whan that he maye get it, but yf he maye slepe at any tyme, best it is for him to refrayn from slepe in the day, & to take his natural rest at nyght whan all thynges is or shulde be at rest and peace, but he must do as his infyrmyte wyll permyt
and suffre, whole men of what age or com∣plexyon soeuer they be of shuld take theyr na¦turall rest and slepe in the nyght, & to exchew merydyall slepe. But an nede shall compell a man to slepe after his meate, let hym make a pause, and than let him stand and leane and slepe agaynst a cupborde, or els let him sylte vp ryght in a chayre & slepe. Slepynge after a full stomacke doth ingendre dyuerse infyr∣myties, it doth hurt the spn, it relaxeth the synowes, it doth ingendre the dropsyes and the goute, and doth make man loke euyl co∣loured. Beware of Ueneryous actes before the fyrste slepe, and specially beware of suche thynges after dyner or after a full stomacke, for it dothe ingendre the crampe, the goute, and other displeasures. To bedwarde be you mery, or haue mery company aboute you, so that to bedwarde no anger nor heuynes, so∣rowe nor pencyfulnes do trouble or disquyet you. To edwaade and also in the mornynge vse to haue a fyre in your chāber to wast and consume the euyll vapours within the cham∣bre, for the breath of man maye putryfye the ayre within the chambre. I do aduertyse you nat to stande nor to syt by the fyre, but stande or syt a good waye of from the fyre takynge the flauour of it, for fyre doth aryfye & dothe drye vp a mānes blode, and doth make sterke the synewes & ioyntes of man. In the nyght let the wyndowes of your house, specially of
your chamber be closed, whan you be in your bed lye a lytel whyle on your left syde, & slepe on your ryght syde. And whan you do wake of your fyrste slepe make water yf you fele your bladder charged, and than slepe on the lefte syde, and loke as ofte as you do wake so ofte tourne your selfe in the bed from the one syde to the other. To slepe grouclynge vpon the stomacke and belly is nat good, onees the stomacke be slowe and tarde of digestion but better it is to lay your hande or your bed felowes hande ouer your stomacke, than to lye grouelynge. To slepe on ye backe vpryght is vtterly to be abhored, whē ye you do slepe let nat your necke nother your shoulders, no ther your handes nor fete, nor no other place of your body lye bare vndyscouered. Slepe nat with an empty stomacke, nor slepe nat af∣ter that you haue eaten meate one houre or two after. In your bed lye with your heade som what hygh, lest that ye meat whiche is in your stomacke thorow eructuacions or some other cause ascēde to ye oryfice of the stomacke let your nyght cap be of skarlet, & thys I do aduertyse you for to cause to be made a good thycke quylt of cotten, or els of pure flockes or of clene wooll, and let the couerynge of it be of whyte sustyan, and laye it on the fether bed that you do lye on, and in your bed lye nat to hote nor colde, but in a temporaunce. Olde auncyent doctours of Physycke sayth.
viii. houres of slepe in sōmer &. ix. houres of slepe in wynter is suffycyent for any man, but I do thynke that slepe ought to be taken as the complexcyon of man is, whan you do ryse in the mornynge, ryse with myrth and remembre god. Let your hosen be brusshed within and without, and flauour the insyde of them agaynst the fyre, vse lynen sockes or lynnen hosen next your legges, whan you be out of your bedde stretche forth your legges and armes and your bobye, coughe and spyte and than go to your stole to make your ege∣styon, and exoncrate your selfe at all tymes that nature wolde expell. For yf you do make any restryction in kepynge your egestion or your vryne or ventosyte, it maye put you to dyspleasure in bredynge diuers infyrmyties, After you haue cuacuated your body, & trus∣sed your poyntes, kayme your head ofte, and so do dyuers tymes in the daye. And wasshe your handes and wrestes, your face and eyes and your tethe with colde water, & after that you be apparelled walke in your gardayne or parke a thousande pace or two, & than great and noble men doth vse to here masse, & other men than can nat do so but must applye theyr busynes, doth serue God with some prayers surrendrynge thankes to hym for hys many folde goodnes, with askynge mercy for theyr offences, & before you go to your refeccyon moderately exercyse your body with some la
meate than accordeth with nature is named replection, or a surfete. Replection or a surfet is takē as wel by gurgytacyons or to moche drynkyng, as it is takē by epulacyon of eatig of crude meate, or eatynge more meate than doth suffyce or can be truely dygested. Or els replection or a surfyt is whā the stomacke is farced or stuft, or repleted wt to moche drynke & meate, yt the lyuer which is the fyre vnder the potte is subpressed yt he cā nat naturally nor truely decoct, defye, ne dygest the super∣abundance of meate & drynke the which is in the pot or stomacke, wherfore dyuers tymes these impedymentes doth folow, the tongue is depryued of his offyce to speke, the wytes or sensys be dull & obnebulated from reason. Slouth & slugy shene consequētly foloweth, the appetyde is withdrawen. The heade is lyght & doth ake, & ful of fantasyes, & dyuers tymes some be so sopyled, yt the malt worme playeth the deuyll so fast in the heade, that al the worlde rōneth rounde aboute on wheles then both the pryncipall membres & the offy∣cyal membres dothe fayle of theyr strength, yet the pulsys be full of agylyte. Such reple∣cyon specyally suche gurgytacyons doth in∣gender dyuers infyrmytes thorowe the whi∣che breuite and shortnes of lyfe dothe folowe For the wyse man sayth, that sufetes do kyll many men, and temporaunce dothe prolonge
the lyfe. And also it is wrytten Eccle. xxxvii. That there dothe dye many mo by surfette, than there doth by the sworde, for as I sayd, surfetynge ingendereth many infyrmites, as the Idropses, the gowtes, lepored, sausfleme & pymples in the face, behemēt impressyons, vndy gest humours, opylacyons, feuers, and putryfacyons. And also it dothe perturbate the heade, the eyes, the tongue, and the sto∣macke, with many other infirmyties. For as Galen sayth, ouer moche replecyon or surfe∣tinge, causeth strangulacyon & soden death, for as I sayde the stomacke is so inferced, and the lyuer is so sore oppressed that natu∣ral heate and the poores be extyncted, wher∣fore abstynence for this mater is the moste best and the parfytest medysone that can be. And in no wyse eate no meate vnto the tyme the stomacke be euacuated of all yll humours by vomed or other conuenient wayes, for els crude and rawe humours vndygested wyll multiply in the body to the detrymēt of man. Two meales a daye is suffycyent for a reste man, and a labourer maye eate thre tymes a day, & he that doth eate after lyueth a beestly lyfe. And he that doth eate more than ones in a day, I aduertyse hym that the fyrste refec∣cyon or meale be dygested or that he do cate the seconde refeccyon or meale. For there is nothynge more hurtfull for mans body than to eate meate vpon meate vndygested. For
the last refeccyon or meale whyll let the dyge∣styon of the fyrste refeccy on or meale. Also sondre meates of dyuers operacyons eaten at one refeccion or meale is nat laudable, nor it is nat good to syt longe at dyner and sup∣per. An houre is suffycyent to syt at dyner, and nat so longe at supper. Englande hathe an euyll vse in syttynge longe at dyner and at supper. And Englysshe men hath an euyl vse, for at the begynnynge at dyner & supper they wyll fede on grose meates. And ye beste meate which be holsome and nutrytyue and lyght of digestion is kept for seruauntes, for whan the good meate doth come to the table thorowe fedynge vpon grose meate, the appe tyde is extynct, but mānes mynde is so auy∣dous althoughe he haue eate ynoughe whan he seth better meate come before hym agaīst his appetyde he wyll eate, whervpon dothe come repleccyon and surfetes. ¶ The. x Chapyter treateth of all maner of drynke, as of water, of wyne, of ale, of bere of cyder, of meade, of metheglyn and of whaye. WAter is one of the foure Elemen tes, of the which dyuers licours or drynkes for mānes sustynaū∣ce be made of, takyng theyr ory∣gynall and sustaunce of it, as ale, bere, meade, and metheglyn, water is nat holsome
sole by it selfe for an Englysshe man, consyde rynge the contrarye vsage, whiche is natrō∣curraunt with nature, water is colde, slowe, and slake of digestyon. The beste water is rayne water so be it that it be clene and pure¦ly taken Next to it is rōnynge water, ye whi¦che doth swyftly rōne from the Eest into the west vpon stones or pybles. The thyrde wa¦ter to be praysed is ryuer or broke water, the which is clere rōnynge on pybles & grauayl Standynge waters the whiche be refresshed with a fresshe spryng is cōmendable, but stan¦dyng waters, and well waters, to the which the sōne hath no reflexciō, although they be lyghter thē other rōnyng waters be, yet they be nat so cōmendable. And let euery man be ware of all waters the whiche be standynge, and be purryfyed with froth, duckemeat, and mod, for yf they bake, or brewe, or dresse meate with it, it shall ingendre many infyr∣mytes. The water ye which euery man ought to dresse his meate with all, or shal vse bakyn¦ge, or bruyng, let it be rōnynge, and put it in vessels yt it may stande there. ii. or. iii. houres or it be occupyed, than strayne the vpper part thoroughe a thycke lynnen clothe, and caste the inferyall parte awaye. If any man do vse to drynke water with wyne, let it be purely strayned, & than seth it and after it be cold let hī put it to his wyne, but better it is to drīke with wyne stylled waters, specyally ye water
of strawberes or the water of buglos or the water of endyue, or the water of cycory, or ye water of southystel, & dandelyon. And yf any man be cōbred with the stone or doth burne in the pudybunde places, vse to drynke with whyte wyne the water of hawes, & the water of mylke, voke for thys mater in a boke of my makynge named the breuyary of health. ☞ Of wyne. ¶ All maner of wynes be made of grapes, excepte respyse the whiche is made of a bery. Those your wyne after thys sorte, it must be fyne, fayre & clere to the eye, it muste be fra∣graunte and redolent hauynge a good odour and flauour in the nose, it muste spryncle in the cup whan it is drawne or put out of the pot in to the cup, it must be colde & pleasaunt in the mouth, and it must be stronge and sub∣tyll of substaunce. And than moderatly dron∣ken it doth acuate and doth quycken a mans wyttes, it doth cōfort the hert, it doth scowre ye lyuer, specyally if it be whyte wine it doth reioyce al the powers of man, and dothe nu∣ry she them, it dothe ingendre good bloude, it doth comforte and doth nurysshe the brayne and all the body, and it resolueth fleume, it ingendreth heate, and it is good agaynst he∣uynes and pencyfulnes, it is full of agylyte, wherfore it is medsonable, specyally whyte wyne, for it doth mundyfye and clense woū∣des & sores. Forthermore the better the wine
is, the better humours it doth ingēdre, wyne must nat be to newe nor to olde, but hyghe wynes as malmyse maye be kepte longe. And bycause wyne is full of fumosyte, it is good therfore to alay it with water, wynes hyghe and hote of operacyon doth cōfort olde men and women, but there is no wyne good for chyldren and maydes, for in hyghe Almayne there is no mayde shall drynke no wyne, but styl she shal drynke water vnto she be maried the vsual drynke there & in other hyghe coū∣tres for youth is fountayne wattr, for in eue¦ry towne is a fountayne or a shalowe wel, to the which all people that be yong & seruaūt{is} hath a confluence and a recourse to drynke. Meane wynes as wynes of Gascony, Fren∣che wynes, & specyally raynysshe wyne that is fyned is good with meate, specyally claret wyne. It is nat good to drynke nother wyne nor ale before a man dothe eate somwhat al∣thoughe there be olde fantastycall saying{is} to the cōtrary. Also these hote wynes as malme sye, wyne course, wyne greke, romanysk, rō∣ny, secke, alygaūt, basterde, tyre, osay, musca∣del, caprycke, tynt, roberdany, with other hote wynes be nat good to drynke wt meate, but after meate, & with oysters, with saledes, with fruyt a draught or two may be suffered Olde mē may drynke as I sayd hyghe wynes at theyr pleasure. Forthermore al swete wy∣nes & grose wynes doth make a man fatte.
¶ Of ale ☞ Ale is made of malte and water, and they the which do put any other thynge to ale thē is rehersed, except yest, barme, or godesgood, doth sophistycat theyr ale. Ale for an englysh man is a natural drynke. Ale must haue these propertyes, it must be fresshe & clere, it muste nat be ropy nor smoky, nor it muste haue no weft nor tayle. Ale shuld nat be dronke vnder v. dayes olde. Newe ale is vnholsome for all men. And sowre ale and deade ae the whiche doth stande a tylt is good for no man. Barly malte maketh better ale thē oten malt or any other corne doth, it dothe ingendre grose hu∣mours, but yet it maketh a man stronge. ❧ Of bere. ¶ Bere is made of malte, of hoppes, and wa∣ter, it is a naturall drynke for a dutche man. And nowe of late dayes it is moche vsed in Englande to the detrimēt of many englysshe mē, specially it kylleth thē the which be trou¦bled with the colyke & the stone & the strāgu∣lyon, for the drynke is a colde drynke: yet it doth make a man fat, & doth inflate the bely, as it doth appere by the dutche mens faces & belyes. If the bere be wel brude and fyned, it dothe qualyfye the heate of the iyuer. ☞ Of cyder. ¶ Cyder is made of the iuce of peeres, or of the iuce of aples, & other whyle cider is made of both, but the best cyder is made of cleane
peeres the which be dulcet, but ye best is nat praysed in physyke, for cyder is colde of ope∣racyon, and is full of bentosyte, wherfore it doth ingendre euyll humours, and doth swa∣ge to moche the naturall heate of man, & doth let dygestyon, and dothe hurte the stomacke, but they the which be vsed to it, yf it be dron¦ken in haruyst it dothe lytell harme. ❧ Of meade. ¶ Meade is made of hony and water boyled both togyther, yf it be fyned and pure it pre∣serueth helth, but it is nat good for them the whiche haue the Ilyacke or the colycke. ☞ Of metheglyn. ¶ Metheglyn is made of hony & water, and herbes boyled and sodden togyther, yf it be fyned and stale, it is better in the regymente of health than meade. ¶ Of whay. ☞ Whay yf it be wel ordered, specyally the whay the which doth come of butter, is a tē∣porate drynke and is moyst, and it dothe nu∣rysshe, it doth clense the brest, & dothe purge redde colour, and good for sausfleme faces. ❧ Of poset ale. ¶ Poset ale is made with hote mylke & colde ale, it is a temporate drynke, and is good for a hote lyuer, and for hote feuers, specyally, if colde herbes be soden in it. ❧ Of coyte. ¶ Coyte is a drynke made of water, in the
which is layde a sowre & a salte leuyn. iii. or iiii. houres, thē it is dronke it is a vsual dryn¦ke in Pycardy, in Flaunders, in Holande, in Brabrant, & in Selande, hit dothe but quench the thyrste. ¶ To speake of aptysan, or of oxymell, or of aqua vite, or of Ipocras, I do passe ouer at this tyme, for I do make mensyon of it in the Breuyary of health. ¶ The. xi. Chapyter treateth of breade. AUycen sayth, that bread made of whe∣te maketh a man fatte, specyally when the breade is made of newe whete and it doth set a mā in tēporaūce. Breade made of fyne flowre without leuyn is slowe of dyge∣styon, but it doth nurysshe moch if it be true¦ly ordered & well baken, whan the breade is leuyned it is sone digested as some olde Au∣ctours saythe, but these dayes is proued the cōtrary by the stomacke of men, for leuyn is heuy & ponderous Breade hauyng to moche brande in it is nat laudable. In rome & other hyghe countres theyr loues of breade be lytel bygger then a walnot, and many lytell loues be ioyned togyther, the which doth serue for great men, and it is safferonde, I prayse it nat. I do loue manchet breade, and great lo∣ues the which be wel moulded and thorowe baken, the brande abstracted & abiected, and
that is good for all ages, Mestlynge bread is made halfe of whete and halfe of Rye. And there is also mestlynge made halfe of rye and halfe of berly. And yll people wyll put whete and barly togyther, breade made of these a∣foresayd grayne or cornes, thus {pro}ched togy∣ther may fyll the gutte, but it shall neuer do good to man, no more than horse breade or breade made of beanes and peason shall do, how be it this mater doth go moche by ye edu¦cacyon or the brynginge vp of the people, the which haue ben nurysshed or nutryfyde with suche breade. I do speake nowe in barlyes or māltes parte to be eatene and also dronken, I suppose it is to moche for one grayne, for barly doth ingendre colde humours, and pea¦son and beanes, and the sustaunce cōmynge from them repleteth a man with ventosyte, but and yf a man haue a lust or a sensuall ap∣petyd to eate and drynke of a grayne bysyde malte or barlye, let him eate and drynke of it the whiche maye be made of otes. For haue cakes in Scotlande is many a good lorde and lordes dysshe. And yf it wyll make good ha∣uer cakes consequently it wyll make good drynke or euyl, euery thyng as it is handled. For it is a cōmon prouerbe, God may sende a man good meate, but the deuyl maye sende euyl cokes to dystrue it. But wyues & may∣des & other bruers, the whiche dothe dystrue malte the whiche shulde make good ale. And
the which that doth nat tyll theyr pote  euyn false measure I woulde they were  theyr, pootes and tacardes at dy∣myngedale. Ayll bakers the whyche reade of whete but wyl ith where, or do nat or yunge good weyght I  they  bo pepe thorowe a  for de doth cōfort, cōfyrme, ōnes her▪ besyde the pro¦perty  vnholsome any mā, or it doth lye in y• stomacke lyke a sponge haustyng vndecoct humours, yet ye smel of newe breade is cōfortahle to ye heade and to the hert. ¶ Soden breade as symnels and crackenels, & breade baken vpō a stone, or yon yron, and breade that saffron is in, is  laudable. Burnt breade and harde crust{is},  crustes, dothe ingendre color aduste, and melncoly humours, wherfore chyp the  crust of your breade. And who so dothe  y• seconde crust after meate, it ma∣e. And so dothe wheten breade  o orande. ¶ Breade y• whi∣ & praysed in physyke shulde . Fyrste it must be newe, , nor it is nat good .  or.  dayes olde, except y•  it muste nat be muldy nor melt ylded, it must be tho∣ must be lyght & nat heuye, and
it muste be temperatly salted. Olde breade or stale bread doth dry vp the vlode, or natural moyster of man, and it dothe ingender euyll humours, and is euyll and tarde of digestion wherfore there is no surfytte so euyll as the surfytte of eatynge of euyll breade. ¶ The▪ xii. Chapyter treateth of potage, of fewe of stewpottes, of grewell, of formentye, of pease potage, of lmon mylke, of ryse votage, of caudels, of culleses, and of other brothes. AL maner of lyquyd thynges as potage sewe, & all other brothes dothe replete a man that eateth them with bētosyte. Potage is nat so much vsed in al christendom as it is vsed in Englande. Potage is made of the liqnor in the which flesshe is soden in, wt puttynge to chopped herbes, & otmell & salte The herbes with the whiche potage is made withall, yf they be pure, good, and clene, nat wanne eaten, nor infected with the corrupte ayer descendynge vpon them, dothe comforte many men, the bentosyte natwithstandynge. But for as much as diuers tymes, many par∣tes of Englaude is infected with the pesty∣lence, thorowe the corrupcion of the ayer the which doth infect y• herbes. In suche tymes it is nat good to make any potage, nor to te no potage. In certain places beyond see where as I haue traueyled in, in y• pestilence
tyme a general cōmaūdemēt hathe ben sēt frō the superyoryte to the cōmonalte, yt no man shuld eate herbes in suche infectuous tymes. ❧ Of sewe and stewpottes. ¶ Sewe & stewpottes, & grewell made with otmel, in the whiche no herbes be put in, can do lytel displeasure, except yt it dothe replete a man with ventosyte, but it relaxeth ye belly ❧ Of fyrmente. ¶ Fyrmente is made of whete and mylke, it is harde of dygestyon, but whan it is dyge∣st dit dothe purysshe, and it doth strength a man but flesshe soded in mylke is nat com∣mendable. ☞ Of pease potage & beane potage. ¶ Pease potage and beane potage dothe re∣plete a man with ventosyte. Pease potage is better then beane potage, for it is soner dy∣gested, & lesser of ventosyte, they both be ab∣stercyue and do clense the body. They be cō∣pytent of nutriment, but beane potage dothe increase grosse humours. ☞ Of almon mylke & of ryce potage. ¶ Almon mylke and ryce potage, Almons be hote and moyste, it dothe comfort the brest and it doth mollyfye the bely, and prouoketh ryne. Ryce potage made with almon mylke doth restore and dothe comforte nature. ❧ Of ale brues, caudelles, & colesses. ¶ Ale brues, caudelles, and coesses for weke men and feble stomackes, the whiche can nat
eate solydate meate is suffered. But caudels made with hempe sede, and collesses made of shrympes doth comforte blode and nature. ☞ Of hony soppes & other brothes. ¶ Hony soppes & other brothes of what kyn¦de or substaunce so euer they be made of, they doth ingendre ventosyte, wherfore they be nat good nor holsome for the colyke nor the Illycke, nor other inflatyue impedymentes or syckenesses, specyally if hony be in it, the sayinges of Plyne, Balen, Auycene, with other Aucthours natwithstandynge, for in these dayes experyence teacheth vs contrary to theyr saynges & wrytyng{is}, for althoughe the nature of man be nat altered, yet it is we∣ker, and nothynge so stronge nowe as when they lyued, & dyd practes & makyng ye okes. ¶ The. xiii. Chapyt treateth of whyte meat o of egges, butter, chese, mylke, and crayme. &c. IN euglande there is no egges vsed to be eaten but henne egges: wherfore I wyll firste write and pertract of henne egges The yolkes of hen egges be cordialles, for it is temporatly hote. The white of an egge is viscus & colde & slacke of digestion, and doth nat ingēder good blode, wherfore whosoeuer that wyl eate an egge, let the egge be newe & roste him reare & eate him, or els potche him for potched egges be best at night, land new
rere rosted egges be good in the mornynge so be it they be tired with a litle salt & suger thā they be nutritiue, In Turkey and other bhe christian landes auexed to it, they vse to seth two or thre bushels of egges togither harde, and pull of the shels, & souse them, and kepe thē to eate at all tymes, but barde egges be slowe and slacke of digestion, and dothe nutryfy the body grosly. Rosted egges be better than sodden, fryed egges be nought, Ducke egges & gose egges I do nat prayse, but esaunt egges and partryche egges Phy∣sycke singulerly doth praise. ¶ Of butter ¶ Butter made of crayme is moiste of ope∣racion, it is good to eate in the mornynge before other meates, Frenche men wyll eate it after meate. Bu eaten with other meat{is} it doth nat onely noryshe, but it is good for the breste and lunges, and also it doth relaxe and doth mollifie the bely, dutche men dothe eate it at all tymes in the day, yt which I did nat praise when I did dwell amonge thē, cō∣siderynge that butter is vnctious, an euery thynge that is vnctious is noysome to the stomacke for as much as it maketh lubrifac∣cion. And also euery thynge that is vnctious that is to say butteryshe, oyle, grease, or fat∣dothe swymme aboue in the brynkes of the stomake, as the fatnes dothe swymme abo∣e in a boylynge potte, the excesse of suche
naucacion or superfyce wyll ascende to the orifice of the stomake, & doth make eructua∣sions, wherfore eatynge of muche butter at one refection is nat cōmendable, nor it is nat good for them the whiche be in any ague or feuer, for the ventuosyte of it dothe auge and augment the heate of the lyuer, a lytell porci∣on is good for eueey man in the mornynge yf it be newe made. ☞ Of chese. Chese is made of mylke, there be foure sortes of chese: whiche be to say, grene chese, softe chese, harde chese, and spermyse, Chese is made of mylke, there be foure sortes of chese: whiche be to say, grene chese, softe chese, harde chese, and spermyse, Grene chese is nat called grene by the reason of the colour, but for the newnes of it for the whey is nat halfe pressed out of it, and in operacy∣on it is colde and moyste. Softe chese nat to newe nor to old is best, for in operacyou it is hote and moyst. Harde chese is hote and drye and euyll to dygest. Spermyse is a chese the whiche is made with curdes & with the iuce of herbes, to tell the nature of it I can nat, consyderynge that euery mylke wyfe maye put many iuces of herbes of sondry operacy∣on & vertue, one nat a greynge with another But and yf they dyd knowe what they dyd gomble to gyther without trewe compoun∣dynge, and I knowynge the herbes, than I coulde tell the operacyon of spermyse chese, yet besyde these. iiii natures of chese, there is a chese called a rewene chese, the whiche yf it
be well ordered doth passe all other cheses no ne excesse taken. But take the best chese of all these rehersed, if a lytel do good and pleasure The ouerplus doth ingendre grose humours for it is harde of dygestyon, it maketh a man constyfe and it is nat good for the stone. Che∣se that is good ought nat to be harde nor to softe, but betwyxt both, it shuld nat be tough nor brutel, it ought nat to be swete nor sow∣re, nor tart, nor to salt, nor to fresshe, it muste be of good sauoure & taledge, nat full of eyes nor mytes, nor magottes, yet in hyghalmen the chese the which is full of magottes is cal¦led there the best chese, and they wyll eate ye great magot{is} as fast as we do eate comfetes. ☞ Of mylke. ¶ Mylke of a woman, & the mylke of a gote is a good restoratyue, wherfore these mylkes be good for them that be in a consumpcyone, and for the great temperaunce the whiche is in them it dothe nurysshe muche. ¶ Cowes mylke and ewes mylke, so it be yt the beestes be yonge & do go in good pasture the mylke is nutrytyue & doth humect, & moy¦steth the members, & doth mundyfye & clense the entrayles, and dothe alleuyat & mytygate the ne of the lunges & the breste but it is nat good for thē the which haue gurgulacy∣ons in the bely, nor it is nat all the beste for sāguyne mē, but it is very good for melācoly
men, & for olde men & chyldren specyally yf it be sodden, addynge to it a lytell suger. ¶ Of Crayme. ❧ Crayme the whiche doth nat stande lon∣ge on the mylke & sodden with a lytell suger is nurysshynge. Clouted crayme and rawe crayme put to gyther, is eaten more for a sen∣suall apetyde, than for any good nurysshe∣mente. Rawe crayme vndecoted eaten with strauberyes, or hurtes is a rurall mans ban∣ket. I haue knowen such bankettes hath put men in ieoperdy of theyr lyues. ☞ Almon butter. ¶ Almon butter made with fyne suger and good rose water, and eaten with the flowers of many vyolettes, is a commendable dysshe, specyally in lent whan the vyolet{is} de fragrāt it reioyseth the herte: it doth comfort ye bray¦ne: and dothe qualyfye the heate of the lyuer. ☞ Beene butter. ¶ Beene butter, is vsed moche in lent in dy∣uers countres, it is good for plowmen to fyl¦the panche, it doth ingendre grose humours it doth replete a man with ventosyte. ¶ The. xiiii. Chapyt, treateth of fysshe. OF all nacions & countres, Engle is best serued of Fysshe, nat onely of al ma¦ner of see fysshe, but also of fresshe water fys∣she, & of all maner of sortes of salte fysshe.
☞ Of See fysshe. ❧ Fysshes of the see the which haue skales or many fynnes, be more holsome than ye fres¦she water fysshe, the whiche be in standynge waters. The elder a fysshe is so muche he is the better so be it that the fysshe be softe and nat solydat, yf the fysshe be faste and solydat the yonger the fysshe is, the better it is to dy¦geste: but this is to vnderstande that yf the fysshe be neuer so solydat it muste haue age, but nat ouer growen: excepte it be a yong por¦passe the which kynde of fysshe is no ther pray¦sed in the olde testament nor in physyke. ☞ Fresshe water fysshe. ¶ The fysshe the whiche is in ryuers & bro∣kes be more holsomer, than they the whiche be in pooles, pondes, or mootes, or any other standynge water, for they doth labour & doth skower them selfe Fysshe the which lyueth & doth fede on the moude, or els doth fede in ye fen or morysshe groūde dothe sauer of ye mou∣de whiche is nat so good as the fysshe that fe¦dyth and doth skowre thē selfe on the stones or grauell or sande. ❧Of Salte fysshe. ¶ Salte fysshe the whiche be poudered and salted with salte, be nat greatly to be praysed specyally if a man do make his hole refeccion with it the qualyte dothe nat hurte, but the quantyte, specyally such salte fysshes as wyll cleue to the fyngers whan a man doth eate it
And the skynne of fysshes be vtterly to be ab∣horred, for it dothe ingendre viscus fleume & color adust. All maner of fysshe is colde of na∣ture, and doth ingender fleume, it doth lytle nurysshe, fysshe and flesshe oughte nat to be eaten togyther at one meale. ¶ The. xv. Chapyter, treateth of wylde fowle, And tame foule byrdes. OF all wylde foule, the Fesaunte it moste beste, Althoughe that a Partreche of all foules is sonest dygested. Wherfore it is a re¦storatyue meate, & doth cōfort the brayne and the stomacke: & doth augment carnall lyste. A wood cocke is a meate of good temperaunce. Quayles & plouers & lapwynges doth nurys¦she but lytel, for they dothe ingēdre melācoly humours, yonge turtyl doues doth ingendre good blode. A crane is harde of dygestyon, & doth ingēder euyl blode. A yong herensew is lyghter of dygestyon than a crane. A bustarde wel kylled & ordered is a nutrytyue meate A byttoure is nat so harde of dygestyon as is an hernesew. A shoueler is lyghter of dyge∣styon than a byttoure, all these be noyfull ex∣cept they be wel ordered & dressed A fesannte henne. A more cocke & a more henne excepte they sute abrode they be nutrytyue. Al maner of wylde foule the whiche lyueth by the wa∣ter they be of dyscōmendable nurysshemente. ¶ Of tame or domestycall foule.
¶ Of all ame oule a Capon is moste beste. For it is nutrytyue and is soone dygested. A enne in wynter is good and nutrytue. And so is a chyken in somer, specyallye coc∣krelles and polettes, the which e vntroden. The flesshe of a cocke is harde o dygestyon: but the broth or gely made of a coke is resto¦ratyue, pygyons be good for coloryke & me∣lancoly men, ose flesshe and ducke flesshe is nat praysed excepte it be a yong gren goose yōge pechyken of halfe a yere of age be pray∣sed, olde pecockes be harde of dygestyon. ❧ Of byrdes. ¶ All maner of smale Byrdes, e good and lyght of dygestyon, excepte sparowes which be harde of dygestyon. Tytmoses, colmoses and wrens, the whiche doth cate spyders and poyson be nat cōmēdable, of all smale byrdes the larke is best, then praysed y• blacke byr∣de & the thursshe. Rasis and Isaac prayse the yonge staares, but I do thynke bycause they be bytter in etyng, they shuld ingēdre colour ¶ The. xvi. Chapyter, treateth of flesshe, of wylde and tame beestes. BEefe is good meate for & Englyssh man so be it the beest be yonge, & that it be nat cowe flesshe. For olde befe & cowe flesshe dothe ingēdre melancoly and leprouse bumours: yf it be moderatly poudered that the groose bloude by salte may be exaustyd, it
doth make an Englysshe man strōge the edu∣cacyon of him with it cōsydered, Martylmas befe whiche is called anged befe in the ofe of the smoky house is nat laudable, it maye fyll the bely and cause a man to drynke, but it is euyll for the stone, & euyl of dygestyon & maketh no good iuce. If a man haue a peace hangynge by his syde & another in his bely, that the whiche dothe hange by the syde shal do him more good yf a showre of rayne do chaunse than that the whiche is in his bely, the appetyde of mās sensualyte natwtstandig. ☞ Of Ueale. ¶ Ueale is nutrytyue meate: and dothe nu∣rysshe moche a man, for it is soone dygestyd wherupon many men doth holde oppinyon that it is the best flesshe and the moste nutry∣tyue meate that can be for mans ustenaunce. ❧ Of mutton and lambe. ¶ Mutton of Rasis and Aueroyes, is pray∣sed for a good meate, but Balen dothe nat laude it, and surely I do nat loue it consy∣derynge that there it no beest that is so sone infected: nor there doth happen so great mur ren and seckenes to any quadrped beest as doth fall to the shepe. This natwithstanding yf the shepe be brought vp in a good pasture and fatte and do nat flauoure of the wolle it is good for sycke persons, for it doth ingēder good bloude. ¶ Lambes flesshe is moyste and flumatyke
wherfore it is nat all the best for olde men ex¦cept they be melancolye of cōplexyon nor bit is nat good for flumatyke men to fede to mo∣che of it, for the flesshe is waterysshe. ¶ Of porke, brawne, bacon, & pygge. ❧ Where as Balen wih other auncient & approbat doctours doth prayse porke I dare nat say the contrarye agaynst them, but thys I am sure of, I dyd neuer loue it. And in ho∣ly scrypture it is nat praysed, for a swyne is an vnclene beast and do the lye vpon fylthy & stynkynge soyles, and with sterorus matter dyuers tymes dothe ede in Englande, yet in Hygalmen and other hygh countres except (spayne & other countres anexed to spayne) doth kepe theyr swyne clene, and dothe cause them ones or twyse a day to swyme in great ryuers, lyke the water of Ryne, which is abo¦ue Coleyne, but Spaynerdes wyth the other regions anexed to thē, kepe the swyne more fylthyer than englysshe persōs doth. Further more the Jeue, the Sarason, the Turkes, cō∣cernynge theyr poyltycke wyt and lernynge in physycke, hath as much wyt, wysdom, rea¦son, & knowlege for the sauyte of theyr bo∣dy, as any chrysten man hathe. And many ex∣perte physycyons, I haue knowen amon∣ges thē: yet they al lacked grace, for as moche as they do nat know or knowlege iesu chryst as the holy scrypture telleth vs & thē. They loueth nat porke nor swines flesshe, but doth
ytuperat and aorr it, yet for al this they wyll eate adders, whiche is a kynde of, ser∣pentes, as well as any other crysten mādwel lynge in Rome, and other hyghe coūtres, for adders flesshe there is called fysshe of the mountayne. Thys natwithstandyng physbke dothe approbut adders flesshe good to be ea∣ten, saynge it dothe make an alde man yonge, as it apperethe by an herte eatynge an adder maketh him yonge agayne. But porke dothe nat so, or yf it be of an olde hogge nat clene kepte it dothe ingendre grose blode, & dothe ume to muche the stomake, yet yf the por∣ke be yonge it is nutrytyue. ¶ Bakon is good for carters and plowmen, the whiche be euer laborynge in the earth or dung, ebut and yf they haue the stone and vse to eate it they shal synge wo be the pye, wher fore I do saye that coloppes and egges, is as holsome for them: as a talowe cādell is good for a horse mouth, or a peece of poudred befe is good for a blereyed mare, yet sensuall ap∣petyde must haue a swynge, all these thynges ntwitwstandynge. ¶ Of brawne. ❧ Brawne is an vsual meate in wynter a∣monges Englysshe men, it is harde of dyge∣styon the brawne of a wylde bore, is muche more better than the drawne of a tame bore, yf a man eate nother of them bothe it shall neuer do hym harme.
❧ Of Pygges. ¶ Pygges specyally sowe pygges is nutry∣tyue and made in a gelye, it is restoratyue so∣be it the pygge be fleed the skyn takē of, and than stewed with restoratyues, as a cocke is stewad to make a gely. A yonge fatte pygge in physycke is syngulerly praised if it be wel ordered in the rostynge, the skyn nat eaten. ☞ Of kydde. ¶ Yonge Kyddes flesshe is praysed aboue all other flesshe, as Auycen, Rasis & Aueroyes sayth, for it is temporate and nutrityue al∣though it be somwhat drye. Oloe kydde is nat praysed. ☞ Of wylde beestes flesshe. ¶ I haue gone rounde aboute crystendome and ouertwharte crystendome, & a thousande or two and more myles out of crystendome, yet there is nat so muche pleasure for harte & hynde, bucke, and doo: and for oo bucke and doo, as is in Englande, & although the flesshe be dispraysed in physycke, I pray god to sen∣de me part of the flesshe to eate physycke nat withstandynge. The opynyon of all oldephy sycyons was and is that venyson is nat good to eate pryncipally for two causes, the fyrste cause is that the beest doth lyue in fere: for it he be a good wood man, he shall neuer se no kynde of deere, but at the. x. byt on the grasse, or brosynge on the tree, but he wyll lyfte vp his hed & loke aboute him, the which cōmeth
of tymorysnes and tymorosyte dothe brynge in melancoly humours, wherfore all Physy∣cyons sayth that venison which is the secon de cause doth ingendre coloryke humours & of trueth it doth so: wherfore let them take y• skyn and let me haue the flesshe, I am sure it is a lordes dysshe, and I am sure it is good for an Englysheman, for it dothe anymate him to be as he is: whiche is stronge and har∣dy, but I do aduertyse euery man for all my wordes nat to kyll and so to eate of it, except it be lefull. for it is a meate for greate men. And great men do nat set so moch by y• meate as they do by the pastyme of kyllynge of it. ❧ Of Hares flesshe. ¶ A hare doth no herme nor dyspleasure to man, if the flesshe be nat eaten, yet he maketh gentylmen good pastyme. And better it is for the boundes or dogges to eate the hare after they haue kylled it, than man shuld eate it: for it is nat praysed nother in the olde te∣stament nother in physycke, for the byble sayth the hare is an vnclene beeste. And phy∣sycke sayth hares flesshe is drye and doth in∣gendre melancoly humours. ¶ Of Conys flesshe & Rabettes. ¶ Conyes flesshe is good, but rabettes flessh is best of all wylde beestes, for it is temperat and dothe nurysshe, and syngulerly praysed in physycke, for all thynges the whiche doth sucke is nutrytyue.
¶ The. xvii. Chapyter dothe treate of perty∣culer thynges, of fysshe and flesshe▪ THe heddes of fysshe, and the fatnes of fysshe specyally of Samn and Cunger is nat god for them the which be dys∣posed to haue reumatyke heddes. And the beddes of lampryes, and lamprons, and the strynge the whiche is within them, is nat good to eate refrayne frome eatynge of the skynnes of fysshe, and flesshe & borned meate, and browne meate, for it dothe ingender viscus humours, and color and melancolye. And dothe make opylacyons. The braynes of any best is nat laudable, excepte the braynes of a kydde, for it is euyll of dygestyon and dothe hurte a mannes appetyde and the sto∣macke, for it is colde and moyste, and viscus a hote stomacke may eate it, but it doth ingē∣der grose humours. The brayne of a wod co∣ke and of a snype and suche lyke is cōmesty∣ble. The fore parte of al maner of beestes and foules be more hotter and lyghter of dygesty on, than the hynder partes be. The mary of all beestes is hote and moyste, it is nutrityue yf it be ll dygestyd, yet it doth mollyfy the stomacke, and doth take away a manes appe∣tyde, wherfore let a man ate peper with it. The blode of all beastes & foules is nat pray∣sed, for it is harde of digestion. All y• inward of beestes and of foules, as the herte the ly∣uer
the longes, and trypes, and trylybubbes, with all the intrayles is herde of dygestyon, and dothe increase grose humours. Thē fat∣nes of flesshe is nat so muche nutrytyue as the lenes of flesshe, it is beste whan lene and fat is myxte one with another. The tounges of beestes be harde of dygestyon and of lytell nurysshement. The stones of a cokell, and the stones of other beestes that hath nat done theyr kynde be nutrytyue. ¶ The. xviii. Chapytre, treateth of roste meate, of fryed meate nd of bake meate. WIth vs at Montpilour, & other vniuersyties is vsed boyled mea¦te at dner, & roste meate to sup∣per: why they shulde do so I can nat tel onles it be for a cōsuetude. For boyled meate is lyghter of dygestyon thārosted mea¦te is. Bruled meate is harde of dygestyon, & euyll for the stone. Fryed meate is harder of dygestyon than bruled meate is, & it doth in∣gendre color & melancoly. bake meate which is called flesshe that is bered, for it is bured  paste, is nat praysed in physycke. All maner of flesshe the which is inclyned to humydyte shulde be rosted. And all flesshe the which is inclyned to drynes shulde be sodde or boyled ¶ Fysshe may be sode, rosted, bruled & baken euery one after theyr kynde, & vse a fasshyon
of the countre, as the coke and the phisicion wyll agre & deuyse. For a good coke is halfe a phisicion. For the chefe phisicke (the coun∣cell of a phisecion except) dothe come from the kytchyn, wherfore the phisicion and the coke for sicke men must consult to gyther for the preparacion of meate for sicke men. For yf the phisicion withoute the cooke prepare any meate excepte he be very expert, he wyll make a werysshe dysshe of meate, the whiche the sycke can nat take. ¶ The. xix. Chapiter treateth of rotes & fyrst of the rotes of borage and buglosse. THe rotes of Borage & Buglosse soden tender and made in a succade doth ingē¦der good blode, and dothe set a man in a temporaunce. ¶ The rotes of Alysaunder and Enula campana. ❧ The rotes of Alysaunder soden tender, and made in surcade is good for to destroy y• stone in y• raines of the backe & bladder. The rotes of Enulacāpana soden tēder & made in a luccade is good for the brest, & for the lun∣ges, & for all the interyall members of man. ¶ The rotes of Percelly, & of Fenel. ¶ The rotes of Percelly soden tender and made in a succade is good for the stone, and dothe make a man to pysse. The rotes of Fe∣nell
soden tender & made in a succade is good for the lunges and for the syght. ❧ The rotes of Turnepes & Persnepes. ¶ Turnepes boyled and eaten with flesshe, augmenteth the sede of man, yf they be eaten rawe moderatly, it doth prouoke a good ape∣tyde. Persnepes soden & eaten dothe increase nature, they be nutrytyue, & doth expel vryne ❧ Radysshe rotes, and Caretes. ¶ Radisshe rotes doth breake wynde & doth prouoke a mā to make water, but they be nat good for them the whiche hath the goute. Ca¦retes soden and eaten dothe auge & increase nature & dothe cause a man to make water. ¶ The rotes of Rapes. ¶ Rape rotes yf they be well boyled they do nurysshe, yf they be moderately eaten, immo¦derately eaten they doth ingender ventosyte and dothe anoye the stomacke. ¶ Of onyons. ¶ Onyons dothe prouoke a man to venery∣ous actes, and to sompnolence, and yf a man drynke sondry drynkes it doth rectyfy and re¦forme the varyete of the operacyon of them: they maketh a mans apetyde good, and put∣teth away fastydyousnes. ¶ Of Lekes. ¶ Lekes dothe open the breste, and doth pro¦uoke a man to make water, but they doth ma¦ke and increase euyll blode. ❧ Of Garlyke.
¶ Garlyke of all rotes is vsed & moste pray∣sed in Lomberdy, and other countres anexed to it, for it doth open the breste, & it doth kyll all maner of wormes in a mans bely, whiche be to say, lūbrici, ascarides, and cucurbitini whiche is to saye longe wormes, small lytell longe wormes which wyll tycle in the foun∣dement, and square wormes, it also hetythe the dody and desolueth grose wyndes. ¶ The. xx. Chapyter, treateth of herbes. And fyrst of Borage, and Buglosse. BOrage doth comfort the hert, and doth ingendre good blode, and cause a man to be mery, and dothe set a man in tem∣perance. And so dothe buglosse for he is takē of more vygor and strength, and effycacye. ¶ Of artochockes, and rokat. ¶ There is nothynge vsed to be eaten of Ar∣tochockes but the hed of them, whan they be almost rype they muste be soden tender in the broth of befe, and after eate them at dyner, they doth increase nature, and doth prouoke a man to veueryons actes. Rokat dothe in∣crease the sede of man, and doth stymulat the flesshe, and dothe helpe to dygestyon. ❧ Of Cykory, and Endyue. ¶ Cycory doth kepe the stomaeke & the heed in temperannce, and doth qualyfy color. En∣dyue is good for them the whiche hath hote stomackes and drye.
❧ Of whyte beetes, and purslane. ¶ Whyte beeten be good for the lyuer, & for the splene, and be abstersyue, Purslane doth extynct the ardor of lassyuyousnes, and doth mytygate great heate in all the inwarde par¦tes of man. ¶ Of tyme, and Parsley. ¶ Tyme breaketh the stone, it dothe desolue wyndes. And causeth a man to make water. Parsley is good to breake the stone, and cau∣seth a man to pysse, it is good for the stomake and dothe cause a man to haue a swete breth. ☞ Of Lettyse, and Sorell. ¶ Lettyse doth extynct veneryous actes, yet it doth increase mylke in a womans brest, it is good for a hote stomake, & dothe prouoke slepe, and doth increase blod, and doth set the blode in a temperaunce. Sorell is good for a hote lyuer, and good for the stomake. ❧ Of Penyryall, and Isope. ¶ Penyryall doth purge melācoly, and doth comforte the stomacke & the spyrites of man. Isope clenseth viscus fleume, & is good for the breste and for the lunges. ☞ Of Rosmary, and Roses. ¶ Rosmary is good for y• palsey, and for the fallynge syckenes, and for the cowghe, and good agaynst colde, Roses be a cordynall and dothe comforte the herte and the brayne. ☞ Of Fenell, and Anys. ¶ These berbes be seldome vsed, but theyr
sedes be greately occupyde. Fenell sede is v∣sed to breake wynde, & good agaynst poysone Anys sede is good to clense the bladder, and the raynes of the backe: & dothe {pro}uoke vryne and maketh one to haue a swete breth. ¶ Of sauge. and Mandragod. ¶ Sauge is good to helpe a woman to con∣ceyue, and doth prouoke vrne. Mandragod doth helpe a woman to concepcion, and doth prouoke a man to slepe. * Of all Herbes in generall. ¶ There is no Herbe, nor wede, but god ha¦ue gyuen vertue to them, to helpe man. But for as muche as, Plyne, Macer, and Diasco∣rides with many other olde auncyent and ap¦probat Doctours hath wrytten and pertrac∣ted of theyr vertues, I therfore nowe wyll wrytte no further of herbes, but wyl speke of other matters that shalbe more necessarye. ¶ The. xxi. Chapyter, treateth of Fruytes, and fyrst of Fygges. AUicen sayth that Fygges dothe nurys∣she more than any other Fruyte, they doth nurysshe meruelously, whan they be eaten with blanched Almons. They be al∣so good rosted, & steued. They do clense the brest & the lunges, & they do open y• opylacy∣ons of the lyuer & the splene. They dothe ste∣re a mam to veneryous actes, for they dothe auge & inerease the sede of generacyon. And
also they do prouoke a man to sweate: wher∣fore they do ingender lyce. ¶ Of great Raysyns. ¶ Great raysyns be nutritiue specially if the stones be pulled out. And they do mak the sto¦make firme and stable. And they do prouoke a man to haue a good appetite, if a fewe of thē be eaten before meate. ☞ Of smalle raysyns of Corans. ¶ Smale raisyns of Corans be good for the raynes of the backe, & they do prouoke vrine. howbeit they be not al y• best for y• splene, for they make opilation. ¶ Of Grapes. ¶ Grapes swete and newe, be nutritiue, and doth stymulat the fleshe. And they do comfort the stomacke and the liuer, and dothe auoyde opilations. Howbeit they do replete the sto∣macke with ventositie. ¶ Of peches, of medlers, and ceruices. ¶ Peches doth mollifie the bealy, & be cold. Medlers takē superfluous doth ingēder melā¦coly. and Ceruices be in man of like operatiō. ¶ Of strawberies, cheries, and burtes. ¶ Strawberies be praised aboue all beries, for they do qualifie the heate of the liuer, and doth ingender good bloud, eaten with suger. Theries doth mollifie the bealie, & be colde. Hurtes be of a groser substāce, wherforethey be not for them the which be of a cleaue diet. ¶ Of nuttes great and smalle. ¶ The walnut & the hanocke be of one opera
cyon. They be tarde and slowe of dygestyon, yet they doth comforte the brayne yf the pyth or skyne be pylled of, and than they be nutry∣tyue. Fylberdes be better than hasell Nuttes yf they be newe and taken from the tree, and the skyn or the pyth pulled of, they be nutry∣tyue, & doth iucrease fatnes, yf they be olde they shulde be eaten with great raysens. But newe nuttes be farre better than olde nuttes, for olde nuttes be colorycke, and they be euyl for the hed and euyll for olde men. And they dothe ingendre the palsey to the tounge, yet they be good agaynst venym. And immode∣ratly taken or eaten dothe ingendre corrupcy¦ons, as byles blaynes & suche putryfaccyon. ¶ Of Peason, and Beanes. ¶ Peason the which be yonge be nutrytyue howbeit they doth replete a man with vento syte. Beanes be nat so muche to be praysed as Peason, for they be▪ full of ventosyte al∣thought the skynnes or huskes be ablated or caste away, yet they be stronge meate, and dothe prouoke venerious actes. ¶ Of Peares, and Apples. ¶ Peares the which be melow and doulce, & nat stony doth increase fatnes ingenderynge waterysshe blod. And they be full of ventosy∣te. But wardens rosted stued, or baken be nu∣trytyue, and doth comforte the stomacke spe∣cyally yf they be eaten with comfettes. Ap∣ples be good after a frost haue taken them or
they y• which be of good odor & melowe, they shuld be eaten with suger or cōfettes, or with fenell sede, or anys sedes bycause of theyr ven¦tosyte, they doth comforte than the stomacke and doth make good dygestyon, specyally yf they be rosted or baken. ¶ Of Pomegranates, & Quynces. ¶ Pomegranates be nutrytyue, and good for the stomacke. Quynces bakē the gore pul¦led out doth mollyfy ye bely, & doth helpe dy∣gestyon, & doth p̄serue a mā frō dronkenshyp. ¶ Of Dates, and Mylons. ¶ Dates moderately eaten be nutrytyue but they doth cause opylacyōs of the lyuer & of ye splen. Mylons doth ingēder euyll humours. ¶ Of gourdes, of cocūbers, & pepones. ¶ Gourdes be euyll of nurysshement, cocum¦bers, restraynethe veneryousnes or lassyuy∣ousnes, or luxuryousnes. Pepones be in ma∣ner of lyke operacion: but the pepones tngen derythe euyll humours. ¶ Of Almondes, and Chesteyns. ¶ Almondes causeth a man to pysse: they do mollyfy the bely, and doth purge the lunges And. vi. or. vii. eate before meate preserueth a man frō dronkenshyp. Chesteynes dothe nu∣rysshe the body strongly, & dothe make a man fat, yf they be thorowe rosted and the huskes abiected, yet they doth replete a man with vētosyte or wynde. ¶ Of Prunes, and Damysens.
¶ Prunes be nat greatly praysed, but in the way of medycyne, for they be colde & moyste. And Damysens be of the sayde nature: for the one is olde and dryed, and the other be takē from the tree. vi or vii. damysen eaten before dyner be good to prouoke a mānes ap¦petyde, they dothe mollyfye the belye and be abstersyue: the skyne and the stones muste be ablated and caste owaye and nat vsed. * Of Olyues, and capers. ¶ Olyues cōdyted, & eaten at the begynnige of refeccyon dothe coroborate the stomacke & {pro}uoketh appetyde. Capers doth purge fleme and doth make a man to haue an appetyde. ❧ Of Orenges. ¶ Orenges doth make a man to haue a good appetyde, & so dothe the ryndes yf they be in succade, & they doth cōforte the stomacke, the iuce is a good sause & doth {pro}uoke an apetyde. ☞ The. xxii. Chapyter treateth of spyces, and fytse of Synger. GYnger dothe heate the stomacke & hel∣peth dygestyon, Grene gynger eaten in the mornynge fastynge doth acuate and quycken the remembraunce. ☞ Of Peper. ¶ There be. iii. sōdry kynd{is} of peper, whiche ve to say whyte Peper, blacke Peper, & long peper. Al kyndes of pepers do heate the body
and doth desolue fleume & wynde and dothe helpe digestion, and makethe a man to make water Blacke peper dothe make a man leane ¶ Of Cloues and Maces. ¶ Cloues doth comforte the sinewes & doth desolue, and dothe consume superfluous hu∣mours, restoreth nature, Maces is a cordiall and doth helpe the colycke: & is good against the blody flyxe and laxes. ☞ Of Graines and Safferon. ¶ Graines be good for the stomake and the hed. And be good for women to drinke. Saf∣feron doth comforte the hert and the stomake but he is to hote for the liuer. ¶ Of Nutmeges and Cynamon. ☞ Nutmeges be good for thē yt which ha∣ue colde in their hed, & doth cōfort the syght & the braine & the mouthe of the stomake, & is good for the splene, Cynamone is a cordi∣al, wherfore ye Hebricion doth say why doth a man dye & can get cynamone to eate: yet it doth stop & is good to restrain fluxes or laxes ¶ Of lecorice. ¶ Licorice is good to clense and to open the lunges and the brest, and doth lose fleume. * The. xxiii. Chapiter sheweth a diet for Senguine men SAnguine men be hote & moiste of cōplex¦con, wherfore they must be circūspecte in eatynge of their meat, cōsiderig that
the purer the cōplexyon is, the soner it maye be corrupted, & the blode may be the soner in¦fected, wherfore they must abstaine to eate in ordynatly fruytes and herbes & rotes as gar∣lyke onyons & lykes, they muste refrayne frō eatyng of olde flesshe, & exchewe the vsage of eatyng of ye braynes of beestes: & frō eatynge the vdders of keyne. They must vse moderat slepe & moderat dyet or els they wyll be to fat and grose. Fysshe of muddy waters be nat good for them. And yf blode do aboūde clen∣se it with stufes, or by fleubothomye. ¶ The. xxiiii. Chapyter sheweth a dyete for Fleumatyke men. FLeumatyke men be colde & moyst: wher∣fore they must abstayne from meates the which is cold. And also they must refray¦ne from eatyng viscus meate, specyally from all meates the which doth ingendre fleuma∣tyke humours, as fysshe, fruyte, and whyte meate. Also to eschewe the vsage of eatynge of crude herbes specyal to refrayne from me∣ate the which is harde and slowe of dygesty∣on: as it appereth iu the properties of meates aboue rehersed. And to beware nat to dwell nyghe to waterysshe and morysshe grounde. These thynges be good for fleumatyke per∣sons moderatlye taken, onyons, garlyke, pe∣per, gynger. And all meates the which be ho∣te and drye. And sauces the whiche be sowre.
These thynges folowynge doth purge fleu∣me Pglypody, netyll, elder, agarycke, yreos, mayden heare, and stycados. ¶ The. xxv. Chapyter, sheweth a dyete for Colorycke men. COlor is hote and drye wherfore Colo∣ryke men must abstayne frome eatynge hote spyces, & to refrayne frome dryn∣kynge of wyne, and eatynge of Colorycke meate: how be it Colorycke men may eate gro¦ser meate than any other complexcyons, ex∣cept iheyr educacyon haue ben to ye contrary Colorycke men shulde nat be longe fastynge These thyng{is} folowyng do purge color. Fu∣mytory Centory, wormewod, wylde hoppes vyoletes, Mercury, Manna, Reuberbe, Eu∣patorye, Tamaryndes, & the whay of butter. ¶ The. xxvi. Chapyter treateth of a dietarye for Melancolye men. MElancoly is colde & drye, wherfore Me¦lancoly men muste refrayne from fryed meate, and meate ye which is ouer salt And from meate the which is sowre and har∣de of dygestyon, and from all meate the whi∣che is burnet and drye. They muste abstayne frome immoderat thurste, & from drynkynge of hote wynes, and grose wyne as redewyne And vse these thynges, Cowe mylke, Almon
mylke, yolkes of rere egges. Boyled meate is better for Melancoly men than rosted meate Al meat the which wylbe sone digested and all meates the which doth ingēder good blo¦de and meates the which be emperatly hote be good for melancoly men, and so be al her∣bes the which be hote and moyste. These thynges folowynge doth purge Melancoly. Seene, quekbeme, Seene, scados, Hartes tounge, mayden heere, pulyall mountane, bo¦rage, organum, suger, and white wine. ☞ The. xxvii. Chapyter treateth of a dyete and of an order to be vsed in the Pesty∣ferous tyme of the pestylence and swetynge sycknes. WHan the Plages of the Pestylēce, or ye swetynge syckenes is in a towne or countre, with vs at Moūtpylour and all other hyghe Regyons & countres yt I haue dwelt in, the people doth fle frō the con¦tagious & infectious ayre p̄seruatyues with other counsell of Physicke natwitstandynge In lower & other base countres, houses the which be infected in towne or citie, be closed vp both dores & wyndowes: & ye inhabytours shall nat come a brode, nother to churche: nor to market, nor to any house or cōpany, for in¦fectyng other the which be clene without in¦fection. A man can nat be to ware: nor cā nat kepe hym selfe to wel from this syckenes, for
it is so vehemēt & so parlouse, yt the sycknes is taken wt the sauour of a mans clothes the which hath vysyted the infectious house, for the infeccyon wyl lye & hāge long in clothes And I haue knowen yt whan ye strawe & rus¦shes hath ben cast out of a house infected the hogges the which dyd lye in it, dyed of ye pe∣stylēce: wherfore in suche infeccyous tyme it is good for euery mā yt wyll nat fly frō the cō¦tagyous ayre to vse dayly, specyally in ye mor¦nyng & euenyng to burue Juneper, or Rose∣mary, or Rysshes, or Baye leues, or Maiero∣me or frankensence, or Bengauin Or els ma¦ke this pouder. Take of storax calamite halfe an vnce, of frankēsence an vnce, of the wodde of Aloes, ye weight of vi. d. myxe all these to∣gyther. Than cast halfe a sponeful of this in a chafynge dysshe of coles, and set it to fume abrode in ye chābers, & the hall, & other hou∣ses, and you wyll put to this pouder a lytle Lapdanum: it is so much ye better. Or els ma∣ke a pomemaūder vnder this maner. Take of Lapdanum. iii. drames, of ye wodde of Aloes one drame, of Amber of grece. ii. drames, & a half, of nutmegges, of storax calamite of eche a drame & a halfe, cōfect all these togyther wt Rose water, & make a bal. And this aforesayd Pomemaūder doth nat only expel cōtagious ayres, but also it doth cōforte the brayne, as Barthelmew of Montagnaue sayth, & other modernall doctors doth afferme ye same: who
so euer yt is infected with the pestylence, let him loke in my Breuyary of helth for a reme by. But let hym vse thys dyete, let the Cham∣ber be kepte close. And kepe a contynual fyre in the Chamber of clere burnynge wodde, or chare cole without smoke, beware of takyng any colde, vse temporat meates and drynge. and beware of wyne, bere, & syder, vse to eate stued or baken wardens yf they can begotten yf nat eate stued or baken peers with comfet∣tes, vse no grose meates, but those the which be lyght of dygestyon. ¶ The. xxviii. Chapyter, shewethe of a dyete the whiche be in any Feuer or gue. I Do aduertyse euery man that hath a Fe∣uer: or an Ague, nat to eate no meate. vi. houres before his course doth take hym. And in no wyse as longe as the Ague doth in dure, to put of sherte nor doublet, nor to ryse out of the bedde, but whan nede shall requyre and in any wyse nat to go, nor to take any o∣pen ayre. For such prouysyon may be had yt at vttermoste at the thyrde course he shalbe delyuered of the Feuer dsynge the medsynes the which be in ye Breuyary of helthe. And let euery man beware of castyng theyr handes & armes at any tyme out of the bed, in or out of theyr agony, or to spraule with ye legges out of ye bed, good it is for ye space of. iii. courses
to weare contynually gloues & nat to wasshe the handes. And to vse suche a dyete in meate and drynke as is rehersed in the pestylence. ¶ The. xxix. Chapyter, treateth of a dyete for them, the which haue the Ilyacke, or the colycke, and the stone. TJe Iliacke & the Colycke be ingēdred of ventosyte, the which is intrused, or inclosed in two guttes, ye one is called Ilia. And ye other is called Colon. For these two infyrmytes a man must beware of colde. And good it is nat to be longe fastynge. And necessarye it is to be laxatyue & nat in no wy¦se to be cōstupat. And these thyng{is} folowinge be nat good for thē yt whiche haue these afore sayd ifirmites, hote bread, nor new ale. They must abstayne also frō drynkynge of beere, of cyder, & red wyne, & cynamom. Also refrayne frō all meates yt hony is in exchewe eatynge of cold herbes, vse nat to eate beanes, peson, nor potage, beware of ye vsage of fruyt{is} And of all thynges yt which doth ingēder wynde. For ye stone abstayne frō drikinge of new ale, bewarde of beere, & of red wyne, & hote win{is} refrayn frō eatyng of red heryng, martylmas befe & baken, & saltfysshe, & salt meates. And beware of goyng cold about the myddel spe∣cyally about ye raynes of ye backe. And make no restryctyon, of wynde & water: nor egesty on that nature wolde expelle.
¶ The. xxx. Chapiter, treateth of a dyete for them the whtch haue any kyndes of the goute. THey the whiche be infected with the goute, or any kynde of it. I do aduerty¦se thē nat to syt longe bollynge & byb∣byng, dysynge & cardyng, in forgettynge thē selfe to cronerat the blader and the bely whā nede shall requyre, & also to beware that the legges hange nat without some stay nor that the bootes or shoes be nat ouer strayte, who soeuer hath yt goute must refrayne frō dryn∣kyng of newe ale, and let him abstayne from drynkyng of beere & red wyne. Also he muste nat eate newe breade, eages, fresshe samon, eles, fresshe heryng, pylcherdes, oysters, & all shell fysshe. Also he must exchewe the eatynge of fresshe befe, of gose, of ducke, & of pygyōs. Beware of takyng colde in the legges, or ry∣dyng, or goyng wetshod. Beware of venery∣ous act{is} after refection, or after or vpō a full stomacke. And refrayne frō all thynges that doth ingendre euyl humours & be inflatyue. ¶ The. xxxi. Chapiter, treateth of a dyete for thē the whiche haue any of the kyn¦des of lepored. HE that is infected, with any of the. iiii kyndes of the lepored muste refrayne frō al maner of wynes, & frō new dryn¦kes, & strōge ale than let him beware of ryot & surfetyng. And let him abstayne frō eatyng
of spyces, & dates, & frō trypes & podynges, & all inwardes of beestes. Fysshe & egges, and mylke is nat good for leperous persons: and they must abstayne frō eatyng of fresshe befe, and from eatynge of gose, ducke & frō water foule & pygions. And in no wyse eate no ve∣neon, nor hare flesshe and suche lyke. ¶ The. xxxii. Chapiter, treateth of a diete for thē, the whiche haue any of the kyndes of the fallynge syckenes. WHo soeuer he be, that haue any of the kynd{is} of ye fallyng syckenes muste ab∣stayne frō eatīg of whyte meate, spe∣cyally of mylke he must refrayne frō drīkyng of wyne, new ale, & strōg ale. Also they shulde nat eate the fatnes of fysshe, nor the hedes of fysshe, the which doth ingender rewme. Shel fysshe, eles, samon, herynge, & viscus fyfthes be nat good for Epilentyeke men. Also they must refrayne frō eatyng of garlyke, onyons, lekes, chybboles, & all vaperous meates, the which doth hurt ye hed: beneson, hare flessh, befe, beanes, & peason be nat good for Epilē∣tyke men. And yf they knowe yt they be infec¦ted with this great syckenes, they shulde nat resorte where there is great resort of cōpany which is in church in sessyons & market pla∣ces on market dayes, yf they do the syckenes wyl infeste thē more there, than in any other place, or at any other tyme. They muste be∣ware
they do nat syt to nyghe ye fyre, for the fyre wyll ouercome them, & wyll induce the syckenes. They must beware of lyeng hore in theyr bed, or to laboure extremely, for suche thynges causeth the grefe to come the ofter. ¶ The. 34. Chapyter, treateth of a dyete for them the whiehe haue any payne in the heed. MAny syckenes, or infyrmytes & impedy¦mētes may be in a mans hed, wherfore whosoeuer haue any impedimēt in the hed must nat kepe the hed to hote, nor to cold but in a tēporaūe. And to beware of ingen∣dryng of rewme, which is the cause of many infyrmytes. There is nothynge yt doth ingē∣der rewme so much as doth the fatnes of fyssh & the heddes of fysshe, & surfestes, & takynge colde in the fete: & taking cold in the nape of the nycke or hed. Also they yt which haue any infyrmyte in ye hed must refrayne of immode∣rat slepe specially after meate. Also they must abstayne frō drynkynge of wyne, & vse nat to drynke ale & beare the which is ouer stronge ocyferacyon halowyng, cryeng, and hyghe syngyng is nat good for the hed. All thynges the which is vaporous or dothe fume, is nat good for the hed. And all thyng{is} the which is of euyl sauour as caryn, synkes wynkraugh∣tes pissebolles snoffe of candels, dunghylles, stynkyng canels, & stynkyng stāding waters, & ynkyng marshes, with suche contagyous
eyes doth hurte the hed and the brayne, and the memorye. All odyferous sauours be good for the hed and the brayne and the memorye. ¶ The. xxxiiii. Chapiter treateth of a dyete for them the whiche be in a consumpcyon. WHo soeuer he be that is in a cōsūpcion must abstayne frō al sowre & tart thin¦ges as veneger & alegar, & suche lyke. And also he must abstaine frō eatyng of grose meates she which be harde & slowe of dyge∣styon. And vse cordialles & restoratyues and nuttytyue meates. All meates & drinkes the which is swete & that suger is in be nutryty¦ue. Wherfore swete wynes be good for them the which be in consūpcyōs moderately takē And sowre wyne, sowre ale, sowre breade is good for no man. For it doth freate away na∣ture, & let thē beware that be in a consump∣cion of fryde meate, of bruled meate, & bronte meate the whiche is ouer rosted. And in any wyse let thē beware of anger & pencyfulnes. These thinges folowyng be good for thē the which be incōsūpciōs a pygge or a cocke ste∣wed & made in a gely, cockrelles stewed, got{is} mylke & suger, almon mylke in ye which ryce is sodē, & rabbert{is} stewed, & newe layd egg{is} & rere yolkes of egg{is} & ryce sodē īalmō mylke. ¶ The. xxxv. chapit treateth of a diete for thē the which be asmatyke men, beynge shorte wynded or lackyng breth.
SHortnes of wynde cōmeth dyuers tymes of impedymētes in the lunges, & strayt∣nes of the brest opylated thorowe vyseus fleume, & other whyle whā the heed is stuffed with rewme called the pose letteth the breth of his natural course, wherfore he that hathe shortnes of breth: muste abstayne frō eatynge of nuttes specyally yf they be olde: and che∣se and mylke is nat good for them, no more is fysshe and fruyte, & rawe or crude herbes. Also all maner of meate, the whiche is harde of dygestyon is nat good for thē. They muste refrayne from eatynge of fysshe specyally frō eatynge fysshe the which wyll cleue to ye fyn¦gers: & be vyscus & slyme & in any wyse be∣ware of the skyns of fysshe and all maner of meate the which doth ingender fleume. Also they muste beware of colde. And whan any house is a swepynge to go out of the house for a space into a clere eyre. The dust also yt ryseth in the strete thorowe the vehemens of the wynde or other wyse, is nat good for thē. And smoke is euyll for them, & so is al thinge yt is stoppyng, wherfore necessary it is for thē to be laxatyue, & to be in a clene & pure eyre. ¶ The. xxxvi. Chapit treateth of a dyete for them the whiche haue the Palsye. THey the whiche haue the Palsye, vnyuersall, or pertyculer muste beware of anger, hastynes, & testynes, & muste be∣ware
of feare, for thorowe anger or feare dy∣uers tymes the Palsye do come to man. Also they must beware of dronkenes, & eatynge of nuttes, which thynges be euyl for the palsye of the tongue, coldnes & contagyous, & uyn∣kyng fylthy eyres be euyl for the palsye. And let euery man beware on lyeng vpō the bare groūde or vpō the bare stones, for it is euyll for the Palsye, the sauour of Castory, and the sauour of a Fox is good agaynst the palsye. ¶ The. xxxvii. Chapiter, doth shewe an order and a dyete for them the whiche be madde and out of theyr wytte. THere is no man the which haue any of the kyndes of madnes, but they ought to be kepte in sauegarde for dyuers in∣cōuenyēce that may fall, as it apperyd of late dayes of a lunatycke man named Michel, the which went many yeres at lybertye, & at last he dyd kyll his wyfe and his wyfes suster, & his owne selfe, wherfore I do aduertyse eue∣ry man the whiche is madde, or lunatycke or frantycke, or demonyacke to be kepte in saue∣garde, in some close house or chamber, where there is lytle lyght. And that he haue a keper the whiche the madde man do feare. And se that the madde man haue no knyfe nor sheres nor other edge roule, nor that he haue no gyr¦dyll except it be a wekelyste of cloth, for hur¦eynge or kyllynge hym selfe. Also the cham∣ber
or the house that the madde man is in, le there be no paynted clothes, nor paynted wal¦les, nor pyotures of man nor woman or foule or beest: for suche thynges maketh them full of fantasyes, lette the madde persons heed de shouen ones a moneth, let them drinke no wy¦ne nor stronge ale, nor stronge beere, but mo∣derat drynke, and let them haue. iii. tymes in a daye warme suppynges, and lytell warme meate. And vse fewe wordes to them, excepte it be for reprehensyon, or gentyll reformacy∣on yf they haue any wytte or perseueraunce to vnderstande what reprehensyon or refor∣macyon is. ¶ The. xxxviii. Chapiter, treateth of a dyete for them the whiche haue any of the kyn∣des of the Idropyses. SAynt Beede saythe the more a man doth drynke that hath the Idropyse, the more he is a thurst, for althoughe the sekenes doth come by superabundaunce of water, yet the lyuer is drye, whether it be alchytes Ipo sacra. Lenoflegmancia, or ye tympany. They that hathe any of these foure kyndes of the Idropyses muste refrayne from all thynges the whiche be constupat and costyue, and vse al thynges the which be laxatyue, nuttes and dry almonnes and harde chese is poyson to them. Aptysane and posset ale made with colde herbes doth comfort them: whosoeuer
he be, the whiche wyl haue a remedy for any of these foure kyndes of the Idropyses, and wyll knowe a declaracyon of these infyrmy∣tes, and all other sycknesses, let hym loke in a boke of my makynge named the Breuyary of helth. For in this boke I do speke but of dye¦tes, & howe a man shulde order hys mansyon place. And him self & his household, with su∣che lyke thing{is}: for the cōseruacion of helth. ¶ The. xxxix. Chapyter treateth of a general dyete for all maner of men and women, beynge sycke or hole. THere is no mā nor woman, the whiche haue any respect to them selfe, that can be a better physyon for theyr owne sa∣ue garde, than theyr owne selfe can be to con∣syder what thyng the which dothe thē good. And to refrayne frō suche thynges that dothe thē hurt or harme. And let euery man beware of care, sorowe, thoughe, pencyfulnesse, & of inwarde anger. Beware of surfettes, and vse nat to moch veneryouse actes Breke nat the vsuall custome of slepe in the nyght. A mery herte and mynde, the which is in rest & quyet¦nes, without aduersyte, causeth a mā to lyue long, & to loke yongly althoughe he be aged, care & sorowe bryngeth in age & deth, wher∣fore let euery mā be mery: & if he cā nat let hī resort to mery cōpany to breke of his {per}plexa∣tyues. ¶ Forthermore I do aduertyse euery man to wasshe theyr handes ofte euery daye.
And dyuers tymes to keyme theyr hed euery day. And to ploūge the eyes in colde water in the mornyng. Moreouer I do counsell euery man to kepe the brest & the stomacke warme. And to kepe the fere from wet, & other whyle to wasshe them, and that they be nat kept to hote nor to colde, but indyfferently. Also to kepe the hed and the necke in a moderat tem∣poraunce nat to hote nor to colde, and in any wyse to beware nat to medle to muche with eueryous actes: for that wyll cause a man to ioke agedly: and also causeth a man to haue a brefe or a short lyfe. All other maters pertay∣nynge to any pertyculer dyete, you shal haue in the dyetes aboue in this boke reuersed. ¶ The. xl. Chapiter, doth shew an order, or a fasshyon, howe a sycke man shulde be ordered. And howe a lycke man shulde be vsed  is lykely to dye. WHo so euer that is sore sycke, it is vn∣certayne to mā, whether he shall lyue or dye, wherfore it is necessarye for hym that is sycke to haue two or thre good kepers, the which at al tymes must be dyly∣gent, and nat slepysshe sloug gysshe nor slut∣tysshe. And nat to wepe and wayle aboute a sycke man, nor to vse many wordes, nor that there be no great resorte to comon and talke. For it is a busynes a whole man to answere many men, specyally women that shall come to him. They the which cōmeth to any sycke
person ought to haue fewe wordes or non: ex¦cept certayne persons she which be of coun∣sell of the Testament makynge, the whiche wyse men be nat to seke of suche matteers in theyr syckenes, for wysdom wold that euery man shulde prepare for such thyng{is} in health And yf any man for charyte wyll byset any person, lette him aduertyse the sycke to make euery thinge euen betwyxt god & the worlde & his conseyence. And to receyue the ryghtes of holy churche, lyke a catholyke man. And to folowe the councell of bothe Physycyons which is to saye the physycion of the soule, & the physycyon of the body, that is to saye the spyrituall councell of his gostly father, and the bodely councel of his physycyon conser∣nyng the receytes of his medsons to recouer helth. For saynt Augustyne sayth he yt dothe nat the cōmaūdement of his physycyon doth kyl him selfe. Forthermore about a sycke per¦son shulde be redolent sauour{is}, and the cham∣ber shuld be replenysshed with herbes & flou¦res of odyferouse sauonr, & certayne tymes it is good to vse some perfumes to stande in the mydle of the chāber. And in any wyse let nat many men, and specyally women be togy¦ther at one tyme in the chāber, nat onely for bablyng, but specyally for theyr brethes. And the kepers shuld se at all tymes that the sycke persons drynke be pure, fresshe & stale, & that it be a lytel warmed, turned out of the colde.
Yt the sycke mē w  sycker, that there is lytle hope  ndemēt but sygnes of death, than no man ought to moue to hym any wordely maters or busynes: but to speke of gholy and godly maters. And to rede the passyon of chryste, & to say the psalmes of the passyon, and to holde a crosse or a pycrour of the passyon of chryste before the eyes of the sycke person. And let nat the kepers forget to gyue the sycke man in suche agony warme drynke with a spone, with asponeful of a cau del or a colesse. And than let euery man inde∣uer him selfe to prayer, that the sycke person may fynysshe his lyue Catholely in the fayth of Jesu chryste. And so departe out of this myserable worlde. I do beseehe the Fa∣ther, and the sonne, & the holy ghost throwe the meryte of Jesu chrystes passyon, that I and all creatures iyuynge may do so. Amen. ¶ Imprynted at London in Fletestrete at the sygne of the George nexte to saynte Dunstones churche by Wyllyam Powell. In the yere of our Lorde god. M. CCCCC. LXVII.
