3806 S106710 99842422 7072
THREE QVESTIONS ANSVVERED. I. QVESTION. What should our meaning be, when after the reading of the fourth Commandement, we pray; Lord incline our hearts to keepe this law? II. QVESTION. How shall the fourth Commandement, being deliuered in such forme of words, binde vs to sanctifie any day, but onely the seauenth, the day wherein God rested, & which the Iewes sanctified? III. QVESTION. How shall it appeare to be the Law of Nature to sancti∣fie one day in every weeke? ACT. 20.20.26.27. I am pure from the blood of all men, for I haue kept backe nothing that was profitable vnto you, but haue decla∣red vnto you all the counsell of God. printer's device of John Lichfield and James Short, featuring the arms of the University of Oxford (McKerrow 336) SAPIET FELICI AC: OX AT OXFORD, Printed by IOHN LICHFIELD, and IAMES SHORT Printers to the famous Ʋniversitie. 1621.
To the Reader. THERE is sarce any point of doctrine more controverted, then the doctrine of the Sabbath,Two points of difference a∣mongst vs are: when the day be∣ginneth, & what worke may be done therein. as Dr Bound telleth vs: indeed, not only we Protestants a∣mong our selues, but the Papists also among their selues, differ in opinion hereabout. Againe, there is (in Eng∣land) iudging one another, there is doing things doubtingly, and there is doing things with offence: which were they to∣lerable in the Church of Christ,Rom. 14. St Paul would not haue spent a whole chapter about these matters. Moreover, whereas the Papists praying in latin doe pray without vnderstanding; many amongst vs doe pray with a sinfull vnderstanding: for as in words, so in meaning, they desire God to incline their hearts to keepe the 7th day for Sabbath, and to doe no worke therein. Farthermore,It was printed last 1618. some in their booke often printed (to say nothing of other) haue these and the like passages: The 4th commandement is no more Ceremoniall, then all the rest: the observation of the 7th day is a morall and perpetuall duty: we may not pick vp a few sticks on the Sabbath: there is asmuch difference betweene the Sab∣bath
and other dayes, as betweene Sacramentall bread and common bread. &c. The knowledg and consideration hereof (among other things) causeth mee greatly to desire, that the doctrine of the Sabbath may once at length be throughly discussed by men of sound iudgment: and doubtles, what the Scriptures sentence is in this matter, would soone be knowne, were it (as Dr Cran∣mer sometime advised) well handled by the learned men of our Vniversityes:Act. and Mo∣num. no man amongst vs should need any lon∣ger to halt betweene two opinions, as (the more to be lamen∣ted) many of long time haue done, and still doe; yea, and vn∣lesse the better order be taken, no doubt will doe even vnto the end of the world. Now to provoke herevnto I haue written this little booke: and partly also, as hoping it will conduce somthing to the fin∣ding out of the trueth, when the time commeth, that it shalbe more carefully sought after which time God hasten for his sake which is the trueth, Iesus Christ; vnto the illumination of whose Spirit I commend thee (gentle Reader) and so rest. Thine in him as long as life lasteth. TH. BROAD.
I. QVESTION. AS when the 8. commandement is read, and we pray; Lord, incline our hearts to keepe this law: it is all one, as if we said; Lord, incline our hearts not to steale. So, when the 4. com∣mandement is read, and we pray; Lord, incline our hearts to keepe this Law: it is all one, as if we had said; Lord, incline our hearts to sanctifie the Sabbath, to keepe the 7. day for Sabbath, and to doe no worke therein: for this is that law. The Iewes had asked this in words and mea∣ning both, suppose they had had the like māner of pray∣ing after this commandement: and we must needs aske the same in words, as they should haue done. The question then is: Whether should we aske the same in meaning, as we doe in words; or what should our mea∣ning be? Answere of some in these daies. By the doctrine of some in these daies, as in words, so in meaning, we should desire God to incline our hearts to keepe the 7. day for Sabbath, and to doe no worke therein. They teach, that the observation of the 7. day is a morall and perpetuall duty: that we may not so
much as picke vp sticks in the same: and (in a word) that the 4. commandement is no more Ceremoniall, then all the rest. Now, whereas there is one text principal∣ly against them,Col. 2.16, 17. namely this; Let no man therefore iudge you in meate, or in drinke, or in respect of an holy day, or of the New-moone, or of the Sabbaths: Which are a shaddow of things to come, &c: by Sabbaths here they will not haue the weekely Sabbaths meant. But what haue they to say? It is Sabbaths in the plurall number: and doth not the word Sabbaths in the plurall number import the weekely Sabbaths? See Mat. 28.1. Act. 13, 14. and 16, 13: with many other places. This (in my knowledge) is all they haue to say; which is so little, that it only ar∣gueth a will to say something: it is not so much as a sha∣dow of sound proofe. Consider (1) that St Paul here vseth another word, which doth most properly signifie the Festivall daies, : and therefore it is very vnlikely, that by Sabbaths the same daies should be meant, as they would haue it: this had beene a needlesse repetition. (2) Vnlesse by Sab∣baths here are meant the weekely Sabbaths:Christian people chose the first day, and made it their Sabbath, sayth the booke of Homilies. By the doctrine then of our Church, the observati∣on of the Lords day is an Eccles: ordinance, and not an Apostol: precept. Sozom: lib: 5. cap. 8. what war∣rant haue we in the Scripture to worke vpon the Iewes Sabbath? Will they say, that the Apostles command to sanctifie the Lords day in memory of Christs resur∣rection? Be this granted, which cannot be proved, and is something discrepant from the doctrine of our Church: doth it therefore follow, that we neede not keepe the 7. day in memory of the worlds creation? Constantine commanded, that the 6 day should be kept in memory of Christs death on the Crosse: yet was the day of Christs resurrection kept also. Sozomenus saith,
that at Constātinople, & almost in all other places,lib. 7. cap. 19. Sabbato & postridie Sabbati conveniunt: and in the Scripture wee read of meetings on both daies. It is then a weake ar∣gument: The Apostles commanded to keepe the first day in memory of Christs resurrection: therfore wee neede not keepe the 7 day in memory of the worlds creation. This I would haue thee well to consider; that St Paul (of the Apostles) is Christs only Doctour about dayes: he alone by way of doctrine handleth this point, and he handleth it purposly in three severall Epistles here; to the Romanes, among whom he had never beene;Col. 2. Rom. 14. Gal. 4. The controversy about the Sab∣bath would soone be ended, did we acknow∣ledg St Paul for a sufficient Doctour in this matter; as it is great reason wee should. and to the Galathians, who turned from the Gospell he had preached vnto them: so that he had diverse times iust occasion to shew his minde fully in this matter. Now then, who can belieue, that we need not keepe the Iewes Sabbath (as it is certaine we need not, and them∣selues wil acknowledge it) but St Paul should giue vs to vnderstand asmuch in one of these places, And vnlesse in this, in none: for in his Epistles to the Romanes and Galathians he speaketh only in a generall manner. True, that generall sayings here are enough, as in the matter of meates: the law forbad swines flesh, blood, and the like: yet we eate these meates, and our warrant is. Let no man iudge you in your meate or drinke, The King∣dome of God is not meate and drink;St Paul speak∣ing twise of dayes in a gene∣rall manner, and once in a parti∣cular; would no doubt haue ex∣cepted the 7 day Sabbath, had it beene to be ex∣cepted. and such like generall sayings. So generall sayings are inough in the matter of daies: but if in this place, where we haue a particular di∣stributiō, & the very word Sabbaths vsed we shal say that the weekely Sabbaths are not meant; who will belieue, in other places? The Sabbatharies, which heretofore would haue vs Christians obserue the Iewes Sabbath,
might with more colour put of any text, then this: ei∣ther this text or none, is of force against them. (.3.) Thus it is taken by many great Divines: & St Augustine termeth the Sabbath Sacramentum vmbratile, Spirit: & lit: cap: 14. Againe, in the 15. chapter of that booke, hee termeth the 4 commandement preceptum figugatum:Instit. in 4 pre∣cept. and Calvin sayth, vmbratile veteres nuncupare solent: so that it seemeth, the Fathers generally by Sabbaths here vn∣derstood the weekely Sabbaths, and therfore termed the 4 commandement vmbratile, shadowish. I haue mervailed, that in these dayes two or three (for I know no more in print) should offer to dissent from so many great Divines about the interpretation of this text; especially, having no more to say for their owne interpretation. But it seemeth, they think, if by Sabbaths here the weekely Sabbaths be meant, then it cannot be avoided but that by ordinances in the second verse before,Col. 2.14. the precept of the Sabbath must also bee meant, aswell as the precepts of the New moone and holy dayes ioyned with it: and thus St Paul should say as∣much of the Sabbath & the precept thereof: as he doth say or can be said of the new-moon & the precept there∣of: for more cannot be said of the new moon, thē that it is a shadow, nor of the precept thereof, then that it is an ordināce blotted out. But shal I therfore offer to interpret a text wrongfully, because I my selfe cannot answer an obiection, which may be grounded on it being rightly interpreted? How much better were it to acknowledg mine owne weaknes, and to think, that other happily may vnloose that knot which I am not able. Besides this text there are other pregnant inough to proue that the Sabbath was a shadow or Ceremony; &
consequently, that the 4 commandement is more Ce∣remoniall, then the rest. As that text, Mat: 12.7: But if ye had knowne, what this meaneth, I will haue mercy, and not sa∣crifice, yee would not haue condēned the guiltlesse.God calleth the Sab. a signe, Exod: 31.13. Christ likeneth it to the shew∣bread and sacri∣fices mat. 12.4.7. and Paul ter∣meth it a sha∣dow Col. 2. Here like∣neth the observation of the Sabbath to the offering of sacrifices: he blameth the Pharysees, because when God would haue mercy before sacrifice, they preferred sacri∣fice before mercy, that is the keeping of the Sabbath be∣fore the feeding of their hungry brethren. Againe Hebr: 4. In this chapter (as Marlorate also obser∣veth) mention is made of three Rests or Sabbaths: one, the first seventh day, ver: 4. another,A day may be termed Gods Rest or Sab. in 2 respects: first because he rested therin: secondly, because it is con∣secrated to his service. In the former respect, only the first 7 day is gods Sab. the land of Canaan (where Zion was Gods Rest for euer Psal: 132. vers. 8) a third, the kingdome of heaven, vers. 9. Now indeed, it is not here said in expresse termes, that the 7 day Sabbath, is a text of the heavenly Sabbath: but consider (.1.) That the Apostle in this Epistle entreateth much of types, & and of that whereof they were types. (2.) If the land of Canaan (Gods locall rest in this world) were a type of the rest in heaven as all acknowledg: then likewise the 7 day (Gods tēporall Rest in this world) as spoken of here both together, and in the same manner. (.3.) The 7 day & the kingdome of heauen haue one common name,Gods Rests in this world were two: the one of the time, the, 7th day the other, of place; the land of Canaan. Rest or Sabbath: & the resemblance between them is as∣much, as betweene the sacrifices of beasts in the time of the law, and that sacrifice of Christ on the Crosse. As God rested on the 7 day after his works in the 6 daies: as the Israelites rested on the 7 day after their works in the 6 dayes: so shall the godly rest in heaven after their la∣bours and miseryes in this world, Blessed are the dead, which dye in the Lord, for they rest from their Labours.Reu. 14.
Some that acknowledge the 7 dayes Sabbath to be a type or shadow, will haue it such in respect of the strict rest,S. Paul would not haue said that the holy dayes, new-moone and Sab. were a shadow; if not these, but circumstances only about them, had beene a sha∣dow. If it were a shadow because it was the last of the weeke: then belike the new-moone was a shadow because it was the first of the month. and that it was the last of seven: but I doubt not the 7 day Sabbath was a shadow of the Sabbath to come, inas∣much as it was a Sabbath that is a day of Rest and re∣freshing. And so was the land of Canaan a type of the kingdome of heaven, inasmuch as it was a place of Rest after the Egyptian-bondage, and wearisome iourny through the wildernes. The like may be said of the new-moone and Feasts ioyned with the Sabbath, Col. 2. they were all in likelihood a shadow of the same thing to come, the kingdome of heaven; and in one and the same respect, I meane, in being times of Resting, Fea∣sting and reioycing. Againe, some that acknowledge the seaventh day Sabbath for a shaddow, will not haue it such from the beginning: but when as all other types and shaddowes were such from their first institution,The very foun∣dation of the Iewes Sab. was typicall: for God sanctified the 7 day because he had rested there∣in who will belieue them without manifest proofe? And shall I demaunde of them, when the 7 day Sabbath became a shadow, and which was the first Sabbath that was such; I doubt not, wee should all enter into the heavenly Sabbath before they would a∣gree vpon an answer to this question. Obserue, that the Apostle Hebr: 4, 4,I say, if not in time: for in like∣lihood God did not sanct. the 7 day, before the first 7 day was ended. Note these words, Gen. 2.3. because in it he had rested, not, would rest. speaketh of the 7 day, as rested vpon by God; and not, as sanctified by him, or inioyned to be sanctified of man: so that the 7 day then became a type, when God rested therein. The 7 day in order (if not in time) before it was sanctified, was Gods Rest, and conse∣quently, a shaddow of the rest remaining to the people of God. But this, by way of disgression: to returne. Inough hath beene said to make it appeare, that the
4 commandement is more Ceremonial, then th ; and therefore not (as the other) to be observed ∣ding to the letter: only I will add for a conclusion t saying of Augustine; Quisquis illum diem (Sabbatu) ob∣servat sicut litera sonat, carnaliter sapit, that is,Spig. & lit. cap. 14. Whosoeuer observeth the Sabbath, as the letter soundeth savou∣reth of the flesh. Now they which keepe the 7 day, & doe no worke therein, keepe the sabbath, as the letter of the precept soundeth. Their Handwriting then should haue beene blotted out, and not put in print, who teach, that the observation of the 7 day is a morall and perpe∣tuall duty, and that we may not so much as pick vp sticks in the same. Answere agreeable to the Doctrine of our Church. When the 8 commandement is read, and wee pray,So, for the rest of the comman. Lord, incline our hearts to keepe this Law, our words and meaning must agree; as in words, so in meaning, wee de∣sire grace not to steale: but here, not so. Though in words we desire God to incline our hearts to keepe the 7 day for Sabbath, and to doe no worke therein, yet not in meaning. It is said in the booke of Homylies, that whatsoever is found in the 4 commandement appertai∣ning to the law of nature,The 4 comman. bound the Israe∣lites to do that, which they were not bound to doe by the law of nature: but not vs Christi∣ans. This is the cōmon doctrine ought to be observed of all good Christians: our meaning then after the doctrine of our Church should be thus: Lord, incline our hearts to keepe this law, so far forth as it is the Law of nature. Or thus: Lord incline our hearts to keepe so much of this Law as apper∣taineth to the law of nature: which is the same in effect. Thus haue I answered a very needfull question in my
opinion: what other will iudge of this matter, I know t for mine owne part I iudge it so needfull to be knowne,Our Church hath taken order for the nstruct∣ion of the igno∣rant in this mat¦ter, I meane, by the booke of Homilyes: but in these dayes sew parishes haue that booke; in fewer it is read; and where ttis read, scarce one in an hundred (I feare) lear∣neth a right meaning by it. that with St Paul I would gladly spend & be spent to bring my ignorant brethren to a right meaning here∣s it not a lamentable case, when a man prayeth, Lord in e mine heart to keepe the 7 day for Sabbath and to doe no worke therein to meane according to his word; which is to obserue a shadow; and this, a kind of deniall that Christ is come? The Papists pray without vnderstand∣ing: but such pray with a sinfull vnderstanding. And if by some triall I may make coniecture, thus doe the greatest part of this kingdome: neyther is it any mervaile, if very many so doe, when they are so taught by some in these dayes. Againe, I finde by experience, that they wil hard∣ly be brought to a right meaning here: it seemeth to them so strange, that in the Publike Service one thing should be spoken, and another meāt; as that they should heare, the 7 day is the Sabbath, when not the 7 day, but the first day must be kept by them. And when to make them take more heed, I tell them, that to keepe the 7 day for Sabbath, and to doe no worke therein (as the words of the cōmandement are) is to savour of the flesh, which is death in the iudgment of St Augustine and other learned Divines:Sapere secun∣dum carnem mors est. Spir. & lit. cap. 14. this maketh them even to stand amazed at the strangnes of the matter. Moreover, as it is hard to bring them to, so no doubt will it be to keepe them in a right meaning; these words, the 7 day is the Sabbath, and, in it thou shalt doe no worke, still sounding in their eares. Which I write to this end, that my brethren may be more carefull often to ingeminate vnto their Parishio∣ners the doctrine of our Church delivered in the booke
of Homilyes. Truely, if ever, it had here need be, as the Prophet Esaie speaketh; precept vpon precept, precept vpon precept, line vpon line, line vpon line, here a little,Esai 28.10. and there a little: or rather indeed here a great deale, and there a great deale; and yet I feare mee all to little, as would be found vpon triall afterward. II. QVESTION. IN the iudgment of St Augustine we Christians are bound by the 4 commandement to keepe a figuratiue or spirituall Sabbath:Epist. 99. ad Ianuar. Inter omnia illa decem precepta &c. Among all those ten precepts, that alone, which is there placed of the Sabbath,Tertul: adver: iud. is commanded figuratiuely to be ob∣served. Thus Tertullian termeth Christ (whom, as the be∣loved Sonne wee must heare Mat. 17. Hebr. 1.) Sabbati spi∣ritualis cultorem: and Chrysostome saying, that Legis iustitia prima & salutaris decem habet mandata, setteth downe this for the 4, Cole Sabbatum spirituale,Cited by Mus: loc. commun. keepe a spirituall Sabbath. There is according to Augustine and other (as I ob∣serue in my little reading) a twofold keeping of those commandements touching the Sabbath, circumcision,There are two sorts of Sabbath, after Augustine and other: the one literall, carnall, or temporall: the other figuratiue, spirituall, and eternall. sacrifices, and the like the one, literall or carnall: the o∣ther, figuratiue or spirituall. Now the Israelites were bound to keepe these in a literall manner, that is, to doe no worke on the 7 day, to circumcise on the 8 day, & to offer lambs and such like in sacrifice to the Lord: We Christians are bound to keepe these in a figuratiue or spirituall manner, that is, to rest from the works of our
corrupt nature all the dayes of the worke, to circumcise the foreskins of our hearts, and to offer spirituall sacra∣fices of praise & thanksgiuing. These two kinds of bind∣ing (figuratiue and literall) I obserue in St Augustine, and some other: but by the common doctrine in these dayes there is a third, of that commandement touching the Sabbath though not of the other; namely, partly li∣terall; for it bindeth vs to sanctifie one day of the weeke. But there a question may wel be demanded. How shal the 4 commandement being delivered in such forme of words, binde vs to sanctifie any day, but only the sea∣venth? Suppose, that Christ had said to his Disciples: Re∣member the day of Resurrection to sanctifie it: sixe dayes of the weeke ye shall labour, and doe all that ye haue to doe; but the first day is the day of Resurrection: in it you shall doe &c. How should this commandement binde vs to sanctifie any day, but onely the first, the day of Resurrection? So God saying: Remember the sabbath (or, day of Rest) to sanctifie it: 6 dayes shalt thou labour, & doe al that thou hast to doe; but the 7 day is the Sabbath &c. How should this commandement binde vs to sanctifie any day but onely the seaventh, the day wherein God rested, and which the Iewes sanctified? I haue thought good thus to vn∣fold the 4 com∣mandement for the better vnderstanding of that which followeth.Answere of a great Divine heretofore. In the 4 commandement we haue to obserue (.1.) The commandement it selfe briefly delivered, & is thus: Remember the Sabbath to sanctifie it. (.2.) Then fol∣loweth an Explication in order, God shewing first,
which is the Sabbath; the seventh day is the Sabbath to the Lord thy God: and after, how it is sanctified; in it thou shalt doe no worke (.3.) Lastly a reason is yeelded, why God requireth this service:Redem: in 4 precept. for in sixe dayes the Lord made &c. Thus Zanchius in effect; thus Virell likewise in his Grounds of Religion: and this analisis of the 4 com∣mandement is so naturall that every one of vnpar∣tiall iudgement must needes approue it and I could wish that such as vndertake to handle the 4th comman∣dement, would take notice of it. So then, this is (for substance) the whole 4 comman∣dement; Remember the Sabbath to sanctifie it: as for that which followeth, it is eyther an explication, or a Reason. Here now the word Sabbath a great Divine would haue taken in a generall sence: so that God say∣ing; Remember the Sabbath to sanctifie it; That thou maist the better conceaue his meaning. Suppose, God had said to the Israelites; Remēber to honour your King, & Saul is your kinge: When Saul was dead, and David come in∣to his place; this commandement, Remember to hon∣our your kinge, had bound them still, asmuch to honour David now, as Saul before. So, God saying; Remember the Sabbath to sanctifie it, and the 7 day is the Sabbath: when the 7 day ceased to be the Sabbath, & the first day came in his place; this commandement, Remember the Sabbath to sanctifie it, may binde aswell to sanctifie the first day now, as it did the 7 day heretofore. Thus teacheth a great Divine: but I cannot easily subscribe herevnto. In my opinion God saying, Remember the Sabbath to sancti∣fie it; is all one, as if he had said, Remember the 7 day to
sanctifie it. The Sabbath is the 7 day, and the 7 day is the Sabbath, in the scriptures: many reasons there are, which will not suffer vs to approue his doctrine. (.1.) The dayes of the weeke may be named thus; the first day, the second day &c. or thus, the day of crea∣ting light, the day of creating the firmament &c. As now the first day, and the day of creating light, are the same: so likewise, the seaventh day, and the day of Rest. And this appeareth to be the iudgment of Augustine, Eusebi∣us,So likewise it is taken in some Courts: a proces citing to ap∣peare dic Sab∣bati, is vpon Sa¦turday. Tertullian &c. seeing in their books by the Sabbath is meant the 7 day, and by the Lords day is meant the first: for otherwise they would haue vsed the names of Sab∣bath and Lords day for one & the same day of the weeke. (.2.) By the word Sabbath in the end of the comman∣dement must needes be meant the 7 day only. For ob∣serue: and rested the 7 day; wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath, & sanctified it. Here thou seest, that Gods resting on the 7 day, is the reason, wherefore he sanctified the Sabbath: and can it be a reason of sanctifiing any other day besides the seventh; especially, when he laboured on all the other?The reason of the 7 dayes in¦stitution va∣nished as a sha∣dow with the shadow. Suppose, we had the like speech in the New Testament, as thus: He rose againe vpon the first day; wherefore he blessed the day of Resurrection, and sanctified it: who would not take the day of Resurrection here for the first day only? Adde, that were not Sabbath & seventh day the same, it should rather haue beene said; Wherefore the Lord blessed the 7th day, or this Sabbath; then the Sabbath. Againe, it is said, blessed the Sabath, the meaning is, in the beginning: and now turne to Gen. 2. and there it is said, that God blessed the 7 day, and sanctified it. These words
then, Sabbath and seventh day, are vsed promiscuè in the Scripture (.3.) By this doctrine the 4 commandement should be of larger extent, then that commandement in the beginning (suppose, it were a commandement as some will haue it:) for there it is said, God blessed the 7 day, not, the Sabbath. (.4.) Thus should the 4 comman∣dement consist of a generall commandement, and a par∣ticular the generall, Remember the Sabbath to sanctifie it: the particular, The 7 day shall be the Sabbath. (5) Had they who first appointed that order of reading the 4 com∣mandement, and the people praying after, beene of this iudgment: they would mee thinks haue put the first in place of the seventh, the first day, and not the 7, being now the Sabbath to the Lord our God. Suppose, God had given this commandement to the Israelites: Re∣member to honour your kinge, and Saul is your kinge. This commandement being read in the Synagogues, and the people praying after; Lord haue mercy on vs &c. when Saul was dead, and David kinge; would they haue still read the commandement in the same forme of words, Remember to honour your kinge, and Saul is your kinge? I cannot belieue it. They then no doubt, who first ap∣pointed this order in the Church, tooke the Sabbath & the 7 day for the same in the 4 commandement. Answeres of other in these dayes. That the Sabbath and the 7 day are the same, is ac∣knowledged by some other in these dayes: but they would haue the word seventh taken in a generall sence;
so that (I conceaue) they would haue the 4 commande∣ment read thus. Remember the Sabbath to sanctifie it &c. sixe daies &c. but a seventh day is the Sabbath &c Here∣vnto my answere is (.1.A seventh day, that is, one of seven; as I vn∣derstand them.) That the word truly and pro∣perly translated, is the seuenth for the particle is there vsed: neyther I belieue, did any ever translate it otherwise (.2.) Thus should the word be taken in one sence in the beginning of the commandement; and in another, afterward. For after it is said; and rested on the 7 day: here by seuenth day must needes be meant one certaine day. (.3.) If God sanctified a seventh day, then he made man on a sixth day; & were not this to confound every dayes worke? (.4) The same word is vsed Gen. 2; and there it must be translated the seuenth day: for it were absurd to say,in it. God blessed a 7 day, because he rested on the 7 day: if God blessed a seuenth day, then he rested vpon a 7 day, Gen. 2. vers. 3. (.5.) Thus should not god from Sinai appoint, what day of the weeke the Israelites should sanctifi; & so indeed writeth a reverend Divine; It was never commanded nor appointed, what one certaine day should bee kept among seaven, but that there should be observed a se∣venth day. But should Paul haue taught in the Iewes Synagogues, that God from Sinai did no more appoint their day to be sanctified, then ours; and that Christians sanctified the Lords day, kept the 4 commandement ac∣cording to the letter, asmuch as they: I leaue it to other to consider, what would haue followed therevpon. There are other againe which will haue it read, the 7 day is the Sabbath to the &c. but yet by their doctrine any day of the weeke may be meant hereby, and with them
the Lords day is the seventh.That the Lords day is, and must be, the 7th day; beginneth to be somthing a com∣mon doctrine. Thus a learned Preacher wrote vnto mee. The 7 day alone is sanctified, but the Lord hath not assigned any immutable Date of time, from which this 7 must be reckoned: for he never sayth in any place, God sanctified the 7 from such or such a Date. So the obser∣ving of that number is immutable, but the taking of one only beginning, from which to begin the account is not im∣mutable: had it beene, the Apostles, in whose time the chang of Dates began, would sure haue knowne it, and not suffered such chang without reproof. This I receaued from a lear∣ned Preacher. Now, vnto those his words; for he neuer sayth in any place, God sanctified &c. my answere is, That he had no need so to say, unlesse there had beene more then sixe dayes before the first seventh, or that hee had blessed any other seaventh day since. Neyther of which being so, the Date must needes bee from the day, wherein God separated the light from the dark∣nes: and what more certaine Date of time, from whence to beginne the reckoning, then from the beginning of the creation, before which there was no time at all? A∣gaine, whereas he sayth, that the change of Dates began in the Apostles dayes: I would know, where this doth ap∣peare. Rather the contrary appeareth:Act: 20. 1. Cor. 16. for by the first of the weeke (as themselues say) is meant the Lords day. See then, the ancient Date of time is continued by the A∣postles: for if the Lords day were the first of the weeke, the Iwes Sabbath must needes be the 7th and last of the weeke in the Apostles time, as it was in the beginning. I haue much mervailed, wherefore some must nedes haue the Lords day be the 7th, so contrary to the Scrip∣tures,
who terme it the first of the weeke in two places: and at the mouth of two witnesses we would thinke, this matter should be established. But it seemeth, as Isaac said,Gen. 27. Iacob haue I blessed, & he shalbe blessed: so they thinke; God blessed the 7th day, and it must be blessed: where∣fore vnlesse the Lords day come to be the 7th, it is not blessed & sanctified. But they should consider, that God did not blesse the day,The Lords day will come to be the 7 when Esau commeth o be Iacob. because it was the 7th had he, then were it some reason, that the name and blessing should still goe together: but now, he blessed the day, because he had rested therein; and if these two may be sundered, much more the other. What God hath put asunder, let not man ioyne together,Gen. 2.3 Lords day and seventh day: it will not procure them a blessing to goe about in such sort to maintaine the trueth. If their doctrine can other∣wise be maintained, I desire them in Christs name, that they would if their doctrine cannot otherwise be main∣tained, I admonish them in the feare of God to teach such doctrine, as may. Were it once receaved that wee must sanctifie the 7th day; and they, neyther by Scrip∣ture, reason, nor Fathers can proue, that the day we doe now sanctifie, is the seventh: will it not come to passe, that we shall fall back to the Iewes day? The Scripture is against them: and that in two places. Act. 20. 1. Cor. 16, Reason is against them: for if the Iewes Sabbath vntill the change were the 7, how should the next day be the seventh also? the name seventh hath reference to other dayes going before: shall one and the same day bee the seventh of one weeke, and the sixth of the next weeke? Now, among the Fathers, Ierome is against them, for he
termeth Wednesday the fourth of the weeke: Si dies obser∣vare non licet, & menses, & tempora, & annos; nos quoque simile crimen incurrimus, quartam Sabbati observantes, & Parasceven, & diem Dominicam &c. Com: in Ep: ad Gal: cap: 4. Finally, by this answere, as by the former, the word seventh should be taken in one sence in the beginning of the commandement, and in another afterward for after it is said, and rested on the 7th day. Here by seventh day must needs be meant one certaine day: no man will say, that God rested on the day, we now keepe holy. A∣gaine, if by seventh day Ex. 20. any day be meant aswell as Saturday: by first day Act: 20. why shall not any day be meant, aswell as Sunday? But not to stand longer herea∣bout: this last answere cannot stand without the over∣throw of Gods weeke: that it may be receaved, God had need to make the world againe. A likelier answere, then either of the former. Chrisostome on Gen. 2. hath these words. Iam hìc ab i∣nitio doctrinam hanc nobis insinuat Deus &c. Here from the beginning God doth insinuate this doctrine, that one day in the circle of the weeke should be severed for spirituall worke. Note the word insinuateth. Dr Field hath these words in his 5 booke, and 29 chapter. Presupposing the knowledg of the creation, reason convinceth vs, that one day of seven must be a day of rest. Reason convinceth. Some such thing I thinke must be said here: as that God by giving this commandement to the Israelites, doth insinuate, that
Christians should sanctifie one day of the weeke. Or thus: Inasmuch as God, having chosen to himselfe a Church commanding thē, after 6 dayes labour to sanc∣tifie the 7 day; reason convinceth, or this is an argument, that it is Gods will, we Christians (now his Church) should doe in some sort, as the Israelites by the 4th com∣mandement were bound to doe heretofore. The 4th commandement bindeth vs to sanctifie one day of the weeke: that is, It bindeth vs to belieue, that it is Gods will, we should sanctifie one day of the weeke; seing (as thereby it appeareth) he once appointed the Israelites after 6 dayes labour to sanctifie the seventh day, & the same reasons in part still continue. To end this matter. Were it a law of this kingdome set forth long agone in these words: Remember to fast vpō Thursday; We in these times faring well vpon Thursday, & fasting vpō friday; some man should say, that the fore∣named law bound vs so to doe; & vnlesse we did fast vpō Friday, we brake that Statute: who hearing this, would not be much moved at the strangenes of the matter, & presently demand; How shall this be, seing the Statute speaketh of Thursday? How can such a Statute binde vs to fast vpon Friday? Now, how the like vnto this may be, I haue shewed with the best skill I haue: and if any thinke my skill herein defectiue, and say; Never any law of God or man did binde in such manner, as you speake of. I must confesse it, in my knowledge: but did ever any other law of God or man appoint a thinge to be done on one day of the weeke, and binde to doe it on another day; or appoint a thinge to be done in one place, and
binde to doe it in another place? Such a law (if there were ever any such) did binde in such manner, as I speake of: or if any hath more skill to answere this question, I greatly desire him to shew his skill. The question is such, as we would thinke, every one of the meanest vnderstan∣ding would demand it first of all: and it is made a need∣full question to be answered, by reason of those strange interpretations of Gods word aforemencioned, I mean that the Sabbath and seauenth day are not the same in the fourth Commandement: againe that by seauenth day in the fourth commandement any day of the week may be signified. Should way bee giuen to such inter∣pretations of the Scripture, who seeth not what would follow therevpon? It doth not a little moue me, when in Protestant writers I read such passages as this; It was neuer commanded nor appointed, what one certaine day should be kept among seauen, &c. Consider well of the matter, and thou wilt say, that I am not moued with∣out cause. III QVESTION. HOW shall it appeare to be the law of Nature to sanctifie one day in every weeke? Answere. Almighty God having in 6 dayes created the heaven and the earth, rested vpon the 7 day,Gen. 2.3. and therfore sancti∣fied it; as is said, Gen: 2. Hence now some would gather,
that it is the law of nature to sanctifie one day in euery weeke: but indeed it will hence rather follow, that it is the law of nature to sanctifie the precise seauenth day. Vpon these premises: God made the world in six daies, and resting on the seauenth day sanctified it; by the light of nature or reason this inference should rather bee made: therefore it is the law of nature to sanctifie the seauenth day. Then doe we most neerely follow Gods example, when we worke vpon those very dayes, which he wrought vpon; and sanctifie that very day, which he sanctified. God in the beginning sanctified the sea∣uenth day: therefore it is the law of nature to sanctifie the seauenth day; is a neerer inference than that other: therefore it is the law of nature to sanctifie one day of the seauen or weeke. The like may be said touching the placing of the fourth commandement among the mo∣ralls, if any would fetch an argument thence to prooue this matter. In the 2 to the Romans Paul saith, That the Gentiles did by nature the things contained in the Law,Rom. 2:14. and were a law to themselues: From which text happily an argumēt might be fetched to proue as much the law of nature, as M. Dod affirmeth, that is, to haue solemne times; for so the Gentiles had: but now the Gentiles sanctified not one day in euery weeke. It will rather follow from the practise of the Gentiles, that it is the law of nature to haue a place appointed, than one day in euery weeke appointed for publike meetings: the Gentiles had Tem∣ples. 1. Cor. 11.14.In the 1 Cor. 11. S. Paul hath these words: Doth not
even nature it selfe teach you, that if a man hath long haire, it is a shame vnto him? Now should I say in like manner, doth not euen nature it selfe teach vs to sanctifie one day in euery weeke? For one that would affirme, many I thinke at first would deny, that nature taught it them, they see no such thing by the light of nature, they had neuer any naturall inclination to sanctifie one day of e∣uery seauen. But though at first euery man will be ready thus to say, yet vpon consideration happily, it will seem the best order: and if we see by The light in vs (whereof Christ speaketh Mat. 6.Though it be not by any expresse command from Christ or his Apo∣stles, but by an ordinance of the Church (as is the doctrine of ma∣ny great Diuines, & of our church in the booke of Homilies) that we sanctifie the Lords day, rather then another day in the weeke: yet can I maintaine, that it is the law of Nature to sanctifie this very day; for it is The best order. And this I think no man of iudge∣ment will once offer to deny; vn∣lesse perhaps, because some hold a superstitious conceit of the day.) that it is the best or∣der to sanctifie one day in euery weeke; then me thinks it may bee said, that nature doth teach vs so to doe. Let all things (saith Paul) be done decently and in order, 1. Cor. 14. This command of Paul is the very law of nature: doth not euen nature it selfe teach vs as much? The best order is the will of God, and the law of nature. This is it then which I say. If reason, the light in vs, or Nature (for these I take for the same) teacheth it to bee the best order to sanctifie one day in euery weeke, then is it to bee held the law of nature so to doe: but Reason, the light in vs,What the Philo∣sophers tearme Reason; Christ tearmeth The light in vs; and Paul, Nature. or Nature teacheth it to bee the best order to sanctifie one day in every weeke: there∣fore it is to be held the law of nature so to doe. This is the only argument to prooue this matter. But here are two things, which I thinke good to ad∣vertise thee of One is, that we should not tearme it Mo∣rall to sanctifie one day in the weeke, though it bee the
law of nature so to doe. Some would haue the Morall law and the law of Nature to be the same: but when they haue better considered the matter, I doubt not, they will be of another minde. The law of nature (to distinguish of it so farre forth as concerneth the present purpose,The la ∣ture is partly morall, & part∣ly circumstantial  twofold. First, the law of nature bindeth vs to performe Morall duties, as to pray, giue almes &c. every one by the light of nature knoweth, that he must doe good, vertuous, and godly actions to his power. Secondly  of nature bindeth vs to obserue cir∣cumstances,  time and place, about the performance of morall duties; that good may then and there be done when and where it is best to bee done: and this againe we all knowe by the light of nature in vs. Now then, inasmuch as the law of nature bindeth vs to performe morall duties, let it be ed morall: it is a morall law of nature to pr to giue almes, to relieue the op∣pressed &c. But inasmuch as the law of nature bindeth vs to obserue circumstances, as time and place, about the performance of morall vertues, it should in my vn∣derstanding be tearmed circumstantiall. Time, as place, is a Circumstance; & therefore I cannot like, that a com∣mandement, whereby the obseruation of any time is re∣quired, should be tearmed morall: it properly belong∣eth vnto those commandements, whereby morall ver∣tues are inioyned. And this seemeth to bee the iudge∣ment of our most iudicious Divine D. Field, who ex∣cepteth the fourth commandement out of the number of the Moralls, booke 5. chap. 22. S. Augustine hath their words, in Galat. cap. 3. Scine priùs debet quis, &c. We ought
first to knowe the  kes of the law are twofold, for part belong vnto S  nd part vnto manners. Vnto the Sacraments th  ircumcision of the flesh,Note that hee saith the Tem∣porall Sabath; and not only the litterall, or sea∣venth day Sa∣bath. the tempo∣rall Sabbath t  he, sacrifices, and innumerable such like obseruat  into mann Thou shalt not kill;  shalt no it adultery; Thou shalt not beare false  and  If now the temporall Sabbath did  nners: if a Jew sanctifying his Sab∣bath  me a morall duty; then is it not mo∣rall  e day of the weeke: for the seauenth day to e Iewes was, as this law of nature it selfe, seeing they laboured all the six daies going before. If the Tem∣porall Sabbath belongeth not to manners, neither doth ours: for ours is aswell temporall, as the Iewes, though not so litterall or shadowish; ours is no more eternall, then theirs was. The other thinge, which I thinke good to advertise thee of, is; that though it be the law of nature to sancti∣fie one day of every weeke: yet not absolutely, but after a sort. After a sort; for it is most commonly the best or∣der: not absolutely; for it is not alwayes the best order. One and the same order cannot be best at all times and in all places: circumstances alter matters of circum∣stance; so that, what Nature teacheth vs to doe at one time, it may forbid vs to doe at another time.This which is a circumstantiall law of nature one yeare, may not bee such the next yeare. To in∣stance: the last yeare of Kinge Edward the sixt, Nature taught the godly (it was the best order) to meete at ap∣pointed times in publick Temples, there to pray, re∣ceaue the Sacraments &c. but the next yeare following, being the first of Queene Mary, Nature or Reason for∣bad
them so to doe, and taught them to meete, when with safety they might, in private houses, fields, or woods, as they did in the Primitiue Church during the times of persecution: this was then the best order. A∣gaine, the absolute Lawes of Nature may not be bro∣ken in case of necessity: a man may not forsweare him selfe, lye, or steale, to saue his life: but to saue the liues of his cattell a man may labour all the week and make e∣very day working day. The Sabbath  said before) was to the Israelites, as this law of Nature: nay, it was more;Col. 2. for the Sabbath was a shadow of things to come: yet in case of necessity the Israelites might breake and pro∣fane the Sabbath, as in the time of the Macchabees some intended to doe.1. Mac. 2. The Sabbath (as Christ sayth) was made for (the good of) man, and not man for (the observa∣tion of) the Sabbath:Mar. 2. That he must be pinched with hunger, that hee must loose his Oxe fallen into a pit, & the like. so that whensoever it fell out, as of∣ten it did, that mans good must be impaired, or the Sab∣bath must be violated; the Sabbath ought rather to be violated, as being inferiour to the good of man, for which it was made and ordained. Such as will haue it the absolute Law of Nature to sanctifie one day in every weeke, of three thinges must affirme one. (.1.) Eyther they must say, that in case of necessity a man may not labour all the weeke: but this no man doth say, in my knowledg. (2) Or else they must say, that a man labouring all the weeke, doth sanctifie one of the dayes: and this some seeme ready to affirme. But if to sanctifie a day be to forbeare our owne worke, and to spend it in the service of God: how doe I sancti∣fie that day, which I spend about mine owne busines. If
he that laboureth all day, may sanctifie a Sabbath or Rest: then he that feasteth all day may sanctifie a Fast also. Moreover, I would demaund: When I labour hard e∣very day of the weeke about the same needfull busines (suppose, repairing of the Sea bankes, defending a citty from the enemy, seeking cattell covered with snow &c.) which of the dayes doe I sanctifie? If I sanctifie one, I may aswell sanctifie all: and then it seemeth I ought so to doe, as being the better (.3.) Or thirdly, they must say; that an absolute law of Nature may be broken in case of necessity: but this againe I knowe none, that will say; though some affirme, that a law of Nature may be bro∣ken by speciall commandement from God thus the Is∣raelites killed the Canaanites, and brake that law, Thou shalt not kill. But to speake properly, the Israelites did not kill the Canaanites, but God killed them by the Israelites hands: ipse non occidit, qui ministerium debet iubenti, sayth Augustine: it is the Iudge, and not the Executioner,Aug: de Civitat. that putteth a thiefe to death. In like sort, to speake properly the Israelites did not rob the Canaanites, nor the Egyp∣tians: for god whose the earth is, gaue vnto the Israelites the goods of them both. D. Field saith touching all the commandements excepting the fourth;In the .5. booke: chap: 22. It is resolued that God cannot permit a man to doe the things forbidden by them. Indeed, how should God permit a man to doe a∣gainst nature, as it was in his perfection? Whensoeuer a law of nature is broken, Gods image, after which wee were created, is defaced in some measure and God can∣not permit, that his Image in vs should be defaced. Now of this iudgement (among other great Divines)
M. Calvin was, I make no questiō: thou maist perceaue by his manner of writing, that as he would not haue it morall, so neyther would he haue it the absolute Law of Nature, to sanctifie one day in every week. Thus he writeth. Institut: lib: 2. in 4 praecept. Ita evanescunt nugae Pseudoprophetatum, qui Iudaica opinione populum superioribus seculis imbuerunt, nihil ali∣ud afferentes nisi abrogatum esse quod cerimoniale erat in hoc mandato (id vocant sua lingua diei septimae taxationem) remanere autem quod morale est, nempe vnius diei observa∣tionem in hebdomade.Calvin will not haue it morall to sancti∣fie one day of e∣very weeke; which yet is the common doct∣rine in these dayes. Atqui id nihil aliud est, quam in Iudaeorum contumeliam diem mutare, diei sanctitatem ani∣mo eandem retinere:Againe, he will not haue the Lords day holy, as the Sab∣bath was, that is, Sacramentally holy: but in these dayes some haue published, that there is asmuch difference betweene the Lords day and other dayes of the weeke, as betweene Sacramentall bread, and common bread. siquidem manet nobis etiamnum par mysterij in diebus significatio, quae apud Iudaeos locum habe∣bat. Et sanè videmus, quid tali doctrina profecerint: qui e∣nim eorum constitutionibus haerent, crassa carnali{que} Sabba∣thismi superstitione Iudaeos ter superant. Chrysostome in a Sermon against obser∣uers of Newmoones. &c.
A DIALOGVE BETVVEENE A IEVV and a CHRISTI∣AN of the common Opinion. Christian. I Keepe the Sabbath, otherwise cal∣led by the name of Lords day.1. Part. Here is shewed the difference betweene Iewes and Christians about keeping the Sabbath. Iew. I keepe the Sabbath, as for your otherwise called, I finde it not in our Scriptures: will you christen the Sabbath with this new name? think you thereby to make it more and lesse Jewish? Chr. I keepe the Sabbath in obedi∣ence to the fourth commandement in the Decalogue. Iew. And I keep the Sabbath in obedience to the same Commandement. Chr. I keepe not the Sabbath as a shadow of things to come. Iew. Neither doe I so keep it: Moses and the Prophets teach vs no such thing, at leastwise in our vnderstanding; as you may perceaue by those many thousands of our nation,Act. 21. who beleeuing in Christ, yet were zealous of the Law, which they would not haue beene, had they knowne, that the Sabbath,
New moone &c. were shadowes of things to come, and the body was of Christ, as since your Apostle Paul makes you beleeue. Chr. I keep the Sabbath on the first day. Iew. I keepe the Sabbath on the seauenth day: and in so doing I fulfill the fourth commandement as well as you by your owne doctrine; and better in my vnder∣standing. Chr. I forbeare all weeke-daie work, & spend the Sabbath in the seruice of God, both in publike and in priuate Iew. And I doe likewise. Chr. I dresse my dinner, and doe such like workes on the Sabbath. Iew. I dare doe no worke, for so hath God charged, Exo. 20. & I finde,Gen. 2. that he himselfe did none heretofore; he rested frō all his worke on the seauenth day. You Christians indeed are bold to doe some worke: but take heed; for we know that a mā for gathering sticks (not cutting down wood) was stoned to death. Chr. We are as certaine, that we may doe such workes, as wee are sure Christ came into the world, and was crucified by you. You were often angry with him for his doings on the Sabbath; & iudg∣ed him not of God,Ioh: 9. because he kept not the Sabbath, & when opportunity serued, you nailed him to the crosse; thinking happily that he being taken out of the way, the Sabbath should be better kept in this respect. But whē you nailed him to the Crosse,Col. 2. he nailed the handwriting of ordinances to the Crosse also, and tooke it out of the way: since which time the Sabbath is not to be kept as before. You will one day repent your crucifying of Christ: for you did not only shed innocent blood; but also made the obseruation of many things in your law sinne vnto you. You bid vs take heed about our keeping
the Sabbath, but looke to your selues, you were best. Iew. Wherefore?Part. 2. It is said that the Iewes Sabbath was Ceremoniall in regard it was the seauenth day and here thou hast some light, what to iudge of this doctrine. Chr. You keepe the Sabbath on the seauenth day. Iew. Is it not said in the fourth com∣mandement, the seauenth day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God? Shall God haue two Sabbaths in one weeke? For the seuenth day must needs be still his Sabbath, the day wherein he rested. And suppose, that the fourth Com¦mandement (as you teach) bindeth to sanctifie one day in the weeke, doth it not binde to sanctifie the seauenth day, as much as any other? Can you blame vs herein, e∣ven by your owne doctrine? Chr. Wee cannot blame you absolutely for keeping the seauenth day: but you keepe it in obedience to the ceremoniall part of the 4th commandement. Iew. I doe not well vnderstand this: I pray explaine it. Chr. J will the best I can: but I had rather you should goe to some other, who can doe it better. The fourth Commandement is partly morall, & partly Ceremoniall or shadowish: the morall part bin∣deth to sanctifie one day of the weeke: the Ceremoniall or shadowish part bindeth to sanctifie the seauenth day only. Now to sanctifie the seauenth day in obedience to the morall part, is tolerable: but you keepe it in obe∣dience to the shadowish part, for you take your selues bound to sanctifie the seauenth day alone: and so you keeping the seauenth day, obserue a shadow; whereas did we keep the same day, we should not; for we would keepe it in obedience to the morall part: and then wee might sanctifie the seauenth day, as well as any other; vnlesse happily, for some other considerations. Iew. This doctrine is strange to me: you speake much
of Shadow, and shadowish: take heed this doctrine bee not rather shadowish then substantiall. Had your Apo∣stles taught such doctrine in the Synagogues, I beleeue our Rabbins would haue smiled at it, neither would so many of our Nation haue followed them. To keep the Sabbath on the seauenth day, as not bound by the 4th Commandement to keepe it on that only day, is tolera∣ble: but to keepe the Sabbath on the seauenth day, as bound by the fourth Commandement to keepe it on that only day, is to obserue a shadow. This is very nice doctrine: Well, haue you any thing else to say, wherein we are to blame? Chr. 3. Part. It is said, that the strict rest was Ceremoniall: & here thou hast some light, what to iudge of this doctrine also. Numb. 15.Yes. You forbeare to dresse meat, and to doe such like workes on the Sabbath: for which (were there nothing else) Christ at his cōming to iudgement would cast you into hell. Iew. Did not your Christ giue out, that he was the sonne of God? Chr. Yes, and so he is: what of that? Iew. God put a man to death in this world, because he did gather stickes on the Sabbath: and will the sonne of God cast vs into hell, because wee doe not gather stickes, kindle a fire, and dresse meat therein? Chr. That he will: for this strict rest was shadowish al∣so. Jt hath beene an olde saying, that the Ceremonies ought to haue some time to be honestly buried: but now it is too long to keepe them aboue ground; they stinke by this time. And least you should maruell, that I say, Christ wil condemne you for your manner of kee∣ping the Sabbath; knowe, that to obserue a shadow, is to denie after a sort, that he came into the world. Jt is too much by word to denie the sonne of Mary the Vir∣gin
to be the Christ; but you denie it by your deeds al∣so, as long as you obserue a shadow. A Father of our Church, Augustine by name (whom wee esteeme as much as you doe any of your Rabbins) speaking of the Sabbath, doth say, Whosoeuer keepeth that day, as the letter soundeth, sauoreth of the flesh; & such are yee. Iew. Though we keepe the Sabbath according to the letter (as by your leaue some Christians also doe in their vnderstan∣ding) yet we keepe it not as a shadow, as I said before. Chr. That's nothing in my opinion: you keepe it in o∣bedience to the shadowish part of the fourth comman∣dement. You keepe not circumcision neither as a sha∣dow: and put case beside, that you did not obserue pre∣cisely the eight day, and more, that you did not cut off all the foreskinne: yet this would not excuse you from obseruing a shadow. As neither shall it excuse those a∣mongst vs (for some such I feare there are) who though they keepe not the Feast of Whitsuntide as a Ceremo∣ny, neither at the same time, nor altogether in the same manner, as you doe; yet through ignorance keepe it in obedience to that your law, Leuit. 23. For this is euen all in all, to obserue any day, time, meat, &c. in obedience to a shadowish Commandement: which I desire you, and those of my brethren, whom it may concerne, to consider well off; and so, Fare yee well. Iew. Nay, I pray, be not so hasty. I may become a Christian, and then some doubt may trouble my mind. Chr. What is that? Iew. You say, that the strict rest is shadowish: and by your doctrine he which resteth too strictly, obserueth a shadow; for he doth it in obedience
to the ceremoniall part of the fourth commandement, mistaking it for the moral. I would now demand of you, whether he doth not rest too strictly, who forbeareth that worke on the Sabbath, which is not forbidden by the moral part of the fourth commandement? Chr. Yes; for that worke is forbidden by the ceremoniall part. All worke is forbidden by the fourth commandement: now the greater workes are forbidden by the morall part; and the lesser, by the ceremoniall part: and where the moral part ceaseth to forbid, there the ceremoniall part begin∣neth to forbid; as I conceaue by this our common di∣stinction. Iew. Me thinks you Christians are here be∣tweene Scylla and Charibdis: you can hardly chuse, but either breake the morall part, or fulfill the ceremoniall part of the fourth commandement. I pray shew mee, how I may rightly discerne the partition; for there must needes bee very little difference betweene some workes forbidden by the morall part, and other forbidden by the ceremoniall. Againe, whereas I perceaue by your words erwhile, that to forbeare dressing of meat, is to rest too strictly, and to fulfill the ceremoniall part: I would learne of you, whether about dressing of meat, I need not feare breaking the morall part? Chr. Yes, you may labour as hard about dressing meat, as at plow; or you may bestow too much time thereabout; and thus breake the morall part. Againe, I must tell you, that you may dresse meat, and yet fulfill the ceremonial part: for you may seeth an Egge, and refuse to seeth Flesh; & so rest two strictly. Iew. It is needfull then, that you define precisely, what meat may be dressed, in what ma∣ner,
how long I may be about it, how hard I may labour thereabout, whether vntil I sweat or not: so, for seruing cattle; whether I may carry burthens of fodder into the field, how big burthens I may carry, how farre I may carry them &c. and so, for many other matters. Chr. I maruell that our learned men, who haue written so largely vpon the fourth commandement, haue not bet∣ter canvased this matter; to say nothing, that they doe not agree among themselues. But I can stay no lon∣ger with you: only I say, when you become a Christian, if you come to me, you shall haue my best advise. FINIS A note touching the Lords day. I Knowe not any learned and godly Divine, but will acknowledge, that the Lords daie is of great antiqui∣tie, and had his beginning from some of the Apostles: but if any man would haue vs beleeue, that Christ did institute it, and that from the time of his resurrection, it hath beene generally obserued of the faithfull; hee must bring better proofe, then hitherto I haue seene any. The Church of Christ cōsisted of Iewes & Gentiles: and as touching the beleeuing Jewes at Jerusalem, it is out of question, that for many yeares they obserued the same day as before: for they were zealous of the Law, one part whereof was the obseruation of the seauenth daie.Act. 21.20. If Baptisme would not serue them insteed of Cir∣cumcision:
who can beleeue, that the Lords daie would serue them insteed of the Sabbath? Nether is it to bee maruelled, that they were zealous of the Law, when as Iames and the Elders did not so much as teach them, that the law of commandements contained in ordinan∣ces, was abolished; as is manifest in that they desired St Paul to make it appeare by his practise,Act 21.24. that the report of him was nothing, & that he himselfe also walked or∣derlie, and kept the Law. But were they zealous of the Sabbath, or not: seeing the vnbeleeuing Jewes were so angrie with Christ afore time for the carriage of a bed on the Sabbath,Ioh 5. and at this time with S. Paul for his pro∣phanation of the Temple,Act. 21.28. as they supposed; it cannot be, that they would suffer their Sabbath, and other ho∣lidaies to be prophaned by Christians, as long as their commonweale stood. The Church then at Jerusalem a long time obserued the Sabbath or seauenth daie: and now that besides the Sabbath, and other holidaies inioi∣ned by the law, they sanctified the Lords daie, and so re∣sted from worke two daies in every weeke; I cannot be∣leeue without some proofe, and hitherto I haue seene none at all. As touching the Churches of the Gentiles: it see∣meth by the Scriptures, that some of them for a time came together rather on the Iewes Sabbath, then on any other daie: indeed S. Paul, as he yeelded lesse to the Jewes then other, so happilie in the Churches by him∣selfe established, hee beganne sooner then other to ap∣point their meetings on the first daie of the week; which daie growing more & more in request, before the yeare
96, obtained the name of Lords day: which name had it beene giuen, when S. Paul wrote his first Epistle to the Corinthians, S. Luke the Acts, it is likely, that one of them would haue vsed it; and yet it is not vnlikely, that this name (Lords day) was giuen, as soone as the day be∣gan to be in any great account. Now, about this Lords Day, the first day of the weeke (commonly called Sunday) there are in these times three opinions something differing the one from the o∣ther. 1 Opinion. It is the will and command of God, that Christians should sanctifie one daie of euery weeke: & as he bound the Israelites heretofore to sanctifie the Sabbath or sea∣uenth day; so in this time of the Gospell hee bindeth vs Christians to sanctifie the Lords day, or first daie of the weeke. 2 Opinion. It is the will and command of God, that Christians should sanctifie one day of euery weeke: but whereas he bound the Israelites heretofore to sanctifie the sea∣venth day alone; hee left it to the Christian Church to chuse their day, and it hath chosen the Lords day. 3 Opinion.Redemp. in 4 praecep. It is the will and command of God to sanctifie some time, aliquam temporis partem, as Zanchius speaketh: whē this time shall be, God left to the Christian Church to appoint, and it hath appointed the Lords day. Of the former opinion, I scarce knowe any Divines of note, vnlesse of late yeares: betweene the two latter
opinions there is in respect of vs little or no difference at all, for by both the Lords day is the command of God mediatly; God mediatly, and by the Magistrate bindeth vs Christians to sanctifie the Lords day. Obiect. Then the Gouernours of the Church may alter the day; yea, they may appoint the first of one weeke, the third of the next, the fift of the next &c. Answ. It doth not follow: for the best order is the will of God, and law of Nature. The Gouernours then can∣not set downe what order they will, neither touching the time and place of Gods worship, neither touching other things belonging therevnto: but what in their vnderstanding is the best order, they are bound to set downe. Obiect. If God mediatly, and by the Magistrate bindeth vs Christians to sanctifie the Lords day: certainely, this bond is so weake, that very many will easily breake it. Answ. This bond is strong enough to hold him, that is not very vnruly. In the fift of Marke we read of one, that be∣ing often bound with fetters and chaines, brake them in peeces; no Man could binde him strong enough: but when Christ had cast out the euill Spirit, they see him (saith the text) sitting,Mar. 5.15. cloathed, and in his right minde. In like sort, deliuer these vnruly fellowes from the evil Spi∣rit, be a meanes to bring them into their right minde, & afterward (J doubt not) the Gouernours of the Church
shall binde them well enough. They will sit still, bee quiet, and be content to be ruled by reason: they wil see by the light of nature, that as there are feet, so there must be an head, of the body; and that the feet cannot say to the head, We haue no need of thee; without the helpe of the head they cannot chuse the best way: they wil re∣member by whom kings raigne, that all power is from aboue; and that as God hath set the members euery one in the body, as it pleased him; so hath he set some in the Church,1. Cor. 12.18.28. first Apostles secondarily Prophets, thirdly teachers, &c. This and much more will they call to minde, when they are brought into their right minde, and very willing shall we haue them to be ordered. What thinke we? Had such vnruly fellowes liued vnder the law (and,Note, that even in the time of the law some things were left to be ordered by the Magistrate. lex à ligando) had they beene bound strong enough? Nay verily: for though God appointed the precise daie, and commanded to haue an holy Convo∣cation: yet, no time of the day for this Convocation, not two Convocations, not Synagogues. When they had beene called,This commande of Paul, or law of Nature, is the generall, com∣prehending the fourth common∣dement in the Decalogue, and all other Com∣mandements touching the time and place of Gods worship and other things belonging there∣vnto. they would haue answered with Dathan and Abiram, We will not come: for God himselfe hath not bidden vs come to such a place, nor at such time of the day. Let the law of Nature be no more, then all acknow∣ledge, to sanctifie some time, as the Gentiles did: suppose, no other command but that of Paul, Let all things bee done to edifying, decently, and in order. If there come a command from authority to sanctifie any day of the weeke, yea besides the Lords day; this is enough to bind him, that is in his right minde: if any wilfully breake this
bond,Iud. ver. 8. it is by the comming of another Spirit vpon him then came vpon Sampson heretofore. It were good to beware, least any of vs bee found such as Iude speaketh of, Despising gouernment, & speaking euill of dignities: for it is too much to despise Governours; but more, to de∣spise gouernment it selfe. Certainely if any man bee so vnruly, that Gods Ministers and Officers here bee not able to binde him; God hath other officers and seruants elsewhere, which are able; And the King said to the ser∣vants, Take him and binde him hand and foot, and cast him into vtter darknesse. To make an end. They which say least, say enough to cause all those, who haue the feare of God before their eyes, to sanctifie the Lords day: and they which say most, doe not say enough to cause those, who feare not God, to forbeare driuing pack-horses therein, fre∣quenting the Tauerne, and the like. Would to God, no man might once say more nor lesse than the truth; for doubtlesse were the truth alone preached, the greatest good would follow therevpon: and this is one matter more, which causeth me, & should cause thee (Gentle Reader) often and earnestly to pray in this manner, or to this effect; Lord haue mercy vpon vs, and incline our Go∣vernours hearts to take such order, that once at length we may be all brought to the right vnderstanding of the fourth Commandement. Amen. FINIS.
Errata. Pag. 1. line 8. strike out, had p. 3. l. 4. strike out your. p. 5. l. 4. for here likeneth, read here he likeneth. p. 5. l. 16. text read type. p. 6. in marg. If the Sabbath were a shadow, &c. p. 9. l. worke r. weeke. p. 10. l. 16. after Remember the Sabbath to sanctifie it, read this should be a more generall commandement, then if hee had said, Remember the seauenth day to sanctifie it. p. 12. l. 3. vs r. me. p. 18. l. 3. commanding, r. commanded. p. 26. The saying of Chrysostome should be placed last of all, after the note touching the Lords day. p. 27. l. 7. to make it more Christian and lesse Iewish. Other faults escaped in printing the Reader may amend.
