6129 99844804 9649
A NOTABLE HIS∣torie of the Saracens. Briefly and faithfully descry∣bing the originall beginning, continu∣aunce and successe aswell of the Saracens, as also of Turkes, Souldans, Mamalukes, Assassines, Tartarians and Sophians. With a discourse of their Affaires and Actes from the byrthe of Mahomet their first péeuish Prophet and foun∣der for 700 yéeres space. VVherunto is annexed a Compendious Chronycle of all their yeerely exploytes, from the sayde Mahomets time tyll this present yeere of grace. 1575. Drawen out of Augustine Curio and sundry other good Au∣thours by Thomas Newton. Imprinted at London by Wil∣liam How, for Abraham Veale. 1575.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
¶To the Ryghte honorable the Lorde Charles Howarde, Baron of Effyngham, and Knight of the most Noble Or∣der of the Garter. RYghte Honorable: Callinge to remembrance what streict accoumpt eue∣rie Man particularlie at the last generall Audite, is enioygned to yeeld for time here bestow∣ed, I haue somewhat in discharge of my duty that waye, according to the rate and mea∣sure of my small Talent, traueiled to bringe to light for the benefite of my Cun∣treymen this historicall Discourse of Sa∣racens, Turks and other Reprobates of the same stampe and Lyuerey, in hope that the same to your Honour and others of rype iudgement thyrstinge after such needefull knowledge, shall bee deemed labour and time not all together yll spent. Which matter al∣though it required the cunninge hande of a skilfuller Woorkeman, for the better polis∣shing and bringing thereof into good frame
and order, yet the dilygent endeuoure of suche as doe their vttermoste seemeth (in the meane whyle) not to bee reiected. For God bestoweth his Gifts and Benefites di∣uerselye (some haue more and some lesse) whiche although by Arythmeticall pro∣portion they seeme very vnequall, yet beinge Geometricallye examyned, respected and waighed, they iumpe in a most euen equalyty. Herein as in a Myrrour is set down, how, when & by whom, this pestilent Generation was first set abroche, what successe in their Affaires euer synce they haue had, and if wee wyllnot by others harmes take warning, what curtesye is to bee looked for at their hands, whē and wheresoeuer they can espye any occasiō or oportunitie to put in practise their bloudy tyranny. They were (in deede) at the first very far of from our Clyme & Region, and therefore the lesse to be fea∣red, but now they are euen at our doores and ready to come into our Houses, yf our pe∣nitent heartes doe not the sooner procure at the mercifull handes of God, an vnytie,
peace and concord among the Princes, Po∣tentates and People of that litle porcion of Chrystendome yet left, which through diui∣sion, discord and ciuile dissention hath from time to time enticed and brought this Baby∣lonian Nabugadnezar and turkish Pharao so neere vnder our noses. The pitifull state wherof although your L. is not now to learn yet for others sake, not so rype in Turkishe garboyles, I know your Honour according to the wonted generositie of your noble na∣ture wil at my hands cherefully accept, as an earnest peny of my loyal heart to your L. most addicted: whō I besech God with that moste vertuous and honorable Ladie your wife to blesse with all spirituall benedictions, prosperous health and daylye increase of much Honour. At London the xii. of May. 1575. Your good Lordships most humble at Commaundment. Thomas Newton.
The Authours Preface. MAny a time and often, considering and debating with my felfe, the acwarde course of this changeable world, among other things I haue bene greatly desyrous to know, what the very & chief cause should be, of the subuersion and ruyne, from time to time, of al mightie kyngdomes: And againe of the setting vp and aduancement of manie obscure persones of base degree and paren∣tage to most high honors and dignities. For when I throughly consider and call to re∣membrance the alteration and decay of the Romane Empire, and the manifolde cala∣mities that haue happened to noble▪ and puyssaunt Kingdomes in times past, I well see, that dissolute life, ambitiō and discord of Rulers amonge themselues hath from time to time bene the chief & originall cause ther∣of. Insomuch that by reading out of olde Monumentes and Histories, thinges long agone atchieued and done, I perceaue ma∣ny Empires haue ben planted and constitu∣ted, many Nations subdued, many King∣domes with long continuance firmlye esta∣blished and most assured peare and tranquil∣lytie among the Communaltie conserued by temperaunce and sobrietie, but chiefly and
specially by ciuill concord and mutuall amy∣tie. Wherfore, both reason, & dayly examples enforce me to think, that Wealth, Ritches, strength and skilfull pollicie in warlyke af∣fayres without concord and goodwyl of the people hurteth many times, but profiteth almost neuer. Whereas concord and bene∣uolence (euen without wealth and rychesse) be of great force and of themselues able to doo very mutch. Therefore, they which neglected the sauegard, quietnesse and com∣moditie of their subiectes (whereby, good∣wyll is both purchased and also nourished,) and wholy yeelded themselues to Ambition and desire of souereignty (bestowing al their studies and cogitations onely to enrich and bring themselues to hye estate among their owne People, desiring rather to be feared of them then of their enemies) were in the end vnprofitable to themselues and pernici∣ous to their countrey. Contrarywise, they that so arme themselues with the vnfayned loue and goodwyll of their owne people and subiectes, that they might both be tenderly and intirelye beloued of them, and also bee terrible and dreadfull to the enemy abroad: those (I say) were thei, which notably bene∣fited both themselues and their common wealth. And if we would peruse and rip vp th auncient beginnings of al Kingdoms, and throughly consider their fyrst originall,
wee shall finde that so many of them as long florished, were by most honest Artes and wayes at the fyrst gotten, and by the best or∣ders of gouerment constituted. For it is wel inough knowne, that at the beginning, the name of a king (which alwaies was a name moste holie and venerable) was geuen and attributed to those that had done best ser∣uice and been most meritorious to their cun∣trie, whom the people for their common pro∣fite and vtilytie created Kinges and Soue∣raignes ouer them. For when as the sacred worde of God was not yet amonge men ac∣knowledged, no religyon reuerenced, nor a∣ny ciuill order regarded, when no man tooke any respect to lawfull matrymonie, or to any certaine procreation of Children, and the due administratiō of iustice and lawes with the profites therof not once heard of, much lesse executed: when men after a brutishe sorte lyued abroad in the woods and open fieldes, wholy drowned in errour and blind ignorance, abusing their strength and pow∣er onely to the satisfyinge of their owne sen∣suall affections and beastlye lustes: what mans power was so great, or who was a∣ble with al the strength he had to gatherto∣gether these sauage and rude persones lurk∣ing in woods & cabines abrod, into one fe∣lowship? & to perswade thē to be obedient & conformable to his cōmandements? Certes
wee muste needes confesse, that this redu∣cing of them from their fyrste vnmannerly rudenesse, to honeste order and comelinesse, was not brought to passe by force and vio∣lence, but by wisedome, equity, iustice, curte∣ous dealyng and liberall benefites bestow∣ed vpon them all generallye, whereby the hartes of the people were rauished and as it were with a certain bond of beneuolence al∣lured to haue them in admiration, and to beare vnto them an earneste zeale of duty∣full good wyll. And although at the fyrste, thei semed after a sort (because of the strang∣nesse thereof) to be halfe vnwyllynge, yet at length by meanes of benefits receaued, and other liberal curtesies, together with an vp∣right equitie in euery respect obserued, they brought them into order and ready to con∣sent vnto euerye thinge that seemed honest and profitable. By these politique meanes, Saturne the aunciente founder of Rome reigned firste in Armenia, and escaped the conspiracye and force of the mightiest kings of Babilon by nothinge so much, as by his iustice aud equitie and the assured good wils of his owne people, and by their onely help, fleeing the furie and crueltie of Iupiter, ob∣tayned and wanne a new kingdome in Ita∣ly. By this way, Romulus the other foun∣der of Rome, of a poore and beggarly sheap∣herd, was aduanced to the degree of a king.
In lyke manner were Numa and Tarqui∣nius Priscus of straungers and priuate per∣sons, made Kinges in the same place. By such good will and affection of his Soul∣diers, Alexander the Great conquered all the East. By concorde, the Greeques victorious∣lye augmented and enlarged their domini∣ons: by concord, the common wealth of the Carthaginians grewe to bee moste mightye: the same concorde made the Romanes, Lordes ouer al Lands, and conquerours of al forraine nations. In this bond of concord the Sarracens a weake and slender rable of Peyzants at the fyrst, being ioyned and lin∣ked together, ouercame and possessed verye many prouinces belōging to ye Romane em∣pire: & by this meanes ye power of the Turks at the fyrst & euer since hath increased. But Insolency, Ambition and Discord hath ben the subuersion of all Kingdomes, mightye Empires and populous common wealthes. For when princes (neglecting and forsaking those trades and waies by which their king domes were at the fyrst constituted) thinke Money and wealth, to be the chief defence, and as it were the Sinewes and stayes of their kingdomes, when any secret hatred and harte burninge enkindleth betweene them and their people, then do they hazard and endaunger both themselues their Roy∣almes and subiectes to the spoyle of the ene∣my.
For nature hath thus ordayned, that as we feele & perceaue others to be affected to∣wards vs, we also ar affected towards thē: & Plato his saying is well known concerning y• same matter who writeth yt as the princes & rulers in a common welth are, such common∣lye bee the people and Citizens of the same. Therefore no man ought to marueile, why those Princes which set more by their own priuate lucre and gayne then by the pub∣lique commodytie of their Realme, are ma∣ny times but slenderlye beloued of their sub∣iectes: and that all their Officers vnder them by their euyll example, are more care∣full to enriche their owne Coffers then to further the common wealth of their coun∣trey. Thus mens harts being diuersly bent and their good wils alieuated one from an other, the common wealth consequently go∣eth to wracke & confusion. These were the causes, why the Empyre was first trans∣lated from the Chaldayes to the Assyrians, from the Assyrians to the Medians, from the Medi∣ans to the Persians and last of all from the Persi∣ans to the Macedonians. Discord was the ouer∣throw and disparcling of that famous and large Monarchy left by Alexander the Great, while his successours (not cōtent euery man with his owne Territory) quarelled among themselues for the whole Monarchy. Dis∣corde abated and tamed the whole power
and common wealthe of the Greeques: by discorde and ciuill warres, the Romane state was destroyed and brought almoste to nothing: and agayne the ciuill diuision of the Greeques amonge themselues was the only cause that the flourishing empire of Constantinople was brought vnder the mise∣rable yoke and slauerye of a Nation moste barbarous. Discord was the vtter vndoo∣yng and defacyng of the Sarracens Empire, as in this History it shall playnly appeare: and the same plague doth at this day so infest and trouble all Christendome that I feare (and I beseech God my feare may be with∣out effect) least wee shall to late rue and la∣ment either the vtter subuersion or at least, the miserable oppression thereof. What do wee meane therfore? seeyng Ambition and her daughter Discorde haue euer bene the causes of so great calamyties and mis∣chieues, why doo we thus runne headlong vpon the Swordes poinct, and cut one an∣others throat? why haue we such delyght in ciuill warres and domesticall murder? why doo wee not (alas for pitie that our mindes should be somuch blinded and be∣witched) lay asyde all priuate grudges and controuersies which ought rather to be de∣cided by equitie and the infallible lawe of God, then with war and effusion of Chris∣tian bloud? why doo wee not rather bende
all our force and power against the profes∣sed enemies of Christianitie, ye cōtemners & destroyers of all humanitye, relygion and learning? These warres (I say) which are deuided into many partes and factions a∣mong vs, one conspiringe an others bane and thyrsting after his brothers bloud, wil in the end bring all Christendome to vtter ruine and wofull desolation. Which if they would ioyne in one and liue together in Christian league, no doubte, Constantinople might be agayn recouered and annexed to the Romane Empire, Grecia and a great nnmber of Christiā cuntries now lyuyng in perpetual moorning, & pitiful slauery might bee deliuered out of the thraldome of vn∣sufferable tyraunts, that Sathanical crew of Turkish lurdens might be expulsed and driuen to trudge out of all Europa, and the sincere profession of christian religion there eftsones planted and truely acknowledged. Paraduenture some wyll cast doubtes and obiect, that this our mortal foe is not neere hand, but must be sought out (as aforetime) in farre countryes, that they must passe sun∣dry aduentures ouer many perilous Seas, that they must goe a great way beyonde all Europa, and set foote into ASIA and Sy∣ria by daungerous places, vnknowne waies suspect countreies and fierce people. But be∣holde, euen at our dores and ready to come
into our houses, we haue this arrogant and bragging helhound, triumphyng ouer vs, laughyng at our misfortunes, reioycinge to see vs thus to lye together by the eares, and gapyng in hope short lye to enioy our goods and Scigniories. O dolefull and daunge∣rous times. O corrupt and wylfull maners. In times past, one Peter an Heremite beyng but a poore seely soule, was able with ex∣hortyng wordes and orations to perswade three hundreth thousand men to put on ar∣mur against the Sarracens, and to procure in∣numerable Gentlemen & Potentates with all the power they were able to make, to march against them, & to bring them as far as into Afia, where they valiantly conquered and wanne from the Sarracens many of their Kingdomes and Prouinces. For the people in those daies were of themselues so willing to adueuture their liues in Christes quarell against the blasphemers of his name, that without any stipend or wages (godly zeale so pricked them forwarde) they tooke in hand such long Expeditions and weary vi∣ages: and while Kinges and Rulers were geuen either to rest and riotte, or els busyed with ciuill and domesticall warres, they ca∣ried their weapons into farre Regions to fight against the Infidels and miscreaunt people. But now whereas our most mightye and the same most vnmercifull Enemye the
great Turke is ready euery day to spyll out bloud and to work our confusion, possessing & hauing alredy vnder his iurisdiction many of ye Christian Prouinces, to some others lai∣yng batterye and siege: and hopyng ere it be long, to spoyle & ouerrunne the rest, and al∣beit that Christendome hath Maximilian an Emperour moste prudent and wyse, yet neuerthelesse, by the sinister perswasions, and deuilish counsailes of some sedicious per∣sonnes wslea and kill one an other. Which thing I considering, and greatly lamentyng the state wherein Christendome presentlye standeth, albeit that I being but one man, and such a one, that lackyng both strength & health, am able in person to doe no good in the exploites of martiall affaires: yet to the intent I might stirre vp and kindle a desire and go dwyl in many others which are bet∣ter hable, to repulse this our common daun∣ger, by such examples as are in Histories re∣gistred and writen, I haue heere taken vp∣pon mee orderlye to describe and set out the Actes of the Sarracens and Turkes, buried al∣most in the rust ye dongeon of cankard obly∣uyon: that we seeyng by what meanes and sleightes they haue increased, and by what folies and ouersightes our power hath di∣minished, may now at length decline and es∣chue the lyke. This whole Historye breeflye comprysinge the whole Discourse of their
raignes and conquestes, collected aswell out of many Greeque, Constantinopolitan, and Latine Authours, as out of the Chronicles of the Arabians & Moores, is deuided into three Bookes. The firste containeth the nati∣uitie, education, raigne and continuaunce of dotynge Mahomet and the beginning of the Saracens, with the successe and increase of their Empire euen tyll it was at the highest, for two hundreth yeeres space. The seconde is contynued from the fyrst inclynation tyll the beginning of the destruction and laste ende thereof, contayninge also the space of two hundreth yeeres. The third breefly compre∣hendeth the finall end of it, and the original beginning of the Turkishe Empire, (which succeeded the Saracenical Domination) till Othoman the first Emperour of Turks which intreateth of their acts, for the space of three hundreth yeeres. So that this Historye ta∣keth his beginning at the byrth of Mahomet, which was fiue hundred & sixty yeeres after the incarnation of our Sauiour Christ, and reacheth vnto ye yeere one thousand & three hundreth. As for the seueral Acts of Othoman and other Emperours that succeeded hym, we haue heere omitted, because they be se∣uerally written and described by many o∣thers. But of that argument which wee in these three Books declare and comprehend,
there is none, neither amonge the Latines nor yet the Greeques (that I know) which hath compiled and made any seuerall Histo∣rye. Which labour of mine, if I may vnder∣stand to be well lyked and allowed, by the iudgment of the honest and learned sorte, I wyll heerafter aduenture to take in hande other matters of greater waight and im∣portaunce.
¶The first Booke. Wherin is contained their first beginning and ori∣ginall, with the successe and encreasing of theyr Empire. I Am purposed to write an Historie concernyng the Actes of the Saracens, atchie∣ued aswel in the East as in the West partes of the world: first because they were greate and renoumed ouer the face of the whole Earth and brought all things out of good state into tu∣multuous broyle and confuse disorder, and also because this power of theirs encreased, through the discorde and dissention of the Christians: that we thereby taking ex∣ample, may plainely perceiue and learne what boldnes and strength, our ciuill warring and inward variance a∣mong our selues giueth to the aduersaries and foes of Christianitie. And that we no longer in this sorte offer our throates willingly to be cut by them, which desire no∣thing more then our blood and destruction. For first of al, this is well ynough knowen, that the Romane Empyre (which throughe concorde temperance and valiauntnes surmounted and grew to such high Maiestie and estate, that all nacions almost in the world were obedienciaries and subiect vnto it) when the Citizens being once lulled in to much ease, and dronken with superfluitie of riches and wealth began to addict themselues to riot and ambi∣tion (the verie causes that ouerthrew it, when it once be∣gan to decline with his owne sway and bignesse, and many striued for title of the Crowne) receiued at the handes of none, such annoyance and calamitie as of the
Saracens. For although the Gothes most vnmercifully and beastly destroying and making hauocke of the aunci∣ent Monumentes of the Romane valiaunce and worthi∣nesse, were the first that triumphed ouer them, being the people which earst had vanquished and conquered all o∣ther nations: Although Attila King of the Hunnes, like a most raging swifte streame spoyled, ouerrunne and de∣stroyed all where euer he came, from the Riphaean to the Pyrene Mountaines: Although the Lumbards occu∣pyed and forcibly enioyed a great portion of Italy, as the Frankes breaking out of Germanie into Gallia also did: yet their raignes and dominations in straunge Coun∣tryes either continued not long, or else at least wise, ly∣uing vnder a more gentle and reasonable Clime, chaun∣ged their former conditions, acknowledged religion and the August Empyre of the soueraigne Caesars. But the Saracens because they woulde séeme to be subduers and ouerthrowers both of the Romane Empire and of all Christian religion also, violently breaking and issuyng out of Arabia, despoyled and wasted the most noble parts of Asia, which in so many sharpe stormes and trouble∣some garboyles of most fierce people euer before remai∣ned frée and vntouched, quite abolishing in the same al the studies of good letters and liberall Sciences and (whiche is most of all) vtterly defacing and inhibiting the true worshipping of God and Christian religion. And not on∣ly infected the Prouinces of Asia but also almoste all Affrica and the moste parte of Spaine with barbarous rites, mystie errours, blinde ignorance, and with a most deuelish, absurde and detestable religion of their owne. And from thēce making sundry Roads into Italy, Greece and Fraunce lamentably afflicted and laid wast the same, and by continuance & sufferance haue planted such a huge Empyre, yt at this day (beyng in Anno. 1575. that is to say .900. yéeres and aboue since it first beganne, it dayly
threateneth our confusion and is dreadfull to all Chri∣stendome. For the Turkes who nowe enioy all their dominions, haue receiued from them as next heires vnto them, both their Religion and Kingdomes: and yet to this day in Affrica, some of the mere lyne of the Saracens be of great power and authoritie. But before we go any further to the declaration & discouerie of their Acts & go∣uernment, we must firste a little speake of the originall Pedagrew of the first founder and authour of their dam∣nable Secte.Arabie. All Arabie is deuided into thrée partes, wherof one is called Petreia, hauing his name of an olde auncient town in it, called Petra, the second is called De∣serta, and the thirde Faelix or Sabaea. Petreia hath on the West side Aegipt and is separated from it, firste by the Mount Casius and then by wast wildernesse: on the North, it hath Iurie and Palestina: on the East, Arabia, Deserta: and on the South the innermost part or arme of the Arabian Goulph called Sinus Arabieus. Deserta, wherin the Citie Scene (otherwise called Scenitis) stoode, boundeth on the South vpon the Mountaines of Arabia Faelix, on the North, it hath Mesopotamia, and on the East the Riuer Euphrates. Arabia Faelix runneth a long betwéene the two bosomes of the Sea, the Arabian and the Persian, being almost on euerie side enuironed wyth water like an Iland.; It hath on the North Petreia and Deserta, on the West of the Arabian Gulphe, on the East the Persian Gulphe, and on the South the redde Sea. I finde that these Regions were inhabited by foure kindes of people, that is, to wit, by the auncient Arabians, which were descended from Arabus, Sabus and Petreius the sonnes of Cures and the Nephewes of Cham, of whom the thrée Arabies had their names as Arabia Deserta of Arabus, Arabia, Sabaea (which is also called Faelix) of Sa∣bus and Petreia of Petreius (as witnesseth Berosus Chal∣daeus.Arabians are the ofspring of Ismael.) Then of the Ismaelites, which were descended
from Ismaell the Sonne of Abraham by his handmayde Agar, of whom a parte of the Countrey, called Agarena and the Town Agarenum (which in Strabo are corrupt∣ly read Ararena and Agranum) had their first beginning and denomination: as that part called Petreia was cal∣led Nabathaea of Nabath, & the people Caedrei of Caedar the Sonnes of the same, Ismael. The thirde people came and descended of the Sonnes of Ketura, Abrahams se∣cond wife, which possessed a great part of Arabia Foelix, specially that portion which lyeth toward the redde Sea. They also made Colonies and vnder Cities in Lybia, and peopled the same with inhabitauntes of their owne linage and nation, where vpon after ward (as Iosephus witnesseth) the Cuntrie was called Affrica,Affrica. of Ophre the Sonne of Mandanes, and Nephew to Abraham by his wife Ketura. The fourth kinde, tooke their originall be∣ginning of Esau the Sonne of Isaac,Esau inhabi∣ted part of Arabie. who inhabited the partes of Arabia Petreia next vnto Iurie, and of him the people in Arabia Petreia, are of Plinie and Ptolomaeus called by ye name of Saracens. For Isaac, Esau his father, was the Sonne of Abraham by his wife Sara. And they were called Saracens, both because they might thereby shew and testifie, that they were descended of the lyne of Sara, who was Mystresse, and not of Agar the handmaid as the Ismaelites were: and also that they might be dis∣cerned and knowen from the Iewes, who also had the ve∣rie same parentes and were procéeded out of the same stocke and Progenie. Among al these, the people Scenitae which inhabited Arabia Deserta, were most valiaunt and warlike, hauing no habitation nor houses to dwelin, but wandred abroade & lay in Tentes in the open fieldes. These insolently bragged and made their auaunt, that they were of most auncientie, and contended with all o∣thers for the nobilitie of their race. There aide and helpe, the Romane Emperours in their warres oftentymes
vsed. The Arabians euer had many ordinaunces and Rites, such as the Hebrewes had, and do yet to this day retaine and kéepe the same: for (as Herodotus and Dio∣dorus two auncient Historiographers affirme) they euer vsed circumcisiō, and kept the same order of their Tribes and families that the Iewes did: and accompt it a hey∣nous offence that a woman should be maried to a man of any other Tribe and familie then shée her selfe is, and likewise for a man to take to wife a woman of another linage. They inuiolablie kéepe the nobilitie of their race and Pedagrew, so that none but of the noblest sort should raigne ouer them. Neither hath one the regiment and gouernaunce ouer all, but euerie Tribe to haue their pro∣per King, after whom, his owne sonne shoulde not suc∣céede in the kingdome, but the first that was borne of the séede of a right noble man and woman, after he were sa∣luted King, was kept and brought vp as heyre apparaunt to the Crowne. A people naturally and generally geuen to thefte and robberie, as all others commonly are which dwell in hoate Countries. Many kindes of religion was vsed among them: for some worshipped Christ, of whose nature, deitie, & omnipotencie at that time, whence this our Historie taketh his beginning (as in all other places at that time also) there were diuerse sectes and opinions. Some obserued the Rites and Ceremonies of the Iewes: some honoured the Sunne and Moone, some certain trées, some Serpentes, some a Towre called Alcaba, which they beléeued and thought was builded by Ismael, some one thing and some another. In the time of these so great garboyles and diuersities in religions, and among suche blockishe and rude people,Mahomet. was Mahomet borne at Itra∣ripe a towne of Arabia Deserta, belonging to Mecca, be∣ing by his fathers side of the auncient line of Corah the sonne of Esau, or (as some say) of Caedar the sonne of Is∣mael, in the moneth of Februarie, and in the yéere after
the incarnation of Christ (as they say) 560. whose father was named Abedela & his mother Emma a Iew borne, both poore folkes and of base parentage. By meanes whereof (his father beyng an Ismaelite and his mother a Iew) he was in his tender age by them instructed and taught both the rites of the Hebrewes and the manner of worshipping that the Gentiles vsed. His Parentes dyed while he was but yet a tender and younge ladde, so that then he was committed to the charge and custodie of one Salutelib, his vncle by the fathers syde. And whē he came to mans stature he was taken prisoner of the Scenites, which were (as before was shewed) the fiercest and war∣lickest people in all that Countrey, and lyued altogether by robberies, and by them was he solde to a ryche Cobbe one Abdimoneples, an Ismaelite. Who quickly percei∣uing his prompt wit and throughly vnderstanding his impudent nature thought him to bée a fit instrument to make his factour into other Cuntries about his traffique of merchandize, and so vsed oftentimes to send him out of Palestina where he dwelte, into Egipt. Which trade of life, Mahomet the space of many yeeres exercising, gotte great acquaintance and crepte highly in fauour with the Hebrews, Christians and Gentiles. This Mahomet was of a meane stature, bigge headded, somwhat broune com∣plexioned, chéerefully countenaunced and liuely coloured, a long bearde, and yet not hoare: because alwayes as it beganne to waxe graye, with oyntmentes he altered it: his visage and looke was graue and portly, pretending a kynde of Maiestie ioyned wyth gentlenesse and curtesie, hys legges very well proportioned, his bodie in goyng or mouyng pleasaunt and gentle, and lyke (as they terme it) to the course of a styll runnyng Ryuer, in talke verie curteous, in mynde and body both stoute, stronge and venturous, quicke and prompte of witte, but the same (as Salust writeth of Catiline) wicked and
disposed to all mischiefe, bolde, hardie, and suche a one that cared for no perilles.  Whereof hée gaue once a manyfest example, for beyng mounted vppon a mar∣ueilous fierce and vntamed Horse (in the presence and sight of sundrie his friendes) he so spourred and gallo∣ped him, that all the beholders, seeyng him in suche great perill, earnestly desyred him to alyght. Vnto whom wyth very amiable countenance and pleasaunt language, he aunswered, that the Horse was lyke vnto the Sea, dooyng them thereby to vnderstande, that he tooke no lesse pleasure and delectation in that prauncing then if hée were in a Shippe vppon the Sea. Also hée was fickle mynded and double in all hys doynges, as the infinite rable of Lawes one cleane contrarying an other, by him made, doe manyfestly witnesse: whiche thyng caused great varietie and diuerse sortes of sectes in hys Religion: hée was also a déepe counterfeytor and dissembler in euerye matter, but by nature verie eloquent withall. Hys ambicious and haultie mynde, gaped wyth∣out measure. after promocion and authoritie. In so muche that consydering in hys mynde this great va∣rietie of Sectes, hée was merueilously enflamed with a desyre to establishe and make one manner of religi∣on, and to take vnto him as well the Soueraigntie of Empyre, as also of diuine honour. Whereof he was put in greate hope, by reason of the great sedicion and discorde of the Christians, the corruption of man∣ners, and the want of warlicke discipline. Moreo∣uer hée was grealy anymated by the peruerse and Deuilyshe Counsell of one Sergius a Monke, who béeyng exiled and expulsed oute of Constantinople, for mayntainyng the Heresie of the Arrians fled into Ara∣bie, and vsed oftentimes to come to the house of Abdimo∣neples,
Mahomets maister, and entirely loued Maho∣met for the singular dexteritie that he conceyued to bée in his wit and towardnes. Therefore assoone as his maister Abdimoneples was dead, leauing behind him no Chil∣dren, his wife Hadigia, beyng then wedow, a woman of fyftie yéeres of age, and lefte sole heyre of all her hus∣bandes Landes, Goods and Cattells, tooke her seruaunt Mahomet to husband. Now, beyng in possession of the wedow and all her substance & by meanes therof growen to great wealth, he often fell grouelong on the ground, fo∣ming and froathing at the mouth (for he had the fallyng sicknes) and laye in a horrible extasie or distraction of minde, which his wife tooke very heauily and cursed her fortune, in that shée had so lothsomely matched her selfe. Hée therfore to appease her griefe and to make her from great agonie to leape to sodaine ioye, tolde her that the same happened vnto him by the operation of the Spirite of God himselfe, who appeared vnto him and reuealed certaine things, which he should pronounce and shewe to the people, touching the law of Moses and of Christ. For (quod he) our mortall bodyes beyng subiect to corruption are not hable to sustaine and abyde the glorious and glit∣tering sight of God, whereby his bodie was in a manner at such times bereft and seperated from his mind. Which wordes the olde trotte beléeuing, as she that tenderly lo∣ued him for his lustie corage and beautifull age, begann now not to loue him as a husband, but to worship and re∣uerence him as a holy man and a diuine Prophete high∣ly in Gods fauour, and to blaze his holines abroad among her Companions and Gossippes. In so much that when she dyed, she not onely left him wealthie in goods and pos∣sessions (for she made him heyre of all) but also in great veneration and credite among the common people for an opinion of sanctitie which was thought to be in him. For which cause, Buback the chiefest and in greatest autho∣ritie
among all of that parte of Arabie, and of the same Tribe that Mahomet was, gaue his daughter Aissa to him in mariage, when he was but yet thirtie yéeres of age. Puffed vp with pryde because of this new affinitie, and for the great abundance of wealth left vnto him by his other wife, he openly professed himselfe to be the mes∣sanger of God and a Prophete, and to teach the people a new kind of religion, patched and gathered together out of the erronious Schismes and hereticall dreames of all Sectes. For he taught and commaunded Circumcision, Baptisme, and abstinence from Swines fleshe & wyne. He instituted a generall fast to bée kept one whole month in the yéere, and that no meate for that space shoulde bée eaten in the day tyme, but onely in the night. He affir∣med, that there were but thrée Prophetes, that is to wit, himself, Moses and Christ, and that Christ was not God, with an innumerable rable of most blasphemous opini∣ons contained in his filthie Alcorane.Alcorane is a Booke conteyning Mahomettes Law. Which assertions and opinions were of many at the first deryded & flouted at, in so much that they accoūpted him no better thē luna∣tique and distraught of his right wittes. But when that he had persuaded and allured all his Allyantes and the fa∣milie of Buback which bore great sway and authoritie, yea and many of the common people also to credite and leane to his Secte, the Magistrates of Mecca, perceiuing that this new dotage and commotion would bréede a scab in the common wealth, if the inconuenience like to ensue therby, were not spéedily preuented, and the impudencie of the man by rigour repressed, (for he slaunderously would inueigh and openly raile vpon Princes) determi∣ned with them selues, to lay handes vpon him and to put him to death. Mahomet hauing vnderstanding of their intentes and mindes, fled out of Mecca: whom many of his Kinsfolkes, Alies, Friends and Clientes, (who were throughly persuaded that he was such a one in déede, as
he had professed and woulde séeme to bée) folowed. And from this yéere, which was after the Natiuitie of our Lorde and Sauiour Christ. 593. yéeres, the Arabians do recken their yéeres: calling this, the yéere of Legira, which is to say the yéere of flight or transmigration. Ma∣homet therefore seeyng such a great multitude to fauour and sticke to him, putting more trust in his power then he did before, made vnto them an Oration, in effect as fo∣loweth. How earnest I haue béene and what desire I haue alwayes had to proclaime,Oration of Mahomet. aduance and publishe that law which hath béen vnto me reuealed by the Archangell and Messanger of Almightie God Gabriel, with commaunde∣ment to teach the same to all mortall wyghtes, both God himselfe knoweth and you most deare friendes can wit∣nesse. For I neuer spared any labour, neuer refused any daunger, neuer any miseries or perillous extremitie, where I thought my painfull trauaile might be auailea∣ble or redound to the benefite and soules health of all peo∣ple, and where without disturbaunce and molestation I might conueniently execute the charge and office to mée committed and enioyned from the mouthe of God. All which I haue done to this ende, that I myght reclayme and call home the people runnyng a stray from their wic∣ked wayes, to a holy & syncere integritie of life: and out of the dongeon of Hell, (whither they runne headlonge,) bring them backe into the ioyes of the celestiall King∣dome: following herein the steppes and bountifulnes of God him selfe, whose message and ministerie we in earth do execute. Who when as all mankinde through Adams transgression and faulte, was forfeyted and fallen into the handes of the Deuill, yet of his méere mercy vouche∣safed to deliuer and saue his people, as before he had pro∣mised to our father Abraham: that is to wit, by appoyn∣ting vnto them a law, whereby they might obtaine euer∣lasting
lyfe and saluation. And therfore first he sent Mo∣ses, to lay the first foundations and beginnynges of this doctrine, and to call them for feare of euerlastyng payne and damnation, to a newnesse and amendment of lyfe. But when the Lawe of Moses little profyted that way, he sent Iesus Christ, by gentler wayes and meanes to allure and wynne them, and to persuade them to lyue in the seruice and obedience of God. Now, mankind béeyng againe so much depraued and gone a straie, that there is no certaine nor constant Religion among them, no dis∣cipline, no order nor honest maners, but all out of square and forlorne: he hath enioyned me (whom euen from the beginning of the world he had made choyse of and predes∣tinated for that purpose) to this office and function, that I should recure extréeme euilles with extreme remedies, and with fire and sword cut of, all iniquitie and make ha∣uocke of all them that once should dare to againe say or opē their mouth against this law: & that I should enlarge the kingdome of God & constitute a more sacred & a more im∣periall cōmon wealth on earth, then euer any hath hereto∣fore béen, for who is so blind, which séeth not, that vnlesse we (whō God hath appointed to yt office) do set to our hel∣ping handes to redresse these so great mischiefes, all man∣kind shall shortly perishe? for mans nature withoute a Lawe (which in so great varietie and licenciousnes of life can be none nor stand in any force) must néedes most gre∣uously sinne and offende. But howe shall wée make and constitute any holesome Lawe to them that are vn∣willing to lyue vnder any, and despise all godly order? What spightfull reproches and slaunderous reportes, wée that are carefull and diligent to accomplishe thys Commission and commaundemente of Almightie God, do sustayne at theyr hands, you most louing friendes and companions haue séene, and howe they pursue after vs as after wylde Beastes to haue our innocent bloud.
But happie are you and blessed, whom God hath chosen to bée as ministers and helpers vnto me in the exploite and atchieuing of these so great mysteries and affayres, whose diuine will it is, that you should not only be par∣takers & Coheires with mée of eternal felicitie in the lyfe to come, but also héere in this world shoulde bee enriched with great wealth & possessions, the which vndoubtedly if you shew your selues men and constantly persist in faith you shall shortly enioy, by subduing innumerable Nati∣ons and conquering most wealthie Countries. For (vn∣doubtedly) it is the good will and pleasure of God, that all those Countries and heapes of wealth, shall be yours, which now wicked men, enemies and aduersaries to this law doe wrongfully possesse. That all these things shall thus happely succéede, both the wickednesse of our aduersaries, which God will not suffer any longer to es∣cape vnpunished, and your trustie ayde and valiauntnes (most worthy friendes and felowes) yea and the most in∣fallible oracles of Almightie God do put vs in hope most assured. Therefore if you desire to bée partakers of the kingdome of Heauen, and of so great rychesse and glory vpon Earth, it is méete and expedient that you all sweare and do homage vnto me, that must be your Captaine and Ringleader. When he had thus made an ende, the chiefe Prin∣ces and Rulers of the people and namely Zaid the Sonne of Zuzara, Aomar and all the rest one after an o∣ther with their swordes drawen, promised by a solemne Oth to allow of none other law, but that which Mahomet should make: in the defence and setting out wherof, they then and there protested, at all assayes when néede should require, to spend their life and bloud. This ended, Maho∣met againe commaunding them to kéepe silence, knéeled down on his knées a pretie while, as though he had patte∣red ouer som mumbling meditatiōs, & afterwards with a
loude voyce vttered these wordes folowing. Now (most couragious champions) make your sel∣ues readie to battaile looke that you want neither wea∣pons nor stomacke to wynne our purpose withall, wée haue the victorie most sure alreadie in our handes. Be∣hold the things which you haue often desired and wyshed for, Richesse, Glorie, Renowne and perpetual felicitie are before our eyes. God hath set thē before you as rewardes for your valiant and victorious seruice: your owne vali∣aunce, the excellencie of the cause, and all the things aboue named ought more to stirre vp your hartes and pricke you forward then any Oration that I can make. After he had thus spoken, he appointed tenne Capi∣taines ouer the people, chosen out of the noblest in byrth and chiefest in dignitie among the rest, and such as were allyed vnto him by mariage, and them did he appoint in∣to Ensignes and Bands. The names of which capitaines were these: Vbequar, Omar, Ozmen, Alifre, Talaus, Azubeir, Zadin, Zaedine & Abuobeid, & so he marched in battail aray toward ye Citie of Mecca. The Magistra∣tes of the Citie vnderstanding thereof, made out a power against him, which encoūtring with Mahomet his Host, discomfited and put them all to flight. Wherefore for the space of foure yéeres after, Mahomet neuer durst make any profer to besiege that Citie any more. Notwithstan∣ding, he ceassed not continually with Orations in ye open fieldes and Countrey villages, to mooue and stirre vp the people to sedition, by meanes whereof he also caused certain vprores and tumultes among the Scenites, which acknowledged for their Lordes and Soueraignes the Romane Emperours. Then once againe he marched with a freshe supply of moe Souldiours against Mecca, where he was againe repulsed and myssed his purpose: and two yéeres after he againe the thirde time attempted the same and sped as he had done twise before. In this
meane while, Heraclius the Emperour perceiuing the youthfull sort of the Scenites to begin mutyne & seditiō, for ye better quieting therof, dispatched & sent a great nū∣ber of thē (vnder the coulour of warfare) into far Coun∣tries. There raigned at yt time in Persia a King named Cosdroes, who had maried ye daughter of Maurice ye Em∣perour called Marie, at whose instāce & persuasiō he was contented to be Baptized: and so long as his father in law liued, vsed himself most friendly toward all ye Christians & was vnto them very curteous & liberall. But after that he was traiterously slaine by Phocas, who succéeded hym in the Empire, Cosdroes detesting ye disloyal treacherie & falsehod of them which had elected such a wicked man, as Phocas, polluted with the bloudie murther of his liege Lorde and Soueraigne to be their Prince, reputing them as Accessaries to the same horrible acte and conspiracie, prepared a great armie at the instigation and procure∣ment of his wife to reuenge the death of his said father in Law. And the more was he emboldened so to do, because he wel ynough perceiued Heraclius (for Phocas was slain within a while after) to bée altogether lulled in securitie and to lye quietly at home without attempting any thing against the Barbarous Nations which with fire, & sword on euery side despoiled Italie and the Romane Empyre. Wherevpon with a huige and populous armie he enua∣ded the frontiers of the Empyre, and subduyng by fyne force all the South partes of Asia, entred into Aegipt and tooke Alexandria: and yet not contented, went further and conquered Carthage, withall Affrica. And when he had taken good order for the fortefying of that Countrey with strong garrisons, he retyred backe to Alexandria, wasting Syria and Iurie. Heraclius being not a litle net∣teled with these iniurious dealings of Cosdroes, sent vn∣to him for peace: which when he coulde not obtaine at his handes, rather enforced and driuen by necessitie, then
drawne to it by any goodwyl in himselfe leuied an army, in which he also had retayned the Arabian Scenites, with whom some say that Mahomet was, and that in a battell wherein Cosdroes side was discomfited, he was sore wounded by a common Souldier named Turcus. And when Heraclius had many times ioyned battell with Cosdroes, and in diuers conflictes put him to the foyle, at length he so much crushed his power yt he was glad to fly beyonde the riuer Tigranes, where he proclaymed his yonger sonne called Medarses, Successour and heyer ap∣paraunt to his Crowne, dishereting and not regardinge his elder sonne Sirochis, a younge Gentleman of great hope and towardnesse. Whose heart not paciently brook∣yng this contumelious and vnnaturall dealyng, secretlye conspyred with Heraclius, to betray both his Father and his Brother Medarses, (whom his father had so vnkind∣ly preferred before him) with al their richesse and prince∣lye furniture. And promised further, to discampe and re∣mooue out of all the Romane Prouinces such Garrisons as his Father had placed there, conditionallye that hee might enioye the Kingdome of Persia, and a firme peace infringiblie to be kept betwéene both Empires. In this poyncte, Heraclius beynge a Christian Prince was no∣more ashamed to delyuer the Kingdome of Persia to a wicked and rank rebellious person, Traytor to his owne Father, and Brother (being now throughlye weakned with the losses of so many vnluckye battailes, and now most certainly in his own hands, specially the King him∣self trusting to his leggs and fléeing, if he could haue vsed his good fortune & victory when it was offred vnto him) and to buy a dishonorable cowardly peace, by consenting to such a wicked déede: then yt wicked Barbarian & disloy∣al yonker was, by such vndue & detestable meanes to pul ye kingdom frō thē to himself. Such desire of principalitie reigned in ye one, & so great loue slouthful idlenes in the other.
Cosdroes therfore and Medarses with their wiues being aprehended and brought backe from whence they were fledde, were cast into prison, and within awhile after, by the commaundement of Syrochis, both put to death. In whom appeared a cruell example of Fortunes variable∣nesse.Horrible and vnnatu¦rable mur∣ther. A goodly president and warning for Princes, to marke and consider vpon, in nominating their Succes∣soure, that they at no hand reiectinge the stout and valy∣aunt, elect and choose tender weaklynges and effiminate Meycokes. For nothing so soone moueth a noble and firce heart to furious impacience and indignation, as (beyng stout and couragious) to be reiected and not accompted of, among his owne friends. All things in Persia by means of this League appeased and set in order, and Syria and Ierusalem with the other Prouinces restored to the Ro∣mane Empire, Mahomet accompanied with a pompous traine, met with Heraclius in his returne whomwarde from these warres, and of hym desired some Countrye for hym, and his Souldiers to inhabite in, which sute and request at the Emperours hands he obtayned. Not long after, it happened that when the Souldiours were paide their wages, the Arabians repyned, and founde them∣selues agréeued, that they were defrauded and cut shorte of their due stipende and ordinarie allowance. Whiche comming to the eares of the chiefe Paymaster, he more rashly and arrogantly, then wisely and consideratly an∣swered, that there was skantlie innough to pay the Ro∣man and Gréeque souldiours,First cause of grudge between the Christians and Saracens much lesse for such a rascal company of Dogs as they were. Which words with∣in awhile after, were almost the subuersion and ruine of all Christendome, insomuch that euen tyll this day they beare a grudge of reuengment for this iniurie in their mindes against vs. Such a heape of mischieues many times doth the ouerthwartinge wilfulnesse of one rashe person bréede, speciallie when stout and warlyke fellows
shynk themselues apparantly iniuried. For the Arabi∣ans swellyng with anger, and incensed with fell disdaine for this reprochfull and open contumelye, departed into Syria, and ioyned themselues to Machomettes traine and faction. Wherat Mahomet glad to see his power thus in∣creased, went the fourth time against Mecca, determi∣ning with might and maine to besiege it. The Magi∣strats of Mecca perceiued well ynough his purpose and what he pretended, wherefore with greater preparation and stronger power then before, ye whole body almost of the Citie bent themselues to repulse his inuasion. Be∣twéene whome there was at the riuer of Bredine a sore and terrible conflict, wherein Mahomet got the victory, and slue of the nobilytie and chief Citizens of Mecca (be∣side a very great number of the Communalty) thrée hun∣dred persons:Mahomet beginneth to ruffle. in somuch that at this battell the whole no∣billytie of Mecca were in maner all slayne. And so Ma∣homet like a triumphant Conquerour entred, and tooke possession of the faire Citie of Mecca, fortefiyng the same with a garrison of his owne appoyntment, & after, depar∣tyng with his army thence, he layd séege to Hunaimum, and wanne it, deuidinge the spoyle thereof (which was very great) among his Souldiers. After that, he besieged Tarsus, which Citie after he had all in vaine battred the space of a whole month, he raysed his séege, and retour∣ned into the maigne Countrye of Arabia and tooke firste Itraripe otherwise called Ietripe, and after that Medina a Mart towne well peopled with wealthy Iewes. And grauntyng the spoyle thereof to his Souldiours, he ran∣scaked and made hauocke of the towne: but as for all the Iewes which partly in ye citie and partly in other places of Arabi (because they being skilfull in ye diuine law greatly withstood his attempts & procedings) he hated deadly, & in the ende in.xi. battailes them vtterlye vanquished, and destroyed. Thence retourninge to Itraripe, he appointed
Azeib his Lieutenant of Mecca, who entred into the Ci∣tie with a great route of Arabians or Saracens. For Mec∣ca then was and yet is, as well because of an opinion of great auncientie (for it is thought to be builded by Ismael or else by Abraham himselfe) as also for, the bignesse of the Citie and resorte of people most noble and famous. Then againe within the same yéere, discharging the said Azeib of his office, he appointed Moad the Sonne of Ga∣del Lieutenant of the same Citie in his roume: with this commaūdement, that after Mahomet his death he should desend and maintayne his lawe, and diligently looke that the same should of the people be reuerently obserued, and so in the meane season to minister iudgement and execu∣tion of his lawes to the Mecchyans. Al things in this sort beyng set in good frame and order, he remooued to Tam∣bicum, and there buylded a Temple, which is to be séene at this day. Thence he sent an armye vnder the conducte of Zalid and Malid two of his chiefe Captaines agaynst Alozaid the Sonne of Almathaliph, King of Aliendel, whom by force of armes they ouercame, and made tribu∣tarie. And thus all Arabia being brought in subiection, he commaunded Eubocar with parte of his Hoste to go to Mecca (he himself lying still at Itraripe) and charged him that he should leaue neuer a mothers Sonne a liue in it, nor suffer any forrayner to enter sauing only such as wil∣lingly would obey his Law and beléeue his doctrine. For his meaning and entent was, (as afterwarde he brought it to passe) that Mecca should be the Metropolitane Citie of his religiō and Empire. And thus within a short space, Mecca was replenished wyth none but Mahometanes. And not onely Mecca but all Arabia besides (as they are people by nature lyght of beléefe and newfangled) embra∣ced his pestilent errours. And from that tyme, all they whych yelded themselues to that Secte, were called by the name of Saracens, both because that errour sprong vp
and was first begonne by the Saracens, and also for that, Mahomet persuaded them that all the promyses, in the Scriptures promysed to the Séede of Abraham, belonged & appertayned to them. Beyng puffed vp with arrogance by reason of thys good successe in hys affayres, he sent Ambassades to Kinges and Princes néere adioyning, aduisyng them to embrace his Religion, and vnto them addressed hys letters, sealed wyth a Signet of Syluer, wherein were engrauen these woordes: Mahomet the messanger of God: namely to the Emperour of Consta∣tinople, to the King of Persia, the King of Egypte and to other Princes. Afterwarde he created soure Tri∣bunes or chiefe Capitaynes in warres commonly called Admyralles, whyche had euerie one vnder them many Peticapitaines and Centurions: and these foure hee woulde commonly vse to call the sharpe Swordes of God, and them he commaunded to goe into the foure partes of the worlde, euerie one by him selfe a seue∣rall waye, and to kyll all suche as repugned hys Law. There names were, Ebubezer, Omar, Ozmen and Ali the Sonne of his vncle Salutelib, vnto whom he also ioyned in mariage Fatema, hys daughter in Lawe by hys first wife. Of these foure, Ebubezer, called of some Vbequar and of some other Buback or Eubocar, father in Law to Mahomet tooke hys voyage to Palestina, and there layde Siege to a certayne towne called Muchea, the Capitayne whereof was one Theodorus Begarius who had the rule of the towne in the behalfe and name of Cae∣sar. Who gathering together his power, sodainly set vp∣pon the Saracens with such valiaunt courage and force, that many of them beyng slayne, the residue lyke tall fellowes ranne away. At which time,  thirde Ides of March, Mahomet dyed, in the yeere of our saluation .637.
when he had raigned tenne yéeres, in the house of Aissa his wife, in the Citie Medina, and in the very same bedde wherein he was wont to sléepe and take his rest. His bo∣die without any Princely furniture or ceremonial solem∣nitie, was shrined and lapped in a white Shéete thrée tymes double, and so beyng chested in an yron coffin, was after a homely sort buried: where afterwarde his kins∣folkes and Allyes edified a sumptuous and magnificall Temple of bricke worke, and arched the same wyth a vault so pargetted with Lodestones (whose nature is to draw yron vnto it) that the yron Coffyn wherein Maho∣met his body was inclosed, was drawen vp, euen vnto the toppe of the Churche and there hangeth. For which cause that place is yet with great deuocion and Pylgry∣mage worshipped of all the East. They say that while he was banished his Countrey, going once on Pylgrimage into Mauritania Tingintana, he crossed the Seas ouer into Spaine. But when he vndestoode that Bishop Isidore laide waite to haue caught him, he immediatly shifted thence and conueyed himselfe away. Vpon his death bed, he appointed Ali his sonne in lawe to bée his Successour and the Caliph (that is to saye the chiefe Prelate) of hys Secte and vnto him togither with his daughter, he com∣mitted the whole charge of his body. But Eubocar his fa∣ther in law stopped them a tyde, in that matter, alledging that for as much as Mahomet deceassed in his house, and by his only meanes had stepped vp to such credite, welth, estimation and gouernment, as being bolstered, main∣teyned and preferred by his countenance and fréendship, none other by good reason was fitter to succéede then he that had béene his chiefe supporter. Against whom Ali durst not once open his mouth to reply, because Eubocar himselfe was a an of great power and also his kinsmen Omar and Ozmen tooke part with him, whiche were men valiaunt and factious, whose wordes would be heard
and whose commaundements before his, would be obey∣ed. Who forasmuch as by good right they iudged the kingdome to appertayne vnto them, being Coadiutours to Mahomet in the exployte of all his affaires, had leifer haue Eubocar succéede, beinge olde & their nere Kinsman then Ali being young and in his lusty yéeres, who might perchaunce raigne so long, that no hope euer to enioy the Kingdome by the order and course of nature shoulde be left to them, and also for that he was nothinge of kin vnto any of them. Wherefore Eubocar was made high Bis∣shoppe of Mahomet his Sect: who immediatly after his creation, departinge out of his owne Territories with a great Armye, discomfited the Roman Garrisons, and retourning into Arabie with victorye, dyed, not without some suspition of poyson, when he had raigned not fullye three yéeres, and without any princely funeralles buried néere to Mahomet. After him succéeded Homar, who (as we before shewed) was his Kinsman. Hesubdued Bosra the chief citie of all Arabie with many mo, and conquered all the country as farre as Gabata. At which successe of the Saracens, the Emperour Heraclius greatly storming sent his Brother Theodorus with a great army against them. Who encountring in a bloody battell with Homar, was ouercome and fledto Emessa. Heraclius hearing ty∣dings of this heauy chaunce, furnished out Baanes with a greater power against them, who incamped himself nere Emessa. Where the Saracens settinge vpon hym with great force and violence, were by hym vanquished, inso∣much that they were fayne to trudge into the borders of Damasco, and lodging their campe by the banke side of the riuer Bardanes made such outragious roades and in∣cursions into the Countraye adioynynge, that no man was hable to represse their furye nor withstand their in∣vasion. Wherefore Heraclius mistrustinge any good successe in the pursute of further warres, and hauynge
great diffidence in his owne power, fearynge also his owne lyfe and safetie if hée should any longer stay with∣in that Prouince and Countrey (for hee was at that time in Hierusalem, out of which, since the League and composition made with Persia hee had not departed) tooke awaye with hym all the precious Shrines and snmptuous Ornamentes of the Temple of Hierusalem, least the barbarous Enemies should despoyle them, and retourned agayne to Constantinople. The next yéere, the Saracenes layde siege to the Citie Damasco, wherewith Baanes (who defended the Citie with the sayd Emperours Garrisons) being greatly mo∣ued, desired Theodorus Sacellarius (Lieutenaunt for the Emperours Maiestie in Assyria) to come to ayde and assist hym. Which hee making hast to doe, was by the way surprised by the Saracenes and discomfited. The Souldiers vnder Baanes, not willing to serue vn∣der a Capitayne of small credit and countenaunce, but ra∣ther desirous to haue a Gouernour of most high power and aucthorytie, saluted hym their Emperour. But they which came with Sacellarius and escaped the handes of the Saracenes in their laste bickeringe, willynge to kéep their true allegiaunce to Heraclius, departed thence, and would not in any wyse consent to the depriuation and deposing of their lawful Prince and Emperour. The number of Baanes his Souldiours was 4000. And Sacellarius had almoste as many. The Saracenes hauing intelligence of this variance and deuision among the Romane Souldiers, discamped from the place where they were lodged, and set vppon them. The bickering was sore on both sides for a while, but (the Wind blowyng ful in the faces of the Roman Host which in that drye and sandye Countrey raysed vp the dust) they neither could sée their Enemies, nor skantly
fetch their breath. Which oportunytie the Saracenes not neglectinge, but takeyng the same to their most ad∣uantage and commoditie, put the Emperials to flyght, in which chase, they fléeinge through thicke and thinne by daungerous wayes and sleepe places did almost all pe∣rishe and were drowned in the Riuer Ermeta. Which luckie victory so puffed vp the haultie mindes of the proude Saracenes that they aduaunced theyr Ar∣mye agaynste Damasco,Damasens wonne by Saracenes and wynnynge that Cittie, subdued and brought al Phoenicia vnder their subiection. Then they made preparation to goe into Egipte, whiche hearynge the Romanes, who were Lordes and possessours of that Prouince, appoynted Cyrus Bys∣shoppe of Alexandria to be Chieuetayne: who sen∣dyng a solemne Ambassade to the Saracenes for peace, ob∣tayned it vppon condition that he should pay vnto them yéerely a Tribute of .200000. Crounes. And so for the space of thrée yéeres they were quiet and receiued no kind of molestation at their handes. But the Emperour Heraclius vnderstandyng this geare and thinkyng this composition greatly sounded to his dishonour, sent for Cyrus home agayne to Constanti∣nople, and in his stéede made Emanuel an Armenian, ru∣ler ouer EGYPT, who flatlye and playnelye deny∣ed the payment of anye money, before by Cyrus pro∣mysed to the Saracenes. Wherefore in great displeasure they inuaded Egipt with a buyge power, and Emanuel with a small compaignie for his sauetie wente to Alexandria. But Heraclius to late now, and to hys coste beynge taught, that promyse and faith oughte to be kepte and perfourmed euen to the Enemies, when hée well sawe that hée had not strength ynough, to match in bat∣tayle against such mighty foes, sent Cyrus agayne to the
common supplications should bée made during the whole moneth of September, and after the same ended, the whole volume of Mahomet hys lawe shoulde be openly redde to the people. He was tall of stature, broune coloured, balde headed, thinne bearded and the same som what enclining to white∣nes, and was buryed néere to Mahomet. But before he dyed, feeling himselfe so sore wounded that he despaired of recouerie, he appoynted for his Successour Ozmen: who also had béen a great furtherer and fauourer to Ma∣homet in all matters, and had twyse beene his Sonne in Lawe. For he maryed his two daughters, which both deceassed wythout children, in the life time of Mahomet, which dignitie he chiefely attained through giftes and bri∣berie. For receyuing at the handes of Homars Treasu∣rer all hys money and goodes, hée frankely distributed bothe it and all that hée himselfe had lefte vnto him by his Parentes among his Souldiours. Ozmen therefore béeyng inuested the thyrde Bishop after Mahomet, sente the nexte yéere following a huyge armye vnder the conducte of Hucba into Affrica, a∣gaynst the Lorde Gregorie, chiefe and supreme gouer∣nour of all that Prouince. He béeyng ouercome in bat∣tayle, and Carthage also subuerted, he vnyted all that Prouince to hys other Saracenicall Dominions. But fearyng to bée surprised and taken nappyng wyth some sodayne Alarum out of Europa, if they shoulde lye long in Carthage, they dislodged thence and remooued to Tu∣nice, a Citie standing within the Baye of Golet, and there rousting themselues for a season, greatly enlarged the same. But afterwarde receyuing a commaundement from Ozmen that they shoulde not dwell in any Port towne or other places vppon the Sea Coaste, (because he had taken suche agréement and order wyth the Emperour,
they departed sixe and thirtie myles from the Sea and aboute a hundreth from Tunice where they buylded themselues a Citie called Cairoan. After this, in the thirde yéere of thys mans raygne, Muauias (who was wée shewed before was Lieutenant of Egypte) wyth a Nauie of a thousande and seauen hundreth (or as some saye) wyth seauen hundreth Shippes onely, arryued in Cypres, and takyng by force the noble Citie Constantia, spoyled the whole Islande. But béeyng certefyed that Carcozir one of the Empe∣rour Constans hys Capitaynes, was commyng agaynst hym with a greate fléete, for feare of further harme, he departed thence and planted hys Siege before another Citie in the same Islande named Aradum, where he no∣thynge preuayled. Séeynge therefore hys purpose to quayle, hée broughte backe hys Hoaste to Winter in Damasco. In the meane whyle Ozmen caused the odde pa∣pers and Schedules of Mahomet (before by Homars procurement collected together) to bée brought into a better order and to bée deuided into Chapters, makyng of them a Booke whiche is called the Alcorane, wher∣in all the opinions and Institutions of Mahomettes Sect are contained and at large specifyed. The nexte Spring after, Muauias with a greater Nauie then before, arryued in Cypres, and assaulted the Citie of Aradum, which at length after many battryes he wanne: and permitting the Inhabitantes to go whi∣ther they woulde wythout hurte or bodely harme, he rased the Citie to the grounde and layde all the Islande waste and left it dispeopled. At the same tyme also, an other army of Saracens vnder the conducte of Busurre, inuaded Isauria and spoyled the whole Countrey wyth fyre and sworde, and retourned home from thence with fiue thousand Prisoners.
After these so many ouerthrowes and miserable discom∣fitures receaued, Constance Caesar desired a truce for .ij. yéeres of Muauias: which beinge not obtayned, while Muauias prepared a great Nauye at Tripolis a Citie of Syria, to inuade the Prouinces and Territories belong∣ing to the Romane Empire, his purpose by the worthy∣nesse and valyaunt demeanure of two Brothers was for a litle while frustrate.A valaunt enterprise. Who breaking open the prisons, wherein a great number of Christians were, set them al at lybertye: insomuch that they sodenly geuing an onset on the Saracens, killed a maruelous number of them, and putting the rest to flight, with victorye ran to their ships, and takeing so many of them as woulde serue to trans∣port them, they set the reste on fire, and came saue into Thracia. But Muauias nothing dismayed with this mischance and ouerthrow,A lamenta∣ble slaugh∣ter. prepared a greater nay, and furnished the same with all habilimentes and Municions ne∣cessarye, with whom he landed at Phoenice a Hauen of Lycia, where Constance with his Nauy laye: and ge∣uing the charge vpon him, made such a slaughter of the Romanes, that the Sea was red with the bloud of them that were slayne. Constance disguising himselfe in the habite and apparrell of a poore man, fled in a Small ship with a fewe others in his company to Constantinople: Which victory set Muauias in such a hoygh and conceipt, that he thought nothing inuincible, or able to withstande hym. Where vpon he tooke Rhodes, and pulled downe the huge Image of the Sun called Colossus Solis, which Chares was in making (as Plinie sayth).xij. yéeres,Of our en∣glish money that Sum a mounteth to, 40000 li. and the charges thereof drewe to thrée hundreth Talentes. The brasse of this Image beyng bought by a certen Iew of Emessa, was somuch as nine hundred Camels coulde carie The Saracenes caryed away thence not onely this I∣mage
which was in height .70. Cubites: but innumera∣ble others. For Plinie writeth that in that Ile there were beside this Colosse of the Sunne .73 thousand Sta∣tues or Images, and a hundreth lesse Colosses. Hauinge spoyled Rhodes, they cut their course alonge by the Sea Agaeum, and plagued the Cyclades with lyke calamitie. At this time also laid Generall of an other army of Sa∣racenes, entred into the borders of Armenia, and wasted al, farre and neere tyll he came to Mount Caucasus. And Muauias retourning from Rhodes, furnished a Na∣uye with all thinges necessary to inuade Sicile, which wasted and ruynated the Countrie with Sword and fire without mercy, tyll Olimpius the Exarche of Italy (for so was he that had the gouernaunce ouer Italy at yt time for the Emperour of Constantinople called) encountringe with them in a bloudye Conflicte, with much effusion of Christian bloud discomfited and expelled them. In which battell he so eagrely fought, & was so fore wearied that he tell sicke and shortly after dyed. Muauias himselfe leuying an Armye by land, conduc∣ted them into Cappadocia to besiege Coesarea the head Citie of that Prouince. But before he could atchieue a∣ny notable exploite worthy to be remembred, hearinge that Ozmen the Caliph was dead, in hope to be his Suc∣cessour, retyered with his Host back agayne. This Oz∣mene in ye twelfth yéere of his Pontificall dignytie being in his owne house beset and besieged with a company of Saracenes which would haue had Ali to be Caliph, slue hymselfe, because he would not fall into their handes. He by chaunce lost the Ring of Mahomet, which all the Ca∣liphes before hym wore: and caused an other to be made of Siluer, wherein by his commaundement were ingra∣uen these wordes: O PERTINACES, O POENI∣TENTES. He was white of coulour, graue and curte∣ous of visage, a long Beard and of a meane stature high∣lye
and dearelye beloued was he of the common people, both before and after he embraced this Secte, and gotte very great wealth by Marchaundize. Notwithstandyng he was alwayes verye lyberall, yea rather magnificent and honourable, and (as we haue shewed) disbursed and gaue bribes largelye to the Soul∣diours that hee might obtayne the Pontificate. He ly∣ued .lxxxvij. yeeres and was buryed in the night with∣out any Funerall pompe because he slue himselfe. Therefore after hys death there arose great conten∣tion amonge the Saracenes, aboute the election of a newe Bysshoppe. Some woulde haue Ali to succéede hym, some Muamad sonne to Ozmen, and some Mu∣auias. But Ali raysed warres againste Muamad, and preuayled agaynste hym, so that he was installed and made Bysshoppe by all mens consent: sauynge onelye Muauias. Who reposinge greate truste and confidence in the Aegiptian and Assyrian Souldiours, (whose prowesse and magnanymytie he had sufficient∣lye tryed aforetime in so manye Battayles) made sharpe warres agaynst hym, colourablye pretendynge that hée tooke the same in hande onely to reuenge the death of Ozmen. When both the Armyes were come to the Riuer Euphrates, Muauias hauynge more skyll in warlyke pollices, and also hauinge olde beaten Souldiours vn∣der hym, so fortyfied and entrenched hys Campe néere to the Riuer side, and the Citie Babylon, that neyther coulde he be inforced by hys aduersarye to fight vnlesse he would hymselfe, and also hys Armye shoulde not be destitute of water, (whereof in that Region there is great scarsitye) nor yet be vnprouided of victayles, and moreouer néeded not to feare anye Alarmes behynde at their backes. Whereas in the meane whyle Ali
his Armye, was extremely pinched for lacke of water. And so for the space of eleuen Monthes keeping his Soul∣diours within the Trenches of hys Campe, he weryed hys Enemye and lyngered the tyme onely now and then with Skirmishes, tyll at length by the intercession of certayne Priestes and others skilfull in the Lawe of Mahomet, order was taken betwéene them, that the whole cause shoulde be decided by the iudgement and a∣warde of two olde men. On Ali his side was chosen Alascates, and for Muaui∣as parte Alascius. These two comminge to a Towne called Algendel, to sit vpon this waightie matter of both their tytles, the one thought it necessarye that Ali should be disgraded and deposed from his pontificall dignitie, and the other stiflye helde opinion that he was a man moste worthy for the office. Thus pleading to and froe, ney∣ther absolutely determyninge nor fully concludinge any attonement, Ali and Muauias retourned agayne ei∣ther of them to his owne Campe. And neuer ceased with often Skirmishing to molest and kill one an other, spoy∣lynge and wastynge one an others Countries till at length Ali in a certayne Temple néere Cufa a Citie of Arabie was by the insidious driftes and Ambushes of Muauias slayne, and in the same buried, for which cause the place at this daye is called Massadale which is as much to saye, as the house of Ali. In his Ringe hee had this inscription: Corde syncero Deum Dominum veneror. Hee was shorte and lowe of Stature, his Bearde was side and longe, his Armes and Legges full of haire, and in his goynge neuer lyfted vp hys Eyes. After Ali was dead, the Citizens of Cufa and A∣ratha created Alhaccem (his eldest Sonne by his wife Fatema, the Daughter of Mahomet) Bysshope: a man in all poynctes of bodelye feacture and comelye
shape, resembling his Graundfather Mahomet. He with an armie, marched against Muauias, but when both the Hostes were ordered in battaile araie readie to geue the onset, and the voward of the one standing full against the fronte of the other, whether it were because he feared the doubtfull hazard of battaile or else (as some do write) that he was ouercome with the goodnes and integrite of na∣ture, vnwilling that so great effusion of bloud and destruc∣tion of men shoulde be made for his sake, he voluntarilie went and submitted himselfe to Muauias, acknowledging him to be his Superiour. Beyng thus reconciled one to the other, they went both together to Cufa, and there fin∣ding great store of money and treasure, they departed thence to Ietrib, where Muauias with his owne handes crowned Alhaccem with the royall Diademe and called him King, because he well knew that he shoulde not liue long. For within sixe monethes after his Coronation he dyed beyng poysoned by the same Muauias. His Poesie engrauen in his Signet was: Solus Deus potens est. Thus Muauias hauing now dispatched and ridde out of the way all his aduersaries, raigned alone. Hauing thus set his affaires in order, he inuaded the frontiers of ye Ro∣mane Empire. But Constantius sendyng vnto him for peace, had the same graunted, condicionally that Constan∣tius should pay vnto him euerie day ten poundes of gold,Peace dear¦ly bought. and a Slaue with a Horse. At this time Damascus was the chiefe Seate and Metropolitane Citie of the Saraceni∣call Empyre. But in this their so great successe and feli∣citie, there arose dissensions among themselues for theyr religion, by reason of the varietie and repugnance of Ma∣homettes scrowles and Schedules. The Persians, béeyng (as we haue shewed) now made Saracens, helde opinions muche differing from them that folowed Homars Alco∣rane in Syria. Wherefore Muauias with his power spée∣ding him into Persia, suppressed that Sect and established
his owne faction, which bore al the swaie in Syria, and ap∣pointed an order,Lustie al∣lowāce, on∣ly to allure men to his Sect. Ambitious Traytor. that the Souldiours of his Secte should haue allowance of two hundreth pence by the day, wher∣as the Persians had but only thirtie. Then inuading Ci∣licia, he spoyled all the Countrey with sword and fire. And when he was retourned to Damascus, Sapor Pre∣tor of all suche places in Persia as yet acknowledged the Romane Empire, now traiterously reuolting from the Emperour, sent vnto Muauias, one Sergius master of the horsemen, with request, that he woulde ayde him to the Empyre of Constantinople. Who beyng nowe come to Muauias his presence and shewing the effect of his Com∣mission for which he was sent, beholde, there came also an Ambassadour from the Emperour to Muauias, whose name was Andrew, promising vnto him in Caesars be∣halfe large and ample rewardes, so that he would not aide nor further the procéedinges of Sapor. Muauias hearing both their errandes and their offers, aunswered: that for∣as much as he accompted both of them for no better then his enemies,He yt hath most money shall haue most friend∣shippe. he would ayde and take part with him that would geue most. And so Sergius geuing more then An∣drew woulde, Muauias entered into a league with him. Andrew taking hys leaue, in hys waye homewarde in∣tercepted Sergius as he was retourning into Persia and hanged him on a gybet: hoping and persuading himselfe, that now the partie to whō the promise was made beyng ridde out of the way, Muauias with a safe conscience (re∣taining & kéeping still the rewardes alreadie to him giuē) might and would dodge & finde cauillations with Sapor yt he was discharged of his promise. But there was more constancie & faithfulnes in the barbarous Infidel, then the Greekes wit could conceiue or forsée. For Muauias, mea∣ning to kéepe touch and promise inuiolably, sent a bande of Arabians to ayde hym vnder the conducte of Fadala, who being kylled by a fall from his horse, he appoynted
in his stéede his Sonne Iazid Capitaine for that expedi∣tion: by which power and armie, Chalcedonia was mi∣serablie afflicted and Armaria a Citie of Phrygia ta∣ken: and leauyng in it a garryson of fyue thousand Sa∣racens (because Winter approched) they retourned with their Hoste into Syria. In this meane season the Emperour althoughe Win∣ter were now at hand and all places couered with Snow sent Andrew with a small crew of Souldiours to expulse the garrysons of the Saracens and to recouer Armaria. The Greeques therfore sodainely skaled the walles and brake into the Citie without any resistaunce, and to re∣uenge their many ouerthrowes and discomfitures before time receyued slew all the Saracens within, who suspec∣ting no suche thing, kepte within their houses, cowring ouer the fire in that extreme colde weather. After thys victorie gotten by the Imperialles, Constantius béeyng now come into Italie out of Grecia, tooke his progresse straight towarde Rome, where he taking a diligent view of all thinges, fell to the spoyle, and caryed away wyth him all such auncient monumentes and workes as were of Marble or brasse,Rome spoi∣led. and generally whatsoeuer myght de∣lyght and content the eye, and lading his Shippes there∣with, sent it firste vnto Naples and from thence to the Citie Syracuse in Sicilie. So that he tooke awaye from the Citie more ornamentes in seuen dayes space, then so many barbarous Nations had done in .CClviij. yéeres before, for there were so many since the first inclinatiō of the Romane Empyre. During his abode there, leadyng his life effeminately & libidinously and looking to receiue the subsidie and tribute that he had with much rigour and crueltie exacted and assessed the Cities and Islandes of Italie to pay,Emperour murthered. in so much that many were spoyled not only of their goods but also of their wiues and children, he was by his owne people slaine and murthered. After whō suc∣céeded
in the Empyre his Sonne Constantine, whom the Saracens perceiuing to be a Coward and vnwarlike per∣son, priuily made preparation for a nauie to inuade Thra∣cia and Greece, if any tumult or seditious vprore should fortune to kindle in Constātinople. But because al things were there quiet, they sayled into Sicilie, wherin the late spoyles of Rome and of all Italy were laid and hoorded vp: and with sodaine force tooke the citie Syracuse which was not defended nor kept with any garrison. And when they could not roust there in safetie by reason of the néerenes of Italie, they shipped all the ornamentes and treasure that was in Syracuse, and with incredible richesse retourned into Egypt. Albeit there be some which write that Con∣stantine hearing of the deathe and murther of his father Constanoius, sayled into Sycilie and caryed the Spoyles from thence with him to Constantinople. After this, an other populous armie of Saracens en∣tring into Affrica, had suche successe that they destroyed and wasted all the Countrey néere the Sea coastes (for a great part of the maine land and middle soyle was alrea∣die in their subiection) and haryed away with them into slauerie and thraldome .800000. Prisoners. And on an other side Muauias furnished out a huige Host vnder the conduct of Muamades and Caises, whiche subdued Lydia and Cilicia two other of the Romane Prouinces. And within a while after, to thintent he might conquere & sub∣iugate Constantinople, he sent another armie after the o∣ther, wherof Saeuus was General, which being ioyned to y• other, marched both directly toward ye citie Constātino∣ple & girded it about with a terrible stege.Constanti∣nople besse∣ged seuen yeeres. And for there more strēgth, he appointed a nauie to help thē, which stop∣ped all the passages and places frō the West promontorie of Hebdomum to Cyglobium. With al this force they oftentimes gaue terrible assaultes to the citie, but their at∣tempts were all in vaine. This siege lasted from ye month of Aprill till September.
fléete left, which then vexed Crete, vnder the guydaunce and conduct of Fadall and Cadall. Through these good for∣tunes and prosperous successes, the Maiestie of the Ro∣mane Empire séemed eftsones to flourish, and somewhat to reuiue and recouer his pristinate glory. But Muauias hauynge thus concluded a peace and league, which to the Christians was most pernicious (because the Saracens beinge nowe weake and without force mighte haue bene vtterly oppressed and easly vanquished if Caesar had not more delighted in present Idlenesse and quiet reste then studying for the long tranquillytie of his Common wealth, which by no meanes is made more longer of con∣tinuaunce and safer with barbarous nations then by per∣fect victory) tourned his power & made his quarell against the Mardaites, and dispossessing them from their high de∣scrying places in ye Mountaines which before they enioy∣ed, he studyed and bent his mind to appease certayne con∣trouersies and Sectes newly sprong vp about his religi∣on. Therfore he called a generall Counsell or Synode of his sect, vnto whom by publique proclamation he com∣maunded all the learned men of his Empire, and such as had any wryting or Schedule either of Mahomet or of a∣ny his predecessours, Bishoppes before hym, to come and bring the same writinges with them. This Tartarical Synode was holden and celebrated at Damasco, where (when as nothyng coulde be determyned by reason of the contrarietie of repugnaunt sentences) hee commaunded sixe of the wisest in ye company by the common consent of them al to be picked out, & so there were chosen Mulcine, Boari, Buor, Anoeci, Atermind & Dauid. These six being shut vp together into one house, wt all such writinges as were thither brought, hee gaue straight charge that they should lay their heades together & out of these writinges gather into one volume such actes & sayings of Mahomet as shuld some to haue ani likelihod of truth. And whē they
had made sixe volumes, ye residue of the writings be cau∣sed to be throwne into a riuer, which were so many that 200. Camels were laden with the cariage of them away. Then he apoincted by a law a greuous paine & punishe∣ment to as many as in thought,By whome Alcoran was clouted toge¦ther. word or déede beléeued o∣therwise then in those sixe Alcoranes was prescribed. Of the which six volumes, afterward procéeded and spronge vp soure Sectes of Saracens: which are called Melicians; Asafians, Alambelians & Buanifians. The Aphrycans were Melicians: the Arabians and Damascenes, Asafi∣ans: the Armenians and Persians, Alambelians: the A∣lexandrians & Assyrians were Buanifians. In Cayre the greatest Citie of Egypt, all these Sectes (no man agayn∣saying) are vsed and embraced. When Muauias had fini∣shed & taken this order in his matters at Damasco which was ye head seat of his Empire, he died and was there bu∣ried. He was the first of the Saracen Capitaines yt with Ozmen (during Homars raigne) entred into the Roman prouinces wt an host, and was the first yt enlarged & am∣plyfied the limites of the Saracenicall Empire as far as Aegipt and Aphrica westward, into Mesopotamia East∣ward, and into Asia northward, and was the first yt consti∣tuted a certen seate royall at Damasco: which citie for the fertilitie of the soyle and pleasantnes of the ayre far excel∣leth any other. He vsed firste of his race, to haue Slaues and Eunuches after a princely state & guise to stand bare headed before hym: for he was a man altogether marcial and warlike, and in the atchiuing of his deuises prudent and wise. His coulour was white, his face pleasaunt and graue, his eyes of diuers coulours, his stature meane, his Bearde alwayes blacke, for euer as it beganne to waxe graye, hee dyed it and conserued it in his former state. He lyued lxxvij. yeares, and raigned twenty and foure. His Signet which he caryed about with hym, had in it this Posie engrauen: O Deus ignosce mihi.
Of learnyng he was altogether ignoraunt, in so muche that he could not write his own name: whereas otherwise he had by nature a verie profound witte. Wherfore it is reported that Mahomet on a time, making his prayers at a banquet in presēce of many (as his custome was) said these wordes: O God teach Muauias to write & to num∣ber, and defend him from all daungers. By which words, that craftie Pseudoprophete who knewe the nature of Muauias to be fierce and prompt withall, shewed and sig∣nified two things. First, that he, if he had the ayde of any learning, might greatly helpe and furder his Secte. For they which can write, can also reade and thereby become wyser. Then because he saw him to be of suche a fierce courage that he was lyke to aduenture and obiect himself to many perilles and hazardes, he desired of God to teach him the Arte of numbring, wherby he might skanne and obserue due times and tempestiuities, and to haue the skil to take the occasions that shoulde be fittest for the exploy∣ting of his affayres when they fell: and for the same cause he desired of God to protect & deliuer him from all daun∣gers. But he being a man craftie ynough of himselfe and naturally geuen to pollicie néeded not these helpes. After that Muauias was dead, immediately his sonne Iezid was saluted Bishop and King, who atchieued no notable acte in his time worthie of remembraunce. For he was a man altogether giuen to slouth, idlenes and riot, and moreouer was sickly and of a body nothing lustie: sa∣uing that he put many of the nobilitie of Arabie to death. He loued his owne Sister lividinously, and was greatly delited in learning and Poetrie, and made many verses, a most spightfull contemner of Mahomets Law and eue∣rie other Religion. During this mans raigne, Mutar whom he had made President ouer the Prouince of Per∣sia, perceiuing his drowsie sluggishnes and desire of eas openly protested himselfe to be a Prophete, & practised ty∣rannie
therin: and of the line of this Mutar, the Kinges of Persia which at this day are called Sophi, are descēded. Iezid his Poesie was: DEVS EST MEVS DOMI∣NVS. He raigned thrée yéeres, and dyed at Arrane, be∣ing of the age of fortie yéeres, when the Citizens of Cufa had called home Hocem the Sonne of Ali, entending to create hym Byshoppe: but Abdalam the Sonne of Iezid in the fieldes of Carball néere Cufa, treacherously lying in waite, slue him, and there was he buried. In remembrāce of which thing, there was at his graue and Sepulchre af∣terwarde builded a Citie called Carbala, called so of the name of the field wherin the fact was done. Hocem lefte twelue Sonnes behind him when he dyed, that is to say, Zeinal Abadine, Zeinal Muamedes, Baguer Muamedes, Giafar Cadeneg, Giafar Musa, Cazine Musa, Hali Mu∣ceratius, Alle, Muamedes Taguin, Muamedes Hali∣naguin, Alle Haceme Asquerine, Haceme Muamedes Mahadine: which were in diuers places buryed, that is to wit, some néere to their great Graundfathers father Mahomet, some at Bagadat, & some at Herine: but as for Muamedes Mahadine,Doting be∣liefe of Per∣sians. the Persians do affirme not to bée yet dead, & do hold opinion, that he shall come mounted on horsebacke to declare and shewe the law to all Nations, and shall conuert all people, and that all this shall first begin in the citie of Massadale where ye body of his graūd∣father Ali lyeth buried. And therfore they haue alwayes in that citie a horse ready to receiue him, whom, after the ende of their praiers and orisons, they lead with Torche light to the Church: and vpō one certaine day which is a∣mong them kept most festiuall and solemne they bryng thys horse to the Temple where Ali is buryed wyth as muche pompe as maye bee, beseechyng and making pe∣tition vnto the same Ali, that he would as spéedily as may bée, send vnto them this his Nephew whom they looke for. Vnto the which feast, there is resort of people from di-
together with the opinion that was conceiued of hym and his Sect, so incensed and swelled his ambitious mind, that he first of all others tooke vpon hym the name of a Miralmumine, which worde in the Arabian lan∣guage signifieth the Prince of all beléeuers: which name afterwards our Historiographers depraued & corruptly called Miramuline. He also builded the large and most e noble citie of Marocco néere to the foote of Mounte Atlas,Marocco builded. and appointed it to be the chiefe Keye and Metropolytane Citie of all his Kingdome: Notwithstandinge many doo affirme that it was built by Iosippus the Sonne of Tes∣fine, and some say by an other. Against them Abdime∣lick (partlye for that he sawe him to procure no hurt nor attempt any hinderaunce to his procéedinges) and partly because he was wrapped in heapes of troubles elsewhere and had moe yrons in the fire then he coulde wel temper, attempted nothing. For although he had supplanted Da∣dack with all his faction and adherentes and with victory retourned to Damascus, yet could he not long enioy that victory nor brooke it quietlye, because there began such a plague and pestilenciall mortalytie that had almost quite destroyed all the Saracenicall Nation. Beside this plague, the people were greatly pinched with famine in all his Countries. And the Mardaites gettyng agayne the possession of Mount Libanus, enlar∣ged their limites as farre as Hierusalem: and morouer the principalytie of Persia, vsurped by Mutar, much dis∣quieted his troubled minde. Abdimelick weltringe in the surges of this froward Fortune, and fearing to bee o∣uerwhelmed with some greater mischaunce, sent a so∣lemne Ambassade to Iustinian then Emperour, beyng of the age of sixtéene yéeres, for a confirmation of the peace and League that Muauias strake with Constantine, and farther to request hym that the Mardaites might bee dis∣possessed and driuen out of Libanus, which thinge if the
rour would graunt, he promysed that he would euery day geue vnto the Romanes in the name of a Tribute, ten poundes of Golde, a Slaue and a goodly faire Horse. And moreouer in consideration of the confirmation of this peace which he so earnestly desired,Tribute of Saracenes (to thend that Caesar might the better expulse and rid the Mardaites which nowe were not aboue .xij. thousand in number out of Li∣banus) he gaue and graunted vnto him the one halfe of his yéerely Tributes of Cyprus, Armenia and Iberia. This peace beyng confirmed and he deliuered out of the feare of the Mardaites (a fierce and outragious people) he sent Ci∣afa with a great Armye againste Mutar, who vnder the pretext and coloure of Religion practized tyranny and ex∣tort regiment in Persia. Which expedition and voyage had very vnluckie end: for Mutar with an Host marching to méete him, vanquished him and discomfited al his pow∣er, whereby he wanne a greater estimation and credite then euer he had before. Abdimelick to th'intent he might from a néerer place surueigh and beholde how matters prospered in Persia, goeth into Mesopotamia: where he was againe wt many calamities & aduerse bruntes sore crushed. For ye Empe∣rour Iustinian (ye Sclauoys partli yéelding themselues vn∣to his mercy and partly tamed by dent of Sword) picking out of the stoutest Gallantes in all that Nation, a crewe of.30000. or there aboute, mustred and tooke vp Soul∣diours apace for his warres: and so trustinge to their va∣lyaunt seruice, brake the League lately made: makyng for the coulour of his quarel, ye the money payable for his yéerely Tribute had not the Roman stamp, but was of a new Arabian coigne. Sending therfore his Lieutenaunt Leontius wt this new leuied army into Asia, subdued and brought vnder his subiection Iberia, Abania, Hircania and Media, which Regions were vnder the Saracenes Empyre.
At the same time also one Said reised sedition and re∣belled against Abdimelick: against whom Abdimelick spéedyng hymselfe with an Army, so dismayd and terri∣fied hym, that he fel downe on his Marybones and craued forgeuenesse. Whom Abdimelick with dissimuling countenaunce pardoned and séemed to forgeue: but with∣in awhile after he commaunded hym priuelie to be slain. At this same time also there arose an other tyrantie a∣mong the Saracenes, named Abdala Zubir, who sent his Brother Musub into Persia against Mutar: and of hym Mutar was both vanquished and slayne: albeit he enioyed not the fruite of his victory long. For Abdimelick withall his power igoynge againste hym, ouercame and dis∣comfited him and all his Hoast: and from thence holding on his way into Persia, brought all that Prouince vnder his subiection. Abdalas Zubir discouraged with the good successe of his aduersarie, fled vnto Mecca, after whome, Abdimelick sent Cagian with a great Armye to pursue and take hym, who by force winning the Citie Mecca, slue Zubir, and set the auntientest Idole of that citie with the Temple also on fire. And thus, Abdimelick hauinge recouered Persia, and dispatched out of the way his aduersaries, and being alone in possession of the Saracenicall Soueraigntie, (after hee had oftentimes in vaine, besought the Romane Emperor that he would not infringe the League betwéene them concluded,) at length bent all his power againste the Greeques which inferred warre vpon hym againste the Lawes both of God and man, and ouer his army he ap∣poynted for Generall one Muamates. Who findinge the Greeques at Sebastonople, hanged the Tables of the League vpon a Speare poynt, and caused the same to bee borne before him like an Ensigne. And calling vpon God to reuenge the breaking and violation therof (which were so solēnelie made and confirmed by taking his holy name
o witnesse) he in good order of battell gave the charge vp∣on them. Albeit first he had corrupted the Sclauoy with money. Of whom assoone as the battell was once begun néerehand xx.M. reuolted from the Emperour & went to the Saracenes: which thinge so appauled the Greeques, that they were easely ouercome and put to flight, and in the chase were kylled almost euery mothers sonne. The Emperour Iustinian (for he was present himselfe at this conflict) dishonorably and shamfully by flight sauing him∣selfe wt a few others in his company,Christians instly plag∣ed. assoone as he came to Leucas, caused all the remnaunt of ye new band of sclauo∣noys to be put to death and their dead carkesses to bee cast into the Sea, Whervpon, the saracenes afterward, with∣out any damage not only recouered their owne Territo∣ries before lost, but also inuaded the residue of the Roman Prouinces. Sabatius also a noble Senatour, and Pretor of Armenia, vnderstanding of the wrecks and ouerthrows of the Romans, reuolted to the Saracens and betraied in∣to their hands the whole countrie of Armenia. Nether did they yet cease to ouerrun the whole East, and to leade away the christians into seruitude: for y• part also of Persia, which yet acknowledged the Roman Empire was sub∣dued by Cagian, and Muamates, wt helpe of those Sclauo∣noy tourning to his side, and entring into the Prouince of Thracia, spoyled it wt Sweard and fire pitifully: the Ro∣man Empire being in the meane season wt ciuile discords and intestine hatred so disseuered and torne asunder, that no man durst set in foote to withstande this outrage. The Lord Leoutius hauing exiled Iustinian into ye Ile Cherson, vsurped ye empire: and straitwaies sent a Lord of his countrie named Iohn, with a nauie to inhibite and stop the violent irruption of the Aphricane saracenes, which not content with the midle lande yt was graunted vnto them by league for their habitation, inuaded a fresh the Countrie néere about the Sea Coastes.
This man vanquishing the Saracenes in battaile, draue them out of the Romane Territories. But for as muche as their power and wealth was dreadfull and terrible in Syria and all the East, and newes brought by sundry ru∣mours that there was more ayde comming from Abdi∣melik, to the ayde of these Saracens in Affrica, Iohn thin∣king his power vnable to defend and kéepe the possession of ye prouince, went to Constantinople to fetch more ayde from Leontius, leauing his hoast behind him in Affrica. But while these things were to slowly purueighed and prepared by Leontius, Abdimelik vnderstanding ye state of his subiectes in Affrica, and sore mooued wyth the late losse by them there sustained, furnished out a great Nauie to recouer the Prouince againe. With whō the Romane fléete (thinking themselues not hable to make their part good) departed thence, into Crete. Where ye Chieuetaines and Princes consulting together, thought it much soūded to their shame & dishonour to returne home, hauing thus lost Affrica and left the same open to their enemies: and partly moved with displeasure towarde the Emperour which did so dreamingly prouide for the furniture & sup∣ply of warlicke affaires, egged the Mariners to reuolte, and to salute Absimar Emperour,The Em∣peroure shamefully abused by his owne subiectes. whom they also called Tybarius. He in all hast speeding himself toward Constā∣tinople with an armie, and finding Leontius vnprouided, without any stop wanne the Citie, and taking Leontius, cut of his nose and cast him into prison. The Saracens for∣ciblie enioyed all Affrica, and draue out all the Romane garrisons. The most part of them that then inhabited the places of Affrica néere the Sea, were of the Gothes lyne. This Tyberius immediatly after he was enthrony∣zed and made Emperour, sent his brother Heraclius with a huige armie into Asia against the Saracenes. Who in∣uading Syria pearced into the countrey as farre as Samo∣sata
and wasting al the places néere therabout, slue néere∣hand of them two hundreth thousande,Slaughter of Saracens. and taking there many prisoners and great booties, brought all the Coun∣trey in great feare of him. And at the same time the Princes of Armenia, in a sedition killed all the Saracenes, which were in Armenia: and sending Ambassadours to Absimar, receiued the Romanes againe into their Pro∣uince. Muamates netteled with these dealinges, with a great power set vpon them, brought them againe vnder the Saracenicall obeysaunce, and burned the chife Prin∣ces and leaders of the people alyue. Then he also inuaded Cilicia, spoyling and ruynating it euerie where piteouslie but he escaped not himselfe scotfree. For Heraclius en∣countring with him, discomfited a great part of his hoast and tooke the rest prisoners, whom he sent bound to Con∣stantinople to the Emperour. At which time Abdimelik dyed, in the .xxi. yéere of his raigne. We shewed before, that one Abedramon (descended of the Mauronion stock) conueyed himselfe into Mauritania in the beginning of Abdimelik his Pontificate, and was there in suche esti∣macion among his people and Sectaries, that all the Sa∣racens dwelling in that Prouince reuerenced him as an other Caliph or rather as one greater then a Caliph, but for as muche as he entermedled not with any bellicall in∣surrections and also was farre of, Abdimelik did not per∣secute him so as he did others. But yet notwithstanding his name was great in Arabia. He dying, left a sonne be∣hind him, named Vlite, who succéeded Abdimelik in the Pontificate, & was called the Muralmumine, in the yéere after the incarnatiō of Christ .708. During whose raigne Armenia was once againe brought vnder the Romane subiectiō, and the Saracens thēce expulsed. The Arabians making an irruption into ye Romane Prouinces, tooke by force ye citie Mista with many Castles & fortified townes and with great booties and prayes returned home. Then
againe vnder the conduct of Abatius they inuaded Galatia and sacked it miserably: and the Emperour Iustinian be∣ing againe restored to the Empyre by Trebellius king of Bulgaria, the Saracens taking occasion by reason of these new tumultes & commotions, issued out of Aegipt with a greater preparatiō & power thē they did before, and debel∣lad all Lybia to the Ocean Sea. I call it now Lybia, be∣cause I haue alreadie shewed ytAffrica was before by thē takē, which is a part of Lybia: to thende you may vnder∣stand yt I do not speake of a part only, which was already conquered, but of ye whole region. For wheras Lybia or ye whole coūtrey of Affrica being almost on euery side com∣passed about with water like an Island, is on ye North en∣uironed with our Sea, on the West and South with the Atlantique Ocean, on ye East with the East, red & Ara∣bian Sea, and is ioyned to Asia by a little narow part of dry land lying betwene the vttermost end of the. Arabiā Gulph & our Sea: yet Egypt (which Prouince extendeth frō the Cataractes and fludgates of the riuer Nilus to the mouth of the same) together with Aethiopia (which lieth a∣boue it) of many old writers, yea of late Authours also, is not reckened into Affrica. And as ye riuer Nilus parteth the East part of this halfe Isle, that is to wit, Aegypt & Ae∣thiopia, where the large & mightie dominions of Presbi∣ter Iohn lye: so ye riuer Nigir, springing (as many write) from the same fountain, and hauing (as the other hath his course from the South into the North) so this frō the East into the Weast, and falling into the Athlantique Ocean, parteth and separateth the most wealthie Kingdomes of the Nigrites from it, So that, the Lybia which we here meane, is contained within the boūdes of Nilus and Nigir the Athlantique Ocean and our Sea. All which as farre as it stretcheth from the Weast into the East, the buyge Mount Athlas cutteth and seuereth a sunder: béeyng at this daye diuided into three partes, Barbaria, Numidia
and Lybia. Lybia which in the Arabian tongue is called Sarra, that is to say Desert, is bound on the Southe wyth the kingdomes of the Nigrites, on the North with ye moūt Athlas, on the East wt the riuer Nilus & on the west with the Oceā. Numidia called in ye Arabiā tongue Biledulge∣rid, (which is to say, a Countrey wherein groweth great store of dates) stretching frō the borders of Aegypt to the Oceā, lyeth South frō the moūtain Athlas. Barbarie from the East to ye West (cōtained within ye same limittes and borders) comprehēdeth all yt which lyeth betwene Athlas and our Sea. And this is also diuided into foure Prouin∣ces: Mauritania Tingintana, which containeth the King∣domes of Marrocco & Feze: Caesariensis, wherin is ye king dome of Telensine: & ye .iii. part both in thold time & now is properly called Affrica, wherin in aunciēt time ye Car∣thaginians flourished, conteining now at this day ye Citie Affrica, Tunice and Tripolis. After this foloweth Cire∣nes, which is cōprehended in ye kingdome of Bugia. At the first inuasiō and irruptiō made into this Prouince during the raigne of Ozmen, ye Saracens swarming out of Aegypt wan Cyrenaica & Affrica. But making peace afterward with ye Emperour, they were cōmaūded to depart from al the places néere to the Sea coastes, and so they remooued further into the Confines of Numidia and Lybia, and in the raigne of Muauias they againe entring into ye Terri∣tories of ye Carthaginians, subdued the coūtrey of Affrica, all about the Sea coastes. And nowe auauncing forward their Standards they inuaded both ye Mauritaines, & ap∣pointed for ye limites of their Empire the Oceā & the riuer Nigir. Ouer which prouince Vlite thē chief Bishop of the Mahumetane sect, made Mucas high deputée, & appointed vnto him a strōg power. But yet ye part of Tingintana that lyeth toward the straictes of Marrocke was vnder the rule of Roderike Visigotte king of Spaine. For the Gothes expulsing all the Romane garrisons were lordes
of the whole countrye of spaine, from 300. yéeres almost passed, acknowledgyng for their King none but this Ro∣dericke: who was not onely King of both the Spaynes, the néerer and furthér, but also possessed all that laye to∣ward the straict Sea in Mauritania Tingintana. The Straictes in Affrica, hath thrée Promontories, makyng two Bayes or Elbowes into the landwarde: and in Spaine as many Promontories with so many bosomes or Elbowes of the Sea. The famous and noble Cities by the Sea, in Spayne, were Carteia situate by the Pro∣montorie Calpe, which afterwarde was called Tarifa: in Aphrica, Tingis, of whom Mauritania Tingintana hath his name, standyng by the Promontorie Abyle: and Cep∣ta, called of Ptolomaeus, Essilissa. The Romanes deuided all Spayne into two Prouin∣ces, and sent into them two Proconsulles, or Propre∣tors: whereof the one gouerned the néerer and the other the furder. But these partes were not alwayes of one greatnesse: for when as they had not yet the whole pos∣session of all Spayne, the hyther Spaine was contayned within the riuer Iberus and the Pyrenee Mountaynes: and all beyond Iberus was of the further Spayne, which belonged to the Carthaginians. But after that they had driuen out the Punique Garrysons out of euery quarter of the Countraie, and had got the possession of all Spayne, they called that which on the East and south is enuironed almost Ilandwise wtour Sea, on the West with the Ath∣lantique Ocean, on ye North with the Sea Cantabricum and the Pyrenee Mountaynes (exceptinge Lusitania and Betica) by the name of the néerer Spaine: and those partes which be deuided by the riuer Anas and compassed about wt the Ocean as far as to ye Asturians, thei called ye further Spaine, callyng yt which marcheth vpon ye straicts, Betica, which now contayneth Vandalusia & the Kingdome of Granado, & ye which extendeth from ye riuer Anas to the
riuer Duria they called Lusitanie and al the hyther part, Tarraconensis. Which tripartite diuision Geographers in their descriptions haue obserued. Ouer these thrée Prouinces and also ouer the Asturians and Cantabrians which be on this side the Pyrenees, by the North ocean, and also ouer the Prouince called Narbonensis so farre as the Riuer of Rhone, which was then called Gallia Got∣tica, this Roderike Visigot was (as we haue sayd king & gouernour at that time, when the Saracenes extended the limits of their Dominyon in Aphrica to the ocean, which was in the yéere of our Lorde .712. This Rodericke made Iuliane Earle of Cepta (descen∣ded of the bloud of Visigottes, a man of great power and wealth in Spayne and chief ruler ouer a certayne Ilande now called Viridis, lying in the narow Sea, and many o∣ther places aswell in Spayne as in Tingintana) his high Deputie and warden in Betica and all other such places as were vnder his rule in Tingintana. Vnto hym hee committed the whole charge, to defend Spayne on that side from the inuasions of the Saracenes,Beautye of a Woman. causeth much mis∣chief. and to kepe the narow Seas. This Iulyan had a Daughter named Ca∣ba, a beautyfull young Ladye, insomuch that for her par∣sonage she was no lesse pernitious to Spayne, then faire Helena was to the Troyanes. For Rodericke fallynge in loue with her, whether it were by force or by fraud (for it is reported both waies) made a breach into her vir∣gynitie. Which vnprincely trick she (as soone as she con∣ueniently could) vttered and discouered vnto her Father. Who dissimuling as though he had knowne nothyng of this iniurie done to him in his Daughter, and kéepyng to hymselfe the desire of iust reuenge till a tyme for his pur∣pose conuenient, desired leaue of the Kinge to departe the Courtand to go to Cepta, because being there (as he said) he could much better defeat the Saracens entended enter∣prises. Which request obtayned, he trussed vp al his fur∣niture
of houshold & wt his wife went to Cepta. When he was come thither, fayning an excuse yt his wife was sore sicke, he desired ye king to geue Caba, his doughter leaue to come home and sée her languishing mother, who was ne∣uer like to sée her any more. For Caba with other Prin∣ces and Lordes daughters (as the manner was) at that time waited in the Court. Hauing by this meanes re∣ceiued home his Daughter, he went to Mucas who was (as before we shewed) the head ruler of all Lybya vnder Vlite, and vnto hym he opened from poynt to poynt the whole cause of his comming away from the Court, and promysing to make hym Lord of all Spayne if he woulde geue the aduenture & take the enterprise in hand. Mucas shewed the whole matter vnto Vlite, because he durste not deale in such a waightye case, withoute his will and pleasure first knowne. Of whom he receaued this answer, that the matter propounded was of great im∣portaunce and difficultie, and that it were not best in such a doubtfull matter to geue rashe credite to a subtyle per∣sone, and one altogether estraunged from their Religion. Notwithstandinge, to trye the trust and faithfulnesse of the Earle, he was resolued, that the matter might be best assayed, by deliuering vnto hym a small crewe of Soul∣diours at the first: and if he sped well and had good successe at the beginning, afterward more ayde and greater pow∣er might be sent. Mucas although he were throughlye perswaded by the Earles talke and motion, that althings would sort to good effect, yet durst he not passe nor goe be∣yond the contents of his Commissiō, prescribed by vlite. Wherefore he delyuered vnto Iulyan, one of his Capi∣taynes named Tarife Auenzarca with a hundred Hors∣men & 400. footemē. Who were all transported in foure Ships, into a litle Ile lyinge in that Elbow of Sea that the Promontorie Calpe maketh, which Ile was after∣ward of this Capitayne Tarife, called Gelriza Tarif.
Vnto this place Iulyan called and by gentle meanes al∣lured all his friendes, and kinsfolkes, recomptinge vnto them from poynct to poynt the commodities and plesures which by his labour, industrie and perilles the King had receaued, for recompence whereof, he forgat not to tell them the Kinges vngratitude, and the spightfull dishonor doone vnto hys house by the rauishing and deflowryng of his Daughter, telling them further, that the King did vn∣iustly vsurp that kingdome, whiche by rightfull successi∣on of inheritaunce belonged to the Sonnes of Vitiza. For which causes he desired their helpynge handes in this so good and iust quarell to assiste hym, tellyng them that the next yéere he would come with a conuenient army to per∣forme asmuch as he then spake. He so much perswaded them with these and such lyke wordes, that they promy∣sed hym when time shoulde serue their best seruice and furtheraunce: and there vpon retourned home euery man to his owne house. Iulian because he would make a be∣ginning of his purposed warre, inuaded the Ile Gades li∣ing in the vtter part of the ocean, néere to the narrow sea, whiche Ile was afterwarde named Alzira Dalfrada: which with Sword and fire he spoyled, caryinge the In∣habitantes awaye with hym Prisoners, and after that shewed the lyke curtesie to Lusitania and Betica, and be∣yng laden with aboundaunce of spoyles and booties retur∣ned into Aphrica. Mucas séeing this good successe and thinkyng it a begin∣ninge good ynough, delyuered vnto hym twelue thow∣sande Saracenes beside them before, vnder the conducte of the same Tarife. With whome hee arriued at the foote of the Promontorie Calpe, which Mountayne was thereof afterward called Gabel Traife, which is as much to say as the Mount of Traif, and now it is called Gibel, and setting his Souldiers on land, tooke by force the citie Carceia, which afterwarde euen till our time was called Tarifa.
The rumour of this great cōmotion being spred through∣out all Spaine, the kinsfolkes of Earle Iulian gathering together all the power that they were able, and feigning that they went to repulse this Saracenicall inuasiō, went straight wayes thither and ioyned themselues with him. And so all their powers being linked in one, they wasted and haryed al the coast about the Riuer Betis now named Guadolouir, and commonly called Andalusia or of the Vandales, Vandalusia. Roderike in the meane season, with as much spéede as he coulde, gathered a very great Armie, and appointing his Cosen Germaine Ignicus to be Chieuetaine thereof, sent him against his enemyes. Who making many conflictes and skirmishes with them was at length with all his Armie discomfited and ouer∣throwne. The Saracens hauing made great pyllage & de∣solation in the Countrey, and laden with foyson of many booties, and carying a great multitude of Prisoners with them returned into Affrica. At which time, Vlite beyng in Asia, and making preparation to warre with Constan∣tinople, dyed, after whom Zulciminie the Sonne of Abdimelik was made high Bishop, during whose raigne the Saracens the seconde time besieged Constantinople. For immediatly after his creation, he sent Malsana with an armie by lande, and Aumar with an other by Sea against Constantinople, and he himselfe with a great po∣wer folowed after. But this his strong and terrible pur∣pose was for a while defeated by Leo the Praetor of Ar∣menia: whō they (séeking meanes to entrap and deceiue) were themselues by him entrapped and deceaued: for he stopping the passages & conuenient places through which they must néedes goe, hindered their reckening. Whilest these thinges were in doyng, Mucas com∣ming out of Affrica, to congratulate and doe his duetie to Zulciminie the new Byshop, declareth vnto him the state of their affaires in Spaine: wherevpon he being merue∣lous
desirous to enlarge the limittes of his Empire, gaue him in commaundement, to send Tarife againe into that Prouince with a mightier armie then any he had before. Mucas therfore retourning into Affrica, the next yeere folowing transfreted with a buige armie into Spayne, kéeping with him as a pledge or hostage, Richila Counte of Tingis, and cosen to Iulian, whom he halfe mistrusted. Which armie being once landed on the next coast, Rode∣rike speedely gathered the powers of the Prouinces néere about. And so with ye ayde of ye people of Gottalonia (now called Catalonia and in tholde time Lacetani) the inhabi∣tauntes of Iberia now called Tarracon or Aragon:) the Cantabrians béeyng at this day in the Kingdome of Na∣uarre: and the people of Gallia Gottica, wherein are the Cities Tolosa & Nimes vnto the Ryuer Rhone, he so∣dainly and vnlooked for, encountred with them at the Ry∣uer Bedalaces whiche of tholde wryters was called Be∣tis, néere to a towne called xerez. The Saracenes at that tyme had encamped them selues on that side of the Ryuer where Andalusia standeth: and the King wyth hys battaile on the other side, wherein the Kingdome of Castile is. For the Ryuer Betis springing out of mount Ortospeda in the borders of Aragon, and runnyng into the Ocean nexte to the Streightes, diuideth Anda∣lusia and the Kyngdome of Granado from Castile: and runneth through the myddle of Betica, which is boun∣ded wyth the ryuer Anas, sprynging oute of the same Mountaine. Lusitanie lying West from Tarracon, by a straight course reacheth from the mouth or entraunce of Anas foorth right to the ryuer Duria: and the ryuer Pisguerra seperateth the Castulonians from the Asturi∣ans. In this place, the .iij. of September being Sunday, in the yéere after the incarnation. 714. he aduaunced hys Standerd and cōmitted his fortune good or bad, to the ha∣zard of battail. The fight was most fierce & deadly for the
passage of the Riuer, whilest the one part woulde néedes passe ouer, and the other wold not suffer them. This con∣tinued a good whyle in such equall match, that hard it was to discerne to whether partie the victorie would encline: which was much to be merueiled at, considering how sore Spaine had for two yéeres last afore, béene afflicted with dearth of victualles and the Pestilential plague. Wherby the souldiours had not the strength and courage that they had before, and the men, who in a hundreth & fiftie yeeres space had not bene trained vp in any warres, cockered and effeminated with ease, had lost in a manner all warlike discipline and right vse of handling their weapons, & were moreouer withoute harnysse armour or habilimentes méete for the warres: because Vitiza, Roderike his Pre∣decessour, a most cruell and bloudie Tyraunt, had caused all weapons to be taken away from the people and to bée broken.A most blo∣die battaile continuing a whole weeke. This battaile continued not onely that day, but during all the whole wéeke till the Sundaie folowing, there were dayly sharpe and terrible conflictes. And on the eyght daye which was the .xi. of September the two Sonnes of King Vitiza hauing the night before inden∣ted and conspired wyth Tarife, (who promysed them their fathers Kingdome,) drew backe and priuely con∣ueighed themselues with their retinue out of the battaile, by meanes whereof Mucas with litle a doe brought al his armie ouer the Ryuer, and then was the Gothes araye quickly broken and they themselues vanquished. Rode∣rike the first day of the battayle, obseruing the auncient guise of his countrey,How kings in those daies came into ye field, with what apparell, & for what cause. came into the fielde, apparailled in a gowne of beaten Golde, hauing also on his head a Crown of gold and golden Shoes, and all his other apparaile set with rich pearles & precious stones, ryding in a horselitter of Iuorie drawē by two goodly horses. Which order the Gothes vsed alwayes in battailes for this consideration, ye the Souldiours well knowing their king could not escape
away by flight from them, shuld be assured that there was none other way, but either to die togither in that place or else to winne the victorie. For it had bene a thing most shamefull and reprochfull to forsake their Prince and a∣noynted Soueraigne. Which custome and maner, many frée confederate cities of Italie folowing, trimmed and a∣dorned for the warres, a certaine Chayre of estate, called Carocio) wherin were set the Penons and Ensignes of all the confederates. This Chayre in battaile was drawē by many Oxen, wherby the whole hoast was giuen to vn¦derstand, ye they could not with any honestie flie, by reason of the slow pace and vnweldinesse of those heauie Beasts. In this sort was king Roderike pompously caried in hys horselitter during the battailes foughten in seuen dayes space. But on the eight day, séeing things brought to the last pushe and to stand vpō sixe and seuen, of or on, he him selfe with others determined to fight it out valiantly: and therfore moūted vpō an excellent couragious courser, cal∣led Orell, and animating his Souldiours with a most ve∣hement and pithie Oration boldly gaue the charge vppon his enemies. But when he saw the fronte of his battaile to shrinke, he departed aside vnto a little hill harde by and stripped himself out of all his royal Robes: and frō thence beholding the mercilesse slaughter of his men on euerye side, moued with repentance, because he knew himself to be the cause & occasioner of all this mishap, chaunged him∣selfe into another wéede and fled into a deserte of Lusita∣nie, where he found a certaine holy man, lyuing solitarie, with whom he passed the rest of his life. Nowe wheras it is reported and written that he folo∣wed a Starre or a messanger of God which conducted and guided him in his way: it may be so, and the same hath also happened to others. But it may aswell also be vnder∣stoode of a certaine secrete Starre mouing and directing his will.
And whereas they say he was put by that holy man into a Caue or hoale and a Serpent with hym that had two heads, which in two dayes space gnawed al the flesh of his body from the bones this beyng simplie taken and vnder∣stāded, hath no likelihood of any truth. For what sanctity, what Religyon, or what pietie, commaundeth to kyll a penitent person, and one that séeketh comfort of his afflic∣ted mynd by amendent of life, with such horrible tormēts and straunge punishment? Wherefore I woulde rather thinke it to be spoken mysticallye, and that the Serpent with two heads signifieth his sinful and gylty conscience, which tormenteth & disquieteth those that haue perpetra∣ted any heynous offence, as though it were the Furies of hell, as the Poetes haue feygned of Orestes and others. There therfore in that place he died, and certaine yéeres after, his Sepulcher or Tombe was founde at Viseo in Portugall with this Epitaph or superscription vpon it. HEre lyes the Corps of Roderick, late King Of Gothes, accurst and fraught with furie dire▪ Whose sensuall raigne brought dule and deadly sting To Spanish soyle: because of Iulians yre, Which would not be appeasde till he had wrought The Toyle of strife, and brought all thinges to nought. All mad with rage and spightfull rancours moode By deuilish fate incensde, Gods heastes despisde, His faith renounced, religion eke withstoode, A foe to frindes, his Countries wracke deuisde: Vnto his Lorde an arrant traytrous Elfe, A murthrous wight, and cruell toward hymselfe. Embrued with guylt, for sheading Christen bloud Which by his driftes were brought to fatall end,
An Homycide, of mangling Butchers broode Did ruyne to his natiue soyle pretend. His memorie shall dye with men for aye, His name shall rotte, as doth his Corps in clay. In this battayle all the men of Armes and Gentle∣men of the Gothes were slayne and the whole power of Spayne vtterlie ouerthrowne. Of the Gothicall Army there slayne, the number was infinite, but of the Saracenes onely twenty thousande: which happened be∣cause the factious rout of Iulian which had al the Armour and defence of the Realme of Spayne tooke parte with them. And the multytude of them was very great: but they which fought on the Kinges side were in a manner all vnarmed and naked men. A few escaping by flyght ranne whither fortune lead them and saued themselues. They which were comming out of forreine prouinces to ayde the King, hearyng of this lamentable discomfiture, ioyned sydes with them that were fled to Egicia, and em∣battayling themselues againste the Saracenes which fol∣lowed the chase, and pursued the poore vanquished fléers, set vpon them with a fierce recharge: fighting (lyke eigre Lyons robbed and bereft of their whelps) & manfully dis∣comfited the vauntgard of their Enemies Armye. But beynge not hable to sustayne the force of Iulians battayle which were strong men and wel armed, they were faine to retyre into the Citie. Tarife encampinge hymselfe there, where now at this daye the Well of Tarif is, and thence géeuing assault to the Citie, with litle a do wanne it. Which done, by the counsell of Iulian, he deuided his host into many braunches, assignynge vnto euery parte such Capitaines as he thought fittest: ymagining yea not doubtyng but the Christians before they coulde take any counsell what way were best to follow or be able to ga∣ther anye more power, might be oppressed and all at
once dispercled whersoeuer they could be founde. They Sonnes of Vitiza and Byshoppe Opasius were appoin∣ted Capitaynes ouer them. One Hoast addressed them∣selues toward the conquest of Malacca (now called Ma∣lega) a Port or hauen of Betica by the midland sea, which to be spéedely taken, was much for their behoofe & aduan∣tage. An other marched to sack Corduba, ouer whom was Chieuetaine, a certayne christian hauing a litle before re∣nounced his Christianitie and Saracenyzed, whose name was Mageitar. And the third was conducted by Tarife himselfe, which tooke the way to the Citie Mentesia, ad∣ioyning to that part of Aquitania, which lyeth hard by the Pyrenees and is called Guienne or Gascoigne. And sub∣uertyng that Citie (which chose rather to be vtterly ruy∣nated then to be come vassall vnder Saracenicall slauerie, he discamped to Toledo, wanne it, and after that, Gauda∣lagiar & Medina Almeide, which Citie was so named of a pretie big Table made all of one gréene precious stone like an Emeraulde, found in it. Then he tooke the strong citie of Amaia, wherin was kept at ye tresure for ye wars. After this he inuaded the Region called Gottici Campi, tooke by surrendrie the Cities Asturica & Gigion (wher∣of Mugnuza a Gothian was Captaine) and subiugated Gatalonia, being ayded by Mugnoces Prince of Cerda∣nia, who also was a Gothian borne. Wherefore the Sa∣racenes made him Ruler of all the places confininge to Cerdania. An other Army, hauinge wonne Granado, marched to subdue Nurtia and Horihuela, where there was a bloudy battaile foughten betwéene the Christians and the Saracenes in the plaine Fields which are to this day thereof called sangonarij: in which conflict (the Sa∣racenes gettinge the vpperhand) the citie yéelded. After this, the same hoast remoued to Valentia, and discomfi∣ting ye Valentians yssuing out of the towne to fight when they saw the citie strongly fortefied & rampiered wt wals
and diches they tooke it by surrendrie, with this condicion, that the Christians should be permitted to haue in it one Temple to inhabit, which was Saint Basil his Colledge, now at this day called Sainct Barptolomewes. All the rest they dedicated to that Idolatrous verlet, their Pro∣phet Mahomet, sauing onely that Temple, whiche stoode in the Figge market, where holie Vincent was marty∣red, which was afterward an Hospital of christians. The citie was pestered & peopled with Moores, albeit the Iews were suffred to remayne still in it, and a few christians, which dwelt in S. Basilles colledge. Which ye inhabitants of Puigum, a towne of Enesa, hearing, wher ther was an other colledge of S. Basill, left their homes & fled, burying their great Bell & a certaine Marble Image in yt churche in hope one day of a returne. Whither the saracenes sent people of their owne to inhabit vnder the conduct of Cebo∣la: wherof the same towne Puigum was afterwarde cal∣led Cebole: who also builded an other litle towne of the same name. And thus Valentia, Sogorbes, Tortosa, Le∣rida, Barcinon & Sarragoza with al Spayne, was brought vnder the power and iurisdiction of the Saracenes. But Tarracon because it long resisted & stoutlye stoode at defi∣ance wt them, they vtterly subuerted & rased, which was afterward new builded by Bernhard Metropolytane of Toledo, at ye cōmandement of Vrban ye second of ye name pope of Rome, in ye yéere 1090. By this meanes, al spaine in ye space of .xiiij Monthes was subdued:All Spayne conquered by Saracenes. which was a thing easie to be doone, considering yt ye people wer cleane without armour, weapon, munition or Capitaine, & O∣pasius Metropolitane of Syuile euer exhortinge them to yéeld, promysing vnto them ye they should quietly enioye their religion & lawes as they had before doone, whiche promise was not obserued, nor kept sauing in a few pla∣ces, as at Valencia, Siuile, and Toledo, in which they left certaine temples for the Christians to inhabite.
Wherevpon yet to this daye, in the chiefest Cathedrall Church of the Citie, the Rites and diuine seruice among them celebrated, is Mozarabicall, that is to say, mingled with Arabian: which was allowed and confirmed by the Bishops of that time, according to the order and instituti∣on of Saint Leandre. After these victories, the number of the Saracens day∣ly encreased in Spaine, in so much that the Spanyardes then chaunged not onely their religion and maners, but corrupted their language, and the names of their Cyties, Townes, Hilles, Ryuers and all other places were like∣wise altered. Albeit many of them fled into Fraunce, England, Italie and Grecia, to craue ayde of other Chri∣stian Princes. Some others planted themselues in that part of the Pyrenees that lyeth out into Asturia and rea∣cheth within the Aquitanicall Ocean. And they whiche remained still with the Saracens, had in euerie place, their Prelates and Pastours, mē deuout and holy. But the first recouerie and helpe of Spaine, sprang vp among ye Astu∣rians. Which Countrey not only remayned safe and vn∣demnified of that Barbarous Nation, but also was the first that stopped their lewde inuasions, and there was the auncient and natiue language of Spayne conserued. Which thing that it maye the better bée vnderstoode by what meanes it happened, we must briefely describe the whole tracte and situation of the Pyrenees. Wée said be∣fore that Spayne was in forme of a Cherronese or al∣most as a Islande. enuironed with Sea on euery side, sauyng onely in one place. The Northe parte whereof, ioyneth to Fraunce by a narowe porcion of lande that lyeth betwéene two Seas, and the Pyrenee Mountaines lying a long from the Sunne rising in Winter, to the set∣ting of the same in Sōmer, enuiron it about lyke a wall. The bredth of the Isthmos or narow trench of land lying betwene the two Seas, being one distant but a litle from
the other is about CClxx. Myles. But the Pyrenee moū∣taines stretch in length a great way further. For when they come to the angle and as it were into a Baye of the Cantabrique Ocean, which lyeth on the Northe syde of Spayne, they stretch out in length a great waye into the Equinoctiall West: and kéeping of the Sea Cantabri∣cum from the Northe part of Spayne, stretcheth euen in∣to the plaine Ocean, that hemmeth in all the West parte of Spaine. That part of these Mountaines that lyeth to∣ward Fraunce, is altogether barraine and vnfruitful: but that part which is next Spayne, is full of trees, and well peopled wyth many townes and villages. We will ther∣fore beginne our description of them, at the Ocean, where they ioyne in Spayne to the region called Guipuzque, but in Fraunce they border vpon the confines of the Vas∣conians. On the side of Spayne there is Stephans vallay, aboue the which are Besaca and Guciutha, townes of the Vardulians, confinyng vpon the region of Nauarre & con∣taineth Cantabria and Asturia: then are there other smal∣ler hilles lying out from the Pyrenees, within which are conteined Basse and Squa, which doe make the vallayes Rocida or Ronus: on Fraunce side, néere to the confines of the Vasconians, is Iean Pedeportesburie, a strong & well fortefied place. Néere to the valley Rocida, ye arme which before wée talked of, is from them let into the Ocean, reaching and extending to the mayne Sea through Galli∣cia or the Gallecians & the Asturians. But from the val∣ley of Rocida, Eastwarde, they make ye valley called Sa∣lazar, wherein standeth a towne called Ociogauia: then Ronceuall wherein is Isaua: and the frontiers of the King domes of Tarraconensis & Nauarre which was once cal∣led Nagiera. Next Fraunce are ye townes of Bierne. Now foloweth the hill of Camfrank: wherevnto in Fraunce is néere ioyning the countrey of Peiraner & Vrdos, in Spain Villa noua, an auncient & noble Citie, Iaca, Saint Chri∣stinsburie,
and Iean Pigniasburie: and in the same tract, lower is ye Mount Aragon. Hosca, and frō them, the Oc∣cetanes and Caesaraugusta now at this day called Sara∣goza. Out of the Mount that lieth ouer Saint Christines springeth the Ryuer Aragon: and because out of the moū∣taines of Ronceuall there springeth an other little Ryuer of the same name, called the lesse Aragon or Subordam, therefore thys is called the greater Aragon: and the whole region lying betwéene them, was of them called Aragonia. There followeth in the Pyrenees a hill named Gauas, abutting on Fraunce syde, vppon Larount a coun∣trey of the Bigorians, and on Spaynes syde, on the coun∣trey of Tenia. In which Countrey are the townes Sa∣lent, Saint Helens, and Biesca. Out of the hill Gauas, springeth a Ryuer named Gallecus, whiche hauing hys course through the valley Tenia, falleth into Iber néere to the Citie Saragoza. Then is there nexte, the Cragge of Horca, the stiepest and roughest of them all, on which, on Fraunce syde confyneth the Countrey of Arne, and on that side towarde Spaine the same valley Tenia, then the Cliues of Tarla, from whom springeth the riuer Ara, which afterwarde runneth into the ryuer Cinca néere to the towne Iuza, hauing on Spaines side the valleyes of Brote, and on Fraunce Voteia a valley of Guyenne. In the valley of Brote are these towns folowing: Torla, Bro∣tum, Oto, Linares, Faulum, Bresse, Sarbise, Aierue, La∣resitalla, Scartinum and Giasa. Then foloweth the crag∣gie mount of Bielsa, from which a part of the Ryuer Cin∣ca spryngeth, and the valley of Bio: and belowe, in this same very tract is the region Sobarbria: then in the Py∣renees, the vale Gistau, out of whose Hilles springeth an other Braunche of the ryuer Cinca, whiche hauing hys course through Sobarbria, is augmented by receauing in∣to it the ryuer Segre néere to a towne called Scarpe, and then falleth into Iber néere Meschinentz.
The chiefest townes of fame in the valley Gistau are these: Gistaine, Senias, Serbetum, Iean Carauelsburie, Plannium, Poma, Gistaina, Cerquetum, Lamian, Ca∣talauigna, Badaine. Then is there moreouer in the Py∣renees the valley Bonasia, and the longe region of Ri∣bagorge: wherein are Gabaleria, Grausium, Benauarre, Peralt and Paniello. Then are the Hilles of Castrum Leonis, vnder whome is the valley Aran or Fiscalia, which hath in it these townes: Biolla in Fiscalia, Lardies, Vorastrium, Saint Iustus, Ligarre, Aretiza, Sciabierre, Saint Olalia, Acortum, Tricase, Abese, Planiell, Saint Foelix, Sason, Silues, Spierle, Ascase, and beneath it, is the valley named Solana. Agayne in the Pyrenees, there followe Petrae Blaniae, Altalauaccae, where there is a passage throughe, the Hylles of Torre, and of the Countie Pimorent and Pallasium. Vnder these, is the valley of Henui, wherein standeth the Citie Valentia, and Palasia: then the Clyues of Andoria, where there is a passage oute of Spaine, into Fraunce, wyth a val∣ley of the same name, ouer agaynst which, in Fraunce is Arachsium in Aquitanie. Hitherto the places of Nauarre. Then a long Cerdania is the Mount Bellamir, the valley Bibesia, the Mount Liuia and the pitche of Per∣sa. Then they enter within the Countrey of Rocilion, ouer against the townes of Puigiualed, Caudiese, Aro∣tonie, Galamij Fanum, Perapertuza, Eitor and Leo∣cata, where theyr precinctes & boundes end by the Me∣diterranean Sea. In the end wherof, in Spain there stan∣deth Salses a Castle impregnable, hauyng wt in it a most plentifull fountaine: where in tymespaste stoode the Ci∣tie Gerunda or Girona, & ouer against it, in Fraunce is Tēplū Veneris now called Cap de Creux. Directly on ye other side in Gottalonia, other hilles do aunswere vnto it, which may be called ye lesse Pyrenees or Antipyrenees.
throw of Rodericke, and what hast the Saracenes vsed in the pursuite of their victory, tooke his Sister with hym and departed to Gigion, supposing yt place to be surer for his securytie. But when Mugnuza duke of Gigion, con∣trarie to his hope & expectation had entred into league and was assistaunt to the Saracenes in their exploytes, Pela∣gius dissimulyng what he inwardly thought, and for the time bearyng two faces vnder one hood, remayned styll with the same Duke, vntyll Mugnuza fallyng sore in loue with his sayde Sister, and deuisinge whiche way to frame his plat to enioy his desired lust, sent her Brother Pelagius to Corduba, to consult & entreat about certaine affaires with the Saracen Princes. In whose absence, (bearyng her in hand that he would mary her) he had the spoyle of her maydenhead. Whereof Pelagius at his re∣tourne beynge by his Sister certefied, departed thence with her, into the higher Country til a time fitter to bring that to passe which he purposed. Mugnuza greatly mooued with his departure, tolde Tarifa that Pelagius intended somwhat against the Ma∣iestie of the Saracenicall Empire.The great daungers and aduen∣tures of Pe∣lagius. Wherefore Tarifa sent one of his Captaines with a band of Souldiours (if it were possible) to apprehend Pelagius. And now the Souldiours were come to Brette, (in which towne Pela∣gius was then resiaunt) who being priuelie aduertised by a Christian, (one that was with them and knew all their counsailes) tooke his Horse, and ridinge all vpon the Spurre tyll he came to the great riuer Pionia, tooke the water and swamme ouer. Whiche they that pursued hym, not daryng to doo for dread of drownyng, hee esca∣ped their clutches, and came with heauy cheere into the Vale of Canica. Where by the prouidence of God hee mette with the Magistrates and Péeres of many Cities of Cantabria and Asturia, whiche were goyng to surren∣der and yéelde themselues and their Cities to the Sara∣cenes.
And when hee vnderstoode the errand and cause of their iourney, it is reported that he made vnto them an oration in these words followyng. Truely I cannot but greatly bewayle the calamitie of these times:His pithye Oration to his Coun∣treymen. & if it were not vngodly so to do, I would extreemly poure out heapes of accusations againste the sates and destynies, which haue differred my natyuytie tyll these dayes, thus to sée such slaughter and lamentable manquellyng of my deare Countreymen and (which is more) such despight and contempt of God and his deuine Lawes. For of whom Gods honoure and glory is now adayes more contempned and deryded, I cannot easelye iudge: whether of yonder barbarous Helhoundes the Saracenes, who lyuinge in the foggie mistes of diuelyshe darknesse, (caste before the eyes of their mindes by that damned soule Mahomet) not knowyng the true God nor the honoure due to his holy name, doo prophane the holie Temples. Wherein his praise and kacred worde was wont to be preached, trayning vp yonge Babes and In∣fantes whome Christe commaunded to be brought vnto him, with their impious rites and diabolicall relygion: and nouselyng them in the filthye suddes of their detesta∣ble traditions: doo perforce rauish and lyke deuilles pol∣lute infinite Christian Women and Virgins yt acknow∣ledge the true & sincere relygion of the mnipotent God. Oppressing so many as they may once get into their hds with most horrible and vnspeakable slauerye, dispylyng them not only of their temperal goodes, wyues and Chil∣dren, but also takyng away from them their faith the rock of their saluation, & finally dimme the glory of God with a patched doctrine of most Idolatrous blasphemy, bring∣gynge them to euerlastinge perdition both of bodye and soule. Or els rather maye I iudge the same of you, who (despayringe of the goodnesse and mightye
power of God, whom you know to haue shedde his most precious bloud for your redemption, by whom you know that eternall saluation is puchased and freely geuen to you and through whose bounteous gift you haue so many sure helpes at your most néede, putting you in an vndoubted hope of victorie ouer your blasphemous enemies (yet will séeme thus shamefully and dastardly vnasked and of your owne accord to put your neckes into the halter, as though there were no more hope of helpe and better fortune, as thoughe you had no God of whome redresse and ayde in aduersitie were to be hoped and craued, or as though you had no fortefied townes and strong places of defence to re∣pulse this present hostilitie. As though it were not a great deale better (valiauntly fighting in Gods quarell vnder the banner of Christian faith) to chaunge this shorte and transitorie life with an euerlasting & glorious life, then to suffer these things before recited. And now behold, you which sometime were hable to encounter with the Ro∣manes being Lords and Conquerours of the whole earth you which could not be vanquished and subdued by them that were the warlickest and stoutest men in the worlde to whom Germanie, Britayne, Fraunce, Spaine, Grecia, yea Italie also the Quéene and maistresse of all the world, all Europa, all Affrica and Asia obeyed: you which in no wise coulde be brought to liue vnder the lawes and iuris∣dition of that very well gouerned Empire: you who a∣lone remayned vnconquered of the Gothes, the fiercest wasters and crushers of the same Empyre: you I say (the power of all Europa being yet whole, and nothing thereof lost but the open places of Spaine onely, which also mys∣caryed partly by treason and partly by the foolishe wilful∣nes of King Roderike, whose sinistre fate brought him to a destruction and end agréeable to his vicious life, who not tarying for that ayde which was comming hable to haue scourged and discomfited those that were the enemyes of
our Countrey vnaduisedly ioyned battaile with his foes, and being disloyally circumuented by his own traiterous subiectes, receiued the reward and hyre due for such rash∣nes and wickednes, which wilfull dealing of him beyng the head, must néedes redound to the generall harme of al the inferiour members of the common wealth) will now wilfully enthrall and make your selues bonde slaues to beare the intollerable yoke a people of al others most vyle, most abiect, most dastardly and wicked. If God for our manifolde sinnes and offences were so highly displeased and so much tourned away from vs, that he woulde not admitte our humble prayers and requestes (which I will neuer be persuaded to beleue: for he is wont neuer to for∣sake such as be vnfeinedly penitent, and tourne vnto hym with true contrition of heart and newnesse of life.) Or if all the rest of the whole world were obedient to the Sara∣cens Lawes, and that wee had no sure places or walled townes for refuge and succour left to resorte vnto: yet were it much better valiauntly to die vppon them then to sée and suffer those thinges, which perforce we should suf∣fer at their handes. Brute Creatures and sauage Beasts, if their whelpes be taken from them, most egerly and im∣potuously flie in the faces of them that haue taken them: whom if they may finde and ouertake, they obiect them∣selues into the extremitie of any perill, contemnyng the sharpe edges of naked Swordes, yea death it selfe, for the rescue of their sely young ones. And you which are men, to whom nature hath geuen not onely the procreation of children and a care to bring them vp, which she hath geuē to other Creatures aswell as to you, but also hath entire∣ly committed to your charge a speciall regard to their edu∣cation, who ought so to instruct & traine them in the true feare & honour of Almighty God, yt they may be enfraun∣chysed and made heyres of life euerlasting in the King∣dome of heauen, will nowe (alas the while) humble and
subiect your selues willingly and wilfully vnto the obey∣saunce of them which ere it bée long will seduce and vio∣lently pull away your Babes and children from you and plucke the feare of God cleane out of their hearts. Where is now that auncient faith, godly zeale and deuout religion that was wont to bée, when younge children not yet pas∣sing the age of .xvj. yeeres, and holy Virgins had leifer to suffer all kinde of Martirdome and punishment then to worshippe those false putatiue Goddes, whom (notwith∣standing) most stoute and wyse nations worshipped and reuerenced? Where be they, which haue aduentured their liues in so manye mayne battayles for their libertie and fréedome? Hoat sournesses, glowing Plates, terrible Rac∣kings, sharpe Swordes, bloudie Axes, al the sortes of tor∣tures & paines that could be deuised, in times passed were not able to terrefie and turne Children from the true re∣ligion and worshipping of God, to Idoles and other phan∣tasticall trumperies of Sathans inuention: and now men of growen and rype yéeres, men of all others most stoute and valiaunt, yea the chiefe Princes of cities, vpon whom the lyght of the sacred Gospell of Iesus Christ hath shy∣ned and béene opened, tremble and shake for feare of a lousie rable of Saracenes, and are goyng to submit and prostrate themselues before them, wythout eyther hea∣ryng or séeyng any weapon, or receyuing sommonce of any warre. But peraduenture you hope to spéede the bet∣ter, and that they will shewe more clemencie to you if you voluntarily yelde your selues, and that all your Reli∣gion and Lawes shall remayne safe and in suche force as they did before, and that your Wyues and Children shall not bée constuprated, harmed nor vncurteously handled. For wyth suche fayre glosing promyses these cutthroates and villanous Traitours to theyr Countrey vse com∣monlye to deceyue and enueigle the simple people: as thoughe there could bée any faithe in them which haue be∣trayed
their Lordes, their Countrey, their friendes, and kinsfolkes, yea God himselfe their Lorde and maker. Did not Valentia a most strong, maritimall, and famous Citie yeelde vnto them vppon this promyse? and yet as soone as they were entred and had possession of the same, they eyther cast out all the inhabitauntes, or kylled them, or else by compulsion enforced them vnto their Secte. Did not Toledo the verye same, and Siuyle and a greate manye of other noble Cities, which being deceiued with this hope and bewitched with these flattering charmes yéelded themselues vnto them? These domesticall exam∣ples are sufficient to teache you, that it is a great deale better, valiauntly to dye together like men, and so much the more, for that as yet thinges are not so farre spent but that they maye bée recured and holpen. You haue hyghe Craggie Mountaines for refuge, and in them some places inaccessible, you haue some Townes moste strongly fortefied, vppon trust wherof many times a smal number hath discomfited populous armies. And you are a sort of tall men, whom the nature of the heauen and earth hath made stoute and valiaunt, acquainted with labours, and hitherto inuincible. Also there lyue a great sortevn∣der the Saracenes, whiche (I put you out of all doubt) will come from all partes and ioyne them selues to you if they once sawe you péepe vp and auaunce your selues in this your so iust quarell. Behynde at our backes is Fraunce, a Region at this daye most flourishing bothe in Chyualrie and skilfull Capitaynes, from whence (no doubte) wée shall haue ayde and succour. For the Frenche will not any longer suffer this cowardly na∣tion whiche hathe alreadie encroched as farre as the Mediterranean Sea beyonde the Pyrenees, so saucely and malapertly to plaie these cruell Pageauntes and fu∣rious prankes against the borders of their Kingdome, in suche sorte as they haue done to others.
And God hymselfe (if we wyll tourne vnto hym with a¦mendement of lyfe) wyllayde and strengthen vs, who being on our side, euerye one of vs néedeth not to feare a hundred thousand of these blasphemous Grynneagods and lewde vyllaynes. This oration sank so déepely into their braines that beyng perswaded with the pithy force therof (for Pelagi∣us was vehement and verye earneste in his matter, and for his wisedome and sanctytie of lyfe highlie estéemed a∣mong those people) they returned euery man to his home and callyng their neighbours together, tolde vnto them the causes of their retourne: to wytte, how that Pelagius (whose vertue and vnspotted lyfe was well knowne vn∣to them all, because as before we haue shewed, he dwel∣led long among them, myraculouslye delyuered out of the cruell handes of bloudy tyrants) met them as though hee had bene some messanger sent downe from heauen, who shewed vnto them what an heynous offence they shoulde commit, and what a pernicious acte they had purposed to doe. Wherfore not ceassing as well in open Sermons, as in priuat talke to perswade the people to constancye and godlynesse, he was by common assent of all the peo∣ple created King of Cantabria and Asturia in the yéere after Christ. 717 Which done, they all got them to mou Anseua. When the fame of this matter was blaset-broad and knowne throughoute Spayne, all the Gothes that could any way scape or by any meanes shyft them∣selues out of the handes of that barbarous nacion, concey∣ing great hope of lyberty & good luck, tooke them to their Weapons and ioyned side with hym, and such as coulde not do the same out of hande, with all care and dillygence sought oportunitie and occasion how to flée to hym. Tarifa sent against hym Abraem Alcamack wt a great Army, and with him Byshop Opasius Sonne of the king
of Egica, and Metropolitane of Syuyle, who (as before hath bene tolde) adhered to the faction of Iulian and other traitours of their Coūtrey. Pelagius hearing what great preparatiō was made against him, & séeing himselfe not of equall power to repulse so great a multitude, entred wt a few of his companie (but of the valiauntest among his whole bande) into a certain Denne within ye Mount An∣seua, appointing the rest to defend ye narow passages and Streight wayes. Whither whē ye Saracens were come, Opasius wēt about wt many glosing termes to persuade them that kepte the Streictes, to yelde them selues vn∣to the Moores, but when he sawe his labour was all in vaine, there beganne a cruell and a bloudie bickering. The Saracenes shotte so many Arrowes and Dartes in∣to the denne, that they séemed to rayne from Heauen as faste as droppes of water in a stormie shower, and to light among them as thicke as Hailestones. But God myraculously making their dartes to rebutte against the same persons that shotte them,A miracle of God in deliuering yt Christians. there were so many of them either slaine or wounded that they were forced to recule and geue back. Then the Christians vndoubtedly knowing ye God was with them & fought for thē, yéel∣ded most hartie thankes vpō their knées vnto his diuine Maiestie, yt it had pleased him, thus to relieue & visit his poore afflicted people: which done, they boldly issued out, & vtterly repulsed all ye residue. There were slaine of ye Sa∣racens in this cōflict about .xx. M. & of the Christiās very few or none at all: for writers make no mention thereof. Those Saracens which escaped from the battaile, fled into ye top of the hill: which by diuine miracle being shaken wt a terrible earthquake, and falling downe into the Riuer Iua, running by the foote of the same hill, they were all cast awaye and perished.Traitours cānot pros∣per long. Opasius and Mugnuza two Archtraitours, as they were fléeing (for they went not vp with their felowes vnto the hill) were taken: and
Mugnuza in a place called Olaglias was straightwayes by the Asturians put to death, and the Citie Gigion vtter∣ly ruynated to the perpetuall ignominie and shamefull reproche of the said Mugnuza Prince therof. What was done with Opasius, Authors make no mention. When Mucas heard hereof, suspecting that Iulian & o∣thers of the same conspiracie, were priuie to the counsells of Pelagius, he straightwayes commaunded Iulian and Sisibertus and Ebasius the sonnes of king Vitiza to be put to death, and thus in the ende they receiued a iust reward of their treason. Which example so terrefied many of Iu∣lians retinue and faction, that they reuolted from Mucas and went to the Asturians: and those whiche liued vnder the tyrannie of the Saracens, dayly by stelth and priuily flying to Pelagius, his power within shorte space was so encreased, that they which a little before were scantly able to defende their owne, now recouered many of those Re∣gions and Cities which the Saracens before had brought vnder their subiection. For the Citie Legio (at this daye called Leon) was immediatly to them surrendred: so also was Rota, Mansilia, Canicas (commonly called Cangas) Tineum and many other townes of that Countrey.
¶The Second Booke. ¶Conteining the declination of the Saracenicall Empyre, till the be∣ginning of the Turkes. THe Saracens in the East being in a great phrensie that their Siege certaine yéeres passed layd to Constantinople was frus∣trate,Constanti∣nople again beseiged. and hearing that (Leo by whose on∣ly meanes their attempte was repelled) was now Emperour, leuyed a mighty ar∣mie againe and deuiding the same into two parties tooke in hand the same enterprise afreshe, purposing then or ne∣uer to bring their desires to a finall effect and conclusion. Malsamas the Generall of thone armie, transfreting with his cōpanie into Thracia, spoyled a great part of that Pro∣uince and geuing a sharpe assault vnto the chiefe citie and Imperiall Seat therof, encamped himself on ye West side of ye same Citie néere to ye walles, where there is an Isth∣mos or narow portiō of land hauing Sea on either syde, & on that part he laid battrie. Zulciminie the chiefe Bishop, laye before the citie on the Sea with a nauie of three thou∣sand Sayle, as many do affirme. For the citie Constan∣tinople being both very huige and beautifull and aswel by nature as Arte most strong and impregnable, standeth at the mouth of the Thracian Sea Bosphorus, (where Asia and Europa do almost ioyne together, hauing no more but one small streit Sea to part them) by which it is emptyed & hath issue into ye Sea Propontis: where there stretcheth out a little Cape or elbow of Sea full of wyndings & tur∣nings in, as though they were Hauens. For which cause the place is called by the name of a Horne, because by rea∣son of the seuen hilles of the Citie hanging out into it, it
hath as it were many boughes or braūches like ye hornes of a Hart. Along betwene this Cape and Propontis, there runneth a certaine hill, in forme like a Cherronese or half Ile, beyng on euery side almost enuironed with water, contayning in length from the west into the East aboute thyrty furlonges, howbeit it riseth not greatly in anye height, but the ridges and clyues thereof do runne styll a long Propontis. On the North side, where his forme is lyke a Horne (which a litle before we tearmed a Cape or Elbow) it hath seauen Hylles annexed vnto it, of the which foure, do hang out into the Cape, and that which is washed with Bosphorus, is the greatest and maketh the base of a Triangle: for the forme of this Citie and coun∣trey beyng almost a perfect Ile is thrée cornerde. This hath two Promontories, one lyinge towarde Propontis, west of Hebdomum, the other Northward, which defen∣deth the mouth of the Baye from the iniurie of wyndes, and is called Chrysoceras. From whiche if a streigth lyne be drawen to the seauenth and innermost Hyll of all (which also defendeth the Bay from the west wynde) you must néeds include ye plaine champaine of Pera (now called Galata) within the compasse of the Arche, made by reason of the continuall ridge and cliffe of the Cherronese. The length of that Cape or Bay is about lx. furlonges in the innermost part whereof, are the mouthes of the Ri∣uers Cydrus and Barbysa: the latitude or bredth thereof is diuers and not in all places alyke: where it is moste, it passeth not sixe furlonges, and where it is lest, not aboue thrée. The streicts of it ar very narrow. For on the north part, wherin the towne Pera standeth, there hangeth out a Promontory into the South named Metopicum and Cyclobium: and lykewise an other on Asia side, direct lye abutting vpon the middle Streictes of the Baye, named Damalicum. This Cherronese on the west side, where
the mayne Land of Thracia lyeth, doth seperate this El∣bow or Bay from Propontis with a narowe porcion of land lying betwéene the two Seas. The bredth of that same Isthmos or narrowe share of Land, where it toucheth the seauenth Hill and inner cor∣ner of the Citie, is fifty paces: and further beyonde, it is greater. Thus in this plot of ground beyng a per∣fect Ile on all sides sauing one, is situate the noble Citie of Constantinople, once called Bizantium, ouer againste whom, on the other shore side of the Streict, standeth the towne Pera, once called Galata, whichalso maketh promō∣tories into ye Horned Bay. And in Asia there is directly o∣uer against it, the Citie Chalcedon. The entries of this Créeke or Hauen in the narowest places are enclosed and fast shut vp with a great Cheyne, which reachynge from the Tower Pharea to the Promontorie Chrysoceras is extended and drawn in length ouer to the Metopique Promontorie of Galata, where there is also an other strong fortresse or Blockhouse. The Citie it selfe is fenced and fortyfied with thrée strong walles, two verye broad and déepe ditches, and many Towers and Bull∣warkes beside. It hath on euery side a playne prospect. The middle part of the Citie ryseth vp a litle in height,Constanti∣nople is in compasse xiii. miles. by reason of the Hylles whereon it standeth. The whole circuite or compasse of the Citie is about xiii. myles. This so noble, and florishing Citie, Constantine in the place where before Byzantium stoode (vnaduisedly y∣nough as the sequele proued) buylded, and translated the Imperiall Seat with all the riche Ornamentes of the Citie of Rome thither. For although the soyle where it stādeth séemed to be a place most fit for an Imperial citie, yet ye disposition of the ayre and destenie would not suffer this citie to be ye head seate & keye of the Romane empire. For as not only euery Country but also euery citie haue their proper fates, maners, fashions and rites: so they
may not safelye be translated or remooued into an other place, no although the verye same persons and Lawes bee translated and remooued thither with them. For the disposition and temperature of the ayre altereth mens manners, which being altered their destinies and Fortunes are also chaunged. Which to be true, the ende proued apparantlie. For the Empire being translated al∣most into the borders of Asia, the Emperors themselues and the Romane Legions were afterwarde chosen out of that Prouince, who being infected with their Gréekishe lightnesse and ambition, seditiously practized sundry facti∣ons amonge themselues, and effeminated with the nyce wantonnesse of Asia, were not of power to repel the in∣cursions of foraine Barbaryans: when as in ye meane sea∣son, Italie and Rome, the Maistresse and Castle of the whole earth, lacking a head and hauyng lost the right vse of warlyke discipline was made an open pray for all na∣tions to inuade. And thus that Empyre which (lyke a good trée) in his owne soyle bare very good fruict, beynge transplanted into a strange aire and ground, within short time perished and came to ruyne. But to retourne agayne to our purposed narration. Malsamas aduaunced his power to besiege by lande, that part which we sayde stoode in the Isthmos or streict péece of grounde, betwéene the Horne and Propontis, whiche could be oppugned none other way but onely by land. He because his purpose was, vtterlye to disapoynt the Citi∣zens that no victuall shoulde be conueighed vnto them, and for that his desire was to encroche as néere to the walles as could be, so politiquely lodged his Garrisons & Host on euery side that the fronte of his Armye, was as though it had bene a Horhe next to ye walles, & thence as the Féelds farder of from the narrow land, stretch out in breadth & scope, raught out along about the Cape or Bay vnto the mouthes of the riuers which we sayd had their
yssu es & fallynge into the same. For this Host was mer∣ueilous populous, and formydable, and therfore required greatground & elbow roome. From thence making many roades into the country adioigning, he lamentably distres∣sed the same, and threatning vtter subuersion to the Citie laide battrye and siege to it with Mynes, Bastiles and all kinde of Engynes that might any way further his pre∣tence. On thother side, Zulciminie with his Nauye on the Sea enuironed the whole Citie, on that side towarde Propontis and Bosphorus from the narowe lande to the Promontorye Metopick, insomuche that to them that looked out of the Citie, ye Seas Propontis and Bosphorus séemed all ouer to be couered with wodde lyke a Forest. He slept no more in his businesse then Malsamas dyd: but with sea skalyng ladders and such Gunnes as then were in vse, assaulted the citie and most fiercely shooke it. But the besieged Citizens were so vigilaunt and so hardy withal, that all their attemptes and deuoyres were wholy frustrate. Wherfore seing they could not this way preuaile, they thought to win their purpose by long siege and tract of time. But Zulciminie in ye meane season died in his owne Campe, whereby there arose a seditious tu∣mult among the Saracenes for the chosinge of a new bys∣shop, and for that cause the siege was for a time intermit∣ted. At length Aumar the sonne of Abdimazid was cre∣ated Byshoppe in the dead mans place, in the yéere 721. The wynter was then so extréemly colde, that all the ri∣uers were hard frosen ouer with yce. And also they had victuall dayly brought into their Campe out of Egipt, yet because the number of the men and Beastes was excée∣dyng great and the winter extreamely colde, a great sorte of them dyed, some with colde, some for famyne and some of diseases, & a great rablement of them thinking to get some booty abroad, yssued out of their owne Campes and made incursions into the frontiers of Bulgaria, where
they were of the Bulgarians incountred withall, and in manner all slayne, as they were about their pyllage. At which time, there were (as some affirme) of them slaine xxx. thousand. Leo the Emperour also was with them to bring, by an artificiall deuise of fireworke, wrought by a Glasse,Burning Glasses. as Archymedes of Syracuse aforetime did. By meanes of which Glasse he set on fire the fléete of the Sa∣racenes and so spoyled them that few of them escaped vn∣burnt and they which escaped were takē of the Greekes, by reason that the Captaines of them for feare of the fire, yelded themselues & fledde for succour vnto the Gréekes. This fine inuention ounde out by a certaine cunning Architect, merueilously appauled their spirites: for ye ve∣rie Sea about the Shippes séemed to be al on a light fire. Such another kind of burning glasse as this, wée reads was at Alexandria in Aegypt in the watche Tower na∣med Pharus, wherewith the inhabitauntes when they lysted, holding the same ful against the Sunne Beames, set the Shippes of their enemies on fire a great way of. During this while, Mucas & Tarifa hauing subdued Spaine, began to bée had in suspicion by Aumar. Wher∣vpon they came both together to salute their new Bishop and to cleare themselues from all suspicious crymes that coulde be obiected against them. Where Tarifa accused Mucas of extortion and layde to his charge that hée had purloyned the Princes treasure during his regiment in Spaine: of which crime he being attainted and found gil∣tie against the high Bishop, tooke such inward griefe that he dyed. In whose place, Aumar preferred Gizid to the Lieutenauntship of Affrica, and Tarifa he appointed Re∣gent of all Spaine. Wherefore Gizid with a well ap∣poynted Nauie of thrée hundreth and sixtie Saile, wyth the supplie of the other Legions and victuall, made hys course directly toward Constantinople: but hearing by the way tidings, how the Constantinopolitanes had con∣sumed
the most part of the Saracenes Ships with fire, he durste not aduenture any further, but stayed vpon the coastes of Bithynia, robbyng and makinge spoyle of the Country round about: In which place he had but a colde welcome géeuen hym by the Romane Legions beynge there in Garrisons, who setting fiercely vpon hym, kyl∣led many of his people and so skarred ye residue that they were glad to retire. Yet neuertheles the terrestrial army vnder the conduct of Malsamas,Lothsome famyne a∣monge Sara∣cenes desisted not their Siege before the Citie, and yet they were so sore pinched with famine and hungre, that they were fayne to eate the dead Carion of any maner of Beaste: yea they eat dryed or∣dure and dung, and are reported also, to be so nere driuen that for very néede they eate their owne fellowes fleshe being dead, such an excéeding desire had they to conquere that Imperiall Seate and Citie royall of all the Romane Empire orientall. Constantinople in the meane season escaped not frée,Great plague in Constanti∣nople. but was plagued with as great mortalytie an other way. For the pestilentiall plague consumed wel néere . CCC. thousand persons. When tydinges of these so great and so many ouerthrowes and infortunate calamyties was brought to Aumar, he was therewith so dismayd that hée immediatly addressed his letters to Malsamas, with com∣maundement foorthwith vpon the receipt thereof to re∣tourne home with all his Army left aliue. Wherevpon Malsamas shipped his Souldiours and departed. But there sodenlye arose such a vehement tempest and boys∣terous wynd,Shipwreck that all their Shippes (sauing onely tenne) perished in the Sea, whereof fiue were taken by the Ro∣manes, the residue retourned home to bringe newes of this their heauy chaunce & mysfortune. But Abdeluzite the Nephieu of Mucas, whome Mucas at his departure out of Spaine appointed his Deputie, marying ye Quéene Egilona late wife of Rodericke, by her counsell proclay∣med,
himselfe king of Syuyle. Whereat the Saracenes greatly fumyng & chafyng, kylled both him and his wife, and in his roome substituted an other of Mucas his kins∣men named Aiub, tyll such time as their high Byshoppe should take order for lendinge some other. This Aiub re∣payred and reedified the Citie Bilbilis (wherein the no∣ble Poet Martiall was long before borne) ruinated and much defaced durying those warres, and many other Ci∣ties in Spaigne: and named it by his owne name Cala∣taiub, which is now called Calacaiud. But he coulde not perfourme his purpose so fullye aboute the rest, because there was diuers in sundrye partes of Spaine, whiche (vsurpyng the Kingdome) were obstacles in his waye. For whereas Corduba was the head Citie and Seats royall of all Spayne, and the Captainshippes or gouer∣naunce of al the other Cities and Prouinces were distri∣buted and bestowed vpon the noble men of the Countrey, euery one imitating the fact of Abdeluzite, called them∣selues Kinges of those places where their auctoritie and Iurisdiction laye. Whereby Spayne was deuided into many Kingdomes, as the Kingdome of Syuyle, Granado Giaen, Murtia. Denia, Sciatiua (whiche was once called Setaba) Valentia, Tortosia, Lerida, Fraga, Saragoza and mani other les places not of so great fame as these. which Kinges so long as they agréed among themselues, often∣times afflicted Christendome with great ouerthrowes and oppressions: but after that they fell at discord and in∣testine variaunce among themselues, they gaue occasion to the Christians, to recouer Spaine againe into their owne rightfull possession. Which thing was first attemp∣ted (as before we haue shewed) by Pelagius, who vsinge his valiauntnesse, wisedome and myracles to his best commoditie, and happelye takyng occasion by this dissen∣tion and discorde of his Enemies amonge themselues,
wanne agayne many cities and deliuered sundry townes out of the miserable thraldome of their tyrannie. With hym did Alphonsus the sonne of Peter Duke of Calabria ioyne and take parte, being descended of the ancient line of Richared King of Gothes, vnto whome Pelagius gaue his Daughter Orismunda in mariage: and they two at∣chiued many notable victories ouer the Miscreaunte Moores. In the East, after the discease of Aumar the Caliph, Gizide the Sonne of Abdimelik succéeded and was in∣stalled in the pontificate in the yéere of our Lorde 722. In whose raigne, there stepped vp an other Caliph and Gi∣zid in Persia, whose name was Moalabs. Against whom was sent with a great army Masabnak, who vanquish∣ed hym in battayle and subdued all Persia: and thus Gi∣zid the sonne of Abdimelick, was the onely Caliph of all the Saracenes, who raigned thrée yéeres and then died. After whom, his Sonne Euelide was created Caliph, who entred the Romane Prouinces in Asia and Euro∣pa with a huge power: but within a short while, without perpetrating any notable exployte worthy of remem∣braunce, he gaue hymselfe altogether to ydlenesse, slouth and voluptuousnesse. Notwithstanding, in the seconde yéere of his Empire he sent Malsamas with an Hoast a∣gaine into Cappadocia, who tooke the Citie Caesarea and Euelite he sent by an other way into Thracia, who ha∣uing wasted and spoyled it, retourned into Syria. About this time néere the Sea coastes of the lesse A∣sia, the earth in the bottom of the sea burned, in such sort, that at the first there appeared nothynge but smoke, but within awhile after such incredible store of hoat burning Pumise stones (as though they had bene litle hilles in the Sea) swam aboue water, that with the same Pumyses, al the shoares of lesse Asia, Lesbos, Abydos and Macedo∣nia were full, and ye Sea it self semed all couered ouer, & a
certaine Island at that time appeared and was discoue∣red néere the holy Isle. After this, Euelide sent one Mua∣uias and Amer with an Hoaste of .90000. Saracenes to besiege Nicaea a Citie of Bithynia: which being most fiercely and strongly with all arte and pollicie by them as∣sayled, the Christians most valiauntly defending, and beating them alwayes back with great slaughter and ef∣fusion of bloude, at length they raised their Siege and re∣turned home without any harme doing, sauing yt in their retourne they tooke a little Towne called Ateum. After∣ward ye Prince of Gazaria, sonne to Cagan king of Bul∣garia, warred vpon the Saracens in the borders of Arme∣nia: and (Gradack the Pretor of Armenia & Media a Sa∣racene borne, being in battaile vanquished and slaine,) he brought those two Prouinces againe vnder the subiecti∣on of the Romane Empire. And in the yéere. 730. Malsa∣mas with a huige power entred into the Streightes of Caucasus, and gaue battayle vnto the Turkes (who at those dayes were called the Hunnes Teutazites which is to saie, Gentile) a fierre & terrible people dwelling within those Mountaynes. This blouddy battaile continued a whole day, and many slaine on both sides, till night came and brake of their fight, vncertaine as yet to whether side the victorie woulde incline. But Malsamas retired into Armenia, for he had now concluded a peace with ye sonne of King Cagan. During all this while, Pelagius hauing good successe in his Spanishe affaires against the Saracenes, the Tar∣raconians liuing in the mountaines, by the example of the Asturians created Garcias Scimenecius their King in the denne of Iean Pignia, called Panouio. And within a while after Pelagius when he had raigned .xiiij. yéeres dyed, in the yéere of our Lord. 732. After whom his sonne Fafila succéeded, who in the secōd yéere of his raigne was in a wodde deuoured of wilde Beares, leauing no childrē
behind him. These kings appointed the chiefe Citie of their Kingdome at Legio which is now called Leon,The Armes of the king∣dome of Lyon. and bare in their Coate Armour, a Lyon purple in a Shielde Argent. Not because of the name of the citie where their Seate royall was, whiche hath his name not of a Lyon but of a Legion of Souldiours whiche Cocceius Nerua placed there: but because they fought so couragiously and eigrely for the sauegard and libertie of their countrey, as though they had béene most fierce Lyons. In the raigne of this Fafila, the Saracenes passed into Fraunce by that part of the Pyrenees that was in their possession by the Mediterranean Sea. Fraunce was then possessed of the Frankes a people of Germanie, who about 400. yéeres after the incarnation, departing out of their natiue Coun∣trey to séeke some other place where to plant thēselues, had that part of high Bourgoyne next to Germanie geuen vnto them to inhabite, by Aetius a Romane Senatour who then was Pretor of the Prouince of Gaule, because he would haue some strong garrison and defence against the Hunnes (who were then issued in great plumpes out of their owne Countrey, and vnder the conduct of Attila, spoyled and wasted Europa) if they shoulde fortune to in∣uade Gaule, which Realme is yet of their name called Fraunce.How Fraūce was first named. For the Frankes were the warlikest & stoutest people in all Germanie, inhabiting (as I thinke) that re∣gion or portion thereof which is yet called Franconia or Frankland: who afterward by little and little enlarging their dition, obtained at length the regiment and Empire of all Fraunce, in so muche that the name of the Frankes extended very farre. But when the Franke or Frenche Kings addicted themselues to an ydle and voluptuous life and degenerated from the former stoutnes and valiaunce of their Progenitours, not executing the administration of their affaires in their owne proper persons but exploy∣ted the same by vnder officers of their Court and Graund
maisters of their Houshold, Pipine the first of that name Sonne of Arnolph Duke of Bauaria first attained this honour and dignitie by subduing and getting the vpper∣hand of ye Lieutenaūts and Captaines of the kings Pro∣uinces, who séeing the King to bée a weake and vnwar∣like man, tyrannically ruled the Countrey according to their own sensual lustes & for their priuate commodities. Then in the raigne of Theodoricus the second, the ex∣cellent dexteritie and worthy vertue of Charles Martel∣lus second Sonne to this Pipine was in that office very conspicuous and renoumed throughout all the lande of Fraunce, in so much that he was accompted and taken as the Prince of all the people. At the same time, was King of Aquitanie (thē called Gallia Gottica) one Eudo a Go∣thian borne, whom king Roderik made ruler of ye Pro∣uince, but hearing of ye discomfiture of ye King his Liege Lord, he made himselfe king thereof. This Eudo whyle Charles Martellus was busied wt other warres in Ger∣manie, began to surmise certaine quarelles, which brake out into open warre with the French Capitaines of the places néere adioyning to the limittes of his Territo∣ries, whom (going about to defend their titles & rightes) he afflicted with many ouerthrowes. Wherfore Martel∣lus tooke the matter in hande and warred against him. And at the same time the Saracens passing the Pyrenees, had taken Narbon, and in it shewed all kind of outragi∣ous crueltie, because they woulde by that example make the countrey afraide any more to withstande thē. Wher∣fore Eudo considering with himselfe that he was vnable to warre at one time both with ye Frankes & the Saracens, and for ye Mugnoces a man in great fauour and estimati∣on with ye Saracens was his Sonne in law, he thought it better for him to make a league & amitie with ye Saracens thē with ye Christians. Which after he had by Mugnoces meanes and friendship brought to passe, looking big vpon
the matter and bearing himselfe stoute by reason of the aide and succour, which they sent to him, he inferred much harme to the Franke Nation. But when he perceaued, that the Saracens fortified with their owne garrisons, and kept to their owne vses, al such Cities & townes as they entred into, he begā when it was to late to beshrew him∣selfe and wishe that he had neuer attempted any such en∣terprise. For they kept Nimes, Mountpelier, & Auinion with all the places thereabout in their owne possession. Wherevpon Eudo gathering all his power together to profligate and driue them out, gaue vnto them battayle, wherin he was discomfited. Mugnoces by whose meanes and procurement the league and amitie was concluded, greatly complayned of the iniurious dealing of Eudo in falsefying his faith & infringing his promise accordingly as he had vndertakē for him. Whervpō Abderama king of Gottalonia marching with an hoast against him, besie∣ged him in ye Castle of Cerdania: out wherof, Mugnoces for scarcitie of water escaping, & fléeing into thickets and hillish places, fell into ye hands of another cōpany of Sara∣cens, who tooke him prisoner & beastly slew him and sent his head & his wiues (ye daughter of Eudo) to Abderama: and thus all ye traitours of their Countrey within shorte space, came to a miserable end and confusion. Then Ab∣derama hauing dispatched and ridde out of ye way all ene∣mies yt were to be feared on his back, returned into Fraū∣ce, passed the riuer of Rhone, and destroyed many places yt belonged to the Christians: and made such a slaughter at Arle, that a heape then made of the bones of the deade carkasses remaineth there yet to this day in a place called Alies Campi. Thē went he with his army against Eudo who began again to gather more strength & make a new commociō. He besieged Tolose the chiefe Citie of Gallia Gottica:Fraunce in∣uaded by Saracens. in which siege, (for that the citie was very well rampyered and fortified with Ditches & walles, and also
well stored with Engins and munitions of war and with all sorts of weapons beside a conuenient Garrison of soul∣diours with all other thinges necessarye thee planted for defence) the Saracenes receiued great losse and were well payde home, especially by meanes of certayne En∣gyns, deuised by skylfull arte of ingenious Architectes and by diuers other Stratagemes of warlyke pollicie. Notwithstanding, Burdeaux was then taken and sac∣ked of the Saracenes, and all the Inhabitauntes therein both man woman and childe vnmercifully slayne and manquelled,Burdeaux ta¦ken and di∣uers other Cities and Townes. and the Temples razed and laide euen with the ground. Thence by the confines of Perigot beyonde the ryuer Geronde, they made inroades into the Coun∣try of Xantongue and destroyed Angolisme and Blaye: From thence through Limosin and Poytiers they russhed into the Countrey of Tours, Where they spoyled the Churche of Sainct Martine, wherein was great foyson and plenty of gyftes and offeringes that had bene geuen and bequeathed vnto it, and afterward set it on fire. Eudo being sore afflicted with these vnmanerly dea∣lyngs, and driuen to great extremytie by the Saracenes, entred into league with Marcellus, and they two (with both their powers ioyned in one) gaue battayle vnto Ab∣derama before the Citie of Tours,Great slaughter. wherein they discom∣fited hym and all his host. In this battayle there were slayne CCC. lxxv thousand Saracenes, and of the French no moe but .xv C. And if the night had not come vppon them ere the battayle was fully ended, the whole route of the Saracenes had bene at that time vtterly destroyed. For Abderama in the night season, perceiuinge how the game went, and what a mortall ouerthrow he had recei∣ued, had no lust to tarye and expect the hazard of the next daye: but trudged as fast as he could, by long iourneyes, with those fewe of his companye that were left and hable to folow him, to the Pyrenees, entendinge from thence to
retourne into Spaine, leauing behinde hym in his Tents all his carriage and stuffe for a praye to his Enemies. But the Nauarrians hauyng stopped the streight passages where their iourney laye, killed them euery one. The next day assoone as the Sonne was vp, Martellus in good order marshalled his army and tooke the Féeld, awaiting the commyng of his enemies. But when he perfectlye vnderstoode that they were fled, his Souldiours fell to the spoyle, which they found in the Saracenes Campe most a∣boundant and plentifull. After the death of Eudo, Martellus added that parte of Eudo his Kingdome, to his Empyre. For which cause Hunold and Vaifar the sonnes of Eudo, incensinge that part of Gaule called Narbonensis Prouincia (containing the Countrys of Sauoye, Dolphinie, Prouance and Lan∣guedock) to take parte with them, renewed the warre a∣fresh with Martellus. And passinge ouer the riuer of Rhone, with most barbarus cruelty destroyed, burnt and killed man and beast, makynge hauock of all Townes, Villages, & Féelds yt was in their way, without sparing either age or Sexe. The chief burnt of which lamentable storme and furious immanitie, that part of the Allobro∣ges (now called Dolphinie) specially felt, before Martel∣lus could prouide or prepare sufficient power to go against them. But when he was come, Visigot departed into the wast desert and wildernesse whiche hee hymselfe had so made, and concluding a league with ye Saracenes more aduisedly and warely then Eudo before had done, that is to wit, by geuing and receiuing hostages on both parties, he eftsoones procured them to come agayne into Fraunce: who now not with an Host of bolde & tymorous, warlike and vnwarlyke, armed and naked persones, one ming∣led with an other as before, but with army of lustye Ser∣uitors and picked Souldiours throughly tryed by Sea and Land, well appointed and furnished with victuall and
all thinges necessary for such an enterprise wherfore was cheife Captaine one Atine, entred into the Prouince. And taking Auignion by treason of Maurice Capitayne thereof, they appoynted that Citie and Narbon to be the principall holdes and fortresses of their martiall procée∣dings. Whom as they were boldly swarming & straying abroad ye Country, as men fearing no daunger, Childe∣brand (sent for that purpose by Martellus with a great power against them) immediatly at his firste commynge compelled to kéepe within the walles of Auignion. Auignion is a Citie standinge by the riuer Rhone, and was at that time stronglye walled, and well fortyfied with many Bulwarkes, Castles and Pyles, insomuche that Atine valyauntly and polytiquely defendinge it,Two baly∣aunt & sail∣full Capy∣taynes com∣pared toge∣ther, Atine the saracen and Martel∣lus ye French. (as he was a man both couragious and stout and also skilfull in the arte of Cheualrye) thought it to be inexpugnable and not able to be wonne. For he had placed his Garri∣sons on euery side where he thought most expedient, and had planted the walles, Bulwarks and Castles full of weapons, Dartes and Engins to throwe stones into the throng of his Enemyes, beside wyld fire and matches to kindle Torches and brands to cast in their faces when so euer they should assay to enter. He had also manned the same wt hardy Souldiours, & saw sure watch & warde to be kept at the Gates, neither lackyng stoare of victuall nor any thing els that for the defence therof was néedfull and requisite. Euery Capitayne, Centurion and decuri∣on had their places and offices appoynted vnto them ac∣cordingly. He himselfe in person went about and viewed the watches, for feare least any thing by negligence or o∣uersight of his officers were amisse, a man that coulde well away with laboure, watching and hunger, and such a one as kept his souldiours in due order and dutie by his owne example, rather then for feare of punishment, any∣matyng and encouraging them valyaunt enterprises,
and martiall aduentures. Childebrand lodging his camp néerer to the citie, gaue assault therevnto: whom Atine not onely repulsed but also enforced to discampe & remoue his Armye furder of. But when Martellus with his retinue and traine was come & both the hosts ioyned in one, after he had surueied and taken view of ye situation and strength of the citie and throughly vnderstood of ye valiaunt courage of ye defenders within, he spéedely & with vndaunted courage setting for∣ward his matters, not only draue thē as they issued out of the towne within the walles againe, but also wan to the place where his army had before pight, & there stronglye encamped he himselfe. For Martellus being a man singu∣lerly wel skilled in warlike affaires, had vnder him in his army such capitaines and souldiours as had bene in many bloudy battailes experienced & in sundry warres vnder him practised: furthermore very precise obseruers of mar∣tiall discipline wherin he himself had trained & instructed them. Who whether ye Army were to be lodged and em∣battailed or ye camp to be remoued, or themselues to be rā∣ked & set in array redy for ye fight, knewe euery man hys office, place & seruice only wt a beck or a signe geuen them by their Generall. When their camp should be fortified for feare of being sodenly surprised by ye enemy, immedi∣atly a man should haue séene some, wt al dillygence busied in perusing & surueiyng ye place ye their General had assig∣ned, some to sée souldiours in good order, some to entrench the camp, some to pitch their tentes, some to place ye watch and assigne them their standinges, some redy marshalled without the Trench ready to repulse the Enemy if he shoulde make any sodaine irruption vpon the labourers. If case stoode, for the Campe to be remoued, euery man semblablye knewe his office and dutye. If they mar∣ched out to fight, euery one knewe at his Fingers ende, where and in what Ranke or place hee shoulde
stande so that the forme and fashion were tolde them by their Chieuetane, how he would haue the battayle orde∣red and appointed, and looke where they stoode and set their foote in the fight, there would they rather haue dyed then to haue left it or shronke one foote backe, so desirous were they to wynne praise and glorie. If they should be∣siege any towne, some brought the scaling ladders, some Turrettes, some Bastyles and clymling bridges sur∣mounting the height of the Towne walles, striuing who should first goe vp and mount vpon the walles. When they had got the Towne, they neuer brake their aray for any pyllage or spoyle, nor for any gréedines of bootie and praie, they neuer ceassed to occupie their blades and lay about them with their falchions, till they had throughly ouercome all such of their enemyes as would not deliuer their weapons. With such a goodly trained host, Martellus aduauncing his Standard and approching his enemies, while the an∣ger of his Souldiours was hoate and the courage of their mindes yet freshe & vnappaulled, as one that well knew the nature of his Countreymen, who at the first brunt as long as an iniurie is fresh in memorie and their mindes with venturous anymositie and hope of victorie, googled are most fierce and hardie: but within a shorte while if the warre continue any thing long, their former hoat for∣wardnes will be straightwayes abated and tourned into such keye colde quietnes that whereas asore they séemed Lyons, then woulde they bée as méeke and tractable as Lambes, geuing therefore no time of rest to his Soul∣diours, but onely so much as néedes must be had to re∣freshe their bodies, with meate, drinke and sléepe, he soū∣ded the bloudie blast to the battaile, and gaue them a signe couragiously to giue the onset but first he whetted them and stirred vp their stomackes with this Oration folo∣wing.
If your valiaunt hearts (most louing Souldiours and felowes in Armes) were not sufficiently already to mée knowen by the manifold aduentures and perilles in my companie to your perpetuall praise exployted,A pleasante and comfor∣table Ora∣tion of Mar∣tellus to his Souldiors. or if our enemie were vnto vs straunge & vnknowen then would I go about with many wordes to incense and pricke you forward: but sithens I haue experimented and tryed you in so many battayles inuincible, & that of late yéeres you easely vanquished this very same enemie, (few of them left a liue) at what time they inuaded the whole Realme of Fraunce with a farre greater armie then they haue now, in hope to haue enioyed the Empyre & Dominion thereof to themselues: I well sée that I haue no néede to stande long in putting you in hope of victorie, which I perfectly know to be alreadie most certain in your hāds, whereof the manifold examples of so many famous bat∣tailes happily and victoriously vnder our leading & con∣duct by you atchieued, may put you in an vndoubted as∣suraunce. Vnlesse peraduenture some will thinke it to be a harder matter for vs nowe to ouercome these fewe (which like fearefull Hares) hyde and include themsel∣ues within walles: then it was for vs heretofore in the Countrey of Tours, to discomfite the whole power al∣most of all the Orient. Or as though Walles were of more force in Warres, then foure hundreth thousande fighting men, whose swordes and armour if they had beene layd together in one heape, had béene hable to haue compassed this Citie about wyth a hygher and thicker bulwarke then these Walles which you sée are. Men (beléeue mée) séeke their defence not in Walles but in theyr weapons. Whereas they which put their trust in Walles, when they be dryuen to that pushe that they sée themselues ouercome, their heartes fayle them, they runne away lyke the fearefull Deere, eyther casting downe their weapons, or else stand stone still dismaide
and amazed lyke sheepe. Addresse your selues therefore to the assaulte lyke men, assuring your selues to fynde suche great plentie of spoyle therein, that you shall fare the better all the dayes of your liues. Daunt and oppresse yonder odious and vile generatiō ye are included in hoales & dennes like birdes in a cage. Take your former vigour and accustomed stomacks vnto you, and know ye ye I am he, which (ouer & beside their share and bootie of ye spoyle) will amply wt my owne hands reward all them yt in this assault shal behaue thēselues valiauntly. I my selfe will not start one foote frō you, but will helpe you not only wt my aduise and pollicie, but also wt doughtie blowes giuen with mine owne arme as I am wont alwayes at a pinch to do where I sée néede. I wil be (I say) both the witnesse bearer and the Iudge of your valiaūce on euery side, and wil sée you to suffer no worse extremitie, and wrong, thē I my self wil be content to participate with you. Auaūce I say once againe, mount vp liuely vppon yonder wall, (which done) you shalbe sure to be celebrated and renow∣med of all men, as they that twyse, haue deliuered and protected their Countrey of Fraunce out of thral∣dome of a blasphemous True of cursed Sathanistes. When he had made an ende, the Souldiours al toge∣ther gaue a great shoute, and then began the assault, the walles were couragiously shaken and battered, ladders, turreties & bridges set vp, the assault geuē in thrée seue∣rall places & the whole army diuided into iij parts, wher∣of one was lead by Childebrād, another by Charlemaine the sonne of Martellus, & the third by Martellus himself. The Saracens rowlling downe great stones which they had for the same purpose prepared, tumbled downe ye sca∣ling ladders & brake them a sunder, shot arrowes among the Assaylaunts as fast as haile, & threw pots of scalding pitch vpō them that approched any thing néere, finally no kind of weapō was vnoccupied. Atine himselfe goyng a∣bout euery corner, chéering vp his Souldiours on euery
side, & diligently looking ye nothing were amisse, played ye part both of a skilfull Captaine & also of a valiaunt souldi∣our: many, which of a high and hautie courage first skaled the walles, felt ye smart & reward of venturous audacitie, and were slaine. Martellus seing that his scaling ladders were partly by his enemies & partly by the waight of his owne souldiours climming vp thick and thréefold broken almost all in péeces, purposing to detrude and driue ye de∣fendauntes frō some part of the wall, erected a Tower of wood, out of which, he shot wt certaine deuised Engynes, great waighty stones at thē that stoode vpon the wall and in it he had placed a great sort of Archers, which with a∣rows kept ye Oppidanes so streict, yt they durst not stād to their tacklings, nor abide vpō the walles. This Turret had a bridge which wt a certain deuise in it, might both be hoised vp on high & let downe low, vp into the which none could ascend yt stoode on the groūd. This Engine was co∣uered all ouer with raw Oxe hides & leather, that no fire could do it hurt. This being wt strength of mē set hard by the walles (for it went vpō whéeles) ye Bridge was set to the top of ye walles, and so within a little while, the wall was ful on yt side with French souldiours. Thē the bicke∣ring being so sore & terrible on both parts, yt it was harde to decerne who shuld haue the victorie, at length fine force and puissaunt māhod of the Frankes got the better & pre∣uailed, who making a great shout, wēt throughstitch with their enterprise, some ascēding & mounting vpō ye walles by ladders, which couered & saued themselues frō harme by holding their Targets close ouer their heades, till they were gottē vp, killing or els throwing downe the defen∣daūts, that resisted. The rest being without all hope of re∣medie & victorie, priuely shifted euery man for himselfe. Atine wt the head men & chief officers of his cōpany, em∣barked thēselues in Shippes readie in the ryuer Rhone for ye same intent, & sayled away wt the streame in safety.
Many of them were slaine in the chase, many crushed to death with fallyng one vppon an other, and many swim∣myng after the Shippes that were now departynge and goynge awaye, were drowned and ouerwhelmed with sourges. Atine with his Shippes takyng the sea, made his course directly to Narbon, a wealthy Citie and well fortified, standyng very commodiouslie to receiue into it ayde from the Sea, wherein was planted an other Ga∣rison of Saracenes. Whereof hearynge Martellus went also to oppugne and besiege it. So that now there was no lesse bickering & contention on both parties for the oppug∣nation and propugnation of Narbon: the one side mea∣nyng to win the citie, the other not intendyng so toloose it. At whiche time Amorreus, an other Saracen Kinge bringynge a bande of newe ayde to succour the besiéeged Narbonians, was encountred by Martellus, at the ryuer Illiberis. Where betwene them was fought a sharp and bloudy battayle: but in the end the victorye fell to Mar∣tellus, and Amorreus valiantly fightyng in the vawarde was slayne with all his company, insomuch that not one was left aliue to carye any newes home of their vniuer∣sall mishappe and calamytie. When Atine vnderstoode of this discomfiture, he and as many as were with hym at Narbon shipped themselues and departed out of the French Prouince and Countrey. At this time, when the Moores were thus dry∣uen out of all Aquitanie, nyne of the chiefe Péeres of Martellus his Host, valyaunt men and hardye, warred vpon the Saracenes in Gotalonia: and Martellus dyed in whose roome his second Son Pipine succéeded. In the orient Malsamas spoylyng and depopulating ye borders of Thracia (which now is called Romania) tooke a stronge Towne of Cappadocia named Cursianum. From thence making an other viage with an Army vnto the Streicts of Caucasus, found the same so wel defended and fortified
by the Vnnes or Turkes, that not daring to meddle with them, he retyred back agayne. And two yéeres after, an o∣ther army of Saracenes whereof was Generall one Eue∣lit the Sonne of Maunias inauaded againe the Borders of Thracia, where after he had made great spoyle, he retour∣ned againe into Syria. In which Prouince many thou∣sands of Saracenes dyed of sundry diseases. Neuerthelesse they abstained nothing the more from making inuasions into the Territoryes yt belonged to the Romane Empire. For Zulciminie with a huyge power the thyrd time pil∣fered and haryed Armenia and Thracia and tooke the towne called Syderonium: afterward he went into Cap∣padocia wt 60000. men, and at the very same time Me∣like and Batal with a hundreth thousand Saracens brake the fourth time into Thracia. But Leo then Emperour, marchyng with an Host against them that wasted Thra∣cia, destroyed and slew them almost euery one. About this time died Euelid, in whose place was created Bys∣shop Gizit the seconde, in the yéere of our Lorde 744. Who for that he saw the Romane Empire to be deuided intofactions, because Constantine Copronymus ye Son of Leo contended with Artabasdus for the Garland, addic∣ted and bent his whole mind to dispose and set order in the Saracenicall Empire. And because ye Ile of Ciprus beyng then well peopled, brued seditious motions and ruflynge disturbaunces, he sent the whole people thereof into Sy∣ria and left the Iland without Inhabitantes. And when he had raigned one yéere, he deceased. After him, Ices ob∣tayned the pontificate, who also dying within lesse then a yéere, Maruane was installed and made high Bishoppe. Pipine the second bearing all thesway and rulynge all the rost in the Realme of Fraunce, the Saracenes eftsoones passinge the Pyrenees were by him surprysed and taken tardy, and payde so dearely for their lustinesse, that so long as he lyued, the neuer durste any more attempt any in∣uasion
or pillage towarde hys land, Territory or domy∣nion, for which valyance and magnanimitie, the French∣mē, by the assent of Zacharie then Pope of Rome deposed Childerick to whome the crowne of Fraunce by lineall descent of inheritaunce belonged, and made Pipine their King: and with him annoynted as heyre Apparaunt to the Crowne, his Sonne Charles, who was after surna∣med the Great. Whom (afterward doyng many things of his owne proper will and authoritie contrarye to his Fathers minde and contentment,Charles as though he had bene already very Kinge and in reall possession of the Regall Diademe) King Pipine his Father exiled out of his sight and commaunded to departe out of all the limytes and boundes of his Domynion and kingdome. Wherefore he not darynge to disobey the kinge his Fathers decrée and iudgement, tooke with hym many of the French No∣bilytie which folowed hym, and went to Galasie Kinge of Toledo, a Saracene borne. Whiche Galasie vsed his helpe, aduise and ayde in the warre whiche then he had a∣gainst Marsilius Kinge of Saragoza, a Saracene also as well as he. In which warres Charles, being Chieue∣tayne of all the King of Toledo his armye, behaued hym selfe like a worthy Knight, and many waies endamaged King Marsilius. Afterwarde fallynge in loue with Galiana Daughter to the king his Master, aduentured and atchieued many worthy enterprises & notorious Actes for her sake, name∣ly against Bramantes, an other Saracen King. Who be∣cause he would haue had Galiana to his wife, maugre her Parentes good wyl, besieged Toledo, and discomfited the Souldiours both French & Saracene which serued vnder the king of Toledo, tyll Charles yssuing out to recharge vpon hym, coaped with him and slew him with hys own handes. This hoat loue continewinge for a time, at length brake out so far, yt vpon a certen time as yt damsel
for her disport and solace was walkyng in the gardens or baynes by the bankside of the riuer Tagus without the walles of the citie Toledo (whiche are at this day called the Palaces of Galiana) Charles no longer hable to quale∣fye his amorous passion, stole her away and fled with her to Burdeaux, wher he buylded for her a sumpteus palace, as lyke in all poyntes to the paterne and situation of the princely Court of Toledo, as he could gesse, which palace is yet extant, and called also by the name of Galiana her Palace. Maruane ruling in Syria, many sedicious mutines and factious partakings chaunced among the Saracenes, & ma∣ny Tyraunts rebelliously reuoulted, pretendynge title to the pontificate. Whose names were Tebid, Dadack, and Zulciminie. Whom Maruane as traytours to him pursued, & toke Tebid and put hym to death: Zulciminie hauing an ouerthrow, fled into Persia. But fortune smi∣led & fauored Dadack better then ether of ye other twaine, for he ioyning battayle wt the Sonne of Maruane, van∣quished hym and discomfited his whole Hoast. Albeit he could not long enioy the fruicts of this victory, for wtin awhile after, encountring wt Maruane, himselfe in a cru∣ell battell was ouercome and slaine. Constantine Copro∣nymus taking occasion and conceyuing hope of future good lucke by meanes of ye Saracens domestical sedition, infer∣red warre vpon Syria, & wanne a great part of that Pro∣uince. Wherfore Maruane hauinge now already gotten the vpperhand of Dadack with al his Adherentes: tour∣ned his conquerous Armes to regayne Syria, and it re∣couered to ye great slaughter & smart of ye Christians. The same yéere, a litle before ye Christians receiued this great ouerthrow and discomfiture at the hands of Maruane, the Countrey Syria, Palestina, almost al Asia, Thracia, Gre∣cia and Italie with many other Regions were terriblye shaken with a dreadfull Earthquake.
After this, more ruffling and commotion kindled in Persia. For Asmuline Prince and kingleader of yt Sect (first reised and excited by Mutar, of whom we haue be∣fore made mention who affirmed Ali to be greater then Mahomet) dwelling and liuing among the Corasenes, a people of Persia, through ye counsaile & instinct of one Ca∣taban, incensed and mooued all the Slaues and Peyzants of the Countrey either priuely or apertly, by secrete con∣spiracie or by open force, to quell and murther their Mai∣sters. With whose wealth, the Slaues being enriched and made of great power, were diuided into two factions, whereof th' one were called the Caismores, and th' other the Lamonites. Now, Asmuline being Captaine of the La∣monites, subdued and cleane dispercled the Caismores. Then beyng accompanyed with his Lamonites and hys Counsellour Cataban, marched forth into Persia: ouer which Prouince was Lieutenaunt for Maruane one Ib∣line, who with an hoast of one C. thousand good fighting men and well appointed, resisted and gaue to Asmuline battayle. In which conflict, the Lamonites although they were a great deale fewer in number, yet hauing an in∣dubitate confidence in the promises of Asmuline and in Cataban, whom they estéemed as men holy and repleni∣shed with Propheticall inspiration, fought most valiant∣ly, in so much that they discomfited Ibline and put hym to flight. Beyng then animated with so many victories, gloriously and happely atchieued, they were not afrayde to offer battayle vnto Maruane who had in his army iij. hundreth thousand fighting Souldiours ready appointed in the fielde, néere to the Ryuer Zaban, whom also with all his army they discomfited. Maruane with foure thou∣sand only of his company fled into Aegypt, cutting downe the bridge where he passed ouer, that his enemies should not pursue and chase after him. But Saline the Sonne of Asmuline persecuted and folowed after him at his héeles
and in Aegypt in a blouddy battaile ouercame him, and thus was all the Maraunian Lynage and Pedagrew ex∣pulsed. The remnauntes of whose lyne and Progenie which had flourished and reigned so many yéeres were dispersed and scattered abroade, some fledde into Mauri∣tania where being wearied, they planted themselues, and some went into Spaine. From this Asmuline afterward that house and family which now at this day raigneth in Persia, called Sophi is lineally descended. After the death of Asmuline and Cataban, one Abu∣balan surnamed Muamat was Prince of Syria and Per∣sia: and Saline of Aegypt: and héere began the first Em∣pyre of the Sultanes or Souldanes of Aegypt, which haue their imperiall Seate at Cayre. For by that name the Ae∣giptian Caliphes would be called: which name (Sultan) by interpretatiō signifieth ye highest Soueraigne Prince and King of Kings. About the same time, dyed Pipine King of Fraunce, and Charles his sonne beganne his raigne in his fathers steede. And among the Asturians, Alphonsus the sonne in Law of Pelagius, and surnamed Catholicus succéeded Fafila. This King recouered from the Saracenes in Gal∣licia, Lucus, Tui and Asturica, in the Countrey called Campi, all that lyeth within the Ryuers Stola, Carri∣on, Pisquerra, and Duerro: in Castulonia, Simancas, Duengas, Amaia, Caniciares, Alesanium, Transi∣nera, Supuerta and Carracia: in Lusitanie, Bracha, Viseum and Portum, (of whom & Gallicians compoun∣ded together, whiche are a people of the same Pro∣uince) all Lusitanie is at this day called Portugall. Hée fortefied many places, as Alaba, Ordugina, in Can∣tabria, whych Countrey is nowe called Biskaie: in Nauarra, Rueonia, Sarracecasium and diuerse other places as farre as the Pyrence Mountaines. And when he had raigned eyghtéene eeres he dyed, after
whom his Sonne Froila was saluted and crowned king. This man gaue an ouerthrow to the Saracens which had inuaded Gallicia, wherein he slew their Captaine Omar with fiftie thousand others of his company, and compelled Ioseph king of Corduba to flée: and brought al the region of Gallicia into his owne rule and iurisdiction. He beyng afterward by his owne Subiectes murthered, Aurelius his brothers sonne obtained the kingdome, of whom we reade no notable exploite done against the Saracens, and he also dying within short space after his Coronation, his brother Silo was made king. Against him the Gallicians rebelled, wherfore because he might ye better subdue and bring thē to reasonable conformitie, he concluded a peace with the Saracens. He raigned eight yéeres and thē dyed. After whō, succéeded Alphonsus the second, sonne of Froi∣la, surnamed Castus, which was in the yéere of our Lord God .780. Against him, by the counsaile and persuasiō of his vncle Mauregate, the Saracens made warre. Thys Mauregate had promised vnto them, that if he myght by their meanes and helpe obtayne the Kingdome of Lyon, which hys Predecessours and Auncestours before hym had enioyed, he would paye vnto them yeerely in the name of a tribute fyftie persons of noble race, and as many Virgins of baser birthe, with many other execra∣ble and impious things. Wherevpon, by the ayde of the Saracenes whiche furthered his pretence and quarell, with all their myght and power, he forciblie got Lyon with the whole Kingdome thereof and it intrusiuely v∣surped by the space of fyue yéeres. After whose deathe, Vermudeces, Sonne to hys brother Vimaran succéeded: who after two yéeres, voluntarily and of his owne frée∣wyll restored the Kingdome to Alphonsus. Whych when the Saracenes vnderstoode, they sent a great ar∣mye agaynst hym, vnder the leadyng of Mucas: be∣twéene whom, néere to a Towne named Lutum or
Ledum was fought a terrible and sharpe battayle, but in the ende the Saracenes were ouercome, and of them were slaine .lxx. thousande, beside a great number which were taken Prisoners. While these garboyles were in doyng in Spaine, the Saracenes in the Orient were deuided among them∣selues by intestine sedicion and ciuill tumulte. For A∣bubalan ruling in Syria, many commotions and vp∣rores were reysed against hym in Arabia, by the fac∣tion of deade Maruane, affirmyng and proclayming abroade that Maruane was not yet deade, and that therefore they put on Armour to restore him againe into hys rightfull estate and regall dignitie. By rea∣son of which rebellious stirre, many were slayne on both sydes, and great depopulation committed. After the deathe of Abubalan, his brother Abe∣dela succéeded, who was traiterously and insidiouslye murthered by an other Abedela, which aspyred to the Byshopprike, hopyng to enioye it after hys decease as hee dyd in déede. During whose Raigne and Em∣pyre, the Turkishe broode and Nation breaking cat of the Streictes of Caucasus about the yéere of oure Lorde .800. made roades and incursions into Armenia, and when they had piteously spoyled and sacked it, they retourned into their owne Countrey. And the yeere folowing, they yssued oute in great Plumpes, and fought with the Saracenes so long, till manie béeing slaine on bothe parties, the nyght made them to surceasse and make an ende of their battaile. Abedela the seconde of that name, in the eightenth yéere of his raygne dyed, in whose place succéeded hys Sonne Madi. Who without any notable thing in al his tyme atchiued, dy∣ed, when he had raigned ix. yéeres, leauyng behind him for his Heyre and successour, his sonne Moyses. Who in the second yéere of his raigne dyed: and in his roome was
created Caliph one Aaron. But now to retourne to the affaires of the Occident. Ibnabala King of Saragoza, being expulsed and dry∣uen out of his Countrey by the other Princes of the Sa∣racenes in Spayne,Charles the Great. came into Fraunce to King Charles, to implore and desire ayd of hym, to reuenge the iniurie vnto hym done: and at the same time also, Ambassadors came to the same Charles from Alphonsus surnamed Castus, King of Asturians, to incense and mooue hym to warre vpon the Saracenes in Spaine and to set the Coun∣try in good order, and by his prowesse to deliuer it out of the clutches of Tyrannicall vsurpers. Charles therefore gathering together not only the power of his owne king∣dome but also hauinge a supplye of forraine aide, among whome were certaine younge Gentlemen of the Danes (which profered their seruice to accompaignie him, part∣lie for a desire that they had to bellicall affaires, and part∣lie to shewe their prowesse and couragious stomackes) with an Host not very huyge and populous in number, but yet competent inough and such as were skilful Soul∣diours and expert Capitaines, passed ouer the Pyrenees by Ronceuall without resistaunce or stoppe of any man. And entring within the frontiers and borders of Nauar∣re, pight his Pauilions before Pompelon, the head Citie of the Kingdome of the Cantabrians. Which Citie the saracenes had strongly fortified with a mighty Garrison. And for that they had béene alredy sufficiently schooled in the auncient tricks and feates of Spayne, they would no more commit the euent of their good or ill Fortune to ye hazard of one entire battaile as they had before done, but determined to protract and lynger out the warre with de∣layes, tergiuersacions and sKirmishes where they might espie their best aduauntage. Charles dispatched and sent an Herauld at armes to sommon the Towne, & to know whether they would yelde or els abide ye doubtfull hazard
of war. They first, asked a time to consult among them∣selues what were best to doo, ere they woulde resolutelye answere to ye Sōmaunce. Vnto whom was granted the space of one day, wherein they demaunded and entreated that thei might haue space graunted to send to their kings Frends and Confederates, and geue them to vnderstand of their distresse, so that if they were not rescued and the siege reysed within xv. dayes, then they would wyllingly yéelde themselues and their Citie into his hands. Allead∣gyng, that it should be much for the auaile and commody∣tie of ye French, to conquere and wyn the Citie, being vn∣peryshed and neither by the Conquerour in his ragynge moode defaced, nor by the conquered defendaunt, through desperation blemished and disfigured. Neither that this taryaunce should in any poyncte hinder his Procée∣dinges, but rather be greatly beneficiall for hym. For why, though he bent all the force he was able to make a∣gainst the Citie, yet was it able to holde hym out for so many dayes as they craued. And furthermore that the French, if their Fortune were to get the vpperhande in fight of their Fréendes that came to succour them, should with a worde onely commaunde the Portecullesses and strong grated Gates of ye Citie to be broken downe & o∣pēned for them quietly to enter, whiche shoulde be much for the honour, Dignitie, and profite of both parties: least otherwise, those innocent Cities that haue committed no fault, for whose deliuerie and regaignynge the French protested themselues to be come, should suffer such ruth∣full and iniurious examples of warre on both sides, as the nature and insolencie of a Siege necessarilye bringeth. Charles prudently perceiuing all these protestations and surmises of the Saracenes to be subtilly and craftelye deuised for none other entent, but onely to abate the heat and courage of his Souldiours (being now most sharply
set to haue their purpose) by protracting the time and ge∣uyng longer day, would in no wise agrée to graunt them any respite to make any further preperation and pur∣ueighaunce for war, which mighte peraduenture tourne hym to greater inconuenience afterwarde, but immedi∣atlye sendeth defiaunce against them, and commaundeth hys Souldiours to prouide and make ready such thinges as to the battrie and siege of the Citie were requisite. The Siege of this Citie continued many dayes, and di∣uers assaultes fiercely geuen. The Assaylauntes were not so busie without, but the Defendaunts were as dyly∣gent within many times yssuinge out of their Gates, not after the Arabian guyse, but accordinge to the Spanish manner, armed with Sword and fire, quick, swift, nym∣ble and sodaine, deluding their enemyes, with many stra∣tagemes and subtyll pollicies, facinge and shifting from place to place, pretermittinge no occasion that made for their purpose, dealynge euery where and at all times so deceiueablye, that when the other partye thought them∣selues surest of their purpose, they were fardest of, and when their desires were likest (as thei thought) to sorte to effect, then were they soonest beguiled and lykely them∣selues to fall into the lapps of their enemies: so secret and spéedy, that they were many times in the middest of their enemies flashing among them before any man suspected their cōming, killing them and setting fire in their tentes and gone againe out of sight, ere any resistaunce could be made or any time to go against them. They skirmished & ruffled wt their enemies, in a maner within their owne tents. And although there was a band apointed at ye gates of the Citie to kéepe them from comminge out, yet (not∣withstanding) they could not be so pent in, nor debarred from their purposes, but with lyke bouldenesse as afore, they would often set vpon them, and by no meanes wolde be brought to kepe wtin ye wals of the citie, til ye same wer throughly entrenched and rampired, and all their works
within, finished to their minde. Thē did they stand at de∣fiaunce valiauntly, not as men defending their manhood with walles, but kéepyng & defending their walles with manhood. This Siege contynuing somwhat longe, the o∣ther kings which were daily looked for to reyse the siege, came in deed, albeit furnished with any hoast, able to fight a maine battaile, but euer as they espied any aduauntage or occasion, they would make out Dimilaunces and light Horsemen by knowen pathes and waies, to annoy King Charles. Which Horsemen oftener by night then by day alitle disquieted his Campe, and made some disturbance and Outcries therein. An other crewe of them killyng the watchmē & perforce making way through their enemies Bulwarkes and Fortifications, entred the citie, & great∣lye relieued them within, whereby thei conceiued great hope of future successe. Charles wt a courage vnappauled and inuincible exhorting his men, tolde them that the vic∣tory was to be obtained with paines taking & vigilancie, that martiall prowesse appeareth not only in the encoun∣trie and conflict, but a great deale rather in good discipline and obseruance of martiall orders, not to be lulled in ease and securytie, bestowing the greatest part of the night in sléepe and bodely rest, but in studie and deuise for the at∣chiueaunce of their waightye businesse, & in the day time incessantly to be busied, abstaining from riot & libidinous lustes & euermore abandoning werines and lingering of time. Geuing them further to vnderstand, yt ye cages and walles wherin those Sathanistes had enclosed themselues for their sauegard, must ether perforce be brokē in péeces & beaten downe about their eares, or els ye enemies thē∣selues to be tamed and brought vnder awfull obedience. Wherfore he had them to aduance their standards & with banners displaid, to march against thē, & not suffer them to rest. Then was ther made fortificatiōs & habiliments, to serue ech way and on euery side, wherby their Camp was kept both before, behind and on either side.
Then they that fisked and raunged out as thei did before, were faine to hyde their heades within their Fortresse, or els were shamfully compelled to retire, and so the matter was brought to a perfect Siege. Then beganne there a sharpe and terrible battrye whiche contynued day and night without intermission, fresh Souldiours euer com∣ming in the places of ye weary, and fighting by course one after an other rounde aboute, with all kinde of deuises Engins, Ordinaunce, Ladders, Bridges, pollicie and va∣lyauntnes, in somuch that ye Saracenes courage being wel cooled, were now dismaid & at their wits end, not hable to hold out ani longer, but on euery side (do what they could) were by the valyant French Assaylaunts throwen downe from the walles or els slayne out of hand. Within the Citie also there was a great slaughter of them, vntyll the King had made proclamation that as many as were vn∣armed and without weapon should be spared. Then lo, the Saracenes, euer before that time, choosing and accustomed rather to die then to yéeld as long as they had weapon & Armure,Kinge Charles coo∣led the sara∣cens courage threwe downe their weapons, and vpon their knées holdyng vp their vnarmed hands be sought pardon. Then were the walles rased and the citie sacked. From thence the Campe remooued and went to Saragoza the head Citie of the Prouince Taraconensis: which beinge terryfied and feared by the example afore, straightway condiscended and agréed to accept the offers and conditions propounded vnto them, whiche was that they shoulde admitte and receaue into their Citie such as preached the glad tydinges of the Gospell of God, and receaue againe Ibnabala their King, and hym to ac∣knowledg and obey as their Soueraigne Lorde. After this, he went into Gottalonia, & compelled the two kings of ye Prouince (which were accused to haue expulsed Ibna∣bala but of his kingdome) Abuam & Deuifeze to come into his Paullion with Giftes and Presents, & condiscend
to become Tributaries. Thus his name was had in feare and awe throughout all Spaine. But when he was re∣turned home agayne into Fraunce, some write that there came out of Aphrica, one Aigoland, sent from the high Duke of the Aphrican Saracens, who kept his Seat roy∣all at Marrocco) with a mighty army, to recouer all such Townes and places as Charles had taken in Spaine: with whom there were many other Princes, Potentats and valyaunt personages. And that Charles (after many combates, darraigned and foughten with hym hand to hand beinge thereunto by hym chalenged and prouoked) fought a bloudy battayle with hym at Baion, a Citie of Vasconia, wherein were slayne 400000. Christians, and among them Myles Anglere Father to Rouland, a stout Gentleman and a hardy, who had the leadinge and was Generall of the whole Army. Notwithstanding, all was regained by the puyssance and prowesse of Charles, and other fresh ayd that then came euen in the nicke out of Italy to succour the Frenchman in that distresse. Inso∣much that Aegoland priuyly fled and conueighed himselfe away. But not long after, hauinge repaired his army with a supplie of moe Souldiours, Aegoland againe prouoked Charles into Vasconia, and besieged the Citie Gennum now called Baion the space of seuen Monthes, and depar∣ting thence was in the borders of Xantongue in a cruell battel ouerthrowen, after which discomfiture he fled back againe into Spaine. And how that Charles (because he would at length bring his Spanish warres to an end) wt a greater army then any afore, entred into Spaine, where after many light skirmishes, he slew Aegolād in a notable battell: after which victorie he brought vnder his subiec∣tion and rule almost all Spaine: with many moe forged reportes and mere fables of some aduoutched, all which, for the vntruth and vnlykelyhood therof we do heare pre∣termit.
But if any be desirous to sée them, let them reade Turpine Byshoppe of Rhemes, to whom also I do re∣ferre you, for the trueth of this which wee haue here last recited. For we doe not fynde in any of those cre∣dible and approued wryters whych wée folowe, that Charles made any moe voyages against the Saracenes into Spaine but one, nor that they euer entred into Fraunce during his Raigne. But this is manifest, that Alphonsus Kyng of Asturia, mooued with the famous renowne of his noble Actes and inuincible valiaunce, and for the common weale of his Kingdome and Sub∣iectes, because he had no Children of his owne, and saw that the power of that onely Region was farre vnhable so beare out and maintaine continuall warres wyth the Saracens, offered vnto him secretely by trustie Messen∣gers and Ambassadours the Kingdome of Lyon, so that he would ayde hym against the King of Corduba, with whom he had then waged Warre. Charles ac∣cepting this offer and condition, sent ayde vnto hym. Which composition when the Nobles and Péeres of the Realme of Lyon vnderstoode, they were soore displeased and tooke the matter greuously, spighting (as commonly in like cases it falleth out) to haue a Nation hard vn∣der theyr noses to bée rulers ouer them, and therevpon they compelled theyr King to starte from his Bargaine and vndoe his League. And not so contented to leaue, purposed also and deuised which way to dispatch and de∣stroye King Charles and all his Army: fearing, least he séeing himselfe thus deluded and mocked would, reuenge this iniurie done vnto him. Therefore gathering and assembling all the power of the Asturians and Canta∣brians together, and sendyng also for ayde to the Sara∣cenes (in secrete wise preuenting Charles) tooke and kept the narow Streights of the Mountaines where the pas∣sage & way lyeth into Spaine by Ronceuall. For Charles
was retourned into Fraunce, and was now againe in his way going into Spaine, to reuenge this wrongfull dea∣ling. The Armie of King Charles was thē at the foote of the Pyrence Mountaines on that side next Fraunce, in the valley (yet called Hospita) when there came newes vnto them, that the Spaniardes were comming in war∣like maner against him along by the valley called at this day Charles Valley, which was a faire plaine Chāpaine. Therfore diuiding his hoast into thrée Battailes, by the fraudulent & traiterous coūsaile of Galerō (or as some cal him Gane) whō the enemies had corrupted with money, he appointed Rouland his Nephew by his Sister, (com∣monly called of ye vulgar sort Orland) Duke of little Bri∣taine, a valiaunt Gentlemā and a hardy, to leade ye Vau∣warde, wherein he placed al the noble States & Péeres of Fraūce: in ye second battaile, he placed innumerable Gen∣tlemē and noble Personages: and he himself with ye third (wherin was the traitour Galerō) taried stil in ye campe, commaunding Orland with the vauntgard to aduaunce himself forward. The Spanish army was embattailed in Ronceuall, expecting their cōming. Vpon, whō the fronte of the French hoast geuing the onset, was at ye first brunt so handled (for the Spanyardes had gottē the vpper groūd and al ye strait passages) yt they were in worse case which escaped their hands, thē they which were slain outright in fighting: for they dyed & were quickly out of pain, but the other léeing through thicke & thinne among ye stones and craggy Cliues & falling down frō high Rockes, had their limmes brokē, & so continued for a lōger seasō in extreme tormente and agonies. Thus, Rouland & all his traine being wearied, what with climing vp the hill, and what with the waight of their armour were easely killed and brought to confusiō.xii. Peeres of Fraunce. After the same maner also was ye se∣cond battaile hādled, wherin were ye. 12. Péeres of Fraūce, in whose power it is to create the king & decide al waigh∣tie causes of the Realme.
Charles still abode in the Valleye, which for this cause is to this day called Charles Valley, whyther he had remo∣ued his Campe out of Hospita. Who vnderstandinge of the great ouerthrow and losse of his Men, retyred with al spéede againe into Fraunce. Alphonsus excused himselfe by Ambassadours vnto him, that all these thinges were attempted and done without his consent and knowledge, with whome Charles renewed the former amytie and league betwene them stroken and concluded. Then deui∣singe in his minde to procure an atonement and vniuer∣sall peace to the whole world, sent his Ambassadours into Syria and Aegypt, to conclude an amytie and peace with ye Princes and Chiefe Rulers of the Infideles, to the ende that they should the better vse and entreate ye Christians liuing vnder their subiection. Which he obteined, inso∣much that Aaron the high Caliph of Persia and Arabia) who not longe afore, rufflingly inuadyng the Prouinces of Asia that were vnder the Constantinopolitane Em∣pire with CCC.M. men, had enforced and by compulsi∣on dryuen Nicephorus the emperour to redéeme and (as it were) to fere peace at his hands, by paying yéerely an annuall fée in gold) from thenceforth not onely not infes∣ted and vexed ye Christians, but also gaue yéerely a great Masse and summe of moneye to the reliefe of those poore Captiues that liued vnder his rule, and also sent his Am∣bassadours with great rewardes to King Charles. For when Aaron had with many ouerthrowes and pillages miserably afflicted and frusshed the Romane empyre, sur¦pryzed and taken Tyana where he erected and dedicated a temple vnto Mahomet & an infinite numbre of townes moe: Nicephorus séeinge his matters goe to wrecke, and distrustinge any better fortune, sent his Letters to the Arabian to obteyne and request a peace accordinge to the tenour folowinge. Why tho shouldest thus vniustlie warre againste
me and my dominions sythens I haue not wronged nor offended thée, or who they be that counsaile thee therunto I know not, neither do I se any cause reasonable to moue thée, vnles it be peraduenture, because thou hast a delight and pleasure in murther, robberie and rapine. For that thou doest it for religion sake, thou canst not pretend a ny excuse, sithens Machomet thy high Prophet, commaū¦deth you to vse and accoumpt al Christians as Brothers. Doest thou thinke that Almightie God the creatour of all thinges and the staie of both the People, whome he hath created and made after his owne similitude and lykenes, is delighted with effusion and shéeding of innocent bloud? God forbid. For your Prophet Mahomet did not com∣maund you to offre vnto him any such sacrifice or satisfac∣torie expation. Or else perchaunce doest thou inuade ye territories and prouinces belonginge to other men, for some néede and want of Syluer, Golde and such other thinges? But alas, there is no such store of these thinges with vs? yea all precious iewelles and wares that are rare and hard to be gotten, are among you in great plen∣tie. But if there be any thinge in our Countreys yt may do thee pleasure, why doest thou not aske it fréendly, and we will bestow the same vpon the without delaye moste louingly. If thou care not for man nor any force ye mor∣tall man can annoye thee with all, yet know thou that there is a God, which séeth and remembreth right and wronge. For sythens we be mortall, it is not comely nor fitte for vs to beare immortall grudge and endlesse ene∣mitie one toward an other, & in that poinct to resemble & imitate the Diuell, which euer spighteth at mans felicity and soulehealth and is at perpetuall warre with all man∣kinde. With these lettres, sent not without rewardes and sumptuous presentes Aaron being appeased, sent agayn many presentes and gyftes to Nicephorus, & concluded a
peace with hym vpon a condition, that the Emperour should pay yéerely vnto hym xxx .M. Crownes, and thrée for his owne head, and as many for his Sonne and that he should not reedifie nor repayre such Townes as were rased and wasted by the saracenes. But in the perfour∣mance of this agreement, there was les faith in ye Greke then in the Barbarian. For Nicephorus after the depar∣ture of the Saracenes out of those townes, immediatly re∣edified and fortyfied them. Which dealyng when Aaron vnderstood, he furnished out an other Armye into Grecia, which tooke Thebes: and sendinge a Nauy into Cyprus, subuerted the Churches and expulsed the Cyprians. And when Aaron had raigned xxiij. yéeres he payed his debte to Nature, after whom succéeded in the Pontificate his Sonne Muamat. Who fallynge at mortall debate with his Brother Halad, and with him coapynge in conflicte wherein his side went to wrack (Fortune more fauoring his Brothers part) grew to a composition wt hym, yt they twaine should ioyntly wt egal authoryty (hauing both one and the same tytle or style) enioy the Empire. Then ther were created foure Tyrauntes whereof one had for his share Spayne, an other Aphrica, the third Aegipt and the fourth Syria and Palestina. Wherevpon, the Sarace∣nical power began to decline, & for awhile ye affayres of ye Orient were indyfferently quiete among the Saracenes. And Muamat the Caliph of Syria woulde not now haue his imperiall Seat at Damasco, but buylded a newe citie néere where olde Babilon once stoode, and called it Baga∣dat, and it constituted the Pontificall Sea of Syria and all the Orient: For the Persians were yet vnder his rule & iurisdiction. The Aegiptian kept his residence at his Me∣tropolitane Citie of Cayre: whiche was (as before wee haue shewed) buylded néere the place where olde Mem∣phis earst stood. Which after the Sea royall was in it ap∣poyncted
and kepte, so encreased, that at this daye it is thought to be one of the greatest Cities in the whole Worlde: the chiefe Sea of Aphrica was accounted by Elagleb to be at Caioran, whiche Citie was builte in Affrica when Ottmen had the regiment and gouer∣naunce of the Empyre, and is distaunte from the Citie of Tunice about an hundreth Myles, and from the Sea thyrtie and sixe. Spaigne although it obeyed & had in it many kings, yet they all acknowledged the Byshop of Marrocco for their Diocesan: whiche is a Citie of Mauritanie Tingi∣tana. He that gouourned Assyria was called the Caliph, whiche name signyfieth a successoure: because he boasted and bragged himself to be the Successoure of Mahomet. The Aegiptian Byshoppe was called the Sultane, and hee of Caioran, (lyke as the Assyrian dyd) named him∣selfe a Caliph: and hee of Marrocco by the auncient name of the Founder and buylder of that Citie, was named a Miralmumine. Vnder these, there also arose certayne other lesse Kingdomes in Affrica: as the Kyngdome of Tunice, of Tripolis, of Algeria, of Oran, of Fess: and an innumerable sorte moe, lesse then these. For as euerye one was Ruler ouer anye Citie or Prouince. So he called hymselfe Kinge of the same, and possessinge the Stile and name thereof, as due by in∣heritaunce, lefte and delyuered the same as it were by hand to his Succession and posterytie. But yet notwithstandinge all these Kinges agnized and acknowledged some of these forenamed Byshops: and as euerie one fauoured thys Byshoppe or that, so in hys quarrell dyd he make Warre with the Kings of the other faction. Which sedicious discordes and mul∣titude of Tyrantes so appaired & weakened the power of the Saracenes that after the regiment of the aforesayde Byshoppes, they so decreased and theyr force so
was enféebled, that at length the name of Saracenes gaue place and was almost cleane eatē vp of the Turkes: and the state of their Empyre was at this time through the perturbation and burlyburly about the soueraigntie, so obscured and vnknowen, that no certaintie in the suc∣cession of their Empyre can be had, no not among their owne writers. Neuerthelesse, wee obseruing the due order of tymes, will as briefely as may be, compre∣hende all such thinges as are confusedly written by di∣uerse Authors, concerning the actes and gestes by them atchieued. In the tyme that this Muamat the Sonne of Aaron ruled Assyria, and Michael the Sonne in law of Nice∣phorus (expulser of Leo out of Armenia) was Empe∣rour of Constantinople, one Thomas brued a great gar∣boyle and commotion.Thomas a ranke sedi∣cious trai∣tor and fil∣thy villain. Of whom the report and fame is tolde after two wayes. Some saye he came of a very poore and base Parentage, and that he lyued long tyme in much pouertie and indigence, faine to get his lyuing with his handie labour, and sometyme with seruile drud∣gerie. Afterward, abandoning his natiue Countrey and comming to Constantinople, was retained in the ser∣uice of an Alderman of the Citie where the gracelesse verlet so much abused himselfe with carnall lust and vi∣cious life, that he committed adultrie with his Mistresse, and dubbed the Alderman his maister, Knight of the common Hall. Which lewde pranke being detected and come to light, Thomas partly for starke shame and ig∣nominie and partly for feare of the paynes and punish∣ment appoynted by Law for suche as he was, fledde to the Saracenes: for whose Diuelishe deuises he was as fit an Organe and Instrument as any in the worlde: with whom, he was had in a great credite, speciallye after that his conuersation and behauiour a long tyme contynued and shewed among them (for he had nowe
dwelled among them .xxv. yéeres) had geuen sufficient testimonie & put them in an assured opiniō of his fidelitie towarde them. Insomuch that renouncing and aposta∣ting his Christianitie and abiuring the holy Religion of the Christians, he embraced the horrible doctrine of Mahometicall Religion. And beyng by them appoynted Capitane of a competent Crew of warlike Souldiours was sent against the Christians. For he had promised vnto them, that if they would furnishe him out with some competent power, he woulde vndertake to subdue the Romane Empyre into their handes. And least the Chri∣stians should haue any mistrust & diffidence in him thus working and contriuing the Toyle of their confusion, or peraduenture taking him as a straunger & forayner giue no credite to his wordes, he named himself Constantine, the sonne of Irene. Which Constantine in very déede (for his crabbed nature and peruerse maners) his mother lōg before had bereft of both his eyes and of the Empire also, and was then dead. Some others there be, which do affirme that this Tho∣mas was whilome in the house of one Bardanius surna∣med Turcus, together with Michael and Leo. At what time soiourning at a place called Philomelium, & seeking by all meanes how to make himselfe Emperour, he disco∣uered his counsaile and opened the very bottome of his stomacke to a certaine Monke skilfull in the prediction of fortunes and things to come, to which deuise and plat he made Leo Armenus priuie. Vnto whome the Monke tolde, that if he first aspired to the Empyre, he should loose both hys eyes and his worldly dignitie: but of them, that brought hym his horse, the first and second should enioy the Diademe, and the thirde should bee proclay∣med Emperour: but not hable to compasse and throughly bring about, his desired purpose, he should shortly pe∣rishe and be brought to confusion.
The first was Leo, the second Michael, and the third this Thomas whom Leo the Emperour made Colonell ouer the Band of his Confederates. Which Leo, when Tho∣mas vnderstoode to bée slaine by Michael, he partly to reuenge the death of him through whose beneuolence & goodwill he had bene promoted to diuerse dignities, and partlie to ease his owne Stomacke and bringe about the effect of his malicious mynde (for Michael and he coulde neuer agrée but maligned one an other euen from their Adolescencie) raysed warre agaynst Michael, and first found the meanes to inueigle and rayse vp the Orientall power (among whom he lyued) to take part wyth hym. Thus he gathered together an armye not of weaklings and vnexpert Souldiours, or of a fewe in number, but huyge, Populous and hardie, of Saracenes, Moores, Indians, Medes, Persians, Assyrians, Armenians, Chaldees, Iberians, Zigians, Cabirians and diuerse other Nations. Of whom, some by compulsion accom∣panied hym in that Warre, some for good will, some in hope of spoyle, and some for a rooted malice and ha∣tred against Michael, who for his froward nature and peruerse manners was generally hated of all men. For Thomas although he was lame on one of his féete, and a Barbarian borne, yet for his gray heares and auncient age he was reputed among them venerable and wor∣shipfull, in famylier talke and conference very curte∣ous and affable (whych are the thinges that most of all wynneth the heartes of Souldiours) and for bodely strength not inferiour to any. He thus furnished with an armie of Saracenes, to whom he had promysed the Constantinopolitane Em∣pyre, and also with a great power of Christians which ventured life limme and goods with him, violently inua∣ded and forcibly got the possessiō of the Orient. And bring∣ing vnder his obedience the exacters of publique tributes
with great statelynesse of minde, folowed the chase of good fortune now seruing his turne and smyling vppon hym, Within a while, of a low Haskerd became a great Ruler and of a weake mungrell Pezaunt a mighty Potentate, by whom all Asia was with spoiling and pillage misera∣bly afflicted. Some Cities for feare ioygned syde with him, and conformed themselues to his humour. Some because they would not reuolte from theyr true Liege the Emperour, were spoyled and the inhabitauntes caryed awaye Captyue. So that there were none in all Asia but only the Opsicians and Armenians which continued in their true allegiance. For which gratuitie & constant obedience, the Emperour released and frankly remitted vnto thē their publique tribute called Fumariū. But Thomas was so puffed vp wt this successe, yt he pre∣sumptuously tooke vpō him ye name of Emperour: & was crowned with ye Diademe at Antioche, by Iob Pastour or Bishop at that time of the Antiochene Congregatiō: whom he (to requite one good turne for another) adopted for his Sonne, and made as his fellowe and Coadiutour in the administration of the Empyre, and then chaun∣ging his owne name called himselfe Constantine the Sonne of Irene the Empresse. The Emperour knowing of this new stirre and com∣motion made preparation for warre: and sent one of his Lordes with an Army nothing equall (God wot) nor of power to match and encounter with his enemies: which was by Thomas discomfited and cleane ouerthrowē. Af∣ter this, méeting with the Romane Fléete, tooke ye same, and with .lxxx.M. men tooke his way to Abydus, which is a Citie of Asia the lesse, standing vpon the Sea syde, spoyling and destroying all where he went, & burning to ashes not only poore vplādish villages, but goodly towns and stronge Cities. And from thence in a very darke nyghte transfreted into Thracia, where many of the
Emperours Souldiours reuoulted and fled dayly vnto hym. He put to flight and draue downe all the Emperors power sent against hym. Wherof were chief Capitaines Olbian and Catacella, and (lyke a ragyng Streame, vio∣lently runnyng downe from a Hyll) profligated both by Sea and Land and bore downe before him, an other wel apoynted Nauy, manned out lykewise by ye emperour a∣gainst him. He burst asunder the yron chayne that went ouerthwart the Hauen & so layd siege to the citie both by Sea and land. But preuailyng nothing that way, he de∣termyned to winne his purpose by long siege, and fortifi∣yng his Campe in very good order, sent parte of his army to subdue ye Townes lying by ye Coast of Euxine. This doone, with the rest of his power (which was very great) he on euery side beclipped the citie with a mighty oppug∣nation and gaue thereto a terrible battery. But by the valyaunt courage of the Defendauntes, all his attemptes were frustrate. And his Nauy on ye Sea by force of tem∣pest was dispersed and disseuered, so that he was fayne to brynge his hoast back agayne into Asia tyll the wynter were passed. The Spring folowyng, he agayne retourned to the same siege: but Michael being now better furnished and prouided then hee was before both with a Nauy of tall Shippes to scowre the Coastes and kéepe the Seas, and also with an army of lusty souldiours by land, first assaied by diuers slights to vndermine Thomas his souldiours & to sollicite them to renownce and forsake their Capitaine but al was in vayne. Wherfore setting all the Gates of ye citie open, he sodenly with all his company issued out and set vpon Thomas suspectyng no such pretence and mat∣ter, and him there discomfited, and his whole Fléete on the Sea also. There was one Gregory, Cosen to Leo late Emperor, who with a crew of good fighting Souldiours ayded Tho¦mas,
but now séeinge the worlde thus tourned, separated foorthwith his Souldiours aparte from the residue, in hope thereby to wynne the Emperours fauour and set vpon Thomas behinde. Whiche when Thomas espyed, beyng nothing therewith discouraged, nor yet therefore remoouing his stronglye lodged Campe from the Citie, set vpon Gregorie with parte of hys Army and him dis∣comfited, who for his sauegard flying away, he caught in the chase and put to death. Then spéeding himselfe into his Camp agayne, he addressed his letters abroad into all quarters, vntruly makyng report that he had gotten the vpperhand against Michael in battayle: and sent for the Nauy that lay at Berytum, wherein were of Gallayes and Hulkes to the number of CCC.L. Sayle, with all expedition to come vnto him, as though the matter should foorthwith be tryed likewise by Sea. Which drifte and commaundement when the Admyralles and Capitaines of the Romane Nauy vnderstoode and knew, they set vp∣pon them at vnwares by night in the roade, when they lay at Anker, and with their sodayne comming, so scarred and affrayed the Mariners that they were at their wittes ende and knewe not how vpon such a sodayne to defend themselues: so yt there many of them were by ye Imperi∣als taken, and many burnt, and very few escaped, which beyng quicke of sayle gott away and ioyned themselues to the other Army that was on the land. While this terrestriall army lay before Constantino∣ple, without any notable battayle sauing only manylight skirmishes, and small bickeringes, wherein somtimes Fortune smyled and somtime frowned vpon either part, the same and reporte thereof was spread and bruted throughout the Worlde. In somuche that Mortago King of Bulgarie, (notwithstandinge the Emperoure for gréedinesse and miserable sparing of his money as he
was by nature most couetous and a néere Prince, than∣kyng hym for his good wyll, had before refused his ayde offeryng to assist him, saying that he had no néede therof) partlye because hee was desirous of Warre and spoyle of his enemies, and partly to confirme the former thrée yeeres League made with Leo Armenus, marched with an Armye agaynste Thomas, and him in a place called Cedocto, not farre from Constantinople where the two armyes met, in Battayle ouercame & vanquished, wher∣in many a man was slayne, and after the ende thereof retourned home with many Prisoners and rich Booties. When the Nauye that Thomas had left at the Siege heard of this notable discomfiture and ouerthrowe, they all reuoulted from Thomas and submitted themselues to the Emperour. Thomas gatheringe together the rem∣naunt of his Armye that escaped vnkylled at the last con∣flict with Mortago, conducted them into a playne Féelde called Diabasis, distaunt certayne Furlonges from the Citie, a place verye commodious and fit for excursions, and for plentie of water very profitable. Where hee a∣new encamped. From thence makinge vagaries and roades, he wasted and despoyled al the Emperours sump∣tuous buyldings and banqueting houses of pleasure stan∣ding in the Suburbes of the Citie. The Emperoure ha∣uinge his Armye euery daye more and more encreased, strake vp Alarme and gaue the charge vpon him in thrée seuerall parts, whereby he throughly put al Thomas his Armye to flight. For Thomas before had geuen com∣maundemente to his men, that at the firste onsette, they should retyre and make a shewe as though they fled, and afterward vpon the sodayne tourne agayne and recharge vpon their enemies. After this discomfiture many of his men fledde to the Emperour. Thomas with a few of his adherents came in safetie to Adrianople and his adoptiue Son Anastasius escaping also by flight, tooke for his saue∣garde
the Castel of Byzia. After whom the Emperour without delay making pursuite, went firste to Adriano∣ple where Thomas was. And least the Scythians dwel∣lyng thereabout, should learne the knowledge of such en∣gyns and Arrtyllerie as serue for Battery and oppugna∣tion of Cities, he determyned by famine to driue them to surrender and yéelde, and so beclipped it rounde aboute with a strong Siege. The Citie was well walled and beside that, surely en∣trenched and fortefied with Bulwarkes. But they were so pinched with Famine, that all their victualles beinge spent, they secretly had conference with Michael and be∣ing at a poyncte and composition with him for pardon of this their rebellyous conspiracie, deliuered Thomas into his handes. The Emperour now hauinge in his possessi∣on his deadly enemie,Ende of Traytours obseruing ye auntient custome of o∣ther Emperors in lyke cases, first made him to prostrate himselfe vpon the Pauement and Stones, whiche done, he set his féete vpon his necke, and trodde vpon hym. Then he caused his Féete and handes to be cutte of, and so setting him vpon an Asse, cōmaunded him to be caryed about the Campe, for euery man to wonder at. Where∣at the miserable caytife said in howling sort these words: Haue mercie & compassion vpon me yu yt art ye true King. And when he was about, vpon ye Emperours interroga∣tories & motions to haue bewraied & accused certen of his famyliers, as pryuie and of counsel with him in this ruf∣fling rebellion, the Emperour being aduised by Exam∣bulius one of his Nobles, that no credite ought in such ca∣ses to be geuen to a professed enemie, accusing the appro∣ued fréendes of his Maiestie, would not heare him. And so geuing order for his execution, caused him, (longe lan∣guishing in terrible forments) to be put to death. They that fled to Byzia, folowing the example of the Adrianopolitanes, tooke Anastasius and deliuered hym
bounde to the Emperour, who also was put to execution. This end had Thomas, whose historie (although he were no Saracen) we thought good not héere to omit, because he chiefely atchieued and perpetrated the same by the aide and power of the Saracens, insomuch that he might right well séeme to haue bene the Emperour and Ringleader of the Saracens. While these things were in doing in the Orient, the Saracens in Spaine, most arrogantly by their Ambassa∣dours demaunded of Ramire King of Asturians (who suc∣céeded Alphonsus Castus) ye Tribute which king Mau∣regat was wont to pay. Vnto whom Ramire by the ad∣uise of his priuie Counsell aunswered, that he had leifer dye a hundreth deathes then so to doe. And forthwith le∣uying an armie marched against them wasting and de∣stroying their Territories and Countreyes, as farre as Nagiera. Betwene whom and the Saracens was fought at Aluelda a sore battayle, and sorer had bene if the night had not made an ende of the same for that daye, wherein forasmuch as the Saracenes were lyker to haue the vic∣torie: Ramire by night with his companie retyred vnto a certaine hill néere Clauigium: and there greatly fearing the doome of Fortune the next day, and what woulde be∣fyde on him and his, after so vnluckie a beginning, sought his onely refuge at Gods handes, bestowing (both he and all his retinue) the whole night almost in watching and prayer to Almightie God for his assistaunce in that theyr gréeuous extremitie. Then and there (as some do saye) Saint Iames the Apostle séemed personally to appeare vnto him, promysing him his helpe and furtheraunce, wherevpon Ramire the next day comming into the field in good aray of battaile, against his enemies, with an as∣sured confidence of Diuine helpe and assistance, the sayde holy Apostle Saint Iames was sene in the battayle, sit∣ting vpon a white horse and bearing in his hande a redde
Crosse, and that in the same Battaile were slayne of Sa∣racenes. lxx. thousand. Then were Albaida, Clauigium, Calagurra, and many other townes thereabout regained by the Christians: In token and remembrance of which victorie by the Diuine assistance of Celestiall presence atchieued,By whom & whervpon ye Knightes of ye order of S. Iames were first instituted. the Noble order of the Knightes of Saincte Iames was by the King instituted. The Saracenes inhabyting the West parte of Spayne where Valentia standeth, pestred with multitude of peo∣ple, and considering that ye Countrey which was vnto thē for their habitation allotted, was neither fruitfull nor wealthye, desired their highe Prince of Marrocco in Mauritania Tingitania whose name was Amerumen, to permit and lycense them to séeke some other place of dwelling, where they might more commodiously rouste: and whyther they might cary theyr people, and famylie and plant themselues more to their cōtentacions. Whose requestes their Prince, as one desirous of new altera∣tions and chaunges of the world graunted: and furni∣shing them out of hande wyth a Hauie of Brigandines and Gallayes, partlye because he woulde staunch their gréedie appetites wyth other mennes goods, and part∣ly because he woulde by this meanes trie and séeke out whether there were any fruitefull Soyle and fertile Island, whereinto he might conueniently deryue a Colonie of his owne people, sent them to the Isles of the Orient. They landed first in Corsica, but thence they were repulsed and dryuen awaye by Abdemar, whom Pipine the Sonne of Charles the Great Kyng of Italie, had sent wyth the Genaway fléete agaynst them. In which conflicte, Abdemar most valiauntly and manfully fighting was slayne. From thence say∣lyng to the Isles of Grecia (whych were spoyled and disfurnished of the Hauie appoynted to kéepe them, through the meanes of the Garrison that tooke parte
with Thomas) they sacked and robbed almost euerye one of them vnmercifully. Among all the rest, lyking Creta best, both for fertilitie of the Countrey, and hole∣somenes of Ayre, they laded theyr Shippes with pil∣lage and retourned for that yéere home againe, and in the Springe folowing, with .xl. tall Shippes well man∣ned and appoynted for the Warres, they hauyng a prosperous gale of wynde came straight agayne to Creta. And setting theyr men on lande at a Promon∣torie called euer after Carax, set theyr Shippes on fire, and there pitching their Tentes, strongly entren∣ched them selues, callyng the place by the name of Cau∣dax. Against whom, the Emperour with all expedicion sent a power vnder the conduct of Photinus Liuetenaunt of the Orient, and one Damianus who in a certaine skir∣mish against them, was slaine, whose death so much, a∣stonned and discouraged the residue, that they trusted to then legges and ranne awaye. Then there came vnto them a certaine Monke out of the mountaines of that Island, who tolde them that the place which they had cho∣sen to builde a Citie vpon, was nothing fit for such a purpose: and withall, shewed vnto them a place, named Candaces, in all poinctes farre more commodious. Where they builded a Citie, which should be as the Ca∣stle and fortresse of the whole Isle, and called it Candie. Out of which they made Roades and inuasions into the whole Isle, insomuch that within a shorte space they brought the same wholly into theyr subiection, dispossessing the inhabitauntes and carying the Citizens away into Captiuitie. At which time, Cyrillus Bishop of Gortyne, suffred Martirdome for the profession and testi∣mony of Iesus Christ, our only Sauiour. An other nauie of thē about the same time, attempted once againe ye win∣ning of Sardinia & Corsica: the which was encoūtred and vanquished about Sardinia by the power of Charles, the
brother of Pipine, being vnder ye conduct of the Countie Bucharede, & v. M. of the saracens slaine, & all the rest of them afterward by him cleane driuen out of Corsica. Pipine hauing warres with the Venetians, the Sa∣racens in Spaine, taking occasiō by the discorde and dissen∣sions of the Christians to bring their own matters to de∣sired effect, sodainly inuaded Sardinia, from whence not long afore, they had bene repulsed with a notable slaugh∣ter & losse of their people. But staying not lōg there, they sodainely departed thence: cutting their course directly to Corsica. And sacking ye Citie Aleria, beside ye Bishop and a few other old mē, all the other multitude & commō sort they caried thence away wt them. The Emperour Mi∣chael, sent out another Nauie wherof was Captain Cra∣terus the Lieutenant of Cyberetes, against the Saracenes which rousted & nestled in Crete. Who with .lxx. Sayle of his owne and an infinite number of Galleys of other Islandes, well manned & appointed, couragiously landed in Crete: where he found the Saracens neuer a whit aba∣shed of his arriuall, neither refusing by dent of sword and stroke of battaile to darraigne their quarell. Whervpon, they mette together in a place méete for such a purpose: where betwene thē was fought a sharpe and cruell Bat∣taile, lasting from the dawning of the day till Noone, in such doubtfull fortune that hard it was to iudge, whether part in th'end would cary away the victory. But at length toward Euening the Saracens were ouercome and fled: wherof many were slain in the fielde but moe, throwing away their weapons were taken: insomuch that yt daye theyr Citie was lyke to haue beene taken and wonne, if it had not béene so néere nighte. Which night and victorie was the destruction and ouerthrow of ye Greekes as afterward shall appéere. For being now in their iolitie and pryde, hopyng the next day folowing wt small labour or none at all, to bring those fewe of theyr enemyes
yet left a liue into their power) gaue themselues to bi∣ynge, ryot and bellychere as though they had not bene in their enemies precincte and daunger but at home in their own houses, taking no regard to set heir watch kept, or any other expedient order obserued: Insomuch that minding no other thing but sléepe, ease and stouth (the vt∣ter ouerthrowers of al goodnes) they were set vpon in the dead time of the night,Dronkenes the cause of a generall mishap and slaughter. snortinge with their dronken nowles, by the Saracenes (who espyed the aduantage and oportunytie) and were slayne euery Mothers sonne, not somuch as a Messenger left aliue to carry home newes of their yll spéede. Onely Craterus the Captaine, embar∣kinge himselfe in a Marchauntes Craer, sought to saue his life. But when the Chieuetayne of the Saracenicall Armye after longe séekinge and tumblinge among the dead Carkasses and Prisoners could not finde him, know∣ing him then to be escaped and fled, sent in all post hast to pursue and hunt him out. Who being taken and appre∣hended in the Ile of Coo, was hanged vpon a Gibbet. The Emperour Michael hearing these newes com∣manded Orypha a wiseman and verie skilfull in Marti∣all affaires to gather together the Praetorian Legion (which because euery souldiour of that Legion had for his wages xl. Crownes was then called Quadragenaria) and with them he spedde himselfe against the saracenes, whome he greatly endamaged, somtimes killinge them as they raunged licentiously and excursiuely abroad into other Ilandes for spoyle, partly breaking out vpon them out of Stales and Ambushes, layd for the nonce to intrap them; and partly by open conflictes & pitched battailes. He also cooled the courage and abated the pride, & moderate audacitie of them that vsurped the Countrey of Crete. At this time, there was one Euphemius, Capitayne of a certayne Band of Souldiours in Sicilie who not ha∣ble to master the lasciuious passions of inordinate loue,
perforce tooke a virgin out of the Cloyster wher she was professed Nun, and had vowed chastytie from her tender age,Inferiours take exam∣ple of their Superiors and her by the example of his Lorde and Maister the emperour (who also had aforetime perpetrated ye lyke e∣normity) rauished and carnally knew against her consent and wyll. For whiche impyous acte, her Brothers made complaynt to the Emperour with humble request ye this detestable exāple might not escape ye penalty & punishmēt due for such a villanye. Whereupon the Emperour sent Commaundement to the Regent of Sicilie, that if this were true) he should slitte and cut of Euphemius his nose. Euphemius vnderstanding what sentence and iudgment the emperour had geuē against him, entred into a conspi∣racie with his owne Souldiours and other Capitaynes besides, and they altogether fled to Ambulak Bysshop of the Saracenes in Mauritania. Promysing vnto him that if he might by his help and meanes be proclaymed Em∣perour of Romanes, he would delyuer and bring all Sy∣cile in subiection vnder him, and woulde moreouer paye vnto hym a great Tribute. Whiche offer and condition Ambulak not refusing, inuested hym with the tytle of Romane Emperour, and furnished him with a great Ar∣mye, by meanes whereof he wan the possession of Sicile: but Euphemius making his progresse and walkes about Sicile in the habit and stately gesture of Emperour, was at the Citie of Syracuse slaine. Then began the Saracens to set foote into Calabria and diuers other partes of Italye, making therin great hauock and spoyle: of whom, one Nauy perished and was cast a∣way about the Coastes of Sardinia, the other (for there were two sent out) in fléeinge wyse retourned home. Whiche caused Ambulak to conclude a peace with the french Kinge. But within a while after, Bernard the Sonne of
Pipine raigning in Italy, ye Saracens despising and reiec∣ting the peace that Ambulak had made, inuaded Corsica: who in their returne homwarde beinge laden and full fraught with booties and great store of Pyllage, were in the mayne Sea encountred by one Ermengarius, a man of great power in ye greater of ye Baleare Ilands, & to ye be∣hoofe of ye king of Italy maintained a garison ther, by whos prowesse the Saracenes at the first onset were cleane dis∣comfited and put to flight, and diuers of their Shipes in∣tercepced and taken, beside 500. Christian Prisoners in them, which were rescued and saued. Notwithstandinge all this misfortune and discomfiture, the Saracens would rest, but coasting about Italie with their Fléet sodaynely landed and surprised a towne, in the Coast of Hetruria, named Centumcel, whiche nowe is called the olde Citie. Which being so taken, they sacked and with Sword and Fire defaced most rufully. From thence holding on their vioage toward Narbon they destroyed, haryed and spoy∣led the Country al about, and that doone inuaded Sardinia where they practised all kinde of wast and robbery. But as they fetched their vagaries and licencious roades, Er∣mengarius agayne with the power of the Ile by hym assembled, vpon a sodayne gaue the charge vpon them, put them to flight, and with great slaughter on their side, draue them to the Sea, where for hast as they thicke and thréefolde striued, who might first get a boorde they were killed downe right at the pleasure and full desire of their Enemies. Being thus gréeuously afflicted and hauynge lost a great part of their Nauy, they waighed vp their Ankers and sayled into Africa. And they which were in Sycile, hearinge that the Venetians (to gratyfie the Con∣stantinopolitan Emperoure) vnto whom that Ile was subiect) purposed to send a Nauy against them, filled their Bagges and stuffed their powches with such spoyle and pray as they lyked and went their way.
After this, Haido whom Lewes Kinge of Fraunce and the Emperour had made Ruler of Aquitanie by trea∣cherye and guylefull dealinge surprysed and ruffled the Citie Ausonia, and because he was not of power hym∣selfe to keepe the same, he procured ayde from the Spa∣nish Saracens, by whose helpe he spoyled farre and néere both Aquitanie and the hither part of Spayne. Whose purpose and pretence, Lewes within shorte space repres∣sed. And Alphonsis surnamed Magnus, Kinge of As∣turia and Lyon, néere to the riuer Duerro vanquished two Armies of the Saracenicall King of Toleto, whiche were thyther sent to besiege and oppugne the Citie of Lyon. Moreouer hee raysed the Siege that the Saracenes had bent agaynste Coimbra, and set the same frée from their dreadfull oppugnation. And when hee was in buyldinge the Citie of Zamorra, the same Saracenes vnder the conducte and leadinge of a Prophet of theirs, named Alchama, came agaynst hym, whom he vanquished, and of them slew a great number, and among the rest their Capitayne Alchama: and tooke Abboaline prisoner,A Churche buylt with the money ye a Saracen payde for his raun∣some. a Capitayne of great fame ann esti∣mation among them, who raunsomed himselfe for two C.M. Ducates and so was delyuered. With which mo∣ney the Kinge newe buylded the famous Temple of S. Iames in Ouiedo of Marble, whiche was before but of Bricke. But in Italie the Saracens had taken Palermo the most famous and noble Citie in all Sicile, neyther was there any man that woulde take vppon him to resiste their fu∣rious attemptes or once goe about to preuent or represse their malycious deuoyres, sauynge onely Boniface Countée of Corsica, who accompaignied with his Bro∣ther Beatrius and a fewe other of the Barons and Lords of Hetruria sayled into Aphrica and landynge betwéene Vtica and Carthage slewe so manye of his Enemyes
in foure cruell Battayles, that like as the Carthaginians whilome were enforced to call home Anniball out of Ita∣lie, so the Saracenes were faine to call home their people that were then in Sicile: and so Sicile was deliuered from the pestiferous oppression and extreme daunger of Sara∣cenicall Hostilitie. After which victories gloriously by Boniface atchieued, he with great foyson and plenty of pray and riche booties retourned home with his victori∣ous Nauie out of Africa. But the Saracens could not in any sauce abyde to be long quiet, but within a while, wt a greater power and puyssaunce then at any time before, they inuaded Italie, and againe tooke the Citie Centum∣cell.Rome spoy∣led by the Saracens. From thence in post hast with a running Campe they spedde them toward Rome, and with little labour got the possession of Vaticanum, and after they had spoy∣led the goodly Church of S. Peter (which standeth in that place) and takē away the Doores of Syluer which it had, of price and valew inestimable, they prophaned it with fire and sworde most sacrilegiously. And tarying there certaine dayes they were fully bent to haue layd Siege to the Citie, but hearing that an armie was leuyed and in comming against them out of Lumbardie they departed and ruthfully wasted al the Suburbes and villages néere the Citie that laye betwéene the two wayes Appia and Latina. They spoyled and robbed the Cathedral Church of S. Paule in the way called Via Ostiensis, and consu∣med the most part of it with fire: from thence turning in∣to Latina Via, they spoylingly rushed into the precincte and Chase of Cassinum, and robbed the Temple of Cassi∣num of all the holy Ornamentes, Vestures, Reliques, and Gyftes whereof it had marueilous great store, and vtterly ruynated a great part therof. Then kéeping their way by the right side of the riuer Leire, they spedde them apace toward the Sea, in such populous Plumpes, that they were like vnto a violent swifte storme or terrible
whirlewinde: and fraughting their Shippes with their spoyles and booties, which lay there ready, they hoysed vp theyr Sailes and launched into the maine Sea. And in Hispaine, Abduramen King of Corduba en∣tring into the borders of Biskaye, fought most valiauntly and fiercely the space of a whole day with the Armies and power of Ordonius King of Lyon and Gartias & Igni∣genius of Biskaye: and fortune séeming for that daye to dispose and enclyne the victorie to neither party, departed the Battaile. Ordonius meaning to requite & pay home Abduramen, entred into his Countrey, and subuerted the Towne of Cintilia, which is now called Santiliana. But in Asia, Imprael ye Caliph of Syria, succéeding Mua∣mat, with a huige power brake into the confines and li∣mittes of the Romane Empyre. Against whom, the Em∣perour Theophilus marched with his royall Army, and hauing in his company two most valiaunt Capitaynes Theophobus and Manuel, in whose prowesse and dexte∣ritie in armes he reposed his whole trust and confidence, was fully resolued and determined to giue vnto him bat∣tayle: of whose approche and comming, Imprael béeyng certefied whether he did it vpon an arrogance & disdaine, or that he feared the euent and fortune of Battayle, lea∣uing behinde him one Abuzachar with .lxxx. thousande good fighting and well appointed men to try the quarell by stroke of mortall conflicte, departed and went hys way with part of hys Armye. The battayle béeyng ioyned and clasped together, and the Saracenes get∣ting the vpperhande, Theophilus wyth his Praetorian bande and two .M. Persians and Theophobus, escaped and attayned into the toppe of a little Hill, which be∣ing fiercely assayled and beset wyth Saracenes, whose onely desire was to take the Romane Emperour Pri∣soner, the Romane Souldiours most valiauntly figh∣ting for the sauegarde and incolumitie of theyr Lorde
and Maister the Emperours sacred Maiestie, defended. The conflicte continued, sharpely and desperately fough∣ten on both sides tyll the Euening. But as soone as night was come, Theophobus by a pretie fleight and Stra∣tageme deluded the Saracenes and brought themselues out of that present daunger and extremitie. For he com∣maunded his Souldiours, as loude as they coulde to shoute and make a noyse, and to sounde theyr Trum∣pettes and play vpon their Harpes and musicall Instru∣mentes, as thoughe there had come some freshe ayde and succour to releeue and rescue them at that present pynche of distresse. Which deuise fell out accordyng to his first imaginacion. For the Saracenes surely think∣ing that more ayde was come, and fearing leaste they should bée entrapped and on euery syde enclosed by their enemyes, discamped and remooued sixe Myles fur∣ther of, and so the Emperour with all hys retinewe and Hoast being delyuered out of daunger, came safe to the residue of hys Armye, whiche saued themselues by flight at the last conflicte. For which politique Stra∣tageme and wyse shifte, the Emperour made Theo∣phobus chiefe Generall and Lieutenaunt of the whole Armie. And the yeere folowing, makyng another voyage and expedition against the Saracenes, vanqui∣shed them in a notable Battayle at Charsianum, and so wyth twentie and fiue thousande Prisoners he re∣tourned home. Agayne, the thyrde yeere he leuyed his power and marched against them and ioyning Battayle with them was so circumuented and beset with his enemyes that he had almost fallen into theyr handes. Which daunger of the Emperour, Manuel chiefe Capitaine of the Ar∣my vnder him perceyuing, encouraged and incensed the mindes of his Souldiours with a vehement Oration
and made a way perforce to the place where the Em∣perour was distressed,A pitifull state. and hym (béeyng nowe wearied and vtterly dispayring of any escape or remedie, yet mynding to abyde the vttermost hazarde, rather then he woulde dismaye and leaue his Souldiours comfort∣lesse through hys departure, saying that he woulde not by flight betray the lyues of his poore vassalles in∣to the mercylesse talauntes of that wicked generation) deliuered and brought out of that daunger, not with∣out, threates and menaces that he woulde kill him vn∣lesse he woulde consent to folow him openyng the way and passage for him to escape. And the fourthe tyme, both the Armyes wyth all theyr powers comming in∣to the fielde without any notable thing done worthie of remembraunce, retourned home. The fifte yeere, Theophilus leadyng his Armye farre within Syria, wasting and spoyling all the Countrey in hys waie, wanne and Conquered Zozopetra the Countrey and Seate of Impraell, which so nettled and chaufed Im∣prael, that he assembled all the power hee was hable to make wyth intent to inuade Amorium the Countrey of Theophilus. His Armye mette all together at Tharsus: whither when Imprael himselfe was come, he sent hys Sonne with parte of his Armye before, to skirmishe and dallye (as it were in the waye of an assaye) with the Romane Hoaste, whiche was lodged and emcaped at Dorylaeum thrée dayes iourney from Amorium. And vnto hym he appoynted tenne thousande Turkes and all the power of Armenia. Who beyng thus furnished and appoynted wyth men and armour and encamped at Drazymenum, Theo∣philus went against him and lodged his Hoaste in a place called Auzin, purposing before he woulde ioyne anye Battayle to espie and discouer the multitude and number of his enemyes.
Armye (for that the Saracenes as though they had bene a∣frayde, kept their heades within the walles of their citie) was lulled in securitie, geuynge no regarde to orderly behauiour, nor to the good keeping of their watch, the Sara∣cenes all in armure vppon the thirde day after the Siege was planted, whē al ye Romane Souldiours were assem∣bled & congregated together to héere diuine seruice (for it was vppon a Sundaye) setting open their Gates and is∣suing out sodaynlye, kylled and manquelled the Romans on euery side: insomuch that the Emperoure himselfe had much a doo to escape, loosing and leauyng behinde him all his carriage and prouision. And agayne within two yéeres next after, the Saracenes entred within the diion and lymites of the Romane Empire with xxx.M. men, wherefore Michael meaning to wynne his Spurres a∣gaine & to be euen wt the saracens for ye foyle lately taken at their handes, leuied an Army of xlv.M. Thracians and Macedonians, and marched against them. Which when they knew, by daungerous iourneyes and compendious pathes they preuented his purpose, settinge vpon him so∣daynly and at vnawares being in his iournay and out of order. Wherby he was discomfited and compelled to flée. And at that time, they saye that Michael had fallen into the handes of his Enemies, if Manuel had not ventu∣rously entred and violentlye broken into the breast of the Enemies Armye and disturbinge their araie delyuered him from daunger. Two yéeres after this, Mamume the Son of Imprael beinge Caliph of Syria, the Saracenes with an Armye of xl. thousand men spoyled and ouerrunne Armenia and all the Sea coastes cruelly. At whiche time, the Ca∣liph is reported to haue done as Xerxes longe afore did, commaunding the Sea to be whipped and beaten with Scourges, because it stopped his intent, that he could not
haue his will to go any further. Michael who could not with pacient minde brooke and digest these iniuries, sent his Vncle Petrona (Lieutenaunt of Thracia) with a great power against Mamume. Who encamped hym∣selfe in a certayne place called Lalacaeon, and settinge Stales and Ambushes on euery side to surprise and en∣trappe his foes when aduantage should be offered, prouo∣ked Mamume to the encountrie and battayle. Mamu∣me being thus beset, and on euery side circumuented by his Enemies, lyke vnto a Byrd in a Cage, or a Déere in a Buckstall, was at his wittes ende, not knowynge how to escape or shift hymselfe out of that imminent perill. And demaunding of one of the Romane captiues (whom he had taken Prisoner) the name of that Countrey and place wherein he had pight his Pauilyons and Campe, and by what name the riuer there harde by, was called, answere was made by the Prysoner, that the Countrey was called Lalacaeon, the place Ptoson, and the riuer Gyris. Whereby he presaged and by the appellacions of the same places (for hee was a man well séene in the Greeque and Latyne Tongues, and earnestlye geuen to ye study of Philosophy) immediatly coniectured ye those names portended his confusion and some notable ouer∣throwe of his people, and signified that hee and his rety∣new should be on euery side beset and caught lyke Fi∣shes in a Net by the Romanes. Notwithstandinge, he encouraged his men not to quayle and despayre, but to stande lustelie to their tackelynge and to determyne with themselues to withstand their Enemies. Therfore the next morning, as soone as the day appeared, well perceiuing himselfe to be hemmed in on euery side, he determined to séeke a way and egresse by that part and place which Petrona guarded, and therevpon geuing vn∣to
his men a watchword and token to geue aloude shout all at once,A Saracen Prince and all his host slayne. there set vpon his enemies. But séeing his at∣tempt and purpose to be all in vayne, he a litle retyred, & after a small breathing, gaue a sharpe and freshe onset a∣gayne, and vsing this order sundry tymes by startes ge∣uyng a blow and away agayne, at length desperatly with a vehement violence and force rushed into the middes of his enemyes, and was there slayne, both he and all his Hoast vtterly. His Sonne whom he had sent on rouing and spoyling with parte of his Armye, hearinge of his Fathers death and confusion, retyred in hast to Melitena. But he was pursued and taken by ye Capitaine of ye Charsian streicts, and presented to Petrona. This Mamume was surerly a man garnished and endued with many excelent quali∣ties and notable vertues.An example of great loue and libera∣litie toward learninge in a saracene. For beyng himselfe singuler∣lie well learned, he cherised and entyerlye loued all them that were learned, estéemyng and entertayning them ve∣ry honorable, as by that example following shal appeare, which for the worthynesse and commendacion thereof, I haue thought good héere to disciphere. There was in Constantinople (somtime called By∣zance) a certayne Philosopher named Leo, somtime by∣shoppe of Thesalonica, and now depriued from the Pr∣lacie and Bysshoprich therof by reason of a deuision and controuerse touching the hauyng and worshipping of I∣mages, which at that time merueilouslye frushed and dis∣turbed the Latine and the Greeke Church. Beinge for this cause thence exiled, hee came to Constantinople, where he hyered a poore Cotage, and set vp a Schole, pro∣fessing to traine and instructe such Scholers as resorted to him, in what Arte soeuer euery one was best disposed to learne. Insomuch that out of his pryuate Schoole ther came many notable Clarkes, very skilfull in the studies of Artes and Philosophy, and among the rest, it so chaun∣ced
about this time that a certayne young man one of his Scholers, hauinge by his Maisters industrious labour and diligence attayned to an exact knowledge and skyll of Geometrie, was taken Prisoner in the warres by the Saracens, & chaunced into ye seruice or rather seruitude of a noble man of great estemacion and name amonge them. Whom Mamume by report and common bruite hearing to be well séene in the Mathematicall Disciplines com∣maunded to be brought before him. And causinge hym in a disputation to be throughly apposed, found, that he so farre passed & surmounted the Arabian Geometricians, that of those thinges whereof they alone thought them∣selues to haue the vse and experience, he was well hable to alledge and bringe the proper reasons and causes. Mamume greatly wondring at his precise and profound knowledge (for he had thought that no nacion had had the skill of that Arte but the Arabians onely) asked him of whom he had learned his Arte, and whether his maister were yet liuing. The younge man aunswered, that his Maisters name was Leo, a poore man, and as yet vn∣luckie to the worldly goodes of Fortunes giftes and dis∣posicion, but geuen altogether to his Booke and Studie. Wherevpon Mamume straightwaies addressed his Let∣ters to Leo in effect as foloweth. Euen as the Trée is knowne by his fruict, so we by the Scholer doo well know the exelencie of the Maister. These therefore shalbe to requeste thée, that (forasmuche as God hath blessed thée with a gyft so incomperable, and sithence thou lyuest there in poore estate, vnknowne or at least vnregarded of thy Citezens and Countrey∣men, reapyng no fruicte of thy rare wisedome and super∣naturall speculation) thou wouldest daigne to come vnto vs, and make vs pertakers of thy admirable learninge. This doing, make thy sure accoumpt, that all the Sara∣cenicall nacion shall submit themselues vnto thée and be
readie at thy hest and commaundement, and thou shalt bée enryched with such rewardes, rychesse and reue∣nues, as neuer yet any man hath béene. These letters he delyuered vnto the young man to carie to Constan∣tinople, setting him frée at libertie and rewarding hym most honorably. When Leo had receiued these letters, he opened and tolde the whole matter to certayne of the Emperours familiers. And by this meanes bee became knowne to the Emperour, who appointing vnto him a competent stipend and pencion commaunded him to teache publikly. Mamume dispairing of Leo his comming, sent vnto him certayne Geometricall and Astronomicall questions and some of the other Sciences, desiring him therein to haue his resolution. The which beyng cunningly by Leo assoyled he sent backe againe to Mamume, wherevnto he had also annexed certaine tokens and Signes tou∣ching the prediction of future thinges. Which Letters when Mamume had read, it is sayde, that he was raui∣shed with suche an ardent desire and zeale toward Leo, that he exclaymed in thys sort: O happie and thrise hap∣pie are they I saye, (O Diuine Leo) which haue the compaignie and fruition of thy presence. Then foorth∣with he sent a solemne Ambassade with great rewardes and ryche presentes vnto the Emperour, and wrate hys Letters also vnto him as foloweth: I was fully deter∣myned (as it becommeth an vnfeigned friende) to haue come my selfe vnto thée: but sithens the waightie affai∣res of our Empyre and the gouernaunce of a most fierce and wylde people, by God committed vnto my charge (from whom all power and superioritie floweth) wil not so permitte: I am faine in my stéede to sende vnto thée my Ambassadours with request, that it may please thée to sende vnto mée Leo, a man endued wyth great sin∣gularitie in the knowledge of Philosophie and other
Sciences, soiourning and makyng his abode wythin thy Citie of Constantinople. That he dwelling a while wyth mée, may geue mee instructions and make me par∣taker of his doctrine,  feruently ena∣moured and as it were . Doe not (I pray thée) deferre the  my request because of any diuersitie  or for any vn∣kinde dealings between  deale with me herein like a friende. For  and curtesie wée will giue vnto thée a.M. It in  and wil enter into an infringible league and perpetuall amitie with thée and al thy Dominions. Which request the Emperour would not graunt, least the Sciences (for which the Romanes were renowmed and had in admiration among al Nations) should be com∣municated & discouered to the Barbarous people. Wher∣in he being a Greeque and a Christian, might full well haue learned at the handes of a barbarous person and Ido∣latrous Infidel to reuerence and condignely estéeme ver∣rue: which thing would God, Princes and noble men in this age, admonished by this goodly example would doe. For euer afterward, he had Leo in great honour, and pro∣moted him to great wealth and dignitie, and restored him againe to his See and Byshopprike of Thessalonica, where he was highly honoured and of al men reuerenced for that through his forecasting wyt & surpassing know∣ledge he conuerted and brought the land and grounde of Thessalonica from barainnesse & sterilitie, to fruitfulnes and fertilitie. But nowe it is time for vs to retourne to discourse of Occidentall matters. The Saracenes of Mauritania, transfreting out of Sicile (wherein they had taken and of longe tyme vsurped manye Townes) into Italie, vnder the guy∣ding and conducte of Saba, besieged Tareno. The Greeke and Venetian Nauies ioyning in one, arri∣ued
in Calabria, to reise the Siege and to rescew the Ci∣tie. Wherefore hearing Saba, seyning as though he had beene afraide, to th'intent he might the rather allure and prouoke the enemie to coape with him, reysed his Siege and discamped, and like as though he had bene loath to meddle, retyred into the region of Crotona: where béeing afterward assayled and set vpon, at the first brunt he dis∣comfited and put to flight the Greekes,Victory of saracens, o∣uer the Greekes and Venetians. and thē the whole puyssaunce of the Saracens was all bent & turned against the Venetians fighting and defending themselues man∣fully: and a few of them in number being by a Nauie so strong and mightie circumuēted, were partly slain, partly drowned, but the Venetians in that conflict perished and were brought to confusion euerichone, which victory set Saba so a flote & ingenerated in him such haultinesse and pride, that spedely coasting ouer the Ionian Sea, he arri∣ued in the coast of Illyria, practising therin along the pro∣uinciall borders great pillage and robberie, and hearing that the Venetian fléete was retourning homeward, la∣den with Wares out of Syria, be brought about his Na∣uie with all expedicion into the Bay of Trieste, and from thence insidiously and sodainly setting vpon them, spoyled and killed the Marchauntes and Mariners, and all the Rowers, their rooted hatred and spightfull rancour to∣ward ye Venetiā name was so vnappeaseable. Lewsing thence, he cut his course toward Aucon a noble Citie of Picene, where there is a goodly hauē, and it forcibly tooke and being taken, sacked and last of all consumed it wyth fire, and a few of the Oppidanes or Townesmen which taried still, were taken. For the rest being brought into sodaine feare and amazednes through this violent irrup∣tion were fledde almost all into the mayne land and me∣diterranean region. Within a litle while after, an other Nauie of Saracens landed in the coast of Hetruria, with purpose and full in∣tent
to besiege and take the Citie of Rome. Whose so∣dayne arriuall and terrible approche filled all the Citie with terrour and dread. Wherfore Pope Leo the fourth of that name assembled the people together, and vnto thē made this Oration folowing. What is the matter my Children whereof you are somuch affraide?Oration of Pope Leo the fourthe, to encorage his Romans against the saracens. or why are your mindes thus troubled and appaulled? Certes there happeneth nothing vnto vs without the prouidence and wyll of the almightye God, neither is it sent vnto vs vndeseruedlye on our partes. Then ought we to feare & dread their tyrannie, whē we fall at ciuill strife and goe together by the eares amonge our selues, when one Brother conspireth his Brothers death and destruction. For all they whiche do beléeue and confesse Christe to be their Sauiour and Redéemer, are Brothers. Then I say when the Brands of these mis∣chiefes are kindled amonge vs, we ought to feare, leaste God being highly displeased with vs therfore, should send these or rather worse plagues vppon vs. For if you think that these impious and barbarous people are sent vnto vs without the will and pleasure of almighty God, you are far deceiued. For holy Scriptures do in many places testife & dayly examples euery where teache & confirme the same. God saying by his owne mouth, that he wyll vse the wicked blasphemers and the enemies of his sacred name as whippes to scourge, and meanes to pursue hys vnfaithfull, wylfull and disobedient Children. And we do know, that the ciuile discord and flagitious dissolutenes of the Greekes gaue first occasion to this pestiferous and diabolicall nacion, to extend their rage and practise their first cruell inuasion vpon the Christians. Did not the lewde lying of the Gothes and Kinge Rodirick, allure them to set foote into Hispaine. Whome although these bellish Impes discomfited and condinglye punished, yet when they once conuerted their force and moued warre
againste good and godlye men, they were repulsed, put to flight and slaigne euen of a few. What? do we feare this most dastardly rable and lowse nacion more then we do Almightye God? for we doubt not awhit, euery howre and euerye mynute of an howre to offend his Di∣uine Maiestie, to prouoke his wrath and anger againste vs, to reuile and blaspheme his holy name: to shewe our selues wilfull, disobedient and stubbourne to the lore of his swéet word and commaundment and by our owne phantasticall deuises to heape vnto ouer selues the gree∣uous sentence of his heauy displeasure: but at the onely hearinge of this reprobate generation, wee tremble and quake for feare, as though humane force and mortall Armes were more to be feared, then euerlasting paynes and eternal damnation. Wher is the auncient puyssance and knightly prowes that was wont to be in the vndaun∣ted Romanes? What is become of their valiauntnes, paynfulnesse, trauaile and courage that in all extremytie and aduersitie was euer inuincible? Our Auncestors and forefathers, before Christianitie was embraced, or Christ to the world notyfied and beleeued on, beyng yet blinded and noseled in Idolatrye and supersticious Reli∣gion, feared no force, no violence, no multytude of Ene∣mies, but oftentimes with a small handfull and power, vanquished the mightie & populous armies of their Ene∣mies. The Gaules & French, being a people and nacion most fierce and at that time by reason of the huygenes of their bodies formidable and dreadfull (the limytes of the Romane Empire being yet but streict and narrow, & the Citie nothing so great as now it is, mens courages also through the sodayne irruption and coming of such a firce and big nacion marueilouslie abbashed) tooke in déede (I cannot deny) this Citie, hauing in it at that time no forte of defence nor cōmodius place made by art for resistance: but yet the Capitoll, they were neuer hable to take. And
not suffered long there to roust, were by the valiaunce of one banished Romane thence repulsed and driuen away with notable slaughter of a great maigny of their people. And beholde, the Romane empire was not of such power and strength at that time as it is now. For the limytes of ye empyre extended no further but to the Romane Ter∣rytory. Now whereas the greatest part of Italy is sub∣iect to the Romane State, and the Citie with people well replenished, hauing now not the Capitoll onely for your fortresse, but a whole Towne also by our industrie and procurement annexed and vnited to your Citie, fortyfied and strengthened with all maner of Artificiall deuise and pollicie, hauyng (I say) so many noble Personages and approued Capitaines both for skill & courage renowmed, and the Sea of the most Catholique Relygion héere resi∣aunt, you now stand in dread and feare not of the Gaules, which be a worthy and noble nacion not of the huyge and populous armyes of the Gothes, nor yet of the Hunnes the Subuerters and destroyers of many moste flourish∣yng and noble cities: but of the most cowardly and rogish nacion of all Asia, a pilfring rable of Mauritanian, thieues and Vagarantes. The Mannes head that was founde in the ground where the Capitoll standeth, gaue such a destinie and fate thervnto, that no nacion shoulde be hable by conquest and force to take it. Doo you think that ye Ca∣pitoll was earst more safe and holie▪ beinge the Seate of Saturn, then it is now, being employed to a Castle of sin∣cere and true religion? Beléeue me, beléeue mee, neyther the Saracenes nor anye other wicked Nacion whiche are the professed Enemies of Christes name and Relygion shall euer buylde their Bowre & plant themselues in this Citie. Rome was buylded vnder such a lucky Constel∣lacion, that the Empyre thereof shall neuer quayle but continue perpetuallye: and vnder this same destenie is this Towne therevnto annexed and adioyned that it
should be the See of Religion, which thing the most em∣periall and Cathedrall Church of him that is chiefe of the Apostles assuredly promiseth. But peraduenture you thinke, that God béeing prouoked and mooued to wrathe by reason of our manyfold sinnes & offences, hath gyuen them leaue thus to extend and shew their villanous rage against vs. I graunt, we haue demerited these and farre greater Plagues, and that this ruffling stirre is sent vp∣on vs not without the speciall foresight and prouidence of God, that taking warning and occasion by these aduersi∣ties and oppressions, to amende our naughtie liues, wee may the better renounce our former haunt of licentious lustes, and with penitent hearts turne vnto him. And so long shall they haue power ouer vs, as we persist & wil∣fully wallow in the stinking puddle of our vngratious wayes. But if we truely repent and implore his mercy, this wicked Nation shall straightwayes geue place and flee before vs lyke shéepe, whom wee shall kill and flea down right before vs, and reuenge the iniuries that they the yéeres passed haue done vnto vs and vnto the Maiesty of Almighty God, whose Tēples and consecrated houses, they haue wickedly polluted and most horriblie propha∣ned. Hereof may you make your full accoumpt, vnlesse peraduenture you thinke that the Asturians, the Canta∣brians and French (who haue oftentimes vanquished and with notorious calamities discomfited them) to haue béen better and more valiaunter mē then you your selues be. But they were not (beléeue me) and God is no lesse mer∣cifull to the present state and inward mindes of mē now∣adayes, then he was in the age and life passed. For at the godly Sermons and zealous admonitions of Pelagius and other holy men, they renounced their vicous wayes and turning vnto God besought his helpe to assist and de∣liuer them out of thraldome. He is so mercifull, and so readie to heare the peticions of the faithfull that he neuer
forsaketh nor leaueth destitute and comfortlesse them, that vnfeignedly and hartely craue ayde at his handes. Amende your lyues therefore, and well thinke with your selues that you must wyth tooth and nayle, so ende∣uour your selues, that you may not in any wise for god∣lynes and faith geue place to any Nation in the worlde. Call to memory the pristiuate valiaunce, of the Romane name, couragiously aduaunce forward, handle your wea∣pons manfully and deale your puyssaunt blowes dough∣tily among yonder miscreaunt people, I my selfe will be your Capitaine and goe before you, and participate wyth you what euent soeuer Fortune sendeth. I doe assure you, the victorie is most certainely in your handes, if you will doe as before I haue directed you. They whose chaunce shall be to dye in this most godly quarrell and Battayle, shall not onely wynne in this worlde, a glori∣ous fame & renoumed praise, but shalbe afterward trans∣ported into the Kingdome of euerlasting lyfe and haue theyr names registred in the Booke, of lyfe among the electe of God for euer.;] After he had made an ende, as many as were hable and fitte for warfare, tooke weapon in hande, and fo∣lowed hym to Ostia. There meanyng to receyue at pushe of the Pyke, the enemie, so soone as he shoulde set any foote on lande. When they euidently descryed the enemyes approche, and in sight perused their order, the Byshoppe eftsoones commaunding his Souldiours to bowe the knees of their heartes and earnestly to pray vnto God, implored the diuine assistaunce and mercy∣full ayde of hym that is the geuer of all victorye, whose woordes and Prayer were in effecte as fo∣loweth. O almightie and most mercifull father which against the victorye vnto Gedeon wyth a small number ouer the huyge multitude of hys enemyes,A prayer. then which neuer yet
But perceuing that the same was not possible to be taken but by long Siege, he thence discamped and passed the ry∣uer Euphrates by a bridge of Shippes. And spoyling the the Countrey and places there aboutes, assaultynge and battering many strong holdes, whereof some he tooke by surrender, he retourned againe to ye citie. Wher he rested not long, but agayne making a warlyke voyage & expedi∣tion into Siria agaynst the Saracens, bent his whole force to winne Germanicia and wanne it. From thence he re∣mooued to the Citie Adata, which he fiercely besieged and burnt the Suburbes. Whiche Citie albeit the Citizenes and Inhabitantes defended very slackly and negligently, yet could not he wynne and take it. Basilius wondring to sée them so secure and negligent in such iminent danger, demaunded of them the cause thereof, vnto whom an an∣cient man of the Citie aunswered: that it was decréed by destynie that he should neuer winne their Citie maugre all his force and battary, notwithstandinge there shoulde come one of his lygne and race called Constantine which should obtayne the same by conquest, but it should not be his Sonne Constantine, who was with him in his camp at that present. At whiche aunswere Basilius so stormed and fumed that he gaue the assault farre more fiercely, and violently then at any time before he had done. But when he saw he could nothing preuaile, he raysed his Siege and went his way, but before his departure, he commaunded all his Prisoners to be slayne, least they should stir vp some dis∣turbaunce and commotion & also because he would be out of feare and not néede to appoynte kéepers vnto them. Shortlye after, the Saracens of Tharsus infesting the Ro∣mane Prouinces, he sent one Andrew surnamed Scytha against them, who acquiting & behauing himselfe against them very honorably & knightlie, their courage was alaid and their malicious attempts well bridled. Whereat the
King of Tharsus so stamped and stared, that in most hor∣rible and blasphemous tearmes he belched out words full of threates and spightfull contumelies againste God,A reuilinge Blasphe∣mer. in his Letters addressed and sent vnto Andrew: Wherein be wrate, ye if he had inuaded and come in person against hym, it was not the Sonne of Mary that should haue hol∣pen or deliuered him. But it was not long before he felt the deserued smarte and due guerdon of his odible myscreauncye. For com∣ming himselfe with more ayde to his Hoast, Andrew on the other side in good order marshalled his Campe and gaue vnto him battayle: Where betwéene them was fought a cruell conflict, but in th'end the Saracenes tour∣ned theis backes and fled, in which Chase, most of them were slayne, and among the rest the Kinge himselfe, was there bereft of lyfe and limme. It chaunced within awhile after, that by the sinister meanes and enuious rancour of some backfrindes which spighted at his good successe and valyaunt prowesse, this Andrew was accused to the Emperour his maister, that when he well might, he woulde not take and wynne the Citie of Tharsus: vnto whiche surmised accusation, such credit was geuen, that Audrew was discharged of his ge∣neralshippe, and one Stypiota placed in his Roome The Saracens which forsowed no time nor ocasion that might further their Affayres and procéedings, perceiuing & vn∣derstanding ye through this priuie gruge & new chaunge, the watch was nothing at al looked vnto, in the night time set vppon them and slew of them very many, and the rest put to flight. On the other side, the Affricane Saracens besieging Ragusium (whiche is a Citie standinge in the borders and coastes of Illyria) and the Ragusines sending to the Emperour for ayde and rescue, Basilius furnished out a hundreth tall Shippes of Warre for their reliefe and sauetie. Whereof the Saracenes hauing intelligence,
reysed their Siege and tooke their iourney into Italy, and takyng the Citie of Barry, most lamentably afflicted and in a maner vniuersallie destroyed with fier murther and rapine the Calabrians, Apuliana Lucanes and Salentines. And being now in minde to deuide Rome and the Em∣pire of all Italy, share and share lyke among themselues, beholde Pope Iohn, greatly mooued with pitie and com∣passion to sée his Countreye in such extreeme perill, im∣ployed ayde and besought Alberick (whose power was greate in all Hetruria) to assist and ioyne side with hym, for the repulse of this daungerous inuasion. Whiche Alberick with a mighty armie that he had leuied in his owne Countrey and partly also mustered and taken vp in and about Rome,Italians dis∣comfired the Saracenes. encountred them, after they had set foote within the Romane Terrytorie: and at the firste not far from the Citie, in Battaile them vanquished: but af∣terwards at the riuer of Leyre about the Citie Minturne he so notably discomfited them, that they were now resol∣ued, and fully purposed altogether to depart quight out of Italy. Wherfore burning all alonge the Sea coaste as they went, they departed into Apulia, and buyldinge a Castle vpon Mount Gargan. and vnder the rydge of the same Mount a Towne strongly fenced and fortyfied for the warres, they continued there for many yéeres, sore infesting and spoyling Italye. Then they tooke Beneuent and it ransacked and after fiered. Whiche terrible exam∣ple so amazed and astonned the other cities adioining, that without resistaunce, they receiued the Garrisons of that nacion within their walles. But ayde beinge sent by the Pope, the barbarous Mawmettes doynge all rather with pyllage and robberie, then with any iust war, departed without any battaile out of the Romane limits and domi∣nions. And an other fléete of the same nacion comminge out of Affrica, after long and cruell Siege tooke the citie of Geane, and at their first entree slue all the defendants,
but the Maydenes, Damoselles, Matrones and younge boyes they shipped and caried away with them into Afri∣ca. But Dandulus Venetus writeth, ye al of the Male sexe retourned afterwarde home againe into their Countrey, but how and by what meanes that came to passe, is by none declared nor written. Geane was wonne and taken in the yeare after the incarnacion 935. And the Saracenes being first dispossessed of the Castle of Mount Gargan by the Dalmatians,Geane take and afterwards in many ouerthrowes weakened and vanquished by the Pannonians, were last∣lye by Otho Emperour of Germaines in the yéere of our Lorde 969. quight expulsed and driuen out of Italy. The Greekes, doo héere make their auaunt, that Italy was de∣liuered and rid out of the seruitude and dreadfull oppres∣sion of ye Saracens through the aide and helpe of their Con∣stantinopolytane Emperoure, in that the French succou∣red and relieued them, for the good wyl and friendshippe that they bare to their Emperoure. For they say, that the Italyans hearinge Rhagusium to bee rescued and deli∣uered from the Siege by the Greekish Nauy, submitted themselues vnder the obeisaunce of the Empyre, and re∣quested ayd also for themselues. Whervpon, Basilius by his Letters directed & addressed vnto ye Frenth King, trea∣ted with him to aide them, and by him was the Sultane taken and brought to Capua: who afterwarde by the fa∣uorable meanes of the Commons of Capua (with whom he had conspired against the) King was set at liberty, and the King being thence expulsed, he inferred warre vpon the Capuans, but by the ayde of the Greekes which came against him, he packed and went away. This French King of whom they surmise this talke and Historye, I thinke should be Carolus Crassus the fifte Emperoure of Germaines, but for the trueth thereof, I referre you to my Authours the Greekes, whom I wyl, shall shifte for themseues touching the credit of the premisses.
a most noble victorye. He wasted and subuerted Berraea al sauing the Castle, where he found great store of riches and treasure, and taking innumerable of them prisoners deliuered many Christians out of thraldome Afterward this Nicephorus Phocas being aduaūced to the Empire, Duke Manuel, the Bastard sonne of Leo, was sent with a mighty Nauie against the Saracens into Sicile, where through negligence & want of skill he with all his hoast was slaine. And at the very same time, Iohn Zimisca (af∣terward Emperour) being sent into Cilicia, had the vp∣perhand of the Saracens at ye Citie of Adana. Thē Nice∣phorus himself in persō, with a great power entred into Cilicia and tooke Anabarza, Rosa and Adana thrée pro∣per Cities of that Prouince, with many other stronge holdes and Castles: which done, he returned into Cappa∣docia and there wintered. In the beginning of the nexte Spring he went thither againe, and sent his brother Leo with a part of his army to Tharsus, & himselfe laid siege to Mopsihestia, through the middle wherof, there ranne a riuer named Sarus. While the Emperour layde harde siege and sore distressed the one side thereof, the Saracens seeing no remedie set fire in that part, and departed vnto the other part, which being also conquered and wonne he slew of them euery man. When the Tharsians hearde thereof, they submitted themselues to the Emperoures grace. And within thrée daies after, a Nauie was sent out of Aegypt to ayde the Tharsians, which could not attaine to land, and in their returne homeward, what with force of weather and blustering windes, and what with incur∣sions of the Romane Gallayes, they were for the most parte all lost and cast away. When the Emperour was retourned home to Constantinople, he caused the brasen gates which he had brought frō the winning of Tharsus & Mopsihestia, of excellent workmanship & curious art, to be set on the East & West side of the Castle wt other
new ornaments & garnishments of his owne cost added therto. Then he inuaded Syria and hauing partly beaten downe and partly wasted the Cities about Libanus & the Sea coast, he came before Antioch, which Citie standeth vpon the riuer Orontes. But the Antiochians standing at resistaunce, and also victual in his Camp waxing very scant beside such continuall raine, that the ground was all ouerflowen & couered with water, he was faine to builde a Bastyle on the Mount Taurus, which is at this day is called Maurus, leauing there behind him to infest & skir∣mish with ye Antiochians, Michael Burze whom he had aduaūced to be one of his chief Nobilitie, & inuested with the tytle of the Capitaine of Mount Taurus. And appoin∣ted one of his Eunuches named Peter, a valiant, constant & skilful warriour, master of his Tentes and Pauilions to sée order taken & prouided for the wintering of hs host in Cilicia, after which order o takē, he returned to Con∣stantinople. Burzes with many venturous Rades & ex∣cursions laid sore to the charge of the Antiochian Sara∣cens, and them greatly molested, studying by all meanes to wynne honour and glorie by déedes of Armes and to take the Citie. Vppon a time he priuily measured out the altitude and height of the Tower of the same, and preparing scaling Ladders equall in height therewyth, in a very darke and snowye Winter nyght, he came se∣cretely and without making any noyse vnder the walles of the Citie:Antioche ta∣ken. where setting vp his Ladders, with. CCC. men that he had brought thyther with him for the same purpose, he mounted vp, and kylled the watchmen and keepers of the Tower and as manye as hee could méete withall: and straightwayes dispatched a Currour to the Maister of the Tentes and Pauilions to aduer∣tyze him, how the case stoode and what he purposed to do, willing him spéedily to come with more power to ayde him and be partaker of that glorious & noble enterprise.
The Antiochians knowing their chiefe Tower to be ta∣ken, ranne couragiouslye to repell and dispossesse the Ro∣manes out of the same. Now the Maister of the Tentes had in charge from the Emperour, that he should not in ani wise inuade An∣tioch, because the common brute went, that the captiui∣tie of that Citie did portende within awhile after, the Emperours confusion, whiche bred in him such doubt∣full cares, that he knew not what to doo in that case, nor which way to take. Neuerthelesse loath, that so manye valiaunt men should through his default perysh, & think∣yng it no poynt of humanytie to sée them thus fall into the lapse for want of a small ayde, marched with all his power and inuaded Antioche: at whose comming the Sa∣racenes were so dismayde that their hartes fainted and their stomackes immediatly quayled. Burzes & his com∣pany which before dispayred of any help or remedye, loo∣king for nothing but present death, tooke new hart agrace and were reuiued, and bursting open the Gates with his battayle Axe, made frée passage and ingresse for the ma∣ster of the Tentes and his traine to enter. Thus was Antioche one of the noblest Cities in the world, brought into the power of the Romanes, whiche shortly after, in the time of the Emperoure Iohn Zimi∣sca, the Saracenes with all their ioynt powers and forces both of the Orient and occident attempted to recouer. And so vnder the conduct of the Caliph of Cairoan in Affrica, (because the power of the Caliph of Syria was now sore weakened and brought to a lowe ebbe) they planted their Siege about it. Whose inuasions and malyce the Cite∣zins and Inhabitauntes manfullye and constantlye withstoode, tyll the Emperour might hereof be certyfied. Who hauing intelligence of this generall conspiracie of the Gentiles, commaunded his Prouost of Mesopota∣mia to ayde his besieged Fréendes and Subiectes. Who
according to his charge and cōmission in a pitched battaile (wherein the Saracenes were in number farre moe then the Romanes) them disparcled, chased and discomfited. Now because I sée the empire of the Saracens to draw apace towarde an ende and finall ruyne, we must before we procéede any further, briefelye and compendiouslie wryte of the remnauntes and reliques of them that yet lurked in Africa and Spayne: and firste wee wyll speak of Spayne, then afterward of Africa. In Spayne therefore Ramire Kinge of Lyon in the yéere of our Sauiour Christ 901. making war vpon the Saracenes, destroyed a Towne of theirs named Madrite and put them to flight néere vnto Osma and made Bena∣iam King of Saragoza Tributary vnto hym. Whom (af∣terward rebelliouslye ioyninge in league with Abdura∣men King of Corduba and tourning to his olde vomyt a∣gayne) Ramire eftsoones vanquished and tooke Prisoner in battayle néere to a Towne called Synncas, wherein there were slayne of the Saracenes thyrtye thousande, and many other annoyances and harmes did hee vnto them: Afterwarde lying at the Siege of Talaura, he ouercame the Toletane Saracenes whiche came to reyse the Siege and to rescue the Citie, of whom. vii.M. were taken and xii.M. slayne. After this Sancius kinge of Lyon beinge depriued and driuen out of his kingdome by his owne people came to Abduramen king of Corduba to be cured of a certayne disease by the help of his Phisicions, whom for conning and knowledge he had heard to be the exper∣test and skilfullest that were then in al the world. Whom the king of Corduba did not onely cause to be healed, but also with his power and help (maugre all his foes) resto∣red him to his Roome and dignitie. But after that hee was dead, the Saracenes wanne Symancas, Duengas Se∣pulueda and Gormas, Townes belonginge to the king∣dome of Lyon and rased Zamorra. And within awhile
after, destroyed and euerted Portugall the head of all Lu∣sitanie and Compostella. After the death of Abduramen, Alliagib his Successoure in that kingdome, naming him selfe Almansor (which is as much to say) as the Protec∣toure of king Mansor his Lorde and maister, because bee hoped therby ye rather to allure the peoples goodwils, and vnder that coloure to insinuate himselfe into their fa∣uoures (for at that time Mansor raigned at Marrocco. Which Citie (as we haue afore shewed) was the Seate royall of all the Saracenes Empire Occidentall, vnder whose iurisdiction and rule all the inferiour kinges of the Saracenicall nacion in Spayne lyued) gathered a mighty power and inuaded the Territories of the Castulonians, Lyon and Bkaye. The Citie of Lyon he almost vtterly defaced, the To∣wers and Bulwarkes thereof, which were all of Marble, he rased and heat downe to the grownde, leauinge onelye one, vntouched and vnblemished, to the intent that the memorye of the beautye and gorgeousnes of that Citie might appeare and remayne to posterytie. He tooke As∣turia and Coiaca which is now called Valenja (not that Valentia which standeth vpon the midland Sea, but an other in the kingdome of Leon by the Pyrenes) and San∣sagnium with many other Townes. And in the Pre∣cinct of the Castulonians, he destroyed Osma, Alcobetla, Berlanga and Atienza: and of the Gallycian Townes, he tooke S. Iames, and commaunded the Belles to bee caryed away thence to Corduba, where he vsed them in stéede of Lampes in his prophane Temples, & in this sorte he continued outraging and kéeping sharpe warres for the space of twelue yeares. Tyll at length Bermudes King of Lyon with the powers of the Castulonians, the Byskayes and his owne bad vnto hym battayle in a place called Calataicor. This battayle was fiercely foughten on both sides for the space of a whole daye, where were
slayne of the Saracenes many thousandes, and in th'end Almansor with all his retinew and Adherents fled and shortly after died for sorow of his ouerthrow. The Spani∣ardes ruffling and spoiling their camp, found therin great booties & prayes which they at their flight had left behind them. Abdimelick greatly mooued wt his fathers misfor∣tune, and purposing to recouer and haue amendes for the same, was also vanquished. But afterward in the reigne of Alphonsus the Son of Bermudes, ye Saracenes agayne inuading ye borders & frontiers of ye Castulonians, destroi∣ed Auila & tooke Ormetum with any other townes. And Alphonsus reedifled the citie of Lyon. After al this, there sprang vp ciuile warres among the Spanish Saracenicall Kinges and Princes, whereby the power of the Christi∣ans in that prouince dayly encreased,Granado wonne from the Saracenes & Infideles by King Fer¦dinando Granfather to Charles the fift Anno D. 1492. insomuch that Ma∣homet Enasr Bishop of Marrocco being vanquished in Gottalonia néere to Valentia and ix.M. Saracenes slaine with him in the yéere of our redémption 1150. the Chris∣tians within xxx. yéeres folowing, recouered Valentia, Deuia, Alicante, Muria, new Carthage, Corduba, Syui∣le, Iaen and Vbeda, and ye Saracenes had no more in their possession but onely the Kingdome of Granado, from whence at length they were vtterlye expulsed and driuen out by Ferdinando the last king of the Tarracomans, (or Aragon) Grandfather by the Mothers side to Charles the fift late Emperour. In Africa a newe Prophet vaunting himself to be one of ye right ligne & race of Mahomet whose name was E∣mahelis, a man both borne & brought vp in ye Mountains, about the yéere of our Lord 1000 brued a new broyle and set abroch certayne quaynte fashions about Religion. He expulsed out of their Kingdomes, the high Bishop of Cairoan (which Citie before we shewed was not farre of from Carthage, & was ye head Citie in the mayne land of Africa) l also Abraem ye king of Marocco: which done, he
subdued both the Mauritanies, all Africa, all Numidia, and Lybia vnto the borders of the Negroes and Aegypt, constituting his royall and Pontificall Seate at Maroc∣co. The King of Marocco, fléeing from Habdulmumen who pursued after him with part of Elmahelis Army, ar∣riued and came to Oranum, a Citie situate vpon the mid∣land Sea in Mauritania Caesariensis. But the Citizens not receiuing him, the poore wretched King being com∣fortlesse and without all hope of better fortune,A miserable king depo∣sed frō his kingdome, by despera∣tion brake his owne necke and his wyues. with hys wife, who for want of better store roade behind him (both on one horse) went vp into the toppe of a very high moun∣taine lying into the Sea and there dashing the Spurres into the horse sides, cast himself, his wife and horse down headlong from a Eraggie rocke, and so al thrée dyed toge∣ther at one instant, and were found in the Shore all brui∣sed and dismembred. And Habdulmumen retourning back to Marocco, found Elmahelis dead, and was crea∣fed King and Byshop in his place. Whose posteritie and Successours, that is to wit Iosippus his Sonne, Mansor his Nephieu and Machomet Enasir, of whom we made mencion before, his Nephieus sonne, enioyed & possessed that Kingdome. But when the tenne Sonnes after the death of Mahomet their father, cōtended and bickered a∣mong themselues for the Garlande, the house of the Ma∣rines popped into the Kingdome of Fess, and the Habdu∣luadean familie inuaded the Kingdome of Telensine, and displacing there the Tunetane Magistrate, created and made there a King. And all the other Kings & Prin∣ces of Africa renounced their homage and reuolted from the Kings of Maroco: wherby the power of the Saracens decreased in Africa aswell as in other places and the name of their Empyre vtterly extinct.
¶The Thirde Booke. Wherein is expressed and plainly de∣clared the euersion of the Saracenicall Empire and the originall beginning, continuaunce & increase of the Turkishe domination, till the first yeere of the raigne of Ottomanne, from whom, louius and diuerse others both Greeke and Latine Turco∣graphers begin their Histories: also the first ori∣ginall of the Tartarians, Mamalukes, Assassines, and Sophians: Containing a true and perfect dis∣course of Turkishe Affaires for three hundreth yeeres space before Ottomanne, for pleasure and varietie very delectable. BVt now must I procéede in a newe kind of order,Saracenes were as the right childrē of Mahomet and Turkes in compari∣son but Bastardes. and discourse vpō mat∣ters most worthy to be remembred: for we haue already so orderly & suc∣cessiuely treated of Saracenicall af∣fayres, that now we be come by or∣der of Historie, to speake of those times, wherin (the auncient and true Saracene Empire decaying and as it were the lawfull Stocke and ofspring of Mahomet excluded and dispossessed) Bastards and vp∣startes of an other ligne stepped in and vsurped the prin∣cipalitie, A people (I saye) shuffling in for the best game, and bearing themselues, not (as the other) vnder a pain∣led shewe and coulorable glose of gaie Religion and holi∣nes, but planted themselues in a more firme and harde Empyre, mainteining and amplifying the same by force of Armes and violence. Whose State differeth as much from the former Empire, as the hardnesse of Yron from the softnesse of Leade. For albeit the huygenes of the Sa∣racenicall
dominion were great and mighty, (insomuch that vnder the patched cloake and pretēce of false doctrine and diabolicall Religion, it ouerflowed and almost drow∣ned the whole world) yet the violent rage therof was by the valiaunt encountrie of couragious Souldiours and Martiall knightes from time to time either brydled and repressed, or at least, brought vnder such awe, that many times they were faine to kéepe bill vnder wing, and to be pent within narrower roome then they were before. Yea many times, such flames of ciuil discord among thēselues burst out, that ye same being dispersed into sundry partes, & farre disseuered from the fire where it was first forged about Babilon and Arabie, waxed in processe of time so keyecold & frostbittē, ye they were not able to wagge & be∣stirre themselues as they did before. And so béeyng distract and pulled from the whole Masse, and consequently made weaker, were either cleane vani∣shed and buryed in the pit of Obliuion, or else wyth an other Fire in some other place newly kindled, were cōsu∣med and quite burnt euen with their owne flame: which thing hapned vnto this aforenamed Forge, till such time that new and stronger Smithes tooke yt office in hand, & forged a harder mettall vppon the Anuill, to harden and strēgthē ye softnes of this Leade, & throughly to beare out ye dignitie of ye Shop. For although (as it euidētly appea∣reth by ye which hath bene alredy declared in the two first Bookes) our Auncestors & Predecessors haue continually warred wt the Saracens welnigh 400 yéeres space, with diuers fortune and doubtfull victorye, in so much that although their power euen from their firste beginning were very mightie and great, and Christendome all that tyme neuer quiet, but continually floted in ciuil dis∣corde, beside the often incursions of Barbarous Nations, the Emperours of Constantinople shewing themselues (that while) no better then Meycockes & effeminate per∣sons:
yet dyd they oftentymes plague them with manye great ouerthrowes, and recouered out of theyr possessi∣ons sometyme Syria, sometyme Armenia, nowe a part of Persia and nowe some other Prouinces: but yet al∣wayes and styll they kept in their possession all Europa, sauyng a peece of Spayne onely, Asia the lesse, Media, and the Kingdomes of Parthia Bithynia and Cappado∣cia with many other Realmes and Kingdomes. But the power of the Turkes encroching and wynning vpon vs now almost for the space of .600. yéeres, they neuer could represse, neyther hinder the course and procéeding of their Empyre, neither yet expel and driue them out of such pla∣ces as they had once gotten. Of such force is warlike dis∣cipline and so much differeth the fiercenes of the Northrē people from the tendernes and effeminacie of the Sou∣thren. How, wherof and by what occasiō, they brake out, we shall now declare. Basilius Porphyrogenitus being Emperour of Con∣stantinople about the yéere of our Lord 1000. many Ty∣rannes wrestled for ye Garlād and diuided among them, the Empire of Saracens, as before in the last Booke was shewed, wherof foure alwayes contending for ye Supre∣macie, & kéeping deadly warres one wt another for ye try∣al of their titles, there began great diuision & hartburning betwene Mahomet Prince of Persians, Corasmiorians & of diuerse other people on the one part, and the Caliph of Syria whose royall Seate & Metropolitane Sea was at Bagadet.Antioche ta∣ken. In which wars, Mahomet being put to ye wors and by ye Babilonian (through helpe and ayde of Sclerus and ye Roman captiues) vanquished, sent to ye Turks for aide, whose helpe and furtheraunce at a pinche (as afore hath beene specified, the Saracenes for certayne yeeres passed were accustomed in theyr Warres too vse and ioygne vnto them, and the rather because they professed and embraced euen at the firste eruptions,
swaded that they were begotten and dyd come of the wylde Faunes. But the Turkes and Tussagetes discendynge of their race and inhabityng the Northside of Mount Cau∣casus as before wee haue shewed, differed muche from them as well in lyfe, as manners and Lawes: beinge (notwithstandynge) so lyke amonge them∣selues and so lynked together in League one with an other, that they were taken and accompted for one People, and peraduenture they were all one, and were so called and named (as prophane Persones) by the Ar∣menians their Neighbours, from whome they recei∣ued their Rites, and whiche were called Sagae (as muche to saye) as holie. For this worde Teuta∣zites (as in the Seconde Booke was shewed) signify∣eth in their language Gentiles or a prophane Peo∣ple. For these names are of many Writers so min∣gled and taken together, that the one seemeth to be theyr name, the other their Surname. Procopius saieth, these People were nothing néere to the other Hunnes, neyther had any thinge to doo with them: but that they brodered vppon the Northe partes of Persia, that is to witte Armenia. For Armenia was euer lyghtlye subiect to the Crowne of Persia. Neyther were they Wanderers from place to place, (as hauynge no habitation sauynge there, where their Cattayle stayed and grazed, as the other Hunnes or Scythians were): but had in their Posses∣sion and inhabyted the beste Plottes and moste fertil Regyon that was amonge the Dounes and Moun∣taynes rounde aboute, and amonge the Hunnes, they onely were white of complexion and coloure, and not so ouglye nor so sterne visaged, neyther lyuing so sauagelye and beastlye as the others dyd: but lyke true Subiectes liued orderly in due obedience and humble subiection vn∣der
one Prince, whome they accepted as their head and King: hauing also a well ordered Common wealth, with due execution and imbracynge of Iustice and other politicall Lawes, both at home amonge themselues, and abroade with other forraine Nacions borderynge vppon them, as the Greeques, Romanes and dy∣uers other ciuile and well gouerned Nacions dyd also. The chiefe Citie of all their Kingdome was cal∣led Gorga. The noblest sorte and wealthyest per∣sones amonge them, had contynuallye seiourninge at their Houses as Gestes, twenty or moe of their fa∣mylier Fréendes, accordinglye as their Substaunce and Rychesse extended, with whom, both wealth, authori∣tie and power was in common: as the same Proco∣pius sheweth, and as their institution and manner of lyuinge to this day witnesseth. Some there be, whiche referre the firste originall of the Turkes, to those tenne Tribes of Israell: whiche (as wee reade in Iosephus) were translated into Media. For proofe and Testimonye whereof, they alledge the likenesse and similitude of their maners and conuersation. Some referre their pedagrew to Gog and Magog, of whome there is mencion made in the holie Scriptures: from whom, we rather be of opynion that the Tartarians yea and peraduenture also the Gothes be lineallye des∣cended. And some there bee whiche doo deriue the of∣springe and Progenie of them: from the auncient Tro∣ians. Whose seuerall opinions by waye of Argu∣ment, either to confirme and allowe or confute and dis∣prooue, is no parte of our purpose and intent in this place, sythince our onely meanyng is not to reason vppon probabilities, but to bringe such certainelye knowen
truthes, as are in the histories and Chronologies of aun∣cient writers aswell of Greekes and Thracians as of the Turkes themselues and other Nations confining vnto them, published and mencioned which is euen so as be∣fore we haue declared. Muchumet therfore desired ayde of their Prince in his warres against the Caliph of Babilon, throughe whose helpe and valiaunce (sent vnto him vnder the conducte of Tangrolipix Mucalet,) he encountred with Pisasire the Babylonian Caliph, and him with litle labour and lesse daunger discomfited, by reason that the Arabians were not hable to abyde the thicke shotte of the Turkishe Ar∣rowes. Beyng from this warre retourned home wyth victorie, he mynded also to vse the ayde of ye same Turkes in his Warres against the Indians. At which season the Turkes weary of that seruice, desired leaue of Muchu∣met, not onely to retourne home, but also that a garr∣son might be appointed to wafte them in safetie ouer e bridge that stoode vppon the Riuer Araxes. Which re∣quest he tooke in suche disdaine and impacience yt with frowning looke he charged them from thenceforth not to vrge him any more with that sute. The Turkes had no other way in their retourne homeward, but must néedes passe the said Riuer Araxes, which is ye limite and Bor∣der of the kingdome of Persia: ouer the which there was no other Bridge but onely this, which was on bothe sides merueylous strongly garded and fortified with Blocke∣houses, Turrettes and Garrisons. The Turkes drea∣ding further daūger priuily shranke away & as closely as they could, departed into the desert of Carbonitis. For considering their number was not aboue three thousande men, they durst not aduenture to fight and buckle wyth such a great multitude. Béeyng in those desertes, they made many vagaries into the Saracenes Territories, and wasted theyr Countrey terriblye. Whereat Mu∣chumet
merueilously stomacking and storming, sent an Armye of 30000. men against them, committing the charge and conducting of the whole Armie vnto tenne Tribunes of ye noblest, stoutest and wisest in his traine. They beyng come néere to their enemies, would not ad∣uenture to enter into the desert, for feare they should be distressed for lacke of water and victuall, but encamped themselues euen in the verye entraunce into the same desert. The Captaine of the Turkes, hauing intelligēce by his Espialles, of the Persians approch, called his Souldiours together, and making them priuie to his deuise, purposed sodainly to set vpon them and vnawares to surprise, both the Saracenes and Persians, while they were yet secure and mistrusted nothing. And spéeding apace toward them by great iournayes, within two dayes was come néere vnto them, The thirde night he set vppon them beyng in their Tentes carelesse and quiet, suspecting nothing lesse then any such matter: whom he put to flight euen at the first onset. After this discomfiture of his enemies, hee fell to spoyle and ransacke their Tentes, where finding great store of Wagons, Horses, and Money, lyued no longer by Robbery and Thefte lyke a Vagabonde or fu∣gitiue (as afore) but from thence forthe pitched hys Tentes and encamped himselfe abroade in the open playne. When the report of his victorie and good for∣tune was blowen abroade, there resorted vnto him from all quarters thereaboute, all suche Cutthroates and Villaines as for their vngracious demerites feared punishment, wyth a great route of Slaues and pylfe∣ring Roges lyuing of the spoyle of others, insomuch that within a whyle hys Armye grewe to the number of 50000.Tyrānye of Muchumet toward his owne men. men. Muchumet stormyng marueilouslye at this ouerthrowe and discomfiture of hys Hoaste, caused the eyes of those tenne whom he had appoynted Capi∣taines
to bée pulled out, and threatened the rest of the Souldiours which fledde out of the Battaile, that so soone as he had vanquished his fees, he woulde cloathe them all, in womans apparell, and leade them as gazing stockes in Triumph before him. This done he himselfe in person marcheth against his Enemies. His men, who before had bene vanquished of the Turkes, considering the threates and shamefull handling that was ment to∣warde them, reuolted from Muchumet and fledde to Tangrolipix. Who now hauing his Armie encreased with such a warlike Crewe of freshe Souldiours, with all his whole power together, came against Muchumet, by dinte of mortall battaile to trie and finally determine the cause of controuersie betwene them. Muchumet with hys power of Saracenes, Persians, Arabians and Cabirians well appoynted and armed, to the number of fyue hundreth thousande, and a hundreth Elephantes wyth Towers on theyr backes, mette his Enemye at a place called Aspacha: where betweene them was fought a cruell and bloudie Battayle and many slayne on bothe partes. In this conflicte, Mu∣chumet, as hee rode vnheedely from ranke to ranke, chéeryng his Souldiours and exhorting them to doe valiauntly, by meanes of the foltering and stumbling of hys horse, fell downe and brake his necke. He béeyng once deade, his Armye fell to a Parley and composition wyth the Turkes, and so wyth one consente and wyll of all sides, Tangrolipix was proclaymed King of Persians. Who immediately opened a waye and passage for his people into Persia. Of whom a great multitude went thyther, and oppressing the Persians and Saracenes,What a Souldane signifieth. perforce possessed all the Countrey of Persia. They also honoured Tangrolipix by the stile or tytle of Sultane, whiche is asmuch to saye as a
most Soueraigne Emperour or Kyng of Kinges. He displaced the Inhabitauntes of the Countrey out of theyr Offices, Roomes and Dignities, and placed his owne Nation and people in the same, and amonge them (empouerishing and vtterly oppressing the Countrey borne persons) diuided and parted the whole Region of Persia. Also Daber, Prince of Aegypt, béeyng in League and amitie wyth the Romanes, falsefyed hys othe and promise whiche before hee had condiscended vnto, and destroyed the Temple at Hierusalem wherein was the Sepulchre of our Sauiour Chryst, and all the o∣ther holie places in the same. For Hierusalem at that tyme was vnder hys obedience and dominion. And wythin a whyle after, hee sent a Nauie into the Isles called Cyclades to trie some maistries there: which Na∣uie was encountred and mette wythall, by the Duke of Samos, who tooke .xii. of them as Pryzes with all the men and Capitaines therein, and the rest to hys hyghe laude and glory dispersed and scattered. After this, Argyropylus béeyng Emperour of Con∣stantinople, the Arabians wanne all suche Cities as Nicephorus and Iohn Zimisca had taken in Syria and slewe the Garrysons that were lefte to keepe them. And the Prynce of Chalep wyth continuall incursions infested Antioche and dyuerse other Cities and Countreyes confyning vppon Syria, that were subiecte to the Romane Empyre. By whom also the Capitayne of Antioche (Constantine béeyng yet a∣lyue) was shamefullye vanquished, and hardly es∣caped wyth the losse of manye of hys men. In whose office and roome the Emperour appoyntyng another, went himselfe wyth a competent number of well fur∣nished Souldiours to snaffle the pretenced outrage and insolent demeanure of the same Prince of Chalep.
The Chalepians hauing vnderstanding of his approche, sent Ambassadours with giftes and rewardes to meete him on the way and to desire pardon for their former te∣merytie and vndutifull behauiours towardes him, offe∣ring agayne to submit themselues and from thencefoorth to become his true Vassalles and liege people. Whiche submission and peace, although manye of his Lordes and Capitaines exhorted him to accepte, yet hee ho∣ping easely to subdue the Saracenes and thereby to pur∣chase vnto himselfe a great name and glory, would néeds march on, and continue his voyage into Syria. And when he had strongly encamped himselfe néere to Chalep, the Arabians beinge bolde and nimble fellowes, and naked, with good swift Horses vnder them, lyke Dimylaunces, planted themselues in euery corner in Ambushes. So yt if any of their enemies went out on forraging or to fetch water they sodenly brake out and either slew or tooke thē prisoners. By reason whereof both the Souldiours and their Horses fainted for thirste and were not hable to doe any seruice. Thus they being better acquainted and enured with these incursions and skirmishes tooke heart a grace, accu∣sing the Romanes of Slouth and cowardyse, and shewe∣ing themselues in great plumpes, descēding sodenly from the Hylles with great shoutes and cryes, so terryfied and dismayed the Romane Hoast,Emperoure in great dan¦ger. that they tourned their backs & fled. The emperour himself being there in great danger of his lyfe and forsaken of his Pretorian Souldi∣ours which for feare shifted for themselues and left hym alone, had fallē in the Lapse and bene taken Prisoner, yf one of his company had not set him vpon his Horse and aduised him to saue him selfe by flight. The Saracenes supposinge this their fléeinge to be done but for a pollicie and for the nonce pursued not the chase, but entred into the Emperours Tentes, where taking a few noble per∣sonages
and spoylinge his rych Pauilion wherein was great foyson of Treasure and princely furniture, depar∣ted thence and retyred back lading their Horses with as much as they could cary away. In their retourne back they ouercame the countrey of Mesopotamia. And ye Aegiptian Fléet wasted the coast of Illyricum, but they could not goe cleare away. For the Greekish Fleet encountered with them and burnt many of them, the rest which escaped by flight, by tempest were drowned in the Sicillian Sea. Also an other Nauy of a thousand Sayle or there about, being sent out of Aphri∣ca, spoyled many Islandes and places bordering vpon the sea Coastes. But the Romane gallayes chaunceing vpon them tooke certayne, sonke many, and sent 500. of them prisoners to the Emperour. And George Maniaces, pro∣uost of all the Cities along the Riuer Euphrates, lying at Samosata, conquered and rased a citie called Edessa, wher he finding an Epistle of our Sauiour Iesus Christ writ∣ten with his owne hande, he sent the same vnto the Em∣peroure. This Citie afterwarde in the Empyre and raigne of Michael Paphlagon was besieged by the Ara∣bians, and had bene wonne if Constantine Capitaine of Antioch, and Brother to the Emperour had not succou∣red and relieued the poore Defendauntes that were within it. After that the Prince of Aegypt was dead, the Quéene his wyfe being a Christian and her son concluded a truce with the Romanes, to endure for xxx. yéeres, and caused the Temple and other holie places at Ierusalem to be re∣stored and newe reedified. About this time two Bro∣thers both Saracenes, iounctlie and with equall authory∣tie raigning in Sycilie, fell at discorde and variaunce be∣twéene themselues, wherevppon the one of them desired ayde and assistance of the Emperoure. Who immediat∣lie
sent George Maniaces a noble Counsaillour and ex∣pert Warriour with a tall companye of Men to ayde hym. But before he could come into Sycile, the two Brothers were reconcyled and made Fréendes and ioyninge bothe their powers together to repulse, Maniaces from lan∣ding in the Islandes, sent also for ayde to Carthage. But when both the armies were clasped together in battayle, the victorie fell vnto the Romanes, who gaue vnto the Saracenes a notable ouerthrow and slew of them a great number. Which done, the Generall rased and destroy∣ed xiii Cities: and from thence marching styll forwarde, recouered and restored againe all Sycile to the Romane Empyre. But in the Orient, it was a fayre hap, that the Citie of Edessa had not bene surprised by the Saracenes.A pollicie of the Sara∣cens to haue taken the ci∣tie Edessa▪ For twelue of the chiefe Princes or Nobles of them brought fiue hundreth Camelles to Edessa, euery one laden with two Chestes a péece, and in euery Chest an armed soul∣diour, pretending and saying that their comming was, to present the Emperoure with certaine rewardes and giftes. Their intent was, if they might haue bene let in, the next night with their armed Souldiours in the Chestes to haue taken the Citie. But their subtile stra∣tageme and crafty conueighance missed of hoped effect by this meanes. There was a certayne Begger,A Begger saued the Citie. an Armenian borne, whiche could well vnderstande and speake the Arabian language. This poore Armenian begging the charitable almes of the Arabians which lodged abroad without the Citie, chaunced to heare one of them in the Chestes as∣king an other of his fellowes where they were, and im∣mediatlye departinge from them went into the Citie, and discouered this trecherous traine to the Prouoste.
Who by this meanes hauing ynckeling and intelligence thereof, left the Princes of the Arabians banquetynge and making good chéere in the Citie, and with a conue∣nient number of Citezens issued out of the Gates, and openinge the Chestes, kylled all the armed men in the same. And comming back againe into the Citie, kil∣led also all the Princes and Capitaines of them, sauing onely one, whose two handes he chopped off, and curtay∣lyng his nose and eares, sent him away packinge with a Flea in his eare, to carry news home of their good spéede and aduenture. On the other side, when the Caliph of Cairoan in Aphrica vnderstoode of the losse and destruction of his Armies, he went himselfe in person with a greater Ar∣mye into Sycile. Against whom, Maniaces came with a maine power, commaunding the Admyrall of his Nauy dilygently to looke to his charge and so narowly to scoure the Coastes and kéepe the Sea, that the vanquished Car∣thaginians should by no meanes escape. And then both the Armies grapeled together in a terrible and moste sharpe conflicte, wherein were slaine so many of the Sara∣cenes, that they could by no meanes be numbred. But their Prince escaping out of the Féelde, embarked him∣selfe with all spéede possible in a Brigandine and retour∣ned home in safetie. Now, Tangrolipix Kinge of Persia hauynge set all the affaires of his Kingdome in good staye and order, made Warre vppon Pisasirye chiefe Gouernour of Ba∣bilon and ouercame him in many battayles and last of al flewe him. And so the Babylonians being subdued and annexed to his Domynions, he sent Cutlume his Nepheu with an Armye againste Carbese Kinge of Arabie.
Of whom Cutlume being ouercome, desired by his Am∣bassadours of Stephan Regent of Media (which countrey is now called Baas Prachan) to geue him leaue with hys people to passe throughe the borders of his Countrey and iurisdiction. Which request, Stephan did not onely flatly denie, but also armed himselfe and went againste him. Notwithstanding he left many of his men, and was himselfe taken Prisoner. And so Cutlume retourning home to Tangrolipix, recompted vnto him his successe in the Median warre, and highly extolled the fertilitie and fruitfulnes of that region, affyrming that the same was verie easie to be wonne. But Tangrolipix being sore of∣fended with him for his late discomfiture, went himselfe against the Arabians. Cutlume for feare fled away with his company, and taking a Citie of the Chorasmiorians named Pasar, reuolted from the Sultan. But the Sultane winking at this matter and letting it slippe for a whyle, helde on his voyage with his whole Hoast against the A∣rabians, by whom he also was put to flight, and so com∣ming home with more losse then gaine, with the greatest part of his Hoast besieged Cutlume. But Cutlume repo∣sing great trust and assuraunce in the naturall situation and strength of the place, long time resisted him. In the meane seasō, Tangrolipix sent Asan his other Nephew surnamed Surdus with .xx. M. wel appointed Souldiours into Media.Turkes goe to wrake. Who rushing with his inuasiue power into the Prouince, and ioyning Battaile with the Romanes was with his whole Hoast (excepting a very few) slaine. The Sultan vnderstanding therof, and minding to winne his honour againe for so notable a losse and ouerthrowe, sent one Alim Abramie with a hundreth thousand figh∣ting men into the same Prouince againe. The Regent of the Countrey sent to the Emperour for aide, & thought it best for him not to fight with the Turkes till Liparites, Prouost of a part of Iberia were come with his Iberians
to ayde him. The Romanes kept thēselues within theyr fortes & strong Holdes, wherfore Alim, séeing that they minded not to trie matter with him by force of battaile, assaulted a small vnwalled village called Arzen, where innumerable wealthy Merchauntes dwelled, supposing the same would haue bene got and surrendred vnto hym at the first brunt, & in a maner without resistance. But it happened not altogether according to his expectatiō. For the Townesmen stopped his wayes and passages, with great Timber logges & threw dartes and other weapons at them from the toppes of their houses, and slew many of them. Alim after that he had giuen the assaulte vnto it by ye space of sixe continual dayes, & saw the stoute hearts of the Citizens in defending, and yt he could not conueni∣ently lye any longer at the Siege therof, threw wilde fire into the houses, which flamed, and in euery place so raged that the Inhabitants to laue their liues, fled. And by this meanes the Turkes wanne the village, wherein they found much Gold and store of rychesse which the fire had not consumed. From thence they discamped & sped them toward the Romane Armye, vnto whose ayde Liparites was now come with the power of Iberia. Both the Battayles ioygnyng together a lyttle be∣fore nyghte, the Turkes were discomfited and put to flight, whom the Romanes chased and pursued till farre in the nyght. Albeit in this conflicte Liparites (who ledde the one wing of the Battayle) was taken Priso∣ner and brought to the Sultan. For whose raunsome and redeliuerie the Emperour sent a great masse of money and other rewardes to the Sultan, desiring him also that a peace and league might bée concluded betwéene them. But the Sultan sending backe all the money and Giftes, frankely delyuered Liparites without any pa∣nie: aduising him after that tyme, neuer to beare ar∣mour
against the Turkes. And beside this, hee sent an Ambassadour vnto the Emperour, one of the worthyest in degree in all his Courte called Seriphes: which Dig∣nitie is so high among them, that after the deathe of the Caliph, the Seriphes succéedeth in his roome. For the Turkes euen at the firste, embracing the doctrine of Mahomet, reuerenced and had in great honour and esti∣mation their Caliphas as Priestes and Byshoppes of their Lawe: notwithstanding they debarred them from wearing the Imperiall Crowne or entermedling with any iuridicall power in prophane matters within their Empyre. This stately Ambassadour, comming to Con∣stantinople was brought before the Emperour, before whom he proudely shewed his Commission, which was, to demaunde a Tribute to bée payde by the Emperour to the Sultane. But he was fayne to retourne without spéeding hys errand. Wherefore the Sultane takyng Pepper in the Nose, made Warre and went himselfe agaynst the Romanes. And when hee was come as farre as Comium a Citie of Iberia, because the Inha∣bitauntes of the Countrey had included themselues and theyr goodes wyth all thinges necessarie in Holdes and Castles (whereof the number at that tyme in Iberia was great) and hearing that the Romanes mustered and assembled a great power about Caesarea, to come a∣gaynst him, hee retyred without doyng any notable ex∣ployte, worthy of remembraunce backe agayne into Media: where lykewyse fynding all places walled and Bulwarked, hys full determination was to wynne his purpose by Siege. And first of all hee attempted the wynning of Mant∣zichierte, a Citie standyng in the playne champion Countrey, vaumured and strengthened wyth three stronge Walles, hauing wythin it many Fountaynes
and lyuely Springes of Water, whiche Citie by the foresight and prouision of the Townesmen was verye well victualled. And encampyng hymselfe néere to the Walles, gaue an assaulte vnto the same .xxx. con∣tinuall dayes without any ceassing, with all kynde of Engynes and Warlike Instrumentes. But in the end, perceyuing hys attempte to bée in vayne, and hauyng no hope of better successe, raysed hys Siege and depar∣ted wyth the losse of many of his people. Then he pur∣sued his Nephewe Abramie, who was nowe confede∣rate and tooke parte wyth his Cosen Cutlume, and him in Battayle néere to the Citie of Pasaris ouercame and slew. But Cutlume wyth sire thousande in his companye, (among whom was Melech the Sonne of Abramie, saued himselfe by flighte, and by hys Ambassadours sued to the Emperour Constantine Ducas to bee recei∣ued into his fauour and protection, and that a League myght bee confyrmed betweene them: staying for an aunswere in Persarmenia at the Citie Charse. But because the Sultane folowyng at hys heeles, was com∣myng wyth a power into Iberia, Cutlume fledde into Arabia Foelix. The Sultane spoyled and wasted all as hee went in Iberia: but hearyng that Michael was commyng wyth an Armye agaynst hym, and think∣ing it muche dishonorable for him to deale wyth the Emperours Seruaunt, retyred agayne into his owne Territories, leauyng behinde hym, one of his Cap∣taynes named Samuch, a man of base parentage and lowe hyrthe, but in Martiall affaires a ryght excel∣lent Capitayne. This Samuch remayning styll he∣hynde, with 3000. men, coasted and strayed about the playne Countrey of the greater Armenia, and wyth many sodayne incursions infested the frontiers of the Romane Empyr.
After this Diogenes being Romane Emperour the Sul∣tan againe with a great power entred within ye precinct and limytes of the Romane dominions: But the Em∣perour comming with an Army against hym, hes rety∣red backe: and deuiding his Hoast into two partes, sent the one into South Asia & ye other into north Asia, which spoyled all as they went, and sodaynly surprising the citie of new Cesaria: sacked it and being full laden with bootie and pray departed thence. But the Emperoure when he heard of it, takinge with him a Bande of lustier and nimbeler Souldiours, coasting the néerest way ouer hill and dale, through thick and thinne, to get betwéene his enemies and home, so vigoriouslye and sodaynly set vp∣on them and therewitall so teryfied and dismayed them that they trustinge to their Legges, leat all their pray and cariage behinde them. Notwithstanding their was no great number of them flaine, because the Ro∣manes (being with their long iournaie weared) were not hable to folowe the chase farre, but they rescued and dely∣uered manye Prisoners whiche before had bene taken. From thence making his voyage into Syria, where hee sent out part of his Army to Melitena, he brought home from Chalep great Booties both of men and beastes, and tooke Hierapolis in Syria by surrendrie. After this, the Emperour (lying at Hierapolis) hearing newes yt the Turkes had vanquished part of the Romane Armies, sped himselfe thitherward in all hast to succoure his distressed Souldiours and afflicted Subiectes. The Capitayne of Chalep, hearing of this ouerthrowe geuen to the Romanes, renounced his allegiaunce and fled with all his trayne to the Turkes. And when the Enemies had enuironed the Romane Campe round about, the em∣peroure without geuing any knowledge to them that hee woulde fight, brought ought his Armie and without the sounde either of Trumpet or other manyfest token, gaue
the charge and onset vpon them, and put them to flight ere they had warning or time to resist. Then he buylte and erected a Castle at Hierapolis, and after he had ta∣ken many other Townes, he came to Alexandria a citie of Cilicia. And takinge order for the winteringe of his Hoast, where they shoulde not be pynched with famyne nor scarcitie of victuall retourned home to Constanti∣nople. In the beginning of ye next spring, ye Emperour making an other voyage to Caesarea, was certaynly enformed yt a great company of Turkes forraged and spoyled that pro∣uince: whom after he had either slayne or taken, hee tooke his iournay to Euphrates: and there leauing parte of his Army, vnder the conduct of Philaretus, he himselfe went northward. The Turkes putting Philaretus his Souldy∣ours in great feare & ieoperdie, got all their trinketes and cariage, and marching forwarde into Cappadocia (was∣ting and making hauocke as they went) came to Iconi∣um. a Citie at that time moste flourishinge and renow∣med. The Emperoure hauinge intelligence hereof at Se∣bastia, spedde him thitherward. But hearing by the way, that his Enemies had destroyed and rased the Citie, and vpon the brute and report of his coming and approche to be departed, he delyuered parte of the Romane Legi∣ons to Cathagurio Capitaine of Antioch, commaunding him foorthwith to repayre to Mopsihestia, where the Turkes shoulde passe, and there to set vpon them. But ere they could come so farre, the Turkes were bidde to a colde breakefast by the Armenians in the plaine of Thar∣sus, and distrussed in a manner of all they had: & hearing further that the Romanes were planted at Mopsihestia to receiue them, if they passed that way, fledde by night. After this, in the beginning of the Spring, the Turks ftsoones inuadinge and infestinge the Romane Prouin∣ces,
were vaunted and ouercome by Mychael Comne∣nus, Generall and Chieftaine for the Emperoure: and within awhile after, the same Michael being sent by the Emperoure into Syria with a lesse power, for certayne spight and hartburning borne agaynst hym, was van∣quished and taken of the Turkes. After this the Empe∣roure in person with a great power went into the orien∣tall Prouinces, and entamping at a place called Criape∣ga, in a battayle whiche hee fought with his Enemies (wher the Scythians that were in his Army forsoke him and fled to the Turkes) most manfully fightinge was ta∣ken and brought before the Sultane whose name then was Axan,Emperour taken Pri∣soner. for Tangrolipix was now dead. This Ax∣an as he was a most precise man and of great moderati∣on and prudence, when hee certainlye knew that it was ye Emperour (for he would not beléeue it was he, till the Ambassadours, (vnto him before sent,) affirmed it was he indéede, and certayne Greeke Capitaines whiche hee had in Prison (being brought before him) fel downe and prostrated themselues at his féete) curteously lifted hym vp from the ground, lying prostrate and knée lynge at his Feete, as the custome and manner is for them that ac∣knowledge themselues vanquished:Great cur∣esse of the Sultane. and so louinglye em∣braced him as though he had bene his owne Brother, speakinge vnto hym these comfortable wordes folow∣yng. I would not wish you (moste noble Emperour) to la∣ment and sorow for this your present chaunce and mise∣rie. For such is the state and course of this worlde, that the fortune of Warre sometime allotteth victorie to one, sometime to an other, humbleth one and aduaunceth an other. Your Maiestie hath moste puissauntlye quitte your selfe in many notable Battayles, your valiaunt courage and inuincible prowesse in warlyke affaires
shall euer be renowmed and spoken of, yf you now shew your selfe to be no lesse pacient and stoute in aduersitie then you were prudent and wise in prosperitie. Albeit at my handes you shall not be vsed as a Captiue and pri∣soner, but lyke an Emperour and as is most sitting for one of your estate. And immediatly he apointed vnto him a most Prince∣lye and rych Tabernacle, with seruauntes to await and geue attendaunce vppon his Person, and all other furni∣ture méete for an Emperour. And caused him to sit at his owne table next vnto himselfe, & for his sake set at lyber∣tie as many Prisoners as he would demaunde. Which Princely curtesie argued that he had regarde to humane mutabilitie and fickle state, considering the same misse∣happe might as well haue happened vnto hym. Thus these two mighty Princes keping company famylyerly together for certayne dayes, & talking most fréendly one to an other, at last established and concluded a perpetuall and infringible peace for euer to continue betwene them, and vpon promise of affinitie by Mariage betwéene their Children to be solempnised, hee franklie delyuered and fréely dismissed Diogenes with a great traine of honora∣ble Personages awaighting vppon him, and gaue vnto hym a riche sute of Princelye Apparaile. But after that Diogenes was at Constantinople murthered by his owne People, Axan the Sultane hearinge thereof and greatlie lamentinge his death, for reuenge thereof sent out his Armies, not now to pylfer and robbe as before, but to subdue and vtterlie to reduce the same vnder his subiection. Against whom, Michael Ducas the Emperour, sent Isaac Comnenus with a great power, who was ouercome and taken of the Turkes and payde a great Summe of Money for his Raun∣some. After this, Cutlume Nepheiu to Tangrolipix (as before hath béene declared) leuyinge agreat Power
some the Citie of Hierusalem and some with muche la∣bour and effusion of bloude regained other Cities and there constituted a Christian Kingdome. Nowe, this while, the Emperour of Constantinople was in league with the other Sultan of the Turkes, was Lord of ye Prouinces confyning and bordering next vnto Constan∣tinople: for wée shewed before, howe that those Prouin∣ces were alotted and geuen to Cutlume, the which hys Heires after him enioyed, and Tangrolipix his Suc∣cessours had the regiment ouer the Persians and Babylo∣nians: and in Aegypt there were yet remayning the rem∣nauntes and residue of the Saracenes. But after the death of Cutlume and his Sonne (Sul∣tanes of the Occident and Lordes of all Cappadocia) one Tanismanye succéeded. Of these Christian Capitaines when they were arryued in safetie in Asia, the Turkes gaue a great ouerthrowe vnto Raymund, watching him at a vauntage, when he was entred into the Countrey about Nice vnaduisedly without searche, and hym com∣pelled to flie vnto a poore desert towne called Exorgum: where after he had bin a certain space besieged & through∣ly wearied, with a sewe others yelded to his enemyes. The rest which would not yelde and submit themselues, after long Siege, were partly consumed in skirmishes and partly perished by famyne: and such as were taken alyue, were slaine euerie one. So many as were leste, departed first to Nicomedia, and from thence remooued to Nice a Citie of Bithynia. Whiche Citie while they fiercely assaulted, Tanismany or Solyman with . lx. thou∣sande Turkes, yssued out and bent his full force agaynst that part of the Christian Campe which was ledde by ye Byshoppe of Podie: but the Frenche, stoode so stoutly at the receipt, that the enemyes were easely repulsed, and so at length the Citie of Nice was taken. After this there was a sharpe bickering and conflict with Solyman, at the
fourth Tent pitch from Nicaea. For he had gathered to∣gether the power of the whole Orient, and had procured as much aide from else where as he could. Thēconium a Citie standing by Mount Taurus, the Seate Royall and Metropolitane Citie of Solyman, (which at this day is called Cogni) and the Pallace of the Princes of Phry∣gia (now called Caramania) and Heraclea were wonne. Afterwarde Baldwyne diuiding hys Armye into two partes tourned into Cilicia, and tooke Tharsus, Edessa and Manussa: the greater Hoaste wynning Armenia, delyuered the regiment and rule thereof to Palmurus an Armenian. After this good successe, they tooke Cappadocia, Caesa∣rea Sororgia and Sura in the Straicts of Mount Taurus. When they had passed the Mount Taurus, ye Turkes ad∣uaunced themselues in a faire plaine, but they were ease∣ly and with litle adoe discomfited and put to flight by the Latines, and from thence marched straight to Antioch, a noble and strong Citie in Phaenicia, by which the riuer Orontes runneth (for there is another of the same name in Pamphilia, néere vnto Seleucia) and tooke the same by surrendre, by reason that the Turkes were afore van∣quished in battaile and yelded themselues. In which bat∣taile were slaine of the Tuks a hundreth thousand, and xv.M. Camelles taken. During these broyles, the Venetian Fleete beynge CC. sayle and sent to ayde the Latynes, wanne a Citie in the Coast of Ionia called Smyrna: and the Latines af∣ter they had taken Antioch, wanne Rugia and Albaria and there Wintered. In the Spryng folowing, departyng thence, they layde Siege fyrst to Tortosa and Tripolis. The king of Tripolis submitting himselfe was receiued vnder Pro∣tection, but Tortosa was verye stoutely defended by the
Inhabitants. Wherfore raysing their Siege and passing ouer the Riuers of Zebul, Zabar and Brai, they came by priuie wayes and vnhaunted places before Berytus a Citie standing vpon the Sea coast, and from Berytus to Sagitta, and from thence the tenth day after, they came to Caesarea, afterward to Rama and so at length they pitched their Tentes and planted their Siege before the noble Citie of Hierusalem, whiche with most cruell bloudshea∣ding and incredible labour was wonne, about ye yéere of our redemption one thousand and one hundreth, & God∣froye crowned King therof. The streates in this assault stood full of congeled bloude ye thicknes of a foote. But the Turkes & Aegiptiās leuying a fresh power, renued warre. Against whom, Godfrey with his Christian army mar∣ched, and finding them encamped at Ascalon, gaue them battaile and slew of them 100000 (or as some say) 50000 and discomfited all the rest. But before that Hieru∣salem was taken, the Venetian Nauy coastinge alonge Lycia,, Pamphylia, Cilicia and Syria, lay at Road in the Hauen of Ioppa, being then in the French Hoastes sub∣iection, because thei might helpe the Christians with victual and necessary prouision: & waighing vp their An∣kers they departed thence, & tooke Ascalon, Porphyria (a Citie néere to Ptolemai  Tyberias, Cities stan∣ding vpon the Sea side. After the death of Godfroye who departed this lyfe within the Citie of Hierusalem, his Brother Baldwine was made King, and the rest of the Princes retourned home. He through the aide and helpe of the Venetians, Genoways and Boemund King of Antioch tooke Ptole∣mais, with Sydon and Beryus cities of Phaenicla. But when that Boemund was dead and Tancrede his Bro∣ther sucéeded in the Crowne and Kingdome of Antioch, (the Turkes & Aegyptians againe inuading the frontiers of the Ierosolymitane Kingdome, Balwine sente for
Tancrede so come and ayde hym, and then gaue vnto them battayle, but the Turkes discomfited him and all his Hoast, wherevpon with great losse of his men he re∣tyred to Hierusalem and Tancrede to Antioch: and the Turkes got into their handes the possession of Mount Si∣nai. Within a while after Baldwine dyed, and in his steade an other Baldwine surnamed Burgensis was made King. Afterward in the raigne and Empire of Alexius Em∣perour of Constantinople,An other voyage to Ierusalem. because Baldwine the seconde, sent for ayde to the Latines to withstand the malignaunt enterprices of the Turkish Rakehelles, an other voyage was made into Syria. Therein went VVylliam duke of Aquitanye, Hugh the Great, Brother to Philip the French King, Stephen Earle of Chartiers (lately retour∣ned home from ye other expedition before) Stephen earle of Burgundie, and Tholouse. The Venetians also sent thither a great Nauye. The Christian Champions and Latine Capitaines with their Hoast after many afflicti∣ons, labours and sharp stormes sustayned by the miscre∣aunts, insomuche that they were almost dispearsed and scattered, came at length to Hierusalem. But Baldwine inconsideratelie fightinge with the Turkes before the comming of the other christians, was taken prisoner, his Host discomfited, and he himselfe brought to Carras, and after a time, payinge his Raunsome was deliuered and set at lybertie. But the Venetian Nauye encountringe with 700. Sayle that belonged to the Caliph of Aegipt, whiche laye at the Siege of Ioppa, ouercame them & tooke the Citie of Tyre. During the time that they lay before that Citie geuing sundrie Battries and assaultes there vnto, there was a Doue séene, flyinge ouer their Campe and Tentes (for the Venetians had set parte of their men on shore) carying the Letters of the King of Damasco tyed
aboute her neck, the contentes wherof was, that he with a great power, would shortlye come to rescue them. The Souldiours séeing her flying ouer their heades towards the Citie,Polycie. at one instant all together, showted and cryed, which shout so deuided & cut the Ayre, that the Doue fell downe to the ground. Then ye Venetian Capitaynes per∣using and reading ouer the letters, forged others, like vn∣to them in preportion and wrighting, but cleane contrary in effect and meaninge, the tenor whereof was, that the besieged parties should shift for their sauegarde as well as they coulde, and onely trust to themselues: for of him the could haue no ayde nor rescue. Wherevpon they im∣mediatelye surrendered themselues and their Citie to the Christians. At this time,The firste beginninge of the Assas∣sines. there raigned among the Saracenes or Turks a certaine kind or Sect of men called Assassines: which killing whōsoeuer they lifted (lyke théeues & Mur∣therers) wrought much skath and harme to the Christi∣ans in Syria. And hereof it came, that afterwarde among ye Italians, al théeues & murtherers were called by ye name Assassines. Which Sect first sprong vp (as it is reported) in this sort. One Aloadine a Saracenist raigned in that parte of Persia, whiche lyeth nexte the Riuer Indus, not farre from the borders of the Prouince of Arriana, vnder the Mount Caucasus (which Region at this day is called Mulehet. In the which in times past the Asacenes in∣habited, of whom Arrianus speaketh in his historie of the Actes of Alexander the great, placing them betwéene the riuers of Cophe and Indus: which Cophe (as I think) is that, whiche is called of Iosephus in his Iudaicall Anti∣quities Cuthus, & that into this Region those ten Tribes of Israel were translated. This Aloadine hauing an intent to inueigle and per∣swade his people, that hee was hable to bringe all such to
the fruition of a blessed lyfe, as obserued and kept his Lawes and commandements, had trimmed and planted in a right pleasant valley betwéene two very high Hils moste goodlye Gardaines of solace, replennished with all kinde of fragraunt Floures and beautiful Trées yéel∣ding smel & fruite most delectable, which gardains, were most finely contriued, and on euery side enuironed with notable gorgeous buildinges, garnished with Golde and other colours, and stored with precious furniture and rich householde stuffe of value inestimable. In diuers places of the same, were Fountaines and riuers of Milk, Honey, Wyne and swéet waters. Within the same, also were fine Damoselles and beautifull Pucelles, which with Melodies, Songes, musicall Instrumentes, mincing daunces, and all other allurementes of Femy∣nine flattereies, delighted and fed the tender eares of such as were brought thither. Moreouer there were other she Seruantes and housewifelie Trulles, which being kept close within dores, dressed all thinges yt could be deuised or thought necessarie aswel for meate & drinke as for the pleasure and delectacion of the Ghestes and Straungers therein. All the place without was most curiously streng∣thened both by nature and arte. When this delightfull Gardaine of pleasure was fully ended and made perfect, Aloadine preached and professed himselfe to those dow∣nish people to be the felow and Mate of Mahomet, and that he had power geuen vnto him, to dispose and bestow the benefit and fruition of Paradice and blessed lyfe vpon such as should be to his lawes and hestes obeysaunt. And of them he chose out certayne yong Stripelinges aboute the age of twelue or fouretéene yéeres, such as séemed to be of the best towardnesse and disposition for Warres in time to come, whome he brought vp in his Hall or Courte.
And because they should with the more willing myndes obey his commaundementes and stirre at his becke, his fashion was with some cōfectioned Potion to bring them into a dead sléepe: which done, his custome was then to transport & carye them into ye place or Gardaine: where being awaked, they solaced themselues and had the fruici∣on of all kynd of pleasures for two or thrée dayes space, and then agayne beyng with the same drinkes brought on sléepe, (as before they had bene) were caryed out, themselues knowing nothing at all thereof. And by this meanes it came to passe, that afterward they refused nei∣ther perils nor Daungers to fulfill his mynde and com∣maundemetes, but were willing and ready to slea and kil whom he would commaunde, yea thoughe they dwelled in places distant farre of. And the number of them which he had there, were about lx. thousand. Wherby his power and his Successours after him (called Sexmountes) grew and in such sorte encreased, that he instituted the same order also in Syria, and had a Lieutenaunt vnder him at Damasco. For there was of them as it were a certaine order of Knightes, whereof the chiefe President and Maister was called Sexmount, and had diuerse offi∣cers of the order of this Knighthode in sundry other pla∣ces. The Castle wherein these Gardaines were, was named Tigad. These Cutthroate Souldiours, with murthers and robberies, made euery place in Asia daungerous and vn∣passable to the Christians. But this Castle being after∣ward assaulted and besieged ful seuen yéeres space by the Tartarians, was in th'end by them taken, and they with∣in vtterly destroyed. This is the Historie of them, whom some by mistaking do call Essenes, and some Arsacidas, as we haue found in the most credible and approued Au∣thours. After the death of Tanismanye, the Occidentall Tur∣kishe
Empyre began to be diuided. For one Muchumet succéeded Tanismanye, betwene whō and Masute Pre∣sident of Iconium, was kindled certaine displeasure and priuie heartburning. But the Emperour Iohn Comne∣nus entred into league and linked in amitie with Ma∣sute, whose both powers ioyned together went agaynst Muchumet. At length for spight borne to the Emperour there was meanes found for a reconciliation and agree∣ment betwene the two Turkishe Potentates, Masute, and Muchumet: which béeing brought about and conclu∣ded, Masute abiured his former league and reuolted frō the Emperour. Notwithstanding, the Emperour rased two noble Cities of Pontus in the Turkes possession, the one called Castamon and the other Gangre. But within a while after, Muchumet recouered them again, and sub∣dued Iberia also, with sundrye places in Mesopotamia. And Masute wanne Iconium with other places in Syria. But making an enroade into Thracia, hee was talked wythall to hys coste, and put to flight by Manuel Com∣nenus. The Emperour glad aboue measure for this victorie, layde Siege to Iconium, but the Turkes set theyr Stales so couertly, and brake out of an Ambushe so sodainely, that they discomfited his Hoast, and he hym∣felfe escaped very hardly. The Christians in Hierusalem béeyng sore distres∣sed by the Miscreauntes,A thirde voyage to∣ward the holy land. there was a thyrde Voyage and expedition made thyther, whereof was chiefe Cap∣tayne and leader Conrade Duke of Franconia, who with a great Armie of Germanes, Italians and Frenchmen re∣lieued thē: and méeting wyth the Turkes (wyth whom the Greeques had also conspired) néere by the Ryuer Meander gaue vnto them Battayle. In which terrible conflicte there was a merueylous greate slaughter of Turkes. After that Masute was deade, his thrée Sonnes parted
the Kingdome among them, and afterward Iagupasanes and the Sultane of Iconium fell together by the eares for their moyties. In th'ende Iagupasanes got the victorie, and the Sultane fledde for succour to the Emperour, who caryed him to Constantinople with him, for a Triumph. And heere by the waye, I may not omyt to declare a pre∣tie Iest of a Sarracene Icarus.One yt: toke vpon him to flie in the aire. This merie felow, at∣tending vpon the Sultane, and bearing the countenaunce of a Iuggeler, at a certaine solemne Iustes or Tyltrun∣nyng, voluntarily went vp to the toppe of a Turret stan∣dyng in the Tyltyeard at Constantinople, vnder ye which Turret was the Tylte it selfe, where the Horse tooke their races and courses, and aboue, were those foure cou∣ragious and praūsing gilt Coursers which now stand on the toppe of the Church of S. Marke in Venice, directly opposite, & standyng ful but one against another. He stan∣ding on the toppe of this Turret craked and bragged that he would flie in the Ayre ye space of a furlong. And hauing on, a large white garmēt, down to his foote, ful of plaites, knotted and gathered round to hoouer in the ayre withall, he stoode fluttering for winde with his handes in steede of winges, and hauing (as he thought) sored long ynough, at length committed his body to the curtesie of the wind, but falling downe headlong on the grounde, hee bruised and brake all his bones wyth the fall, and there lyke a vaine Cockscombe yelded vp the Ghost and dyed. Nowe, Manuel to th'intent he would bee reputed and thought of the Sultane to be a Prince liberall, mag∣nificent and mightie, dismissed and sent him away not wythout honourable rewardes, besyde a huyge Masse of money and other most precious Wares: vppon conditi∣on, that hee shoulde redeliuer and restore vnto him the Citie of Sebastia, wyth the Suburbes of the same. But when the Sultane was retourned to Iconium wyth
hys money he retourned to hys former vomite,What trust is in ye pro∣mise of a Turke. spoy∣ling Sebastia and all the places neere aboute it, and tooke vppon hym the chiefe Soueraigntie and prehe∣minence of all that Territorie: and dryuing hys other brother Dadune out of the Countrey, and getting by force the Citie of Caesarea, he went about also to supplant and ouerthrow Iagupasan. Dadune got into hys possession the Countrey of A∣masia béeyng wythout any possessour: but it was not long ere he was agayne expulsed and dryuen oute by Clizastlan the Sultane, who bore all the swaye in Cap∣padocia.A good Childe. This Clizastlan albeit he called the Empe∣perour, father: yet he euer incroched vppon his Pro∣uinces and spoyled hys Countreyes. Wherevppon, within a whyle after, a newe garboyle and hatred was kindled betweene them: for that the Sultane likewise charged the Emperour with breache of promyse, in sundrye Articles and couenauntes before condiscended vnto. The Emperour purposing with all hys myght to bée auenged of his Aduersaries, and alreadye concey∣uing in his mynde the destruction and vtter subuer∣tion of the Turkishe Nation, leuyed together al his olde beaten Souldiours, mustered newe Legions, and procu∣red all the forayne ayde that hee coulde from any place, made a firme League with Baldwine King of Hierusa∣lem, and retained in wages the Scythians confyning vp∣on the Ryuer Ister, and thus hauing a mightie and popu∣lous Army, wyth all thinges in good order and readines decently purueighed, (after he had made hys prayers to Almightie God the gyuer of all victorye for his diuine assistaunce) marched foorth in good order against them: His iourney lay through Phrigia and Laodicaea Cho∣nas S. Archangel, Lampis and Celenas where the head Spring of the great Meander is, into whiche the Riuer
rashlie then aduisedlie, chopped hardilye into the same streicts hauing his battel apointed in this order folow∣ing. The Voward was led by the two Suns of Angelus Constantine whose names were Iohn and Andronicus, with Macroduca Constantine and Lapardus Androni∣cus, with their Ensignes and Bands, and was marshal∣led in Lunare ranks or Mooned araye. The right wing was led by Baldwine King of Hierusalem, and the lefte by Maurozomes Theodorus. After them folowed the Drudges, Skullions, Woodcarters, Cartes and all the other bagage and Trinketrie of the Hoast. After them came the Emperoure himselfe with the maine Battaile, where in was a valyaunt Crew of chosen fellowes. The Rerewarde was conducted by Andronicus Conto∣stephanus. Assoone as they were entred within the Streights, where there was no starting hoales nor yet elbowroome for the Hoast, and the Bandes of Angelus Macroduca, and Lapard ordering themselues into a thrée square bat∣taile, (small before and thick behinde like vnto a wedge) gaue the charge vpon the barbarous Turkes and by fine force draue them backe from the Hilles and higher pla∣ces where they fought, into the Mountaines, and so per∣force,A lamenta∣ble slaugh∣ter of Chris¦tians by negligence. made for themselues a through passage without ani hurt or daunger. But the residue of the Legions, folow∣ed after them nothing couragiouslie: neither did they set their Archers in the flankes of their Battayle to gall and kéepe of the Turkish force as they should haue done, neither held they their Targetts close together ouer their heades like a vault, to beare of their shotte and blowes. Wherefore the Turkes in thick plumps and with great violence brake out on euery side vpon them from the higher places into the lower grounde and from the bankes where before they sought, into the plaine, and boldely en∣croched,
still more and more vpon the Romanes till they had pearced and broken their araye. And firste putinge Baldwine his winge to flight, wounded and flew many. Which when Baldwine perceued, with an intent to res∣cue and ayde his men in that distresse, taking with hym a picked Troupe of expert Horsemen, rushed in amonge the thickest of his Enemies. Of whom he was so beset and on euery side circumuented that hee himselfe was there slaine, and all his men most valyauntlye fightynge, likewise there dyed. This good successe set the Turkes on such a glorious hoigh, that they stopped all the wayes where the Romanes should passe, meaning that day so to plague the Christians, that they should neuer after he ha∣ble to attempt the lyke enterprise against them: for now being enclosed in those perillous Streightes, and one hin∣dring an other, they wer not hable to endamage nor hurt their Enemies by any kinde of meanes, but rather hin∣dred and disturbed one an other, and were cause of one an others slaughter and lamentable destruction. So ex∣treemely cooped in and pounded were they, that they nei∣ther could haue any help of the Emperoure neither yet of the Rerewarde, neyther coulde they goe backe or de∣cline on any syde, because the Cartes and carriage that were placed in the middle like a Bulwarke or Rampire, letted them. Their Horses and men were kylled lyke Shéepe, and with Turkes Falchions gored and foyned through. The Vallayes laye full of dead Corses, the wayes stenched with grisly sightes of slaine persons, the Downes couered ouer with dismembred bodies, the wa∣ters of the Riuers were coloured and ranne with bloude of Men and Beastes mingled together: and to be shorte, such lachrimable slaughter was in this place made vpon the poore Christians, that the wofulnesse thereof cannot with Penne accordinglye be expressed.
And beside all other outrages and vnspeakeable calami∣ties, the Turkes pitched the head of Andronicus Bataza the Emperours Nephew (which had leuied an Army out of Paphlagonia and Heraclea Pontica and was sent a∣gainst the Amasene Turkes in Amasia) vpon a Speare poynt, and caryed it before them for a mockage in derisi∣on. Which heauie spectacle and daūgerous plight so vex∣ed and inwardly gréeued Manuel, that his minde was wonderfully perplexed, insomuch that he was euē at his wittes ende and wist not what to doe nor which waye to tourne him. But the Romane Legions in the Voward, (as before was declared) hauing passed those pykes & deadly trappes helde themselues close together and for their sauegarde senced in their Campe, vpon the toppe of a little Hill very conuenient and commodious (as the time then fell out) for their purpose. The Turkes with might and maine stri∣ued to ouerrunne and beare downe the Emperours bat∣taile, because it they mighte once throughly disperse and subdue the greatest and strongest part of the Army, they thought the residue would easely and with small adoe bée vanquished, like as a Serpent when the head is bruysed and crushed to powder, all the other partes of the bodye (which before by themselues mooued, being cleane cut of) do straightwayes die. The Emperour fought valiauntly that day and oftentimes assayled the Turkes fiercely to driue them out of the Staightes and to open the waye for his men to passe through, but perceiuing the power and force of the Turkes (which fought frō the higher ground) still to encrease, and making his full accoumpt, that whe∣ther he taried or went forwarde, there was none other way for him and his company but present death, he ex∣horted his men first of all to repose all their hope in Al∣mightie, God and next in their weapons and handes, and that they should either saue their lyues by hardy blowes
and valiaunt déedes or else by honest and glorious death wynne to themselues perpetuall fame and renoume: for he plainely tolde them that he saw none other way for thē to escape cleare and harmelesse, but by such a famous ad∣uenture. And ye God would not vtterly forsake nor leaue succourlesse them that beare armour and fight in the qua∣rel of his holy Catholique Religion, for ye aduauncement of his glorious name, against the impious contemners and blasphemers of all religion, godlines, vertue and ho∣nestie, so that they would prostrate thēselues before hym and with deuoute mindes (crauing his diuine assistance) valiantly vse ye courage and power which his diuine Ma∣iestie gaue, & inspired into their stomackes. And although their chaunce were then to be slaine, yet should they (ha∣uing a most iust cause and quarel) for this their short and transitorie life, gaine and winne a double life: ye one, euer∣lasting and most blessed in the heauenly kingdome, pro∣mised and prepared by our Lord and Sauiour Christ for all such true Christians as sincerely worship and vnfey∣nedly beléeue on his name, but namely and specially for such as spend their bloude and life for the loue of his holy word and setting forth of his glory. And y• other is, a per∣petuall fame and a worthye memoriall in this worlde a∣mong all posteritie, which would most assuredly for euer extoll & celebrate this their prowesse and constancy. But such as threw away their weapons, should for euer be ill reported of and reuiled in the mouthes and speaches of al men, as fugitiues, forsakers, & Traitours, of their Liege Emperour & as villaines vnthankfull & vnmyndfull of God his benefites, and which is more, should by God his own mouth be accurst and adiudged to endlesse paines & sempiternal tortures. Wherfore he aduised thē to plucke vp their heartes, and by his example, euery one to make for himself a way & passage with his sword. Whē he had finished these his spéeches with those few that he had left,
be made streyght into the middest of his enemies, and af∣ter many woundes geuen and taken on either side,Valiaunt∣nes of the Emperour. brea∣king through the Turkes araie, and being so slashed and hewen in all his body that thirtie Arrowes or the rabout, stacke fast in his Target, and not able to take vp his own Bassenet or headpéece that was stroken of, yet (maugre their heades) hee escaped and went throughe the thickest crowde of them. The other Legions were on euery side slaine and brought to their bane, and troden down one of another. Such as escaped alyue and were passed these pe∣rillous Streictes in safetie, were neuerthelesse slayne and quelled by their enemies in the other vallay, beyond. For the passage in that place was diuided into .vij. déepe vallayes néere one to another: and beyng at the first en∣traunce somewhat broade and roumye, was (the further a mā went in) streicter and narrower. All which places ye Turkes had fortified & planted with their Ambushmētes and garrisons. Moreouer, there sodainely arose such a ter∣rible gale of blusterous and tempestuous windes, which tossed & raised vp such habundance of Sand (wherof those places are full) yt both the Armies most fiercely clasping together, bickered in the darke, as though it had bene at midnight, and killed all such as came in their reach with∣out any respect whether they were friendes or foes. And in ye same place, (were they Turkes or Romanes, horses or other cattel) it skilled not, for they dyed in heapes to∣gether one with another. And ye valley where this cōflicte was, séemed to bee nothing else but a common & a large Sepulchre or buriall place for them all. But yet at this time, there died moe of ye Romanes thē of the Turkes, & specially of ye nobler sort & such as were the Emperours néere Cosens & kinsmen. And many be∣ing there left halfe aliue, lay so buried & couered ouer wt heapes of dead Carkasses ye they were not hable by any meanes by strugling to get themselues out: neither was
there any at hand to help them, for euery one had ynough adoe to labour & sweate for his owne life and saluetie. In this ougly sort, they long languishing in that kind of hor∣rible & lothsome torment, wer in th'end enforced there to geue vp ye Ghost by a death most stinking, lothsome and lamentable. The Emperour himself panting and out of breath, was got al alone vnder a wilde Peare trée to take aire & recouer his faint powers, hauing with him neither Page, Henxmā, yeman of his Gard nor kéeper. Whom a poore cōmon Souldiour or horsemā of his owne troupe (being likewise thither escaped out of the battaile) finding in such miserable plight, breathlesse and comfortlesse, du∣tifully pitied and bewailed: and offering in yt his calami∣tie,A freend at neede. to minister vnto his Maiestie the best seruice that hée was able, raught him vp his Helmet & buckeled on hys other Armour yt lay héere and there dangling about him. Which while he was in doing, a certaine Turke ranne hastely vnto him, & séeing no man there to defend nor res∣cue him, tooke ye Emperours horse by ye bridle, meaning likewise to haue caried away ye Emperor himself as pri∣soner. Whom the Emperour with a péece of his broken Speare yt he had yet left, so blessed and humbasted about the pate, yt he laid him there on the ground to sléepe. Then ranne the other Turkes fiercely vpō him, to haue taken him aliue. Which he séeing, tooke the same horsemans Speare of whō before we spake, and wt the same run one of his enemies cleane through: while ye said Souldiour wt his naked sword, dubbed another of thē shorter by ye head, and so repulsed & kept thē of, at ye swordes point, till tenne other of ye Roman souldiors came running to assist them. Then was he very desirous to haue ioyned himselfe to ye other Legions, and most coragiously gaue the aduēture through his enemies: but the heapes aswel of dead Car∣kasses as of Turkes encountring wt him in euery corner as he went, much hindered and preiudiced his pretence.
Horse in suche a pace as hee was hable. Him had fifty Turkes espied, and on ech side enclosed to haue taken, but he no more stirred nor amended his pace for them, then if no man at all had pursued him. When they were clustered about him, he drew his sword, aud slyced one of them so cleane in the middle, from the head downe to his backe, together with the Sadle of the Horse also, that the residue for feare to be serued with the same sauce kept a∣loofe and durst not meddle.Friderick drowned. And after that this Frederick was drowned in a riuer, the Germaines retourned home agayne. About this time there sprong vp great discord and sedi∣tion among the Turkes. For Clizastlan the mightie Sul∣tan of Iconium, when he dyed, left foure Sonnes behind him, Masute, Coppatine, Rucratine and Chaichosroes. Vnto Masute he bequeathed the principalitie of Amasia, Ancira, Dorylaeum and certaine other cities of Pontus. Vnto Coppatine, hee gaue Melitene, Caesarea and the Colonie nowe called Taxara. Vnto Rucratine, hee allotted Amisa, Docea and the other Cities vpon the sea Coastes. Chaichosroes possessed Iconium, the regall seat of the Sultans, and with it Lycaonia and Pamphylia and all as far as Cottyanium. Coppatine being dead, Rucra∣tine and Masute fell together by the eares and stroue for his Segniorie and enheritance. But Rucratine for that he was a wittie and skilfull man in martial affaires, got the victorie and wyped Masute his nose cleane from all ye principalitie of Coppatine their late Brother. And being now all in his iolytie and ruffe for this his good successe & victorie, & hauing a monthes mind to catch into his hands Iconium also, denounced open warre and sent his deff∣aunce vnto his Brother Chaichosroes whose Mother was a Christian, vnlesse he woulde resigne his Crowne & geue place vnto him ouer all his Soueraigntie. Wher∣vpon Chaichosroes fled for his refuge and ayd to the em∣peroure
Alexius Angelus as his father had done before him, albeit not with so good Fortune and spéede as his fa∣ther, for hee was sent home agayne thence without his purpose. He was scantly come to Iconium, but hee was expulsed by Rucratine and driuen to flie to Lebune king of Armenia: of whom he was freendlie receiued and cour∣teouslie entertayned: but as for reléefe and ayde he gotte none, wherefore hee retourned to Constantinople and there in poore estate passed out the rest of his dayes. During the Empyre of this Alexius Angelus, the Ve∣netians tooke Constantinople and Angelus being thence disthronyzed, the Greekes in Asia created Theodorus Lascaris his Sonne in Law, Emperoure, who had vn∣der his Empire and obedience not onely Bythinia and the Regions along the Sea,Emperonte deposed by his Sonne in law. but also extended the Lymittes of his Dominions very farre into the maine Lande, and had vnder him all from Caria and the riuer Meander Southwarde, to the Sea Galaticum and Cappadocia Northward, and cōstituted his Imperial Seate at Nice. Which so tickeled and fretted Alexius, that he passing the Sea Aegaeum entred into Asia, and priuily went to Ia∣thine the Sonne of Rucratine (being now Sultane) in pi∣tifull plight & poore rayment: before whō he in suppliant words opened his state & fortune, & humbly besought him of aide & succor to restore him to his lawful Empyre and Crowne, vniustly by an vsurper detained & withholden: not forgetting to put him in remembrance of the former frendship which afore time he had shewed & horne to him while he was in prosperitie, and further promised hym great Summes of money. Insomuch that Iathine taking compassion vpon him and mooued greatly with his large promises, forth wt dispatched Ambassadours to Theodo∣rus, threatning warre and destruction vnto him, vnlesse he gaue place to his father in law & suffred him quietly to enioy his rightfull Diademe and Imperiall authoritie.
them out of that poore plot and beggerly region, which af∣fronteth Persia and the Caspiā Sea (almost Islandwise) and is enuironed on ech side with the Scythian Ocean, and ioyneth vnto Asia by one onely Isthmus or narrow porcion of land lying betwene the two Seas, the which is compassed and enclosed with the highe and inaccessible Mountaines called Riphaei as it were with a Wall or Rampier: the waues of the Sea (sayeth Hayton the Ar∣menian) going backe, and making way for them to passe betwene the Mountaines and the Sea. And therfore all those Scythians afterward, of yt Tribe wherof their first Emperor was descended, were called Tartarians: whose auncient descēt and beginning many (as before we haue sayde of the Turkes) doe referre vnto the tenne Tribes of Israell, whose opinion I doe not see howe it standeth with reason nor wherevpon it is grounded. This am I persuaded and this séemeth vnto me most like and proba∣ble, that the Scythians be descended of Magog the sonne of Iapetus, of whom the Scripture in many places ma∣keth mention: and that those tenne Tribes were by the King of Persia translated not into Scythia but into Me∣dia. But howsoeuer the matter goeth, the Tartarians in such sort as we haue declared, yssuyng and in great com∣panyes departyng from the Hyperboreans vnder the conduct of Cangio, (whom for honours sake they called Cham, which is as muche to say as a most high and So∣ueraigne Emperour) tooke their way downe along to the Sea Caspium. In the meane season, Cangio the Cham departing this lyfe, his Sonne Hoccota succéeded in his place, a man ryght wyse and valiaunt, and the eldest of twelue brothers. Hée sendyng out Gebesabada with a huyge po∣wer to subdue and conquere the regions of the Occident, and himselfe in person passing the Caspian Streictes,
Sogdiana, Bactrian, Oxo and the ryuer Sogdus (whiche is encreased wyth many and the same great Springes flowing and running into it) wyntered at the foote of Mount Taurus, solacing himselfe and enioying the fruictfulnesse of that region and suche bootie as he had be∣fore taken. This Mount Taurus is the greatest Moun∣taine in all the world, whose ridge & top hanging still to∣gether without any particion, hath his beginning West∣ward néere the Sea Aegaeum and stretching a long to the Ocean Orientall, diuideth all Asia into two parts. This Hill is also called Caucasus. The next Spring when the groūd was new clothed & decked with the fresh attyre of greene grasse & pleasant floures, they discamped from ye foote of Caucasus, & like an innumerable sort of Sheepe, mounted to the toppe of the Mountaines, inuading the Countreyes vnderneth them: and after they had there, made great pillage and taken their pleasure, they pearced into India, all about the Bankes of the noble ryuer Indus on either side:Cambalu a noble citie of India. constituting the Ocean, for the limitte of their Empyre. And there building a Princely Citie cal∣led Cambalu most beautifull sumptuous and large, and for all pleasure of man the most delectable and pleasaun∣test Citie in all Asia, appointed it to be their chiefe Pal∣lace and Seate Royal. Afterward, exployting his warres by Deputies and Lieutenauntes whom he made Chief∣taines and Generalles ouer hys Armyes, choosing ther∣to such as were eyther hys brothers or else of the bloude Royall: some of them went Northwarde, some West∣warde, and some Southwarde: and after they had sub∣dued the Arachosians Caramanians & sundry other Nati∣ons, wonne Persia and thence expulsed the Turkes: they then came to the Chaldees and Arabians. From thence they marched agaynst the Babylonians, and Assyrians and conquering Mesopotamia, brought vnder their sub∣iection the Persians, Parthians and Medians.
After this, going vp by the greater Armenia, wt incredi∣ble celeritie they ouercame Colchis northward, and Ibe∣ria that confineth hard vpon it, insomuch that their state surmounted, and flourished in same and honor excéeding∣lye. Now, this mightie Tartarian Prince was purpo∣sed to make the Sea on euery side the limits and bounds of his Empire, but the pleasaunt delicacies and amyable soyle of the Countrey of India, so mollified and effemina∣ted his mind, that beinge loath to departe thence, he set∣led & staied there, and distributed the Prouinces, Cities, Houses, fat Farmes and Tenements amonge his soul∣diours and people, and receiued the Rites, Ceremonies and Customes of the Assyrians, Persians and Chal∣dees. Therefore as soone as these Tartarians hauinge passed the Caspian Mountaines, had sodainly and forciblie sur∣prised Alexandria, a citie standing néere ye Streicts now called the Yron Gates: the Imperiall Sultane of the Turkes greatly terrified and dismayd with this sodayne irruption of a new and most fierce people and fearing lest if he should be driuen and enforced to enter into Warres with the Tartarians, his olde Enemies the Romanes would be readie to set on him behind at his backe, sent his Ambassadours with full authoritie and commission to the Emperour, to confirme and strike an vnitie and peace be∣twéene them: which thing the Emperoure as being en∣coumbred with Europian Warres) was very glad of, and willinglye therevnto condescended, because the Turks should be as a strong Rampier and Wall in Asia for him, against the inuasion of the Tartarians. This League therfore with the Turkes was of al handes glad∣lie embraced, and to the Greekish Empire most conduci∣ble. For whereas men (being so long time afflicted wt the lamentable calamyties of long Warres) bad neither oc∣cupied tillage, nor bred vp Cattayle, it fell out in th'end
(as néedes must) that great dearth and scarsitie was in all the countrey, and their Treasuries also with the char∣ges and costes of so long continuance were in maner em∣tied and cleane exhausted. Wheresore beinge now by this newe attonement and League ridde out of the same and brought to quietnesse,Peace bringeth plentie. he bent his whole minde an other while to the feats of peace, the swéet Nource and Storehouse of plentifulnesse and aboundaunce. And because he would by his example prouoke and stirre vp the rest of his subiectes to doe sem∣blablit, he (like a good Householder & one fit to be a Prince among ye people) vndertooke to procure & cause so much of the vnhusbanded ground as was neither fit to beare corne nor good to plant Vines, to be tourned vp and tylled: and manured so much thereof, as he thought woulde be suffi∣cient for the expences of his owne Table, & for the main∣tainance of all them whom of his méere liberalitie and bountifull goodnesse he had retayned and taken into hys charge to kéepe and sée cherished, that is to witt, the poore, diseased, & impotent people, vnto whom he assigned hou∣ses and Hospitalles, and appointed also certaine Grana∣ters and ouerseeers such as were trained vp & had the skil of Tillage and Vine planting.The good example of the Prince doth muche good in a Realme. Which officers layed vp yéerely in his Storehouses and Graners great prouision and store of the ouerplus of the corne. He also had aboun∣dantly store himselfe with Oxen, Kyne, Horses, Shéep Swine and with diuers kindes of same Byrdes, by whom he yéerely receiued great encrease and profyte. This not onely did he himselfe, but also by his example, occasioned others of the Péeres and Nobilyty, his Cosins and Allyes to doe the lyke, so that euery one, hauinge of his owne competentlie whereon to liue, the Communal∣tie should not be oppressed, nor the inferiour sort by sorce and extortion of the richer impouerished, with any intol∣lerable Tributes, Assessements and Paymentes.
By this means, the Romane weale publique was scow∣red and cleane purged from all notable exactions, and bri∣bing pyllages insomuch that within fewe yéeres space, e∣uerye man had his Barnes and Cellers full stored and stuffed with Corne and Wine: and such encrease of cattel Hens and other homish Foules, that the high waies and strets, Stables and Shéepe cotes, Houses and Gardens were vneth hable to holde them. This golden state and blessed felicitie was héereby al∣so the more augmented,A blessed plentie of al things cau∣sed through peace and good go∣uerment. for that the Turkes were with∣in themselues merueilouslie pinched and afflicted with great hunger, dearth and penurie of Corne, whereby it came to passe, that all their Golde, Syluer, Iuelles and precious Wares through this godlye forcaste and diuine wisedome of the Emperour, came into the hands and pos∣session of the Romanes, for then might a man haue séene them faine to choppe and chaunge their rich Wares for a litle bread Corne, to sustaine themselues withall: and e∣uery Byrde, Oxe, Cow or Kidde was solde at an exces∣siue price. All the wayes were pestered full of Turkysh Women and Children of the Turkish Nacion cōminge to and going from the Romane Prouinces. The Empresse also of the ouerplus of Hennes egges (for they were not possible to be all spent in her house and Famylie) at that time solde at a very high price daylye to the Turks,I Crowne Imperiall for the Em∣presse boght with the money that was had of the Turks for Egges in the time of dearth. had got together in short space such an incre∣dible Masse of Money as was sufficyent to pay for a most rych Crowne of Goulde set full of orient Pearles and precious Stones, whiche for that cause the Emperours called and tearmed Ouata, because it was bought with Egge Money & so in short time the Emperour enriched himself and all his Subiectes with Wealth excéedinglie. During this while, the Tartarians vnder the leadinge of their Capitaine Baydo, marching and making impres∣sions into the frountiers of the Turkishe countries, the
Sultan of Iconium, leuying as great a power as hee was able of all Nacions (for he had then with him of Greekes and Latines, that is to wit, of Italians, Germaines and Frenchmen, two Cohortes or Bands. Ouer the Grée∣kish band was Capitaine one Iohn Liuitnada a Cyprian borne (or as some say, one Paleologus) who earst had re∣uolted from the Emperoure: and ouer the Latines was Boniface Moline one of the nobilitie of Venice) euerie man being braue in apparell & well apointed wt Penons and flages of their owne Armes. With these couragious personages, marching against the Tartarians, he met wt them in a place neere to the Citie Arscor in the great Ar∣menia called Cosdrach. The Tartarians so sone as the es∣pied this straung Army apparailed contrarie to the guise and fashion of that countrey, supposing some greater ayd and succour had bene sent vnto them, were merueilously dismayd & astonied, and if one of ye Sultane his Kinsmen, for an olde gruge, had not in the beginning of the battaile fled vnto their side wt a great crew of pertakers, thei wold haue tourned their backes and fled, But the occasion ther∣of was the cause at that time of the Turkes ruyne and o∣uerthrow, & afterward almost brought al their kingdom & principalytie in subiection to ye Tartarians. For ye Tar∣tarians obtaining the vpperhand & victorie in this conflict, neglected not the oportunitie & good chaunce that Fortune now offered them, but passed ye riuer Euphrates and sub∣dued Syria as far as Palestina & Arabia. Wher after thei had assessed yéerely tributes vpon ye remnaunts of ye Syri∣ans, Arabians, & Phaenicians, they laded themselues wt many rich booties & spoyles, & returned againe into ye ori∣ent. But the next yéere folowing, thei passing Euphrates againe tooke their way Northwarde into Cappadocia, & went as far as the riuer Thermodoon: and taking I∣conium the chiefe Citie that belenged to the Turkes, Azatine the Sultane beynge banished with his Brother
Melecke fled for succour to the Emperour Michael Pal∣eologus, whom not long before (in like case and respect fléeing vnto him for comforte and aide) he had pleasured honorably and entertained with all poinctes of princely curtesie. And putting him in remembraunce of his for∣mer fréendship shewed vnto him in his néede & distresse, and vnfolding before him the pitifull plight of thys hys present state and calamitie, instantly requested him, ey∣ther to ayde him against his Capitall foes the Tartari∣ans, or else to assigne him some péece of ground or odde corner (as it were a colonie) where he & his people might repose themselues in some more ease and securitie: for he had brought with him his Wyues and Children and many Seruauntes, with much wealth and Richesse. The Emperour, for that he was on euery side encombred and wrapped in Warres, would in no wise diminishe anye part of his own power,Pollice in Princes. and as for the assignement of any part of his Countrey, to such a great Potentate as had beene a mightie Monarch and Prince ouer many Pro∣uinces, and also from his tender age euer brought vp in Princely pompe and stately preheminence, he iudged a thing very daungerous. For he considered, and wysely imagined that the Lordes and nobilitie which were vn∣der his rule and authoritie, would séeke their Lorde and Maister where euer he should be, and that his people be∣ing scattered and dispersed in diuers places, like the wan∣dring Planetes in the night, would flocke together and concurre to him that goeth before them with a Linke and leadeth the way. So would they come running to theyr King, and so perchaunce in th'ende, worke vnto the Ro∣manes some myckle woe and disturbaunce. And therfore ooding him out with faire wordes and noseling hym in good hope, he kept him at a doubtfull staie, without ge∣uing any resolute aunswere to his requestes. Azatine, for that his Parentes were Christians and he himselfe
also Christened & washed in the Sacramēt of holy Bap∣tisme in his infancie, resorted dayly with the Emperour to Sermons and hard ye holy Scriptures, dayly preached and remained so long with the Emperour, till at length by the meanes & helpe of the Europiā Scythians, he made an escape and fled with his Sun Melecke out of ye towne Aenum and passed the ryuer Ister and within a while af∣ter dyed, and Melecke by Sea passed into Asia to ye Tar∣tarians, and of them obtained the Kingdome of the Tur∣kish Nation, as his fathers enheritance. But a certayne Duke named Amurie with a Warlike power him en∣countred and ouerthrew, so that he was faine to flie vnto Heraclea, a Citie of Pontus: and wtin a while after again returning to his natiue Cuntry & recouering his fathers kingdome, wtin short space was trayterously murthered. Thus was the Turkishe Empire subuerted and brought to finall ruyne, and from a State of well or∣dered discipline and magnificence, fell to vtter decay and extreeme confusion: the cause whereof was, for that, not onely the Nobilitie and higher Powers dyuided the Kingdome into many sections and partes, but many also of baser degrée and obscurer Parentage, (associatyng vnto them the rascall Peazauntes and vulgar sort) practi∣sed pylfering and robberie, carying nothing with thē but their Bowe and Quiuer of Arrowes: and taking vp their Rowst in the Streictes of the Mountaines, made many roades into the Countreys about, and the Cities belong∣ing to the Romane Empire. For it happened a little be∣fore, that the garrisons defending the Castles & fortresses of the Empyre, for want of payment of their féees, & yéere∣ly stipendes at the Emperours handes, woulde serue no longer but departed thence, whych being at the first (as a thing of small waight and moment) neglected, was in the ende the cause, that the Romane Empyre sustained and incurred most gréeuous daungers and calamities. For
when the Turkes were displaced and expulsed by the Tartarians, they displaced and expulsed the Greekes, and looke howe weake they were in comparison of the Tar∣tarians, so stronge were they against the Greekes: inso∣much that at length the matter was decided with open warre and dent of Sworde. For the Emperour vnder∣standing that a great power of Turkes were vp in Pa∣phlagonia, leuyed a very competent Armye, to represse and (as much as might he) to inhibite their violent inso∣lencie, least if they shoulde bee still suffered impunely to raunge & spoyle without resistaunce, it might breede fur∣ther daunger and inconuenience. And therfore when bee had assembled his power together, he sent the same being wel appointed against them, who encountring ye Turks, had of them the victory. But whilest they disorderly and ouerfarre in chase beyond the ryuer pursued them, they fell into the bandes of an Ambushe which the Turkes ye night before had there layd for them. By meanes wherof they being on th'one side beset with an Haost of freshe Souldiours well appointed in battle aray, and on th'other side pent in and enclosed with the ryuer, they were slaine almost euery man. The Turkes triumphing for thys successe and victorie, enroaded afterward within the Ro∣man Territories, and came as farre as the ryuer Sanga∣rius, and subiugated vnder their obesaunce., all from the Pontique Sea and Galatia to the Sea Lycium and Ca∣rium and the ryuer of Eurymedon. At this time also,Mamalukea. the Mamalukes (which worde by in∣terpretation signifieth Seruauntes or Slaues) obtained the Kingdome in Aegypt, and aduaunced the limittes of theyr Empyre into Aphrica & Lybia as farre as Gades: and subdued Phaenicia and Syria and all the Countrey ioyning vpon the Sea coastes. Nowe, how this came to passe, we wyll declare. The
Caliphes and all the Saracenes, lulled in case and noseled in effeminate nycenesse, (engendred by the delicious and tender allurementes of that pleasaunt Clime and regi∣on) became so slouthfull, that althoughe they possessed a most wealthy and fertile kingdome, yet were they easie to bée vanquished and subdued by any: and the Caliphes béeyng all geuen to lust, Sensualitie and pleasures, tooke no care to any thing, neyther attempted any enterpryses themselues, but executed and administred all their Af∣faires by a Vicegerente which was called an Admyrall. Therefore when as Baldwine King of Hierusalem had made ye Kingdome of Aegypt tributarie vnto him (which tribute Almericke his brother and Successour claymed as due and payable vnto him, and the Aegyptians flatly denying the same:) Almericke with an Army entred in∣to Aegype and in the deserie vanquished in battayle Dar∣gan the Admirall of the Kingdome wyth all his power, and compelled him to flye for his sauegarde into the Ci∣tie Bilbis. This was about that time of the yéere, whē the ryuer Nile, by course had his yéerely incremente and o∣uerflowed his Bankes, whose Dammes and Scluses ye Aegyptians of purpose brake downe, because they would stoppe Almericke from further pursuite and victorye∣wherefore laden wyth spoyle and ryche boofyes of hys enemyes hée retyred backe agayne into hys owne Countrey and Kingdome, for feare least hee wyth hys whole Hoast if they had longer raryed, should haue bene drowned and swallowed by with the mercylesse water. Thys ouerthrow and aduerse fortune of Dargan, gaue occasion to Sanar (whom the same Dargan a lyttle before perforce had displaced and put out of the office and dignitie of Admyrallship, and caused to flye for succour to the Arabians, hys Tribe fellowes) to go to Norandine the Sonne of Sanguin ye most mighty King of Damasco, by him to be shrowded from the malice of hys aduersary.
that Realme and Countrey, eftsoones inuaded Aegipt and tooke by force the Citie Bilbis, shewinge much crueltie with fire and Sword to all sortes of people, sparing ney∣ther age nor Sex. Wherfore Sanar desired ayd of No∣randme, & vpon promise of great Summes of money, so long staied and repressed the impetuous course of Alme∣rick his victory, till such time that his ayde came, of whose comming when Almerick had vnderstandinge, he raised his Campe and departed out of Egipt. Therfore Syra∣con who had the leading and conduct of Norandines men finding Egipt without any foraine ayde or succour mar∣ched straight to Cayr the chéefe & royal Citie of the whole realme, nd slew Sanar comming out to parle and confer with him. And when he had got the possession of the Ci∣tie he went to do his dutie and exhibit honour to the Ca∣liph, of whom hee was created Admirall of the Lande, which dignitie he enioyed a yéere and then died: leauing behinde him for his Successoure Saladine his Brothers Sonne, a man of a surpassing and polytique wit, stoute, valyaunt,Egipt when it first came into the pos∣session of the Turkes. and of nature most franck and lyberall. Who immediatlie murthered the Caliph with all his bloud and Progenie, to th'intent he might alone haue both the Authorities and roomes. Thus was that most wealthye Kingdome brought vnder the obedience of the Turkes in the yeere of our Lorde. 1150. Afterward Saladine (as he was a man verye prudent and wise) perceiuing how tenderlie and effeminately the Egiptians liued, insomuch that when any invasion of fo∣reyne hostelitie approched or were like to grow, ye kings were euer glad and faine to craue foreygne ayde to sup∣port and helpe them, determined with himselfe to insti∣tute some kinde or order of warfare and to trayne vp a troupe of such Souldiours as should be hable at al brunts and assayes to be as a rampire, or stronge Bulwarke to
the whole kingdome. Perceiuing therfore that the people bred and borne in the Northren quarters were both a p∣ter and also stouter for the Warres then the Sou∣therne borne were, entred into League with certayne people inhabiting about Maeotis and Pontus, called Cir∣cassians (of Plinie and olde writers, Zigians) and bartered with them for an entercourse of Merchaindize betwéene them & him, namely that they should serue him of Boyes and young Striplinges at a certaine price. Who beynge brought into Egipt and from their youth trayned vp in feates of chieualrie and warlyke discipline, should do no∣thing but handsomely practise the handeling of their we∣pons and artilery, & when time required serue in warres and should haue the ordering of all honours and dignities bellicall. For the Zigians are a people of nature verye fierce, accustomed euen from the Cradle to abide all ma∣ner of labour, hardnes and trauell, inhabitinge that parts of Pontus and Meotis which is about the riuer Phasis which riuer is the bounder and méere of Colchis, and the mouth of Tanais, which Countrey or region containeth welnéere 500. myles. These people dwell not in Cities and Townes,These peo∣ple were af∣ter called Mamalukes. but wander and are dispearced héere and there without any certayne habitation from Village to Village. Christi∣ans they are by their profession and religion, albeit they vse many rites vnlyke vnto ours: their Infants as soone as they are borne (yea though it he in the middest of win∣ter) they cary vnto a riuer and there washe them. They are for the moste part faire of complexion and of comely stature, the countrey is fenny and full of réedes, whereof they doo make Houelles and Cotages to dwell in, they be at continuall Warres with the Tartarians and other Nacions aboute them. The Nobles and Gentlemen amonge them neuer goe but in Armour and Coates of Fence, and alwayes ryde
Lieuetenaunt and chiefe Captaine vnder the Emperour of Tartarians hym ouercame and tooke Prisoner in the yeere of our Lorde God. 1258. and caused Mustacene Munibila (who at that tyme had that office and dignitie, among the huyge and inestimable heapes of treasure and ryches which he had hoorded vp and miserably scraped together) to bée famyshed. After this, almost for. 200. yeeres space the Saracenes had no high Byshoppe, till at length in Persia the lynage and ofspringe of Mahomet beganne againe to raygne in the yeere. 1480. whyche how and by what sort it came to passe, resteth heere to be shewed and described. There was a certayne Prynce among the Persians, Lorde of a Towne called Ardenel, and his name was Sophi who greatly gloried, and bore himselfe very loftie and high for that he was as he saide descended of the rac and Pedagrewe of Ali the Sonne in lawe of Mahomet by Musa Cazine hys Nephewe, of whom we spake in the first Booke. This felowe nowe séeyng the Baby∣lonian Caliphe to bée slayne, and the contrarie faction which the Turkes maynteyned and kept to bée depres∣sed and tryumphed ouer by the Tartarians, beganne frankely and boldly to vtter hys mynde and opynion concernyng Religion. And because Hoceme the Sonne of Ali from whom he made his auaunt to bée lineally descended, had .xij. Sonnes, therefore he willing to geue some difference and token wherby his Sectaries might be discerned and knowen from all others, commaun∣ded and ordeyned that so many as woulde embrace and folowe hys Lore and Doctrine shoulde weare a pur∣ple Rybon or Labell hanging downe from theyr wrea∣thed Veyle which all Turkes weare aswel as they vpon their heades, called Tulibante, and the same in the mid∣dle to bée reysed vp into .xij. toppes or heightes wythoute the Tulibante.
After he was deade, his sonne Guines succéeded in hys roume, who for learnyng and sanctitie gotte suche estimation and fame throughout the whole Orient, that the most mightie Emperoure of the Parthians, named Tamburlane (euen he which tooke Baazete the King of Turkes Prysoner) leading his Army & passing through Persia, daygned to tourne out of his way and to visite as a man of most holy life and vnspotted sanctitie. At the re∣quest of which Guines, the same Tamburlane fréely de∣liuered out of hys captiuitie .xxx. M. Prisoners which he had taken in hys Warres and as then had with him in his Campe: whom afterward Guines instructed and trai∣ned vp in hys Sect and discipline, whoseseruice and helpe Secaidar his Sonne in his warres afterward vsed. For he after ye death of his father Guines, reposing his spe∣ciall trust & chiefe strength in them, warred vppon the Georgians a people of Scythia beyng Christians borde∣ring vpon his Countreyes, and by their help afflicted and put them to many foyles, ouerthrowes, and distresses. There raygned in Persia a certayne Turke named Mirza Geunda, who warred wyth Hacembecke (whom some doe call Assambey) Kyng of the greater Armenia which is of them called Diarbeck, béeyng also a Turke aswell as hée: in whiche Warres A∣cembeck gotte the vpperhande, and stewe hys ene∣mye Mirza in Battayle, and hauyng wonne Per∣sia, because hée was but of a base stocke and obscure familie and wythout Kinsmen and Allies, hee meant to make and establishe the state of hys Kyngdome the surer by linking in affinylie with some puyssaunt house and thereuppon gaue hys daughter whych he begat vp∣pon hys wife the Emperour of Trapezunte hys daugh∣ter (who was a Christian) in mariage vnto Secaidar.Beg in the Turkishe language signifieth a Lorde. After the deathe of Hacembeck, succeeded Iacob Beg, whyche worde signifyeth a Lorde.
This Iacob fearinge the great power of his Brother in lawe Secaidar (partlye gotten by his new Sect, and part∣lye by his Warres with the Georgians) priuely sent ayd to his Enemies, and caused him to be slaine. But his two sonnes Ismahel and Solyman, he committed in charge to one of his famylyer and assured Fréendes to carye and conueyghe a farre of, vnto Mansor Deporna, Con∣stable of the Citie of Siracia: willing and streightlie char∣ging him to kéepe them in sure warde and custodie with∣in the strong Castell of Zalgah, which standeth vppon a high and inaccessible Rock, till such time as by expresse certificate he should otherwise countremaunde him. But Mansor taking remorse and pitie on them, for the honor of Ali (of whose auncient bloud they were deriued) kepte them like Princes and vsed them most honourablie, cau∣sing them to be trained vp and instructed in learninge with his owne Children. And after certaine yéeres,An example of pitie to∣ward them that were fa∣therlesse. falling into a gréeuous sick∣nesse and maladie, insomuch that he saw himselfe not like any longer to liue, and fearing least his Sonne Caceme beinge a younge man, woulde after the death of him, deliuer these young Orphans and fatherlesse Children to Rocene (which raigned after his Father Iacob) furnished them with money, Horse and Guides néedfull for their iourney, and sent them home againe to their Mother and Kinsfolkes. These Orphans being enformed of their state and no∣ble byrth, and by what meanes they had béene preserued (which thing before that present thei knew nothinge of) their Kinsmen, Adherents and fauorers, for their fathers sake flocking in from euery part vnto them. Ismael the elder of the twaine, whose wit was both more pregnant and déeper then his Brothers, (drawne therto by destiny & naturall zeale) openlie before his fréends protested that he would neuer rest, till he had reuenged the murder and
death of his father, and after he had made certaine roades into the Marches and Precinctes of the Georgians (his power also daylie encreasing) he named himselfe Protec∣toure of Ali his doctrine and defendour of all his autho∣rities; and therwithall denounced open Warre vpon Ro∣cene King of Persia and all his pertakers. And because he had xij Brothers, which contended with him for the suc∣cession of the Crowne, he flew him and al the rest, sauing only Marabeck. This Marabeck fledde to Solyman Prince of Turks, and requested his ayde, wherupon ensued much trouble and great Warres betwéene the Othomannians and Sophians. But before he had obtained any ayde of the Turkes to succour him, Ismael had wonne not onely al Persia, but also atchieued and won many notable vic∣tories of the Tartarians.The kinges of Persia be right sara∣cenes. And thus the Saracenes expul∣sing the Turks, began agayne to raigne in Persia, in the yéere after the natiuitie of our Sauiour Christe 1500. and there do raigne tyll this day. And the Turkes with all their powers together ha∣uing conquered all the Romane Prouinces in Asia as farre as the Sea, distributed and cast lottes for the same among themselues, in which distribution and Lotterie, the maigne countrey of Phrygia as far as Philadelphia, and néere to Antioch (situate vpon the riuer Meander) fell vnto Carman Alisure, whereof the Countrie was af∣terwarde named Caramania. All from thence to Smyrna and the inner Coast of Ionia, happened vnto one Sar∣cane. Magnesia, Priene and Ephesus were allotted vnto Sa∣san. From Lydya and Aetolia to Mysia situate by Helles∣pont, Calames and his Sonne Cerasus enioyed. From the riuer Sangar to Paphlagonia, the Sonnes of Armu∣rius parted among them. All within Olympus and the whole Countrey of Bythinia, fell vnto Atman, other∣wise
named Othoman, (of whose race the Emperours of Turkes which euer since and now at this day raigne in Turkye and lineally descended) in the yéere of our salua∣tion 1300. Albert the firste of that name, descended of the house of Austrich being then Caesar and Empe∣rour of Germanie. And from this Othoman, Laonicus Chalcondyla an Athenian, Pau∣lus Iouius and other both Gréeke and Latine Turcographers doo beginne their Histories: wherfore to auoyd tediousnes, least after Homere, wee shoulde seeme to write an other Ilias, héere we make an ende. FINIS.
¶A Summarie or breefe Chro∣nicle of Saracens and Turkes, continued from the birthe of Ma∣homet, their first péeuish Prophet and Founder, till this present yeere. 1575 MAhomet the Sonne of Abedela and Em∣ma, of the ligne of Ismael, was borne at Itraripe in Arabia, in the time that Mau∣rice was Emperoure and Gregory the first, Pope of Rome. Mahomet patched together his Alcorane, (a Booke con∣taining his pestilēt doctrine & grosse opinions) through ye instinction and procurement of two hereticall Monkes. Iohn of Antioch and Sergius of Italy. And therewith se∣ducing the light brayned Arabians and other fickle min∣ded people of Asia, called them Saracens. At the age of xl. yéeres he dyed, and was burried in Me∣cha a Citie of Persia. Hierusalem after it had bene besteged by the Saracens the full space of two yéeres, was taken and spoyled. All Syria ouerrunne and wasted by the Saracenes. The Saracenes reuolted from the Emperoure of Romanes. Antioch destroyed by Saracenes, Damascus taken, Phaenicia inuaded, and Egipt subdued. The Saracenes wanne the greatest part of Africa and layed it to their Empyre. The moste Noble Ile of Rhodes inuaded by the Saracenes and taken: out of whiche they caryed a∣waye with them great abundaunce of Golde, and a Noble Image of the Sunne, called a Colosse, whiche
was in height. 110. foote. The Brasse therof being solde to the Iewes, was as much as 900 Camelles coulde carye away. They practyzed outragious Pyracie on ye Aegean Sea, and did much harme to the Isles called Cyclades. The Saracens discomfited Olympius the Exarch of I∣taly with all his Hoast in Sicilie. Constantine the fourth, entred into league with Mu∣chamed King of Saracens vpon condition that the Sara∣cens shuld pay a great Summe of Gold to the Romanes, with a goodly Horse and a Childe of noble byrth. The Saracens rushed into Sicilie, and after they had ta∣ken Syracuse and wasted the whole Countrey, they re∣turned backe to Alexandria. Constantinople was besieged by the Saracens, vnto which, they gaue sundry assaultes but al in vaine: where∣fore they shipped themselues entending to haue returned home, but the greater part of them through Shipwracke perished by the way. The Romanes ouercame the Saracens, and slewe of them. 30000. Peace the second time was made betwene ye Romanes and the Saracens for xxx. yéeres, vpon condition, that the Saracens should pay yéerely to the Romanes. 3000. li. of Gold, 50. noble Prisoners and as many Horses. The Saracens in the reigne of their King Ammirath, inuaded Africa and Lybia, & caryed away many spoiles. After the death of Constantine, the Emperour Iustini∣an entred into league with the Saracens vpon these con∣ditions, that they shoulde restore vnto the Empyre, Africa and Lybia, and pay euery day for the space of ten yéeres, a thousande Crownes, a Horse, and a Childe of noble byrthe, in the name of a Tribute. Iustinian breaking this League, and ioyning battayle with the Saracens, receyued at theyr handes much harme
and great ouerthrowes. The Saracens putting the Romanes to flight, greatly enhaunced their name and authoritie: contrariwise, the dignitie of the Romanes therby greatly decayed. Abimelech King of Saracens, inuading Africa, enioy∣ed not his victory there long. The Romans spoyling Syria, discomfited. 200000. Sa∣racenes. While Iustinian and Leontius were striuing for the Empire, the Saracens againe inuader The Saracens sayling out of Lybia, thus yéere set first foote into Spaine, wasting Aragon, Betica and Lusitanie. The Saracens of Asia, landed at Constantinople with 300. Saile, and fiercely besieged the same both by Sea and lande. The same yéere in Bulgaria there were slaine. 22000. Saracens. Zulcemō King of Saracens, dyed in his Camp before Constantinople, in whose place succéeded Amirath. During this Siege of Constantinople, many of ye Sa∣racens dyed of famyne, plague and colde. They that re∣mained alyue meaning to retourne home, by tempest on the Sea and Lightening, perished, being partly cōsumed by fire and partly drowned in the waters: insomuch that of their whole fléete which was. 3000. Shippes more and lesse, there escaped but only fiue. This Siege lasted fully two yeeres. The same yeere the Saracens thinking to recouer some of theyr former losses, wyth a huyge Army entred into Spayne, and spoyled all the Countrey sa∣uing onely Gallicia. Abidimar Capitaine of the Saracens in Africa, sacked and spoyled Burdeaux a Citie of Fraunce, and remoo∣uing thence to Poytiers, was mette withall and repressed by Charles Martellus. Their Captaine and Prince Abi∣dimar being slaine, the Saracens for a while were quiet and medled not with any moe warres.
The Saracenes bringyng wyth them theyr wyues, Children and whole Householde, entred a freshe into Fraunce, as thoughe they had meant there continual∣lye to haue dwelled, and planted themselues for euer. Wyth them, Charles the Great ioyned Battayle, ha∣uyng the ayde of the Frenche Nation, and slewe of them. 380000. and loste of his owne men onely 1500 Souldiours. Charles King of Fraunce, by hys valiaunt Knyght∣hood delyuered out of the handes of the Saracens, the noble Citie of Auinion, whyche they had before guile∣fully surprized. Charles restored many other Cityes to peace and li∣bertie, expulsing out the Saracens: slaying Amorrheus one of their Captaines, & putting Athine another of their Guydes to flight. The same Charles by helpe of Luitprand Kinge of Lumbardie, draue and expulsed all the Saracens out of Fraunce. Constantinus Copronymus Emperour of Constan∣tinople furnished out a Nauie against the Saracenes in Aegypt. The Saracens in the East were euer wynning some∣what that belonged to the Romans and layed it to theyr owne Empyre, by meanes that the Romanes disagreed among themselues, and bent themselues only against the French Kings. Charles the Great, had a noble victorie agaynst the Sa∣racenes in Spaine. Rowlande in combate ouercame a Saracen that often chalenged the Christians. Through which Victorie and vpperhande, he made the waye the easyer for the rest of his fréendes and Countreymen to wynne the victorie. Leo the fourthe Emperour made a voyage against the Saracens in Syria.
Aaron Prince of Saracens wyth 300000 lyght Horse∣men inuaded Nicephorus Emperour of Constantino∣ple, and made hym glad to become Tributarie, and to accepte such offers as greatly mislyked and diseased hym, but there was no remedy. Sardinia and Corsica two Islandes, were spoited by the Saracens. The Saracens wanne the Ile of Crete, and ouercame the Gréekes in two Battayles. The Saracens of Asia rushed into Palestina, and they of Africa into Sicilie. Boniface Countee of Corsica, hauing no helpe of the Chrystians sauyng onely the Hetrurians, sayled into Africa: and in foure Battayles, betweene Carthage and Vtica, had of them the Victorie and vpperhand, and so feared the Saracenes wyth the terrour of his one∣ly name, that they were faine to depart out of Sicilie, and get them home to defend theyr owne. Many Countreyes receyued greate damage at the handes of the Saracenes, and manye Cyties for feare, in euery quarter fledde and submitted themselues vnto them. Saba Kynge of Moores and Capitayne of the Sa∣racenes wasted Sicilie and all the Countrey about Cro∣tona, and tooke Tarento: agaynst whom, Theophi∣lus the Emperour and the Venetian fleete stoode at resist∣staunce, but all in vaine. The Saracenes inuadyng Hetruria and Latium, spoyled and sacked Rome: but before theyr retourne home, the greatest parte of them perished by Shyp∣wrecke. Hauyng wasted Illyrium and Dalmatia, they coa∣sted alonge the Adrian Sea, and burned Ancona a Citie of Picene, after they had taken the spoyle there∣of.
Leo the fourth, Pope of Rome, compelled the residue of the Saracens to packe oute of the Hauen of Ostia, and strengthened all the Countrey beyonde Tyber againste them. The Saracens agayne (onely for bootie and spoyle) brake into Italie, and wasted with fire and sword all the Countrey aboute Beneuent by the Samnytes. But by King Ludouick and Kinge Lotharius they were put to flight. The Saracens renewed Warres with the Persians: The Persians through the help of the Turkish Souldy∣ours (at that time the Turkes inhabited Mount Cauca∣sus and were called Tartarians) ouercame them. Euer after from that time, the Turkes neuer left Asia, and not onely encroched vpon the Domynions of the Saracens, but also were called by the same name as they were. After the Saracenes had enioyed Sicilie xlvii. yéeres, they were thence cleane expulsed. Charles surnamed the Thicke, repulsed the Saracens breaking into Italy. Nicetes one of the Capitaines of the Constantinopo∣litane Emperoure, had a notable victorie ouer the Sa∣racens The Saracens inuaded Puell and Calabria. At Lyris a riuer of Campania, the Saracens as they were spoylynge the Cities belonginge to the Romans, were ouercome. The Saracens breaking out of Fraxinete, came as far as Aquisgrane where encountringe with the Inhaby∣tantes, they were vtterly destroyed and Sagitus theyr Capitaine slayne. The Saracens spoyled Geane a Citie of Liguria, and with great booties retourned into Afryca. Hugh King of Italie wanne Fraxinete, and burned the Nauie of the Saracens.
Ramyre King of Gallyce, discomfited a great Armye of Saracenes in Spayne. The Saracenes committing many murthers and fi∣ryngs in Calabria, Puell and Lucania, by the Knightlye prowesse of Alberick Marquesse of Hetruria were re∣pressed, and néere to Minturne in Campania by the Ry∣uer Lyris vanquished. There intentes were to haue come to Rome. The Saracenes by force kéeping the Mount Garganus made out of it many Roades into the Countrey néere ad∣ioyninge, and burned Beneuent. Otho the first, Emperour of Germanes, draue the Sa∣racenes out of Italie, and dispossessed them cleane out of their holde in Mount Garganus. The Saracenes recouered Consentia, out of the which a litle before they were throwen out by the Hungarians. The Ile of Crete taken from the Saracenes. Otho the seconde, receiued a great ouerthrowe at the handes of the Saracenes, in a battayle fought with them in Calabria the Ides of Iulie, with whom the Greekes had stricken a League and ioyned powers. His stoutest souldiours and Capitaines being in this conflict slaine, he himselfe had much a doo by flight to saue himselfe. Alphonsus King of Spaine, besiedging a stronge holde of the Saracens called Viseum, was wounded with an Arrowe and therof dyed. The Saracens deuidinge their hoast into two partes, landed in Italie, tooke Capua and besieged Barum. The Saracenes of Asia tooke Hierusalem. Henry the second Emperour of Germanes, draue the Saracens out of Capua, and persecuted with gréeuous Warre certayne Capitaines which fauored their side. The Egiptian Caliph, through ye ayd of an army of Sa∣racens and Turks (which then ruled all the roast in Per∣sia) spoyled the Temple of our Lord at Hierusalem.
Baldwyne after .xviij. monthes Imprisonment, decey∣ued his kéepers and escaping out of Prison, retourned to his owne people. Dominicus Michael Duke of Venice with a well fur∣nished Nauie, greatly annoyed the Saracenes in Syria. To the Venetians for their worthy seruice and valiaunt∣nes were graunted sundry great Priuiledges. An Army of 400000 men set vpon the Christians and were encountred withall by 3000. Christians: who tho∣row the goodnes of God, slew of their Enemies with the sworde 7000, and 5000 drowned, so that the victorye fell to the Christians. In Syria the Christians discomfited the Saracens in two notable ouerthrowes: in ye first conflict 2500 of them were slaine. In the other, although both Armies were af∣flicted, yet the Christians obteined the victory. The king of Ascalon was by Baldwine repressed, and the king of Damascus in thrée battailes ouercome. After the death of Baldwine the third king of Hierusa∣lem, Fulco was made the fourth king. The Erle of Tripolis by treason was slaine, king Ful∣co was put to flight by his Enemies and condiscended to very hard conditions, to be clearely deliuered from siege. The Christians coaped in fight with the Egyptians and were superiours. Ascalon was recouered by the Christians. Fulco the fourth king of Hierusalē in hunting ye Hare and ryding fast after the game, through a fall from hys horse dyed: after whom succéeded his Sonne Baldwine who was the fift king. The Citie Edessa and almost all Mesopotamia was wonne by the Saracens & Alaph Captaine of ye Turks, which now were of great name and power in the East: where they kylled without all mercy a wonderfull num∣ber of Christiās, rauishing mens wiues in the Church of
Saint Iohn Baptiste, & in despight of Christianitie euen vpon the Alter. Baldwine the thirde of that name, and the fifte king of Hierusalem, conquered Gaza and Ascalon and cast out al the Saracens. And at Hierico he ouercame and put to flight Norandine Maister of the Chiualry of Damascus and slue 5000. of his enemyes. Manuel Emperour of Constantinople with muche ouersight and negligence led through daungerous wayes and desert places his Christian Hostes against the Sara∣cens, insomuch that for scarcitie of vittayles and other ne∣cessaries, they could atchiue no notable enterprise against the myscreaunt people. Roger King of Sicilie and Normannes, made the Afri∣cane Saracens tributarie to him for .xxx. yéeres, and tooke their king Prisoner. This yéere Conrade the second, Emperour, leuyed a great power against the Saracens, against whom he had in battaile but ill successe. Lewys King of Fraunce, assembled a mightie Armie to go against the Infideles. Out of England, Flaunders and Loraine were furni∣shed out 200 saile against the Saracens. This yéere Conrade the Emperour passing ouer Bos∣phorus without anye resistaunce, came néere to his ene∣mies: but for want of victuals and (as some say) his corne being corrupted and mingled with lyme and plaister, he was glad to stay himselfe and go no further and to bring backe his Armye. The Saracens vnderstanding hereof, set vpon them behind and slue of them certain thousands. The same yéere the French king came to the Empe∣rour to aide him: but by reason that his Army was great∣ly distressed and pynched with famine, he could bring no notable atchieuaunce to passe. The same time, the Vene∣tians with a well furnished Nauie went into Asia, to aide
the Emperour against the Saracens. The Spanyardes expulsing the Saracens, recouered Almaria and Tortosa, two goodly embattailed Cities. The same yeere, Damascus was besieged by the Syri∣ans, Frenchmen, and Hierosolymitanes, and the Va∣mures thereof defaced. And when they were euen at the poynt to haue wonne the Citie and subdued the Sa∣racenes, the chiefe Princes and Capitaines disagreyng and fallyng out amonge themselues, called theyr owne Souldiours euery man together, and departed thence, leauing the siege. Raymund King of Antioch with hys whole Hoast was discomfyted by the Saracens, who spoyled all hys Countrey. Antioch it selfe by the Kinge of Hierusalem was hardly rescued and saued. Baldwine King of Hierusalem, discomfited the Aegipti∣ans and Babilonians. The Saracenes draue the Spanyardes by force of Armes out of Almaria. Baldwine set at libertie and restored many Cities, ex∣pulsing thence the Saracens. Baldwine dyed, and in his stéede reigned hys brother Almericke, the fixt king of Hierusalem. Almericke in Aegypt obteined a noble victorie. The same king befieged Damiata: but in th'ende he a∣greed to a peace vppon conditions neither honorable nor profitable. The Saracenes of Africa made manye Roades into Spaine. Almericke King of Hierusalem dyed of an Ague: And his sonne Baldwine was annoynted the seuenth king. Baldwine in two battailes vanquished Saladine Kyng of Aegypt, and brought much treasure into Hierusalem. The Daughter of the king of Saracens being maryed to Prince Pagane, was taken prisoner on the Sea, by the
King of Sicilie, in hir voyage and iourney homewarde to hir husband. Thys yeere, the Christians in Hierusalem were ouer∣come. Mausamunth king of the Saracens with great costes and charges repayred Carthage. Baldwine the .vij. king of Hierusalem, beyng infected with Leprosie dyed. His Nephew Baldwine, his Sisters sonne was elected king after him, but by frouning deste∣nies he was kepte backe from his dignitie. After whom succéeded the .viij. king Guye of Lesingham. Betweene this Guye kyng of Hierusalem and Ray∣mund Earle of Tripolis, there arose dissension and hart∣burning whiche was the cause, that the Christians were brought into extreme daunger. The Christians ioyning battayle with the Armye of Saladine, had a lamentable ouerthrow. In this battayle were slaine 20500. Christians. King Guye was taken Prisoner, and the Erle of Tripolis, dyed sodainly. Hierusalem hauing now bene enioyed and possessed by the Christians .lxxxbiij. was this yéere by surrendrie deli∣uered vp to the king of Saracens, and ye Christians there expelled, the second day of October. This yéere all Iurie was wonne from the Christians by the Saracens: the Cities of Tyre, Tripolis and Anti∣oche being with much a doe and hardly kept. Fridericke Emperour of Romans with his sonne Fri∣dericke, Philip king of Fraunce, Richarde king of Eng∣land with manye other Princes and Nobles, assembling their Parliamentes, decreed & throughly determyned to ayde the Christians in Iurie. Great preparation was made for this voyage. Fridericke leadyng hys Armie in∣to Syria, and wynning the lesse Armenia, went in the hoate time of Sommer, into the Riuer Selephus to bathe & washe himselfe, where by misfortune he was drowned.
Lewes Kinge of Fraunce, went with an Armye to∣ward the holy Land, with entent, to supplant the Sara∣cenes and relieue the Christians. The sayd King Lewes, ioyning battayle with the Sa∣racenes, brought vnder his subiection Damiata a popu∣lous citie and curiouslye embatteyled. The same King Lewes, in a terible conflict at Faramia was taken prisoner by the Saracens, with his two bre∣thren Charles and Alphonse. Wherevpon Damiata was redeliuered into the hands of the Saracens, whereby he saued his owne lyfe and his fréendes, and was delyuered out of Prison. This kinge was taken the fifte day of Aprill. The Saracens lost the Ile called Baleares, which the Duke of Aragon subdued. The kinges of Spaine fallynge at variaunce and dis∣cord, the one brother fled into Fraunce to craue ayde, the other into Africa to desire assistaunce of the Saracens a∣gainst his owne brother, whereby they wrought much scath both to themselues and to their countrey. Deadly hatred and grudge fell betwéene the Veneti∣ans and the Genoways, whereby the Christians inhaby∣ting Ptolomais and Tyre were gréeuously afflicted. The Saracens draue the christians cleane out of Siria. Antioch was sacked by Bodegar the Sultane. Yet againe, Lewes the french kinge with his thrée Sonnes sayled into Africa against the Saracens with a great power. Where by his knightly prowesse he had the victorie of them and besieged Carthage: but by reason of the vnholsome countrey and chaunge of ayre, the pestilēce infected his Hoast, wherof the king himself dyed, and his sonne Iohn also, and then brake vp the siege. The Armenians and Scythians at Gamala a citie of Iu∣rie were destroyed by the Saracens, with the citie also. The citie Tripolis was taken & fiered by the Sultan of Aegipt, and the Christians in most cruell wyse slayne, or els caryed away captiue.
The cities of Tyre, Sydon, Tripolis and Bericus, by the same Sultan, were fiered & rased euen with ye ground. Ptolomais also being afore a place of refuge for the dis∣pearsed christians, was taken without any resistance and destroyed, and the very foundations digged vp. The chris∣tians which fled away and for sooke the citie, in their way toward Crete perished by shipwrack and were drowned. And thus were the Christians vtterly chased out of syria 190 yéeres after they wan it vnder Godfrey of Bolleine. The kingdome of Turkes. OThoman a man of obscure byrth & very ambicious, growing in great wealth & riches by spoyle and rob∣berie, was the first that tooke vpon him, ye name of Kinge of Turks. He within x. yéeres space subdued to his seig∣niorye a great part of Bythinia & other countreis about the Euxine Sea, whose generation since, hath wrought much mischiefe to Christendome. The Ile of Rhodes was won frō ye Sar. by ye hospitelers. Alphonse King of Castile in a notable conflict ouer∣came the Saracens, and tooke two mighty cities. Othoman king of Turks dyed and after him succéeded Orchanes his Sonne, the second king of that Nacion. While Cantacuzen & Paleologus contended for the Empire of Constantinople, Orchanes by force wan the most noble citie of Prusia. Orchanes in a battayle against the Tartarians (for so ar the Scythians called) lost the féeld and was with many of his army slaine. After him succéeded Amurathes the third kinge of Turkes. Amurathes through the couetousnes and treason of the Genowais (lending their ships vnto him) passed ye streicts of Hellespont to Abydus, where he conquered ye cities of Philippople and Hadrianople vnto his subiection.
This Ammurathes inuaded Seruia and Bulgaria, con∣quered them from the Christians, and at the same tyme tooke and slue Lazarus King of Seruia. Ammurathes inuading the higher Mysia, was thrust into the flanke with a Dagger, by one that was a faithful seruaunt to the aboue named King Lazarus, (whose pre∣tence was to reuenge his maisters death) of the whiche wound he dyed. After Ammurathes thus slaine, Baiazeth his sonne, obteyned the kingdome, & was the fourth king of Turkes, and slue his owne brother. Marke Cratenique king of Bulgaria, with all the nobi∣litie of his realme, was vanquished in battayle by Baia∣zeth. He spoyled Bosna Croacia, Illyria, Albania and VVa∣lachia, kyllyng many thousandes of Christians, being partly slaine and partly caryed into captiuitie. Constantinople was afflicted and besieged fully .viij. yéeres by this vnmercifull Tyraunt the Turkish king. The Lordes of England and Fraunce at the instance of the Genowayes ioyning with them, made a voyage in∣to Africa against the Saracenes and compelled them to restore and set at liberty the Christian Prisoners liuing among them, and to pay 10000 Crownes. The Walachians craued ayde of the Turkes against the Hungarians, whom (notwithstanding) the Hungari∣ans vanquished and put to flight. The Christians and the Turks mette and ioyned bat∣tayle at Nicopolis, vpon the. 28 day of September. But the victorie fell to Baiazeth who had there 300000. stoute fighting men well appoynted, wherof 60000 were horse∣men. The Army of the Christiās (being French & Hun∣garians) was not aboue. lxxx. thousande, among whom there were about .xx. M. Horsemen. The French Capi∣taines were in a maner all taken Prisoners, Sigismund the king of Hungarie himselfe escaped hardly by flight.
In this battaile were slaine of Christians 20000. and of Turkes 60000. This lamentable ouerthrowe happened throughe the discorde of the Christian Host among them∣selues, by reason that one whyle the Frenche and ano∣ther while the Hungarians claimed the first onset and the leading of the Vauntgard. After this battaile the Turke retyred backe to the siege of Constantinople. Tamburlane Kyng of Scythia, a man of obscure byrthe and Pedagrew, grew to such power, that he maynteined in his Court daily attending on him, a thousand and CC, Horsemen. This Prince inuadyng the Turkes domini∣ons in Asia with an innumerable multitude of armed Souldiours, in the confynes of Gallitia and Bithynia, néere to Mount Stella, gaue to the Turke a sore battaile, in the which, he slew of them two hundreth thousand. He tooke Baiazeth the Great Turke Prisoner, and kepte hym in a Cage, tyed and bounde wyth golden Chaynes. When so euer hee tooke Horse, he caused the sayde Ba∣iazeth to be brought out of hys Cage, & vsed his necke as a Styrrope: and in this sorte caryed hym throughout all Asia in mockage and derysion. He vanquished the Per∣sians, ouercame the Medians, subdued the Armenians, and spoiled all Aegypt. He built a Citie and called it Mar∣chantum, wherein he kept all his Prisoners, and enriched the same with the spoyles of all such Cities as he conque∣red. It is reported in Histories, that in his hoast he had an incredible nūber of thousands, he vsed cōmōly to haue xij. hundreth thousand vnder him in Campe. When he cam in sight of his enemies, his custome was to set vp thrée sortes of Pauylions or Tentes: the first, was white, sig∣nifying therby to his Enemyes, that if at that shew, they would yelde, there was hope of grace and mercye at hys handes: the next was redde, whereby he signified bloude and flame: & lastly blacke, which betokened vtter subuer∣sion & mercilesse hauocke of all things for their contempt.
The same yéere Walachia, Transyluania, Moldauia and all the Region beyonde the ryuer of Danowe, by pro∣curement of Stephan Vaiuoda their Captaine, sedicious∣ly mutyned and stirred vprores, against Sigismund. Whereby all men might perceiue and vnderstande, that the same Vaiuoda was the very Authour of the late dis∣comfiture, in procuring the Turkes to come thither. Cyriscelebes (whom some do call Calepine) after yt the Great Turke his father was takē prisoner and his Host vanquished by Tamburlane the Scythian King, saued himself by flight, & tooke vpon him to be king of Turkes, being the fyst from Othoman. The Turkes (after their king was thus taken & their power daunted) atchieued nothing worthy of any remē∣braunce vnder this Cyriscelebes. Cyriscelebes the kinge, this yéere dyed, leauing behind him two Sonnes, Orcannes and Mahomet. Orcannes throughe the great fauour of the Nobles of Thracia, was appointed Successour to the Crowne, bée∣ing yet a very young man: but in a conflict at Gazar, not farre from the ryuer Hebrus he was slaine chiefly by the villanie of his owne vncle Moses. Mahomet the sixte Kyng of Turkes, when his bro∣ther was thus rydde out of the way, enioyed the Crowne alone. This Mahomet subdued Seruia, Walachia, and a great part of Sclauonie. Sigismund king of Hungarie, in a battaile against the Turkes foughten in the fieldes of Salumbeze (whyche were somtimes called Philadelphia) was put to ye worse, and fledde. Mahomet imposed gréeuous and intollerable tributes vpon the Walachians. He translated the Seate royall or chiefe Citie of his Empire out of Bythinia into Thracia, and gaue prerogatiue to Adrianople, preferring it be∣fore
Prusia. He was the first king of that race that passed the ryuer of Danowe, he subdued Macedonie, and came as farre as the Ionian Sea. Ammurathes the seuenth King of Turkes, vanqui∣shing Mustapha ye sonne of Baiazeth by force of Armes, obteined his fathers kingdome. This Turke made his first voyage against George the king of Seruia, otherwyse called Rascia, from whom after foure yeeres siege hee wanne Newmound and Scopia, and myserably afflicted Synderouia. The kinges ij. sonnes whom he tooke in battaile, he berest of their eyes and cutte of their priuie members. But he maryed and tooke to wife his daughter for her rare beautie and come∣ly personage. Thessalonica a famous Citie belonging to the Seig∣niorie of Venice was won by the Turkes, who left there no kinde of villanie and spightfull dealing agaynste the Christians vnpractyzed. Amurathes besieging Belgrade in Hungarie, loste 10000 of his men and was faine to retyre into his owne Countrey after he had in vayne and to his great shame, continued his siege vij. monthes. Iohn Huniades encountred with the Turkes spoyling Hungarie, and them discomfited. Ladislaus king of Polonie and Hungarie, sending out a power against the Turkes vnder the guydaunce & lea∣ding of the same Iohn Huniades had ouer thē a noble vic∣torie in the fieldes of Haemus, and draue ye Turke to such a streict, that he was faine to condiscend to a peace. This peace made with the Turke, (contrary to league and othe) was violated and broken by the vnabuised pro∣curement and exhortation of Pope Eugenius, whiche breache to the Chrystians was verye pernicious and hurtful. For first, ye Christians in the Streicts of Helles∣pont lost lxx. Gallyes. Afterward in a battaile foughtē at
the féeld, aboue xxx. thousand of them slaine, belīde a great number drowned in the Bogges. In that battayle was slayne Iulian Caesarine a Cardinal & Legat for the pope, who came thither to procure and incense the Princes to violacion of their League and Oth, and warranted them from daunger: ye king Vladislaus himself was ther slaine who was merueilous desirous to enterprise this War. Huniades with much adoo escaped by flight and saued himselfe. The Turke could not haue brought his Na∣uy through the Streictes of Bosphorus in Thracia to do this mischief, had not the couetous Genowayes win∣ked at the matter and suffered them, hauing in bribe and rewarde, for euery Turke, a péece of Golde payed vnto them. Ammurathes wanne the Isthmos of Corynth, and van∣quished the Gréekish Garrysons, together with the em∣perours Brother of Constantinople, and ouercame with pitifull spoyle all Peloponesus. The Kinge of Polonie encountred with the Turkes as they inuaded Hungary, and obtayned the victory. The Turkes desirous of reuenge, assembled a huige power a∣fresh, and renewed Warre. Wherin both parties were lamentably damnyfied, loosing welnéere 800000 men be∣twéene them. Notwithstanding, the number of ye Turks there slayne, was farre greater then of the Christians. But the Generall of the Christian Armye was there slayne and his head brought to the Kinge of Turkes. In the same battayle also was slayne the sonne of the sayd King of Turkes. The Hungarians vnder the leadinge of Huniades to the number of 600000 entred into the Turks Countries, and ioyning battayle with them, at the firste conflict, they had the victorye: but in the seconde, they were slayne in maner euery one, except 1000. or ther aboute which by flight saued themselues.
The great Turke besieged Croia a citie of Aemathia, many Monthes, but by the worthy prowesse of Scander∣beg, he was defeated from his purpose, and with losse of many of his men was sent away packing with a Flea in his eare. Amurathes Emperoure of Turkes dyed, bequeathing his Crowne and kingdome to Mahomet his Son, the 8. King of Turkes. Who (least his Father should be buried alone without company) slew at his first entraunce, his owne Brother, and commaunded them to be buried both in one graue. The first Warre that this Mahomet tooke in hande, was against Scanderbeg. Besieginge Croia with lxxx. thousand men, but he departed away without his purpose to his great shame and reproche, leauing behinde him at the sayde Siege Ballabano one of his chiefe Bassaes. The famous and renowmed Citie of Athens, the V∣niuersitie and Nurce of all worthy Artes & Disciplines, was conquered and rased to the ground by this most cruel Tyrant the Turk, who in some places therof digged vp the very foundacions, for extreeme hatred that he bare to learning. He threw all the Bookes and Monuments that he could finde, into dyrtie Sinkes and filthiest places in the citie, and to be put to the vilest vses that could be. And if any man séemed to lament it, the same partye was streight wayes put to death. The Castle of Pyruaem and Munychia was also most furiously rased to the grounde. This Tyraunt the xxix. day of May, after a continuall assault geuen thereto from the ix. of Aprill afore, that is to say, 50. continual daies, by his innumerable multytude of Turks, conquered the noble citie of Constantinople, to the vnspeakable hindraunce of all Christendome and high aduancement of the Turkes Domynion. At the taking of this citie, most horyble prophanacion of the Temples was vsed. As for Imags which the Turks
themselues cannot abyde, in great scorne and contempte were throwne downe. Among others, Mahomet himself laughing at the supersticious Citezens, in great be rysion gaped and laughed at the Crucifix, and caused it in scorn∣full maner to be caryed about the Stréetes with Trum∣pettes, and wrat vpon the head of the said Picture these wordes Hic est Christianorum Deus. This is the God of the Christians. Thrée dayes together he gaue leaue to his outragious Souldiours, to kill spoyle and rauishe both Wyues, Matrons and Maydes without any reuerence of nature. The citizens some they murthered, some they rosted vp∣pon Spits, some they steyed the skinnes, and afterwarde hanged them vp to consume with fainyne, of others they put Salt into their woundes the more to encrease theyr payne, contending amonge themselues who could deuise most straungest kind of new torment, insomuch that the Citie was no Citie, but rather a Slaughter House or Shambles of Christian bodyes. The Emperoure hym∣selfe being there slayn, his head was pitched vpon a speare and caryed about. At euery dinner and Supper, some of the Emperours Cosens and Nobles of the Countrey were put to death, so longe as anye remayned of that ligne. Of the inferior sorte, no day passed wherein he cau∣sed not to be put to execution aboue CCC. persons, the residue he gaue to his Sauldiours. The excéeding crueltie that they vsed at the winninge of this Citie, towards al sort of Men, Women & Chil∣dren, and their spightfull demeanour towarde Christian religion, it would me any mans hart to heare or read of. Mahomet besieged Belgrad (of some called Alba Gre∣ca) with a hundred and fiftye thousand men. The Chris∣tians assembling their powers together, at the exhortati∣on of Iohn Capistrane, Huniades their chiefe Capitaine and Ringleader slue aboue xl. thousande of his Enemies
and put to shamfull flight all the reste of them, in whiche encountre Mahomet himselfe was wounded with an Ar∣rowe. This battaile was fought vpon the 22. day of Iuly. This Turke ioyninge battaile wt Assimbey kinge of Persia, whō they call by ye name of Vsuncassane (signifi∣ing a worthy & drad prince) in ye first cōflict at Euphrates, lost x.M. men, but in ye second he obtained the victorie. Corynth was taken by Mahomet. The Turke wan from the Christians the Empyre of Trapezunce, beheading Dauid the Emperour therof and beside the sayd Empire and Constantinople also, he tooke from ye christians xii. kingdomes & conquered 200. cities. The Ile of Malta conquered by Turkes. The Venetians furnished out a great nauy well apoin∣ted into Grecia, to recouer Corynth, but they retourned without bringing their purpose to passe. The same yéere the king of Hungarie recouered Geisa a citie of Bosnia, the which the Turk had now the second time besieged, and hearing of the approche of the Christi∣ans, he cast 4. great Gunnes or Cannons into the riuer Drina, & fled trusting better to his legs then to his hands. Mahomet requiringe the Prince of Mysia to come to speake with him vnder coulorable speaches and pretence of peace, when he had him within his daunger, he fleyed and pulled his skinne ouer his eares, and caryed his bro∣ther and Sister about with him in triumph. The Turke wan a very strong holde in Epyre. George Castriot (otherwise surnamed Scanderbeg) king of Epyre, discomfited & put to notable foyles ye Turks in sundry skirmishes. It is testified of this Scanderbeg ye being prouoked, he neuer denied to fight, and in fighting neuer tourned his back, neither yet was he euer woun∣ded but once wt an Arrow in the foote, neither did he euer set vpon ye Turks with moe then 6000 horsmen & 3000 footemen. He is cōstantly said to haue slayne wt his owne handes of Turkes 2000 whome with such violence
he strake, that many of them he clefte a sunder from the head to the middle. Mahomet discomfited the Syrians and Aegyptians, tooke the Cities of Narrantana & Scandolora and fiered them, killing all the Inhabitantes most rufully, and throwing downe the Nobles and Gentlemen from the toppes of Turrettes and high places to breake their neckes. The same yeere he entred into League with Cisime King of India, to whō he gaue in mariage a noble Dam∣sell, out of his owne brothelhouse or Nurserie, with royal giftes and noble magnificence. Mahomet was put to many afterdeales by the power of King Vsuncassane. The same yéere Nicolas Canalis, Admyrall of the Ve∣tian fléete, gaue a mightie ouerthrow to Mahomet on the Sea, and slue two thousand Turkes. At the same time many Christians were taken and led into captiuitie by the Turkes out of diuerse quarters. The Turke sent 400 Sayle and 120000 men into the the Ile of Euboea vnder the leading of Omar one of hys Bassaes, in which enterprise and inuasion he lost almost 40000 of his men: notwithstanding, after xxx. dayes he tooke it, pytching the Italian Souldiours vpon Poales & stakes, and shewing all kind of horrible crueltie and vio∣lent rape vpon the Inhabitauntes. The same yéere the Turkes army entred into Hun∣garie spoyling and robbing as farre as Zagabria, and ca∣ried away with them. 10000. Prisoners. In the same yéere also they inuaded Dalmatia, Foriulij, and Styria, and haried great booties of men and Cattell. The King of Portugall, passing the Gaditane Sea, re∣couered many Cities in the borders of Mauritania from the Turke, and laid them to his owne dominions. King Vsuncassane hauing the vpperhand of ye Turks, wonne from them sundry Cities, whereby he purchased
to himselfe a perpetuall fame ouer all the East. Nicholas Throne the same yéere ioyned the Venetian fléete with the Armie of the Kyng of Parthia against the Turke. Vsuncassane in a skirmish vanquished and put to flight 3000 of the Turkes Army. The same yéere ye Turke entring into Hungarie with a maine power, spoyled al the Cities néere the water side. The Persian kyng and the Turke ioyning battayle néere to the Ryuer Euphrates: the Turke had the victo∣rie, and tooke of his Enemyes 6800 of whom in his re∣tourne homewarde at euery staying place and Tent pit∣ching, he commaunded euery day fiue hundreth to be cut in peeces with a sword, and then cast them out (like dogs) vnburied, filling all the Countrey of Armenia with thys loathsome spectacle of dead Carkasses. In a part of the Countrey that lyeth by the ryuer Ister called Muldauia and Walachia, the Turks had an ouer∣throw and were slayne by Stephan the Palatine of Mul∣dauia, Foure Turkishe Bassaes were heere taken and xxxvj. Ensignes. Matthias king of Hungarie, at the Ryuer of Saue wan a strong Forte from the Turkes to his high praise and commendation. The same yéere Capha, a Colonie of the Genowayes in the coast of the Sea Euxine, was by treason delyuered vp to the Turke. This yeere dyed Kyng Vsuncassane, who had vnder his gouernment the Persians, Parthians, Medians and almost all the East beside. After whom, succéeded his el∣dest sonne: who puttyng his other brothers to death, reig∣ned alone. The same yéere the Turkes practyzed much Pyracie in Nicosia, to the great blemishing and detriment of that Citie.
A great multitude of Turks were ouercome in Mysia. The Venetians made league with the Turke: Chal∣cis was by force of Armes subdued, and Scodra by sub∣tile practyze gotten and persuaded to yeelde. They pro∣mysed to paye hym, yeerely 8000 Crownes, condicio∣nally that their Nauigation and traffique ouer Pontus myght bee open for their Marchauntes as before it had bene. Mahomet sent a great Nauie into Puell, and he him∣selfe went with an Armye into Hungarie, and brought out of both places a great multitude of Christian Priso∣ners. And afterward by force subdued the Iles Leucadia, Neritus, Cephalenia and Zacynth. Mahomet went with an Armie into Aegypt to cōquere Alexandria and at home made preparation for all things néedefull for his expedition to Rhodes, which he nowe mindedout of hande to besiege, and had framed his plat which way to attempt it. This Mahomet by Mesich his Generall (a Bassa) besieged Rhodes, and beate the same with iiij. Nauyes most terribly. But the same was so manfully defended, that hee was fayne to his great reproche and shame to departe and leaue his Siege, which he had there conti∣nued lxxxix. dayes, in which while he loste of his men which were slaine out of hande ix. thousande beside .xv. thousande whiche were wounded. The Maister of the Rhodes at this Siege for the Christians was the vali∣aunt Peter Dabuson. The same yéere the Turke with a great Nauie inua∣ded Puell and by Acomate one of his Capitaines, wanne Otronto, a goodly large and populous Citie standyng vppon the Sea, and put all the Inhabitauntes to the Sworde. In this yeere also 6000 Turkes were slaine at the Citie Mantinea in the kingdome of Lacedemon.
In this yeere also, this raging Helhounde Mahomet the Great Turke, first of all others tooke vpon him the name of Emperour. Hee wanne from the Christians two flourishing and Noble Empyres, Constantinople, and Trapezunce, twelue Christian Kingdomes, and CC. cities. After which sundry conquestes he yéelded vp his blasphemous soule, and payed his debt to nature, to the great relaycing aswell of his enemies as of his owne peo∣ple, because of the horrible & vnspeakeable iorueltie, with∣out respecte aswell to fréendes as foes, most rigorouslye shewed. Baiazeth the viij. Emperour of Turkes, appeasing all ciuile dissensions and domesticall discorde at home, chased his brother Zizime out of all Turki, and was himselfe enstalled in the Empire. The same yeere Ferdinando King of Naples, sent his Sonne Alphonse with an Armye, who recouered from the Turkes the Citie Otronto, before wonne by Ma∣homet. Also this yéere Iohn Castriotte the Sonne of Scander∣beg assembled a power and recouered his enheritaunce that was by force taken from his father by Mahomet. The same yéere also Stephan Vamoda and King Mat∣thias, wanne from the Turke the higher coūtrey of My∣sia, which now is called Bosna. Baiazeth often ioyning battaile with the Sultan of Ae∣gypt had the worse, and in the ende was glad to make a league with him. The Turkes inuaded and wanne Walachia. Brother to this Baiazeth the Great Turke liuing an exile in (Rhodes whither he fled for scare of ye sayd Turke his brother,) was this yéere sent to Rome to Pope Innocent the viii. And after a certeyne time of abode there, was poysoned together with Alexander the Pope his Sonne.
Ferdinando king of Spaine with x.M. Horsemen and fifty thousand footemen, wan from the Saracen Moores, the kingdome of Granado, and chased them vtterly out of that Countrey beyond the Sea. This Turke Baiazeth with a great power both by Sea and Land inuaded the Inhabitaunts of the Hils in Greece called Ceraunij, and all the frée Corporacions of Epyre, and them subdued to his Turkish Empyre. The same yéere Matthias Kinge of Hungary, conque∣red a strong Holde from the Turkes called Sabatrum, whereby his Countrey lyued in more quietnesse and out of eare. A mightye Armye was sent into Hungarie vnder the leading of Cadume Bassa, by whom were slayne vii.M. Hungarians: and for testimony of this spoyle and ouer∣throw géeuen to the Christians, they sent many Christi∣an mens Heades with their noses cut of and in lothsom wise disfigured, to Constantinople. The Turks rushing into Croacia, were put to flight by Maximilian. The Turke warred against the Venetians, spoylinge with fire and Sword the Countrey Dalmaia,  aryed away wt him great prayes. In Foriulij also he cōmanded aboue 4000. men to be beheaded, because he coulde not cary them away with him by reason of a great deluge of the riuer there. The Citie of Venice for dread of hym was in great perplexitie and feare. The Turkes wanne this yéere, Modona and Corona, two cities of Peloponese. The Citie Methon was by the Turkes wonne from the Venetians vpon S. Laurence daye. Baiazeth com∣maunded the Byshop of that place to be beheaded in hys sight, and killed the Townesmen euery one, and for the most part consumed all the Houses with fire. By lyke
misfortune also, the sayd Venetians lost Naupactum and Dyrrhachium. Certayne Kings & Princes of Christendome, fréends and fauorers of the Venetian state, ioyned their Nauye with the Venetian Fléete (ouer the which Benedict Pi∣saure was Admirall) and spoyled the Iles of Aegina and Zacynth, inuaded Leucas and Cephalenia, tooke the Ile of Neritus (at this day called Sainct Maures Ilande) and reskued Nauplia. The Turke greatly fearing his owne state, by reason of the brute and rumour yt went vpō Elias the Prophet of Persia, commaunded aboue CC. Houses in Constanti∣nople with all the Inhabitauntes therein to be burnte. This Prophet was in such credit and estimation among the People, that aboue CL. thousande men leaned to his Sect and folowed after hym in Campe. His Tentes were excéeding rich and gorgeous, and all thinges among them were common. The same yéere, the Turke entred into League and concluded peace with the king of Hungary and the Duke of Venice. The King of Spaine in Mauritania Caesariensis, wan Mayneport from the Saracenes. The Sophie of Persia, vanquished, chased, and slew the Turkes in Asia. Grane a populous and wealthy citie of Africa this yere was wonne by the Spaniardes. The Spaniardes by force of Armes conquered Bugia in Africa. Zelime youngest Sonne to Baiazeth the great Turke rebelliously and most vnnaturally lay in wayt to kill his olde Father, expelled him out of his kingdome in his olde dayes, with all his Brothers and Kinsmen. At length he caused his Brothers and their Children to be strangled
and by a certayne Iew, whom for that intent he had hy∣red, he caused his sayd father to be poysoned. This Zelime by the factious election of his disordered doultiours and affectionate Rakehelles, was chosen and annoynted the ix. Emperoure of Turkes. Acomathes the brother of Zelime, being ayded by the Persians, warred against his Brother, but Fortune so frowned on him, that he was strangled. Zelime concluding a peace & renewinge League with the Venetians and Hungarians, made sharpe Warre vp∣pon Ismael ye king of Persia, & him neere to a towne called Chalderan, vanquished and put to flight: And tooke Tau∣rum the chiefe Citie of his kingdome (somtime called Ar∣taxata) without any resistaunce or bloudshed. Hee waged fresh warres against Aladule Kinge of Cappadocia, and taking his chiefe Capitaine in the chase, cut him shorter by the head, and sent his head to Venice for a Trophée or signe of his victory. This bloudy Zelime discomfited Campsor the Sultane of Aegypt with all his power, and slue the Sultane hym∣selfe in the chase. And folowing his good fortune and pros∣perous successe in this battayle, conquered and annexed to his Empyre, Alkaire, and Alexandria two goodly em∣batteled Cities, and all Aegipt beside. He also wanne Da∣mascus, the large and renowmed Citie of Syria. Hee made a passage or a Brydge of Shippes ouer the riuer Nilus, to the intent hee might pursue and coape with Tomombey the new Sultan of Aegipt. Whom by treason hee tooke and after all kindes of most cruell tor∣mentes and spightfull contumelies, commaunded hym to be hanged. Charles Kinge of Spayne draue out of his Realme the Marranes, which were a remnaunt of the Saracens and slue welnéere of the Barbarians .40000. Zelime the Great Turke was this yéere (as he had
well deserued) murthered in that place, where before he had moste vnnaturallye and rebelliouslye persecuted hys Father. After him succéeded his Sonne Solyman, the xii. Emperour of Turkes. This Solyman conquered the Citie Belgrade, a moste strong Buttresse and Garrison for Christendome, and wan diuers other Castles and strong Holds in Hungary. He also besieged the Ile of Rhodes with a Nauye of foure hundreth Sayle and a mightie multytude of  men. He beganne the siege in the later end of Iune, and tooke it vpon Christmas day next folowing to ye great shame & dishonour of al christian Princes. The knights of ye same Ile valyauntly a great while defended it, & often skirmis∣shed with hym, but in th'ende after many notable ouer∣throwes for want of ayde and power they yéelded. Lewys Kinge of Hungarie desired by his Ambassa∣dours, aid of the Princes of Germany, against the Turke inuading his Countrey and Kingdome, whiche they ap∣poynted to sende, but it came to late. For the Turke was already come, wherefore king Lewys in his owne person, leading his whole power against hym, encounte∣red with hym in battayle, wherein hes was ouercome, and thinking to haue saued himselfe by light, was drow∣ned in certayne Bogges or Fennes both Horse and Man. Many worthy Gentlemen in this Battayle were slayne to the great weakeninge of that noble Kingdome. The chiefe Citie of the Realme called Buda, was sacked and spoyled: and the noble Librarie, of Kinge Matthias vtterly consumed with fire. The Knights of the Rhodes planted thēselues against the Turkes in the Ile of Malta. The same yéere Solyman came agayne into Hungary, besieged the second time the strong fortresse of Bude, but séeing he could not according to his minde by force win it, he perswaded the Defendauntes by certayne offers and
conditions to yelde it into his handes. From thence he marched to Vienna a noble Citie of Austrich, and vppon the xxij day of September gyrded the same about with a most terrible Siege, beate it with Ordinance and shooke the walles with most hydeous noyse of roaring Canons. But through the courage of the defendauntes, he lost ma∣ny of his Souldiours, and being brought into a vtter de∣spaire of any good successe, he trussed vp his trinkets and in flying maner trudged away toward his owne Coun∣trey with all spéede that coulde be, fearing least the Empe∣rour and other Princes had folowed at heeles after him. During this siege, he haried great booties out of ye Coun∣trey thereabout, and caryed away many thousande Pry∣soners. He cast out young Virgins & auncient Matrones starke naked, and pitched little Children vpon stakes and poales. In his Armie he had a hundreth and fortye thou∣sand men: whereof (partly in this Siege of Vienna and partly in their flight) perished for famine and colde, the number of .lxxx. thousand. The Citie was most valiant∣ly defended by Philip of Bauary Earle Palatine of the Rhine brother to the Palsgraue; a young Gentleman in yéeres but of noble courage, with the Lord William Ro∣gendorf and Nicolas Erle of Salme and with them onely xx.M. Almeynes and two M. horsemen. In his iourney, through Austrich, the Turke vsed vnspeakeable crueltie, of some he cut of their noses, some he put out their eyes, of some he cut of their priuy members, of women they cut their pappes, Virgins they rauished, and of women great with childe they rypped their bellyes and brent the children: beside this, all along as they went, they brent Corne, Trees, Houses and all that was combustible, to make the countrey desolate. Solyman with CC.M. armed souldiours assaulted the Castle of Guntz in Hungarie, geuing thereto .xii. terri∣rible assaultes. Which Castle was valiauntly defended
by a noble Gentleman named Nicolas Iuryze. At length it was surrēdred vnto him, not as wonne by force, but as yeelded by composition. The great Trke himselfe hea∣ring that the Emperour Charles was comming agaynst him wyth. lxxx. thousande footemen and .30000. well ap∣poynted horsemen, of Germaines, Italians and Spany∣ardes, beside the Horsemen of Hungarie, thought the Countrey woulde bée too hoate for hym to staye anye longer, and therevppon fledde homewarde through the Hillishe Downes of Norica and wyth great booties re∣tourned home, wythout dooyng any thing worthye of memorie. Solyman yet againe meant to haue an other flinge at Hungarie, and to scourge the Kingdomes of Africa. Wherevppon he sent one Corradine Barbarossa Capi∣tayne of his Nauie into Africa against the King of Tu∣nice. Whom he draue out of his Kingdome, and depo∣sed from hys Crowne. And into Hungarie he sent Lewys Gritte, Bastard sonne of Andrew Grytte Duke of Venyce, to expulse and dryue out thence Vaiuode. But Meilane Vaiuode wynninge the Cytie of Mede∣uisch, which the saide Lewys Grytte before had gotte into hys possession, slewe both hym and all his Armie: And cutte hys Children into pieces, before theyr fa∣thers eyes. Charles the fifte with a great Nauie sailed into Africa, and restored the king of Tunice to his Crowne againe, and deliuered out of miserable captiuitie about the num∣ber of .xx. thousand Christian Prisoners. The same yéere Taurus a Citie of Persia was taken by the Turke. Where the Turkishe Souldiours lyuing in carelesse securitie, were sodainly set vpon by Tahames king of Persia, and .xx. thousande of them slayne. The Persians caryed thence manye spoyles and the Great
Turkes Concubines, to the great shame and reproche of their Enemies. Solyman assembled out of the Countreyes of Pontus & Propontis, C l. Gallyes. lxxx. Brigandines, & Foystes, and CC. lxx other vesselles of diuers sortes wherwith he inuaded Corsica an Ile belonging to the Seigniorie of Venice, and it besieged the space of .x. dayes. Then setting the Suburbes on fier, & making great spoyle of the coun∣trey beside killing or else taking Prisoners, many of the Inhabitauntes, he departed thence, and wasted the Ile of Zacynth and Cythera. Hee conquered and layde euen with the grounde, the Ile of Aegina, subdued Paros, and make Naxos Tributarie. He sent into Puell, the greater and better part of his Nauie, which were in number ten thousand picked footemen and M M. of his stoutest Horse∣men, which haryed and spoyled all the Coast of the Tyr∣rhene Sea. The fléete of the Emperour, the Pope, and Venetians ioyning together at the first, through discorde and ambition of the Captaines among themselues were disseuered and scattered a sunder. Inuasion and Roades were made into Styria by the Martyloys, a rude sort of Peyzauntly Lurdens, altoge∣ther geuen to Pylfery and Theft: but by the valiantnesse of the Countrey Inhabitauntes they were repulsed. The same yéere throughe Treason of Duke Calcian the Christians had an ouerthrowe at the handes of the Turkes in Sauia. The Venetians entred a Truce with the Turke, by paying vnto him thrée hundreth thousand Crownes, and yelding vp into his handes the Townes of Neapolis and Maluasia in the borders of Macedonia. The Towne of Newcastle in Dalmatia (wherein was a Garryson of Spanyshe and Germaine Souldi∣ours) was this yeere conquered and sacked by the Turks and all the Inhabitauntes and Souldiours therin (accor∣ding
to their vsuall custome) put to the Sword. The Ve∣netians all this while wynked at the matter, in whom it lay to haue holpen this outrage. After the death of Iohn Vaiuoda, who committed the o∣uersight and tutorship of his young Sonne to his Cosen Georgius Monachus, it chaunced ye Ferdinando leuied an Army to recouer his Landes & right in Hungarie. Whō Monachus in the behalfe of the Infant resisted. At length the matter betwéene them beyng brought to a Parle and conuention, for the quieting of all stryfe, it happened a∣mong Ferdinando his men, sodainely a Dagge to be hard goe of, which by the heae of the daie (as it is thoughte) discharged of it owne accorde. But Monachus iudging that it was shotte at him, charged Ferdinando with great iniurie, saying that from that time, he woulde neuer be∣léeue the promyses of Christians. And vppon thys rashe suspicion, sent to the Turke, desiring hym to come in∣to Hungarie with hys power to ayde him, who glad to haue this occasion, came spéedely with a great Army and discharging the Hoaste of Ferdinando from the Siege of Buda, seyzed the Cytie into hys owne handes and to hys owne vse, commaundyng the young Infant and his mother to folowe after his Campe. Then entred he himselfe and tooke possession of the Castle, and wanne also Pestum a Citye ryght ouer agaynst Buda, well sto∣red wyth Ordinaunce and Munition. At the same time he also won Stridon, and the Towne called Quinquec∣clesiae or Fynffenkyrken he rased and made lauell with the grounde. At the wynnynge of Buda, two Ensignes yéeldinge themselues to the Turke vppon promyse of lyfe and limme, were first by him cōmaunded to put of their Ar∣mor, thē to put it on again, & to ranke thēselues in battaile aray, after the Christian fashion which they readily accō∣plishing according to his cōmaūdment, & he riding about
the bankes to view and behold them, at length hadd them put of their Armure againe: whiche done, certaine of the tallest and strongest he picked out, the residue he cōmaun∣ded his Souldiours comminge behinde, to hew in péeces with their Swordes. Of the other which he had chosen out, some he set for Marks, or Buttes to be shott at: and some he appointed to his two Sonnes to slashe with their Falchions, and to trye their strength, whether of them coulde geue the déeper wounde, or (as they tearmed it) strike the fayrer blowe, that most bloud might flow and gush out of their bodies. Ioachim Marques of Brandeburge Prince Electour, was appoynted with a great power to goe into Hunga∣rie to recouer Buda and other péeces from the Turke. At the first, he séemed so forward and couragious, as though he woulde haue conquered the whole World. But his great heate in shorte space so slaked that he was full glad to be discharged of his office againe, before any wronge were offered him, and with shame ynough retourned home agayne. Whose cowardise the Turkes perceiuing, thought to shew hym some cast of their office before hys departure, and set vpon the right Winge of his Armye, and thence tooke 500. Duchmen prisoners. Whom in de∣rision they horriblye mangled and disfigured: and so sent them through Grecia to bee witnesses of their victorie. The kinde of their punishment was this: first, they thrust them cleane through the right Arme, with an yron redde hoat, to make them euer after vnhable to laboure and warfare, secondly their heades were shauen to the verye Sculles lyke Monkes or Friers, and thirdlye their pry∣uye members were cut of, to make them vnfrutefull for propagacion of Children. Notwithstandinge Maurice Duke of Saxonie in his expedition, shewed himselfe a gen¦tleman of haultye courage and was lyke to haue bene taken prisoner.
This yéere the Emperoure Charles, spéeding hymselfe somwhat late in ye yéere with a goodly Nauy into Mauri∣tania Caesariensis against Barbarossa to recouer Argiers, & staying (as some say) somwhat long at Luke, to cōferre wt the Pope, by force of tempest & contrary Windes, suf∣fred a lamentable Shipwrack, and loste a great number of his goodly Shippes with the Ordinaunce and Habyli∣ments of Warre that were within them. The Empe∣roure himselfe by force of weather was cast vpon the Ba∣leare Islands. In this expedition the Germaines valyant∣ly quitte themselues in skirmysh against the Barbarians in the Emperours behalfe, but the Italyans recuyled and fled back. Truce was for a certeyne time taken with the Turke which to both parties with longe warres wearied, was welcome and very acceptable. Sigismund King of Poleland, by Breuitz one of his Capitaynes, conquered and rased a stronge Fortresse which the Turke had buylt néere to the Marches of his Realme and Kingdome. Mustapha the Turkes eldest Sonne, thought he tary∣ed too longe, if he shoulde be kept from the Crowne tyll his father were dead, wherefore he incensed the Egipti∣ans to take part with him, and stirred vp the Persians to make sharpe Warre vpon Solyman his father. Solyman the Turke with a huge army, marched a∣gainst Tolcha▪ King of Persia, where the Turke in bat∣tayle had a great ouerthrow and lost many of his men in Persia. The Tartarians which were comminge to ioyne their powers with him for his defence, were slayne and spoyled in the lesse Armenia. The same yéere, one Curculey a Turkishe Pyrate with twenty Galleyes and Foystes, contrarye to the League and truce practized muche Pyracie and rouerye about the Coastes of Sicilie and Campania, sodaynlye
surprisinge the Inhabytantes, and thence caryed away incredible spoyle. The same yéere the Saracenes in Barbaria bruynge newe sedicious vprores, were by the valyauntnesse of Sestian and Albane two of the Emperours Capitaines repressed: who also delyuered Portugall and Spaine from their malicious inuasion. The Turke intending to make amendes for the late ignomynie and foyle that he had receiued, leuyed a newe Armye againste the Persians: and firste, he inuyted hys Souldiours by augmenting their wages, and afterward, by his Ambassadours, insinuated himselfe to all his confe∣derates and confirmed such Leagues as were betwéene them. But he lost of this is very well appoynted Armye in this iourney by famine and plague a great multytude. The plague also beinge very hoate and raiginge in Con∣stantinople (which Citie in his absence, he had strength∣ned with a Garrison of a hundreth Galleyes) consumed well néere lxx, thousand persons. In the beginning of this yéere, (whiche was a yéere of Iubylie) Solyman was reported (but vntruelye) to bee dead: which mercilesse Tyraunt sore afflicted the people of God, the space of xxx. yéeres. The same yéere the Emperoure Charles the fifte, by the Viceroy of Sicile, conquered and wan the Citie Af∣frica, from whence he brought 8000 prisoners, and draue out the Archpyrate Dragute, King therof, who fled to the Turke. The Turkes after they had in vaine for a time be∣sieged the Casle of Malta, tooke the Citie of Tripolis a Porte of Barbarie. Solyman at this time caused his eldest Sonne Musta∣pha to be strangled wt a Bowstringe, by his dumbe men ministers of Murther a vizured, he himself being present and looking on, for suspition of treason layd to his charge.
And there was a truce taken betwéene hym and Ferdi∣nando king of Romanes. After which act committed, he woulde haue geuen to an other of his sonnes named Gianger, the Treasure, horse, Armur Ornament and Prouince of his slayne Brother: but Gianger for very sorrowe of his Brothers death ra∣ging against his Father, callyng hym wycked dog, tray∣toure and murtherer, and bidding pby vpon him, refused his offers and drawinge out his owne Dagger pre∣sently thrust himselfe through the body and dyed. The Turkes Army came into Styria, and wanne the townes of Coppa, Capenisuar, and Baboza. And atemp∣ting to winne Sigetum, they could not with all their po∣wer bring it to passe. Wherevpon they departed home∣warde, but first, they fyered Baboza, Sanmartine, Ge∣rosgall, Selia, San Laurence and Caliange. Philip Kinge of Spaigne furnished out an Nauye to conquere Tripolis, or the Ile Gerbe: which Fléete ary∣uing in Gerbe and ioyninge battaile with the Turkes, was put to a shrewde afterdeale & ouerthrow. For there were slaine of them out of hande to the number of xviii. thousande persons. The Turkes in this conflicte tooke xxvii. Galleyes, one Foyst of force, and fouretene great Hulkes. In the beginning of the same yéere the Turkes wanne a strong Holde in Hungary named Filech: and after∣warde a Truce was taken betwene the Emperour Fer∣dinando and Solyman the great Turke so long as Ferdi∣nando lyued. The great Turke, sent his Ambassadour to Ferdinan∣do, who from the great Turke his Maister presented vn∣to the said Emperour a goodly Ienet richlye trapped and 4. Camelles with sundrye Christian Prisoners. Maximilyan now Emperoure, by the Lorde Lazarus Swendy his Generall, conquered & beat downe a strong
holde & Fort called Tochay, belonging to Iohn Vaiuoda which was eigerly defended by the Turkes. King Philip sent Garzias Captaine of his Gallyes and Admyrall of those Seas with a goodly. Nauie to wynne a stronge Castle belonging to the Turkes called Del Peuol di Velez, standing vpon the coast of Africa, from whence Turkish Pyrates were often wont to infest the Spanishe Seas and take suche as traueiled that waye. Which in .vj. ayes they tooke, for that ye Turkes defen∣ding it, in the still time of the night fled away. Solyman besieged the Ile of Malta, wonne the Castle of S. Helme, but not able to winne the rest, he left all and departed with great losse of his men. Solyman with a huige power entred into Hungarie, and besieged Sigeth and Iula. And there dyed, the iiij. of September, leauing behinde him for Heyre to all his dominions and Kingdomes, his sonne Selyme, now Em∣perour of Turkes. Whose tyrannie and rage God for his mercyes sake, inhibite and qualefie, that he vse not his po∣wer to the destruction and ouerthrowe of Christendome, which with ciuile discord within it selfe is at this present piteously rent asunder and most daungerously dismem∣bred. In this Siege the rather to allure his Souldiours to valiaunt enterprises, he made Proclamation, that who∣soeuer, brought to him or to his Sonne in law Mechmet Bassa the head of a Sygethian Souldiour should haue in reward .x. Duckattes, and after that rate accordingly for so many heades as they brought. Beside diuerse other causes ye vehemently mooued him to conquere this strong Piece, this was one, & none of the leaste, for one of the Turkes Captaines named Begen comming out of Tur∣kie toward Fynfenkyrken or Quinquecclesiae into Hun∣garie with .1000. freshe Horsemen, was encountred by the Erle Seryne Captaine of Sygeth in the night, who tooke from him 8 Camels 50 Moyles 60 Horses, and fire Wagons laden with Treasure and also gotte
ij. redde Guydons, with a whole piece of riche clothe of Golde, and a goodly Iewell. This Captaines Horse was betrapped most richly. The Pomell of the Sadle & backe part was couered ouer with plate of fyne Arabicke work, and the rest of the sadle beside the sitting place was plated with Siluer and gylt. The Seate of the Sadle was coue∣red with purple Veluet, the Trappers and brydle beset with small Turkeys and Rubyes. Which horse and fur∣niture, was sent by Earle Seryne to the Emperour to Vienna. The Captaine Begen (although the Erle Serine would faine haue saued him and taken him aliue, yet be∣cause the Ianitzaries fought so eigerly to deliuer him, he was forced to kill both him and them. From this Begen, the Erle got .xv. thousand Turkishe & Hungarish Duc∣kates, which should haue payd the Turkishe Souldiours in Fynfenkyrken. This valiaunt Gentleman at the Siege of this For∣tresse was slaine, whose death greatly discoraged all hys company. The Turke himselfe althoughe he dyed in the Campe at this Siege, certaine dayes before the fortresse were taken, yet by the subtyle pollicie and wonderfull si∣lence of Mechmet Bassa his Sonne in lawe, his death was kept secrete and vnknowen till the Hold was taken for discoraging his Souldiours. Insomuch that the sayde Mechmet Bassa, priuely caused Solymans Doctor of Phisicke to be executed and put to death, least he shoulde haue blabbed out his death. At this Siege were slaine thrée or foure Bassaes & 18000. Turkes. The Arabians and certeyne other Countreyes began in the beginning of the raigne of this Selyme to rebell a∣gainst him, whom he quickely appeased & brought vnder obedience. And made a league wyth the King of Persia. After this, althoughe the Turke had entred in league with the Venetians, yet now laying title & chalenge to ye Ile of Cypres, he sent his Ambassadour to Venice state∣ly
and malapertly to demaūd surrendry of the same vnto him. Which saucy request being not graunted, he cōtrary to league, othe, & promyse, first sent out Hali Bassa with 80 Gallyes thither to transport Souldiours, Munition, freshe victuall & other necessaryes. Then were appointed as chiefe Generalles two Lordes of his Priuie Coun∣cell, Mustapha Bassa, and Piali Bassa, whiche with their mayne power landing in Cypres first wonne the Citie Nicosia but not without greate slaughter and effusion of bloude on both partes. The Citie Famagosta was most terrible besieged and sixe times cruelly assaulted and righte valiauntly by the Christians defended so long as their power, victuall, pou∣der and Shot remayned. But the want of these thinges & the state of their Vaymures being by Canon shot bea∣ten downe & perished, caused the right valiaunt & honora∣ble Sig. Bragadino Lord Gouernor of the Citie & others of ye Venetian Nobilitie there, to yeld vp thēselues and ye Citie vpon some honorable condicions. That is to wit, that they might depart with their lyues Armour & goods, fiue pieces of Ordinaunce, thrée of their best Horses and safe passage from thence to Candye with theyr own Gal∣lyes: and last of all that the Grecians inhabiting in that Island, might dwell there quietly and enioy their goods and possessions peaceably and still reteyne their Christi∣an Religion without either burt or contradiction. Al these requests and Articles, Mustapha the Turkish Generall graunted and subscribed vnto with his own hand, but the cursed Caytif spake one thing with mouth & thought an other in heart, for the 15 of August, the said Sig. Bragadino (vpon trust of this Bassa his promise) accompanyed with sundry other Lordes Gentlemen and Souldiours came foorth of their Holde and went vnto the Pauilion of Mu∣stapha, with the keyes of the Citie: of whom at the first they were curteously enterteyned and caused to sit downe
by him, discoursing with them of sundrye matters and drawing them frō one tale to another, till at lēgth picking a surmysed quarel and specially to Sig. Bragadino sodain∣ly commaunded them all to be pynyoned and to be layde bounde one by one in the market place, and in hys pre∣sence there to be hewen in péeces. As for Sig. Bragadino, he first commaunded his eares to be cut of, and most vile∣ly to be stretched a long vpon the grounde, while Musta∣pha talked and blasphemously demaunded of him, where his Christ was that he helped him no better. Then he led him to all the breaches of the Citie, making him to carie at once two baskettes of rubbish and earth, th'one on hys backe and th'other in his hand slauelyke to euery sundry battry, being enforced also and commaunded to kysse the grounde as often as he passed by him. After this, he was ledde to the Sea side where being set in a Chayre, he was wynched vp and fastened to the maineyard of a Galley, and hoysed vp with a Crane so high that al the Christian Souldiours and Slaues in the Hauen alreadye shipped might behold, and was afterward let downe againe, and vpon the Pyllorie in the market place most cruelly fleyed quicke. After which most sauage tyrānie, his skinne was stuffed with Straw and hanged vpon the Bowsprit of a foyst to be caryed along the coastes of Syria, that al ye Port townes might behold and vnderstand who he was. The Turkish Army at this Siege of all sortes were in num∣ber 200 thousande persons. In 79 dayes (all which time the Battry still continued) 140 thousande yron pellettes were shot into the Citie, numbred and séene. The Christian Nauy being in number 207 Gallyes, 6. Galeazes beside a great nūber of Pynnesses and other Shippes, and 20. thousande all Souldiours, of Spayne, Italy and Germanie beside the Labourers and Rowers, wherof was chiefe General Don Iohn de Austria tooke the Sea at Messana from thence sayling to Coreyra, & so
to Cephalenia séeking the Turkes: where being out of Candy enformed of the miserable taking and cruell dea∣lyng at Famagosta, were further geuen to vnderstande, that the Turks lay at Anker in the Gulph of Velapan̄t. Spéeding themselues thytherward, the Turkes were in a ioly ruffe, marueilyng that the Christians curste so fondly hazard themselues vnto certayne death, and mak∣yng full reckenyng so to afflict and crush the Christian power at that time, that they should neuer be able after∣warde to withstand thē more. But they reckened before their Host, and God gaue the victorie. For there were taken, burnt, and sunk of the Turkish Gallyes, Galiots and Brygandines 230. There were slayne of the Turkes 30. thousand, beside a great number taken priso∣ners: and about xiiii. thousand Christians that had bene kept in lothsome captyuitie, were set at libertie, breaking their chaynes to be reuenged of their extréeme slauerie, to helpe the Christians when the Turkishe side began to goe to wreck. The chiefe brunt of this conflict was vpon the 6. day of October, and lasted foure houres, but the slaughter and chase continued all day from morning tyll night, insomuch that the Sea séemed redd with bloud: for none escaped thence aliue sauing 40. Gallyes which fled at the first beginning. The Christians lost seauen Gal∣lyes and were slayne betwéene the number of vi. or vii. thousande. The wind and Sunne was on the backs of the Chris∣tians, and full in the faces of the Turkes, whiche great∣lye helped them at this pinch, and furthermore the Stemmes of the Turks Gallies were so high, that they ouershotte our men, which made them to vasten to grap∣pling & there beside a great sort of Ianyzaries and commō Turkes, their Bassa was slaine. This yéere the seauenth of October, the noble and valyaunt Prince Don Iohn De Austria with 105 Gal∣lyes and 40. great Shippes was sent by Phylip King of
Spayne to take and set order in the kingdome of Tunice, where was great ruffling and hurly burly for the State. He therfore takyng Ship at Iauagnana, had the wynd so fauorable, that by noone the next day he arryued at Go∣letta. Afterward there folowed and came to him Marcel∣lus Auria with 29. well trimmed Foysts, and the Duke of Sessia with 14. of the Popes gallyes. The Turkes in Tunice for dread of his puissaunce (whom to their cost not long before they had tryed) fled out of Tunice, some to Carauana and 400. of them to Bisana, sometime called Vtica: whom the Bisanes would not receiue nor succour: whervpon after many hoat wordes on either party, they fell together by the eares among themselues. The Bisa∣nes (to be the stronger in that byckeringe) vnclogged and vnchayned 150. Christian Prisoners whom the Turkes had vsed for Gallye Slaues, and them furnished with Weapon and armure. By whose help and meane special∣ly, the Bisanes got the vpperhande and slue many of the Turkes. Which done, Don Iohn (hauing the goodwyl of the Townesmen) sent thither Sig. Salazara the Spani∣arde, to take possession of the Towne, and to sweare the Ahabitauntes to be true obedient Subiectes to Kinge Philip. Then landing his Army within foure miles of Tunice, he sent 2500. Footemen to the citie, where they found no body to resist them but onely 200 Moores in the Castle, who sayde that they kept the same to the vse of Amidas their Kinge. Whom Don Iohn sent Prisoner with his Wife and Children into Sicile, because he had bene cause of great discorde and faction in that Countrie, and (dispossessing the lawfull heyres thereof) had violent∣lye vsurped the same and procured the Turkes to come thither. In whose roome be appoynted young Muleasses, who sware to be true Vassall vnto Kinge Phylip and to holde his Crowne of hym by Homage, whom the Cite∣zins with a goodly peale of Ordinaunce receiued & glad∣lye
séemed to admit for their Souereigne. Ouer the Cas∣tle or chiefe Fort of the Citie he appoynted. Sig. Serbel∣lane Captaine. The iiij. of February 200 footemen and 150 Horsemen of the Garrison of the sayd Sig. Serbellan, ioyning also vnto thē for helpe 4000 Moores, yssued out of their. Fort and encountred with 1500 Turkes and 3000 Arabians, which robbed and spoyled the goods of the Tunicians and gréeuously molested them. In which conflict, the false har∣ted Moores reuolting and refusing to fight, there was ta∣ken 150 Christians and two Gunnes. Still the Turkes stamping and staring for rage to see the Spanyardes beare rule and authoritie in those quar∣ters, priuely in the night the 21 of Februarie surpryzed Canisum, killing therein and slaying aboue a thousande persons, and after they had vtterly burnt the towne euen to the Castle gate, they retyred backe whence they came. The Garrison in the Castle to their great griefe all thys while beholding this outragious dealing, & durst not once aduenture to coape with them for frare of loosing all, be∣cause they were in number farre fewer their they. This yéere the Venetians entred into league with Se∣lyme the Great Turke, for confirmation whereof, they sent Sig. Francesco Barbero to Constantinople, ye condi∣tions wherof were, yt eyther partie should stil kéepe & en∣ioy so much as they had alredy in their seueral possessiōs, sauing that the Venetians promised the deliuery of Sapo∣tum and resignation of all their tytle in the Forte of xe∣menicum into the Turkes handes: and againe, ye Turke resigned and graunted vnto them, two miles euery way about the Territory of Zara and other their Iurisdictions therabout, and that the Venetians for Dalmatia and cer∣teyne other péeces about Zara, should yéerely answer on certaine tribute to the said Turke.
In March this yéere the Moores whom Don Iohn de Austria permitted vpon their humble sute still to in∣habite in Tunyce, by the egging and procurement of Radamane Viceroy of Algiera, entred into conspyracie and deuise, how to surprise and winne the new Fort that the Spaniardes had there lately made, against whom Salazara was commaunded by Sig. Serbellane to go with a thousand footemen, which put the Moorish Drudges to flight, and slue of them 1200. Thrée Shippes were sent to Charles the ix. Kinge of Fraunce, laden with great Horses, Lyons, Lyberds, and other Presentes. Whiche colourable curtesie vnder the cloake of glosing flatterie, it is thought the Turke vsed, the rather to obteyne the Kinges goodwyll and consent that he might winter his Gallyes in the Port Tolonen∣sis. But hearing that the King was departed this lyfe be∣fore their comming, one of them retourned to Constan∣tinople with spéede, to intimate to the Turke their Mai∣ster, the French Kinges death, and further to know his pleasure what they should doe. In Iune the Emperour and the Turke concluded a peace for fiue yéeres to come. In Iule, 300 Turkes landing in Calabria to fetche fresh water and filch some other booties, were snatched vp euery one and either slaine or taken. Vppon the Seas about Tunyce were seene 350 Saile of the Turkes, whose intent and meaning was (as very shortly after they brought it to passe) to recouer and wynne the new Fort which Sarraglion builded, toge∣ther with Goletta and other Péeces there. With whom also a mighty rablement of traiterous Moores about Al∣giera, Tripolis & Zerbite ioyned side: which dispossessed thence the Spanish garrisons, to the great furtherance of their deuelish purposes ad to the lamentable griefe of all Christendome, considering what a small way they haue
from thence into Spaine & so into the rest of other Chri∣stian Realmes, vnlesse the good and gracious prouidence of our God qualese and as with a Snaffle reine this raging Beaste and bloudy Tyraunt, the common robber of all the world from further inuasion, which he graciously graunt for his mer∣cye sake through the mediation of his Sonne Christ our Lord and onely Sauiour Amen. FINIS. ❧ IMPRINTED AT London by William How, for Abraham Veale, dwelling in Paules Churchyard, at the signe of the Lambe. 1575.
