7049 99853685 19079
A SERMON OF COMMEMO∣RATION OF THE Lady Dāuers, late Wife of Sr. Iohn Dāuers. Preach'd at Chilsey, where she was lately buried. By Iohn Donne D. of St. Pauls, Lond. 1. Iuly 1627. Together with other Comme∣morations of Her; By her Sonne G. Herbert. LONDON, Printed by I. H. for Philemon Stephens, and Christopher Mere∣dith, and are to be sold at their shop at the golden Lion in Pauls Church yard. 1627.
Errata. Page 17. line 19. for her, reade the. p. 27. l. 20. for Royall, r reall p. 34 l. 5. for Germ, r. Iohan∣nes Baptista Vergerius. p 35. l. 15. for in, r. into. p. 36. l. 6. for the power, r. the abused power p. 44 l. 12. for hic, r. hûc. p. 47. l. 16. for foundation (adde) or openly disturbed the Church. p. 66. l. 9. for succession, best succession, from here. iques or at best from an imprbable example of the Nazarites. p. 67. l 13. in Sacerdotibus, &c. as an vncleane. Act. (adde) in Marg. August. ep. 74. p. 75. l. 20. for Apostolicall, r. Apochryphall p. 93. l. 11. for comming, r. cunning. p. 99. l 13. dele our. p. 123. l. 5. for prosued, r. pursued. p. 160 l. 10. woman (adde) sate on a Beast which had. p. 192. for Edward, r. Edwin. p. c 137. l. 16. for Di∣uels, r. damned with Diuels. p. 248. l. 2. for Apo∣stle, r. Euangelist. p. 275. l. 17. cita Ferum in cap. 1 Io. . 1550. p. 34.
THE PRAYER BEFORE the SERMON. O Eternall, and most Glorious God, who some∣times in thy Iu∣stice,Psal. 79. 2. dost giue the dead bodies of the Saints, to be meat vnto the Fowles of the Heauen, and the
flesh of thy Saints vnto the beasts of the Earth, so that their bloud is shed like water, and there is none to burie them, Who sometimes,Psal. 44. 12. sel'st thy Peo∣ple for nought, and dost not increase thy wealth, by their price, and yet ne∣uer leau'st vs without that knowledge,Ps. 116. 15. That precious in thy sight is the death of thy Saints, inable vs, in life and death, seriously to consider the value, the price of a Soule. It is precious, ô Lord, because thine Image is stampt, and imprinted
vpon it; Precious, because the bloud of thy Soone was paid for it; Precious, be∣cause thy blessed Spirit, the Holy Ghost workes vpon it, and tries it, by his diuers fires; And precious, because it is enter'd into thy Reue∣nue, and made a part of thy Treasure. Suffer vs not therefore, ô Lord, so to vn∣der value our selues, nay, so to impouerish thee, as to giue away those soules, thy soules, thy deare and preci∣ous soules, for nothing, and all the world is nothing, if the Soule must be giuen for
it. We know, ô Lord, that our Rent, due to thee, is our Soule; and the day of our death, is the day, and our Death-bed the place, where this Rent is to bee paid. And wee know too, that hee that hath sold his soule before, for vniust gaine, or giuen away his soule before, in the society and fellowship of sinne, or lent away his soule, for a time, by a lukewarmnesse, and temporizing, to the dishonor of thy name, to the weakning of thy cause, to the discouraging of thy Ser∣uants,
he comes to that day, & to that place, his Death, and Death-bed, without any Rent in his hand, with∣out any soule, to this pur∣pose, to surrender it vnto thee. Let therefore ô Lord, the same hand, which is to receiue them then, preserue these soules till then; Let that mouth, that breath'd them into vs, at first, breath alwaies vpon them, whilst they are in vs, and sucke them into it selfe, when they depart from vs. Pre∣serue our soules ô Lord, be∣cause they belong to thee;
and preserue our bodies, because they belong to those soules. Thou alone, dost steere our Boat, through all our Voyage, but hast a more especiall care of it, a more watchfull eye vpon it, when it comes to a narrow cur∣rant, or to a dangerous full of waters. Thou hast a care of the preseruation of these bodies, in all the waies of our life; But in the Straights of Death, open thine eyes wider, and en∣large thy prouidence to∣wards vs, so farre, that no Feuer in the body, may
shake the soule, no Apo∣plexie in the body, dampe or benumbe the soule, nor any paine, or agonie of the body, presage future tor∣ments to the soule. But so make thou our bed in all our sicknesse, that being vs'd to thy hand, wee may be con∣tent with any bed of thy ma∣king; Whether thou bee pleas'd to change our fea∣thers into flockes, by with∣drawing the conueniences of this life, or to change our flockes into dust, euen the dust of the Graue, by with∣drawing vs out of this life.
And though thou diuide man and wife, mother and child, friend and friend, by the hand of Death, yet stay them that stay, and send them away that goe, with this consolation, that though we part at diuers daies, and by diuers waies, here, yet wee shall all meet at one place, and at one day, a day that no night shall deter∣mine, the day of the glorious Resurrection. Hasten that day, ô Lord, for their sakes, that beg it at thy hands, from vnder the Altar in Heauen; Hasten it for our
sakes, that groane vnder the manifold incombrances of these mortall bodies; Hasten it for her shake, whō wee haue lately laid downe, in this thy holy ground; And hasten it for thy Son ChristIesus sake, to whom then, and not till then, all things shall bee absolutely subdu'd. Seale to our soules now an assurance of thy gracious purpose to∣wards vs in that day, by ac∣cepting this daies seruice, at our hands. Accept our hum∣ble thankes, for all thy be∣nefits, spirituall, and tempo∣rall,
already bestowed vpon vs, and accept our humble prayers for the continuance and enlargement of them. Continue, and enlarge them, ô God. vpon thine vniuersall Church, dispersed, &c.
A SERMON OF Commemoration of the Lady Dāuers, late wife of Sr. Iohn Dāuers. Neuerthelesse, we, according to his promises, looke for new Hea∣uens, and new Earth, wherein dwel∣leth Righteousnesse. 2 Pet. 3. 13. I Propose to my selfe, and to this Congrega∣tion, two Workes for this day; That
wee may walke together two miles, in this Sab∣bath daies iourney; First, To instruct the Liuing, and then To commemorate the Dead. Which office, as I ought, so I should haue performed sooner, but that this sad occasion surprized me vnder other Pre-obligations and Pre-contracts, in the seruices of mine own Profession, which could not be ex∣cused, nor auoided. And being come now to this double worke, whether I looke vp to the Throne
of Heauen, and that Fir∣mament, for my first worke, The Instruction of the Liuing, or downe to the stones of the Graue, and that pauement, for my second worke, The com∣memoration of the Dead, I need no other words than these which I haue read to you, for both pur∣poses; For, to assist the Resurrection of your soules, I say, And to as∣sure the Resurrection of your bodies, she saies, Ne∣uerthelesse, we according to his promise looke for new
Heauens, and new Earth, wherein dwelleth Righte∣ousnesse. But first let vs doe our first worke, and pursue the literall pur∣pose of the Apostle, in these words. Which words, out of their con∣nection, and coherence, be pleas'd to receiue, thus spread and dilated into this Paraphrase, Neuerthe∣lesse, that is, though there be scoffers and iesters that deride and laugh at the se∣cond comming of Christ, (as the Apostle had said v. 3.) And, neuerthelesse againe,
Though this day of the Lord will certainly come, and come as a Theefe, and as a Theefe in the night, and when it comes, the Heauens shall passe away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with seruent heat, the Earth al∣so, and all the Workes that are therein, shall be burnt vp (as hee had also said, v. 10.) Though there be such a scorne put vpon it, by scoffers and iesters, and though there be such a horrour in the truth of the thing it selfe, yet, neuer∣thelesse,
for all that, for all that scorne, and for all that horrour, We, We, saies the Text, We that are fixt in God, We that are not igno∣rant of this one thing, (as he saies v. 8.) that one day is with the Lord as 1000. yeares, and 1000. yeares as one day, We that know, that the Lord is not stacke in his promise, though he be long-suffering to vs-ward (as he also saies v. 9.) We, According to his promises, that is, building vpon that foundatiō, his Scrip∣tures, presuming vpon
nothing that is not in that euidence, and doub∣ting of nothing that is there, We expect, We looke for something, saies our Text, which we haue not yet; Wee determine not our selues, nor our con∣tentment, in those things which God giues vs here; not in his Temporall, not in his spirituall Blessings, in this life; but we expect future things, greater than wee are capable of here; for, We looke for new Hea∣uens, and new Earth; in which, that which is not
at all to be had here, or is but an obscure In-mate, a short Soiourner, a transi∣tory Passenger in this World, that is, Righteous∣nesse, shall not onely Bee, but Dwell for euer; Ne∣uerthelesse, wee, according to his promise, looke for new Heauens, and new Earth, wherein dwelleth Righte∣ousnesse. So then, in this our Voyage through this Sea, which is truly a Me∣diterranean Sea, a Sea be∣twixt two Lands, the Land of Possession, which wee haue, and the Land
of Promise which wee expect, this Old, and that new Earth, that our dayes may be the better in this land which the Lord our God hath giuen vs, and the surer in that Land which the Lord our God will giue vs, In this Sea-voyage bee these our Land-markes, by which we shall steere our whole course: First, the day of Iudgement is subiect to scorne, some laugh at it; And then (in a second consideration,) it induces horror; The best man,
that is but man, trembles at it; But wee, (which is a third branch) those that haue laid hold vpon God, And (in a fourth place) haue laid hold vpon God, by the right handle, Accor∣ding to his promises, Wee, (which will constitute a fift point,) Wee expect; We blesse God for our Pos∣session, but We looke for a greater Reuersion; which Reuersion (in the next roome) is, new Heauens, and new Earth; And (last∣ly) such Heauens, and such Earth, as may be an euer∣lasting
Dwelling for Righ∣teousnesse. And through all these particulars, we shall passe, with as much cleerenesse, and shortnesse, as the weight, and number thereof will admit. First then,Scornes. to shake the constancy of a Christian, there will alwaies be Scor∣ners, Iesters, Scoffers, and Mockers at Religion. The Period and Consummati∣on of the Christian Religi∣on, the Iudgement day, the second comming of Christ, will alwaies be subiect to scornes. And many times
a scorne cuts deeper then a sword. Lucian wounded Religion more by making Iests at it, than Arius, or Pelagius, or Nestorius, with making Arguments against it. For, against those profest Heretikes, and against their studied Arguments, which might seeme to haue some weight, it well beseem'd those graue & Reuerend Fathers of the Church, to call their Councels, and to take into their serious consideration those Ar∣guments, and solemnly to
conclude, and determine, and decree in the point. But it would ill haue become those reuerend persons, to haue cal'd their Councels, or taken into their so serious con∣siderations, Epigrams, and Satyres, and Libells, and scurrill and scornfull iests, against any point of Reli∣gion; Scornes and Iests are easilier apprehended, and vnderstood by vulgar & ordinary capacities, then Arguments are; and then, learned men are not so earnest, nor so diligent to
ouerthrow, and confute a Iest, or Scorne, as they are, an Argument; and so they passe more vn∣control'd, and preuaile further, and liue longer, then Arguments doe. It is the height of Iobs com∣plaint, that contemptible persons made Iests vpon him. And it is the depth of Samsons calamity, that when the Philistins hearts were merry, then they cald for Samson,Iudg. 16. 24 to make them sport. So to the Is∣raelites in Babylon, when they were in that heaui∣nesse,
that euery breath they breath'd was a sigh, their enemies cal'd,Psal. 137. 3. to sing them a song. And so they proceeded with him, who fulfil'd in himselfe alone, all Types, and Ima∣ges, and Prophesies of sor∣rowes, who was, (as the Prophet calls him) Vir dolorum,Esa. 53. 3. A man com∣pos'd, and elemented of sorrowes, our Lord and Sauiour Christ Iesus;Mat. 27. 29 For, They platted a crowne of thornes vpon his head, and they put a reed into his hand, and they bowed the
knee before him, and mockt him. Truly, the conniuing at seuerall Religions, (as dangerous as it is) is not so dishonourable to God, as the suffering of Iesters at Religion: That may in∣duce heresie; but this do's establish Atheisme. And as that is the publike mischiefe, so, for the pri∣uate, there lies much dan∣ger in this, that hee that giues himselfe the liber∣ty, of iesting at Religion, shall finde it hard, to take vp at last; as, when Iu∣lian the Apostata had re∣ceiued
his Deathes-wound, and could not chuse but confesse, that that wound came from the hand, and power of Christ, yet he confest it, in a Phrase of Scorne, Vi∣cisti Galilaee, The day is thine, O Galilean, and no more; It is not, Thou hast accomplish't thy purpose, O my God, nor O my Ma∣ker, nor O my Redeemer, but, in a stile of con∣tempt, Vicisti Galilaee, and no more. And there∣fore, as Dauid begins his Psalmes with Blessednesse,
so he begins Blessednesse, with that, Blessed is hee, which sitteth not in the seat of the scornfull; Dauid speakes there, of walking with the vngodly, but walking is a laborious mo∣tion; And hee speakes there, of standing with the sinner, but standing is a painfull posture; In these two, walking and stan∣ding, there's some intima∣tion of a possibility of wearinesse, and so, of de∣sisting at last. But in sit∣ting in the seat of the scorn∣full, there is denoted a
sinning at ease; and, in the Vulgate edition, at more that ease; with au∣thority, and glory; For, it is In cathedra, In the chaire of the scornfull; which implies a Magisteriall, a Doctorall kinde of sin∣ning, that is, to sinne, and to prouoke others, by example, to sinne too, and promises no returne from that Position. For as wee haue had diuers ex∣amples, that men who haue vs'd, and accustom'd their mouthes to Oaths, and Blasphemies all their
liues, haue made it their last syllable, and their last gaspe, to sweare, they shall die, so they that inlarge, and vngirt their wits, in this iesting at Religion, shall passe away at last, in a negligence of all spiri∣tuall assistances, and not finde halfe a minute, be∣tweene their last iest, and their euerlasting earnest. Vae vobis qui ridetis; Woe be vnto you that laugh so, for you shall weepe, and weepe eternally. Saint Paul preacht of the Resurrection ofAct. 17. 32. the
dead, and they mockt him. And here, St. Peter saies, there will be, (that is, there will be alwaies) Scoffers that will say,Vers. 4. where is the promise of Christs com∣ming? For since the Fa∣thers fell asleepe, all things continue as they were, from the beginning of the Crea∣tion But doe they so, saies this Apostle? Was not the world that then was,Vers. 6. ouer∣slow'd with water, and pe∣rish't? If that were done in earnest, why doe yee make a iest of this, saies he,Vers. 7. That the heauens and
the earth which are now, are reserued vnto fire, a∣gainst the day of Iudge∣ment. 2. Tim. 3. 1, The A∣postle saies, That in the last dayes, perillous times shall come; and hee reckons there, diuers kindes of perillous men; but yet, these Iesters are not a∣mong them. And then 1 Tim 4. 1. The Apostle names more perillous men; Seducing Spirits, and Seducing by the do∣ctrine of Deuils, forbid∣ding meats and mariage; and we know, who these
men are.Mat. 24. 24 Our Sauiour tels vs, they shall proceed a great way; They shall shew great signes, and wonders; they shall pretend Mira∣cles; & they shall exhibite false Christs, Christs knea∣ded into peeces of bread; And wee know, who these are, and can beware of these proceedings. But Saint Iude remembers vs of the greatest danger of all,Vers. 17. Remember the words, which were spoken before, of the Apostles of our Lord Iesus Christ, that there should bee mockers, in the
last time. For, against all the rest, the Church of God is better arm'd; But Perniciosissimum humano generi, sayes Saint Au∣gustine, This is the ruine, and ouerthrow of man∣kinde, (that is, of Reli∣gion, which is the life and soule of mankinde) Cum vera & salubris sententia imperitorum populorum ir∣risione sordescit; When true, and sincere Reli∣gion, shall be cri'd down, and laugh't out of coun∣tenance, by the scornes, and iests, of ignorant
people. When to all our sober preaching, and se∣rious writing, a scornfull ignorant, shall thinke it enough to oppose that one question of con∣tempt, Where was your Church before Luther? Whereas, if wee had had any thing from Luther, which wee had not had before, yet euen that, were elder than those Articles, which they had from the Councell of Trent, and had not (as Articles) be∣fore; For Luthers Decla∣rations were before the
Constitutions of that Coun∣cell. So that wee could play with them at their owne Game, and retort their owne scornes vpon themselues, but that mat∣ters of Religion should moue in a higher Spheare, and not bee deprest, and submitted to iests. But though our Apostles pro∣phesie must be fulfilled, There will bee, and will alwaies be, some scoffers, some iesters; Neuerthe∣lesse, saies the Text, there is a Religious constancy vpheld, and maintained
by others; And farther wee extend not this first Consideration of our dan∣ger. But,2 Terrors. though I can stand out these scornes and iests, there is a Tentation, that is Reall; There are true terrours, sad apprehensi∣ons, substantiall circum∣stances, that accompany the consideration of Christs second comming and the Day of Iudge∣ment. It is a fearefull thing to fall into the hands of the liuing God, if I doe but fall into his hands, in a
feuer in my bed, or in a tempest at Sea, or in a discontent at home; But, to fall into the hands of the liuing God, so, as that, that liuing God, enters in∣to Iudgement, with mee, and passes a finall, and irreuocable Iudgement vpon mee, this is a Con∣sternation of all my spi∣rits, an Extermination of all my succours. I consi∣der, what God did with one word, with one Fiat he made all; And, I know, he can doe as much with another word; With one
Pereat, he can destroy all; As hee spake,Psal. 33. 9. and it was done, he commanded and all stood fast; so he can speak, and all shall bee vndone; command, and all shall fall in peeces. I consider, that I may bee surpriz'd by that day, the day of Iudgement. Here Saint Peter saies,Vers 10. The day of the Lord wil come as a Thiefe. And Saint Paul saies, we cannot be ignorant of it, Your selues know perfectly,1 Thes. 5. 2. that the day of the Lord so commeth as a Thiefe. And, as the Iudgement it selfe,
so the Iudge himselfe saies of himselfe,Apoc. 3. 3. I will come vpon thee as a Thiefe. He saies, he will, and he doe's it.16. 15. For it is not, Ecce ve∣niam, but Ecce venio, Be∣hold I doe come vpon thee as a Thiefe; There, the fu∣ture, which might imply a dilatorinesse, is reduc't to an infallible present; It is so sure, that he will doe it, that he is said, to haue done it already. I consi∣der, hee will come as a Thiefe, and then, as a Thiefe in the night; And I doe not only not know
when that night shall be, (For, himselfe, as he is the Son of man, knowes not that) but I doe not only not know what night, that is, which night, but not what night, that is, what kinde of night he meanes. It is said so often, so often repded, that he will come as a Thiefe in the night, as that hee may meane all kinde of nights. In my night of Ignorance hee may come; and hee may come in my night of Wantonnesse; In my night of inordinate and sinfull
melancholy, and suspicion of his mercy, hee may come; and he may come in the night of so stupid, or so raging a sicknesse, as that he shall not come by comming; Not come so, as that I shall receiue him in the absolution of his Minister, or receiuim in the participation of his body and his bloud in the Sacrament. So hee may come vpon mee, as such a Thiefe, in such a night; nay, when all these nights of Ignorance, of Wantonnesse, of Despera∣tion,
of Sicknesse, of Stu∣piditie, of Rage, may bee vpon mee all at once. I consider, that the Holy Ghost meant to make a deepe impression of a great terror in me, when he came to that expressi∣on, That the Heauens should passe away,Vers. 10. Cum stridore, with a great noise, and the Elements melt with feruent heat, and the earth, and the workes that are therein, shall be burnt vp; And when he adds in E∣say,66. 15. The Lord will come with fire, and with his
Chariots, like a whirle∣wind, to render his anger, with fury; for by fire, and by his sword will the Lord plead with all flesh. So when hee proceeds in Ioel, a day of darknesse,2. 2, 3. and gloominesse; and yet a fire deuoureth before them, and a flame burneth behind them.7. 9. And so in Daniel also, His Throne a fiery flame, and his wheeles a burning fire, and a fiery streame issuing from him. I consider too, that with this streame of fire, from him, there shall bee a
streame, a deluge, a floud of teares, from vs; and all that floud, and deluge of teares, shall not put out one coale, nor quench one sparke of that fire. Behold,Apoc. 1. 7. hee commeth with clouds, and euery eye shall see him; And, plangent omnes, All the kindreds of the earth shall waile and lament, and weepe and howle because of him. I consider, that I shall looke vpon him then, and see all my Sinnes, Substance, and Circumstance of sin, Waight, and measure of
sinne, hainousnesse, and continuance of sinne, all my sinnes imprinted in his wounds; and how shall I bee affected then, confounded then to see him so mangled with my sinnes? But then I consider againe, that I shall looke vpon him a∣gaine, and not see all my sinnes in his wounds; My forgotten sinnes, mine vn-considered, vnconfest, vnrepented sinnes, I shall not see there; And how shall I bee affected then, when I shall stand in
Iudgement, vnder the guiltinesse of some sins, not buried in the wounds, not drown'd in the bloud of my Sauiour? Many, and many, and ve∣ry many, infinite, and in∣finitely infinite, are the ter∣rours of that day; Neuer∣thelesse, my soule, why art thou so sad, why art thou disquieted within mee? Thou hast a Goshen to restin, for all this Aegypt; a Zoar to flie to, for all this Sodome; a Sanctuary, and Hornes of the Altar, to hold by, for all this
storme. Neuerthelesse, saies our Text; though there bee these scornfull iests, though there bee these reall terrours, Neuer∣thelesse, there are a Wee, certaine priuileged per∣sons; And the considera∣tion of those persons, is our third and next cir∣cumstance. To those who preten∣ded an interest in Christ,3 Persons. and had none, to those who would exorcise pos∣sest persons, and cast out Deuils, in the Name of Iesus, without any Com∣mission
from Iesus, to those sonnes of Sceua the Deuill himselfe could say, Qui vos? Iesus I know,Act. 19. 15. and Paul I know, but who are you? To those who liue in an outward con∣formity to Christ, but yet seeke their saluation in the light of Nature, and their power of resisting temptations, in their Mo∣rall constancy, the Deuill may boldly say, Qui vos, Iesus I know, & the Church I know; but who are you? I would I had no worse enemies than you. Ne∣uerthelesse
we, for all his scornes, for all these ter∣rours, shall haue an an∣swer to his Qui vos? and bee able to tell him, that we are that Gens Sancta, and that Regale Sacerdo∣tium,1. 2, 9. that this Apostle speakes of; That holy peo∣ple; made holy by his Co∣uenant, and Ordinances; and that royall Priest∣hood, which, as Priests, haue an interest in his Sa∣crifice, his Sonne; and as Kings, haue an interest in that Crowne, which, for his Sonnes sake, hee hath
ordain'd for vs. Wee are they, who haue seene the markes of his Election, in their first edition, in the Scriptures; and seene them againe, in their se∣cond edition, as they are imprinted in our conscien∣ces, in our faith, in our manners; and so wee can∣not mistake, nor bee de∣ceiued in them. Wee are that Semen Dei, that Ma∣lachie speakes of;2. 15. the seed of God, which hee hath sow'd in his Church; and by that extraction, we are Consortes diuinae Naturae,
Partakers of the diuine Nature it selfe;2 Pet. 1. 4. And so grow to bee Filij Dei, The Sonnes of God; And by that title, Cohaeredes Christi,Rom. 8. 17. Ioint-heires with Christ; And so to bee Christi ipsi, Christs our selues; as God calls all his faithfull,Psa, 105. 5 his Anointed, his Christs; And from thence, we grow to that height, to be of the Quorum, in that Commission, Dij estis, I haue said you are Gods; and not onely Gods by Representation, but Idem Spiritus cum Domino; So
become the same Spirit with the Lord, that as a Spirit cannot be diuided in it selfe,Rom. 8. 38. so wee are per∣swaded, that neither death nor life, nor any creature; shall be able to separate vs from God. If any man be ig∣norant,1 Cor. 14. 38. let him be ignorant still. If he will not study his owne case, let him be subject to these scornes, and these terrours still; But, Christianus idiota per∣suasissimum habet,Origen. The vn∣learned'st Christian that is (be he a true Christian) hath learning enough to
establish himselfe so, that neither scornes, nor ter∣rours can shake his foun∣dations. So then you see, what fellowship of the Faithfull, what houshold of the Righteous, what communion of Saints it is, that fals vnder this deno∣mination, Wee; Wee that haue laid our foundations in faith, and made our superedifications in sancti∣mony and holinesse of life; We that haue learn't, and learn't by the right rule the rule of Christiani∣ty, how to put a right va∣lue
vpon this world, and those things, which can but concerne our body in this world.Seneca. For Multis seruiet qui corpori seruit, saies the Oracle of Morall men. That man is com∣mon slaue to euery body, that is a slaue to his owne body; That man dares displease no man, that dares not displease him∣selfe; That man will gro∣uell, and prostrate, and prostitute himselfe, at e∣uery great mans thre∣shold, that is afraid to loose a dish from his Ta∣ble,
or a pillow from his bed, at home; Multis seruiet, qui corpori seruit, & qui, pro illo, nimium timet; Hee is the true co∣ward, that is afraid of eue∣ry inconuenience, which another may cast vpon his person, or fortune. Honestum ei vile est, cui corpus nimis charum est; Hee that hath set too high a price vpon his bo∣dy, will sell his soule cheape. But if we can say of the fires of tribulation, as Origen saies, (whether hee speake of the fires of
conflagration at the last day, or these fires of pu∣rification in our way to it) Indigemus Sacramento ignis, Baptismo ignis, That all our fiery tribulations fall vnder the nature, and definition of Sacraments, That they are so many visible signes of inuisible Grace, that euery corre∣ction from Gods hand, is a Rebaptization to me, and that I can see, that I should not haue beene so sure of saluation, without this Sacrament, without this Baptisme,
without this fire of tribu∣lation; If I can bring this fire to that temper, which Lactantius speaks of, that it be Ignis qui obtempera∣bit iustis, A fire that shall conforme it selfe to mee, and doe as I would haue it; that is, concoct, and purge, and purifie, and prepare mee for God; If my Christianity make that impression in mee, which Socrates his Philo∣sophy did in him, who (as Gregorie Nazianzene te∣stifies of him) In carcere damnatus, egit cum disci∣pulis,
de corpore, sicut de a∣lio ergastulo, Who, when he lay a condemn'd man in prison, then in that prison, taught his disci∣ples, that the body of man, was a worse prison, then that, hee lay con∣demn'd in; If I can bring these fires to this compasse, and to this temper, I shall finde, that as the Arke was in the midst of the Waters, and yet safe from the waters, and the bush in the midst of the fire, and yet safe from the fire, so, though Saint Ierome
say, (and vpon good grounds) Grandis audaciae est, purae{que} conscient{que}, It is an Act of greater bold∣nesse, than any man, as man, can auow, and a te∣stimony of a clearer con∣science, than any man, as man, can pretend to haue, Regnum Dei postu∣lare, & iudicium non ti∣mere, To presse God for the day of Iudgement, and not to feare that day, (for, vpon all men, consi∣der'd but as men, falls that seuere expostulation of the Prophet Amos,5. 18. Woe
vnto you that desire the day of the Lord; to what end is it for you? The day of the Lord is darknesse, and not light;) Yet I shall finde, that such a family, such a society, such a communion there is, and that I am of that Quorum, that can say, Come what scornes can come, come what terrours can come, In Christo omnia possumus, Though we can doe no∣thing of our selues, yet as we are in Christ, wee can doe all things, because we are fixt in him, Secun∣dum
promissa; Which is our fourth and next branch, According to his promises. I haue nothing to plead with God,4 Promissa. but onely his owne promises. I cannot plead birthright; The Iewes were elder brothers, and yet were disinheri∣ted. I cannot plead de∣scent; My mother was an Hittite,16. 3. (as the Prophet E∣zechiel speakes.) I am but of the halfe bloud, at best; More of the first, then of the second Adam; more corporall, then spirituall.
I cannot plead purchase; If I haue giuen any thing for Gods sake, if I haue done any thing, suffered any thing, for Gods sake, all that, is so farre from merit, as that it is not the interest of my principall debt. Nay, I cannot plead mercy; For,Eph. 2. 3. I am by nature the childe of wrath too. All my Plea is, that, to which he carries me so often, in his word, Quia fidelis Do∣minus, Because the Lord is a faithfull God. So this Apostle calls him,1. 4, 19. Fide∣lem Creatorem, A faithfull
Creator; God had gracious purposes vpon me, when he created me, and wil be faithful to those purposes; so St. Paul calls Christ Fi∣delem Pontificem,Heb. 2. 17. A faith∣full high Priest; graciously he meant to sacrifice him∣selfe for the world, and faithfully hee did it. So Saint Iohn call him Fi∣delem Testem,Apoc. 1. 5. A faitfull Witnesse; Of his Mercy he did die for me, and his spirit beares witnesse with my spirit that hee did so. And in the same Booke, 19. 11. his very denomi∣nation,
his very name is Faithfull. For this Faith∣fullnesse in God, which is so often recommended to mee, must necessarily imply a former promise; If God be Faithfull, he is faithfull to some contract, to some promise, that hee hath made; And that promise, is my euidence. But then, to any promise, that is pretended, and not deduc'd from his Scrip∣tures, he may iustly plead Non est factum; He made no such promise. For, as in cases of Diffidence, and
Distrust in his mercy, God puts vs vpon that issue, Vbilibellus, Produce your Euidence; why are you icalous of me? Where is the bill of your mothers di∣uorce whome I haue put a∣way;Esa. 50. 1. or which of my Cre∣ditors is it to whom I haue sold you? So in cases of presumption in our selues, or pressing God with his promises, (and so also, in cases of Innouation of matter of Doctrine in his Church) God puts vs to the same issue, Vbi libellus, Produce your Euidence;
where in my Scriptures, haue I made any such Contract, any such Coue∣nant, any such promise to you? My Witnesse is in Heauen,16. 19. saies Iob; But yet, my Euidence is vpon earth; GOD is that Wit∣nesse; but that Witnesse hath beene pleased, to be examined Ad perpetuam rei memoriam; And his testimony remaines of Record, in the Church; And there, from his Scrip∣tures, exemplified to me, by his publike Notary, the Church, I may lawfully
charge him, with his pro∣mise, his contract, his co∣uenant; & else not. There is a generall, and a vsefull obseruation, made by Saint Augustine, Omnium haereticorū quasi regularis est ista temeritas, This is a Regular Irregularity, this is a fixt and constant Le∣uity, amongst all Here∣tikes, Authoritatem stabi∣lissimam fundatissimae Ec∣clesiae quasi rationis nomine & pollicitatione suparare; To ouerthrow the foun∣dations of the Church vpon the appearance, and
pretence, and colour of Reason; God cannot haue proceeded thus or thus, because ther is this and this reason against it. Now the foundations of the Church are the Scrip∣tures; And when men present reasons of probabi∣lity, of verisimilitude, of pious credulity, not de∣duc't out of the Scrip∣tures, they fall into that regular Irregularity, and into that constant leuity, which Saint Augustine iustly makes the Chara∣cter, and Specification of
an Heretike, to seeme to proceede vpon reasons, and not deduce those reasons from the Scrip∣tures. When therefore they reason thus (as Bel∣larmine does) Non discre∣tus Dominus, That God had not dealt discreetly, if he had not establish'd a Church, a Certaine, a Visi∣ble, and Infallible Church, a Church endow'd with these and these, with those and those, and such and such, and more and more Immunities and Priuileges, by which,
that particular Church must bee Super-Catholike, and Super-vniuersall, a boue all the Churches in the world, we ioyne not with them in that bold∣nesse, to call Gods discre∣tion in question, but wee ioyne with them in that issue, Vbi libellus, Where is your euidence; which is your Scripture, which you will rely vpon for that, for such a Church? For we content not our selues, with such places of Scripture, as may serue to illustrate that Doctrine,
to them, that beleeue it aforehand, without Scripture, but wee aske such places of Scrip∣ture, as may proue it to them, who, till they see such Scriptures, beleeue, and beleeue truly, that they are not bound to beleeue it; If I may plead it, it is a promise; and if it be an issuable promise, it is in the Scriptures. If any distresses in my fortune and estate, in my body, and in my health, op∣presse mee, I may finde some receits, some Medi∣cines,
some words of con∣solation, in a Seneca, in a Plutarch, in a Petrarch; But I proceed in a safer way, and deale vpon bet∣ter Cordials, if I make Da∣uid, and the other Pro∣phets of God, my Physiti∣ans, and see what they prescribe me, in the Scrip∣tures; and looke how my fellow-patient Iob applied that Physicke, by his Pa∣tience. And if any thing heauier then that which fell vpon Iob, fall vpon mee, yet I may propose one, to my selfe, vpon
whom there fell more, then can fall vpon any man; for all mankinde fell vpon him, and all the sinnes of all mankind, and Gods Iustice, Gods Anger, for all the sinnes of all mankinde fell vpon him, and yet he had a glorious eluctation, a victory, a triumph ouerall that. And he is not onely my rule, and my example, but my Surety, and my Promise, That where he is,Ioh. 14. 3. I shall be also; not only, where hee is, in Glory now, but in euery step, that he made
in this world; If I bee with him, in his Afflicti∣ons, I shall be with him, in his Eluctation, in his Vi∣ctory, in his Triumph. St. Chrysostome, falling vpon such a meditation, as this, is loth to depart from it; Hee insists vpon it thus; Illine, qui à dextris Dei se∣det, conforme fiet hoc cor∣pus? Will God make this body of mine, like that, that sits now at his right hand: Yes; he will Illi, quem adorant Angeli? Like him, whom all the An∣gels worship? Yes; like
him. Illi, cui adstant incor∣porales virtutes? Like him, to whom, the Thrones, and Powers, and Dominations, and Cheru∣bins, and Seraphins mini∣ster? Yes; he will doe all that, saies that Father. But allow mee the bold∣nesse, to adde thus much, Cumillo, I shall bee with him, before; with him, wheresoeuer hee was in this world. I shall bee with him, in his Agonies, and sadnesse of soule; but in those Agonies and sad∣nesses, I shall be with him
still, in his Veruntamen, In his surrender of himselfe; Not my will, but thine, O Father, be done. I shall bee with him vpon his Crosse; but in all my crosses, and in all my iea∣lousies and suspitions of that Dereliquisti, That God, my God hath for saken me, I shall be with him still, in his In manus, In a con∣fidence, and assurance, that I may commit my Spirit into his hands. For all this I doe According to his promise, that where hee is, I shall be also. Si totus
mundus lachrymis sumptis deflesset, (saies the same Father) If men were made of teares, as they are made of the Elements of teares, of the occasions of teares, of miseries, & if all men were resolu'd to teares, as they must re∣solue to dust, all were not enough to lament their miserable condition, who lay hold, vpon the miserable comforters of this World, vpon their owne merits, or vpon the super-erogations of other men, of wch there are no
promises, and cannot finde that true promise, which is impli'd in those exam∣ples of Iob and Christ, appliable to themselues. Neuerthelesse we, we that can doe so, wee, that can reade that promise, that where they are, we shall be, that what he hath done for them, he will also do for vs, we according to his promise, declar'd in his Scriptures, in the midst of Scoffers, and in the midst of Terrours, expect, and looke for more, than we haue yea; which is ano∣ther,
ther, and our fift consi∣deration. As God hath prouided vs an Endlesnesse,The fu∣ture. in the world to come, so, to giue vs an Inchoation, a Re∣presentation of the next world, in this, God hath instituted and endlesnesse in this world too; God hath imprinted in euery natu∣rall man, and doth exalt in the super-naturall, and regenerate man, an end∣lesse, and Vndetermina∣ble desire of more, then this life can minister vn∣to him. Still God leaues
man in expectation. And truly, that man can scarce proue the immortality of the soule to himselfe, that feel's not a desire in his soule, of something be∣yond this life. Creatures of an inferiour nature, are possest with the pre∣sent; Man is a future Crea∣ture. In a holy and vsefull sense, wee may say, tht God is a future God; to man especially hee is so; Mans consideration of God is specially for the future. It is plaine, it is e∣uident, that that name
which God hath taken in Exodus, signifies, Essence,3. 14. Ambros. Being. Verum nomen Dei, Semper esse, Gods proper name is Alwayes Being. That can bee said of no creature, that it alwayes was; That which the Arrians said blasphe∣mously, of Christ, Erat, quando non erat, is true of all creatures, There was a time, when that thing, was nothing. But of God, more than this may bee said; so much more, as that when we haue said all that wee can, more
then so much more re∣maines vnsaid. For,Nazian. To∣tum Deum, nemo vno no∣mine, exprimit, sicut nec totum aerem haurit; A man may as well draw in, all the aire, at one breath, as expresse all God, God entirely, in one name. But the name that reaches farthest towards him, is that name, which he hath taken in Exodus. Deo si coniungimur sumus;Greg. In being deriu'd from God, we haue a Being, we are something; In him we liue and moue and haue our
Being; But Deo si compare∣mur, nec sumus; If we bee compar'd with God, our Being with his Being, we haue no Being at all, wee are Nothing. For Being is the peculiar and proper name of God. But though it be so cleere, that that Name of God in Ex∣odus is Being, yet it is not so cleere, whether it be a present, or a future Being. For, though most of the Fathers expressed, and our Translators rendered in the present, Sum qui sum, I am that I am, and,
Goe, and tell Pharaoh that he whose name is I am, hath sent thee; yet in the Origi∣nall, it is plaine, and plaine in the Chalde Paraphrase, that that name is deliue∣red in the future, Ero qui ero, I shall bee that I shall be, and, Goe, and tell Pha∣raoh that he whose name is I shall bee, hath sent thee. God cals vpon man, euen in the consideration of the name of God, to con∣sider his future state. For, if we consider God in the present, to day, now, God hath had as long a fore∣noone,
as he shall haue an afternoone; God hath beene God, as many mil∣lions of millions of gene∣rations, already, as hee shall be hereafter; but if we consider man in the present, to day, now, how short a forenoone hath any man had; if 60. if 80. yeeres, yet few and euill haue his daies beene. Nay, if we take man collectiue∣ly, entirely, altogether, all mankind, how short a forenoone hath man had? It is not yet 6000 yeeres, since man had his first
being. But if we consider him in his Afternoone, in his future state, in his life after death, if euery mi∣nute of his 6000. yeeres, were multipli'd by so ma∣ny millions of Ages, all would amount to no∣thing, meerely nothing, in respect of that Eternity, which hee is to dwell in. We can expresse mans Af∣ternoone, his future Per∣petuity, his Euerlasting∣nesse, but one way; But it is a faire way, a noble way; This; That how late a Beginning soeuer
God gaue Man, Man shall no more see an end, no more die, then God him∣selfe, that gaue him life. Therefore saies th' Apostle here, Wee, We that con∣sider God according to his promise, expect future things, looke for more at Gods hand hereafter, then we haue receiu'd hereto∣fore; For his mercies are new euery morning; and his later mercies are his largest mercies. How many, how great Nati∣ons perish, without euer hearing the name of
Christ; But God wrapt mee vp in his Couenant, and deriu'd mee from Christian Parents; I suck'd Christian bloud, in my Mothers wombe, and Christian milke at my Nurses breast. The first sound that I heard, in the world, was the voice of Christians; and the first Character, that I was taught to know, was the Crosse of CHRIST IESVS. How many children that are borne so, borne within the Co∣uenant, borne of Christian
Parents, doe yet die be∣fore they bee baptiz'd, though they were borne heires to Baptisme? But God hath afforded me the seale of that Sacrament. And then, how many that are baptiz'd, and so eas'd in originall sinne, doe yet proceed to actall sins, and are surpriz'd by death, before they receiue the Seale of their Recon∣ciliation to Christ, in the Sacrament of his body and his bloud; but God hath afforded mee the Seale of that Sacrament
too. What sinnes soe∣uer GOD forgaue mee this morning, yet since the best (and I am none of them) fall seuen times a day, God forgiues mee se∣uen more sinnes, to mor∣row, then he did to day; and seuen, in this Arith∣metike, is infinite. Gods temporall, Gods spirituall blessings are inexhausti∣ble. What haue wee that we haue not receiued? But what haue wee receiued, in respect of that which is laid vp for vs? And therefore, Expectamus,
We determine our selues in God so, as that wee looke for nothing, but from him; But not so, as that wee hope for no more from him, then we haue had: For, that were to determine God, to cir∣cumscribe God, to make God finite. Therefore we blesse God for our posses∣sion, but yet we expect a larger reuersion. And the day intended in this Text, shall make that Re∣uersion our Possession; which is, the day of Iudg¦ment.
Therefore,Expect. in the verse, immediatly before the Text, the Apostle accom∣panies this Expectantes, with another word; it is Expectantes, & properan∣tes, Looking for, and ha∣sting to, the comming of the day of God. Wee must haue such an Expectati∣on of that day as may imply, & testifie a loue to it, a desire of it, a longing for it. When these things beginne to come to passe (saies Christ,Luk. 21. 28. speaking of the signes, preceding the last day) then looke vp, and
lift your heads, for your Re∣demption draweth neere. All our deiections of spi∣rit, should receiue an ex∣altation, in that one con∣solation, that that day draweth neere.August. Seu veli∣mus, seu nolimus, Whether we will, or no, that day will come; but, saies that Father, in that short pray∣er of his, the Lord hath giuen thee an entire Pe∣tition, for accelerating, and hasting that day of the Lord; When hee bids thee say, Thy Kingdome come, hee meanes, that
thou shouldest meane, the Kingdome of glory at the Iudgement, as well as the Kingdome of Grace, in the Church Christ sayes,10. 14. 3. If I goe, and prepare a place for you, I will come againe and re∣ceiue you vnto my selfe, that where I am, you may be also. Now, Beloued, hath Christ done one halfe of this, for vs, and would not we haue him doe the other halfe too? Is he gone, to prepare the place, and would we not haue him come to fetch
vs to it? Certainly Christ speakes that in fauour, he intends it for a fauour, when he sayes,Apoc. 22. 1. Behold I come quickly. It is one fa∣uour that hee will come; and seconded with ano∣ther, that he will make speed to saue vs, that hee will make haste to helpe vs. And to establish vs in that assurance, hee addes in that place, Behold I come quickly, and my re∣ward is with mee; if the comming doe not, if the speed doe not, yet let the reward worke in you a de∣sire
of that day. The last words that Christ speakes in the Bible (and amongst vs, last words make dee∣pest impressions) are, Surely I come quickly;Vers. 20. And the last answer that is made in our behalfes, there, is, Amen, euen so, come Lord Iesus. There is scarce any amongst vs, but does expect this com∣mings They that feare it, expect it, But, that crowne, that the Apostle speakes of,2 Tim. 4. 8. is laid vp for them, that loue the appearing of the Lord; Not only ex∣pect
it, but loue it; And no man can doe so, that hath not a confidence in his cause;Gregor. Aduentū Iudi∣is non diligit, No prisoner longs for the Sessions, no Client longs for the day of hearing, Nisuqui in cau∣sa suase sciat habere iusti∣tiae meritum, Except hee know his cause to bee good, and assure him∣selfe, that hee shall stand vpright in Iudgement. But can wee haue that assu∣rance? Assuredly  wee may. He that hath seene the marks of election, in
both editions, in the Scrip∣ture first, and then in his conscience, hee that does not flatter, and abuse his owne soule, nor tempt, and presume vpon God, he that in a sobe and recti∣fied conscience, findes himselfe truly incorpo∣rated in Christ, truly inte∣ressed in his merits, may be sure, that if the day of Iudgement came now, now he should be able to stand vpright in Iudge∣ment. And therefore, let Schoole-boyes looke after holy-dayes, and worldly
men after rent-dayes, and Trauellers after Faire∣dayes, and Chap-men after Market-dayes, Neuerthe∣lesse, We, we that haue laid hold vpon God, and laid hold vpon him by the right handle, According to his promises, Expectamus, We looke for this day of the Lord, and Propera∣mus, We are glad it is so neere, and wee desire the further hasting of it. But then,Wait. Beloued, the day of our death is the Eue of this day of the Lord; The day of our
death is the Saturday of this Sunday; the next day after my death, is the day of Iudgement, For, be∣tweene these, these eyes shall see no more dayes. And then, are wee bound, nay, may wee lawfully wish, and desire the day of our death, as wee haue said, wee are bound to doe the day of Iudgement; The Soules of the Mar∣tyrs vnder the Altar in Heauen, cry vnto God there,Apoc. 6. 9. Vsque quo Domine, How long ô Lord holy and true, doest thou not iudge,
and auenge our bloud? That which those Mar∣tyrs solicite there, is the day of Iudgement; And thogh that wch they aske, was not presently gran∣ted, but the day of Iudge∣ment put off, for a time, yet God was not displea∣sed with their solicitati∣on; for, for all that, hee gaue them then, their white robes; testimony enough, of their innocen∣cie. If we could wish our owne death, as innocent∣ly, as harmlesly, as they did the day of Iudgement,
if no ill circumstances in vs, did vitiate our desire of death, if there were no dead flies in this oyntment,Eccles. 10. 1. (as Salomon speakes) if we had not, at least, a collate∣rall respect, (if not a direct, and principall) to our owne ease, from the in∣cum brances, and grie∣uances, and annoyances of this world, certainly wee might safely desire, piously wish, religiously pray for our owne death. But it is hard, verie hard to deest those circum∣stances, that infect it. For
if I pretend to desire death, meerly for the frui∣tion of the glorie, of the sight of God; I must re∣member, that my Saui∣our desid that glorie, and yet staid his time for it. If I pretend to desire death, that I might see no more sinne, heare no more blasphemies from others, it may be I may do more good to others, than I shall take harme by o∣thers, if I liue. If I would die, that I might be at an end of temptations, in my selfe, yet, I might lose
some of that glory, which I shall haue in Heauen, by resisting another yeeres tentation, if I died now. To end this considerati∣on, as this looking for the day of the Lord, (which is the word of our Text) implyes a ioy, and a glad∣nesse of it, when it shall come, (whether we con∣sider that, as the day it selfe, the day of Iudge∣ment, or the Eue of the day, the day of our death) so doth this looking for it, imply a patient attending of Gods leasure. For our
example, the Apostle saies, The earnest expectation of the Creature,Rom. 8.19. waiteth for the manifestation of the Sonne of God; It is an ear∣nest expectation, and yet it waits; and, for our neerer example,Vers. 3. Wee our selues, which haue the first fruits of the spirit, groane within our selues; But yet, he addes, wee wait for the adoption, the redemption of the bodie. Though wee haue some eares, we wait for the whole sheaues. And we may be content to doe so, for we shall not
wait long.1. 2. 11. This is the last time, sayes St. Iohn; spea∣king of the present time of the Gospell; In the time of nature, they were a great way off, from the Resurrection; for then, the time of the Law was to come in. And in the time of the Law, they were a great way off; for then the time of the Go∣spell was to come in. But this is the last time; There shall bee no more chan∣ges, after the Gospell; the present state of the Go∣spell shall land vs vpon
the Iudgement. And (as the Vulgate reads that place, Nouissima horaest, If God will haue vs stay a little longer, it is but for a few minutes; for, this is our last houre. Wee feele scornes, wee apprehend terrours, Neuerthelesse we, we rooted in his promises, doe expect, we are not at an end of our desires, and with an holy impa∣tience that he would giue vs, and yet with a holy patience till he be pleas'd to giue vs New Heauens and new Earth, wherein
dwelleth Righteousnesse; Which are the two bran∣ches, which remaine yet to be consider'd. As in the first discoue∣riesNew Hea∣uens. of the vnknowne parts of the world, the Maps and Cards which were made thereof, were verie vncertaine, verie vn∣perfect, so in the disco∣uerie of these New Hea∣uens, th expositions of those who haue vnder∣taken that worke, are ve∣rie diuers. First, Origen, citing for his opinion, Clement, whom hee cals
the Disciple of the Apo∣stles, takes those heauens, and that Earth, which our Antipodes, (and ge∣nerally those that inha∣bit the other Hemi∣spheare) inhabit, to be the new Heauens and the new Earth of this Text. Hee sayes, Oceanus intransibilis ad reliquos mundos, There are Worlds beyond these Worlds, beyond that Oce∣an, which wee cannot passe, nor discouer, sayes Origen; But, those Worlds, and those Heauens, and that Earth shall bee dis∣couer'd
before the last day, and the Gospell of Christ bee preach't in all those places; And this is our expectation, that which wee looke for, Ac∣cording to his promises, in the intention, and expo∣sition of Origen. Those that were infected with the heresie of the Chiliasts, or Millenarians (with which heresie diuers great and learned men, whom we refuse not to call Fathers in the Primi∣tiue Church, were infe∣cted) vpon the mistaking
of those words in the A∣pocalyps,20.4. of reigning with Christ a thousand yeeres after the first Resurrecti∣on, argu'd and concluded a happie temporall state, of Gods Saints here, vpon this Earth, for so many yeeres after that day. So that, though there should not be truly a new Earth, and new Heauens, but the same Heauens, and the same Earth as was be∣fore, for those future thou∣sand yeeres, yet, because those Saints of God, which in their whole
former life, had beene in miserie, vpon this Earth, should now enioy all earthly happinesse, vpon the same Earth for a thousand yeeres, before they ascended into Hea∣uen, these Heauens, and this Earth (because they are so to them) are called a new Earth, and a new Heauens, by those Mille∣narians. St. Ierome, and St. Augustine, and after them, the whole streame run in another channell. They say, that these Hea∣uens, and this Earth shall
be so purified, so refin'd, by the last fires of confla∣gration, as that all corrup∣tible qualities shall bee burnt out of them, but they, in their substance, re∣maine still. To that, those words of St. Paul helpe to inclne them, Perit fi∣gura,1 Cor. 7. 31. The fashion of this world passeth away; The fashion, not the substance. For, it is Melioratio, non interitus, The world shall bee made better, but it shall not bee made no∣thing. But, to what end shall it be thus improu'd?
In that, St. Augustine de∣clares himselfe; Mundus in melius immutatus apte accommodabitur homini∣bus in melius immutatis. When men are made bet∣ter by the Resurrection, this World being made betterby those fires, shall bee a fit habitation for those Saints of God; and so euen this World, and whatsoeuer is not Hell, shall bee Heauen. And, truly, some verie good Diuines, of the Reforma∣tion,Polanus. accompany those Ancients in that Expositi∣on,
that these Heauens pu∣rified with those fires, and super-inuested with new endowments, shall be the euerlasting habitati∣on of the blessed Saints of God. But still, in these discoueries of these new Heauens, and this new Earth, our Maps will bee vnperfect. But as it is said of old Cosmographers, that whē they had said all that they knew of a Countrey, and yet much more was to be said, they said that the rest of those coun∣tries were possest with
Giants, or Witches, or Spi∣rits, or Wilde beasts, so that they could pierce no farther into that Coun∣trey, so when wee haue trauell'd as farre as wee can, with safetie, that is, as farre as Ancient, or Mo∣derne Expositors lead vs, in the discouerie of these new Heauens, and new Earth, yet wee must say at last, that it is a Countrey inhabited with Angells, and Arch-angells, with Cherubins, and Seraphins, and that wee can looke no farther into it, with
these eyes. Where it is locally, wee enquire not; We rest in this, that it is the habitation prepar'd for the blessed Saints of God; Heauens, where the Moone is more glorious than our Sunne, and the Sunne as glorious as Hee that made it; For it is he himselfe, the Sonne of God, the Sunne of glorie. A new Earth, where all their waters are milke, and all their milke, honey, where all their grasse is corne, and all their corne, Manna; where all their
glebe, all their clods of earth are gold, and all their gold of innumerable ca∣rats; Where all their mi∣nutes are ages, and all their ages, Eternity; Where e∣uery thing, is euery mi∣nute, in the highest exal∣tation, as good as it can be, and yet super-exalted, & infinitely multiplied, by euery minutes additi∣on; euery minute, infinite∣ly better, then euer it was before. Of these new hea∣uens, & this new earth we must say at last, that wee can say nothing; For, the
eye of Man hath not seene, nor eare heard, nor heart conceiu'd, the State of this place. We limit, and deter∣mine our consideration with that Horizon, with which the Holy Ghost hath limited vs, that it is that new Heauens, and new Earth, wherein dwel∣leth Righteousnesse. Here then the Holy Ghost intends the same new Heauens,Righte∣ousnesse. and new Earth, which he doe's in the Apocalyps,21. 1. and de∣scribes there, by another name, the new Ierusalem.
But here, the Holy Ghost doe's not proceed, as there, to enamour vs of the place, by a promise of improuement of those things, which wee haue, and loue here; but by a promise of that, which here wee haue not at all. There, and elsewhere, the holy Ghost applies him∣selfe, to the naturall affe∣ctions of men. To those that are affected with ri∣ches, he saies,Ver. 18. that that new City shall be all of gold, and in the foundations, all manner of precious stones;
To those that are affected with beauty, hee promi∣ses an euerlasting associa∣tion, with that beautifull Couple, that faire Paire, which spend their time, in that contemplation, and that protestation, Ecce tu pulchra dilecta mea;Cant. 1. 15, 16.  Ec∣ce tu pulcher; Behold thou art faire, my Beloued, saies he; and then, she replies, Behold thou art faire too; noting the mutuall complacencie betweene Christ and his Church there. To those which delight in Musicke, hee
promises continuall sing∣ing, and euery minute, a new song; To those, whose thoughts are exerciz'd vp∣on Honour, and Titles, Ci∣uill, or Ecclesiasticall, hee promises Priesthood, and if that be not honour e∣nough, a Royall Priest∣hood; And to those, who looke after military honor, Triumph after their victo∣ry, in the Militant Church; And to those, that are car∣ried with sumptuous, and magnifique feasts, a Mariage supper of the Lambe, where, not onely
all the rarities of the whole world, but the whole world it selfe shall be seru'd in; The whole world shall bee brought to that fire, and seru'd at that Table. But here, the holy Ghost proceeds not that way; by improuement of things, which wee haue, and loue here; ri∣ches, or beauty, or musicke, or honour, or feasts; but by an euerlasting posses∣sion of that, which wee hunger, and thirst, and pantafter, here, and can∣not compasse, that is, Iu∣stice,
or Righteousnesse; for, both those, our pre∣sent word denotes, and both those wee want here, and shall haue both, for euer, in these new Hea∣uens, and new Earth. What would a worne and macerated suter,Iustice. op∣prest by the bribery of the rich, or by the might of a potent Aduersary, giue, or doe, or suffer, that he might haue Iustice? What would a deiected Spirit, a disconsolate soule, opprest with the weight of heauy, and ha∣bituall
sinne, that stands naked in a frosty Winter of desperation, and can∣not compasse one fig leafe, one colour, one ex∣cuse for any circum∣stance of any sinne, giue for the garment of Righte∣ousnesse? Here there is none that doe's right, none that executes Iu∣stice; or, not for Iustice sake. Hee that doe's Iu∣stice, doe's it not at first; And Christ doe's not thanke that Iudge,Luk. 18. 2. that did Iustice, vpon the wo∣mans importunity. Iustice
is no Iustice, that is done for feare of an Appeale, or a Commission. There may bee found, that may doe Iustice at first; At their first entrance into a place, to make good impressi∣ons, to establish good o∣pinions, they may doe some Acts of Iustice; But after, either an Vxorious∣nesse to wards to the wife, or a Solicitude for chil∣dren, or a facility towards seruants, or a vastnesse of expence, quenches, and ouercom's the loue of Iu∣stice in them; Non habitat,
In most it is not; but it dwels not in any. In our new Heauens, and new Earth, dwelleth iustice. And that's my comfort; that when I come thi∣ther, I shall haue Iustice at God's hands. It was an Act of mercy, meerly, that God decreed a meanes of saluation; But to giue saluation to them, for whom Christ gaue that full satisfaction, is but an act of Iustice.2. Thess. 1. 6. It is a righte∣ous thing with God, to re∣compence Tribulation to them, that trouble you, and
to you who are troubled, rest with vs, saies the A∣postle. It is an act of the same Iustice, to saue the true Beleeuer, as to damne him, who by vnbeleefe, hath made himselfe a Reprobate. Iustice dwels there,Righte∣ousnesse. and there dwels Righteousnes; Of which there is none in this world; None that growes in this world; none that is mine owne; For; howsoeuer we doe dispute, or will conclude of inherent Righteousnes, it is, indeed, rather adhe∣herent,
then inherent; ra∣ther extrinsecall than in∣trinsecal. Not that it is not in my self; in my will; but it is not of my selfe, nor of my will; My will was neuer able to rectifie, to iustifie it selfe; But the power of God's grace cals in a forraine Righteousnes, to my succour, the Righ∣teousnesse of my Sauiour, and cals his, and makes his, my Righteousnesse. But yet, Non habitat, This Righteous dwels not vnre∣moueable, in mee, here. Though I haue put on
that garment, in Baptisme, and girt it to me closer in the other Sacrament, and in some acts of holinesse, yet, my sinnes of infirmi∣ty slacken this garment, and it fals from mee, be∣fore I am aware, and in my sinnes of contempt, and rebellion, I teare it off, and throw it away my selfe. But in this new state, these new Heauens, & new Earth, Iusticia ha∣bitat, This Righteousnesse shall dwell; I shall haue an innocence, and a con∣stant innocence; a present
impeccancy, and an impec∣cability for the future. But, in this especially, is Righteousnes said to dwell there, because this Righ∣teousnesse, is the very Son of God, the Sonne of Righ∣teousnesse himselfe. And, this day, the day of his se∣cond Comming, is the last day of his Progresse; For, euer after that day, these new Heauens, and new Earth shall bee his standing house, where hee shall dwell, and wee with him; as himselfe hath said,Mat. 14. 43 The Righteous shall
shine forth, as the Sunne it selfe; As the Sonne of God himselfe, as the Sonne of glory, as the Son of Righ∣teousnesse himselfe. For, God shall impart to vs all, a mysterious Gauelkinde, a mysterious Equality of fulnesse of Glory, to vs all: God shall not whisper to his owne Sonne, a Sede à dextris, Sit thou at my right hand; nor a Hodie genuite, This day haue I begotten thee, nor a Po∣nam inimicos tuos, I will make thine enemies thy footstoole, and no more;
But, as it is said of the Armies of Israel, That they went forth as one man, so the whole Host of God's Saints, incorporated in Christ Iesus, shall bee as one man, and as that one Man, who was so the Sonne of Man, as that he was the Sonne of God too. And God shall say to vs all, Sedete à dextris, Si ye all on my right hand; for from the left hand, there is no prospect, to the face of God; And to vs all, Ho∣die genui vos, This day I haue begotten you all;
begotten you in the con∣firmation of my first Bap¦tisme, in the ratification of my first Election; And to vs all, Ponam inimicos ve∣stros, I will make all your enemies your footstoole; For God shall establish vs there, Vbi non intrat ini∣micus,Aug. nec amicus exit, Where no man shall come in, that troubles the company, nor any, whom any of the com∣pany loues, goe out; but wee shall all, not onely haue, but be a part of that Righteousnes which dwels
in these new Heauens, and new Earth, wch we, Accor∣ding to his promise look for. ANd be this the end of our first Text,Comme∣moration. as it is a Text for Instructi∣on. Passe we now to our second, our Text for Com∣memoration. Close we here this Booke of life, from which we haue had our first Text, And, Surge quae dormis in puluere, A∣rise thou Booke of Death; thou, that sleepest in this consecrated dust; and hast beene going into dust,
now, almost a Moneth of dayes, almost a Lunarie yeere, and dost deserue such Anniuersaries, such quick returnes of Periods, and a Commemoration, in euery such yeere, in euery Moneth; Arise thou, and bee another Commentary to vs; and tell vs, what this new Heauen, and new Earth is, in which, now, thou dwel'st, with that Righteousnesse. But wee doe not inuoke thee, as thou art a Saint in Hea∣uen; Appeare to vs, as thou didst appeare to vs
a moneth agoe; At least, appeare in thy history; Appeare in our memory; that when euery one of vs haue lookt vpon thee, by his owne glasse, and seene thee in his owne Interest, such, as thou wast to him, That when one shall haue seene thee, the best wife, And a lar∣ger number, the best mo∣ther, And more then they, a whole Towne, the best Neighbour, And more then a Towne, a large body of noble friends, the best Friend,
And more then all they, all the world, the best ex∣ample, when thou hast receiu'd this Testimony from the Militant Church, as thou hast the recom∣pence of all this, in thy Blessed Soule, in the Triumphant, yet, because thy body is still within these Walls, bee still con∣tent, to bee one of this Congregation, and to heare some parts of this Text re-applie'd vnto thee. Our first word, Neuer∣thelesse,Neuerthe∣lesse. puts vs first vpon
this consideration, That shee liu'd in a Time, wherein this Prophecie of Saint Peter, in this Chapter, was ouer-abun∣dantly perform'd, That there should bee scoffers, iesters in diuine things, and matters appertaining to God, and his Religion. For, now, in these our dayes, excellency of Wit, lies in prophanenesse; he is the good Spirit, that dares abuse God; And hee good company, that makes his company the worse, or keepes them from good∣nesse.
This being the Aire, and the Complexi∣on of the Wit of her Times, and her inclina∣tion, and conuersation, naturally, cheerfull, and merry, and louing face∣tiousnesse, and sharpnesse of wit, Neuerthelesse, who euer saw her, who euer heard her countenance a prophane speech, how sharpe soeuer, or take part with wit, to the pre∣iudice of Godlinesse? From this I testifie her holy cheerfulnesse, and Re∣ligious alacrity, (one of
the best euidences of a good conscience) That as shee came to this place, God's house of Prayer, du∣ly, not onely euery Sab∣bath, when it is the house of other exercises, as well as of Prayer, but euen in those weeke-dayes, when it was onely a house of Prayer, as often as these doores were opened for a holy Conuocation, And, as she euer hastned her fami∣ly, and her company hi∣ther, with that cheerfull prouocation, For God's sake let's go, For God's sake
let's bee there at the Con∣fession. So, her selfe, with her whole family, (as a Church in that elect La∣die's house, to whom Iohn writ his second E∣pistle) did, euery Sab∣bath, shut vp the day, at night, with a generall, with a cheerfull singing of Psalmes, This Act of cheer∣fulnesse, was still the last Act of that family, vnited in it selfe, and with God. God loues a cheerfull giuer; Muh more a cheerfull giuer of himselfe. Truly, he that can close his eyes,
in a holy cheerfulnesse, euery night, shall meet no distemper'd, no inor∣dinate, no irregular sad∣nesse, then, when God; by the hand of Death, shall close his eyes, at last. But, returne we againe to our Neuerthelesse; You may remember, that this word in our former part, put vs first vpon the con∣sideration of Scoffers at the day of iudgement, and then, vpon the conside∣ration of Terrours, and sad Apprehensions at that day. And for her, some
sicknesses, in the declina∣tion of her yeeres, had o∣pened her to an ouer-flowing of Melancholie; Not that she euer lay vn∣der that water, but yet, had sometimes, some high Tides of it; and, though this distemper would sometimes cast a cloud, and some halfe damps vpon her naturall cheerfulnesse, and socia∣blenesse, and sometimes induce darke, and sad ap∣prehensions, Neuerthe∣lesse, who euer heard, or saw in her, any such effect
of Melancholy as to mur∣mure, or repine, or dis∣pute vpon any of Gods proceedings, or to lodge a Ielousie, or Suspition of his mercy, and good∣nesse towards her, and all hers? The Wit of our time is Prophanenesse; Neuerthelesse, shee, that lou'd that, hated this; Occasionall Melancholy had taken some hold in her, Neuerthelesse, that neuer Ecclipst, neuer in∣terrupted her cheerfull confidence, & assurance in God.
Our second word de∣notes the person; We, Ne∣uerthelesse We; And, here in this consideration, Neuerthelesse shee. This may seeme to promise some picture, some Cha∣racter of her person. But shee was no stranger to them that heare me now; nor scarce to any that may heare of this here after, which you heare now, and therefore, much needes not, to that purpose. Yet, to that pur∣pose, of her person, and personall circumstances,
thus much I may remem∣ber some, and informe o∣thers, That from that Worthy family,Daughter of Sir Rich si∣ster of Sir Fran. Aun of Sir Rich. Neupo, of Arcol. whence shee had her origi∣nall extraction, and birth, she suckt that loue of hospitality, (hospitali∣ty, which hath celebrated that family, in many Ge∣nerations, successiuely) which dwelt in her, to her end. But in that ground, her Fathers fami∣ly, shee grew not ma∣ny yeeres. Transplanted young from thence, by mariage, into another
family of Honour, as a flower that doubles and multiplies by transplanta∣tion, she multiplied into ten Children;Rich. Her∣bert of Blachehall in Montgo∣mery Esqu. lineally de∣scended from that great Sir Rich. Her∣bert in Ed. 4. time, and father of Ed. Lord Herbert Baron of Castle-Island, late Embassador in France, and now of his Maie∣sties Councel of Warre. Iob's num∣ber; and Iob's distribu∣tion, (as shee, her selfe would very often remem∣ber) seuen sonnes, and three daughters. And, in this ground, shee grew not many yeeres more, then were necessary, for the producing of so ma∣ny plants. And being then left to chuse her owne ground in her Widow-hood, hauing at
home establisht, and in∣creast the estate, with a faire, & noble Addition, proposing to her selfe, as her principall care, thee∣ducation of her children, to aduance that, shee came with them, and dwelt with them, in the Vniuersitie; and recom∣penc't to them, the losse of a Father, in giuing them two mothers; her owne personall care, and the aduantage of that place; where shee con∣tracted a friendship, with diuers reuerend persons,
of eminency, and estima∣tion there; which conti∣nued to their ends. And as this was her greatest businesse, so she made this state, a large Period; for in this state of widow∣hood, shee continued twelue yeeres. And then, returning to a second ma∣riage, that second mariage turnes vs to the conside∣ration of another perso∣nall circumstance; that is, the naturall endowments of her person; Which were such, as that, (though her vertues were
his principall obiect) yet, euen these her personall, and naturall endowments, had their part, in draw∣ing, and fixing the affe∣ctions of such a person, as by his birth,Sir Iohn Dāuers onely bro∣ther to the Earle of Danby. and youth, and interest in great fa∣uours in Court, and legall proximity to great posses∣sions in the world, might iustly haue promist him acceptance, in what fa∣mily soeuer, or vpon what person soeuer, hee had directed, and plac't his Affections. He plac't them here; neither diuer∣ted
then, nor repented since. For, as the well tu∣ning of an Instrument, makes higher and lower strings, of one sound, so the inequality of their yeeres, was thus reduc't to an euennesse, that shee had a cheerfulnesse, agree∣able to his youth, and he a sober staidnesse, confor∣mble to her more yeeres. So that, I would not consider her, at so much more then forty, nor him, at so much lesse then thirty, at that time, but, as their persons were
made one, and their for∣tunes made one, by mari∣age, so I would put their yeeres into one number, and finding a sixty be∣tweene them, thinke them thirty a peece; for, as twins of one houre, they liu'd. God, who ioyn'd them, then, ha∣uing also separated them now, may make their yeres euen, this other way too; by giuing him, as many yeeres after her go∣ing out of this World, as he had giuen her, before his comming into it; and
then, as many more, as God may receiue Glory, and the World, Benefit by that Addition; That so, as at their first mee∣ting, she was, at their last meeting, he may bee the elder person. To this consideration of her person then, be∣longs this, that God gaue her such a comelinesse, as, though shee were not proud of it, yet she was so content with it, as not to goe about to mend it, by any Art. And for her At∣tire, (which is another
personall circumstance) it was neuer sumptuous, ne∣uer sordid But alwayes a∣greeable to her quality, and agreeable to her company; Such as shee might, and such, as o∣thers, such as shee was, did weare For, in such things of indifferency in themselues, many times, a singularity may be a lit∣tle worse, then a fellow∣ship in that, which is not altogether so good. It may be worse, nay, it may be a worse pride, to weare worse things, then o∣thers
doe. Her rule was mediocrity. And, as to the conside∣ration of the house, be∣longs the consideration of the furniture too, so, in these personall circumstan∣ces, we consider her for∣tune, her estate. Which was in a faire, and noble proportion, deriu'd from her first husband, and fairely, and nobly dis∣penc'd, by herselfe, with the allowance of her se∣cond. In which shee was one of Gods true Stew∣ards, and Almoners too.
There are dispositions, which had rather giue presents, then pay debts; and rather doe good to strangers, than to those, that are neerer to them. But shee alwayes thought the care of her family, a debt, and vpon that, for the prouision, for the or∣der, for the proportions, in a good largenesse, shee plac't her first thoughts, of that kinde. For, for our families, we are Gods Ste∣wards; For those without, we are his Almoners. In which office, shee gaue
not at some great dayes, or some solemne goings abroad, but, as Gods true Almoners, the Sunne, and Moone, that passe on, in a continuall doing of good, as shee receiu'd her daily bread from God, so, daily, she distributed, and imparted it, to others. In which office, though she neuer turn'd her face from those, who in a strict in quisition, might be call'd idle, and vagrant Beggers, yet shee euer look't first, vpon them, who labour'd, and whose
labours could not ouer∣come the difficulties, nor bring in the necessities of this life; and to the sweat of their browes, shee con∣tributed, euen her wine, and her oyle, and any thing that was, and any thing, that might be, if it were not, prepard for her owne table. And as her house was a Court, in the conuersation of the best, and an Almeshouse, in fee∣ding the poore, so was it also an Hospitall, in mini∣string releefe to the sicke. And truly, the loue of
doing good in this kind, of ministring to the sicke, was the hony, that was spread ouer all her bread; the Aire, the Perfume, that breath'd ouer all her house; The dispositi∣on that dwelt in those her children, and those her kindred, which dwelt with her, so ben∣ding this way, that the studies and knowledge of one, the hand of another, and purse of all, and a ioynt-facility, and open∣nesse, and accessiblenesse to persons of the mea∣nest
quality, concur'd in this blessed Act of Chari∣ty, to minister releefe to the sicke. Of which, my selfe, who, at that time, had the fauour to bee ad∣mitted into that family, can, and must testifie this, that when the late heauy visitation fell hot∣ly vpon this Towne, when euery doore was shut vp, and, lest Death should enter into the house, e∣uery house was made a Sepulchre of them that were in it, then, then, in that time of infection, di∣uers
persons visited with that infection, had their releefe, and releefe applia∣ble to that very infection, from this house. Now when I haue said thus much (rather thus little) of her person, as of a house, That the ground upon which it was built, was the family where she was borne, and then, where she was mar∣ried, and then, the time of her widowhood, and lastly, her last mariage, And that the house it selfe, was those faire bodily endow∣ments,
which God had bestow'd vpon her, And the furniture of that house, the fortune, and the vse of that fortune, of which God had made her Steward and Almoner, when I shall also haue said, that the Inhabitants of this house, (rather the seruants, for they did but wait vpon Religion in her) were those married couples, of morall ver∣tues, Conuersation married with a Retirednesse, Faci∣lity married with a Reser∣uednesse, Alacrity married
with a Thoughtfulnesse, and Largenesse married with a Prouidence, I may haue leaue to depart from this consideration of her person, and personall cir∣cumstances, let by insi∣sting longer vpon them, I should seeme to pre∣tend, to say all the good, that might bee said of her; But that's not in my purpose; yet, onely there∣fore, because it is not in my power; For I would doe her all right, and all you that good, if I could, to say all. But, I haste to
an end, in consideration of some things, that ap∣pertaine more expresly to me, then these personall, or ciuill, or morall things doe. In those, the next is, the Secundum promissa, That shee gouern'd her selfe, according to his pro∣mises; his promises, laid downe in his Scriptures. For, as the rule of all her ciuill Actions, was Religi∣on, so, the rule of her Re∣ligion, was the Scripture; And, her rule, for her par∣ticular vnderstanding of
the Scripture, was the Church. Shee neuer diuer∣ted towards the Papist, in vndervaluing the Scrip∣ture; nor towards the Se∣paratist, in vnderualuing the Church. But in the doctrine, and discipline of that Church, in which, God seal'd her, to him∣selfe, in Baptisme, shee brought vp her children, shee assisted her family, she dedicated her soule to God in her life, and sur∣rendered it to him in her death; And, in that forme of Common Prayer, which
is ordain'd  by hat Church, and to which she had accustomtd her selfe, with her family wide day, she ioyn'd with than company, which was about her death-bed, in answering to euery par thereof, which the Congrgationl is directed to answer to with a cleere vnderstanding, with a con∣stant memory, with a di∣stinct voyed, not houres before she died According to this pro∣mise that is, the will of God manifested in the
, She expected; Shee expected this, that she hath receued; Gods Physioke, and Gods M∣sicke a Christianly death. For, death, in the old Testa∣men was a Comnation; but in the now Testament, death is a Promise; When there was a Super-dying, a death vpon the death, a Morte vpon the Moreris a Spirituall death after the bodily, then wee died acording to Gods threat∣ning; Now, when by the Gospell, that second death is taken off, though wee
die still, yet we die accor∣ding to his Promise; That's a part of his mer∣cy, and his Promise, which his Apostle giues vs from him,1 Cor. 15. 51 That wee shall all bee changed; For, after that promise, that change, follow's that tri∣umphant Acclamation,Vers. 5. O death where is thy sting, O graue where is thy victory? Consider vs fallen in A∣dam, and wee are misera∣ble, that wee must die, But consider vs restor'd, and redintegrated in Christ, wee were more
miserable if wee might not die; Wee lost the earthly Paradise by death then; but wee get not Heauen, but by death, now. This shee expected till it came, and embrac't it when it came. How may we thinke, shee was ioy'd to see that face, that Angels delight to looke vpon, the face of her Sa∣uiour, that did not abhor the face of his fearfullest Messenger, Death Shee shew'd no feare of his face, in any change of her owne; but died with∣out
any change of coun∣tenane, or posture, with∣out any strugling, any dis∣order; but her Death-bed was as quiet, asher Graus. To another Mag∣dalen, Christ said vp on earth, Touch me not, for I am not ascended  Being ascended now, and she bing gone to him, asr she'e had a∣waited his  so yores, as that more, would growne to bee vexdon, and srrow, was her last horb, were,
my will to the will of God; so wee doubt not but the first word which she heard there, was that Euge, from her Sauiour, Well done good and faithfull seruant, enter into thy ma∣stersioy. Shee expected that, dissolution of body, and soule; and rest in both, from the incumbrances, and tentations of this world. But yet, shee is in expectation still; Still a Reuersionarie; And a Re∣uersionary vpō along life; The whole world must
die, before she come to a possession of this Reuersi∣on; which is a Glorified body in the Resurrection. In which expectation, she return's to her former charity; shee will not haue that, till all wee, shall haue it, as well as shee; She eat not her mor∣sels alone, in her life, (as Iob speakes) Shee lookes not for the glory of the Resurrection alone,31. 17. after her death. But when all we, shall haue beene mel∣low'd in the earth, many yeeres, or chang'd in the
Aire, in the twinkling of an eye, (God knowes which) That body vpon which you tread now, That body which now, whilst I speake, is moul∣dring, and crumbling into lesse, and lesse dust, and so hath some moti∣on, though no life, That body, which was the Ta∣bernacle of a holy Soule, and a Temple of the holy Ghost, That body that was eyes to the blinde, and hands, and feet to the lame, whilst it liu'd, and being dead, is so still,
by hauing beene so liuely an example, to teach o∣thers, to be so, That body at last, shall haue her last expectation satisfied, and d'well bodily, with that Righteousnesse, in these new Heauens, and new Earth, for euer, and euer, and euer, and infinite, and super-infinite euers. Wee∣nd all, with the valedicti∣on of the Spouse to Christ His left hand is vnder my head,Cant. 8. 3. and his right embra∣ces mee, was the Spouses valediction, and goodnight to Christ then, when she
laid her selfe downe to sleepe in the strength of his Mandrakes, and in the power of his Spices, as it is exprest here; that is, in the influence of his mer∣cies. Beloued, euery good Soule is the Spouse of Christ And this good Soule, being thus laid downe to sleepe in his peace, His left hand vn∣der her head, gathering, and composing, and pre∣feruing hen dust, for fu∣ture Glory, His right hand embracing her, assuming, and establishing her soule
in present Glory, in his name, and in her behalfe, I say that, to all you, which Christ sayes there, in the behalfe of that Spouse,Vers. 4. Adiuro vos, I ad∣iure you, I charge you, O daughters of Ierusalem, that yee wake her not, till she please. The words are directed to the daughters, rather then to the sons of Ierusalem, because for the most part, the aspersions that women receiue, ei∣ther in Morall or Religious actions, proceed from womē themselues. Ther∣fore,
Adiuro vos, I charge you, Oye daughters of Ie∣rusalem, wake her not. Wake her not, with any halfe calumnies, with any whisperings; But if you wil wake her, wake her, and keepe her awake with an actiue imitation, of her Morall, and her Holy ver∣tues. That so her example working vpon you, and the number of Gods Saints, being, the soo∣ner, by this blessed ex∣ample, fulfil'd, wee may all meet, and meet quick∣ly in that kingdome,
which hers, and our Saui∣our, hath purchac't for vs all, with the inestima∣ble price of his incorrup∣tible blou. To which glorious Sonne of God, &c. FINIS.
MEMORIAE MATRIS Sacrum. AH Mater, quo te deplorem fnte? Dolores Quae guttae poterunt enumerare meos? Sicca meis lacrymis Thamesis vicina videtur Virtutumque choro siscior ipse tuo. In flumen maerore nigrum si funderer ardens, Laudibus hand ierem sepia iusta tis. Tantùm istaec scrib gratus, n tu mih tant ùm Mater: & ista Dolor nc tibi Mtra parit.
Confer lacrymas: Illa quae vos iniscuit. Vestrasaue laudes, posoit & mixi as genas. Pudorque constet vel solut is crinibus; Decus mulerum perijt: & metùunt vr Vtrumqu sexum dote ne mulctauerit. Non illa soles terere comptu lubricos. Struices superbas at que turritum cpute Molita, reliquum deinde garrens diem. (Nam post Babelem Linguae adest confusio) Quin post mode stam, qualis integras decet, Substructionem capit is & nimbum breuem, Animam recentemrite curauit sacris Adorta numen acr & igue â prece. Dein familiam lustrat, & res prandij Horti, colique distributim pensitat. Suum cuique tempus & locus datur. Inde exiguntnr pensa crudo vespere. Ratione cer vita constat & domus, Prudenter inito quot-diebus calculo. Tot â renident aede decus & suauitas
Solùm dolores, & dolores, stellulae. At tu qui ineptè haec dicta censes filo, Nato prentis auferens Encmium Abito trunce cum tis pudoribus. Ergo ipse solùm mutus at que excors ro Strepent mundo tinnulis praeconijs? Mihine mtris vrnaclausa est vnico, Herbae exoetae, ros-marinus aridus? Matrine linguam refero, solùm vt mordeam? Abito barde. Quàm pi isc su impudens? Tu verò mater perpetìm laudabere Nato dolenti: liter hoc debent tibi Quêis me educasti; sponte char as illinun Fructum laboru consetae maximum Laudando Matrem, cum repugnant inscij. CVr spndes O Phoebe? ecquid demittere matrem Ad nos cum radio tam rutilante potes? At super at caput illa , quantu ipse cader, Mens superat; corpus solùm Element a tenēt. Scilict id splendes: haec est tibi causa micand Et lucro apponis gandia sancta tuo. Verùm he si nequeas coelo demittere matre, Sitque omnis motus nescia, tanta quies,
Fa radios saltèm ingemines, vt dextera trts Implicet, & matre, matre manente, petam. QVid nugor calamo fans? Mater perpetis vida gandis, Horte pro tnui colis Edenem Borae statibus inuinm. Quin coeli mihi sunt mei, Materni decu & debita nminis, umque his inigilo frequens Stellarum socis, pellibus Exr. Quare Sphaeram egomet eam Connixus, digitis impiger vrgeo: Te, Mater, celebrans di Noctu te celebrans uminis aemulo. Per to nascor in hunc globum Exemploque tuo nascor in alterum: Bis tu mater eras mihi, Vt currat paribus gloria tibis. HOrti, deliciae Dominae, marcescite tand; Ornâstis capulum, noc superesse licet.
GAlene frustra
Pallida
Tam langues genitrix inri suppsta fug: Verū augusta parens, sanctum os clos lo , Quale paludoss iamia lictura cessus Praetulit Astraea, aut solio Themis alma vtsto Pensilis, at que acri dirimens Examine lites. Hunc vulum ostendas & tecum nobile spect Quod superest vitae, insumam: solisque ingales Ipse tuae solùm adnecta, sine murmure, tensa. Nec querar ingratos, studijs dum tabidus inst, Effixisse dies, suffcatamue Mineruam Aut sps productas, barbata{que} somnia vertam In vicium mundo sterili, cui cedo cometas Ipse suos tanquam digno pallantiaque astra. Est ihi his quinis laqueata domūcula tignis Rure, brnis{que} hortus, cuius cum veere slorū Luctatur spacium, qualem tamen eligit aequi Iudiij dominus stores vt iunctius halent Stipati, rudibusque volis imperuius hortus Sit quasi fasciculus crescens, & nidus odorum. Hìc ego tu{que} erimus, variae suffitibus herbae Quotidiè pasti: tantùm verm ind vultum Affectusque mei similem; nc languida misce Ora meae memori menti  ne dispare cult Pugnacs, teros or tur bmus odores, Aqu inter reliqus bori crscentiafatus Nostra etia paribus arcescant gaudia fatis.
PAruam piamque dum lubentèr semitam Grandireaeque praefero. Carpsit malignum sydus hanc modestiam Vinumque felle miscuit. Hinc fremere totus & minari gestio Ipsis seuerus orbibus Tandem prehensâ comiter lacernulâ Susurrat aure qnispiam, Haec fuerat olim potio Domini tui. Gust proboque Dolium. HOc Genitrix scriptum proles tibi sedula mittit. Siste parum cantus, dum legis ista, tuos. Nôsse sui quid agant, quaedant est quo  music Quae{que}, olim fuerat cura, manere potest. Nos miserè flemus, solesque obducimus almos sāctis Occiduis, tanquam displice nube, genis. Interea classem magnis Rex instruit ausis: Nos autem flemus: res ea sola tuis. Ecce solutra est, ventos causata morantes: Sin pluuiam: fletus suppedit âsset aquas.
Tillius incumbit Dano: Gallusque marinis: Nos flendo: haec nostrûm tessera sola ducum. Sic aeuum exigitur tardum, dum praepetis anni Mille rotae nimijs impediuntur aquis. Plura tibi missurus era (nam quae mibi laurs, Quod nectar, nisi cum te celebrare diem?) Sed parte in scriptis etiam dum lacryma poscit, Diluit oppositas candidus humor aquas. NEmpe huc vs{que} notos tenebricosos Et maestum nimio madore Coelum Tellurisque Britannicae saliuam Iniuste satis arguit viator. At te commoriente, Magna Mater, Rectè, quem trahit, aerem repellit Cum probro madidum, reumque difflat. Nam te nunc Ager, Vrbs, & Aula plorant: Te nunc Anglia, Scotiaeque binae, Quin te Cambria peruetusta deflet, Deducens lacrymas prioris aui Ne serae meritis tuis venirent. Non est angulus vspiam serenus, Nec cingit mare, nunc inundat ones.
DVm librata suis haeret radicibus ilex Nescia vulturnis cedere, firma manet. Post vbi crudelem sentit diuisa securom Quò placet oblato, mortua fertur, hero: Arbor & ipse inur sa vocor: dū{que} insitus almae Assideo Matri, robore vinco cedros. Nunc sortipateo, expositus sine matre procellis, Lubricus, & superans mobilitate salum. Tu radix, tu petra mihi firmissima Mater Ceu Polypus, chelis saxa prehendo tenax: Non tibi nunc solifilum abrupere sorores Dissutus videor funere & ipse tuo. Vnde vagans passimrectè vocer alter Vlysses, Alteraque hac tua mors, Ilias esto mihi. FAcesse Stoica plebs, obambulans cautes. Exutastrato carnis, ossibus constans, Iisque siccis adeo vt os molossorum Haud glubat inde tres teruncios escae. Dolere prohibes? ant dolere me gentis Adò inficetae, plumbeae, Meduseae,
Ad saxa speciem retrahentis humanam, Tantoque nequioris optimâ Pirrhâ. At forte matrem perdere haud soles demens: Quin nec potes; cuipraebuit Tigris partum. Proinde parco belluis, nec irascor. Epitaphium. HIc sit a foeminei lans & victoria sexus: Virgo pudens, vxor fid, seueraparens. Magnatu{que} inopum{que} aequū certamē & ardor: Nobilitate illos, hos pie tate rapit. Sic excelsa humilis{que} simulla dissita iunxit, Quic quid habe4 tellus quicquid & astra, fruēs.
EXcussos manibus calamos, falcemque resumptam Rure, sibi dixit Musa fuisse probro. Aggreditur Matrem (conductis carmine Parcis) Funereque hoc cultum vindicat aegra suum. Non poui non ire acri stimulante stagello: Quim matris superans carmina posci honos. Eia, agedum scribo: vicisti Musa; sed audi Stulta semel scribo, perpetud vt sileam.
