B1814 12020759 52607
A IVSTIFICATION OF THE City Remonstrance AND ITS VINDICATION. OR, An Answer to a Book written by Mr. I. P. Entituled, The City Remonstrance Remonstrated. Wherein the frequent Falsifyings of the said Mr. I. P. are discovered, the many Charges by him laid upon the Remonstrance and its Vindicator, dis∣proved, and the parity and agreement of the Remonstrance (especially in those particulars so much condem∣ned by him) with the Propositions, Declarations, Remonstrances, and Votes, of both or either House of Parliament manifested. By JOHN BELLAMIE. LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, 1646.
To the Right Honorable Thomas Adams Lord Major, and to the Right Worshipfull the Aldermen, and the rest of the Common-Councell of the City, LONDON. Right Honourable, Right Worshipfull, VPon the 14 of April last, you being in Court of Com∣mon-councell assembled, made choice of a Committee of Aldermen and Commoners to prepare a draught of A Remonstrance and Petition to both Houses of Parliament, and to present it in Court, to be there either approved or altered, as upon debate should be judged meet. In obedience thereunto, the said Committee upon the 20 of May following, presented it in Common-councell, where every branch thereof was taken apart and by it self into serious Conside∣ration, and after three dayes debating in open Court, it was by consent and approbation of the Court finished, and upon the 26 of May, in the name of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Com∣mon-councell presented to both Houses of Parliament. Since which time two Libells have been Printed against the said Re∣monstrance, the one call'd, A moderate Reply to the City Remonstrance, the other entituled, The Interest of England maintained; In one of which it is charged to carry a full com∣plyance with His Majesties wonted Declarations against the Parliament; and in the other, That a great part of the main Sticklers in it, are such as were alwayes backward to the Parliament, and forced to pay their Fifth and twentieth part; with many other foolish, foule, and false aspersions in them both: Whereupon, (though the unmeetest, because the unablest of many others) I adventured the Vindication of it; In answer whereof, ad in further opposition to the said Remonstrance, one Mr. J. P. hath since published a Book named, The City Remonstrance Remonstrated, calling it a hard-hearted Remonstrance, and a Remonstrance invective against the Parliament, &c. And
in Page 29. charges mee for saying smething (but instances in nothing,) concerning the King, the Lords, and the power of the Commons, and what my carriages have been not ve∣ry long since in Common-councell, &c. and doth thereby, as it were, in a tacite way, call the Court to testifie against me. All whch, hath occasioned me this second time to put pen t Paper, in a further Justification of your Remonstrance, and also of its Vindication, and to a clearing of my self from those many charges of mutation and change, which (to beget a dsesteem of what I have written in Vindication of the Remonstrance) hee hath laid a∣gainst me. My intention in this my addresse unto your Lordship, to the wor∣thy Aldermen, and to all the rest of the Common-councell, is, neither to exasperate you against the person of my opposite, nor yet to seeke protection from you for my self or Books; for if what I have written be not cocordable to Truth and true Reason, let both mee and them fall before my Antagonist. But being thus publkely charged that I should (not very long since) speak something (but what it is, hee saith not) in Common-councell, &c. as if it were crosse or contrary to some passages in the Remonstrance, or to what I have written in the Vindication thereof, for saith he, It makes them that heard it, and observe what your Carriages are now, stand with admiration and amazement at your wheeling thus about. I oe therefore humbly crave leave to present this my Justifica∣tion of your Remonstrance, and its Vindication to your Lord∣ship, and to the whole Court of Common-councell, and doe ap∣peal to all of you in generall, and to every one of you in particular, t estifie against me, if at any time since I had that undeserved honour and happinesse to be a member of this Court, there ever fell any one word from me, so much as savouring of such things, as by this Mr. J. P. I am charged to speak in your presence, and I shall ever remain Your Lordships, and this Cities servant IOHN BELLAMIE.
To my truly Loved and Honoured FRIEND Mr. IOHN PRICE. SIR, I Have perused your Book, entituled, The City Remonstrance Remonstrated, or an answer to my Vindication of the said Remonstrance, wher∣in I perceive you have been very ready to receive whatever Reports, either true or false have been brougt unto you concrning my carriage in matters of Religion, even from the day of my birth to the publishing of your Book, and taking them upon trust, (for you have not the least knowledge of any one of the particular, and many of them relate, I think, to the time before you were born,) without ever speaking one word to me about them, (though wee are professed, and have been long acquainted ntimate Friends, and to the best of my knowledge and remembrance, not any time the least offensive word ever passed between us, and now are so neare neighbors that whenever you peased, in lesse then one quarter of an hour you might freely have communicated to me whatever you hd a desire to bee satisfied in) you have, as I coneive, to weaken my esteem, and to render what I have written to bee the more invalid, divulged them to the world. Two thngs I desire i love to represent unto you in this, First, if all that you have written of mee were true, the con∣trary wherof I shall easily prove when I come to the particulars;
yet I beseech you consider how irregular this your proceeding against me is, and contrary to the rule given by our Saviour Christ, for you and mee and all Gods people to walke by, in Math. 18. 15, 16, 17. If thy brother trespasse against thee, goe and tell him his fault between thee and him alone, if he shall heare thee, thou hast gained thy brother, &c. and mind that of Solomon, Prov. 15. 18. A man that bea∣reth false witnesse against his neighbour, is a maul, a sword, and a sharpe arrow. Secondly, I pray al∣so remember how exceedingly your selfe, and all your friends the Antipresbyters, have distasted, and by word of mouth often with much dislike, blamed Mr. Edwards for medling with personall matters, notwithstanding his way of writing in this kind, is much different from this of yours, as being of practises and matters within these few years, since they went into that way of Independency, and as hee conceives, flowing from their principles (and not as you in this, of things raked up through the whole course of their lives) being also professedly to discover the errors of the times (viz Hereies, Blasphemies, &c.) and thereby to preserve the people from the evill of them. Now I pray you put this question seriously to your own soul, whether the same act done in the same kind by Mr. Edwards against the Independents, &c. be a vice and blame worthy, and yt being done by Mr. J. P. against a Presbyterian or a Remonstrant, be a vertue, and worthy commendation; think seriously of it, and then receive such an answer as your owne heart shall dictate to you. You know Mr. J. P. how carefull I was of your good name, when about four monehs since a report was brought unto mee cncerning some opinions of yours in matters of Religion (whether true or false I now argue not) that presently by a god∣ly intimate friend of yours and mine, viz. Mr. James Russell,
I did privately, without the least divulging them abroad, make you acquainted with it: And that very morning after your Book came forth against me▪ the like report was again pub∣likely brought unto mee in the presence of sundry witnesses; but in sead of taking revenge of you (which God hath forbid∣den me, Rom. 12. 19. saying, Avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath, for it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repy saith the Lord) ei∣ther by spreading them by reports, or printing them to your dsparagement, I did pesently, in the presence of Mr. James Story, who also heard them reported, tell them to you, remembring that of Solomon, Prov. 1. 9. He that repeateth a matter separateth very Friends; and desiring to follow our Saviours counsell, Matth. 7. 12. Whatsoe∣ver you would that men should do to you, doe yee even so to them; and I hope I shall ever make it a rule for me to walk by, viz. to doe as I would be done unto, and not as I am dealt with. And therefore in the examination and answering of your Book, I will (though much provoked by you, yet) by Gods grace indevour to be as free from pasiion or retaliation as possibly I can, well remembring that David, when Shimei cursed and railed upon him, observed much good from God in Shimei his great evill, and said, So let him curse, because the Lord hath said unto him, curse David; who shall then say, wherefore hast thou done so? 2 Sam. 16. 10. So I heartily desire, without the least reluctancy of Spirit against you, as the instrument seriously to observe, and truly to bee sensible of, whatever is from God in all that you have said, and to lay my selfe in the dust in giving God the glory, both in the acknow∣ledging of any error justly charged upon mee, and of his mercy in my recovery. And I trust that through the goodness of▪ God I shall yet get much good out of that which perhaps you
intnded, and therefore divulged for mor evill, setting be∣fore me as a pattern in this to walke by the practice of our Lord Christ, recorded for our example in 1 Pet. 2. 21, 23. Who when hee was reviled, reviled not againe, but com∣mitted himselfe to him that judgeth righteously; and with freedome of spirit I do heartily both praise the Lord, and thanke you for your plaine dealig with mee in any thing wherein as you professe, you really and singly intended my spi∣ritua good, and pray the Lord to give you repentance, and to pardon you in every thing wherein in this transaction you have done otherwise. Thus with the reall demnstration of y true love and affe∣ction to you, I crave your leave to goe on to the answearing of your Book, earnestly desiring that if yet after all wee cannot agree in judgement and opinion, we may still close together in heart and affection, which (whatever the event shall prove) shall alwayes bee the desire, prayer, and endeavour of Your cordially loving and faithfull Friend Iohn Bellamie.
A IVSTIFICATION OF THE City Remonstrance, AND ITS VINDICATION. THE first thing you quarrell withall, is the Title of the Book, A Vindiction, &c. and this you continue to the latter end of your sixth Page, and (as in the Moderate Re∣ply, so here in this) you endeavour in ge∣nerall termes to lay low the Remonstrance and its Vindication in the eyes of the peo∣ple; As in your first page by comparing them to a bad Cause and its Advocates, then to the Kings Declarati∣ons, Rmonstrances, and their Abettors, to Absaloms rebllion again his Father David, and Achitophels cunning counsell to draw the peple fter hi, to Demetrius his plea for Diana's greatnesse, and to Tertul∣lu against St. Paul. Ans. e passe by the parallel which here you make with the Vindicator of the City Remonstrance, and leave it wholly to the ensure of the judicious Reader, whether there be
any the least party in the things and cases by you compared, for I had much rather abide their test and tryall, then in this to bee a pleader of my own cause, and so I come to your application of it in these words: Viz. As it was in the beginning, so it is now; witnesse the present case, A moderate Reply to the City Remonstrance, in justfication of the Parlia∣ments innocencie from the prejudice raised against them by the said Re∣monstrance, as (say you) shall bee fully evidenced before we have dne. Answ. Two things I observe in this: first, that you say, (and therein you lay a charge upon the City) that the City Remon∣strance hath raiseda prejudice against the Parliaments innocen∣cy: And secondly, you further say, that this shall bee fully evi∣denced before you have done; the first is exprest, as usually you use to doe, onely in generals, which amount to nothing: But I pray consider with your selfe, is not Mr. I. P. a Freeman and Ci∣tizen of London, one who lives, under God, in and by the Trad of the City, and yet so farre to forget himselfe and his duty, as thus to asperse the City and its actions with generall, and yet un∣just defamations, and all this under a specious shew of a justi∣fication of the Parliaments innocency, when as there are clouds of witnesses, and many of them under the Parliaments own attestation, at all times ready to bee produced if required, of Londons fidelity, of Londons loyalty, of Londons unparal∣lel'd embowelling, and in a great measure emptying themselves, not onely of treasure, but of blood also, and all this unwea∣riedly from time to time, since the Parliament first fate, to this very day, yea alwayes, with alacrity and freedome both of heart and hands, for the honour, the defence, the just and necessary oc∣casions of Parliament; and hath not the Honourable Hose of Lords, accepted and fully approved most of the particulars in the said Remonstrance, yea, those in speciall, and by name, which you so much oppose, viz. the suppressing of all Heresies and Sismes, &c. and promised to take the other particulars into thir serious and speedy considration, as by their answer to that Remonstrance pre∣sented to them it doth appeare? and hath not the Honourable House of Commons also received the said Remonstrance, and promised to give an answer thereunto in due time, and not at any time since its receiving into their Honourable House, by any pblie act ma∣nifested
to the world the least dislike thereof? and yet must Lon∣s Remonstrance by one of its own members be charged with rai∣sing a prejudice against the Parliaments innoceney? I pray consider whether by this you doe not first charge the House of Lords for their being well satisfied with that, which yet you say, doth raise a prejudice against the Parliaments innocencie. And secondly, whether you doe not prejudge the judgement of the House of Commons, and therein breake the Priviledge of Parli∣ament, in passing such a sentence, and laying such a charge upon that, which yet lyeth under their consideration: I onely offer these two Quaeries to your after, or second consideration. But for a  this, you say that this shall bee fully evidenced be∣fore you have done. Answ. I pray remember what it is that in this you promise, and be sure that in the particulars of it you make your Charge good, otherwise you must not bee offended, nor take it ill, if according to the common Proverbe, you be judged to be one of them, which will undertake more in an houre, then you can performe in an age. I appeal to the Reader, whether as yet, either the Moderate reply, or this your Remonstrance Remonstrated, hath in any one instance, which either of you have given, or in all that both of you have done, done any thing which proves that the City Remon∣strance hath raised a prejudice against the Parliaments innocency; and tly you must needs beare with me in this, that I cannot judge your bare word to be of that Authority, as to beleeve it because you affirme it, especially considering the honorable House of Commons hath not as yet passed any the least displeasing sentence against it; and the honorable House of Lords hath declared, that they are wel sa∣tisfied with the particulars contained in it. And both House of Parliament, since their receiving of this Remonstrance, have in the Propositions sent to his Majesty for a safe & wl grounded Peace even in terminis, proposed more to his Majety for his Royall▪ assent, as unto Reformation of Religion, then the Remonstant have desired in their second, third, and fourth Petitidus, so much condemned by you; for the drift of all that they desire, is  an e∣quall conformity of all the Subjects of England to the publike dis∣ipline and doctrine set forth, or to bee set forth by Authority of Parliament, as by reference to those three Petitions will clearely
shew, but both Houses of Parliament in their great wisdome, faithfulnesse, and care for the publike safety and peace of the Kingdome, have in the fifth and sixth Articles of the Propositions in these words thus proposed; viz. Aric. 5. That Reformation of Religion accordin to  by Act of Parliame, in such manner as both Hoses have agreed,  agree upon, after consultation had with the Assembly of . And Article 6 it thus followeth; For  much as ot Kingdome are  obligd by the same Covmn to indeavo the arest onjunction and unifrmity in matters of Religion, that such unity and  in Religin ac∣cording to the Covenant as after  Divines of bt Kingdomes now assembled,  shall bee  agreed pon  Hou∣ses of Parliament of England, and by the Chrch and Kingdome of Scotland, be  by Acts of Parliament of both Kingdomes re∣spectively. And therefore were I thought worthy to bee of your Councell, I shold advise you to bee so ingeous, as in this to confesse your error, and not to imagine that you see more in the City Remonstrane, then either one or both Houses of Parliament can yet discerne; and for after times, I woud perswade you to for∣beare the thus unjust besmaing and falsly accsing that City whreof you are a member,  amongst whom under God you enjoy your livelihood. You ge on and say,  Reply  with adversary pon adversary representi the Auhor of the said ooke, a lyer, be∣cause tells  a friend to the Parliament. Ans, Truly, these are fine  if they were true, to be∣get Remonstrance, and to ingratiate the opposer in the eyes of the people. But I pray what doe you , I must needs say you tread in the Replyer , and it's very the book and the page if you , and tell us the truth you have told,  you are called a Lyer, and where you are  you are a friend to the Parliame  be taking with chil∣dren .
The next thing you fall upon, is in your fourth page, and that is the word Humble Remonstrance, and upon this you descant in some similitudes, as of Court complements, and Cavaliers carri∣age, and then in plaine termes you call it, a Remonstrance invective against the Parliament. Answ. You are full of charges, though never so false, and libe∣rall in your expressions, though you make nothing good; I con∣ceive you thinke your selfe safe and secure, and perhaps you are so from ever giving an accompt of these your actions to any earthly authority: but yet methink the words of the ninth Commande∣ment should be of some authority to you, and beare some sway with you, viz. Thou shalt not beare false witnesse against thy neigh∣bour. If not against a particular person, then sure not against a Corporation, a City whereof your self are a member. Then you are offended at these expressions, viz. Two late Li∣bells, published by two Anonymusses; and you aske why I call them Libells before I prove them so. Answ. They were so in themselves before I named them so; neither called I them Libells, for any of those reasons which you would have the world beleeve I did. As first, because they are written by an Antipresbyter; nor yet because they containe in them lies, falsities, untruths, though all these in severall instances are in the vindication made good against them, nor because they are little Bookes, nor yet singly, because they are written against the City, or because they are without the Authors Names, but for these two last reasons joyntly and together: A Libell I call that which is an untrue, and therefore an unjust Charge upon or a∣gainst a Person, a Corporation, a Court, without any name an∣nexed to make good what is there charged; and in this respect I appeale to the Reader, whether I did not truly and justly call them Libells. Lastly, before you come to the body of the Booke, you have yet another fling against the Title, A Vindication of the City Re∣monstrance, that is, (say you) a Vindication of that which is invindi∣cable: And therefore (say you) better it would bee that both the City Remonstrance, and the vindication thereof were written in ashes with the finger of vanitie, then in marble with the pen of a , &c. Answ. For ought I yet see, it is but one  opinion, and
he none of the gravest neither, that the City Remonstrance is invindicable, and what you have said to prove it to be so, I desire the Reader to judge, for truly I cannot disern it. But of this I am confident, that it is appoved by the Chrch of Scotland, wit∣nesse the Letter now in Print for all the Kingdome to see, which was sent from the Generall Assembly  the Church of Scotland, to the Lord Major, Alderme, and  of London, June 18. 1646. manifesting thei approbation of it, and thankfulness for it. And sure I may say it is appved by the generality of the ablest, grave, and  witnesse their Pe∣tition subscribed by eight Thous  Hundred, thirty and four of their Hands presented the twenty third of Iune, 1646. to the Court of Common-Councell, giving them Thankes for it; testifying their approbation of t, and desing them to wait upon the House of Comns fo thir gracios answer to it, which Petition is by Order of Cot since Printed. And me think you should not forget that the same Remonstrance for the substance of it, was not onely well accepted, but also graciously answered by the House of Lords. And therefore urely in the judgment of all these, the City Remonstrance s not udged : But perhaps you are of the ind of  6. 16. who was reason. And I make as little , yet it is and will be  all the Reformed Churches in Europe, not one excep. . Qarrells is you have to say against the
whether in all probability the Reply, and not the Remonstrance hth raised those disturbances, for the Subject of the Remon∣strance is an earnest desire of the settlement of government, by one Uniforme Law, for all the Subjects of England to submit e∣qually and alike unto, which I am sure must needs tend to peace and quietnesse, but the dift of the Reply is quite contrary, and therefore without all peradventure it's this, and its abettors, and not that and its promoters, which hath desired and occasioned these Divisions both in Church and State. In pag. 9 you go about to shew that the Common-Councell by their Remonstrance, did act in a direct, evident, and obvious manner against the expresse Will and Word of God; and for proofe of this in page 11▪ you give us some Scriptures, and some passages in the Remon∣rance, which you say, or at least would have the world beleeve, is in a direct, evident, and obvious manner against the expresse Will and Word of God; but you never tell the reader how, or wherein they are so, but thus you deliver them. LET US TRY THEN: WORD OF GOD. CITY REMONSTRANCE. Rom. 14. 5. Let very man bee fully perswaded in his owne minde. That as we are Subjects of one Kingdom, so all may bee equally required (and here to delude the Reader, you insert, without making the least change of the character, these following words, as if they also were in the Remonstrance; viz. Be they perswaded in their own minds, or not perswaded) to yeeld obedience to the go∣vernment set forth, or to be set forth by the Parliament. Now I shall wholly all along in these your Parallels, leave it to the judgment of the Reader to consider, whether there be such an antipathy between these Scriptures, and those Petitions of the Remonstrance, as in the Remonstrance, without your insertion, they are exprest; and crave your leave in the same way of paral∣lel, to set the same Scriptures with some branches of the Propo∣sition
sent by both Houses of Parliament to the King, and other passges of Parliament and then desire your judgement, whether they also  a direct, eident and obvious manner against the expresse Will and Word of God. WORD OF GOD. Propositions of both Houses of Parli∣ament, Article the 5th. Rom. 14. 5. Let every man bee fully perswaded in his owne minde. That rformation of Religion according to the Covennt, bee setled by Act of Parliament, in suh manner as both Houses have agreed, or shall agree upon, after consultation had with the assembly of Divines.   CITI REMONSTRANCE. Rom. 14. 13. That no man put a stum∣bling block or an oc∣casion to fall, in his b others way. That all such Sectaries as conform not to the publike Discipline established, or to bee established (by Parliament, saith the Remon∣strance, but this you leave out,) may be fully declared against, and some effectual course setled for proceeding against such persons: Here, say you, is a stumbling block viz. a menace in a brothers way. Answ. But why doe you leave out the beginning of that pray∣er, in the Petiton which you cite t tels you the meaning of the Remonstrants, by the words all such Sectaries, iz. Those immedi∣ately before mentioned, as Anabptists, Brownists, Heretiques, Schismaticks, Blasphemers; doe you not by omitting the menti∣oning of these, indeavour to delde the Reader? I pray put down that Petition wholly together, and let the Reader be fairly deat with all, and have it, as in the Remonstrance it is exprest, an then see how it is opposite to the Scripture by you set against it.
I desire here also in a parallel way, to set downe the Scriptu by you brought, and a passage or two of the Parliaments, and desire your judgement, whether they also be in a direct, evident and obvious manner, against the expresse Will and Word of God. WORD OF GOD. Parliaments Declaration upon his Ma∣jesties Declaration after the Ba∣taile at Edgebill, Pag. 659. Rom 14. 13. That put a blok, or an occasion to fall, in his brothers way. Had not his Majesty (seduced thereunto by that Popish and Prelaticall faction) denyed his conset to the Bil for the Assembly, so often by both Houses presented to him, wee had long since manifested to the world by a well setled reformation, our dislike of * Brownisme and Anabptisme.Remonstrance of the State of the king∣dom, page 19.We do declare, that it is far from our purpose or dsire, to let loose the golden reynes of † discipline and government in the Church, to leave private persons, or particular Congregations to take up what for me of Divine Service they please, for wee hold it requisite that there should be through∣out the whole realme, a confrmity to that Order which the Laws enjoyne, according to the Word of God. Mt. 7 12. As you would that men should doe unto you, so doe unt them, for this is the Law and the Propheis. Page 3. Wee will not receive im∣pression of any forced construction of the Covenant: compare this with Page 7. Will you never leave falsfying? where doe you finde any such expression in the Remonstrance, either in Page 3, or 7. as this is, viz. we will not receive impression of any forced construction of the Covenant? The House of Commons in their late De∣claration of the 17 of Aprill, 1646. doe say, Wee expect that the people of England should not receive impressions of any forced constru∣ction of that Covenant; and in obedience thereunto, the Remon∣strants, doe say in page 2 and 3 of the Remonstrance, that in pur∣suance
of that Noble resolution of this Honourable House, for the due observation of the Covenant, and their expectation of conformity of the people of England thereunto, expressed in the late Declaration, we doe resolve by the grace of God not to re∣ceive impression of any forced construction thereof; and is it now become an acting in a direct, evident and obvious manne against the expresse Will and Word of God, for the Common-Councell to professe their resolutions to yeeld obedience to the desires and expectations of the House of Commons, in their not receiving impressions of any forced constructions of the Covenant? I desire your leave here also in a parallel way to set downe the Scripture by you here brought, and another branch of the Pro∣positions sent by both House of Parliament to the King; and to desire your judgement, whether that also be in a direct, evident and obvious manne against the expresse Will and Word of God. WORD OF GOD. Propositions of both Houses of Parlia∣ment, Article the 6th. Mat. 7. 12 A you would that mn should do unto you, so do unto them, for this is the Law and the Pro∣hets. For as much as both Kingdomes are mutually obliged by the same Covenant, to endeavour the nearest conjunction and uniformity in matters of Religion: That such unity and uniformity in Religion according to the Covenant, as after con∣sultation had with the Divines of both kingdoms now assembled, is, or shall bee jointly agreed up∣on by both Houses of Parliament of England, and by the Church and Kigdom of Scotland, be confirmed by Acts of Parliament of both King∣domes respectively.   CITY REMONSTRANCE. Mat. 7. 1. As you would, that men should doe unto you, so doe unto them, for this is the Law & the Prohets. The 4 Petition, That no person disaffected to Prebyterian government (saith the Remonstrance, st forth, or to be set forth by the Parliament, but according to your usuall course, this to blind the reader you sti leav ou) may be employed in any place of publike trust; and the you add, which is not at all in that Petition, those words: viz. But some effectual course setled to proceed against such persons, as in the 3 Petiti∣on, where there is not the shadow of a word ten∣ding to any such purpose.
I confesse the words you cite are in the 2d. Petition, but not at all in the least manner applyed to persons onely disaffected to Pres∣byterian government, for there is no such word in that Petition, nor any thing looking that way; neither doth the Common-Councell, in any part of thir Petitions so much as desire that persons onely disaffected to Presbyterian government, should by some effectuall course▪ setled, be proceeded against; and therefore methinks you should have been a little more considerate, before you should thus falsly and unjustly have charged the Common-Councell to act in a direct, evident, and obvious manner against the expresse Will and Word of God. This I will grant you, that in the second Petition the Common-Councell doth desire, that all Anabap∣tists, Brownists, Heetiques, Schismaticks, Blasphemers, and all such Sectries as conforme not to the publike Discipline establi∣shed, or to be established by Parliament, may be fully declared a∣gainst, and some effectuall course setled for proceeding against such Persons, but is there no difference between Anabaptists, Brow∣nists, Heretiques, chismaticks, Sectaries, and persons but disaffe∣cted to Presbyterian government? I pray tell mee your minde plainly, would you have Heretiques and Blasphemers, . such as deny the Scriptures to bee the Word of God, such as professe the Scriptures are writings onely probable to be beleeved as the Story of King Henry the eighth such as deny the Trinity of Per∣sons in the Unity of Essence, such as call the Trinity a three hea∣ded Cerberus, uch as deny the Divinity of Christ, such as deny the immortality of the Soule, and such as deny that there is a God, or say, if there bee a God, the Devill is a God, such as say God is the author of sin, such who hold that all men shall bee saved, yea, and the Devills too, such as say that Christs humane Nature is defiled with Originall sin as well as ours, such as hold that all Rligions, Worships, Consciences, whether Paganish, Jewish, Antichristian, &c. should bee tolerated: would you have these tolerated, or would you not have some effectuall course setled for proceeding against such Persons? or doe you thinke these to be no more dangerous, if permitted to broach these Hereies and Blasphemies in the Kingdom, then to permit persons otherwise every way peaceable, godly, and orthodox, because meerly disaffected to Presbyterian government?
I desire here also in a parallel way to set downe the Scripture by you here brought, and a Vote of the House of Commons of the 30 Iuly, 1641. and to desire your judgement, whether that also be in a direct, evident, and obvious manner against the expresse Will and Word of God. WORD OF GOD. Vote of the House of Commons, die V∣neris 30 Iubii, 1641. Mat. 7. 12 As you would  men should doe unto you, so doe un∣to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets. Resolved upon the Question. That this House doth conceive that the Protesta∣tion made by them, is sit to be taken by every per∣son that is well-affected in Religion, and to the good of the Common-wealth: And herefore doth eclar, That what person soever shall not take the Protestation, is unfit to bear Office in the Church o Common-wealth. Thus having given you these Articles of the Propositions of both Houses of Parliament sent to the King for a safe and well grounded Peace, and the other passages of both or either House of Parliament, which I have placed after your example, in a pa∣rallel way, against the Scriptures by you brought, and desired your judgement whether these also do act (as you would have the world beleeve the Petitios in the Remonstrance doth) in a di∣ect, evident, and obvious manner against the expresse Will and Word of God. I pray you now also seriously to consider of those Petitions in the Remonstrance, and compare them together, with thes Propositions for Peace, and the other passages of both or either House of Parliament, and then tell mee what the Re∣monstrants in those three (so much by you condemned) Petiti∣ons, for the substance of them, did more desire of the Parlia∣ment, then both Houses of Parliament have now proposed to the King, or hath been formerly by them in these passages of both or either House of Parliament declared to the world. The you say, Presbyteriall government is not in the Covenant, there∣re a , and this (say you) you inforce upon others, though you will receive no forcd conruction of the same your selves.
Answ. Where did the Remonstrants say that Presbyteriall government was in the Covenant? and if they never said it, as they never did, why doe you here bring it in as if they had said it▪ I hope that at last you will learne to forbeare falsifying. It is true, that in page 2 of the Remonstrance, they speake of Ordi∣nance for Presbyteriall government; and I thinke you will not deny but there are such, if you doe, I will produce them; but though Presbyteriall government be not nominally, and in vbis in the Covenant, yet I hope without offence, it may be said that it is concordble to the Covenant, as being nearest to that government which the best reformed Churches doe practise, and that by our Covenant we are bound to endeavour the settlement of. And that progresse which both Houses of Parliament have already made, in, and towards the settlement of Presbyteriall go∣vernment, they have done it in pursuance of the said Covenant, as by their owne words in the Ordinance of the 14 of March, 1645. it doth appear, Viz. The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament being very sensible of the grt duty which lyeth upon them to settle mat∣ters eligion and the worship of Almighty God; and having con∣tinually before their eyes the Covenant, which they have so solemly taken: for the performance thereof, and the manifold motives and incouragements thereunto, which are given them from God himselfe by a speciall hand of Providence, pwring forth daily mercies upon them; In discharge of their duty, and in pursance of the said Covenant, and in thankefulnesse to God for all his Mercies, have diligently applyed themselves to that work of his Hose, by his grace and assistance they have made some progresse therein, notwithstanding the exigency of other affaires, accompanied of∣tenties with great and imminen dangers. And notwithstanding the great difficulty of the worke it selfe in divers respects, and particularly in the right jointing of what was to be setled with the Laws and Govern∣nt of the Kingdome, the want whereof hath aused much trouble i this and other States; yet by the mercifull assistance of God, having reo∣ved the booke of Common-prayer, with all its unnecessary and burden∣some Ceremonies, and established the Directory in the ome thereof, and aving abolishd the Prelaticall Hierarchy, by Archbishops, Bishops, and their dependants, ad in stead thereof, laid the foundation of a Pres∣byteriall Government in every Congregation, with subrdintion to Clai∣call, Provincill, and Nationall Assemblies, and of te all to te Parlia∣ment.
Why doe you also wrong the Remonstrants, in saying, They force Presbyteriall government upon others? doe they any other thing then Petition the Parliament to settle that government which in the words of this Ordinance both the Lords and Commons do say, that in discharge of their duty, and in prsance of the said Covenant, they have laid the foundation already, viz. of a Presbyteriall govern∣ment. You have yet one parallel more: WORD OF GOD. ITY REMONSTRANCE. Dut. 19. 15. At the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every thing be established. That Quarterman may be brought to some exemplary punishment for the af∣front done by him, &c. And then you say, Though no such thing was ever proved by one witnesse or testimony, that what hee did was any affon done to the Priviledges and Government of the City▪ Hang him, hang him, what hath e done? Answ. You deny not the act of Quarterman presume it is not that which you say was never proved by one witnesse or testimo∣ny, for the act was done at high Exchange time, within the sight and hearing of many hundeds; but I conceive your meaning (for you doe not expresse it, and therefore I can but guesse at it) is, that the act in entring the City, and making proclamation therein with sound of Trumpet; without acquainting the Lord Major therewith, was not proved by one witnesse or estimony to be any affront done to the Priviledges or Government of the City, there never was any the least exception taken against the Order to proclaime, nor against the matter proclaimed, nor the time when, nor the place where the Proclamation was made; if according to the constant and uninterrupted course of trans∣acting things of that nature, the Lord Major, who is the chiefe Magistrate of the City had but been acquainted with it. Now I appeale to the Reader, whether such an act done in such a manner in the sight and hearing of many hundreds, without acquainting the Lord Major therewith, be not an affront done to the priviled∣ges and government of the City. In page 14. you tell the Reader, that I except against the replyer,
for saying, The Parliament hath promised in severall Declarations a gra∣tious respect to tender Consciences. Answ. In page 9 of my Vindication, I cited out of the Replyer, page 2, these following words, viz. That it is notoriously known that the Parliament did promise in severall declarations, a gracious respect to tender Consciences. I did not except against him for so saying, but I told him then, and I tell you now, that I will not say that this is false, left I should fall into that sin, which I am forced so frequently to reprove you for; but  bee any such promi∣ses in former Declarations which I yet remember not, as I then said to him, so I now say to you, you should have done well to have expressed the date of those Declarations, and the words of the promises, that so the Reader might see, that at least in some∣thing you, I say you, as well as the Replyer, desire to deale fairly with them, for the Remonstrants they still laid a fair Copy before you in the Remonstrance, so to have writ after them. And now without shewing any one Declaration more then the Replyer did, you goe on and say, It seems you are willing to hide your eyes from such observations in the Parliaments Declarations, as though this were an abòminatio to you, that they should ae any respect to ten∣er consciences. Answ. I never knew before, that a desire to know the dates of the Parliaments severall Declarations, and to see the words of the promises which they therein make, of a gracious respect to tender consciences, which the Replyer saith, is so notoriously knowne, (and which I must confesse as then, so now, I remember not,) had been a manifestation of a mans willingnesse to hide his eyes from such observations in the Parliaments Declarations. And it is so farre from being an abomination to me, that the Par∣liament should have any respect to tender Consciences, that I shall much rejoice both in the beholding of any true tendernesse of conscience in any man, and at all due respect which the Parlia∣ment shall shew unto them. Yet can I not conceive that Heretiques that deny there is a God, or that the Scriptures are the Word of God, and that they are no more to bee beleeved then the Stories of Henry the 8th', &c. or Blasphemers, which call the Trinity of Persons in the Unity of Essence, a three headed Cerberus, &c. that these, and such as
these, can properly be brought in under the notion of tender con∣sciences. But thn you aske me if I have forgotten th lst Declaration of the 17 of Aprill, 1646, Answ. You know tha neither the Remon∣strants, no yet my self have forgotten that Declaration, for it is by the Remonstrants in their second page, cited as a Noble re∣solution of this Honourable House for the due observation of the Covenant: and their expectation of the conformity of the people of England thereunto  in that Declaration, and it is by  in the tenth page  my Vindication quoted as a justifica∣tion of the Remonstrants (who to answer the expectation of the House of Commons manifested in that Declaration in these words, viz. Wee do expect that the people of England, should not re∣ceive impressis of any forced costruction of that Covnant) doe pro∣fesse that they doe resolve by the grace of God not to receive impressions of any forced construction thereof. But what is this one Declaration to that the Replyer saith, that it is notoriously known that the Parliament did promise a gracious respect to ten∣der Conscience in many severall Delarations, or what i it to that which you doe say, viz. Wer I as well furnished with Books as your selfe, doubtlesse I coud shew you sverall other Dclarations, where they promise a Christian respect to tender Cnsiences. Then you goe on and say, I am sory Mr. Bellamie, you shuld bee so apt now adayes to cast out of your memorie the praise▪ orthy Acts f the Parliament. Answ. Ile say no more in  Replyer or your selfe, but that I would desire you not to take it , because I remember not that which yet  so notoriously known, and that which you say, were I well furnished with bookes, doubtlesse I could shew  is whil neither hee, nor you, can, or at  in∣stance of any other  inreat you at present to fobeare your sorrow, and for aftertimes not to be so censorius as to charge me to be so apt now a dayes Parliament; I shall be as ready to  without any ground charges mee to be so apt now a dayes to cast them out of my me∣mory.
In your 16 page you thus goe on, speaking to me, viz. In th next place you begin with an interrogation, as if you had gotten a Com∣ission to ins't; thus; What? is Londons care to keep the Covenant▪ now become Londns ruine, &c. Doubtlesse these are Doctrines of a new date, and neare a kin to those new Lights, which so many now adyes de so much bost of. And thn you say, Whither now Mr. Bellamy? I professe my eart akes, and my hand trembles, shall I write, or shall I forbeare? I passed by your scffing at new Lights once bfore at pag. 10. and tooke no notice of it; but I meet with it againe, yea, with an addi∣tionall scoffe, Doctrines of a new dte, and new Lights, &c. Answ. When I resolved to indevour the Vindication of the City Remonstrance, I resolved with my selfe, that I should mee with oppositions, and therefore desired so to carry on the worke as not willingly to let a phrase fall from me, that might justly give any cause of offence, and to that end, my care was to weigh words as well as matter, well knowing that sweet and pleasing languge, with solid reason and stong aguments, best conduce to the carrying on of a controversie. I confesse, that as in p. 10. so here, I use the word new Lights, and Doctines of a new date, but whether in the least appearance as a scoffe or a jeere, I freely leave to the Reader both to examine and censure; for as scoffing and jeering are farre from my dis∣position, so I can safely say, they were as farre in this from my in∣tention. I desire the Reader to take a survey of the passages im∣mediately preceding these expressions, as they are transcribed out of the Moderate Reply, and judge whether I had not just cause to speake what ever is there spoken; the expressions are these, viz. That the Remonstrants doe discourage the Parliament, and that they presse them in all haste, unto a sudden enfeebling of their strength, by crushing a considerable party of as cordiall friends as ever they had since the Wrs began. And that, because they will not sweare a submission unto that Church-government, whic (say you) neither they, nor your selves ye understand, and to make so ill a requitall of their Winters wrke. And then againe, Shall the whole Kingdome, that was almost redy  all its Quarters to congratulate with London for all its love, now throw by these thoughts, and with sad earts, and pale faces, tll their wives and children, friends, and neighbours, We and alasse London will ruine , London begins to decline the Parliament, London begins to clos
with the King, London is fill'd with Malignant language, London remonstrates to the Parliaments prejudice, Londons City is Englands woe. Now I pray consider whether these so many, so foule, and yet withall so false charges shall bee laid against London, and that for their performance of what by Covenant they are sworne unto, doth not justly occasion these interrogations; and let the Rea∣der judge whether my using of them gave you any cause to say, that I begin with them, as if I had a Commission to insult, and whether from these, and my calling them Doctrines of a new date, wch▪ whether they be so or no, the Reader will easily discerne. And my saying that they are neare akin to those new Lights which so many now adayes doe so much boast of; which I therefore did, because they which doe now adayes so much boast of their new Lights, are the persons which doe thus calumniate London for this their Remonstrance, and are the prime men which vilifie the Co∣venant, as in sundry particular instances in my Vindication I made it good. I say, pray consider, and let the Reader judge whether all or any of these things gave you any just occasion thus to rake up, as you have done, reports against mee, whether true or false, and to publish them to the whole World, as in your 1617, 18, 19, 20, & 21 pages of your Book, and so almost al along to the end you have thus done, leaving the argument in difference between us, and falling upon some personall things, which you say have been reported to you concerning my carriage in matters of Religion: Ile come to the particulars; first, you tell the Rea∣der the place of my birth, and that I was borne a Son of the Church of England under Episcopacy: Truly, if this bee a fault or erour, I conceive Mr. I. P. will not deny himselfe to bee guilty of the same crime. Then you come to the manner of my breeding, the time of my comming to London, and my being bound an Appren∣tice to Mr. Nicholas Bourne, Citizen and Stationer of London: and you tell the Reader how my carriage was for the time of my Ap∣prentiship, which you are pleased thus to expresse, Exercising such strictnesse and exactnesse in keeping and preserving that rich jewell of a quiet and tender conscience, &c. Answ. What is this either to the City Remonstrance, or to my Vindication thereof? these are the things now in debate be∣tween
you and mee; but your thus elevating mee up in praises i this, and some such other passages in your Book, is only to cast me downe with the greater violence, so farr as you can, to my defa∣mation and destruction; but I pray consider (nd lt your owne heart bee yur owne Iudge, for I will not accuse you) whether your dealing with me in this, be not just like the Devils with our Saviour Christ, Matth. 4 5, 6. who tooke him up to the Pinnacle of the Temple, that so, if it were possible, hee might breake his neck by throwing him down to the ground. But say you, my tendernesse of conscience appeared, In that I would not personally sell such Bookes (as Prayer books) which were or∣dinarily sold by other Stationers, and in my Masters Shop. Ans. Mr. I. P. you and the Reader shall both see by this first par∣ticular, what credit either you are to give to the reports you have heard of me, for there is not any one thing that you deliver upon your knowledge, but all upon heare-say; and you know the old Proverb, Famest mendax, or what little regard is to bee had to what you all along in this, and in other particulars have written of mee; For as you have delivered them, I solemnly professe, that to the best of my knowledge and remembrance there is not one of them true. I confesse that neither my selfe, nor any of my fellow Servants did sell any Play-books, or other books in that nature; and our not selling these, was by my Masters owne order and di∣rection, and that upon such good grounds, as I know you neither will, nor can question. But for the particular which you instance in, viz. Prayer-books, there is but one man living that I know of, that can testifie any thing upon knowledge concerning my pra∣ctise in this particular, and that is my Master Mr. Nicholas Bourne, who was concerned in it, and therefore his testimony is the more considerable: Ile give it you in, as an answer to what in this you have Printed upon the Credit of your reporters, and that in his own words written to mee in a Letter upon the sight of this pas∣sage in your Book; it thus follows: This 24. of Iuly, 1646. Mr. Bellamie, This day there came to my hands, a Booke called the City Remonstrance Remonstrated, where in pag. 1. I find you are accused, that when you
were my Srvant you would not sell Prayer-books: To which I answer, to prove the contrary, that I know you nevr refused to sell any Prayer-books; and that I printed a Prayer-book, called The Supplications of Saints, of which I doe beleeve you sold some hundreds: And this I testfie under my Hand the day and year above written. Pr me Nicholas Bourne. The next thing you fall upon, thinking thereby to defame me, is, That after I set up Shop for my selfe, the businesse of Infants Bp∣tisme grew into debte; and (say you) I then fell into the Opinion of the Anbaptists, &c. Answ. Mr. I. P. I am sorry you should so easily entertain re∣ports without ground, and so freely publish them to the World, knowing nothing of them; hee that told you this, if hee knew what it was hee said unto you, knows, that as unto the point of time hee told you an untruth. I confesse, that many years before this, even when I was not above 17 yeares of age, I did upon some sruples put into me by an Anabaptist, entertaine their opinion, but I blesse God, it was not above a moneths time before the Lord discovered my error to mee. It is now above 30 yeares since, and must this be raked up afresh by you, and throwne in my face to blemish what you can that which I have written in defence of the Remonstrance? Is this a carriage becomming a sober Christian? one olid argument, or good reason, if you had them to give, a∣gainst the Remonstrance or its Vindication, would with wise men bee more regarded, then twenty such uselesse or vaine re∣ports. Then you tell the Reader of my applying my self to a separate Cox∣gregation, and of my continuance with them, and the manner of departing from them; and all this you affirme, it seems, as up∣on your owne knowledge, for you doe not in all this say as in others things, it is reported so, but positively affirme he particu∣lars to be so. Ans. I am sure you know nothing more, nor lesse, of all that in this you have written, for the time you relate to, was neare twenty yeares before you and I ever saw the faces one of a∣nother, but to shew you your mistake, and to let it appeare how you are abused in receiving, and have abused mee in divulging of
of thse things, Ile give you and the world, (being as it wer thus by you called thereunto) a true account of them, It's true, I did above thirty yeares since apply my self to that Congregati∣on, whereof Mr. Iacob was then Pastor, with whom I con∣tinued in Communion all the time he continued in this King∣dome, and some yeares after: but that this was then as you af∣firme a Separate Congregation, I deny, and son proof of what I say, I appeale to the confession of the faith of the said Congrega∣tion published in print, in Anno 1616. Which was a little after the time applying my self, as you call it unto them, in which it doth appeare that Separation was then witnessed against by that Con∣gregation, and the judgement of that Congregation then was that the pubique Congregations in this Kingdom, was the true Churches of Christ, the Ministery thereof as received by the people, a true Ministery, the Ordinances there administred, both of Baptisme, the Lords Supper, &c. the true Ordinances of Jesus Christ, and that wee not onely might, but in some re∣spect ought to joyn in Communion with the said publique Con∣gregations in the said Ordinances, and that not so to doe was our sinne. Ile give it you for your present satisfaction in the very words of the printed confession of the Faith of that Congrega∣tion, Article the eleventh, the latter end of it, thus it is. It be∣ing no evill, nor any appearance of evill, justly in us to joyne to the Parish-Congregation and Ministery in such respect, and so far fort only  is aforesaid, wee ought, (as wee beleve) sometime on wight occasion so to joyne, and wee sinne if wee doe not. This printed confession of Faith I have by mee, and am very ready for the cleare and full confirmation of what in all this I write, to shew to you, or to any one that desires satisfaction in the truth of what I affirm. And as it was then the judgement of that Congregation, so was it also then the practice of the members thereof. And for the proofe of this, I appeale first to so many of the then members in generall of that Congregation, who are now living, and knew the Churches practice in this particular, and in speciall to Mr. Sa∣bine Staresmore, who, (I conceive, and that upon good grounds) hath been one maine instrument by mis-reports to have thus mis∣led you, and therein abused mee: but if it bee so, God give him grace to see his sin, and forgive it him, or whoever it was; I
trust, my heart shall never with consent, entertaine so much as the shadow of a thought to make the like requitall; but I will study and indeavour, and lay hold upon every opportunity which the Lord shall hold forth unto mee, to doe all the good I can to him, to them, to you, for this your evill done to mee, re∣membring what our Saviour Christ hath taught mee, Matth. 5. 44. Love your enemies, blesse them that curse you, doe good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you. But I beseech you all seriously to consider, that if this bee not persecution with the tongue, then tell mee what is. And I pray you considerately to ponder and weigh well that of the Prophet Ieremy 20. 10. and make such use of it to your owne soules, as God shall direct you to doe; the words are these, I heard the defa∣ming of many, feare on every sid, report, say they, and wee will report it, all my familiars watched for my halting, saying, Peradventure will bee entid, and we shall prevaile against him, and we shall take our revenge on him. But my comfort and stay in this I trust sall be the same with the Prophet, in that, manifested in the next verse, But the Lord is with me as a mighty terrible one, therefore my persecutors shall stumble, and they shall not prevaile, they shall bee greatly ashamed, for they shll not prosper. I futher appeale for proofe of what I affirme, unto Mr. Henry Roborough, now one of the Scribes of the Assembly of Divines, and Pastor of Leonards Est cheape London, whether hee hath not at that time observed that Mr. Jacob, and other knowne members of that Congregation, did usually communicate in the Ordinnces of Christ in the publike Congregations: And whether hee hath not with his owne hands, administred the Lords Supper to Mr. Jacob, and other then knowne members of his Church. And that the members of this Congregation, did then not onely communicate in the publique Assemblies in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, but also in the Sacrament of Baptisme, yea, that they did bptize their owne chil∣dren in the publique Assemblies; I appeale for the truth of this, un∣to the testimony of so many of them as bee now living, and re∣member the Churches practice in this particular at that time, and if there bee none now living that can remember, and will testifie this, then in particular I appeale to the Register Book of Andrew Hubbard London, whether upon the 7 of December, 1623. there
was not then and there baptized, Susan the daughter of Robert Lynell, and of Susan his Wife, both which was then Parishioners of that Parish and members of this Cngregation, and Rbert Lynell Deacon of the Church. I futher appeal unto the Regier-book of Saviours Southwarke, whether upon the third of February, 1624. there was not then and there baptized, Brshua, the daughter of Daniel Ray, who then was a Paishioner of that Parish, and a member of this Congregation. I could produce many others in the like kind, but these may suffice to confirme the truth of what I affirme, neither would I have printed this, but for the witnesse of this truth, viz. That that Congreation did then hod it not onely lawfull, but of necssity, upon pain of sin, erding to the Printed Con∣fession of Faith, to cmmunicate in the publike Ministery and Ordinn∣ces, and that bth of Baptisme and the Lord Supper. Neither do I write this in the least measure, to reflect upon the present now members of that Congregation, if in their judgments and practice they now walk otherwise; provided, that by the war∣rant of the word of God they can clearly justifie their present wal∣king; but I must crave your favor for my self stil to continue in the same judgment and practice I then was, and which is concordable to the then Confession of the Faith of the Church, as unto com∣munion in the Parish Congregations, both in the Ministery and Ordinances of Baptisme and the Lords Supper, though you false∣ly charge me of mutation and change in so doing. And thus I hope I have shewed you your mistake in that you affirm, I apply∣ed my self to a separate Congregation. I shall also endevour to give you as ample an account of the just reason (as I humbly con∣ceive) of my leaving them. Mr. Iaob leaving England, and going to Virginia, the Con∣gregation was then for a time, to the best of my remembrance, left without a Pastor: and then many of the members of the said Congregation varying in their judgements from what was in the Confession of the Faith of the Church formerly printed; and being now both in judgement and practice against Communion in the Or∣dinances of Christ in the publike Congregations, which by the Confession of the Faith of the Church, we were bound upon pain of sin to maintain, both in judgement and practice; this occasioned many disputes, and some differences, a last the point of Ordination of Ministers came
under debate, which was the first, yea, the onely occasion that Put a thought into my breast about my departing from that Con∣gregation: And at that time Mr. Iohn Lothrop, a learned, holy, humble, and painfull Preacher was the Pastor, then the Congre∣gation ordered three of their members to conferre with mee a∣bout that difference, I then did, now doe, and ever will acknow∣ledge their great love, and tender respect to mee in it, but after undry Conferences, and wee not agreeing, I thought it my duty, to signifie my mind in writing under my hand to the whole Congregation, which I then did in these words: To his dearly beloved Christian Friends Mr. John Lothrop, and all the rest of the Congregation with him assembled, this publikely present. Christian Friends, and dearly beloved in the Lord Jesus Christ, having by the Congregations appointment had Conference with three of the Brethren, about a point in controversie, which wee cannot agree, I thought it my duty to signifie my minde in wri∣ting to the whole Congregation, which is, That after many thoughts spent, and some paines taken in Conference, and exa∣mination of Scriptures, and searching the judgements of Divines, both ancient and moderne, about the matter in contro∣versie, viz. Ordination, or the compleat investing of persons cho∣sen by the free consent of the Congregation into those Offices (for Ministeriall imployments) unto which they are elected, I conceive for the Reasons following, this to be the truth, viz. That it ought to bee performed actually by precedent Church-Offi∣cers. 1. Because that the Apostles in Acts 6. finding the Church to be in want of Officers, gave them direction for the performance of what was their duties, tending to the obtaining of the afore∣said wants, which was to elect persons qualified according to di∣rection, which they, viz. the Congregation did, & reserving the o∣ther of compleat stating them into their Offices, unto themselves, which they, viz. the Apostles effected: the texts for confirmation, which with a single eye I desire to be considered of, are, Acts 6. v. 3. for the precept injoyning the duty, and v. 5, and 6. for the du∣ty in obedience to the precept performed, the words are, Chuse you out whom we may appoint, not chuse you and appoint.
2. That which the Apostles reserved in this place to them∣selve in their precept to the Congregation, and accordingly after practised, as in the first appeareth, so also in other Congre∣gations or Churches they did the like, as Acts 14. 23, When they had  them Eldrs in every Church, they, that is, Paul and Bar∣nabas, as appeareth v. 12, 14. If it bee objected, that this was done by Officers extraordinary, which had their Calling and Commission immediately from God, and therefore is not fitly brought so, as to require the like to bee done by ordinary Officers: I desire for answer to it, this third reason may be conidered. 3. That which in this kind was done by the Apostles, which I grant were extraordinaily called by God, and gifted according∣ly, the same was after done by them which had their ordinatio by ordinary Officers in Churches, as Timothy Titus, as appea∣reth, 1 Tim. 4. 14. where Timothy was ordained by the hands of the Company of the Eldership, and he in particular, and not the Congregation in generall, is charged before God and the Lord Iesus Christ, and the elect Angels, to lay hands suddenly on no mn, 1 Tim. 5. 21, 22. which Scripture, with submission to better judgments, I conceive teacheth these two duties. 1. That Timothy an ordained Officer ought to lay on hands in Ordination, and not any other but Officers ordained. 2. That they that doe Ordaine, ought to doe it with advise∣ment and great deliberation, not preferring one before another par∣tially. And as Timothy, so Titus, as testifieth the Apostle, 1 Titus v. 5. was left at Creta to ordaine Elders in every City: And for my part, I am ignorant of any one example in all the new Testament, where Ordination was performed by any but Church Officers; and for the clear and distinct understanding of the quality and difference of Church Officers extraordinary and ordinary, that we may know which is, which, I desire that this Scripture may bee considered, Gal. 1. 1. Paul an Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Iesus Christ; where the Apostle to prove his Apostolicall, or extraordinary Calling, affirmth that hee was not an Apostle of men, neither by man, for then hee had been but an ordinary Minister, but by Jesus Christ; and so as his calling was extraordi∣nary,
his Oice is the like; from whence followeth this infe∣rence, that such as is the calling, such is the Office, they that had their calling immediately, was extraordinary Officers, such was te Apostles; & such as have their calling mediately, or by means are ordinary, such was Timothy, as in the fore-quoted Scripture may appear, and so are all such as have their Ordination by pre∣cednt Church Offiers. This interpretation I so give, as upon a better manifested, I shall desire to rtract this. 4. If it had been in the power of the Congregations as to e∣lect, so lawfully and without sinne to Ordaine, the Apostle might have written from place to place, Letters of direction according to which, Congregations might have proceeded, and so of them∣selves effected it, and then the Apostles by that might have had the more time for the publishing of the Gospel of Christ in o∣ther places, where yet they had not been, and not have travailed so many miles back againe from place to place to Ordaine El∣ders, which if lawfully it might have been omitted, it would have spared them much paines, and much advanced the publi∣shing of the Gospel, for wee see that when the Church omit∣ted another Ordinance, viz. Excommunication, the Apostle went not to them, but sent to them to doe it, 1 Cor. 5. 5. That which the holy Ghost maketh two distinct Ordinan∣ces in Churches, and commands them to bee performed by per∣sons of a twofold or distinct consideration in Churches, that none ought to confound, or make them one Ordinance, neither ought they to be performed by Churches otherwise thn by the persons in the said twofold or distinct considerations. But the holy Ghost maketh Election and Ordination two distinct Ordinances in Churches, & commands them to be performed by persons of a twofold or distinct considerations in Churches, viz. Election by the members, Ordination by the Officers, Act. 6. 3. Therefore none ought to confound, or make them one O∣dinance, neither ought they to bee performed by Churches o∣therwise then by the Persons in the said twofold or distinct con∣siderations. These things thus considered, prove this Conclusion, That that Church or Churches which hold and enjoy their Church Officers any otherwayes, then by the Ordination of former
Church officers hold and enjoy them not according to the mind of Crist, and all the administrations of such Church Officers, their manner of entrance into their Office, not being grounded on Scripture, are unlawfull, and not to bee cmmunicated with; and this is the ground of my withdrawing my selfe from that Congregation with whom I formerly walked. If it bee objected, I formerly made question of this same par∣ticular, and yet after that walked with the Congregation again. I answer, that it is true, and that I did upon this ground, as to some it's evidently known. After some question with the Congregation about it, one of the members, who formerly also had doubtd of the same thing, at last said, hee was stayed for the present upon this considera∣tion; That if the Ordination of the Church without Officers, were not of force to give a compleat being by Ordination to a Pastor, yet our Pastor having formerly been Ordained by a pre∣cedent Ministery, in that respect his Ministery was tue, and his Administrations lawfull; unto which, as willing to embrace any truth manifested, I assented, and upon that ground, and no other, I received his Ministery, and partooke in, and commu∣nicated with his Administrations, and this not secretly, but pro∣fessedly. But after that, I being in trouble, and in probability to be que∣stioned about my practise in this particular, I was, as some know, in mind much troubled, for having withdrawne my selfe from the Publike Assemblies, and yet enjoying in my own judgement, and by my owne confession, neither Ministery nor Administra∣tions, but what derivatively I had from them; and also pro∣fessing both the Publike Congregations, and Ministery, and Or∣dinances, to be the true Churches Ministery, and Ordinances of hrist, and so farre pure, as for mee to refuse communion with them, even by the publike Confession of that Congregation with whom I walked, was a sinne: I could not then, neither can I now tell which way, without a great deale of scandall, to take upon mee, before authority in these respects to cleare my practice, or to reconcile this at least seeming Paradox, the rather conside∣ring, that in this particular I was not onely left alone by the most and best of Orthodox Diines, Foraine and Nationall, but even
by that Congregation also with whom I walked, who though it hold a necessity of communicating in the Assemblies in some ca∣ses, and that as before the Churches Ministery and Ordinances be true, yet hold not their Ministery in their owne, by vertu of Ordination from a precedent Ministery, but by the Ordina∣tion of the Congregation, unto which, neither could I then, nor can I now, for the Reasons fore-specified give my assent, bu must remaine contrary minded till the force of the Reasons and Argument, be taken away, or a beter ground bee manifested to mee, which at all times, I shall desire to embrace. Thus desiring what truth herein is contained may be received, and what error, if any, may be shewed, that all of us by leaving the evill, and do∣ing the good, may obey our God in whom I rest; desiring ever to be a true Friend and Brother to you all, and to all others that love the Lord Christ. Iohn Bellamie. After the sending of this Letter, I received an answer from the Congregation, and returned them a Reply, a Copy of which Reply I have now by me, but upon desire, I delivered back the Answer to one of the members, and would now have obtained it againe, and printed it with my Reply to it, but it would not bee granted me. I would not have printed these passages, but that I conceived it requisite to satisfie you and the reader the grounds of my leaving that Congregation. And after this, (what further passed in that Congregation concerning my selfe) I know not. Now, if that Congregation with whom I then walked, was af∣terwards in their judgements and practice changed or altered, from what the Confession of the Faith of the Church then was when I joyned to them, and the practice of the members thereof then was, while I walked with them, as unto communion in the Ministery and Ordinances both of Baptisme and the Lords Sup∣per, &c. in the Publike Parish Congregations (for that is the ex∣pression in the Confession,) and that not thus to communicate, in such respect, and so farre forth onely as aforesaid, was our sin, even by our own confession; then I pray you tell me (for I will not judge) whether is most blame worthy, they or I, and in whom is most mutation to be found.
But if I may without offence speake it, methinkes you exceed the bounds of Christian love and charity (yet will I not call it, a piece of your Independent justice which we must expect, as in another case you call it, a piece of Presbyteriall justice, which (say you) wee are like to finde from you when power is in your hands, Pag 4.) in presuming that revenge against this Congregation and its members, hath put me thus on worke in the City Remonstrance and its Vindiction, for the Lord that searcheth the hearts of all men, knoweth my heart, and unto him I doe appeale, that from that time to this hour, which I thinke is now near twenty years, I never had the least thought of revenge in me, either against the whole, or any particular member of that Congregation, but have according to my poore ability, been alwayes ready and wil∣ling to performe all offices of Christian love and respect unto a∣ny of them; and I hope, as ccasion is offered, ever shall be; and though I cannot agree with them in opinion and practice, yet I hope I shall ever love them as my own soul. In page 18. you speak of my meeting with a select company of Christians in a cursory way; where you are pleased to say more then ever I deserved, or had cause to thinke of, concerning my carriage amongst them to their comfort and content. Anw. Truly, I blesse God, I have often met with sundry s∣lect Companies of godly Christians in holy duties, and been wil∣ling, according to the best of my abilities, to doe or receive any good to, or from them, but sure I dare not think you judge this to be criminall; but yet you say, that with much griefe of soul they assert these things. What your meaning in this is, as you expresse it not, so indeed I know it not; I hope, as I ever have done, so I ever shall endeavour to do or to receive any spirituall goo from any company of Christians with whom either purposely or occasi∣onally I shall converse; and for this you have my minde and judgement, which according to that talent God hath given mee is, and ever shall be concordable to my practice; you may read it in my Vindication, page 21. it is in an answer to a Querie of the Replyer, viz. what the Remonstrants meane by private and se∣parate Congregations; it's answered negatively in these words, That the Remonstrants doe not mean by private and separate Congrega∣tions, the private meetings of Christian people for Prayer, Exhortation,
Repetition of Sermons, or any other laudable and Christian familie, or neighbourly duties amongst the Saints; as to these I am assured all the Remonstrants will joyne with you in your desire, that abhr'd hth by God and all good men, may all requests be that shall bee made for the suppres-pressing of thse. Next, you goe about summarily to reckon up such things, as either lying fame hath told you, or your own fancy dictates to you, and for fear of failing, you repeat them in several places; and therefore where you are pleased to lay them downe, I must un∣dergoe the paines to take them up, they are in pge 19, and page 30. where you say, I have been for Bishops, and against Bishops; for Separates, and against Sparates; a Sectary, and an A∣ti-sectary; a Schismatick, and an Anti-schismatick; and so you goe urther on in many other the like expressions according to your pleasure. Answ. If all these were true which here you specifie, and all the former particulars before recited, yet what are all, or any of these to the City Remonstrance or its Vindication? Truly, I must needs say, that it is a shrewd signe of a bad Caue; and I thinke the Reader will bee of the same minde with mee, when in stead of Arguments or Reasons to confute what is affirmed, you must fall so foule upon the Person, and the suppoed mis∣carriages of him whom you oppose; it seems you had little hope that your selfe by strengtst of Argument should doe any good, and therefore you call in for helpe, such as it is, in this way of combating to cast mee downe, just like the Heathens against the Christians in the Primitive imes, and the Papists against the Pro∣testants in these latter times; but I pray emember what you say of the Reply, in the 5 page of your Booke, the latter end, That there may possibly be mistakes more then enough in it, for the holy Scrip∣ture onely excepted, where is thirt writing without mistakes? May not the like bee said, as of Books, so of men, where is the man with∣out his errors, without his miscariages? as I will not accuse, so I beleeve you will not excuse Mr. I. P. himselfe from these. And truly, for y self, I dare not to these plead my defence; for I know more by my selfe, then you, or all your Reporters can accuse me of, and earnestly & humbly I desire that God may be glorified both in my acknowledgement of them to him, and his pardo∣ning
of them to mee; but upon what ground you should thus boldly breake in upon mee, knowing nothing of any thing that of thee you affirme, I can but wonder: I pray be pleased to make a second inquiry amongst all your Reporters, and see if they can make it out for truth unto you, that ever at any time, in any place, either by word or writing, any thing fell from mee, either for Bishops, for Separates, for Schismaticks, or for Sectaries, and if not, as confident I am nor you, nor they can, then why doe you wrong your selfe and your Cause, in thus going about to wrong me, by reporting and divulging these untruths of me? But I have tyred out my selfe, and perhaps wearied the Rea∣der too, in following you so long upon these personall things, yet must I needs crave favour to particularize one passage more, viz. in your 29 pag. in these words, viz. Mr. John Bellamie, what kinde of man are you? They that observe your sayings what they have been formerly concerning the King, concerning the Lords, concerning the power of the Commons▪ (whispering your thoughts in the eares of many that now speake of it) what your carriages have been not very long since in Common-Councell, or among your brethren the Stationer's, the Committee appointed for the keeping up and maintaining the Expository Lectures, and what your carriages are now, stand with admiration and amusement at your wheeling thus about. Answ. I desire the Reader to observe the many Charges which in this you lay against mee, at the least six, yet you particularize not any one; might I not more justly then you, take your owne words used in reference to Quarterman, in your 12 page, and ap∣ply them to that which in this you spake against mee, viz. Hang him, hang him, what hath he done? And what I pray you may such as know mee not, be ready to judge of mee? when they heare so many, and so great Charges in the generall laid against mee, and seemingly confirmed by so many Witnesses, as the whole Com∣mon-Councell, the Company of Stationers, the Committee for Expository Lectures? was there ever the like passages printed a∣gainst any man by the worst of enemies that ever he had to charge him with something against the King, as if that were Treason, something against the Lords & Commons, as if that were either Treason, or at least Scandalum Magnatum, and this to be whis∣pered by mee in the eares of many, that now speake of it againe,
and yet to instance in nothing at all; and then furthr to say, what your carriages have been not very long since in Common-Councell, or among your Brethren the Stationers, the Commit∣tee appointed for the keeping  maintaining the Expository Lectures. Now I appeale to your own soule, whether this your dealing can have any defence mde for it. And I do appeale also to the worst of Enemies that I have alive (as it seemes I have a great many; for I thanke you heartily for it, you told mee pri∣vately by word of mouth upon Saturday the 8 of this August, that there is a Booke of the History of my life, already drawn up, and fitted for the Presse, wherein are many heavie Charges laid against me in the matters of my conversation:) to make any thing good against mee in any of these generalls which here you spak of, and in particular I appeal to the Court of Common-Coun∣cell, to the Company of Stationers, and to the Committee a∣pointed for the keeping up and maintaining the Expository Le∣ctures, (for all these you seeme to bring as witnesses against me,) whether ever I did or spake any thing at any time in any of thee Assemblies, which in any thing was any way crosse or contrary either to the City Remonstrance, or to any thing in my Vindica∣tion thereof; for you say, that they observing your now carriages, stand with admiration and amasement at your wheeling thus a∣bout. Mr I. P. I pray remember that Scripture, which in your 1 page you set in a parallel against a passage in the Remonstrance, to prove that the Common-Councell doth act in a direct, evident, and obvious manner against the expresse Will and Word of God, and bring it hither, and set it likewise in parallel against this your dealing with me, and then tell mee who doth act in a direct, evident, and ob∣vious manner, against the expresse Will and Word of God; the Scrip∣ture you cite, is Matth. 7. 12. As you would that men should doe unto you, so doe unto them, for this is the Law and the Prophets. Mr. I. P. I beseech you aske your owne soule, whether you would that I, or any other man should deale thus by you, as you have dealt by me, gathering up whatever you coud heare against mee, whether true or false, in my carriages about matters of Religion, and that for above 30 yeares together; and though you know nothing of any one of them more or lesse, and there being not one of
them true as you relate them, yet without ever speaking one word to me about them, with such boldnesse and confidence of truth to publish them to the world: And now tell me, Whether you doe as you would bee done unto, and whether in this, your owne Conscience being your judge, you doe not act in a direct evident, and obvious man∣ner against the expresse will and word of God. But I must break off, yet with this resolution, that your indea∣vour thus to blaz on my Name, and blast my Repute, shall by Gods grace quicken mee up to a more Christian watchfulnesse over all my wayes, that I may walke more inoffensively towards men, and more pleasingly before God; and I blesse my God, that my Name is neither in the power of your tongue, nor pen, nor yet of your re∣porters neither, but onely in the hand & power of my good God who is able to keep that which I have committed to him; and I blesse his Name, I am not in any thing terrified by that which you or they have in this already done, in thus seeking to defame mee, nor yet, I hope, ever shall bee at that History of my Life, which you say is ready for the Presse to be Printed against mee. Next, you come in your 22 page to that question wherein re∣sides the Supreme power of the Kingdome, and upon this Argu∣ment you continue neare to the end of your Book; and in page 23 you begin your Queies, and first, you aske what I meane by three Estates, and yet in the same, and the foregoing pages you transcribe my very words, where I told you, that by the three E∣states I meant (as all the Laws and Records of the Kingdome ex∣presse it, and as all men unquestionably have hitherto concluded it, and as the truth in it selfe is) the King, the Lords, and the Com∣mons. Your second Querie is, What I meane by Fundamentall; and then you tell the Reader, that I say the King, the Lords, and Com∣mons are the three Estates of which the Fundamentall constitution of the Kingdome is made up. It's true, I did, and doe say so still, and you say little to con∣tradict it, onely you aske another question (which, how wise a one it is, I desire the Reader to observe, for I must not judge) viz. are there three Fundamentalls? and you propose it, as if I had said or imply'd so much; and then you tell the Reader, you ever thought there had been but one; and in this I agree with you, but herein is our difference which you and I must leave to the judge∣ment
of the reader to determine, I say this one Fundamental con∣stitution of the Kingdm, is the three Estates of the King, Lords, and Commons, and this I still abide by; but you say, this one Funda∣mentall is the Commons, and that for two Reasons; 1. Becuse the Commons made the King, and the King made the Lords, and so the Com∣mons are the prime oundtion. 2. Bcause both the King and the Lords were advnced for the benefit, quiet, and welfare of the Commons, and not the Commons made for thm: And you say, if you are deceived, the common Maxime of Salus populi suprema Lex, deceived you. Answ. First, the frame of the Government of this Kingdome, by the admired wisdom of the Architects and Contrivers thereof, is so composed of these three Estates, as may best preserve the whole, and keep either of those Estates from any such exorbi∣tancy as might destroy the other; for as they are the three Estates in Parliament, I humbly concive there is no subordination of the one to the other, but a co-ordination of them all three toge∣ther, by which the Princes Soveraignty, and the peoples free∣dome and liberty are together preserved and maintained, and herein is that common Maxime of Salus populi suprema Lex, chief∣ly made good. Secondly, the legislative Power of this Kingdom is not in any one Estate distinct, but in al the three Estates conjunct, yea, the ve∣ry root and essence of this Legislative Power is compounded, and as it were, mixed together in the three Estates of King, Lords, and Commons, and these three concurrent Estates producing one su∣preme Act as con-Cause, canot have a subordination among themselves, it not being imaginable how a power can cause the supreme effect, and yet be subordinate: thus the very being of our Common and Statute Lawes prove this truth, for they are not composed nor enacted by any one of the three Estates divisim, but they are established by the sole authority of the three Estates conjunctin, every act being enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, and by the authority of the Lords and Cmmons assembled in Parlia∣ment. Thirdly, I must needs dissent from you, in that you say, that both the King and the Lords were advanced for the benet, quiet, and welfare of the Commons, if your meaning bee, as indeed by your words it seems to be, exclusive, excluding therein the benefit, quiet
and welfare of the King and the Lords, for I conceive the benefi quiet and welfare of the whole, viz. King, Lords, and Commns was equally and alike intended in the Fundamentall constitution of the Kingdom, and so the Commons were as well made for the King, as the King for the Commons, yea the King, and the Lords, and the Commons were all alike made for the benefit, quiet, and welfare each of others, and so of the whole together; and this is that, which in my minde maketh the Constitution of this Kingdome in this state of a limited and mixed Monarchy farre to surpasse the Constitution of any other Kingdome that I know; and I think, that in a good sense it may truly bee said of the severall members of this thus constituted Poitique body of this Kingdome, as the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. 21. speakes of the members of the naturall body, the eye cnnot sy to the bnd, I have no need of thee, nor again the ead to the feet, I have no need of you; for as every member in the na∣turall body is by God there set and placed, not alone for its owne good, but for the welfare of the whole, and accordingly it acts, and is serviceable therein for the good of the whole, yea, such a naturall necessity there is in the body, of every member, that not any one member can be wanting, but the body is thereby defective, and so the eye cannot say to the and, I have no need of thee, nor againe, the head to the feet, I hv no need of you. So in the body Politique of this Common-wealth, by the ancient and excellent Constitution thereof, the three Estates, viz. King, Lords and Commons are so set and placed, that in their severall stations they should not act alone for their owne particular, but for the Common and Publike good and welfare of the whole; yea, I humbly conceive, that to the upholding & continuance of this so excellent a Constitution, there is such a Politique necessity of every one of the three Estates in this Commonwealth, for the preserva∣tion of the whole, that the King cannot say to the Commons, I have no need of you, nor againe the Commons to the King, I have no need of thee, nor yet the King and he Commons to the Lords, we have no need of you: For if any one Estate in this bdy Politique be cut off, the whole constitution is presently destroyed; and when I seriously consider how by the Fundamentall Constitution of this Kingdom, there is such care taken for the preservation of the Soveraignty of the King, and yet withall such provision made for the just Liberties
and freedome of the people, and how the one may be justly allay∣ed, and yet consist without impeachment of the other, I cannot but conceive it to be unparalleld for true policy in the whole world: and thus much in answer to your two first Qeries. Your third Querie is, whether the King, and suppose the major part of the Lord, whih mke up two Estates, do agree togther, suppose it be to set up absolute prerogative, and the Commons will not assent hereunto, whether the majo part of the Estates must not conclude the minor, the two conclude the third, and so as for the Common, will they, nill they, sles they must be, and slaves they shall be. Answ. To the making of a Law, there must bee the concurrent consent of all the three Estates, viz. King, Lords, and Commons; the King and the Lords, without the consent of the Commons can make no Law valid, and in that case the major part of the Estate doe not conclude the minor, and so the Commons are thereby preserved from slavery; but in another case the major part of the Estates doe conclude the minor, viz. when the Lords and Common doe agree upon a Law for the good and safety of the Kingdome, then the King is concluded in that their agreement, and ought t set his flat thereunto: For the Kings of England are bound by their Oaths to grant such Laws which shall bee for the good and safety of the Kingdome, with the accord of their people in  presented to them, as in the preamble of the Statute made in the 25 yeare of dward the Third, entituled, The Statute of provi∣sos of Benefices, made at Wstminster, in these words it doth ap∣peare: Whereupon the said Commons hae prayed our Soveraigne Lord the King, that sith the Right of the Crowne of England, and the Law of the said Realme is such, that upon the mischiefs and dammges which appen to this Realme, Hee ought, and is bound by His Oath, with the accord of His People in His Parliament thereof, to make remedy and law. And the King acknowledgeth this for a truth, and accordingly Acted, as in these following words in the same Statute, it appea∣reth: Our Soveraigne Lord the King, seeing the mischiefes and dammages before mentione, and having rgard to the Statute made in the time of his Grandfther, and by so much as Hee is bounden by Hi Oth to cause the a Law of His Realme, &c. by the assent of all the great
Men and Commnalty of is said Relme, to the honor of God, and pro∣fit of the said Church of England, and of all His Realm,  Ordi∣ned and esablished, &c. Thus farre the words of that Preamble and Statute, upon which the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled say thus: Viz. Here the Lords and Commons claime it directly as the right of the Crowne of England, and of the Law of the Land, tha the King is bound by his Oth, with the  of his people in Parliament, to make remedie and  the mischiefs and dammgs which happen to this Realme, and the King doth not deny it, Cllect of Declarations, p. 229. Lt this suffice as answer to your third Querie. Your fourth Queie is this, Whethr ee (viz. the King) be pre∣sent as a distinct Estate, if so, if one distinct Estate may bee present in power quatenus, an Estate, and absent in person, my not a second Estat be so present, though absent in body; yea, a third Estate s present, and yet absent in body; and so we shall have the Estates in Parliament, and not a man amongst them; this is a Riddle inded Mr. Bellamie, I pray you unfold this also. Answ. At your request e undertake the taske; your owne words grant, that s well in Parliament, as in all his inferiour Courts of Justice, the King is present in his power; these are your words, viz. I know Sir, hee is present in power in all his inferiour Couts of Iustice, as well as in the Parliament, 24. Now in Parlia∣ment there is no power but the power of the three Estates, viz. King, Lords, and Commons; and therefore all the Acts that are encted by the power of Parliament are enacted by the power of the three Estates conjunction; It is possible that the King may withdraw his person from the Parliament, as now hee hath done, but hee can never withdraw his power, no, not his power as a distinct Estate, for in the making of every Act of Parliamnt, there is present in Parliament the power of all the three Estates, with∣out all which conjunctim, no act can bee made. But there is an Act made this Parliament by the free consent of all the three Estates in Parliament, that this Parliament shall not be dissolved, prorogued, or adjourned without the consent of both Houses of Parliament first had and obtained, viz. Anno 17 Caroli Regis, enti∣tuled, An Act to prevent inconveniences which may happen by the un∣timely
adjourning, proroguing & dissolving of this present Parliament. In Act are these words, viz. Be it declared and enacted by the King our So∣veraigne Lord, with the assent of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, That this pre∣sent Parliament now assembled, shall not bee dissolved, unlesse it be by Act of Parliament to bee passed for that purpose, nor shall be at any time or times during the Continuance thereof, prorogued or adjourned, unlsse it be by Act of Parliament to be likewise passed for that purpose. Now then thus I argue, if at the passing of this Act of Parlia∣ment, there was present the power of all the three Estates in Par∣liament, viz. King, Lords, and Commons, and by vertue of this Act of Parliament, the Parliament cannot be dissolved, prorogued, or adjourned, unlesse it be by act of Parliament to bee passed for that purpose, then the power of all the three Estates, viz. King, Lords and Commons must needs continue in Parliament, till by Act of Parliament to be passed for that purpose this Parliament bee dissolved, prorogued, or adjourned. But at the passing of this Act of Parliament, there was present the power of all the three Estates in Parliament, viz. King, Lords and Commons, (vide the Act  supra) and by vertue of this Act of Parliament, the Parliament cannot be dissolved, prorogued, or adjourned, unlesse it be by Act of Parliament to be passed for that purpose, vide also the Act  supra. Therefore the Power of all the three Estates in Parliament, viz. King, Lords and Commons must needs continue in Parliament till by Act of Parliament to bee passed for that purpose, this Par∣liament be dissolved, prorogued, or adjourned. And thus the particular by me affirmed, is clearly proved, viz. That though the person of the King bee absent from the Parliament, yet the power of the King, viz. as one of the three Estates in Parliament, is present with the Parliament. I now come briefly to the second part of your Querie, and will endeavour herein, (as you call it) to unfold your Riddle▪ the other two Estates in Parliament, viz. Lords, and Commons, cannot be absent from the Parliament, neither in power, nor ye in person: thus farre e grant you, that many of the members of either House may bee absent from either of their respective Houses, and yet the two Estates of Parliament continue entire
in Parliament, for there must be at least three Lords present in the House of Lords to make it a House, and so an Estate in Parliament; and forty Commons with the Speaker, in the House of Com∣mons to make it an House, and so an Estate in Parliament; and therefore there cannot bee, as you affirme, three Estates in Par∣liament, and not a man amongst them; and this I give as an an∣swer to your fourth Querie, and if you please, you may also let it passe for the unfolding of your Riddle. In the ifth place, in page 24. you have these words, viz. The Replyer observing the Remonstran sascribing onely a share of the supreme Power to the House of Commons proposeth this Question to them; Will not you allow so much power to the Kingdome representative, in rfe∣rence to the Kingdome, as to the representative City, in reference to Lon∣don? And then you come to your fifth Querie in these follow∣ing words, viz. And so doe I Querie, will not the Commons of Lon∣don yeeld or ascribe unto the Commons of England, as the Commons of London to themselves will ascribe? Answ. I pray mak the termes of your Querie, for methinks it is a little defective; you say the Commons of London, not the Common-Councell, but as you propose your Querie, I answer affirmatively, that the Commons of London will yeeld and ascribe unto the Commons of England, as the Commons of London to themselves will ascribe; but I say again, observe your termes, you say the Commons of London, not the Common-Councell; I shall presntly shew you the difference, the Commons of London are not the City representative, but the Common-councell, (which doth consist of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Com∣mons) is the City representative. Then you goe on in these words, viz. Therefore Mr. Bellamie to make your absurdities the better appeare, in your parallel between the Kingdome representative, and the City representative, I come upon you thus; First, you grant that th Common-Councell is the City representative, page 2 of your Vindication. Answ. I grant it. Secondly, you grant that the House of Commons in Parliament assem∣bled, is the Kingdom representative, in the same page. Answ. I grant the House of Commons in Parliament assem∣bled,
to be the Kingdome representative in that sense in which in page 2 of my Vindication, I said it was, viz. as it is made up of and chosen by the Kingdome collective, viz. the Commons of the Kingdome, whom in Parliament it onely represents, and therefore onely can be the representative body of them, and ac∣cordingly in all their addresses to the House of Lords, they goe in their owne names, and in the names of all the Commons of England; and desiring the concurrence of the House of Lords in any Act, they desire it in their owne names, and in the names of all the Commons of England, of whom they onely are a repre∣sentation, or whom they doe represent, and in that sense I ex∣pressed it in page 4, where I called the Kingdome collective, the body of the Commons of England, not the body of the Kingdom of England; And as this representative body, viz. the House of Commons, is one of the three Estates in Parliament, so also in that page I called it the House of Commons in Parliament assem∣bled, but I called it not the Parliament; so the Lords are called the House of Lords in Parliament assembled, but no man cals tha House the Parliament. Likewise the Lords and Commons joy∣ning together in any one Act, as, in the last Propositions sent to His Majesty, it is said to be agreed by both Houses of Parliament, as in Article 1, 5, 6, 12, &c. it appeareth, but it is not said to be agreed by Parliament, for it had been so agreed, why then is the Kings assent to these Propositions prayed for by both Houss of Parliament, as in the Proem to the said Propositions in these words it doth appeare? Viz. May it please your Majesty,Wee the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of En∣gland, in the name, and on the behalfe of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scot∣land, in the name, and on the behalfe of the Kingdome of Scotland, Doe humbly present unto your Majesty, the humble desires and Propositions for a safe and wel-grounded Peace, agreed upon by the Parliaments of both Kingdomes respectively, unto which we do pray your Majesties assent, and that they, and all such as shall bee tendred to your Majesty in pursuance of them, or any of them, may bee established and enacted for Statutes and Acts of Parliament by your Majesties Royall assent in the Parliaments of both Kingdoms respectively.
You might also have observed in the same page, that when I come to speake of making Laws, which is the worke of the Par∣liament, and not of any particular Estate alone in Parliament; I there say in expresse termes, the Kingdome representative, which is the Parliament. And sure no man could possibly imagine that my expression should be taken in any other consideration; for I did all along in the 14, 15, 1, 17, 18 pages of my Vindication also hold out this truth, that there was three distinct Estates in Parliament, viz. the King, the Lords, and the Commons, and doe you thinke that it was probable or possible that I should meane, that one of the thee E∣states in Parliament, should be a representation of all the three? Thirdly, you say, the City representative hath a power to make a Law for those whom it represents. Answ. I grant this too. Then you thus goe on, viz. Fourthly, I desire to know whether you allow the Kingdom representative the same power to make a Law for those whom it represents. Answ. I crave your favour and patience before you goe any further to present you in this place with these two following considerations: First, that the House of Commons, all the members thereof being chosen by the collective body of the Kingdome, viz. the Commons, are in that respect, and in that sense truly the repre∣sentative body of the Kingdome, viz. of the Commons of the Kingdome, and so have in them in this consideration, the full Legislative power of the Commons of England. Secondly, I pray also consider, that though the House of Com∣mons have in them the full Legislative power of the Commons of England, yet the whole Legislative power of the Kingdome of England, is not concentred in the Commons of England, but is, (as hath before been fully proved) in the three Estates of the King, the Lords, and the Commons of England conjunctim, and there∣fore no one Estate alone, and by its selfe can make a Law; but to the making of every Law in the Kingdome of England there must be the concurrent consent of all these three Estates conjunctim. And this as I humbly conceive, makes a cleare way to give an answer to your Querie, viz. Whether you allow the Kingdom repre∣sentative
(viz. the House of Commons) the same power to make a Law for those whom i represents, and the answer will bee this; It hath in it the full legislative power of the Commons of England, whom in Parliament it doth represent, but it hath not in it the full legislative power of the kingdome of England, it hath in it all the power of the Commons of England towards the making of a Law, but it must have the concurrent consent of the other two Estates, viz. of the King, and of the Lords to the full consummating of a Law, and making it obligatory to the Kingdome of England. And besides, that it is thus setled by the fundamentall Consti∣tution of the Kingdome, I humbly also conceive that there is just reason for it too, and that not onely from the relation which these three Estates have one to another, but also because of that interest which one Estate hath in another. The King being no otherwise King of England, but with relation to the subjects of England, and so he hath an interest in them, and they are his liege, that is, his lawfull Subjects, or, his Subjects ac∣cording to the Law. And likewise the Lords and Commons of En∣gland, are no otherwise Subjects of England, but with relation to the King, as hee is the King of England, in whom also they have the like reciprocall interest, and so he is their liege, our lawfull Sove∣raigne, or their King according to the Law, and thus runs the formes of our Laws, viz. Bee it enacted by the King our Soveraigne Lord, with the assent of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled. But the City of London by the Charter of Edw. 3. in the 15 yeare of his Reigne, hath a power granted to the Major, and Aldermen, and their successors, with the assent of the Commonalty, to make lawes for the common profit of the Citizens of the same City; by vertue of which grant, the Lord, Major, Aldermen, and Commons in Court of Common-Councell assembled, being therin as one entire Court, the representative Body of the City, doe to this day make Laws, which are alwayes binding to the Citizens of the same City. And there is no other consent required to the consummation of these Laws, but the sole and onely authority of this Court, and therefore all our Acts of Common-councell are made in the joint names of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons in the Court of Common-councell assembled, and by the authority thereof; and in the addition of any branch in an act of Common councell it is still thus
exprest, It is by this Court further Ordered, &c. Or this Court doth further Order, &c. which doth fully prove that all the power of making or altering, or adding to the City lawes, rests wholly and alone in the body of that one Court of Common-councell, or the greater number of them, which doth alwayes consist of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons, but all the power of making or repealing, or adding to the lawes of the kingdome, doth not rest wholly and alone in the House of Commons, but the concurrent consent of the other two Estates, viz. the King, and the Lords, is necessarily required to this of the Commons, for making or re∣pealing of the Laws of the Kingdome. And thus I hope I have an∣swered your first head of Queries arising from that question, viz. wherein resides the Supreme power of the Kingdome. I shall now likewise endeavour to give a solution to your Argu∣ment, and all the satisfaction I can to the second head of your Queries. For a foundation to build your Arguments upon, you produce an Argument of mine out of my Book, entitled, A Plea for the Commonalty of London, thus it is, That Court which hath a power to make a law, and by that law to conferre a power upon the Lord Major and Aldermen, which as Lord Major and Aldermen they had not before, must needs bee quoad hoe, as unto the making of a law, above the Lord Major and Aldermen. But this Court of Common-councell hath, &c. Ergo, this Court of Com∣mon-councell so farre as to the making of a Law must needs bee above the Lord Major and Aldermen. Answ. I owne the Argument, and for confirmation of what I tre affirmed concerning the power of the Court of Common-coun∣cell, I made it good, and proved it d facto, by an act of Common-councel made in the sixth yeare of Hen. 7. upon the 15 of Aprill, concerning the choice of the Chamberlaine of London, and the Bridge-masters of the City, as by reference to the said Book appeareth, and I would willingly see what you have to say against it. But upon this in your 25 page you thus argue: That Court which hath the power to make a law, and by that law, to conferre a power upon the King, and Lords, which as King and Lords they had not before, must needs be quoad hoc unto the making of a law, above the King and Lord.
But the House of Cmmon, which say you (speaking of mee) is the kingdome representative, even as the Common-councell is the City repre∣sentative upon your suppostion, hath a power, &c. Ergo, the House of Commons, so far as unto the making of a law, must needs bee above the King and Lords. But I pray you tell me, is there no difference between the Court of Common-councell, and the Commons in Common-councel? I told you even now in page 42 that the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons in Common-councell assembled being therein one entire Court, are the representative body of the City, I ne∣ver said the Commons in that Court were so; and if you had been pleased to have perused that Booke of mine you cite to this purpose, and out of which you take my argument, viz. The Ple for the Commonalty of London, in page 10. where I instance in four severall acts of that Court, viz. the removing of Deputy Aldn from the Court, Mr. Iohn Wilde from being Town Clerk, Mr. Tho. Wiseman from being the City Remembrancer, and divers Alder∣mens Deputies from their places of Deputyship, you might there have found that I thus conclude it, viz. And all this by the joint and concurrent power of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons in this Common-councell assembled. And what though the Court of Common-councell, which alwayes consisteth of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons, have a pow∣er to conferre upon the Lord Major and Aldermen that power, which as Lord Major and Aldermen they had not before (as I fully proved, and therefore without the least mutation am still of the same mind) and in that respect, as unto the making of a Law are above the Lord Mjor and Aldermen, as the whole is above a part But will it hence follow that the Commons in Common-councell alone and by themselves, have either this power to conferre a power upon the Lord Major and Aldermen, which as Lord Major and Aldermen they had not before, or that they are above them▪ If you will argue from my assertion, bee sure you keep my terms, and then see how it will advantage you for the confirmation of your argument. I grounded this power of making City Laws from the Charter of Edw. 3. in the 15 yeare of his Reigne. And in the same Book of mine, out of which you took my argument, you might also
have had my authority for it, it is in page 7 in these words, Wee have granted further for us and our heires, and by this our present Charter confirmed to the Major and Aldermen of the City aforesaid, that if any customes in the said City hitherto obtained and used, be in any part diffi∣cult or defective, or any thing in the same newly happening, where before there was no remedy ordained, and have need of amending, the same Major and Aldrmen and their successors, with the assent of the Commo∣nalty of the same City, may adde and ordaine a remedy meet, faithfull, and consonant to reason, for the common profit of the Citizens of the same City, as oft, and at such time as to them shall be thought expedient, which Charter was confimed by act of Parliament 43 yeares after, in the 7 of Rich. 2▪ Now if you can produce the like authority granted alone to the House of Commons by the Parliament, that they of themselves, without the consent of the King and the Lords, have power to make lawes for the Kingdome, as by this Charter the Lord Major, Aldermen, and their successors, with the assent of the Commons of London, haue for the City, then you hit the buines aight indeed, but otherwise I thinke your argument is not true: And therefore for after times, let me advise you, that if you will imitate an argument in the words of it, be sure you imitate it al∣so in the proofes of it, and let them be as full and cleare for the confirmation of what you affirme; for it is not words, though never so smooth, that proves any thing in matters of fact, as this is: And truly, should I have laid down that argument to prove the power of the Court of Common-councell, as unto the making of City laws to bee above the Lord Major, and Aldermen, and not have proved it de facto, by the acts of the Court of Common-coun∣cell, I should have thought it at least to have been a scandalum Magnatum, against the Lord Major and Aldermen, and very blame-worthy in my selfe to have done it. But perhaps you think the condition of the King, and the Lords to bee such, as that what∣ever you speak or publish concerning them, tending to the anni∣hilating of their legislative power and authority in Parliament, can neither be an offence to them, nor a fault in you, or if it bee, it seemes you regard it not; but I hope you will not take it amisse, if, as I did in that so I desire you in this, either to produce a proof d facto, to make good that the House of Commons hath by an Act of that House alone conferred a power upon the King and Lords
as King and Lords they had not before, which are the very word of your argument, or else in plaine English to tell the Reader that though you can transcribe the words of my argument, which a childe of ten yeares old can doe as well as you, yet now upon second thoughts you must needs confesse you come very short in a parallel proofe of it, there neither now being, nor ne∣ver was any act of the House of Commons that doth prove that, that House alone and by it selfe did ever make a law which did confer a power upon the King and Lords, which as King and Lords they had not before, and without this proofe, I perswade my selfe no man will beleeve, that as unto the making of a law the House of Commons is above the King and Lords, though Mr. I. P. affirmes it to bee so. And this I give not onely as a solution to this your argument, but also to the other arguments which follow, viz. concerning the power of the House of Commons alone without the King and Lords to repeale what lawes they think meet, and to make laws and rules for all the Courts and people in England to bee steered and acted by, and whereunto (say you) the King him∣selfe is bound by his Oath, and therefore ought in duty to consut; and likewise to that which you say will follow from my logick, viz. that the Kingdome representative is inferiour in its power, in reference to the government of the Kingdome, then the City re∣presentative is in reference to the government of the City, and to the other Queries which you ground upon them, for they all alike hang upon this string, and if in the opinion of the Reader, to whose judgement I referre it, this be ut asunder, I am sure they must all then needs fall to the ground, and therefore I shall not need to trouble my self any more with them. And now Mr. I. P. I have endeavoured with all the candor and tendernesse I could to examine your Book, and have not I hope, let one word fall from mee, that in the least measure doth reflect upon your person, for it is the matter of your Book, and not any of your personall infirmities (for, alasse the Lord know, I have work more then enough to meddle with, and to master my own) or other your supposed errors in matters of Re∣ligion that I encounter with. And if we cannot yet agree in this present difference and debate, my earnest desire is, and I trust y endeavour shall for ver be answerable thereunto, that wee may
manage the matter with that sweet moderation and temper of Spirit as becommeth Christians, for of this I am confident, that though through weaknesse or error in judgement, perhaps mine, not yours, we cannot agree together to live in one Church fellow∣ship or communion here upon earth, yet we shall for ever mutu∣ally enjoy communion and fellowship with God the Father, with Christ, with the blessed Spirit, three Persons in one Essence, and with the holy Angels, and the glorified Saints for ever in heaven. And therefore I beseech you while we yet live here in this vale of teares, let us remember and obey that counsell the Apostle gives us, Philip. 3. 15, 16. Let us therefore, as many as bee perfect bée thus minded, and if in any thing you bee otherwise minded, God shall reveale even this unto you; neverthelesse, whereunto we have already at∣tained let us walke by the same rule, let us mind the same thing. I shall gladly imbrace and entertaine any truth of God, which shall by you bee held forth unto mee with the warrant of his Word, and as willingly leave and forsake whatever either in opi∣nion or practice I now hold or doe that shall bee made apparent to be dissonant thereto; for I solemnly professe unto you, that I labour not for Masteries, neither desire I to give the last blow, I esteem it no shame to be conquered, when Christ proves the Vi∣ctor, nor no losse to bee vanquished when the Truth prevailes, for it's verity, not victory that shall be my comfort. A POSTSCRIPT. I Have at this time no more to say, either to your selfe, or to your Book, but in one word to let the Reader know, that my desire and endevour to afford you all the faire quarter that possi∣bly I could in this our Conflict about this Subject, was such, That I did upon Saturday the 8 of this instant August, in the presence of Mr. Samuel Clarke Pastor of Bennet Fynck, London, and of Mr. Iames Story, and Mr. Henry Overton, two of yours, and of my owne acquaintance, shew you in Writing this my Justification of the City Remonstrance and its Vindication, before ever I ten∣dered it either to be Licensed, or Printed, and desired you to per∣use
it, and if there was any thing in it either for matter of Fact, or otherwise, that you could justly except against, I would ex∣punge it, and it should never see the light; And when you would not accept of that offer, I then read some passages in the Epistle to you which I told you, that in my apprehension, they were the things which most nearly concerned your Person; this I did to manifest my unwillingnesse to let any thing passe from mee, that might bee either prejudiciall to the Truth, or justly distastefull to your Person, and if it be possible, to overcome evill with good. FINIS. In the absence of the Author these following Errata's escaped in the prin∣ting of the Vindication, which I pray thus Correct. Page 2. line 23. for you will charge, read, you will not charge; p. 6. l. 30. for and Sectaries, . of Sectaries; p. 7. l. 1. for till, r. the; p. 8. l. last, for stated, r. sacred; p. 14. l 22 for finde in, r. finde it in; l. 24. for these their words, r. these are their words, p. 23 l. 27. for elected, r, erected; p. 26. l. 26. for ones Poesie, r Ovids Poesie.
