B2565A 12882476 95001
THE WHOLE BOOK OF PSALMS, As they are now sung in the Churches: WITH THE SINGING NOTES OF TIME and TUNE Set to every SYLLABLE, Made plain and easie to the Understand∣ings of all that can read; by the Dire∣ctions in the latter part of the Preface. Never before done in England. Col. 3. 16.. Teaching and admonishing each other in Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs. Licensed, July 26. 1688. LONDON, Printed by R. Everingham for the Company of Stationers, and are to be Sold by E. Brewster in S. Paul's Church-yard, and S. Keeble near the Temple-gate. 1688.
David Thanksgiving. II Samuel 22 Verse 1. And David spake unto ye Lord ye words of this song in ye day that ye Lord had deli¦verd him out of ye hand of all his Enemies
To the Honourable ROBERT BOYLE, Esq. May it please Your Honour, THE presumption of this Dedication was first taken from that Religious and Honourable Character, which Your Piety and Moderation have made fa∣mous, and celebrated among Godly Men of divers Perswasions; from whence I did con∣clude, That the shelter of Your Honour's Pa∣tronage would not only be a sufficient Prote∣ction for this well-designed Work, from what∣ever reflections may happen to be cast against it; but would also introduce the much more general acceptance of it to multitudes of well-disposed people. And now, Sir, that Your Condescension hath been so great, in stooping to peruse the Preface, and inspect the Work; and after all, That Your Wisdom hath crowned it with Your Approbation and Countenance, and also vouchsafed that generous Grant, of permit∣ting Your Honourable Name to be prefixed in the Front of it; the Eyes of those who are truly vertuous, will have a regard an∣swerable thereunto, and they will be animated
thereby to pursue the footsteps of a Precedent so highly Noble, and universally Renowned. Sir, Complements are things beneath the dignity and gravity of the Subject, or Your self: But Duty and Gratitude call upon me to acknowledge, That by how much I am a Stranger to Your Honour, by so much the more infinitely, do these immense Favours ren∣der me beyond expression, YOUR HONOURS'S Most obliged and most devoted Servant, T. M.
THE EPISTLE TO THE READER. GOD gave to Moses, and to all Israel cer∣tain Rules for the performance of Divine Worship, from Exod. 20. to 31. inclu∣sive. St. Paul saith, Let all things be done decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14. 40. and Holy men have (successively) introduced Institutions a∣greeable (at least as they have judged) to the te∣nour of the Sacred Scriptures. I do not presume to think of any new thing (much less to offer any such to the Publick) but only to make plain what hath been of long time used imperfectly; That seeing some more worthy Instru∣ment hath not yet applied himself to facilitate the means of Singing the Psalms true, I have thought this little piece of Service may be acceptable to Al∣mighty God, and to good men not unwelcome. The antiquity and profitableness of singing
Psalms, and Divine Hymns, may appear to those that shall be at the charge of a few minutes to read the following Preface, wherein I hope they will not find any faults too big for their Charity to bear with, because my meaning is good and sincere, and what I have done is for Ease to the skilful, and for a Guide to the unskilful. Let those that want instruction, and reject it, be content with their own remissness, but not envy, or be offended at the ingenious and devout, who are desirous of present comfort, and everlasting safety. Let him that accepts it, make the improvement desired. Let God give his Blessing, and take all the thanks. Let me have your Love and Prayers, because I have endeavoured to be Your helpful Servant, T. M.
THE PREFACE. IN this Preface I purpose Two things; First, To re∣commend the singing of Psalms, from its Antiqui∣ty, and the Examples, and Commands of Holy men, and from its profitableness to those that sing with the heart and with understanding: And secondly, To give plain directions, whereby persons that can but read, may be (quickly) able to sing true, by perusing them a few times over, and practising the same at Churches, and at vacant opportunities. The first Master of Musick, recorded in Scripture, was Jubal, Gen. 4. 21. long before Noah; but Moses (who gives us the account of him) is brief in his Histo∣ry of things in times before his own, especially of those before the Flood, or else we might have (perhaps) had many other instances. Songs also were used in Jacob's time, as appears Gen. 31. 27. The Israelites, Numb. 21. 17. sang for joy of being delivered from perishing by thrist. Deborah and Barak, Judg. 5. 1. sang at the Conquest of Sisera: These were before King David, whereby we see he was not the Inventer of this vocal sort of Sacrifice, or if he had been so, a man after God's own heart, 1 Sam. 13. 14. and of a heart perfect with the Lord, 1 King. 15. 3. were an Author worthy to recom∣mend the use thereof unto us. The Wisest of wise men hath left us the Song of Songs of his own compiling, viz. the Book called, The Song of Solomon; and we are informed of a thousand and five Songs that he made, 1 Kings 4. 32. which (are
concluded) were lost in the Babylonian Captivity. God∣ly Hezekiah commanded singing to the Lord in the words of his holy Predecessour David, 2 Chron. 29. 30. The people which came back to Jerusalem with Zerub∣babel from their slavery in Babylon, sang for joy of their return, Nehem. 12. 43. The succeeding Prophets do approve and practise the same, Isa. 5. 1. and in many other places of that Book; and Jer. 31. 7, &c. and Ezek. 27. 25, &c. in divers places of both those Books; and Hos. 2. 15. Zeph. 2. 14. Zach. 2. 10. Hab. 3. 1. And lest any should imagine Christ to have disappro∣ved that ancient and pious custom of Songs to God, see the Example of himself, Matt. 26. 30. None can say how often he did so, because our Records have only a few fragments of his actions, Joh. 21. 25. Nor can we suppose to have more of those the Apostles did; yet are there enough to let us know their continuance of vo∣cal Melody both in precept and practice, Act. 16. 25. Paul. and Silas sang in prison: 1 Cor. 14. 15. I will sing with the Spirit and understanding. Eph. 5. 19. and Col. 3. 16. S. Paul bids them speak in spiritual songs, &c. and Jam. 5. 13. commands the like. The profitableness and usefulness of this pleasant Ex∣ercise may appear also from the several occasions, whereby holy men have been prompted thereto, which have not only been outward causes of joy and exulta∣tion; but even the greatest straits and troubles, where∣in the same hath been made use of, to comfort and so∣lace the Soul. The Songs indeed of Moses, of Barak, and Deborah, &c. were made upon times of publick temporal delive∣rances, whereto agrees the command of the Apostle James, Is any merry? let him sing Psalms. But we find holy and devour David apply himself hereto, under both outward and inward troubles, in the sixth and thirteenth Psalms, and thereby to obtain relief from God in those grievous distresses, as appears by the lat∣ter
parts of both those Psalms; nay, the contents of the twenty second Psalm render him a man ultra spem, & in abysso tentationum, beyond hope, and in the bottomless it of temptations: and also the 25, 26. 28. 32. 35, 36. 38, 39. 41, 42, 43. 51, 52. 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59. 64. 69. 74. 83, 84, 85, 86. 88. 102. 109. 120. 123. 130. 137. 140, 141. 143. Psalms were all penn'd in seasons of sor∣row and heaviness, as you may read at leisure. And we may understand in what anguish our Lord himself was, when he sung that Hymn or Psalm, Mark 14. 26. by looking forward to the 34. verse, where 'tis said, His soul was sorrowful even to death: which words were spoken immediately after that Supper at which he had been singing, and at the same time had told his Disci∣les of the reason plotting against him, and the Actor, in the 18. and 20. verses of the same Chapter. These practices of our blessed Saviour and the Prophet David may teach us, That to recommend our selves and our Cause to God by way of finging (even in the greatest afflictions) is a very proper remedy to alleviate the ame, and he that shall try it will find, That though Prayers do oftentimes (through his Mercy) procure case and relief in the most grievous perplexities; yet by lifting up the Soul unto the Lord, Psal. 25. 1. in sing∣ing some Psalm of David that may fit our case, or some Divine Hymn of our own composing, it will be enabled he more to exult, and bear it self up under the heaviest ads of trouble, and to rejoye in God, when no other hings do minister any comfort, and for your guide herein, see the latter end of the Preface, where divers salms are recommended to their proper seasons. Something I have seen taxing the conversation of Mr Clement Marot, asserting him to have been the first at did digest the Psalms into Metre: But 'tis said by thers, there were two of that name, the one dissolute, he other a man of austere holiness. Neither is it easie believe, That a man who did employ himself in such
solemn and sacred labours, should be culpable of a cor∣rupted government in other matters, and all the World have celebrated that Reverend Divine his Fellow-labou∣rer Theodore de Beza. But suppose it were the same per∣son, yet I do not find any thing objected against him like to that of the man after God's own heart, 1 Sam. 13. 14. (the divine Royal Author of the Psalms) with Vriah the Hittite, 2 Sam. 11. Notwithstanding which, God did not reject him, nor ought we to slight his Psalms on that account. We ought not to oppose mens vices against the honour due to their vertues, lest the major part of the Bible come under challenge: For there we see Moses, that man of God, 1 Chron. 23. 14. as not any Prophet like him, Deut. 34. 10. murmuring at Meribah, Deut. 12. 51. and Job cursing his birth-day, Job 3. 3.—9. Solomon an Idolater, 1 Kings 11. 33. and all the very best Kings (even) of Judah, have left blemishes upon their names, if we begin with Saul, 1 Sam. 10. 1. and read their History: Nay, Christ found every one of his (very) Apostles tardy of unbelief, Matt. 17. 20. and the chief of them were guilty of gross crimes. And if S. Paul may be born with for murthering S. Stephen, Acts 7. 58. because it was before his Conversion; yet zealous S. Peter hath not that excuse, who did no less than forswear his Lord and Master, Matt. 26. 74. after his (unasked) Oath of Allegiance, by which he had (voluntarily) bound himself to the contrary (tho' he should die) not two hours before, as may be inferred, and yet their laudable actions are not reflected on with upbraidings of their failings. Neither are Mr. Marot's Works of Piety to be ridicul'd with the memory of his miscarriages in other cases, if they were yielded to have been true of the same person. Songs to God are recommended too much by exam∣ple and practice in Sacred Writ to be spoken against; and if any shall attempt an assault upon Divinity in Metre, he will give just offence to divers modern emi∣minent
Champions for God, who will take up the chal∣lenge and manage the conflict: But here is not occa∣sion to say more, than that daily Experience proves what is writ in Metre, to be sung, is more grateful to mens fancies, sooner imbib'd, makes a deeper impress, and is longer retained in memory; yea, it elevates the hearts and minds to more heightned contemplati∣ons, and excelse divine raptures than Prose. These are not slender Reasons for its approbation, and (no doubt) were part of the well-grounded consi∣derations, that have prevailed with Churches and King∣doms to approve and establish the same. Some do except against (I shall not say altogether without cause) the ill compilement of the English Me∣tre now in use, nor is that objection new, or unan∣swered; but if it shall be desired to have the Psalms tun'd to the Prose, or the Metre alter'd, or to have both done, by so many as may bear the charge of com∣posing and printing Rules for them, there will be no unwillingness to gratifie their good likings also. Those who shall be desirous to see more on this sub∣ject, may have recourse to Mr. Cotton's Book, entituled, Singing of Psalms a Gospel-Ordinance, and to Mr. Ford's Book called, Singing of Psalms the Duty of Christians, for Exhortation to the Musical; and to the third and fourth Parts of Dr. Sherlock's Practical Christian, for the Con∣templative part thereof. Thus much therefore may suffice in this place, to recommend this devout and holy Exercise: What re∣mains is to give such directions, as that (in the use of this Edition) all persons may be capable of singing the Psalms true, both as to Time and Tune; which two things are all that are to be observed in Musick.
The DIRECTIONS explaining the meanings of all the Characters in the Musick-part of the Psalms. I intreat those who shall read them, to go delibe∣rately through all of them, once or twice, before they find any faults, or ask any questions, and by that time they will see all the marks so very clearly unfolded, as to have nothing in them abstruse, or uneasie to be un∣derstood, that is necessary to the singing of the Psalms true. I will speak first of the Times, which are but three in all, used in singing of Psalms. The first Time is marked thus {breve note} The second Time is marked thus {semibreve note} The third Time is marked thus {minim note} or thus {minim note} The first Time {breve note} (and which is least used) is cal∣led a Brief, or two Times, or a double Time, being about the duration of eight pulses at the wrist of a person in good health and temper; and about that length of Time must the same Tune of Voice continue unto any Syllable which hath this Brief {breve note} marked over it. The second Time {semibreve note} is called a Semibrief, or a whole Time, and is but one half of a Brief {breve note}, and so holdeth the Voice the space of but four pulses on that Syllable which hath this mark or note over it {semibreve note}. The third Time {minim note} or {minim note} (whether the strokes be up∣wards or downwards) is called a Minim, or half a Time,
and is but one half of a Semibrief {semibreve note} or whole Time, and but one quarter or fourth part of a Brief {breve note} or double Time, and holdeth the Voice the space but of two pul∣ses. In Summ, One Brief {breve note} is two {semibreve note} {semibreve note} Semibriefs, or eight pulses. One Semibrief {semibreve note} is two {minim note} or {minim note} Minims, or four pulses. One {minim note} or {minim note} Minim is but two pulses. So that one {minim note} or {minim note} Minim is half of a Semibrief {semibreve note}, or a quarter of a Brief {breve note}, and one Semibrief {semibreve note} is half of a Brief {breve note}, as is said before. But the Clerks are seldom so exact as to keep these distinct Times in the Churches: They do generally ob∣serve but one Time, as indeed is most easie, and there∣fore most agreeable to the capacities of the greater number in Congregations and Families, and that is (usually) about a Minim and half, or three pulses, or three quarters of a Semibrief. But it would be more musical, and commendable to keep the due Times also, which, if the Clerks and Masters of Families will take but a little care in, all the people may quickly be expert at, after a small practice, if
each Singer have but one of these Books in his hand. But I hold it best, That the Clerks do proceed in their old fashion, of one Time, for a while, until the people may become acquainted with the different Times of the Notes, and the right way of singing them; who (then) will be able to follow as readily as Travellers do their Guides; wherein also the Clerks must remember to declare, with an audible voice, to the Congregations when they will keep their accustomed one Time, or when the proper musical Times; and likewise when they will observe the ♭. flat, called in Musick the fa Notes, or half Notes, and the mark ♯ called sharp, or when they will omit the notice of them, which Characters ♭. and ♯ will be spoken of in their proper place. For other∣wise the people in Congregations will confound one another all over, not knowing which sorts of Times to observe, nor how to conform the degrees of their Voices. This is all that is needful to be said in this place, of the Times of Voices in singing of Psalms. The next thing to be spoken of is, the lowness, or height of the Voice; of which there are eleven de∣grees, plainly demonstrated by five Lines, upon and be∣tween which, the Notes (aforementioned) of the Tunes are set. Wherein observe, That the degrees of the Voice are like unto the differences in the Sounds of Bells, save that in singing is practised a twofold contrary order to that of the Bells: For in ringing, the smallest and most shrill Bell (which begins first) the Ringers call the Treble or lowest; and so the Bells go (in their terms) upwards to the biggest, and most full expression of the Sound: But the first Note in singing begins at the biggest and most full delivery of the Voice next to grumbling, and so goes upwards to the smal∣lest and most shrill utterance of it next to squeaking;
so that what soundings the Singers call downward, the Ringers call upward. And thus the difference between Singers and Ringers appears to be twofold, as is said before. For one difference is in the order of their begin∣ning, the other in their order of naming the degrees to the Sounds, as is plainly shewed in what next follows, viz. The first is the lowest, or most deep (and is the biggest, or most full.) Sound, or degree of the Voice, which is under the lowest Line called the first Line. The second degree of the Voice, is upon the lowest Line. The third degree of the Voice, is between the lowest Line and that Line next above it, called the second Line. The fourth degree of the Voice, is upon the second Line, which is that next above the lowest Line. The fifth degree of the Voice, is betwixt the second and third Line upwards. The sixth degree of the Voice is upon the third, or middle Line. The seventh degree of the Voice is betwixt the third Line, and the fourth Line upward from the lowest or first Line. The eighth degree of the Voice is upon the fonrth Line, which is next to the uppermost Line. The ninth degree of the Voice is betwixt the fourth Line, and the fifth and uppermost Line. The tenth degree of the Voice is upon that upper∣most Line. The eleventh, and highest degree of the Voice, is above the fifth Line, and is the most shrill Note of all in singing of Psalms. These Lines are figured in the two first Examples, that Beginners may know the degrees of the Voice at sight, and learn (the more easily) to understand them. The Lines are figured at the right hand ends of them, 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. and the degrees of the Voice are set in words under the Lines, which now I come to
the demonstration of, as in these Examples, viz. The first Example. Begin to tune your Voice at the lowest degree, which is at the first Note, and is under the lowest Line, and sing the numbers upwards, one, two, three, and so forth, up to eleven; and then sing them backwards down again, eleven, ten, nine, and so back down to one. These are all Semibriefs or four Pulse-notes, called whole Times, one, two, three, four, five, six, sev'n, eight, nine, ten, 'lev'n. Exercise the risings and fallings of your Voice up and down a while by these Notes of Time, pronouncing the numbers forwards up, raising your Voice, and back∣wards down, falling your Voice, as before. The second Example Is to be sung as the first, only these are but Minims, or two Pulse-notes of Time, called Half-times; for two {minim note} {minim note} Minims make but one {semibreve note} Semibrief, as is taught be∣fore. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. When you have used your self a little to these two Examples, then proceed to the Changes, or breakings of your Voice, to the Tunes and Times in the next Ex∣ample; whereby you will have knowledge and practice to sing any Psalm true, and with pleasure.
The third Example. 2, 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 6, 8, 11, 9, 10.] 10, 9, 11, 8, 6, 7, 5, 4, 3, 1, 2. You will do well to hold some pointed thing in each hand to guide your eye the more readily in the appli∣cation of the Figures, and Notes to each other, when you sing this Example; for thereby the eye and mind will take both of them at once, without study or po∣ring; but after a little practice, such pointing will be left off as needless; for you will know to apply them readily without any help. In this Example you must give Times to your Voice, longer or shorter, accord∣ing to the Notes, which will be very easie; because there are but two Times used in singing of Psalms (as is said before) besides the Brief {breve note}, which is applied chiefly to the last Syllable of some Verses, and to most of the Staves or Stanza's. Before you begin to sing any Psalm, observe the com∣pass of the Tune; that is, what distance, or how many degrees of the Voice there are from the lowest to the highest degree in the Tune you are about to sing, that so you may form your Voice to sing the lowest Note without grumbling, and the highest Note without squeaking; and observe well upon what Line, or in what space the first Note stands, and also have an eye where the lowest and highest Notes do both stand, that so you may raise and fall your Voice betwixt them; for tho' some persons have strong breasts, yet there are others, whose Voices will not so well reach the compass of many Notes: As for instance, in the first Psalm, the first Note stands upon the first Line, which is the se∣cond degree of the Voice answering to the Figure 2. in
the former Example, and to the word [the] in the Psalm. The lowest Note stands in the first space, that is, under the first Line, signifying the first degree of the Voice, and is over the Figure 1. in the Example, and over the word [in] being the ninth Syllable in the third Line of the Psalm-Book, which the fourth Exam∣ple doth not reach to; and the highest Note stands in the space between the fourth and fifth Line, which shews the ninth degree of the Voice, and is over the Figure 9. in the Example, and over [doth] the first Syl∣lable in the fourth Line of the Psalm, so that the com∣pass of this Tune is nine Notes, for that both the low∣est and highest Notes are inclusive in the number of the compass, because both of them must be sung. The second Psalm hath the same Tune with the first. The third Psalm hath the first Note upon the second Line, which is the fourth degree of the Voice, and is over the Figure 4. in the Example, and belongs to the Letter [O] in the Psalm. The lowest Note is under the first Line, and is over the Figure 1. and over the word [my] in the first Line. The highest Note is upon the fourth Line, and is over the Figure 8. and over the word [kill] in the second Line, whereby the compass of this Tune is eight Notes. The fourth Psalm hath the first Note upon the se∣cond Line, and is over the Figure 4. in the Example, and belongs to the letter [O] in the Psalm, and also there is no Note lower than it in that Psalm, and the highest Note is in the space between the third and fourth Line, as is over the Figure 7. and over the word [call] which is the last Syllable in the first Line, whereby the compass of this Tune is but four Notes; and therefore the more fit for Beginners to sing: For those Tunes, which have the least compass, are the most easie, and also they may be sung with the more chearful high pitch of the Voice, because people will not be in danger of squeaking, as in Tunes of greater compass;
nd if they begin high, there can be no danger of rumbling; but I recommend an indifferency of Voice s best to be used. You are now prepared to begin upon the Psalms; ut that your entrance may be the more easie, here ollows an Example of the first four Lines of the first Psalm, wherein I have set the Figures under the Notes, hewing in what degree of the Voice each Note is pla∣ed, and which Notes you may (at your pleasure) try your Voice by, pronouncing the words of the numbers before you sing the words of the Psalm, which you will afterwards do the more readily and perfectly; and when you can sing this Psalm by the Notes, you will be able to sing all the Psalms true by the help of these Notes which are set with them. Here follow the words of the first long verse which contains four short verses of the first Psalm. The man is blest that hath not bent, being eight Syllables: Pronounce the words of the numbers that do stand under those Notes, which do appertain to the said Syllables, and then instead of the said words, or eight Syllables, you will sing these eight numbers, viz. Two, four, two, five, four, seven, seven, six, because the figures of these numbers do stand under those Notes, and over the same Syllables to which the said Notes do belong. The second short verse is, To wicked read his ear. There being but six Syllables, instead of them sing these six numbers, Five, six, two, four, three, two. The third short verse is, Nor led his life as sinners do. There being eight Syllables (as in the first verse) sing instead of them, these eight numbers, Six, six, six, five, four, seven, six, five.
The fourth short verse is, Nor sate in scorners chair. This verse contains but six Syllables, as in the se∣cond verse, and therefore instead of them sing but these six numbers, Five, eight, four, six, five, four. And after a very little use of this, you will sing the words of the Psalms to the Notes with great facility and delight, not only in this little tryal, but even throughout all the Psalms. Thus having fully explained it, I come now to give you the last, being The fourth Example. 2 4 2 5 4 7 7 6. 5 The man is blest that hath not bent] to 6 2 4 3 2. 6 6 6 5 4 wicked read his ear] nor lead his life as 7 6 5. 5 8 4 6 5 4 sinners do] nor sate in scorners chair.] In the Metre, four short verses which are four Lines in the common Psalm-books (that have not the Musick-Notes) are accounted to one long verse, and two long verses make one staff of eight short verses: The first of which short verses consists of eight Syllables, which makes four feet, the next consists of six Syllables, ma∣king three feet in Poetry, through the most part of the Psalms, only these one and twenty Psalms following have
ther sorts of Metre, viz. the 25, 50, 51, 67, 70, 100, 104, 111, 112, 113, 120, 121, 122, 124, 125, 126, 127, 130, 134, 136, 148. The short Metre verses are divided by this Character etwixt them] and the Musick over them is divided by a cross Bar coming down thwart the Musick thus {barline} ut this stroke is put by the Printer more oft than need∣ful in some places. Musicians, in teaching to Sing, did use to give unto the Notes of the degrees of the Voice these seven terms, Vt, re, mi, fa, sol, la, ci, as the French yet do; but now they teach by no more than these four terms, Sol, la, ni, fa, and so double the repetition of either sort of terms, until they come up to the number of 11. as thus, Vt, re, mi, fa, sol, la, ci, ut re, mi, fa. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. but now they change ut, re, into sol, la, and do teach thus, Sol, la, mi, fa, sol, la, fa, sol, la, mi, fa. But these unaccustomed words, or Syllables, and the repeating of them, being difficult to be learned by such as have no acquaintance with Musick, I have made use of those numbers to distinguish the degrees of the Notes by, as more intelligible, and easie to ordinary Capacities, wherein the numbers, seven and eleven, are printed with Apostrophies thus, sev'n and 'lev'n, that each of them may be pronounced in Singing, as but one Syllable, because two Syllables cannot so con∣veniently be expressed to one Note in Singing. The long strokes of the Minims, {minim note} or {minim note} are carried upwards or downwards, as they will come in most commodiously among the five Lines, but do signifie no other thing than the same Time of two pulses. The Characters at the right hand end of every System, or row of five Lines, whereon the Notes are placed
thus {direct}, or else in some of the spaces thus {direct}, is on to shew, that the Note ensuing on the left hand end i the next row of Lines, stands in the same degree of th Voice, which this mark {direct} is set at, on the right han end of the System foregoing, that the Voice may take the Note readily before the eye can find it at the left hand end of the System. I come now to the letter ♭. and the mark sharp ♯, which I promised to speak of. You find the Letter ♭. in the fourth space at the be∣ginning of the Tune to the first Psalm, but you have no sharp ♯ until you come to the fourth Psalm, where it is put at the beginning of the Tune upon the second line: Their signification is only thus, that where the said letter ♭. stands in any space, or upon any line at the beginning of a Tune, all the Notes standing in that space, or upon that line, ought to be sung one half de∣gree of the Voice lower than else they should have been; but if ♭. stand in any other part of the Tune, it must be applied to that Note only, which it stands before, and to no other Note: And on the contrary, when the mark sharp ♯ stands in any space, or upon any line, at the beginning of a Tune, all the Notes standing in that space, or upon that line, ought to be sung one half degree of the Voice higher than else they should have been; but if the mark sharp ♯ stands in any other part of the Tune, it must be applied only to the raising that Note which stands next after it, one half degree of the Voice, and to no other Note. By this means the compass of the Tune of the first and second Psalms will be no more than eight Notes and half, and the compass of the Tune of the third Psalm
will be but seven Notes and half, because the letter ♭ hath fallen both those Tunes half a Note; and also the compass of the Tune of the fourth Psalm will be found but three Notes and half, because the mark ♯ doth raise the lowest degree of the Voice in that Tune half a Note. Most of the Psalms have this mark or letter {timeimperf-prolatimperf-str} with a stroke down it, at the beginnings of the Tunes, but there are thirty three Psalms, viz. the 14, 15, 17, 19, 24, 29, 31, 39, 40, 42, 44, 50, 52, 54, 63, 65, 72, 79, 80, 82, 92, 93, 94, 99, 100, 104, 107, 109, 117, 128, 145, 147, 149. which have the said letter {timeimperf-prolatperf} with a prick in it before them: The meaning is thus, The said marks are two Moods which are explained as fol∣loweth. First, The imperfect of the more {timeimperf-prolatperf} called Tripla or (less usual) swift time where one Semibrief {semibreve note} contains three Minims {minim note}{minim note}{minim note} which ought to be observed by the skilful, as an Exception from the general Rule at the beginning of these Directions, where one Semibrief {semibreve note} is said to contain but two Minims {minim note}{minim note}, as it is in the other next Mood. Secondly, The imperfect of the less {timeimperf-prolatimperf-str} called dupla or more usual slow time, signifieth the Semibrief {semibreve note} to contain but two Minims {minim note}{minim note} according to the afore∣said general Rule. This mark {C-clef} in Musick is called the letter C. for
Cliff, from the French word Clef, which signifies in Eng∣lish Key, whereby to set the height or lowness of the Tune according to what line the middle of the said Cliff stands upon, and so all the rest of the Tune must be sung in proportion of voice; so this Cliff. {C-clef} which is called the C. sol, fa, ut Cliff, being placed on the fourth line signifies a Tenor, on the third line a Contra-tenor on the second line a lower mean, on the first line a higher mean; whereby is understood that the lower the mid∣dle of this Cliff {C-clef} stands in the System of lines, the higher it sets the tune; so in the Psalms this Cliff is placed upon the fourth or upon the third line, being a Tenor and Contra-tenor, each of which is applied three manner of ways, being demonstrated and figured thus, viz. 1 2 3 Tenor Cliffs 1 2 3 Contra Tenor Cliffs But most part of the Psalms are sung by the first, called the Tenor, because the middle of the cliff {C-clef} stands on the fourth line; only these forty three, viz. the 14, 15, 17, 19, 24, 29, 31, 39, 40, 42, 44, 50, 52, 54, 63, 65, 72, 79, 80, 82, 92, 93, 94, 99, 100, 104, 107, 111, 113, 115, 118, 220, 122, 124, 125, 129, 130, 136, 137, 139, 140, 146, 149. Psalms are sung by the second, called the Contra-tenor, because at those the middle of the cliff {C-clef} stands upon the third line. There are two other Cliffs in Musick, namely the F. fa, ut cliff, marked thus {F-clef} and the G. sol, re, ut cliff,
marked thus {G-clef}. but I have spoken only of the C. sol, fa, ut cliff {C-clef}, because there is no other put to the Psalm-Musick, nor is it material to insist further upon any of these mysterious Terms and intrigues of Art, for that t would give greater trouble to render those intelligi∣ble to the plurality of people, than is needful in this concernment: But this little is not amiss, for that it may give satisfaction to some particular ingenious per∣sons, who may peradventure desire it. All the other former Directions are necessary for Clerks Masters of Families, or persons alone, to sing exactly, true; but any people may sing well enough in Congregations, or single, when they shall have in∣formed themselves only of the three Notes of Time {breve note}, {semibreve note} and {minim note} or {minim note} mentioned at the beginning of these Directions, and of the eleven degrees of the voice; and better perfection will come, by a little pra∣ctice, insensibly, as will be found by Experience. These Psalms are printed in a small Character, that the Books may be the cheaper, and of the less bulk, and by that means the more commodious for pockets, in being the fewer sheets; it having been one of my great∣est aims, to make them as cheap, and portable as possi∣ble: But the smallness of both Letter and Musick, hath made the printing of each sheet the more chargeable. The Printer hath also been very careful in placing the Notes exactly over their respective Syllables, to prevent disorderly application of each to the other, the neglect whereof is a great fault in those Books I have seen, wherein the Notes are put to the first slaves, or verses of some of the Psalms. These Directions are not long, and if they had been more brief, they must have been less plain, which would no have been so fit and proper for such Capacities, as this Work is partly intended: Wherefore here is
every thing done that could be devised or advised, and (I hope) enough to render this Seraphick Devotion plain, easie, and pleasant to every unprejudiced Under∣standing; perswading my self, that as many as shall be delighted in it, (how dissolute or wicked soever before∣hand) will be led into the contemplation of the rich Divine things contained in these heavenly Songs, and (by degrees) to the knowledge of Him, who may be said to have sung his own Elegy or Funeral Song, the Pa∣schal Psalm-Singer, even our Lord and Master Jesus Christ. I commend all to the practice of the wise and of the unwise, with my most hearty prayers to the Author of all Blessings, for His peculiar Benediction on these frail endeavours of His most unworthy Servant, T. M. ERRATA. Page 13. vers. 1. for with read wilt: Psal. 48. v. 2. for he r. the: Psal. 50. v. 12. for well r. dwell: Ps. 89. v. 38. for whithin r. within: Psal. 113. v. 7. for paor r. poor: Psal. 119. v. 64. for they r. thy.
HEre are pointed out those Psalms for your Guide, as most proper to be sung upon these respective Occasions following, taken out of some English Collections, viz. In times of Joy and Thanksgiving, the 30, 34, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 111, 113, 119, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150. In times of Sorrow, the 25, 54, 67, 70, 72, 86, 143. In case of Confession and Repentance, sing any of these called the seven Penitential Psalms, the 6, 32, 38, 51, 102, 130, 143. In case of extraordinary Afflictions, burthensomness of life, or temptation to despair, the 13, 22, 31, 42, 44, 54, 56, 64, 69, 84. But those above being not so particular as the French Col∣lections, I have thought it requisite to translate and give you these also, viz. For Remission of Sins, and especially if under trouble of mind, because of them, or in sickness, the 6, 25, 32, 38, 51, 130. For the Church, when under troubles of divers kinds. Of Calumnies, the 10, 12, 13, 14, 123. Of hindrance in Religion, the 42. If in trouble for the Word, the 35, 44, 74, 88. If under Force, the 17, 20, 80, 83. If molested by false Brethren, the 94. If under Captivity, or for deliverance from it, the 99, 102, 137. If for her Prosperity, the 67.
For returning of Thanks. If after Deliverance, the 9, 18, 23, 27, 34, 77, 124, 129, 149. If for Benefits received, the 48, 81, 106. If for Deliverance in part, the 126. If for increasing the Church, the 105. For the general Supplication of private persons, the 85, 121. If under inward Discomfort, the 16, 71. If outwardly afflicted, the 88, 142, 143. If under oppression of Adversaries, the 3, 5, 43, 52, 53, 54, 59. If in great danger, the 31. If God's Name be abused, the 28. If the wicked prosper, the 37, 73. If assaulted by despair, or but by impatience, the 39. If to preserve one's Innocency, the 58. If prevented of godly Company, the 84, 120. If under reproach by false Witnesses, the 109. If towards a Conflict, the 144. If for deliverance from Death, the 30, 138. If after Relief, the 40. If to magnifie God's Works, the 8, 19, 29, 104, 111. If to extol, his Liberality, the 24, 33, 65, 66, 103, 118, 145. —His Mercy and Truth, the 88. —His Greatness, the 77. —His Righteousness, the 92, 93. —His Providence, the 75, 113, 136, 139. —His Laws, the 119. —His Adoption of his People, the 9, 60. To invite Men and all Creatures to rejoyce in God, the 47, 95, 96, 118, 135, 148, 150. For Help and Assurance from God, the 46. 62. 63. 88. 91. 97. 125. 127. 146.
Of the Prophecy of Christ, his Kingdom and Church, the 2. 22. 45. 50. 72. 110. The Righteous in Adversity, the 41. A Description of the World's Vanity, the 49. Exhortations to good Rulers, the 82. A Description of them, the 101. A Description of Man's Happiness, the 102. 128. A Description of the Misery of Man's Life, the 90. But where a whole Psalm doth not suit to the Occa∣sion, you may sing such parts as do best agree with it, and so pick out of any Psalm such portions as shall be most pertinent to your purposes. ALl Hallow'd Acts should be perform'd with awe And Reverence of Body, Voice, and Heart. W'have Rules to Pray; but those who never saw Rules how to Sing, How should they bear a part? T'avoid therefore, an uncouth jangling Noise, This will direct Conformity of Voice.
The Names of those eminent Pro∣fessors of Musick who did long since compose the Tunes of the Psalms. THomas Tallis. John Douland Doctor of Musick. Thomas Morley Bachelor of Musick. Giles Farnaby Bachelor of Musick. Thomas Tomkins Bachelor of Musick. John Tomkins Bachelor of Musick. Martin Pierson Bachelor of Musick. William Parsons. Edmund Hooper. George Kirby. Edward Blancks. Richard Allison. John Farmer. Michael Cavendish. John Bennet. Robert Palmer. John Milton. Simon Stubbs. William Cranford. William Cobhold. William Harrison. Thomas Ravenscroft Bachelor of Musick.
The Scale to Musick, called the Gamut. 3 Scales, Shewing the Names of Notes. E la   la mi ♭ fa D la Sol — Sol la la C Sol fa   fa Sol Sol B fa ♯ mi — mi ♭ fa ♭ fa A la mi re   la la mi G Sol re ut {G-clef} — Sol Sol la F fa ut   fa fa Sol E la mi — la mi ♭ fa D la Sol re   Sol la la C Sol fa ut {C-clef} — fa Sol Sol B fa ♯ mi   mi ♭ fa ♭ fa A la mi re   la la mi G Sol re ut   Sol Sol la F fa ut {F-clef} — fa fa Sol E la mi   la mi ♭ fa D Sol re — Sol la la C fa ut   fa Sol Sol B ♯ mi — mi ♭ fa ♭ fa A re   la la mi Gam ut — Sol Sol la     B E A     duralis. naturalis. mollaris. You must Sing twice, fa, Sol, la, above mi: and twice la, Sol, fa, under mi. Find out where mi is and you have all. All the Characters used in this Book. 1 2 1 ½ ¼ 1/8 {F-clef} {C-clef} {G-clef} {long note} {breve note} {semibreve note} {minim note} {crotchet note} {quaver note} · {timeimperf-prolatperf}3 {timeimperf-prolatimperf-str} ♯ ♭ {long rest} {breve rest} {semibreve rest} {minim rest} {barline} {double barline} {repeat} {fermata} {direct}
Explanation. TO understand the Scale of Musick, you must begin at the foot of the first Colume, and say upwards, Gamut, Are, and so to Ela at the top: And then downwards, Ela. D la Sol, to the bottom. In which Colume there are 3 Cliffs: The Bass {F-clef} the Mean {C-clef} & the Treble {G-clef}. At the foot of the 3 last Columes you have three Capitals. B. E. A. all to find out the Master note mi, which is always in the Compass of 8 Notes. B. without a flat in that Colume. E. with a flat in B mi, and B fa b mi. And A with 2 flats, that is, in B mi and Ela mi. Note that every 8th. is the same in naming the Notes in the 4 Columes. As to the Characters in the last Line: The first is the Treble-Cliff. The 2d. the Mean. The third the Bass. The 6 Notes that follow in use are Named a Long, a Breve, a Semi-breve, a Minim, a Crochet, a Quaver and a (.) Prick, when added to any Note makes it half as much more in Time. Then 2 Moods, Tripla, 3 to 1: and Dupla, 2 to 1. Then a b sharp, which makes the Note half a Note higher; and a b flat, half a Note lower. Then the Pauses or Rests, the first a Long. 2d. a Breve 3d. a Semibreve, 4th. a Minim. Then a single Bar to part the Time, be it Tripla or Dupla. Then a double Bar for the End of a Song. Then a Repeat, {repeat} that is, when any part of the Musick is to be Sung or Played over again. Then a Hold or Close {fermata} And a Direct to lead the eye to the beginning of the next Line.
A Table for the whole number of Psalms, and also in what Page you may find every of them. A Psalm  ALl laud and praise Folio 66 Psalm  All people hearken Folio 121 Psalm  Attend my people Folio 207 Psalm  Amid the press Folio 227 Psalm  All people that Folio 272 B. Psalm 1 BE light and Folio 224 Psalm 9 Blessed are they Folio 336 Psalm 8 Blessed art thou Folio 376 Psalm 4 Behold and Folio 382 Psalm 2 Before the Folio 403 Psalm 4 Blest be the Folio 406 D. Psalm  DO not O God Folio 228 E. Psalm 7 EXcept the Folio 374 G. Psalm  GIve to the Folio 64 Psalm  Grudge not Folio 88 Psalm  Great is the Folio 119 Psalm 5 Give praise Folio 291 Psalm 7 Give thanks Folio 306 Psalm 48 Give laud Folio 415 H. Psalm 2 HElp Lord Folio 23 Psalm 3 How long Folio 24 Psalm 1 Have mercy on me Folio 135 Psalm 6 Have mercy Lord Folio 146 Psalm 7 Have mercy on us Folio 170 Psalm 8 How ever it be Folio 192 Psalm 4 How pleasant is Folio 231 Psalm 1 He that within Folio 255 I. Psalm 5 INcline thine Folio 7 Psalm 1 I trust in God Folio 21 Psalm 0 In trouble Folio 42 Psalm 5 I lift mine Folio 55 Psalm 4 I will give Folio 77 Psalm 9 I said I will Folio 98 Psalm 0 I waited long Folio 100 Psalm 3 Judge and revenge Folio 108 Psalm 7 I with my Folio 204 Psalm 2 It is a thing Folio 258 Psalm 00 In God the Folio 273 Psalm 01 I mercy will Folio 271 Psalm 09 In constant Folio 315 Psalm 116 I love the Folio 329 Psalm 120 In trouble Folio 365 Psalm 121 I lift mine eyes Folio 365 Psalm 122 I did in heart Folio 367 L. Psalm 6 LOrd in thy Folio 9 Psalm 16 Lord keep Folio 27 Psalm 26 Lord be my Folio 58 Psalm 35 Lord plead Folio 81 Psalm 42 Like as the Folio 106 Psalm 68 Let God arise Folio 171 Psalm 72 Lord give thy Folio 188 Psalm 86 Lord bow thine Folio 236 Psalm 88 Lord God of Folio 240 Psalm 130 Lord to thee Folio 377 Psalm 140 Lord save me Folio 399 Psalm 143 Lord hear my Folio 404 M. Psalm 23 MY shepherd Folio 12 Psalm 45 My heart doth Folio 113 Psalm 62 My soul to God Folio 119 Psalm 71 My Lord my Folio 184 Psalm 103 My soul give Folio 281 Psalm 104 My soul praise Folio 285 Psalm 146 My soul praise Folio 411 N. Psalm 125 NOt unto us Folio 326 Psalm 124 Now Israel Folio 369 O. Psalm 3 O Lord how are Folio 4 Psalm 4 O God that Folio 5 Psalm 7 O Lord my God Folio 11 Psalm 8 O God our Lord Folio 13 Psalm 15 O Lord within Folio 26 Psalm 17 O Lord give ear Folio 29 Psalm 18 O God my Folio 32 Psalm 21 O Lord how joyful Folio 44 Psalm 22 O God my God Folio 46 Psalm 31 O Lord I put Folio 68 Psalm 44 Our ears have Folio 109 Psalm 51 O Lord consider Folio 132 Psalm 55 O God give ear Folio 142 Psalm 60 O Lord thou Folio 155 Psalm 63 O God my God Folio 161 Psalm 64 O Lord unto my Folio 162 Psalm 70 O God to me Folio 183 Psalm 79 O God the Gentiles Folio 218 Psalm 94 O Lord thou Folio 261 Psalm 95 O come let us Folio 263 Psalm 98 O sing ye now Folio 269 Psalm 102 O hear my Folio 277 Psalm 108 O God my heart Folio 313 Psalm 117 O all ye Nations Folio 331 Psalm 118 O give ye Folio 332
Psalm 123 O Lord that heaven Folio 368 Psalm 129 Oft they now Folio 376 Psalm 131 O Lord I am Folio 378 Psalm 133 O how happy Folio 381 Psalm 135 O praise the Folio 383 Psalm 136 O laud the Lord Folio 388 Psalm 139 O Lord thou Folio 396 Psalm 141 O Lord upon Folio 401 P. Psalm 38 PUt me not to Folio 95 Psalm 106 Praise ye the Folio 298 Psalm 136 Praise ye the Folio 386 Psalm 147 Praise ye the Folio 413 R. Psalm 61 REgard O Lord Folio 157 Psalm 132 Remember David Folio 379 S. Psalm 54 SAve me O God Folio 141 Psalm 59 Send aid and Folio 152 Psalm 69 Save me Folio 177 Psalm 96 Sing ye with Folio 265 Psalm 125 Such as in God Folio 370 Psalm 149 Sing ye unto Folio 417 T. Psalm 1 THe man is Folio 1 Psalm 14 There is Folio 25 Psalm 19 The heavens Folio 40 Psalm 23 The Lord is Folio 51 Psalm 24 The earth is Folio 53 Psalm 27 The Lord is both Folio 60 Psalm 28 Thou art Folio 63 Psalm 32 The man is blest Folio 72 Psalm 36 The wicked with Folio 86 Psalm 41 The man is blest Folio 104 Psalm 46 The Lord is our Folio 116 Psalm 50 The mighty God Folio 124 Psalm ib. The God of gods Folio 127 Psalm 53 The foolish man Folio 139 Psalm 57 Take pity for Folio 148 Psalm 65 Thy praise Folio 164 Psalm 76 To all that now Folio 202 Psalm 80 Thou shepherd Folio 221 Psalm 85 Thou hast been Folio 234 Psalm 87 That city shall Folio 239 Psalm 89 To sing the Folio 243 Psalm 90 Thou Lord Folio 252 Psalm 93 The Lord as Folio 260 Psalm 97 The Lord doth Folio 267 Psalm 99 The Lord doth Folio 271 Psalm 110 The Lord did Folio 320 Psalm 112 The man is Folio 323 Psalm 125 Those that Folio 371 Psalm 138 Thee will I praise Folio 394 Psalm 145 Thee will I laud Folio U. Psalm 75 UNto thee Folio W. Psalm 2 WHy did the Folio Psalm 9 With heart Folio Psalm 10 What is the Folio Psalm 52 Why dost thou Folio 1 Psalm 74 Wh at thou Folio 1 Psalm 111 Wh heart I do Folio 3 Psalm 114 Wh  Folio 3 Psalm 126 When that the Folio 3 Psalm 137 When as we sate Folio 39 Y. Psalm 30 YE righteous Folio Psalm 47 Ye people all Folio 1 Psalm 58 Ye rulers that Folio 1 Psalm 66 Ye men on earth Folio 1 Psalm 113 Ye children Folio 3 Psalm 150 Yield unto God Folio 4 These ye shall have after the Psalms. Psalm Veni Creator Folio 42 Veni Creator Spiritus Folio 42 The humble suit of a sinner Folio 42 Venite exultemus Folio ibid. Te Deum Folio 423 The Song of the three Children Folio 425 Benedictus Folio 425 Magnificat Folio 426 Nunc dimittis Folio ibid. Quicunque vult Folio 427 The lamentation of a sinner Folio 428 The Lord's Prayer. I. F. Folio 429 The ten Commandments Folio 430 The complaint of a sinner Folio ibid. A Psalm before Morning-prayer Folio 431 A Psalm before Evening-prayer Folio 432 Audi Israel Folio ibid. The Lord's Prayer, Dr. Cox Folio 433 The Creed 434 A Prayer to the Holy Ghost Folio 435 Da pacem Folio ibid. The lamentation Folio 436 A Thanksgiving Folio ibid. A Prayer Folio 438
THE PSALMS OF DAVID In METRE. PSALM I. Beatus vir. T. S. THe man is blest that hath not bent, to wicked read his ear: Nor led his life as sinners do, nor sate in scorners chair: But in the law of God the Lord doth set his whole delight: And in that law doth exercise himself both day and night. He shall be like the tree that grows▪ fast by the river side, Which bringeth for most-pleasant fruit in his due time and tide. Whose leaf shall never fade nor fall, but flourish still and stand:
Even so shall  all things prosper well, that this man takes in hand. So shall not the ungodly men, they shall be nothing so: But as the dust which from the earth the wind drives to and fro. Therefore shall not the wicked men, in judgement stand upright: Nor yet the sinners with the just, shall come in place or sight. For why the way of godly men, unto the Lord is known: And eke the way of wicked men, shall quite be overthrown. PSALM II. Quare fremuerunt. T. S. WHy did the Gentiles tumults raise? what rage was in their brain? Why did the Jewish people muse? seeing all is but vain. The kings and rulers of the earth conspire, and are all bent Against the Lord and Christ his Son, which he amongst us sent. Shall we be bound to them, say they? let all their bonds be broke:
And of their doctrine and their law, let us reject the yoke. But he that in the heaven dwells, their doings will deride: And make them all as mocking stocks, throughout the world so wide. For in his wrath the Lord will say, to them upon a day: And in his fury trouble them, and then the Lord will say: I have anointed him my King upon my holy hill: I will therefore Lord preach thy law, and eke declare thy will. For in this wise the Lord himself, did say to me I wot, Thou art my dear and onely Son, to day I thee begot. All people I will give to thee, as heirs at thy request: The ends and coasts of all the earth, by thee shall be possest. Thou shalt them bruise even with a mace, as men under foot trod,
And as the potters sherds shalt break them with an iron rod. Now ye O kings and rulers all, be wise therefore and learn'd: By whom the matters of the world, be judged and discern'd. See that ye serve the Lord above, in trembling and in fear: See that with reverence ye rejoyce to him in like manner. See that ye lss and eke embrace his blessed Son I say, Lest in his wrath ye suddenly perish in the mid way. If once his wrath never so small, shall kindle in his brest: O then all they that trust in Christ, shall happy be and blest. PSALM III. Domine quid. T. S. O Lord how are my foes increast, which vex me more and more? They kill my heart when as they say, God can him not restore. But thou (O Lord) art my defence, when I am hard bestead:
My  worship and mine honour both, and thou holdst up my head. Then with my voice upon the Lord, I did both call and crie, And he out of his holy hill, did hear me by and by. I laid me down, and quietly I slept, and rose again: For why, I know assuredly the Lord will me sustain. If ten thousand had hem'd me in, I could not be afraid: For thou are still my Lord and God, my Saviour and mine aid. Rise up therefore, save me my God, for now to thee I call: For thou hast broke the cheeks and teeth of those wicked men all. Salvation onely doth belong to thee O Lord above: Thou do'st be∣stow upon thy folk, thy blessing and thy love. PSALM. IV. Cum invocarem. T. S. O God that art my righteousness, Lord hear me when I call:
Thou hast set me at libertie when I was bound and thrall. Have mercy Lord therefore on me, and grant me my request: For unto thee uncessantly, to crie I will not rest. O mortal men how long will ye my glory thus despise? Why wander ye in vanity, and follow after lies? Know ye that good and godly men, the Lord doth take and chuse: And when to him I make my plaint, he doth me not refuse. Sin not, but stand in awe therefore, examine well your heart: And in your chamber quietly, see you your selves convert. Offer to God the sacrifice of righteousnesse, I say: And look that in the living Lord, you put your trust alway. The greater sort crave worldly goods: and riches do embrace:
But  Lord grant us thy countenance, thy favour and thy grace. For thou thereby shalt make my heart more joyful and more glad, Than they that of their corn and wine, full great increase have had. In peace therefore lie down will 1, taking my rest and sleep: For thou onely wilt me, O Lord, alone in safetie keep. PSALM V. Verba mea auribus. T. S. INcline thine ears unto my words, O Lord my plaint consider: And hear my voice, my King, my God, to thee I make my prayer. Hear me betime, Lord tarry not, for I will have respect, My prayer early in the morn, to thee for to direct. And I will trust through patience, in thee my God alone: Thou art not pleas'd with wickedness, and ill with thee dwells none. And in thy sight shall never stand these furious fools, O Lord:
Vain workers  of iniquitie, thou hast alwaies abhord. The liers and the flatterers, thou shalt destroy them than: And God will hate the blood-thirsty, `and the deceitfull man. Therefore will I come to thine house, trusting upon thy grace: And reverently will worship thee, toward thine holy place. Lord lead me in thy righteousnesse, for to confound my foes: And eke the way that I shall walk, before my face disclose. For in their mouths there is no truth, their heart is foul and vain: Their throat an open sepulcher, their tongues do glose and fain. Destroy their false conspiracies, that they may come to nought: Sub∣vert them in their heaps of sin, which have rebellion wrought. But those that put their trust in thee, let them be glad alwaies:
And render  thanks for thy defence, and give thy Name the praise. For thou with favour wilt increase, the just and righteous still: And with thy grace, as with a shield, defend him from all ill. PSALM VI. Domine ne in furore. T. S. LOrd in thy wrath reprove me not, though I deserve thine e: Ne yet correct me in thy rage, O Lord I thee desire: For I am weak, therefore, O Lord, of mercie me forbear: And heal me Lord, for why, thou know'st my bones do quake for fear. My soul is troubled very sore, and vexed vehemently, But, Lord, how long wilt thou delay to cure my misery? Lord turn thee to thy won∣ted grace, my silly soul up take: Oh save me, not for my deserts, but for thy mercies sake.
For why, no man among the dead remembreth thee one whit: Or who shall worship thee, O Lord, in the infernal pit? So grievous is my plaint and mone, that I wax wondrous faint: All the night long I wash my bed, with teares of my complaint. My sight is dim and waxeth old, with anguish of my heart: For fear of those that be my foes, and would my soul subvert. But now away from me all ye that work iniquitie: For why, the Lord hath heard the voice of my complaint and crie. He heard not onely the request, and prayer of my heart: But it received at my hands, and took it in good part. And now my foes that vexed me, the Lord will soon defame: And suddenly confound them all, to their rebuke and shame.
PSALM VII. Domine Deus meus. T. S. O Lord my God, I put my trust and confidence in thee: Save me from them that me pursue, and eke deliver me. Lest like a Lion he me tear, and rend in pieces small: while there is none to succour me, and rid me out of thrall. O Lord my God, if I have done the thing that is not right: Or else if I be found in fault, or guiltie in thy sight. Or to my friend rewarded ill, or left him in distresse, which me pursu'd most cruelly, and hated me causlesse. Then let my foes pursue my soul, and eke my life down thrust Unto the earth, and also lay mine honour in the dust. Start up O Lord, now in thy wrath, and put my foes to pain: Perform the kingdom promised to me which wrong sustain.
Then shall great nations come to thee, and know thee by this thing: If thou declare for love of them, thy self as Lord and King. And as thou art of all men judge, O Lord now judge thou me, According to my righteousnesse, and mine integritie. Lord cease the hate of wicked men, and be the just mans guide: By whom the secrets of all hearts are searched and descri'd. I take my help to come of God, in all my pain or smart: That doth preserve all those that be of pure and perfect heart. The just man and the wicked both, God judgeth by his power: So that he feels his mightie hand, even every day and hour. Except be change his mind, I die, for even as he should smite, He whets his word, his bew he bends, aiming where he may hit.
And doth prepare his mortal darts, his arrows keen and sharp, For them that do me persecute, whil'st he doth mischief warp. But lo, though he in travel be of his dev'lish forecast: And of his michief once conceiv'd, yet brings forth nought at last. He digs a ditch, and delves it deep, in hope to hurt his brother: But he shall fall into the pit, that he dig'd up for other. Thus wrong returneth to the hurt of him in whom it bred: And all the mischief that he wrought, shall fall upon his head. I will give thanks to God therefore, that judgeth right'ously: And with my song will praise the Name of him that is most hie. PSALM VIII. Domine Deus noster. T. S. O God our Lord, how wonderful are thy works every where! Whose fame surmounts in dignitie, above the heavens clear.
Even by  the mouths of sucking babes, thou wilt confound thy foes: For in those babes thy might is seen: thy graces they disclose. And when I see the heavens high; the works of thine own hand: The Sun, the Moon, and all the Stars, in order as they stand: What thing is man (Lord) think I then, that thou dost him remember? Or what is mans posterity, that thou dost him consider? For thou hast made him little less, than Angels in degree: And thou hast crowned him also, with glory and dignitie. Thou hast prefer'd him to be Lord of all thy works of wonder: And at his feet hast set all things, that he should keep them under. As sheep and neat, and all beasts else, that in the fields do feed: Fowls of the air fish in the sea, and all that therein breed.
Therefore must  I say once again, O God that art our Lord: How famous and how wonderful, are thy works through the world? PSALM IX. Confitebor tibi, Dom. T. S. WIth heart and mouth unto the Lord will I sing laud and praise: And speak of all his wondrous works, and them declare alwayes. I will be glad and much rejoyce in thee O God most hie: And make my songs extoll thy name above the starry skye. For that my foes are driven back, and turned into flight, They fall down flat and are destroy'd, by thy great pow'r and might. Thou hast revenged all my wrong, my grief and all my grudge: Thou dost with justice hear my cause most like a right'ous Judge. Thou dost rebuke the heathen folk, and wicked so confound: That af∣terward the memory of them cannot be found.
My foes thou hast made good dispatch, and all their towns destror'd: Thou hast their fame with them defac'd, throughout the world so wide. Know thou that he which is above, for evermore shall reign: And in the seat of equitie, true judgement will maintain. With justice he will keep and guide the world and every wight: And so will yield with equitie, to every man his right. He is protector of the poor, what time they be opprest: He is in all adversitie, their refuge and their rest. All they that know thy holy Name, therefore shall trust in thee: For thou forsakest not their suite, in their necessitie. Sing Psalms therefore unto the Lord that dwells in Sion hill: Publish among all nations, his noble acts and will.
For he is mindful of the bloud, of those that be opprest: Forgetting not the afflicted heart, that seek to him for rest. Have mercy Lord on me poor wretch, whose enemies still remain: Whichs from the gate of death art wont to raise me up again. In Sion that I might set forth thy praise with heart and voice: And that in thy salvation Lord, my soul might still rejoyce. The heathen stick fast in the pit, that they themselves prepar'd: And in the net which they did set, their own feet fast are snar'd. God shews his judgments, which were good for every man to mark: When as we see the wicked man lie trapt in his own wark. The wicked and deceitful men, go down to hell for ever: And all the people of the world, that will not God remember.
But sure the Lord will not forget the poor mans grief and pain: The patient people never look for help of God in vain. O Lord arise, lest men prevail, that be of worldly might: And let the heathen folk receive their judgement in thy sight. Lord strike such terror, fear and dread into the hearts of them, That they may know assuredly, they be but mortal men. PSALM X. Vt quid Domine. T. S. WHat is the cause that thou, O Lord, art now so far from thine? And keepest close thy countenance from us this troublous time? The poor do perish by the proud and wicked mens desire: Let them be taken in the craft that they themselves conspire. For in the lust of his own heart th'ungodly doth delight, So doth the wicked praise himself, and doth the Lord despite.
He is so proud that right and wrong he setteth all apart: Nay, nay, there is no God, saith he, for thus he thinks in heart. Because his ways do prosper still, he doth thy laws neglect: And with a blast doth puff against such as would him correct. Tush, tush, saith he, I have no dread, lest mine estate should change: And why? for all adversity to him is very strange. His mouth is full of cursedness, of fraud, deceit, and guile: Under his tongue doth mischief sit, and travel all the while. He lieth hid in ways and holes, to slay the innocent: Against the poor that pass him by, his cruel eyes are bent. And like a Lion privily lies lurking in his den: If he may snare them in his net, to spoil poor simple men.
And for the nonce full craftily he croucheth down, I say: So are great heaps of poor men made by his strong power his prey. Tush, God forgetteth this, saith he: therefore I may be bold: His countenance is cast aside, he doth it not behold. Arise, O Lord, O God in whom the poor mans hope doth rest: Lift up thy hand, forget not Lord the poor that be opprest. what blasphemy is this to thee, Lord dost thou not abhor't? To hear the wicked in their heart say, tush thou car'st not for't? But thou seest all their wickedness: and well dost understand, That friendless and poor fatherless are left into thy hand. Of wicked and malicious men, then break the power for ever: That they with their iniquity may perish altogether.
The Lord shall reign for evermore, as King and God alone: And he will chase the heathen folk, out of the land each one. Thou hear'st (O Lord) the poor mans plaint, their prayer and request: Their hearts thou wilt confirm until thine ears to hear be prest. To judge the poor and fatherless, and help them to their right: That they may be no more opprest by men of worldly might. PSAM XI. In Domino confide. T. S. I Trust in God, how dare ye then say thus my soul until? Fly hence as fast as any fowl, and hide you in your hill. Behold the wicked bend their bows, and make their arrow prest, To shoot in secret, and to hurt the found and harmless brest. Of worldly hope all stays were shrunk and clearly brought to nought! Alas the just and righteous man, what evil hath he wrought!
But he that in the Temple is, most holy and most high, And in the heavens hath his seat of royal Majesty. The poor and simple mans estate considereth in his mind: And sear∣cheth out full narrowly the manners of mankind: And with a chearful countenance the righteous man will use: But in his heart he doth abhor all such as mischief muse. And on the sinners casteth snares; as thick as any rain: Fire and brimstone and whirlwinds thick, appointed for their pain. Ye see then how a righteous God doth righteousness embrace: And to the just and upright men shew forth his pleasant face. PSALM XII. Salvum me fac. T. S. HElp Lord, for good and godly men do perish and decay: And faith and truth from wordly men is parted clean away.
who so doth with his neighbour talk, his talk is all but vain: For e∣very man bethinketh how to flatter, lye, and fain. But flattering and deceitful lips, and tongues that be so stout, To speak proud words, and make great brags the Lord soon cuts them out. For they say still we will prevail, our tongues shall us extol, Our tongues are ours, we ought to speak, what Lord shall us control? But for the great complaint and cry of poor and men opprest: Arise will I, now saith the Lord, and them restore to rest. Gods word is like to silver pure, that from the earth is tri'd: And hath no less than seven times in fire been purifi'd. Now sith thy promise is to help, Lord keep thy promise then: And save us now and evermore, from this ill kind of men.
For now this wicked world is full of mischiefs manifold: When vanity with worldly men so highly is extol'd. PSALM XIII. Vsquequo Domine. T. S. HOw long with thou forget me, Lord, shall I ne'er be remembred? How long wilt thou thy visage hide, as though thou wert offended? In heart and mind how long shall I with care tormented be? How long eke shall my deadly foes thus triumph over me? Behold me now, my Lord my God, and hear me sore opprest: Lighten mine eyes lest that I sleep, as one by death possest. Lest that mine enemies say to me, behold I do prevail: Lest they also that hate my soul, rejoyce to see me quail. But from thy mercy and goodness my hope shall never start, In thy relief and saving health. right glad shall be my heart.
I will give thanks unto the Lord, and praises to him sing, Because he hath heard my request, and granted my wishing. PSALM XIV. Dixit insipiens. T. S. THere is no God, as foolish men affirm in their mad mood: Their drifts are all corrupt and vain, not one of them doth good. The Lord beheld from heaven high the whole race of mankind: And saw not one that sought indeed the living God to find. They went all wide and were corrupt, and truly there was none, That in the world did any good, I say, there was not one. Is all their judgment so far lost, that all work mischief still? Eating my people even as bread, not one to seek Gods will? When they thus rage, then suddenly great fear on them shall fall: For God doth love the righteous men, and will maintain them all.
Ye mock  the doings of the poor, to their reproach and shame: Because they put their trust in God, and call upon his Name. But who shall give thy people health, and when wilt thou fulfil Thy promise made to Israel, from out of Sion hill? Ev'n when thou shalt restore again such as were captive led: Then Jacob shall therein rejoyce, and Isra'el shall be glad. PSALM XV. Domine, quis? T. S. O Lord within thy tabernacle, who shall inhabit still? Or whom wilt thou receive to dwell in thy most holy hill? The man whose life his uncorrupt, whose works are just and straight, Whose heart doth think the very truth, whose tongue speaks no deceit. Nor to his neighbour doth none ill, in body, goods, or name: Nor wil∣lingly doth move false tales, which might impair the same.
That in his heart regardeth not malicious wicked men: But those that love and fear the Lord, he maketh much of them. His oath and all his promises that keepeth faithfully: Although he make his covenant so, that he doth lose thereby. That putteth not to usury his mony and his coin: Nor for to hurt the innocent, doth bribe or else purloin. Who so doth all things as you see that here is to be done: Shall never perish in this world, nor in the world to come. PSALM XVI. Conserva me. T. S. LOrd keep me, for I trust in thee, and do confess indeed Thou art my God, and of my goods O Lord thou hast no need. I give my goods unto the Saints that in the world do dwell: And name∣ly to the faithful flock in vertue that excel.
They shall heap sorrow on their heads, which run as they were mad: To offer to the idol gods, alas! it is too bad. As for their bloody sacrifice, and offerings of that sort, I will not touch, nor yet thereof my lips shall make report. For why? the Lord the portion is of mine inheritance: And thou art he that dost maintain my rent, my lot, my chance. The place wherein my lot did fall, in beauty did excel: Mine heritage assign'd to me, doth please me wondrous well. I thank the Lord that caused me to understand the right: For by his means my secret thoughts do teach me every night. 8. I set the Lord still in my sight, and trust him over all: For he doth stand on my right hand, therefore I shall not fall.
Wherefore my heart and tongue also do both rejoyce together: My flesh and body rest in hope, when I this thing consider. Thou wilt not leave my soul in grave, for Lord thou lovest me: Nor yet wilt give thy Holy One, corruption for to see. But wilt me teach the way to life: for all treasure and store Of per∣fect joy are in thy face, and power for evermore. PSALM XVII. Eudi Domine. T. S. O Lord give ear to my just cause, attend when I complain: And hear the prayer that I put forth, with lips that do not fain. And let the judgment of my cause, proceed always from thee: And let thine eyes behold and clear this my simplicity. Thou hast well tri'd me in the night, and yet could'st nothing find, That I have spoken with my tongue, that was not in my mind.
As for the works of wicked men, and paths perverse and ill, For love of thy most holy Name, I have refrained still. Then in thy paths that be most pure stay me, Lord, and preserve: That from the way wherein I walk, my steps may never swerve. For I do call to thee, O Lord, surely thou wilt me aid: Then hear my prayer and weigh right well the words that I have said. O thou the Saviour of all them that put their trust in thee: Declare thy strength on them that spurn against thy Majesty. O keep me as thou wouldest keep the apple of thine eye: And under covert of thy wings defend me secretly. From wicked men that trouble me, and daily me annoy: And from my foes that go about my soul for to destroy.
Which wallow in their worldly wealth so full are they and fat, That in their pride they do not spare to speak they care not what. They lie in wait where I should pass, with craft me to confound: And musing mischief in their minds to cast me to the ground. Much like a Lion greedily that would his prey embrace: Or lurking like a Lions whelp, within some secret place. Up Lord, in haste prevent my foe, and cast him at thy feet: Save thou my soul from the ill man, and with the sword him smite. Deliver me, Lord, by thy power, out of these tyrants hands: Which now so long time reigned have, and kept us in their bands. I mean from worldly men, to whom all worldly goods are rise: That have no hope nor part of joy, but in this present life.
Thou of thy store their bellies fill'st with pleasure to their mind: Their children have enough and leave to theirs the rest behind. But I shall with pure conscience behold thy gracious face: So when I wake I shall be full of thine image and grace. PSALM XVIII. Diligam te Domine. T. S. O God my strength and fortitude, of force I must love thee: Thou art my castle and defence in my necessity. My God, my Rock in whom I trust, the worker of my wealth: My refuge, buckler, and my shield, the horn of all my health. When I sing laud unto the Lord, most worthy to be serv'd: Then from my foes I am right sure that I shall be preserv'd; The pangs of death did compas, me. and bound me every where: The flowing waves of wicked∣ness did put me in great fear.
The slie and subtil snares of hell . were round about me set: And for my death there was prepar'd a deadly trapping net. I thus beset with pain and grief, did pray to God for grace: And he forthwith did hear my plaint: out of his holy place. Such is his power, that in his wrath he made the earth to quake: Yea the foundation of the mount of Basan for to shake. And from his nostrils came a smoke, when kindled was his ire: And from his mouth came kindled coles of hot consuming fire. The Lord descended from above, and bow'd the heavens high: And underneath his feet he cast the darkness of the sky. On Cherubs and on Seraphins full royally he rode: And on the wings of all the winds came flying all abroad.
And like a den most dark he made his hid and secret place: With waters black and airy clouds environed he was. But when the pre∣sence of his face in brightness shall appear: Then clouds consume, and in their stead come hail and coles of fire. The fiery darts and thunder-bolts disperse them here and there: And with his often lightenings he puts them in great fear. Lord at thy wrath and threatnings and at thy chiding chear, the springs and the foundations, of all the world appear. And from above the Lord sent down to fetch me from below: And pluck'd me out of waters great that would me overflow. And me deliver'd from such my foes; that would have made me thrall; Yea from such foes as were too strong for me to deal withal.
They did prevent me to oppress in time of my great grief: But yet the Lord was my defence, my succour and relief. He brought me forth in open place, whereas I might be free: And kept me safe, because he had a favour unto me. And as I was an innocent, so did he me regard, And to the clean∣ness of my hands he gave me my reward. For that I walked in his ways, and in his paths have trod: And have not sinned wickedly a∣gainst my Lord and God. But evermore I have respect to his law and decree: His statutes and commandements I cast not out from me. But pure, and clean, and uncor∣rupt appear'd before his face: And did refrain from wickecness and sin in any case.
The Lord therefore will me reward, as I have done aright: And to the cleanness of my hands appearing in his sight. For, Lord, with him that holy is, wilt thou be holy too: And with the good and vertuous man right vertuously wilt do. And to the loving and elect thy love thou wilt reserve: And thou wilt use the wicked man, as wicked men deserve. For thou dost save the simple folk in trouble when they lie: And dost bring down the countenance of them that look full high. The Lord will light my candle so, that it shall shine full bright: The Lord my God will make also my darkness to be light. For by thine help an host of men discomfit, Lord, I shall: By thee I scale and over-leap the strength of any wall.
Unspotted are the ways of God, his word is purely try'd: He is a sure defence to such as in his faith abide. For who is God except the Lord for other there is none: Or else who is omnipotent, saving our God alone? The God that girdeth me with strength is he that I do mean: That all the ways wherien I walk, did evermore keep clean. That made my feet like to the harts, in swiftness of my pace: And for my surety brought me forth into an open place. He did in order put my hands to battel and to fight: To break in sunder barrs of brass. he gave mine arms the might. Thou teachest me thy saving health, thy right hand is my tower: Thy love and fami∣liarity doth still increase my power.
And under me thou makest plain the way where I should walk: So that my feet shall never slip, nor stumble at a balk. And fiercely I pursue and take my foes that my anoy'd: And from the field do not re∣turn, till they be all destroy'd. So I suppress and wound my foes, that they can rise no more: For at my feet they fall down flat, I strike them all so fore. For thou dost gird me with thy strength, to war in such a wise, That they be all scat∣tred abroad, that up against me rise. Lord thou hast put into my hands my mortal en'mies yoke: And all my foes thou dost divide in sunder with thy stroke. They call'd for help, but none gave ear, nor helpt them with relief: Yea to the Lord they call'd for help, yet heard he not their grief.
And still like dust before the wind, I drive them under feet: And sweep them out like filthy clay, that sticketh in the street. Thou keep'st me from seditious folk, that still in strife are led: And thou dost of the heathen folk appoint me to be head. A people strange to me unknown, and yet they shall me serve: And at the first obey my word, whereas mine own will swerve. I shall be irk∣some to mine own, they will not see my light: But wander wide out of the way, and hide them out of sight. But blessed be the living Lord, most worthy of all praise: That is my rock and saying health, praised be he always. For God it is that gave me pow'r, revenged for to be: And with his holy word subdu'd the people unto me.
And from my foes deliver'd me, and set me above those That cruel and ungodly were, and up against me rose. And for this cause O Lord my God, to thee give thanks I shall: And sing out praises to thy Name. among the Gentiles all: That gavest great prosperity unto the King, I say: To David thine a∣nointed King, and to his seed for aye. PSALM XIX. Coeli enarrent. T. S. THe heavens and the firmament do wondrously declare The glory of God omnipotent, his works, and what they are. The wondrous works of God appear by every days success: The nights likewise which their race run, the self same thing express. There is no language, tongue, or speech, Where their sound is not heard: In all the earth and coasts thereof their knowledge is conferr'd.
In them the Lord made for the Sun a place of great renown: Who like a bridegroom ready trim'd, doth from his chamber come. And as a valiant champion, who for to get a prize, With joy doth haste to take in hand, some noble enterprize. And all the skie from end to end he compasseth about: Nothing can hide it from his heat, but he will find it out. How perfect is the law of God, how is his Covenant sure: Conver∣ting souls, and making wise the simple and obscure? Just are the Lords commandements, and glad both heart and mind: His precepts pure, and giveth light to eyes that be full blind. The fear of God is excellent, and doth endure for ever: The judg∣ments of the Lord are true, and righteous altogether.
And more to be embrac'd alway than fined gold I say: The honey and the honey-comb are not so sweet as they. By them thy servant is forewarn'd to have God in regard: And in performance of the same, there shall be great reward. But Lord what earthly man doth know the errors of his life? Then cleanse me from my secret sins, which are in me most rise. And keep me that presumptuous sins prevail not over me: And so shall I be innocent, and great offences flee. Accept my mouth, and eke my heart, my words and thoughts each one: For my Redeemer and my strength, O Lord, thou art alone. PSALM XX. Exaudiat te Domine. T. S. IN trouble and adversity, the Lord God hear thee still: The Majesty of Jacobs God defend thee from all ill.
And send thee from his holy place his help at every need: And so in Sion stablish thee, and make thee strong indeed. Remembring well the sacrifice, that now to him is done: And so receive right thankfully; thy burnt-offerings each one. According to thy hearts desire, the Lord grant unto thee: And all thy counsel and device, full well perform may lie. We shall rejoyce when thou us sav's and our banners display Unto the Lord; which thy requests fulfiled hath alway. The Lord will his anointed save, I know well by his grace: And send! him help by his right hand out of his holy place. In chariots some put confidence, and some in horses trust; But we re∣member God our Lord, that keepeth promise ist.
They fall down flat, but we do rise and stand up stedfastly: Now save and help us Lord and King, on thee when we do cry. PSALM XXI. Domine, in virtute. T. S. O Lord how joyful is the King, in thy strength and thy power? How vehemently doth he rejoice in thee his Saviour? For thou hast given unto him his godly hearts desire: To him nothing thou hast deni'd, of that he did require. Thou didst prevent him with thy gifts, and blessings manifold; And thou hast set upon his head a crown of perfect gold. And when he asked life of thee, thereof thou mad'st him sure; To have long life, yea such a life as ever shall endure. Great is his glory by thy help, thy benefit and aid: Great worship and great honour both thou hast upon him laid. Thou wilt give him felicity.
that never shall decay: And with thy chearful countenance wilt comfort him alway. For why? the King doth strongly trust in God for to prevail: Wherefore his goodness and his grace will not that he shall quail. But let thine en∣mies feel thy force, and those that thee withstand: Find out thy foe, and let them feel the power of thy right hand. And like an oven burn them, Lord, in fiery flame and fume: Thine anger shall destroy them all, and fire shall them consume. And thou shalt root out of the earth their frt that should increase: And from the number of thy folk their seed shall end and cease. For why? much mischief did they muse against thy holy Name: Yet did they fail and had no pow'r fo to perform the .
But as  a mark thou shalt them set in a most open place: And charge thy bow∣strings readily against thine enemies face. Be thou exalted Lord therefore in thy strength every hour: So shall we sing right solemnly, praising thy might and pow'r. PSALM XXII. Deus, Deus meus. T. S. O God my God, wherefore dost thou forsake me utterly? And helpest not when I do make my great complaint and cry? To thee my God even all day long, I do both cry and call: I cease not all the night, and yet thou hearest not at all. Even thou that in thy Sanctuary, and holy place dost dwell: Thou art the comfort and the joy, and glory of Israel. And he in whom our fathers old had all their hope for ever: And when they put their trust in thee, thou didst them aye deliver.
They were delivered ever when they called on thy Name: And for the faith they had in thee, they were not put to shame. But I am now become a worm, more like than any man: An out∣cast whom the people scorn, with all the spight they can. All men despise as they behold me walking on the way: They grin, they mow, they nod their heads and on this wise they say; This man did glory in the Lord, his favour and his love: Let him re∣deem and help him now, his power if he will prove. But Lord out of my mothers womb I came by thy behest: Thou didst preserve me still in hope, while I did suck her breast. I was committed from my birth, with thee to have abode; Since I was in my mothers womb, thou hast been e're my God.
Then Lord depart not now from me, in this my present grief: Since I have none to be my help, my succour and relief. So many Bulls do compass me, that be full strong of head: Yea, Bulls so fat, as though they had in Basan field been fed. They gave upon me greedily, as though they would me slay: Much like a Lion roaring out, and ramping for his prey. But I drop down like water shed, my joynts in sunder break: My heart doth in my body melt, like wax against the heat. And like a potsheard dri'th my strength, my tongue it cleaveth fast In∣to my jaws, and I am brought to dust of death at last. And many dogs do compass me, and wicked counsel eke Conspire a∣gainst me cursedly, they pierce my hands and feet.
I was tormented, so that I might all my bones have told; Yet still up∣on me they do look, and still they me behold. My garments they divided eke. in parts among them all: And for my coat they did cast lots, to whom it might befall. Therefore I pray thee be not far from me at my great need: But ra∣ther sith thou art my strength, to help me, Lord, make speed. And from the sword, Lord, save my soul by thy might and thy power: And keep my soul thy darling dear from dogs that would devour. And from the Lions mouth that would me all in sunder shiver; And from the horns of Unicorns Lord safely me deliv'r. Then shall I to my brethren all thy Majesty record: And in thy Church shall praise the Name of thee the living Lord.
All ye that fear him praise the Lord, thou Jacob honour him: And all ye seed of Israel with rev'rence worship him. For he despiseth not the poor, he turneth not awry His countenance when they do call, but granteth to their cry. Among the folk that fear the Lord, I will therefore proclaim Thy praise, and keep my promise made for setting forth thy Name. The poor shall eat and be suffic'd, and those that do endeavour To know the Lord, shall praise his Name, their hearts shall live for ever. All coasts of th'earth shall praise the Lord, and turn to him for grace: The heathen folk shall worship him before his blessed face. The Kingdom of the heathen folk the Lord shall have therefore: And he shall be their governour, and King for evermore.
The rich man of his goodly gifts, shall feed and taste also: And in his presence worship him, and bow their knees full low. And all that shall go down to dust of life by him shall taste: My seed shall serve and praise the Lord, while any world shall last. My seed shall plainly shew to them that shall be born hereafter, His justice and his righteousness, and all his works of wonder. PSALM XXIII. Dominus regit me. W. W. THE Lord is only my support, and he that doth me feed. How can I then lack any thing, whereof I stand in need. He doth me fold in coats most safe, the tender grass fast by: And after drives me to the streams which run most pleasantly. And when I feel my self near lost, then doth he me home take: Con∣ducting me in his right paths, even for his own Names sake.
And though I were ev'n at deaths door yet would I fear none ill: For with thy rod and shepherds crook, I am comforted still. Thou hast my table richly deck'd, in despight of my foe: Thou hast my head with balm refresh'd; my cup doth overflow. And finally while breath doth last, thy grace shall me defend: And in the house of God will I my life for ever spend. Another of the same by T. S. MY shepherd is the living Lord, nothing therefore I need: In pastures fair with waters calm, he sets me for to feed. He did convert and glad my soul, and brought my mind in frame To walk in paths of righteousness, for his most holy Name. Yea though I walk in vale of death, yet will I fear none ill: Thy rod, thy staff do comfort me, and thou art with me still.
And in the presence of my foes, my table thou shalt spread: Thou shalt (O Lord) fill full my cup, and eke anoint my head. Through all my life thy favour is so frankly shew'd to me: That in thy house for evermore my dwelling place shall be. PSALM XXIV. Domini est terra. J. H. THE earth is all the Lords, with all her store and furniture: Yea his is all the world, and all that therein doth endure. For he hath fastly founded it, above the seas to stand: And laid alow the liquid floods, to flow beneath the land. For who is he, O Lord, that shall ascend into thy hill? Or pass into thy holy place, there to continue still? Whose hands are harmless, and whose heart no spot there doth defile: His soul not set on vanity, who hath not sworn to guile.
Him that is such an one, the Lord shall place in blissfull plight: And God his God and Saviour shall yield to him his right. This is the brood of travellers, in seeking of his grace: As Jacob did the Israelites, in that time of his race. Ye Princes ope your gates, stand ope the everlasting gate: For there shall enter in thereby the King of glorious state. Who is the King of glorious state? the strong and mighty Lord: The mighty Lord in battel stout, and trial of the sword. Ye Princes ope your gates, stand ope the everlasting gate: For there shall enter in thereby the King of glorious state. Who is the King of glorious state? the Lord of hosts it is: The King∣dom and the royalty of glorious state is hi.
PSALM XXV. Ad te, Domine. T. S. I Lift my heart to thee, my God and guide most just: Now suffer me to take no shame, for in thee do I trust. Let not my foes rejoyce, nor make a scorn of me: And let them not be overthrown, that put their trust in thee. But shame shall them befall, which harm them wrongfully: Therefore thy paths and thy right ways unto me Lord descry. Direct me in thy truth, and teah me I thee pray: Thou art my God and Saviour, on thee I wait alway. Thy mercies manifold, I pray thee, Lord, remember: and eke thy pi∣ty plentiful, for they have been for ev'r. Remember not the faults, and frailty of my youth: Remember not how ignorant I have been of thy truth.
Nor after my deserts let me thy mercy find: But of thine own be∣nignity, Lord have me in thy mind. His mercy is full sweet, his truth a perfect guide: Therefore the Lord will sinners teach, and such as go aside. The humble he will teach his precepts for to keep: He will direct in all his ways the lowly and the meek. For all the ways of God are truth and mercy both: To them that keep his Testament, the witness of his troh. Now for thy holy Name, O Lord, I thee intreat, To grant me par∣don for my sin, for it is wondrous great. Who so doth fear the Lord, the Lord will him direct, To lead his life in such a way, as he doth best accept.
His soul shall evermore in goodness dwell and stand: His seed and his posterity inherit shall the land. All those that fear the Lord, know his secret intent: And unto them he doth declare, his will and testament. Mine eyes and eke my heart to him I will advance, That pluck'd my feet out of the snare of sin and ignorance. With mercy me behold, to thee I make my mone: For I am poor and desolate; and comfortless alone. The troubles of my heart are multiply'd indeed: Bring me out of this misery necessity and need. Behold my poverty, mine anguish and my pain: Remit my sin and mine offence, and make me clean again.
O Lord behold my foes, how they do still increase: Pursuing me with deadly hate, that fain would live in peace. Preserve and keep my soul, and eke deliver me: And let me not be overthrown, because I trust in thee. Let my simple pureness me from mine en'mies shend. Because I look as one of thine, that thou should'st me defend. Deliver Lord thy folk, and send them some relief: I mean thy cho∣sen Israel, from all their pain and grief. PSALM XXVI Judica me, Domine. T. S. LOrd be my Judge, and thou shalt see, my paths be right and plain: I trust in God, and hope that he, will strength'n me to remain. Prove me, my God, I thee desire, my ways to search and try: As men do prove their gold with fire, my reins and heart espy.
Thy goodness laid before my face, I durst behold always: For of thy truth I tread the trace, and will do all my days. I do not lust to haunt or use with men whose deeds are vain: To come in house I do refuse, with the deceitful train. I much abhor the wicked sort, their deeds I do despise: I do not once to them resort, that hurtful things devise. My hands I wash, and do proceed in works to walk upright: Then to thine altar I make speed to offer there in sight. That I may speak and preach the praise that doth belong to thee: And so declare how wondrous ways thou hast been good to me. O God thy house I love most dear, to me it doth excell: I have de∣light and would be near
wherein thy grace doth dwell.
O shut not up my soul with them, in sin that take their fill: Nor yet my life among those men, that seek much blood to spill. Whose hands are heapt with craft and guile, their lives thereof are full, And their right hand with wrench and wile for bribes doth pluck and pull. But I in right'ousness intend my time and days to serve: Have mercy Lord, and me defend, so that I do not swerve. My foot is slaid for all assayes, it standeth well and right: Wherefore to God will I give praise in all the peoples sight. PSALM XXVII. Dominus illuminatio. J. H. THE Lord is both my health and light, shall man make me dis∣maid? Sith God doth give me strength and might why should I be afraid? While that my foes with all their strength begin with me to brawl, And think to eat me up at length, themselves have caught the fall.
Though they in camp against me lie, my heart is not afraid: In battle strong if they will try, I trust in God for aid. One thing of God I do require, that he will not deny: For which I pray and will desire, till he to me apply. That I within his holy place my life throughout may dwell, To see the beauty of his face, and view his temple well. In time of dread he shall me hide within his place most pure: And keep me secret by his side, as on a rock most fre. At length I know the Lords goods grace shall make me strong and stout, My foes to foil and clean deface, that compass me about. Theretore within his house will I give sacrifice of praise: With Psalms and Songs I will apply to laud the Lord always.
Lord hear the voice of my request, for which to thee I call: Have mercy Lord on me opprest, and send me help withall. My heart doth knowledge unto thee, I sue to have thy grace: Then seek my face, say'st thou to me, Lord, I will seek thy face. In wrath turn not thy face away, nor suffer me to slide: Thou art my help still to this day, be still my God and guide. My parents both their son forsook, and cast me off at large: And then the Lord himself yet took of me the care and charge. Teach me, O Lord, the way to thee, and lead me on forth right: For fear of such as watch for me, to trap me if they might. Do not betake me to the will of them that be my foes: For they sur∣mise against me still, false witness to depose.
My heart would faint, but that in me this hope is fixed fast: The Lord Gods good grace shall I see, in life that aye shall last. Trust still in God whose whole thou art, his will abide thou must: And he shall ease and strength thy heart, if thou in him do trust. PSALM XXVIII. Ad te Domine T. S. THou art (O Lord) my strength and stay, the succour which I crave: Neglect me not lest I be like to them that go to th' grave. The voice of thy suppliant hear, that unto thee doth cry: When I lift up my hands unto thy holy ark most high. Repute me not among the sort of wicked and pervert: That speak right fair unto their friends, but think full ill in heart. According to their handy-work, as they deserve indeed: And after their inventions, let them receive their meed.
For they regard nothing, Gods works, his Law, ne yet his lore: There∣fore will he them and their seed destroy for evermore. To render thanks unto the Lord, how great a cause have I, My voice my pray'r, and my complaint that heard so willingly? He is my shield and fortitude, my buckler in distress: My hope, my help, my hearts relief, my song shall him confess. He is our strength and our defence, our en'mies to resist: The health and the salvation of his elect by Christ. Thy people and thine heritage, Lord bless, guide, and preserve: Increase them, Lord, and rule their hearts, that they may never swerve. PSALM XXIX. Afferte Domino. T. S. GIve to the Lord, ye potentates, ye Rulers of the world: Give ye all praise, honour, and strength unto the living Lord.
Give glory to his holy Name, and honour him alone: Worship him in his Majesty, within his holy throne. His voice doth rule the waters all, ev'n as himself doth please: He doth prepare the thunder-claps, and governs all the seas. The voice of God is of great force, and wondrous excellent: It is most mighty in effect, and most magnificent. The voice of God doth rend and break the Cedar trees so long: The Cedar trees of Lebanon, which are most high and strong. And makes them leap like as a Calf, or else the Unicorn: Not onely trees, but mountains great, whereon the trees are born. His voice divides the flames of fire, and shakes the wilderness: It makes the desart quake for fear, that called is Cades.
It makes the Hinds for fear to calve, and makes the coverts plain: Then in his Temple every man his glory doth proclaim. The Lord was set above the floods, ruling the raging sea. So shall he reign as Lord and King, for ever and for aye. The Lord will give his people power in virtue to increase: The Lord will bless his chosen flock with everlasting peace. PSALM XXX. Exaltabo te Domine. J. H. ALL land and praise with heart and voyce, O Lord I give to thee: Which didst not make my foes rejoyce, but hast exalted me. O Lord my God to thee I cry'd in all my pain and grief: Thou gav'st an ear, and didst provide to ease me with relief. Of thy good will thou hast call'd back my soul from hell to save: Thou didst revive, when strength did lack, and keptst me from the grave.
Sing  praise ye Saints that prove and see the goodness of the Lord: In memory of his Majesty rejoyce with one accord. For why? his anger but a space doth last and flack again: But in his favour and his grace always doth life remain. Though gripes of grief and pangs full sore shall lodge with us all night: The Lord to joy shall us re∣store before the day be light. When I enjoy'd the world at will, thus would I boast and say: Tush, I am sure to feel none ill, this wealth shall not decay. For thou, O Lord of thy good grace hadst sent me strength and aid: But when thou turn'dst away thy face, my mind was sore dismaid. Wherefore again yet did I cry, to thee, O Lord of might: My God with plaints I did apply, and pray'd both day and night.
What gain is in my blood (said) I if death destroy my days? Doth dust declare thy Majesty, or yet thy truth doth praise? Wherefore, my God some pity take, O Lord, I thee desire: Do not this simple soul forsake, of help I thee require. Then didst thou turn my grief and woe into a chearful voice, The mourning weed thou took'st me fro, and mad'st me to rejoyce. Wherefore my soul uncessantly shall sing unto thy praise: My Lord, my God, to thee will I give laud and thanks always. PSALM XXXI. In te Domine. J. H. O Lord I put my trust in thee, let nothing work me shame, As thou art just deliver me, and set me quite from blame. Hear me O Lord, and that anon, to help me make good speed: Be thou my rock and house of stone, my fence in time of need.
For why? as stones thy strength is tri'd, thou art my fort and tower: For thy Name sake be thou my guide, and lead me in thy power. Pluck thou my feet out of the snare which they for me have laid: Thou art my strength and all my care is for thy might and aid. Into thy hands Lord I commit my spirit which is thy due. For why? thou hast redeemed it, O Lord my God most true. I hate such folk as will not part, from things to be abhor'd: When they on trifles set their heart, my trust is in the Lord. For I will in thy mercy joy, I see it doth excel: Thou seest when ought would me annoy and know'st my soul full well. Thou hast not lest me in their hand, that would me overcharge: But thou hast set me out of band, to walk abroad at large.
The Second Part. Great grief O Lord doth me assail, some pity on me take: Mine eyes wax dim, my sight doth fail, my womb for woe doth ake. My life is worn with grief and pain, my years in woe are past: My strength is gone, and through disdain my bones corrupt and waste. Among my foes I am a scorn, my friends are all dismay'd My neighbours and my kinsmen born, to see me are afraid. As men once dead are out of mind, so am I now forgot: As small effect in me they find. as in a broken pot. I heard the brags of all the rout, their threats my mind did fray: How they conspir'd and went about to take my life away. But Lord I trust in thee for aid, not to be over-trod: For I confess and still have said, thou art my Lord and God.
The length of all my life and age O Lord is in thy hand: Defend me from the wrath and rage of them that me withstand. To me thy servant (Lord) express, and shew thy joyful face: And save me Lord for thy goodness, thy mercy and thy grace. The third Part. Lord let me not be put to blame, for that on thee I call: But let the wicked bear the shame, and in their grave to fall. O Lord make dumb their lips outright which are addict to lies: And cruelly with pride and spight, against the just devise. O how great good hast thou in store, laid up full safe for them That fear and trust in thee therefore, before the sons of men. Thy presence doth them fence and guide from all proud brags and wrongs Within thy place thou dost them hide, from all the strife of tongues.
Thanks to the Lord that hath declar'd, on me his grace so far: Me to defend with watch and ward, as in a town of war. Thus did I say both day and night, when I was sore opprest: Lo, I was clean cast out of sight, yet heard'st thou my request. Ye Saints love ye the Lord, I say, the faithful he doth guide: And to the proud he doth repay according to their pride. Be strong and God will stay your heart, be bold and have a lust: For sure the Lord will take your part, sith ye in him do trust. PSALM XXXII. Beati quoum. T. S. THE man is blest whose wickedness the Lord hath clean remitted: And he whose sin and wickedness is hid and also cover'd. And blest is he to whom the Lord imputeth not his sin: Which in his heart hath hid no guile, nor fraud is found therein.
For whilst that I kept close my sin, in silence and constraint: My bones did wear and wast away, with daily mone and plaint. For night and day thy hand on me so grievous was and smart: That all my blood and humours moist to driness did convert. I did therefore confess my fault, and all my sins discover: Then thou, O Lord, didst me forgive, and all my sins pass over. The humble man shall pray therefore, and seek thee in due time: So that the floods of waters great shall have no pow'r on him. When trouble and adversity do compass me about: Thou art my re∣fuge and my joy, and thou dost rid me out. Come hither, and I will thee teach, how thou shalt walk aright: And will thee guide as I my self have learn'd by proof and sight.
Be not so rude and ignorant, as is the horse and mule: Whose mouth without a rein or bit, from harm thou canst not rule. The wicked man shall manifold sorrows and griefs sustain: But unto him that trusts in God, his goodness shall remain. Be merry therefore in the Lord, ye just lift up your voice: And ye of pure and perfect heart, be glad and eke rejoyce. PSALM XXXIII. Exultate justi. J. H. YE righteous in the Lord rejoyce, it is a seemly sight, That upright men with thankful voice, should praise the Lord of might. Praise ye the Lord with harp and song, in Psalms and pleasant things: With Lute and instrument among, that soundeth with ten strings. Sing to the Lord a song most new, with courage give him praise: For why? his word is ever [true, his works and all his ways.
To judgment, equity, and right, he hath a great good will: And with his gifts he doth delight the earth throughout to fill. For by the word of God alone the heavens all were wrought: Their hoasts and pow'rs every one, his breath to pass hath brought. The waters great gather'd hath he on heaps within the shore: And hid them in the depths to be, as in a house of store. All men on earth both small and great, fear God and keep his Law: Ye that inhabit in each coast, dread him, and stand in awe. What he commanded, wrought it was at once with present speed: What he doth will, is brought to pass, with full effect indeed. The counsels of the Nations rude, the Lord doth bring to nought: He doth defeat the multitude, of their device and thought.
But his decrees continue still, they never slack nor swage: The mo∣tions of his mind and will take place in every age. The second Part. And blest are they to whom the Lord as God and guide is known: Whom he doth chuse of meer accord to take them as his own. The Lord from heaven cast his sight on men mortal by birth: Con∣sid'ring from his seat of might, the dwellers of the earth. The Lord, I say, whose hand hath wrought mans heart. and doth it frame: For he alone doth know the thought, and working of the same. A King that trusteth in his hoast, shall nought prevail at length: The man that of his might doth boast, shall fall for all his strength. The troops of horsmen eke shall sail, their sturdy steeds shall sterve: The strength of horse shall not prevail, the rider to preserve.
But loe the eyes of God intend, and watch to aid the just: With such as fear him to offend, and on his goodness trust. That he of death and great distress, may set their souls from dread: And if that dearth their land oppress, in hunger them to feed. Wherefore our soul doth whole depend on God our strength and stay: He is our shield us to defend, and drive all darts away. Our soul in God hath joy and game, rejoycing in his might: For why? in his most holy Name we hope and much delight. Therefore let thy goodness, O Lord, still present with us be: As we always with one accord, do only trust in thee. PSALM XXXIV. Benedicam Domine. T. S. I Will give laud and honour both, unto the Lord always: And eke my mouth for evermore shall speak unto his praise.
I do delight to laud the Lord, in soul and eke in voice: That humble men and mortifi'd may hear, and so rejoyce. Therefore see that ye magnifie with me the living Lord: And let us now exalt his Name, together with one accord. For I my self besought the Lord, he answer'd me again: And me de∣liver'd incontinent, from all my fear and pain. Who so they be that him behold, shall see his light most clear: Their countenance shall not be dasht, they need it not to fear. The grieved man for some relief unto the Lord did call: Who did him hear without delay, and rid him out of thrall. The Angel of the Lord doth pitch his tents in every place: To save all such as fear the Lord, that nothing them deface.
Taste and consider well therefore, that God is good and just: O happy man that maketh him his only stay and trust. Fear ye the Lord ye holy ones above all earthly thing: For they that fear the living Lord, are sure to lack nothing. The Lions shall be hunger-bit, and pin'd with famine much: But as for them that fear the Lord, no lack shall be to such. The second part. Come near therefore my children dear and to my words give ear: I shall ye teach the perfect way, how ye the Lord should fear. Who is the man that would live long and lead a blessed life? See thou refrain thy tongue and lips from all deceit and strife. Turn back thy face from doing ill, and do the godly deed: Inquire for peace and quietness, and follow it with speed.
For why? the eyes of God above, upon the just are bent: His ears likewise do hear the plaint of the poor innocent. But he doth frown and bend his brow upon the wicked train. And cuts away the memory, that should of them remain. But when the just do call and cry, the Lord doth hear them so, That out of pain and misery forthwith he lets them go. The Lord is kind and straight at hand to such as be contrite: He saves also the sorrowful, the poor and meek in sp'rite. Full many be the miseries that righteous men do suffer: But out of all adversities the Lord doth them deliver. The Lord doth so preserve and keep their very bones alway: That not so much as one of them doth perish or decay.
The sin shall slay the wicked man, which he himself hath wrought: And such as hate the righteous man, shall sconre brought to nought. But they that fear the living Lord, the Lord doth save them sound: And who that put their trust in him, nothing shall them confound. PSALM XXXV. Judica me, Domine. J. H. LOrd plead my cause against my foes, confound their force and might: Fight on my part against all those that seek with me to fight. Lay hand upon the spear and shield, thy self in armour dress. Stand up for me, and fight the field, to help me from distress. Gird on thy sword, and stop the way mine en'mies to withstand, That thou unto my soul mayst say, Lo, I thine help at hand. Comfound them with rebuke and blame, that seek my soul to spill: Let them turn back and flee with shame that think to work me ill.
Let them disperse and fly abroad, as wind doth drive the dust: And that the Angel of our God, their night away may thrust. Let all their ways be void of light, and slipp'ry like to fall: And send thine Angel with thy might to persecute them all. For why? without my fault they have in secret set their gin: And for no cause have dig'd a cave, to take my soul therein. When they think least and have no care, O Lord, destroy them all: Let them be trapt in their own snare, and in their mischief fail. And let my soul with heart and voice in God have joy and wealth; That in the Lord I may rejoyce, and in his saving health. And then my bones shall speak and say, my parts shall all agree: O Lord, though they do seem full gay, what man is like to thee?
Thou dost defend the weak from them that are both stout and strong: and rid the poor from wicked men that spoil and do them wrong. My cruel foes against me rise, to witness things untrue: And to accuse me they devise of things I never knew. Where I to them did owe good will, they quit me with disdain: That they should pay my good with ill, my soul doth sore complain. When they were sick I mourn'd therefore and clad my self in sack: With fasting I did faint full sore, to pray I was not slack. As they had been my brethren dear I did my self behave: As one that maketh woful chear about his mothers grave. But they at my disease did joy, and gather on a rout: Yea, abject slaves at me did toy, with mocks and checks full slout.
The belly-gods and flatt'ring train, that all good things deride, At me do grin with great disdain, and pluck their mouths aside. Lord why wilt thou so long forbear why dost thou stay and pause? O rid my soul mine only dear, out of these Lions claws. And then will I give thanks to thee, before the Church always: And where most of the people be, there will I shew thy praise. Let not my foes prevail on me, which hate me for no fault: Nor let them wink or turn their eye, that causeless me assault. The third Part. Of peace no word they think or say, their talk is all untrue: They still consult, and would betray all those that peace ensue. And now their mouths they open lay, in scorn and spite at me: So, so, our hearts desire they say, on him our eye doth see.
But, Lord, thou seest what ways they take, hold not thine hand to mend: Be not far off, nor me forsake, as men that fail their friend. Awake, arise, and stir abroad, defend me in my right: Revenge my cause, my Lord, my God, and aid me with thy migh According to thy righteousness, my Lord God set me free: And let them not their pride express, nor triumph over me. Let not their hearts rejoyce and say, so would we have it be: Let them not boast, O Lord, that they have quite devoured me. Confound them with rebuke and shame that joy when I do mourn: And pay them home with spite and blame, that brag at me with scorn. Let them be glad and eke rejoyce, which love mine upright way: And they all times with heart and voice, shall praise the Lord, and say,
Great is the Lord, and doth excall, for why? he doth delight, To see his servants prosper well, that is his pleasant sight. Wherefore my tongue I will apply, thy righteousness to praise: Unto the Lord my God will I sing laud and praise always. PSALM XXXVI. Dixit injustus. J. H. THe wicked with his works unjust, doth thus perswade his heart: That of the Lord he hath no trust, his fear is set apart. Yet doth he joy in his estate, to walk as he began: So long till he de∣serve the hate of God and eke of man. His words are wicked, vile, and naught. his tongue no truth doth tell: Yet at no hand will he be taught, which way he may do well. When he should sleep, then doth he muse, his mischiefs to fulfill: No wicked ways doth he refuse, nor nothing that is ill.
But, Lord, thy goodness doth ascend above the heavens high: So doth thy truth it self extend unto the cloudy sky. Much more than hills so high and steep, thy justice is exprest: Thy judgments like to seas most deep, thou sav'st both man and beast. Thy mercy is above all things, O God it doth excell: In trust whereof as in thy wings, the sons of men shall dwell. Within thy house they shall be fed with plenty at their will: Of all de∣lights they shall be sped, and take thereof their fill. For why? the well of life so pure doth ever flow from thee: And in thy light we are full sure, the lasting light to see. From such as thee desire to know, let not thy grace depart: Thy righ∣t'ousness declare and shew to men of upright heart.
Let not the proud on me prevail, O Lord of thy good grace: Nor let the wicked me assail, to throw me out of place. But they in their device shall fall, that wicked works maintain: They shall be overthrown withall, and never rise again. PSALM XXXVII. Noli aemulari. W. W. GRudge not to see the wicked men in wealth to flourish still: Nor yet envy such as to ill, have bent and set their will. For as green grass and flourishing herbs are cut and with'r away: So shall their great prosperity soon pass, fade, and decay. Trust thou therefore in God alone, to do well give thy mind: So shalt thou have the land as thine, and there sure food shalt find. In God set all thy hearts delight, and look what thou would'st have, Or else canst wish in all the world, thou need'st it not to crave.
Cast both thy self and thine affairs on God with perfect trust: And thou shalt see with patience, th'effect both sure and just. Thy perfect life and godly name, he will clear as the light: So that the Sun ev'n at noon day, shall not shine half so bright. Be still therefore, and stedfastly on God see thou wait then: Not shrink∣ing for the prosp'rous state of lewd and wicked men. Shake off despight, envy, and hate, at least in any wise: Their wick∣ed works avoid and flee, and folow not their Guise. For ev'ry wicked man will God destroy both more and less: But such as trust in him are sure: the land for to possess. Watch but a while, and thou shalt see, no more the wicked train: No not so much as house or place, where once they did remain.
The second Part. But merciful and humble men enjoy shall sea and land: In rest and peace they shall rejoyce, for naught shall them withstand. The lewd men and malicious against the just conspire: They gnash their teeth at him, as men which do his bane desire. But while that lewd men, thus do think the Lord laughs them to scorn: For why? he sees the term approach. when they shall sigh and mourn. The wicked have their swords out drawn, their bow eke have they bent, To overthrow and kill the poor, as they the right way went. But the same sword shall pierce their heart, which was to kill the just: Likewise the bow shall break to shiv'rs, wherein they put their trust: Doubtless the just mans poor estate is better a great deal more, Then all these lewd and wicked mens rich pomp and heaped store.
For be their power never so strong, God will it overthrow: Where contrary he doth preserve the humble men and low. He sees by his great providence, the good mens trade and way: And will give them inheritance, which never shall decay. They shall not be discouraged, when some are hard bestead: When o∣thers shall be hunger bit, they shall be clad and fed. For whosoever wicked is, and enemy to the Lord: Shall quail, yea melt even as Lambs grease, or smoke that flies abroad. The third Part. Behold the wicked borrows much, and never pays again: Whereas the just by liberal gifts, makes many glad and fain. For they whom God doth bless shall have the land for heritage: And they whom he doth curse likewise shall perish in his rage.
The Lord the just mans ways doth guide and gives him good success: To every thing he takes in hand, he sendeth good address. Though that he fall, yet is he sure not utterly to quail; Because the Lord puts out his hand at need and doth not fail. I have been young and now am old, yer did I never see The just man lest, nor yet his seed to beg for misery. But gives alway most lib'rally, and lends whereas is need: His children and posterity receive of God their mead. Flee vice therefore and wickedness, and vertue do embrace: So shall God grant thee long to have on earth a dwelling place. For God so loveth equity, and shews to his such grace: That he pre∣serveth them alway, but stroys the wicked race.
Whereas the good and godly men inherit shall the land: Having as Lords all things therein in their own pow'r and hand. The just mans mouth shall ever speak of matters wise and high: His tongue doth talk to edifie, with truth and equity. For in his heart the Law of God his Lord doth still abide. So that where ev'r he goes or walks, his foot can never slide. The wicked like a ravening wolf, the just man doth beset: By all means seeking him to kill, if he fall in his net. The fourth Part. Though he should fall into his hands yet God would succour send: Though men against him sentence give, God would him yet defend. Wait thou on God and keep his way, he shall preserve thee then: The earth to rule, and thou shalt see destroy'd these wicked men.
The wicked have I seen most strong, and plho'd in high degree: Flou∣rishing in all wealth and store, as doth the Lawrel tree. But suddenly he pass'd away, and lo he was quite gone: Then I him sought, but could not find the place where dwelt such one. Mark and behold the perfect man, how God doth him encrease: For the just man shall have at length great joy with rest and peace. As for transgressours, wo to them, destroy'd they shall all be: God will cut off their budding race, and rich posterity. But the salvation of the just doth come from God above: Who in their trouble sends them aid of his meer grace and love. God doth them help, save, and deliver from lewd men and unjust: And still will save them whilst that they in him do put their trust.
PSALM XXXVIII. Domine ne. J. H. PUt me not to rebuke O Lord, in thy provoked ire: Nor in thy heavy wrath, O Lord, correct me I desire. Thine arrows do stick fast in me, thy hand doth press me sore: And in my flesh no health at all appea∣reth any more. And all this is by reason of thy wrath that I am in: Nor any rest is in my bones, by reason of my sin. For lo, my wicked doings (Lord) above my head are gone: A greater load than I can bear, they lye me sore upon. My wounds stink, and are sester'd so, as loathsom is to see: Which all through mine own foolishness betideth unto me. And I in careful wise, am brought in trouble and distresse that I go wailing all the day, in doleful heaviness.
My loyns are fill'd with sore disease, my flesh hath no whole part, I feeble am, and broken fore, I roar for grief of heart. Thou know'st (Lord) my desire, my groans are open in thy sight: My heart doth pant, my strength doth fail, mine eyes have lost their light. My lovers and my wonted friends stand looking on my woe: And eke my kinsmen far away are me departed fro. They that did seek my life, laid snares, and they that sought the way To do me hurt, spake lies, and thought on mischief all the day. The Second Part. But as a deaf man I became, that cannot hear at all: And as one dumb, that opens not his mouth to speak withal. For all my confidence O Lord is wholly set on thee: O Lord, thou Lord, that art my God, thou shalt give ear to me.
This did I crave, that they my foes triumph not over me For when my foot did slip, then they did joy my fall to see. And truly I poor wretch am set in place a woful wight: And eke my grievous heaviness is ever in my sight. For while that I my wickedness in humble wise confess: And while I for my sinful deeds my sorrows do express: my foes do still re∣main alive, and mighty are also: And they that hate me wrongfully, in number hugely grow. They stand against me that my good with evil do repay: Because that good and honest things I do ensue alway. Forsake me not O Lord my God, be thou not far away: Haste me to help, my Lord, my God, my safety and my stay.
PSALM XXXIX. Dixi custodiam. J. H. I Said I will look to my ways, for fear I should go wrong: I will take heed all times that I offend not with my tongue. As with a bit I will keep fast my mouth with force and might: Not once to whisper all the while the wicked are in sight. I held my torgue, and spake no word, but kept me close and still: Yea from good talk I did refrain, but sore against my will. My heart waxt hot within my brest, with musing, thought, and doubt: Which did increase and stir the fire, at last these words burst out; Lord number out my life and days, which yet I have not past: So that I may be certifi'd, how long my life shall last. Lord, thou hast pointed out my life, in length much like a span: Mine age is nothing unto thee, so vain is every man.
Man walketh like a shade, and doth in vain himself annoy In getting goods, and cannot tell who shall the same enjoy. Now Lord, sith things this wise do frame, what help do I desire? Of truth my help doth hang on thee, I nothing else require. The second Part. From all the sins that I have done, Lord quit me out of hand; And make me not a scorn to fools, that nothing understand. I was as dumb, and to complain no trouble might me move: Be∣cause I knew it was thy work, my patience for to prove. Lord, take from me thy scourge and plague, I can them not with∣stand: I faint and pine away for fear of thy most heavy hand. When thou for sin dost man rebuke he waxeth woe and wan: As doth a cloth that moths have fret, so vain a thing is man.
Lord hear my suit, and give good heed, regard my tears that fall: I sojourn like a stranger here, as did my fathers all. O spare a little, give me space my strength for to restore: Before I go away from hence, and shall be seen no more. PSALM XL. Expectans expectavi. J. H. I Waited long and sought the Lord, and patiently did bear: At length to me he did accord, my voice and cry to hear. He-pluck'd me from the lake so deep, out of the mire and clay: And on a Rock he set my feet, and he did guide my way. To me he taught a Psalm of praise, which I must shew abroad: And sing new songs of thanks always, unto the Lord our God. When all the folk these things shall see, as people much afraid: Then they unto the Lord will flee, and trust upon his aid.
O blest is he whose hope and heart, doth in the Lord remain: That with the proud doth take no part, nor such as lye and sain. For Lord, my God, thy wondrous deeds in greatness far do pass: Thy favour towards us exceeds all things that ever was. When I intend and do devise, thy works abroad to show: To such a reck'ning they do rise, thereof no end I know. Burnt off'rings thou delight'st not in, I know thy whole desire: With sacrifice to purge his sin thou dost no man require. Meat-offerings and sacrifice, thou would'st not have at all: But thou (O Lord) hast open made mine ears to hear withal. But then, said I, behold and look, I come a mean to be: For in the volume of thy book, thus is said of me:
That I (O Lord) should do thy mind,) which thing doth like me well For in my heart thy Law I find, fast placed there to dwell. Thy justice and thy right'ousness, in great resorts I tell: Behold my tongue no time doth cease O Lord, thou know'st full well. The second Part. I have not hid within my brest thy goodness as by stealth: But I de∣clare and have exprest thy truth and saving health. I kept not close thy loving mind, that no man should it know: The trust that in thy truth I find, to all the Church I show. Thy tender mercy Lord from me withdraw thou not away: But let thy love and verity preserve me still for aye. For I with mischiefs many a one am sore beset about: My sins in∣crease, and so come on, I cannot spy them out.
For why? in number they exceed the hairs upon my head: My heart doth faint for very dread, that I am almost dead. With speed send help and set me free, O Lord I thee require: Make haste with aid to succour me, O Lord at my desire. Let them sustain rebuke and shame, that seek my soul to spill: Drive back my foes, and them defame, that wish and would me ill. For their ill deeds do them descry, that would deface my name: Always at me they rail and cry, fie on him, fie for shame. Let them in thee have joy and wealth that seek to thee alwayes: That those that love thy saving health may say, To God be praise. But as for me, I am but poor, opprest and brought full low: Yet thou, O Lord, wilt me restore to health, full well I know.
For why? thou art my hope and trust, my refuge, help, and stay. Where∣fore my God as thou art just, with me no time delay. PSALM XLI. Beatus qui intelligit. T. S. THE man is blest that careful is the needy to consider: For in the season perillous the Lord will him deliver. The Lord will make him safe and sound And happy in the land: And he will not deliver him into his enemies hand. And in his bed when he lies sick, the Lord will him restore: And thou O Lord, wilt turn to health his sickness and his sore, Then in my sick∣ness thus said I have mercy Lord on me, And heal my soul, which is full sad that I offended thee. Mine en'mies wish'd me ill in heart and thus of me did say, When shall he die, that all his name may vanish quite away?
And when they come  to visit me. they ask if I do well: But in their hearts mischief they hatch, and to their mates it tell. They bite their lips and whisper so, as though they would me charm, And cast their wiles how for to trap me with some mortal harm. Some grievous sin hath brought him to this sickness, say they plain: He is so low that without doubt he cannot rise again. The man also that I did trust, with me did use deceit: Who at my table ate my bread, the same for me laid wait. Have mercy, Lord, on me therefore, and let me be preserv'd: That I may render unto them the things they have deserv'd. By this I know assuredly to be belov'd of thee, When that mine en'∣mies have no cause to triumph over me.
But in my right thou hast  me kept, and maintained alway: And in thy presence place assign'd where I shall dwell for ay. The Lord the God of Israel be praised evermore. Even so be it (Lord) will I say, even so be it therefore. PSALM XLII. Quemadmodum. J. H. LIke as the hart doth breath and bray the well-springs to obtain, So doth my soul desire alway, with thee, Lord, to remain. 2. My sould doth thirst and would draw near the living God of might: O when shall I come and appear in presence of his sight? The tears all times are my repast, which from mine eyes do slide: When wicked men cry out so fast, Where now is God thy guide? Alas what grief is it to think what freedom once I had? Therefore my soul as at pits brink, most heavy is and sad.
When I did march in good array, furnished with my train, Unto the tem∣ple was our way, with songs and hearts most fain. My soul why art thou sad always, and fret'st thus in my brest? Trust still in God, for him to praise I hold it ever best. By him I have succour at need, against all pain and grief: He is my God which with all speed will hast to send relief. And thus my soul within me, Lord, doth faint to think upon The land of Jordan, and record the little hill Hermon. The second Part. One grief another in doth call as clouds burst our their voice: The stoods of evil that do fall, run over me with noise. Yet I by day felt his goodness, and help at all alsayes: Likewise by night I did not cease the living God to praise.
I am perswaded thus to say to him with pure pretence: O Lord thou art my guide and stay my rock and sure defence. Why do I then in pensiveness, hanging the head thus walk? While that mine en'mies me oppress, and vex me with their talk. For why? they pierce my inward parts. with pangs to be abhorr'd: When they cry out with stubborn hearts where is thy God, thy Lord? So soon why dost thou faint and quail, my soul with pain opprest: With thoughts why dost thy self assail, so sore within my brest? Trust in the Lord thy God always, and thou the time shalt see To give him thanks with laud and praise for health restor'd to thee. PSALM XLIII. Judica me, Domine. T. S. JUdge and revenge my cause, O Lord, from them that evil be: From wicked and deceitful men, O Lord deliver me.
For of my strength thou art the God, why put'st thou me it fro? And why walk I so heavily, oppressed with my foe? Send out thy light, and eke thy truth, and lead me with thy grace: Which may conduct me to thy hill, and to thy dwelling place. Then shall I to the Altar go of God my joy and chear: And on my harp give thanks to thee, O God, my God most dear. Why art thou then so sad my soul, and frett'st thus in my breast? Still trust in God, for him to praise? I hold it always best. By him I have deliverance against all pain and grief: He is my God, which doth always at need send me relief. PSALM XLIV. Deus auribus. T. S. OUr ears have heard our Fathers tell, and rev'rently record. The wondrous works that thou hast done in older time, O Lord,
How   did'st cast the Gentils out, and 'stroy'dst them with strong hand: Planting our Fathers in their place, and gav'st to them their land. They conquer'd not by sword nor strength the land of thy behest: But by thy hand, thy arm, and grace, because thou lov'dst them best. Thou art my King, O God, that holp Jacob in sundry wise: Led with thy Pow'r we threw down such▪ as did against us rise. I trusted not in bow nor sword, they could not save me sound: Thou keptst us from our en'mies rage thou didst our foes confound. And still we boast of thee our God, and praise thy holy Name: Yet now thou go'st not with our host, but leavest us to shame. Thou mad'st us fly before our foes, and so were overtrod: Our en'∣mies spoil'd and robb'd our goods, when we were spers'd abroad.
Thou  hast us given to our foes, as sheep for to be slain: Amongst the heathen every where scatter'd we do remain. Thy people thou hast sold like slaves and as a thing of nought: For profit none thou hadst thereby; no gain at all was sought. And to our neighbours thou hast made of us a laughing stock: And those that round about us dwell at us do scoff and mock. The Second Part. Thus we serve for none other use, but for a common talk: They mock, they scorn, they nod their heads where e're they go or walk. I am a∣sham'd continually to hear these wicked men: Yea so I blush, that all my face with red is cover'd then. For why? we hear such sland'rous words, such false reports and lyes: That death it is to see their wrongs, their threatnings and their cryes.
For all this we forgot not thee, nor yet thy cov'nant brake: We turn not back our hearts from thee, nor yet thy paths forsake. Yet thou hast trod us down to dust where dens of Dragons be: And cover'd us with shade of death, and great adversity. If we had our Gods Name forgot, and help of Idols sought, Would not God then have try'd this out for he doth know our thought. Nay, nay, for thy Names sake, O Lord, always are we slain thus: As sheep unto the shambles sent, right so they deal with us. Up, Lord, why sleepest thou? awake, and leave us not for all: Why hidest thou thy countenance and dost forget our thrall. For down to dust our soul is brought, and we now at last cast: Our belly, like as it were glew'd, unto the ground cleaves fast.
Rise up  therefore for our defence, and help us, Lord, at need: We thee beseech for thy goodness to rescue us with speed. PSALM XLV. Eructavit cor meum. J. H. MY heart doth take in hand some Godly song to sing: The praise that I shall shew therein, pertaineth to the King. My tongue shall be as quick, his honour to indite: As is the pen of any scribe, that useth fast to write. O fairest of all men, thy speech is pleasant pure: For God hath blessed thee with gifts, for ever to endure. About thee gird thy sword, O Prince of might elect: With honour, glory, and renown, thy person pure is deckt. Go forth with godly speed, with meekness, truth, and right: And thy right hand shall thee instruct in works of dreadful might.
Thine arrows sharp and keen their hearts so sore shall sting, That folk shall fall and kneel to thee, yea, all thy foes, O King. Thy royal seat, O Lord, for ever shall remain: Because the Scep∣ter of thy Realm doth righteousness maintain. Because thou lov'st the right, and dost the ill detest: God, ev'n thy God, hath 'nointed thee with joy above the rest. With Mirrh and favours sweet, thy cloaths are all bespread: When thou do'st from thy Palace pass therein to make thee glad. Kings daughters do attend in fine and rich array: At thy right hand the Queen doth stand in gold and garments gay. The second Part. O daughter, take good heed, incline and give good ear: Thou must forget thy kindred all, and fathers house most dear.
Then shall the King desire thy beauty fair and trim: For why? he is the Lord thy God, and thou must worship him. The daughters then of Tyre, with gifts full rich to see: And all the wealthy of the land shall make their suit to thee. The daughter of the King is glorious to behold: Within her closet she doth sit all deckt with beaten gold. In robes well wrought with needle, and many a pleasant thing: With Virgins fair on her to wait, she cometh to the King. Thus are they brought with joy and mirth on ev'ry side, Into the pa∣lace of the King, and there they do abide. Instead of parents left, (O Queen the case so stands) Thou shalt have sons whom thou maist set as Princes in all lands.
Wherefore thy holy Name all ages shall record: The people shall give thanks to thee for evermore, O Lord. PSALM XLVI. Deus noster refugium. J. H. THE Lord is our defence and aid, the strength whereby we stand: When we with wo are much dismaid, he is our help at hand. Though th'earth remove, we will not fear, though hills so high and steep Be thrust and huried here and there, within the Sea so deep. No, though the waves do rage so sore, that all the banks it spills: And though it overflow the shore, and beat down mighty hills. For one fair flood doth send abroad his pleasant streams apace: To fresh the City of our God, and wash his holy place. In midst of her the Lord doth dwell, she can no whit decay: All things against her that rebel, the Lord will truly stay.
The heathen folk the  kingdoms fear the people make a noise: The earth doth melt and not ap∣pear, when God puts forth his voice. The Lord of hosts doth take our part, to us he hath an eye: Our hope of health, with all our heart, on Jacobs God doth lye. Come here and see with mind and thought, the working of our God: What wonders he himself hath wrought, in all the world abroad. By him all wars are husht and gone which countries did conspire: Their bows he broke, and spears each one, their chariots burnt with fire. Leave off therefore, saith he, and know I am a God most stout: Amongst the heathen high and low, and all the earth throughout. The Lord of hosts doth us defend, he is our strength and tow'r: On Jacobs God we do depend, and on his ight and pow'r
PSALM XLVII. Omnes gentes. J. H. YE people all, with one accord, clap hands and eke rejoyce: Be glad, and sing unto the Lord, with sweet and pleasant voice. For high the Lord and dreadful is, with wonders manifold: A mighty King he is truly, in all the earth extold. The people shall he make to be unto out bondage thrall: And under∣neath our feet he shall the nations make to fall. For us the heritage he chose, which we possess alone: The flour'shing worship of Jacob, his well beloved one. Our God ascended up on high, with joy and pleasant noise: The Lord goes up above the skie, with trumpets royal voice. Sing praises to our God, sing praise, sing praises to our King: For God is King of all the earth, all skilful praises sing.
God on the heathen reigns, and sits upon his holy throne: The princes of the people have them joyned every one. To Abrahams people; for our God which is exalted high, As with a buckler doth defend the earth continually. PSALM XLVIII. Magnus Dominus. J. H. GReat is the Lord, and with great praise to be advanced still: Within the City of our God, upon his holy hill. Mount Sion is a pleasant place, it gladdeth all he land: The City of the mighty King on her north side doth stand. Whithin the palaces thereof, God is a refuge known: For lo, the Kings are gath'red, and together they are gone. But when they did behold it so they wondred, and they were Astomish'd much, and suddenly were driven back with fear.
Great terror there on them did fall, for very woe they cry, As doth a woman when she shall go travel by and by. As thou with Eastern winds the ships upon the Sea dost break: So they were stroy'd: And even as we heard our Fathers speak. So in the City of the Lord, we saw as it was told: Yea, in the Ci∣ty which our God for ever will uphold. O Lord, we wait and do attend on thy good help and grace: For which we do all times attend within thy holy place. O Lord, according to thy Name for ever is thy praise: And thy right hand, O Lord, is full of righteousness always. Let, for thy judgments Sion mount fulfilled be with joys: And eke of Juda grant, O Lord, the daughters to rejoyce.
Go walk about all Sion hill, yea round about her go: And tell the tow'rs that thereupon are builded on a row. And mark ye well her bulwarks all, behold her towers there: That ye may tell thereof to them, that after shall be here. For this God is our God, our God for evermore is he: Yea and unto the death also, our guider shall he be. PSALM XLIX. Audite haec omnes. T. S. ALl people hearken and give ear, to that that I shall tell: Both high and low, both rich and poor, that in the world do dwell. For why? my mouth shall make discourse of many things right wise: In understanding shall my heart his study exercise. I will incline mine ears to know the parable so dark: And open all my doubtful speech, in meeter on my harp.
Why should I fear affliction, or any careful toil: Or else my foes which at my heels, are prest my life to spoil. For as for such as riches have, wherein their trust is most: And they which of their treasures great themselves do brag and boast. There is not one of them that can his brothers death redeem: Or that can give a price to God, sufficient for him. It is too great a price to pay, none can thereto attain: Or that he might his life prolong, or not in grave remain. They see wise men as well as fools, subject unto deaths bands: And being dead, strangers possess their goods, their rents, their lands. Their care is to build houses fair, and so determin sure: To make their names right great on earth, for ever to endure.
Yet shall no man always enjoy high honour, wealth, and rest: But shall at length tal of deaths cup, as well as the brute beast. The second Part. And though they try their foolish thoughts to be most lew'd and vain: Their children yet approve their talk, and in like sin remain. As sheep into the fold are brought so shall they into grave: Death shall them eat, and in that day the Just shall Lordship have. Their image and their royal port, shall fade, and quite decay: When as from house to pit they pass, with woe and well away. But God will surely preserve me from death and endless pain: Because he will of his good grace my soul receive again. If any man wax wondrous rich, fear not I say therefore: Although the glory of his house increaseth more and more.
For when he dyes, of all these things nothing shall he receive: His glory will not follow him, his pomp will take her leave. Yet in this life he takes himself the happiest under Sun: And others likewise flatter him, saying, all is well done. And presuppose he live as long, as did his fathers old: Yet must he needs at length give place and be brought to deaths fold. Thus man to honour God hath brought; who doth not in him trust: But like brute beasts, so doth he live, which turned are to dust. PSALM L Deus deorum. W. W. THe mighty God, th' Eternal hath thus spoke, and all the world he will call and provoke: Ev'n from the east and so forth to the west, From towards Sion, which place he liketh best: God will appear in beau∣ty most excellent: Our God will come before that long time be spent.
Devouring fire shall go before his face: A great tempest shall round about him trace. Then shall he call the earth and heavens bright, To judge his folk with equity and right: Saying, go to, and now my Saints as∣semble: My pact they keep, their gifts do not dissemble, The heavens shall declare his right'ousness: For God is judge of all things more and less. Hear my people, for I will now reveal: List Israel, I will thee nought conceal; Thy God, thy God am I, and will not blame thee, For giving not all manner off'rings to me. I have no need to take of thee at all, Goats of thy fold, or Calf out of thy stall, For all the beasts are mine within the woods: On thou∣sand hills cattel are mine own goods. I know for mine all birds that are on mountains: All beasts are mine, which haunt the field and fountains.
Hungry if I were, I would not thee it tell: For all is mine that in the world doth well. Eat I the flesh of great bulls or bullocks? Or drink the blood of Goats and of the flocks? Offer to God praise and hearty thanksgiving, And pay thy vows unto God ever living. Call upon me, when troubled thou shalt be: Then will I help, and thou shalt honour me. To the wicked thus saith th'Eternal God: Why dost thou preach my laws and hests abroad: Seeing thou hast them with thy mouth abused, And hat'st to be by discipline reformed? My words I say thou dost reject and hate. If that thou see a thief, as with thy màte, Thou runn'st with him, and so your prey do seek: And art all one with bands of Belial eke. Thou giv'st thy self to backbite and to slander▪ And how thy tongue deceives, it is a wonder.
Thou sitt'st musing, thy brother for to blame: And how to put thy mo∣thers son to shame. These things thou didst, and whist I held my tongue, Thou didst me judge, because I staid so long, Like to thy self: yet though I keep long silence, Once shalt thou feel of thy wrongs just recompence. Consider this, ye that forget the Lord, And fear not when he threatneth with his word: Lest without help I spoil you as a prey. But he that thanks offereth, praiseth me aye, Saith the Lord God, and he that walketh this trace; I will him teach Gods saving health to imbrace. Another of the same by J. H. THe God of gods, the Lord, hath call'd the earth by name: From whence the Sun doth rise, unto the setting of the same. From Sion his fair place, his glory bright and clear: The perfect beau∣ty of his grace, from thence if did appear.
Our God shall come in hast, to speak he shall not doubt: Before him shall the fire wast, and tempest round about. The heavens from on high, the earth below likewise: He will call forth, to judge and try, his folk he doth devise. Bring forth my Saints, saith he, my faithful flock so dear: Which are in band and league with me, my Law to love and fear. And when these things are try'd, the heavens shall record, That God is just, and all must bide the judgment of the Lord. My people, O give heed, Israel, to thee I cry: I am thy God, thine help at need, thou canst it not deny. I do not say to thee, thy sacrifice is slack: Thou offerest daily unto me much more than I do lack.
Think'st thou that I do need thy cattle young or old? Or else so much desire to feed on Goats out of thy fold? Nay, all the beasts are mine, in woods that eat their fills: And thou∣sands more of neat and kine, that run wild on the hills. The second Part. The birds that build on high, in hills and out of sight, And beasts that in the fields do lie, are subject to my might. Then though I hungred sore, what need I ought of thine? Sith that the earth with her great store, and all therein is mine. To Bulls-flesh have I mind, to eat it dost thou think? Or such a sweetness do I find, the blood of Goats to drink? Give to the Lord his praise, with thanks to him apply: And see thou pay thy vows always unto the God most high.
Then seek and call to me, when ought would work thee blame: And I will sure deliver thee, that thou maist praise my Name. But to the wicked train, which talk of God each day: And yet their works are foul and vain, to them the Lord will say. With what a face dar'st thou my word once speak or name? Why doth thy talk my law allow? thy deeds deny the same. Whereas for to amend thy life thou art so slack: My word the which thou dost pretend, is cast behind thy back. The third Part. When thou a thief dost see, by theft to live in wealth: With him thou runn'st, and dost agree likewise to thrive by stealth. When thou dost them behold that wives and maids defile, Thou lik'st it well, and waxest bold to use that life most vile.
Thy lips thou dost apply, to slander and defame: Thy tongue is taught to craft and lie, and still doth use the sae. Thou studi'st to revile thy friends to thee so near: With slander thou would'st needs defile thy mothers son most dear. Hereat while I doe wink, as though I did not see: Thou go'st on still, and so dost think that I am like to thee. But sure I will not let, to strike when I begin: Thy faults in or∣der I will set, and open all thy sin. Mark this I you require, that have not God in mind, Lest when I plague you in mine ire, your help be far to find. He that doth give to me the sacrifice of praise, Doth please me well: and he shall see to walk in godly ways.
PSALM LI. Miserere mei. W. W. O Lord consider my distress, and now with speed some pity take: My sins deface, my faults redress, good Lord, for thy great mercies sake. Wash me, O Lord, and make me clean from this unjust and sinful act: And purifie yet once again my hainous crime and bloody fact. Remorse and sorrow do constrain me to acknowledge mine excess: My sin alas doth still remain before my face without release. For thee alone I have offended, committing evil in thy sight: And if I were there∣fore condemn'd, yet were thy judgments just and right. It is too manifest, alas, that first I was conceiv'd in sin: Yea of my mo∣ther so born was, and yet vile wretch remain therein. Also behold Lord, thou didst love the inward truth of a pure heart: Therefore thy wisdom from above thou hast reveal'd me to convert.
If thou with hysop purge this blot, I shall be cleaner than the glass: And if thou wash away my spot, the snow in whiteness shall I pass. There∣fore, O Lord, such joy me send, that inwardly I may find grace: and that my strength may now amend, which thou hast swag'd for my trespass. Turn back thy face and frowning ire, for I have felt enough thy hand: And purge my sins, I thee desire, which do in number pass the sand. Make new my heart within wy brest, and frame it to thy holy will: Thy constant spirit in me let rest, which may these raging en'mies kill. The second Part. Cast me not, Lord out, from thy face, but speedily my torments end: Take not from me thy spirit of grace which may from dangers me defend. Restore me to those joys again, which I was wont in thee to find: And let me thy free spirit retain, which unto thee may stir my mind.
Thus when I shall thy mercies know I shall instruct others therein: and men that are likewise brought low by mine example shall flee sin. O God, that of my health art Lord forgive me this my bloody vice: My heart and tongue shall then accord to sing thy mercies and justice. Touch thou my lips, my tongue untie, O Lord, which art the only key: And then my mouth shall testifie thy wondrous works and praise alway. And as for outward sacrifice, I would have offer'd many a one: But thou esteem'st them of no price, and therein pleasure tak'st thou none. The heavy heart, the mind opprest O Lord, thou never dost reject: And to speak truth, it is the best, and of all sacrifice th 'effect. Lord, unto Sion turn thy face, pour out thy mercies on thy hill, and on Jerusa∣lem thy grace, build up the walls and love it still.
Thoushalt accept then our off'rings of peace and righteousness, I say: Yea calves and many other things, upon thine Altar will we lay. Another of the same by J. H. HAve mercy on me, Lord, after thy great abounding grace: Af∣ter thy mercies multitude do thou my sins deface. Yea wash me more from mine offence, and cleanse me from my sin: For I do know my faults, and still my sin is in mine eyne. Against thee, thee alone, I have offended in this case: . And evil have I done before the presence of thy face. That in the things that thou hast done upright thou may'st be try'd: And eke in judging, that the doom may pass upon thy side. 5. Behold, in wickedness my kind and shape I did receive: And loe my sinful mother eke in sin did me conceive.
But loe, the truth in inward parts is pleasant unto thee: And secrets of thy wisdom thou revealed hast to m. With hysop, Lord, besprinkle me. I shall be cleansed so: Yea wash thou me, and so I shall be whiter than the snow. Of joy and gladness make thou me to hear the pleasant voice: That so the bruised bones which thou hast broken, may rejoice. From the beholding of my sins Lord, turn away thy face: And all my deeds of wickedness do utterly deface. O God, create in me a heart unspotted in thy sight: And eke within my bowels, Lord, renew a stable sp'rit. Ne cast me from thy sight, nor take thy holy Sp'rit away: The com∣fort of thy saving health give me again I pray.
With thy free sp'rit establish me, and I will teach therefore Sinners thy ways, and wicked shall be turned to thy lore. The second Part. O God, thou art God of my health, from blood deliver me: That praises of thy right'ousness, my tongue may sing to thee. My lips that yet fast closed be, do thou, O Lord, unloose: The praises of thy Majesty, my mouth shall so disclose. I would have offer'd sacrifice, if that had pleased thee: But pleased with burnt offerings I know thou wilt not be. A troubled sp'rit is sacrifice, delightful in Gods eyes: A broken and an humble heart, God, thou wilt not despise. In thy good will deal gently, Lord, to Sion, and withall Grant, that of thy Jerusalem uprear'd may be the wall.
Burnt off'rings, gifts, and sacrifice of justice, in that day Thou shalt accept, and calves they shall upon thine altar lay. PSALM LII. Quid gloriaris. J. H. WHy dost thou tyrant boast abroad, thy wicked works to praise? Dost thou not know there is a God, whose mercies last always? Thy tongue speaks mischief which thine heart deviseth wickedly: And like unto a rasor sharp, it works deceitfully. On mischief why sett'st thou thy mind, and wilt not walk upright? Thou hast more lust false tales to find, than bring the truth to light. Thou dost delight in fraud and guile, in mischief, blood, and wrong: Thy lips have learn'd the flattering stile, O false deceitful tongue! Therefore shall God for aye confound, and pluck thee from thy place: Thy seed root out from off the ground and so shall thee deface.
The  just when they behold thy fall, with fear will praise the Lord: And in reproach of thee withall, cry out with one accord. Behold the man that would not take the Lord for his defence: But of his goods his God did make, and trust his corrupt sense. But I as O-live fresh and green, shall spring and spread abroad: For why? my trust all times hath been upon the living God. For this therefore will I give praise to thee with heart and voice: I will set forth thy Name always, wherein thy Saints rejoice. PSALM LIII. Dixit insipiens. T. S. THe foolish man in that which he within his heart hath said: That there is any God at all, hath utterly deny'd. They are corrupt, and they also a hainous work have wrought: Among them all there is not one, of good that worketh ought.
The Lord look'd down on sons of men from heaven all abroad: To see if any were that would be wise and seek for God. They are all gone out of the way they are corrupted all: There is not one doth any good, there is not one at all. Do not all wicked workers know; that they do feed upon My peo∣ple, as they feed on bread? the Lord they call not on. Ev'n there they were afraid, and stood, with trembling all dismai'd: Whereas there was no cause at all, why they should be afraid. For God his bones that thee besieg'd, hath scatt'red all abroad: Thou hast confounded them, for they rejected are of God. O Lord, give thou thy people health, and thou, O Lord, fulfil. Thy promise made to Israel, from out of Sion hill.
When God his people shall restore, that erst were captive led: Then Jacob shall therein rejoyce, and Isr'el shall be glad. PSALM LIV. Deus in nomine J. H. SAve me, O God, by thy great Name, and for thy goodness sake: Unto the strength (Lord) of the same. I do my cause betake. Regard, O Lord, and give an ear to me when I do pray: Bow down thy self to me, and hear the words that I do say. For strangers up against me rise, and tyrants vex me still: Which have not God before their eyes, they seek my soul to spill. But loe, my God doth give me aid, the Lord is straight at hand: With them by whom my soul is staid, the Lord doth ever stand. With plagues repay again all those for me that lie in wait: And in thy truth destroy my foes with their own snare and bait.
An offring of free heart and will, then I to thee shall make: And praise thy Name, for therein still great comfort I do take. O Lord, at length do set me free from them that craft conspire: And now mine eye with joy doth see on them my hearts desire. PSALM LV. Exaudi Deus. J. H. O God, give ear, and do apply to hear me when I pray: And when to thee I call and cry, hide not thy self away. Take heed to me, grant my request, and answer me again: With plaints I pray full sore opprest, great grief doth me constrain. Because my foes with threats and cries, oppress me through despight: And so the wicked sort likewise to vex me have delight. For they in counsel do conspire to charge me with some ill: So in their hasty wrath and ire they do pursue me still.
My heart doth faint for want of breath, it panteth in my brest: The terrors and the dread of death do work me much unrest. Such dreadful fear on me doth fall, that I therewith do quake: Such horror whelmeth me withal, that I no shift can make. But I did say, Who will give me the swift and pleasant wings Of some fair dove, that I may flee, and rest me from these things. Loe, then I would go far away, to flie I would not cease: And I would hide my self, and stay in some great wilderness. I would be gone in all the hast, and not abide behind: That I were quit and overpast these blasts of boistrous wind. Divide them, Lord, and from them pull their dev'lsh double tongue: For I have spide their city full of rapine, stri, and wrong.
Which things both night and day throughout do close her as a wall: In midst of her is mischief stout, and, sorrow eke withal. Her inward parts are wicked plain, her deeds are much too vile: And in her streets there doth remain all crafty fraud an guile. The second Part. If that my foes did seek my shame I might it well abide: From o∣pen en'mies check and blame: some where I could me hide. But thou that wast, my fellow dear, which friendship didst pretend: And didst my secret counsel hear, as my familiar friend. With whom I had delight to talk in secret and abroad: And we together oft did walk within the house of God. Let death in hast upon them fall and send them quick to hell: For mischief-reigneth in the hall and parlour where they dwell.
But I unto my God will cry, to him for help I flee: The Lord will hear me by and by, and he will succour me. At morning, noon, and ev'ning tide, unto the Lord I pray: When I so instantly have cry'd, he doth not say me nay. To peace he shall restore me yet, though war be now at hand: Al∣though the naber be full great, that would against me stand. The Lord that first and last doth reign. both now and evermore: Will hear when I to him complain, and punish them full sore. For sure there is no hope that they to turn will once accord: For why? they will not God obey, nor yet do fear the Lord. Upon their friends they laid their hands, which were in cov'nant knit: Of friendship to neglect the bands, they pass or care no what.
While they have war within their hearts, as butter are their words: Altho' their words were smooth as oyl they cut as sharp as swords. Cast thou thy care upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee: For in no wise will he accord, the just in thrall to see. But God shall cast them deep in pit that thirst for blood always: He will no guileful man permit to live out half his days. Tho' such be quite destroy'd and gone in thee, O Lord, I trust: I shall depend thy grace upon, with all my heart and lust. PSALM LVI. Miserere mei. J. H. HAve mercy, Lord, on me, I pray, for man would me devour: He fighteth with me day by day, and troubleth me each hour. Mine en'mies daily enterprise, to swallow me outright: To fight against me many rise, O thou most High of Might.
When they would make me most afraid, with boasts and brags of pride: I trust in thee alone for aid, by thee I will abide. Gods promise I do mind and praise, O Lord I stick to thee: I do not care at all assays, what flesh can do to me. What things I either did or se, they wrest them at their will: And all the counsel that they take, is how to work me ill. They all consent themselves to hide, close watch for me to lay: They spy my paths, and shares have ty'd, to take my life away. Shall they thus scape on mischief set? thou God, on them wilt frown: For in his wrath he doth not let to throw whole kingdoms down. Thou seest how oft they made me flee, and on my tears dost look: Re∣serve them in a glass by thee, and write them in thy book.
When I do call upon thy name, my foes away do start: I well per∣ceive it by the same, that God doth take my part. I glory in the word of God, to praise it I accord: With joy I will declare abroad the promise of  Lord. I trust in God, and yet I say, as I before began: The Lord he is my help and stay, I do not care for man. I will perform, with heart so free, to God my vows always: And I, O Lord, all times to thee will offer thanks and praise. My soul from death thou dost defend, and keep'st my feet upright: That I before thee may ascend, with such as live in light. PSALM LVII. Miserere mei. J. H. TAke pity for thy promise sake, have mercy, Lord, on me: For why? my soul doth her betake unto the help of thee.
Within the shadow of thy wings, I set my self full fast: Till mischief, malice, and like things, be gone and overpast. I call upon the God most high, to whom I stick and stand: I mean the God that will stand by the cause I have in hand. From heaven he hath sent his aid, to save me from their spight: That to devour me have affai'd, his mercy, truth, and might. I lead my life with Lions fell, all set on wrath and ire: And with such wicked men I dwell, that fret like flames of fire. Their teeth are spears and arrows long, as sharp as I have seen: They wound and cut with their quick tongue like swords and weapons keen. Set up and shew thy self, O God, above the heavens bright: Exalt thy praise on earth abroad, thy Majesty and Might.
They lay their nets and do prepare a privy cave and pit: Wherein they think my Soul to snare, but they are fall'n in it. My heart is set to laud the Lord, in him I joy always: My heart I say doth well accord to sing his laud and praise. Awake my joy, awake I say, my lute, my harp, and string: For I my self before the day, will rise, rejoyce, and sing. Among the people I will tell the goodness of my God: And shew his praise that doth excell in heathen lands abroad. His mercy doth extend as far, as heavens all are high: His truth as high as any Star, that shineth in the skie. Set forth and shew thy self, O God, above the heavens bright: Extol thy praise on earth abroad, thy Majesty and Might.
PSALM LVIII. Si vere utique. J. H. YE rulers that are put in trust to judge of wrong and right: Be all your judgments true and just, not knowing need or might. Nay, in your hearts ye mark and muse in mischief to consent: And where ye should true justice use, your hands to bribes are bent. The wicked sort from their birth-day have erred on this wise: And from their mothers whom alway have used craft and lies. In them the poyson and the breath of serpents do appear: Yea, like the adder that is deaf, and fast doth stop her ear. Because she will not hear the voice of one that charmeth well: No, though he were the chief of choice, and did therein excel. Break thou their teeth, O God, at once within their mouths throughout: The tusks that in their great jaw-bones like lions whelps hang out.
Let them consume away and waste, as water runs forthright: The shafts that they do shoot in haste, let them be broke in flight. As snails do waste within the shell, and unto slime do run; As one be∣fore his time that fell, and never saw the sun. Before the thorns that now are young, to bushes big shall grow: The storms of anger waxing strong, shall take them ere they know. The just shall joy, it doth them good, that God doth vengeance take: And they shall wash their feet in blood of them that him forsake. Then shall the world shew forth and tell, that good men have reward: And that a God on earth doth dwell, that justice doth regard. PSALM LIX. Eripe me. J. H. SEnd aid and save me from my foes, O Lord, I pray to thee: Defend and keep me from all those that rise and strive with me.
O  Lord, preserve me from those men whose doings are not good: And set me sure and safe from them that still thirst after blood. For lo, they wait my soul to take, they rage against me still: Yea, for no fault that I did make, I never did them ill. They run and do themselves prepare, when I no whit offend: Arise and save me from their snare, and see what they intend. O Lord of hosts of Israel, arise, and strike all lands: And pity none that do rebel, and in their mischief stands. At night they stir and seek about, as hounds they howl and grin: And all the city clean throughout from place to place they run. They speak of me with mouth alway, but in their lips are swords: They 'greed my death, and then would say,
What, none doth hear our  words. But, Lord, thou hast their ways espide, and laught thereat apace: The heathen folk thou dost deride, and mock them to their face. The strength that doth our foes withstand, O Lord, doth come from thee: My God he is my help at hand, a fort of fence to me. The Lord to me doth shew his grace in great abundance still: That I may see my foes in case such as my heart doth will. The second Part. Destroy them not at once, O Lord, lest it from mind do fall: But with they strength drive them abroad, and so consume them all. For their ill words and truthless tongue confound them in their pride: Their wicked oaths, with lies and wrong, let all the world deride. Consume them in thy wrath, O Lord, that nought of them remain: That men may know throughout the world that Jacob's God doth reign.
At evening they return apace, as dogs they grin and cry: Throughout the streets in ev'ry place, they run about and spy. They seek about for meat, I say, but let them not be fed: Nor find a house wherein they may be bold to put their head. But I will shew thy strength abroad, thy goodness I will praise: For thou art my defence and God, at need in all affaies. Thou art my strength, thou hast me staid, O Lord, I sing to thee: Thou art my fort, my fence and aid, a loving God to me. PSALM LX. Deus repulisti. J. H. O Lord, thou didst us clean forsake, and scatt'redst us abroad: Such great displeasure thou didst take, return to us, O God. Thy might did move the earth so sore, that it in sunder brake: The hurt thereof, O Lord, restore, for it doth bow and quake.
With heavy chance thou plaguest thus the people that are thine: And thou hast given unto us a drink of deadly wine. But yet to such as fear thy Name, a banner thou didst shew: That they may triumph in the same because thy word is true. So that thy might may keep and save thy folk that favour thee: That they thine help at hand may have, O Lord, grant this to me. The Lord did speak from his own place, this was his joyful tale: I will divide Sichem by pace, and mete out Succoths vale. Gilead is given to mine hand, Manasses mine beside: Ephr'im the strength of all my land, my law doth Judah guide. In Moab I will wash my feet, ore Edom throw my shoe: And thou Palestine ought'st to seek for favour me unto.
But who will bring me at this tide unto the City strong? Or who to E∣dom will me guide, so that I go not wrong? Wilt thou not God, which did'st forsake, thy folk, their land, and coasts? Our wars in hand thou would'st not take, nor walk among our hoasts. Give aid, O Lord, and us relieve from them that us disdain: The help that hoasts of men can give, it is but all in vain. But through our God we shall have might to take great things in hand: He will tread down, and put to flight all those that us withstand. PSALM LXI. Exaudi Deus. J. H. REgard, O Lord, for I complain, and make my suit to thee: Let not my words return in vain, but give an ear to me. From out the coasts and utmost parts of all the earth abroad: In grief and anguish of, my heatt, I cry to thee, O God.
Upon the rock of thy great pow'r, my woful mind repose: Thou art my hope, my fort and tow'r, my fence against my foes. Within thy tent I lust to dwell, for ever to endure: Under thy wings, I know right well I shall be safe and sure. The Lord doth my desire regard, and doth fulfil the same: With goodly gifts will he reward all those that fear his Name. The King shall he in health maintain, and so prolong his days: That he from age to age shall reign, for evermore always. That he may have a dwelling place, before the Lord for aye: O let thy mercy, truth, and grace, defend him from decay. Then shall I sing for ever still, with praise unto thy Name: That all my vows I may ful∣fill, and daily pay the fame.
PSALM LXII. Nonne Deo. J. H. MY soul to God shall give good heed, and him alone attend: For why? my health and hope to speed, doth whole on him depend. For he alone is my defence, my rock, my health, and aid: He is my stay, that no pretence shall make me much dismay'd. O wicked folk, how long will ye use craft? sure ye must fall: For as a rotten hedge ye be, and like a tottering wall. Whom God doth love, ye seek always to put him to the worse: Ye love to lye; with mouth ye praise, and yet your heart doth curse. Yet still my soul doth whole depend on God my chief desire: From all false seats me to defend, none but him I require. He is my rock, my fort, and tow'r, my health is of his grace: He doth support me, that no power can move me out of place.
God is my glory and my health, my souls desire and lust: My fort, my strength, my stay, my wealth, God is my onely trust. O have your trust in him alway, ye folk with one accord: Pour out your hearts to him, and say, our trust is in the Lord. The sons of men deceitful are, on balance but a sleight: With things most vain do them compare for they can keep no weight. Trust not in wrong, robbery, nor stealth, let vain delights be gone: Tho' goods well got flow in with wealth set not your hearts thereon. The Lord long since one thing did tell, which here to mind I call: He spake it oft, I heard it well, that God alone doth all: And that thou, Lord, art good and kind, thy mercy doth exceed: So that all sorts with thee shall ind according to their deed▪
PSALM LXIII Deus, Deus meus. T. S. O God, my God, I watch betime, to come to thee in haste: For why? my soul and body both, doth thirst of thee to taste. And in this barren wilderness, where waters there are none: My flesh is parch't for thought of thee for thee I wish alone. That I might see yet once again, thy glory, strength, and might: As I was wont it to behold, within thy Temple bright. For why? thy mercies far furmount this life and wretched days: My lips therefore shall give to thee due honour laud and praise. And whil'st I live, I will not fail to worship thee alway: And in thy Name I shall lift up my hands when I do pray. My soul is fill'd as with marrow, which is both fat and sweet: My muth therefore shall sing such songs as are for thee most meet.
When as in bed I think on thee, and eke all the night tide: For un∣der covert of thy wings, thou art my joyful guide. My soul doth surely stick to thee, thy right hand is my power: And those that seek my soul to 'stroy them death shall soon devour. The sword shall them devour each one, their earkasses shall feed The hungry foxes, which do run their prey to seek at need. The King and all men shall rejoice▪ that do profess Gods word: For lyars mouths shall then be stopt, which have the truth disturb'd. PSALM LXIV. Exaudi Deus. J. H. O Lord, unto my voice give ear, with plaint when I do pray: And rid my life and soul from fear of foes that threat to stay. Defend me from that sort of men, which in deceit do lurk: And from the srowning face of them, that all ill seats do work.
Who whet their tongues as we have seen men whet and sharp their swords: They shoot abroad their arrows keen, I mean, most bitter words. With privy flights shoot they their shaft, the upright man to hit: The just un'wares to strike by craft, they care nor fear no whit. A wicked work they have decreed, in counsel thus they cry: The use deceit let us not dread, what? who can it espy? What way to hurt they talk and muse all times within their heart: They all consult what feats to use, each doth invent his part. But yet all this shall not prevail, when they think least upon, God with his dart shall sure assail, and wound them every one. Their crafts and their ill tongues withall shall work themselves such blame, That they which them behold their fall, shall wonder at the same.
Then all that see shall know right well that God the thing hath wrought: And praise his mighty works, and tell what he to pass hath brought. Yet shall the just in God rejoyce, still trusting in his might: So shall they joy with mind and voice whose hearts are pure and right. PSALM LXV. Te decet hymnus. J. H. THY praise alone, O Lord, doth reign in Sion thine own hill: Their vows to thee they do maintain, and their off'rings fulfill. For that thou dost their prayers hear, and dost thereto agree, The peo∣ple all both far and near with trust shall come to thee. Our wicked life so far exceeds, that we shall fall therein: But Lord forgive our great misdeeds, and purge us from our sin. The man is blest whom thou dost chuse within thy courts to dwell: Thy house and temple he shall use with pleasures that excell.
Of thy great justice hear us, God, our health of thee doth rise: The hope of all the earth abroad, and the sea-coasts likewise. With strength thou art beset about, and compast with thy power: Thou mak'st the mountains strong and stout to stand in ev'ry show'r. The swelling seas thou dost asswage, and mak'st their streams full still: Thou dost restrain the peoples rage. and rule them at thy will. The folk that dwell full far on earth, shall dread thy signs to see: Which morn' and ev'ning in great mirth do pass with praise to thee. When that the earth is chapt and dry, and thirsteth more and more: Then with thy drops thou dost apply, and much increase her store. The sloud of God doth overflow, and so doth cause to spring The seed and corn which men do sow, for he doth guide the thing.
With wet thou dost her furrows fill whereby her clods do fall: Thy drops on her thou dost distill, and bless her fruit withal. Thou deck'st the earth of thy good grace, with fair and pleasant crop: Thy clouds distil their dew apace, great plenty they do drop. Whereby the desert shall begin full great increase to bring: The little hills shall joy therein, much fruit in them shall spring. In places plain the flocks shall feed, and cover all the earth: The vales with corn shall so exceed, that men shall sing for mirth. PSALM LXVI. Jubilate Deo. T. S. YE men on earth in God rejoyce, with praise set forth his Name. Extol his might with heart and voice, give glory to the same. How wonderful, O Lord, say ye, in all thy works thou art! Thy foes for fear shall seek to thee, full sore against their heart.
All men that dwell the earth throughout shall praise the Name of God: The laud thereof the world about is shew'd and set abroad. All folk come forth, behold and see what things the Lord hath wrought: Mark well the wondrous works that he for man to pass hath brought. He laid the sea like heaps on high, therein a way they had: On foot to pass both fair and dry, whereof their hearts were glad. His might doth rule the world alway, his eyes all things behold: All such as would him disobey, by him shall be controull'd. Ye people give, unto our God due laud and thanks always: With joy∣ful voice declare abroad, and sing unto his praise. Which doth endue our soul with life, and it preserve withall: He stays our feet, so that no strife can make us slip or fall▪
The Lord doth prove our deeds with fire, if that they will abide: As workmen do when they desire to have their metals try'd. Although thou suffer us so long in prison to be cast: And there with chains and setters strong to lye in bondage fast. The second Part. Although (I say) thou suffer men on us to ride and reign: Though we through fire and water run of very grief and pain. Yet sure thou dost of thy good grace dispose it to the best: And bring us out into a place, to live in wealth and rest. Unto thy house resort will I, to offer and to pray: And there I will my self apply my vows to thee to pay. The vows that with my mouth I speak in all my grief and smart: The vows, I say, which I did make in anguish of my heart.
Burnt off'rings I will give to thee of Oxen fat and rams: Yea this my sacrifice shall be, of Bullocks, Goats, and Lambs. Come forth and hearken here full soon all ye that fear the Lord: What he for my poor Soul hath done, to you I will record. Full oft I call to mind his grace, this mouth to him doth cry: And thou my tongue make speed apace to praise him speedily. But if I feel my heart within in wicked works rejoice: Or if I have delight to sin, God will not hear my voice. But surely God my voice hath heard and what I do require: My pray∣er he doth well regard, and granteth my desire. All praise to him that hath not put nor cast me out of mind: Nor yet his mercy from me shut, which I do ever find.
PSALM LXVII. Deus misereatur. J. H. HAve mercy on us, Lord, and grant to us thy grace: To shew to us do thou accord, the brightness of thy face. That all the Earth may know, the way to godly wealth: And all the Nations on a row, may see thy saving health. Let all the world, O God, give praise unto thy Name: O let the people all abroad, extol and laud the same. Throughout the world so wide, let all rejoyce with mirth: For thou with truth and right dost guide the Nations of the earth. Let all the world, O God, give praise unto thy Name: O let the people all abroad. extol and laud the same. Then shall the earth increase, great store of fruit shall fall: And then our God, the God of peace, shall bless us eke withall.
God shall us bless, I say, and then both far and near, The folk through∣out the earth alway of him shall stand in fear. PSALM LXVIII. Exsurgat Deus. T. S. LEt God arise, and then his foes will turn themselves to flight: His en'mies then will run abroad, and scatter out of sight. And as the fire doth melt the wax, and wind blows smoak away: So in the presence of the Lord, the wicked shall decay. But righteous men before the Lord, shall heartily rejoyce: They shall be glad and merry all, and chearful in their voice. Sing praise, sing praise unto the Lord, who rideth on the Sky: Extol the name of Jah our God, and him do magnifie. The same is he which is above, within his holy place: That Father is of fatherless, and judge of widows case.
Houses he gives, and issue  both, unto the comfortless: He bringeth bondmen out of thrall, and rebels to distress. When thou didst march before thy folk, th'Egyptians from among: And brought'st them thro' the wilderness, which was both wide and long. The earth did quake, the rain pour'd down, heard were great claps of thund'r: The mount Sinai shook in such sort, as it would break in sund'r. Thine heritage with drops of rain, abundantly was washt: And if so be it barren waxt, by thee it was refresht. Thy chosen flock doth there remain, thou hast prepar'd that place: and for the poor thou dost provide of thine especial grace. The second Part. God will give women causes just, to magnifie his Name: When as his people triumphs make, and purchase bruit and fame.
For puissant Kings  with all their pow'r shall fly and take the foil: And women which re∣main at home, shall help to part the spoil. And tho' ye were as black as pots, your hue shall pass the Dove: Whose wings and feathers seem to have silver and gold above. When in this land God shall triumph o're Kings both high and low: Then shall it be like Salmon hill, white as any snow. Though Basan be a fruitful hill, and in height others pass: Yet Sion, Gods most holy hill, doth far excel in grace. Why brag ye thus, ye hills most high, and leap for pride together: The hill of Sion, God doth love, and there will dwell for ever. Gods army is two millions of warriours good and strong: The Lord also in Sinai is present them among.
Thou did'st, O Lord, ascend▪  on high, and captive led them all: Which in times past thy chosen flock, in bondage kept and thrawl. Thou mad'st them tribute for to pay, and such as did repine Thou didst subdue, that they might dwell in thy temple divine. Now praised be the Lord for that he pours on us such grace: From day to day he is the God of our health and solace. The third Part. He is the God from whom alone salvat'on cometh plain: He is the God by whom we scape all dangers, death, and pain. Thus God will wound his en'mies head, and break the hairy scalp Of those that in their wickedness continually do walk. From Basan will I bring, said he, my people and my sheep: And all mine own as I have done, from dangers of the deep.
And make  them dip their feet in blood of those that hate my Name: And dogs shall have their tongues imbru'd with licking of the same. All men may see how thou, O God, thine en'mies dost deface: And how thou go'st as God and King unto thine holy place▪ The singers go before with joy, the minstrels follow after: And in the midst the damsels play with timbrel and with taber. Now in the congregation, O Israel, praise the Lord: And Jacobs whole posterity, give thanks with one accord. Their chief was little Benjamin, but Juda made their host: With Zebulon and Neptha∣lim, which dwelt about their coast. As God hath given pow'r to thee, so, Lord, make firm and sure, The thing that thou hast wrought in s for ever to endure.
And in  thy temple gifts will we give unto thee, O Lord, For thine unto Jerusalem sure promise made by word. The fourth Part. Yea, and strange Kings to us subdu'd, shall do like in those daies: I mean, to thee they shall present their gifts of laud and praise. He shall destroy the spear-mens ranks, those calves and bulls of might: And cause them tribute pay, and daunt all such as love to fight. Then shall the lords of Egypt come, and presents with them bring: The Moors most black shall stretch their hands unto their Lord and King. Therefore, ye kingdoms of the earth, give praise unto the Lord: Sing psalms to God with one consent, thereto let all accord. Who though he ride, and ever hath, above the heavens bright: Yet by the fearfull thunder-claps men may well know his might.
There∣fore  the strength of Israel ascribe to God on high: Whose might and pow'r doth far extend above the cloudy skie. O God, thy holiness and pow'r is dread for evermore: The God of Israel gives us strength, praised be God therefore. PSALM LXIX. Salvum me fac. J. H. SAve me, O God, and that with speed, the waters flow full fast: So nigh my soul do they proceed, that I am sore agast. I stick full deep in mire and clay whereas I feel no ground: I fall into such flouds, I say, that I am like be drown'd. With crying oft I faint and quail, my throat is hoarse and dry: With looking up my sight both fail, for help to God on high. My foes that guiltless do oppress my soul, with hate are led: In number sure they are no less than hairs are on my head.
Though for no cause they vex me sore, they prosper and are glad: They do compel me to restore the things I never had. What I have done for want of wit, thou Lord all times canst tell: And all the faults that I commit to thee are known full well. O God of hoasts, defend and stay▪ all those that trust in thee: Let no man doubt or shrink away for ought that chaneeth me. It is for thee, and for th sake, that I do bear this blame: In spight of thee they would me make to hide my face for shame. My mothers sons, my brethren all, forsake me on a row: And as a stranger they me call, my face they will not know. Unto thy house such zeal I bear, that it doth pine me much: Their checks and taunts at thee to hear, my very heart doth grutch.
The second Part. Though I do fast my flesh to chast, yea if I weep and mone: Yet in my teeth this jear is cast, they pass not thereupon. If I for pain and grief of heart in sackeloth use to walk: Then they anon will it pervert, thereof they jest and talk. Both high and low, and all the throng that sit within the gate: They have me ever in their tongue, of me they talk and prate. The drun∣kards which in wine delight, it is their chief pastime To seek which way to work me spight, of me they sing and rime. But thee the while, O Lord, I pray, that when it pleaseth thee: For thy great truth thou wilt alway send down thine aid to me. Pluck thou my feet out of the mire, from drowning do me keep: From such as owe me wrath and ire, and from the waters deep.
Lest with the waves I should be drown'd, and depth my soul devour: And that the pit should me confound, and shut me in her pow'r. O Lord of hoasts▪ to me give ear, as thou art good and kin: And as thy mercy is most dear, Lord, have me in thy mind. And do not from thy servant hide, nor turn thy face away: I am op∣prest on every side, in haste give ear, I say. O Lord, unto my soul draw nigh, the same with aid repose: Because of their great tyranny, acquit me from my foes. The third Part. That I abide rebuke and shame, thou know'st, and thou canst tell: For those that seek and work the same, thou seest them all full well. When they with brags do break my heart, I seek for help anon: But find no friends to ease my smart, to comfort me not one.
But in my meat they gave me gall, too cruel for to think: And gave me in my thirst withall, strong vinegare to drink. Lord, turn their table to a snare, to take themselves therein: And when they think full well to fare, then trap them in the gin. And let their eyes be dark and blind, that they may nothing see: Bow down their backs, and do them bind in thraldom for to be. Pour out thy wrath as hot as fire, that it on them may fall: Let thy displea∣sure in thine ire, take hold upon them all. As deserts dry, their house disgrace, their off-spring eke expell: That none thereof possess the place, nor in their tents do dwell. If thou dost strike the man to tame, on him they lay full sore; And if that thou dost wound the same, they seek to hurt him more.
Then let them heap up mischief still, sith they are all pervert: That of thy favour and good will, they never have a part. And rase them clean out of thy book of life, of hope, of trust: That for their names they never look in number of the just. The fourth Part. Tho' I, O Lord, with woe and grief have been full sore opprest: Thy help shall give me such relief, that all shall be redrest. That I may give thy Name the praise, and shew it with a song: I will extol the same always, with hearty thanks among. Which is more pleasant unto thee, (such mind thy grace hath born:) Than either Ox or Calf can be, that hath both hoof and horn. When simple folk do this behold, it shall rejoyce them sure: All ye that seek the Lord, behold, your life for aye shall dure.
For why? the Lord of hoasts doth hear the poor when they complain: His pris'ners are to him full dear, he doth them not disdain▪ Where∣fore the sky and earth below, the sea, with flood and stream: His praise they shall declare and show, with all that live in them. For sure our God will Sion save, and Juda's Cities build: Much folk possession there shall have, her streets shall all be fill'd: His servants seed shall keep the same, all ages out of minde: And there all they that love his Name, a dwelling place shall find. PSALM LXX. Deus in adjutorium. J. H. O God, to me take heed of help I thee require: O Lord of hoasts, with haste make speed, help, help, I thee desire. With shame confound them all, that seek my soul to spill: Rebuke them back with blame to fall, that think and wish me ill.
Confound them that apply, and seek to work me ill: And at my harm do laugh and cry, so, so, we have our will. But let them joyful be, in thee with joy and wealth: Which only trust and seek to thee, and to thy saving health. That they may say always, in mirth and one accord: All glory, honour, laud, and praise, be giv'n to thee, O Lord. But I am weak and poor, come, Lord, thine aid I lack: Thou art my stay and help, therefore make speed and be not slack. PSALM LXXI. In te Domine. J. H. MY Lord, my God, in all distress, my hope is whole in thee: Then let no shame my foul oppress, nor once take hold on me. As thou art just, defend me, Lord, and rid me out of dread: Give ear, and to my suit accord, and send me help at need.
Be thou my rock, to whom I may for aid all times resort: Thy promise is to help alway, thou art my fence and sort. Save me my God from wicked men, and from their strength and pow'r: From men unjust, and eke from them that cruelly devour. Thou art the slay wherein I trust, thou Lord of hoasts art he: Yea from my youth I had delight still to depend on thee. Thou hast me kept ev'n from my birth, and I through thee was born: Wherefore I will thee praise with mirth, both evening and at morn. As to a monster seldom seen, much folk about me throng▪ But thou. art now, and still hast been my sence and aid so strong. Wherefore my mouth no time shall lack thy glory and thy praise: And eke my tongue shall not be slack to honour thee always.
Refuse me not (O Lord) I say, when age my limbs doth take: And when my strength doth waste away, do not my soul forsake. Among themselves my foes inquire, to take me through deceit: And they against me do conspire, that for my soul laid wait. The second Part. Lay hand and take him now they said, for God from him is gone: Dis∣patch him quite, for to his aid (I wis) there cometh none. Do not ab∣sent thy self away, O Lord, when need shall be; But that in time of grief thou may in haste give help to me. With shame confound and overthrow all those that seek my life: Oppress them with rebuke also, that fain would work me strise. 14. But I will patiently abide thy help at all assays: Still more and more, each time and tide, I will set forth thy praise.
My mouth thy justice shall record, that daily help doth send: But of thy benefits, O Lord, I know no count nor end. Yet will I goe and seek forth one, with thy good help, O God: The saving health of thee alone to shew and set abroad. For of my youth thou took'st the care, and dost instruct me still: Therefore thy wonders to declare, I have great mind and will. And as in youth from wanton rage thou didst me keep and stay: Forsake me not unto mine age, and till my head be gray. The third part. That I thy strength and might may shew to them that now be here: And that our seed thy pow'r may know, hereafter many a year▪ O Lord, thy justice doth exceed, thy doings all may see: Thy works are wonderful indeed, O who is like to thee.
Thou mad'st, me feel affliction sore, and yet thou didst me save: Yea thou didst help and me restore, and took'st me from the grave. And thou mine honour dost increase, my dignity maintain: Yea thou dost make all grief to cease, and comfort'st me again. Therefore thy faithfulness to praise, I will with viol sing: My harp shall found thy praise alwaies, O Israels holy King. My mouth will joy with pleasant voyce, when I shall sing to thee: And eke my soul will much rejoyce, for thou hast made me free. My tongue thy uprightness shall sound, and speak it daily still. For grief and shame do them confound, that seek to work me ill. PSALM LXXII. Deus judicium. J. H. LOrd, give thy judgments to the King, therein instruct him well: And with his son, that princely thing, Lord, let thy justice dwell.
That he may govern uprightly, and rule thy folk aright: And so de∣fend through equity the poor that have no might. And let the mountains that are high unto thy folk give peace: And eke let little hills applie in justice to increase. That he may help the weak and poor with aid, and make them strong: And eke destroy for evermore all those that do them wrong. And then from age to age shall they, regard and fear thy might: So long as fun doth shine by day, or else the moon by night. Lord, make the King unto the just like rain to fields new mown: And like to drops that lay the dust, and fresh the land new sown. The just shall flourish in his time, and all shall be at peace: Until the moon shall leave to prime, waste, change, and to increase.
He shall be Lord of sea and land, from shore to shore throughout: And from the flouds within the land, through all the earth about. The people that in deserts dwell, shall kneel to him full thick: And all his en'mies that rebel, the earth and dust shall lick. The lords of all the isles thereby great gifts to him shall bring: The kings of Saba, and Araby give many'a costly thing. The second Part. All kings shall seek, with one accord, in his good grace to stand: And all the people of the world shall serve him at his hand. For he the needy sort doth save, that unto him do call: And eke the simple folk that have no help of man at all. He taketh pity on the poor, that are with need opprest: He doth preserve them evermore, and bring their soul to rest.
He shall redeem their lives from dread, from fraud, from wrong, from might: And eke the blood that they shall bleed is precious in his sight. But he shall live, and they shall bring to him of Saba's gold: He shall be honoured as a King, and daily be extol'd. The mighty mountains of his land of corn shall bear such throng: That it like cedar-trees shall stand in Libanus full long. Their cities eke full well shall speed, the fruits thereof shall pass: In plenty it shall far exceed, and spring as green as grass. For ever they shall praise his Name, while that the sun is light: And think them happy through the same, all folk shall bless his might. Praise ye the Lord of hosts, and sing to Israels, God each one: For he doth ev'ry wondrous things, yea he himself alone.
And blessed be his holy Name all times eternally: That all the earth may praise the same, Amen, Amen, say I. PSALM LXXII. Quam bonus Deus. T. S. HOwever it be, yet God is good, and kind to Israel: And to all such at safely keep their conscience pure and well. Yet like a fool I almost slipt, my feet began to slide: And ere I wist, ev'n at a pinch, my steps awry 'gan glide. For when I saw such foolish men, I grudg'd, and did disdain: That wicked men all things should have without turmoil or pain. They never suffer pangs nor grief, as if death should them smite: Their bodies are both stout and strong, and ever in good plight. And free from all adversity, when other men be shent: And with the rest they take no part of plague or punishment.
Therefore presumption doth embrace their necks as doth a chain: And are ev'n wrapt as in a robe, with rapine and disdain. They are so fed, that ev'n for fat their eyes oft-times out start: And as for worldly goods, they have more than can wish their heart. Their life is most licentious, boasting much of the wrong, Which they have done to simple men, and ever pry'd among. The heavens and the living Lord, they spare not to blaspheme: And prate they do on worldly things, no wight they do esteem. The people of God oft-times turn back, to see their prosp'rous state: And almost drink the self same cup, and follow the same rate. The second Part. How can it be that God, say they, should know or understand These worldly things, since wicked men be Lords of sea and land?
For we may see how wicked men in riches still increase: Rewarded well with worldly goods, and live in rest and peace. Then why do I from wickedness my fantasie refrain: And wash my hands with innocents, and cleanse my heart in vain? And suffer scourges every day, as subject to all blame: And every mor∣ning from my youth, sustain rebuke and shame? And I had almost said as they, misliking mine estate: But that I should thy children judge, as folk unfortunate. Then I bethought me how I might this matter understand: But yet the labour was too great, for me to take in hand. Until the time I went unto thine holy place; and then I understood right perfectly▪ the end of all these men.
And namely how thou settest them upon a slippery place: And at thy pleasure and thy will thou dost them all deface. Then all men muse at that strange sight, to see how suddenly They are destroy'd, dispatch'd, consum'd, and dead so horribly. Much like a dream, when one awakes so shall their wealth decay: Their famous names in all mens sight that ebb and pass away. The third Part. Yet thus my heart was grieved then my mind was much opprest: So fond was I and ignorant, and in this point a beast. Yet ne'retheless, by my right hand thou hold'st me always fast: And with thy counsel dost me guide to glory at the last. What thing is there that I can wish, but thee in heav'n above? And in the earth there is no thing like thee, that I can love.
My flesh and eke my heart doth fail, but God doth fail me never: For of my health God is the strength, my portion eke for ever. And lo, all such as thee forsake, thou shalt destroy each one: And those that trust in any thing, saving in thee alone. Therefore I will draw near to God and ever with him dwell: In God alone I put my trust, his wonders I will tell. PSALM LXXIV. Vt quid Deus. J. H. WHy art thou, Lord, so long from us, in all these dangers deep? Why doth thine anger kindle thus, at thine own pasture sheep? Lord, call the people to thy thought which have been thine so long: The which thou hast redeem'd and brought from bondage sore and strong. Have mind therefore, and think upon, remember it full well: Thy plea∣sant place, thy mount Sion, where thou wast wont to dwell.
Lift up thy foot, and come in hast, and all thy foes deface: Which now at pleasure rob and wast, within thy holy place. Amid thy congregations all, thine en'mies roar, O God: They set as signs on every wall, their banners 'splaid abroad. As men with axes hew down trees, that on the hills do grow: So shine the bills and swords of these within thy temple now. The cieling saw'd, the carved boards, the goodly graven stones, With axes, hammers, bils and swords, they beat them down at once. Thy places they consume with flame and eke in all this toil: The house appointed to thy Name, they rase down to the soil. And thus they say within their hearts, dispatch them out of hand: then burnt they up in every part Gods houses through the Land.
Yet thou no sign of help dost send, our Prophets all are gone: To tell when this our plague shall end, among us there is none. When wilt thou, Lord, once end this shame, and seise thine en'mies strong? Shall they always blaspheme thy name, and rail on thee so long? Why dost thou draw thy hand aback, and hide it in thy lap? Oh pluck it out, and be not slack to give thy foes a rap. The second Part. O God, thou art our King and Lord, and evermore hast been: Yea, thy good grace throughout the world for our good help hath seen. The seas that are so deep and dead thy might did make them dry: And thou didst break the Serpents head, that he therein did dye. Yea, thou didst break the heads so great, of Whales that are so fell: And gav'st them to the folk to eat, that in the deserts dwell.
Thou mad'st a spring with streams to rise, from rock both hard and high: And eke thy hand hath made likewise deep rivers to be drie. Both day and eke the night are thine, by thee they were begun: Thou setst to serve us with their shine, the moon and eke the sun. Thou didst appoint the ends and coasts of all the earth about: Both sum∣mer-heats and winter-frosts, thy hand hath found them out. Think on (O Lord) no time forget, thy foes that thee defame: And how the foolish folk are set, to rail upon thy Name. O let no cruel beasts devour the Turtle that is true: Forget not al∣ways in thy pow'r the poor that much do rue. Regard thy cov'nant, and behold, thy foes possess the land: All sad and dark, far worn and old, our realm as now doth stand.
Let not the simple go away, nor yet return with shame: But let the poor and needy aye, give praise unto thy Name. Rise (Lord) let be by thee maintain'd, the cause that is thine own: Remember how that thou blasphem'd art by the foolish one. The voice forget not of thy foes, for the presumption high, Is more and more increast of those that hate thee spitefully. PSALM LXXV. Confitebimur tibi. J. H. UN-to thee (God) will we give thanks, we will give-thanks to thee: Sith thy Name is so near, declare thy wondrous works will we. I will uprightly judge, when get convenient time I may: The earth is weak, and all therein, but I her pillars stay. I did to the mad people say, Deal not so furiously: And unto the ungodly ones, set not your horns on high:
I said unto them, Set not up your raised horns on hie; And see that you do with stiff neck, not speak presumptuously. For neither from the eastern parts, nor from the western side: Nor from forsaken wilderness, protection doth proceed. For why? the Lord our God he is the righteous judge alone: He put∣teth down the one, and sets another in the throne. For why? a cup of mighty wine is in the hand of God: And all the mighty wine therein, himself doth pour abroad. As for the lees and filthy dregs that do remain of it; The wicked of the earth shall drink, and suck them every whit. But I will talk of God, I say, of Jacobs God therefore: And will not cease to celebrate his praise for evermore.
In sunder break the horns of all ungodly men will I: But then the horns of righteous men shall be exalted high. GLORIA PATRI. To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all glory be therefore: As in be∣ginning was, is now, and shall be evermore. PSALM LXXVI. In Judaea. J. H. TO all that now in Jewry dwell, the Lord is clearly known: His Name is great In Israel, a people of his own. At Salem he his tents hath pight, to tarry there a space: In Sion eke he hath delight to make his dwelling place. And there he brake both shaft and bow, the sword, the spear, and shield: And brake the ray to overthrow in battel on the field. Thou art more worthy honour, Lord, more might in thee doth lie: Than in the strongest of the world, that rob on mountains high.
But now the proud are spoil'd through thee, and they are faln on sleep: Through men of war no help can be, themselves they could not keep. At thy rebuke, O Jacobs God, when thou didst-them reprove, As half on sleep their chariots stood, no horsemen once did move. For thou art dreadful, Lord indeed, what man the courage hath To bide thy sight, and doth not dread when thou art in thy wrath? When thou dost make thy judgments heard from heaven through the ground: Then all the earth full sore afraid, in silence shall be found. And that when thou, O Lord, dost stand in judgment for to speak, To save th'afflicted of the land, on earth that are full weak. The sury that in man doth reign shall turn unto thy praise: Hereaf∣ter, Lord, do thou restrain their wrath and threats alwaies.
Make vows, and pay them to our God, ye folk that nigh him be: Bring gifts all ye that dwell abroad, for dreadful sure is he. For he doth take both life and might from Princes great of birth: And full of terrour is his sight to all that dwell on earth. PSALM LXXVII. Voce mea. J. H. I With my voice to God do cry, with heart and hearty chear▪ My voice to God I lift on high, and he my suit doth hear. In time of grief I sought to God, by night no rest I took: But stretcht my hands to him abroad my soul comfort forsook. When I to think on God intend, my trouble then is more: I spake, but could not make an end, my breath was stopt so sore. Thou heldst mine eyes always from rest, that I alwaies awake: With fear I am so sore opprest, my speech doth me forsake.
The days of old in mind I cast, and oft did think upon: The times and ages that are past, full many years agone. By night my songs I call to mind, once made thy praise to show: And with my heart much talk I find, my sp'rits do search to know. Will God, said I, at once for all, cast off his people thus: So that hence∣forth no time he shall be friendly unto us? What? is his goodness clean decay'd for ever and a day: Or is his promise now delay'd, and doth his truth decay? And will the Lord our God forget his mercies manifold? Or shall his wrath increase so hot, his mercy to with-hold? At last, I said, my weakness is the cause of this distrust: Gods mighty hand can help all this, and change it when he lust.
The second Part. I will regard and think upon the working of the Lord: Of all his wonders past and gone, I gladly will record. Yea all his works I will declare, and what he did devise: To tell his facts I will not spare, and eke his Counsel wise. Thy works, O Lord, are all upright, and holy all abroad: What one hath strength to match the might of thee O Lord our God. Thou art a God that dost forth show thy goodness every hour: And so dost make the people know thy vertue and thy pow'r. And thine own folk thou dost defend, with strength and stretched arm: The sons of Jacob that descend, and Josephs seed from harm. The wa∣ters, Lord, perceived thee, the waters saw thee well: And they for fear away did flee, the depths on trembling fell.
The clouds that were both thick and black, did rain full plenteously: The thunder in the air did crack, thy shafts abroad did fly. Thy thunder in the air was heard, thy light'nings from above, With stshes great made men afraid, the earth did quake and move. Thy ways within the sea do lye, thy paths in waters deep: Yet none can there thy sleps espy, nor know thy paths to keep. Thou ledst thy folk upon the land, as sheep on every side: Through Moses and through. Aarons hand, thou didst them safely guide. PSALM LXXVIII. Attendite populi J. H. ATtend my people to my Law, and to my words incline: My mouth shall speak strange parables, and sentences divine. Which we our selves have heard and learn'd ev'n of our fathers old: And which for our instruction, our fathers have us told.
Because we should not keep it close from them that should come after: Who should Gods pow'r to their race praise and all his works of wonder. To Jacob he commandment gave, how Israel should live: Willing our fa∣thers should the same unto their children give. That they and their posterity that were not sprung up tho, Should have the knowledge of the law and teach their seed also. That they might have the better hope in God that is above: And not forget to keep his laws, and his precepts in love. Not being as their fathers were, rebelling in Gods sight: And would not frame their wicked hearts to know their God aright. How went The people of Ephraim, their neighbours for to spoil: Shooting their darts the day of war, and yet they took the foil?
For why? they did not keep with God the cov'nant that was made: Nor yet would walk or lead their lives accordine to his trade. But put into oblivion his counsel and his will: And all his works most magnifick, which he declared still. The second Part. What wonders to our forefathers did he himself disclose In Egypt land, within the field that call'd is Thaneos? He did divide and cut the sea, that they might pass at once: And made the waters stand as still, as doth an heap of stones. He led them secret in a cloud by day when it was bright: And in the night when dark it was, with fire he gave them light. He brake the rocks in wilderness, and gave the people drink, As plentiful as when the deeps do flow up to the brink.
He drew out rivers out of rocks, that were both dry and hard: Of such abundance, that no floods to them might be compar'd. Yet for all this, against the Lord their sin they did increase: And stirred him that is most high, to wrath in wilderness. They tempted God within their hearts, like people of mistrust: Requi∣ring such a kind of meat, as served to their lust. Saying with murmu∣ration in their unfaithfulness: What? can this God prepare for us a feast in wilderness? Behold he struck the stony rock, and floods forthwith did flow: But can he now give to his folk, both bread and flesh also? When God heard this, he waxed wroth with Jacob and his seed: So did his indig∣nation on Israel proceed.
The third part. Because they did not faithfully believe, and hope that he Could always help, and succour them in their necessity. Wherefore he did command the clouds, forthwith they brake in sunder, And rain'd down Manna for them to eat a food of mickle wonder. When earthly men with Angels food, were fed at their request: He bad the East-wind blow away, and brought in the South-West, And rain'd down flesh as thick as dust, and fowls as thick as sand: Which he did cast amidst the place where all their tents did stand. Then did they eat exceedingly, and all men had their fills: Yet more and more they did desire to serve their lusts and wills. But as the meat was in their mouths, his wrath upon them fell: And slew the flower of their youth, and choice of Israel.
Yet fell they to their wonted sin, and still they did him grieve: For all the wonders that he wrought, they would him not believe. Their days therefore he shortened, and made their honour vain: Their years did wear and pass away, with terrour and with pain. But ever when he plagued them, they sought him by and by: Re∣membring that he was their strength, their help and God most high. Though in their mouths they did but glose, and flatter with the Lord: And with their tongues, and in their hearts dissembled every word. The fourth Part. For why? their hearts were nothing bent to him, nor to his trade: Nor yet to keep or to perform the cov'nant that was made. Yet was he still so merciful, when they deserv'd to dye: That he forgave them their misdeeds,
and would not them destroy.  Yea, many, a time he turn'd his wrath, and did himself advise; And would not suffer all his whole displeasure to arise. Consid'ring that they were but flesh, and even as a wind, Passing away, and can∣not well return by his own kind. How oft-times in the wilderness did they the Lord provoke? How did they move and stir the Lord to plague them with his stroke? Yet did they turn again to sin, and tempted God est soon: Prescribing to the holy Lord, what things they would have done. Not thinking of his hand and pow'r, nor of the day when he Deli∣ver'd them out of the hands of their fierce enemy. Nor how he wrought his miracles, (as they themselves beheld) In Egypt, and the won∣ders that he did in Zoan-field.
Nor how he turned by his pow'r, their waters into blood: That no man might receive his drink at river or at flood. Nor how he sent them swarms of flies: which did them sore annoy: And fill'd their coun∣trey full of frogs, which did their land destroy. The fifth Part. Nor how he did commit their fruits unto the caterpiller: And all the labour of their hands he gave to the grashopper. With hail∣stones he destroi'd their vines, so that they were all lost: And not so much as wild fig-trees, but he consum'd with frost. And yet with hail-stones once again the Lord their cattle smote: And all their flocks and herds likewise with thunder-bolts full hot. He cast upon them in his ire, and in his fury strong, Displeasure, wrath, and evil sp'rits, to trouble them among.
Then to his wrath he made a way, and spared not the least: But gave unto the pestilence the man and eke the beast. He struck al∣so the first-born all, that up in Egypt came: And all the chief of men and beasts within the tents of Ham. But as for all his own dear folk, he did preserve and keep: And carried them through wilderness, ev'n like a flock of sheep. With∣out all fear both safe and sound he brought them out of thrall: Whereas their foes with rage of seas were overwhelmed all. And brought them out into the coast of his own holy land: Ev'n to the mount which he had got by his strong arm and hand. And there cast out the heathen folk, and did their land divide: And in their tents he set the tribes of Israel to abide.
Yet for all this their God most high they stirr'd and tempted still: And would not keep his testament, nor yet obey his will. But as their fathers turned back, ev'en so they went astray: Much like a bow that would not bend, but slip and start away. The sixth Part. And griev'd him with their hill-altars, with off'rings and with fire: And with their idols vehemently provoked him to ire. Therewith his wrath began again to kindle in his breast: The naughtiness of Israel he did so much detest. Then he forsook the Tabernacle o Shiloh, where he was Right conversant with earthly men, ev'n as his dwelling place. Then suff'red he his might and pow'r in bondage for to stand: And gave the honour of his Ark into his e'nmies hand.
And did commit them to the sword, wroth with his heritage: Their young men were devour'd with fire, maids had no marriage. And with the swords the Priests also did perish every one: And not a widow left alive their death for to bemone. And then the Lord began to wake, like one that slept a Time: And like a valiant man of war, refreshed after wine. With Emrods in the hinder parts he strake his en'mies all: And put them then unto a shame, that was perpetual. Then he the tents and Tabernacle of Joseph did refuse: As for the Tribe of Ephraim, he would in no wise chuse. But chose the Tribe of Jehuda, whereas he thought to dwell: Even the noble mount Sion, which he did love so well.
Whereas he did his Temple build both sumptuously and sure: Like as the earth which he hath made for ever to endure. Then chose he David him to serve, his people for to keep: Whom he took up and brought away even from the folds of sheep. As he did follow th' Ewes with young, the Lord did him advance: To feed his people Israel, and his inheritance. Thus David with a faithful heart, his flock and charge did feed: And prudently with all his pow'r did govern them indeed. PSALM LXXIX. Deus, venerunt J. H. O God, the Gentiles do invade, thine heritage to spoil: Jeru∣salem an heap is made, thy Temple they defile. The bodies of thy Saints most dear, abroad to birds they cast: The flesh of them that do thee fear, the beasts devour and wast.
Their blood throughout Jerusalem as water spilt they have: So that there is not one of them, to lay their dead in grave. Thus are we made a laughing-stock almost the world throughout: The en'mies at us, jest and mock, which dwell our coasts about. Wilt thou, O Lord, thus in thine ire against us ever sume: And shew thy wrath as hot as fire, thy folk for to consume. Upon those people pour the same, which did thee never know: All Realms which call not on thy Name consume and overthrow. For they have got the upper hand, and Jacobs seed destroy'd: His ha∣bitation and his land they have left waste and void. Bear not in mind our former faults, with speed some pity show: And aid us, Lord, in all assaults, for we are weak and low.
The second Part. O God, that gav'st all health and grace, on us declare the same: Weigh not our works, our sins deface, for honour of thy Name. Why shall the wicked still alway, to us as people dumb, In thy re∣proach, rejoice and say, where is their God become? Require, O Lord, as thou seest good, before our eyes in sight; Of all these folk thy servants blood, which they spilt in despight. Receive into thy sight in hast the clamours, grief, and wrong, Of such as are in prison cast, sustaining Irons strong. Thy force and strength to celebrate, Lord, set them out of band, Which unto death are destinate, and in their en'mies hand. The ntions which have been so bold as to blaspheme thy Name, In∣to their laps with seven fold repay again the same.
So we thy flook and pasture sheep will praise thee evermore: And teach all Nations for to keep, for thee like praise in store. PSALM LXXX. Qui-regis Israel. J. H. THou Shepherd that Isr'el dost keep, give ear and take good heed: Which leadest Joseph like a sheep, and dost him watch and feed. Thou, Lord, I say, whose seat is set on Cherubims most bright: Shew forth thy self, and do not let, send down thy beams of light. Before Ephraim and Benjamin, Manasses eke likewise: To shew thy pow'r do thou begin, come, help us, Lord, arise. Direct our hearts unto thy grace, convert us, Lord, to thee: Shew us the brightness of thy face, and then full safe are we. Lord God of hoasts of Israel, how long wilt thou, I say, Against thy folk in anger swell, and wilt not hear them pray?
Thou dost them feed with sorrows deep, their bread with tears they eat: and drink the tears that they do weep, in measure full and great. Thou hast us made a very strife, to those that dwell about: And that our foes do love a life, they laugh and jest it out. O take us, Lord, unto thy grace, convert our hearts to thee: Shew forth to us thy joyful face, and we full safe shall be. From Egypt where it grew not well, thou brought'st a vine full dear: The heathen folk thou did'st expel, and thou didst plant it there. Thou didst prepare for it a place, and set her roots full fast: That it did grow and spring apace, and fill'd the land at last. The second Part. The hills were cover'd round about with shade that from it came: And eke the Cedars strong and stout, with branches of the same.
Why then didst thou her walls destroy? her hedge pluckt up thou hast: That all the folk that pass thereby, thy vine may spoil and wast. The Boar out of the wood so wild, doth-dig and root it out: The furious beasts out of the field devour it all about. O Lord of hosts, return again, from heaven look betime: Behold, and with thy help sustain this poor vineyard of thine. Thy plant, I say, thine Israel, whom thy right hand hath set: The same which thou didst love so well, O Lord, do not forget. They lop and cut it down apace, they burn it eke with fire: And through the frowning of thy face we perish in thine ire. Let thy right hand be with them now whom thou hast kept so long: And with the son of man whom thou to thee host made so strong.
And so when thou hast set us free, and saved us from shame: , Then will we never fall from thee, but call upon thy Name. O Lord of Hosts, through thy-good grace convert us unto thee: Be∣hold us with a pleasant face, and then full safe are w. PSALM LXXXI. Exultate Deo. J. H. BE light and glad, in God rejoyce, which is our strength and stay: Be joyful, and lift up your voice to Jacob's God, I say. Prepare your instruments most meet, some joyful Psalm to sing: Strike up with harp and lute so sweet, on every pleasant string. Blow as it were in the new moon, with trumpets of the best: As it is used to be done at any solemn feast. For this is unto Israel a statute and a trade: A law that must be kept full well, which Jacobs God hath made.
This clause with Joseph was decreed, when he from Egypt came, That as a witness all his seed should still observe the same. When God, I say, had so prepar'd to bring him from that land: Whereas the speech which he had heard, he did not understand. I from his shoulders took (saith he) the burthen clean away: And from the furnace set him free from burning brick of clay. When thou in grief didst cry and call, I helpt thee by and by: And I did answer thee withal in thunder secretly. Yea, at the waters of discord I did thee tempt and prove: Whereas the goodness of the Lord with mutt'ring thou didst move. Hear, O my folk, O Israel, and I assure it thee: Regard, and mark my words full well, if thou wilt cleave to me.
The second Part. Thou shalt no God in thee reserve, of any land abroad: Nor in no wife bow to or serve a strange or foreign god. I am the Lord thy God, and I from Egypt set thee free: Then ask of me abun∣dantly, and I will give it thee. And yet my people would not hear my voice when that I spake: Nor Israel would not obey, but did me quite forsake. Then did I leave them to their will, in hardness of their heart, To walk in their own counsels still, themselves they might pervert. O that my people would have heard the words that I did say: And eke that Israel would regard to walk within my way: How soon would I confound their foes, and bring them down full low: And turn my hand upon all those that would them overthrow.
And they that at the Lord do rage, as slaves should seek him till: But of his folk the time and age should flourish ever still. I would have fed them with the crop, and finest of the wheat: And made the rock with honey drop, that they their fills should eat. PSALM LXXXII. Deus stetit. J. H. AMid the press with men of might the Lord himself doth stand, To plead the cause of truth and right, with judges of the land. How long (saith he) will you proceed false judgment to award, And have respect for love of meed, the wicked to regard. Whereas of due you should defend the fatherless and weak: And when the poor man doth contend, in iudgment justly speak. If ye be wise, defend the cause of poor men in their right: And rid the needy from the claws of tyrants force and might.
But nothing will they know or learn, in vain to them I talk: They will not see, or ought discern, but still in darkness walk. For lo, ev'n now the time is come, that all things fall to nought: And likewise laws both all and some, for gain are sold and bought. I had decreed it in my sight, as gods to take you all: And chil∣dren to the most of might for love I did you call. But notwithstanding ye shall die as men, and so decay. O tyrants I shall you destroy, and pluck you quite away. Up, Lord, and let thy strength be known, and judge the world with might: For why? all nations are thine own, to take them as thy right. PSALM LXXXIII. Deus qui similis. J. H. DO not (O God) refrain thy tongue, in silence do not stay: Withhold not, Lord, thy self so long, and make no more delay.
For why? behold thy foes, and see how they do rage and cry: And those that bear an hate to thee, hold up their heads on high. Against thy folk they use deceit, and craftily they inquire: For thine elect to lye in wait, their counsel doth conspire. Come on, say they, let us expell and pluck those folk away: So that the name of Israel may utterly decay. They all conspire within their heart, how they may thee withstand: A∣gainst the Lord to take a part they are in league and band. The tents of all the Edomites, the Ismaelites also: The Hagarens and Moabites, with divers others moe. Gebal with Ammon, and likewise doth Amalek conspire: The Phi∣listines against thee rise, with them that dwell at Tyre.
And Ashur eke is well appaid with them in league to be: And doth become a sence and aid to Lot's posterity. As thou didst to the Mid'anites, so serve them, Lord, each one: As to Sit'ra and to Jabin, beside the brook Kison: Whom thou in Endor didst destroy and waste them through thy might: That they like dung on earth did lie, and that in open sight. The second Part. Make them now and their Lords appear like Zeb and Oreb than: As Zeba and Zalmunna were, the Kings of Midian. Which said, let us throughout the land in all the coasts abroad, Possess and take into our hand the fair houses of God. Turn them, O God, with storms as fast as wheels that have no stay: Or like the chass which men do cast, with winds to fly away.
Like as the fire with rage and sume, the mighty forests spills: And as the flame doth quite consume the mountains and the hills: So let the tempest of thy wrath, upon their necks be laid: And of thy stormy wind and show'r, Lord, make them all afraid. Lord, bring them all, I thee desire, to such rebuke and shame: That it may cause them to inquire, and learn to know thy name, And let them evermore daily to shame and slander fall: And in re∣buke and obloquy to perish eke withall. That they may know and feell full well that thou art called Lord: And that alone thou dost excell, and reign throughout the world PSALM LXXXIV. Quam dilecta. J. H. HOw pleasant is thy dwelling place, O Lord of hosts to me! The Tabernacles of thy grace, how pleasant Lord they be.
My soul doth long full sore to go into thy Courts abroad: My heart doth lust, my flesh also, in thee the living God. The Sparrows find a room to rest, and save themselves from wrong: And eke the swallow hath a nest, wherein to keep her young. These birds full nigh thine Altar may have place to sit and sing: O Lord of hosts, thou art, I say, my God, and eke my King. Oh they be blessed that may dwell within thy house always: For they all times thy facts do tell, and ever give thee praise. Yea, happy sure likewise are they, whose strength and stay thou art: Which to thy house do mind the way, and seek it in their heart. As they go through the vale of tears, they dig up fountains still: That as a spring it all appears, and thou dost their pits fill.
From strength to strength they walk full fast, no faintness there shall be: And so the God of Gods at last in Sion they do see. O Lord of hosts to me give heed; and hear when I do pray: And let it through thine ears proceed, O Jacobs God, I say. O Lord, our shield, of thy good grace regard and so draw near: Re∣gard, I say, behold the face of thine anointed dear. For why? within thy courts one day is better to abide: Than other where to keep or stay a thousand days beside. Much rather would I keep a door within the house of God: Than in▪ the tents of wickedness to settle mine abode. For God the Lord, light and defence will grace and worship give: And no good thing shall he with-hold from them that purely live.
O Lord of hosts, that man is blest, and happy sure is he: That is per∣swaded in his breast, to trust all times in thee. PSALM LXXXV. Benedixisti Dom. J. H. THou hast been merciful indeed, O Lord, unto thy land: For thou restored'st Jacobs seed from thraldom, out of hand. The wicked ways that they were in thou didst them clean remit: And thou didst hide the peoples sin, full close thou coverd'st it. Thine anger eke thou didst asswage that all thy wrath is gone: And so didst turn thee from thy rage, with them to be at one. O God, our health, do now convert thy people unto thee: Put all thy wrath from us apart, and angry cease to be. Why shall thine anger never end, but still proceed on us? And shall thy wrath it self extend, upon all ages thus?
Wilt thou not rather turn therefore, and quicken us, that we, And all thy folk, may evermore be glad and joy in thee? O Lord, on us do thou declare thy goodness to our wealth: Shew forth to us, and do not spare thine aid and saving health. I will heark what God saith, for he speaks to his people peace, And to his saints, that never they return to foolishness. For why? his help is still at hand to such as do him fear: Whereby great glory in our land shall dwell and flourish there. For truth and mercy there shall meet in one to take their place: And peace shall Justice with kiss greet, and there they shall embrace. As truth from earth shall spring apace and flourish pleasantly: So right'ousness shall shew her face, and look from heaven high.
Yea, God himself shall take in hand to give us each good thing: And through the coasts of all the land the earth her fruit shall bring. Before his face shall Justice go, much like a guide or stay: He shall direct his steps also, and keep them in the way. PSALM LXXXVI. Inclina, Domine. J. H. LOrd, how thine ear to my request, and hear me by and by: With grievous pain and grief opprest, full poor and weak am I. Preserve my soul, because my ways and doings holy be: And save thy servant, O my Lord, that puts his trust in thee. Thy mercy (Lord) on me express, defend me eke withal: For through the day I do not cease on thee to cry and call: Comfort (O Lord) thy servants soul that now with pain is pin'd, For unto thee (Lord) I extol and ist my soul and minde:
For thou art good and bountiful, thy gifts of grace are free: And eke thy mercy plentiful to all that call on thee: O Lord likewise when I do pray, regard and give an ear: Mark well the words that I do say, and all my prayers hear. In time when trouble doth me move, to thee I do complain: For why? I know and well do prove, thou answ'rest me again. Among the gods (O Lord) is none with thee to be compar'd: And none can do as thou alone, the like hath not been heard. The second Part. The Gentiles and the People all, which thou didst make and frame, Before thy face on knees will fall, and glorifie thy name. For why? thou art so much of might, all power is thine own: Thou workest wonders still in sight, for thou art God alone.
O teach me, Lord, thy way, and I shall in thy truth proceed: O joyn my heart to thee so nigh, that it thy Name may dread. To thee, my God, will I give praise, with all my heart, O Lord: And glorifie thy Name always, for ever through the World. For why? thy mercy shew'd to me is great, and doth excell: Thou set'st my soul at liberty, out from the lower hell. O Lord, the proud against me rise, and heaps of men of might: They seek my soul, and in no wise will have me in their sight. Thou, Lord, art merciful and meek, full slack and slow to wrath: Thy goodness is full great, and eke thy truth no measure hath. Oh turn to me and mercy grant, thy strength to me apply: O help and save thine own servant, thy handmaids son am I.
On me some sign of favour show: that all my foes may see, And be asham'd, because (Lord) thou dost help, and succour me. PSALM LXXXVII. Fundamenta ejus. J. H. THat City shall full well endure, her ground-work still doth stay Upon the holy hill full sure, it can no time decay. God loves the gates of Sion best, his grace doth there abide: He loves them more than all the rest of Jacob's tents beside. Full glorious things reported be in Sion and abroad: Great things I say, are said of thee thou City of our God. On Rahab I will cast an eye, and bear in mind the same: And Babylon shall eke apply, and learn to know thy Name. Loe, Palestine and Tyre also, with Ethiope likewise: A people old, full long ago were born and there did rise.
Of Sion they shall say abroad, that divers men of fame Have there sprung up, and the high God hath founded fast the same. In their records to them it shall through God's device appear, Of Sion, that the chief of all, had his beginning there. The trumpeters with such as sing, there in great plenty be: My fountains and my pleasant springs are compast all in thee. PSALM LXXXVIII. Domine Deus. J. H. LOrd God of health, the hope and stay, thou art alone to me: I call and cry throughout the day, and all the night to thee. O let my prayer soon ascend unto thy sight on high: Incline thine ear, O Lord, attend, and hearken to my cry. For why? my soul with woe is fill'd, and doth in trouble dwell: My life and breath almost doth yield, and draweth nigh to bell.
I am esteem'd as one of them, that in the pit do fall: And made as one among those men that have no strength at all. As one among the dead, and free from things that here remain: It were more ease for me to be, with them the which are slain. As those that lie in grave, I say, whom thou hast clean forgot: The which thy hand hath cut away, and thou regard'st them not. Yea, like to one shut up full sure, within the lower pit: In places dark, and all obscure, and in the depth of it. Thine anger and thy wrath likewise full sore on me doth lye: And all thy storms against me rise, my soul to vex and try. Thou put'st my friends far off from me, and mak'st them hate me sore: I am shut up in prison fast, and can come sorth no more.
My sight doth fail through grief and woe, I call to thee, O God: Throughout the day my hand also to thee I stretch abroad. The second Part. Dost thou unto the dead declare, thy wondrous works of fame? Shall dead to life again repair, and praise thee for the same? Or shall thy loving kindness Lord be preached in the grave? Or shall with them that are destroy'd thy truth her honour have? Shall they that lye in dark full low, of all thy wonders wot? Or there shall they thy justice know, where all things are forgot? But I, O Lord, to thee alway do cry and call apace: My prayer eke ere it be day, shall come before thy face. Why dost thou, Lord, abhor my soul, in grief that seeketh thee? And now, O Lord, why dost thou hide thy face away from me?
I am afflict, as dying still, from youth this many a year: The terrours which do vex me ill, with troubled mind I bear. The furies of thy wrathful rage, full sore upon me fall: Thy terrors eke do not asswage, but me oppress withall. All day they compass me about, as water at the tide: And all at once with streams sull stout beset me on each side. Thou settest far from me my friends and lovers every one: Yea, and mine old acquaintance all, out of my sight are gone. PSALM. LXXXIX Misericordias. J. H. TO sing the mercies of the Lord, my tongue shall never spare: And with my mouth from age to age, thy truth I will declare. For I have said that mercy shall for evermore remain: In that thou dost the heaven stay, thy truth appeareth plain.
To mine elect, saith God, I made a cov'nant and behest: My servant David to perswade, I sware and did protest. Thy seed for ever I will stay, and 'stablish it full fast: And still uphold thy throne alway, from age to age to last. The heavens shew with joy and mirth thy wondrous works, O Lord: Thy Saints within thy Church on earth thy faith and truth record. Who with the Lord is equal then, in all the clouds abroad? Among the sons of all the gods, what one is like our God? God in th' assembly of the Saints, is greatly to be dread: And over all that dwell about, in terror to be had. Lord God of hoasts, in all the world what one is like to thee? On eve∣ry side, most mighty Lord, thy truth is seen to be.
The raging Sea by thine advice thou rulest at thy will: And when the waves thereof arise, thou mak'st them calm and still. And Egypt, Lord, thou hast subdu'd, and thou hast it destroy'd; Yea, thou thy foes with mighty arm hast scatter'd all abroad. The second Part. The heav'ns are thine, and still have been, likewise the earth and Land: The world, and all that is therein, thou foundedst with thy hand. Both north and south, with east and west thy self didst make and frame: Both Tabor mount, and eke Hermon, rejoice and praise thy Name. Thine arm is strong and full of pow'r, all might therein doth lye: The strength of thy right hand each hour thou listest up on high. In right'ousness and equity thou hast thy seat and place: Mercy and truth are still with thee, and go before thy face.
That folk is blest that knows aright thy present pow'r, O God: For in the favour of thy sight, they walk full safe abroad. For in thy name throughout the day they joy and much rejoice: And through thy right'ousness have they a pleasant fame and noise. For why, their glory, strength, and aid, in thee alone doth lye: Thy goodness eke that hath us staid, shall lift our horn on high. Our strength that doth defend us well, the Lord to us doth bring: The Holy One of Israel, he is our Guide and King. Sometimes thy will unto thy saints in visions thou didst show: And thus then didst thou say to them, thy mind to make them know. A man of might I have erect, your King and guide to be: And set him up whom I elect among the folk to me.
The third part. My servant David I appoint, whom I have searched out: And with my holy oyl anoint him King of all the rout. For why? my hand is ready still with him for to remain: And with mine arm also I will him strengthen and sustain. The en'mies shall him not oppress, they shall not him devour: Nor yet the sons of wickedness on him have any pow'r. His foes likewise I will destroy before his face in sight: And those that hate him I will plague, and strike them with my might. My truth and mercy eke withal, shall still upon him lie: And in my Name is horn eke shall be lifted up on high. His Kingdom I will set to be upon the sea and land: And eke the running floods shall be embrace with his right hand.
He shall depend with all his heart on me, and thus shall say: My Father and my God thou art, my rock of health and stay. As my first-born I will him take, of all on earth that springs: His might and honour I will make above all worldly Kings. My mercy shall be with him still, as I my self have told: My faith∣full cov'nant to fulfill my mercy I will hold. And eke his Seed I will sustain for ever strong and sure: So that his seed shall still remain while heaven doth endure. The fourth Part. If that his sons forsake my Law, and so begin to swerve: And of my judgments have no awe, nor will not them observe: Or if they will not use aright my statutes to them made, And set all my commandments light, and will not keep my trade.
Then with the Rod will I begin, their doings to amend: And so will scourge them for their sin, if that they do offend. My mercy yet and my goodness, I will not take him fro: Nor handle him with craftiness, and so my truth forgoe. But sure my cov'nant I will hold with all that I have spoke: No word the which my lips have told: shall alter or be broke. Once sware I by my holiness, and that perform will I: With David I will keep promise, to him I will not lie. His seed for evermore shall reign, and eke his throne of might: As doth the Sun, it shall remain or ever in my sight. And as the Moon within the sky for ever standeth fast: A faithful witness from on high, so shall his Kingdom last.
But now, O Lord, thou dost reject, and now thou changest chear: Yea, thou art wrath with thine elect, thine own anointed dear. The cov'nant with thy servant made, Lord thou hast quite undone: And down upon the ground also hast cast his royal crown. The fifth Part. Thou pluck'st his hedges up with might his walls thou dost confound: Thou beatest eke his bulwarks down, and break'st them to the ground: That he is sore destroy'd and torn, of comers by throughout: And so is made a mock and scorn to all that dwell about. Thou their right hand hast lifted up, that him so sore annoy: And all his foes that him devour, loe, thou hast made to joy. His swords edge thou dost take away that should his foes withstand: To him in war no victory thou giv'st, nor upper hand.
His glory thou dost also wast, his throne, his joy and mirth, By thee are overthrown, and cast full low upon the earth. Thou hast cut off and made full short his youth and lusty days: And rais'd of him an ill report, with shame and great dispraise. How long away from me, O Lord, for ever wilt thou turn? And shall thine anger still alway, as fire consume and burn? O call to mind, remember then, my time consumeth fast: Why hast thou made the sons of men as things in vain to wast? What man is he that liveth here, and death shall never see? Or from the hand of Hell his soul shall he deliver free? Where is (O Lord) thine old goodness so oft declar'd before, Which by thy truth and uprightness to David thou hast swore?
The great rebukes to mind I call, that on thy servants lye: The rai∣lings of the people all born in my breast have I. Wherewith, O Lord, thine en'mies blasphemed have thy Name: The steps of thine anointed one they cease not to defame. All praise to thee, O Lord of hosts, both now and eke for aye: Through sky, and earth, and all the coasts, Amen, Amen, I say. PSALM XC. Domine refugium. J. H. THou Lord hast been our sure defence, our place of ease and rest: In all times past, yea, so long since, as cannot be exprest. E're there was made mountain or hill, the earth or world abroad: From age to age, and always still, for ever thou art God. Thou grindest man through grief and pain, to dust or clay, and then: And then thou said'st return again, again ye sons of men.
The lasting of a thousand years, what is it in thy sight? As yesterday it doth appear, or as a watch by night. So soon as thou dost scatter them, then is their life and trade all as a fleep, and like the grass, whose beauty soon doth fade. Which in the morning shines full bright, but fadeth by and by: And is cut down e're it be night, all wither'd, dead, and dry. For through thine anger we consume, our might is much decay'd: And of thy fervent wrath and fume, we are full sore afraid. The wicked works that we have wrought thou sett'st before thine eye: Our privy faults, yea eke our thoughts thy countenance doth spy. For through thy wrath our days do waste, thereof doth nought remain: Our years consume as words or blasts, and are not call'd again.
Our time is threescore years and ten that we do live on mold: If one see fourscore, surely then we count him wondrous old. The second Part. Yet of this time the strength and chief the which we count upon: Is nothing else but painful grief, and we like blasts are gone. Who once doth know what strength is there, what might thine anger hath? Or in his heart he doth thee fear according to thy wrath? Instruct us, Lord, to know and try, how long our days remain: That then we may our hearts apply true wisdom to obtain. Return, O Lord, how long wilt thou forth on in wrath proceed? Shew favour to thy servants now, and help them at their need. Refresh us with thy mercy soon, and then our joy shall be: All times so long as life doth last, in heart rejoice shall we.
As thou hast plagued us before, now also make us glad: And for the years wherein full sore affliction we have had. O let thy work and pow'r appear, and on thy servants light: And shew unto thy children dear thy glory and thy might. Lord let thy grace and glory stand on us thy servants thus: Confirm the works we take in hand, Lord prosper them to us. PSALM XCI. Qui habitat. J. H. HE that within the secret place, of God most high doth dwell: In shadow of the mightiest grace, at rest shall keep him well. Thou art my hope and my strong hold, I to the Lord will say: My God is he, in him will I my whole affiance slay. He shall defend thee from the share the which the hunter laid: And from the deadly plagu and care whereof thou art afraid,
And with his wings shall cover thee, and keep thee safely there: His faith and truth thy fence shall be, as sure as shield and spear. So that thou shalt not need, I say, to fear or be afright of all the shafts that fly by day, nor terrors of the night. Nor of the plague, that privily doth walk in dark so fast: Nor yet of that which doth destroy, and at noon days doth waste. Yea, at thy side as thou dost stand, a thousand dead shall be: Ten thousand eke at thy right hand, and yet thou shalt be free. But thou shalt see it for thy part, thine eyes shall well regard: That even like to their desert, the wicked have regard. For why, O Lord, I only lust, to stay my hope on thee: And in the high'st I put my trust, my sure defence is he.
Thou shalt not need none ill to fear, with thee it shall be well: Nor yet the Plague shall once come near the house where thou dost dwell. For why, unto his Angels all, with charge commanded he: That still in all thy ways they shall preserve and prosper thee. And in their hands shall bear thee up, still waiting thee upon: So that thy foot shall never chance to spurn at any stone. Upon the Lion thou shalt go, the Adder fell and long: And tread upon the Lions young, with Dragons stout and strong. For he that trusteth unto me, I will dispatch him quite: And him de∣fend, because that he doth know my Name aright. When he for health to me doth cry, an answer I will give: And from his grief take him will I, in glory for to live.
With length of years, and days of wealth, I will fulfil his time: The goodness of my saving health, I will declare to him. PSALM XCII. Bonum est. J. H. IT is a thing both good and meet, to praise the highest Lord: And to thy Name, O thou most High, to sing with one accord. To shew the goodness of the Lord betime e're day be light: And eke declare his truth abroad, when it doth draw to night. Upon ten stringed Instruments, on lute and harp so sweet: with all the mirth you can invent of Instruments most meet. For thou hast made me to rejoice in things so wrought by thee: And I have joy in heart and voice, thine handy works to see. O Lord, how glorious and how great are all thy works throughout? So deeply are thy counsels set, that none can find them out.
The man unwise hath not the wit, this work to pass to bring: And all such fools are nothing fit to understand this thing. When so the wicked at their will, as grass do spring full fast: They when they flourish in their ill, for ever shall be wast. But thou art mighty, Lord most High, yea thou dost reign therefore: In ev'ry time eternally, both now and evermore. The second Part. For why? O Lord, behold and see, behold thy foes, I say: How all that work iniquity shall perish and decay. But thou like as an Unicorn shalt lift my horn on high: With fresh and new prepared oyl, thine oynted King am I. And of my foes before mine eyes shall see the fall and shame: Of all that up against me rise, mine ears shall hear the same.
The just shall flourish up on high, as Date-trees bud and blow: And as the Cedars multiply in Libanus that grow. For they are planted in the place. and dwelling of our God: Within his Courts they spring apace, and flourish all abroad. And in their age much fruit shall bring, both fat and well be seen: And pleasantly both bud and spring, with boughs and branches green. To shew that God is good and just, and upright in his will: He is my rock, my hope, and trust, in him there is none ill. PSALM XCIII. Dominus regnavit. J. H. THe Lord as King aloft doth reign, in majestie most bright: And he to shew his strength and pow'r, hath girt himself with might. The Lord likewise the earth hath made, and shaped it so sure: No night can make it move or fade, at stay it doth endure.
Ere that the world was made or wrought, thy seat was set before: Beyond all time that can be thought, thou hast been evermore. The floods, O Lord, the floods arise, they roar and make a noise: The floods (I say) did enterprise, and lifted up their voice. Yea though the storms arise in sight, though Seas do rage and swell: The Lord is strong and more of might, for he on high doth dwell. And look what promise he doth make, his houshold to defend: For just and true they shall it take, all times without an end. PSALM XCIV. Deus ultionum. J. H. O Lord thou dost revenge all wrong, that office 'longs to thee: Sith vengeance doth to thee belong, declare that all may see. Set forth thy self, for thou of right the earth dost judge and guide: Reward the proud and men of might, according to their pride.
How long shall wicked men bear sway, with lifting up their voice? How long shall wicked men, I say, thus triumph and rejoyce? How long shall they with brags burst out, and proudly prate their fill: Shall they rejoyce that be so stout, whose works are ever ill? Thy flock, O Lord, thine heritage, they spoil and vex full sore: A∣gainst thy people they do rage, still daily more and more. The widows which are comfortless, and strangers they destroy: They slay the children fatherless, and none doth them put by. And when they take these things in hand, this talk they have of thee: Can Jacobs God this understand? tush, no, he cannot see. O folk unwise, and people rude, some knowledge now discern: Ye fools among the multitude, at length begin to learn.
The Lord which made the ear of man, he needs of right must hear: He made the eye, all things must then before his sight appear. The Lord doth all the world correct, and make them understand: Shall he not then your deeds direct: how can you scape his hand? The second Part. The Lord doth know the thoughts of man, his heart he sees full plain: The Lord (I say) mans thoughts doth scan, and findeth them but vain. But, Lord, that man is happy sure, whom thou dost keep in awe: And through correction dost procure to teach him in thy Law. Whereby he shall in quiet rest, in time of trouble sit: When wicked men shall be supprest, and fall'n into the pit. For sure the Lord will not refuse his people for to take: His heritage whom he did chuse, he will no time forsake.
Until that udgment be decreed, to justice to convert: That all may follow her with speed, that are of upright heart. But who upon my part shall stand: against the cursed train? Or who shall rid me from their hand that wicked works maintain? Except the Lord had been mine aid, mine en'mies to repell: My soul and life had now been laid almost as low as hell. When I did say my foot did slide, I am now like to fall: Thy good∣ness, Lord, did so provide, to stay me up withall. When with my self I mused much, and could no comfort find: Then, Lord, thy goodness did me touch, and that did ease my mind. Wilt thou have fellowship and draw with wicked men to sit: Which with pretence instead of law much mischief do commit.
For they consult against the life of righteous men and good: And in their counsels they are rise to shed the guiltless blood. But yet the Lord he is to me a strong defence or lock: He is my God to whom I flee, he is my strength and rock. And he shall cause the mischief all themselves for to annoy: And in their malice they shall fall, our God shall them destroy. PSALM XCV. Venite exultemus. J. H. O come let us lift up our voice, and sing unto the Lord: In him our rock of health rejoice let us with one accord. Yea, let us come before his face, to give him thanks and praise: In singing Psalms unto his grace, let us be glad always. For why? the Lord he is no doubt, a great and mighty God: A King above all Gods throughout, is all the world abroad.
The secrets of the earth so deep, and corners of the land: The tops of hills that are so steep, he hath them in his hand. The Sea and waters all are his, for he the same hath wrought: The earth and all that therein is, his hand hath made of nought. Come let us bow and praise the Lord, before him let us fall: And kneel to him with one accord, the which hath made us all. For why? he is the Lord our God, for us he doth provide: We are his flock, he doth us feed, his sheep, and he our guide. To day if ye his voice will hear, then harden not your heart: As ye with grutching many a year provok'd me in desart. Whereas your fathers tempted me my power for to prove: My won∣drous works when they did see yet still they did me move.
Twice twenty years they did me grieve and I to them did say: They err in heart, and not believe, they have not known my way. Wherefore I sware when that my wrath was kindled in my breast: That they should never tread the path to enter in my rest. PSALM XCVI. Cantate Deus. J. H. SIng ye with praise unto the Lord new songs with joy and mirth: Sing unto him with one accord, all people on the earth. Yea, sing unto the Lord I say, praise ye his holy Name: Declare and shew from day to day salvation by the same. Among the people eke declare his honour round about: to shew his wonders do not spare in all the world throughout. For why? the Lord is much of might, and worthy praise alway: And he is to be dread of right, above all Gods I say.
For all the Gods of heathen folk, are Idols that will fade: But yet our God he is the Lord, that hath the heavens made. All praise and honour eke do dwell for aye before his face: Both pow'r and might likewise excell within his holy place. Ascribe unto the Lord alway ye people of the world, All might and worship, eke, I say, ascribe unto the Lord. Ascribe unto the Lord also, the glory of his Name: And eke, unto his Courts do go with gists unto the same. The second Part. Fall down and worship ye the Lord, within his Temple bright: Let all the people of the world be fearful in his sight. Tell all the world, be not agast, the Lord doth reign above: Yea, he hath set the earth so fast, that it can never move.
And that it is the Lord alone, that rules with princely might: To judge the Nations ev'ry one, with equity and right. The heavens shall great joy begin, the earth eke shall rejoice: The sea, and all that is therein, shall shout and make a noise. The field shall joy, and ev'ry thing that springeth on the earth: The wood, and ev'ry tree, shall sing with gladness and with mirth. Before the presence of the Lord, and coming of his might: When he shall justly judge the world, and rule his folk with right. PSALM XCVII. Dominus regnavit. J. H. THe Lord doth reign, whereat the Earth may joy with pleasant voice: And eke the Isles with joyful mirth, may triumph and rejoice. Both clouds and darkness eke do swell and round about him beat: Yea, right and justice ever dwell and 'bide about his seat,
Yea, fire and heat at once do run, and go before his face: Which shall his foes and en'mies burn abroad in every place. His lightnings eke full bright did blaze and to the world appear: Where at the earth did look and gaze with dread and deadly fear. The hills like wax did melt in sight and presence of the Lord: They fled before that Rulers might, which guideth all the world. The heavens eke declare and show his justice all abroad, That all the world may see and know the glory of our God. Confusion sure will come to such as worship Idols vain: And eke to those that glory much dumb pictures to maintain. For all the Idols of the world, which they as Gods do call: Shall feel the power of the Lord, and down to him shall fall,
With Joy shall Sion hear this thing, and Juda shall rejoyce: For at thy Judgments they shall sing, and make a pleasant noise. That thou, O Lord, art set on high, in all the earth abroad: And art exalted wondrously above each other God. All ye that fear the Lord, do this, hate all things that are ill; For he doth keep the souls of his from such as would them spill. And light doth spring up to the just, with pleasure for his part: Great Joy with gladness, mirth and lust to them of upright heart. Ye right'ous in the Lord rejoyce, his holiness proclaim; Be thankfull eke with heart and voice, and mindful of the same. PSALM XCVIII. Cantate Domino. J. H. O Sing ye now unto the Lord, a new and pleasant song: For he hath wrought throughout the world his wonders great and strong.
With his right hand full worthily, he doth his foes devour: And get himself the victory, with his own arm and pow'r. The Lord doth make his people know his saving health and might: The Lord doth eke his justice show in all the heathens sight. His grace and truth to Israel, in mind he doth record: That all the earth hath seen right well the goodness of the Lord. Be glad in him with joyful voyce, all people of the earth: Give thanks to God, sing and rejoyce, to him with Joy and mirth. Upon the harp unto him sing, give thanks to him with Psalms: Re∣joyce before the Lord our King, with Trumpets and with Shalms. Yea let the Sea with all therein for joy both roar and swell: The earth likewise let it begin, with all that therein dwell.
And let the floods rejoyce their fills, and clap their hands apace: And eke the mountains and the hills before the Lord his face. For he shall come to Judge and trie the world and ev'ry wight: And rule the people mightily with Justice and with right. PSALM XCIX. Dominus regnavit. J. H. THe Lord doth reign, altho' at it the people rage full sore: Yea, he on Cherubims doth sit, though all the world doth roar. The Lord that doth in Sion dwell, is high and wondrous great: A∣bove all folk he doth excell, and he aloft is set. Let all men praise thy mighty Name, for it is fearful sure: And let them magnifie the same, that holy is and pure. The Princely power of our King doth love judgment and right: Thou rightly rulest ev'ry thing, in Jacob through thy might.
To praise the Lord our God devise all honour to him do: Before his footstool worship him, for he is holy too. Moses, Aaron, and Samuel, as Priests on him did call, When they did pray he heard them well, and gave them answer all. Whithin a cloud to them he spake, then did they labour still: To keep such laws as he did make, and pointed them untill. O Lord our God thou didst them hear, and answer'st them again: Thy mercy did on them appear, their deeds didst not maintain. O laud and praise our God and Lord within his holy hill: For why? our God throughout the world is holy ever still. PSALM C. Jubilate Deo. J. H. ALl people that on earth do dwell, sing to the Lord with chearful voice, Him serve with fear, his praise forth tell, come ye before him & rejoyce.
The Lord ye know is God indeed, without our aid he did us make: We are his slock, he doth us feed, and for his sheep he doth us take. O enter then his gates with praise, approach with joy his courts unto: Praise, laud and bless his Name alwayes, for it is seemly so to do. For why the Lord our God is good, his mercy is for ever sure: His truth at all times firmly stood, and shall from age to age endure. Another of the same by J. H. IN God the Lord be glad and light, praise him throughout the earth: Serve him, and come before his sight with singing and with mirth. Know that the Lord our God he is, he did us make and keep: Not we our selvess, for we are his own flock and pasture sheep. O go into his gates always, give thanks within the same. Within his Courts set forth his praise, and laud his holy Name.
For why? the goodness of the Lord for evermore doth reign: From age to age throughout the world his truth doth still remain. PSALM CI. Misericordiam. N. I Mercy will and judgment sing, O Lord God, unto thee: And wisely do in perfect way, until thou come to me. And in the midst of my house walk, in pureness of my sp'rit: And I no kind of wicked thing will set before my sight. I hate their works that fall away, it shall not cleave to me: From me shall part the froward heart, none evil will I see. Him will I 'stroy that slandereth his neighbour privily: The lofty heart I cannot bear, nor him that looketh high. Mine eyes shall be on them within the land that saithful be: In perfect way who alketh shall be servant unto me.
I will no guileful person have within my house to dwell: and in my presence he shall not remain that lyes doth tell. Betimes I will destroy ev'n all the wicked of the land: That I may from Gods City cut the wicked workers hand. PSALM CII. Domine exaudi. N. O Hear my prayer, Lord, and let my cry come unto thee: In time of trouble do not hide thy face away from me. Incline thine ears to me, make haste to hear me when I call: For as the smoke doth fade, so do my days consume and fall. And as a hearth my bones are burnt, my heart is smitten dead: And withers like the grass, that I forget to eat my bread. By reason of my groaning voice, my bones cleave to my skin: As Pelican in wilderness, such case now am I in.
And as an Owl in desart is, lo, I am such a one: I watch, and as a Sparrow on the house top am alone. Lo, daily in reproachful wise, mine en'mies do me scorn: And they that do against me rage, against me they have sworn. Surely with ashes as with bread my hunger I have fill'd: And mingled have, my drink with tears, that from mine eyes have still'd. Because of thy displeasure, Lord, thy wrath and thy disdain: For thou hast lifted me alost, and cast me down again. The days wherein I pass my life, are like the fleeting shade: And I am wither'd like the grass, that soon away doth fade. But thou, O Lord, for ever dost remain in steddy place: And thy remembrance ever doth abide from race to race.
The second Part. Thou wilt arise, and mercy thou to Sion wilt extend: The time of mercy, now the time foreset is come to end. For even in the stones thereof thy servants do delight: And on the dust thereof they have compassion in their sp'rit. Then shall the heathen people fear the Lords most holy Name: And all the Kings on earth shall dread thy glory and thy fame. Then when the Lord the mighty God again shall Sion rear: And then when he most nobly in his glory shall appear. To prayer of the desolate when he himself doth bend: When he doth not disdain unto their prayers to attend. This shall be written for the age that after shall succeed: The people yet uncreated the Lords renown shall spread.
For he from his high sanctuary hath looked down below: And out of heaven hath the Lord beheld the earth also. That of the mourning captive he might hear the woful cry: And that he might deliver those that sentenc'd are to dye. That they in Sion may declare the Lords most holy Name: And in Jerusalem set forth the praises of the same. Then when the people of the lands and kingdoms with accord: Shall be assembled for to do their service to the Lord. The third Part. My former force of strength he hath abated in the way: And shorter he did cut my days, thus I therefore did say: My God in midst of all my days now take me not away: Thy years endure eternally, from age to age I say.
Thou the foundations of the earth before all times hast laid, And, Lord, the heavens are the work, which thine own hands have made. Yea, they shall perish and decay, but thou shalt tarry still: And they shall all in time wax old, even as a garment will. Thou as a garment shalt thenr change, and changed they shall be: But thou dost still abide the same, thy years do never flee. The children of thy servants shall continually endure: And in thy sight their happy seed, for ever shall stand sure. PSALM CIII. Benedic anima. T. S. MY soul give laud unto the Lord, my sp'rit shall do the same: And all the secrets of my heart praise ye his holy Name. Give thanks to God for all his gifts, shew not thy self unkind: And suffer not his benefits to slip out of thy mind.
That gave thee pardon for thy faults, and thee restor'd again: For all thy weak and frail disease, and heal'd thee of thy pain. That did redeem thy life from death, from which thou could'st not flee: His mer∣cy and compassion both he did extend to thee. That fill'd with goodness thy desire, and did prolong thy youth: Like as the Eagle casts her bill, whereby her age renew'th. The Lord with justice doth repay all such as be opprest: So that their suff'rings and their wrongs are turned to the best. His ways and his commandements to Moses he did show: His counsels and his valiant acts the Israelites did know. The Lord is kind and merciful, when sinners do him grieve: The slowest to conceive a wrath, and readiest to forgive.
He chides not us continually, though we be full of strife: Nor keeps our faults in memory, for all our sinful life, Nor yet according to our sins the Lord doth us regard: Nor after our iniquities he doth not us reward. But as the space is wondrous great, 'twixt earth and heaven above: So is his goodness much more large to them that do him love. God doth remove our sins from us, and our offences all: As far as is the Sun rising full distant from his fall. The second Part. And look what pity parents dear unto their Children bear: Like pity beareth God to such as worship him in fear. The Lord that made us, knows our shape, our mold and fashion just: How weak and frail our nature is, and how we are but dust.
And how the time of mortal men is like the with'ring hay: Or like the flower right fair in field, that fades full soon away. Whose gloss and beauty stormy winds do utterly disgrace: And make that after their assaults such blossoms have no place. But yet the goodness of the Lord with his shall ever stand: Their childrens children doe receive his righteousness at hand. I mean, which keep his covenant with all their whole desire: And not forget to do the thing that he doth them require. The Heavens high are made the seat and foot-stool of the Lord: And by his power imperial He governs all the world. Ye Angels which are great in power, praise ye and bless the Lord: Which to obey and do his will, immediately accord.
Ye noble host and Ministers, cease not to laud him still: Which ready are to execute his pleasure and his will. Yea, all his Works in every place, praise ye his holy Name: My heart, my mind, and eke my soul, praise ye also the same. PSALM CIV. Benedic anima. W. K. MY soul, praise the Lord, speak good of his name: O Lord our great God, how dost thou appear? So passing in glory that great is thy fame: Honour and Majesty in thee shine most clear. With light as a robe thou hast thee beclad: Whereby all the earth thy greatness may see: The heavens in such sort thou also hast spread, That it to a curtain compared may be. His chamber-beams lie in the clouds full sure, Which as his chariot are made him to bear: And there with much swiftness
his course doth  endure, Upon the wings riding of winds in the air. He maketh his sp'rits as Heralds to go: and Lightnings to serve, we see also prest: His will to accomplish, they run to and fro, To save or consume things as seemeth him best. He groundeth the earth so firmly and fast, That it once to move none shall have such pow'r. The deep a fair covering for it made thou hast: Which by his own nature the hills would devour. But at thy rebuke the waters do flie: And so give due place thy word to obey: At thy voice of thunder so fearful they be: That in their great raging they haste soon away. The mountains full high they then up ascend: If thou dost but speak, thy word they fulfil: So likewise the vallies
most quickly  descend, Where thou them appointed'st remain they do still. Their bounds thou hast set how far they shall run, So that in their rage not pass that they can: For God hath appointed they shall not return, The earth to destroy more, which made was for man. The second Part. He sendeth the springs to strong streams or lakes, Which run do full swift among the huge hills: Where both the wild Asses their thirst oft-times slakes, And beasts of the mountains thereof drink their fills. By these pleasant springs of fountains full fair, The fowls of the air abide shall and dwell: Who moved by nature to hop here and there, Among the green branches their songs shall excell. The mountains to moist the clouds he doth use, The earth with his works is wholly replete: So as the brute cattel
he doth not  refuse, But grass doth provide them, and herb for mans meat. Yea bread, wine, and oyl, he made for mans sake, His face to re∣fresh, and heart to make strong. The Cedars of Liban', This great Lord did make: Which trees he doth nourish, that grow up so long. In these may birds build, and make there their nest: In firr-trees the Storks remain and abide. The high hills are succour for wild Goats to rest: And eke the rock stony for conies to hide. The Moon then is set her season to run, The days from the nights thereby to discern: And by the descending also of the Sun, The cold from heat alway thereby we do learn. When darkness doth come by Gods will and power Then creep forth do all the beasts of the wood: The Lions range roaring
their prey  to devour: But it is thou, Lord, which givest them food. As soon as the Sun is up they retire: to couch in their dens then are they full fain: That man to his work may as right doth re∣quire: Till night come and call him to take rest again. The third part. How sundry, O Lord, are all thy works found? With wisdom full great they are indeed wrought: So that the whole world of thy praise doth sound: And as for thy riches they pass all mens thought. So is the great sea, which large is and broad, Where things that creep swarm, and beasts of each sort: There both mighty ships fail, and some lye at road; The Whale huge and monstrous there also doth sport. All things on thee wait, thou dost them relieve: And thou in due time full well dost them feed: Now when it doth please thee
the same for  to give, They gather full gladly those things which they need. Thou openest thy hand, and they find such grace, That they with good things are filled we see: But sore are they troubled if thou turn thy face: For if thou their breath take, vile dust then they be. Again, when thy Sp'rit from thee doth proceed, All things to ap∣point, and what shall ensue: Then are they created as thou hast de∣creed, And dost by thy goodness the dry earth renew. The praise of the Lord for ever shall last, Who may in his works by right well rejoice: His looks can the earth make to tremble full fast, And likewise the mountains to smoke at his voice. To this Lord and God sing will I always: So long as I live my God praise will I: Then am I most certain
my words shall  him please: I will rejoice in him, to him will I cry. The sinners, O Lord; consume in thine ire: And eke the perverse, them root out with shame: But as for my soul now, let it still desire, And say with the faithful, praise ye the Lords Name. PSALM CV. Confitemini Dom. GIve praises unto God the Lord, and call upon his Name: Among the people eke declare his works to spread his fame. Sing ye unto the Lord, I say, and sing unto his praise: And talk of all his wondrous works, that he hath wrought always. In honour of his holy Name, rejoice with one accord: And let the heart also rejoice of them that seek the Lord. Seek ye the Lord, and seek the strength of his eternal might: And seek his face continually, and presence of his sight.
The wondrous works that he hath done keep still in mindful heart: Ne let the judgments of his mouth out of your mind depart. Ye that of faithful Abraham his servant are the seed: Ye his elect, the chil∣dren that of Jacob do proceed. For he, he only is, I say, the mighty Lord our God: And his most rightful judgments are through all the earth abroad. His promise and his covenant, which he hath made to his, He hath remembred ever∣more to thousands of degrees. The second Part. The covenant which he hath made with Abr'am long ago: And faithful oath which he hath sworn to Isaac also. And did confirm the same for law, that Jacob should obey: And for eternal covenant, to Israel for aye.
When thus he said, lo, I to you all Canaan land will give: The lot of your inheritance, wherein your seed shall live. Although the number at that time did very small appear: Yea, very small, and in the land they then but strangers were. While yet they walk'd from land to land without a sure abode: And while from sundry kingdoms they did wander all abroad. And wrong at no oppressors hand he suffered them to take: But even the great and mighty Kings reproved for their sake. And thus he said, touch ye not those that mine anointed be: Nor do the Prophets any harm that do pertain to me. He call'd a dearth upon the land, of bread he 'stroy'd the store: But he against the time of need had sent a man before.
Ev'n Joseph which had once been sold to live a slave in woe: whose feet they hurt in stocks, whose soul the Irons pierc'd also. Until the time came when his cause was known apparently: The mighty word of God the Lord his faultless truth did try. The King sent and delivered him from prison where he was: The ruler of the people then did freely let him pass. And over all his house he made him Lord to bear the sway: And of his substance made him have the rule and all the stay. That he might to his will instruct the Princes of the land: And wisdoms lore his ancient men might cause to understand. Then into the Egyptian land came Israel also. And Jacob in the land of Ham did live a stranger tho'.
His people he exceedingly in number made to flow: And over all their enemies in strength he made them grow. Whose heart he turn'd that they with hate his people did entreat: And did his Servants wrong∣fully abuse with false deceit. The fourth Part. His faithful servant Moses then and Aaron whom he chose. He did command to go to them, his message to disclose. The wondrous mes∣sage of his signs among them he did show: And wonders in the land of Ham then did they work also. Darkness he sent, and made it dark instead of brighter day: And unto his Commission they did not disobey: He turn'd their waters into blood, he did their fishes slay: Their lad brought frogs evn in the place where their King Pharaoh lay.
He spake and at his voice there came great swarms of noisom flies: And all the quarters of the land were fill'd with crawling lice. He gave them cold and stony hail instead of milder rain: And fi'ry flames within their land he sent unto their pain. He smote their vines and all their trees whereon their figs did grow: Aud all their trees within their costs down did he overthrow. He spake, then Caterpillers did and Grashoppers abound: Which ate the grass in all the land and fruit of all their ground. The fifth Part. The first-begotten in their land eke deadly he did smite: Yea, the be∣ginning and first fruit of all their force and might. With gold and sil∣ver he them brought from Egypt land to pass: And in the number of their Tribes no feeble one there was.
Egypt was glad and joyful then when they did thence depart: For terror and the fear of them was fall'n upon their heart. To shroud them from the parching heat a cloud he did display: And fire he sent to give them light, when night had hid the day. They asked, and he caused Quailes to rain at their request: And fully with the bread of heav'n their hunger he represt: He opened the stony rock, and waters gushed out: And in the dry and parched ground like Rivers ran about. For of his holy covenant aye mindful was he tho': Which to his servant Abraham he plighted long ago. He brought his people forth with mirth and his elect with joy, Out of the cruel land where they had liv'd in great annoy.
And of the heathen men he gave to them their fruitful lands: The labours of the people eke they took into their hands. That they his holy statutes might observe for evermore: And faithfully obey his laws, praise ye the Lord therefore. PSALM CVI. Confitemini Domino. PRaise ye the Lord, for he is good, his mercy dures for aye: Who can express his noble acts, or all his praise display? They blessed are that judgment keep, and justly do alway: With fa∣vour of thy people (Lord) remember me, I pray. And with thy saving health (O Lord) vouchsafe to visit me: That I the great fe-li-ci-ty of thine elect may see. And with thy peoples joy I may a joyful mind possess: And may with thine in-he-ri-tance a glor'ing heart express.
Both we and eke our fathers all, have sinned ev'ry one: We have committed wickedness, and lewdly we have done: The wonders great which thou (O Lord) hast done in Egypt land: Our fathers tho' they saw them all, yet did not understand. Nor yet thy mercies multitude did keep in thankful mind: But at the sea, yea the red-sea, re-bel-led most unkind. Nevertheless he saved them for honour of his Name: That he might make his power known, and spread abroad his fame. The red-sea he did then rebuke, and forthwith it was dry'd: And as in wilderness, so through the deep he did them guide. He sav'd them from the cruel hand of their despiteful foe: And from the en'mies hand he did de-li-ver them al-so.
The second Part. The waters their oppressors whelm'd, not one was left alive: Then they believ'd his word, and praise in song they did him give. But by and by unthankfully his works they clean forgat: And for his counsel and his will they did neglect to wait. But lusted in the Wilderness, with sond and greedy lust: And in the desert tempted God, the stay of all their trust. And then their wanton minds desire he suff'red them to have: But wasting leanness therewithal into their souls he gave. Then when they lodged in their tents at Moses they did grutch: Aaron the holy of the Lord so did they envy much. Therefore the earth did open wide, and Dathan did devour: And all Abirams company did cover in that hour.
In their assembly kindled was the hot consuming fire: And wasting flames did then burn up the wicked in his ire. Upon the bill of Horeb they an Idol Calf did frame: And there the molten Image they did worship of the same. Into the likeness of a Calf, that seedeth on the grass: Thus they their glory turn'd, and all their honour did deface. And God their only Saviour, unkindly they forgot: Which many great and mighty things in Egypt land had wrought. The third Part. And in the land of Ham for them, most wondrous works had done: And by the red sea dreadful things performed long agone. Therefore for their so shewing them, forgetful and unkind: To bring destruction on them all
he purpos'd in his mind.  Had not his chosen Moses stood before him in the break: To turn his wrath, lest he on them with slaughter should him wreak. They did despise the pleasant Land that he behight to give: Yea, and the words that he had spoke, they did no whit believe. But in their tents with grudging heart they wickedly repin'd: Nor to the voice of God the Lord, they gave an heark'ning mind. Therefore against them lifted he his strong revenging hand: Them to destroy in wilderness, e're they should see the land. And to destroy their seed among the nations with his rod: And through the Countries of the world to scatter them abroad. To Baal Peor then they did adjoyn themselves also: And ate the of∣ferings of the dead. so they forsok him tho'.
Thus with their own inventions, his wrath they did provoke: And in his sore enkindled wrath the plague upon them broke. But Phineas stood up with zeal, the sinners vile to slay: And judgment he did execute, and then the plague did stay. The fourth Part. It was imputed unto him for righteousness that day: And from thence∣forth so counted is from race to race I say. At waters eke of Meribah they did him angry make: Yea so far forth that Moses was then punish'd for their sake. Because they vext his sp'rit so sore that in impatient heat, His lips spake unadvisedly, his servour was so great. Nor as the Lord commanded them they slue the people tho': But were among the heathen mixt, and learn'd their works also.
And did their Idols serve, which were their ruin and decay: To fiends their sons and daughters they did offer up and stay. Yea with unkindly murth'ring knife the guiltless blood they spilt: Yea, their own sons and daughters blood without all cause of guilt. Whom they to Canaan Idols then offer'd with wicked hand: And so with blood of innocents defiled was the land. Thus were they stained with the works of their own filthy way: And with their own inventions a whoring they did stray. Therefore against his people was the Lords wrath kindled sore: And ev'n his own inheritance therefore he did abhor. Into the hands of heathen men he gave them for a prey: And made their foes their Lords, whom they were forced to obey.
The fifth Part. Yea, and their hateful enemies opprest them in their land: And they were humbly made to stoop as subjects to their hand. Full oftentimes from thrall had he deliver'd them before: But with their counsels they to wrath provok'd him evermore. Therefore they by their wickedness were broughtfull low to lye: Yet when he saw them in distress he hearken'd to their cry. He call'd to mind his covenant which he to them had swore: And by his mercies multitude repented him therefore. And favour he made them to find, before the sight of those, that led them captive from their land when er'st they were their foes. Save us, O Lord, that art our God, save us, O Lord, we pray: And from among the heathen folk, Lord, gather us alway.
That we may spread the noble praise of thy most holy Name: That we may glory in thy praise, and sounding of thy fame. The Lord, the God of Israel be blest for evermore: Let all the people say, Amen; praise ye the Lord therefore. PSALM CVII. Confitemini Dom. Give thanks unto the Lord our God, for gracious is he: And that his mercy hath no end all mortal men may see. Such as the Lord redeemed hath, with thanks shall praise his Name: and shew how they from foes were freed, and how he wrought the same. He gather'd them sorth of the Lands that lay so far about: From East, to West, from North to South his hand did find them out. They wandred in the wilderness, and strayed from the way: And found no City where to dwell, that serve might for their stay.
Whose thirst and hunger was so great in these deserts so void: That faintness did them sore assault, and eke their souls annoy'd. Then did they cry in their distress unto the Lord for aid: Who did remove their troublous state, according as they pray'd. And by that way which was most right, he led them like a guide: That they might to a City go, and there also abide. Let men therefore before the Lord confess his goodness then: And shew the wonders that he doth before the sons of men. For he the empty soul sustain'd, whom thirst had made to faint: The hun∣gry soul with goodness fed, and did them eke acquaint. Such as do dwell in darkness deep, where they on death do wait: Fast bound to tast such troublous storms as iron chains do threat.
The second Part. For that against the Lords own words they sought so to rebel: Estee∣ming light his counsels high, which do so far excel. But when he humbled them full low, they then fell down with grief: And none was found so much to help, whereby to get relief. Then they did cry in their distress unto the Lord for aid: Who did remove their troublous state, according as they pray'd. For he from darkness out them brought, and from death's dreadful shade: Bursting with force the Iron bands which them before did lade. Let men therefore before the Lord confess his kindness then: And shew the wonders that he doth before the sons of men. For he threw down the gates of brass, and brake them with strong hand: he iron bars he sinote in two, nothing could him withstand.
The foolish folk great plagues do feel, and cannot from them wend: But heap on more to those they have, because they do offend. Their souls so much did loath all meat, that none they could abide: Whereby death had them almost caught, as they full truly tri'd. Then they did cry in their distress unto the Lord for aid: Who did remove their troublous state, according as they pray'd. For then he sent to them his words, which health did soon restore: And brought them from those dangers deep, wherein they were before. The third Part. Let men therefore before the Lord confess his kindness then: And shew the wonders that he doth before the sons of men. And let them offer sacrifice with thanks and also fear: And speak of all his wondrous works with glad and joyful chear.
Such as in Ships and brittle barks into the Seas descend: Their merchandise through fearful floods to compass and to end. Those men are forced to behold the Lords works what they be: And in the dangers Deep the same, most marvellous they see. For at his word the stormy wind ariseth in a rage: And stirreth up the surges so, as nought can them asswage. Then are they lifted up so high, the clouds they seem to gain: And plunging down the depth untill their souls consume with pain. And like a drunkard to and fro, now here, now there they reel: As men with fear of wit bereft, or had of Sense no feel. Then did they cry in their distress unto the Lord for aid: Who did remove their troublous state, according as they pray'd:
For at his word the Lord doth make the sturdy storms to cease: So that the great waves from their rage are brought to rest and peace. Then are men glad when rest is come which they so much did crave: And are by him in haven brought, which they so fain would have. The fourth Part. Let men therefore before the Lord confess his kindness then: And shew the wonders that he doth before the sons of men. Let them in presence of the folk with praise extol his Name: And where the Elders do convent there let them do the same. For running stoods to dry desarts he doth oft change and turn: And drieth up as it were dust, the springing well and bourn. A fruitful and with pleasures deckt full barren doth he make: When on their sins which dwell therein he doth just vengeance take.
Again the  wide he maketh fruits to bear: With plea∣sant springs of waters clear, though none before were there. Wherein such hungry souls are set, as he doth freely chuse: That they a City may them build, to dwell in for their use. That they may sow their pleasant Land and vineyards also plant: To yield them fruit of such increase, as none may seem to want. They multiply exceedingly, the Lord doth bless them so: Who doth also their bruit beasts make by numbers great to grow. But when the faithful are low brought by the oppressors stout: And minish do through many plagues that compass them about. Then doth he Princes bring to shame which did them sore oppress: And likewise caused them to err within the wilderness.
But yet the poor he raiseth up, out of his troubles deep: And oft∣times doth their train augment much like a flock of sheep. The righteous shall behold this sight, and also much rejoice: Whereas the wicked and perverse with grief shall stop their voice. But who is wise that now full well he may these things record? For certainly such shall perceive the kindness of the Lord. PSALM CVIII. Paratum cor. J. H. O God my heart prepared is, and eke my tongue is so: I will advance my voice in song, in giving praise also. Awake my Viol and my Harp, sweet melody to make: And in the morning I my self right early will awake. By me among the people, Lord, still praised shalt thou be: And I among the heathen folk will sing O Lord to thee.
Because thy mercy Lord is great above the heavens high: and eke thy truth doth reach the clouds within the lofty Skie. Above the starry heavens high exalt thy self, O God: And Lord dis∣play upon the earth thy glory all abroad. That thy dearly beloved may be set at liberty: Help O my God with thy right hand, and hearken unto me. God in his holiness hath spoke, wherefore my joys abound: Sichem I shall divide, and mete the vale of Succoth ground. And Gilead shall be mine own, Manasses mine shall be: My head strength Ephraim, and law shall Juda give for me. Mob my washpot and my shoe on Edom will I throw: Upon the land of in triumph will I go.
Who shall in-to the City strong be guide to conduct me? Or how by whom to Edom's land conveyed shall I be? Is it not thou, O Lord, which late hadst us forsaken quite? And thou, O Lord, which with our hosts didst not go forth to fight? Give us O Lord thy saving aid when troubles do assail: For all the help of man is vain, and can no whit avail. Through God we shall do valiant acts and worthy of renown: He shall subdue our enemies, yea he shall tread them down. PSALM CIX. Deus laudem tuam J. H. IN constant silence do not hold, O God, thy tongue always: O God ev'n thou I say that art the God of all my praise. The wicked and the guileful mouth on me disclosed be: And they with false and lying tongues have spoken unto me.
They did beset me round about, with words of hateful spite: Without all cause of my desert against me did they fight. For my good will they were my foes but then 'gan I to pray: My good with ill, my friendliness with hate they did repay. Set thou the wicked over him, to have the upperhand: At his right hand eke suffer thou his hateful foe to stand. When he is judged, let him then condemned be therein: And let the prayer that he makes be turned into sin. Few be his days, his charge also let thou another take: His Chil∣dren let be fatherless, his Wife a Widow make. Let his off-spring be vagabonds, to beg and seek their bread: Wan∣dring out of the wasted place, where erst they have been fed.
Let covetous extortioners catch all his goods and store And let the strangers spoil the fruits of all his toil before. Let there be none to pity him, let there be none at all. That on his children fatherless will let their mercy fall. The second Part. And so let his posterity for ever be destroy'd: Their name out-blot∣ted in the age that after shall succeed. Let not his fathers wickedness from Gods remembrance fall: And let thou not his mothers sin be done away at all. But in the presence of the Lord, let them remain for aye: That from the earth their memory he may cut clean away. Sith mercy he forgat to shew, but did pursue with spite The trou∣bled man, and fought to stay the woful hearted wight.
As he did cursing love, it shall betide unto him so: And as he did not blessing love, it shall be far him fro. As he with cursing clad himself, so it like water shall Into his bowels. and like oyl into his bones befall. As garment let it be to him, to cover him for aye: And as a girdle wherewith he shall girded be alway. Lo, let the same be from the Lord, the guerdon of my foe: Yea, and of those that evil speak against my soul also. But thou, O Lord, that art my God deal thou I say with me: After thy Name, deliver me, for good thy mercies be. Because in depth of great distress, I needy am and poor: And e within my pained breast, my heart is wounded sore.
The third Part. Even so do I depart away, as doth declining shade: And as the Grashopper, so I am shaken off and fade. With fasting long from needful food enfeebled are my knees: And all her fatness hath my flesh enforced been to leese. And I also a vile reproach, to them was made to be: And they that did upon me look, did shake their heads at me. But thou, O Lord, that art my God, mine aid and succour be: Ac∣cording to thy mercy Lord, save and deliver me. And they shall know thereby, that this, Lord is thy mighty hand: And that thou hast done it, O Lord: so shall they understand. Although they curse with spite, yet thou shalt bless with loving voice: They shall arise and come to shame, thy servant shall rejoyce.
Let them be cloathed all with shame that en'mies are to me. And with confusion as a cloke eke cov'red let them be. But greatly I will with my mouth give thanks unto the Lord: And I among the multitude his praises will record. For he with help at his right hand will stand the poor man by: To save him from the man that would condemn his soul to die. PSALM CX. Dixit Dominus. THe Lord did say unto my Lord sit thou on my right hand: Till I have made thy foes a stool Whereon thy feet shall stand. The Lord shall out of Si-on send the Scepter of his might: Amid thy mortal foes be thou the ruler in their sight. And in the day on which thy reign and pow'r they shall see: Then hereby free-will-o'rings shall
thy people offer thee.  Yea, with an holy worshipping then shall they offer all. Thy births dew is the dew that doth from womb of morning fall. The Lord hath sworn and never will repent what he doth say: By th' order of Mel-chi-se-deck, thou art a Priest for aye. The Lord thy God on thy right hand that standeth for thy stay. Shall wound for thee the stately Kings upon his wrathful day. The heathen he shall judge, and fill the place with bodies dead: And over divers countries shall in sunder smite the head: And he shall drink out of the brook that runneth in the way: Where∣fore he shall lift up on high his royal head that day. PSALM CXI. Confitebor tibi. WIth hear I do accord, to praise and land the Lord, In presence of the just: For great his works are found,
To search them such  are bound, As him do love and trust. His works are glo-ri-ous, Also his right'ousness It doth endure for e-ver. His wondrous works he would We still remember should: His mercy faileth never. Such as to him love bear, A por-ti-on full fair He hath up for them laid: For this they shall well find, He will them have in mind, And keep them as he said. For he did not disdain His works to shew them plain, By light'ning and by thunders: When he the Heathens land Did give in-to their hand, Where they beheld his wonders. Of all his works ensu'th, Both judgment right and truth, Where to his statutes tend: They are decreed sure For ever to endure, Which e∣quity doth end. Re-demp-ti-on he gave His people for to save: And hath al-so required, His promise not to fail, But alway to prevail:
His ho-ly Name be fear'd. Whose with heart full fain True wisdom would attain, The Lord fear and o-bey: Such as his laws do keep, Shall knowledge have full deep: His praise shall last for aye. PSALM CXII. Beatus vir. W. K. THe man is blest that God doth fear, And that his law doth love in∣deed: His seed on earth God will uprear, And bless such as from him proceed. His house with good he will fulfill, His right'ousness endure shall still. Unto the right'ous doth arise In trouble joy, in darkness light: Com∣passion is in his eyes, And mercy always in his sight: Yea pity mo∣veth such to lend, He doth by judgment things expend. And surely such shall never fail: For in remembrance had is he: No tidings ill can make him quail,
Who in the Lord sure hope doth  see. His heart is firm, his fear is past. For he shall see his foes down cast. He did well for the poor provide. His right'ousness shall still remain: And his estate with praise abide, Though that the wicked men disdain, Yea gnash his teeth thereat shall he And so consume his state to see. PSALM CXIII. Laudate pueri. W. K. YE children which do serve the Lord, praise ye his name with one accord: Yea blessed be always his Name, Who from the rising of the Sun, Till it return where it begun, Is to be praised with great same. The Lord all People doth surmount, As for his glory we may count. Above the heavens high to be, With God the Lord who may compare, Whose dwelling in the heavens are: Of such great pow'r and force is he. He doth abase himself we know, Things to behold both here below, And al-so in the heav'n above. The needy out of dust to draw,
And  eke the paor which help none saw, his only mercy did him move. And so him set on high degree, With Princes of great dignity, that rule his people with great fame. The barren he doth make to bear, And with great joy her fruit to rear, therefore praise ye his holy Name. PSALM CXIV. In exitu Israel. WHen Israel by Gods address, from Pharachs land was bent: And Jacobs house the strangers left, and in the same train went. In Judah God his glory shew'd, his holiness most bright: So did the Israelites declare his kingdom, pow'r, and might. The sea it saw, and suddenly, as all amaz'd, did fly: the roaring streams of Jordans flood recoiled backwardly. As rams afraid the mountains skipt, their strength did them forsake: And as the silly trembling lambs,
their tops did beat and shake.  What ail'd thee, Sea, at all amaz'd, so suddenly to fly? Ye rolling waves of Jordans flood why ran ye backwardly? Why shook ye hills, as rams afraid? why did your strength so shake? Why did your tops, as trembling lambs, for fear, quiver and quake? O earth confess thy sovereign Lord and dread his mighty hand: Before the face of Jacob's God, fear ye both sea and land. I mean the God which from hard rocks doth cause main floods appear: And from the stony flint doth cause gush out the fountains clear. PSALM CXV. Non nobis Domine. NOt unto us, Lord, not to us, but to thy Name give praise: Both for thy mercy and thy truth, that are in thee always. Why shall the heathen scorners say where is their God become? Our God in heaven is, and what he will, that hath he done.
Their Idols silver are and Gold, works of mens hands they be: They have a mouth, and do not speak; and eyes, and do not see. And they have ears joyn'd to their heads, and do not hear at all: And noses eke they formed have, and do not smell withall. And hands they have, and handle not; and feet, and do not go: A throat they have, yet through the same they make no sound to blow. Those that make them are like to them, and those whose trust they be: O Israel, trust in the Lord, their help and shield is he. O Aarons house trust in the Lord, their help and shield is he: Trust ye the Lord that fear the Lord, their help and shield is he. The Lord hath mindful been of us, and will us bless also: On Israel and on Aarons house, his blessing he will show.
Them that be fearers of the Lord, the Lord will bless them all; Ev'n he will bless them every one, the great and eke the small. To you, I say, the living Lord will multiply his grace: To you and to the children that shall follow of your race. Ye are the blessed of the Lord, even of the Lord, I say: Which  both the heaven and the earth hath made, and set in stay. The heavens, yea the heavens high, belong unto the Lord: The earth unto the sons of men, he gave of free accord. They that be dead do not with praise set forth the Lords renown: Nor any that into the place of silence do go down. But we will praise the Lord our God, from henceforth and for aye: Sound ye the praises of the Lord, praise ye the Lord, I say.
PSALM CXVI. Dilexi quoniam. I Love the Lord, because my voice and prayer heard hath he: When in my days I call'd on him, he bow'd his ear to me. Ev'n when the snares of cruel death about beset me round: When pains of hell me caught, and when I woe and sorrow found. Upon the Name of God my Lord, then did I call, and say, Deli∣ver thou my soul, O Lord, I do thee humbly pray. The Lord is ve-ry mer-ci-ful, and just he is al-so: And in our God compassion doth plen-ti-ful-ly slow. The Lord in safety doth preserve all those that simple be: I was in woful mi-se-ry, and he de-li-ver'd me. And now my soul, sith thou are safe, return un to thy rest: For large∣ly, lo, the Lord to thee his bounty hath exprest.
Because thou hast de-li-ve-red my soul from deadly thrall: My moist∣ned eyes from mournful tears, my sliding feet from fall. Before the Lord I in the land of life will walk therefore: I did believe, therefore I spake, for I was troubled sore. The second Part. I said in my distress and fear that all men lyars be: What shall I pay the Lord for all his benefits to me. The wholsom cup of saving health I thankfully will take: And on the Lord's Name I will call, when I my prayers make. I to the Lord will pay my vows that I to him behight: Yea, e∣ven at this present time in all his peoples sight: Right dear and precious in his sight, the Lord doth aye esteem The death of all his ho-ly ones, what e-ver men do deem.
Thy servant Lord, thy servant lo, I do my self confess, Son of thy handmaid: thou hast broke the bonds of my distress. And I will offer up to thee a sa-cri-fice of praise: And I will call upon the Name of God the Lord always. I to the Lord will pay the vows that I have him behight: Yea even at this present time in all his peoples sight. Yea in the courts of God own house and in the midst of thee, O thou Je-ru-sa lem, [say, wherefore the Lord praise ve. PSALM CXVII. Laudate Dominum. O All ye nations of the world, praise ye the Lord always: And all ye people e-very where set forth his noble praise. For great his kidness is to us his truth endures for aye: Where∣fore praise ye the Lord our God, praise ye the Lord, I say.
PSALM CXVIII. Confitemini Dom. O Give ye thanks unto the Lord, for gra-ci-ous is he: Because his mercy doth endure for e-ver towards thee. Let Is-ra-el confess and say, his mercy dures for aye: Now let the house of Aaron say, his mer-cy dures for aye. Let them that fear the Lord our God ev'n now confess and say: The mercy of the Lord our God endureth still for aye. In trouble and in heaviness un-to the Lord I cri'd: Which lo∣vingly heard me at large, my suit was not deny'd. The Lord himself is on my side. I will not stand in doubt: Nor fear what man can do to me, when God stands me about. The Lord doth take my part with them that help to succour me: Therefore I shall see my desire u-pon mine e-ne-my.
Better it is to trust in God, than in mans mortal seed; Or to put confidence in Kings, or Princes in our need. All Nations have inclosed me, and compassed me round: But in the name of God shall I mine e-ne-mies confound. They kept me in on every side, they kept me in I say: But thro' the Lord's most mighty Name, I shall work their de-cay. They came about me all like Bees, but yet in the Lord's Name I quencht their thorns that were on sire, and will destroy the same. The second Part. Thou hast with force thrust sore at me, that I indeed might fall: But through the Lord I find such help, that they were vanquish'd all. The Lord is my defence and strength, my joy, my mirth, and song: He is become to me indeed, a Saviour most strong.
The right hand of the Lord our God doth bring to pass great things: He causeth voice of Joy and health in righteous mens dwellings. The right hand of the Lord doth bring most mighty things to pass: His hand hath the preheminence, his force is as it was. I will not die, but e-ver live to ut-ter and declare, The Lord his might and wondrous power, his works and what they are. The Lord himself hath chast'ned, and hath corrected me: But hath not given me o-ver yet to death, as you may see. Set o-pen un-to me the gates of truth and righteousness: That I may enter in-to them, the Lord's praise to confess. This is the gate ev'n of the Lord, which shall not be so shut: But good and righteous men alway shall enter in-to it.
The third Part. I will give thanks to thee, O Lord, because thou hast heard me: And art become most lovingly a Saviour un-to me. The stone which ere this time among the builders was refus'd: Is now become the corner stone, and chiefly to be us'd. This was the mighty work of God, this was the Lord own fact: And it is marv'llous to behold with eyes that noble act. This is the joyful day indeed which God himself hath wrought: Let us be glad and joy therein, in heart, in mind, and thought. Now help us, Lord, and prosper us, we wish with one accord: Blessed be he that comes to us in the name of the Lord. God is the Lord that shews us light, bind ye therefore with cord Your sa-cri-fice to the Al-tar, and give thanks to the Lord.
Thou art my God, I will confess, and render thanks to thee: Thou art my God, and I will praise thy mercy to-wards me. O give ye thanks un-to the Lord, for gra-ci-ous is he: Because his mercy doth endure for e-ver towards me. PSALM CXIX. Beati immaculati. W. W. ALEPH. BLessed are they that perfect are, and pure in mind and heart: Whose lives and con-ver-sa-ti-ons from Gods laws never start. Blessed are they that give themselves his statutes to observe: Seeking the Lord with all their heart, and ne-ver from him swerve. Doubtless such men go not astray, nor do no wicked thing: Which stedfastly walk in his way, without a-ny wandring. It is thy will and commandment, that with attentive heed Thy noble and divine precepts we learn and keep indeed.
O would to God it might thee please my ways so to address: That I might both in heart and voice thy laws keep and confess. So should no shame my life attaint, whilst I thus set mine eyes: And bend my mind always to muse on thy sacred decrees. Then will I praise with upright heart and magnifie thy Name: When I shall learn thy judgments just and likewise prove the same. And wholly will I give my self to keep thy laws most right: Forsake me not for ever, Lord, but shew thy grace and might. BETH. The second Part. By what means may a young man best his life learn to amend? If that he mark and keep thy word, and therein his time spend. Unseigned∣ly I have thee sought, and thus seeking abide: O never suffer me, O Lord. from thy precepts to slide.
Within my heart and secret throughts thy words I have hid still: That I might not at any time offend thy Godly will. We magnifie thy Name, O Lord, and praise thee evermore: Thy statutes of most worthy fame, O Lord, teach me therefore. My lips have never ceas'd to preach, and publish day and night. The judgments all which did proceed from thy mouth full of might. Thy testimonies and thy ways, please me no less indeed. Than all the trea∣sures of the earth, which worldlings make their meed. Of thy precepts I will still muse. and thereto frame my talk: As at a mark so will I aim, thy ways how I may walk. My only joy shall be so fixt, and on thy laws so set: That nothing can me so far blind, that I thy words forget.
GIMEL The third Part. Grant to thy servant now such grace as may my life prolong: Thy holy word then will I keep both in my heart and tongue. Mine eyes which were dim and shut up, so open and make bright: that of thy law and marvellous works I may have the clear sight. I am a stranger in this earth, wandring now here, now there: Thy word therefore to me disclose, my footsteps for to clear. My soul is ravisht with desire, and never is at rest: But seeks to know thy judg∣ments high, and what may please thee best. The proud men and malicious, thou hast destroy'd each one: And cursed are such as do not thy hests attend upon. Lord turn from me rebuke and shame which wicked men conspire: For I have kept thy covenants with zeal as hot as fire.
The Princes great in counsel sate, and did against me speak: But then thy servant thought how he thy statutes might not break. For why, thy covenants are my joy, and my hearts great solace: They serve in stead of counsellors, my matters for to pass. DALETH. The fourth Part. I am, alas, as brought to grave, and almost turn'd to dust: Restore therefore my life again, as thy promise is just. My ways when I ac∣knowledged, with mercy thou didst hear: Hear now eft-soon, and me instruct thy laws to love and fear. Teach me once throughly for to know thy precepts and thy lore: Thy works then will I meditate, and lay them up in store. My soul I feel so sore opprest, that it melteth for grief: According to thy word therefore, haste, Lord, to send relief.
From lying and deceitful lips, let thy grace me defend: And that I may learn thee to love, thy holy law me send. The way of truth both straight and sure. I have chosen and found: I set thy judgments me before, which keep me safe and sound. Since then, O Lord, I forc'd my self thy covenants to embrace: Let me therefore have no rebuke, nor check in any case. Then will I run with joyful chear, where thy word doth me call: When thou hast set my heart at large, and rid me out of thrall. HE. The fifth Part. Instruct me, Lord, in the right trade of thy statutes divine: And it to keep even to the end, my heart will I incline. Grant me the knowledge of thy law, and I shall it obey: With heart and mind and all my might, I will it keep I say.
In the right paths of thy precepts guide me, Lord, I requite: None other pleasure do I wish, nor greater thing desire: Incline my heart thy laws to keep, and covenants to embrace: And from all filthy ava∣rice, Lord shield me with thy grace. From vain desires and worldly lusts turn back mine eyes and sight: Give me the sp'rit of life and pow'r to walk thy ways aright. Con∣firm thy gracious promise, Lord, which thou hast made to me: Which am thy servant, and do love and fear nothing but thee. Reproach and shame which I so fear, from me, O Lord, expell: For thou dost judge with equity, and therein dost excell. Behold my hearts desire is bent, thy laws to keep for aye: Lord strengthen me so with thy grace, that it perform I may.
VAU. The sixth Part. Thy mercies great and manifold let me obtain, O Lord: Thy saving health let me enjoy ac-cor-ding to thy word. So shall I stop the slan∣d'rous mouths of lewd men and unjust: For in thy faithful promises stands my comfort and trust. The word of truth within my mouth let e-ver still be prest: For in thy judgments wonderful my hope doth stand and rest. And whilst that breath within my breast doth natural life preserve: Yea, till this world shall be dissolv'd, thy law will I observe. So walk will I, as set at ge, and made free from all dread: Be∣cause I sought how far to keep thy precepts and hy . Thy noble acts will I  be as things of most grea fame: Ev'n before Kings I will them blaze, and shrink no whit for shame.
I will rejoyce then to o-bey thy worthy hests and will: Which e∣vermore I have lov'd best: and so will love them still. My hands I will lift to thy laws, which I have dearly sought: And practise thy commandements in will, in deed, in thought. ZAIN. The seventh Part. Thy promise which thou mad'st to me thy servant, Lord, remember: For therein do I put my trust, and confidence for ever. It is my comfort and my joy, when troubles me assail: For were my life not by thy word, my life would soon me fail. The proud and such as God contemn, still made of me a scorn: Yet would I not thy law forsake: as he that were forlorn. But call to mind, Lord, thy great works shew'd to our fathers old: Whereby I felt my joy surmount my grief an hundred fold.
But yet, a-las, for fear I quake, seeing how wicked men Thy law forsook, and did procure thy judgments who knows when? And as for me, I fram'd my songs, thy statutes to exalt: When I among the stran∣gers dwelt, and thoughts 'gan me assault. I thought upon thy name, O Lord, by night, when others sleep: As for thy law, al-so I kept, and e-ver will it keep. This grace I did obtain because thy cov'nants sweet and dear I did embrace and al-so keep with rev'rence and with fear. HETH. The eighth Part. O God which art my part and lot, my comfort and my stay: I have decreed and promised thy laws to keep alway. Mine earnest heart did humbly sue in prefence of thy face: As thou therefore hast promised, Lord, grant me of thy grace.
My life I have ex-a-mi-ned, and try'd my secret heart: Which to thy statutes caused me my feet straight to convert. I did not stay nor linger long, as they that slothful are: But ha-sti-ly thy laws to keep, I did my self prepare. The cruel bands of wicked men have made of me their prey: Yet would I not thy law forget, nor from thee go astray. Thy right'ous judgments towards me so great are and so high: That ev'n at mid∣night will I rise thy name to magnifie. Companion am I to all them which fear thee in their heart: And ne-ver will for love nor dread, from thy commandments start. Thy mercies, Lord, most plent'ously do all the world fulfill: O teach me how I may o-bey they statutes and thy will.
TETH. The ninth Part. According to thy promise, Lord, so bast thou with me dealt: For of thy grace in sundry sorts have I thy Servant felt. Teach me to judge always aright, and give me knowledge sure: For certainly be∣lieve I do that thy precepts are pure. E're thou didst touch me with thy rod, I err'd and went astray: But now I keep thy ho-ly word, and make it all my stay. Thou art both good and gra-ci-ous, and giv'st most lib'rally: Thine ordinances how to keep, therefore, O Lord, teach me. The proud and wicked men have forg'd against me many a lie: Yet thy commandments still observe with all my heart will I. Their hearts are swoln with worldly wealth, as grease so are they fat: But in thy law do I delight, and nothing seek but that.
O happy time may I well say, when thou didst-me correct: For as a guide to learn thy law, thy rod did me direct. So that to me thy word and law is dearer ma-ni-fold: Than thousands great of silver and gold, or ought that can be told. JOD. The tenth Part. Seeing thy hands have made me, Lord, to be thy cre-a-ture: Grant knowledg likewise how to learn, to put thy laws in ure. So they that fear thee shall rejoyce, when e-ver they me see: Because I have learn'd by thy word, to put my trust in thee. When with thy rod the world is plagu'd I know the cause is just: So when thou dost correct me, Lord, the cause just needs be must. Now of thy goodness I thee pray, some comfort to me send: As thou to me hast pro-mi-sed, so from all ill me shend.
Thy tender mercies pour on me, and I shall surely live: For Joy and con-so-la-ti-on both thy law to me doth give. Confound the proud, whose false pretence is me for to destroy: But as for me thy hests to know I will my self employ. Whoso with rev'rence doth thee fear, to me let them retire: And such as do thy cov'nants know, and them alone desire. My heart without all wavering let on thy laws be bent: That no confusion come to me, whereby I should be shent. CAPH. The eleventh Part. My soul doth faint and ceaseth not, thy saving health to crave: And for thy words sake still I trust my hearts desire to have. Mine eyes do sail with looking for thy word, and thus I say: O when wilt thou mè comfort, Lord, why dost thou thus delay?
As a skin-bottle in the smoke, so am I parch'd and dri'd. Yet will I not out of my heart let thy commandments slide. Alas how long shall I yet live, before I see the hour, That on my foes which me torment, thy vengeance thou wilt pour? Presumpt'ous men have digged pits, thinking to make me sure: Thus contrary against thy law my hurt they do procure. But thy command∣ments are all true, and causless they me grieve: To thee therefore I do complain, that thou might'st me relieve. Almost they had me clean destroy'd, and brought me quite to ground: Yet by thy statutes I abode, and therein succour found. Restore me Lord  to life, for thy mercies excell: And so shall I thy cov'∣nants keep, till death my life expel.
LAMED. The twelfth Part. In heaven, Lord, where thou dost dwell, thy word is stablisht sure: And shall for all e-ter-nity, fast graven there endure. From age to age thy truth abides, as doth the earth witness: Whose ground-work thou hast laid so sure, as no tongue can express. Ev'n to this day we may well see how all things persevere Accor∣ding to thine Ordinance, for all things thee revere. Had it not been that in thy law my soul had comfort sought: Long time e're now in my distress I had been brought to nought. Therefore will I thy precepts aye in memory keep fast: By them thou hast my life restor'd when I was at last cast. No wight to me can ti-tle make, for I am on-ly thine: Save me therefore, for to thy laws, mine ears and heart incline.
The wicked men do seek my bane, and thereto lie in wait: But I the while con-si-de-red Thy noble works and great. I see nothing in this wide world, at length which hath not end: But thy commandments and thy word beyond all end extend. MEM. The thirteenth Part. What great desire and servent love, do I bear to thy law? All the day long I me-di-tate on it with rev'rent awe. Thy word hath taught me far to pass my foes in po-li-cy: For still I hold it as a thing of most ex-cel-len-cy. My teachers, which did me instruct, in knowledge I excel: Because I do thy cov'nants keep, and them to others tell. In wisdom I do pass al-so the ancient men indeed: And all because to keep thy laws, I held it best to read.
My feet I have refrained eke, from ev'ry e-vil way: Because that I con-ti-nual-ly thy word might keep, I say. I have not swerv'd from thy judgments, nor yet shrunk a-ny deal: For why? thou hast me taught thereby, to live godly and well. O Lord, how sweet un-to my tast find I thy word alway? Doubtless no honey in my mouth feel ought so sweet I may. Thy laws have me such wisdom learn'd that ut-ter-ly I hate All wicked and un-god-ly ways, in every kind and rate. NUN. The fourteenth Part. Ev'n as a lantern to my feet, so doth thy word shine bright: And to my paths where e're I go, it is a flaining light, I have both sworn and will perform my promises doubtless, That I will keep thy judgments just, and them in life express:
Affliction hath me sore opprest, and brought me to death's door: O Lord, as thou hast promised, so me to life restore. The offerings which with heart and voice, most frankly I thee give: Accept, and teach me how I may after thy judgments live. My soul is aye so in my hand, that dangers me assail: Yet do I not thy law forget, nor it to keep will fail: Although the wicked laid their nets to catch me at a bay: Yet did I not from thy pre∣cepts once swerve or go astray. Thy law I have so claim'd alway, As mine own he-ri-tage: And why? for therein I delight, and set my whole courage. For evermore I have been bent thy statutes to fulfill: Ev'n so likewise un-to the nd, I will con-ti-nue still.
SAMECH. The fifteenth Part. The crafty thoughts and double hearts I do always detest: But as for thy law and precepts, I love them e-ver best. Thou art my  hid and secret place, my shield of strong defence: Therefore have I thy pro-mi-ses look'd for with patience. Go to therefore ye wicked men, depart from me a-non: For the Commandments will I keep of God my Lord alone. As thou hast promis'd so perform, that death me not assail: Nor let my hope abuse me so, that through distrust I quail. Uphold me, and I shall be safe, for ought they do or say: And in thy statutes pleasure take, will I both night and day. Thou hast trod such under thy feet, as do thy statutes break: For nought avails their sub-til-ty, their counsel is but weak.
Like dross thou casts the wicked out, where e're they go or dwell: Therefore can I as thy statutes love nothing half so well. My flesh (a-las!) is struk with fear, as though it were benumm'd: For when I see thy judgments, straight I am as one aston'd. GNAIN. The sixteenth Part. I do the thing that lawful is, and give to all men right: Resign me not to them that would oppress me with their might. But for thy servant surety be in that thing that is good: That proud men give me not the foil, with-rage as they were wood. Mine eyes with waiting are now blind, thy help so much I crave: And eke thy right'ous promise, Lord, whereby thou wilt me save. En∣treat thy servant lovingly, and favour to him show: Thy statutes of most ex'lency teach me al-so to know.
Thy humble servant (Lord) I am, grant me to understand, How by thy statutes I may know best what to take in hand. It is now time (Lord) to begin for truth is quite decai'd: Thy law like∣wise they have transgrest, and none against them said. This is the cause wherefore I love thy laws better than gold, Or jewels fine which are esteem'd most costly to be sold. I thought thy precepts all most just, and so them laid in store: All crafty and ma∣li-cious ways, I do abhor therefore. PHE. The seventeenth Part. Thy covenants are most wonderful and full of things profound: My soul therefore doth keep them sure, when they are tri'd and found. When men first en-ter to thy word they find a light most clear: And very idiots understand when they it read or hear.
For joy I have both gap'd and breath'd to know thy commandment: That I might guide my self thereby, I sought what thing it meant. With mercy and compassion, Lord, behold me from above, As thou art wont to behold such as thy Name fear and love. Direct my footsteps by thy word, that I thy will may know: And ne-ver let in-i-qui-ty thy servant over-throw. From sland, your tongues and deadly harms preserve and keep me sure: Thy precepts then will I observe, and put them eke in ure. Thy countenance which doth surmount the Sun in his bright hue, Let shine on me, and by thy law teach me what to eschew. Out of mine eyes great floods gush out of dreary tears that fall: When I behold how wicked men thy laws keep not at all.
TSADI. The eighteenth Part. In every point, Lord, thou art just, the wicked though they gruge. And when thou dost sentence pronounce, thou art a right'ous Judge. To render right, and flee from guile, are two chief points most high: And such as thou hast in thy law commanded us straightly. With zeal and wrath I am consum'd and even pin'd away: To see my foes thy word forget, for ought that I do say. So pure and perfect is thy word, as a-ny heart can deem: And I thy ser∣vant nothing more do love or yet esteem. And though I be nothing set by, as one of base degree: Yet do I not thy laws forget, nor shrink away from thee. Thy righ∣t'sness (Lord) is most just, for e-ver to endure: Al-so thy law is th it self, most constant and most pure.
Trouble and grief hath seiz'd on me, and brought me wondrous low: Yet to I still of thy precepts delight to hear and know. The right'ousness of thy judgments doth last for e-ver-more: Then teach them me, for ev'n in them my life lies up in store. COPH. The nineteenth Part. With servent heart I call'd and cri'd; now answer me, O Lord: That thy commandments to observe I may fully accord. To thee my God, I make my suit with most humble request: Save me there∣fore, and I will keep thy precepts and thy hests. To thee I cry ev'n in the morn, before the day wax light: Because that I have in thy word my con-fi-dence whole plight. Mine eyes prevent the watch by night, and ere they call I wake: That by de-vi-sing on thy word, I might some comfort take.
Incline thine ears to hear my voice, and pi-ty on me take: As thou was wont so judge me Lord, lest life should me forsake. My foes draw near, and do procure my death ma-li-ciously. Which from thy law are far gone back, and stray'd from it lewdly. Therefore, O Lord, approach thou near, for need doth so require: For all thy precepts true they are, then help I thee desire. But thy commandments have I learn'd not now, but long a-go: That they re∣main for e-ver-more, thou hast them grounded so. RESH. The twentieth Part. My trouble and af-flicti-on con-si-der and be-hold: De-li-ver me, for of thy law I ever take fast hold. Desend my good and right'ous cause, with speed some succour lend: From death (as thou hast promised) Lord keep me and defend.
As for the wicked, far they are from having health and grace: Whereby they might thy statutes know, they en-ter not the trace. Great are thy mercies, Lord, I grant, what tongue can them at-tain? And as thou hast me judg'd ere now, so let me life ob-tain Though ma-ny men did trouble me, and persecute me sore: yet from thy laws I ne-ver shrunk, nor went a-wry therefore. And truth it is, for grief I die when I these traitors fee: Because they keep no whit thy word, nor yet seek to know thee. Behold, for I do love thy laws With heart most glad and fain: As thou art good and grac'ous Lord, restore my life again. What thy word doth decree, must be, and so it hath been ever: Thy right'ous judgments are al-so most true, and decay never.
SCHIN. The twenty first Part. Princes have sought by cruelty, caussess-to make me crouch: But all in vain, for of thy word the fear did my heart touch. And cer∣tain-ly even of thy word I was merry and glad, Than he that of rich spoils and prey, great store and plenty had. As for all lies and fal-si-ties, I hate most and de-test: For why thy ho-ly law do I a-bove all things love best. Sev'n times a day I praise the Lord, singing with heart and voice: Thy right'ous acts and wonderful, so cause me to rejoyce. Great peace and rest shall all such have as do thy statutes love: No danger shall their qui-et state impair or once remove. My on-ly health and comfort, Lord, I look for at thy hand: And therefore have I done those things, which thou didst me command.
Thy laws have been my ex-er-cise, which my soul most desir'd: So much to them my love was bent, that nought else I requir'd: Thy statutes and commandements I kept (thou know'st) aright: For all the things that I have done, Are present in thy sight. THAU. The twenty second Part. O Lord, let my complaint and cry before thy face appear: And as thou hast me promise made, so teach me thee to fear. Mine humble sup-pli-ca-ti on, t'wards thee let find ac-cess: And grant me, Lord, deli∣verance, for so is thy promise. Then shall my lips thy praises speak af-ter most ample sort: When thou thy statutes hast me taught, wherein stands my comfort. My tongue shall sing and preach thy word, and in this wise say shall: Gods famous acts and no-ble laws are just and perfect all.
Stretch out thy hand, I thee beseech, and speedily me save: For thy commandments to observe, chosen, O Lord, I have. Of thee alone, Lord I crave health for other I know none: And in thy law and nothing else I do delight alone. Grant me therefore long days to live thy Name to magnifie: And of thy judgments merciful, let me the favour try. For I was lost and went astray, much like a wandring shee: Oh seek me, for I have not fail'd, thy commandments to keep. PSALM CXX. Ad Dominum. T. S. IN trouble and in thrall, unto the Lord I call, And he doth me comfort: Deliver me I say, From Lyars lips alway, and tongues of false report. 3. What, vantage or what thing, Getst thou thus far to sting,
thou false and  flatt'ring lyar? thy tongue doth hurt I ween, No less than arrows keen, Or hot consuming fire. Alas too long I slack Within these tents so black, which Kedars are by name. By whom the flock elect, And all of Isaac's sect Are put to open shame. With them that peace did hate, I came a peace to make, And set a quiet life. But when my tale was told, Causeless I was controll'd, By them that would have strife. PSALM CXXI. Levavi oculos. W. W. I Lift mine eyes to Sion hill, from whence I do attend, That suc∣cour God me send. The mighty God me succour will, Which heaven and earth hath fram'd, and ev'ry thing therein nam'd. 3. Thy foot from slip he will preserve, And will thee safely keep:
For he will  never sleep. Lo he that doth Isr'el conserve, No sleep at all can catch, But his eyes shall ever watch. The Lord is thy warrant alway, The Lord eke doth thee cover, As at thy right hand ever. The Sun shall not thee parch by day, Nor the Moon not half so bright Shall with cold thee hurt by night. The Lrod will keep thee from distress And will thy life sure save: And thou shalt also have. In all thy basiness good success: Wherev'r thou go'st in or out God will thy things bring about. PSALM CXXII. Laetatus sum W. K. I Did in heart rejoice, to hear the peoples voice, In offering so willingly: For let us up say they, And in the Lords house pray: Thus spake the people lovingly. Our feet that wander wide, shall in thy gates bide. O thou Jerusalem most fair, which art so seemly set,
Much like a City  near, The like whereof is not elsewhere. The Tribes with one accord, I The Tribes of God the Lord Are thither bent their way to take, So God before did tell That there his Is-ra-el Their prayers should together make. For there are thrones erect, And that for this respect, To set forth justice or-der-ly: Which thrones right to maintain To David's house pertain, His folk to judge accordingly. To pray let us not cease For Je-ru-sa-lem's peace, Thy friends God pro∣sper migh-ti-ly Peace be thy walls about, And prosper thee throughout Thy Pa-la-ces con-ti-nual-ly: I wish thy prosp'rous state, For my poor brethrens sake, That comfort have by means of thee: God's house doth me allure, Thy wealth for to procure, So much always as lies in me. PSALM CXXIII. Ad te levavi. T. S. O Lord, that heaven dost possess, I lift mine eyes to thee:
,  Ev'n as the servant lifteth his, his master's hand to see. As handmaids wash their mistress hands some grace for to atchieve: So we behold the Lord our God, till he do us forgive. Lord grant us thy compassion, and mercy in thy sight: For we are fill'd and o-ver-come with hatred and despight. Our minds be stuft with great rebuke, the rich and wordly wise Do make of us their mocking stocks, the proud do us despise. PSALM CXXIV. Nisi quia Dom. W. W. NOw I-sra-el may say, and that tru-ly: If that the Lord had not our cause maintain'd: If that the Lord had not our right su∣stain'd. When all the world against us fur'ously Made their uproars, and said we should all die. Now long a-go they had devour'd us all:
And swallow'd quick, for  ought that we could deem: Such was their rage, as we might well esteem. And as the floods with mighty force do fall: So had they now our lives ev'n brought to thrall. The roaring streams, most proud in roaring noise, Had long ago o'rewhelm'd us in the deep. But lov'd be God, which doth us safely keep, From bloody teeth, and their most cruel voice, Which as a prey, to eat us would rejoyce. Ev'n as a bird out of the fowlers gin Escapes away, right so it fares with us: Broke are their nets, and we have scaped thus. God that made heav'n and earth, is our help then: His Name hath saved us from these ill men. PSALM CXXV. Qui confidunt. W. W. SUch as in God the Lord do trust, as mount Sion shall firmly stand
And be removed at no hand. The Lord will count them right and just: So that they shall be sure For e-ver to endure. As mighty mountains huge and great Je-ru-sa-lem about do close: So will the Lord do un to those, Who on his godly will do wait: Such are to him so dear, They ne-ver need to fear. For though the right'ous try doth he, By making wicked men his rod: Lest they through grief forsake their God, It shall not as their lot still be. Give, Lord, to us thy light. Whose hearts are true and right. But as for such as turn a-side. By crooked ways which they out sought, The Lord will surely bring to nought; With workers vile they shall a-bide: But peace with Is-ra-el. For evermore shall dwell. Another of the same by R. W. THose that do put their confidence
Upon the Lord our God  only, And fly to him for their defence, in all their need and misery. Their faith is sure still to endure, Grounded on Christ the corner-stone; Mov'd with none ill, but standeth still, Stedfast like to the Mount Sion. And as about Je-ru-sa-lem, The mighty hills do it compass, So that no en'mies come to them, To hurt that Town in any case: So God indeed in every need, His faithful people doth defend, Standing them by assuredly, From this time forth world without end. Right wise and good is our Lord God And will not snffer certainly, The sinners and ungodlies rod, To stay upon his family: Lest they also from God should go, Falling to sin and wickedness: O Lord defend world without end Thy Christian fok thro' thy goodness. O Lord, do good to Christians all, that stedfast in thy word abide:
as willingly from God fall, And to false doctrine daily slide, Such will the Lord scatter abroad, With hypocrites thrown down to hell, God will them send pains without end: But Lord, grant peace to Israel. Glory to God the father of might, And to the Son our Saviour, And to the Holy Ghost, whose light Shine in our hearts, and us succour: That the right way from day to day We may walk and him glorifie. With hearts desire, all that are here Worship the Lord, and say, Amen. PSALM CXXVI. In convertendo. W. W. WHen that the Lord again his Sion had forth brought, from bondage great and also servitude extreme: His work, was such as did surmount mans heart and thought: So that we were much like to them that use to dream, : Our mouths they were with laughter filled then, and eke our tongues did shew us joyful men.
The heathen folk were forced then this to confess, How that the Lord for them also great things had done. But much more we, and therefore can confess no less: Wherefore to joy we have good cause as we begun. O Lord go forth, thou canst our bondage end: As to deserts the flow∣ing rivers send. Full true it is, that they which sow in tears indeed, A time will come, when they shall reap in mirth and joy. They went and wept, in bear∣ing of their precious seed: For that their foes full often times did them annoy: But their return with joy they shall sure see: Their sheaves home bring, and not empaired be. PSALM CXXVII Nisi Dom. W. W. EXcept the Lord the house doth make, and thereunto doth set his hand, What men do build, it cannot stand. Likewise in vain men undertake,
Cities and holds to watch and ward, except the Lord be their safeguard. Though ye rise early in the morn, and so at night go late to bed, Feed∣ing with sorrow on dry bread, Yet were your labour lost and worn: But they whom God doth love and keep Receive all things with quiet sleep. Therefore mark well when e're you see that men have heirs t'injoy their land It is the gift of God's own hand: For God himself doth multiply, Of his great li-be-ra-li-ty, The blessing of posterity. And when the children come to age They grow in strength and active∣ness, In person and in comliness: So that a shaft shot with courage, Of one that hath a most strong arm, Flies not so swift, nor doth like harm. O well is he that hath his quiver Furnisht with such artillery: For when in peril he shall be, Such one shall never shake nor shiver
When  that he pleads before the Judg Against his soes that bear him grudge. PSALM CXXVIII Beati omnes. T. S. BLessed ar thou that fearest God, and walkest in his way: For of thy labour thou shalt eat, happy art thou I say. Like fruitful vines on the hose side so doth thy wife spring out: Thy children stand like olive plants thy table round about. Thus art thou blest that fearest God, and he shall let thee see, Th promised Je-ru-sa-lem, and her fe-li-ci-ty. Thou shalt thy childrens children see, to thy great joys increase: And likewise grace on Israel, pro-spe-ri-ty and peace. PSALM CXXIX. Saepe expugnaverunt. OFt they, now Israel may say, me from my youth assail'd: Oft they assail'd me from my youth, yet never they prevail'd. Upon my back the plowers plow'd, and furrows long did cast:
The  righteous Lord hath cut the cords of wicked foes at last. They that hate me shall be asham'd, and turned back also: And made as grass upon the house, which with'reth e're it grow. Whereof the mower cannot find enough to sill his hand: Nor can he fill his lap, that goes to glean upon the land. Nor passers by, pray God on them to let his blessing fall: Nor say, we bless you in the Name of God the Lord at all. PSALM CXXX. De profundis. W. W. LOrd, to thee I make my moan, when dangers me oppress: I call, I sigh, plain, and groan, trusting to find release. Hear now, O Lord, my request, for it is full due time: And let thine ears aye be prest, unto this prayer mine. O Lord, our God, if thou weigh our sins, and them peruse:
Who  shall then escape and say, I can my self excuse? But Lord thou art mer-ci-ful, and turn'st us to thy grace: That we with hearts most care∣ful, should fear before thy face. In God I put my whole trust, my soul waits on his will: For his promise is most just, and I hope therein still. My soul to God hath re∣gard, waiting for him alway, More than they which watch and ward to see the dawning day. Let Israel then boldly in the Lord put his trust: He is that God of mercy that his deliver must. For he it is that must save Is∣ra-el from his sin: And all such as surely have their confidence in him. PSALM CXXXI. Domine, non est. O Lord I am not puft in mind, I have no scornful eye:
I do  not ex-er-cise my self in things that be too high. But as the child that weaned is, ev'n from his mothers breast: So have I, Lord, behav'd my self in silence and in rest. O Is-ra-el trust in the Lord, let him be all thy stay: From this time forth for e-ver-more, from age to age, I say. PSALM CXXXII. Memento Dom. REmember David's troubles, Lord, how to the Lord he swore: And vow'd a vow to Jacob's God, to keep for e-vermore. I will not come within my house, nor climb up to my bed: Nor let my temples take their rest, nor the eyes in my head. Till I have found out for the Lord, a plae to sit thereon: An house for Jacob's God to be an ha-hi-ta-ti-on. We heard of it at E-phra-ta, there did we hear this sound:
And in the fields and  forrests the▪ these  first were sound. We will  and go in row his  here: Before his footstool to fall down. and worshi him in fear. rise O Lord, a rise, I say, in to thy resing-place▪ oth  nd the  of thy strength, the presence of thy grace. Let all thy Priests be clothed, Lord, with truth and : Let all thy Saints, and ho-ly men, sing all with joy-ful-ness. And for thy servant David's sake, refuse not, Lord, I say, The face of thine a-noin-ted Lord nor turn thy face away. The second Part. The Lord to David swore in truth, and will not shrink from it: Saying, the fruit of thy body u-pon thy seat shall sit. And if thy sons my cov'nant keep, that I shall learn each one:
Then shall  their sons for e-ver sit: u-pon thy princely throne. The Lord himself hath chose S-on, and loves therein to dwell: Saying, this is my resting-place, I love and like it well. And I will bless with great increase her victuals every where: And I will sa-tis-fie with bread the needy that be there. Yea, I will deck and cloath her Priests with my sal-va-tion: And all her Saint; shall sing for joy of my pro-te-cti-on. There will I surely make the horn of David for to bud: For there I have ordain'd for mine A lantern bright and good. As for his en'mies, I will cloath with shame for e-ver-more: But I will cause his crown to shine more fresh than heretofore. PSALM CXXXIII. Ecce quam. W. W. O How happy a thing it is, and joyful for to see,
Bre∣thren  together ast to hold the band of a-mi-ty! It calls to mind the sweet perfume. and that costly oyntment, Which on the Sa-cri-fi-cer's hd by God's precept was spent. It wet-not Aaron's head a-lone, but drencht his beard throughout, And fi-nal ly it did run down his rich at tire a-bout. And as the lower ground doth drink the dew of Hermon hill, And Si-on with her silver drops the fields with fruit doth fill. Ev'n so the Lord doth pour on them his blessings ma-ni-fold: Whose hearts and minds without all guile this knot do keep and hold. PSALM CXXXIV. Ecce nunc. W. W. BEhold and have regard, ye servants of the Lord, Which in his house by night do watch, praise him with one accord. List up your hands on high, unto his holy place:
And give the Lord  his praises due, his benefits mre. For why the Lord who did bot  and heaven frame, Doth Sion bless, and will conserve, for evermore the same. PSALM CXXXV. Laudate Dom. O Praise the Lord, praise him, praise him, praise him with one accord O praise him still all ye that be the servants of the Lord: O praise him ye that stand, and be in the house of the Lord: Ye of his Court and of his House, praise him with one accord. Praise ye the Lord, for he is good, sing praises to his Name: It is a comely and good thing, always to do the same. For why? the Lord hath chose Jacob his very own you see: So hath he chosen Israel, his people for to be. For this I know, and am right sure, the Lord is very great:
He is  indeed above all gods, most easie to intreat. For whatsoever plea∣sed him, all that full well he wrought: In heav'n, in earth, and in the sea, which he hath made of nought. He lifts up clouds ev'n from the earth, he makes lightnings and rain: He bringeth forth thee winds al-so, he made nothing in vain. He smote the first-born of each thing in Egypt that took rest: He spared there no li-ving thing, the man nor yet the beast. He hath in thee shew'd wonders great, O Egypt void of vaunts: On Pharaoh thy cursed King, and his severe servants. He smote them ma-ny Na-ti-ons, and did great acts and things: He slew the great and migh-ti-est, and chief of all their Kings. Sehon King of the A-mo-rites, and Og King of Bashan:
He slew  also the Kingdoms all, that were of Canaan. And gave their land to Is-ra-el, an heritage we see: To Is-ra-el his own people. an heritage to be. The second Part. Thy Name, O Lord, shall still endure and thy memorial Throughout all generations, that are or ever shall. The Lord will surely now avenge his people all indeed: And to his servants he will shew fa∣vour in time of need. The Idols of the heath'n are made in all the coasts and lands, Of silver and of gold they be, the work even of mens hands. They have their mouths and cannot speak and eyes that have no sight: They have eke ears and hear nothing their mouths be breathless quite. Wherefore all they are like to them that so do set them forth:
And  likewise those that trust in them, or think they be ought worth. O all ye house of Israel, see that ye praise the Lord: And ye that be of Aa∣rons house, praise him with one accord. And ye that be of Levi's house, praise ye likewise the Lord: And ye that stand in awe of him, Praise him with one accord. And out of Sion sound his praise, the great praise of the Lord, which dwelleth in Je-ru-sa-lem, praise him with one accord. CXXXVI. Confitemini Dom. PRaise ye the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endureth for ever. Give thanks unto the God of Gods, for his mercy endureth for ever. Give thanks unto the Lord of lords. for his mercy endureth for ever. Which on∣ly doth great wondrous works, for his mercy endureth for ever. Which by his wisdom made the heav'ns for his mercy endureth for ever.
Which on the waters stretcht the earth, for his mercy endureth for ever. Which made great lights to shine abroad, for his mercy endureth for ever. The Sun to rule the lightsom day, for his mercy endureth for ever. The Moon and Stars to guide the night, for his mercy endureth for ever. Which smote Egypt with their first born, for his mercy endureth for ever. And Israel brought out from thence, for his mercy endureth for ever. With mighty hand and stretched arm for his mercy endureth for ever. Which cut the red sea in two parts, for his mercy endureth forever. And Israel made pass there through, for his mercy endureth for ever. And drowned Pharaoh and his Host, for his mercy endureth for ever. Through wilderness his people led, for his mercy endureth for ever. He which did smite great noble Kings, for his mercy endureth for ever.
And which hath slain the mighty Kings, for his mercy endureth for ever. As Sehon King of Amorites, for his mercy endureth for ever. And Og the King of Basan land, for his mercy endureth for ever. And gave their land for heritage, for his mercy endureth for ever. Ev'n to his servant Is-ra-el, for his mercy endureth for ever. Remembring us in base estate, for his mercy endureth for ever. And from oppressors rescu'd us, for his mercy endureth for ever. Which giveth food unto all flesh, for his mercy endureth for ever. Praise ye the Lord of heav'n above, for his mercy endureth for ever. Give thanks unto the Lord of lords, for his mercy endureth for ever. All that hath breath praise ye the Lord, for his mercy endureth for ever. Another of the same by T. C. O Laud the Lord benign, whose mercies last for aye:
Give  thanks and praises sing to God of gods I say: For certainly, his mercies dure both firm and sure e-ter-nal-ly. The Lord of lords praise ye, whose mercies aye do dure: Great won∣ders only he doth work by his great pow'r. For certainly, his mercies dure both firm and sure, e-ter-nal-ly. Which God omnipotent, by his great wisdom high: The heav'nly fir∣mament did frame, as we do see. For certainly, his mercies dure both firm and sure, e-ter-nal-ly. Yea, he the heavy charge of all the earth did siretch: And on the wa∣ters-large the same he did out-reach. For certainly his mercies dure both firm and sure, e-ter-nal-ly. Great lights he made to be for why? his love is aye:
Such as the  Sun we see, To rule the lightsom day, For certainly, his mercies dure both firm and sure, e-ter-nal-ly. And eke the Moon so clear, which shineth in our sight: and Stars that do appear, to guide the darksom night. For certainly, his mercies dure both firm and sure e-ter-nal-ly. With grievous plagues and sore, all Egypt smote he then: The first∣born less andmore, he slew of beasts and men. For certainly, his mer∣cies dure both firm and sure, e-ter-nal-ly. And from amidst their land, his Israel forth brought: which he with mighty hand and stretched arm hath wrought. For certainly, his mercies dure both firm and sure e-ter-nal-ly. The Sea he cut in two, which stood up like a wall:
And mad  through it to go His chosen children all. For certainly, his mer∣cies dure, both firm and sure e-ter-nal-ly. But there he whelmed then The proud King Pha-ra-oh, With his huge host of men, And Chariots eke al-so, For certainly, his mercies dure, both firm and sure e-ter-nal-ly. Who led through wilderness, His people safe and sound: And for his love endless, Great Kings he brought to ground, For certainly, his mercies dure, both firm and sure e-ter-nal-ly. And slew with puissant hand Kings mighty and of fame. As of A-mo-rites land, Se-hon the King by name, For certainly, his mer∣cies dure, both firme and sure e-ter-nal-ly. And Og (the giant large) O Basan King al-so:
Whose land for  he-ri-tage He gave his people tho'. For cer-tain-ly, his mercies dure, both firm and sure e-ter-nal-ly. Ev'n un-to Is-ra-el, His servant dear, I say, He gave the same to dwell, And there abide for aye. For cer-tain-ly, his mercies dure, both firme and sure, e-ter-nal-ly. To mind he did us cail in our most base degree: And from oppressors all, In safety set us free: For cer-tain-ly, His mercies dure, both firme and sure, E-ter-nal-ly. All flesh on earth abroad with food he doth full fill: Where∣fore of heav'n the God to laud be it your will. For cer-tain-ly, His mercies dure both firm and sure, E-ter-nal-ly. PSALM CXXXVII. Super flumina. W. W. WHen as we sat in Ba-by-lon, the rivers round a-bout:
And in remembrance of Si-on, the tears for grief burst out. We hang'd our harps and instruments the willow trees u-pon: For in that place men for their use had planted man' a one. Then they to whom we prisoners were, said to us tauntingly: Now let us hear your Hebrew songs, and pleasant me-lo-dy. A-las! said we, who can once frame his sorr'ful heart to sing The praises of our loving God thus un-der a strange King? But yet if I Je-ru-sa-lem out of my heart let slide: Then let my fingers quite forget the warbling harp to guide. And let my tongue within my mouth be ti'd for e-ver fast: If that I joy before I see thy full de-li-v'rance past. Therefore (O Lord) remember now the cursed noise and cry,
That  Edom's sons against us made, when they raz'd our City. Remember. Lord, their cru-el words, when as with one accord They cry'd, on, sack and raze their walls, in despight of their Lord. Ev'n so shalt thou, O Ba-by-lon, at length to dust be brought: And happy shall that man be cali'd, that our revenge hath wrought. Yea, blessed shall that man be call'd, that takes thy children young: To dash their brains against hard stones, that li'n the streets among. PSALM CXXXVIII. Confitebor tibi. THee will I praise with my whole heart, my Lord, my God, always: Ev'n in the presence of the gods I will advance thy praise. Toward thy ho-ly Temple, I will look and worship thee: And prai∣sed in my thankful mouth, thy ho-ly Name shall be. Ev'n for thy loving kindness sake, and for the truth withal:
For  thou thy Name hast by thy word advanced o-ver all. When I did call, thou heardest me, and thou hast made al-so The power of increased strength within my soul to grow. Yea, all the Kings on earth, they shall give praise to thee, O Lord: For they of thy most ho-ly mouth have heard the mighty word. They of the ways of God the Lord in singing shall intreat: Because the glory of the Lord it is ex-cee-ding great. The Lord is high, and yet he doth behold the lowly sprite: But he (contemning) knows a-far the proud and lof-ty wight. Although in midst of trouble I do walk, yet shall I stand, Renew∣ed by thee, O my Lord, thou wilt stretch out thy hand. U-pon the wrath of all my sees, and saved shall I be.
By thy  right hand, the Lord God will perform his work to me. Thy mercy, Lord, endures for aye, Lord, do me not forsake: Forsake me not, that am the work which thine own hand did make. PSALM CXXXIX. Domine probasti. O Lord thou hast me try'd and known, my sitting thou dost know, And rising eke, my thoughts afar thou understand'st also. My paths, yea and my lying down thou compassest always: And by familiar custom art acquainted with my ways. No word is in my tongue, O Lord but known it is to thee: Tho me behind hold'st, and before thou lay'st thine hand on me. Too wonderful above my reach, Lord is thy cunning skill: It is  high, that I the same cannot attain untill. From sight of thy all-seeing Sprite,
Lord whither shall I go? Or whi∣ther  shall I fly away, thy presence to scape fro? To heav'n if I mount aloft, loe, thou art present there: In hell if I lye down below, ev'n there thou dost appear. Yea, let me take the morning wings, and let me go and hide: Ev'n there where are the farthest parts where slowing Sea doth slide. Yea, even thither also shall thy reaching hand me guide: And hy right hand shall hold me fast, and make me to abide. Yea, f I say, the darkness shall yet shrow'd me from thy sight: Loe, ev'n also the darkest night about me shall be light. Yea, darkness hideth not from thee but niht doth shine as day To thee the darkness and the light are both alike alway. The second Part. For thou possessed hast my reins, and thou hast cov'red me,
When I  within my mothers womb enclosed was by thee. Thee will I praise, made fearfully and wondrously I am: Thy works are marvellous, right well my soul doth know the same. My bones they are not hid from thee, although in secret place I have been made, and in the earth beneath I shaped was. When I was formless, then thine eye saw me, for in thy book Were written all, nought was before that after fash'on took. The thoughts therefore of thee, O God, how dear are they to me: And of them all how passing great the endless number be. If I should count them, Ioe, their sum more than the sand I see: And whensoever I awake, yet am I still with thee. The wicked and the bloody men. O that thou wouldest slay;
Ev'n those,  O God, to whom, depart, depart from me, I say. Ev'n those of thee, O Lord my God, that speak full wickedly: Those that are lifted up in vain, being enemies to thee. Hate I not them that hate thee, Lord, and that in earnest wise? Con∣tend I not against them all against thee that arise? I hate them with unfeigned hate, ev'n as my utter foes. Try me, O God, and know my heart, my thoughts prove and disclose. Consider, Lord, if wickedness in me there any be: And in thy way (O God my guide,) for ever lead thou me. PSALM CXL. ripe me LOrd save me from the evil man, and from the cruel wight: And from all those that evil do imagine in their sprite. Which make on me continual war, their tongues, loe, they have whet
Like serpents, underneath their lips is adders poyson set. Keep me, O Lord, from wicked hands, preserve me to abide Free from the cruel man, that means to cause my steps to slide. The proud have laid a snare for me, and they have spread a net With cords in my path-way, and gins for me eke have they set. Therefore I said unto the Lord, Thou art my God alone: Hear me, O Lord, O hear the voice wherewith I pray and mone. O Lord my God, thou only art the strength that saveth me: My head in day of battel hath been cover'd still be thee. Let not, O Lord, the wicked have the end of his desire: Perform not s ill thought, lest he with pride be set on fire. Of them that compass me about; the chiefest of them all:
Lord let  the mischief of their lips upon themselves befall. Let coals fall on them, let him cast them in consuming flame, And in deep pits, so as they may not rise out of the same. For no backbiter shall on earth be set in stable plight: And evil to destruction still shall haunt the cruel wight. I know the Lord, th'afflicted will revenge and judge the poor: The just shall praise thy Name, just shall dwell with thee evermore. PSALM CXLI. Domine clamavi. O Lord upon thee do I call, Lord haste thee unto me: And hearken, Lord, unto my voice, when I do cry to thee. As incense let my prayers be directed in thine eyes: And the up-lifting of my hands, as ev'ning sa-cri-fice. My Lord, for guiding of my mouth set thou a watch before:
And  also of my moving lips, O Lord, keep thou the door. That I should wicked works commit incline thou not my heart: With ill men of their delicates, Lord, let me eat no part. But let the righteous sinite me, Lord, for that is good for me: Let him reprove me, and the same a precious oyl shall be. Such smiting shall not break my head, the time shall shortly fall, when I shall in their mi∣sery make prayers for them all. Then when in stony places down their Judges shall be cast: Then shall they hear thy words, for then they have a pleasant taste. Our bones about the graves mouth lo scattered are they found: As he that heweth wood, or he that diggeth up the ground. But O my Lord, my God, mine eyes do look up unto thee:
In thee  is all my trust, let not my soul forsaken be. Which they have laid to catch me in, Lord, keep me from the snare: And from the sub∣tle gins of them that wicked workers are. The wicked in-to their own nets, together let them fall: While I do by thy help escape the danger of them all. PSALM CXLII. Voce mea. BEfore the Lord God with my voice I did send out my cry: And with my strained voice un-to the Lord God prayed I. My me-di-ta-t'on in his sight to pour I did not spare: And in the presence of the Lord my trouble did declare. Although perplexed was my sp'rit, my path was known to thee: In way where I did walk a snare they sli-ly laid for me. I look'd and view'd on my right hand,
but none there would me  know: All refuge failed me, and for my soul none cared tho'. Then cry'd I, Lord, to thee, and said, my hope thou on-ly art: Thou in the land of living art my port'on and my part. Hark to my cry, for I am brought full low: de-li-ver me From them that do me per-se-cute, For me too strong they be. That I may praise thy Name, my soul from prison, Lord, bring out: When thou art good to me, the just shall press me round about. PSALM CXLIII. Domine, exaudi. LOrd, hear my prayer, heark the plaint that I do make to thee: Lord, in thy na-tive truth, and in thy justice answer me. In judgment with thy servant, Lord, O en-ter not at all: For justi∣fi'd be in thy sight not one that liveth shall. The en'my hath pursu'd my soul, my life to ground hath thrown:
And laid me in the dark, like them that dead are long agone. Within me in perplexity was mine accumbred sprite: And in me was my troubled heart amazed and afright. Yet I record time past, in all thy works I me-di-tate: Yea, in thy works I me-di-tate, that thy hands have create. To thee, O Lord my God, lo I do stretch my craving hands: My soul de-si-reth af-ter thee, as do the thirsty lands. Hear me with speed, my sp'rit doth fail, hide not thy face me fro: Else shall I be like them that down in-to the pit do go. Let me thy loving kindness in the morning hear and know: For in thee is my trust, shew me the way where I shall go. For I lift up my soul to thee, O Lord, de-li-ver me
From all  mine e-ne-mies: for I have hidden me with thee. Teach me to do thy will, for thou, thou art my God, I say: Let thy good sp'rit un-to the land of mercy me convey. For thy names sake with quick'ning grace a-live do thou me make: And out of trouble bring my soul, ev'n for thy Justice sake. And for thy mercy stay my foes, O Lord, destroy them all That do oppress my soul: for I thy servant am, and shall. PSALM CXLIV. Benedictus Dom. BLest be the Lord my strength, that doth instruct my hands to fight: The Lord that doth my fingers frame to battle by his might. He is my goodness, fort, and tower, de-li-ve-rer and shield: In him I trust; my people he subdues to me to yield. O Lord, what thing is man, that him thou holdest so in prise?
Or son of man, that up-on him thou thinkest in such wise. Man is but like to va-ni-ty, so pass his days to end, As fleeting shade: bow down, O Lord, the heavens and descend. The mountains touch, and they shall smoke, cast forth thy lightning flame, And scatter them; thine arrows shoot, consume them with the same. Send down thine hand ev'n from a-bove, O Lord, de-li-ver me: Take me from waters great, from hand of strangers make me free. Whose subtle mouth of va-ni-ty, and sondness doth intreat: And their right hand is a right hand of falshood and deceit. A new song will I sing, O God, and singing will I be On Viol and on In-stru-ment ten-stringed un-to thee. Ev'n he it is that on-ly gives de-li-ve-rance to Kings:
Un-to his  servant David help from hurtful sword he brings. From strangers hand me save and shield, whose mouth talks vani-ty. And their right hand is a right hand of guile and sub-til-ty. That our sons may be as the plants, whom growing youth doth rear: Our daughters as carv'd corner-stones, like to a palace fair. Our garners full, and plenty may with sundry sorts be found: Our sheep bring thousands, in our streets ten thousands may abound. Our Ox-en be to labour strong, that none do us invade: There be no goings out, nor cries within our streets be made. The people blessed are that with such blessings are so stor'd: Yea, blessed all the people are, whose God is God the Lord. PSALM CXLV. Exaltabo te. THee will I laud, my God, my King,
and bless thy Name  for aye For e-ver will I praise thy Name, and bless thee day by day. Great is the Lord, most worthy praise, his greatness none can reach: From race to race they shall thy works praise, and thy power preach. I of thy glor'ous Ma-je-sty the beauty will record: And me-di-tate upon thy works most wonderful, O Lord. And they shall of thy pow'r and of thy fearful acts declare: And I to publish all abroad thy great∣ness will not spare. And they into the mention shall break of thy goodness great: And I aloud thy righteousness in singing shall repeat. The Lord our God is gracious, and mer-ci-ful also: Of great abounding mercy, and to anger he is slow. Yea good to all, and all his works, his mercy doth exceed:
Lo.  all thy works do praise thee, Lord, and do thy honour spread. Thy saints do bless thee, and they do the Kingdoms glory show: And blaze thy pow'r, to cause the sons of men thy pow'r to know. The second Part. And of his mighty kingdom eke to spread his glorious praise: Thy kingdom, Lord, a kingdom is that doth endure always. And thy do∣minion through each age endures without decay. The Lord upholdeth them that fall, their sliding he doth stay. The eyes of all do wait on thee, thou dost them all relieve: And thou to each sufficing ood, in season due dost give. Thou openest thy plenteous hand, and bounteously dost fill All things whatsoever do live, with gifts of thy good will. The Lord is just in all his ways, his works are holy all.
Near al  he is that call on him, in truth that on him call. He the desires Which they require that fear him will fulfill: And he will hear them when they cry, and save them all he will. The Lord preserves all those, to him that bear a loving heart: But he them all that wicked are will utterly subvert. My thankful mouth shall gladly speak the praises of the Lord: All flesh to praise his ho∣ly Name for ever shall accord. PSALM CXLVI. Lauda anima mea. J. H. MY soul praise thou the Lord always, my God I will confess: While breath and life prolong my days, my tongue no time shall cease. Trust not in worldly Princes then, though they abound in wealth: Nor in the sons of mortal men, in whom there is no health. For why, their breath doth soon depart,
to earth anon they fall And  then the counsels of their hearts decay and perish all. O happy is that man I say, whom Jacobs God doth aid: And he whose hope doth not decay. but on the Lord is stay'd. Which made the earth and waters deep the heaven high withal: Which doth his word and promise keep in truth, and ever shall. With right always doth he proceed for such as suffer wrong: The poor and hungry he doth feed, and loose the fetters strong. The Lord doth send the blind their sight, the lame to limbs restore: The Lord, I say, doth love the right and just man evermore. He doth defend the fatherless, and stranger sad in heart: And quit the widow from distress, and ill mens ways subvert. Thy Lord and God eternally, O Sion, still shall reign:
In time of  all posterity, for ever to remain. PSALM CXLVII. Laudate Dominum. PRaise ye the Lord, for it is good unto our God to sing: For it is pleasant, and to praise it is a comely thing. The Lord his own Jerusalem, he buildeth up alone: And the disperst of Is-ra-el, doth gather into one. He heals the broken in their heart, their sores up doth he bind: He counts the number of the Stars, and names them in their kind. Great is the Lord, great is his pow'r his wisdom infinite. The Lord relieves the meek, and throws to ground the wicked wight. Sing unto God the Lord, with praise unto the Lord rejoice: And to ou God upon the harp advance your singing voice. He covers heav'n with clouds, and for the earth prepareth rain▪
And  on the mountains he doth make the grass to grow again. He gives to beasts their food, and to young Ravens when they cry: His pleasure not in strength of horse nor in mans legs doth lye. But in all those that fear the Lord the Lord hath his delight: And such as do attend upon his mercies shining light. The second Part. O praise the Lord Jerusalem▪ thy God, O Sion, praise: For he the bars hath forged strong wherewith thy gates he stays. Thy children he hath blest in thee; and in thy borders he Doth set∣tle peace, and with the flow'r of wheat he filleth thee. And his commandement upon the earth he sendeth out: And eke his word with speedy course doth swiftly run about. He giveth snow like wool, hoar frost like ashes he doth spread:
Like  morsels cast his ice, thereof the cold who can abide. He sendeth forth his mighty word, and melteth them again: His wind he makes to blow, and then the waters flow amain. The doctrine of his ho-ly word to Ja-cob he doth show: His statutes and his judgments he gives Is-ra-el to know. With e-very Nat'on hath he not so dealt, nor have they known his secret judgments, ye therefore praise ye the Lord a-lone. PSALM CXLVIII. Laudate Dominum. J. H. GIve laud un-to the Lord, From heav'n that is so high: Praise him in deed and word, Above the starry sky. And al-so ye, His Angels all, Armies royal, Praise him with glee. Praise him both Moon and Sun, Which are so clear and bright: The same of you be done, Ye glist'ring stars of light:
And eke no  less Ye Heavens fair, And clouds of th'air, His laud express. For at his word they were All formed as we see: At his voice did appear All things in their degree, Which he set fast: To them he made A law and trade, For aye to last. Extol and praise God's Name On earth ye Dragons fell: All deeps do ye the same, For it becomes you well. Him mag-ni-fie, Fire, hail, ice, snow, And storms that blow At his decree. The hills and mountains all, And trees that fruitful are: The Ce∣dars great and tall, His worthy praise declare. Beasts and cattel, Yea birds fly-ing, And worms creeping, That on earth dwell. All Kings both more and less, With all their pompous train: Princes and all judges, That in the world remain, Exalt his Name.
Young men and maids, Old men and babes, Do ye the same. For his Name shall we prove To be most ex-cel-lent, Whose praise is far a-bove The earth and fir-mament. For sure he shall Ex∣alt with bliss The horn of his, And help them all. His saints all shall forth tell His praise and worthiness: The chil∣dren of Israel, Each one both more and less: And al-so they That with good will His words ful-fil; And him o-bey. PSALM CXLIX. Cantate Domino. SIng ye un-to the Lord our God, a new re-joy-cing song: And let the praise of him be heard his ho-ly saints a-mong. Let Is-ra-el rejoyce in him that made him of nothing: And let the seed of Si-on eke be joy-ful in their King. Let them sound praise with voice of lute, un-to his ho-ly Name:
And with the timbrel and the harp sing praises of the same. For why? the Lord his pleasure all hath in his people set: And by deliv'rance he will raise the meek to glory great. With glo-ry and with honour now let all his saints rejoyce: And now a-loud up-on their beds advance their singing voice. And in their mouths let be the acts of God the mighty Lord: And in their hands eke let them bear a double edged sword. To plague the heathen, and correct the people with their hands: To bind their stately Kings in chains, their Lords in i-ron bands. To ex-e-cute on them the doom that written is before: This honour all his Saints shall have, praise ye the Lord therefore. PSALM CL. Laudate Dominum. YIeld un-to God the mighty Lord praise in his Sanctuary:
And praise him in the firmament, that shews his pow'r on high. Advance his Name, and praise him in, his mighty acts always: Ac∣cording to his exc'lency of greatness give him praise. His praises with the princely noise of sounding Trumpets blow: Praise him up-on the Vi-ol, and up-on the Harp al-so. Praise him with Timbrel and with Flut, Organs and Vir-gi-nals: With sounding Cymbals praise ye him, praise him with loud Cymbals. What e-ver hath the be-ne-fit of breathing, praise the Lord: To praise the name of God the Lord a-gree with one ac-cord. The end of the Psalms of DAVID in Metre.
