B4231 15260811 103291
17. June 1661. ORdered, That the undernamed persons, or any three or more of them, do repair unto His Grace the Lord Primate of all Ireland, and in the Name of this House, return thanks unto His Grace for his great pains taken yesterday in Preaching and Administring the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper unto the Members of this House, and to desire His Grace that he would cause the same to be Printed. Sir Henry Tichburne. Sir Theophilus Jones. Mr. of the Wards. Sir Francis Hamilton. Sir Robert Forth. Sir Richard Kirle. Copia Vera. Ex. per Philip Ferneley Cler. Parl.
THE RIGHT Way to Safety AFTER SHIP-WRACK: IN A SERMON Preached to the Honourable House of Com∣mons, in St. Patrick's Church, Dublin. Jun. 16. 1661. At their Solemn Receiving of the Blessed SACRAMENT. By the most Reverend Father in God, JOHN Lord Archbishop of Armagh, Primate and Metropolitan of all Ireland. DUBLIN, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty: And are to be sold by John North, Bookseller in Castle-street. 1661.
PROV. 28. 13. He that covereth his sins shall not prosper: but whoso confesseth and forsaketh them, shall have mercy. IN these Words, two different Ways, which Sin∣ners take to attain to Happiness, are represented to us; The one short and broad, but impassable, by reason of Thieves and Precipices; He that covereth his sins shall not prosper: the other long and strait, but certain and secure, Who so confesseth and for∣saketh them, shall have mercy. Or if you will, a com∣mon Shipwrack, wherein two Planks are presented to us, to save us from drowning; The one painted, but rotten, which will undoubtedly deceive us, that is, the Plank of Dissimulation: He that covereth his sins shall not prosper: The other rugged, but sound, which will infallibly bring us safe to Land, that is, the Plank of Repentance; He that confesseth and forsaketh them, shall have mercie. Or lastly, We may consider herein the Sore, the Chyrurgery, and the Success: The Store is Sin, the Course of Chyrurgery is double and different, the one by healing over, or binding up, the other by inci∣sion,
or cleansing out; the one with supple Oyl, the o∣ther with sharp Vineger; the one by bathing, the o∣ther by lancing; the one by covering, the other by confessing. The Success is likewise double, and dif∣ferent, proportionable to the two ways of cure; the one unprosperous, shall not prosper; the other prospe∣rous, shall have mercy. He that covereth his sins shall not prosper: but whoso confesseth and forsaketh them, shall have mercie. The Sore is spiritual and epidemical, that's Sin, 2. Chron. 6. When every one shall know his own sore. And more emphatically Isa. 1. 6. it is styled a putrifying sore. So long as our first Parents continued in the state of Innocencie, Roses grew without Thorns, as St. Ambrose observed. As there was no Sin, so there was no Sickness; no Sores in the World, either of Soul or Body. Indeed it was not impossible for them to sin, so they should have been Gods, not Men; but it was possible for them not to have sinned, which is as much as the Angels in Heaven can challenge to them∣selves: for many of them fell irrecoverably, because they found not a Redeemer, and those, which stood, owe their Conservation, as we do our Redemption, to the Cross of Christ, Col. 1. 20. But by the fall of A∣dam the Image of God became defaced in Man, the Rays of heavenly Light eclipsed, the Sparkles of di∣vine Grace cooled, the Understanding infatuated, the Will confounded, the Affections disordered, and in place of these Perfections, Sin entered into the world as an Hereditary Contagion, a spirituall Leprosie, with
the Consequents of it, all manner of Sores and Di∣seases, both of Soul and Body, which cannot be cur'd with all the Balm in Gilead, nor cleans'd with all the Water in the Ocean; but onely by the Blood of Christ, and in order to that, by Repentance; which is the Cure commended in my Text. Hence all those swarms of Fevers, Catarrhs, Gouts, Palsies, Apoplexies, and the like, which do infest the Body of Man more than any other living Creatures: We may be burned up with Cholerick Distempers, drowned with Hydropick Humours, choak'd with the Fumes of a vitious Stomack, and buried quick in the Grave of Melancholick Imaginations. But the chiefest Defects are those of the Soul, as 1. Ignorance, that in so thick a mist of Errours and Sects, we know not how to finde out the Truth; and that, which tops up our Folly, is, That we are grown too wise in our own conceits. 2. Concupiscence, that Pestilence of the Soul, whose cankered Blossoms are still sprout∣ing up in the most Regenerate Hearts; this weaken∣ed the Power of Sampson, infatuated the Wisdom of Solomon, defiled the Holiness of David. 3. Self-love, an hidden Poyson, the Rust of the Minde, the Moth of Holiness, the Parent of Envie, the Original of all Vices. 4. Discontent, which makes up prize what we want, sleight what we enjoy, more sensible of Sufferings than of Blessings; like little Children, which for want of some Toy which they affect, throw away all they have, and fall a crying: we follow Contentment hard, but as Fools do an Ignis Fatuus,
always at a distance. 5. Preposterous fear; If we do ill, we fear Magistrates; if we do well, we fear Detractors: if we be rich, we fear Thieves; if poor, Creditors; if we hate, we fear Enemies; if we love, Corrivals. 6. Distrust; We all say, We trust God, but for the most part sooner with our Souls, than with our Estates, and hardly without a Pawn, as Usurers would trust a Bankrupt. Lastly Hypocrisie: If there be a Mote in the Eye, there is a Beam in the Heart; if there be a Beam in the Eye, there is a Stack of Mis∣chief in the Heart: We look one way, and row ano∣ther way; blow hot and cold with the same Mouth, and have our Hearts more double than our breath: We flatter for advantage, and we slander for advan∣tage; we serve God for advantage, and if need be, we serve the Devil for advantage. Then since we have all made shipwrack of Baptismal Grace by sin, since all without exception do stand in need of a se∣cond Plank to save them from drowning, it remains that we make choice of one of the two presented to us in my Text, Dissimulation, or Conversion; Cover∣ing, or Confessing: That's the next part: He that co∣vereth his sins shall not prosper: but whoso confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy. There are three good covers of sin in holy Scri∣pture, 1. Charity, 2. Conversion, 3. Pardon: The two first are mens covers, the third is Gods cover. 1. Charity, Prov. 10. 12. Hatred stirreth up strife, but love covereth all sins, and 1. Pet. 4. 8. Charity shall cover the multitude of sins; Charity thinketh no evil, Charity suspecteth no hurt, Charity interprets all
things in the best sense; Charity doth not aggravate or exaggerate the faults of men, but seeks to extenu∣ate them, imputing them to a good Intention, or to Ignorance, or to Surprize, or to the violence of Tem∣ptation: Charity delights not in carrying about far∣dles of Tales and Calumnies, as Pedlars do their Packs, from House to House, nor to divulge the Faults of Men, as cursed Cham did the Nakedness of his Father; but to conceal them, and to suppress them, as Joseph was not willing to make Mary a publique example: Charity is not vindictive, to write Injuries in Marble, but buries them in oblivion. He that wants this co∣ver, is an unclean Vessel; He that hath not this wed∣ding Garment, is sure to be cast into outer darkness; but he that hath it is blessed; he shall prosper: Judge not, and you shall not be judged. The second good Cover is Conversion, Jam. 5. 20. He that converteth a sinner, shall save a soul, and hide a multitude of sins. Just as he converts a Sinner, and saves a Soul, so he hides sins; not primitively, but de∣rivatively; not principally, but subordinately; not sovereignly, but ministerially. He converts morally, but Grace, Physically; he by perswading, but Grace by renewing. Now Conversion being an infallible way to Remission, he that helps to convert, helps to cover sin; that's one way. 2. He that converts a man helps to amend him, and after amendment the shame of former sins is covered; the memory of them is ra∣ther a Badge of Honour, than a note of Ignominy; like the scar of a Souldiers wound, after it is healed.
Thus he hides the sins of his Convert. But he hides his own sin likewise, that is, dispositively he renders himself more capable of Gods pardon. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall finde mercy: But those bu∣sie Bodies, whose Affections are stronger than their Judgements, who labour with tooth and nail to spread abroad their erroneous Dreams, must expect no share in this Blessing: VVo be to you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites: for you compass sea and and land to make a Proselyte, and make him two-fold more a child of Hell, than your selves. The third kinde of covering of sin is the forgi∣ving of it. Psal. 85. 2. Thou hast forgiven their iniqui∣ty, and covered all their sins: that is, covered them from the eye of thy Justice; as a Wound is covered with a Plaister, to cure it; as a dead Body is covered in the Grave, to avoid the stench of it; as the Doors of the Israelites were covered with the Blood of the Paschal Lamb, to cause the destroying Angel to pass by them. In the same regard elsewhere the Remis∣sion of sins is called a forgetting of them, a casting of them behinde the back, a burying them in the bottom of the sea: of all Covers, this is the best, Psal. 32. 1. Blessed is the man whose transgression is forgiven, and whose sin is covered. But these are not the Covers intended in my Text, the first of which is down-right Denial, as Gehezi thought to have out-faced his Master, and Ananias and Sapphira, St. Peter. Prov. 30. The harlot eateth and wipeth her mouth, and saith, What have I done? Men
are too apt to forget the all-seeing Eye of GOD; like Woodcocks, which thrust their Heads in a Bush, and think no man sees them, because they see no man. Let the leprosie of Gehezi, let the sudden death of Ananias & Sapphira warn us to take heed how we seek to co∣ver our faults with lyes; well may it advantage a man a little for the present, as a lye got St. Peter his admissi∣on into the high Priests hall, but it hath ever a foul end∣ing, and within a while forfeits the whole stock of a mans credit and reputation: Therefore the Scripture saith, That a lying Tongue is but for a moment; and to God it is a very abomination, Prov. 12. 22. Then tell the Truth, and shame the Devil: When a Fault is inge∣nuously discovered, the Amends is half made. The second Cover is mincing or extenuating of our sins, as the Sluggard, Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, and Jonathan did but taste a little Honey upon his Rods end: But a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, a few dead flies cause the oyntment of the Apothecarie to stink, Eccl. 11. He that clippeth a little of the Kings Coyn, is guilty of Treason; every little Sand hath his weight; and it is all one whether a man be pressed to death with an heap of Sand, or a Mass of Lead, whe∣ther a Ship be overwhelmed with one great wave, or drowned with many small Leaks. More perish by the daily habitual presumptuous practice of lesser sins, than by one foul act of some greater sin. We detest that horrid Paradox, That all sins are equal; That he is as great a Transgressor that kills a Cock-Chicken without a cause, as he that murthers a Prince. But he
that makes light of any sin, when he comes to make up his account with God, destroys himself; yet this is often our Condition: A mote in our neighbours eye, shews greater than a beam in our own. The third Cover is that of Excuses. Saul pleads for a Sacrifice to the Lord, to excuse his own Disobe∣dience. Gehezi pleads the necessity of the Sons of the Prophets for his Bribery, Judas alleageth the poor to palliate his Covetousness. When the King of hea∣ven invites Men to his great Supper, one hath marri∣ed a Wife, another purchased a Farm, the third must go to prove some Oxen; many frame Excuses to themselves with as much ease as the Spider weaves her Webs. Every Sin hath its Cloak, Malice and Re∣venge pretends zeal of Justice; Willful Murther, I mean in our Duellists, which cries to Heaven for Re∣venge, muffles it self up in the Cloak of Honour and Reputation. These Fig-tree Leaves may serve to co∣ver our Sins well enough, whilst it is Vacation; but take heed of the Term-time when it comes: When Conscience begins to spit Fire and Brimstone in our Face, when the Devil pulls off the Hood wherewith he hath blinded us; then all these painted Excuses va∣nish away, we hear nothing but Hues and Cries, we see nothing but evident Destruction. The fourth Cover is, Transferring of our sins upon others; as Adam upon the Woman, the Israelites up∣on their Fathers. The Fathers have eaten sowre grapes, and the Childrens teeth are set on edge; as if the multi∣tude of Delinquents did lessen the Offence; nay ra∣ther,
the more the Transgressors, the nearer are the Judgements of God. Others accuse the Times, and evil Company of their Faults. How should one stick say it remained unscorch'd in the midst of a flaming Bundle? 'Tis true, As fire begets fire, so doth sin; e∣vil manners corrupt good, though the operation be not always present: Poyson must have a time of working: The more our familiarity grows with sin, the less the deformity thereof appears: After the Musick is en∣ded, the Tune still remains in our Ears. He that makes Conscience of his Ways, must avoid evil Com∣pany as he would do Poyson, or an house infected with the Plague; and write, Lord have mercy upon us on the one Door, as well as on the other. Others make Satan their Cover, and cast their Sins upon his Score. The Devil may sollicit us, but he cannot ne∣cessitate us: He could not thrust the Apple by force down Eves Throat, nor push Christ by violence down from the Pinnacle: He hath a sleight of perswading, not a power of compelling: He blows the Coals, but the Fire is our own: He bites, but it is those which thrust themselves into his Jaws: Resist the Devil, and he will fly from you. Lastly, Some make GOD him∣self the Cover for their Sins; of all Covers this is the worst: So Adam, The Woman which THOU gavest me. Such are they which make all things in the World, even Sin it self, to come to pass fatally, inevi∣tably, by virtue of a necessitating Decree of GOD. Such are they which make their Redeemer their Pack-Horse (be it spoken with Reverence) to bear their pre∣sumptuous
Sins: as if he had shed his precious Blood to purchase our Liberty, that we might turn Liber∣tines: Deceive not your selves; to whom Christ is made Redemption; to them he is made Righteousness and Sanctification. This is the fourth Cover, the Transferring of our Sins upon Others. The fifth Cover is Hypocrisie. This was Absalom's Cloak for his Rebellion: Such Covers were Cain's Sa∣crifice, Esau's Tears, Jezebel's Fast, the Pharisees Alms, the Harlots Vow, the Traytors Kiss. The World is full of such Juglers and Mountebanks in Religion, of all Sects, who cry, Great is Diana; and magnifie the Image that fell down from Jupiter; meaning nothing but their Profit: Who cry aloud, Lord, Lord; and mutter to themselves, Da mihi fallere, da jusum san∣ctum{que} videri: Give me grace to cheat and to delude the Eyes of the World: painted Sepulchres, very Glow-Worms, which have a counterte it Light, with∣out any Heat; Pictures with double Prospectives, that to the Light, presents an Angel, the other from the Light, a Devil: We have pulled down other Pictures to set these up in our Churches. Nothing is more o∣dious unto God, than to make a stalking-Horse of Re∣ligion: Christ throws out seve woes against Hypo∣crites: Other Sinners may be converted, the Hypo∣crite hardly, because he hath converted Conversion it self into sin. Such as devour Widdows houses un∣der a colour of long prayers, shall receive the greater damnation. The sixth and last Cover is Impudence to defend
our Sins, and glory in them, which is used by none but those who have already gotten one Foot within the Gates of Hell. Periisse puto cui pudor periit: Past Shame, past Grace. St. Austin bewails his Youth, led in the Streets of Babylon, where when he heard his Companions boasting of their lewdness, he was for∣ced to feign those things he never did, least he should appear so much more vile, by how much he was more innocent. That which was his Detestation, is now the onely Garb for a Gallant: Such a Gallant was Cham, that gloried in the Nakedness of his own Fa∣ther, whilst his more modest Brethren covered it with their Faces backward: Such another Gallant was Ca∣ligula, who said, He liked nothing better in his own Dis∣position than his Impudence: A Voice fitter for a Hang∣man than an Emperour. It was the height of Israel's sin, That she had a Whores Forehead, and refused to be ashamed: Shamefastness is the praise of Nature, the Harbinger of Grace, the Ensign of Honesty, the Seat of Virtue, the Witness of Innocencie. But glorying in sin is the next Link to Damnation. They that use such vain Covers as these, shall one day wish for another cover, even the Mountains to fall upon them, and the Hills to cover them from the presence of the Lamb. So unprosperous is this course of con∣cealing: That's the next part, Shall not prosper. First, He shall not prosper in his sin; he shall not finde that Happiness and Content in it which he ex∣pects. Amon was sick of love until he enjoyed Tha∣mar,
that moment passed, his Love was dogged with Hatred and Repentance. What a deal of conveni∣encie and hearts ease did Ahab promise to himself in Naboth's Vineyard; and the very first time he goes to take possession of it, he meets there with the Tidings of the utter ruine of Himself and Family. Herod vi∣olated all Laws of God and Man, burthened his Conscience, waded through a Sea of Blood, all to settle the Kingdom upon his Son; and he proves an Unthrift; offers half of it to a wanton Minion for a Dance. So Goods ill gotten, are like a Coal of Fire in a thatch'd House. Remember Herod. Before Judas had fingered that beggerly sum of thirty pieces of Silver, his Desires were upon the Rack; he for∣got his Duty to God, his Fidelity to his Master, his care of his own soul. But when he once had it, he could not indure to look upon it, as being the cause of his bane; he casts it away as an infectious Rag; he dis∣gorgeth it in the very Temple: his detestation of that poysonous Morsel, was greater than his reverence to that Holy Place. When Pharaoh's lean Kine had de∣voured the fat, they were still no better favoured themselves. Let us all but look back to our former Excesses, and unlawful Pleasures, and see if we may not sighing say with the Apostle, What profit had we of those things whereof we are now ashamed? So he shall not prosper in his sin. Secondly, He shall not prosper in his Affairs; not in his temporal Undertakings, Jer. 22. 30. Write this man childless, a man that shall not prosper in his days.
Israel could not prosper so long as the accursed thing remained hidden in Achan's Tent. The eleven Tribes prospered not against Benjamin, until they had hum∣bled themselves by fasting. Jonas prospered not in a Ship until he had reconcile himself to God; then he found safety in the Belly of a Whale. Neither shall he thrive or prosper in spiritual Graces: No Man can serve both GOD and Belial: These hidden Sins do choak the Seed of the Word; they hinder the Effi∣cacie of our Prayers, they make the blessed Sacrament to become poyson, and our Fasts and Humiliations, to be meer Mockeries. The Grace of God will not suffer Mates, to be chamber-fellows, and fellow-com∣moners with her in the same Heart. To ask for which of our sins things have succeeded unprosperously with us, were to seek a man in Athens at noon day, with a Candle and a Lanthorn. The Lord sanctifie our suf∣ferings to us; until then, we cannot prosper in our Affais. Thirdly, He shall not prosper in his concealment. God will bring it to light, 2 Sam. 12. 2. Thou didst it secretly, but I will do this thing before all Israel, and be∣fore the Sn:—For nothing is covered, which shall not be revealed, Luk. 12. 2. Almost incredible are the ways which God useth for the Discovery of crying Sins; especially of Murther. Whilst the Earth is covered with Snow, the Ditches, and Dunghills, and Defor∣mities thereof are hid; but by the melting of the Snow they are discovered: So the vilanous Projects of Dissemblers are so covered over with a shew of Snow-white
Innocence and Candor, that they are able like Zeuxis his Counterfeit Grapes to deceive a piercing Eye: But when time shall bring Truth to light, their horrid ugliness will appear to the Eye of the World: we may this day observe the footsteps of God's justice, how he brings the same Troubles home to their Doors who have been underhand the Contrivers and Fomen∣ters of them among their Neighbours: And now Bel∣lona begins to shake her bloody Whip among them, as if God should say, Thou didst it secretly, but I will do this thing before all Europe, and before the Sun. Just art thou, O Lord, and right are thy judgements. So he shall not prosper in his concealment. Fourthly, He shall not prosper in obtaining pardon for his sin; and then all his other Advantages are too much to his cost: What shall it profit a man to gain the whole world, and lose his own Soul. A damned spirit in Hell may as soon hope for forgiveness at the Hands of God, as that person who hides and cherisheth his sins privately in his Heart; this is to make God Confede∣rate with us in our wickedness and dissimulation: 'Tis in vain to skin over a sore, whilst dead flesh remains within; the Weapon must first be pull'd out, be∣fore the Wound can be cured: The Medicines of sal∣vation profit not a wounded Soul, until the firy darts of Satan be drawn out by Repentance. So he shall not prosper in his Recovery. Lastly, These Words, He Shall not prosper, are a , and signifie as much as he shall suffer, he shall smart for it.
1. He shall suffer in his Conscience, those Coeca vulnera, those blinde blows which no man knows but he, which feels worse than all the Plagues of E∣gypt, and Botches of Job. This made Cain a Runna∣gate upon the face of the Earth. 2. The Judgements of God shall pursue him both in this Life, and the Life to come. Herod did not only not prosper in his aim, to entail the Crown to his Posterity, but the day came that paid for all, such a conglomeration of unmeasurable Torments, as they are described by Josephus, did hardly ever meet to∣gether in one man, and which is worse, these were but the fore-runners of greater: Judas did not onely miss his contentment in the thirty pieces of Silver, but he got thirty Curses; you may finde them Psal. 109. The Money perished, but the Curses stuck by him until they brought him to an halter. Envie not a Murtherer that braves it upon the stage for the first or second Act of a Tragedy, nor an Oxe, that is fatting for the slaughter, nor a Thief that is ri∣ding in state to his Execution: Have patience and expect the Catastrophe, Eccles. 8. Though a sinner doth evil an hundred times, and the Lord still prolongeth his days, yet I know it will be well with them that fear the Lord; but it shall not be well with the wicked. Thus every way he shall not prosper. And so I leave him lurking under a Net, treasuring up to himself wrath against the day of wrath, to come to the true Convert in the next Words.
But he that confesseth and forsaketh them, shall have mercie. Confession, with its Requisites, Contrition and Amendment of Life, which is here called forsaking, do make up a compleat Repentance. Which some Fathers style a second Table after shipwrack, others a Baptism of pains and tears: yea, some of them doubt∣ed not to say, That Confession did loose the bands of sin, and extinguish the Fire of Hell; that is, not by way of Merit, but by way of Impetration; not by paying, but by pacifying the wrath of God, and so averting his Judgements. No, those blessed Saints did never dream that the Covenant of Grace, where∣unto we are admitted by Baptism, was evacuated by a Lapse into sin; or that any new & different Co∣venant was established by Repentance, grounded partly upon the Merits of Christ, and partly upon our selves. Let Confession and Repentance have their due, but let them not thrust Christ out of the Chair, from whose Grace they flow, from whose Ac∣ceptation they have their Efficacy. Thrice happy are they which use this Plank aright, to bring them through the raging Billows of this sinful world, to the Haven of eternal Bliss. Confession is as ancient as our first Parents, whom God himself did call to the performance of this duty. It was practised among the Israelites, by Divine Pre∣cept, Num. 5. 7. By those Jews that repaired to the Ba∣ptism
of John, Matth. 3. By those Ephesian Con∣verts, Acts 19. prescribed by St. James, Jam. 5. Confess one to another, and pray one for another. En∣dowed with such ample privileges, as in the first Epistle of St. John, If we confess our sins, he is faith∣full and just to forgive us our sins, and cleanse us from all unrighteousness. And here in my Text, He that covereth his sins shall not prosper, but he that confesseth and forsaketh them, shall have mercy. There is no better physick for a full stomach than a vomit; nor for a soul replete with sin, than Confession. Bodily sores do oftentimes compell a man to put off natu∣ral shamefac'dness, and to expose his less honourable parts to the view of the Chirurgion. Ought not every one to be as solicitous for his soul? We of∣fend God three ways; by the imaginations of our hearts; by the words of our mouths; by the a∣ctions of our lives. If we intend to please God, we must take a clean contrary course; for evil thoughts of the heart, bring contrition of the heart; for corrupt speaches of the mouth, bring Confession of the mouth; for wicked actions of our life, bring fruits worthy amendment of life. Buy this means we bring glory to God, and shame to our selves; and prevent that great confusion of face, which otherwise must fall upon us at the day of Judgement, before God and Angels and Men. A contrite sinner stands not upon terms of repu∣tation with God, or with his Church. Why should we be more affraid to confess, than we
were to offend? to make those the Witnesses of o Tears, who have been the Witnesses of our Faults to take away the Scandal that we our selves have g∣ven? Let the World take notice of our Sin, so may likewise take notice of our Repentance. great Sickness often ushers in Health, and a bet Habitude of the Body; a broken Bone, when it is w knit, grows the stronger: So the first shall be l and the last shall be first. Indeed Innocence (if t Herb of Grace were to be found) is better than C¦fession: but there is more joy in heaven over one sin that repenteth, than ninety nine just Persons that need repentance, among the Holy Angels: Da Pater per eis gaudere de nobis, &c. Grant, O Father, t they may always rejoyce over us, that Thou ma always be glorified by them for us, that we and th together may praise thy Holy Name, O Thou t art the Creator of Men and Angels. No man can doubt but the Romanists have gro abused Confession, by tricking it up in the Robes a Sacrament; by obtruding a particular and plen enumeration of all sins, to Man, as absolutely ne¦sary to Salvation by Divine Institution, by mak it with their commutations, a Remedy rather for Confessors Purse, than the Confitents Soul, by in¦sing ludibrious Penances: As Chaucer observed, knew how to impose an easie Panance, where he l¦ed for a good Pittance, by making it a Pick-Loc know the secrets of States and Families, Scire secreta domus atque unde timeri, by absolving b
hey enjoyn Ecclesiastical Satisfaction, by reducing to a customary Formality; as if it were but the oncluding of an Old Score to begin a New. So on he other side it cannot be denied that our Protestant Confessions are for the most part too General; We onfess we are Sinners, and that's all, which signifies nothing: And a little too presumptuous: They that dare not trust their own Judgement about their E∣states, without the opinion of a Lawyer, nor about heir Bodies, without the advise of a Physician, are wise enough for their Souls, without any other Dire∣tion: And a little too careless, as if we were telling Story of a third Person that concern'd not us: We onfess light Errors willingly, which neither intrench pon our Credit, nor threaten us with punishment; ut greater Crimes, where the discovery brings with fear of ignominy and disgrace, or suffering for them, e conceal and cover with as much art as may be. astly, Even whilst we are confessing, we have too ften a minde to return with the dog to his vomit, and ith the sow to her wallowing in the mire; What this but a plain mocking of GOD? Far from y Hopes of Mercy: For though Covering alone be sufficient Cause of Punishment, He that covereth s sins shall not prosper: yet Confession alone, with∣t Forsaking, is not a sufficient Cause of Mercy; But that confesseth and forsaketh, shall have mercie. Not rbears them in natural, or onely by an outward ab∣inence, but forsaketh them as a man would cast a nake out of his Bosome, with detestation. An out∣ward
abstinence is not the true change of a Christian: like a Dog that is muzzel'd, or a Thief that is mana∣cled, which still retain their former dispositions: When the unclean spirit returns to his old habitation, and finds it swept and garnished, not throughly, but superficial∣ly cleansed by an outward Reformation, without an inward Renovation, he brings with him seven other spirits, and the latter end of that man is worse than the beginning. He that absteins from an old sin not for Conscience towards God, but for fear of shame or punishment, is like that Wolf whereof the Father speaks, which came unto the Sheepfold, to kill and to devour, the Shepherd waking, the Dogs barking sca∣red him away indeed, but altered not his wolvish na∣ture: Lupus venit fremens, Lupus redit tremens; Lu∣pus est & fremens & tremens. So forsakes them, not forbears them. Again, Forsakes them, not conceals them: Pene∣tration of Bodies, is a Monster in Philosophy: an Heart inwardly replete with secret sins, hath no room for Grace: A good Lesson, or a good Motion to it, is like a Spark of Fire falling into a Vessel of Water, presently extinguished; or like good Seed falling a∣mong Thorns, soon choak'd. What fellowship hath Light with Darkness, or CHRIST with Be∣lial? In natural Transelementation, there must be some affinity between the Bodies, as Fire and Air, not Fire and Water; for the too great contrariety: but in spiritual Conversion, no disparity can hinder the
change: The greatest sins do often produce the most signal conversions, as it was in Saul, changed in the height of his fury from a Persecutor to an Apostle, from a Wolf to a Shepheard, from a Pyrat to a Gover∣nour. We cannot live as Amphibians in two such contra∣ry Elements, as a resolved course of sin and of God∣liness; such half Converts, who have nothing but a few idle yawning desires, can expect nothing at the hands of God, but to be spewed out of his mouth for their luke-warmness; the mouth of Hell is full of such vain Wishes and Wishers, which use no serious means to gain them liberty, but onely thrust their heads out of the Grate, to look about them. A man may break all the Commandments of God, and be guilty of none, if it be against his resolution, if he be heartily sorry for it: It is not so much Sin, as Impe∣nitence, for which men are damn'd: And on the other side, he that breaks but one Commandment habitual∣ly, and resolvedly, is guilty of all. I fear this is ma∣ny of our Conditions, we rather cover our sins, or forbear them, than forsake them; we desire rather to make a Truce with God, than a Peace; We do with our sins, as Servants do with their fires when they go to Bed, put them not out, but rake them up; so when we come to reckon with Conscience, and to make up our Accompts with God, we do not desire to take an everlasting farewell of our sins, ab hoc momento in Ae∣ternum, as St. Austin saith, but onely a Coverfen, to hide them in an heap of Devotions, for the present,
whilst we are doing some superficial Duties to God, or whilst the blessed Sacrament doth strike a kind of Reverence into our hearts, with a purpose to re-as∣sume them upon the first opportunity; as the Serpent doth her poyson, which she had left behinde her in her Den. Can any man think that such a fained show of forsaking our sins, can be acceptable to God? O no! it is too hollow-hearted. That conversion which findes mercy, must be serious and sincere: Gods for∣giveness and our forsaking, go still hand in hand toge∣ther: Forgive us our trespasses, there's the one; And lead us not into temptation, there's the other: Turn thy face from my sins, O Lord, there's the former; And make me a clean heart, there's the latter: Lord have mercie upon us, there's forgiveness; And incline our hearts to keep thy Law, there's forsaking: That brings me to the last Part, Shall have mercy. One might ask, Which of all gods Mercies? The Air we breathe, the Light we behold, the Ground we tread upon, the Meat we eat, whatsoever we are, or have, or hope for, it is his mercie: By it we live, and move, and have our being: Thou hast crowned me with thy mercie, saith David: it is a Metaphor taken from a Garland, which is composed of many and dif∣ferent Flowers. Gods mercie was the onely motive to our Redemption; his merciful Grace preventing us and assisting us, is the onely means to apply this Redemption; the consideration of this mercie is that which incourageth us to Repentance: As Christ prayed Father forgive them; the poor Thief grew
bold, Lord remember me. Mercie is the end of our Repentance, that we may finde forgiveness: Mercie is our supporter in all our sorrows for sin, that we roar not out with Cain, My sin is greater than that it can be forgiven; nor betake our selves desperately, with Ju∣das, to an halter. Mercie is our onely plea, when we do repent; we cannot say we have done such and such good offices for the time past, we are too unprofitable Servants, we dare not promise of our selves, to be more serviceable for the time to come, we are too de∣sultory creatures: Lord forsake not us, least we for∣sake Thee. Mercy is the object of our hopes, the total sum of our desires; both Grace and Glory do depend upon Mercy. So mercie is the beginning, the middle, the end of our happiness. But St. John will tell us what mercy this is; If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins: This Mercy then is forgiveness of sin. That which is called Mercy here, is called Justice there: It is Mercie to make a gracious Promise, bus it is Justice to keep it. Without this Mercy of Forgiveness, all the other Mercies of God are no Mercies, but Judge∣ments: In this Mercy true blessedness doth consist, Blessed is the man whose iniquities are forgiven: what confort can a person sure to be condemned have, without hope of a pardon? The best musick in the world, is, Son, thy sins are forgiven thee, when GOD shall stretch forth the Golden Scepter of Mercy, that is, to all those who for his love do mortisie their earth∣ly members, and forsake their own Lusts: For he
that hideth his sins shall not prosper, but he that confesseth and for saketh them, shall have mercie. Now among all the means ordained by God for the obtaining this saving mercy mentioned in my Text, after Baptismal Grace, there is none more efficacious than the blessed Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, the very conduit-Pipe of Grace to all worthy Communicants, the Manna of Life and immortality, the precious Antidote against the sting and infection of the infernal Serpent, that inestimable Love-token which Christ at his departure left to his Church, to keep in remembrance of him; the true pool of Bethes∣da, wherein we may be cured of all our infirmities. Pre∣paration of our selves is necessary before the perfor∣mance of all holy Duties, but especially before the ho∣ly Sacrament. We ought to repair to the participati∣on of this with as great care and anxiety, as if we were immediately to depart out of the world. It was death for an uncircumcised person to eat of the Paschal Lamb; we must circumcise our eyes, our ears, our hands and our hearts; and take heed how we come to this Wedding Feast, without the Wedding Garment. O Lord, Be merciful to all those who prepare their whole hearts to seek Thee, though they be not purged ac∣cording to the Purification of the Sanctuary. FINIS.
