B6007 10836140 46083
A Hue and Cry AFTER THE FALSE PROPHETS AND DECEIVERS Of Our Age; AND A DISCOVERY of them by their Works and Fruits, and who they are in this Age that follow the same spirit, and act the same things as did the false Prophets in former Generations. FOrasmuch as in the World at this day, and through all Christian Nations, there is a great Cry concerning false Prophets and Deceivers, each one sort and sect of people accusing and charging the Teachers and Ministers that are of others, and not of their way, to be Deceivers and false Prophets. Thus the Papists cry against the Protestant Ministers, and the Protestant Ministers do the like by the Papists, each one sort of people cryes the like against the Ministers of the others. And without all controversie, there are in the Christian World (so called) and in these Kingdoms many false Prophets and Deceivers even at this day, and hath been for many Ages, since the dayes of the Apostles; And the World, and Nations, and multitudes have been deceived into the way of Error through
the means of the Deceivers, who have done much hurt in the world by their Divinations and Antichristian wayes that they have walked in; But though it is acknowledged by all sorts of Christians, That there are and have been many Deceivers and false Prophets, yet the great Controversie is at this day, who are the Deceivers and false Prophets? seeing (as I have said) that every sort of men are accusing others to be such. But now it remains to be sought out [and that carefully by all] who are the Deceivers and false Prophets; whether Papist Ministers, or Pro∣testant Ministers, or whether any others; and who such are in this day. Now therefore for this very end, that it may be made mani∣fest unto all, who the Deceivers are, and that they may be tur∣ned from, and their wayes eschewed by all people: Thus I try them, and bring them to right and true Judgment, and shall not charge and Papists, the Protestants, or any others, by their Name, or because of their Name that therefore they are Decei∣vers: But seeing that all sorts of Christians do profess the Scriptures; and that they own them, Therefore according to the Scriptures, and by the Spirit of God, I shall lay both Papists and Protestants, and all others, to the Line of Judgment, by the Rule of Scriptures, and the Spirit that gave them; and if▪ Pa∣pists, Protestants, or whose Ministers soever come under the Judgment of that Rule, they shall be concluded by the Rule of the Spirit of God and the Scriptures, to be false Prophets and Deceivers: Therefore come out Papists, Protestants, Anabap∣tists, Quakers, and all others, come forth and hear your Tryal, and receive your Iudgment. First of all, it is concluded (and that I hope by all reasonable men) That whosoever they are at this day through the world, whether Papists of Protestants (so called) or whoever, that shall be found walking by the same spirit, and in the same wayes, and doing the same things that the false Prophets of Israel did in the dayes of old, and that the false Brethren and false Teachers among the Churches of the Christians in the Apostles dayes walked in and followed, such may at this day be adjudged, deemed, and taken to be false Prophets and false Teachers, Deceivers and Seducers, and this without respect to any Name or Title whatso∣ever
that they bear in their Religion. And this is the Rule of Tryal and Iudgment, in which I may justly and righteously pro∣ceed. 1. They were false Prophets and Deceivers in the dayes of the true Prophets, Isa. 56. 11. That were greedy dumb Dogs, which could never have enough; and that sought every one of them for their gain from their quarter; and that preached for Hire, and divined for Money, Mic. 3. 11. The Priests that taught for Hire, and the Prophets that divined for Money, against such as these Isaiah and Micah cryed, and that by the Spirit of the Lord, being commanded of Him so to do. Now whosoever, whether Papists or Protestants of any sort, Independents, Presbyterians, Quakers, or any other, that have a Quarter from which they seek their Gain for Preaching, and teach for Hire, and have Hire for Teaching, (viz.) Tythes or Sums of Money, and divines for Money; such, whatsoever they be, without respect of their Names or Professions, walk by the same spirit, and in the same way, and do the same things as the false Prophets did, and are false Prophets and Deceivers: And therefore all People, it is left to the Witness of God in your Consciences, and that you may give witness in this Case, who are they now, and where they are that can never have enough, but are greedy after gain and covetous, and that seek for Gain from their Quarters, or Portions of a Country or City, And where are they now? and who is it that preach for Hire, and divine for Money, that take so much Money or Gifts by the Year or Month for Preaching? Who is it, or, who are they now that walk in these wayes? S, whoever they be, whether Papists, Protestants, Sectaries (so called) are false Prophets and Deceivers. 2. They were false Prophets and Deceivers, that stood not in the Counsel of the Lord, and that did not turn People from their Ini∣quities and evil wayes, but spake a Vision of their own hearts, and not from the mouth of the Lord; And that cryed Peace to them that walked wickedly, and prophesied lyes, and used their tongues, and said, the Lord saith it, when as the Lord had not spoken to them; and that seduced the people by crying Peace, when there was no Peace; and saw Vanity, and spoke Vanity and Lyes in the dayes
of the true Prophets: I say, such were false Prophets and Decei∣vers. Now whosoever, whether Papists or Protestants, or any others that do not stand in the Counsel of God, and that do not turn People from their Iniquities and their evil wayes; but speak a Vision of their own hearts, and not from the mouth of the Lord; and that cry Peace to them that walk wickedly, that prophesie lyes and use their tongues, when the Lord hath not spoken to them; And that seduce People by crying Peace, when there is no Peace; and that builds the wall, and daubs it with untempered mortar, and that do not profit the People at all, but cause them to erre; Such are false Prophets and Deceivers at this day, wheresoever and whosoever (without respect of Name or Title in their Profession) Such now walk by the spirit of the false Prophets, and are in the way of the Deceivers, which the Lord sent true Prophets to cry against. And now to all People, of what Name soever, it is left to the Witness of God in you all to give witness, who they are now, and where they are that are guilty hereof. Who is it now that stand not in the Counsel of God, and that do not turn People form their Iniquities, that do not convert them to God by their preaching, But speak what they have studied for, even a Divination of their own Brain, and not what they have recei∣ved from God; and that use their tongues, and take other mens words, the words of Christ, the Prophets and Apostles; when as they have not the same Spirit of Christ and his Apo∣stles; Nor have they heard the Voice of God speaking to them, But take Chapter and Verse▪ and say, Hear the Word of the Lord, when the Lord never spoke to them, nor sent them. Who is it now, and where are they that are guilty hereof? and that cry Peace to the Wicked, when the Lord speaks no Peace to them; and that are light vain persons, and covetous and greedy per∣sons, and that see Vanity and daub with untempered mortar; that cry Peace unto people, and say they shall have Peace by Christ, while yet they kill Christ, and are not changed by Him. Where are there such now, by whom people are not converted to God, although they preach time after time? Let all people bring in their Witness; For whosoever are such at this day,
whether they be Papists or Protestants, Anabaptists or Quakers (so called) or whosoever, Such (I say) are led by the spirit of the false Prophets, and are in their way and practices, and all such are to be judged, deemed and taken for Antichrists Mini∣sters, false Prophets and Deceivers, without respect of Persons or Titles of Religion. 3. They were false Brethren and false Teachers, that taught for filthy lucre; that professed they knew God in words, and in works denied him; being abominable and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate; Who had a Form of Godliness, but denied the Power; and were heady and high-minded men, and lovers of plea∣sures more than lovers of God; that were ever teaching, and never able to bring people to the knowledge of the Truth. And such were false Prophets and false Teachers, that through Covetousness and feigned words, did make merchandize of people; that beguiled un∣stable souls, and that had hearts exercised with covetous practices; being out of the right way, and following the way of Balaam, who loved the wages of unrighteousness. These, and such as these, were Deceivers and false Teachers in the Apostles dayes, Tit. 1. 11. 2 Tim. 3. 5, 7. 2 Pet. 2. chap. Now whosoever, whether Papists or Protestants, or of what sect soever they be that do these things, that teach for filthy lucre; that profess God in words, but in works deny him; and that live wickedly, and are disobedient to God; and have the form of Godliness, but want the power; and are heady and high-minded men, and love pleasures; under whom people are ever learning, but not able to come to the knowledge of the Truth; and that through Covetousness and feigned words make merchandize of people; that are unstable men, and do exercise themselves in covetous practices; and are not in the right way, but do follow the way of Balaam, who loved un∣righteous wages. Whosoever are such, whether they be Papists or Protestants, or Quakers, or whomsoever they be, they follow the spirit of the false Prophets, and are in the way of the false Teachers, and are Ministers of Antichrist, even false Prophets and Deceivers. And now to all people whatsoever I appeal for Evidence to the Witness of God in your Consciences, that you may judge
in this case; Where are they now, and who is it? Are there not some such present amongst you this day in your Cities and Towns, and Countries, even such as teach for filthy lucre; that will preach were they can get gain for preaching, but not other∣wise; and that profess God and Christ with their lips, and shew much love, but deny God in works; who live unholy lives, and in evil wayes, and give bad Examples to people, and that are reprobate to good works; and that have the form of God∣liness, but not the power; and that are heady and high-mind∣ed, and ambitious persons; and that are teaching many years together, and people cannot come to the knowledge of the Truth by them, but are alwayes ignorant and wicked. And do not your Teachers exercise covetous practices among you, and go in the way of Balaam for Gifts and Rewards (viz.) so much for a Sermon, and for a years Preaching: Such who are made Ministers by man, and not by the Lord, and who do not profit the people at all: Whosoever they are that are such [now in this Age] are false Prophets and Deceivers, and follow the spirit, and walk in the steps of the Deceivers of old; and whosoever they are, whether Papists, Protestants, or any others, they may lawfully be taken, judged and deemed to be false Prophets, Ministers of Antichrist, and Deceivers. 4. The false Prophets and Deceivers in the dayes of old, were feigning and flattering men, and cryed Peace to the wicked, and cryed Peace, peace, to every one that put into their mouthes; but prepared War against every one that did not, Mica. 3. 5. And they respected mens persons, and held mens persons in Admiration because of Advantage, Jude 16. Now whosoever, whether Papist or Protestant, or any else, that are feigners and flatterers, and that cry peace to the wicked, and cry peace to them that put into their mouthes; but are bitter and angry and perverse against such as will not, or can∣not give them Hire and Money for preaching; and that respect mens persons, and turn every way from one kind of Worship to another; and have mens persons in admiration for their own gain and advantage. Whoever are such now in this Age, are false Prophets and Deceivers. And therefore all people, bring in your Evidence; who are
such now? and where are they that are flattering men▪ that cry Peace to all that will give them means and put into their mouthes, and that admire the persons of great men, and re∣spect the persons of great men for advantage; If there be any such now amongst you, whether they be Papists or Protestants, Anabaptists or Quakers (so called) you may justly take such, and let such be deemed, judged and reputed false Prophets, Seducers and Ministers of Antichrist. And now all people upon Earth, try, learn and examine your Teachers and Ministers, lay them to the Line of Judgement: For if they are such as are here described, if they bear these Marks and Fruits declared, and if they follow the same spirit, and do as the false Prophets of old did, according as 'tis decla∣red in the Scriptures▪ then may you justly judge them to be Deceivers and false Prophets, and Ministers of Antichrist: For whosoever they be that are amongst you, as preach for hire, and that have a Quarter from whence they seek their Gain, and di∣vine for Money, and go a preaching for Gifts and Rewards, and that teach for filthy lucre; and that are covetous persons, heady and high-minded persons, and ambitious men, that do not profit the people at all, nor turn them from sin by their preaching; and that prophesie lyes, and that are flatterers and changeable persons, and will turn from one way to another, and have mens persons in admiration because of advantage. Whosoever he be that is one of these above described, who hath these marks and signs upon him, of this Physiognomy, of this Nature and Feature as before described; wheresoever such a one shall be found, or whensoever you see him, or meet with him; or if such a one be amongst you, or pass by you, let him be suspected, taken, deemed and judged for a false Prophet and De∣ceiver, without respect of his Name and Title in his Profession of Religion. Again, Christ Jesus prophesied and said, That Deceivers and false Prophets should come, who should have the sheeps cloathing, but inwardly ravening wolves: And Iohn said, the false Prophets were already come into the world [in his dayes] even the false Prophets and Antichrist; whom Christ said should come; And the false Pro∣phets
and Deceivers that Christ said should come, John saw were come into the world in his dayes. Now, who is it, and where are they that are wolves in sheeps cloathing, that are those Antichrists that Christ said should come; and Iohn said were come? Even such are they that have the Out∣side (viz.) Christ's words, and the Apostles words, and the Saints practices; they have the sheeps cloathing, but inwardly are the wolves in the evil nature; and their evil nature is covered with the Saints words and practices; and such are the wolves in sheeps cloathing, that have the outside of the sheep, but want the Nature of Christ, and are in the contrary nature. And to all people that are upon the Earth I do appeal, and ask, where are they that are such now? and, who are they? whether they be Papists or Protestants, or whomsoever else that are such, that have the outside, the sheeps cloathing, but in∣wardly are wolves of a devouring nature; such are they that Christ said should come, and Iohn saw was come; And such are Ministers of Antichrist, whosoever they are, and such are in the world, and have overspread it since the Apostles dayes: and whole Christendom hath been deceived by such Wolves in Sheeps cloathing, even by such as have got the Outside, the Saints words and practices, but wanted the Life, and have been in the Evil Nature, and not in the Nature of CHRIST IESUS: And such now in this Age, are to be taken, judged and deemed false Prophets and Deceivers, Wolves in Sheeps cloa∣thing, and Ministers of Antichrist. E. B. THE END. LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Black Spread-Eagle and Wind-mill, in Martins Le Grand, 1661.
