C4503 17007686 105735
A Briefe And yet Exact, and Accurate DESCRIPTION Of the Present state of the GREAT & MIGHTY EMPIRE OF GERMANY, Both touching the Formes of their CIVIL GOVERNMENT, and profession in RELIGION. Taken By a Diligent and Faithfull Surveyor of it, who with much paines travelled over that whole Country to informe him∣self and others of these things. Now published by SA. CLARKE, somtime Pastor in St. Bennet Fink, London, for the publick good. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for William Miller at the Guilded Acorn in St. Pauls Church-yard, near the little North Door. 1665.
A Description of the GREAT EMPIRE OF GERMANY: Together with an Account of their Government both Civil, and Religious, wherein ma∣ny Memorable things are contained. GErmany is divided into ten Provinces,Ten Pro∣vinces of Germany. which are called the Circuites, or Circles of the Empire; whereof the first Circuit is of the four Electors besides the River of Rhine, viz. of the Archbishops of Mentz, Collen, and Treere, and the Counte Pala∣tine. The second is the Circuit of Franconia: The third of Bavaria: The fourth of Austria:
The fifth of Suevia: The sixth of the Rhine: The seventh of Westphalia: The eigth of Saxonia Superior: The ninth of Saxonia Inferior:The Go∣vernours of he ten Provinces elected. and the tenth of Burgundia. All the which Circuits are Governed by ten severall Heads, that are chose out of the Nobility, and doe use that Office commonly during their lives, or according to the will of the Emperour, and the States of the Empire, as hereafter in the end of this Book it shall appear, where the division of the same Provinces shall more at large be set forth. And as all these ten Circuits are but one Body; so doe they consist in three estates, viz. of Churchmen,The Empire consisteth of Church∣men, Tempo∣rall Po∣tentates and free-Cities. Temporall Potentates, and Free Cities, the which all have one Head, that is the Emperour: who at present hath his residence at Vienna in Austria, to whom, as for Homage, they pay yearly some little Tribute; and in cases needfull for the state of the Em∣pire they contribute Men, Weapons, and Money ex∣traordinary, every one according to the assessement made in the division of the said ten Circuits of the Empire. The which extraordinary contribution is given by the consents of these three estates being law∣fully called to some place certaine,The Diett. The first estate of the Em∣pire. The heads of the Church∣men. Arch∣bishop of Mentz Chancel∣lour of Germany. Arch∣bishop of Collen, and Trier. by the Emperour, un∣to a Parliament, which they tearm a Diett. The Churchmen have three heads, which are Arch∣bishops, and Electors: of the which, the first is the Arch∣bishop of Mentz, High Chancelour of Germany, with whom remaine all the Acts of the Diettes. And he hath authority sede vacante to call the rest of the E∣lectors to a Diett for the choosing of an Emperour, which is alwayes done at Francford upon the River of Mene. Next unto him is the Archbishop of Colen, High Chancelour of Italy; and after him the Archbishop of Treer High Chancelour of France, the which two doe take their place in the Sessions alternis vicibus, by turnes. And here is to be noted, that these three Spirituall E∣lectors have not their Office of Electorship, nor their
preferment of the Archbishopricks by succession of In∣heritance, but by election of the Cannons of their Cathe∣drall Churches, who commonly choose such to be their Archbishop as is a Gentleman of a good House. Further in this Ecclesiasticall estate are comprehended all the other Archbishops, and Bishops of Germany;Arch∣bishop of Saltzburg. as the Archbishop of Saltzburge, which is one of the An∣cientest, and in respect of his Mines of Salt, Silver, and Gold, is counted the Richest, whose Revenue is yearly to the value commonly of one hundred and fifty thou∣sand guilderns. The Archbishops of Magdeburge,Arch∣bishop of Magde∣burge. who is called the Primate of the Empire, whose Revenue is likewise great, for out of one City called Hall, he receiveth for the proffit of Salt that is gotten, every Saturday at night, five hundred Dollars, all charges deducted. The Archbishop of Bream, and Bisontz,Arch-Bishop of Bream. Twenty five bi∣shops. The two estates of the Empire. Temporal Electors with about twenty five Bishops that have great possessions, and in respect of their Cities, Castles, and Provinces are called Princes of the Empire: Amongst the which the Bishop of Munster in Weastphalia, who is also Bishop of Esenburge, and Padeborn, is counted one of the cheifest. Of the Temporall Lords there are counted likewise four cheif, the which are also called Princes Electors, and have each one a severall Office which they use in their Stiles for any honour in the service of the Emperour, at his coronation. The Count Pallatine of the Rhine is the greatest a∣mongst them, and is chief Sewer to the Emperour,four. First Count Pallatine of the Rhine. and Sede vacante, vicarius Imperij in Pallatinatu, whose cheif Court is commonly at Heydelberge upon the Ri∣ver of Neccar, his Liuetenant in the Office of Sewer∣ship, is alwayes one of the House of Nortenberge by Inhe∣ritance. Next to him in all Sessions of Parliament,Second Duke of Saxon. but before him in the Wars (the Emperour being personally in the Field▪) is the Duke of Saxon, whose principall House is at Dresden in Misuia, upon the River Albis, who is
High Marshall of the Empire, and beareth in all Tri∣umphs the Sword before the Emperour. His Lieute∣nant in that Office of high Marshalship, is alwayes one of the House of Papenheim by Inheritance. The third place of the Temporall Lords, and the sixth place of the Electors,Third Marquis of Bran∣denburge. hath the Marquis of Branden∣burge, who is high Chamberlain; whose Court is cheifly at Birlyn in Marchia upon the River of Spre. His Liue∣tenant in the Office of high Chamberlain, is alwayes one of the House of Falkenstein by Inheritance. There is also a seventh Elector who is Cupbearer, and hath no other Office,Fourth King of Behemia. nor authority in the Empire, but only in the Election, a voice, when the other six are equally divided, and then on that side that he giveth his voice, there doth the matter prevaile. And the same is ever the King of Bohemia, which is now Em∣perour himself. His Lieuetenant in the Office of Cup∣bearer is alwayes one of the House of Lymburge by Inhe∣tance. The seventh Elector was appointed long after the o∣ther six, viz. in Charles the fourth his time, and the rest in the time of Otho Tertius. All these four Temporall Electors, have their Au∣thority by succession of heritage, and the eldest of the House hath alwayes the place of Electorship; they have power, and Authority after the death of the Em∣perour to chuse a man,The E∣lectors may chuse also a King of Ro∣mans. whom they list, or during the Emperours Life to elect a King of the Romanes, who alwayes doth succeed the Emperour, as the Prince of Wales doth in the Kingdom of England, and the Dophin of France doth the French King. After the Lords Electors, are reckoned the Noblemen, and Princes of their Houses,Duke of Bevaria. The com∣mon guil∣dern or floren is worth 38. Starling. as for example: The Duke of Bavire whose residence is at Monachum, or Munchen in Bavaria, where his yearly revenue is said to be six hundred thousand guildernes, with the rest of the Palse∣graves, whose Feodaries are the Ringraves, the Earles of Erbach, and Isenberg.
The Duks of Saxon,Duke of Saxon. whose Feodaries are the Counties of Mansfelde; Swerzberge, and Stolberge. The Marquesses of Brandenburge, whose Feodaries are the Earles of Reppein, and Vyer Rotton,Marquesse of Bran∣denburge. (which Earl∣dom now the Earle of Houlstine possesseth) and the Bar∣rons of Potlas. The Dukes of Brunswick (whose yearly revenue is two hundred thousand guildernes) the eldest of that House,Duke of Brunswick. The Dal∣ler is worth 4s 4d ster∣ling. who is called Duke Julus of Wolfenbottel) receiveth every day through out the year one, hundred Dollers out of one Silver Myne at Gloster only, besides his other mines of Lead, and Copper &c. his Vassales are the Contz of Regenstein, and Barrons of War∣berge. The Dukes of Lumburge, and Harburge,Duke of Lumberge Hamberge. who are of the House of Brunswicke. The Dukes of Lawenburge, and Princes of An∣halt,Duke of Lawen∣burge: Princes of Anhalt. Land∣grave of Hessen. which are of the ancientest House of Sax∣on. The Landesgrave of Hessen, whose Country is very great, for they be also Earles of Catzenelbogen, and have in Hessia seventy Citties, their Vassals are the Earles of Rippan, of Hoyz, of Trefeld, of Lipe, of Sul∣mos, of Witstem, of Nefsowz, and of Shaum∣borcke.Duke of Wirtem∣berge. Duke of Pomer & Mechel∣berge. Marquesse of Baden. Order of prehemi∣nence. 7. Electors. 4. Dukes. 4. Mar∣quesses. 4 Land∣graves. The Duke of Wirtemberge (whose yearly re∣venue is two hundred thousand Florens, or Guil∣dernes. The Dukes of Pomer and Mechelburge. The Marquesses of Baden, with a number of other Princes, Marquesses, Earles, and Barrons, of all the which, in all Conventions, and Dietts of the Empire, next after the seven Electors, the four Dukes, which are of Suevia, Brunswick, Bavaria and Lothering, do take their place. And after them, the four Marquesses of Misnia, Marchia, Baden, and Brandenburge. And next unto them the four Landgraves of Muring, Heses, Litchtenberge, and Elsotz. After them the four
Burgraves of Magdenburge,4 Bur∣graves. 4. Earles. 4. Barons▪ 4 Knights. Normberge, Renake, and Strumburge. And after them the four Earles of Sa∣voye, Cleve, Zilie, and Schwartzburge. And next to them the four Barons of Lymsperge, Tasis, Wester∣burge, and Aldenwalde. And last of all, the four Knights of Andelaw, Meldin, Stomeck, and Frawenberge. The three estates of the Em∣pire. Free Ci∣ties, the number. Their Tribute.The third estate consisteth in the Free Cities, which are in number at present (as some say) seventy two: and have been heretofore eighty five. All the which doe acknowledge no other head but the Emperour, to whom they pay a small Tribute yearly, not amounting in all to the summe of fifty thousand Guildernes: from the which payment also certaine of these Citties are ex∣empted, and pay nothing but at the Generall contribu∣tion of all the states at the Diett, as shall hereafter ap∣pear. Touching the pollicy of these three estates of the Em∣pire,Absolute power of the three-estates. it is to be understood, that every one hath within their own Dominions an absolute power to Coyn Mo∣nies (which serve not in any other Teritories, but in their own, except Dollers, which according to their rate are currant in all places) to determine by Law, to execute Justice, to dispence and deal with their Subjects according to right, and equity, as they list. The Go∣vernment and plicy of the Count-Pallatine.But forasmuch as it would be too tedious to speak of every Princes Government apart, namely, seeing that in most things they have one order and form; I shall therefore give an example of one, or two of the most principall, which may serve for all the rest. And be∣cause among the temporall estates the Count Pallatine (as was said) is the chiefest, I will begin with him. At Heidelberge, where his Court is, he hath a very fair House adjoyning to his Castle,His Court. which is called his Chancery. In the which place are five principall Coun∣sels, or Courts. 1. His Counsell.The first is his Privy Counsel, where he himself,
with a few others, whereof the chiefest be Doctors of the Civil Law, doe daily sit to consult of matters of Im∣portance touching the state of his Country: The an∣swering of forreign Princes Ambassadours, dispatching of his Ambassadours to forreign Princes: the bestowing of his Children in marriage, &c. The second Counsell, whereof the Chancelour is cheife, is of a few Civillians,2. Coun∣sell. where all matters extraju∣diciall (as they tearm it) are handeled and compremit∣ted, and in case they cannot by the arbitrators, be ended, then are they, by the Chancelour, referred to the third Counsel, which is called the Hossegerichte, which is of a great number both of Doctors, and Gentlemen. In the which all Civill controversies and causes be∣tween his Subjects, and Actions, both personall,3. Coun∣sell. and reall, are by Law decided, and in the which, the Sub∣ject, if he be injured by his Prince, may have the Law against him, from the which Court, it is not lawful to apeal to the Chamber of the Empire, except the cause doth surmount the some of six hundred guil∣dernes. The fourth Counsell is the Consistory Court and is of Civillians, and Spirituall men,4. Coun¦sell. wherein all Church matters, both for Doctrine, and Discipline are deter∣mined: Testaments proved, and controversies in mar∣riage decided. This Prince hath reformed this Court, and whereas before, it had no other Counsellours then Spirituall men,His refor∣mation of the spiti∣tuall Court. now he hath joyned together with them, certain honest discreet Ministers, some of his wisest and best-learned Counsellours. The fifth Counsell (whereof the Camer Master, that is the Chamberlain or the Treasurer is President) is of certain Doctors, and of houshould Officers,5 Coun∣sell. in the which there is accompt taken of all his Revenues, how his debts are to be paid, his Houshold ordered and served, his Lands sett and lett, his Customes and Tolls examined.
This Prince maintaineth commonly in his Court of all sorts of People twenty four Tables,Officers of his Court. eight persons to every Table, the which do eat commonly in two sever∣all places. In the one place, which is a faire large Cham∣ber, sitteth himself, his Wife and Children, at one Table standing alone in the upper end of the Chamber: and his Gentlewomen, and Preachers at two other Ta∣bles, and about ten Tables more adjoyning to those, two Tables which stand in a rowe, on one side of the said Chamber, whereat doe sit his Gentlemen, who immediatly after the Prince is set down, do likewise sit and eat continually at one hour, which is at ten and at five of the clock. In the other place the rest of his Family; as his Guard (which are twenty four Halberders) with others of his Yeomen, and Groomes, together with all the Officers and Gentlemen Servants, who likwise eat together at one time, which is at nine and four of the clocke: before which houres they are continually warned by the noise of eight Trumpets and two kettle Drummes. His Houshold Officers, be the Marshall, the Steward, the Treasurer, the Secretary, and the Clarke of the Kitchen: The Marshall first placeth all men and seeth good order kept: the Steward seeth all things provi∣ded for the House and Houshould: The Treasurer dis∣burseth the money: The Secretary taketh the accompt and writeth the Letters▪ The Clarke of the Kitchen seeth all things ordered in the Kitchen, and everv one served according to their degrees, and of all the Hous∣hould expences keepeth a Book. The Prince is served in Silver with four courses, besides fruit, and in every course nine covered Dishes, which three Gentlemen with their Caps on their Heads, do alwayes bring to the Carver, having the Marshall to goe before them with his staffe, and when they have delivered their Dishe, they sit lik∣wise down at a Table appointed only for them in the same Chamber. There waiteth ordinarily on the Prince at the Table, a Sewer, a Carver, a Gentleman of his Chamber
that waiteth on his Cup, and taketh the same, and two or three Pages that waite on his trencher which the Car∣ver alwayes giveth. The Carver giveth every one to eat in like sort as it is at the Lord Majors of London his Table. All the other Tables be served by the Princes Guard. In the Princes Chamber, one of his Preach∣ers doth alwayes say Grace, both before and after meat, and in the common Hall the Clark of the Kitchen, who is there in the Place of the Marshall, causeth like∣wise thankes to be given to God by one of the poor Schollers that the Prince keepeth of purpose. The meat that is left in both places is alwayes forthwith giv∣en to the poor by the Almner. His Counsellors have alwayes allowed them every one according to his virtue and quallity, a very good stipend both for his Fee and diet in their own Houses. There is straight Discipline in his Court against swear∣ing, Blasphemy, and Drunkennesse, Whoredom, Fighting and all other kinds of Vices, in which cases notwithstanding, some more respect is had to the pun∣ishment of a Gentleman, then of an other, and yet none spared. Dauncing also is forbidden in his Court, and through∣out all his Land. The charge of his Stable hath the Master of his Horse, & every Gentleman that by his commandment keepeth any Horses, is allowed Oates sufficient, and for every Horse tweny five Dollers the year, towards pay and stable roome; and every Yeoman twenty five Guil∣dernes. And because I have entered into some discourse of his Houshould matters,The exer∣cises of the Pallatine. it shall not be impertinent to shew this Princes order, and conversation, how he spendeth his time: both because the example is notable and worthy of all good Princes to be followed, as also be∣cause that hereby he winneth great favour of the peo∣pele.
His order is to arise every morning at five of the clock, and at six he cometh to his Chappel, with his Wife, Children, and Family, where one of the three Ministers (which he alwayes keepeth in his Court to say Grace, preach, and administer the Sacrament) af∣ter a Psalm sung by Children, which are kept in his Court for that purpose, doth preach and pray untill seven of the clock, and then the Prince goeth straight a∣way into his Court Chancery, where he tarrieth un∣till ten, which is the houre to dine. At dinner he com∣monly sitteth two hours, and after dinner one hour, talking with his Wife and Children. After he riseth up (which is about one of the clock) he goeth straight∣wayes into his Closet, where he tarrieth till five, in perusing and reading his Subjects supplications, which are duly given to him as he goeth and cometh from the Chancery: the which supplications, the next day he sendeth to every Court as the matter requireth, where immediatly justice is administred. At five of the clock he goeth to supper, where he sitteth two hours, and afterwards either walketh, or otherwise passeth the time with his Wife, and Children untill it be nine, and then he calleth both the Gentlemen, Grooms, and Pages of his Chamber to his Privy Chamber door, where they hear him pray half an hour, and so he goeth to rest. This is the conversation commonly of this good Prince, the which order he breaketh not but upon some very great occasion. Somtimes as he sitteth at his Table he heareth his Musitians, whereof he hath five, playing excellently well on Shalmes that be made, the one like a Halberd, the second like a Crossebow, the third like a Boarstaff, the fourth like a Handgun, and the fifth like Javeline. The same Musitians have also Cornetts, Violins, and Virginals, which they mingle one with an other, as it is the Princes pleasure to hear them: Other pastimes he exerciseth not, except when he hath no supplications of his Subjects to read, which is very seldome. He then
hunteth the Stagge or Hinde, according to the season of the year; or else seeth his Sons and Gentlemn ride his great Horses and run at the Ring, or else rideth about certain Villages, and converteth the Curates, to the understanding of the true Doctrine of the Sacraments, wherein a number of his Country are not yet well per∣swaded. When this Prince hath any War towards,His Par∣liament. or other∣wise upon some urgent cause for the Weale of his Coun∣try, and conservation of his State, he calleth (as the manner is of all other Princes in Germany) a Parliament, which they tearm a Landstage, to the which all the No∣bility of his Country, and certain Burgesses of every City within his Dominions doe come. By whose com∣mon consent, either a Subsidy is granted to be levied of all his Subjects or else new Statuts are made, or old re∣voked, or reformed, according to the state and neces∣sity of the time, the which Statuts are called Quandtz ordnuce: and are alwayes expounded by the rules of the Civil Law, when their intent is not well otherwise to be understood. This Princes Country lieth,His Coun∣tries. partly along both sides of the River Rhine from Argentine unto Collen, the which he Governeth himself, and partly in Bavaria superiour, whereof the principall City is Amberge, upon the Ri∣ver of Fills, where his eldest Son, Duke Lewis doth Govern under him, and hath the same order in Ad∣ministering Justice (as near as the manner of the Coun∣try will permit) as his father hath at Heidelberge, from which place notwithstanding the Subjects may appeal to Heidelberge, because that is the highest Court by reason that the Elector, who is chiefe of that House, dwelleth there. This Prince, although his Father was a great Papist,His Reli∣gion. yet he being perswaded by one of his Sisters that was of the Religion, and chiefly instructed by Eberhard, Earle of Eberbache, a godly and wise Gentleman, and then Steward to Ottho Henrye, his predecessor in the Elector∣ship,
as soon as he came to the same estate, which was in Anno 1558. he reformed the Religion in his Country, as much as was possible for the obstinacy of the Luthe∣rans. And at this day throughout all his Dominions the Gospell is sincerely preached, Images, and other su∣perstitious Ceremonies which the Lutherans throughout all Germany yet use) were abolished, and the Sacrament as well administred, as it is at present in the Church of England, for the which his reformation he was like to have suffered great trouble in the Diett at Augusta, in Anno. 1566.His touble in the Diett at Augusta, for Reli∣gion. Where the Emperour Maximilian that now is, with all the Electors, and States of the Empire, his Eledest Son Duke Lewis, and his Sons in Law the Dukes John Fredrick, and John William of Waymar in Saxon, and the Dukes of Swebrooke, and Wirtemberge, were so earnestly bent against him for the same, that in case Duke Augustus, the present Elector of Saxon, had not been, many supposed that he should have been com∣mitted to Prison. and deprived of his Electorship. In the which Convention he did so wisely, Godly and con∣stantly defend his cause before them and against them all (having only the Duke of Casimere his second Son that stood alwayes by him, with the Bible in one hand and the confession off Augusta in the other, that he did convince them and put them all to silence, and during his aboad there, caused his Preachers openly to set forth the true Doctrine of the Eucharist, in their Sermons in his House at Augusta, where they had a wonderfull audience, to the great grief and dispight of all the Lu∣therans. But to knitt up the discourse of this good Princes Go∣vernment, and Godly conversation, I think it not su∣perfluous to shew what word he useth in all purposes and events, and the which I heard him ut∣ter the eighth day of Aprill last in Anno 1569. when a great part of his estate at Heidelburge was sodenly by ca∣sualty in the night set on fire, and the whole in great danger to be utterly burnt and consumed notwithstand∣ing
the exceeding great watch that is nightly there kept by four men, which at every quarter of an hour doe blow great base hornes, and at every hours end do sound Trumpets in four quarters of the said Castle: At that time, even in the extremity of the flame, he said with his hands lift up to Heaven, not once but often, (Herenach dine will) which is to say, Fiat voluntas tua Domine. Thy will be done, O Lord. Now like as before is shewed of the Count Pallatines order of Justice, in like sort may be said of the Duke of Saxon, now Elector, saving that his Counsels, and Courts of Justice be not all at one place. For his Chan∣cery where he holdeth his Privy Counsell and Exche∣quer, are at Dresden,His chiefe Court. which I declared before to be the cheif place of his residence; unto the which all the rest of his Courts doe appeal, and from the which his Sub∣jects doe in no case appeal to the Chamber of the Em∣pire, as was said that the Paulsgraves subjects may. And further his Court called Croffegricht,No appeal from him where the dif∣ferences between his Subjects are decided and whereun∣to himself, if he doe his Subjects wrong, may be sited, is kept alwayes in the City of Leiptzigke, in Misnia. And his Consistory Court, which is not so well reformed as the Palsgraves Court, is holden in two places, the one at Misen in Misnia, and the other at Witemberge in Saxony. In all this Princes Provinces Adultery is punished with death,Punish∣ment of Adultery and For∣nication. and Fornication with whipping and ban∣nishment. This Elector, albeit he kepeth not so many Tables in his Court as the Count Pallatine doth, yet he kepeth a greater State, and giveth ordinary entertainment to more then the Palsgrave doth. For besides his ordinary guard, whereof there be fifty Holbardiers, and as many Harquibushers, to whom he giveth monthly, besides their Liveries, which are black cloaks, for their diet and Fee five Guildernes, when they sit still, and six Guildernes when they travell He hath continully a∣bout
him fourteen Rittmasters, that is Captaines, which are able to bring him on the suddaine for all events, three hundred Horses apiece, of the which every one keepeth ordinarily twelve Horses, for the which twelve Horses each of them hath allowance of the Prince, yearly five hundred French Crowns and for their yearly Fee of Cap∣tainship one hundred and fifty French Crowns the peice, and these Captaines are all Gentlemen that are for the most part married, and keep Houses themselves at Dresden, where the Court is. To the rest of his train, to whom he giveth meat and drink in his Court, he al∣loweth besides provender yearly for every Horse fifty dollers, and some Gentlemen he alloweth six Horses, to some more to some lesse, according as he favoureth them, and according to their quallity, and for every Horse he alloweth them a Servant, who hath his live∣ry, meat, and drink at the Princes charges in the Town. Of all the Princes of Germany, the present Elector of Saxony, is the richest, and of the greatest power, both of men and money: for his yearly Rent of Assise is reckned to be above seven hundred thousand dollers, be∣sides his Taxes, Tolles and Impositions of Beer, and Wine, &c. which is accounted to amount yearly to as much more. The said Duke hath one hundred and thirty four Seig∣nories, and in the same twenty Earldomes, and sixteen Barronies, he hath of late gotten into his hands by the consent of the Cannons (for the tearm, as he hath pro∣mised, but of one and twenty years, but as it is thought for ever) three Bishopricks of Mersburge, Misen, and Nawimberge: and out of the last only he hath yearly for Impost of Beer about twenty four thousand dollers. His Mines of Silver, Copper, Brasse, Tin, Lead, &c. which he hath at his Cities of Friberge, Anneberge, Maryberge, Sueberge, and Swertzberge, &c. which be faire Towns, and maintained only by the said Mines, doe yeild him yearly wonderfull riches, whereof I could learn no cer∣taine
yearly summe, because the commoditie is uncer∣tain, some years better, some years worse, according to the goodnesse of the vaines, in the which there are working, above ten thousand able men for the Wars, besides a great number of poor impotent Men, Women and Chil∣dren, which have there livings only by the same. Of the which works their i sone at Friberge, wherein is a singular art used in drawing of the Water out of a Well that is above one hundred fathom deep, and in most places not a fathom broad, into the which I went down with Mr. Henry Killegrew & Docter Christofer Chemius, the Count Pallatines Ambassador, the twenty first Junij 1569, we all being apparrelled with such garments as the work∣men and Miners thereof doe use, and as the manner is for all such as will see their works: but when we were de∣scended almost four hundred staires by very narrow ladders, they two were almost dead with the damp and close aire, so as they were constrained to cause the guides, who conducted every of us with a Lamp, to re∣turn, by meanes whereof I could not see the bottom of the Water worke, whereof I did not greatly passe, be∣cause those works, and the Engines used in them be ex∣actly set forth by Georgius Agricola of Remuitz in Saxon in two great Volumes Printed at Basill by Frobenius. But among other commodities which grow out of these Mines, there are three sorts of Stones, in a work in the Town of Swertzberge, whereof the one is named Mag∣nes, commonly called the Loadstone, which properly draweth Iron to it, and the othet Andromedes, which putteth Iron away from it; the third is called Merga, which being made into powder & drank in a little white-Wine warmed, is approved to be very good for a bruise. By the benefit and great quantity of Iron and Copper which are gotten in those Mines, the Prince hath furnish∣ed such an Armory, at his City of Dresden, as by report of them that have travelled farre, the like is not to be found in any other place in Europe, I shall describe the order thereof as I did see it the twenty fourth of June, 1569.
First the House is builded four square of Free stone, the two lengths are each one of them three hundred foot long, and the breadths each one of them one hundred seventy five foot broad, every one of these lengths, and breadths hath three roomes or Stories. In the lowest roomes are the great Ordnance, being about fifty six double Cannons that carry a shot, which waieth one hundred and sixty pound, and three hundred and fifty Culvernis, half Cannons, Cannon pieces, Sacres, Fawcons, Rabnets, and other small Field pieces, all of brasse ready mounted on very good carriages, and furnished with all things necessary, as shot made with the Hammer to an infi∣nite number, Chargers, Scowrers, Horsetraines, Pio∣neers tooles, &c. And every of those have three or four great peices hanging for them on the walles, eleven harquebushes, a crock. In the two uppermost roomes or stories are Armor, as Corslets, black and parcell white, very good and of the newest fashion, Calivers, long Curriours; Daggs, Pikes armed and unarmed, Lances, Halberds, Partisons, Holy water sprinkles, two hand∣swordes and swordes with basket hiltes, thirty six En∣signes, Drums, Fiffes, and all other things necessary for the furniture of four Regiments, to every Regiment ten Ensignes, and to every Ensigne three hundred men, which is twelve thousand Footmen, and Curaces for the proofe for two thousand Horsemen, so that of the sodain this Prince is able to furnish into the Field fourteen thou∣sand men with Armour in every point, which is only in his City of Dresden. His Cities besides at Lipsia, Wittimberge, and Guicca, are said to have also their severall Armories, besides that every Subject in all his Dominions, to his ability is bound to have his proper furniture both for himself and his Servants, for as many as every man keepeth, a Cor∣selet, a Harquebush, a Halberd, and a Pike, of the which (that are able to bear Armour) the Prince, if need require, may well make into the Field eighty thou∣sand men, whereof six thousand shall be Horsemen,
leaving his Country notwithstanding with sufficient Guard. This Prince as he hath not the perfect know∣ledg of God like unto the Count Pallatine, even so is his conversation such as misliketh all men universally; he is misliked for his inaffability, for ever since the Wars of Gottha, he hath kept himself so secret, as no man, except one or two of his Privy Counsell, can either see him or speak with him, he keepeth himself still within his Privy Chamber, where he learneth to play on the Virginals, the which exercise he doth so earnestly ap∣ply, as almost he never ceaseth but when he must either eat or sleep. Not long since his mind was to learn the Latin Tongue whereof he was utterly ignorant, and now he hath so profited in a short time therein, that he is able commonly to understand any thing that is either spoken or written in Latin. The great delight that he hath in hunting the Stagg, and wild Boar, bringeth him some time abroad, but then he is so ac∣companied on either side with all his Guard, and with at the least, four hundred Horsemen that no man almost, for what cause so ever it be, is suffered to come to his speech: he seldom giveth any Princes Ambassadors audience in his own person, but answereth them by his Chancelour or chief Councellour. The Princes of Germany do not love him, (although by reason of his great power and authority, they flatter him) because of his extream dealing with his kinsman, Duke John Fre∣derick, from whose Father Duke Maurice, this Electors Brother did take the Electorship and the most part of this living besides (all which the said Duke Maurice, dying without issue male, left unto Duke Augustus his Brother, whereupon such displeasure grew between these Houses (as I shall hereafter declare) that the eldest Son of John Frederick the old Elector, is spoiled both of all his Land & Liberty. Further this Duke Augustus is hated of his Nobility and Gentlemen, as well for the cause last recited, as also for purchasing of late the Lands of one Miltitz, a Gentle∣man
in Misnia in a manner against his will, for the which he paid one hundred and sixty thousand Guildr∣nes, and as it is said, the Woods only on the same Lands, were worth as much. He offendeth his Nobility also for his other cruelties, in tormenting of Men with such Deaths, and specially for cutting in four peices of late on Carolutius, a Gentleman of an ancient House and one of his Houshould servitors, who albeit he had commit∣ted things worthy of death, yet the manner of his exe∣cution seemed so strange, and was so odious to the Gentle∣men of his Court, as they all went forth of the City that day that he suffered death. The People of his Cities love him not for his Covetousnesse, because there is no traffique nor handleing whereof there may arise any commodity or gain, but he getteth it into his own hands. As for example, the gain that they were wont to have in buying and selling the Mettall that riseth of his Mines, he hath now taken into his own hands. Besides that he maketh Silke, dieth Cloth, selleth Malt, and handleth every thing himself whereof any proffit may grow. He hath furthermore raised such taskes and impositions upon his People, and hath turned the Tenants out of certain Lands that he lately purchased, whose Ancestors have held the same time out of mind: and they know not now where to place themselves again, and hath con∣verted the same to his own use, in such sort as through∣out all his Country there is great complaint of him. All these things are the more grievous, and specially marked, by reason that the memory of the late Princes his predecessors, is fresh, who albeit in some respects wanted not their faults, yet generally, for affability, mer∣cifulness, and liberallity, were very much commended; The cause why this Elector was sirred to deal so extream∣ly with his Cozen John Frederick, I think it not amiss to insert in this place, as well because it is not yet to my knowledge set forth truly by any other, as also for that upon the grudg between the Princes of this House, dependeth almost the Weale or ruine of all Germany, by
reason of the Alliances that either part hath with the most Noblest Houses, not onely in Dutchland, but in other Kingdoms neer about. The story as I have heard it credibly reported is this, In Anno 1567, John Frederick of Wymar in Saxony, Son unto John Frederick the late Elector of Saxony, kept within his Jurisdiction one William Grombache, and certain other Rebels to the Empire, for the which cause he was also declared by a publick Decree, a Rebell to the same State of the Empire. This Grombache was an Ancient Captain about threescore and ten years old, born in Franconia, of a Noble and Ancient house, and from his Youth was brought up in the exercise of War, and was of nature sediciously disposed, always attempting new designs in his Countrey; for in the Wars that Marquess Albert made against the Bishops and Churchmen, he took part with him, and never left him so long as he kept the field. And although he was oftentimes called home by the Bishop of Wertzburge, whose Vassall he was, under the pain of Confiscation; yet he continued with the said Marquess untill he was overthrown: Whereupon the Bishop seized on his Goods and Lands. After the over∣throw of Marquess Albert he went into France to Henry the second, of whom he received great summes of money to levy Souldiers to serve against the Emperor Charles; but peace being concluded between them at Amienz in Anno 1558, he returned into his Countrey, where, by secret means he had caused the Bishop of Wietzburg to be slain, in Anno 1557, because he had con∣fiscated his Lands. Afterwards in Anno 1564, he was commanded by the Duke of Guise to Levy certain Souldiers for the service of the French King, whose Colonell he was, against them of the Religion in France; but peace being then also con∣cluded, he was not there imployed, whereupon he re∣turned home, and with part of those Souldiers whom he had taken up with the French Kings money, he march∣ed against the other Bishop of Wertzburg and Bamberg
the which succeded him that before he had killed, where he not only by force recovered his goods taken away by the said Bishop, but also spoiled and made havock of both those Bishoppricks; for which cause he procured to himself the Bann of the Empire and was Proclaim∣ed a Rebel, by reason whereof he was forced always to keep a good guard of souldiers about him, for the safety of his Person. But in the last Dyett holden under the Em∣peror Ferdinand, an Edict was published, that no man of what Degree soever he were, should keep any man in Arms except it were by the publique consent of the States of the Empire. Notwithstanding Grombache did not only keep his old band of men still together, but also Levyed new, and practised with some Personages of Name and Authority to enteprise somewhat for the li∣berty of such as were oppressed and sustained wrong in the Empire. Of the which enterprise the forenamed John Frederick of Wymar was one of the chiefest favourers, being perswaded by the same Grombache, that then the time served him to recover the Electorship, the which was taken by force from his Father, and that the most part of the Princes of Germany would aid him therein. Whereupon, in the Dyett holden by Maximilian, the Emperour that now is, at Augusta, in Anno 1566, by the common consent of all the States, the said Grombache was declared a Rebell of the Empire, with all his adhe∣rents, and order taken to proceed against him as against a sedicious man, and disturber of the Commonweale. This notwithstanding, Grombache continuing his faction, was received by John Frederick into his Castle of Gottha, the which was of such force, as they in all re∣spects thought themselves safe from their enemies. But Augustus now Elector of Saxony, being in the afore∣said Dyett, appointed the Emperors Lieutenant for the Wars, and having at the charges of the Emperor six thousand horses, thirty Ensigns of Footmen, and forty pieces of great Ordnance, besieged the Town of Gottha, and Castle of Grimsteteine, which thing the Citizens and
certain Captains there perceiving, and weighing with themselves that the matter was taken in hand by all the Estates of the Empire, were contented to yield, both Grimbache, the Town and the Castle to the said Elector, who as soon as he was entred, took John Frederick, and sent him, with a sufficient guard to the Emperor, with whom he remaineth still a prisoner in the City of Presburge, in Hungary, above one hundred English miles beyond Vienna, near Turkey, and executed above twenty of the chiefest Rebels, whereof Grombache, and Dr Pon∣tanz, Chancellor to Duke John Frederick, with certain others, were quartered quick. This Victory was so joyfull to the Elector Augustus, that in memory thereof he caused Dollers to be coyned with this Inscription, Tandem bona Causa triumphat, A good cause at last prevails. After he had sent Duke John Frederick away Prisoner, he caused his Castle, which was one of the fairest houses, and strongest fortresses in all Germany, and the principall Mannour house of the old Elector John Frederick, to be utterly razed and destroyed, so as there is not one stone left upon another. I heard as I passed through the town of Gottha, that the razing only of that Castle Grimsteteine and the Walls of Gottha, cost him seventy three thousand Guilderns, which the States of the Empire (as I hear) do grudge to repay, because, as they alleadge, repay they did not consent to the razing thereof. Grombache, and divers others that were executed with him and since, before their death confessed, that their intent was to have killed Augustus, and to have reduced the Electorship to John Fredicks house, whom notwith∣standing, Grombache in that respect did clear, as not privy to that enterprise for the killing of Augustus, and pro∣tested that he was not culpable in any thing but in de∣fending him, to the which he said, by great perswasions he had also allured him. And moreover because his brother, Duke John William, would not agree to this enterprise, but ever withstood the same, the said Grombache found means to set dissention,
betwixt him and his brother about the partition of their third brothers part, who died a little before the same time; for the which cause Duke John William was content to assist Augustus, the Elector, against his brother in the siege of Gottha. By means whereof both his brothers parts were given unto him, the which he at present en∣joyeth. Notwithstanding there is now a heart-burning betwixt the Elector Augustus and the said Duke John William, as well for the cause of their Electorship, that mo∣ved his foresaid brother to the former enterprise, as also for certain controversies in Religion that are between their Preachers, whereof I shall speak further here∣after. Now because I have not heretofore touched the man∣ner and custom that the Princes of Germany have in the devision of their Lands, I think it good in this place to shew what I have learned thereof. The manner commonly of all the Noblemen, Princes, and Gentle∣men in Germany is by their last Will to dispose to every Child their Portion, both of Lands and Money. The Women, so long as there liveth any Male of the Name, do never inherit any Land. He that hath many sons and beareth an affection to one more than to another, if he be a great Prince, then he calleth the Gentlemen and great States of his Countrey and Cities together, and by their consent establisheth in his life time the division of his Childrens portions, and giveth to some more to some less, according as he favoureth, and as his Estates will agree, whose consent commonly dependeth upon the Princes pleasure. But to disinherit any son, or to make too much an unequall devision of Land, is very dan∣gerous, as it appeareth by that which John Selden writeth in the fourteenth book of his History, touching the devisions of the Lands of the Dukes of Saxony, where∣of sprang the first quarrell betwixt them of that house, and was cause of a great Civill War in Ger∣many. Such inequality in Partition is not therefore lightly
seen, except it be for certain such causes as are prescribed in the Civil Law; that is, in case the Son conspireth his Fathers death, or doth not his endeavour to redeem him out of Prison if he be taken by their Enemies, &c. If the Father dieth Intestate, then doe his Children divide his goods equally pro raeta Portione: Sons have the Land, and the Daughters the Mony; and in case there be no Mony left, then the Sons are bound every one out of his portion of Land, to pay a certain summe of Money towards the Dowry of his Sisters. In the which cases there are cer∣tain Ordinances whereby every one knoweth what to have, according to their quality. The Subjects of all the Princes and Gentlemen in Ger∣many, do hold their Lands, ether in Feodo, for paying a chief rent and acknowledging Homage, or in Fee-Farm, paying a certain Rent, either in Money, Corn, or Wine, or in all. Or else there are Tennants, at the will of the Lord for so many years, and for so much Rent as is agreed between the Lord and the Tennant. There is al∣most no Prince, Nobleman, nor Gentleman but hath certain Vassals that of right do owe them their labour, some to sowe, some to mowe, till, carry, ditch, hedge, &c. by whose labour their Demesnes are for the most part Manured. Thus I have as briefly as I could, set forth by the ex∣amples of the Count Palatine and the Elector of Saxony, the form of Government in Politicall matters of the two first Estates, that is to say, of the Spirituall and Tem∣porall Potentates, who both in their Houshold service, and Civill Affairs, have also the most part the same Or∣der and Form that the foresaid Electors have. Touching the third estate, which I said was of the Free Cities, thus much is to be understood; that of the same Free Cities, some are meerly Subject to the Empire, as Augusta, Acona, Argentina, Francfordia ad Menum, Lubeca, Hamburga, Vlma, Colonia, Spira, Noriberge, &c. And other some, for that they were once under another Lord, to whom every one yet acknowledgeth a certain
duty, do therefore yield no such contribution, as the Im∣periall Cities do: as for Example: Magdeburge, Erford, Breme, Brunswicke, Luniburge, &c. have each of them a severall Lord, who is either the Bishop, or Duke of the name that every one is called by, to whom they owe their Homage and a small Duty besides. But they use notwithstanding their own proper Municipall Laws, which have their ground on the Civill Laws, and their Ancient Customs, as the Imperiall Cities do, from the which their Laws, Ordinances, and Customs, it is law∣full for the Citizens in some cases to appeall to the Chamber of the Empire which is at Spires. They are all Governed, either by Democriti's, that is by certain chosen out of the multitude of the common people, or by the State of Olygarchy, that is, by a few of the Wealthiest and most Principall of the People: Or else by Ari∣stocracy, that is, by a few of the best sort, not in respect of their Wealth, but of their Vertue. They got their liberties, either by purchase of money, or else by the favour of the Emperor, or by force of Arms from that Prince that was their Sovereign, and have by that means of liberty, such traffique, and handling, as they are grown so rich that they have fortified their Ci∣ties, and Territories in such sort as they fear not the force of the Enemy be they never so mighty. There are four Cities which are called by an Ancient name, The four Cities of the Empire, and are free, that is, Au∣gusta, Metis, Acona, Lubeca: Whereof Metis is at present under the French King, and is not free as the rest be. Also there are four other Cities which are named the Dorffes, that is, the Towns of the Empire, viz. Bam∣berga, Erlistadia, Haganoa, Ulma, whereof, Bamberga is now under a Bishop, and Salistadium, under Archduke Ferdinando, the Emperors brother that now is. There be also four other Cities which are termed The Boores of the Empire, that is, the Villages, but yet are notwith∣standing great Cities, as Collen, Regensburge, Constantia, and Saltzburge: the which three last are all Subjects to the Bi∣shops of that name.
There be many other Cities of great fame, and force, as Magdeburge which sustained the siege by the space of thirteen moneths together, of the Emperours Lieutenant, Duke Maurice, Elector of Saxon, and others the mighti∣est Princes of Germany. In the which siege they took Pri∣soner George Duke of Mechelburg, and in the end com∣pounded not with so unreasonable conditions as the other Cities did, in the Wars of Smascald. For they would never agree to receive the Interim no more than the Ci∣ties of Brunswiche, Hamburge, Lubecke, and the sons of John Frederick, the Elector of Saxon did. Breame standing upon the River of Wesar, is likewise famous for resisting Duke Erike of Brunswicke, Lieute∣nant Generall to the Emperour Charles the fifth, where he besieged the same in vain, and was in the end, by the help of the Hamburgers conducted by Coúnte Peninge, chased away from thence and forced to leave his great Ordinance behinde him. Brunswicke, standeth neer the River of Owker, which taking in another little River, called the Sconder above the Town of Zell, falleth into the Weser, the which City of Brunswick, hath been at variance with their Dukes from the year of 1536, untill this present year 1569. Henricus Senior Duke of Brunswick, besieged it a whole year in vain. Henricus Junior, the Father of Duke Julius that now is, besieged it twice, once by the space of six weeks, and another time eight weeks together, and prevailed not. The said Duke Julius is now agreed with them, and entreth the Town with seven hundred Horse, the third of October next; but is not to remain there with any force. In this City is an Ancient Monument of a monstrous Brazen Lyon, the which beast Duke Henricus, surnamed Leo, is said to have brought thither with him out of England. There is also made in this City the best Harnis for the proof, and otherwise, and the best Daggers, and Firelocks that be in all Europe. Lubeck, upon the River of Trowe, hath as it were conserved the King of Denmark in his seat, against the Swede, but is at
this day greatly Impoverished because of the continuall Wars they have had with the King of Sweden, and stop∣ping of a River between them and the City of Hamburge called the Trow, with Jasper Bucolt, a Gentleman of that Country, because they refused to pay a small towl unto him, hath of mallice thrown a number of great trees and stones into it, so that they cannot traffique too, and for Hamburge by water as they were wont to do. But are driven to carry all their wares by land, which is greatly to their discommodity. Hamburge standing at the mouth of the great River of Albis, about one hundred English miles beneath, is fa∣mous for the number of Beer-brewers, whereof there are dwelling there, housholders seven hundred and twenty. There is also Ausperge upon the River of Leche, in the which are the richest Merchants in Europe, namely the Fowlkers, Peimels, Schorers, Bawingartners, &c. Francford standing upon the River of Mene, is famous for the two great Marts that are kept there yearly, and for the Election of the Emperour. Regensburge (as was before said) is now under a Bi∣shop, but once was meerly subject to the Empire, where Caesar Frederick the third, in Anno 1446, did hold a Dyett, to the which Diet for certain respects, a strait com∣mandment was given by the Emperour, that no Earl should bring more servants than three, nor no Knight nor Gentleman more than one. At the same time there was a Gentleman named Babo, of Abenspurge, the which by two lawfull Wives, had eight Daughters, and thirty two sons all living at one time, and of good Age and Stature, and hearing of this Dyett, brought his thirty two Sons thither, being all apparelled in red, and thirty three Servants with them, all well mounted, his Sons riding before him, and his Servants after him. And when the Emperout heard that the said Babo was come to the Dyett with so many Horses, he sent for him and asked where∣fore he had broken his Commandment? To whom Babo answered, May it please your Majesty, I have not trans∣gressed
your will, for I and my thirty two Sons of my Body lawfully begotten, and therefore right Gentlemen, have but thirty three Servants, which is for every Gentle∣man a Servant, according to your Majesties command∣ment. The Emperour marvelling at the blessing of God, gave unto him at that present great possessions to maintain his Geneology with all, and caused a Monu∣ment to be made in the City of Regensburg of him and his Children, the which at this day remaineth there to be seen. But now there is none alive of that House; for in the Wars that were betwen the Dukes Albert, and Christopher of Bavaria, in Anno 1485, Nicholas of Aben∣sperge, which only remained of all that Stock, was slaine by a servant of the said Duke Christophers, and his Inheritance given away. Exford upon the River of Vnstra, an old University founded in Anno 1392, in the which Martyn Luther first studied and became a Frier in that City, and there remaineth to this day for a Monument of him, the pul∣pit wherein he made his first Sermon. Noriberge upon the River of Bgnitz, notable aswell for the good Government, as also for resisting the force of Albert, Marques of Brandenburge and for all kind of Iron work which is there made excellently well. Luneburge upon the Aller and Elmenawe, famous for the golden Table which is in Saint Michaels Abby, and is almost two yards long and a yard broad, set full of old Rubies, &c. It was given by Duke Erneste of Stuplecorne, who was Elector of Saxony, and Duke of Brunswick and Luneburge &c. who wan the same Table at Dice of a Jew, as is reported. There is in the City of Luneburge, which is distant above twenty eight English Miles from the main Sea, a Salt pitt, out of the which six men by a Pumpe do continually both night & day, changing every five houres fresh Men, draw so much Salt Water as ser∣veth fifty four Houses in, every of the which Houses there be four Leaden Pannes that boile in a day and a night a Wagon load of Salt, which is sold for six Dollers
one time with another, which amounteth yearly to a∣bove one hundred thousand pound Sterling. The Spiri∣tualty hath the most part of the commodity thereof. There are in every House three Labourers at the least, so as by the benefit thereof a number of poor People are set on work. Collen is an ancient University founded in Anno 1388, and a great City; wherein is said to be for every day of the year, a Church. In it also are three Idols of pure Gold, which the blind Papists believe to be the Images of the Wise men that offered to our Saviour Christ, and are thought to be brought thither by the Bishop of that City from Millian in Lumbardie. In the same City are also I cannot tell how many thousand Virgins skuls, which the doting Antiquity believed to be slaine in England for the Testimony of the Gospell Vlma standing upon the River Danubius, a very great and Rich Ci∣ty. Aquisgrave that once was the Seat of Carolus Magnus, and after the place of his Sepulture, where the Emperour ought also to receive his first Crown as King of the Ro∣mans. In the which City is kept for a relique, an old Linnen cloath which the grosse Papist shame not to af∣firme to be the Virgin Maries Smocke, like as not farre off at Fere, they Dream also to have the Shirt of our Sa∣viour Christ, by the which no small gain riseth to the proud Prelats from the poor simple People. Argentine or Strasburge, standing upon the River of Brushe, is one of the strongest pieces in Germany. In the which there are seven hundred and odd gardners that are Houshoulders and are no small maintainers of that Commonwealth. Spire also, is the Chamber of the Empire, where all controversies in Law between the Princes and the Free Cities of the Empire are decided. In the which Court the Emperour presenteth the President, who is commonly either an Earle or Baron, who hath for his Fee yearly three thousand Guildernes, and two other Ba∣rons
Assessors, the which have fifteen hundred Guilder∣nes apeice. And every Elector hath a Counsellour there alwayes resident, and every Circle of the Empire hath also one which are called Sessors Camere, who Solicit the Cause of there Princes or Estate, and have for their Fee yearly five hundred Guildernes a peice allowed them, out of the Chamber of the Empire. To this Court all the other Courts, except before excepted, both of the Princes and Free Cities in Germany do appeal, and receive by the Civill Law there a definitive sentence. All these Free Cities for the most part do stand upon Rivers, whereof the principall are Danubius, Rhenus, Albis, Menus, Mose, Mosella, Amisia, Visurgis, Egra, Odera, Vestu∣la, &c. Of the which Danubius falleth into Mare Euxinum by Constantinople, and the rest into the Ocean. And by the benefit of these Rivers and other small Rivers that fall in∣to these, the abovesaid Free Cities are cheifely maintain∣ed, for by meanes thereof they have traffique with the most part of other Nations. The Commodities that commonly are had in Germany, are, Copper, Brasse, Rhe∣nish Wine, Rie, Firr-tree wood, Woll, Madder, Hopps, Wax, Flax, Blew-sclate, Harnis, Harquebushes, Daggers, Locks, and all kinde of Iron work, Horses, Onyon seed, Paper, Furrs, Glasses for windowes, and Drinking Glasses, with such like, the which are tran∣sported from one City to an other, and so to other Na∣tions for other Comodities that they have need of. There be also in Germany divers great and rich Cities, that partly are fallen away from the obedience of the Empire, and partly forced under the power of other Princes or States adjacent, as Basilia, Geneva, Schaffhaw∣sen, and Milhawsen, the which at divers times have been all won to the confederacy of the Helvetians, or Switchers. Dantzicke standing upon the River Vistula, neer the Ocean, a great City and chiefe Market of all the North part is become Subject, together with Eluma, and a great part of Prusia, to the King of Polonia. In Anno
1525, Rostocke was taken by the Duke of Mechleburge. Constance is under the King of the Romans, Mettz, Tho∣ve, and Verdune are possessed by the French King. Vtrict, and Cambrais King Phillip enjoyeth, with many others which now are not contributers to the Empire as other Free Cities are. The Free Cities, because they cannot otherwise be commanded, are called in all necessary affaires of the Empire, as is aforesaid, by the Emperour to the Diet: In the which Diet, as they be called three Estates, so they are three Counsels. Into the first Counsel come only the seven Electors. Into the second the Princes Spiri∣tuall, and Temporall, and for every Abbot of the Em∣pire enter two Parsons, and for every Count and Baron enter likewise two. And into the third Counsell come those that are sent from the Free Cities. Unto all those three severall Counsels are propounded such matters as either the Emperour, or the King of the Romans, or any other Prince of the Empire hath to in∣treat of. Upon the which every of them give their advise a part. An in this Diet, the Free Cities give only their advise, but are allowed no sentence. Thus much touching the politicall Government of these three Estates in Civill affaires. Now it remaineth that I speake something of their Religion, whereof in Germany there be three kinds especially used, viz. Po∣pery, Calvenism (as they term it) and Lutherism. They which abide in Popery are the three Spirituall Electors, with all the rest of the Archbishops and Bishops, except the Bishop of Magdeburg, who is the Elector of Bran∣denburgs eldest Son and Heire, and the Archbishop of Bream, who is the second Son to Duke Francis of Lawen∣burg, the which two have induced their Dioces from Popery to Lutheranism. Of the three Archbishops E∣lectors, the Archbishop of Treere, who is of a mean Gentlemans House, is the most vehement in Popery, and the greatest enemy to the other professions. The Arch∣bishop of Mentz, who is also of another mean Gentle∣mans
House in Hessia, called Daniell Brendell, albeit he favoreth Popery with all his heart, yet doth he suffer every man to use the liberty of his conscience through∣out all his Country; And in many of his Cities the Lu∣therans preach the Gospell. The like may be said of the Archbishop of Collen, who is the only Heire male of the County of Isenburg, and is by reason thereof Feo¦darie to the Count Pallatine, Elector, who wrote to him in December last in Anno 1568. At which time the in∣heritance of the said County fell to the said Archbishop, that according to the Laws and Customes in Germany, he should within one year next following, being the on¦ly Heire male left in his House, either take a Wife, or else he would, as by right he might, being cheif Lord, seize upon the said County: whereupon the Arch∣bishop made answer, that he would within the said time marry a Wife, which yet he hath not done as I hear. Of all the rest of the Ecclesiasticall Princes, the Bishop of Munster is the greatest enemy to the true Religion, and the greatest suporter of the contrary. The Abbot of Fulda, who is the Emperesses Chancelour by In∣heritance, hath in his Teritories all sorts of Religion, viz. Jesuits, Jews, Lutherans, Anabaptists, &c. Of the Temporall Lords that dwell in Germany, the Duke of Bavire only maketh open profession of Popery, whose Country abideth still in the dregges thereof. As also the Country of Tirolis, and Alsatia do that are under Archduke Ferdenando, and Stiria, and Carinthia, that are under Archduke Charles, the Emperours Brethren. Duke Francis of Lawenburg, and Duke John William of Saxony, albeit they professe Lutherism, yet being provo∣ked, partly by poverty and needinesse, and partly by the sinister perswasion of their Preachers, who maketh them believe that the Calvenists be worse then the Pa∣pists, they have been contented to aide the Papists a∣ganist them of the Religion: the one with the Duke of Alva, in whose hire he yet remaineth: and the other
which is Duke John William in the second Civell Wars in France, served the French King. The like also did of late Philibert, Marques of Baden, who was slaine by the Admirall in the last conflict of France. There be also other Noble men of Germany, that this day live out of their Country, partly for lack of living, and partly because their Country is against their will reformed in Religion, as Duke Erick of Brunswick, and Peter Erneste of Mansfeld, who have abandoned their Country and live at present under the Duke of Alva. And the Counties of Ringrave, who serve the French King. But all these that thus have, and doe serve a∣gainst the Religion, are with the most part of the No∣bility and states of their native Country the worse esteemed, and have the lesse credit The Count Pallatine, and the Electors of Saxony, have through all their Domi∣minions, and Circles of the Empire, commanded all their Subjects of what estate or degree soever he be, by publike Edict, which now are in the service of any Pa∣pist, that they within a certain time, upon pain of confis∣cation of their Lands, and Goods, shall return home, and have by the same given commandement to all other their Subjects, that they, nor any of them, upon like pain, shall hereafter goe unto the service of the French King, the Duke of Alva, or of any other forrigen Potentate, without their lycense and consent. Of the Free Cities that are not Subject to any other power then only to the Empire, besides Munster, Aquis∣grave, and Collen, I know not any that professeth al∣together Popery, and yet in all these, any man may use his conscience without constraint to live after their order: And in Collen a number of those which are banished out of the Low Countrys for their Religion, have liberty at this day to remain; whereof the principall are the Prince of Oringe, the Countesse of Horne, and the Count of Killingbrooke &c. The Cities of Colmar, Sledstat, Kaysersberge, &c. In Al∣satia Superior, not withstanding that they are after a
sort Imperiall, yet they be properly under the Archduke Ferdinand, and therefore do maintain Popery still; the which Religion the common people and most part of the Citizens there, do so little regard, as, if they had means, they would reform it in like sort as their Neighbours of Hagona, Turkeine, Mynster, &c. of late about three years past, have done. The second kind of Religion that is used in Germany, is that which they call Calvenisme, of the which, amongst the Nobility, onely the Count Palatine and the Grave of Embden maketh profession, and have accordingly Re∣formed their Countries. And of the free Cities Breme only beginneth to incline that way, by reason that the chiefest Burgomaster Danyell van Buren, and Millanus, the chief Schoolmaster there, are earnest in that opinion, and labour all that they may to reduce the State there to their minde. All the rest both of the Princes and free Cities in Ger∣many, except before excepted, are Lutherans in profession of Doctrine, and Papists in Ceremonies: for they have at this day in their Churches, Images, Lamps, Torches, Copes, Vestments, Albes, Surplices, Crosses, Altars, and the very same Superstitious Rites and Ceremonies, both in Administring the Communion (saving that they deliver it in both kinds in their mother tongue without any elevation.) In Baptism, Marriage, Auricular Con∣fession, and burying, even as the Papists have. There is at this day two sorts of the Lutherans in Ger∣many, whereof the one sort is called Truncistae, because they affirm that a man is born, Quasi truncus in rege∣neratione, having no power of himself to do well, and that works be not necessary to Salvation: And that the Church is too much burthened with Ceremonies. This opinion did Matthias Flaccus Illericus as Argentine main∣tain to be the Doctrine of Luther; whom, Wigandus of Gena, with all the rest of Duke John William of Wimars Preachers, do follow. The other sort are termed Sunergistae, because they say
that God draweth Hominem volentem in regenerationem, and that good works are requisite to follow faith in mans justification, and that Ceremonies be , things indifferent. Of this sort is Georgius Major, who, with all the Divines in the Universities both of Wittemberge, and Leyipzeigke, and withall the Princes of the Elector Au∣gustus, do maintain this to be the Doctrine of Philip Me∣lancton. This contention is gone so far between these Preachers and Divines of both sides, that the Princes of each side are become parties therein, for the pacifying thereof it was thought good by the wisest of either side to have the matter openly disputed, the which was done at Aldenburge, a Town in Saxony, between both the said Princes Dominions, in Feb▪ last 1569. The which Disputation is set forth in Print. But the Faction not∣withstanding continueth, and to what end that will come, the Lord in heaven onely knoweth. But wise men doubt that these are but the beginnings of a further mischief to come upon Germany, and the Dutch Nation, who both for their security in Religon, dissolute living, and horrible drunkenness, do exceedingly provoke the plague of God unto them. To these three kindes of Religions used in Germany, there may be added a fourth, which is of Newtrals, such as are the Duke of Cleive, and the Emperour. And first touching the Duke of Cleive, albeit for his own part he professeth Lutheranisme, yet by means of his Wife, who is the Emperours sister, and of his Chancellor, who is an earnest Papist, the Romish Religion is permitted through∣out all his Dominions, to as many as like the same, who are not a few. On the other side, the Emperour, although he make publick profession of Popery in his Court; yet as well in his Countrey of Austria, which is a member of the Empire, as also in all his other Dominions, for the most part the confession of Augusta, is for certain respects, and after a sort, granted to such as are desirous thereof; but the greatest number of his Subjects do dwell still in
Popery, The which Religion, the Emperour himself, as it is reported, doth not in Conscience like, although for some wordly respects he dare not but dissemble the same; for there are, both some of his Privy Councill, whom I know, that professe openly the Reformed Reli∣gion, and Divines, both Learned, and Noblemen in Ger∣many, the which have had secret conference with him in that behalf, who do affirm assuredly, that he knoweth the truth in Religion, & that for pollicies sake he dissembleth the same: but howsoever the matter doth stand, and whatsoever he maketh men to believe to the contrary, Sure I am, that in all his actions, both publick and pri∣vate, he hath shewed himself an enemy to all those of the Religion: And on the contrary part, hath favoured and supported the Romish faction, for the which respect he hath at this present so little favour with the Princes, Protestants in Germany, as both his authority is with them the less regarded, and their minds so alienated from him, as they are purposed never in their time to establish the succession of the Empire in his house, neither yet during his Reign, to come any more themselves in person to any Dyett that he shall appoint for what cause soever it be. Wherefore considering the premisses, a man may gather hereof a State conjecture, and conclude with the saying in the Gospell, that for as much as this Nation of Ger∣many is in so many respects divided in it self, that it shall in the end suffer desolation.
The ten Provinces or Circuits of the Empire, and what Horsemen and Footmen, every one is bound to Contri∣bute in all necessary affairs for the State of the Empire. Where is to be Noted that the Protestants in the same, do double their Contribution. 2. Circulus quatuor Electorum ad Rhenum, whereof the Count Palatine is head. Horsemen. Footmen. 120 Mentz. 554 120 Collen. 554 120 Trier. 554 120 Palatinatus. 554 2 Philip Count of Nasshaw, and Brelstem. 8 4 Count of Newenard. 8 4 Lords of Rifferschird. 12 2 Lords of Reyneck. 6 6 Bayliffes of Confluence. 26 6 Abbot of St Maximyn. 44 4 Prenost of Selz. 12 6 Town of Geluhausen. 42 4 Gerloch Lord of Nether Isemburge. 16 Summ. 518. Summ. 2390. The Circle of Franconia whereof George Ludovike of Zenzam is head. 72 Bamberge. 404 90 Wartzburge. 416 60 Aystat. 264 38 Duchemr. 110 2 Amburge the Provost. 6 2 Abbey of St Giles. 26 90 Marquess of Brandenburge as Burgrave of Noriburg. 416 18 Count Hennan of Hennyberge. 48 18 Count William of Hennyberge. 48 2 Count of Castell. 8
12 Count of Wortheim. 20 4 Count of Reyneck of Lar. 20 0 Count Albrecht of Horulor. 60 12 Count George of Horuloe. 0 0 Count Wolf of Horulor. 24 2 Regenspurge Bishop of Wurtzburge. 8 4 Heirs of Schenckgotzen of Limpurge. 20 4 George, and William Cupbearers of Limpurge. 20 4 Ebererd and Valentine Pincernae Lords of Eberbache. 8 2 Heirs of Count John of Schwarzberge. 6 18 The Town of Norinberge. 500 20 The Town of Rodtenburge. 180 10 Swinford. 72 8 Wynsheym. 72 8 Weysenburge. 36 Summ. 566. Summ. 2792. 3. The Circle of Bavaria whereof the Duke of Bavire is Head. 120 The Archbishop of Saltzburge. 554 36 The Bishop of Bassaw. 156 28 The Bishop of Brisingen. 64 18 The Bishop of Regensburge. 62 12 Bishop of Rempsen. 48 4 Provost of Betchtadsgaden. 68 8 Abbot of Waldsachsen. 36 2 Abbot of Rode. 20 8 Abbot of Raysheime. 134 8 Abbot of Haymerachs. 90 8 Abbess of Nether Mynster. 36 4 Abbess of Over Mynster. 20 120 Dukes William and Lodowicke Palatines. 554 60 Ottho Henry Phillips Countes Palatines. 230 42 Landtgrave of Lichtenberge. 28
8 Count of Haage. 36 4 Countes of Ortenberge. 12 6 Barons of Stanssen of Erenselfe. 20 4 Lords of Degenberge. 18 4 Lords of Wolsteine and Barons of Over Sultzberge. 8 40 Town of Regenspurg. 224 Summ. 514. Summ. 2524. 4. The Circle of Austria with the Countries and Estates apertaining, whereof the Emperour is head. 240 Archduke of Austriche. 1200 28 Trent. 182 28 Brixen. 182 24 Gurke. 120 12 Sackaw. 48 10 Cavall. 38 6 Bayliffes of Ostriche. 26 16 Bayliffe of Etsche within the mountain. 26 16 Count George of Schemburg in the County of Entz. 48 6 Barons of Wolchenstein. 48 6 Lords of Cassentrin. 26 4 Lords of Rogendorfe. 8 24 Count of Hardeche. 90 Summ. 420. Summ. 2042 5. The Circle of Suevia whereof in the place of Christopher late Duke of Wertemberge, Charles Marquess of Radan is now head. 42 Bishop of Auspurge. 200 28 Bishop of Constans. 120 10 Bishop of Cur. 36 10 Abbot of Rempten. 36 2 Abbot of Rephenawe. 60
12 Abbot of St. Gallus. 36 10 Provost of Elwangen. 134 8 Salmenschweyler. 36 8 Wyngarten. 26 6 Schutter. 40 4 Weisenaw. 36 8 St Blasie. 20 2 St Petro in Silva Sereina. 44 10 Maulbrunen.   8 Schaffhausen. 36 0 Steyne upon the Rheyne. 20 0 Petershausen. 12 6 Emisedell. 44 2 Pfeffors. 8 2 Rrentzlingen. 8 2 Dissides. 20 2 St John in Turgaw. 8 4 Schaschrurent. 36 2 Rockenburck. 16 6 Ochsengaroson. 26 2 Koningsborn. 20 2 Marckthall. 8 6 Elchingen. 26 2 Psuye. 12 2 Munchrodt. 20 0 Owersperge. 20 0 Hursawe. 18 2 Gengenhache. 18 2 Abbess of Lindawe. 20 0 Abbess of Rottencuaster. 18 4 Abbess of Bynhawe. 20 0 Abbess of Hickhache. 10 0 Abbess of Guttstell. 10 0 Abbess of Bounde. 10 6 Bayliffes in Alsatia and Burgundia. 26 120 Duke of Wirtenberge. 554
38 Marquess Phillip of Baden. 96 4 Count Vlrich of Helsenstein. 0 16 Count of Werdenberge. 90 16 Count of Ottingham. 90 8 Count of Rupsen. 36 16 Counts of Mimdford Wolsange. 90 16 Counts of Mimdford Johan. 90 16 Count Frederick of Furstanberge. 90 6 Count of Eberstem. 8 12 Solern Joachim and Wegand Sons to Count Francis. 60 4 Randolfe Count of Sultz. 18 4 Lewis and Frederick of Lewinstem. 18 2 Tubengen. 2 10 The Inhabatants in the County of Kirkberge. 20 2 Brandis the Count Radalfe of Sultz. 12 4 Zimmern. 18 2 The Inhibitants of the Signiorie of Islingen. 8 2 Christopher Count of Denngen. 0 4 Gandelfing Lord of Schwdukharte. 8 24 Dapiferi de Waldeburge & possessores honor: de Son∣nenburge. 134 2 Heirs of the Lord Leo of Stanffe. 18 2 Sigismond Lord of Fawlkenstein. 6 4 John Lord of Roingsocke. 20 0 John Dennys Lord of Konigs Ekerberge. 10 2 Gandalf & Walter Lord of Serotzecher. 6 2 Lord of Hoenloe. 8 50 Augusta. 300 8 Rawssbewru. 136 50 Vlma. 134 20 Mynningen. 72 6 Rempten. 72 12 Bibrache. 110 4 Lutkirtche. 36 8 Pslyn. 44 4 Wangen. 46 8 Lyndawe. 144
8 Ravenspurge. 134 0 Buerchorn. 20 20 Vbereingen. 156 12 Constance. 144 6 Pfullendorfe. 80 0 St. Gallas. 114 14 Schafdansen. 90 12 Renthingen. 110 20 Esslingen. 134 10 Sunndt. 90 4 Weyl. 36 12 Helbron. 120 6 Wiwpfen. 26 20 Hall. 160 10 Drinkelspuell. 116 2 Dopffingen. 18 4 Gingen. 26 4 Alen. 36 20 Nortlingen. 160 8 Werdt. 72 0 Buchatt. 12 0 Offenburge. 90 0 Gengenbache. 72 0 Zell in Hamberspache. 44 6 Rotheoell. 244 Summ. 918. Summ. 6394. The Circle of the Rhine whereof the Count of Sul∣mos is Head. 4 Bishops of Wormes. 26 36 Bishop of Speire. 120 30 Bishop of Strasburge. 200 14 Bishop of Basill. 84 48 Bishop of Bysontz. 150 0 Bishop of Wallis. 450
6 Bishop of Geneva. 26 28 Bishop of Losanna. 120 48 Bishop of Metz▪ 200 18 Bishop of Doll. 48 38 Bishop of Verdon. 86 28 Abbot of Fuldawe. 92 4 Abbot of Hirchfell. 18 12 Abbot of Murbache. 38 8 Provost of Wisenburge. 36 28 Master of the Jobaintes. 92 2 Provest of Odenhayme. 20 2 Abbot of St. Gregories. 8 8 Abbot of Rfrin. 60 2 Abbess of Ranfinget. 20 120 Duke of Lorayne. 554 36 Duke John Count of Spanheime. 150 120 Duke of Savoy. 554 16 Donest Marques of Baden. 46 48 Duke Lewis Count of Veldent. 150 136 Landgrave of Hesen. 554 60 Prince of Calyn. 188 4 John Lewis Count of Nasshawe of Barbruck. 24 6 Ringraves with the Tutors of the Children of Phil∣lip deceased. 24 4 Wolfgange Lord of Leipoltzkirche. 26 4 Lord of Krirchingen. 8 2 Phillip of Buxing Lord of Oberstein. 2 8 Raynard Count of Bitch his Children. 24 2 George of Recheshoven Count of Bitsch. 6 4 Nicholas Count of Salyn. 18 8 Phillip Count of Hannaw, Lord of Litchtenburge. 24 6 Emmieht and Englehardt, Brothers, Lords of Lein∣nigen. 18 2 Werrich of Oberstein Count of Folkenstein. 8 8 John Jacob Lord of Merspurg and Beffort. 40 8 Lord of Bavilstein. 90
4 The Inhabitants of high Koningsperg, John of Sukingen to bring them to Eusisheim. 18 12 Of the Duke of Lorrayne, as Possessor of the Signi∣ory of Blankenburge. 50 6 Phillip of Wysbaden Count of Nassaw. 26 8 Eberhard Count of Koningstein Lord of Ebstein. 26 12 John and Anthony of Buttingen Counts of Nether Isenburge. 60 8 William Count of Sulmos. 40 6 Barnard Count of Sulmos. 32 4 Tutors of the goods of the Count of Wayker of Leymengen to bringe their Souldiers to the Lords of Riepolkirch and of Oberstein of Rixingen. 18 24 Balthasar as Tutor to the Children of Phillip Count of Hannow, Lord of Muntzburg late de∣ceased. 60 4 Can Count of Westerburge. 20 2 William Count of Wytenstein. 18 6 Phillip and Harry Counts of Waldeck. 32 2 Lords of Bless. 0 Towns. 20 Bassil. 360 20 Mulhausen in Simkaw. 54 10 Colmar. 78 6 Kaysersberge. 36 2 Turkheim. 18 0 Munster in the valley of St. Gregories. 54 86 Strasburge. 450 6 Obernesheim. 62 2 Rosheim. 18 14 Stridestade. 116 14 Haganawe. 116 4 Wysenburge upon the Rhine. 44 4 Landaw. 44
6 Speire. 198 20 Worms. 158 40 Francford. 280 0 Fridburg. 44 0 Weislor. 62 80 Metz. 500 20 The order of the Knights of the Castle of Frie∣berge. 90 8 The order of the Knights of the Castle of Gel∣hausen. 30 14 Doll. 122 20 Verdun. 90 4 Kansmans Sarbrucke. 18 14 Bisons. 116 Summ. 1468. Summ. 8008. The Circle of Westphalia and of the Low Country, where∣of the Duke of Cleve is Head. 36 Padenborn. 68 120 Lutich. 380 100 Vtriche. 410 68 Munster. 338 44 Chamerick. 164 12 Osenbruck. 72 10 Pserden. 48 12 Mynden. 30 4 Werden. 26 4 Stabell. 44 8 St. Cornelius Minster. 90 4 Achternach. 36 4 Corfei. 18 0 Hawerden. 20 4 Essen. 26 90 Duke John of Burchenburge. 540 90 Duke John of Cleve and Marcke. 540
16 Barnard Marques of Baden of Lutzenburge. 46 20 William of Dillinmarke Count of Nashaw. 90 6 John Count of Sam. 26 4 William Count of Fuerberge. 20 12 Diotrick. Counts of Manderscheid. 54 8 John Counts of Manderscheid. 26 2 James Counts of Manderscheid. 8 8 John Count of Wye, Lord of Ruchen. 24 6 William Count de Morsch Lord of Rodenache. 24 12 Justus Lord of Brimkurst. 54 4 Eberwein Count of Bewthen. 54 4 Arnold Count of Steinfeld. 18 2 The possessors of the goods of the Lords of Tur∣mesex. 8 4 Counts of Teckinberge. 18 8 John Count of Oldenburge. 60 8 Otto Lord of Rieperge. 54 4 Justus Count of Hoye. 16 2 Frederike Count of Tirfeild. 8 16 Schawenburge, and Gemma. 68 6 Lord of Spitzenburge. 12 2 Lord of Wargenburge 0 8 Eberhard and Rupreckt of the Marcke, Lords of A∣renburge. 90 4 Limaw Count of Frunenburge for the Inhabitants of the Signiory of Someraw. 0 8 Symon Lord of Lyffie. 36 60 Collen. 644 40 Aquesgreve. 180 10 Nether-Wesell. 100 6 Dewer. 40 4 Camerich. 36 40 Dortumbt. 200 40 Sost. 240 4 Dusburge. 36 2 Herwarden. 26 14 Bracken. 116
6 Warburge. 44 0 Verdon. 30 80 Leinchawe. 44 Summ. 1104. Summ. 5490. The Circle of Saxony Superior whereof Augustus the Elector is Head. 120 John Elector of Saxony. 554 120 Ihoachim Marques of Brandenburge, Elector. 554 12 Bishop of Meissen. 12 12 Bishop of Mersperge. 12 12 Bishop of Nawumburge. 12 10 Bishop of Brandenburge. 30 18 Bishop of Havelburg. 66 10 Bishop of Lebus. 30 18 Bishop of Camyn. 84 4 Abbot of Salfeld. 26 4 Abbot of Rittershawsen. 20 4 Abbot of Walchenried. 12 2 Abbot of Luedelburge. 20 2 Abbess of Gerenrode. 20 90 George Duke of Saxony. 416 90 George Duke of Barvim. 540 18 All the Princes of Anhal. 20 8 Gunter the Elder Countz of Scwartzburge. 28 4 Gunter the Younger Countz of Scwartzburge. 20 2 John Henry Countz of Scwartzburge. 10 20 All the Countz of Manfelt. 90 6 Otto Count of Stolberge. 24 4 Bein Count of Hunstein. 0 4 Erneist Count of Hunstein. 16 6 Adam Count of Benchlingen. 0 2 Countez of Rapm. 24 6 Countez of Baxby and Meulingen. 8 2 All the Countez of Gleichem. 26
2 Countez of Lyswecke. 4 4 Contez of Wyldenselss. 4 2 Lords of Geracoe. 24 4 Renssen of Blat Lord of Gretz. 6 2 Barons of Schoenberge. 8 2 Barons of Dantenberge Pincernae. 8 0 Lords of Branderstain and Rentz. 8 0 Dantzik. 330 0 Ilburge. 164 Summ. 628. Summ. 3230 The Circle of Saxonia Inferior, whereof Adolf Duke of Holstein is Head. 120 Of the King of Denmarke for those his Countries that belong to the Empire. 554 114 The Archbishop of Magdenburge. 524 72 The Archbishop of Bream. 300 28 Hyldechem and Bishops. 56 28 Lubeck Bishops. 56 4 Schwerin 26 24 Ratzenburge. 38 10 Seblswyke. 30 10 Magims Duke of Lawenburge. 30 30 Erick Dukes of Brunswike. 224 35 Henry Dukes of Brunswike. 164 35 Ernest Dukes of Brunswike. 164 70 Philip Dukes of Brunswike. 328 24 Henry Dukes of Mechelburge. 6 40 Albert Dukes of Mechelburge. 67 40 Fredrick Duke of Holstein. 67 80 Countez of Honstein. 134 2 Countez of Rhenstein. 8 4 Lubeck. 0
40 Hamberck. 354 40 Muthawsin in Thuringia. 240 6 Northansen. 156 0 Gosler. 260 0 Gottengen. 44 Summ. 822. Summ 3724. The Circle of Burgundia, whereof King Phil∣lip is Head. 246 Duke of Burgundia, for so much of his Country as pertaineth to the Empire. 1200 40 Nawssaw and Breda, 180 69 Lords of Weryn. 44 20 Lords of Egmond and Iselstein. 90 20 Lords of Bergea and Walda. 134 8 Aswold Count of Bergin. 96 Summ. 334. Summ. 1684. Summ. Totall, Horsemen, 7292. Summ. Totall, Footmen, 38478. FINIS.
Courteous Reader▪ be pleased to take notice that these Books following, are Printed for, and sold by William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St Pauls Church-yard, near the little North Door. HIckes Revelation Revealed. Folio. Clark's Martyrology Compleat, with the Persecutions of Eng∣land to the end of Queen Maries Reign. Folio. —Lives of ten Eminent Divines, some being as follow; Bishop Vsher, Dr Gouge, Dr Harris, Mr Gataker, Mr Whittaker, &c. and some other famous Christians. 4o —The Lives and Deaths of such Wotthies who by their PRU∣DENCE, POLICY, and POWER have Purchased and procure to themselves the Surnames of GREAT. 4o —Life of Christ. 4o —Life of Herod the Great. 4o —Life of Nebuchadnezzar, and Cyrus the Great; the one, the first founder of the Babylonian Empire, the other, the first founder of the Em∣pire of the Medes and Persians. 4o —Life of Alexander the Great, the first founder of the Grecian Empire, As also of Charles the Great, commonly called Charlemagne, the first founder of the French Empire, 4o —The Life and Death of Hannibal▪ the Great Captain of the Cartha∣ginians, who maintained Wars against all the power of Rome for eighteen years together in Italy. As also the Life and Death of Epaminondas, the Great Captain of the Thebans, who was famous both for his Vertues and Valour. 4o —The Life and Death of Pompey the Great, with all his Glorious Victories and Triumphs. As also The Life and Death of Artaxerxes Mnemon, one of the great Persian Emperours. 4o —The Life and Death of Julius Caesar, the first founder of the Roman Empire. As also the Life and Death of Augustus Caesar in
whose Raign our Blessed Lord and Saviour Jasus Christ was born. 40 —A Prospect of Hungary, and Transylvania, together with an account of the qualities of the inhabitants, the Commodities of the Countries, the Chiefest Cities, Towns, and Strong-holds, Rivers, and Mountains, with an Historycal Narration of the Wars amongst themselves, and with the Turks, continued to this year 1664. As also a Brief Description of Bohe∣mia, Austria, Bavaria, Steirmark, Croatia, Dalmatia, Moravia, and other Adjacent Countries, contained in a Map joyned therewith, by which Map you may know which Places are in the Power of the Turk, and which Christians have, 4o. —Ministers Dues. 4o Cradock's KNOWLEDGE and PRACTICE; Or, a Plain Discourse of the Chief Things necessary to be KNOWN, BELIEVED, and PRA∣CTISED in Order to SALVATION, 4o Ford of Baptism. 8o Vennour's Whole Armor of God. 8o Cotton, on the Covenant of Grace, 8o Culverwell, of Assurance, 8o Records Urinal of Physick, 8o Ravius Oriental Grammer, 12o Peacocks Visitation, 12o Dr Tuckney's Good Day well Improved, 12o —Death Disarmed, 12o —Balm of Gilead, 12o Cleaveland Poems Characters and Letters. 12o Clamor Sanguinis, 12o Aristippus or Balscat's Master-piece. 12o King Charles's Works, 24o. Defence and Vindication of Tithes, 4o Dr Mays Relation of a strange Monster, or Serpent found in the left Ventricle of the heart of a Gentlemen, 4o Estwicks Christ's Submission to his Fathers Will, 4o Ferriby Lawfull Preacher, 4o.
