C6335 13156313 98175
A CONFERENCE Mr. John Cotton HELD AT BOSTON With the ELDERS of NEW-ENGLAND, 1. Concerning gracious conditions in the soule before faith. 2. Evidencing Justification by Sanctification. 3. Touching the active power of Faith. Twelve Reasons against stinted forms of prayer and praise. Together with The Difference between the CHRISTIAN and Antichristian Church. Written by FRANCIS CORNWELL, a Minister of Jesus the Christ. London, Printed by J. Dawson, and are to be sold Fr. Eglesfield, at the Signe of the Mary-gold in Pauls Church-yard. 1646.
TO THE HONOVRABLE AND True-hearted lover of his Countrey, Sir HENRY VANE Junior, Knight, sometimes Governour of New-England; Treasurer of the Navie Royall, and a Member of the House of COMMONS. Sir, 1 Cor. 14 27 THe Churches of the Saints and the World, may not bee unfitly compared to the Pearle and the Peb∣ble: though both of one naturall substance, earth; yet the one of rare price, whose beauty is the sun∣beames inclosed; the other wanting
it, is cast away as refuse. What maketh the Saint more excellent then his neighbour, seeing both are borne of flesh, both subject to the same corruptions, sicknesse, death, but this?Ephes. 4. 24 The Saints excellency is nothing else but the Image of Jesus Christ the Sunne of righteousnesse shining in him: For as the moone and starres derive their light from the sunne;1 Cor. 1. 30 so all the wisdome, righ∣teousnesse, holinesse a Saint hath, hee deriveth from Christ. Hence David the King doth so prize their fellowship, All my delight is in thy Saints,Psal. 16. 3. thine excellent ones that are in the earth, and them that excell in ver∣tue. Yea, it is a sure note of a Ci∣tizen of Sion, that hee honours them that feare the Lord:Psal 15. Whereas world∣ly men without grace, are rendred in his eyes as vile. Hence the Spouse acknowledgeth that all her excel∣lency cometh from plantation; Let my Beloved come into his garden,Cant 4 16. and eat his pleasant fruit. Yea, Christ
declareth to Nicodemus that a be∣leevers holinesse cometh from re∣generation;Joh. 3. 5. that in Christ hee may onely glory. How doth the Lord discover this his excellency to a beleever, by his calling, till that time hee lieth amongst the refuse of the world,Tit. 3. 3. as foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and plea∣sures, living in malice and envie, hate∣full, and hating one another. But then the kindnesse and love of God to man appeared,Col. 1. 13. by delivering him out of the kingdome of darknesse, and tran∣slating him into the kingdome of his deare Sonne. By which it is manifest, that hee is one of the Chosen genera∣tion, the royal priesthood,1 Pet. 2. 9. the holy na∣tion, the peculiar people, whom hee hath called out of darknesse into his mar∣vellous light. But when doth the Lord discover the truth of his cal∣ling to his conscience? Then when hee giveth him precious faith; for that onely distinguisheth him form the world that lieth in sinne. Gal. 3.
22. The Scripture concludeth (father, mother, sonne, daughter, nay the infant that is borne of the most holiest parents) all under sinne, that the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ might bee given to them that beleeve. So that in that same houre the Lord giveth him faith, hee giveth him an evidence in himselfe,Heb 15. 1. that hee loved him in Christ before he was borne,Rom 9 11. before hee had done good or evill,Act. 13. 39. that hee hath justified him from all those things hee could not be justified by the Law,Heb. . 14. that hee hath purged his conscience from all dead works, that his person is ac∣cepted, his sinne discharged,Act 26. 1. and he hath a right to the purchased in∣heritance amongst them which are sanctified. Thus the love of Christ revealed to dye for him, to take away his iniquity, and reconcile him to God; the Spirit given to take away his heart of stone,Eccl. 36. 25. 26. giveth him an heart of flesh, to cause to walke in his flatutes; yea, and draw∣eth
his heart to yeeld obedience to every commandement of Jesus the Christ. The truth of this grace given, Right Worshipfull, you can give a true testimoniall; for you were once in your naturall condi∣tion as well as others, till it plea∣sed God who separated you from the womb,Gal. . 15, 1. to call you by his grace, to reveale his Sonne in you; you consulted not with flesh and bloud, but left your native soyle, (in the persecuting times of the Prelates) chusing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God (according to the light they had received) then to remaine in England and enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Yet there the Lord exalted your Worship to bee the Governour: And in that dawning light, coming forth out of mysticall Babylon, the Lord dis∣covered much spirituall knowledge, of the riches of his free-grace in Jesus Christ, amongst you; you be∣ing freed from the yoke of the Task∣Masters
heere, the Bishops, that kept you in bondage: you had li∣berty there to debate those Questi∣ons; which the naming onely of them heere, would have rendred a man odious. But Satan that en∣vieth the peace of the Saints; stir∣red up a spirit of contention a∣mongst you; especially when these Queries came to be debated. 1 Whether there are any gracious conditions, or qualifications wrought in the soule before faith? 2 Whether any man can gather his evidence of the assurance of his Justification from his Sanctifi∣cation? 3 Whether there bee an active power of Faith, and other gifts of grace in a Christian conversation? The one side would not beleeve themselves justified, no farther then they could see themselves worke; making their Markes, Signes, and
Qualifications, the causes of their Justification. The other side, laid the Evidence of their Justification, onely by Faith in the free Promise: for there are foure things that makes remission of sinnes perpetuall to a beleever. First, The cause of Remission, the sacrificed Body of Christ on the Crosse, or accursed Tree; Heb. 10. 4. By one offering, hee hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified. Secondly, The ground is a free promise tendred to us from God; as to Adam, The Seed of the Woman shall breke the Serpents head, Gen. 3. 15. John. 3. 16. 1 John 4. 10. Thirdly, The meane is, Faith ap∣prehending it, Phil. 3. 9. Fourthly, The Spirit of Christ sea∣ling of it, Ephes. 1. 13. This truth revealed for the com∣fort of poore drooping Saints found great opposition; But the good Lord, stirred up your gracious spirit, to countenance, and defend
them in the midst of strong opposi∣tion; and though you were sleigh∣ted, and set light by at the ende of your Government, as not worthy to be an assistant, with many other Instruments more; yet the good Lord stood by you, and strength∣ned you, and delivered you from the hands of your opposers, per∣served you from the dangers of the Sea; and though at your returne to your Native Soyle, you lived like Joseph, a while, in a despised con∣dition, yet the Lord raised you up to sit amongst Princes. So that though you were willing to lose life, friends, preferment, for Christ; found you not then, life, peace, joy, in the Lord Jesus, which was bet∣ter to you, then all worldly amity; according to his owne promise, In the World you found affliction, but in him you found peace: And when you were called to be a Mem∣ber of the high Court of Parlia∣ment, in our distressed and distra∣cted
times; the Lord made you an nstrument to defect the Trecherous plot of those two brethren in evill; Thomas Lord Strafford; and Willi∣am Lord Archbishop of Canterbu∣y, that contrived the destruction of our fundamentall Lawes, ratified by the Statute of Magna Charta, by abouring to set up an Arbitrary Go∣vernment, and keeping on foot a Po∣ish Army, consisting of Irish Re∣els, and others, to compell the faith∣ull, and true-hearted Nobility, and loyall Commons of England, o subject themselves to their illegal Taxations: hazarding the losse of he favours of the King, Nobi∣ty, Parents, Friends, and Allyes, together with those places of Ho∣our and Maintenance, the King of lemency had freely bestowed; ra∣er then his Country should be ru∣ed, and enthralled, by such accor∣
a branch of that goodly Caedar, under whose shade, the Innocent and oppressed, tender Consciences that stand for a through Reforma∣tion, agreeable to the Word o God, find rest) ever be forgotten, and left unrewarded; God forbid: I is worthy to be written on a Pilla of Marble; and recorded in the Chronicle: that after-ages may ne∣ver forget to shew kindenesse, and mercy to your Noble Posterity that did not thinke your life (toge∣ther with your neerest relations deare unto you, so as to part with them, that you might purchase you Countries Liberty; I cannot judge him Englands Friend, that enviet your honour, and promotion; Se∣ing you are (for the love you hau shewed to Christ his Truth, and poore Members, together with you Native Countrey) worthy of double honour. Now (worthy Sir) seeing all your excellency is nothing else, bu
the Image of Jesus Christ, the Son of righteousnes shining in you. Dis∣ain not to receive from the hand of a poore despised Instrument that pre∣sents this Treatise, The Learned Con∣ference of Master John Cotton, that he had with the Elders, at the Bay of Boston in New England. Though I am the least of all Saints, not wor∣thy to be called a Saint; because n the time of the Prelats raigne; I ided with them, in persecuting the Faith of Jesus Christ, and impriso∣ning of his Members; But did it gnorantly, through unbeliefe, and when the Lord pierced my heart for it; I trembling, cryed, What shall I doe? The holy Spirit and the Bride said, Repent, and bee baptized in the name of Jesus, for the remission of sinnes, and I should receive the gifts of the Spirit, &c. Then Noble Sir, though I procrastinated it for a sea∣son, at last, I was not disobedient to the heavenly voice, but arose, and
was Baptized; For this cause, have beene much opposed by my old Friends, and Countrey-men▪ But yet remaine a Loyall Covenanter, that standeth for a Refor∣mation in England, and Ireland, agreeable to the Word of God, and the best Reformed Churches: See∣ing it is not the voice of the Chur∣ches, but Christ in the Churches we Convenented to hearken unto as Master Case his Sermon yet te∣stifieth. First, To extirpate Popery; (which I apprehended at the taking of the Nationall Covenant) was that Doctrine of Antichrist, which doth universally oppose the doctrine of Jesus the Christ. Affirming what Christ denieth; and denying what Christ affirmeth. Secondly, Prelacy, viz. The Go∣vernment of Arch-bishops, and Bi∣shops, and all Ecclesiasticall Offi∣cers depending on that Hierarchy,
Roote and Branch: as a Plant the heavenly Father hath not planted. Thirdly, Superstition: viz. What∣soever is supra Statutum, that hath not the word of God to warrant it. Fourthly, Schisme: Namely, from all those that teach, and cosent not to the wholesome words,even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godlinesse; from such I must with∣draw, 1 Tim. 6. 3, 5. Fifthly, Heresie: Even from all them that deny that Jesus is the Christ; They are Antichrist that deny the Father and the Sonne. Whosoever denyeth the Sonne, the same hath not the Father, 1 Joh. 2. 22, 23. Sixthly, That the Lord may be one: viz. Even the Lord Jesus the Christ, whom God raised from the dead, and et him at his owne right hand in the eavenly places; Farre above all prin∣cipality, and power, and might, and
dominion, and every name that is na∣med, not onely in this world, but that which is to come: And hath put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the Church, Which is his body, the fulnesse of him that filleth all in all, Ephes. 1. 20, 21 22, 23. Seventhly, And his Name to one in the three Kingdomes: (that is, as I conceive it) his power, autho∣rity, and royall Commission must be exalted in all his Offices, to be the eternall King, eternall Prophet, and eternall Priest, in all things appertaining to the conscience: see∣ing the loyall Spouse of Christ hath no Head, no Husband, no Lord, no Law-giver, but royall King Je∣sus. That wee, and our posterity after us, may live in faith, and love; and the Lord may delight to dwell amongst us.
For the keeping of which Co∣venant, I had rather chuse to dye, then to deny the faith of Jesus the Christ: Knowing, that he which confesseth him before men, him he will confesse before his Father. But hee which is ashamed of Christ, nd his words, in this sinfull and a∣dulterous generation, of him also shall the Sonne of man bee ashamed, when hee cometh in the glory of his Father, with the holy Angels, Mar. 8. 38. Thus I desire, in the first place,Mat 22. 21 to give to God the things that are Gods; and, in the next place, render to the high and honourable Court of Parliament, whereof your Honour is a Member, and to your King, when the Lord shall put it into his heart to returne unto his Parlia∣ment, and to joyne with you, all your dues,Rome. 13. 7. tributes, customes, feare, honour; and subject my selfe to obey all your just, legall, and civill commandements: Knowing, that
you set not up the Sword for nought; Pet. 2. 14 but to be a terrour to them that doe evill, and a praise, a guard and defense, for them that doe well. Your poore Oratour at the throne of grace, that earnestly prayeth, that the Lord will give you, and the great Councell of the King∣dome, wisdome and prudence, to beare with tender Conscien∣ces, that desire to exalt Jesus the Christ in all his Royall Offices, FRAN. CORNWELL. Orpington, in Kent, the ninth Month, 1645.
To all the Churches of Iesus the Christ, coming out of Mysticall Babylon, gathered, or scattered, that follow the Lambe, the Lord JESUS where∣soever he goeth. BEloved in CHRIST, Disdaine not to Read this Learned Treatise of Ma∣ster John Cotton, of Bo∣ston in New-England, out of any prejudice thou mayest take a∣gainst the person, or publisher of it. What if some judge him a Schisma∣ticke? yet he regardeth not mans rash censure: Seeing he can with holy Paul, that before his Conversion persecuted the Church of God, safely Apologise for himselfe; Acts 24. 14. That after the way that you call Heresie, so
worship I the God of my Fathers; beleeving all things that are written in the Law, and in the Prophets. Verse 15. And have an hope toward God, which you your selves also allow, that there shall bee a re∣surrection of the dead, both of the just, and unjust. Verse 16. And herein doe I exercise my selfe, to have alwaies a Conscience void of offence toward God & towardman. But yet this I confesse unto you, that I am lesse then the least of all the Messengers of Christ; for I am not worthy to bee called a Messenger, or Minister; for I persecuted the Church of God, that pro∣fessed the Faith of Jesus the Christ; that held foorth all his Royall Offices, King, Prophet, Priest, according to his outward administration, in admit∣ting of Members into his Spiritual Kingdome: And sided with the An∣tichristian Prelates, and Bishops, that denyed, that Jesus is the Christ, whom the Spirit of God calleth Lyars, and Antichristians, That denyeth the Fa∣ther
and the Sonne, 1 John 2. 22. For though I, with the Antichristian Bishops, and Priests, did acknowledge Jesus the Christ, our high Priest that ever liveth to reconcile us unto God; yet wee have persecuted them that hold his Kingly and Propheticall Office to be eternall, aswell as his Priesthood, and the gathering of his Church according to his Royall Commission, Matth. 28. 18, 19, 20. Hence it is, that Christ divided, becometh no Christ to the di∣vider; this according to the Vulgar Latine, Solvere Jesum, to dissolue Je∣sus, that is, to receive him onely in part, and not in the whole, which is the spirit of Antichrist. Now when the Lord opened the eyes of my understan∣ding, and convicted me of all the abo∣minations I had done in my spirituall Captivity under Antichrist, especially, that I had crucified Jesus the Christ in his Members, being pricked in my heart, I trembling cryed, what shall I doe? The Spirit and the Bride, the Lambes wife, said; Repent, and be
Baptized in the name of Jesus, &c. Then I gladly received the Word, was Baptized, and was added to the Church, Acts 2. 38, 39, 40, 41, 42. Yet, by the grace of God, now I am, what I am; And having from some Friends, re∣ceived this Learned Conference, kept it by mee as a precious Diamond of great worth, from which my soule, through the great goodnesse of God, did reape much spirituall comfort. And did wait, hoping that some learned and faithfull friends of his, would long a∣goe have Printed a larger, and an ex∣acter Copy of it: But finding none, (I that am lesse then the least of all Saints) could not any longer conceale it, but thought with my selfe, I was bound in Conscience to publish it, in this lear∣ned Age, wherein there is so much enquiry after truth, for the benefit of poore, hungry, empty, selfe-denying Spirits; rather then such a Learned Tract of heavenly light, should alwaies lye in the dust, as unseene, and forgot∣ten. For this cause alone, I have at∣tempted
(Courteous Reader) to present o thy view this Learned Treatise; Not hat I have any relation to that Lear∣ed man; nor any command from him o doe it: But onely in love, that this his Learned Disputation might not bee uried in silence. Read it therefore (Be∣loved in Christ) not for his sake that publisheth it; but for his sake that was he Author of it; or rather for the God f Truths sake. For whose cause the Learned Author contendeth for the Faith in these daies, wherein the Gos∣ell of Truth hath suffered so great Ec∣lipses, through the rage and tyranny of the Popish Antichristian Prelates and Priests. Thine that earnestly desireth to exalt the Lord Jesus the Christ, in all his royall Of∣fices FRAN. CORNWELL.
A Conference that Mr. IOHN COTTON had with the Elders of the Congre∣gations in New-England, touching three Questions that are here dis∣cussed on: 1. Touching gracious conditions, or qua∣lifications, wrought in the soule before faith. 2. Touching the gathering of our first e∣vident assurance of our faith from san∣ctification. 3. Touching the active power of faith, and other spirituall gifts of grace in a Chri∣stian convrsation. The first Question. Quest. 1. WHether there be any gracious conditions, or qualifications, in the soule before faith, of dependance unto which, such promises are made?
Wee deny it, for these reasons. Reas. 1. If there be any gracious conditi∣ons, or qualifications, wrought in us before faith of dependance; then, before wee receive union with Christ: The reason is, For by faith of dependance it is, that wee first received union with Jesus Christ, Joh. 1. 12. But there be no gracious conditi∣ons wrought in us before wee recei∣ved union with Jesus Christ; Therefore there bee no graci∣ous conditions, or qualifications, wrought in us before faith of de∣pendance. Minor. If wee cannot bring forth good fruit, till wee be good trees; nor become good trees, untill wee be grafted or united unto Jesus Christ; then there can be no gracious con∣ditions, or qualifications wrought in us, before wee receive union with Christ. But wee cannot bring forth good
fruit, till wee become good trees; nor become trees of righteousnesse, untill wee be grafted into Jesus Christ; Therefore there bee no graci∣ous conditions, or qualifications wrought in us, before we received union with Jesus Christ. The Proposition is cleare of it selfe, that wee cannot bring forth good fruit, untill we be good trees:Mat. 7. 18. A corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit. Nor can we become the good trees of righteousnesse, of the Lords plantation, Isai. 61. 3. untill wee be grafted into Christ.Joh. 15. 4. As the branch cannot beare fruit of it selfe, except it abide in the vine, no more can yee, except yee abide in me. Verse 5. I am the vine, y are the branches; hee that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: for without me ye can doe nothing. A second proofe of the Minor. If there be any gracious conditi∣ons,
or qualifications wrought in us before union with Christ, then we may be in a state of grace and sal∣vation, before we be in Christ: But that cannot be: Acts 4. 12. Neither is there salvation in any other; for there is none other name under heaven given amongst men, whereby wee may be sa∣ved. Reas. 2.If there be any gracious condi∣tion or qualification in us before faith, then there may be something in us pleasing unto God before faith: But there is nothing in us plea∣sing unto God before faith; Heb. 11. 6. But without faith it is impossible for us to please him: for hee that cometh to God, must beleeve that hee is, and that hee is a rewarder of them that di∣ligently seek him. Object. But there must be some saving preparatives wrought in the soule, to make way for faith, and our u∣nion with Christ. For wee must be cut off from the old Adam, before
wee can be grafted into the new: Wee must be dead to the first hus∣band, before we can be married un∣o another. Answ. 1. To works of creation there need∣th no preparation; the almighty ower of God calleth them to be his people, that were not his peo∣ple, 1 Pet. 2. 10. And by calling them to be so, hee maketh them to bee so. Rom. 9. 25, 26. As hee saith inHosea, I will call them, My people, which were not my people; and her, Beloved, which was not beloved. Verse 26. And it shall come to passe that▪ in the place where it is said unto them, Yee are not my people, there shall they be called, The children of the living God. While Satan, the strong man, keepeth the house, Christ the stron∣ger cometh upon him, and berea∣veth him of his armour, and divi∣deth the spole, Luke. 11. 21, 22. Wee are dead to our first hus∣band. the Law by the body of Christ, Rom. 7. 4. and therefore it is
by the vertue of Christs death we have fellowship with Christ; and that giveth the deadly stroak unto our first husband. The second Question. Quest. 2. WHether a man may evidence his justification by his sancti∣fication? The state of the Question is thus unfolded. First, To take a mans sanctificati∣on, for an evident cause or ground of his justification, is flat Popery. Secondly, To take a mans san∣ctification, for an evident cause or ground of that faith whereby hee is justified, is utterly unsafe; for faith is built▪ upon Jesus, the Christ, the head corner stone, Ephes. 2. 20. Mat. 16. 16. and not upon works: A good work floweth from faith not faith from them.
Thirdly, To take common san∣ctification, that is, such a reforma∣tion and a change of life as flow∣eth from a spirit of bondage, re∣straining from sin, and constraining unto duty, and sometimes accom∣panied with enlargement and com∣forts in duty; yet without the sense and feeling of the need of Christ, and before union with him, to take such a sanctification for an evident signe of justification, is to build up∣on a false and sandy foundation. Fourthly, That when a man hath first attained assurance of his faith, of his justification, by the witnesse of the Spirit of Christ, in a free promise of grace, made to him in the bloud of Christ, Acts 13. 38, 39. hee may discern, and take his san∣ctification as a secondary witnesse, or an evident signe or effect of his justification. The Question being thus stated, I propound the Question thus; Whether a man may gather the first
evidence or assurance of his faith, of his justification, by his sanctification? Wee hold in the Negative part. The first Argument. As Abraham came to the first as∣surance of his justification, so wee, and all that beleeve, as Abraham did; for hee is made a patterne to us in point of justification: Rom. 4. 23. Now it was not written for his sake a∣lone, that it was imputed to him; V. 24.But for us also, to whom it shall be im∣puted, if we beleeve on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead.V. 25. Who was delivered for our of∣fences, and raised againe for our justi∣fication. But Abraham came to his first as∣surance of his sanctification, not from any promise made thereunto, but from a free promise of grace;Rom. 4. 18. Who against hope, beleeved in hope, that hee might become the fa∣ther of many nations: according to that which was spoken, So shall they seed be.V. 19. And being not weak in faith,
he considered not his own body now dead, when he was above an hundred yeares old; neither the deadnesse of Sarahswombe. Vers. 20. He staggered not at the promise of God through unbeliefe, but was strong in faith, giving glory to God. Vers. 21. And being fully per∣swaded that what hee had promised hee was able to performe: Vers. 22. And therefore it was imputed unto him for righteousnesse. The promise was absolute, and free, So shall thy seed be as the stars of heaven: this hee beleeved with full assurance of faith, resting onely on the faithfulnesse and grace, and power of him that promised, Rom. . 21. Therefore wee, and all the chil∣dren of Abraham, come to our first assurance of our Justification, not from our Sanctification, or from a∣ny promise made thereunto; but om the free promise of grace. The secoud Arguwent. No man can take his assurance of
the faith of his Iustification: But as God will declare and pronounce him righteous in Christ Iesus. But God will not declare, and pronounce us righteous in Christ, upon the sight and evidence of our sanctification. Therefore we cannot take the as∣surance of the faith of our Iustifica∣tion, from the sight and evidence of our sanctification. The Assumption is proved thus. If God justifieth us (that is) de∣clareth, and pronounceth us to bee righteous, he doth then declare his owne righteousnesse, that he might be just; Then he doth not declare us to be righteous in Christ, upon the sight and evidence of our san∣ctification, which is a righteousnesse of our owne. But when God justifieth us, that is, first declareth us, and pronoun∣ceth us to be righteous, he doth de∣clare his owne righteousnesse; that he might be just.
Therefore he doth not first pro∣nounce and declare us righteous upon sight, and evidence of our sanctification, which is a righteous∣nesse of our owne. The proofe of the Proposition. It will not stand with the righte∣ousnesse of God to declare and pro∣nounce a man just, upon the sight of such an imperfect righteousnesse, as our best sanctification is: And there∣fore when God declareth, and pro∣nounceth us righteous; He doth it not upon any sight of any sanctifica∣tion, or righteousnesse of ours: But onely upon the sight of the perfect righteousnesse of Christ imputed unto us. The proofe of the Assumption. That when God justifieth us (that is, when he first declareth, and pro∣nounceth us to be righteous) he doth declare his own righteousnesse, that he might be just, as Paul speaketh, Rom. 3. 26. and the justifier of him, which beleeveth on Jesus.
And it is the speech of David, that when God declareth himselfe to bee just; hee declareth onely the sinnefulnesse of the Creature, Psal. 51. 4. The third Argument. If the promise be made sure of God unto faith out of grace; Then it is not first made sure to faith out of works. But the promise is made sure of God to faith out of grace, Rom. 4. 5. to him that worketh not, but belee∣veth on him, that justifieth the un∣godly, his faith is accounted for righteousnesse. Therefore the promise is not made sure to faith out of works. From the opposition of Grace, and Works, Rom. 11. 6 Aud if by grace then it is no more of workes; otherwise grace is no more grace. The opposition standeth not one∣ly betweene grace and workes, but beweene grace and the merits of works; now no man ascribeth the
assurance of faith in the promise to the merits of works. Answ.The opposition standeth not only betweene grace and the merits of works: but between grace and the debt due to workes; For so the A∣postle Paul expresseth it, Rom. 4. 4. Now to him that worketh is the reward not reckoned of graco, but of debt. If the assurance of faith of our justification, doe spring from sight of sanctification, it is by right of some promise made unto such a worke, and the right which a man hath by promise to a worke, maketh the assurance of the pro∣mise, but debt unto him: and then the promise is not sure unto him out of grace. The fourth Argument. If when the Lord declareth him∣selfe pacified toward us, he utterly shames us, and confounds us, in the sight and sense of our unworthy∣nesse, and unrighteousnesse; then he doth not give unto us our first assu∣rance
of the faith of our justifica∣tion, upon the sight and sense of sanctification. But when the Lord declareth himself pacified towards us, he doth utterly ashame us, and confound us, in the sight and sense of our unwor∣thynesse, and unrighteousnesse. Therefore he doth not first give us assurance of the faith of our ju∣stification, upon the sight and sense of our sanctification. The consequence is plaine from the Law of Contraries: For, if the Lord shame us with a sight and sense of sinne; hee doth not then, first comfort and incourage us, with the sight and sense of sanctificati∣on. Minor is proved, Ezek. 16. 63. Rom. 4. 5. Ezek. 16. 63. That thou maist re∣member and bee confounded, and never open thy mouth any more because of thy shame; when I am pacified toward thee, for all that thou hast done, saith the Lord God.
Rom 4. 5. To him that worketh not, but beleeveth on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is accounted for righteousnesse. The fift Argument. When sanctification is not evi∣dent, it cannot be an evidence of ju∣stification. But when Justification is hidden, and doubtfull, Sanctification is not evident. Therefore Sanctification cannot be our first evidence of Justification. Minor. When Faith is hidden and doubt∣full, Sanctification is not evident: But when Justification is hidden and doubtfull, Faith is hidden and doubtfull. Therefore when Justification is hidden and doubtfull, Sanctificati∣on is not evident. The first proofe of the Major. If Faith be the evidence of things not seene, then when Faith it selfe is hidden and doubtfull, which ma∣keth
all things evident, what can be cleare unto us. But Faith is the evidence of things not seene, Hebr. 11. 1. Therefore when Faith it selfe is hidden and doubtfull, Sanctificati∣on cannot be evident. The second proofe of the Major. If no Sanctification be true and sin∣cere, but when it is wrought in faith: then neither can it be evident. But when it evidently appeareth to bee wrought in Faith: Therefore when Faith is hidden, and doubtfull, San∣ctification cannot be evident. But no Sanctification is pure and sincere, but when it is wrought in Faith: nor cannot be evident, but when it evidently appeareth to bee wrought in Faith. Therefore when Faith is hidden and doubtfull, Sanctification can∣not be evident. The sixth Argumont. Such a Faith as a practicall Sillo∣gisme can make, is not a Faith
wrought by the Lords Almighty power: For though Sillogismus i∣em facit; yet such a faith is but an umane faith; because the Conclusi∣on followeth but from the strength of reasonings, or reason; not from the power of God, by which alone Divine things are wrought, Ephes. . 19. 20. Col. 2. 20. But the Faith which is wrought by a word, and a worke, and the light of a renewed Conscience with∣out the witnesse of the spirit; and efore it, is such a Faith as a practi∣all Sillogisme can make. Therefore such a Faith as is wrought y a word, and a worke, or by the ight of a renewed Con∣cience, without the witnesse of the Spirit, and efore it; is not a Faith wrought by the Lords Almighty ower. The proofe of the Minor. From the condition of all these hree; the Word, the Work, and the ight of a renewed Conscience; they
are all but created blessings, and gifts. Thereore cannot produce of themselves a word of Almighty power. Because the Word with∣out the Almighty power of the Spi∣rit is but a dead Letter; and the Work hath no more power then the Word; nor so much neither. For Faith co∣meth rather by hearing of a Word▪ then by seeing of a Worke, Rom. 10. 17. And the light of a renewed Conscience, is a created gift of spiri∣tuall knowledge in the conscience. Object. 1. 1 Iohn 2. . Hereby we know that wee know him, that we keepe his Commande∣ments. 1. John. 3. 14. Wee know wee have passed from death to life, because we love the Brethren. Vers. 19. Here∣by we know we are of the . Answ. 1.No better Answer need to be ex∣pected then what Calvin hath given in the exposition of these Scrip∣tures; who thus expoundeth them. Though every beleever hath the testimony of his Faith from his Workes, yet that commeth in
a posteriori probatione, a latter, or, se∣condary proofe, instead of a signe. Therefore the assurance of Faith (saith hee) doth wholly reside in the grace of Christ; and we must alwaies, saith he, remember, that it is not from our love to the Bre∣thren, that we have the knowledge of our estate, which the Apostle speaketh of, as if from thence were fetched the assurance of sal∣vation. For surely wee doe not know by any other meanes, that we are the Children of God: but because hee sealeth unto our heart by his Spirit, our adoption of us out of free-grace: and we by faith receive the assured pledge of him▪ given in Christs love. Therefore as an addition, or inferiour helpe, for a prop unto faith, not for a foundati∣on to leane on. Answ. 2. Certaine it is, that those which ohn writ unto, were three sorts of en: Old men, Young men, and Babes: et there was none of them but
did know their good estate, by the knowledge of the Father; before they knew their good estat by their brotherly love: For even of Babe (he saith) they knew the Father, 1 Ioh 2. 13. And therefore by the rule o relation, they knew their Son-ship and adoption: And if it should be asked, how they knew it; John tel∣leth, By the unction they had receive from Christ, Ioh. 2. 27. that is, b the spirit it selfe, which taught them t know all things; which no crea∣ted gifts of Sanctification could doe. Even in nature, children do not first come to know their parents either by their lov to their brethren or by their obedience to their pa∣rents; but from their parents love descending on them: So we loved him because he first loved us, 1 Iohn 4. 19▪ Herein is love, not that we loved God, bu that he loved us, and sent his Son to bee propitiation for er sins, 1 Ioh. 4. 10. Object. If Iohn could give sanctification fo an evidence of adoption, to such a
knew their good estate before by the witnesse of the Spirit; this were but to light a Candle unto the Sunne? Answ. 1.Whether were it more absurd to light a Candle unto the Sunne, or to light a Candle to see to a mans eyes; Now faith is instead of eyes unto the soule: By Faith Abraham saw the day of Christ, and rejoyced, hough it were a farre off, Ioh. 8. 56: Answ. 2. The same Apostle saith, that here bee six Witnesses that give ight and evidence unto our spiri∣uall life in Christ: of which three e in heaven, and three on the earth; nd the Spirit in both: yet he did ot thinke it a vaine thing to give he water of Baptisme, (as out of he death and resurrection of Christ we receive the power to walk in new∣esse of life, Rom. 6. 3. 4.) as a witnesse fter foure of the greater lights. Answ. 3. If you take Sanctification for a reated gift, it is indeed but a Can∣dle to the Sunne. But when John aketh it, but to confirme faith, he
meaneth then, the Spirit of God beareth witnesse in it: or else the testimony of sanctification, though it be a divine gift or work, yet it would not give a divine testimony, nor increase divine faith; for the heavens and earth are divine and supernaturall works, yet they doe not give divine testimony of the Godhead, unlesse the Spirit of God himself doe beare witnesse in them. Therefore John giving sanctifi∣cation for an evidence of a good e∣state, to such as already knew it, by the witnesse of the Spirit, is not a lighting of a candle to the Sunne; but as the setting up of another win∣dow, though a lesser, to convay the same Sun light into the house ano∣ther way. Object. 2. In 2 Pet. chap. 1. from verse 5. to 10. the Apostle exhorteth us, by adding one gift of sanctification to another, to make our calling and ele∣ction sure. Answ. Let Calvin answer for me: This
assurance (saith hee) whereof Peter speaketh, by adding grace to grace, is not in my judgement to be re∣ferred unto conscience, as if the faithfull did thereby before God know themselves called, and cho∣sen; but if any man will understand it, of making of it sure before men, there will be no absudity in this sense: Neverthelesse it might be extended further, that every one may be confirmed in their calling; by their godly and holy life. But that is a proofe, not from he cause; but from a signe, and effect. Object. 3. There be many conditionall pro∣mises in the Gospel, which are made to the gifts and duties of sanctifica∣tion; which are all in vaine, if poore drooping soules, finding such gifts, and duties of sanctification in them∣selves, may not take comfort from them, according to the promise. Answ. 1. The conditionall promises are made to poore drooping soules, no in respect of such conditions, or as
they are qualified with such gifts and duties of sanctification; but in respect of their union with Christ, to whom the promises belong, Gal. 3. 26, 28, 29. The fruits of such an union with Christ, such duties and gifts of sanctification be, when they be sincere: otherwise, if the pro∣mises were made to such soules, in respect of such conditions, then the reward promised would belong un∣to them, not of grace, but of debt, Rom. 4. 4. A promise made to any condition, after it be made, it be∣cometh due debt to him, in whom∣soever such condition is to be found: But therefore that such promises might be of grace, they are made to us, not as wee are indued with such and such conditions; but as wee who have such and such con∣ditions are united unto Christ. Whence it is, that such blessings of∣fered in such promises, as they are tendered to us in Christ, so are they fulfilled to us in Christ. Where∣upon,
we look for the blessing, not in our gifts and duties; but in going still unto Christ, for a clearer and fuller manifestation of him to us, and of comfort in him. As for ex∣ample, A thirsty soule, to whom promise is made that hee shall be satisfied; hee looketh not present∣ly to be satisfied from his thirsting, nor from any right his thirsting might give him in the promise; but hee looketh to be satisfied by going unto Christ, in drinking more a∣bundantly of him by his Spirit, as Christ himself directeth such droop∣ing soules to doe: and so we are to make use of such kind of promises; Joh. 7. 37, 38, 39. Answ. 2. No man can see his gifts and du∣ties of sanctification in himselfe, but hee must first have seen Christ by faith, the Spirit of Christ enligh∣tening his understanding in the knowledge of him. As in case of mourning, to which many promi∣ses are made, No man can (with E∣vangelicall
repentance) mourne o∣ver Christ, and for himselfe, untill the Spirit work faith; and by faith beholding Christ, hee hath seen him crucified, and by him, Zech. 12. 10. So then these conditions, and the promises made to them, doe not give us our first sight of Christ, nor the first glymyse of light and comfort from him; but rather our sight of Christ, and some glympses of light and comfort from him, doth beget such conditions in us. Answ. 3. Such conditionall promises are not in vain, though poore drooping soules have found no comfort by them, and though they cannot suck present comfort from them, and from their good conditions accor∣dingly to them. Reas. 1.Because these promises being dis∣cerned in a Covenant of free-grace made in Christ, by them doe work (if they were not wrought before) or at least confirme such conditions in the soule. As when God pro∣mised
them to send a Redeemer out of Sion, unto them which turne from transgression in Jacob, Isai. 59. 20. the Apostle expoundeth it, That Christ shall come out of Sion, and shall turne away transgression from Jacob: which is as much as if hee should say, He shall work that condition which the promise was made unto. And this the Apostle maketh to be the meaning, and the blessing of the pro∣mise, according to the Covenant of grace, Rom. 11. 26, 27. Reas. 2. The promises are not in vain to such soules, in whom such good conditions are wrought; because they direct them where they may find comfort, and satisfying to their hearts desire: to wit, not by clearing their good conditions in them∣selves; but by coming unto Christ, and drinking a more full draught of his Spirit; as Christ directeth thirsty soules to doe, Joh. 7. 37. If any man thirst, let him come to me, and drink. V. 38. Hee that beleeveth on me, (as
the Scripture saith) out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. V. 39. But this hee spake of the Spirit, that they which beleeve on him, shall receive. Object.But why may not the holy Spi∣rit breathe his first comforts into our soules, even on such conditi∣ons? Is not this to limit the Spirit, who is free, and bloweth where hee listeth? Joh. 3. 8. Answ. He doth not breathe his first com∣forts in such conditions, because he listeth not: it is not his good plea∣sure to give us our first comfort (which is the comfort of our Justifi∣cation) from our owne righteous∣nesse, before hee give us comfort in the righteousnesse of Christ. The holy Spirit in all his dispensa∣tions to us ward, delighteth to re∣ceive all from Christ, rather then from us; that so hee might glorifie Christ in us. The Comforter whom I shall send to you, hee shall glorifie me; for hee shall receive of mine, and shew it unto you, Joh. 16. 14. Nor will he
so much dishonour the righteous∣nesse and grace of the Father of glo∣ry, as first, to pronounce and de∣clare us justified in the sight of our owne righteousnesse. Object. 4. In Mat. 7. from verse 16. to 20. The tree is knowne by his fruit. Answ. True, to others; but not unto himselfe. If a tree could know it selfe, it would first come to know it selfe, by seeing upon what root it grew, before it came to see what fruit it did beare; Joh. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Object. 5. But this Doctrine is new, it is not ancient, nor gray-headed. Answ. The Doctrines of the Covenant of free-grace are ever new; because they are the Doctrines of the New∣Covenant, which can never waxe old: should it once waxe old, it would soone vanish away, Heb. 8. from vers. 8. to 13. though it be as ancient as Abraham, yea, as Adam; for hee had his first comfort and as∣surance, in an absolute promise of
free-grace, Gen. 3. 15. yet it hath e∣ver seemed new in every age. Augustines Doctrine of Con∣version, that is of grace, and not of free-will. Luthers Doctrine of Justification, that is of faith, not of works. Calvins Doctrine of Predestinati∣on, that is of grace, not of faith and works fore-seen: were all of them thought new Doctrines in their times; and yet all of them the anci∣ent truths of the everlasting Cove∣nant of grace. And surely, for this Doctrine in hand, Calvin is as clear, as my hearts desire to God is wee all might be; his words have been partly rehear∣fed before, in the answer of some Objections; and partly in my large Answer to your Reply. Bellarmine taketh it to be the gene∣rall Doctrine of the Lutherans, That, Assurance of faith goeth before works, and doth not follow after, Institnt. lib. 3. cap. 9. And Pareus in
answer unto him, saith, That though there be an assurance that followeth good works, yet the for∣mer assurance from the witnesse of the Spirit goeth before. And seeing they that are the chief Reformers of the Protestant Assem∣blies, doe generally make sanctifica∣tion a fruit of faith, and doe define faith to be, A speciall assurance of mercy in Christ; it must needs be out of controversie their judgement, That a man receiveth his first assu∣rance, not from his sanctification, which they make to be an effect flowing from it; but from an high∣er principle, even from the grace of the Father, and the righteous∣nesse of the Sonne, the Lord Jesus Christ; and witnessed by the holy Spirit. Bilney, in the Book of Martyrs, in his Epistle to B. Tustall, relating the manner of his conversion, pro∣ested, That when hee had wearied himself in many superstitious works
of fasting, and Popish pennance, hee received at last his first assurance, from that place in Timothy, 1 Tim. 1. 15. hee calleth it a most sweet word unto him, This is a true saying, and worthy of all men to be received, Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am the chiefe. A word from an absolute promise, set home unto him by the oly Spirit, without respect of any sanctificati∣on formerly wrought or seene in him. Alas, how farre are they mista∣ken, that thinke the contrary Do∣ctrine hath beene sealed with the bloud of Martyrs? Zancheus his judgement, though he was a godly and an eminent lear∣ned man, yet I would not have na∣med him, but that Mr. Perkins high∣ly approved his discourse, and tran∣slated it, as a choyce piece, into his owne Volume, which maketh it ob∣vious to every godly Reader, that studieth Perkins learned Workes;
Page 429. the first testimony, saith Zanchey▪ and Porius, for him; by which God assureth us of our ele∣ction, is that inward testimony of the Spirit, of which the Apostle Paul speaketh, Rom. 8. 16. The Spi∣rit witnesseth to our spirits, that wee are the sonnes of God; And afterward comming to give some direction how a man may know, whether this testimony be true, and proceedeth from the holy Spirit, or no. Hee answereth, Page 433. three waies. First, A man may know it, first, by the perswasion it selfe. Secondly, By the manner of its perswasion. Thirdly, By the effects. For the first, the holy Spirit doth not simply say it, but doth perswade with us; that we are the sonnes of God: And no flesh can doe it a∣gaine. By reasons drawne not from our
worke, or from any worthinesse in us; but from the alone goodnesse of God the Father, and the grace of Christ freely bestowed, and in this manner the Devill will never per∣swade any man. The perswasion of the holy Spi∣rit is full of power; for they which are perswaded that they are the sons of God, cannot, but must needs call him Father, and in regard of love to him do hate sinne; and on the contra∣ry, they have a sound hearty desire to do his Word and Will revealed. Answ. 2. For the second Answer to the im∣putation of Novelty; Either (saith John Cotton) I am exceedingly de∣ceived, or it justly falleth upon the contrary Doctrine, and they are much mistaken that think other∣wise; I never read it to my best re∣membrance, in any Author olde o new: that ever a man received his first evidence of the faith of his Ju∣stification, from his Sanctification▪ unlesse it be one, (whom I met with
within these two dayes) Printed within these two yeares, that main∣taineth our first comfort of Justi∣fication from Sanctification. But enerally all our English Orthodox Teachers doe oppose it. Amongst the English Teachers one, for ought I know, did more dvance the Doctrine of Marks and ignes, then Master Nicholas Byfield, d yet he himselfe professeth, that umane reason cannot beleeve such reat things from God, from any ing that is in us: But onely be∣use we having the Word of God suring such happinesse unto such lay hold upon the promises con∣ined in it. So that it is that which eedeth Faith, or as he calleth it, e perswasion of our good estates∣et notwithstanding, saith he, the surance of Faith is much increased, d confirmed by Signes; the for∣er part of which speech, touch∣g the first begettings of the assu∣nce of Faith, consenteth with me;
the latter, concerning the increasing and confirming of the assurance argueth plainely his consent, thu farre also, that he meant not that th assurance of the Faith of Justifica¦tion should spring from Sanctifica¦tion: But when he would have th assurance of Faith to bee increase and confirmed by the light Signes, I would not refuse it; by the assurance of Faith, h meanes onely assurance of Know¦ledge; or if he meaneth onely a¦surance of Faith, properly so ca¦led, I would then put in this ca¦tion. That then the Spirit of Go himfelfe had need, by his owne t¦stimony, to reveale our justificat¦on unto us, and Gods free grace accepting us in Christ: or else it not Word, nor Worke, nor t light of a renewed conscience, th can increase, or confirme, the ass¦rance of Faith of our Justificatio▪ But only the manifestation of Go
Free-grace, in a Divine testimony, atified by his owne good Spirit. The third Question is concerning the activenesse of Faith: The Controversie is Quest. 3.WHether Faith concurre as an active instrumentall cause to ur Justification? In the explicating of it, I must rst speake what it is that justifieth ee. First, we doe beleeve, that in our ffectuall calling, God draweth us to nion with Christ, Ioh. 6. 44. Shed¦ing abroad his Spirit in our hearts, Rom. 5. 5. And working Faith in us receive Christ, Ioh. 1. 12. 13. And live by Faith upon him, Gal. 2. 20. Secondly, we are no sooner alive inChrist, but we are accounted of God s his adopted children in Christ, Gal. . 26. Ephes. 1. 5. and so are made
heires of righteousnesse, Galat. 3. 29. God imputing the righteousnesse of his Sonne Jesus to us for our justification, Rom. 4. 23. 24. 25. As we were no sooner alive in the first Adam, but we became his chil∣dren, and heires of his transgressi∣on; God imputing the guilt of it to our condemnation. Now in this we all consent; that in receiving the gift of Faith we are meerely passive. But yet a double Question heere ariseth. Quest. 1. Whether in receiving of Chris (or the Spirit, who commeth into our hearts in his name) we be meer∣ly passive? Quest. 2. Whether our Faith bee active to lay hold upon the righteousnesse o Christ,before the Lord doe firs impute the righteousnesse of Christ unto us. Our Reasons are. Reas. 1. If it be the spirit of Grace she abroad in our hearts, that doth be
get Faith in us: then if wee were Passive in receiving Faith, wee are much more passive in receiving Christ, or the Spirit of Christ, that begetteth Faith: for if we have no life to be Active untill Faith come; we have much lesse life to be Active before the Cause, and root of Faith come. But it is the spirit of Grace, shed abroad in our hearts, that begetteth Faith in us, Zech. 12. 10. Therefore if we be Passive in re∣ceiving Faith; we are much more Passive, in receiving the spirit that begetteth Faith. Reas. 2. If we bee active in laying hold on Christ, before he hath given us his Spirit: then we apprehend him, before he apprehend us: then wee should doe a good act, and so bring forth good fruites, before wee be∣come good trees; yea, and bee good trees before we be in Christ. But these are all contrary to the Gospell, Philip. 3. 12. 13. Matth.
7. 18. Iohn 15. 4. 5. Therefore wee bee not active in laying hold on Christ, before hee he hath given us his Spirit. Whether our Faith bee active to lay hold upon Christ for his righ∣teousnesse,Quest. 2. before the Lord do first impute the righteousnesse of Christ to us; we conceive no. For these Reasons. If the sinne of Adam were impu∣ted unto us for our condemnation,Reason 1. assoone as we were alive by naturall life before we had done any act of life, good or evill: then the righ∣teousnesse of Jesus Christ is imputed unto us to our Justification, as soon as we be alive unto God by Faith, before wee have done any act of Faith. But the former is plaine, Rom. 5. 18. 19. Therefore the latter also. Reas. 2. If our Faith be first active, to lay hold upon Christ for his righteous∣nesse, before God imputeth it unto
us; Then wee take Christs righte∣ousnesse to our selves, before it bee given unto us. But that wee cannot doe, for in the order of nature, giving is the cause of taking; unlesse wee take a thing by stealth. Reas. 3. If our Faith be first active in lay∣ing hold on Christ for his righte∣nesse, before God impute it unto us; then we doe justifie God, before he doth justifie us. For hee receiveth the testimony which God hath given of his Son: that God hath given us life in his Sonne, he hath set to his seale that God is true, Iohn 3. 33. And so he which justifieth God, as others that doe not receive the testimony, con∣demne God of lying, 1 Ioh. 5. 10. But we cannot Justifie God be∣fore he justie us; no more then we can love him before hee first loved us, 1 Ioh. 4. 19. Reas. 4. If our Faith be first active to lay hold on Christ for his righteousnes,
before God impute his righteousnes unto us: Then wee are righteous men to act, and worke out our own righteousnesse, before we be righ∣teous, by the imputed righteousnes of Christ. But we be to our best acts and workes of righteousnesse, unrighte∣ous, till our sinnes bee pardoned, which is not untill the righteous∣nesse of Christ be imputed to us. Reason 5. In the order of nature, the object is before the act that is conversant a∣bout it: Therefore it is in the order of nature, before the act of our Faith. Object. 1. To beleeve on the name of Christ is an act of Faith; To beleeve on the name of Christ, is to receive Christ, Iohn 1. 12. Therefore the receiving of Christ is by an act of Faith. Answ. The place in Iohn, upon which the weight of this Argument lieth, saith no more, but that they which received Christ in the second Aorist
in the time past, doe beleeve on his name in the time present. Which we willingly grant; that they who re∣ceive Christ, their faith becommeth active through him to beleeve in his name, that so they might receive him, and his righteousnesse. Object. 2. We are justified by Faith, Rom. 3. 28. Answ. When we are said to bee justifi∣ed by Faith; It is by the righte∣ousnesse of Christ imputed unto us. Object. 3. Abrahams To credere, his act of be∣leeving,was imputed unto him for righteousnesse, Rom 4. 3. Answ. It is taken generally amongst the Learned, for a singular opinion of Master Wotton, that To credere, the act of beleeving should be imputed for rigteousnesse. For, indeed, the act of beleeving is neither a righteousnesse according unto the Law; For the Law is per∣fect, Psal. 19. 7. Nor a righteous∣nesse according unto the Gospell; For the act of beleeving is an act
of our owne, though given of grace: But the righteousnesse of the Gospell is not an act of our own And therefore Paul desireth that he may be found in Christ, not having his owne righteousnesse which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the righteousnesse which is of God by faith, Phil. 3. 9. to wit, the righteousnesse of Christ imputed. Object. 4. But this Doctrine is opposite un∣to the streame of all the Learned; a passive Faith is not heard of a∣mongst men, and they doe gene∣nerally make Faith an instrumen∣tall cause of their Justification. Answ. A passive Faith is rarely hard of out of my mouth, but yet the thing meant by it, is never rare in the wri∣tings of the learned, nor sometimes the word passive Faith. Two things are meant by the word of Faith, and may be said to be passive in our Justification, in a double respect. Because a habite of Faith may be
called passive, before it putteth forth any act, and we are justified assoone as by an habit of faith we are alive in Christ; in the first moment of our conversion, before Faith hath put forth any act: as we were all guilty of Adams sinne, before we were a∣ctive to reach forth any consent un∣to it. Faith may be said to bee passive in our justification, because it doth not lay hold on Christ, to fetch Justi∣fication from him, till Christ have first laid hold on us, and imputed his righteousnesse to us; and declared it unto us by his Spirit, in a free pro∣mise of Grace: And then Faith be∣commeth active, actually to receive Christs righteousnesse; and actually to beleeve on it, either by way of de∣pendance, or assurance. For the truth is, seengi wee are not justified, neither as it is a gift in us; nor as it is an acting and wor∣king from us; but in regard of his object, the righteousnesse of Christ
whch it receiveth. Therefore which way soever Faith may receive Christ first or last, by the same way we may be justifi∣ed by it. Now Faith of it selfe, even the habit of Faith is an emptying grace, and so is as an empty vessell, fit to receive Christ and his righteousnes. And both the act of Faith, whe∣ther of dependance on Christ, or of our assrance in Christ, carrieth us out of our selves unto him, and so maketh us fit to receive Christ, and his righteousnesse. Thus I have explained what I meane by a passive Faith. Let me shew you, that neither the Word, nor the naming of it, is an untruth from our best learned men of eminent worth for parts and abilities. Calvine in his Institutions, Lib. 3. cap. 3. Sect. 5. Quoad Justificationem. Ursinus in his Catechisme, Quest. 60, Sect. 5. Potius Deum primum.
Chemierius de fide, lib. 13. Chap. 6. Verissimum esse duo. Doctor Amesius in Medullam Theo∣logiae, lib. 1. Cap. 26. Recepti Christi. Paul Banes on the Ephesians 2. Vivificant. He quicken us, since he acknowledge a passive receiving of Christ, he must acknowledge a pas∣sive Faith: for there is no receiving of Christ, but by Faith. In a Booke of choice English Ser∣mons, that goeth under the name of Doctor Sybbs, and our Brother Hoo∣ker, and master Davenport, there one stiled the Witnesse of Salva∣tion, on Rom. 8. 15. 16. where in Page 135. are these words: In Ju∣stification, Faith is a sufferer onely; But in Sanctification, it worketh, and purgeth the whole man. As for our Learned men that doe generally make Faith an in∣strumentall cause of their Justifica∣ion. I confesse it is true; But I doe not understand them (as Che∣nerius doth in the like case) to
meane no other kinde of causa; then Cause sine qua non, or, Causa remo∣vens, or prohibens. For Faith kee∣peth the Soule empty of confidence in it selfe, and maketh a way for the receiving of the righteousnesse of Christ. Even as the poore▪ Widdowes empty vessells made a way for the receiving the oye out of the Cruse; whereas the ful∣nesse of the Vessell caused the stay. The good Lord empty us more and more of our selves, that wee may be filled with him, Out of whose fulnesse wee receive grace for grace, John 1. 16. Gloria sit soli Deo.
Twelve Reasons laid down against prescribed and stinted Formes of Prayers or Prayses. Reas. 1. BEcause it is against Gods glory, in stinting unto him such a dai∣ly measure of Service (consisting of Prayer or Praise) and so hindering the spirituall petitions and phrases, that otherwise would be, if Gods good gifts were used. It is against the dignity of Christ, which hath qualified his Saints with a proportionable measure of the gifts of the Spirit, for Prayer or Praise, 1 Cor. 14. 15, 16. in making their gifts needlesse and uselesse, when they can serve themselves with Books, and Formes, without them. It quencheth the gifts of the ho∣ly
Spirit; because it hath no spiri∣tuall imployment for Prayer nor Praise in his spirituall house, 1 Pet. 2. 5. God is so jealous of his glory, that hee cannot endure his worship should be corrupted with the least mixture of man: Nadab and Abihu, for offering with strange fire which God commanded them not, were destroyed with fire from the Lord, Levit. 10. 1, 2. Vzzah, for touching the Ark con∣trary to the order of the God of Is∣rael, was smitten dead, and Israel had a breach made amongst them, 1 Chron. 13. 9, 10, 11. compared with 1 Chron. 15. 12, 13. Jeroboam devised worship at Dan and Bethel, though hee pretended by it to worship the true God, and advance the worship of Jehovah; yet hee worshipped nothing but the Devils, and Calves that hee made, 2 Chron. 11. 15. And it became a sinne to Jeroboam and his house, to
destroy it root and branch, and all the Kings that countenanced and upheld it; 1 Kin. 13. 34. 2 Kin. 17. 21, 22, 23. But such as feared the Lord amongst them, both Levites and Priests, left their Cities, and possession; and of the people, such as set their heart to seeke the Lord God of Israel, came to Jerusalem: So Jeroboams Kingdome weakned; but Rehoboam, that gave liberty of conscience to worship the true God, strengthened; 2 Chron. 11. 16, 17. Now, was God so jealous of his glory under the Law, that hee that inned against that worship which God by Moses prescribed, hee died without mercy? how much seve∣rer punishment are they worthy of, that sinne against the Sonnes autho∣rity, seeing hee is Lord of the spiri∣uall house, whose house are wee, Heb. . 6. And the heavenly Father com∣mandeth us to heare him, Mat. 17. 5. and that in all things, or our soules must perish, Acts 3. 22, 23? Now, if
we worship God in prayer or praise▪ or any other way, by any innova∣tion or invention of man, let us heare what our Prophet Jesus saith In vaine yee worship me, teaching f Doctrines the Commandements of me Esay 29. 13, 14. Mar. 7 6, 7, 8. An however it may seeme glorious our eyes, yet God hath set th stigma on it, That it is a vai worship. I cannot worship God in a stinte forme of worship, in prayer, a praise, and the like, lest I make selfe guilty of the bloud of Christ. Christ by his death hath free me from the whole Ceremonia Law, so that if I consent to rea againe what Christ by his dea hath abolished, I crucifie Chris make my selfe gailty of his blou and as much as in me lieth, exp him out of the Nation. Now, the Ceremoniall Law h his constitution in Israel, either fro Moses, or from God: Not from
for hee was a servant in his ouse, and hee did nothing in the Tabernacle, nor about it, but what God shewed him, Exod. 25. 4. Acts . 44. But the Ceremoniall Law his originall law from God: Now, if the death of Christ were f that power, to put an end to the hole Ceremoniall prescribed orship, so that whosoever should are it again should crucifie Christ, nd make us guilty of his bloud, &c. hen, that death of Christ is of rce, to put an end to mans Cere∣noniall Worship: But the first is true; Ergo, the ter. Object. The Consequence is denyed. Answ. That power which can disanull e greater, must needs disanull the er; if the death of Christ put an to the heavenly Fathers Cere∣oniall Worship, and in prayer and aise, at, or before the Ark, or in e Temple; then it will put an nd to all mans devised Worship,
unlesse you will advance the autho∣rity of man above God the Father. Col. 2. 20, 21, 22, 23. If Christ by his death hath freed us from the rudiments of the world, the Mo∣saicall Ceremonies, why living in the world are wee intangled with ordinances, after the doctrine, tra∣ditions, and commandements o men? Object. But they are set up for the glory of God. Answ. Not I, but Paul shall answer fom me; They have a shew of wisdome, i will-worship; but it is onely a shew there is no substance in it. Wee harden the obstinate Papist in their superstition; for they say and that truly, Wee received mo of our formes of prayer and prai from them. Wee rob the Spirit of his glory who is given to Saints to form prayer and praise in them, 1 Cor. 1. 15, 16. Rom 8. 26. Gal. 4. 6. Wee impose a burthen upon
conscience to be practised, which God hath left arbitrary, to be used according to our necessities; If we be afflicted, then pray; if wee have tasted how bountifull the Lord hath been to us in blessings, then let us praise him; Jam. 5. 13. If wee frequent devised formes of Worship in prayer or praise, we shall lay a stumbling block before a weak brother, and cause him to fall. Woe be to them that follow the way of Balaam, who taught Balackto cast a stumbling block before the chil∣dren of Israel, Revel. 2. 14. Jud. v. 11. Now offences must come, but woe unto the men by whom they come: It were better for me, that a milstone were hang∣ed about my neck, and that I were cast into the sea, then that I should offend one of these little ones, Luk. 17. 1, 2. If wee frequent devised formes of Worship in prayer or praise, we shall offend our consciences; (even so many of us as are Saints enlight∣ned, to behold the beauty of his
spirituall Worship, performed, or offered in his spirituall house, the Congregation of the faithfull uni∣ted;) Now if our consciences condemne us, God is greater then our consciences, and hee will condemne us also, 1 Joh. 3. 19. for he knoweth all things. Therefore I say to you (who blame us for not frequenting devised forms of Worship in prayer and praises) as Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego did to King Nebuchadnezzar, We are not carefull to answer you in this mat∣ter; Our God whom wee serve is able to deliver us out of your hand: But if he will not, be it known to you, we will not serve your gods; nor worship our God in that devised way that men set up, Dan. 3. 16, 17, 18. It one set form of spirituall Wor∣ship in prayer and praises had been needfull, Christ would have left one: But the Prophets, Christ, the Apostles, never prayed nor praised God by any set forme of Worship invented by man; but by the pow∣erfull
worke of the holy Spirit, Rom. 8. 26. Gal. 4. 6. A set forme of Worship prescri∣bed in prayer or praises, cannot in prayer expresse the severall neces∣sities of Gods people; for the more grace they have, the more they see their owne wants; and the more sensible they are of their owne in∣firmities, corruptions, and sinnes. Neither can it in praises expresse the manifold experiences that the Saints daily observe of Gods mercifull dealing with them: Therefore a set Forme of prayer or praises to Gods Saints, and faithfull ones, principled with a spirit of prayer and praise, it is altogether unusefull; 1 Cor. 14. 15, 16. Soli Deo honor & gloria FINIS.
A DESCRIPTION OF THE Spirituall TEMPLE: OR THE SPOUSE Prepared for the LAMBE, The LORD JESUS. Written by FRANCIS CORNWEL, a Minister and Servant of Jesus, the Christ, for the benefit of poore distressed conscences, in City and Countrey. LONDON, Printed by John Dawson. 1646.
TO THE HONOVRABLE, and the true lover of all consci∣entious Covenantours, that stand up for a through Reformation, according to the word of our good God, in England, and Ireland, CORNELIUS HOLLAND Esquire, a Member of the House of Commons Assembled in Parliament. SIR, DAvid describeth the godly man, by his pleasure, and by his paines: First, the plea∣sure of the godly man, in these words:Psal. 1. 2. He delighteth in the Law of the Lord. Secondly, the paines of the godly man: And in that Law he me∣ditateth day and night; not only in the day appointed for man to labour in, but in the night also appointed for man to rest: the reason is, because it is his meat and drinke, to doe the will of his God. (Honoured Sir) The Word of Christ being the Rule
of Englands Reformation; the good Lord (that writeth his Lawes in his peo∣ples hearts, according to his new Cove∣nant of Grace: Heb. 8. 10.) put it into my minde, seriously to consider, What Schisme was, that I had covenanted a∣gainst. And searching the Scriptures, I found it thus written, 1. Tim. 6. 3. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to the wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ; and to the Doctrine which is according to godlinesse. Vers. 4. He is proud, knowing nothing; but doting about Questions, and strife of words; whereof commeth envy, strife, raylings, evill surmisings. Vers. 5. Perverse dis∣putings of men of corrupt mindes, and de∣stitute of the truth; supposing that gaine is godlinesse; from such withdraw thy self. Yea, and after a further enquiry, to under∣stand aright the things that are controver∣ted amongst us; by the good providence of the Almighty, I found two Texts of ho∣ly Scripture, setting forth two sorts of men, Diametrally opposing one another, as light doth darkenesse, truth doth false∣hood; the one ths written: 1 John 5. 1. Whosoever beleeveth that Jesus is the Christ, is borne of God. And the other, thus; 1 John 2. 22. Who is a lyar, but he
that denyeth that Jesus is not the Christ, He is Antichrist, that denyeth the Father and the Sonne. And when I thought to understand the difference, it was to hard for me, untill I went into the Sanctuary of God; where the Father of glory, of his good pleasure, revealed to me (the most unworthyest of all his servants) the truth of that; which (I conceive) is the root of all our Controversies, and gave me to understand the meaning of the Scriptures, 1 John 5. 1. Whosoever beleeveth that Je∣sus is the Christ, viz. the eternall King, Prophet, Priest of the Church of the new Testament, ratified with his bloud, whom the Father of glory hath exalted to bee Lord and Christ, Acts 2. 36. and head, Ephes. 2. 20, 21, 22, 23. Is borne of God. Seeing no man can say, (that is confest) that Jesus is the Lord but by the holy Spi∣rit, 1 Cor. 12. 3. Hence I find it written, Joh. 1. 11. Jesus came to his owne, but his owne received him not, that is, for the Christ, that Mes∣siah which was to come: but onely for the Carpenters sonne; Matth. 13. 58. The reason was, because none could understand that Mystery: but they onely to whom the Father of heaven revealed it, Matth. 11. 14. Hence, when Jesus demanded of his
Disciples? Whom doe men say that I the Sonne of Man am? Peter answereth, thou art the Christ, the Sonne of the li∣ving God: Jesus answereth, Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Jona; for flesh and blood hatb not revealed this unto thee; but my Father in heaven. And thou art Peter, and upon this Rock (Jesus the Christ, whom thou hast confessed) I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not pre∣vail against it, Mat. 16. 16, 17, 18. Many for fear durst not in those dayes confesse Jesus to be the Christ: Instance the Parents of the blind man: Because the Jewes had a∣greed, that if any did confesse, that hee was the Christ; He should be put out of the Synagogue, John 9. 22. But so many as recived him (viz. to be the Christ) to them he gave power to be called the sons of God; even to them that beleeve in his name; which were borne not of bloud nor of the will of the flesh, nor of th will of man, But of God, John 1. 12, 13▪ And as for that other Text of the holy Scripture that doth universally oppose it the heavenly Father gave me thus to inter∣pret it: 1 John 2. 22. Who is a lyar (viz orne of the evill one, who is a lyar, and the father of lyes, and abode not in the truth, John 8. 14. But hee that denieth
that JESUS (whom hee confesseth dyed for his sinnes; and rose againe the third day, according to the Scrip∣tures) Is not the Christ, viz. the an∣nointed King and Prophet of his Church, in all his outward administrations and in∣stitutions, in admitting of Members into his spirituall Kingdome, according to his royall Commission, Matth. 28. 18, 19. Mark. 15. 15, 16. (though he acknow∣ledge him to be his eternall Priest that e∣ver liveth, to make intercession to God for him, Heb. 7. 25. He is that Antichrist (viz. an enemy and adversary to Jesus the Christ) that denieth the Father and the Sonne, He that denieth the Sonnes Authority, to bee the eternall King, and his Commission to bee in force, Matth. 28. 18, 19, 20. Mark. 15. 15, 16. and to be the eternall Prophet; and his word to be the eternall rule for Do∣ctrine and Gouernement; aswall as his eternall Priest to reconcile him to God Denieth the Father, that sanctified the Sonne, and sent him into the World, John 10. 36. and raised him from the dead, and exalted him to bee Lord and Christ, Acts 2. 36. Hence it is (my Honoured friend) First, that in all my writings, I have studied to exalt Jesus the Christ, it
being the Primitive. Faith once given to the Saints, Math. 16. 16. Secondly, to distinguish Jesus the Christ from all o∣thers named with the name of Jesus in Scripture Record: as Joshua is called Je∣sus, Hebr. 4. 8. &c. others. Thirdly, be∣cause I find the Scriptures giving that Ti∣tle to him in divers places. John confesseth, I am not the Christ, John 1. 20. The Woman of Samaria said, I know the Messiah commeth which is called the Christ, John 4. 25. Apollos mightily convinced the Jewes, shewing by the Scriptures, that Jesus was the Christ, Acts 18. 28. Now that I received from the Lord, I could not but make knowne to you, You being one of the tender hearted Loyall Covenanters, a Member of that High and Honourable Court, under whose shade Conscientious Covenantours (that contend for the faith of Jesus the Christ, once given to the Saints) find rest. Know (worthy Sir) that the depar∣ture from the faith of Jesus the Christ, is a cause of so many Schismes, and Here∣sies maintained in the earth. Disdaine not therefore to read a little Treatise, called the Difference betweene the Chri∣stian, and Antichristian Church, Deli∣niated
according to the Scripture Record, though the truth therein contained (like the Two witnesses, Revel. 11. 3.) have long mourned in Sackcloth: Yet if God give you an heart to receive it, It will be a Jewell surpassing all earthly Treasure. For if Iesus the Christ bee your Prophet to teach you, his heavenly Father will, Matth. 17. 5. Acts 3. 22. 23. He will then be your King to protect you, Matth 28. 20. Your Priest to intercede for you, Joh. 27. 20. Your Judge to acquit you, Joh. 12. 48. and if the love of Christ draw you to keepe all his Commandements (though in the world you meet with afliction for his sake; yet in Christ you shall find peace) for the Father, Son, and Spirit will dwell in your heart, and take it for the Sanctum Sanctorum, where they will abide to cheer and refresh you, Joh. 14. 23. And if you confesse, him in this world before men: He will confesse you before his Father, and pro∣claime it to your eternall peace and com∣fort, (Euge bone serve) Well done thou good and faithfull servant, enter into your Masters joy. Matth. 25. 21. Orpington in Kent▪ the tenth Moneth, the first day, 1645. Yours, who contendeth for the faith of Jesus the Christ. FRANCIS CORNWELL
To all loyall Covenan∣ters, contending for the Faith of JESUS the CHRIST, once given to the Saints; Mat. 16. 16, 17. CƲrteous Reader, be not too cen∣sorious concerning him that is the Publisher of this little Treatise, stiled, The difference between the Christian and Antichristian Church, as if hee condemned the Ages and Generations that are past, as in a lost condition; because he saith they have built their house upon wood, and hay, and stub∣ble, and not upon the sure rock Jesus the Christ: Farre be it from him to judge so ashly of the Ages and Generations past, or present, concerning their finall estate; for ee is commanded to judge no man before he time, knowing that they stand and fall to their owne Master: And, wee shall all stand before the judgement seat of Christ;
And then and there every one shall give an account for himselfe to God, Rom. 14. 4, 10, 12. Knowing, as it is recorded in the inspired Scriptures, that If any man build upon this foundation (Jesus the Christ) gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay stubble; Every mans work shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare it; be∣cause it shall be revealed by fire: and th fire shall try every mans worke. If any mans worke abide, which hee hath buil thereon, hee shall receive a reward: If a∣ny mans work shall be burnt, hee shall suffer losse; but himselfe shall be saved yet so as by fire, 1 Cor. 3. 12, 13, 14, 15. Secondly, Know that the discovery of this truth was (as the vision that is his for an appointed time) and is become un∣to us, as the words of a book that is sea∣led, which men deliver to one that is lear∣ned, saying, Read this I pray thee: And h saith, I cannot; for it is sealed. And th book is delivered to him that is not lear∣ned, saying, Read this I pray thee: An hee saith, I am not learned, Esay 29. 11, 12▪ So that it is not in him that is learned, no in him that is unlearned, to discover the mystery of iniquity, by which Antichris hath filled the Temple so full of smoak, that no man can see how to enter into it, unti
God enlighten him; which caused the Lord Jesus in the dayes of his flesh, to break out into an Eucharistia of praise, looking on his Disciples, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and learned, and hast revealed them unto babes. Even so, O Fa∣ther, because it seemed good in thy sight, Mat. 11. 25, 26. That the whole glory in discovering of truth to any, might be given unto God. Thirdly, Know (gentle Reader, who art a searcher after truth in these inqui∣ring times) that the Publisher wrote this Treatise, to discover that the difference lieth not so much amongst us in point of Baptisme; as it is about the Doctrine of the Faith of Jesus the Christ, the Sonne of God; which whosoever beleeveth and confesseth, that Jesus the Christ is the Son of God, it is lawfull to baptize him, Act. 8. 36, 37, 38. And, to which Faith of Jesus the Christ, and Baptisme, the promise of receiving the gifts of the holy Spirit is given, Act. 2. 38, 39. And though for pub∣lishing this mystery of Faith, which hath been hidden for some Ages and Generati∣ons that are past, hee suffer reproach and contempt from the hands and tongues of some; yet, if the will of God be so, it is bet∣ter
hee suffer for well-doing, then for evill. Yet the love that hee beareth to the loyall Covenanters in the Nation, constraineth him to doe it, rather then his Country-men should ever remaine in blindnesse, under the power of Antichrist. Thine, who is the unworthiest of all the servants of Christ, (who is content it should be said of his good name, that is as a precious oyntment, as Luther said of Mo∣ses his body, Let it die and rot, so God may be glorified, and Je∣sus the Christ exalted in all his royall Offices;) FRAN. CORNWELL.
A DESCRIPTION Of the Spirituall TEMPLE. THe Spirituall Temple of the New Testament, the New Jerusalem which came downe from hea∣ven, the Bride prepared for the Lambe, the Lord Jesus the Christ, Revel. 21. 2. may not be unfitly compared to the materiall Temple of Jerusalem, in the letter, whose foundation stone was of earth; whose materials were hewen stones, compacted into one edifice or Tem∣le: the furniture thereof was an Altar, a Sacrifice, and a Priesthood;
who were made after the law of a carnall Commandement, Heb. 7. 16. which was typicall, and was not to continue for ever; but onely to the time of Reformation, and then the glory of it should vanish away. In which materiall Temple, none must come thither to worship, but the cir∣cumcised Jewes and Proselytes; for the uncircumcised and unclean were an abomination, and must not enter in at the gates thereof; Ezek. 44. 6, 7. And for the defects the people of Israel and Judah committed in their worship, so long as they con∣tinued in their integrity, the high Priest went once every yeare into the Holy of Holiest, and that not without bloud, to offer up for him∣selfe, and for the errours of the peo∣ple, Heb. 9. 7. Yea, and great were the priviledges that belonged to the Jewish Church: To them (saith Paul) pertained the adoption, and the glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and
the promises: Who are the fathers, and of whom, as concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever, Amen. Rom. 9▪ 4 5. But Christ being come an high Priest of good things to come, by a greater and a more perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not made of this building, Heb. 9. 11. reareth up a spirituall structure, or house. 1. Whose Foundation was the living stone, who hath life in him∣selfe, Jesus the Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 11. Seeing other foundation no man can lay, save that is laid, Jesus the Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 4. For there is salvation in none other, Acts 4. 12. 2. The spirituall Materialls are such as are borne of water and of the Spirit, Joh. 3. 5. Quest. Who are they which are born of the Spirit? Answ.Such men and women as through a Gospel Ministry are brought to beleeve, and manifest by their con∣fession, that Jesus who was cruci∣fied,
dead, and risen, is the Christ, is borne of God, 1 Joh. 5. 1. For no man can say (that is, confesse) that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Spirit: and being born of water, they are mani∣fested to be lively stones, that have received life from Jesus the Christ, the living stone, 1 Pet. 2. 4. and fit spirituall materialls, to be set into the spirituall house, 1 Pet. 2. 5. Quest. 3. What is the Forme of this spi∣rituall house? Answ. Union: They which gladly received the word were baptized, and were added unto the Church (and so were com∣pacted into one spirituall house, whereof Jesus the Christ is Lord:Heb. 3. 6. But Christ as a Sonne over his owne house, whose house are we, if wee hold fast the confidence, and the rejoy∣cing of the hope firme unto the end:) And these continued stedfastly in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, in breaking of bread, and prayers, &c.Act 2. 41, 42. The Furniture of this spirituall
ouse of the new Testament, where∣f Jesus the Christ is the King, Priest nd Prophet, is a Priesthood, Sa∣rifice, and an Altar; but all spiri∣all. First, The Priests, whether they e Male or Female, they are all ne in Christ, Gal. 3. 28. Yea, every ember of this spirituall house areade Kings and Priests to God the Fa∣her,Revel. 1. 6. Yea, and the whole Church united into a body, is a cho∣n Generation, a royall Priesthood, an oly Nation, a peculiar People; that they ould shew forth the vertues of him that hath called them out of darknesse into is marvellous light: Which in times ast were not a eople, but are now the people of God, 1 Pet. 2. 9, 10. Secondly, The Sacrifices that ese Priests offer, are all spiri∣uall. 1. Psal. 141. 3.The first is Prayer, which the pirit of Christ formeth in the heart f a beleever, whereby hee layeth pen all his spirituall and tempo∣rall
wants unto God his Father, in the name and mediation of Jesus Christ, through whom hee hath received a promise to bee heard, and to have his request granted; Joh. 16. 23, 24. 2. Secondly, Praise is a spiritu∣all sacrifice, offered up unto God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name, Heb. 13. 15. Which is done by prai∣sing God in Psalmes, and Hymnes, and spirituall Songs, which the Spirit o Christ formeth in us, to sing, and make melody in our hearts to th Lord, Ephes. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16. Quest. What is a Psalme? Answ. It is a rehearsall of those special mercies and particular experience that the Lord hath done for a belee∣ver, when his soule was brough into great adversity; and when the Lord delivered him, the Spirit o God in the dayes of his mirth bring∣eth into his mind, and causeth him with heart and lips to blesse th
Lord in the Congregation, for his mercies received. Thus Hannah, that was barren, he Lord made to keep house, and o be the joyfull mother of a sonne, ingeth her song of praise, 1 Sam. 2. . My heart rejoyceth in the Lord, my orne is exalted in the Lord, my mouth is enlarged over mine enemies; because rejoyce in thy salvation. Mary the mother of Jesus singeth her Magnificat; My soule doth mag∣nifie the Lord, and my spirit rejoyceth in God my Saviour, Luk. 1. 46, 47. So when the Lord had made good unto old Zacharias what hee had foretold him concerning his sonne John, Luk. 1. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. being filled with the Spirit, breaketh forth into his Eucharistia of praise, Luk. 1. 68. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for hee hath visited and redeemed his people. Yea, and old aged Simeon sing∣eth his Nunc dimittis, Lord, let thy servant depart in peace; for mine
eyes have seene thy salvation. Nay, King David upon his har warbles out the speciall mercies and favours, and deliverances Go had done for his soule, Psal. 103 Blesse the Lord, O my soule, and within mee blesse his holy Name. Bles the Lord, O my soule, and forget all his benefits. Who forgiveth all thi iniquities: who healeth all thy diseases Who redeemeth thy life from destructi∣on: who crowneth thee with lovin kindnesses, and tender mercies, & Nay, the Psalmist exhorteth th Traveller, the sicke man, and th Mariner, to praise God for thei speciall mercies received; Psal. 107. Hence (holy Paul saith) I will pra with the spirit, and I will pray wit understanding also: I will sing wit the spirit, and I will sing with understanding also. Else, when thou shal blesse with the spirit, how shall he whic occupieth the roome of the unlearned▪ say, Amen, at thy giving of thanks? Cor. 14. 15, 16. So that to sing
blesse, and give thanks, in the lan∣guage of holy Scripture, is all one. Hence, as spirituall Prayer is a Sacrifice, Psal. 141. 2. offered up unto God our Father in the name of Christ, to comfort, solace, and cure a sad and grieved spirit; so spi∣rituall praise is a Sacrifice, tendered to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, through Christ, Heb. 13. 16. by a merry and rejoycing Spirit, for the speciall mercies and blessings spirituall, and temporall, that the Lord hath bountifully bestowed on him. According to that of the A∣postle Iames, Is any afflicted amongst yo, let him pray? Is any merry amongst you, let him sing? James 5. 13. 3. Thirdly, Sacrifice, is a bro∣en and a contrite heart for his sins, and his dayly failings he hath com∣mitted against a crucified Jesus: when God powreth upon his peo∣ple the Spirit of grace and supplica∣tion, Zech. 12. 10. The more the Spirit of Christ openeth the eyes
of their spirituall understanding, to looke up by faith upon a Jesus, who for their sinnes was peirced, the more will their hearts bee pierced with godly sorrow for their sinnes, which bringeth repentance to sal∣vation, never to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7. 10, 11. and to loath themselves in their owne eyes, for all their spi∣rituall and corporall abominations, Ezek. 36. Hence beleeving David the King, that sorrowed after a godly manner, for all his iniquities, said, The sacri∣fices of God are a troubled spirit: A broken and contrite heart for sinne, o God, thou wilt not despise, Psalm 51. 17. 4. Sacrifice; is a free, ready, and cheerefull contribution to the poor and needy members of Christ Hebr. 13. 16. To doe good and distri∣bute forget not, for with such a sacri∣fice God is well pleased, Phil. 4. 18. 5. Sacrifice; is an holy life, which the Spirit of Christ formeth
in us. Rom. 12. 1. I beseech you bre∣thren upon the mercifulnesse of God, that yee present your bodies a living sa∣crifice, holy, and acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service. 1 Cor. 6. 20. Yee are bought with a price; glorifie God therefore in body and spirits which are Gods. Thirdly, The Altar, that sanctifi∣eth the person and the Sacrifice, and maketh them both acceptable unto God, Is Jesus the Christ. 1 Pet. 2. 5. Yee also as lively stones (that have re∣ceived life from Jesus the living stone) are built up a spirituall house, and holy Priest-hood to offer up spiritu∣all sacrifices acceptable to God, through Jesus Christ. To this Spirituall House, or Church of the New Testament, gathered according to the royall Commission of King Jesus, Matth. 28. 18, 19, 20. as the Churches in Judea, in Rome, Corinth, Galatia, E∣phesus, &c. were constituted. The Promises were made:
First, that God would bee a Fa∣ther to all those that did obey his voice, and come out from among the Jewes, Heathens, and Gentiles, and separate from their false waies, and superstitious worship, and touch not the uncleane thing, and he will receive you; And yee shall be his Sonnes and Daughters, saith the Lord, the Almighty, 2 Corinth 6. 17, 18. Secondly, for all the defects that these commit against his Spirituall worship, they have this promise; The bloud of Iesus Christ, his Sonne, clenseth them from all their sinnes, 1 Iohn 1. 7. 1 Iohn 2. 1, 2. Thirdly, So many as have been bptized into the name of the Lord Jesus; (that is, into the profession of Faith that the Apostles taught, to wit, that men should beleeve in a Crucified, dead, and risen Jesus, whom God hath exalted to be Lord and Christ) had the promise of re∣ceiving the gifts of the holy Spirit.
Quest.How prove you that to this Faith and Baptisme, the gift of the holy Spirit was granted. Answ. Repent, and be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus, for the remis∣sion of sinnes, and yee shall receive the gfts of the holy Spirit. For the pro∣mise (of giving the holy Spirit) is to you, and to your children, (asJoel the Prophet foretold;) I will powre out my spirit upon all flesh; and your Sonnes and Daughters shall pro∣phesie; and your old men shall dreame Dreames; and your young men shall see Vsions, and also upon the servants, and upon the handmaides, in those daies I will powre out my spirit, Joel 2. 8, 9. And all that are a farre off, even so many as the Lord our God shall call,verse 29. and to the twelve in Asiahe promise was made good, Acts 19. 5, 6, 7. And when this Spirit is come, he will guid thee into all truth; for he shall not speake of himselfe: but whatsoever he shall heare, that shall ee speake, and he will shew them things to
come, John 16. 13. Yea to be to the whole Church, as a River that shall make glad the City of God, Psal. 46. 4. compared with John 7. 37. If any man thirst, let him come to me and drinke; vers. 38. Hee that beleeveth on me, as the Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living waters. Vers. 39. (But this he spake of the Spirit, that they that beleeve on him shall receive: For the holy Spirit was not yet given, because that Jesus wa not yet glorified.) But when Jesus was by the right hand of his Father ex∣alted, he received of the Father th promise of the holy Spirit; He hath shed forth this, which you now se and heare, Acts 22. 33. A Fourthly, All things that ar lost and accursed to mankinde by the fall of the first Adam: are re∣stored and sanctified to the use o the beleevers, in and by the second Adam, Jesus the Christ. All thing are yours: Whether Paul, or Apollo▪ or Cephas, or the world, or life, or
death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours, and yee are Christs, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor 3. 21, 22, 23. Hence the unbeleeving wife is sanctified to the use of the belee∣ver: And shee being an unbeleever dwelling with the beleeving hus∣band is sanctified, to bring forth an holy Seed to the use of the belee∣ver: though the childe be borne in sinne, and by nature the child of wrath, as the most prophanest Pa∣gans are, Psal. 51. 5. Ephes. 2. 3. Void of understanding, not able to di∣stinguish betwixt good and evill: Yet, Titus 1. 15 Unto the pure, all things are pure: Nay, the meat and drinke and the Creature which God hath created, are sanctified to his use; 1 Tim, 4. 3, 4, 5. For every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refu∣sed; If it bee received with thankesgi∣ving: For it is sanctified by the Word and Prayer. Quest.What Priviledge hath the unbe∣leeving party, by dwelling and abi∣ding
with the beleever? Answ. Great is the Priviledge, if he, or shee, will abide; for living under them, where the holy Spirit breath∣eth, and his lips drop as the honey combe; the sweet precious treasure of the Gospell of grace; What knowst thou, oh thou beleeving hus∣band, whether God will not make thee instrumentall to save thy wife? though an unbeleever: Or what knowest thou, oh thou beleeving wife? whether God will not make thee instrumentall to save thy hus∣band? 1 Cor. 7. 16. And when hee is converted, hee will blesse God for you, (as David did for Abigail, in another case) Blessed be the Lord for you, and blessed be your good counsell, for you have been an in∣strument to convert a soule from the errour of his way, and save a soule from death, and hide a multi∣tude of transgressions. Quest.Is it not a greater Priviledge for an Infant to be borne of a beleever,
then to be borne of a Jew, a Turke, or an Heathen? Answ. yea; For the Children borne of beleevers are brought up in ho∣ly instruction,1▪ Tim. 3. 15. and education from their childe-hood (as young Timo∣thy was taught in the Scriptures from his youth, by his mother Eu∣nice) seeing it is the charge, the ho∣ly Spirit hath laid upon beleeving Parents: Ephes. 6. 4. Fathers pro∣voke not your children to wrath; But bring them up in the nurture and feare of the Lord. Whereas if their Pa∣rents were Jewes, and Turkes, and Heathens, the Parents being with∣out Christ, being Aliants from the Common-wealth of Israel; and strangers from the covenant of Promise, having no hope, and with∣out God in the world, Ephes. 2 12. Their children brought up with them, follow after Superstitious vanities; and ferve dumbe Idolls, as their Teachers, and Fathers led them,  Cor. 12. 1.
Fiftly, They are people live un∣der precious promises: And hee hath promised, that the eye of his providence shall bee over them, all their dayes for good: He biddeth them not distract them∣selves with immoderate carking care:Mat. 6. 25. For what they shall eate, or what they shall drinke, or yet for their bodies, what they shall put on. Reasons Christ giveth are two. Reas. 1. First, Your heavenly Father knoweth yee have need of all these things. Secondly, But seeke yee first the Kingdome of God, and his righteous∣nesse; and all these things shall be ad∣ded unto you, Matth. 6. 33. Now the members of the Church of Christ, gathered according to Christs Institution, Matth. 28. 18, 19, 20. are the Children of the Kingdome; and under the Promise, that God, as a Father, will provide for them; Therefore they are exhorted to bee carefull for nothing: But in every thing, by Prayer, and Supplications,
with thankesgiving, let their request be made knowne unto God, Philip. 4. 6.Hence the Apostle exhorteth the Church of he Hebrewes; Let your conversation bee without covetousnesse; and bee content with such things as yee have: For he hath said, I will never faile thee, nor forsake thee: So that we may boldly say, the Lord is my helper. And I will not feare what man shall doe unto me, Hebr. 13. 5, 6. Sixtly, They are under the pro∣mise of Audience, whensoever they come to petition in the name of his Sonne Jesus the Christ, for what they want, be they few or many: Matth. 18. 19. I say to you, that if two of you (beleevers baptized) agree in earth, as touching any thing that they shall aske, It shall bee done for them of my Father in Heaven. Vers. 20. For where two or three are gathered together in my Name, (that is, by his Power, Authority, and Royall Commission, he hath promised his presence) there am I in the midst of
them; to heare and returne them an answer to their request; yea, and to protect and preserve his Church, gathered in every Age, to the ends of the world. Thus at the Prayer of the Church, that was reproched, for holding forth the Faith of Jesus; the gift of the holy Spirit was given, to speake the Word of God with boldnes, Acts 4. 31. At the earnest suit and intercession the Church made unto God, Peter the Apostle was relea∣sed out of his Imprisonment, and brought to the house where they were praying, Acts 12. Seventhly, Lastly, there is no Society hath such Priviledges, as this Spirituall Hose, which is con∣stituted according to the Magna Charta of the Gospel, Matth. 28. 18, 19, 20. Marc. 16. 15, 16. though while they are in the Wold, they are for the Faith of Jesus the Christ killed all the day long (either in their good names, by rproch, and lander; or in their estates, by the
ighty Nimrods of these oppres∣ng daies, they are exposed to plun∣er and spoiling, which they are to ake patiently, Hebr. 10. 32. or in heir Liberties to be imprisoned, for ontending for the Faith of Jesus he Christ, 1 John 5. 1. Once given nto the Saints, or forbid to preach ny more in his name, as the Apo∣tle Peter was, Acts 4 18. or to have heir lives taken violently fom hem, as James the Apostle was by he Tyrant Herod, Acts 12. 2. 3. And accounted, But as sheepe for the slaughter, (regarded no more by the Wolves in sheepes clothing, then the bloudy Butcher regardeth the life of his sheepe;) yet the poorest member amongst them is rich in faith, and heire of the Kingdome which God hath promised to them that love him, James 2. 5. Yea, and the whole body of beleevers, walking in that faith and order, Christ hath prescri∣bed, with perseverance in the faith unto the ende, shall be more then con∣querours,
through him that loved them, Rom. 8. 36. Yea, next to the Paradise of glo∣rie; there is no Society like to this Spirituall Corporation of Saints, where the Lord will dwell in the middest of them, and give them light: Hence was the beloved Apostles Utinam, Oh that you had fellowship with us, 1 John 1. 3. Object. Why was it such a Priviledge? Answ. Truly, our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Sonne Jesus Christ: So that the Father, Sonne, and holy Spirit, and Saints, make up but one Society, or Family, where God will dwell, to comfort and so∣lace them: the good Angels their guard, to protect and save them (as they did once the Prophet Elisha from the troop of the Aramites, 2 King. 6. 17.) seeing they pitch their tents round about them that feare him, Psal. 34. 7. And are sent forth to be ministring Spirits, to minister unto them that are heires of salvation, Heb. 1. 14.
And when they die, they resigne their spirits to God that gave them, as the Proto-Martyr Stephen did, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, Acts 7. 59. to remaine in the mansion pre∣pared for the spirits of just men departed. So that happy are the people that are in such a case; yea, blessed are those Churches that have the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ for their God. Quest. What is the Antichristian faith? Answ.It is to deny that Jesus (whom they confesse dyed to take away the sinnes of the world) is the Christ. Quest. How prove you that? Answ. 1 Joh. 2. 22. Who is a liar, (viz. borne of the evill one, who is a liar, and the father of lies, and abode not in the truth, Joh. 8. 44.) but hee that denyeth that Jesus is the Christ? (viz. the eternall King, Prophet, Priest of his Church, bought with his owne bloud) hee is Antichrist (an e∣nemy and an adversary to Jesus the Christ) that denyeth the Father and
the Sonne. For he that denyeth the Sonnes authority, to be the eternall King and Prophet of the Church of the New Testament, to the end of the world, according to the royall Commission hee received from the Father of glory, when hee raised him from the dead, Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20. compared with Mar. 16. 15, 16. aswell as his eternall Priest, that e∣ver liveth to make intercession to God for him, Heb. 7. 25. hee denyeth the Father that sanctified the Sonne, and sent him into the world, Joh. 10. 36. and raised him from the dead, and exalted him to be Lord and Christ, Act. 2. 36. Ephes. 1. 20, 21, 22, 23. Quest. What Congregations deny that Jesus is the Christ? Answ.Even all such as build their house upon the hay and stubble of mans inventions, and not upon the preci∣ous stone, Jesus the Christ, in whom onely salvation is found, Act. 4. 12. Of which sort of builders are these:
The first sort are those that build their house upon the person of Peter, and so successively upon the Ppe. These the Spirit of God discove∣reth to be foolish builders▪ because there is no salvation in Peter, nor Pope: the Apostle Peter himselfe being the Judge to decide the con∣troversie, Acts 4. 11. Peter speaking of Jesus the Christ, saith, This is the stone which was set at nought of you buil∣ders▪ which is become the head of the corner. Ver. 12. Neither is there sal∣vation in any other; for there is none o∣ther name under heaven given amongst men, whereby wee must be saved. The second sort are those that build their house upon the Office of Peter, and so successively on the Officers: So that if the Officers u∣nited into a body in Councell erre, the whole Church that receiveth their faith, from their Edicts and Decrees, erre also. Now, that Councells may erre, and have er∣red, in things appertaining to God,
appeareth in the 21. Article of the Church of England, by Law esta∣blished; as appeareth. Adoration of Images was established in the se∣cond Generall Councell of Nice. The Popish Clergy were advanced above all earthly Princes, by the Councell of Lateran. And Priests prohibited to marry, which is ho∣nourable amongst all men, Heb. 13. 4. by the said Councell. The late Tri∣dent Councell erred in many things grosly; as in exalting the traditions of men to be of equall authority with the word of God; Trident. Sess. 4. Decret. Together with the invocation of creatues. Or any o∣ther Councell, that should decree, that grace cometh by generation; or, Beleevers should beget belee∣vers: or, Christians beget Christi∣ans: then the whole Church that build their faith upon such corrupt Councells may erre also. The third sort are all those that build their house upon another mans
faith, and not basing or laying the foundation aright, on the Gospel faith; to wit, to beleeve in a crucifi∣ed, dead, and risen Jesus, whom God hath exalted to be the Christ: If they erre in the object of their faith, Jesus the Christ, though they owne him to be Jesus their eternall Priest, to make intercession to God for them; yet if they deny him their e∣ternall King and Prophet, in all his outward institutions, in admitting of members into his spirituall King∣dome, they build but on a sandy foundation, and not on the sure rock Jesus the Christ. These Congregations, when the storme of Gods indgnation blow∣eth upon them, it will faile them▪ because they were so foolish as to build upon the sand, Mat. 7. 26. and not upon the immoveable rock Jesus the Christ; seeing other foundations no man can lay, save that is laid, Jesus the Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 11. Paul calleth him, The corner stone, Ephes. 2. 20.
Peter, The living stone, 1 Pet. 2. 4. Yea, The chiefe corner stone, elect and precious: hee that beleeveth on him shall not be confounded, 1 Pet. 2 6. Vnto you that beleeve (in Jesus the Christ, hee i precious, 1 Pet. 2. 7. Now, the true Spouse of Christ can have no communion with such as deny Jesus the Christ their onely Rock, in whom salvation onely i found, Act. 4. 12. First, Because shee is a loyal Spouse, that hath no head, no hus∣band, no Lord, no Law-giver, in things appetaining to the consci∣ence, but royall King Jesus: no will admit any other pretende Spouse to have fellowship with hr▪ that is partly governed by the wor of Christ, and patly with the chaff and straw of their owne traditions, in Gods spirituall worship, or in admitting of mmbers into his spi∣rituall house: Knowing, that in so doing shee should be found to be a Monster, that hath two heads; o
else like to that proud harlot Rme, that hath a divided heart, that goeth a whoring after two husbnds; Christ, and Antichrist. Secondly, This loyall Spouse her love toward her husband the Lord Jesus the Christ, is tender and com∣passionate love; shee cannot endure to heare her husband should bee spoyled of any of his royall dig∣nities, either his Kingly or Prophe∣ticall, as well as Priestly Offices: Shee cannot with harlot Rome bee content with a divided Christ; but with the true mother shee must joyn onely with them that will have a whole Christ, or no Christ. Christ her King, and his Commission to bee eternall, Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20. Christ her Prophet, whose voyce shee must onely heare; as the Fa∣ther of glory hath given her in charge to doe, Mat. 17. 5. Yea, and the extent how farre, in all things, whatsoever hee shall say; Act. 3. 22. Knowing, the danger followeth,
her soule shall be cut off from his people, Act. 3. 23. reckoned no sheep of his fold, Joh. 10. no Spouse of her royall husband, Ephes. 5. 24. as well as her eternall Priest, to make intercession for her, Heb 7. 25. because shee knoweth, Christ divi∣ded, becometh no Christ to the di∣vider: And this, according to the Vulgar Latine, is solvere Jesum, to dissolve Jesus, to receive him onely in part, and not in the whole; which is the spirit of Antichrist, &c. Lastly, The Christian Church, Christs loyall Spouse, knoweth that her royall husband is jealous of his glory, and will not endure his Worship should be corrupted with the inventions of man; there∣fore shee deserteth the communion of all such as have forsaken Christ, the fountaine of living waters, and dig to themselves cisternes, broken cisternes, that will hold no water. Hence it is as possible for light and darknesse to agree in one subject, and the
Temple of God, and Iols: as the Church that hath Christ for her head, and the Word to bee the rule of her Doctrine, and Government. And those Congregations that are governed, partly by the Word of Christ, and partly by their owne T. aditions, should have communi∣on together. Quest.But have Gods Elect in Babylon any power of themselves to returne out of the Land of their spirituall Captivity under Antichrist. Answ. Nay: Untill God enlighten them, that are darke; and quicken them that are dead, and cause them to returne, by being obedient to a Gospel Ministery: as formerly he brought in our fore-fathers, which were Gentiles aswell as wee, and strangers from the common-wealth of Israel, and Aliants from the co∣venant of Promise, having no hope, and without God in the world, by opening their blind eyes: and tur∣ning them from darkenesse to light; and
from the power of Satan, unto God; that they might receive the remission of their sinnes, and an inheritance amongst them which are sanctified by Faith in Christ Jesus, Acts 26. 18. Now as many as shall bee obedient to the voice of the Lord, will be unequal∣ly yoaked no more with unbelee∣vers, but wil become obedient unto the voice of the holy Spirit, and come out from amongst them, and be separate; and touch no more a∣ny of the uncleane thing; and then the Lord will make good his pro∣mise: To be a Father unto you, and yee shall be his Sonnes and Daughters. Ha∣ving therefore these Promises (dearely beloved) Let us clense our selves (even so many poore Iaphets, as God shall perswade to dwell in the Tents of Shem;) from all filthy∣nesse, both of the flesh, and of the spi∣rit, perfecting holynesse in the feare of the Lord, 2 Cor. 6. 14, 17, 18. Chap. 7,Object. 1. If all Churches come out of Ba∣bylon
by degrees; then you condemn all Churches that are not of your judgement? Answ. 1. We condemne no Churches that are built upon the tryed stone: the precious Corner Stone; the sure Foun∣dation, Esay 28. 16. Jesus the Christ. Seeing other foundation can no man lay, save that is layd Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 11. Whom Paul calleth the cor∣ner stone, Ephes. 2. 20. Peter, the li∣ving stone, 1 Pet. 2. 4. Yea, the chiefe corner stone, elect and precious, 1 Pet. 2. 6. For there is salvation in none other, Acts 4. 12. 2 And that holdeth the Gospell Faith: namely, that they beleeve in a crucified, dead, and risen Jesus (through whom they obtaine re∣mission of sinnes) whom God hath exalted to be Lord, and Christ, viz. eternall King▪ Priest▪ and Prophet, and head of the body of his Church, Ephe. 1. 22, 23. which must be preached among all Nations; beginning at Je∣rusalem, Luke 24. 46, 47, 48. And
constituted according to the Com∣mission given to the Apostles, Math. 28. 19, 20. which is left as a rule for the gthering of all Churches, to the ends of the World; seeing the Word of Christ is eternall. The word of the Lord endureth for ever; and this is the Word, which by the Gospell is preache unto you, 1 Pet. 1. 25. Yea, and after their apostasie, under the spirituall Babylonish captivity, to reforme any errour crept into the Churches of the old and new Testa∣ment: It was their holy custome, to reduce all things to their first Institution: Quod primum verum, tht which was first is true, accor∣ding to ertullians jdgement. For instance, so  David in the mis∣carriage of the Arke of God, 1 Chro. 15. 2. 12. 13. And it was zealous Iosiahs rule (whom the Spirit of God so commedeth in Scripture, that none was like before him for his Reformation) 2 Chr 34 31. The like example tooke Nehemiah after
his returne from the Babylonish Cap∣tivity, Neh. 10. 29. To observe all the Commandements of the Lord, and the Statutes which Moses the servant of the Lord gave them to keepe. So in reforming of the particular Chur∣ches of the New Testament, where∣of Jesus the Christ is head, King, and Prophet (if ever they be right∣ly brought out of their Spirituall Babylonish captivity under Anti∣christ) we must reforme all the In∣novations, as the Lord Jesus him∣selfe reformed the long-spread er∣rour of Bygamie and Polygamy. Non fuit sic ab initio, From the beginning it was not so, Matth. 19. 7, 8. Yea, and we must so follow Paul (as he followed Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1.) in reforming the abuses crept into the Church of Corinth, reducing all things to the first Institution: With a what I rceived from the Lord, that I delivered unto you, 1 Cor. 11. 23. We condemne none that are com∣ming out of Babylon, that make en∣quiry
after truth (as the daughters of Ierusalem did of the Spouse, Cant. 5. 9. What is thy beloved more then another beloved; oh thou fairest among women? What is thy beloved more then others beloveds, that thou dost so charge us? And truh being rvealed to them, joyne with us in the practise of truth, (as the Daughters of Ie∣rusalem did with the Spouse, Cant. 6. 1. Whither is thy beloved gone, oh thou fairest among women? Whither is thy beloved turned aside that we may seeke him with thee?) The Spouse giveth them a gentle, and a loving direction, Cant. 6. 2. My beloved is gone into his garden, to gather Spics: to feed in the garden, and to gather Lillies. But wee onely condeme those that deny Jesus the Christ (though they owne him their eternall Priest, that ever liveth, to make intercession to God for them Hebr. 7. 25.) yet they deny him their King and Pophet in all his outward administrations, in admitting of members into his
Spirituall Kingdome; stablished ccording to Christs eternall Com∣mission, Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20. and are uil upon wood, hay, and stubble, 1 Cor. 3. 12. Now though these pre∣end to come out of Babylon, yet they persecute, scofe▪ and deride all poore weake enqiing soules, for seeking after the pure wayes of that spirituall Worship, that Jesus the Christ hath appointed, and esta∣blished in all the Churches of the Saints, gatheed according to the Pimitive▪ pattern Act. 2. 41 42, 43. as the watch∣man id the Spouse, Cant. 5. 7. Wee condemne onely those that sinne through a wilfull contempt; because the evll of their halfe-way Reformation is discovered by them, whom God hath raised up to de∣clare his truth in an evill day. Now, when these sorts of men shall bee so farre from repenting of all the evill that they have done to the ser∣vants of the Lord Jesus, in this kind, that they still persevere in persecu∣ting
them for the truth they deli∣ver, (as the Jewes did of old the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, as it is written, 1 Thes. 2. 14. For yee, brethren, became followers of the Churches of God, which in Judea are in Christ Jesus; for yee have also suf∣fered like things of your owne country∣men, even as they of the Jewes: Verse 15. Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their owne Prophets, and have per∣secuted us, and they please not God, and are contrary to all men; Ver. 16. For∣bidding us to preach to the Gentiles, that they may be saved, that they may fill up the measure of their owne iniquity, that the wrath of God may come upon them unto the uttermost.) Upon these sorts of men, not we, but the Lord Jesus hath set this dreadfull doome, This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love darknesse rather then light, because their deeds are evill. For every one that doth evill, hateth the light, neither cometh to the light, least his deeds should bee dis∣overed,
John 3. 19, 20. Not wee, but the good Spirit of ur God condemneth all those that inger after false and Antichristian wayes: When Babylons down-fall s pronounced, Rvel. 14. 8. Babylon s fallen, it is falln, that great City; because shee made all nations drunk with he wine of her fornications. V 9. Af∣er that followed a third Angel, that cryed with a loud voyce saying, if any man (be hee high or low, rich or poore, noble or ignoble, bond or free, male or female) worship the Beast (that Antichrist of Rome, that exalteth himselfe above all that is called God, or worshipped) or his Image, (that is, his Government, that receive their power and juis∣diction from, in, or under him) or his mark, (viz. his Canons, Consti∣tutions, Edicts▪ or Decrees) into their hands, (viz. to fight, or write in the defence of them) or into their fore∣heads, (to plead or preach for them) mark their doome, The same (not
that doe it ignorantly through unbeliee, that are mislead by thei Teachers; but they which sinn against knowledge, obstinately to defend their Antichristian practices shall drink of the wine of the wrath o God, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his indignation, an they shall be tormented with fire an brimstone in the presence of the hol Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb And the smoke of their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever: and they hav no rest day nor night, who worship th Beast and his image, and receive th mark of his name, Revel. 14. 10, 11 The good Lord of his great mer∣cy grant to all those that belong to his election (that linger after false and Antichristian wayes and practices) repenting hearts, to for∣sake their sinnes, that none of that evill threatned fall upon them. A∣mongst which marks of the Beast, Is not the decree of Pope Innocen∣tius the third? Decret. Gregor. lib. 3.
it. 42. cap 3. as Doctor Willet in his Synopsis Papismi de baptismo infanti∣m, citeth: That whereas Circum∣ision (by the commandement of God) was conferred upon the in∣ants as well as the elder sort; so Baptisme also, which succeedeth in he roome thereof, and is more generall to men and women, must e conferred to both. By which Decree, the Nations in name and ti∣tle have been christianized, (though n the power they have denyed it) and have killed many a precious Saint, under the brand of Hereticks, for opposing it: whereby, the inha∣bitants of the earth have beene made drunk with the wine of her fornication, Revel. 17. 2. But the Spirit of God describeth the true Church, after Babylons down-fall, Revel. 14. 12. Here is the patience of Saints: here are they which keep the commandements of God, and the faith of Jesus. And is it not a commandement of God, that all
Churches should be gathered ac∣cording to the Commission of King Jesus? Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20. Mar. 16 15, 16. Wee onely condemne those Churches (that persecute Christ in his members, from city to city, (as Saul did, Act. 26. 9, 10.) fo keeping the commandements o God, and the faith of Jesus, Mat 16. 16. 1 Joh. 5. 1.) as no true Churches of Christ; but rather Sy∣nagogues of Satan: for, no hurtful thing shall be in the holy mountaine Esay 65. 25. The wolfe and the lam shal fold together; and the lion shall eat straw like an oxe; and the dust shall the serpent eat: They shall not destroy in all my holy mountaine, saith the Lord As likewise, Esay 11. 6, 7, 8, 9. If the Churches that men now contend for (coming out of Baby∣lon by degrees) should crucifie Christ in his members, for conten∣ding for the faith of Jesus the Christ, once given to the Saints, Mat. 6.
16, 17, 18. yea, reproach, whip, crop, and persecute them, for hold∣ing the Commission of their royall Master Jesus the Christ, Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20. that Antichrist by his Decretals, and Popish Councels, hath defaced, (as of late the Arch-Prelate of England did some Wor∣thies, that stood for a Reformati∣on according to the light God dis∣covered unto them) then they in such an estate were no true Chur∣ches of Christ; but Congregati∣ons that are hardened, and speake evill of the way before the multi∣tude, and are to be separated from, Act. 19. 9. But if they be meek, and gentle, peaceable, and willing to bee in∣structed, inquiring after truth, it being discovered by the true Spouse (whom God hath enlightened to direct them,) wee contemne not those daughters; but rejoyce in their fellowship, tender them as lambes of Christ, that have a long∣ing
desire to be added to that sheep∣fold, whereof▪ Jesus is the true shep∣herd; though as yet ignorant of the way of truth in many things▪ But as for the neutrall party, tha are neither hot nor cold, but luke∣warme, God will spue them out o his mouth, Revel. 3. 15, 16. Quest.Whether the Church of Chris is not now to be recovered out o an Antichristian estate, that deny∣eth that Jesus is the Christ, 1 Joh 2, 22. and crucifieth Christ in hi members; as the Church of the New Testament in the Apostoli∣call times, was gathered out of th Nationall Church of the Jewes (that was of old once a true state untill they crucified Jesus the Christ in his humane nature; whom God raised from the dead, and exalted him to be Lord and Christ, Act. 2. 36.) i God shall by his Gospel-Ministery wound and prick their hearts for their sinne of crucifying Christ in his members, that confesse the faith
f Jesus the Christ, 1 Joh. 5. 1. (as ee did once the Jewes that crucifi∣d the Christ, their Messias, in his wne person, Acts 2. 37.) so that ey trembling cry out, Men and ethren, what shall we doe? Answ.Must not the Reply bee that oyce that the holy Spirit spake by e mouth of Peter, Repent, and be aptized every one  you in the name of Jesus for the remission of sinnes: nd yee shall receive the gift of the ho∣ Spirit. For the promise is to you, and your children, and to them that are farre off, even so many as the Lord God shall call. And with many other words hee said, (and must not ee doe so likewise? seeing what∣oever things ere written afore-time, were written for our learning, Rom. 15. .) Save your selves from this unto∣ard generation. Seeing the same wrath is fallen on them (as was on he Jewes, for killing the Lord Jesus nd their owne Prophets, 1 Thes. 2. 14, 15, 16.) seeing they crucifie
Christ in his members, that con∣tend for the faith of Jesus the Chris (as Paul did, Act. 9.) Now so ma∣ny as shall gladly receive this word and be baptized, shall be saved from wrath; as Noah and his family were saved in the Ark, from perishing by water; seeing it is written, by th like figure Baptisme saveth, 1 Pet. 3 20, 21. Reas. 1. The Reason is, first, Because th time of our ignorance God hath winke at; but now (seeing light is come and truth is revealed) the Lord Je∣sus commandeth us every where to repent, &c. Acts 2. 38. Else our condemnation will be heavie, Joh. 3▪ 19, 20. This is te condemnation, ligh is come, and men love darknesse mor then light, because their deeds are e∣vill, &c. Secondly, Because we have with Paul and the Jaylor, in the time o our ignorance, beaten and persecuted Jesus the Christ in his members, that contend for the faith
1 Joh. 5. 1. and wee though with∣in our selves we ought to doe some∣thing contrary to the name of Je∣sus of Nazareth (as Paul did in the time of his ignorance, Act. 26. 9.) If God shall by his good Spirit convince us of the evills that wee have done, so as that we trembling cry, Men and brethren, what shall we doe? Must not the reply be, Re∣pent? &c. Act. 2. 38. Else, shall they not be disobedient to the voyce of the Spirit that speaketh? seeing Paul and the Jaylor arose and were baptized, Acts 9. 18. & 16. 33. Reas. 3. Thirdly, Because there is no promises of salvation to be found in the Antichristian states, that de∣ny Jesus the Christ, 1 Joh. 2. 22. The Reasons are, First, Because all the promise of God are made over to them onely that beleeve in Jesus the Christ, 2 Cor▪ 1. 20. Hee that beleeveth in the Sonne of God hath life, and he that beleeveth not in the Sonne of God, hath not life;
but the wrath of God abideth on him,John 3. 36. Secondly, Till we did beleeve in Jesus Christ, we were (in respect of any visible calling) without Christ;being Aliants from the Common-wealth of Israel, and strangers from the Cove∣nant of Promise; having no hope, and without God in the world. But once beleevers in Christ, Yee who were sometime afarre off, are made nigh by his bloud, and through him have accesse by one Spirit unto the Father. And are no more strangers and forraigners: but fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of Gods houshold, &c. Ephes. 2. 12, 13. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Thirdly, Because they in deny∣ing the Sonnes authority to bee the King and Prophet of his Church in all his outward administrations, in admitting members into his spiritu∣all kingdome, Math. 28. 19. 20. though they own him their Priest, that ever liveth to make reconciliation to God for them, Hebr. 7. 25. They
deny the Father, that sanctified the Sonne, and sent him into the world, and raised him from the dead, and ex∣alted him to be the Lord and Christ, Act. 2. 36. Ephes. 1. 20, 21, 22. Fourthly, Because the Antichri∣stian state deny the Sonne, 1 Iohn 2. 22, 23. Whom the Father of glory commandeth us to heare, Math. 17. 5. Yea, and the Apostle Peterciting the Testimony of Moses, saith,Truely Moses said to the Fathers, The Lord your God will raise up a Prophet from the midst of your bretheren, like unto me; him shall yee heare in all things whatsoever he shall say: and the dan∣ger followeth. It shall come to passe, that every soule which refuseth to heare the voice of that Prophet, that soule shall be cut off from his people, Acts 3, 22, 23. The Reasons are these. First, If Jesus the Christ bee not our Prophet to teach us, hee will not be our King to protect us: Math. 28. 10. Teach them, saith Christ, to
observe, all things that I command you: And loe, I am alwaies with you to the end of the world. Secondly, If Christ be no Prophet to teach us his heavenly Fathers re∣vealed will, he wil be no Priest to in∣tercede for us, Ioh. 17. 20. I pray not for these alone, but for all them that shall beleeve in me through their word. Now it is not their word that they speake, but what they have received fromChrist to speake. Seeing it is written2 Iohn 9. Whosoever transgresseth and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God: but he that abideth in the doctrine of Christ, hath both the Father and the Sonne. Verse 10. If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrin, receive him not to house, neither bid him God speed. Verse 11. For hee that biddeth him God speed is partaker of his evill deeds. Thirdly, If Christ bee no Pro∣phet to teach us: Hee will bee no Judge to acquit us. Iohn 12. 48. Hee which rejecteth mee, and rece i∣veth
not my words, hath one that judgeth him; the words that I have spoken, the same shall judge us in the last day. And then like the wise Merchant, let us cast up our accouut, what it will profit us? If by deny∣ing to heare the voice of our Pro∣phet Jesus, we gaine the world, and in the meane season loose our pre∣cious soules. Knowing the Sonne of man shortly will come to judge the world: And then they which be ashamed of him, and his words, in this sinnefull and adulterous ge∣neration, of them will the Sonne of man be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Father▪ with all his holy Angels, Marke 8. 38. Fourthly, If we joyne with them that deny Jesus the Christ, I Iohn 2. 22. and will be partakers of their sinnes, wee shall bee partakers of their plagues, Revel. 18. 4. And for our unbeliefe, in persisting to persecute them, that contend for the faith of Jesus the Christ, Math. 16▪ 16, 17,
18. The wrath of God abideth on them, 1 Thess. 2. 14, 15, 16. Fiftly, There is no promise to any people, that deny the Faith and Baptisme of Jesus the Christ, that they waiting shall receive the gifts of the Spirit. But rather that they shall be given up of God to strong delusions, to beleeve a lye, 2 Thess. 2. 10. Because they received not the love of the truth, that they might bee saved.Verse 11. For this cause, God shall give them up to strong delusions to be∣leeve a lye. Verse 12. That all might bee damned that beleeve not the truth, but have pleasure to continue in unrigh∣teous practises. 2 Thess. 2 10, 11, 12. Object. But there is a promise to all poore enquiring soules, that in the time of their ignorance and unbeliefe, have denyed Jesus the Christ, their eternall King and Pro∣phet, aswell as Priest, and now by the Spirit of God being convicted, that they are lyars and Antichristi∣an,
that deny the Father and the Son, 1 Iohn 2. 22. And being pricked at the heart, now trembling, cry out, Men and brethren what shall we doe? Answ. The Spirit of Christ in the in∣spired Scripture, saith: Repent, and be baptized▪ every one of you in the name of Iesus for the remission of sins, and yee shall receive the gifts of the ho∣ly Spirit, Acts 2. 38. We have an instance of twelve Disciples found at Ephesus, baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, and and Paul laid his hands on them, and they spake with new tongues, and Prophesied, as Ioel the Pro∣phet foretold, Ioel 2. 28. I will powre out of my Spirit upon all flesh, &c. Object.But were those Disciples Paul found at Ephesus (that had beene baptized by Iohn the Paptist) rebap∣tized by Paul? Answ. In answering this objection, I conceive: First, there was a vast difference betweene Faith and Bap∣tisme; Iohn preached before the
suffering, death, and resurrection of Christ: And the Faith and Bap∣tisine Christ commanded his Disci∣ples to preach after his Resurrecti∣on, Luke 24. 46, 47. Secondly, Iohn the Baptist preach∣ed the Baptisme of repentance▪ saying, that they should beleeve on him that was to come after him, Acts 19. 3, 4. Whom Christ himselfe declareth to his Apostles, being come in the flesh that he must goe up to Ierusalem, fall into the hands of sinners, bee killed, and the third day rise againe, but th Disciples understood it not, though it were declared to them, and they were afraid to aske him, Mark. 9. 31, 32. Much more John understood not, that Christ should dye, and rise a∣gaine from the dead. First, because it was not revea∣led to him, though John sent two of his Disciples to demand of him,Whether it were he that should come, or shall we looke for another? Christ an∣swereth, Goe tell John, the blind see
he deafe heare, the dead are raised, and the poore the Gospell is preached, and lessed is he that is not offended in me,Math. 11, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Secondly, Christ saith of John: This was that Elias that was to come, hat should prepare the way before him,Mal. 3. 1. Thirdly, Hee was the greatest Prophet borne amongst women:for he saw him come in the flesh, and said to two Disciples, Behold that Lamb f God which taketh away the sinnes of he world, John 1. 29. Yet hee that is he least member in the kingdom of heaven is greater then John: because after the death and resurrection of Christ, they could preach and de∣clarethat great mystry of godtinesse, 1 Tim. 3. 16. that Iohn the Baptistnever knew. But the Apostles after the resur∣rection of Christ, he having opened their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures, said un∣to them, That it behoveth, Christ to
suffer, and rise againe the third day, that repentance and remission of sinnes should bee preached in his name, a∣mongst all Nations, beginning at Ieru∣salem: and yee are witnesses of these things, Luke 24. 46, 47, 48. Again, Iohn the Baptists baptisme, was the Baptisme of water onely but had no promise of the holy Spi∣rit annexed, as himselfe confesseth,Math. 3. 11. I indeed baptize you with water to repentance: But he that commeth after mee is mightier then I▪ he shall Baptize you with the holy Spi∣rit and with fire. Secondly, The holy Spirit wa not to bee given in his full measure untill Christ was glorified. Iohn 7. 39 compared with Acts 2. 33. But to the Faith and Baptisme the Apostles preached after the death, and resurrection, and ascen∣tion of Christ into glory, there was a promise of giving the gifts of the ho∣ly Spirit, Acts 2. 38. Repent, and b Baptized, every one of you in the nam
of Iesus for the remission of sinnes: and yee shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit: as the Prophet Ioel fore∣told, Ioel 2. 28. and the twelve at Ephesus received, Acts 19. 6. Answ. 2. I affirme, that the twelve at E∣hesus, that had beene Baptized by Iohn, or his Disciples Ministry, were re-baptized by Paul, or them that were with him in the time of his Ministery; for these ensuing Rea∣sons. Reas. 1. First, In respect of the different dispensations. The Faith and Bap∣tisme that these twelve had received from Iohn, or his Disciples Ministe∣rie, though it was a saving Faith all the dayes of Iohn and his Di∣sciples Ministry, yet it was not a saving Faith after the death, and resurrection, and ascention of Christ into glory, in the time of Pauls Mi∣nistery: For Iohn and his Disciples preached the Baptisme of Repentance; saying, that they should beleeve on
him that was to come after him▪ that was in Jesus Christ, that was to bee crucified. But Paul and Time∣theus preached, that Jesus indeed is come, and crucified, dead, and risen, through whom all that beleeve shall have remission of sinnes, Acts 13. 38, 39. 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4. Reas. 2. Secondly, Because this Faith that they had received from Iohn, or his Disciples, in the time of Pauls Ministery would not save them: Because they denyed the Resurre∣ction of Christ from the dead: Looking onely for him to come, and to be crucified; and were ig∣norant that he was crucified, dead, and risen: And then according to the doctrine of the Holy Spirit, by the mouth of Paul, 1 Cor. 15. 14. If Christ be not risen, our Faith is vaine, and our Preaching is vaine. Reas. 3. Thirdly, If the Faith and Bap∣isme of Iohn, that declared that there was a Jesus to come to
bee Crucified; and the Faith and Baptimse of Paul that decla∣reth that Christ dyed for our sins, according to the Scriptures, and rose againe the third day according to the Scripture, 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4. Be all one for substance (as some of the Learned amongst us affirme) then are wee found false witnes∣ses of God, because wee have testified of God; that he hath raised up his Sonne Iesus Christ, whom he aised not up if the Faith and Bap∣isme of Iohn be in force at his day, Cor. 15. 15. Reas. 4, Fourthly, If the Faith and Bap∣isme of Iohn be in force under the time of Pauls Ministery, Acts 9. 3, . Then was the preaching of Paul vaine, and the faith of all that recei∣ved his Gospell, (to wit, That Christ dyed for our sinnes, according to the Scriptures, and rose againe the third day, 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4.) vaine, and hat they were yet in their sinnes, 1 Cor.
15. 16. 17. Neither were the gifts o the Spirit then given: For they wer not to be shed forth until Christ wa risen and ascended up into glor Acts 2. 33. which is blaspemous to imagine, or to divulge and declare abroad. For these Reasons, I conceiv there was a nullity of the Faith an Baptisme of John, which was to continue but till the death and resur rection of Christ: And the twelve in Asia were re-baptized into th Faith of a crucified, dead, and ri∣sen Jesus, whom God exalted to b the Christ. And Paul layd his hand on them, and they received the hol Spirit, Acts 19. 5. 6. May it not rather bee, that with Apollos, they were more fully instru∣cted what it was to bee Baptized in∣to the name of the Lord Jesus. Nay; Because there was as vast a difference, according to the distin∣ion I formerly layd downe, be∣weene
the Faith and Baptisme of ohn and his Disciples before the eath of Christ, and the Faith and aptisme of Paul; and he residue of the Apostles after the death and resurrection of Christ: As now is etwixt the Jewes at this day: and s that truely beleeve in Jesus the Christ, 1 Joh. 5. 1. Whosoever belee∣veth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God. For the Jewes at this day be∣eeve (as John and his Disciples then taught, That they should beleeve on him that should come, Acts 19. 4.) e∣ven in that Messiiah whom they wait or. And we beleeve (as Peter and Paul then taught) That Christ in∣deed is come, and crucified, dead, and risen, and exalted to bee the Christ, Acts 2. 36 Ephes. 1. 20, 21, 22, 23. So that, if the Jewish Faith be not a saving Faith at this day; Seeing they looke for a Messiah to come: when indeed hee is already come, and crucified, dead, risen and ascen∣ded
to glory; So that we wait now for a Saviour from heaven, Jesus that shall deliver us from the wrath t come, 1 Thess. 1. 10. Neither coul the Faith of those twelve Disciples Paul found at Ephesus bee a saving Faith in the time of his Ministery because Christ was come (though they were ignorant of it, being a that time in Asia) and had finished all those things that were written of him in the Law of Moses, the Pro∣phets, and the Psalmes, Luke 24. 44. But as neither the twelve Disciples of Christ could not understand that all things were fulfilled of him: untill hee had opened their under∣standings, that they might under∣stand the Scriptures: And then they rightly understood the end of his suffering, death, and resurrection: namely, That repentance, and remissi∣on of sinnes, should bee preached in his name among all Nations, beginning at Ierusalem, Luke 24. 45, 46, 47, &c.
So neither could these twelve Paul found at Ephesus know it; because, they had not heard, whether there were any holy Spirit, yea, or nay; and so were ignorant of the death, and re∣surrection of Christ, untill the Lord was pleased by his good Spirit to open their understanding, by the ministery of Paul; therefore it is written, When they heard it, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Je∣sus, Act. 19. 5. Object. 2. Was there any necessity that they should be Re-baptized; would not a more perfect instruction have served? Answ. Nay: Because those twelve were departed into Asia, after they had received the Faith and Baptisme of John, and were ignorant whether there were any holy Spirit yea or nay, Acts 19. 2. Because Johns Faith and Baptisme (as I have formerly shewed) had no promise of giving the gifts of the holy Spirit, Mat. 3.
11. If they therefore should con∣tinue in the Faith and Baptisme they had received from John, they had no promise that waiting they should receive the gift of the holy Spirit. But to the Faith and Bap∣tisme that Peter and the residue of the Apostles preached, there was a promise of giving the gifts of the holy Spirit, Acts 2. 38. And when these twelve which had been bap∣tized by John, or his Disciples, heard it, they submitted them selves, and were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus; (viz. into that profession of Faith Paul preached, 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4.) And when Paul had laid his hands on them, the holy Spirit came upon them, and they spake with new tongues, and prophesied; and the men were about twelve, Acts 19. 5, 6. Such an instance likewise wee have in Samaria; Philip preaching the things concerning the Kingdome of God, and the name of Jesus
Christ, and they were baptized both men and women, Act. 8. 12. When the Apostles which were at Hierusalem heard it, they sent Peter and John unto them: And when they were come down, they prayed, that they might re∣ceive the holy Spirit: (For as yet hee was fallen upon none of them, onely they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus) Then they laid their hands on them, and they received the holy Spi∣rit, Acts 8. 14, 15, 16, 17. So that by the examination of these texts of holy Scripture, it appeareth to me, that these twelve that were former∣ly baptized by Iohn, and then af∣terwards by Paul were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus; and then the Lord according to his owne free promise, Acts 2. 38. gave them the gifts of his holy Spirit, by his ordinance of Imposition of hands; that the earth might bee filled with his glory, and his Church replenished with gifts meet
for the ministery, Ephes. 4. 11, 12. Object. 3. But was Andrew and the other Disciple Iohn baptized, Re-bap∣tized by the Disciples of Jesus the Christ? Answ. Nay: Because that Faith which Iohn preached and baptized into, and the Faith and Baptisme that Je∣sus and his Disciples preached be∣fore his sufferings, death and resur∣rection, was all one in substance, and to one peculiar people, the Jew∣ish Nation. Mat. 3. 2. Iohn preach∣ed, Repent, for the kingdome of heaven is at hand. So did Jesus, Mat. 4. 17. Repent, for the kingdome of heaven is at hand. So Christ commanded the twelve, As yee goe, preach, saying, The kingdome of heaven is at hand, Mat. 10. 7. Likewise the seventy, The kingdome of heaven is come nigh unto you, Luke 10. 9. Peter and all the Disciples were ignorant of the death and resurrection of Christ, untill he was risen from the dead, Mar. 9. 31,
32. compared with Luk. 24. 6, 7, 8. They wait for the fulfilling of the promises as well as Iohns Disciples, Luke 24. 19, 20, 21, 22. Object. 4. But were the twelve Disciples of Christ, and the seventy, Luk. 10. that had accompanied with him from the time of Iohns Baptisme untill the time of Christs ascension into glory, that had been baptized, were they also Re-baptized af∣ter the death and resurrection of Christ? Answ. The Answer is, Nay: Because they had the promise of the holy Spirit to be given them, without any more baptizing with water. Acts 1. 5. Iohn truly baptized with water, but yee shall be baptized with the holy Spirit not many dayes hence. And the Lord made good his word of promise, they were filled with the holy Spirit, when the dayes of Pen∣tecost were fully come, Acts 2. 2, 3, 4, 5. Thus I have answered the Ob∣jections.
Reas. 7.Because, If two Disciples of Christ agree together in earth, touching any thing that they shall ask, they have promise it shall bee done for them of his Father in hea∣ven, Mat. 18. 19. But there is no promise to any people in faith and order, but a people agreed: Reas. 1. Because two cannot walk together unlesse they be agreed, Amos 3. 3. nei∣ther can the heart of two beleevers truly consent to pray together, un∣lesse they bee agreed touching the things they will ask of the Father of glory. Reas. 2. Difference of o∣pinion causeth difference of affecti∣on, and is an occasion of many deare and precious soules to with∣draw communion; as is to be seen in Barnabas and Paul, dissenting a∣bout the choyce of a companion, the contention grew so hot, that they separated the one from the other,Reas. 8. Acts 15. 37, 38, 39, 40. Two or three Disciples of
Christ, gathered together in his name, (that is, by his power, au∣thority, and royall Commission) where-soever, (whether in the mountaine, or in the desert, or in ship, or in the dungeon) there will Christ be in the midst of them, to heare and grant their petitions, or deliver them out of trouble; as he did Peter out of the prison, at the intercession of the Church, Act. 12. Reas. 9. To all such as walk in this Go∣spel faith and order, the Lord Je∣sus hath promised a greater mani∣festation of his presence, and Spi∣rit, Joh. 14. 26. And John in the Island of Pathmos ound it, Revel. 1. 9, 10. Yea, and to all them that love him and keep his commande∣ments, the Father and the Sonne hath promised to owne their poor hearts to be his Temple and Palace, where hee will abide and dwell; Joh. 14. 23. Reas. 10. Lastly, All such as are congre∣gated
in Gospel faith and order, have a promise from King Jesus, of Royall Protection in their greatest dangers, Heb. 13. 5, 6. So that with the Prophet Habacuck they can glo∣ry in Christ, in their greatest ex∣tremities, Hab. 3. 17, 18. Though the vine doe not yeeld her fruit, and the fatnesse of the olive faile, and the herd perish from the stall; yet will I joy in the Lord, and rejoyce in the God of my salvation. Quest. But is there any hope to see the Nation of England reformed accor∣ding to the Primitive pattern, foun∣ded upon the word of the eternall Truth? Ephes. 2. 20. Answ. Yea. First, Because there was ne∣ver a more exact Covenant taken in no Realme, or Nation, since the dayes of zealous Josiah, 2 Chron. 34. 31. and Nehemiah, Nehem. 10. 29. than is in these our dayes, to see a through Reformation in England and Ireland, according to the word
of God; and to extirpate Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Schisme, He∣esie, in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline; that the Lord should be one, and his Name one, in the hree Kingdomes. So that we are ot to leave so much as an hoofe behind us of any Superstition, or Romish relique, or any humane Tradition, in Gods worship, to be etained; though it have remained nder the venerable garbe of An∣iquity, Universality, and Unity, he three great pillars of the Ro∣man Hierarchy. Reas. 2. Secondly, Because there are in he Synod some learned, pious, ten∣er, conscientious men, that in the ayes of the cruell and ambitious Prelates (like the Priest and Levites, the dayes of idolatrous Jerobo∣m, that served the Devils and the Calves hee made, 2 Chron. 11. 13, 14, 5.) left all their maintenance, and went and lived in a strange land,
to enjoy the liberties of a good conscience, and worship the Lord Jesus according to the light they had received; that are at this day truly sensible, what a burden th Penall Statutes have beene in ou Land, in former times, to tende consciences, that desire (without a∣ny sinister ends) to see a Reforma∣tion according to Gods word▪ therefore will never consent t have such a Penall Law enacted (as the Prelates of England onc obtained by fraud and policy, in the dayes of Richard the Second to kill the English Subjects, that would declare the whole truth o God, so farre as it was revealed to them, and keep a good conscienc toward God and man: which oc∣casioned the death of some of th Nobility, Gentry, and Ministery in the Nation; with many other of inferiour rank. Thirdly, There are in the hig
and honourable Court of Parlia∣ment, some such conscientious ten∣der-hearted men, that in the Pre∣ates dayes left, if not sold, their ossessions, to goe into a desolate ildernesse, to worship the Lord esus in spirit and truth, according o the light God revealed unto hem; and many other were fol∣owing after, that are truly sensi∣le, that it hath ever been a plot of the Bishops and Priests to labour o enthrall the English Nobility, and Commons in Parliament, to ake Lawes to kill and imprison he conscientious in the Land, that oe desire to worship the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ in spirit and ruth, according to his revealed will in his owne word, under the spe∣ious pretences of unity, and uni∣formity in the worship of God: as he Statutes of K. Henry 8. K. Ed∣ward 6. Q. Mary, and Q. Elizabeth, eclare.
Fourthly, It is obvious to every well-affected Subject in the English Nation, that when our Brethren that noble, ancient, warlike Nation the Scots, contended for a Reforma∣tion according to the light they ha received, and casting off Rome proud Papall and Prelaticall Go∣vernment, with all their devise formes of Worship, they must hav dyed; the English Prelates had s farre incensed his Majesty against them, and raised large summes o money toward the levying of a Army, to kill and destroy them had not the Lord by his special providence prevented it. Reas. 5. Fifthly, When the Lord opened the eyes of our deare and thric noble Patriots of our Countrey assembled in Parliament, to make a solemne Protestation, to oppos all Popery and Popish innovati∣ons, and to extirpate Episcopacy root and branch, as a Plant th
heavenly Father never planted; Then evill counsell prevailed with the King to withdraw from his Par∣liament, and under the pretence of a Guard to protect his Person, to make warre against his Parliament, that they should dye: But our faith∣full Nobles, and true hearted Com∣mons in England reply, Shall our Ionathans dye? who have in part freed our consciences from Roman Traditions, and ancient corrupt Fe∣stivals, and covenanted with us for a pure Reformation agreeable to the word of our good God, and have preserved our estates and li∣berties from an Arbitrary Govern∣ment; shall they dye which have wrought such a deliverance in the Land? they shall not dye: we will bleed our selves before an haire shall fall from their heads, if either wee with our persons, prayers, counsells, states, or swords can prevent it. And hath the Lord
given such a blessing to our endea∣vours, that God hath made the righ∣teous of the Land, (next to the Lord) a wall of defence to the Parliament; shall it ever therefore enter into the heart of loyall and tender-hearted Cove∣nantors to have such hard thoughts; that the Parliament will ever con∣sent to burden us any longer with unjust Penall Statutes, who have thought nothing too deare for them, but have jeopardized lives and live∣lyhods for their preservations. E∣specially, they being sensible what a burden such penall Lawes have been to tender Consciences, and what an hinderance they are for propagating truth. Reas. 6. Sixtly, All the faithfull in the Parliament know but in part; and the more they tast of the honey of Gods eternall truth, the more their eyes are enlightened to see, they have not as yet attained to a full
Reformation. And if now they should build but upon the least hay and stubble, they should not onely suffer losse; but lay a foundation of a new rent in the Ages and gene∣rations to come: yea, and looke what unjust Penall Statutes they impose now; may perhaps fall as heavy upon their Posterity, as some∣time did upon that famous Lord Cobham, that gave his consent to the Statute of Lolordi, and afterward was put to death for a Lolord. Reas. 7. Seventhly, The Lord hath added such a blessing to the pious endea∣vours of the Parliament, that they have discovered many things to be ruth; that the Learned Prelates in former times adjudged to be He∣resies: As the parity of the Mini∣stery. Superstitious formes of de∣vised Worship, called Divine. Su∣perstitious Festivals, formerly e∣steemed holy Feasts, now taken a∣way, that men may follow their ho∣nest
labour six daies, and Sanctifi a Seventh, as a day of holy re to the Lord; being now the first day of every weeke; as the holy Scripture hath left us a rule of practise to observe and doe, Act 20. 7. And hee which hath begu this great and happy Worke of Re∣formation by this Parliament: we are confident, will never leave them untill hee hath made them instru∣ments, either to perfect it; or a least, to give to all his faithfull Da∣niels, libertie of Conscience, to wor∣ship the Lord in Spirit and truth according to his will revealed against whom they can object no∣thing, unlesse it bee in the matte that concerne the spirituall wor∣ship of their God; Seeing the have learned to give Caesar his due Tribute, Custome, Feare, Honour; Yea and lay downe their lives, rathe then just and lawfull Magistrate should not be maintained among
us, and obeyed in all their just, Le∣gall, and Civill commandements. Knownig, they carry not the Sword for nought, but for the punish∣ment of them that doe evill, and for the praise, and defence of them that doe well. Lastly, the wrondrous power of the Spirit of grace, in enlightning darke mindes with the knowledge of his Truth; and scattering the knowledge of it, all the Kingdome over, in Cities, Countreyes, and Campe, and causing men of singu∣lar parts of learning to bring their gifts toward the building up of Zi∣on; and powring out of his Spirit (as Ioel the Prophet foretold, Ioel 2. 28.) upon all sorts of people, both young, and old; rich, and poore; which is to mee a plaine demonstration, that the Lord will never leave us, untill he hath made his new Jerusalem, the praise of the whole earth, and prepared the
Spouse, the Lambes wife; Yea, and advanced Jesus the Christ once againe upon the Throne, to be the Head, King, Priest, and Prophet of his Church, according to the an∣cient Prophesie of David, Psal. 2. 6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Zion. Gloria soli Deo. FINIS.
