C7550 12233532 56656
TWO TREATISES: The First of BLOOD-LETTING, AND THE Diseases to be cured thereby. The Second of CUPPING AND SCARIFYING, AND THE Diseases to be cured thereby. By Nich. Culpeper Gent. M. Ruland, And Abdiah Cole, Doctor of Physick. LONDON. Printed by Peter Cole, Printer and Book-seller, at the Sign of the Printing-press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1663.
Books Printed by Peter Cole and Edward Cole, Printers and Book-sellers of Lon∣don at the Exchange. Several Physick Books of Nich. Culpeper, Physitian and Astrologer, and Abdiah Cole Doctor of Phy∣sick, commonly called, The Physitian's Library, containing all the Works in English of Riverius, Sennertus, Platerus, Riolanus, Bartholinus. Viz. 1. A GOLDEN Practice of Physick: after a new, easie and plain Method of know∣ing, foretelling, preventing, and curing all Diseases inci∣dent to the body of Man. Ful of proper Observations and Remedies, both of Ancient and Modern Physitians. Be∣ing the fruit of one and thir∣ty years Travel, and fifty years Practice of Physick. By Dr. Plater, Dr. Cole, and Nich. Culpeper. 2. Sennertus Practical Phy∣sick; the first Book in three Parts. 1. Of the Head. 2. Of the Hurt of the internal sen∣ses. 3. Of the external Senses, in five Sections. 3. Sennertus Practical Phy∣sick; the second Book, in four Parts. 1. Of the Jaws and Mouth. 2. Of the Breast. 3. Of the Lungs. 4. Of the Heart. 4. Sennertus Third Book of Practical Physick in four∣teen Parts, treating, 1. Of the Stomach and Gullet. 2. Of the Guts. 3. Of the Me∣sentery, Sweetbread and Omen∣tum. 4. Of the Spleen. 5. Of the Sides. 6. Of the Scurvey. 7 and 8. Of the Liver. 9 Of the Ureters. 10. Of the Kid∣nies. 11. and 12. Of the Bladder. 13. and 14. Of the Privities and Generation in men. 5. Sennertus fourth Book of Practical Physick in three Parts. Part. 1. Of the Dis∣eases in the Privities of wo∣men. The first Section. Of Diseases of the Privie Part, and the Neck of the Womb. The second Section. Of the Diseases of the Womb. Part 2. Of the Symptoms in the Womb, and from the Womb.
The second Section. Of the Symptoms in the Terms and other Fluxes of the Womb. The third Section. Of the Symptoms that befal al Vir∣gins and Women in their Wombs, after they are ripe of Age. The fourth Section. Of the Symptoms which are in Conception. The fifth Section. Of the Government of Women with Child, and preternatural Distempers in Women with Child. The sixth Section. Of Symptoms that happen in Childbearing The seventh Section. Of the Government of Women in Child-bed, and of the Dis∣eases that come after Travel The first Section. Of Dis∣eases of the Breasts. The se∣cond Section. Of the Sym∣ptoms of the Breasts. To which is added a Tra∣ctate of the Cure of Infants. Part 1. Of the Diet and Government of Infants. The second Section. Of Diseases and Symptoms in Children. 6. Sennertus fifth Book of Practical Physick, Or the Art of Chyrurgery in six Parts. 1. Of Tumors. 2. Of Ulcers. 3. Of the Skin, Hair and Nails. 4. Of Wounds, with an excellent Treatise of the Weapon Salve. 5. Of Fractures. 6. Of Luxations. 7. Sennertus sixth and last Book of Practical Physick in nine Parts. 1. Of Diseases from occult Qualities in ge∣neral. 2. Of occult, ma∣lignant, and venemous Dis∣eases arising from the inter∣nal fault of the humors. 3. Of occult Diseases from water, air, and infections, and of infectious diseases. 4. Of the Venereal Pox. 5. Of outward Poysons in general. 6. Of Poysons from Mine∣rals and Metals. 7. Of Poy∣sons from Plants. 8. Of Poy∣sons that come from Living Creatures. 9. Of Diseases by Witchcraft, Incantation, and Charmes. 8. Sennertus Treatise of Chymistry, shewing the A∣greement and Disagreement of Chymists and Galenists. 9. Sennertus two Treatises. 1. Of the Pox. 2. Of the Gout. 10. Sennertus thirteen Books of Natural Philosophy: Or the Nature of all things in the world. 11. Twenty four Books of the Practice of Physick, being the Works of that Learned
and Renowned Doctor La∣zarus Riverius, Physitian and Counsellor to the late King, &c. 12. Idea of Practical Phy∣sick in twelve Books. 13. Bartholinus Anatomy, with very many larger Brass Figures, than any other Ana∣tomy in English. 14. Veslingus Anatomy of the Body of Man. 15. Riolanus Anatomy. 16. A Translation of the New Dispensatory, made by the Colledg of Physitians of London, in Folio and in O∣ctavo. Whereunto is added, The Key of Galen's Method of Physick. 17. A Directory for Mid∣wives, or a guide for women 18. Galens Art of Physick. 19. A new Method both of studying and practising Phy∣sick. 20. A Treatise of the Ric∣kets. 21. Medicaments for the Poor: Or, Physick for the Common People. 22. Health for the Rich and Poor, by Diet without Physick 23. One thousand New, Famous and Rare Cures, in Folio and Octavo. 24. A Treatise of Pulses and Urins. 25. A Treatise of Blood-letting, and Cures perfor∣med thereby. 26. A Treatise of Scarifi∣cation, and Cures perfor∣med thereby. 27. The English Physi∣tian enlarged. The London Dispensatory in Folio, of a great Caracter in Latin. Divinity Books Printed by Peter Cole, &c. Eighteen Several Books of Mr. Burroughs's viz. on Matth. 11. 1 Christs Call to all those that are weary and heavy la∣den, to come to him for rest. 2 Christ the great Teacher of Souls that come to him. 3 Christ the Humble Tea∣cher of those that come to him. 4 The only easie way to Heaven. 5 The Excellency of Ho∣ly Courage in Evil times. 6 Gospel Reconciliation.
7 The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment. 8 Gospel-Worship. 9 Gospel-Conversation. 10 A Treatise of Earthly Mindedness, and of Heavenly Mindedness, and Walking with God. And eight seve∣ral Books more. Twenty one several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Col∣lected into two Volumes, Viz. 1 Scripture light, the most sure Light. 2 Christ in Travel. 3 A lifting up for the cast down. 4 Sin against the Holy Ghost. 5 Sins of Infirmity. 6 The false Apostle tried and discovered. 7 The good and means of Establishment. 8 The great things Faith can do. 9 The great things Faith can suffer. 10 The great Gospel My∣stery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and applied from Christs Priest∣ly Office. And eleven seve∣ral Books more. New Books of Mr. Sy∣drach Sympson, VIZ. 1 Of Unbelief, or the want of readiness to lay hold on the comfort given by Christ. 2 Not going to Christ for Life and Salvation, is an ex∣ceeding great sin, yet pardo∣nable. 3 Of Faith, Or, That be∣lieving is receiving Christ; and receiving Christ, is be∣lieving. 4 Of Coveteousness. Mr. Hookers New Books in three Volumes: One in O∣ctavo, and two in Quarto. These Eleven New Books of Mr. Thomas Hooker made in New-England, are attest∣ed in an Epistle by Mr. Tho∣mas Goodwin and Mr. Philip Nye, to be written with the Authors own hand: None being written by himself be∣fore. One Volume being a Comment upon Christ's last Prayer, in the seventeenth o John. Wherein is shewed, 1 That the end why the Saints receive all Glorious
Grace, is, That they may be one, as the Father and Christ are one. 2 That God the Father loveth the Faithful, as he lo∣veth Jesus Christ. 3 That our Savior desi∣reth to have the Faithful in Heaven with himself. 4 That the Happiness of our being in Heaven, is to see Christs Glory. 5 That there is much wanting in the Knowledg of Gods Love, in the most able Saints. 6 That the Lord Christ lends daily Direction, accor∣ding to the daily need of his Servants. 7 That it is the desire and endeavor of our Savior, that the dearest of Gods Love, which was bestowed on him∣self, should be given to his faithful Servants. 8 That our Union and Communion with God in Christ, is the top of our hap∣piness in Heaven. Ten Books of Applicati∣on of Redemption by the ef∣fectual Work of the Word, and Spirit of Christ, for the bringing home of lost sinners to God: By Thomas Hooker of New-England. Dr. Hills WORKS. The Kings Tryal at the High Court of Justice. The wise Virgin: Published by Mr. Thomas Weld, of New-England. Mr. Rogers on Naaman the Syrian, his Disease and Cure discovering the Leprosie of Sin and Self-love, with the Cure, viz. Self-denial and Faith. A Godly and fruitful Ex∣position, on the first Epistle of Peter: By Mr. John Ro∣gers, Minister of the word of God at Dedham in Essex. An Exposition on the Gos∣pel of the Evangelist St. Ma∣thew: By Mr. Ward. Mr. Rogers his Treatise of Marriage. The wonders of the Load-stone: By Samuel Ward of Ipswitch. The Discipline of the Church in New-England: By the Churches and Synod there. Mr. Brightman on the Re∣velation. Great Church Ordinance of Baptism.
Mr. Loves Case, containing his Petitions, Narrative and Speech. A Congregational Church is a Catholick visible Church By Samuel Stone in New-En∣gland. A Treatise of Politick Po∣wers. Dr. Sibbs on the Philip∣pians. Vox Pacifica, or a Perswa∣sive to Peace. Dr. Prestons Saints submis∣sion, and Satans Overthrow. Pious Mans Practice in Parliament time. Barriffs Military Discipline The Immortality of Mans Soul. The Anatomist Anatomi∣zed. The Bishop of Canterburys Speech. Woodwards sacred Ballance. Dr. Owen against Mr. Baxter. Abrahams offer, Gods Of∣fering: Being a Sermon by Mr. Herle, before the Lord Major of London. Mr. Spurstows Sermon, be∣ing a pattern of Repentance. Englands Deliverance from the Northern Presbitery: By Peter Sterry. The Way of God with his People in these Nations: By Peter Sterry. The true Way of uniting the People of God in these Nations: By Peter Sterry. Mr. Sympson's Sermon at Westminster. Mr. Feaks Sermon before the Lord Major. The best and worst Magi∣strate: By Obadiah Sedgwick. A Sermon. A Sacred Panegyrick: By Stephen Marshal. A Sermon. The Craft and Cruelty of the Churches Adversaries: By Matthew Newcomen of Dedham. A Sermon. Mr. Nyes Sermon of the use∣fulness of a powerful Mini∣stry to the Civil Governor. Dr. Owens stedfastness of the Promises. Mr. Stephen Marshals New WORKS. 1 Of Christs Intercession, or of sins of Infirmity. 2 The high Priviledg of Believers, That they are the Sons of God. 3 Faith the means to feed on Christ. 4 Of Self-denial. 5 The Saints Duty to keep their Hearts, &c. 6 The Mystery of Spiritu∣al Life.
Taylors Capitulae Patrum. —on the Lamentations in Latin Fullwood of Errors. Des Crates on the Passions of the Soul. Hobbs de Corpore Politico. Whites State of future Lie. Greaves Grand Seraglio: Or the Turks Court. Cowells Institutes of the Civil Law. Montross Redivivus. Or the History of Montross, &c. The Royal Game at Pic∣quet. Jones Cause and Cure o our Divisions. To the Physical Reader. THe greatest Reason that I could ever observe, why the Medicines prescribed in the Physick Books before men∣tioned, do not (somtimes) perform the Cures promised, is, the unskilfulness of those that make up the Medicines. I therefore advise all those that have occasion to use any Medicines, to go or send to Mr. Ralph Clarke Apothecary, at the sign of the three Crowns on Ludgate-Hill, in London; where they shall be sure to have such as are skilfully and honestly made.
OF BLOOD-LETTING AND THE Diseases to be cured thereby. What Blood-letting or Phlebotomy is? IT is an Universal evacuation of fulness of humors or Plethory. And Plethory is the increase of humors above equality in the Veins. The knowledg of Complexions is re∣quisite to Phlebotomy. The signs of a sanguine complexion are containd in these Verses. By nature they are fat and love to hear News and reports, to drink and make good cheer, To court fair Ladies, and to laugh and sing
And play the Poets, and learn any thing. To Wrath not prone, but noble, kind and free, Abounding much in liberatilie. Of red Complexion like the fragrant rose, And bold as Hector to affront their foes. Signs of Plethory and Blood abounding. When blood abounds the face is over red, The eyes fart out, and cheeks are fully fed, The body is unwildy, pulse is quick, Full, soft, and in the forehead there doth stick A tearing pain, the belly it is bound. The tongue is dry, with thirst, and sleep profound. Spittle is sweet, and when they sharp things take The tast is sweet, it cannot no difference make. Signs of the cholerick Complexion and of Choler abounding. Choler's a humor raign's in furious men That strive to lord it o're their brethren; They learn but slowly, but can eat apace From whence they grow, in stature, and in face
And heart are bold, still soaring above all Crafty, deceitful, angry, prodigal, Slender, rough, dry, and yellow is their skin. If tongue be parcht with heat, and noise within The ears, with watching, and with vomi∣ting, And thirst, fat stools, and pain, and belly wing With loathing: heartach: want of appetite. If pulse be hard, and swift, and hot, and light, Mouth dry and bitter, and of fire thou dream, Be sure that choler is in thee supream. Signs phlegmatick Complexion, and of Flegm abounding. Flegm makes men strong; of stature broad and low They flatter, then the sanguine men do grow, They idleness affect, their sense is dull, And in much sleep they do their bodies lull. They move as slowly as the housed snail, And are of colour very wanne and pale. Flegm makes unsavoury tast, which meat doth loath With spitting; pain in head and stomach both
The pulse is seldom, slow, and soft, and wide, With dreams of water, where the flegm doth guide. Signs of Melancholick Complexion and of Melancholy abounding. It makes men evil, sad, and slow to speak, To be contemplative, and sleep to break, To be resolved, but think nothing fast, Envy and avarice in them doth last. Deceit and fear, the colour of their skin Is sad and black, pulse hard, and urin thin. They dream of Ghosts, Hobgoblins and Cells. They yawn and belch, from wind that in them dwells. They spit, and spawle, and relish very sour, And in their left ear is a noise each hour. What Age is fit for Phlebotomy. Before the seventeenth yeer draw none at al. In middle age oft for the Surgeon call. Old folk and children must but little bleed, And then when as there is apparent need. An Addition. At this time in great necessity, especi∣ally in a Pleurisie and other strong dis∣eases, we bleed with good success; in the
fourth or fifth year three or four ounces. The middle age is from thirty to forty five or fifty. What things hinder Phlebotomy. Bleed not at all, when the Complexions cold Nor in cold weather, nor when pain doth hold With violence, nor after thou hast been In baths, or sporting with thy Fancy's queen Nor after tedious sickness, nor when Thou art by meat or drink a shame to men. Bleed not too yong, nor when thou art too old, Nor when thy stomachs weak with sense of cold. Addition. To these add. Bleed not in the begin∣ning of a Disease, for the Crisis is the day of the motion of sickness, or in the fit, nor before the Guts are clensed from excre∣ments, nor in the time of the Natural courses of women nor in the flux of the Haemorrhoids; nor after a cholerick dis∣ease, and the like, of which we shal speak in the Aphorisms for bleeding. At what time Bleeding is good. In every month thou lawfully maiest bleed, If blood abound, and thou a vent dost need.
April and May the Liver-vein is best., September's for the Spleen; and for the rest In Winter take the Vein comes from the head, And in the Autumn let the Feet be bled. In Summer, open still the Liver-vein. In Spring, that of the Heart cal'd Median. What is to be done in Bleeding. When you let Blood make a large ori∣fice to let out the Wind and the Blood more freely, after Bleeding let him not sleep for six hours: make not too deep an orifice, least thou prick a Nerve, and let him not eat presently after bleeding. It is good to bath two or three daies a∣fore bleeding and three or four daies af∣ter, give Wine afore and in time of blee∣ding, if you fear swounding, move before and after by gentle walking. What is to be avoided after Bleeding. Abstain from milk, meats and drink, and cold things, and keep from foul wea∣ther: cleer Air is good and rest; for mo∣tion often hurteth Of the Effects and profit of Phlebotomy. It cheereth the sad, appeaseth the an∣gry; and keeps Lovers from madness: it cleereth the sight, and makes the Brain
warm, and the marrow. It purgeth the bowels, stomach and belly, purifieth the senses, causeth sleep. It mends the hear∣ing, and voyce and increaseth strength. What Vein is to be opened safely, and pro∣fit bleeding bringeth. I. The Vein between the Eye-brows in the middle of the Forehead, called Recta or Preparata is opened. Against old Infirmities, foul Ulcers, the Leprosie, Scab, Morphew, Impetigo, Itch, diseases of the Eyes, old Head-ach, heaviness behind in the Head, diseases of the Brain, Madness. II. The two twisting Veins in the Temples are opened either of them. Against the half head-ach, great head-ach, and long sickness, old sore Eyes, blear Eyes, mists in the Eyes, spots, films tears and webs in the Eyes, scabs in the Eye-lids, Nyctilops, and to make barren∣ness. III. The Vein against the little corner of the Eye is opened a little above the jugal bone. Against diseases of the Eyes, Head-diseases
abated, Head-ach, half Hed-ach, Pannus, Tears, old sore Eyes, Nycti¦lops, scabs in the Eye-brows. IV. The Veins about or behind the Ears in the hollow, which appear when the Throat is tied, and are in that place where you may feel a beating with your finger are opened Against half Head-ach, old Catarrhs, scald head, to refresh and restore the me∣mory, ulcers in the Ears and Neck, to clense the Face, against Tooth-ach from defluxion, the head open, and against ul∣cers and all pain. V. The Vein in the tip of the Nose between the two Gristles is opened. Against Phrenzies, sharp Feavers, old Head-ach, old red Faces, diseases in the Eyes and bleareyedness, heaviness of head, Haemorrhoids, Itching of the Nose, Apostem of the Nose, Bothor. VI. The two visible Veins under the Tongue are opened. Against Imposthumations of the throat
and mouth, and other Distempers there, and Quinzy after the Head-vein is first opened, of Imposthumes in the Almonds, heaviness of Tongue, Apoplexy, Tooth∣ach, and Diseases in the Gums, Catarhs, Pannus, Cough, and distempers in the Jaws and Cheeks. VII. The Vein between the Skin and lower Lip is opened. Against stinking breath, Corrosion of the Gums and rottenness, Ulcers of the Nose, and distempers in the Face and Nose pains in Womens breasts and head-ach. VIII. The Veins in the Lips are opened. Against Imposthumes of the Mouth and Gums, the Head-vein being first opened. Against want of Breath and Leprosie. IX. The two Veins in the sides of the Neck, call d Gindegi, they grow large in Singing-men, and when men hold their breath, if the Neck be bound with a Towel are opened Against Impetigo or Serpigo or Itch,
Noli me tangere or Canker, swollen Gums, Quinzy, Asthma, Hoarsness. Im∣posthume of the Lungs, Dispnoea, fits of the Spleen, side-pains. X. The Head-vein called Cephalica hume∣raria, and Cubit between the Thumb and fore-finger without danger is o∣pened there, and in the upper part of bending of the Arm. Against hot pains of the Heart, half Head-ach, Madness, Flux of the Eyes, Epilepsie, all Diseases in the Ears, Tu∣mors in the Head, all hurts in the Tongue and distempers of the Stomach, and Feavers if it be opened in both Hands. XI. The Median in the middle of the bending of the Arm, between the Head-vein and the Basilick or Liver-vein It is called the common, black or Heart-vein is opened. Against evacuation of all humors and hot distempers of the whole body, all Diseases in the Heart, lost Appetite, all Passions; of the Ribs, Stomach, Spleen,
Liver, Sides, Lungs, Breast, and whole body. XII. The Basilick Vein which is called the great Vein, or inward or Liver-vein is o∣pened for evacuation and all Diseases In the Liver, Breast, Lungs, Stomach, Spleen, Pleura, against Choler from the Liver too hot, Toothach, or pain of the Back, Ribs, Sides, and all the members, bleeding of the Nose, and Feavers. XIII. The Salvatella or veins called Scelles or Spleen-vein, between the ring and lit∣tle finger, is opened safely in the right hand, for Stoppage and Diseases of the Liver; and in the left hand, for diseases of the Spleen: it is good also against eva∣cuations and Diseases of the Spleen, Li∣ver, Breast, Voyce and Stomach, Heart-ach, Jaundies, all Feavers, stoppage of the Breast, want of Appetite, distempers in the Face, Paleness, and yellowness of the Eyes.
XIV. The Ham-vein called Vena poplitis un∣der the Knee in the bending is better to be opened than the Saphena. To provoke Terms, against pain in the Fundament and Loyns, Haemmorrhoids, and pain in the Bladder and Stones and Feet, all Gouts or Joynt-pains XV. The Sciatica vein in the Ankles of both Feet or thereabout is to be opened. Against Sciatica Gout, Elephantiasis or Leprosie, Vaices, pains in the Bladder, Dysury or difficulty of Urin, Ulcers and swellings in the Stones, and swellings, and Ulcers of the Kidneys and the like. XVI. The Saphena under the inward Ankle of both Feet, somtimes upon the Ankle, or on the sides of it, is often opened. Against all passions of the Mother, and of the Stones; against old Scabs and salt flegm, pains of the Hips and Legs to provoke the Terms, and Haemorrhoids
to purge the Womb, Afterbirth, to take away Barreness; against Diseases of the Yard and Stones, to draw blood from the Mother, Yard and Stones. XVII. The Vein in both Insteps upon the great Toe, is opened Against Diseases of the Bladder, and spots in the Face, Ophthalmy or sore Eyes, redness and Bleareydness, Cancer and Varices or Veins in the Legs, and the Diseases which the Saphena is opened a∣gainst. XVIII. The Veins in both the little Toes are opened. Against hurts in the Reins, Heaviness and Weariness of Limbs, Apoplexy, Pal∣sie and Epilepsie.
A Catalogue Alphabetical OF ALL Diseases that may, and ought to be cured by Phlebotomy. A ABortion to avoid it, open the Median in the first months. Against Alcola or Imposthume in the mouth, open the Veins in the Lips. Anchus, open the Sciatica. Against Anhalitus or difficult breath∣ing, open the Gindegi or Veins on each side the throat, or the Veins under the tongue. Anhelitus foetor or stinking breath, o∣pen the Vein under the Chin. Against Angina or Quinzie, first open the Head-vein and then these under the tongue, or Gindegi in the Neck. Almonds imposthumed, open the vein under the tongue above the Chin, or both Veins under the Tongue.
Animi deliquium of Swounding, open the Vein in the middle of the Forehead. Anus or Fundament, if it be distempe∣red, open one of the four veins above the Groyns on both sides. If pained, open the Saphaena. If inflamed, open that of the Arm. If there be a hot Imposthume, open the Basilick. Against Aposthumes of the Anus, if cold, open the Head-vein in the Hand. If it come forth, open the Vein under the Ankle and the Salvatella. Against the Appetite dog-like, open the Salvatella on the left Foot. Apoplexie, open the Ham-vein or An∣kle-vein, or Humeraria in the bending of the Arm, or that between the Thumb and Fore-finger, or let the Nose bleed. If you first open the Saphaena, and then that in the tip of the Nose it doth wonders. Or open the two Cephalicks, or the two Veins in both little Toes, or them under the Tongue. Against Apostems internal, open the Median. Apostums of the Liver, see Jecur or He∣par. Apostums and pains of the Kidneys, Loins, Thighs, Hips, Bladder, open the
Veins under both Knees. Arthritick, Articular, or Joynt-pains, open first the Basilick, then the Saphena, or Sciatica Vein; and the right Basilick, if it be on the right side, and the left, if on the left. It it be in the Hand, open the Sciatica on the same side, or the Ham-vein. Against Asthma, open the Median on the right side, if it be from Blood, if from Vapors on the left side, or the two veins on each side the Neck; or open the veins under the Tongue, or the Basilick, or in∣ternal Vein in the Arm. Auditus or Hearing to quicken, open the beating Vein, or that on both sides the Nose. Aurium dolores, or dseases of the Ear, open the Veins in the Temples, or first the Cephalick on the contrary side, and then on the same side. If Blood flow out of the Ears, open the Cephalica on the contrary side. If there be an Ulcer, open the hearing Vein, or a∣bout the Ear. If Inflammation and Al∣monds, open that under the Ear. If there be noise or deafness begun, open the veinabout the Ear. Against Axillarum tumorem, or Swel∣ling
in the Armpits, open the inward vein of the left Arm, if it swel not, to the ben∣ding of the Arm. B. Bilious or Cholerick Humors, are e∣vacuated by opening the internal Vein in the Arm. Bilis atra or Melancholy, by the in∣ward Vein on the left Arm. C. Against Calculus or Stone in the Kid∣neys, open the Sciatica Vein, or Saphena in the Ankle on both Feet. Calculus or Stone in the Bladder, open the Saphena's. Calor or Natural heat abounding, open the Vein by the Thumb. In Diseases Capitis, or of the Head both internal and external, open the hu∣merary Vein, or Cephalick in the right Arm; if on the right side and the left, if on the left, or that between the Thumb, and the Fore-finger, or the Nose, or the Vein under the Chin. Or that under the Tongue, or the external Jugular Ve∣na puppis, or the Cephalick of the left
Hand, or those of the Temples, or the Salvatella, for pain before in the Head, open that in the middle of the Forehead, for Feavers with Headach, open the Me∣dian. For old Headach, the frontal vein or the Arteries behind the Ears, or the Temple Veins. In Catarrhs, open Vena puppis, or those under the Tongue, or that in the Nose, or about the Ears. Exter∣nal Jugular, or those on both sides of the Nose, or the four Palate veins. Against heaviness, or pain behind the Head, open the Frontal Vein. Against Ulcers and Scabs in the Head, open the Nose Vein, or in the Temples, or about the Ears. A∣gainst Trembling, Giddiness and Pain, o∣pen the Vein in the Hollow of the Ear. Against Melancholy, open that between the Thumb and the Fore-finger on the right Hand. Against Carus, first open the Head, then the black or Median Vein. Casus or Imposthumes by fals, open the Basilick. Cephalaea or old Headach, open the Forehead vein, or them behind the Ears. Cerebri passiones, or Diseases of the Brain, open the Veins in the Neck or the Salvatellas, or Spleen Veins, Nose Veins, or frontal Vein.
Against Cogitations fantastick, open the Vein in the Forehead. Cholerick Blood, open the two Veins in the little Toes. Cholerick heat that between the thumb and the right Fore-finger, or both. Cholick, the right Basilick. Collum or Neck ulcerated, the Vein a∣bout the Ear, if swollen the Thumb vein. Against Diseases Cordis of the Heart. In all Passions, the Median Salvatella and the Artery. Trembling and Palpi∣tation, the internal Vein of the left Arm, the Saphena, and then the Basilick, third∣ly apply Cupping-glasses to the left Shoulders. In Repletion, open the right Basilick, in Vapors, open the left Basi∣lick, in oppression of the Heart, the Me∣dian, in Aposthums, the Basilick or the Artery. Against Diseases Costarum of the Ribs, open the Median pricking in the short Ribs the Salvatella. Coxendicum of the Hips, the Saphena and Sciatica. Crudities, the inward Veins in both Arms. In Diseases
Crurum of the Legs. Heaviness, the Ham or Sciatica Vein. Pain and Aposthume, the Veins in the great Toes, the Hams and Saphena. In Swelling, the Saphena. In Inflammati∣ons of the Legs, the Arm Veins. D. In Dilirum or Doting, open the hume∣rary in the Arm, or the Vein between the Thumb and the Fore-finger, or the Nose. In Diseases Dentium Of the Teeth, open the Cephalick on the contrary side, the Palate Vein, first the Shoulder Veins, then under the Hips. Those behind the Ears, under the tongue. If the lower Teeth ach, that under the Chin, in pain and putrefaction, that be∣tween the Chin and under the Lip. In Diarrhoea, open the left Basilick. In Diaphragma. Inflamed and ulcerated, open the in∣ward Vein on the left Arm. And in all Diseases below the Diaphragma, the Ba∣silick, and above, the Cephalick. In Dolor Or pain of the Kidneys, Loins, Feet,
Thighs, Bladder, open the Ham Vein: of the Back, first the Basilick then the Scia∣tick. If there be Plethory, in the Joynts and Feet, the Ham Vein. See Articu∣lorum dolor or Joynt-pain. In Dysentery, open the Liver-vein on the right side if there be Repletion. In Dyspnoea, open the Gindegi in the Neck. E In Elephantiasis or Leprosie, open the Salvatella on the contrary side, and then the Ham Vein or Sciatica. In Empyema, open the black Veins on that side. In Hepatis Or Liver-diseases, open Basilica or Salvatella on the right Hand in a San∣guine Imposthume, the Basilick or Ce∣phalick, or Saphena on the same side, or the right Basilica. See Jecur. In Epilepsie or Falling-sickness, open first the Saphena then the Cephalick, thirdly that under the Tongue. Also the Ham or Ankle vein, or left Hand Cepha∣lick, or left Salvatella. In Erisipelas, open that between the Thumb and fore-finger in the right hand.
F In Diseases of the Face, as flux and other passions, that in the Forehead. In Tumors, Knobs, Redness, open the Palate-vein and Ce∣phalick on both Hands. In Leprosie, Redness, Pustles, that under the Chin, the frontal. Those behind the Ears, the two Veins in the first Joynt of the great Toe, that Palate Veins. In Redness Pustles, Spots and ill Colour, the Frontal. In de∣formity, Foulness, Spots, Scabs, Pustles. And either Vein in the little Toe, that be∣hind the Ear or in the Temples, under the Chin or Tongue. In all Feavers, the Salvatella on the left Hand, or both, or both Cephalicks. In Feavers, Synoch the internal right Arm-vein. In Women with Child, the Saphena and Ham in a burning pestilent Feaver. Tertian, Quotidian, Intermit∣ting, and Semitertian, the inward Vein of the right Arm. In all Quartans, the in∣ward Vein in the left Arm. In Fistulaes, the Lip-veins. In Fluxes, with Phethory, the Cepha∣lick on the right Hand, and that in the
Arm first, and then that in the Ham, as Sciatica, also the black Vein, Head-vein under the Tongue. When the feet have water, the Sciatica, or that under the lit∣tle Toe. The Nose, the Saphena on the same side, and the Cephalick. In a flux of the Belly of blood not excoriating, o∣pen the black Vein or the Basilick. If it be from the Veins of the upper Guts, o∣pen the Basilick or Salvatella on the same side, or the Axillares under the Belly. In Flatus or Wind of the Belly, the ce∣phalick. In Foetor or Stink and Putrefaction of the Teeth or Gums, that in the Chin and lower Lip. G In Genitalium morbis, or Diseases of the Privities, the Sciatica, Popletica or Saphena. In Gums diseased, first the Humerary, then under the Lips and Tongue. If im∣posthumed, first the Cephalick, then the Lips. If Pain, or Imposthume, or Ul∣cers, open the Veins in the Neck or Lips. In Putrefaction, Stink, Ulcer, Inflamma∣tion, that between the Lips and Chin, or that in the corner of both Lips.
In Gibbosity, the Basilick. In Gonorrhaea, the Basilick. In Diseases. Gutturis of the Throat swollen &c. the veins of the Palate under the tongue, the Jugulars. In passions of the Gurgulion or Weasand the two under the tongue. H. Haemorrhoids, to open them the Sa∣phena, Ham, Sciatica or Ankle-vein. Hemorrhoids to stop, that in the Arm called Basilic right or left, the left Salva∣tella is better, the Lip-veins or that in the Nose. In Hemicrania the Cephalick, Temple-veins, or behind the Ears, the Frontal, the veins behind the Head. Humerorum morbis, or diseases of the Shoulder that on the top of the Arm, in tumor; the left internal, unless it reach to the Elbow. In humors crude: the internal vein on both Arms. In Hpdrops or Dropsie: the two Ham-veins, or that under the Prepuce in gene∣ral swelling: or the Cephalick if it be Wind.
In Hypothondries distempered the Salvatella on the right hand. I. In Jaundies yellow, the right Salva∣tella whether a Feaver or no: or the basilick Jaundies black, the left basilick, and then the Salvatella. In Jecoris morbis or diseases of the Liver. The Salvatella on the left hand, the basilick on the right in an Imposthume: see Aposthume by fall or stroak, the Ba∣silick on the other side, or the same in a Phlegmatick Imposthume, the right Ba∣silick, or on the same side in obstruction. First the black vein, then the Basilick, and right Salvatella. In Inflammation of it in the inward Vein of the right Arm. In Impetigo the frontal. Inflammations, first in the Arm if that doth not prevail, then in the Ham or foot: If it be a light Inflammation, o∣pen the Vein beneath on the same side. In Inflammations, under the Reins o∣pen the inward vein of the Arm on the same side.
Of the Fundament, Privities, Bladder, Groyns, Thighs, open the upper veins in the Arm. Inflammation of the Groyn the upper vein in the Arms. Insania or Madness, the Humerary vein in the Arm, the Cephalick or the Nose, Vena puppis or in the cavity of the Ear, or in the crown of the Head, or in the Frontal. Joynts pain and Diseases, see Arthri∣tis. Ischias or Sciatica, the Sciatica-vein. L. In Lachrimae tears or flux of the Eyes, open the Temples, the Humerary on the same side, or that Vein in the great cor∣ner of the Eye. see Oculus or Eye. Lactis abundantia or Milk abounding, first the Saphena, then scarifie the Thighs and open the Basilick. Lassitude or laziness of Limbs, the Ham-veins. Laterum dolor or side-pain the Ginde∣gi or Median. Lentigo, the tip of the Nose, or that in the Lips, or under the Chin.
Leprosie, the frontal or Gindegi in the Neck. To lighten the body and mind, the vein of the Prepuce. To lighten the feet and legs, the Ham-vein. In Diseases. Linguae. Of the Tongue, In Imposthumes, Tu∣mors, first the Cephalick on the right side, then the Lip-veins or under the tongue. In slowness or hinderance of speech, the vein under the Tongue, or when it is swollen the veins under it, or the Cephalick. Lipothymia or swounding, the frontal. Lippitude or Bleareyedness and red∣ness, &c. open the veins between the Thumb and fore-finger, or the Cephalick of the left hand, or in the tip of the Nose, or in the Temples, or in the corners of the Eyes. Loyns pained and other Diseases, both the Hams, the Median, the Saphena, both the great Toe-veins, and the Sciatica. M. In Mammillarum or Pap-diseases, o∣pen
the Vein under the Chin. When the Paps are swollen or imposthumated, the Saphena. Madness; first the Basilick, then the Median or Saphena, the Cephalick, or hu∣merary in the Arm, in the Nose, see Insa∣nia or Madness. In Mother-diseases, open the Salvatel∣la in the left hand, the Sciatica or Saphe∣na. When there is an Ulcer or Impost∣hume, open first the Basilica, then the Sa∣phena. When there are clefts, the left basilick or left Saphena. When a Cancer, first the basilica, then the Saphena. In an Inflammation, open the Ham or Ankle-vein. When there is Itch, open first the Median, then the Basilica. When it is discolored upwards, open the Saphena. When fallen down, the Basilica. When it is suffocated, the Saphena or Ham-vein: to purge and clense the Mother, o∣pen the Saphena. Maxillarum affectibus or in diseases of the Jaws, first open the humerary veins, then under the Lip and the Veins of the Palate. In the Diseases of the under Jaw and Mandible, open that under the Tongue:
when they are swollen, open the Ginde∣gi and the veins above the Ears. Melancholy, open the right Cephalick or the left vein of the Back, the left Basi∣lick, or first the black vein, then the ba∣silick or Foot-vein. Memory to repair and keep it open, the veins behind the Ears, or the Nose-vein. Menstrua or Terms to provoke, the Saphena and that behind the Clavicula or the Knee-vein, or that in the Ham: or first open the basilick, then both the Saphenaes, or open one one day and the other the next, and take four ounces: or open the vein in the great Toe, or that in the little Toe, or the Sciatica vein. To stop them open the Basilica. Mictus sanguinis or pissing of Blood, open the Basilick and Saphena, or the Cephalick, if it bleed from the bladder, Liver, or Spleen: if bleeding come from Reins, Kidnies, or back, open the Sa∣phena. Mole, open the Saphena often. Morphew, open the Frontal, or vein in the Nose, or that under the Chin.
N. Nostrils bleeding, open the Saphena on the same side, then the Cephalick, in Bothor or Itch open the Nose-vein in an Ulcer the Saphena, if the Terms or He∣morrhoids begin to flow, if not open the Cephalick and Nose-vein, or that under the Chin: if they stick open, the Cepha∣lick and then the Nose-vein. Nerves when weak, the Ham-vein. Nyctalops, the Cephalick or lachry∣mal veins in the Nose, then in the Tem∣ples, or the Arteries behind the Ears. O. Occiput or the hinder part of the Head pained, open the vein under the Tongue, the Vena puppis, or of the neck. Oculi the Eyes, in their Diseases, open the upper Vein in in the Arm, those in the Temples, that in the Forehead, or under the Thumb, or first the Cephalick, then the Frontal, or in the corners of the Eyes. In pain or dim sight, open the great Toe vein, or them in the corners of the Eyes by the Nose: in spots of the
Eyes and redness, the Nose-vein, in Lip∣pitude, Catarracts, Clouds, Dimness, Moisture, &c. open the Temple-veins on both sides, the right Cephalick, both Veins in the great corners of the Eyes. In heaviness, open the Frontal, in redness, the Nose, in heat and pricking, those in the corners of the Eyes. In Tears, Defluxion and Moisture, the humerary on the same side, or that in the great corner of the Eye, both Cepha∣licks, both the Temple-veins, and that of the Nose. In Lippitude, that between the thumb and the fore-finger in both hands, the Nose-vein, and both the Temples, both the veins, and in the great corners of the Eyes neer the Nose, the left Cephalick: in Tumor or Ulcer, both the veins be∣tween the Thumb and the fore-finger, both the great Toe veins, and that in the middle of the Forehead: in Inflamma∣tion and salt Tears, open the humerary on the same side, or that in the great cor∣ner of the Eye. Omnes humores or all humors, to purge and cure all Diseases. If the blood of∣fend, open the Median. In all Diseases of Nutritive members
open the Sciatica or Saphena. In all Diseases above the Diaphragma, open the Cephalick. In all Diseases in parts under the Dia∣phragma, the Basilick. Ophthalmy, the Cephalick in the con∣trary hand; if there be Plethory, first the opposite Basilick, then the Cepha∣lick, or first the Saphena on the same side if the matter be little and a flux, the Ce∣phalick on the same side, also the Tem∣ple-veins, or them in the great Toe, or between the Thumb and forefinger, or the Arteries behind the Ears. Orifice of the the Stomach pained, the Artery is to be opened. Oris or Mouth-evils, the Tongue-veins, in pain, the Palate-vein; stink, that under the Chin, or that between the Chin and the Lip, or that in the hollow of the Ears: in Imposthumes and Ulcers, first the Cephalick, then the Lip-veins, and under the Tongue. P. Palpebrae or Eyebrows if Scabby, the Cephalick or Lachrymal veins, or of the Temples, if thick, the Cephalick.
Palpitation of the Heart: the inward veins of the left Arm. Pannus the Temple-veins, and the two Arteries behind the Ears. Palsie: both the veins in the little toes, or that under the Tongue. Parotis: that under the Ear. Pectoris of the Breast: the Basilick on the left Arm, the Neck veins, or the two under the Tongue. To clense the breast: open the salva∣tella. Pedum of Feet, in all pains open the Ham vein, or in the little Toes, when swollen and red, the Ham and sciatica-veins. In itch or scabs, the two great toe veins. Peripneumony: the basilick opposite, if the pain reach to the Throat, Breast or Arm, open the internal vein on the same side. Percussion or stroak causing impost∣hume: the Basilick. Pestilent Feaver: the right Arms in∣ward vein. Plague, if it be in the Neck: open be∣hind the Ears, if in the Cervix, the Ce∣phalick in the Arm or Thumb. If in the Chin or Forehead, the veins under the Tongue.
If in the Head, Shoulder, Breast, the Median. If in the Arms, Ribs, Breasts, Armpits, the Basilick, Median and salvatella. If in the Thigh, the saphena. If in the Knees, Shins or Ankles, the sciatica vein. If in the Loins and Feet: open the Palsie vein near the little Toe. Phrensie, first the Hand Cephalick, or the Saphena which is better, then the Forehead: but take heed that he move not much in, or after bleeding, or the hu∣merary, or between the Thumb and fore-finger, or in the Nose. Phthisis or Consumption, first the left Basilick, then the Salvatella. Pleurisie, the opposite Basilick, at the beginning when the matter flows, when there is plenitude; or first open the Sa∣phena, and then the Basilick. If it be in the right side, open the right Saphena, when there is but little plenitude, or when the matter is flowed, then open on the same side, or the Gindegi and Median. If the pain reach to the Throat, Papps or Arm, open the internal Vein on the same side. Plethory, when no part is affected a∣ny
Vein may be opened with benefit. In Plethory, that maketh diseases from unknown causes, open the Liver-vein in the right Arm. Plethory of crude humors in internal Veins in both Arms. Plethory from Terms stopt, the Saphe∣na. Plethory great with Defluxion, first the Veins in the Arm: and if that will not do, the Leg or Foot-veins. Plethory of Melancholy, the inward Vein in the left Arm. Plethory of Choler, the inward Vein in the right Arm. Podagra or Foot-gout, first the Basi∣lick, the then Arthritick or Saphena: and the right Basilick, if it be in the right Foot, if in the left, the left; also the Ham vein. See Arthritis. Podex inflamed, the upper Veins in the Arm. Praegnantes or Women with Child, bleed about the fifteenth week, again when they open again about the twenty sixth week, open the Hepatick against the little finger. Andrenatus allows to Plethorick women with child, bleeding in the second, third or fourth month, but
not in the eighth or ninth month. Priapism, first the black Vein, then the Basilick. Pudendi or Privities, the Saphena, the Genital-vein, Sciatica, Ham-vein, or the Veins above the Pecten. When there is Ulcer or Tumor, open the great Toe veins. See Virga. Puerpurae or Women with Child in feavers, open the Saphena and Ham-vein. Pulmonum or Diseases in the Lungs, the Median, the Veins under the Tongue, the inward Vein in the left Arm, the Sal∣vatella. In Imposthums of the Lungs, the Gindegi. Punction or pricking under the small Ribs, the Salvatella. Pupil of the Eye dilated, the Cepha∣lick or lachrymal Veins, and the Tem∣ples. Q Quartan Ague, the inward Vein in the left Arm. Quotidian daily, intermitting, and se∣minary, the inward Vein of the right Arm. R Rhagades or Clefts of the Womb, open the Basilick in the left Hand, or the Sa∣phena in the left Foot.
Raucedo or Hoarsness, the Gindegi, the two Veins on both sides the Throat near the Neck. Reins, in all Dieases, the left Salvatel∣la, the Veins in the Knees, the Vein in the Glans of the Yard. In pain present or to come, the right Basilick, then both Saphenaes. In plenitude, the Ham-vein or Ankle. In obstruction, the Basilick often, then the Saphena. To evacuate and mundifie, the Sciatica, to strengthen the Veins between the Loins and But∣tocks. In inflammation, the inward vein of the right Arm, if the right Kidney, suffer in the left, if the left Scabs, the Ba∣silick. Apostems and Ulcers, the com∣mon vein if there be Repletion: or the Basilick on the same side, if humors of∣fend, or the Cephalick, if the matter be above. Or the Saphena on the same side, and the Ham-vein. In the Stone, the four veins above the Pecten, or the Sciatica. Rheum: the Palate vein. Rheum upon the Eyes sharp: the tem∣poral Arteries must be opened. S Sanguinis in blood abounding and un∣clean:
open the Basilick or right Salva∣tella, or the little Toe when it is hot and cholerick: open both little Toe-veins. When there is Melancholy: open the veins between the Loins and Buttocks. Scab or Itch: open both little Toe-veins. Sciatica: the Sciatica vein on the same side, Saphena or Ham vein. Speech hindered: the veins under the Tongue. Sleep profound, first the Cephalick, then the Median. Spatula or Shoulder diseases: open the vein in the top of the Arm. Spiration with difficulty and the like: that under the Tongue, the Median and Salvatella. Spiration or breathing parts pained in Feavers: open the inward Vein in the Arm. In Spleen diseases: open the inward Vein in the left Arm, Gindegi; first the left Basilick, then the Salvatella, or the Sciatica and Saphena. Spondil Diseases: the Vein in the top of the Arm. Spitting of blood: the Saphena, with Ulcers, the inward Vein on the left arm.
Spitting of blood from Terms stopt: open the Basilick twice or thrice, or the Saphena once. Spitting of matter: the black vein on, the same side. In Sterility or Barrenness from moi∣sture: both Saphena's. Stomach passions: the Median, Basi∣lick, and the vein of the under Lip. Stomach Imposthume: the right hand Basilick, if Plethory be first the Saphena, then the Basilick or Median. Stomachs evil Complexion with mat∣ter: the black vein, if there be Plethory. Stomachs Orifice hurt the salvatella. Strangury: the two veins on the sides of the Pecten. Stupour: first the Basilick, then the Cephalick, then that vein that is proper to the nummed Member. Subet from blood: first the Cepha∣lick, then the black vein. Synanche or Quinzie: first the Hume∣raries under the Tongue, or both Cepha∣licks, then the Gindegi. Syncope or Swounding: the vein in the Forehead. Synoch Feaver simple and putrid: the inward vein of the right Arm.
T In Tabes or Consumption: the inward left vein. See Phthisis. Tenesmus: the right Basilick, or the left, if there be repletion of blood. Tertian burning, pestilent, quotidian, constant or intermitting, and semitertian: open the inward vein in the right Arm. Testicles or the Stones, to empty the saphena. In diseases of them, both the veins on the sides of the Pecten, or that in the Knee. In pain, the saphena. Tu∣mor and inflation, both saphenaes, the sciatica, the Groyn-vein, both great Toe veins. In imposthumes of the stones, the right Hand veins, if pain or imposthume be in the right side, after that the saphena on the same side, if the imposthume be on both sides, in both Hands. In a wound of the Testicles: the Basilick, especially if there be repletion. Thorax or Breast: open the internal Cephalick of the left Arm. See Pectus or Breast. Tibiae or Legs pained: the Ham or sci∣atica vein Trembling of Heart: the saphena then
the Basilick, thirdly apply Cupping-glas∣ses to the left shoulder. In repletion, o∣pen the right basilick, in vapors the left. In Tristitia or Sadness: the Cephalick. Tumors of all sorts: the Groyn vein and Cephalick. Tumors in the Armpits or shoulders: the inward vein of the left Arm. Tumors of Tongue and Jaws: the right Cephalick. Tussis or Cough: the Cephalick, if mat∣ter fals, or the black vein, if there be mat∣ter contained, or the basilick, if the Li∣ver being hot cause it, or the saphena, if the Terms be stopt. If blood be coughed up: open the in∣ward vein on the left Arm. V In Varices: open the sciatica, saphena or Ham vein. Venter or Belly diseases: the basilick. In Belly-flux. See Diarrhaea or Fluxus. In Vertigo or Megrim: the Cephalick, Ham or Ankle vein, or the Arteries be∣hind the Ears. Vesica or Bladder offended: open the veins on each side the privities or saphe∣na.
If it be imposthumed: the left basilick or left salvatella. If inflamed: the upper veins in the arm. If a Stone in the bladder. See Calcu∣lus. In Virgae or the Yard diseases: the sci∣atica, saphena, Ham, the four veins a∣bove the Pecten, the basilick on the same side. In inflammation, open the upper veins in the Arm. Tumor or Ulcer, both the great Toe veins. Visus or Sight weakned from many spi∣rits: first open the basilick, then the Ce∣phalick. if there be great repletion, take first the saphena. If it be from the spleen, open the left Cephalick. See Oculus. Vomica or Imposthumes: open the two veins in the little Toes. Vomiting the Head, or black vein, or basilick, when there is Choler. If blood abound, open the left basilick or the sa∣phena, if the Liver cause it, open the right side basilick. Voice hurt: the salvatella or veins un∣der the Tongue. Urin difficult, the basilick and then the saphena, or the veins on both sides the privities. See Mictus or Pissing. In Vteri malis or diseases of the womb,
open the salvatella of the left Hand, sci∣atica or saphena. In inflamations of it, open the Ham or Ankle veins. Ʋvula fallen: open the right Cepha∣lick or Basilick, if there be Repletion. APHORISMES TO BE Observed in Bloodletting. Hippocrates his Aphorismes concerning Phlebotomy. IF the Vessels be emptied as they should be, it doth good; and the Patient likes it wel, if otherwise not. Therefore con∣sider the Climate, Time and Age, and Diseases, whether you ought to bleed or no. All diseases by repletion, are cured by Evacuation or Blood-letting, if large and
violent, or much at the nose. If any be dumb on the sudden, open the vein in the right arm. A Woman with child will miscarry upon bleeding, and the sooner as her child is older. In acute diseases open a vein, when the disease is vehement, and the patient in his youth, and strong. The veins behind the Ears being ope∣ned, cause barrenness. If you will let blood, by reason there is blood gathered together, to turn it from the place, do it at a great distance from the part afflicted. The opening of the veins beneath in the Groyns, Thighs, Legs and Ankles, maketh men unfruitful. It is good for a man to bleed somtimes: the time of bleeding begins at February, and again at September. The Aphorismes of Galen, concerning Bleeding. THere are three Considerations in Blood-letting, the vehemency of the disease, the youth of the Patient, and the strength of the Faculty.
Nor too yong, nor too old are to be let blood. They need no blood-letting that have any natural evacuation. Many need bleeding after long Diseases by the three considerations mentioned. We bleed when there is no fulness, when there is great pain, or in a Fracture or dislocation, or any contraction in a Joynt. Bleeding requires strength agreeable to the evacuation. It is not good to bleed often in one year. When you let blood, keep off far from the Artery. Bleeding and Water-drinking are chief remedies of conteining Feavers. When you wil cure obstructions first open a Vein though there be no fulness. Necessity allows and commands blood-letting at any time or hour. It is a good Remedy in continual Fea∣vers to let blood til they faint, if the Pa∣tient be strong. Two hours after bleeding the Patient may eat. In bleeding in continual Feavers con∣sider not the number of the daies, but on∣ly the strength.
If at the time of bleeding the Terms chance to flow, or the Haemorrhoids, ob∣serve it, and if the quantity voided be sufficient, leave the whole business to Na∣ture and that flux, but otherwise bleed a little. These are the inconveiencies that fol∣low, loss of too much blood, Faintness, worse habit of body, a colder temper, discoloring of the whole body, and fal∣ling into long deadly Diseases. In all Feavers bleed at the first if the Patient be strong. It is lawful by bleeding to evacuate su∣perfluities in a Feaver. In a Phlegmon of the Liver, the blood that flows thicker must be let out by o∣pening the internal vein in the right Arm. In a Phrenzy and Lethargy, bleed at first coming of it. In a Carbuncle bleed til they faint. In great Diseases, alwaies bleed, but with respect to the age and the strength. You must bleed plentifully in a Lassi∣tude with a Phlegmon, somtimes til they faint. After bleeding you must not present∣ly refresh the Patient.
Abstain from bleeding when the blood is good and little, and other humors are abundant; but when it is contrary let blood. If you forbear bleeding by reason of the age or for fear, let the Patient purge the more. To open the Haemorrhoids, or pro∣voke Terms, or open the Ankle-vein, and then purge is good with bleeding in the Arm. When blood abounds, it must not pre∣sently be let out: for fasting, slender di∣et, loosness of belly, or purging, or bath∣ing often, or exercise alone, or much rub∣bing wil abate it. After the opportunity of bleeding is passed, other evacuations are dangerous▪ when there are excrements either in the Brain or the Instruments of the Spirits. Bleeding must be at the beginning of Diseases, and somtimes purging. Bleeding is a common way to cure dis∣eases by repletion. Bleeding whatsoever, or wheresove or howsoever done, equally evacuateth the whole body.
The Aphorisms of Cornelius Celsus out of his Book 2. Chap. 9. THere is scarce a Disease in which bleeding is not allowed. It is an old custom to let blood yong men and women not with Child. But not Children and old folks, and Women with Child, for the Ancients thought the first and last age could not endure this kind of help, and were per∣swaded that if a Woman with Child ould be let blood, she would abort: but after this, Custom hath shewed that it is otherwise; for it is not matterial what age the party is of, or what is in the body, but what strength the Patient is of. herefore if a Youth be weak, or if the woman be not with Child, and be al∣so weak; it is not good to let blood, for so the strength that remains wil be taken away: but a strong Boy or old
Man, and a hearty strong Woman with Child may be cured by bleeding accord∣ing to Celsus. But the Physitian may be deceived if unskilful, because in those ages there is less strength. A Woman with Child hath need of strength after her cure, not only for her self but to sustain the Child. The chief art is to consider the strength of a Child, old Man, or Woman with Child. There is difference to be observed be∣tween a fat and a lean body, a strong and a weak. The thin bodies have more blood, the full bodies have more flesh. They endure the loss of blood bet∣ter, and a fat man is sooner disturbed with it if it be too much. Therefore the strength of the body is better to be found by the Veins than the Form. Nor are these only to be considered; but the Disease, what kind it is, whether abundance or want of matter hurteth, whether the body be corrupt or sound. For if the matter be wanting, or be sound, that is another thing: but if it
offend in plenty or be corrupt, it can no way be better helped than by bleeding. Therefore in a vehement Feaver when the body is red, and the veins are swol∣len bleeding is required. But if the Feaver be vehement, and you let blood in the height of it, you kill the Patient. Therefore expect a remission: if it de∣creaseth not, but hath ceased to decrease and you hope for no remission, then though it be worse bleeding then before, avoid not the opportunity. Somtimes make two daies work of it, if there be necessity, for it is better first to refresh the Patient, and then to do it throughly, then to spend all the strength at once. If you bleed for the whole body, open the arm, if for a part, bleed in that part, or near it. But this cannot be done eve∣ry where, but in the Temples, Arms, or about the Ankles. Some say that blood must be drawn far off from the part affected. For that will divert the course of the matter, and take away that which offendeth. But that is false. For it emptieth the nearest part first, and blood flows thither
from the remote while it bleeds: when it is stopt it will not be drawn. And ex∣perience shews, that if the Head be bro∣ken, that it is best to bleed in the Arm. If there be a fault in the shoulder, the contrary Arm is to be blooded, because if there be any evil, the part that is affe∣cted will sooner receive it. Somtimes blood is diverted when it breaks out in one part, and you let blood in an other. And it ceaseth to flow by applying things that stop to the part, first bleeding, and giving it another vent. Though bleeding be easie to an Artist, yet is it hard to an ignorant person. For the vein is joyned to the Arteries and the Nerves to them. Therefore if the Lan∣cet touch the Nerve, there is stretching of the Nerve, which his grievous. But an Artery cut, neither grows toge∣ther, nor wil be healed, but somtimes causeth a violent flux, but if a Vein be cut, the heads or orifices being pressed down the blood stoppeth. If the Lancet be fearfully applied, it only cuts the Skin and not the Vein. The Vein must be cut in the middle out of which when blood flows you must ob∣serve the color and habit of body; for if
blood be thick and black, it is bad and fit to be lost. If it be red and shining, it is sound, and the loss of it (instead of profit) hurteth, therefore it must be stopt. But these things cannot happen to a Physitian that knows what Body ought to loose Blood. If it be all black, let it often out, and bleed not again, if you have enough be∣fore fainting. Tie up the Arm with a Pledget dipt in cold water, and open the vein with your nail the next day, for the new Escar will easily come off, and it will bleed again. But whether it be in the first or second day, that blood which first was thick and black, begins to wax red and clear, there is enough taken; therefore let the Vein be presently bound up, and kept so till there be a strong Eschar which will quickly be in a Vein. This Celsus. THE APORISMES OF Arnoldus de Villa nova out of his Book of the Regiment of Health. AFter Bathing, or Venery, or great
Exercise, bleed not by any means. And also after a long sickness. They which serve in hot houses, and take great pains in their calling to re∣solve the Body, must not be let blood. Bled not in very hot nor very cold Weather. The Spring and Autumn are best times to let blood in. Bleed not in a pestilent Air, cloudy, or stormy Weather, or when the South-wind blows. In Summer bleed at eight in the mor∣ning, in Winter at noon. Let young men bleed in the first quar∣ter of the Moon, and old in the last. Sanguine men must bleed in the first quarter, Cholerick in the second, Phleg∣matick in the third, and Melancholick in the fourth. If the Moon be in a sign with a evil as∣pect, or to any member, bleed not in that member In Aries, bleed the Head, in Gemini, the Arms, in Cancer, the Median, in Sagit∣tarius, the Thigh, in Aquarius, the Legs and Thighs, and in Pisces, the Feet. The other parts are safe at any time. If the Moon be in Taurus, Virgo, Capri∣corn,
it is bad to let blood, if in Cancer, Scorpio, Piscis, indifferent, if in Aries, Libra, Sagittarius or Aquarius it is good. Let Drunkards and Gluttons, and those that are filled to loathing, abstain from Bleeding. If any want Blood-letting, and neg∣lect it there wil be Imposthumes inward and outward, the great and small Scab, the Ring-worm, Synochus, Meazles, A∣poplexy and Palsie, small Pox and spit∣ting of Blood, Quinzy, Plague, sudden Death and Leprosie, and generally all sickness of much Blood or corruption of Blood: and they that are inclinable to such Diseases, let them not neglect phle∣botomy. There are many evils by bleeding un∣reasonably. From often bleeding come Obstructions, Dropsies, Age hastneth on, the Appetite decaies and Stomach, weak∣ness of Heart and Liver, Trembling and Palsie, and weakness of all virtues both Natural and Animal. He that is very musculous and fleshy, by accident, and he that is extenuated, and they which use to diet that breeds much blood, and live in idleness and pleasure, and dwell in Countries where
there is little resolution; and that eat much flesh roasted, and drink sweet Wines, and use Baths, and no copulati∣on, and exercise little, are more to bleed than others, and they who fast and eat melancholick meats are to bleed less. When Phlebotomy is used to evacuate and in a place near the Disease or the part where it is, then the first blood ought to be worse than the second, and the second then the third, and if the con∣trary happen, there is stil need of bleed∣ing and Physick. But in some bodies that need little bleeding, it often hap∣pens that the first is better than the se∣cond, and then you may bleed again presently. Before bleeding it is good to exercise, move and watch to make it move better. The Member to bleed is to be rub'd and heated, and washed with warm Water, to make the Vein plainer and the blood freer. The Chirurgeon must be yong, expert, and of quick sight, not trembling or drunk. If a weak-hearted Patient, or one ve∣ry faint is to bleed, let him first eat Bread and drink astringent Wine.
They whose Blood is thick, immova∣ble, and the Veins hidden, must be bath∣ed some daies before, except the body be very plethorick. Before bleeding let the Belly and Blad∣der be free. In those that have an Imposthume bleed while the colour of it changeth: but when there is a simple plenitude without an Imposthume, expect not the change of blood, for the blood may be all a like, or good. If the Blood be whitish and thin, lose but little. In Summer and Spring bleed in the right side in Autumn and Winter in the left. In a venemous matter, bleed on the same side. When there is great necessity open the same Vein twice in a day, or when you have not taken enough. If after the Vein is opened the blood wil not flow, then it is good to cough and hawk, and clap the Patient upon the Shoulders. Touch the Blood as it comes forth, if it be cold, stop it presently, and also if it be very hot and thin, for in both cases, you may fear swounding.
Take a drop of blood upon the Nail, if it flow off, and stand not firm, it is waterish, and must be presently stop∣ped Or drop it into water, if it sink, it is too thick, and if it disperse and swim, it is too watery, if it be in a mean, it is good. After bleeding, Exercise not that day, but rejoyce at home, nor Bath that day, & use no Venery till the fourth day, nor sleep in the day. Consider also the substance of the Blood, it is either melancholick, phlegma∣tick, sanguine, pure, cholerick, or wa∣tery. Melancholy is the dregs of blood, it is black, and in the bottom of the Poringer, and when there is too much of this, it is no good sign, then we may judge that the Patient is sad, envious, and curi∣ous, covetous, fearful and poor-spirited, such must use things to clense and in∣crease blood. Flegm is white, slimy, unsavory, like whites of Egs, and it is in the blood next above the Melancholy, this must not be too much, and if there be much of it, we judge him to be flegmatick, naturally,
sleepy, rude, and dull to action, and to spit much, but there ought to be more of this than of Melancholy. Then follows pure blood, it ought to be of a purple colour, reddish or ruddy, of this there ought to be more, if there be much of it the Patient is sanguine, and and free, amiable and cheerful, laughing and of a red colour, bold and bounti∣ful. Then follows Choler which is the froath of Blood, of a Saffron-colour, with glittering red, there ought to be less of this than of blood or flegm, and more than of melancholy. If therefore there be a great quantity of this, we may judg the party cholerick, and by consequence crafty, deceitful, wrathful, bold and prodigal, apt for a∣ction, watchful and subtile. Moreover you must consider the wate∣ry substance that swims at top when the blood is congealed, as whey when milk is curdled, and it is like Urine, if it be put into a Glass, and when this water is like the Urine of a sound man whose blood it is, it is good, otherwise not. And when this water is separated more perfectly from the blood, the better it is,
and the better is the digestion and de∣coction in the Liver. And the contrary. This water must be in the blood to make it thin, that it may pass more free through the great Veins and small, and so come to the members. Therefore it is not good that blood should be without this water. For it wanted shew, driness and thick∣ness of blood, this is in such us fast much, and watch, and eat dry and hot meats, and that study and exercise much, and in some that are wel. Moreover it is not good that too much water be in the blood, for it would shew defect of digestion, either in respect of meat or drink, or in respect of the parts that cannot convert the meat into blood, and it shews also too much coldness and moistness of blood, and weakness of body. Hence it is that they who have cold Stomachs, and Livers, and Veins, and eat cold and moist Meats, and much, and es∣pecially drink much, and exercise little, and fast not, nor watch, have such blood. Also in Blood there is a fleshy Sub∣stance declining to white, for the Blood beginning to whiten in the Veins, because
the farther digestion to convert it into Members proceeds in whitning. This dige∣stion begins in the great veins, and end in the small with the Members of the third digestion, namely at the outward solid Members of the whole Body. This Substance is flesh-like, and ap∣pears manifestly in Blood after it is wa∣shed, and the fatter, moister, or more wa∣tery the Blood is, the less there is in it of this substance, and the thicker (except it exceed the temper) and less far, and with∣out water, the more of this fleshy sub∣stance is to be seen. Therefore from a great quantity of this white substance, is signified the good di∣gestion in the Veins, and the pliableness of the Blood to turn into Members, espe∣cially when you feel it with your hands. And when there are no great things con∣tained in it, that are not hard, but will crumble with the fingers. For by such there is signified an inclination to a Le∣prosie. Moreover if thou wouldst know the substance of the whole blood, cut it when it is congealed with a knife or thin stick, and if it resist not but cut easily, it signi∣fies the subtility of the blood; but if it
divide with difficulty, then it signifies sliminess and grossness of Blood. And if Blood wil not be cut, though it be easily divided as it is in Oyl, and wa∣ter and other moist things which are easi∣ly divided, though not cut, that blood is too thin, and that thinness argues want of digestion. And when blood is easily pricked but not cut then it is slimie, and that blood is commonly flegmatick. And when it is cut but with resistance, then the blood is gross, but not viscous or clammy. You must consider also of the colour of blood for if in one part of the Porin∣ger it appear of one colour, and in ano∣ther of another colour, as in a Pigeons neck, it signifies diversities of evil hu∣mors. Therefore we must consider the true fixed colour of the blood; it is red and purple, not dark red, and that argues good blood. If it be a glittering red, it argues pre∣dominant choler, and also if it be like Saffron. If it be froathy, it shews wind. If it be white or livid, or blew, it signifies cold and predominant flegm, and especi∣ally
if the blood be slimie, and there are other signs of flegm. These colours may come from burn∣ing, as appears in consumptive and le∣prous persons. Green signifies burning, and specially of choler. Black and Blew, signifies natural me∣lancholy, or that which is burnt. You must also consider the tast, for it ought to be sweet, if it be unsavory, it signifies flegm predominant, if bitter, choler, if sower or brackish, melancholy and sour flegm, if it be salt, it signifies salt flegm and adustion of humors. The scent is also to be considered, if it be sweet and pleasant, it is good if it stink, it shews great putrefaction in the humors. Moreover if blood drawn do quickly coagulate or congeal, it is too gross, if it be long and slow to congeal, it is too thin and undigested. If it be in a mean, the blood is indiffe∣rent.
APHORISMS of Avicen, Rhasis, Aetius, Montagnanus, Savanarola, and Damascen, and others. THey that use much Blood-letting in Youth, are cured after sixty sooner than others, and their natural heat is choaked, especially if they are of a cold complexion. They who dwel in the fourth or sixt cli∣mate, may lose more blood than they that live in the seventh, first, second or third. They who have weak Stomachs, and cold weak Hearts and Livers, and Cold, and have cold Diseases, must not be let blood, nor melancholick persons, except their veins be swollen. Nor pale, lean, starved, or such as eat melancholick food, nor such as use too much Venery, nor such as have a Dysentery or Iliack, or are much bound in Belly, nor such as have not bodies prepared, nor such as are seventy, except they be strong, and have broadful veins, and used it, and when there is necessity.
At sixty open not the Cephalick. At fifty open not the Median. At seventy take heed of opening the black vein. It is good for phlegmatick persons to open a Vein when the Moon is in Aries or Sagittarius For Melancholick, when she is in Libra or Aquarius. For Cholerick, when she is in Cancer or Pisces. In the New and Full, abstain from Phlebotomy. Let Youths from fourteen to twenty five bleed in the first quarter. From twenty five to thirty five, in the second. From thirty five to sixty five, in the third quarter of the Moon. Bleed in the morning when the Sun is risen after an hour, two or more of sleep. After noon, open the Head, Hand, and Feet veins, and the Arms in the morning. Let old and sick people eat Broath and drink Wine an hour or two before. They who sweat easily and often want Blood-letting. Usual accustomed Bleeding is not to be omitted without danger.
After Bleeding, drink thin and good Wine: avoid Mead, Ale, Fish, and what breeds bad blood. Bleeding when there is no necessity doth more hurt than good. After Bleeding, avoid bad Air, eat white Bread, wel baked Veal, Hens, Chickens, Lamb, rear Eggs, and that which breeds good humors and blood, drink pure Wine cleer and thin, abstain from Cheese, Milk, Herbs, Fish, Ale, and Meath, Anaer, Sadness and Copulation. FINIS.
OF CUPPING AND SCARIFYING, And diseases cured thereby The Time and Age of Cupping and Scarifying. SCarifie not before four years old, nor after sixty. Cup not nor scarifie in the full or new Moon. It is good when the Moon is in Cancer, Libra, Scorpio, Aquarius and Pisces: but not in other signs. It is good in the se∣cond or third hour of the day, and after an hour they may eat and drink. Let the Body or part to be scarified, be
washed an hour, or half an hour with hot water before and rubbed. It is good to use Cupping-glasses after Evacuation of the Body. For it is not good in Plethory, or to any part that hath a flegmon. The Use and Profit of Cupping in General. Cupping without Scarification. Is good to turn an Imposthume from a a noble part to an ignoble or inferior part. To draw heat to a Member weak∣ned by cold. Against the Cholick, if ap∣plied below or above the Navel. To take away pain. Against Dislocations. To draw out that which lieth deep to the skin outward. To evacuate wind and hu∣mors. To stop the flux and Haemor∣rhoids. To heat a Member, and to draw blood and heat it. To reduce a Member into its place. Against pain of the Ma∣trix, if they be fastned under the Navel, and the woman sit warm with them up∣on her. Against extraordinary flux o the Terms, if applied under both Breast an hour or more. Against Bleeding at the
Nose, applied to the Liver, if the right Nostril bleed, and upon the Spleen, if the left. Against a pestilent Botch to draw venom from within. Against a Rupture in the Groyn. To divert blood that flow∣eth immoderately from any part or place. To stop the fluxes of the stomach. To stop blood, applied to the opposite parts. To attract blood, extract poy∣son. Against a cold Stomach, if applied to it. To remove Wind. The Use of Cupping-glasses with or without Scarification, accor∣ding to Places and Parts. Cupping-glasses upon the Head; are good. Against Madness, Diziness, Baldness, Scabs in the Eyes, Bothor, sticking out of the nap of the Neck, and other Diseases. They hurt The Understanding, Memory. Cause astonishment, and hasten madness, in dry Brains. Cupping-glasses to the Forehead, are good. Against pain in the hinder-part of the Nose,
Head, heaviness of Head and swelling, disease of the Brain, madness and doting. They are good to the Fore∣head, for the face In old diseases of it. Impetigo, Ulcers, Leprosie, Scabs, Morphew. And also diseases of the Eyes and Me∣grim. But They hurt The Reason and Understanding. Ʋnder the Chin, they are good. Against Pustles and Tumors in the Mouth, Tooth-diseases and Gums. Spots in the Face, and the like. Against the In∣firmities in the skin. Of the Head, Throat, Jaws, Cheeks. Applied to the Back-bone between the Neck and Shoulders. Against diseases in the Head, Face, Neck, Teeth, Nostrils, Eyes and Mouth, Heaviness, Impetigo, Quinsie, and are in∣stead of opening the Cephalick or Medi∣an. But They hurt The Memory, and make the Head shake. Applied between the Shoulders, right against the Heart and Stomach, they are good. Against diseases of the Breast, Neck,
Shoulders. Against Asthma, Cramp, Trembling of Heart from blood, and dis∣eases in the Throat, and are instead of o∣pening the Basilick. But They hurt The Stomach and Heart, and make a trembling without blood. Ʋnder the Breast, they are good Against diseases thereof, and Asthma. Ʋpon the Liver, If it be dry or inflamed. Ʋpon the Back. Against Diseases there. Ʋpon the Stomach, they are good Against Tumor in it, cold and foul hu∣mors. Ʋpon the Hands, Against all diseases of the Head, Eyes and Ears. Ʋpon the Kidneys and Reins, Against Inposthumes of the Hips and Scabs, and Haemorrhoids, Gout, Lepro∣sie, Itch and Scabs of the back, Wind in the Mother, and other cold Wind in the bladder, diseases of the Thighs, and all parts beneath. Ʋnder the Navel, Against diseases of the Matrix, Cholick and Gripings.
To the Hypocondria. To stop bleeding at the Nose, and Womb. To the Loyns. They provoke the Hoemorrhoid, take pain from the Back, Mother and Loyns, Scabs from the Thighs, Imposthumes and Tumors, and allay Venery or Lust. Ʋpon the Buttocks. They clense the Blood of the whole body, and are good for the sides, Loyns, and Breast, and abate Lust. Before in the Hips. They are good against Imposthumes in the Stones, and starting forth of the Ribs and Hips. To the hinder part of the Head. They are good against Imposthumes Strains in the Buttocks. Ʋnder the Ham. Against beating in the Ham from hot humors, against Strains and Ulcers in the Legs and Feet. To the Thighs. They are good for the whole body, against swollen and impostumed But∣tocks, pains in the Kidnies, and Bladder, Fluxes in the Eyes, Diseases in the head. Against hot burning Imposthumes in the
Knees, Evils in the Breast and Back. Im∣posthumes in the Cods, applied inward to the Groyn. Against wounds in the Hip, and Thighs. Against old pain in the Mother, and to purge it from Super∣fluities. Against Imposthumes in the Hands and Strains, applied behind. To provoke Haemorrhoids and the Terms, they clense the Blood and take away Plethory, and are as good as any Blood-letting. To the Soals of the Feet. They provoke the Terms, are good a∣gainst the Sciatica, Gout, Megrim, and in∣stead of Phlebotomy in the Feet-veins. A CATALOGUE of the Dis∣eases to be cured by Scarification and Cupping A AGainst Anctae apply them between both. Angina or Quinzy, apply them often to the Shoulders with Scarification, and cup the Thighs. Anus or Arse-hole hot Imposthume,
Cup the Loyns and the upper part of the Buttocks. Anus or Fundament out: Cup the Mus∣cles of the Back. Apoplexy: Cup and Scarifie Neck and Shoulders, and the Thighs. Apostems and Strains in the Buttocks: Cup the Hips behind. Asthma: Scarifie between the Shoul∣ders where the Neck and the Back joyn together. Aurium or the Ears diseases: Cup in the Wrists and under the hinder part of the Head on both sides the Neck. For Ears bleeding: Cup upon the Shoulders. B. Basilick vein is as good as opened when the Cupping-glasses are applied between the Shoulders under the Neck, where it is joyned to the Back. Bothor: Cupping behind in the Head or Pole, or before in the Head about the Crown, or above the Forehead is good against it. C. Canicies or Baldness: Cup behind in the Head, and in the Crown before, or above the Forehead.
Cephalick vein is as good as opened, if you apply Cupping-glasses upon the top of the Head behind, neer the Veins on the sides of the Neck that ascend to the Head. Capitis or Head-diseases, are cured by Cupping the Neck and Shoulders with Scarification, and by Cupping upon the top of the hinder part of the Head neer the two Veins in the side of the Neck that ascend to the Head, or by Cupping with Scarification in the Wrists. The Head is clensed by Cupping un∣der the Chin. And upon the Fundament, Cupping draws from the Head. Trembling of the Head: by Cupping upon the top of the hinder part of the Head, neer the two Veins in the side of the Neck that ascend to the Head. For pain in the Head behind, Scarifie the Forehead Colick, against its pain, Cup upon the Navel. Cordis or Heart-trembling, Scarifie between the Shoulders. Corpus or body is refreshed, by Cup∣ping the Fundament. Coxae or Hips, are cured of Impost∣humes,
Scabs and Strains, by Cupping within side, or on the Loyns, or that part that contains five Spondils. For the two internal parts of the Hips, Cup between the two Anchae. Crurum or Thighs, are cured of Scabs, Ulcers and Strains by Cupping before in the Hips, and Scarifying under both Knees. D. Delirium to cure, Scarifie the Neck and Shoulders. Dentium doloribus, or Tooth-ach, Cup under the Chin, and upon the top of the hinder part of the Head near the two Veins on the sides of the Neck that as∣cend to the Head. Diarrhoea: to cure, Cup upon the Re∣gion of the Spleen. Dyspnoea or difficult Breathing, Cup the Shoulders. Dolor to allay, Cup upon the part. Dorsi dolores or Back-pains, upon the Loyns and Back. Dolor of the Shoulders: Cup upon the part between the Shoulder-blades under the Neck, where the Neck is joyn∣ed to the Back. Dolor of the Throat: Cup in the same place upon the Throat.
Dolor of the Colick; Cup upon the Navel. E. Against Elephantiasis: Cup the Loyns or in the part that contains five Spon∣dils. Also Scarifie the Thighs and Feet. Epilepsie: first Cup the Thighs, and then the part where the Neck is joyned to the Cranium, or Cup the Shoulder-blades. F. Against Face-evils: Cup under the Chin, and upon the top of the hinder part of the Head near the two Veins in the side of the Neck that ascend to the Head. Fevers are certainly cured by Scarifi∣cation upon the Back bone with ten or twelve Cupping-glasses. Flux and Blood that corrodes be∣neath: Cup with Scarification upon the Buttocks at the bottom of the Loyns: or use Cupping without Scarification up∣on the same parts, and about the Navel, and about the right and left Hypochon∣dria. G. Gums-evils, Scarifie under the Chin. Gibbosity, Cup the Buttocks or the
Brawn of the Thighs. Gullet evil or pain: Cup between the Shoulder-blades under the Neck where it is joyned to the Back. Guttur or Throat: Cup under the Chin. H. Haemorrhoids to move: Cup the Loyns. Haemorrhoids to stop: Cup between the Shoulders without Scarification or with, or about the Loyns and Reins which is better. Humerorum dolores or the Shoulder-pain: Cup between the Shoulder-blades under the Neck where it is joyned to the Back. I. Jaundies yellow, Cup upon the Liver, under the right Shoulder, or under the Ribs. Jecoris or Liver-diseases, Scarifie in the Region of the Liver. Liver Inflamed and the like, Scarifie the right Hypochondrium. Iliack Passion: Cup the upper part of the Belly. Insanium or Madness: Scarifie Neck and Shoulders, and before in the Head
about the Crown, and above the Fore∣head. Incontinency: Scarifie Buttocks and Loyns. Intestines evil: Cup the Fundament. Ossis exitum or Bone out of joynt: Cup upon the Ancha. L. Against Lactis abundantia, too much Milk, Scarifie the Thighs. Lust, Scarifie the Loyns and Buttocks. Linguae Magnitudinem or Tongue too big: Cup and Scarifie upon the Shoul∣ders in the Neck. Tongue Impostume: Scarifie behind the Ears, or Cup under the Chin and Neck. Lippitudo or Blear-eyedness: Scarifie Neck and Shoulders. Loyns diseases: Scarifie the upper part of the Buttocks and the bottom of the Loyns. M. Mandibles to mundifie, Cup under the Chin. Against Madness: Scarifie Neck and Shoulders, or Cup above the Forehead. Mother-diseases: Scarifie the Thighs below, and cup the Navel and against the Knees.
Mother windy: Cup the Loyns or that part that contains five Spondils im∣mediately among the twelve. Mother fallen and Suffocated: Cup the Groyns, Hips and Pecten. Menstrua or Terms to provoke, Cup the Thighs and upon the Heels, and the muscles of the Legs, properly for fat Women, also in the bending of the Ham, or between the Thighs to the Privities. Menstrua to stop, Cup under the Breasts with and without Scarification, let the Glasses be great, and they be ap∣plied upon both Anchae. Against Menstrua alba or Whites, Sca∣rifie the Buttocks, it is good also against corruption of the Menstrua. Mictum sanguinis or pissing of Blood: Cup upon the Reins, Bowels, Pecten, and Anchae, especially about the Bladder. N. Against Nose and Nostrils evils, Cup upon the top of the hinder part of the Head near the two veins in the side of the Neck ascending to the Head. Nose-ulcer: Cup in the nape of the Neck with Scarification. Nose-bleeding: Cup the Shoulders
and Buttocks with light Scarification also upon the Liver, without Scarifica∣tion, if the right Nostril bleed, and upon the Spleen if the left, and upon both, if from both: or upon the Sumen which is best. Also upon the Thighs within: Al∣so upon the Neck and Shoulders with light Scarification. If the Flux be Arterial: Cup upon the Region of the Heart and the Neck. Natibus or Buttocks, if in them there be an Imposthume or Pussi, Cup behind in the Coxae. O. Against Oculorum, of Eyes all Diseases, Scarifie the top of the Forehead, the Crown and Neck, and in both Wrists. Against Scabs about the Eyes, Dul∣ness, Inflammation, Tears and the like evils: Scarifie Neck and Shoulders, or between the Shoulder-blades. Against Omnia Vitia Corporis or all e∣vils in the body: Cup and Scarifie the Buttocks and upon the Fundament. Ophthalmy, Cup the Shoulders. Against Oris Apostomata or Impost∣humes in the mouth, Ulcers, Pustles, Tu∣mors, Scarifie the extremities of the Ears, and cup under the Chin and Neck. Against Stink of Mouth, Cup between
the Shoulder-blades. P. Against Palphebrarum or Eye-brows, Heaviness, Thickness, or Scabs: Cup be∣tween the Shoulders, & upon the Thighs, and in the Spatula's & nape of the Neck. Pannus: Scarifie the Neck. Against Pectoris vitia or Diseases of the Breast, Imposthumes, and Bloody Evils: Scarifie under the Breast or be∣tween the two Shoulder-blades where the Neck is Joyned to the Back. Against Pedum Scabia or Scabs in the Feet and Tumors: Cup and Scarifie un∣der both Hams. Against Feet inwardly pained: Scari∣fie the Loyns. To bleed the Feet, Scarifie under both Ankles. Peripneumony: Cup and Scarifie the Buttocks. Against Phrenzies: Scarifie the Neck and Shoulders, and Cup the Shoulders and Buttocks. Pleurisie: Cup between the Shoulders and the Buttocks and Thighs, and under the part pained with and without Scari∣fication. Poplitis or Ham-beating from hot hu∣mors, Cup in the Ham.
Podagram or Gout: Cup between the two Anchae or under both Hams, or in the Loyns, or in the part that contains the five immediate Spondils, or upon both the Alchab. Pupilla dilated: Cup the Neck and Shoulders, or Scarifie the Ear. Purge the whole body, and refresh by Scarification in the Buttocks and Funda∣ment. R. Against Reason confused: Cup the hin∣derpart of the head, which lieth upon the ground, when a man lieth with his Face upwards, or Cup the fore part of the head, about the Crown, or above the Fore∣head. Reins Scaby and Imposthumed: Cup the Reins and Buttocks, and the Shoul∣der-bones. Rupture in the Groyn, Cup between the two Anchae. S Sanguinem mundificare, to clense the Blood: Cup the Thighs. Saphena, its opening to supply: Cup in the Thighs neer the Privities. Against Scabs: Scarifie Loyns and Buttocks. Scabs of the Feet and Legs: Scarifie under both Hams.
Sciatica, Cup upon both Alchabs and Anchaes. Spasm from Blood: Cup between both Shoulder-Bones, where the Neck and Back joyn together. Spleen-diseases: Scarifie the left Hy∣pochondrion or place of the Spleen. Against Spirandi difficultatem or diffi∣culty of breathing: Cup and Scarifie be∣tween the Shoulder-bones. Spitting of Blood and Matter: Cup upon the Buttocks, and about the Reins, or between the Shoulder-bones under the Neck, where it is joyned to the Back. Stomach-diseases and weakness: Cup the Shoulders, if the pain be great, if the matter be thick, Scarifie the Buttocks. Also apply a great Cupping-glass to the mouth of the Stomach, or between the Shoulder-blades. Against Stomachs evil complexion with matter, Cup the Thighs, Buttocks, with Scarification. Stomachs Imosthume, apply to it Cup∣ping-glasses with Scarification to draw the Flux of the matter to the contrary part. Supercilliorum or Eye-brows heaviness: Cup upon the Nocra or between the Shoulder-bones.
T. Against Testicles imposthumated: Cup before in the Hips. To draw from the whole body, Cup the Fundament. Against Trembling of the Head or sha∣king: Cup the top of the hinder part of the Head neer the two Veins in the side of the Neck ascending to the Head. Trembling of the Heart, apply Cup∣ping-glasses to the left Shoulder. Tumor of the Gums and Mouth, Cup upon the Chin. Against Tussim or Cough, Cup between the two Shoulder bones where the Neck is joyned to the Back. V. Varices, Cup the buttocks. Vein Median, opening supplied, if you Cup between the Shoulder-blades. Vein Cephalick supplied, Cup upon the top of the hinder part of the Head, neer the two veins in the side of the Neck ascending to the Head. Vein basilick supplied, by Cupping be∣tween the two Shoulder-blades under the Neck where it is joyned to the Back. Against Venery, Scarifie the Loyns and Buttocks
Ventosity of Belly: Cup the Navel. Ventricle-diseases, Scarifie between the Shoulders. Vertigo, Cup upon the Shoulders, or the hinder part of the Head, or upon the Crown before on the top of the Fore∣head. Vesicae or Bladder-Imposthumes, Sca∣rifie the Fundament. Vesicae or Bladder-wind, Cup the Reins or that the part that contains the five im∣mediate Spondils and under both Hams. Against Visus or sight weak, Scarifie the Neck. Ulcers: the Loyns and Reins. Ulcers of Legs and Feet; the Hams. Vomiting: Cup the Shoulders with Scarification. FINIS.
