D172 R29696 11192780 46661
Kneeling to GOD, At Parting with Friends: OR THE FRATERNAL Intercessory CRY Of Faith & Love: Setting forth and Recomen the Primitive Mode of taking Leave By I. Danforth, Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in Dorchester. 1 Thes 5.25. Brethren Pray for Ʋs. Col. 1.9. We—do not cease to Pray for You. 1 Sam. 12.23. Moreover, as for Me, GOD forbid that I should SIN against the LORD, in CEASING to Pray for You, &c. Boston, Printed by B. Green, & J. Allen. Sold by S. Phillips, at the Brick Shop 1697.
The Dedication. TO THE RELIGIOUS, CAN DID, AND FAVOURABLE AC¦CEPTANCE, AND PATRONAGE OF THE VERY HONORABL WILLIAM STOƲGHTON, ESQUIRE, LIEUTENANT GOVER¦NOUR AND COMMANDER IN CHIEF &c. AS ALSO, OF THE HONORABL OMAS DANFORTH, Esq. NE OF THE CHIEF JUDGES & AND OF THE REST OF HIS MA¦ESTIES HONORABLE JUDGES COUNCELLOURS, AND JUST¦CES, IN THIS PROVINCE: A ALSO, OF HIS FATHERS, AN BRETHREN, IN CHRIST I¦SVS, THE REVEREND MIN¦STERS OF THE GOSPEL, I THE CHURCHES IN NEW-EN¦LAND: AND LIKEWISE, OF ¦THER LIVING AND LATEL
SIGNALIZED INSTANCES, YEA PATTERNS, OF A TRUE, GENE∣ROUS, PUBLICK SPIRIT, THAT HAVE ALSO APPEARED, AND ARE YET TO BE FOUND, A∣MONG OUR WORTHY MER∣CHANTS, GENTLEMEN, AND OTHER CHRISTIANS; [WHOSE ZEALOUS OBLATIONS OF PRAYERS, CARES, PAINS, COUN∣TENANCE, AND INFLUENCE, UNTO THE SPREADING OF THE GOSPEL, AND INLARGE∣MENT OF THE KINGDOM O CHRIST; AND OF ADDITIONAL MAINTENANCE, TO SOME GODLY PREACHERS, IN SOME POORER PLACES, IS GONE UP FOR A MEMORIAL BEFORE GOD;] THE UNWORTHY AUTHOR [A SENSIBLE AND DUTIFUL OBSERVER OF THE WORTHY DEEDS, THAT THE SOVERAIGN, AND EFFECTUAL GRACE OF GOD, HATH INA∣BLED YOU TO DOE, BOTH
FOR GOD, AND FOR HIS HOUSE; BEING BY THE CALI OF THE DIVINE PROVIDENCE UPON A SUBJECT, THAT CALI S FOR SUCH PATRONS, AS STAND NEEREST TO HIS THRONE OF GRACE; AND BEING BROUGHT UPON THE PUBLICK STAGE, IN A DIFFI¦CULT TIME, BY UNGAINSAYA¦BLE IMPORTUNITY;] HUM¦BLY, AND PROPERLY, RECOM¦MENDS AND DEDICATES THE FOLLOWING MEMORIAL FOR PRAYER. Licensed by AVTHORITY. Published by T. Tilestone, Senior H. Leadbetter, N. Clap Senior, W Pra D Preston, N. Glover; and Diver Others. Anno Dom. MDCXCVII.
Kneeling to GOD at Parting with Friends ACTS 21.4, 5, 6. And finding Disciples, we tarryed there seve days, Who said to Paul, through the Spirit that be should not go up to Jerusalem. An when We had accomplished those days, w departed, and went our Way, and They a brought us on our Way, with Wives and Chi¦dren, till we were out of the City: And  KNEELED DOWN ON TH SHORE AND PRAYED. And wh We had taken our Leave, one of anothe W took Ship, and They returned home agai Honorable, Reverend & Beloved in our Lord Iesus Christ. A Great part of Sacred Scripture i Hstorical: No part Uprofitable Pecepta D cent; Exempla Movent Examples are Powerful Preachers The brrenest Ground in Scriptur
bears the richest Mines; Nor can a Child of GOD fall into such a Case or Strait, as for a plentiful Relief whereof, this wonderful Trea∣sury and Store-house is unprovided; So Ado∣rable is the Fulness of the Scriptures. To make an Experiment hereof, I have produced this Text at this Time, when we are upon taking our Leave of sundry of our dear Brethren, Ministers and other Christians, now ready to depart from us, unto divers Places, upon the Service of the Kingdom of CHRIST; Nor am I altogether without hope, that it may prove a Word in Season, and useful, at least, to instruct us in some considerable part of our present Duty; although between our Case, and the Case in the Text, in some parti∣culars, there be no Comparison, or Parallel. Our Text is a small Paragraph of the Hi∣story of Pauls Adventures: He had been a Persecutor, Acts 9 1. but now is a Propagator of the Gospel: and through Soveraign Good¦ness He is chosen and made a First Rate Vessel to bear Christ's Name before the Gentiles far and near. Yet Rectoral Paternal Holiness will shew Him how great things he must suf∣er, himself, not from Others only, but from Christians also, whom He had made before the Subjcts of Sufferings. 'Twas not enoug that an Uncomfortable Contention had parte Him, and his Comortable Companion, Bar¦nabas,
that Son of Consolation, [Acts 13.1, 2. & 15.39, 40.] But, when, after a large Circuit, (being called by the Spirit from one place to another) He is now bound, in the Spirit, to go to Jerusalem, (Acts 20.16, 22, 23.) Behold! the Disciples at Tyre, said to Paul, by the Spirit, that He should not go up unto Jerusalem. What a perplexing exercise was this to the mind of Paul! And doth the Spirit indeed first Bid, and then Forbid? Doth he say one thing at Miletum, and another thing at Tyre? I suppose it not: But that when the Holy Spirit certifyed Them of the Bonds and Afflictions which Paul must endure at Jerusa∣lem, [as He had before-hand, and did after∣wards also certify Paul and other Saints of the same, Acts 20.23: & 21.11.] then the Dis¦ciples at Tyre did [as did the Disciples at Ce¦sarea, Acts 21.12.] by their own Spirits en∣deavour to disswade Him from this Adventure. Thus, as our Blessed LORD Suffered afflicti∣on from the irregular fondness of Peter. Mat. 16 22, 23. So Paul suffers no small perplex¦ity from his Christian Friends, who having a clearer sight and discerning of his Danger, than of his Duty, and knowing but in part, did ve∣ry ill to intangle the Sacred Text of the SPI∣RIT, with their ignorant and fallible, though well meant Commentarys. Our Text shews us the Renowned Apostle
of the Gentiles at the famous Sea-port City of Tyre: And in this short History, we may Consider, [1.] His Arrival at Tyre: Amplifyed with the Narrative of some Rarities that He met with there: [And finding Disciples The best of men in the worst of places; Lo the good Seed, long since sprinkled upon th Tyrians by the LORD Jesus, is sprung up un¦to a comfortable Harvest: Disciples that can∣not find out one another, nor consort together have Shipwreckt and lost one most noble fa¦culty and property of Disciples of CHRIST. [2] His Continuance there. He stays lon enough to enjoy one Sabbath with them: Hi other Work would allow no more; Thei Desires could be satisfied with no less: Whe the Spirit urgeth to hasten to Jerusalem, Pa can't be content to linger at Tyre. [3] His Departure thence: Illustrated. [1] From the Aversion of the Tyrians, o account of the Suffering which the Holy Spi¦rit had shewed them that Paul would be expo¦sed to at Jerusalem. [They said to him, by th Spirit, that He should not go up to Jerusaem [that is] excpt he would hazard his Life. An Elliptical Expression; Bu, to be interp¦ted by Clauses, in this History of Pauls Tr¦vais, preceding and following it; as othe Elliptical Sentences (of which both Tst¦ments
have good store) usually are: so 1 Sam. 23.12 They will deliver thee up; it is to be understood, with a Subauditur, [If thou con∣tinuest there.] Gen. 30.27. I pray Thee: his meaning is; I pray thee, Tarry with me. Psal. 109.4. I prayer, Our Translation reads it with a supply of the Verb, I give my self unto Pray∣er. So in many other places. [2] From the Resolution of blessed Paul and his Companions, manifested by the Effect of it; (And we Departed.) [3.] From the Admirable Concession, Submission and Condescension of those Exem∣plary Christians manifested in their most af∣fectionate and encouraging Attendance and As∣sistance afforded to the Apostle, all along his way through the City, and until he went A∣board the Ship [They all brought us on our way, with Wives and Children, till we were out of the City.] Thus, ¶ When our Brethren see their Call clear, to adventure upon any hazardous Designs for the Gospel; 'Tis but a Christian Duty to fur∣ther them, and help them, in the best way we can: Yea, suppose some particular Enterprizes, upon which they are resolvedly, and by Ad∣vise of many, bound forth, and their Remo∣vals, on the account thereof, may not be, at the present, perfectly in all points agreeable to the opinion and inclination even of some of their Brethren that have the Spirit of God; yet
All that have the Spirit of God, Men, Women and Children, will, and ought unanimously to strengthen their Hearts and Hands in their God, & to promote the Work of the Lord that is under their Hands. [4] It is illustrated and set forth by their Prayers at Parting. [And we kneeled down on the Shore, and Prayed, &c.] Behold! the very place where, and Posture wherein they made their Applications to the Great God of the Sea, and of the Dry Land, taken notice of by the Holy Ghost, and put upon Everlasting Record▪ Verily, now, unto the Believer that Realizeth the Omnipresence of the LORD, all the World is God's House, and every Place as an House of Prayer, a Temple for Spiritual Worship. And in every Place, if his Heart hath but a Sacrifice ready, he hath a Glorious Sanctify∣ing Altar at Hand, and a GOD too, that hath respect to Him and to His Offering His hum¦ble Heart is not nice or squeamish at all about the place, and he can Kneel on the Sand, as well as Stand in the Temple, before the Lord his Maker. He knows, God looks for outward Profession, as well as inward Subjcti¦on, ad Devotion; outward signs, as well a inward sense; the KNEE as well as th HEART; and by the Mercies of God, H is ingaged to presnt his Body, together with his Soul and Spirit, an Holy Sacrifice to the Lord. Rom. 12.1.
But from their Affectionate and Devout Prayers at their last Parting, we may gather his DOCTRINE. ¶ That the very best thing that Disciples of Christ, at taking leave one of ano∣ther, can do one for another, is to turn their Cases into Prayers. I shall endeavour by the Lords Help, to demonstrate this Doctrine from these three Considerations 1. That 'tis the best we can do, in that it is most highly Lawful, and always possible and practicable. 2 In that it is as Needful as Lawful. 3. In that it is the most powerful and suc∣cessful of any thing that we can do. First of all, It is most Lawful and Possi∣ble. We have Precept, Promise and Example to convince us, that we may Lawfully as well as Possibly turn one anothers Cases into Pray∣ers. I exhort saith Paul, by the Spirit, 1 Tim 2.1. that Intercessions be made for all men, [He intends not the Damned, nor such as have Sinned against the Holy Ghost:] All men that Christ Offers His Blood and Benefits unto, we ought to offer our Prayers for them; see verse 4, & 8. But especially, we may and must Pray, with and for the Brethren. Jam. 5.
14, 16. Pray one for another. Although  are unworthy of liberty to make Petition fo our selves, yet the Grace of God allows, y injoyns us to put in requests for others also Moses, and Samuel, and Daniel, may speak good word for all Israel: & the Debt of Lo to Jerusalem is to be discharged in the lawf and current Coin of Prayers. Psal. 122 6 Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, They sha prosper that Love Her. If we are for Exam¦ples; Look we to our Father Abraham, Th first thoughts of Parting with his Son, are fu of Prayer; Oh! that he may Live in Th Sight. Gen. 17.18. Isaac and Jacob part wit Prayers. Gen. 28.3, 4, 5. So Israel and H Sons. Gen. 43.14. God Almighty give y mercy. So Job and his Friends part friendl with Prayers and Sacrifices offered up at thei Parting. Job 42 8, 9. And this was Pau Custom. The Shore of Miletum was Sanct¦fyed with his Knees and Tears, before th Shore of Tyre was; The Elders of Ephes being Witnesses; whom, at parting, as a choic part of his dear Charge, He Surrendred an Commended, unto the Tuition of Heave Not expecting to see them or do for then any more, upon the Earth. Acts 20.32, 36 38. But Our Lord Jesus is an Example with¦out Exception: And we have His Farewe Prayer in the 17th Chap. of John as well a
His Farewell Sermon in the foregoing Chapters; Moreover, unto the Warranty of His own Pattern and Precept He hath graciously added he further Encouragements of His Promises, That He will even Pardon our Sins to us in nswer to our Prayers one for another, 1 John .16. Yea, that if we joyn together in desi∣ing and requesting of Him, any thing what∣oever, that it shall be done for us by His Fa∣her which is in Heaven, Mat. 18.19, 20. Thus we have proved, that this Way is ighly warrantable; and very Possible and racticable also; for Ab Esse ad Posse, valet onsequentia, That that hath actually been one, is possible to be done; Coelius [lib. 20. ap. 25] Relates, that when Themistocles, pon a severe demand of Moneys from the nhabitants of Andrios, told them that he brought. wo Gods with him unto them, viz. Persuasion nd Force: They replied, that they had two reat Gods among themselves, that hindred hem, to wit, Poverty, and Impossibility. But s to the case in hand, the Saints are delivered om them both. But 'tis the best we can do, or (1.) 'Tis All that we can do, many mes (2) It may Always be done. 'Tis (1) Only, (2.) Constantly Possible. True Christians, Disciples, do belong to Christ; Now ad they not the Spirit of Christ, they were one of His. Rom. 8.9. They have there∣fore
His Spirit, and He teacheth and helpeth them to Pray, Rom. 8.15, 26. And there is no Chosen Vessel but upon his Conversion, it may be said, Behold he prays. Acts 9.11. If Nathanael be an Israelite indeed, Christ hat, seen him Kneeling under the Fig-tree. John 1.47, 48. And in Prayer Jacob gets the name of Israel. Gen. 32.28. This therefore they can do for their Brethren, they can Pray for them, to the LORD; and many times they can do nothing else for them; their Wit, Strength, Purse, can't reach to Help them. The swel∣ling Ocean may swallow up, or Enemies sink them, or Sickness make an end of them long before we can hear of it, or reach them Help with our other Talents: But now, so long as they do but keep within the compass of THIS World, let them go as far as ever they can, they can never get out of the reach of Prayer. Would we have frequent Intelligence of their Welfare, we may in a New and Living way, draw near to Him, that is always near to them, and have it: Hannah's Son Sa¦muel was very Remote, when she had her first satisfactory Intelligence concerning him, after which her face was no more sad 1 Sam. 1 11, 17, 18. Nor was that the only case where∣in Prayer hath condescended to become an Informer. Many Holy men of God in late Times, and some of them in New-England  have obtained upon their Knees, happy
Tidings from Remote Countries, and strange Assurances of things to come. They perceiv∣ed well the Information, beholding no Infor∣mer, but Prayer in Faith. King Edward the Sixth asking news concerning one, that he highly Respected, was told, that there was no hope of his Life; but he instantly replied, that he was well assured he would recover, for he had that morning begg'd his Life of God: and he recovered accordingly. Daniel indeed had swift Information from an Angel, but it was obtained by Prayer. Dan 9.21, 22. Are some of our dear Brethren Removing to a great and wide Distance from us, of many hundreds of miles; yet I do not see what should hinder, but that, if the fault be not our own, we and they may daily meet at the same Throne of Grace, and interchange some com∣fortable Intelligence. Why should we not trust Faith in Prayer, when it hath been making Friends with Gods Name and Pro∣mise for Information? [Luk 16.7, 8] What though the Holy SPIRIT do more rarely afford the strong Pleadings of Faith, & mighty Assurances of particular Audience, as to outward Specialties of Persons and Cases, (notwithstanding 'tis not Enthysiastical to say, tha the LORD is not wont, powerfully to bear in such persuasions of Audience afer strong Cries, where he means to deny the Re∣quest,)
yet could we not double the Cape o Good Hope, although they were beyond Hercu∣les Pillars? And when the Wings of Faith & Prayer have mounted our Souls to the top o the Promontory of Sacred and Surest Prospect, I mean the Promise, without doubt, the Eye o Hope, will have a mighty advantage for the making of its most unashaming and most com∣fortable Observations. Truly, if the means used, have a kindly operation, 'tis a promising sign, to a sick Patient. And if the Decree hav joyned fervent Prayers and gracious Answer together, as the appointed means to the ap∣pointed and desired End, woe be to that Un∣belief, that shall put them asunder. I remem∣ber, when (Attending on the Colledge) I had been absent long from my nearest Relations, That HONORABLE PERSON, (with whom I Sojourned divers years, & from whom I my self, [as well as others, alike devoted to, and in Education for the Service of the Sanct¦uary] received much of the kindness of GOD, which the LORD of His Grace, reward with Everlasting Kindness;) He was pleased to ask me, whether my Friends at Home were in good Health or no? And when I answered, that I could not tell; he seemed to wonder at it, inquiring whether I had not, that morning been fervent in Prayers of Faith on their be∣half: signifying further, that although other
ways of Intelligence were shut up, yet some comfortable satisfaction concerning them, might be obtained in such a way; Oh! may we All now prove the Experiment by that Excel∣lent man of Prayer, suggested seasonably unto One! We shall neither mistake the Paradox, nor miss of the Consolation: May our Spiri∣tual Experience, be but the Interpreter. This is indeed considerable, but this is not All; For we may Save their Lives, and Assist their Glo∣rious Design, by our Prayers on their behalf: Luther soke it by Experience, Est quaedam Praecum Omnipotentia: Nothing is too hard for the Prayer of Faith: Jobs Prayers were able to break the Ice, to clear the Passage for his three Friends: Job 42.1 — 8. Who can tell or think how much Good that man may do, for his Absent Friend, that is himself an honest Favourite with an Earthly Prince, and that is unweariedly improving all Opportuni∣tles for his Friends advantage? Brethren! we also may help our Brethren, if we bestir our selves to take hold on God for them in this way of Prayer. And as often 'tis the only thing, so always, it is the most constant thing that we can do, one for another: If other help may seldom reach them, (yet by the Assist∣ance of the Spirit of God) we may afford them the Help of Prayer every day, and often in a Day. Thus did Paul to the Saints in
Rome. Rom. 1.9. God is my witness whom  Serve in the Gospel of His Son, with my ver Spirit, that without ceasing I make mention o you always in my prayers; And thus also t Philemon, Phil verse 4 I thank my GOD, ma¦king mention of thee aways in my prayers: An I verily believe that those Holy Persons foun the benefit of Pauls Prayers every Day. Thu 'tis Best, because most Lawful and Possible. Secondly: Because it is as Needful a Lawful, that Parting or Parted Disciple should turn their several Cases into Prayer Such as stay at Home have Need to Pray  Them that go abroad: Yea, a necssity let on them; and Wo unto Them if they d it not: They cannot Prove the Sincerity o their Obedience to God, or Love to the Saints or obtain any comforble Token and Evidenc of their own future Prosperi, that do not Pray for their Brethren, who make a part of th Church; in Praying for whom, they Pray f the Peace of Jerusam, Psal 122 6. And sup¦pos, their Brthrn should miscarry throug the weakness or for the want of their Pray¦ers, what horrib e Guit will unvoidably b incurred. And they need Oe anthe Prayers, in that, The Divine Order hah  Link't Men together, as that the one (und Heven) must be beholden to (because, d¦pendent
on) the other, for Preservation: None but a Cain will make it a Question, Am I my Brothers Keeper? How often doth the Lord permit the Devil to execute the Curses of Witches on their Neighbours, although, blessed be GOD, Balaam cannot Curse, nor yet Satan Execute when and where they sometimes could rejoyce to do it. Micah 6 5. How often doth the Lord fulfill the Blessings of the Saints? They that are blessed of the Gdly man, shall inhe∣rit the Earth: Psal. 37.22. 'Tis Promised, that, One day, the Saints shall be inthroned as Coss sss with the Lord Jsus Christ, to Judge the World; And verily He seems loath to do any great thing without their Suffrage now: They Bless and then He Blesseth Jobs Friends must be beholding to Jobs Prayers for their accptance with the Lord, as hath been sid. And Abimeleck to Abraham's, Gen. 20.7. [He shal Pray for the, and thou shalt Live] And Peter to the Churches Pray∣ers Acts 12 5, 12. And Paul to Philemon's Prayers, Philem. v. 22. And to the Prayers of Others. And the Bnedictory Opions of such Saints as stand near the Gate of Heaven, have been allowd by the Lord, to have a more peculiar hand in the Distribution of Divine Bnfits. As Eijah's to E sha 2 King 2 9. E sha's to King Jos; 2 King. 13.17. So Isaac's to
Jacob of Old; Gen. 28. 1, 3. Jacobs to His Sons, Gen. 49.1. And Moses's to Israel Deut. 33.1. Yet Our own Single Prayers for our selves, have not so great and extensive an Effi∣cacy as the Prayers of Many others for us may have, in which more Grace is Exercised, by more Subjects, the Lord being also more Glorifyed when after the Prayers, He receives the Praises, not of One but of Many Saints, for the Mercys which He hath bestowed. But more particularly to accommodate this Article to the Case of our now Parting Brethren. It will evidently appear that Our joynt Prayers are Needfull for them, if we duly weigh hese following Considerations. As Namely: [1.] Our Prayers are Needfull to them, in regard of Those by Whom they are sent forth upon the Work of the Lord, and Whom they are departing from: They are of Us: We and They are of One People of God; They and we are likely to stand and fall to∣gether. Now, One Achan may trouble all Israel. A man not long since in a Neigh∣bouring Colony had one Leg cut off: and when, in another Room, the Chirurgeons slashed the Leg that was cut off, to make a more perfect discovery, The poor man felt the Pains of the Gashes, and Roared dreadfully
for Anguish, until they left off: Even so, If it should fare ill with them, we should Cry out, and if we should Desert them an Sin in Ceasing to Pray for them, they woul feel it bitterly. Brethren! Our Sins, ar their Danger, and our Holy Devotion, may concur and conduce, not a little to their Safety and Prosperity. It may fare with the Hoste Abroad, even as the People that send them do demean themselves at Home: Hence the Lord gives a strict Caution, Deut. 23.9. When thine Host goeth forth—then keep thee from every Wicked thing Some Parents have had so strange a Sympathy with their Children, many Scores yea Hundreds of Miles distant from them; and some Veruous Wives, with their Husbands; as that no considerable danger or distress hath happ'ned to their Husbands or Children, but they have been distressed and in Agonys themselves, with a strange fear on their Spirits, concerning their Relations, that were in distress at the same Moments of Time. Some such Instances are recorded in faithful History, and more are ready at hand to be produced. Even so our Prayerlessness, as it will Indanger our selves nd State, so we may fear, they, that may e Abroad, may Feel it and Rue it. They therefore have no small Need, that we duly seek the Lord on their behalf. There
were some of whom the Apostle John Writes, 1 Joh. 2.19. They went out from us, but they were not of us: But of these our Beloved Brethren, it will rather be spoken, They were of us and went, as they were sent forth by us, 2 Cor. 8.23 All Extraordinary Calling unto the Service of the Kingdom of Christ, was not so immediately from God, as ever, to exclude the Ministry of Man; as appears in the History o the Calling of Elizeus and Matthias. Wickliff, Luther, Zwinglius, and other Reformers an Restorers of the Church, were neither Prophets, Apostles, nor Evangelists, to speak properly▪ but having received singular Gifts from God, such as the Lord saw His Church stood i need of, and living in the time when all goo Order was disturbed and so being Necessi¦tated and Spirited, to act some things besid and beyond the Common Order; their Action and Successes somewhat, though but a littl resembling what was performed by Prophet and Apostles of old; therefore we find them by some Godly Writers Metonimically calle Extraordinary and Apostolical Ministers o the Church of God: Truly they had tom Uncommon Seals set unto their Ministry, bu neither were Miracles necessary to attend The Ministry, nor yet the Ministry of all such o old as had a Proper Extraordinary Calling, a the Examples of many Old Testament Prophets
and of John the Baptist do shew. And al∣hough the Church Militant, is now without the Apostles Cares to spread and Propagate the Gospel, all over the World; Yet it is not the will of Christ, that that Work should all to the Ground: But as there is an Ordi∣nary Ministry, which hath its whole Direction rom the will of God revealed in the Scrip∣ures, and from those Media which God hath ppointed in His Church, and deriving Power f administring Divine things alone immedi∣tely from God, though their Call is by man, from he Lord, who also (not without good Education y men for the most part) hath qualify'd nd fitted them for their Calling: I say, as here is such a Ministry for the building up of e Church Catholick in the several similary Visible particular Parts of it, viz. Particular ongregational Churches, so there is an Incum∣ency of Duty on this Ministry and these hurches to expend and bestow both Pray∣rs and Pains for the stretching forth the Curtains of their increated Solomon, and the athering of others, even of Strangers, into the eep fold of Jesus Christ, and Settlement of ospel Order and Ordinances among them. It as meet that first the Law should go forth of ion, and the Word of the Lord from Jeru∣lem, by the Ministry of the Apostles; but erward the Gentiles must Call one another,
and spread it from Nation to Nation; Isai 2 2— 5 and from Neighbourhood to Neigh∣bourhood. As Leaven is first laid in, and then it diffuseth, and spreads it self gradually, Mat. 13.33. And as from one grain of Mustard-seed, a whole Field of it is propaga∣ted at length: So 'tis as to the Glorious Cit of God; time was, when it had but one Hous in it, but Zerubbabel holds the Plummet till it b fully Built to the very Suburbs: The Wor is carried on by Him that gives Gifts unt men, and Pastors and Teachers to build up the Body of Christ, till we all come, &c. Eph 4 10— 13. And the Word is to be committe to faithful men, who are to transmit it further 2 Tim. 2.2. Thus, the Temple is often bu even in Troublous Times; Dan. 9 25. and  the Church begin to neglect to disperse the Go¦pel abroad, in comes Persecution, & disperset the Church, to the wonderful Increase of B¦lievers in the World. Acts 8.4, 5, 6. O Candle may serve to light up many more and One Church may lend materials to the fu¦nishing of Another Cant. 8.8, 9, 10. T Candlestick that holds the Candle must n Monopolize its light and influence: Our L¦banon is not for our selves only, but to enclo others with Doors of Cedar. Our Mines Treasures must stand open to our Solomon  Build more Palaces of Silver with. T
Church that is already Organed,  with Christ, of Common Council, Care and Endea∣vour, for the Communication of what may tend to the New Up-springing & Maturity of Sister Churches. Yea every Believer hath some degree of a Catholick Spirit in him, wishing that all the World, and striving to the utmost of his Influence, that all that are near him, may become atogether such as he is [ex∣cept his Bonds,] Acts 26 29. And, as for New-England, Let our ancient Charter speak, what our Fathers Professed Intention ad Design was in coming hither, Ʋiz Not only purely and peaceably to Enjoy, but also generousl an chariably to Spread and Propagate the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and o direct the blind Pagans in the way to blessedness for ever. Some that have seen our first Times, can Remember, how much the Indian Work was then in the Hats and raers of the Saints, and how it Flourished, and how many of those American Converts have had a Triumphant Passge into Gory; but since that Work is grown out of our Hearts and Prayers, 'tis dolefull to observe what dark and deadly Smptoms, in most places, do appar upon the face thereof. When Gods Times to favour a People are come: His aints do greatly pitty their Stones and Dust, sal. 102.13, 14. But when the Lords
Rembranrs hold their peace, The Lord Himself also holds His Hand, as if He had for∣gotten His Work; for, His stated Order, He will observe, and stands upon His Honour and Glory, of being sought unto by the House of Israel to do it for them, Ezek. 36.37. The Lord recover and revive that work, and our Prayers for it, for His Holy Name sake. Amen. But to proceed, were not our Fathers a Ge∣neration of Witnesses and Confessors of the Lord Jesus Christ? Did not God the Father of Christ put His Son into Possession of these Ends of the Earth, by livery and seizin, when He cast out many of the Heathen, and planted His Peo¦ple here, in their stead? And were not these Churches of Christ Jesus to be Pillars for th Truth, 1 Tim. 2.15? When Israel Apostatiz¦ed to Idolatry, many of Asher, forsook their Inheritances, and came and dwelt in Judah for Religions sake, and when Prophecy was restored to Israel, behold a Prphetess of the Daughter of Phanuel of that Tribe: Luk. 2.36. And are the Days near for the Illumination of the Dark Parts of the World? May we not humbly Hope, that New-England (though Sinful) shall have an hand therein  What if the Lord will have His Word go forth along into this America, from His Jerusaem here? and that too, whilest our Sins and Hi Judgments are upon us, that so no flesh ma
glory in His sight? And if the Lord have de∣signed these Churches unto such work; Suppose, we should be slack & negligent herein, Quere, whether God may not find out ways to scatter and disperse us abroad, and compel us to At∣tend it? Acts 8.4-6 And I will add this further, Hath the Lord made the Offers of the Gospel by the Ministers of these Churches, Acceptable unto any Consi∣derable Places [sometimes deeply prejudiced a∣gainst us and our way of Worshipping the Lord, by occasion of Auncient Severities] and opened a Door unto us, to shew them the Kindness of God, for their Everlasting Good? And hath the Lord In∣clined some other Places more remote, to send ither for Spiritual Help, rather than to other Lands? And hath the Lord Inclined the Hearts of sundry of our Dear Brethren, both Ministers and other Christians, to accept of Mission unto such Service; and are they now going forth, [One of them having been lately Separated to the Pastoral Office, over a Little Church, with Fasting and Prayer, by the Reve∣end Elders and Messengers of divers of our Churches] And shall we not Kneel for hem before the Lord? What we All owe o God and to His Kingdom, we have Sepa∣ated them to discharge it for us, and they re New Englands Offering to the LORD JE∣SƲS
CHRIST, for the Service of His King∣dom: and how shall we Sanctifie them other∣wise, than by Prayer? 1 Tim. 4.5. And are we not more peculiarly obliged to be much in fervent Supplications for them, than the Churches of God in other Countries are, since they are peculiarly Ours, and our Offering to the LORD? Do we not yet know that we stand but in ill Terms with the Lord our God, and that an Offering will not be easily Accepted from declined and pro∣voking New-England? And have we not th greater need to use what humble Importunity we can? Paul desires the Brethren to pray for Him, that his Charitable Offerings an Services might be accepted of the Saints; Rom 15 31. But verily we have need also to pra hard, that our poor Oblations may be ac∣cepted of the Lord: For if our hearts be not much in, and our Prayers with our Gratula∣tory Sacrifice to the Lord, how can we ex∣pect, that he should regard it at all? Qui frigide orat, docet negare. Our dear Brethren, now going forth from us, have a greater depen∣dance (under Christ) upon our poor Pray¦ers for them, than we can esily apprehend for, if we desert them, considering their relati¦on to us, they may fear, that the Lord wi also; But His Ways and His Thoughts ar high above ours, as the Heavens are abov
the Earth, which is, through Christ Jesus, our only hope and stay, when we see the Glory of His Paternal Holiness and Severity, and our own Vileness Well, I will be humbly bold to say, that a Price is this day put into our Hands, may we have Hearts to improve it. 'Tis too sadly evident, to be conceal'd or dissembled, that we have lost much of our wonted frequency and ancient intimacy with the Lord, and that a lamentable estrangedness of Spirit is grown between the Lord and New-England; Now, as wise Courti¦ers when under a Cloud, seek, and make much of some Ingratiating Errand into the presence of their Prince, especially some matter of migh∣ty Consequence to the Realm and State; So were we wise Christians, we should prize highly any good Errand, into the Presence of the Lord, especially such an Important Errand as this, wherein the Great Affairs of His King∣dom and Gory and of the Souls of men are con∣cerned May we obtain such Grace, that the Lord, may se our hearts once purely and throughly concerned, and warmly engaged a∣bout such things as are chiefly in the Lords Eye and Heart; as hereby, Religion may bgin to be Revived within us, so a fair way will be paved for us, by His Infinite Grace, for our Returning into His Favour and Ac∣quaintance again. Our Brethren then, that
have so earnestly desired our Prayers this Day, might use the words of the Apostle in another case, and say, We ask Your Prayers, not only, or not so much, that we desire and need the Gift, and the Help thereof, but, that FRUIT may abound unto YOUR ac∣ount, both now, and in the day of Christ. Your Applications to the Throne of Grace for us, shall further Your Own Wecome at that Throne, as well as Ours; and moreover, whatsoever we shall obtain and prevail to do, by the force of your Prayers (next under CHRIST) and by the force of New Englands Prayers 'twill be accepted as if New-England and you had done it your selves. [2] As our Prayers are needful for them in Regard of Our selves that send them, so also in Regard of Themselves that are sent; The Places they are sent unto, The Work they are sent upon, and the great dependance that will be upon their Success therein. As for some of the Plantations which they are sent unto, Is not their Mode of Settlement an high Provcoation to the Lord? Who can justify their laying out of, and sparate Settling upon such large, Scattered, distant Plantations, and Farms, as Bid Defiance unto Civil Cohabitation in convenient Vicinity, and so not only to Religion and the Worship of God, not so to
be attended and maintained, but even to Civility it self? And who then can much wonder if many of the Rising Generation should grow Atheistical, Ignorant, Erroneous, Profane, Profligate, and Abominable, having no such Publick Spiritual Means to restrain them from Vice, and to have promoted their Conversion, as in other Places is Enjoyed? Is not World∣liness a Reigning Sin among them? Now the Friendship of the World is Enmity to God; and he that Loveth the World, the Love of the Father is not in him, 1 Joh. 2.15. And how many are grown Old in a custom of Sinning? and can they change? Can they learn to do well, who are accustomed to do evil? And how inveterate have some been in their Prejudices against even Godliness it self, because of the Vices of some, that have made a Profession thereof! As if Christ and His Family were to be abhorred because there was one Horrible Judas there. Such Great Sins will not be Pardoned, without Great Suit at the Throne of Grace. One, that was meditating in the Field in one of those Places, was much surprised and affcted, when he suddenly met with a great Parcel of milk white Dry Bones, n Embleme of the Dead Souls that Ezekiel was Commanded to Prophecy over, that they might live. Verily their Spiritual Resurrection will not be obtained without Prayer. The
Lord will be sought to for the Life of such Souls, Ezek. 36.26, 37. Yet at the Faith and Prayer of others for them, God can Par∣don mighty Sins, Mat 9 2. And cast out Monstrous Devils and Lusts, that will not otherwise be ejected but by Fasting and Prayer, Mark 9.29. Oh! Can we endure to see the Destruction of so many English People, and not make an Out-cry of Prayer to the Lord on their behalf? [Esther 8.6.] And now that the Gospel in the pure and powerful Dispensation of it, is advancing to them, and their Eternal State is put upon the Turning Point; What a Precipice of Infan∣dous Ruine stand they upon; and how shall they escape if they neglect so great Salvation? and when the Lord once puts them thus upon the Wheel, (and God knows whether as to many of them, it may not be the last proba∣tion time, that ever they shall have) our hearts should tremble for them, least that they be Marred in the hands of the Potter: and now that they are Brought to the Birth, why should Precious Immortal Soul: perish, in any part, for want of the Sacred Midwifery of Prayer! Do not some Fields among them promise well, and seem white already for the Harvest; But then also our Duty remains upon us, Luk. 10.2. To Pray to the Lord of the Harvest, &c.
Dares any man presume to say or think, that he hath one spark of true Grace in his Heart, that can forbear to pray now? Again, the weakness of these our Dear Bre∣thren that are Sent doth bespeak our Prayers on their behalf. Though the Lord hath sig∣nally preserved them from Spots, (Blessed be His Holy Name! yet Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Have they not been born and bred in the very depth of the Apo∣stacies of these Churches? However, it is with them personally, yet doth not Publick Guilt involve them as well as others? As for Satan (whose Kingdom they are sent to de∣stroy, in the Name of Christ) He will stand at theirs (as He did at Joshua's) Right-hand, to resist them: Not only with cursed Tempta∣tions; but also with cruel Accusations; May He but see them Cleathed with filthy Raiment be∣fore the Angel: Now, If the Lord mark Iniqui∣ty, they cannot stand: And oh! how much Faith and Holiness do they and we want? The Babe wants of the Stature of Manhood, much more than He hath already atteined. So it is with the New Creature at first: Oh! How much is lacking in Faith, hope, love, zeal, purity, and what is wanting of Perfect∣ion of Sanctification, is doubtless made up with Imperfection and Corruption: But they ought to be extraordinarily holy, abstaining,
not from Evil only, but even from all appea∣rance of Evil, that adventure upon such Ex∣traordinary Service, and most strictly must they walk, that have such and so many Eyes upon them, that will judge of our whole Re∣ligion, wholly by their Conversations? If Sa∣tan should trip them (and he will be sure to do the utmost that he shall be permitted to∣wards it) what a scandal would arise to Re∣ligion, what an incurable ruine to that Work under their hands! Say then uprightly, D not they stand in need of Prayers? Again, th Devil bearing them such a cruel spite: Though there be an open Door, yet they must ex∣pe many Adversarie: The many monstrou Militant Members of atan Mystical will be rallyed up against th, if God restrain them not; and do not they need Prayers then, that must do well and bear ill, and must adventure all for Jesus Christ? and so more than Fight with Beasts at Ephesus. Besides, they are young and inxperienced, and in that respect have this principally to comfort them: Judg. 7.2, 4. That It may be they are not too many for God to work by. Prayers of Saints were most needful to the Apostles them∣selves, much more unto These Our Brethren: For, 1. Then, the Spirit was more plentifully poured out, but less now.
2. They had Miracles to confirm their Of∣fice and Doctrine, which are not ordinarily to be expected now. And 3. Souls are as sorely prejudiced, blinded, and hardened now, as ever in the Apostles Dayes: Do we indeed understand the Perils and Toils and Tryals that the Work will unavoi∣dably expose them unto, that we do our part o ingage them in, and can we find in our hearts to leave them in the lurch now, and so in against the Lord, in ceasing to pray for hem? God forbid it should be so. Thus we have seen that it is most needful. Consider we in the last place, that 'tis the most owerful and successful thing that we can do or our Brethren, to put in daily for them at he Throne of Mercy. When did the Lord ay unto the Seed of Jacob, that they should eek his Face in vain! Are not fervent Suppli∣nts such Favourites, as cannot possibly miscar∣y in their well grounded Suits for Grace?  Joh. 5 14, 15 If King David stood so much upon His Honour, that He would not ecal His banished (though his Heart was set pon it) until one of his most noble Peers, id supplicate Him for it: Well may the Lord o so too; But God is of one mind: Can Prayer turn Him? Verily His invariable mind nd dcree is, that His outward Works shall urn upon the Wheel of Prayer, Mat. 6.6.
and that our hearts and desires within us shall bear the Counter part unto His Will and Designs without us, referring to what desira∣ble good shall come to pass, and be wrought in the World. The Holy Spirit helps our infirmities, and teaches us to Pray, Rom. 8. The Lord therefore can no more be out of Love with Evangelical Prayer, than with His own Will and Work And if the Spirit helps our infirmities, Our infirmitie (no more than El as his Passions) shall no hinder the Success of our Prayers, any more than the acceptance of our Persons in Christ Jesus. 'Though we have Dross in our most golden Prayers, yet we have a curious and careful Refiner at the Altar of Incense into whose Golden Censer they must pass, before they pass unto the Father. We are Intercssours, but not of Mediation, we are Priests unto God, yet (saith Judicious Ames,) not so much as Subordinate to Christ in His Priestly Office He offers, He presents and pleads His ow Blood and Mrits in the holist of all; w stand without, and desire to receive His be¦nefits; we open our Mouths wide (by Hi Spirit) and stand in the capacity of Reciever whereas He stands alone in the high Qualit of a Mediatorial Procurer of Blessings. B how is the Grace and Blessing in the Ne Covenant most Free, when as it is not to b
attained without much Pains in Prayer? Yet what can be more free and easy than to Ask and Receive? How can we take in much Mercy, if we don't open our Mouths wide? If we open them wide, what doth God gain by it? If He fills them, Is it not of Grace? What is this mite of Duty, and Acknowledg∣ment, to the Millions Per Annum, that it is re∣payed withal? And whence have we this poor mite also? Doth not the same bountiful Hand that bestows the consequent Blessings, Create and Assist the antecedent Prayers for them? Is not Gospel-Prayer a part of Salvation, and a good step into it, making way for further steps and degrees of Salvation. Gods Decrees are Absolute, His Gifts free and absolute, without the Scientia Media, & the moral conditionateing Terms on which the first Grace & all Salvation some say is to be had, and without the won∣derul Merits of Condignity and Supererroga∣tion or of Congruity and the other Paradoxes of the Jesuites. You will say then, wherein consists the Efficacy of Prayer? Since if we do but what is duty to do, what thanks do we deserve; and what Obligations in any wise can we lay the Lord under thereby? Yea in our best Prayers we come short of our Duty? I Answer, In that, the Grace and Exercise also of Prayer in the up grown, is given in Con∣unction with other Mercys inseparably, for
the Jewel of Salvation is set in the Gold-Ring of Prayer: He that calleth on the Name of the Lord shall be Saved: Hold fast the Ring and you secure the Jewel. In the bails and bundle of Life and Blessings; the Covering that all is bound up in, is Prayer. If you come not at that to lay it open, you can come at no other particulars of the Invoice of Salvation. The Lord Jesus hath sent us the Treasures of His Goodness Lockt up in the Glorious Cabinet of the New Covenant and Promise, and in the Lock thereof is put the Key of Prayer; now God hath Ordained such an Order and Me∣thod in the Application of the benefits, that we shall first take and use the Key and thereby come at further Mercys: and the Eterna Decree is so Absolute, that we can no more fail of the means set down in that decree, than we can fail of the end; and therefore they speak what is not meet to be spoken of God, that say, They and their Brethren shall do well enough, if it be so decreed, whether they Pray or no; as if God had certainly decreed the End without the Means. And they Blas∣pheme the Lord Jesus Christ, who look to Prayer, more than unto Christ Himself; when as Prayer without Christ is worse than nothing. 'Tis CHRISTS NAME mainly and not our Prayers that hath Power with God and with Christ Joh. 14.23. What eve
yee Ask in MY NAME, I will do it. Christians! If when you stand in need of Atonement, Pardon & other Blessings, you fly to your Pray∣ers, but neglect Christ, His Blood and Inter∣ssion, and free Promise of Grace to Sinners; God may break your Prayers to pieces and make them Nehushtans, and you shall be so shut up, that you shall not be able to Pray, till you mend that Great Fault. But if you arry Christ and His Name, in the Vessel of your Prayers, you shall arrive at your de∣sired Port in Safety. The Promises Assure us of the Prevalency of Prayer, and Innumerable Experiences of Saints are so many Seals to the Assurance. What frequency and fervency of Prayer was used by the Fathers of New-Eng∣land, and Oh with what Glorious Successes! Time would fail, to mention other Instances, faithfully Recorded by one of our Reverend Seers, in his precious Bk, Intituled, The Pre∣vaency of Prayer, to which I refer you. So much shall suffice for the Demonstra∣tion of the DOCTRINE. I Proceed to the APPLICATION. And omitting what might be spoken by way of Inference, for Information, Humiliati∣on,
Caution, Reproof, Tryal and Comsort, least I should be too Prolix, I shall only add somewhat, by way of Exhortation unto the great Duty of Prayer; and particularly, Let us from what we have now had of the Word of the Lord, be effectually moved to turn our Brethrens Cases into Prayers. Two Sorts of Prayer Let me Urge upon you, in the Name of the Lord, the God that Heareth Prayer; viz. [1.] Proper Prayer. And [2.] Practical Prayer, as some Distinguish them. Firstly; Proper Prayer, both Mental and Vocal, not Publick only, but also Private and Secret. Make dayly most Religious Repre∣sentations of your Wills and Desires as to these Matters, unto the Lord, and Pour out your Hearts before Him: We have proved that it is not needless: GOD Will have Our Good Will to His Doing of our Neighbours Good. Yea, (as Proud as we are, and prone to de∣spise our sinful Brethren and their Prayers) the Most High will make us stoop to them, to beg their Prayers, before He will stoop down to us, with such Mercies and Bounties as only can lift us up. I add, He is a Stranger in Is∣rael that hath not heard of the deplorable E∣state of Religion (not to mention Morality) in some of the English Plantations in thi Ame∣rica; and for what an astonishing Number of years, Ignorance, Atheism, Profaneness and
Confusion have prevailed, not only to the amazement of their Neighbours, but also un∣to the Grief and Lamentation of all Good and Wise men, among themselves, who still found their Essays and Motions for general Refor∣mation, without the desired success. And in truth, we are swallowed up, when we venture to wade into the deep Mysteries of the hidden Counsels of the Wisdom, Soveraignty, and Holiness of God; and the Interpreter had need be One of a Thousand [Job 33.23, 24] Who shall only declare so much thereof, as must be Heard and Ʋnderstood, be∣fore the Lord will alter the Course and Tenor of His Dispensations; The Good Lord give every of Them to have such an Interpreter a∣mong them, for His Mercies sake, Amen. But if any Thunders have uttered the Voice of God, yet I must confess and bewail my dulness of Hearing, and Apprehension, and Unfitness to declare and expound the same: Only One thing hath been so plainly spoken, and is so agreeable to our present Subjct, and to the like Discoveries of Gods Mind and Way, that are made and exhibited to us in His Written Oacles, as that I cannot forbear to give an hint thereof: And what is the Voice of the Lord unto some of the Plantations! A∣mong many other Things, doth not the Lord say, Oh my poor People, whom I have
permitted to spread abroad in the Wilder∣ness, and to labour under Spiritual Difficul∣ties! I know the Prejudices you have long had, against your Neighbours the Churches of New-England, especially for some of their Strictnesses and Severities in their Excess of Zeal for My Name: I am not ignorant, how fast your hearts have been shut against them, and how uncapable of receiving any Spiritual Advantage from them. I also have seen all their Transgressions and Declensions, and have variously Punished them, using both ordinary and extraordinary Means for their Recovery; and many of you, for your part, have (as Jobs three Friends) reputed them, Wicked Hypocrites, and their strict Pro∣fession to be nothing but a vile Formality, for which the Divine Vengeance comes down upon Them; yet although the Distance be∣tween you is so wide, I that have Mercies in store for you both, am absolutely resol∣ved, that thy shall not be bstowed, until the difference be made up, yea, I am re∣solved, that your Offerings to the Lord, shall be put into Their Hands, and that you shall be much in Their Hearts and Prayers, before you be Accepted to highest Favour's, and B essings, to become a Name, a Praise, and a G ory to Me in the Earth; and they shall ex∣press their most affctionate Rgards, (for
My sake) Unto you with Christian Solli∣citudes for your everlasting Wefare, before I shall turn Their Captivity. See Job 42.7, 8, 9, 10. I proceed to say, that to me, it is no Won∣der that choicest Blessings are but sparingly be∣stowed upon particular Persons and Families and Churches too, since (while Iniquity a∣boundeth) Love and Zeal, Wax cold, and there are so few Church Fastings and Prayers, & Family Fastings and Prayers, & the Private Meetings of the Ʋpright, are by so many laid aside. Oh sensible Believer! Art thou un∣der the Frowns of the Lord, and is He sparing of His B essings? Thus saith the Lord God unto thee [Isa 50.2. & 59 1] 'Tis not, because My Hand is shortned; 'Tis not, because Mine Ear is grown Heavy; 'Tis not, because My Goodness is Exhausted; I certainly intend to give you the Blssings which you need, in great Abundance; but, First of all, I must have more of your own harty Good Will and Desires for it, than Yet I have seen: You must come to see that they are Gifts Worthy and Fit for a GOD of Infinite Power, Riches, and Good∣ness, to give; and to you most Needful, and such as you will Glorify Me for: So must you Open your Mouths wide, that I may fll them. [Psal. 81.10.] And Ʋrge Me, with
your restless Importunity, And I will not say you Nay; But this is not all, for Secondly, There are several dear Friends and Children of Mine, whom I must and will Honour, and Gratify, in the same Matter, at the same Time; Go and acquaint them with your Case, Get them together, before Me, that I may take their Sufferage, Consent, Request. If they do not pitty you, the Set Time for My Favour in your Case, is not yet fully come. Psal. 102.13, 14. But Know, for your Comfort, that I have Decreed it, that both They shall will, and I Work, for My Glory, and your Comfort. Well, we are now be∣fore God, and our Brethren have beg'd our Prayers, and under God and Christ, have a great Confidence of them, Let us not say them Nay; Or be willing that God should say us Nay. Stir we up our selves to take hold of God with the Effectual Fervent Prayers, that avail much. Help them to Work the Engine that turns about the Hearts of men and the Face of God; and hold out to the End: Be bove Guilt, Fears, Faintings, in the Name of Christ! Let us not be Out done, by Women that have done great things in this way! See that Gentile Woman in Matt. 15 22-28. How Mdestly Impudent and Invincible she is; [to use the Words of Nazianzen, concerning that Heavenly Heroesse and Powerful Amazon, his
Sister] Not her Sex, not her Nation, not her Sins, not her Misery, nor yet her Delays, from the LORD, can discourage her: Will Christ give No Answer? I'le at it again, (thinks she) Here's no Denyall yet: Doth He give a Discouraging, Chiding, Ʋpbraiding Answer? 'Tis well (thinks she) His Majesty Vouchsafes, at all, to Reply; that He condescends to Argue the Case, and Capitulate, as having takn it into Consideration: Calls He her, Dog? Here's Encouragement; May she be of the number of Houshold Animals, she is content, and puts in hard for Crums and Scraps: She will not take a Denyall; Well, the Lord at length al∣lows her to be Her own Carver; She is Humble in Asking, but have it, she Will: And instantly, and fully, she has even What she will. Was there ever Faith and Courage more Magnanimous and Masculine. If God hath made us Kings and Priests, Rev. 5.10. and if ever we Reign with God over Heaven and Earth, while we are on this side Heaven; it is at least partly Spiritually by Importunate Prayer. The Lord admires that Champion Iacob, and Honours Him to all Generations: What is thy Name? Saith He: It is (as a Learned Author expresseth it) as if he should have said, I never met with such a Fellow: Now as the Infants Cries and Tears can do any thing with the Parents,
so Jacob, He wept and made Supplication to the Angel, (that is) CHRIST, and Prevailed [Gen. 32.24, 27. Hos. 12.4.] [Like as He Commanded Athens of old, that could do any thing with Her, who could do every thing with Him that Sway'd that State] But on the other hand consider, He that Prays coldly, begs a Denyal. Now shall not these things move us? Do not our Brethrens urgent Ne∣cessities, urge our urgent and fervent Supplica∣tions? Inasmuch as, if we turn thir Cases in∣to instant Prayers to God, He will, and per∣haps instantly too, turn their Cases into Bles∣sings. And if this Branch of the Exhortation Laden with the full ripe Clusters of Eschol, fall chiefly to our Share, that Stay at Home; Let the other Branch be especially for such as Move Abroad, to carry with them: It Urgeth upon YOU the Wise Merchandize of Pra∣ctical Prayer. There is in every act of Gos∣pel Obedience, a certain Power to Impetrate Blessings at the Hands of God. [Ames. Me∣dul. p. 266. Amst.] This is figuratively deno∣minated Prayer: et is it so necessary, as that no Prayers are, with the Lord acceptable and prevalent without it. Obedience is better than Sacrifice [1 Sam. 15.22.] If we separate Prayer from Obedience, we maim the Sacri∣fice, and shall offer a blind, lame, corrupt un∣acceptable, abominable thing. But one point
of Obedience, I would take leave to Re∣commend especially unto you, and leave it with you, before we take our Leave; and hat is the Obedience of Endeavour; You must Watch as well as Pray against Tempta∣tion; [Mat. 26.41.] You must Work for, as well as Pray for, the Salvation of Souls, and the Inlargement of the Kingdom of Christ Iesus. Ʋp and be Doing, and the Lord will be with you. The Ʋse and Application of Means Natural, for this or that End, what is it, but an Application to the God of Nature for that End. God is said to Hearken to it, as if it were a Prayer unto Him [Gen. 30.17.] In vain doth Balaam desire the End of the Righteous, that would not Use their Way. The Child of Grace, when he desires the Breast of Blessing, you shall see his Eyes, Lips, Tongue, Hands, Feet, all move together: The Sluggard desireth: and hath nothing, Prov. 13.4. but Hunger and Nakedness, Prov. 23.21. because his hands refuse to labour. Prov. 21.25. Isael bound for Canaan must Stand still from Dif∣fidence and Distraction, but not from Endea∣vour, Exod. 14.13, 15. — And the Lord said unto Moses, wherefore Cryest thou unto me: Speak thou unto the Children of Israel, that they Go FORWARD. Now that nothing may Discourage your and our Faith in Prayer, and Courage in En∣deavour,
Let me remove some Objections out of the way and so Conclude. The Objections that I suspect, refer chifly to these Four Heads. [1] The Work. [2.] The Call. [3.] The Times. [4] The Events 1. The Work it self: 'Tis unreasonable that any Doubt should arise, whether it be the Lords or no. Truly, the SIGNS of the Work of the Lord, are to be seen upon it. Is it not for the Glory of Gd, and Good of men? Do not both Piety and Charity constrain unto it? Or was it set about without thoughts, cares, counsels, prayers, fears? Is not the O¦pen Door that is afforded, an Answer of many Publick Prayers? Doth it not begin Low? hath it not occasioned some Commotion in some Places? Hath it no Adversaries? Is it nt contrary to the Interests of the World, the Flesh and the Devil? Hath it not been strange∣ly forwarded by Oppositions? Hath not the Progress of it exceeded our rational Expectations? How many Divine Commands and Promise refer unto such Work to be done in the Latte Dayes, whereof some have been already me¦tioned. Although I well remember what h said of old, viz. Careat. succssibus opto, Quisqui ab Even, Facta notanda Putet: Yet I wi
say, is it not Encouraging to recognize and consider, what smiles of Heaven have been thus Early upon it? (If it must indeed be put to the test of present appearances of Providence) Is there any one Person living, that knew the former wide Distances, Deep Prejudices, Jea∣lousys and Animosities, that admires not, with what a Temper (agreable to Christianity) Our Godly Ministers, in their several Turns, Waiting upon them, and Christs Gospel with them have been Received and Entertained; and how many Worthy Gentlemen in the place which is referred unto, have appeared to forward the Work? (One of whom being present at a Town Meeting, wherein many appeared, very desi∣rous to hinder it) stood up, and had Wisdom and Courage enough to say, Refrain from these men, and let them alone: for if this Counsel and his Work be of men, it will come to nought; but f it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, least haply ee be found even to fight against God [as it is in Acts 5.38, 39.] I will be bold then to sup∣pose, yea conclude, That such and so many Signs, may be sufficient to create some Hope, at least, That this Work is of the Lord; And ou may therefore adventure upon it, with Cheerfulness and Confidence. [2] Perhaps, your Call unto the Work, will be Objected against, on account of your nability, Ʋnworthiness, Want of Ordination, as
to some of you; Absenc from the Ordinances of God, Absence from Friends, Straitness as to Temporals, &c. But, 1. If you complain, how much you fall short of the sufficient Abilities of others for so great a Work. Then I reply; The Apostolical Qustion remains still to be Answered, Who is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2.16. Yet remember, If there be not Gifts, if there be not Grace, sufficient in you, yet there is Grace sufficient for you; and you know, in and with whom. 2 Cor. 12.9. Pauls presence was thought mean and speech contmpible. 2 Cor. 10.10. Yet he acknowledgeth the Grace of GOD, that he was, what he was 1 Cor 15 10. He was not too Great for Gd to Work by: He could hold the earthen Vssels and Lamps while the Lord fulfilled the Work, to allude to Judg. 7.2, 20 Yet he that undertakes the Work of God, in the Strength and Abiiies of a Man, will out Shame the Work and Beak himself. Jeremys insufficiency would not A∣vail, as a sufficient excuse, to xempt him from the Work of God. Jere. 1 6, 7, 8 Their said I, Ah Lord GOD! I cannot speak, for I am a Chid. But the Lord said unto me, say not I am a Chid: For thou SHALT GO to All, to whom I shall send thee, and whatsoever I command thee, thu SHALT SPEAK: — For I AM WITH THEE, &c. Hearken to the Conference of
GOD & Moses: Exod. 4.10, 11, 12. Moses said, I am not Eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou hast spoken unto thy Servant, but I am slow of speech, &c. And the LORD said unto him, WHO hath MADE Mans mouth? — Have not I the LORD? Now therefore GO: And I will BE WITH thy Mouth, and TEACH thee, what thou shat say. And the Lord was Angry, Verse 14. when he demurred after this. 2. If against the Divine Validity of your Call, ou Object your own Ʋnworthiness; you must give me leave to Aswer, That this Ob∣jection would not be accepted in Joshua's case, who was before the Ange, Cloathed with filthy Garments, Zech. 3.3. but was most happily removed and so (I trust in God through Christ) shall yours. 'Tis not unusual for the Lord to bring His Servants unto a deep and most Soul humbling Sense of their Vileness just upon their Entrance into His Work, which wonder∣fully prepares them, for it, and His Mrcy in it. So in Isa. 6.5 The Prophet Crys out, Wo is me! I am undone! A man of Ʋnclean Lips &c. I shall not therefore go about to diminish your apprehensions, and sense of greatest Unworthi∣ness of any part of the Lords Work and much more of so great and extraordinary a part of it; but Instructing you unto highest adm¦rations at His Grace to you therein, shall only Remember you of what the Great Apostle of
the Gentiles said in his own case: Eph. 3.8 Ʋnto me, who am LESS THAN THE LEAST of all Saints, is this Grace given, tha I should Preach among the Gentiles the Ʋnsearch¦able Riches of CHRIST. 3 But, you will say, some Object agains the Divine and Orderly Call and Mission of One of you, because he carries Brethren with him. Unto which I might Answer, that we find not only Evangelists, but also Messenger of Churches, of the Fraternity, attending such as were sent forth upon such Work of old, & that the Fathers of New-England did so much in England, in order to the Work of Christ here, as may allow me to say in this Case, that that man now varys a large point from the wisdom of the Wisest, that Sets his Heart to every word that is spoken. Eccles. 7.21 YOU well know, what Importunity was used with our Ministers, by Letters, and otherwise, that both a Minister should be Sent to those Remote Places, and that He should be here Or∣dained also: Sundry Godly Christians there, being both prepared for, and longing after the Enjoyment of Al the Edifying Ordinances of God; there being withal in all that Country neither Ordained Minister, nor any Church, in full Gospel Order, and so neither Imposition of the Hands of the Presbytery, nor Donation of the Right-hand of Fellowship to be expected there,
or from any Place, much nearer to them than our selves. And some of YOU can tell, how often, our Reverend Brother was offered Or∣dination to this Work of Christ, in foro Eccle∣siastico, in a Way, not disagreeable to what we find in Acts 13.2, 3. whereunto many Churches in the Neighbourhood, might also have been Concurring and Assisting. But this being a Rarity, not easily to be justifyed from preceding Examples in New-England, where there hath been seldom any Occasion to think of the Ordination of a Minister, until by some time of Preaching, and Conversing with Them, His Doctrine, Abilities and Conver∣sation, (bsides good Testimony from Ministers and Christians, in the Vicinity) come to be Approved by the Congregation themselves, over whom He is to be the Overseer, and He he by Them, or the most of Them, Elected to be their Pastor or Teacher. A Practice War∣ranted by Acts 6 3-6. As also by Acts 14.23. The Original word there used, signifying Ordination not without but by and with the Suffrage of many, manifested by lifting up of Hands; Authors, both Sacred and Profane a∣mong the raecians, always using that word in such a Sense (as the Learned Cartwright hath Eaborately and Unanswerably Evinced) ac∣cording to the proper Ntation thereof: This (I say) being a Rit here, our Brother mo∣destly
Declined it, though the Extraordinari∣ness of the Case seemed to allow, yea, require the same. And his Aversion to it being known unto Sundry Brethren of our Churches, [Who when they were in those Remote Parts met with such Solicitations from some Godly Inhabitants there (whose Souls longed for more Communion of Saints, and for all Gods Holy Ordinances, but were loth to remove from that Place, if they might obtain the same there) as prevailed upon them to resolve to return to them, and take up their settled A∣boad among them] They being now Bound thither, desired to Gather into a Church, that so a Minister might be Ordained in the ordinary Way, whom they might carry with them thither: But these being too Few, some Others Influenced (as I cannot but believe) by the Holy Spirit of God, with a deep Concern∣ment of Spirit, least That which they thought to be the Work of God, should fall to the Ground, for want of two or three Hands more, offered their Conjunction and Assistance, All of them obtaining Letters of Dismission from their respective Churches unto so good a work, full of Complacency and Benedicti n. These therefore having improved what advantages the time would allow, for the proving of one another both Gifts and Graces, and peculiar∣ly their intended Pastors, &c It is come to
this, That a Godly Minister hath been by most Publick and Solemn Ordination Separa∣ted to, and Sent forth upon the Service of the Gospel and Kingdom of the Son of God, advantaged with the Attendance, Submission & Assistance of sundry Godly Brethren, who ac∣knowledge Him as their Pastor in the Lord. What is there, abating Humane Weakness, in all this, that the Godly will condemn, or that is Disagreeable to the Holy Word of God? But it is Objected, that the Brethren aim not at the promoting of Christ's Glory and King∣dom, but only or mainly at Secular Advantages. To this I Reply: If Suspicion may make Guilty, who can be Innocent? not to say how Impro∣bable the Suspicion is as to some of them who are not likely to mend their Estates in divers years by their Removal, they being so com∣fortably Seated here. Moreover, if men must ever be Discouraged from doing what they are well satisfied is Right and Good, because they have deceitful Hearts, & because irregular aims & thoughts (notwithstanding all their watch∣fulness) will sometimes (to their sorrow and self-loathing for them) croud in: Then fare∣wel all well Doing in the World: For with Rust, and Dross sufficient to imploy our own Fi es, and GODS Furnace too, all our Lives long, is our most Golden Sincerity in this World alloyed; and, Who can understand his
own Errors? Besides that, they have solemnly Professed, that Religion is chief in their Eye, which they would not lose for all the World, but would firstly promote in their Removal, and not their own Estates, except subordinate∣ly, subserviently, and secondarily thereunto: And as far as they can understand their own deceitful hearts (that though renewed, yet in this World, can be so but in part) contrary and sinister Designs, and Desires, they Know of none, they Allow of none Nor have they yet been Left of God, (so great hath been His Mercy towards Them) to Forfeit their Credit, so as to deserve that they should not be Belie∣ved. I besech you therefore, My Brethren, to Suspect your own Harts, and to Charge and Judge your selves, as much as you can, yet ne∣ver be Discouraged, if by others you chance to be Over-charged. 4 But you will say, Others of Ʋs are not Ordained, Is Our Cat clear? Answ If God furnish men with Ministerial Gifts and Grace discerned and approved by the Spirits of the Prophets, and with an Holy Propensity of Mind, and an humble self dedication unto the Work of the Ministry in general, and if the best advice that can be had after solemn seek∣ing of God, carry them to such a Peope in par∣ticular, who accept them in the Lord, and de∣sire the Continuance of their Godly Lours
among Them, I believe such men are Sent of God and Christ to such a People; and as I never yet saw, so I am apt to think I never shall, any solid Confutation of the Scriptures and Arguments produced by my Predecessor in this Church, viz Your Judicious Teacher now with God, the very Reverend and Aged, Mr. Richard Mather, in his Printed Answer to Mr. Rutherford. Now all this may be said con∣cerning You, and something more, namely that you being present at Private Meetings of Mini∣sters, for Fasting and Prayers (not to mention the frequent Publick Prayers that are made on your behalf) have been most solemnly Pre∣sented before the Lord for this Service of His Kingdom in many ardent Supplications for His Assistance, & Acceptance therein. Obj But do we not read in the Works of the Learned Clarkson, that Laborious Searcher into Anti∣quity, that for the first Three Hundred Years after Christ's Ascension, every single Con∣gregation though consisting but of twenty Souls, or under, had an Ordained Bishop, then so called more usually than Pastor, & among the copious Instances given, few or none of Ministers any where in all the World that were not Ordained Bishops, though in the Smallest Places. Answ. If in the Primitive Times, Deacons must first be proved before Their Installment into, and Instatement in their
Office and Work, then much more Ministers, and doubtless the Primitive Church allowed some to Preach as Probationers; though we meet not with multitudes of Instances: I know the extream strictness and caution of the Churches of the Reformation in France, in this matter, who allow not an Unordained Proba∣tioner to Preach, except an Ordained Mini∣ster be present to give a word of Exhortation after he hath Done, which is needless as to your selves; yet notwithstanding what hath been mentioned, I could rejoyce, if some further steps were taken, and I hope in Gods good time it shall be so. If you find Converts in the Pla∣ces you are going unto, I hope you will ha∣ten them into Church Estate as fast as you can, that You may (if God incline your hearts to settle with them) or some Others, be Or∣dained to the Work of Christ among Them. Yet again, If you say, are any of us Called of God to live without any of the Ordinances of God, and so to Jeopard our own Suls: I pray Read, Rom 9 3. Ezek. 11.16. Dn. 12 3 Jam 5 19 Or, if you say, we want our Friends, look upon Mark 10.29, 30. III. But the Times are Apostatick rather than Apostolick; Pride budding, Faction in Fashion, Strife Rife, with Stoutness, Rashness, Harshness, Slander, Scorning among too ma∣ny; once Holiness was on Tavern Pots and
Trooping Bridles, Zech. 14.20, 21. Now, how much Lewdnss! Most are sound in Profession, yet as to Practice of Godliness with not a few; the very Form is going after the Power, &c. For Answer, Read Hag. 2.13, 14. with Hag. 1.13. All's Ʋnclean, yet Work, and I'le be with you: Read also Rom. 11.15. Obj. But we should have been Earlier. Answ. Beware of Further Guilt, by letting slip the Present Time: Take the Night, if the Day be lost: Luk. 11.5 - 8 In the Night we have seen the Bow in the Cloud. Object. But Discontented People will Remove if we Go. Answ S if you Stay also: But Woe to us, f we slck for this Peril. Esther 4.11 14. Because some Crums go awr, shall we Lose the whole Meal of Mercy? But the Times are Troublous Yet see Dan 9 25. The Apstles also ut forth in a Tempest, having Wind and Tide against them. Lastly, Objct not E∣ents; to Paul and You alike Ʋncertain, Acts 20.22. Run the 'venture. 2 Sam 10 12. Know, There is something worth the Seeking, f GOD Lights the Candle Luk. 15 8. Your ains is well Paid, with the Gain of One oul. Jam. 5.20. If you Convert None hat are Fallen, you have your Hire, If you onfirm those that Stand Eph 4.12, 13. However, Your Work will Rtun into Your n Bosome. Psal. 35.13. And Despair not
of Supply. GOD, not Man, maintains His Ministers, though by Man Read Luke 22 35. Psal. 34.9, 10. Obj. How shall we do, if Sincere Saints of other Perswasions offer themselves? Ans. If sound in main Points and if they will not disturb you in your way, Receive them, Rom. 14.1. Luk. 9 49, 50. Did not Godly Father Garnsey live and dy in the Communion of this Church of Dorchester: al∣though an Episcopal man invariably? And was it not to his and our Edification. Obj But the Gospel like the Sea, what it Gains in one place, it loseth in another: Are you in New-England, willing to part with the Gospel? Answ. This was the Objection and Scandal of the Jews of old. But we rather hope for life from the Dead by the Emulation, Rom. 11.14, 15 Obj. We would desire to be Lions, if the Glory of God called us so to be: and nescit remeare. Leo, Prov. 30 30 But it is not in us, we are born as the wild Ass Colt, Job 11.12. Answ. Your Humility is to be Commended, yet (in a sense) The Lord may have NEED of you, Luke 19.30-33. and may Honour you, if you will let him Ride you whither He pleaseth Yea, the weak and foolish shall be as Davi also Zech. 12.8 Obj. But had not God raised up of the Son
of Israel [and of New-England] to be Pro∣phets [Amos 2.11.] In the Schools of the Prophets at Bethe, and Jericho, (2 King. 2.3, 5. 1 King 18.4. 1 Sam. 19.20. He had not had Seven Thousand Knees that had not Bowel to Baal there, notwithstanding all the Sons of the Prophets in Judah hardby. And so Uninviting unto Strangers should your poor Maintenance in New-England have been, that One Fifty of your Congregations would have been without a Learned, Able, Godly Ministry, had you depended wholly on Other Countreys for Supply, and so would have soon Dgenerated, and so we fear Our Children will do. Ans. Be Content to Creep before you Fy: Yet Lay Foundations for Great Matters in your day of Small things. Less than Eighty Pounds Per An∣num, in Mney, would have more than bought New England Presidents Salary, allowed him by the Country for many years; yet God gave us an Invauable Man, and Oh what a Blessing with Him! You that go to Remote Parts will be most happily Situated to spread Religion in the American Islands & Continent. If Schools of Learning fundamentally nc ssry, to the Pro∣pagation of Godlinss forward to the Nations and down-ward to Posterity, will not agree with the Governmnt and People there; I charge you in the Name of Gd & the Lod Jesus Christ, and as you have any regard to the Souls
of your Posterity (after that you have laboured with them, what you can for their Good) to Return to us again. However, Despair not, 'till you have made the Tryal. To Conclude then, Trust GOD; Urge Man, and at it again and again; Watch much; Guard well; Pray hard and never give in; Work hard & never be Weary; Ly Low, and look High; be upright though you hear Hypocrites for't; rather Dy in Gods cause, than hear Cowards; Walk Close∣ly with CHRIST; Sowe your s ed in Tears: Look hard for Tryals; and Hope to the End; Propagate what Good you have seen or gotten with Us, but leave Our Vices, behind you, Provoke not the Spaniard; Debauch not the In∣dians with Drink; be Just to all men; and be sure you Divide not one from another, or from your Worthy Easter. Sacrifice the World to Re∣ligion evermore; and be of Publick Spirits: Eye Christs Second Coming, as much as Anti¦ent Believers did His First, and long for it: Do all you do, humbly & valiantly in the Name of the Son of God: and often say one to another as Jab to his Brothr: 2 Sam. 10.12. Be of Good courage and let us play the men, for our People, and for the Citys of our God; and the LORD do that which seemeth Him Good Now the LORD the Gd of our Fathers, & New Englands God be with you for Evr. Farewel Dear Brethren in the Lord, and be sure
you Pray for us: and God forbid that we should SIN agaist the LORD in Ceasing to Pray for You, 1 Sam 12.23 Man is nothing in GODS Work, and of himself can do No∣thing, but what is worse than Nthing and will come to Nothing or worse: Set we then the LORD on work, by humble Prayer, that the LORD may be All in All. Now the Good Lord do away with His own most Precious Bood, the Imperfections and Infirmities in this present Service, attending a poor Sinful Worm, that knows but in part and Prophecys but in part, and in a very small part too; and make His own Word however, the Power of God to Your Salvations; for His own Names Sake. AMEN. Errata. P. 14. l. 31. r. too p. 43. l. 23. r. for them Memoandum. Unto the Discourse, uttered in Publick, upon this Text, some what above a year agoe, some Additin in these Printed Seets, is made out of a Sermon Preached in Private some time since, uno a Society of Christians, keeping a Day of Prayer on the be∣half of some of their Society, that were at that time, upon their Removal from them. To fill up the Vacant Pages the following POEMS, formerly Composed, are here suffixed.
Upon the Triumphant TRANSLATION of a Mother in Our ISRAEL, Viz. Mrs. ANNE ELIOT. From This Life to a Better. on March 24th. 1687. Aetatis Suae. 84. ALL Hallelujahs, Oh ye Heav'nly Quires, Ye Powers, ye Winged & Immortal Fires! Redouble to the Highest ONE: Here's Joy, to your Eternal Jubile Advanc'd, by th'New come welcome Company Of a Bight Soul, but lately slown. Congratulate Eternally, With Sacred Symphony, Her happy State Haile! Happy Soul! In Luster excellent Transcending far the Starry Firmament, Which is thy Foostool now become: With all the World, America shall Vye, For to Produce thy Peer: Now cast thine Ee All round about that Spacious Room, None shalt thou see Of Best Women, Much more Triumphant than Thy self to be Haile! Thou Sagacious & Advent'rous Soul! Haile, Amazon! Created to Controll
Weak Nature's Foes, & t'take her part, The King of Terrours, Thou, ('till the Command Irrevocable came to Stay thy Hand,) Didst oft Repel, by thy Choice Art: By High Decree, Long didst thou stand An Atlas, in Heav'n's Hand To th' World to be. Al Haleujahs to His bounteous Care, That such a Peerless Consort did Prepare For HIM, whom Sacred Things with held From Secuars; Who was to Gospellize, And Preach Redemption to GODS Enemys Beyound all Memory, Rebell'd: For his sake, sure, Thine Aged Life It did with Death in Strife So long endure. Heav'n's Richest Spices, Choicest Graces were [Queen Esther like,] allotted to Thy Share, For to Prepare Thee for thy KING: Thee, to Pay Table, for Full Recompence, With Interest, for all thy Vast Expense, Anges, on Wings of Grace, strait, bring: As Phatiel, Thy CONSORT Dear Mourning, Thee follow'th near, To bid FAREWEL. I. D.
To the Blessed MEMORY of the Venerable Mr. JOHN ELIOT, TEACHER to the Church of CHRIST in Roxbury, and a PROPAGATOR of the Gospel to the Indians in N-England. Who rested from his Labours, May, 20. Anno Dom. 1690. Aetatis Suae. 86. SHall ELIOT slip away? & not his Sons Spy & Regret it, with Athletick Groans? None Cry Alarm, when Horse & Chariots taken? None Feel, when Israel's weal's Foundation's shaken? Lately, a stately Stone pluckt out; none 'spy it? Nor run to stop the woful Breach made by it? Where's sweet Tongue'd David, sad Song'd Jeremiah, Jon'than to 'wail, to Elegiz Josiah? Where's matchless Moses's Muse? Had I his Staff, I'd find one Grave, and 'Grave one Epitaph. English and Indian Work, he did so well, Define we cannot, which did which excell Pagans, This Paul converts; Peter doth use His Talents chiefly to confirm the Jews. Paul to Barbarians, own's Himself a Debtor; Our John a brave Divine, T'Himself, no better Des supererrogate, in the vast Cost And Pains, expended to Reduce the lost. A brave Divine, said I? I had not mist, Sure, had I Stil'd Him an Evangelist.
To Trace their Pagan Genealogies Was not his Task, yet would his curious Eyes Maugre oblivions Dust, 'venture to scan At least by guess, These hideous Wrecks of Man: And thought, he trackt, to Palestina's Strand: How e're; He was resolv'd, to th' Holy Land Them to reduce, [might Heav'n a Moses make him] Nor did their barb'rous Heathenism shake him. Th' Eternal Mind in Mortal Airs, nev'r blew Unformed Blast; His Sov'reign Shalms yet flew On Syriac Wings; His Gentleness equips His Sacred Chariot with Chaldean Chips: Three Other, His own Mother-Tongue bside, Upon His Pascal Cross, He Sanctify'd His Tharsian-bred Apostle don't refuse To sharp his Tools with Philistines, to use Greek Poets, cited to the Sacred Bar, T' wait on Effata's more Oracular. Like Hercules toils ELIOT, lest that He Should to Barbarians, a Barbarian be. Since Babel's Trait'rous Tower was Thundersmit, By Heav'ns Inraged Ire, & fell, & split One Tongue into a Thousand Shivers, o Can tell the Wounds, which this one Wo alone, Hath more than scarr'd the World with; next th' Expulsion At first from Paradise, & th' next Convulsion In Grandsire Japheth's Time, no Storm before, The Universal World e're delug'd more: But now, thro' matchless Grace, to Eliot's given The Key t'expel what lockt men out of Heaven.
His Tongue sails right, with Indian Tempest tost; Puts in for Peter's Plea, at Pentecost. The Ambassadour unto Them dares preferr. Offers of CHRIST, without Interpreter. Th' Incarnate Furys, straitway from the Pit Of Darkness worse than Egypts, Rise, & Spit On all their Daemons, whilst their Breast & Brow They to the LORD, & to His Baptist vow. One Testament Seventy Interpreters Translate to Greek Antiquity avers; Both Testaments, yet ELIOT alone Converts into the Indian Tongue & Tone; Abel, tho' dead, yet speaks, in one Tongue more; say's, Apollo's Eloquence, before, Ne'r Rode in such a Chariot: Luke Physician, 'Tho' skill'd in Pulse,) would scarce tell the Condiion Of His own Gospe: Pau, with his much Learning Would here be Posed: — or 'though to many Regions He did pass, et no West-Indian Antiquary was. Sr Thomas Eiot was Great Brittains Glory: ur Saint shall have a Chronicle in Ags Story: Great XAVER bings the Crucifix & Lib, To Indian Souls, of Masses; Ours, the Bible. anctius, for this, owns Him a Tutelary: Calls on him & hi joyns with GOD & Mary: liot before such cursed Adoration, Would chuse much rather, an Annihilation. et made His Woks before mns Eyes to shine, hat they might Glorifie the Name Divine,
The Indian-Work lay greatly on his Heart; Until the Last, when He and That must part. They parted not without most solemn Blessing, While Clouds thereon were to his Soul Distressing, He dyes; His Work, when Time Dyes shall survive; 'Tho' Dead, yet speaks, that th' Indian Work And to's Sucessors doth good Counsel give may Live, Address (I pray) our Senate for good Orders, 'To Civilize the Heathen in our Borders. 'Vertue must turn into Necessity; 'Or this brave Work, will in its Urn still lye. ''Till Agriculture, and Cohabitation, 'Come under full Constraint and Regulation, 'Much you would do, you'l find Impracticable, 'And much you do will prove Ʋnprofitable. 'In common Lands that lie unfenc'd you know 'The Husbandman, in vain doth plow & fow: 'We hope in vain, the Plant of Grace shall thrive 'In Forrests, where Civility can't Live. 'In English Towns, when they their Months do spend, 'Make Them, Gods Worship with us, to attend. 'Whilst I us'd (as you must) sharp Discipline, 'The saving Gains were Theirs, the Pains were mine. 'Their Tender Sors to Sacred Learnings Throne 'None can advance, but such Divines alone, 'As are most Expert in their Dialect, 'If Teaching in their own Tongue we respect:
'Such Youths, (if GOD vouchsafe to Sanctify 'Their studious minds) the sacred Oars may Ply, 'Each Sabbath too, through Sarry Arches bring, 'Their Common Hmage to our Mighty King. 'Look well to the Ʋprising Nursery: 'You know full well, none more for Schools than I 'To drown their Woes, some drown their Wits, and All 'Their Common Grace: Correct that Fault you shall. 'If you be Instant, only out of Season, 'Your Hope soars out of sight of all my Reason, 'If you expect, (while Lords Days hold their Station) 'To Lecture them, on Week-Days, to Salvation. impossible to make a Purse, ' Invite a Lecturer, in Turns, to Nurse 'Your English Flocks, That those may have good Dressing 'That have most need, upon the Day of Bessing? 'Their Indian Teachers are but Weak; I Wiss; 'Thei Preaching, by their Hearers, slighted is: 'Take thn this Way, to readvance the Standard Of Hlinss, b late backslidings Slander'd. 'Let fire-hot Zeal, boile in your thirsty Veins, 'To save poor Caiffs from Eernal Pains 'Our Antient Heroes, with their Engish Prayers 'Did edify Their Souls; yet then, such Ayres 'Were Ʋnintelligible, more by far, 'Than now adays, (sice long Converse) they are 'Call many English Suppliants: Let them Kneel, 'With Them & for Them; for their saving Weale.
'Joyn hand in hand: Help up the Weak, Heav'ns Stairs: 'Salvation, serves in pay of Joyned Prayers. 'The Friends of Christ, & Souls, Let none be mute 'In any Tongue, that can GODS Throne salute: 'FAST with and for Them also twice a Year, ''Twill shew, and bring their Resurrection near. 'May GOD in Heav'n, & may poor Heathens see 'That much affected, & concern'd All be: 'Christs Intercessions may they have rebound, 'Echo'd from hence, 'Twill to their Weal redound '(Grand Usurer) I, nev'r gave Heav'n a Mite 'But gain'd, & gather'd, Thousand Millions by't 'Never Regret (Brave Hearts!) your vast Expence 'Of Time & Pains: Mark well the Diffrence ''Twixt Indian Traders & their Teachers made; 'What Blessings These, what Blastings Those Invade 'Those often are annoy'd with mischiefs, whiles 'These doe enjoy most sweet Coelestial smiles. His Couses, we have done with; And return, To close the Ashes of his Sacred Ʋrn. When Pious Grandsir lately came to visit This Saint, then at Heav'n's Gate, And said, How is it? Such was his sense, he sagely made reply, I am Afrai: But not afraid to Dy: Sir! Thankull Joy, My Motto is, (Quoth He) Unto Another; And I Joy to see What Lights Christ sets in 's Churches, & that still GOD hath His Fok, that do His Temples fill. How solemnly He Bst 'em, sme cn tell; Like Paul; Begging, mean while; their Pray'rs as well:
And may they Bessed be! May they inherit, A Double Portion of Elijah's Spirit. On Golden Letters of His Name I mused; JOHN, distill'd Hony, ELIOT, Toile produced. Pains bring in gains; for sweets, he sweats: thus frau't With richest Lading, To His Port, He's brought, This Vessel yet of Honour, had not been So soon seen under Saile, Had not our Sin Deserved & Provoked such a sign Of Woe descending from the Wrath Divine. This blurs the Trophys of our New Eectins, With Interlinements of sad Interjections Indians! Your Hearts are Mble, if Distress Seize you not, for Unprofitableness. Fear you not Wrath poor Souls! will you not grieve Th' Ambassador of Peace has tak'n his Leave. He Lov'd your Nation dearly; did He not? (Adding your Language to the Polyglott;) In ways unparellell'd, his strange Compassion Drew Soul & Substance out, for your Slvation Heav'ns Fier Balls, Flames, Smke & Thundring Sh And Bloody Drops, (lare Prodigies) are no More signal than this Death, at such a season Such was Methuselah's: and we have Reason, May we have Grace, t' repent the Provocation, With speed, that crys aloud for Desolation. Yet Muse! Don't overgroan: thy Fathers Gl In's reimbraced Colleague should with Thee Advance new Sonnets to His Jubilee Indulcify'd, sweet ELIOT by Thee. I. D FINIS.
