D2382 11906206 50677
THREE POEMS Upon the Death of the Late USURPER Oliver Cromwel. Written By Mr. IO. DRYDON. By Mr. SPRAT, of Oxford. By Mr. EDM. WALLER. LONDON: Printed by William Wilson, in the Year, 1659. And Reprinted for R. Baldwin, 1682.
HEROIQE STANZA'S, On the Late USURPER Oliver Cromwel. Written after his FVNERAL. ANd now 'tis time for their Officious hast, Who would before have born him to the Sky, Like eager Romans, e're all Rites were past, Did let too soon the Sacred Eagle fly. (2) Though our best notes are treason to his fame, Joyn'd with the loud applause of publick voice; Since Heav'n, what praise we offer to his name, Hath render'd too authentick by its choice: (3) Though in his praise no Arts can liberal be, Since they whose Muses have the highest flown, Add not to his Immmortal Memory, But do an Act of friendship to their own. (4) Yet 'tis our duty and our interest too, Such Monuments as we can build to raise;
Lest all the World prevent what we should do, And claim a Title in him by their Praise. (5) How shall I then begin or where conclude, To draw a Fame so truly Circular? For in a round what order can be shew'd, Where ll the parts so equalperfect are? (6) His Grandeur he deriv'd from Heaven alone, For he was Great e're Fortune made him so; And Wars, like mists that rise against the Sun, Made him but greater seem not greater grow. (7) No borrowed Bays his Temples did adorn, But to our Crown he did fresh Iewels bring, Nor was his Vertue poysoned soon as born With the two early thoughts of being King. (8) Fortune (that easie Mistress of the young, But to her ancient servants coy and hard) Him at that age her favourites rank'd among When she her best-lov'd Pompey did discard. (9) He, private, mark'd the faults of others sway, And set as Sea marks for himself to shun; Not like rash Monacrhs who theiry outh betray By Acts their Age too late would wish undone, (10) And yet Dominion was not his design, We owe that blessing not to him but Heaven, Which to fair Acts unsought Rewards did joyn, Rewnads that less to him than us were given
(11) Our former Cheifs like sticklers of the War. First sought t' inflame the Parties, then to poise; The qnarrel lov'd, but did the cause abhor, And did not strike to hurt but make a noise. (12) War our consumption was their gainful trade, VVe inward bled whilst they prolong'd our pain: He fought to end our fighting, and assaid To stanch the Blood by breathing of the vein. (13) Swift and resistless through the Land he past, Like that bold Greek who did the East subdue; And made to Battels such Heroick hast As if on wings of Victory he flew (14) He fought secure of fortune as of fame, Till by new Maps the Island might be shown, Of Conquests which he strew'd where e're he came, Thick as the Galaxy with Stars is sown. (15) His Palms though under weights they did not stand, Still thriv'd; no Winter could his Laurels fade; Heav'n in his Portraict shew'd a VVorkman's hand And drew it perfect yet without a shade. (16) Peace was the Prize of all his toyls and care, VVhich VVar had banifh't, and did now restore; Bolognia's VVall thus mounted in the Air, To Seat themselves more surely than before. (17) Her safty rescued, Ireland to him owes, And Treacherous Scotland to no int'rest true,
Yet blest that fate which did his Arms dispose, Her Land to Civilize asto subdue. (18) Nor was he like those Stars which only shine, When to pale Mariners they storms portend, He had his calmer influence; and his Mine Did Love and Majesty together blend. (19) 'Tis true his Count'nance did imprint an awe, And naturally all Souls to his did bow; As Wands of Divination downward draw, And point to Beds where Sov'raign Gold dothgrow. (20) When past all offerings to Feretrian Iove He Mars desposd, and Arms to Gowns made yield, Successful Councels did him soon approve As fit for close Intrigues, as open field. (21) To suppliant Holland he vouchsaf'd a Peace, Our once bold Rival in the British Main, Now tamely glad her unjust claim to cease, And buy our Friendship with her Idol gain. (22) Fame of th' asserted Sea through Europe blown Made France and Spain ambitious of his Love; Each knew that side must conquer he would own, And for him fiercely as for Empire strove. (16) No sooner was the French mans cause embrac'd Than the light Mounsire the grave Don outweigh'd, His fortune turn'd the Scale where it was cast, Though Indian Mines were in the other laid.
(24) When absent, yet we conquer'd in his right; For though some meaner Artist's Skill were shown, In mingling colours, or in placing light, Yet still the fair designment was his own. (25) For from all tempers he could service draw; The worth of each with its allay he knew; And as the Confident of Nature, saw How she Complexions did divide and brew. (26) Or he their single vertues did survay By intuition in his own large Breast, Where all the rich Ideas of them lay, That were the Rule and measure to the rest. (27) When such Heroique Vertue Heaven sets out. The Stars like Commons sullenly obey; Because it drains them when it comes about, And therefore is a Tax they seldom pay. (28) From this high-spring our foraign Conquests flow, Which yet more glorious triumphs do portend, Since their Commencement to his Arms they owe, If Springs as high as Fountains may ascend. (29) He made us Freemen of the Continent Whom Nature did like Captives treat before, To nobler prey's the English Lyon sent, And taught him first in Belgian walks to rore. (30) That old unquestioned Pirate of the Land, Proud Rome, with dread, the fate of Dunkirk har'd;
And trembling wish't behind more Alpes to stand, Although an Alxander were her guard. (31) By his command we boldly crost the Line, And bravely sought where Southern Stars arise, We trac'd the far fetch'd Gold unto the Mine, And that which brib'd our Fathers made our prize (32) Such was our Prince; yet own'd a Soul above The highest Acts it could produce to show: Thus poor Mechanique Arts in publick move Whilst the deep Secrets beyond practice go. (33) Nor dy'd he when his ebbing Fame went less, But when fresh Lawrels courted him to live; He seem'd but to prevent some new success; As if above what triumphs Earth can give. (34) His latest Victories still thickest came, As, near the Center, Motion does increase; Till he press'd down by his own weighty name, Did, like the Vestal, under Spoils decease. (35) But first the Ocean as a tribute sent That Giant Prince of all her watery Heard, And th' Isle when her Protecting Genius went Upon his Obsequies loud sighs confer'd. (36) No Civil broyls have since his death arose, But Faction now by habit does obey: And Wars have that respect for his repose, As Winds for Halcyons when they breed at Sea.
(37) His Ashes in a peaceful Urn shall rest, His Name a great example stands to show How strangely high endeavours may be blest, Where Piety and Valour joyntly go.
To the Reverend Dr. WILKINS WARDEN OF WADHAM COLLEDGE IN OXFORD. SIR, SEeing you are pleas'd to think fit that these Papers should come into the publick, which were at first de∣sign'd to live only in a Desk, or some private friends hands; I humbly take the boldness to commit them to the Security which your name and protection will give them with the most knowing part of the world. There are two things especially in which they stand in need of your defence. One is, that they fall so infinitely below the full and lofty Genius of that excellent Poet, who made this way of writing free of our Nation: The other, that they are so little proportion'd and equal to the renown of that Prince on whom they were written. Such great Actions and Lives deserving rather to be the Subjects of the Noblest Pens and
most Divine Phansies, than of such small beginners and weak essayers in Poetry, as my self. Against these dange∣rous Prejudices, there remains no other shield than the uni∣versal Esteem and Authority, which your judgment and ap∣probation carries with it. The right you have to them, Sir, is not only upon the account of the Relation you had to this great Person▪ nor of the General favour which all Arts re∣ceive from you; but more peculiarly by reason of that obli∣gation and zeal with which I am bound to dedicate my self to your service. For, having been a long time the object of your care and Indulgence towards the advantage of my studies and fortune, having been moulded, (as it were) by your own hands, and form'd under your Government; not to in∣title you to any thing which my meaness produces, would not only be injustice, but sacrilege. So that if there be any thing here tolerably said, and which deserves Pardon, it is yours, Sir, as well as he, who is Your most Devoted and Obliged Servant.
TO THE MEMORY Of the Late USURPER Oliver Cromwel Pindarick Odes. (1) TIs true, Great Name thou art secure From the forgetfulness and Rage Of Death or Envy, or devouring Age. Thou canst the force and teeth of Time endure. Thy Fame, like men, the elder it doth grow, Will of it self turn whiter too Without what needless Art can do; Will live beyond thy breath, beyond thy Hearse, Though it were never heard or sung in verse. Without our help, thy Memory is safe; They only want an Epitaph,
That does remain alone Alive in an Inscription Remembred only on the Brass or Marble Stone. 'Tis all in vain what we for thee can do, All our Roses and Perfumes Will but officious folly shew, And pious Nothings to such mighty Tombs. All our Incence, Gums and Balm Are but unnecessary duties here: The Poets may their spices spare Their costly Numbers and their tuneful feet: That need not be inbalm'd, which of it self is sweet. (2) We know to praise thee is a dangerous proof Of our Obedience and our Love: For when the Sun and Fire meet, Th' ones extinguish't quite; And yet the other never is more bright. So they that writ of Thee and joyn Their feeble names With Thine, Their weaker sparks with thy Illustrious light, Will lose themselves in that ambitious thought, And yet no Flame to thee from them be brought. We know, blest Spirit, thy mighty name Wants not Addition of another's Beam; It's for our Pens too high and full of Theam. The Muses are made great by thee, not thou by them. Thy Fames eternal Lamp will live And in thy Sacred Urn survive, Without the food or Oyl, which we can give. 'Tis true; but yet our duty calls our Songs Duty Commands our Tongues,
Though thou want not our praises, we Are not excus'd for what we owe to thee: For so men from Religion are not freed. But, from the Altars, Cloud must rise, Though Heaven it self doth nothing need; And though the Gods don't want, an Earthly Sacrifice. (3) Great life of Wonders, whose each year Full of new Miracles did appear! Whose every Month might be, Alone a Chronicle or a History! Others great Actions are But thinly scatter'd here and there; At best, all but one single Star: But thine the Milky way, All one continued light, and undistinguish't day. They throng'd so close, that nought else could be seen Scarce any common Sky did come between What shall I say, or where begin? Thou mayest in double Shapes be shown; Or in thy Arms, or in thy Gown. Like Iove sometime with Warlike Thunder, and Sometimes with peaceful Scepter in thy hand, Or in the Field, or on the Throne; In what thy Head, or what thy Arm hath done. All that thou didst was so resin'd, So full of Substance, and so strongly joyn'd; So pure, so weighty Gold, That the least grain of it, If fully spread and beat, Would many leaves, and mighty volumes hold.
(4) Before thy name was publish't, and whilst yet Thou only to thy self wert great: Whilst yet thy happy Bud Was not quite seen, or understood; It then sure signs of future greatness shew'd; Then thy domestick worth Did tell the World, what it would be When it should fit occasion see, When a full Spring should call it forth. As bodies, in the Dark and Night, Have the same Colours, the same Red and VVhite, As in the open day and Light; The Sun doth only show That they are bright, not make them so: So whilst, but private Walls did know What we to such a Mighty mind should owe: Then the same vertues did appear Though in a less, and more Contracted Sphear; As full, though not as large as since they were. And like great Rivers, Fountains, though At first so deep, thou didst not go; Though then thine was not so inlarg'd a flood Yet when 'twas Little, 'twas as clear as good. (5) 'Tis true, thou wast not born unto a Crown, The Scepter's not thy Fathers, but thy own. Thy Purple was not made at once in haste, But after many other colours past, It took the deepest Princely Dye at last.
Thou didst begin with lesser Cares And private Thoughts took up thy private Years: Those hands which were ordain'd by Fates To change the World, and alter States, Practic'd, at first, that vast design On meaner things, with equal mind. That Soul, which should so many Scepters sway. To whom so many Kingdoms should obey, Learn'd first to rule in a Domestick way: So Government, it self began From Family, and single Man, Was by the small relations first Of Husband and of Father nurst And from those less beginnings past, To spread it self, o're all the World at last. (6) But when thy Country (then almost enthrall'd) Thy Vertues and thy Courage call'd, When England did thy Arms intreat And t'had been sin in thee, not to be great; When every Stream, and every Flood, Was a true vein of Earth, and ran with blood. When unus'd Arms, and unknown War, Fill'd every place, and every Ear; When the great Storms and dismal Night Did all the Land afright; `T was time for thee, to bring forth all our Light. Thou lest'st thy more delightful Peace Thy Private life and better case; Then down thy Steel and Armor took, Wishing that it still hung upon the hook:
When death had got a large Commission out Throwing her Arrows and her Stings about; Then thou (as once the healing Serpent rose) Was't listed up, not for thy self but us. (7) Thy Country wounded 'twas, and sick before, Thy Wars and Arms did her restore: Thou knew'st where the disease did lye And like the Cure of Simpathy, Thy strong and certain Remedy Unto the Weapon didst apply, Thou didst not draw the Sword, and so Away the Scabbard throw; As if thy Country shou'd Be the inheritance of Mars and Blood; But that when the great work was spun War in it self should be undone: That Peace might land again upon the shore Richer and better than before. The Husbandman no Steel should know None but the useful Iron of the Plow; That bays might creep on every Spear. And though our Sky was over-spread With a destructive Red, 'Twas but till thou, our Sun, didst in full light appear. (8) When Ajax dyed, the Purple Blood That from his Gaping Wounds had flow'd Turn'd into Letters, every Leaf Had on it writ his Epitaph:
So from that Crimson Flood Which thou by fate of times wert led Unwillingly to Shed Letters and Learning rose, and were renew'd. Thou fought'st not out of Envy, Hope or Hate, But to refine the Church and State; And like the Romans, what er'e thou In the Field of Mars didst mow, Was, that a holy Island thence might grow. Thy Wars, as Rivers raised by a Shour Which Welcome louds do pour; Though they at first may seem To carry all away, with and inraged Stream Yet did not happen, that they might destroy Or the better parts annoy; But all the filth and Mud to scower And leave behind a Richer Slime, To give a birth to a more happy power. (9) In Field unconquer'd, and so well Thou didst in Battels, and in Arms excel, That Steelly Arms themselves might be Worn out in War as soon as thee. Success so close upon thy Troops did wait, As if thou first hadst conquered Fate; As if uncertain Victory Had been first overcome by thee; As if her wings were clipt and could not flee, Whilst thou didst only serve, Before thou hadst what first thou didst deserve. Others by thee did great things do, Triumph'st thy self and mad'st them Triumph too:
Though they above thee did appear, As yet in a more large and higher sphear, Thou the Great Sun, gav'st light to every Star. Thy self an Army wert alone, And mighty Troops contain'dst in one: Thy only Sword did guard the Land Like that which slaming in the Angels hand From Men God's Garden did defend: But yet thy Sword did more than his, Not only guarded, but did make this Land a Paradise. (10) Thou sought'st not to be high or great, Not for a Scepter or a Krown, Or Ermyne, Purple or the Throne; But as the Vestal heat Thy Fire was kindled from above alone. Religion putting on thy shield Brought thee Victorious to the Field: Thy Arms like those which ancient Hero's wore VVere given by the God thou didst adore: And all the Swords, thy Armies had Were on an Heavenly Anvil made. Not Int'rest, or any weak desire Of Rule, or Empire, did thy mind inspire: Thy valour like the holy Fire, Which did before the Persian Armies go, Liv'd in the Camp, and yet was sacred too. Thy mighty Sword anticipates VVhat was reserv'd for Heaven, and those blest Seats And makes the Church triumphant here below.
(11) Though Fortune did not hang on thy Sword, And did obey thy mighty word; Though Fortune for thy side, and thee, Forgot her lov'd Inconstancy; Amidst thy Arms and Trophies Thou Wert Valiant, and Gentle too; Wounded'st thy self, when thou didst kill thy Foe. Like Steel, when it much work hath past That which was rough doth shine at last; Thy Arms by being oftner us'd, did smoother grow▪ Nor did thy Battels make thee proud or high; Thy Conquest rais'd the State not thee: Thou overcame'st thy self in every Victory. As when the Sun in a directer line Upon a Polish'd Golden Shield doth shine, The Shield reflects unto the Sun again his Light; So when the Heavens smil'd on the in Fight, When thy propitious God had lent Success and Victory to thy Tent; To Heaven again the Victory was sent. (12) England, till thou didst come, Confin'd her Valour home; Then onr own Rocks did stand Bounds to our Fame as well as Land; And were to us as well As to our Enemies unpassible: We were asham'd, at what we read; And blush't at what our Fathers did;
Because we came so far behind the dead. The British Lyon hung his Main and droopt, To slavery and burthens stoopt, With a degenerate sleep, and Fear Lay in his Den and languish't there; At whose least voice before A trembling Eccho ran through every Shore, And shook the World at every Rore. Thou his subdued Courage didst restore, Sharpen his Claws, and in his Eyes Mad'st the same dreadful Lightning rise; Mad'st him again afright the neighbouring Floods His mighty Thunder sound through all the woods. Thou hast our Military Fame redeem'd Which was lost, or Clouded seem'd, Nay more, Heaven did by thee bestow On us at once an Iron Age, and Happy too. (13) Till thou Command'st, that Azure Chains of Waves Which Nature round about us sent Made us to every Pirate slaves, Was rather burden than an Ornament. Those fields of Sea that washt our shores Were plow'd and reap'd, by other hands than ours. To us the Liquid Mass Which doth about us run As it is to the Sun, Only a Bed to sleep in was. And not, as now, a powerful throne To shake and sway, the World Thereon. Our Princes in their hand a Globe did shew, But not a perfect one
Compos'd of Earth and Water too. But thy Command the Floods obey'd; Thou all the Wilderness of Water sway'd; Thou didst but only Wed the Sea Not make her equal, but a slave to thee. Neptune himself did bear thy Yoke, Stooped and trembled at thy Stroke: He that ruled all the Main Acknowledg'd thee his Soveraign. And now the Conquer'd Sea doth pay More Tribute to thy Thames; than that unto the Sea. (14) Till now our Valour did our selves more hurt; Our Wounds to other Nations were a sport; And as the Earth, our Land produced Iron and Steel which should to tear our selves be (used. Our Strength within it self did break, Like Thundering—Cannons Crack, And kill those that were nere; While the Enemies secur'd and untouch't were. But now our Trumpets thou hast made to sound Against our Enemies Walls in Foraign-ground, And yet no Eccho back on us returning found. England is now the happy peaceful Isle, And all the World the while Is exercising Arms and Wars With forraign or Intestine Jars. The Torch extinguish't here, we lend to others Oyl, We give to all, yet know our selves no fear, We reach the Flame of ruine and of death Where e're we please Our Swords t'unsheath.
hilst we in calm and temperate Regions breath. Like to the Sun, whose heat is hurl'd Through every corner of the World; Whose Flame through all the Air doth go, And yet the Sun himself the while no fire doth know. (15) Besides the Glories of thy peace Are not in number, nor in value less; Thy hand did Cure and close the Scars Of our bloody Civil Wars; Not only Lanc'd, but heal'd the Wound; Made us again, as healthy and as sound. When now the Ship was well nigh lost After the Storm upon the Coast, By its Mariners endanger'd most; When they their Ropes and Helms had left, When the Planks asunder clest, And Floods came roaring in with mighty sound; Thou a safe Land, and Harbour for us found, And savedst those that would themselves have drown'd. A work which none but Heaven and thee could do, Thou mad'st us happy whe're we would or no: Thy Judgment, Mercy, Temperance so great, As if those Vertues only in thy mind had seat. Thy Piety not only in the Field but Peace, When Heaven seem'd to be wanted least. Thy Temples not like Janu's only were Open in time of VVar: VVhen thou hadst greater cause of fear Religion and the Awe of Heaven possest. All places and all times alike, thy Breast.
(16) Nor didst thou only for thy Age provide, But for the years to come beside, Our after-times, and late posterity Shall pay unto thy Fame, as much as we; They too, are made by thee. When Fate did call thee to a higher Throne, And when thy Mortal work was done, When Heaven did say it, and thou must be gon: Thou him to bear thy burthen chose, Who might (if any could) make us forget thy loss: Nor hadst thou him design'd, Had he not been Not only to thy Blood, but Vertue Kin; Not only Heir unto thy Throne, but Mind. 'Tis He shall perfect all thy Cures And, with as sine a Thread, weave out thy Loom. So, One did bring the Chosen people from Their Slavery and Fears, Led them through their Pathless Road, Guided himself by God, He brought them to the Borders: but a Second hand Did settle and Secure them, in the Promis'd Land.
UPON THE LATE STORM, AND DEATH Of the Late USURPER Oliver Cromwel Ensuing the same. By Mr. Waller. WE must resign; Heav'n His great Soul do's claim In storms as loud, as His Immortal Fame: His dying groans, his last Breath shakes our Isle, And Trees uncut fall for His Funeral Pile, About His palace their broad Roots are tost Into the Air; So Romulus was lost: New Rome in such a Tempest mis't their King, And from Obeying fell to Worshipping.
On Oeta's top thus Hercules lay dead, VVith ruin'd Okes and Pines about him spread: The Poplar too, whose bough he wont to wear On his Victorious Head, lay prostrate there. Those his last fury from the Mountain rent, Our dying Hero, from the Continent, Ravish'd whole Towns; and Forts from Spaniards rest▪ As his last Legacy to Britain left. The Ocean which so long our hopes confin'd, Could give no limits to His vaster mind; Our Bounds inlargement was his latest toyl; Nor hath he left us Prisoners to our Isle; Under the Tropick is our language spoke, And part of Flanders hath receiv'd our yoke. From Civil Broils he did us disingage, Found nobler objects for our Martial rage; And with wise Conduct to his Country show'd Their Ancient way of conquering abroad. Ungrateful then, if we no Tears allow To him that gave us Peace and Empire too. Princes that fear'd him, grieve, concern'd to see No pitch of glory from the Grave is free. Nature her self took notice of his death, And sighing swel'd the Sea with such a breath That to remotest Shores her Billows rold, Th' approaching Fate of her great-Ruler told. FINIS
