D420 12854249 94570
A GREAT DISCOVERY OF A DAMNABLE PLOT AT RVGLAND CASTLE In Monmoth-shire in WALES: Related to the High Court of Parliament, by Iohn Davis, November the 12. 1641. The chiefe Actor being the Earle of Worcester, Wherein is discovered the Number of Horses, Men, Powder, Match and Shot by them prepared, with the places where they are, and the Danger wee were in, had not God by his Mercy protected US. With certaine Quaeres presented to the High Court of Parliament Concerning such wicked Designes. As also, the Reasons wherefore the House of Commons gave strict command, that there should be a strong watch set about the Earle of Worcesters house, and the French Ambassadors. Wherennto is annexed, the true Relation of a damnable Plot which was disco∣vered on tuesday last, by a Religious man intended against the High Court of Parliament. LONDON Printed by Barnard Alsop, MDCXLJ.
A great DISCOVERY Of the damnable Gun-powder PLOT, At Rugland Castle; in Hereford shire. Lately found out by John Davis. The chiefe Agent in this Hellish Plot, is the Earle of WORCESTER. ONe John Davis▪ servant to Mistris Lewis, who kéepeth an Inne at the signe of the George in Rosse, in the County of Hereford, néere unto Rug∣land castle in Monmouth shire, where the Earle of Worcester now is. This John Davis being newly come to London, chanced to be at Alderman Actons, one of the Aldermen of the city of London: and being formerly acquainted with his Coach-man, related unto him the Discovery of a dangerous Plot, which the Earle of Worster hath cunningly contrived at this time.
Which when the Coach-man had heard related, he acquainted his Master, the said Alderman Acton there∣with; who caused him to be brought in unto him, and asking him further of it, he thought it worthy the con∣sideration of the honourable Assembly in the high Court of Parliament, and therefore brought the said John Davis before the house of Commons on Fryday last▪ being the 12 day of November. The said John Davis being called into the house to relate this discovery, was commanded by Mr. Speaker to relate what he knew of it. Alderman Acton being also present, told him that the thing that the house did require of him, was to relate that to them, which before he did to him. Then he being a plaine Country-fellow, and not able so fully to expresse himselfe: yet so well as hee could, spake to this effect. May it please your honours, to give me leave to speak the truth, so neare as I can, as I have formerly done to this Gentleman Mr. Acton: I am, and it please your honours, a poore man, the servant of Mistris Lewis, she kéepes an Inne at the towne of Rosse, in Hereford shire. And not long since, there came two Gentlemen to lodge at my Mistrisses house; who when they went a∣way, desired of my Mistris a guide to conduct them to the Earle of Worcester at Rugland Castle in Mon∣mouth shire. Now my Mistris kéeping a good Gelden or two alwayes in the stable: in case any Guests should want upon any urgent occasion, I knowing of the way thither very well, it pleased my Mistris to appoint mée to goe with them, which I did, and returned home a∣gaine orderly, as I use to doe, receiving satisfaction for my paines. Afterwards againe there came a very per∣sonble gentleman to our Inn himself alone, having no company at all: who having layne there all night, de∣sired my Mistris likewise to have some man to conduct him to the said Castle, to the aforesaid Earle of Wor∣cester.
And she sent me with him also, as she did before with the other two. So in the next morning wee set out, and I rode with him on the way, upon a very good Gelding of my M∣stresses, as I used to doe. And when we came to the Castle, he alighted, and caused me to alight also: he was a very portly man for person; he had a Monteer on his head, with a red feather in it, and very rich in apparell, and going into the house he called for some water to wash his hands, which was brought to him in a pewter Bason, but he refused, as be∣ing unwilling to wash in pewter. Then he called for a Uenice Glasse, which glasse they brought with water, holding about a quart: which glasse he tooke, and set the bottome of it in the Bason of water; for the top hée could not, it being about a foote high, there he set it, and washed his hands in it. To what end this Ceremony was used, I doe not know, your Honors can better judge of it then I. Then I having conducted this gentleman hither, he paid me, and gave me satisfaction, and my horse was set in the Earls stable to beat a while, to the end, that afterward I might the better returne home. I being there in the stable, saw many light Horses, and falling in discourse with the Groome of the stable, hee shewed me to the number of about thréescore horses prepared for warre. And he séemed to me, to go about to entise me by many perswasions, and entisements to have an affecti∣on to stay there. After he had shewed mé all that was in that stable, he led me into a Uault-under the ground, which went round about the Castle, where was made an obscure stable: in which I perceived about twelve light Horses for it was darke I could not well sée.
I was going further into that stable under ground to have séene the rest of the house there, which was, as he reported, about forty, but it was so darke, that I was fearefull to goe any further, for feare of danger. In another place under ground, he shewed me fur∣niture for about sixe or sevenscore of horse. In which place was furniture also, for about two thousand men, with great store of match and powder, and other Am∣munition belonging to war, in abundance: one of these stabls I guesse to be about sixescore foote in length, and twenty foure foote in breadth. Then he was leading me to shew me the Uault that went round about the Castle: but I was fearfull, partly having regard to my charge, the Gelding wher∣on I rode, lest I should be cosened of him, and partly in regard I was in so dangerous a place: therefore I desired to make the more haste away. Then he returned with me to my horse againe, and amongst other discourse, he told me that his master the Earle of Worcester, gave notice privately, that any man who would be entertained, should have sixtéene pence a day, good pay from him, in case they would be true to him. And to presse me, as I conceive, to have some de∣sire to serve him: he told me that his master had at this time seven hundred men under pay. But I, being no∣thing at all pleased with this discourse, hasted away to returne to my own businesse at home, where I returned immediately: and now by Gods providence, am come hither to acquaint your honours with what I know. After the house, had heard him speake, they tooke notice of it, and appointed him to come againe certaine dayes before them. In the meane time, great care is taken, to provide for his safety, and great charge given at his lodging, that he shall want for nothing.
Quaeries upon this Plot, humbly presented to the High Court of Parliament. 1 Whether Father Philips was not an Agent in this Plot? 2 Whether there be not more such evill-affected plotters in Wales besides? 3 What evill consequence might ensue of our hopefull Princes going to such a place▪ 4 What punishment they are worthy of, who shall séeke to have him there? 5 Whether wee have not as just cause to feare the Papists in England, as they had in Ireland & Wales, and if they should once take an head, and he not preven∣ted, what evill consequence may insue thereof? FINIS.
UPon this plot discovered, the Parliament hath caused a strong Guard of men to be set about the Earle of Worcesters house here in London. As also, they have caused another strong Guard to be set about the French Ambassadors house in Lin∣colns Inne fields supposing he hath some hand in this businesse, & to be a chiefe Agent in this damnable Plot▪ The true Relation of the great discovery, which was brought to light on tuesday last, being the 16 day of November, 1641. THere was a cruell and wicked Plot discove∣red about the City of London, which was in∣tended against some of the chiefe Members in the High Court of Parliament, and brought to light by a religious man. Therefore it was commanded by the house of Cōmons, that great search should be made for the finding out of two Frenchmen. who were supposed to be the chiefe Agents in this wicked Design. FINIS.
