e3776 10700720 45523
Exceeding welcome News FROM IRELAND. Being the Copie of a Letter sent from Dun∣dalke to Mr. Dudley Norton Esquire, Inhabitant at Nanptwich, and now resident in LONDON. Wherein is declared in what condition the Kingdome of Ireland is at this present. Which true information what victories have been obtained against the Rebels in severall parts of that Kingdome, By The Earle of Ormond. Sir Henry Titchburne. Sir Chrstopher Loftus. Sir Richard Greenvill. Captaine Bartlet. Colonel Vavasor. With others that are the chiefe Commanders of the Armie for that service. Published for the satisfaction of all those that desire true information of the proceedings in that Kingdome, by Authority. LONDON, Printed for Henry Fowler. Septemb. 2. 1642.
VVelcome Newes FROM IRELAND. HAving received true informati∣on from you of the proceed∣ings betweene the King and Parliament in England; in re∣quitall I have thought it ne∣cessary to informe you how the case stands with us in Ire∣land. For the Rebels they increase daily, like Hydra's heads; one is no sooner cut off, but there arise three in his place; but God be thanked they want Armes to furnish them; by which meanes (though their Forces are very considerable) they are not invincible; for severall assaults have been made against them, upon great oddes on their side; yet so great is Gods mercy towards us, that notwithstanding their numbers, our handfull have
still the victory, comming off with little losse, they being killed by thousands. For our souldiers, though their habits are poore, yet they have good hearts, for they weigh neither danger nor death, but upon all occasions are forwarder to fall on then their Commanders are to have them. For example, the Earle of Ormond with 5000. Foot and 800. Horse fought with 15000 Rebels neere Kilkenni, where the Rebels are incamped, kil∣ling at least 3000. with the losse of 60. Foot and 20. Horse. Sir Henry Titchbourne before Dundalke fought with Rorum Maguiers (brother to the Lo: Maguiers now prisoner in the Tower) having but three Re∣giments of Foot and two Troops of Horse, Ma∣guiers having above a thousand Rebels: in which fight Sir Henry Titchbourne behaved himselfe so valiantly, that had not Maguiers bestirred himself very nimbly, he had accompanied his brother: for his valiant followers shewed him a faire paire of heeles, and left him to fight it out by himselfe; which he seeing, followed their example, and ran away for company. In this battaile there were killed neere 2000. Rebels, 20. Prisoners taken, which were hanged like Rebels as they were. Sir Christopher Loftus. hath cleared the Coast of Galway, it having long time been besieged by the Rebels; but being oft times worsted by the English Forces, and gauled by the often issuing out of the Citizens, they were forced to steale away by night. But Sir Christopher Loftus having discovered them, fell upon them
on the morrow as they marched towards a wood that was neere adjoyning, thinking there to secure themselves; but seeing themselves intercepted, they fronted the English, who gave them a sowre welcome. The English were straight seconded by the Citizens of Galway, at whose arrivall the Rebels began to be amazed, and in a confused manner ran into disordor: In which confusion they were cut off so fast that they found the place too hot for their company. Wherefore instead of fighting, they tooke themselves to running, leaving the english and the Citizens of Galway to congratulate their happy victory. Captain Gibs was lately hard beset at Garmaston being opposed by Oneale the great rebell, whose forces were 18000. foote, and 3000. horse. Cap. Gibs having beene abroad relieving severall Ca∣stles besieged by the Rebells; and upon his re∣treate he made Garmaston his quarters intending to stay there a day or two to refresh his men, and to give them time to mend their clothes which were very bad: But Philome Oneale having in∣teligence that there was a small company of En∣glish in Garmaston under the command of Cap. Gibs, marched through the wood privately, stea∣ling upon the Towne, but being discovered by the English, certain notice was immediately gi∣ven to Captain Gibs, who sent immediately to Captain Bartlet, who was then in Limricke Castle, desiring him to send him some present aid, other∣wise he and his men had beene lost. Philome Oneale
having surprised him in his quarters, neverthelesse, Garmaston having a little Castle in it, hee had planted to small field pieces which he would in∣tercept him some small time, likewise placing his men to his best advantage, to offend him and se∣cure himselfe. This being done as soone as Pwilome Oneale came within shot of the Towne, he caused his men to give a generall shoute, which Oneale hearing feared some treachery, whereupon hee made a stand, all this while Captain Gibs stood not still, for his field pieces and other small shot with the drums made such a confused melody, that the Rebells were almost amazed, fearing that they had beene almost betrayed to death, they not conceiving any other cause of joy could be at such a time so vehemently expressed. Thus both parties continued shooting for the space of two howers. Captaine Gibs his men shooting at a full body, did doe great execution amongst them, but the rebells shooting at randome scarce frighted the English. At length Captain Bartlet with 500. foot and 3. troopes of horse, marched through the wood for the more privacie, and before they were a∣ware clapt just upon the reare of the Rebels, which Oneale seeing; caused his men to wheele about, and to front Captain Bartlet, who having the advantage of the hill, fronted them both
(knowing his men to be of an approved courage) and gave them a hot charge with musquet bullet. In the meane time Captain Gibs drew out his men and planted them just at the bottome of the hill, shooting very fast, so that betweene them they caused them to retreate, discharging on the flanke. Which they having done, being cleare of both the parties of English, they very fairly mar∣ched away with speede, with the losse of 500. men. In this Skirmish Captain Gibs was shot through the arme with a musquet bullet, and lost neere 100. men Sir Richard Greenwel fought with Mac-mahaun neere Munster. Mac-mahaun being plundering cer∣taine villages having 3000. fooote, and 500. hors; but Sir Richard Grenevill having not alliegiance went up to the rescue of the Inhabitants, where after 5. houres fight Macmahanone having strength∣ened himselfe with a Castle whereon hee had planted three field pieces, but after so much time spent to decide the difference, the English pressed so hard upon them, so that they fled out of the Towne leaving their Ordnance for Sir Richard Grenevill to carry home with him, their hast be∣ing such that they were either too hot or too hea∣vie. Colonel Vavasor obtained a Castle from the Lord Plunket, wherein was great store of Amu∣nitio, where he slew 50. Rebels, and tooke the Lady Plunket prisoner, with her two sons which were sent to Dublin. These are the chiefe of our proceedings in Ire∣land,
pray let me at the next returne bee infor∣med what hath passed betweene the King and Parliament since your last letter, and in returne I shall gratifie you with the like courtesie from hence. So I rest Your friend to be commanded, Patrick Kilborne. Dundalke, Aug. 26. 1642. FINIS.
