E3947A 18775480 108295
READER, THe great Work of them who are Embassadors for Christ, to beseech men in his stead, to be reconciled unto God, is to reveal the Will and Love of the Father, in making him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him. The manifestation of the Excellency, Fulness, Sufficiency, and absolute preheminence of that Righ∣teousness, so wrought out, from the Councel of the Will of God, dispensed in a Covenant of Grace, is that, which in the pursuit, and discharge of the Trust committed to them, they cheifly, through the strength of God, do, or ought to lift up themselves unto. In this Labor of the Gospel, hath the Author of the ensuing Treatise, evinced his Fellowship and Communion, by the travel of his minde, (accompanied with those advantages of Abilities, and Learning, which make such undertakings acceptable, and useful) which he hath laid out therein. The persons, occasion, and other circumstances, re∣lated unto, in this Discourse, I am utterly unacquainted withal, but onely by the light which concerning them, it self holds out unto me; which being not a sufficient bottom for a Judgement of this notoriety, I am not called, no more then desired to deliver my Thoughts concerning them. Every mans work shall be made manifest, for the day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall try every mans work, of what sort it is. Of the Matter treated on herein, various are the Thoughts of Learned Men; those doubtless seem to have the advantage, who walk in a professed compliance with the design of God, to give the Son of his Love, with his Love and Grace in him, the preheminence in all things. To deliver my Thoughts concerning the severals, argued, and disputed in this Treatise, nei∣ther the minute of time, whereunto for this expression of my self I am con∣fined, will admit me, nor doth my present aim require: [Especially consider∣ing that I have at large delivered my self to the main Head of the whole, in my Book of the Perseverance of the Saints, and Answer to Mr. John Good∣win on that subject, now almost cleared off the Press.] For the present, I shall only say, That there being too great evidence of very welcome entertain∣ment, and acceptance, given by many to an almost pure Socinian Justifica∣tion, and Exposition of the Covenant of Grace, even amongst them, into whose hearts God seems to have shined, in some measure, to give the light of the knowledge of his glory, in the face of Jesus Christ, all solid, learned, sober, endeavors, for the Vindication, of the absoluteness freedom, independen∣cy, and preheminence of that Grace in Jesus Christ, whereby we are saved, will doubtless finde acceptance with the Children of Gospel-Wisdom, and all that love the glory of him that bought us. Amongst such Labors and Endeavors (Christ an Reader) I commend to thy consideration, the ensuing Treatise, and commit thee to the Lord. Westminster▪ Nov. 7. 1653. JOHN OWEN.
VINDICIAE Justificationis Gratuitae. Justification without Conditions; OR The Free Justification of a Sinner, Explained, Confirmed, and Vindicated, from the Exceptions, Objections, and seeming Absurdities, which are cast upon it, by the Assertors of Conditional Justification: More especially from the Attempts Of Mr. B. Woodbridge in his Sermon, Entituled [Justification by Faith] Of Mr. Cranford in his Epistle to the Reader, and of Mr. Baxter in some Passages, which relate to the same Matter. Wherein also, the Absoluteness of the New Covenant is proved, and the Arguments against it, are disproved. By W. EYRE, Minister of the Gospel, and Pastor of a Church in the City of New Sarum. Rom. 3.24. Being justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemp∣tion that is in Jesus Christ. Dei gratia non erit gratia ullo modo, nisi gratuita fuerit omni modo, Aug. de pec. Orig. l. 2. c. 24. LONDON: Printed for R. I. and are to be sold by Edward Forrest Book-seller in Oxford. 1654.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE PARLIAMENT OF THE Commonwealth OF ENGLAND. Most Noble Senators. THe design of this Dedication, is not to call in your help and assistance to the Cause here depending, it being sufficiently guarded by a higher power, to wit, By that Living WordHeb. 4.12. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5., which is sharper then any two edged Sword; and which is able by it self, to overthrow and dissipate those deep and subtile Reasonings which men oppose against it. That Doctrine which is armed with
the Authority thereof, will be sure to stand, though men oppose it; but that which is destitute of this support, will be as sure to fall, though men protect it: Although I think, you to be as fit, as any company of men upon the face of the Earth, to umpire Diffe∣rences of this nature; knowing that many of you have   Clem. Alexand. VI. Strom. Senses exercised to discern between Truth and Error; yet to be Judges in matters of Faith, is an honor which I dare not give you, and which I hope you dare not take. Indeed, as you are Christians you ought to judge for your selves, and not (like those Horns, which gave their power to the Beast) give up your Faith to the Votes of others; how Godly, or Learned soever they are accounted; but to make your own Judgements in Matters of Religion, a Rule or Standard for the Faith of others, and to compel them to believe, what you conceive is Truth, were to assume a power more then God; who though he doth effectually move and perswade Gen 9.27. mens hearts, yet he doth not necessitate them to believe, and embrace the Truth; whose example may instruct us, that Religion ought to be propagated by conviction, and not by compulsion Religio est sua∣denda, non ∣genda.. It is remarkable, that they who a∣scribed unto Magistrates a Definitive and Coercive Power in Spirituals, have (when Magistrates would not serve their turns) denied the power, which they have in Temporals; refusing (contrary to the Rules of Christ 1 Tim. 2.2. Jere 29.7. Rom 13.1.) to own them, pray for them, or to yeeld obedience to their lawful commands; as if none must hold the Sword, but such as will use it, to fight their quarrel, and to effect that by force of Arms, which they themselves cannot do by strength of Argument. Though (blessed be God) we now have the counte∣nance
and protection of the Magistrate; yet we seek not to engage his power to extirpate, or to cut off them, that do differ from us. We desire no other liberty for our selves, then what we are willing should be given unto our Brethren, Viz. To be∣lieve and worship God according to the Light, which he hath given us, humbly to declare our Judge∣ments in Matters of Faith, and with meekness to Rea∣son out the things, wherein they and we do differ, from the Word of God. For my own part, I look upon it as a special Mercy (for which we ow suitable acknowledgements, both to God and you) that although we live in times, wherein the Truth is opposed, and blasphemed more then ever before; yet the Faithful have liberty to write and speak in defence thereof: We may re∣member when it was not so. I wish that all Orthodox Christians, and especially our University Worthies, (who have more leisure and far greater helps for such Polemical Exercises, then their Brethren abroad) had more Zeal to improve this Liberty for the ad∣vantage of the Truth. The Authors of most of those Errors and Blasphemies which have been lately started, are but little more to be faulted, then they that do profess the Truth (I mean such as are indued with Gifts and Abilities) who suffer them to walk abroad without check and controle; seeing there is no Error whatsoever, but the Scrip∣ture affords us variety of Weapons to wound and slay it. We cast the blame upon Magistrates, be∣cause they do suffer them, (nor can I excuse their con∣nivence at any of those Evils which are contrary to the Light of Nature) yet I fear the greatest share of
this guilt will lie at our doors who are the Ministers of the Gospel, whose office (without controversie) it is, To contend for the Faith, to convince gain-sayers; and by sound Doctrine,Jude 3. Tit. 1.9, 11. to stop their mouths, who teach things which they ought not. It is but a slender discharge of our Duty, to cry out against Errors and Heresies, and never shew and convince men what Truth and Er∣ror is, such loose and general Invectives do never ad∣vantage, most times they wound the sides of Truth; whereas, if the Trumpet gave a more certain sound, and Ministers did prove those things to be Errors, which they brand with this name, their pains would much more succeed to the profit of their Hearers, they would be better armed against such dangers. Your late Resolves to emit a Declaration, For giving fitting Liberty to all that fear God within this Com∣monwealth; for the better preservation of the mutual Peace of such as fear God among themselves, without imposing one upon the other; and to discountenance Blasphemies, damnable Heresies, and Licentious Practises (in Answer to the Petitions of the Congregated Churches in the Northern Counties) I am perswaded, have exceed∣ingly rejoyced the hearts of all the Faithful through∣out the Land. Now I humbly offer it to your con∣siderations, whether it be not a necessary expedient to preserve the mutual peace of Christians; straitly to prohibite, under fitting penalties, the giving names of obloquy,Jude 9. or railing accusations (such as the Arch∣angel durst not bring against the Devil,) and the im∣posing of slanders, upon one another. I see not how any manner of good can be expected from this Pra∣ctise; me thinks mens Arguments might be as keen and nervous, though their Language be sober, be∣seeming
Christians, and civil Men. Such names, they do not convince, most times they harden those that are mis-led. But then the mischeifs that come by it, are not a few: I know nothing that doth imbitter the spirits, and alienate the hearts of Christians from each other, so much as this; and which is worse, the Truths and Ways of God are not seldom, nor a little clouded by this means. For usually the names of the vilest Errors and Heresies, are made the Badge and Livery of the choisest Truths. The Discourse before you, doth instance in one, the title of ANTINOMIAN (which was ori∣ginally the character of loose and licentious Liber∣tines) i by some of our new Doctors, appropriated to them, who have most faithfully managed the Pro∣testant Cause, against the Papists, and in the cheif Points which are depending between them; to wit, Our Justification by Christ alone, without Works and Con∣ditions, performed by our selves; and our full and perfect Deliverance from the Curse of the Law. Though there is no true Christian, but will rejoyce to suffer shame, for the sake of Christ; yet by these arts, the Ignorant and Sim∣ple have their ears stopt, and eyes shut against the Word of Life; for few have so much courage, as to look into that which is generally branded with an evil name: So that in a short time, a few nick-names shall do us more hurt, then Fire and Faggot did here∣tofore. The Lord therefore keep these purposes in your hearts, till you have fulfilled them, and inable you to perfect the Work which you are called to; that the Truth may spred, and Godliness flourish, that Righte∣ousness may be equally administred, and Wickedness
(especially in High Places) severely punished; that Learning (whereof there is so great use, both in Church and State) may be encouraged; and Peace (if possible) be restored unto us. For the effecting hereof, I doubt not, but you have the earnest Prayers of all the Faithful through∣out the Land, I can assure you, of him, who is Yours Honors most humble Observer, W. Eyre. The Fourth day of the Nineth Moneth. 1653.
TO My Deare Flock in the City of NEVV-SARUM, unto which, God, and their own Choise, have made me an Over-seer. Loving, and Beloved Brethren, IT was a frequent saying in the mouth of Luther, That after his death, the Doctrine of Justifica∣tion would be corrupted. A few years last past have contributed more to the fulfilling of his Predi∣ction, then all the time that went before: Can there be a greater evidence of mens Apostacy from this Article of our Faith, then their branding of the Doctrine it self, with a mark of Heresie? Though our Adversaries are grown more sub∣tle to distinguish, yet they are as wide from the true Doctrine of Justification by Christ alone, as the perverters of the Faith in Luthers daies. It is not easie to number up all the wiles and methods wherewith Satan hath assaulted this Foundation-Truth; he knew it was too grosse, to tell men, That they must be justi∣fied by Works, seeing the Scriptures are so expresse against it; And therefore mens wits must be set on work to find out some plau∣sible distinctions and extenuations, a little to qualifie and and swee∣ten
this Popish leaven, to take off the odium of the phrase, and to rebate the edge of those Scriptures which usually are brought a∣gainst it. It is true (say they) we are not Justified by Works of Nature, but we are Justified by Works of Grace; and though we are not Justified by Legal, or old Covenant Works, yet wee are Justified by Evangelical or New Covenant Works performed by our selves; And againe, works though they are not Physicall Causes (which no man ever affirmed) yet they are morall Causes, or Conditions of our Justification; though they do not mer in a strict sense, by their innate worth and dignity, yet in a large sense, and by vertue of Gods Promise and Covenant, they may be said to merit our Justification and Salvation. Or if these will not doe it, the matter is dispatched, if Faith may be but taken in a proper sense, the  credere fetches in all other works within its circum∣ference. But that delusion which is least apt to bee suspected by wel-meaning Christians, is the calling Works, or Inherent Holinesse, by the name of Christ, the successe of this bait, we have seen of late in too many, who have dallied so long with the notion of a Christ within them Grounded on Col. 1.27 Christ in you the hope of glory. Whereas Christ in you is no more then Christ preach∣ed among you.  is rendred among in the same verse., that they have quite forgotten, nay, some have utterly denied, the Christ without them, that God-man, who is the onely Propitiation for our sins. How much cause then, my Brethren, have we, of continuall thankfulnesse unto our God, who in so generall a defection hath been pleased, to keep us that we are not led aside with the de∣ceivablenesse of this unrighteousnesse, and to lead us to that rock which is above us? For how ever the world doth account of Pha∣risisme, yet they that have any acquaintance with the mind of God, know there can be hardly named a greater sin Vx  est peccatum, quam Justificationem, ex operibus quae∣rere. Twis. Vi. Grat. l. 1. p. 2. sect 2. prope si∣nem▪, then the establishing our own righteousnesse. It is the good pleasure of God (for which everlasting praise be given unto him) to reveale those things unto babes, which are hiden from the wise and prudent; The Gospel hath been, and will be a mystery to the worlds end. Humane reason cannot conceive how men should buy without mony; or become rich, by stripping and emptying of themselves; attain unto righteousnesse by renouncing and abhorring their own righteousnesses. Hence it is that the Doctrine of an unconditionate Covenant, and the Free Justification of a sinner, is looked upon, by our learned Rabbies
as such a foolish and ridiculous conceit. A great Master Dr. Hammon Sermons, p. 144. in our Israel speaks strangely of it. Unconditionate promises (saith he) beget onely an irrational, fallacious, foundationless Faith, which the bigger it swells, the more dangerous it proves. And a little after, he calls the Faith and Hope begotten by such promises, A de∣pendance on some fatal chain, (some Necromantick trick of believing, thou shalt be saved, and thou shalt be saved) nay, on Satan himself, some responce of his Oracle, &c. And not much before Pag. 141., It is a miracle (says he) that they who believe this Doctrine of unconditional Prmises, are yet restrained from ma∣king this so natural a use of it, from running into all the riots in the World. I remember a good Note of his, from John 7.48 At an Act Sermon in Oxn., That the greatest Schollars, are not always the soundest Christi∣ans. We see Christianity is not Book-Learning, nor is Faith at∣tained to, by strength of parts. I should (might I be so bold) humbly ask this Learned Doctor, Whether the Faith and Hope of all the Saints, we read of in the Scripture, were an irrational, fal∣lacious, and foundationless Faith? Now let him shew us any one of them, that in his addresses unto God, did ever plead a Condi∣tional Promise That of Hezekiah, 2 King. 20.3. is of a pecu∣liar consideration: I remember Luther calls it, Stulti loquium Hezekiae Enarrat. in Psal. 45.. Others that excuse it, say, That Hezekiah draws his Argument, not from his own works, but from Gods; he rea∣sons from what God had done for him, that he would do more, and bestow the mercy which then he needed Mr. Caryl on Job.. But besides him, from the beginning of Genesis, to the end of the Revelation, we do not finde that any of Gods people have used any other plea unto God, or have had any other support for their Hope and Confi∣dence; then his free promises of Grace and Mercy; not onely the woman of Canaan, the Publican, and such as they were;Matth 15 22. Luke 18.13. & 23.42. Gen. 18.27. & 32.9, 10. Num. 14.18, 19. 2 Sam. 23.5. 1 Cor 4 4. Phil 3.9. but Abraham, Jacob, Moses, David, Paul, &c. have all of them, Fled for refuge unto these promises; their Faith never knew any other bottom or foundation besides this. Is it an irrational thing to receive life, as a gift, and not as wages? It were very strange, if the Mercy and Faithfulness of God, should not be as sure a Founda∣tion to relie upon, as our own Works? I will be bold to say, Who∣soever do build upon other Foundations, besides the free Promise of Mercy, they will have no better success, then he who built his
house upon the Sand, Matth. 7.27. They may (perchance, when it is too late) experiment the fallacy, they have put upon their own souls. The Doctor is as much mistaken in the use of the point, as he is in the Doctrine; to say, That the natural use of it, is to run into all the ris in the world; he might have taken notice where the Holy Ghost makes another use of it, Tit. 2.11. Luke 1.74. 2 Cor. 7.1. And right reason would have suggested, that the freer the Promise is, the more is the love and bounty of the Promiser shewn: Now Love naturally begets Love▪ Publicans (saith our Saviour) will love those that love them;Matth 5.46. Luke 7.47. and can a man believe so great a benefit, as the free remission of his sins, and not love him that hath remitted them? Possibly a man that hath received this Grace, but in the notion, may draw such untoward conclusions from it; but for any true Believer to sin upon this ground, is as impossible, as that light should become darkness, 1 John 3.3, 9. I must confess, the loose and unevn walking of many Professors, hath given too much occasion unto Adversaries to Blaspheme this Doctrine: And though it be unjust in them, to charge the faults of Professors upon their Profession; yet you cannot but see how much it concerns them, who have hope of Salvation, through Christ alone, to vindicate the honor of this Grace, and by their exem∣plariness in wel-doing, to put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. The vindication of this Doctrine lies as much upon private Chri∣stians, as it doth upon Ministers; the strongest Arguments against it, are but the Suppositions, and Consequences of carnal Reason, which are soonest confuted, by a holy Conversation; in which re∣spect illiterate men may be irrefragable Disputants, and women may nonplus the learnedst Doctor. And therefore whilest I am in this Tabernacle, I shall not cease to stir you up, by putting you in remembrance of these things, though you know them, and are established in the present truth. Some of you know, how unwillingly I undertook this Publick Imployment, being more inclined to the Truel, then the Sword; to build up my Hearers in their most Holy Faith, then to engage in Controversies against Opposrs: And truly, nothing could have induced me to it, but the tendency of the Work to your Edifica∣tion; that the simplicity of the Gospel may abide amongst you,
and that you may stand fast in the Truth which you have received, being able to answer the cavils of them that do oppose it. It was not least in my eye, That our honest Neighbors, who (by the evil arts of some that affect preheminence) have been prejudiced and disaffected towards us, may see, and satisfie themselves, Whether we believe and contend for any other Faith, then that which was once delivered nto the Saints; for surely, they will have but little com∣fort in separating from us, without a cause: I must needs tell them their account at last, will not be with joy, who have rejected the counsel of God against themselves. Whatsoever success this Discourse may finde with others, I doubt not but it will be an acceptable service unto you. I desire, that it may provoke you, to be more instant in Prayer for me, that tterance may be given me; and that my Labors in the Wo of the Gospel, may be more successful unto you, and to all others that do partake of them: Which will be the greate joy on arth unto him, who is Yours in the nearest Bonds, W. Eyre. The Third day of the Ninth Moneth. 1653.
TO THE Christian Reader. FRIEND, IF thou knowest me, and how many Burdens do lie upon me, I dare say, thou dost not expect an Apology for the tarriance of this little peece: For though, considering the work, thou mightest have had it much sooner, yet by rea∣son of my much sickness, daily services in the Ministry, and the cares of my Family, (which are not ordi∣nary) though I had finished it eight moneths since, it was not likely thou shouldst have had it now. However, If any shall up∣braid me, as Ecchius did Melancthon, when he delayed to An∣swer an Argument he had put unto him Id verò non est laudi dandum, si extempre respondere ne∣queas. Cui Me∣lancthon, mi Doctor non quae∣ro meam gloriam hoc in negotio sed veritatem. Melch. Adam. in vit Melanct. . 339., It is not praise-worthy (sayes he) if thou dost not answer it presently: I shall say to him, as Melancthon to the Doctor, I seek not my own praise in this matter, but the truth; and perhaps it may succeed more to the advantage of the truth, that it was delayed. I lately met with a passage, which fell from the Pen of a Lead∣ing Man Mr. Baxter in his Epistle be∣fore his Dire∣ctions for com∣fort. in these times; whereof I held it necessary to give thee my thoughts, to remove the prejudices (which probably it hath begotten against this discourse. There is (says the Author) a very judicious Man, Mr. B. Woodbridge of Newbey, hath written so excellent well against this Error, sil. Justification before the act of believing, or without conditions; and in so small room, being but one Sermon, that I would advise all private Christians to get one of them; as one of the best, easiest, cheapest preservatives against the contagion of this part of Antinomianism. It is far from me to envy the praises of Mr. Woodbridge, being ready to give a more ample Testimony to his personal worth: I do freely
acknowledge, that in natural and acquired parts for his time, he is like Saul amongst the people, higher by the head and shoulders, then most of his Brethren: However, that commends not the cause he is engaged in. It is not to be wondered at, that Mr. B. hath given this superlative encomium to Mr. Wood∣bridges Sermon, he knew well enough, that it would rebound upon himself, Mr. W. being a son of his own Faith; and this notion of his, but a spark from out of Mr. Baxters forge. I sup∣pose Mr. Baxters praises or dispraises, are not greatly regarded by sober-minded Christians, who have observed how highly he magnifies J. Goodwin, with others of his notion, and how slight∣ingly he mentions Dr. Twisse, and all our Protestant Divines that differ from him. How excellently Mr. W. hath written of this matter, will appear to the impartial Examiner of this Sur∣veigh. Learned Men have held, that the best way to demolish Error, is to build up Truth; as to drive out Darkness, is to let in Light; Now M. W. though he endeavors to prove no Justi∣fication before Faith, yet throughout all his Sermon, he never so much as hinted, how or in what sense we are justified by Faith; the Explication whereof, according to the sense of our Protestant Writers, would have ended the matter: For the Question depending between us, is not so much about the time, as the terms, and matter of our Justification, to wit, How, and by what means we are made Just and Righteous in the sight of God? Which, we affirm to be, by the perfect Righteousness of Christ alone, which God doth impute unto us freely, without Works and Conditions performed by us; though we have not the sense and comfort of it, any otherwise then by Faith. The Antecedency of our Justification in foro Dei, before Faith, is but a Corrollary from this Position; and Mr. B. acknowledgeth it to be a necessary consequence, from the imputation of Christs Active Obedience Aphor. p. 46., which hath hitherto been the unanimous Tenent of our Protestant Divines; and Mr. Norton Answer t Pincen. of N. E. thinks it no less then Heresie, to deny it. His advice, unto all private Christians to buy one of these Sermons, argues rather his conceit of himself, then his charity to them; that he dares take upon him the office of a Universal Dictator, to prescribe not onely to his Kedermisterians, but to all private Christians what Books
they shall read. Whether Mr. Woodbridges Tract may be called the best, amongst none good, that are written against this Truth, I shall not dispute. But that it is such an easie peece for all pri∣vate Christians to understand, I doe very much doubt, though the men of Kedermister (who I fear are fed but with little better food) can swallow down such choakly meat, as his Paradoxes and distinctions of Faith, evidencing Axiomatically, or Syllogisti∣cally; Of Justification Impetrated, and Exemplified; Of our working actively and passively; Of Promises in the Covenant, which are not parts of the Covenant, but means to bring us into Covenant, &c. yet unto other private Christians, I dare say they are like Herring bones in the throat, and not a whit more intelligible then a Lecture of Arabeck. The next motive, he hath his upon, probably may take with many, the cheapnesse of the book which he doth commend; but if the price and the profit were put toge∣ther, I dare say the Buyer will confesse that he hath given a great too much. He buyes poison too dear who hath it for nothing. As for the title of Antinomianism which he bestowes upon our Do∣ctrine, it is no great slander out of Mr. Baxters mouth, with whom an Antinomian, and an Anti-Papist are termini convertibles. Let him shew us any one Church or single person accounted Ortho∣dox till this present age, that did not hold some, yea, most of those Points which he cals Antinomianism, and I will openly ac∣knowledge I have done him wrong; otherwise, let him bee looked upon as a Slanderer and Revilr of all the Protestant Churches, who under a shew of friendship hath endeavored to expose them to the scorne and obloquie of their Enemies. Mr. B. (the better to ingage his Reader) tels him his Doctrine is of a middle straine Ibid.; as if all the Reformed Churches, had hitherto been in an extreame, in this fundamentall point of our Justification. It is like, he thinks the Papists are much nearer to the line of truth, then any of them. But in earnest is Mr. Baxters Doctrine of a middle strain? I am sure he gives as much unto Works and lesse unto Christ then the Papists doe; He makes Works, by vertue of Gods Promise and Covenant, to be the meritorious causes of Justification and Salvation, and in no other sence doe the Papists affirm it. I must needs say, I never yet met with that Papist, which calls Christ a sine qua
non (i. e. a cause which effects nothing) of our Justification: But I shall desire the Reader for his better satisfaction to para∣lell Mr. Baxters Doctrine with these ten Positions of Bishop Gar∣diner See Act. and Mon. 2 vol. p. 52. & . Joyes first Ans. to Winch. in prin., which e endeavored to maintain against those blessed Martyrs of Jesus Christ, Barns, Hierome, and Garret, who sealed the contrary Doctrine with their dearest blood. 1 The effect of Christs passion hath a Condition, the fulfilling of the Condition diminisheth nothing from the effect of Christs passion. 2 They that will injoy the effect of Christs passion, must fulfil the Condition. 3 The fulfilling of the Condition, requireth, first knowledge of the Condition, which knowledge we have by Faith. 4 Faith commeth of God, and this Faith is a good gift. It is good and profitable for me to do well, and to exercise this Faith, Ergo, By the gift of God I may do wel before I am justified. 5 By the gift of God I may doe well towards the attainment of Justification. 6 There is ever as much Charity towards God, as Faith; and as Faith increaseth, so doth Charity increase. 7 To the attainment of Justification, is required Faith and Charity. 8 Every thing is to be called freely done, whereof the beginning is free, and set at liberty without any cause of provocation. 9 Faith must be to me the assurance of the Promises of God made in Christ, if I fulfil the condition▪ and love must accomplish the condition, whereupon followeth the attainment of the Promise ac∣cording to Gods Truth. 10 A man being in deadly sin, may have Grace to doe the works of Repentance, whereby hee may attain to his Justifica∣tion. Never did the child (saies G. JoyG. Joy Re∣joynd. fol. 1.) so lively resemble his own Father, as these Articles do expresse the Bishop of Romes Anti-christian Doctrine. And as for his choise Notion of Justification by Workes, as they are our New Covenant Righteousnesse; I finde it was a shift of the Papists long agoe. The said Doctor Barnes Tr. of Justif. by Faith alone having cited this passage out of Bernard Sup. Cant. Serm. 67. [I do ab∣hor whatsoever thing is of me, &c.] See (saies he) Bernard
doth despise all his good works, and taketh him onely to Grace. Now had he no works of the New Law, as you call them? I shall not trace Mr. B. any farther, there being now in the Presse (as I am informed) a large and full answer to his Paradoxicall A∣phorismes, by a faithful Servant Mr. Crandon of Fawley in Hampshire. of the Lord Jesus, a work∣man that needs not to be ashamed; though I heartily wish that the work may provoke others unto shame, who have more strength, leisure, and far greater helps for such undertakings then Coun∣try Ministers. I dare say, that they who sate at the stern in our Ʋniversities heretofore such as Reynolds, Whittaker, Davenant, Prideaux, &c. would never have indured to see so many Popish and Arminian books (far more dangerous then the Ranters blasphemous Pamphlets) shew their heads but would have sent forth their Antidotes to correct their poison. I doe speake the more freely to stir up others of greater abilities then my selfe, to undertake this cause, least it should suffer overmuch, through my weaknesse in managing it. We were wont to say that if a man doth plead for the King, all is to be taken in good part; the design of this Discourse, was to plead the cause of the greatest King, that no flesh might glory in his presence, who of God is made unto us Wisdome, Righteousnesse, Sanctification and Redemp∣tion; though the Advocate hath not holpen the Cause, yet the goodnesse of the Cause may excuse the Advocate. I shall de∣sire thee to read without prejudice, and either to read all, or none, for that which is curtaild in one place, is more explained in another. If thou reapest any good from what I have writ∣ten, I know thy returns will be according to my hearts desire, Praises unto God, and more fervent prayers for Thy Servant in the Work of the Gospel. W. EYRE. The Third day of the Ninth Month. 1653.
Justification without conditions; OR, The Free Justification of a Sinner justified. CHAP. I. Shewing the occasion of this Discourse, and the rise of the Controversie which is here debated. SInce it hath pleased the Lord to reveal the riches of his Son unto me, and to make me a Steward and Dispenser of this Grace unto his People; the cheif design of my Ministry hath been to bottom my hearers upon Christ alone 1 Cor. .11. Matth. 16.18. Eph. 1.20, 21: Isa. 28.16., that they might have no confidence in the flesh Phil. 3.3, 9., but in that perfect and everlasting Righteousness which he hath wrought: For which end it hath been my care frequently and clearly to demonstrate to them, both the sole-sufficiency, and effi∣ciency of Christ in the work of Mans Redemption; that he is able to save unto the utmost Heb. 7.25., and that no work of ours, either before or after our Conversion, doth share with him in the glory of this atchievement. In a word, That there is no cause . Heb. 5.. Causa nostr cum Deo reconci∣liationis, nisi u∣nica statuitur, nulla est. Calv. Opusc. p. 317. If you give not all, and fully, and alonely to Christ, you deny Christ, and the Holy Ghost. Doctor Bar Martyr, Tr. of Justif. without God concurring with the precious and invaluable merit of his Blood, to present us holy, unblameable, and unreprovable in the sight of God. Which truth, as it shines clearer then the Sun, throughout the Scripture, so it appears unto me to be of greatest moment, when I consider the concernment thereof, both to God,
and Christ, and to the precious souls of Gods Elect: I know no∣thing that gives so much glory unto God and Christ, as to proclaim him the onely Saviour Hos. 13.4. Isai 43.11. & 49.26. & 60.16. John 5.23. Acts 4.12.; and that besides him there is none other, that we ow the whole work of our Salvation from the beginning to the end unto Christ alone; and surely, there is no point in the whole Doctrine of Godliness, which contributes so much to the Peace, Security Tutius vivimus quando totum Deo damus., and Fruitfulness of the Saints, as this doth: It affords the greatest encouragement to sinners to believe, to be∣lievers to hold fast their confidence firm unto the end, and to serve God with a willing minde, in Righteousness and true Holiness all the days of their life. §. 2, Now though this truth be so evident, and my intentions in pressing it, such as have been mentioned, yet it hath hapned un∣to me (as unto many of my betters) to be mistaken, and by some of my own Profession, who insinuated into the people, That I taught a new Gospel, made Faith and Repentance to be needless things; for no other reason, that I know of, but because I dare not give them that honor which is due to Christ, in making them con∣causes with him in procuring our Peace with God, and in obtain∣ing our Right and Interest in all the Benefits which he hath pur∣chased; for they themselves are my witnesses (would they speak their knowledge, as to matter of Fact) that in all my Exercises, though usually something of Christ be the Doctrine which I handle, yet the use that I make of it, is to press men unto Faith and Holi∣ness: Nay, I challenge all my Adversaries to say, that ever I posi∣tively spake so much as one syllable to lessen the esteem of Inherent Holiness, though I am not ashamed comparatively to say as the Apostle doth, That I count all things Omnia quae▪ nunc Christianus & Apostolus a∣go & habeo— Non solum opera ante justificati∣onem facta, ve∣rum etiam quae post justificatio∣nem fiunt. Zan. in Phil 3.8. Acts 24.16. but loss and dung, that I may win Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.8. But otherwise, I thank the Lord, if I should speak slightingly of Holiness, my own practise would condemn my Doctrine; For herein I exercise my self, to have always a conscience void of offence towards God, and to∣wards men. §. 3. It is needless to give the Reader an account of all the Oppositions which I have met with, in the course of my Ministery; nor are they worth the mentioning, seeing (as the Apostle Heb. 12.4. speaks) I have not yet resisted unto blood, I shall onely acquaint him with the rise of this present Difference, which hapned about three or
four years since upon this occasion, handling those words, How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation? Heb. 2.3. in the weekly Lecture, which I Preach in this City, I proposed this Question, Why the Gospel, and not the Law, is called Salvation, seeing Life and Salvation is the end of both? One Reason which I gave in Answer thereunto, was, Because the Law promiseth men life but conditionally, upon condition of their Perfect Obedience; which condition no man is able to perform, and consequently no man can attain unto Life and Happiness by means thereof; but the Gospel reveals a Salvation which is freely given unto Sinners, which God bestows upon such as have neither money to buy, nor worth to deserve it. This led me to speak more largely of the Difference between the Law and the Gospel, the First Covenant, which is a Covenant of Works, and the Second, which is a Covenant of Free-grace. Concerning the latter, I laid down this Thesis, That in the New Covenant there is no condition required on our parts to intitle us to the blessings of it. One Corollary which I drew from hence, was, That Faith is not the condition of the New Cove∣nant. I cannot without too much tediousness rehearse my Explica∣tions of this Proposition, and I do the rather forbear it now, be∣cause in the process of this Discouse I shall have more opportunity to rescue my sense of them, from some common mistakes. I shall onely inform the Reader of one Reason which I then gave for proof of the last Position, to wit, That Faith is not the condition of the New Covenant, and particularly of our Justification (which as Mr. W. calls it, is the Special and Noble-blessing of the New Covenant) in regard that our Controversie concerning Justificati∣on before Faith, grew first from thence. The Argument was to this effect. If Faith be the condition of our Justification, it must follow, That men are Believers before they are justified, (for the condition must be performed, before the benefit which is promised thereupon, can be received.) But men are not Believers before they are justified; the Scripture witnesseth, that the Subject of Justification is a sinner, or ungodly person, Rom. 4.5. & 5.8, 10. Now the Holy Ghost never calls Believers ungodly or wicked, but Saints, Faithful, Holy Brethren, Children of God, Members of Christ, &c. §. 4. The next news that I heard, was, That all the Pulpits in
the Town were filled with invectives against my Sermon. I must confess it surprised me with no little wonder, knowing that I had delivered nothing but what was consonant to the Scriptures, and wherein I was sure I had the suffrages of many godly and learned men, and those too, that are reputed amongst the more manly sort of our Protestant Divines. But that which I mused at most, was the usage of a Neighbor Minister, who though he heard not my Sermon; and although by reason of a like mistake, he had solemnly promised me not to clash against my Doctrine, until he had first conferred with me about it; yet shortly after, without giving me the least hint of his dis-satsfaction, he publickly com∣plained to the people, what dangerouis Errors had been lately vent∣ed amongst them, suborned the words of the Apostle, Gal. 1.8. to pronounce me cursed, and charged the people not to hear them that do teach: (1) That the New Covenant is not conditional; (2) That Faith is not the condition of the New Covenant; or (3) That Justification goes before Faith. To let pass those odious Nick-names which my Neighbors, and others (who have been invited hither to disaffect the people towards my Doctrine) have frequently bestowed upon me (as Antinomian, New-De∣clarative, Troubler of Israel, &c.) which troubled me the less, when I remembred what Luther sayes,Luther on Gal. , 29. He that will Preach Christ truly, and confess him to be our Righteousness, must be content to hear, that he is a pernitious fellow, and that he trou∣blth all things, &c. And a little before, The faithful must bear this name and title in the World, that they are Seditious and Schismaticks, and the Authors of innumerable Evils, &c. And in another place, viz. on Gal. 5.11 Paul (saith he) taketh it for a most certain sign, that it is not the Gospel▪ if it be preached in peace. But that which grieved me most, was, That Satan had gotten such an advantage against my Ministry; for those insinuations prevailed so far upon the people, that many of my wonted hearers fell off, and re∣ained from coming to my Lecture, for fear least I should per∣swade them to believe some other Gospel▪ then that which is reveal∣ed in the Scriptures: And how to remove this offence, so unjustly taken, I could not devise; for though I made things never so plain in Publick, thither they would not come; or if I had gone to them in Private, it had been but to little purpose, they being possessed
(as one of them most uncharitably told me) that I had a design to vent new Doctrine in Publick, and to blanch it over with a fair construction in private. It came into my minde (as the most like∣ly expedient to vindicate both the truth and my self) to de∣sire those Reverend Ministers, who sometimes came unto my Lecture, That if they were dis-satisfied with what I had deliver∣ed, they would be pleased publickly to declare it, assoon as Sermon was ended, and show me wherein I had swerved from the truth. I hoped that by this means, we should have a clearer under∣standing of one another, and the people would be the better satis∣fied, when they had compared their Exceptions, and my Answers together. But hitherto I could never obtain this favor from them, though some of them have taken the Liberty to clamor lustily against me, behinde my back, and when I was safe enough from giving them an Answer. §. 5. About April last (which was Anno 1652.) I came unto the Wednesdays Lecture in this City, where I heard a stran∣ger Mr. Warren of Houghon in Hampshire. (whom I knew not) let fall sundry Passages, which I con∣ceived to be very wide from the Orthodox Faith, as well as con∣trary to the Doctrine which I had lately delivered in the same place. It sounded harshly in mine ears, That the Elect them∣selves (to whom Christ was peculiarly given by the Father before the foundations of the world; for whom Christ gave himself a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor, whose sins he bare in his Body on the Tree, even to a full propitiation) had no right or interest in Christ, nor any more benefit by his death, then reprobates, till they did believe; and that they are but dreamers who do conceit the contrary. I know not what could be spoken more contradictory to many plain Scriptures, which shall be mentioned anone, more derogatory to the full atonement which Christ hath made by his Death, and more disconsolatory to the souls of men, in laying the whole weight of their Salvation upon an uncertain condition of their own performing: And therefore after the Exer∣cise was fully ended, I desired the Minister that Preached, that with his leave, and the patience of the Congregation, I might remonstrate the insufficiency of his Grounds or Reasons, to uphold the Doctrine he had delivered; three of which I took more espe∣cial notice of. One was drawn from the parallel between the first
and the second Adam, As men (said he) are not guilty of Adams sin, till they have a Being; so the Elect have no benefit by Christ, till they have a Being; whereunto he added those old Philoso∣phical Maxims, Non entis non sunt accidentia, and, Accidentis esse, est inesse. Another was, That where there is no union, there can be no communion; but there is no union between Christ and the Elect, before they believe: Therefore the E∣lect have no communion and participation in the benefits of Christs death, before they have a Being, and do believe in him. The proof of the Assumption was managed thus. The union be∣tween Christ and the Saints is a personal union, which cannot be supposed till their persons have a Being. A third ground (upon which he laid the greatest stress) was to this purpose, The Elect have no benefit by Christ before they do believe, because God hath made a Covenant with his Son, That they for whom he died, should be admitted to partake of the Benefits of his death, by Faith. §. 6. Whereunto my Replies were to this effect. I told him that I conceived his first Allegation made very much against him; For if the Righteousness of Christ doth come upon all the Elect unto Justification, in the same manner as Adams sin came upon all men to condemnation, as the Apostle shews it doth, Rom. 5. Then it must follow, That the Righteousness of Christ was reckon∣ed or imputed to the Elect, before they had a Being, and then much more before they do believe in him; for it is evident that Adams sin came upon all men to condemnation, before they had a Being; for by that first transgression (sayes the Apostle, vers. 12.) Sin entered into the world. And more plainly, Death passed up∣on all men: The Reason follows, because in him, or in his loyns, all have sinned. Now as in Adam the , that is, All that shall perish, were constituted sinners, before they had a Being, by reason of the imputation of his disobedience to them; so in Christ the , All that shall be saved, were constituted righteous, his obedience being imputed unto them by God, before they had any Being, otherwise then in him as their Head and common Per∣son.Mr. Burges of Justif. p. 80, 86. There is a late Writer who tells us, that there is not the same Reason for the imputation of Christs Righteousness to all the Elect before they believe; as there is for the imputation of
Adams sin unto his posterity before they have a Being; Because (says he) the issues of the first Covenant fell upon Adams poste∣rity in a natural and necessary way, but the issues of Christs death do come to us in a supernatural way. But this Reason seems to me to be of small validity; for the issues of Adams disobedi∣ence came not upon his posterity by vertue of their natural propa∣gation; for then his sin should be imputed unto none, until they are actually propagated; and the sins of other parents should be imputed to their posterity as much as Adams, because they descend as naturally from their immediate Parents, as they do from Adam; so that the issues of Adams sin may be said to descend to his posterity in a supernatural way, i. e. By vertue of Gods Covenant which was made with him as a common person, in behalf of all his posterity; and in the same manner do the issues of Christs obedi∣ence descend unto Gods Elect, by vertue of that Covenant which was made with Christ, as a common person, in their behalf; and therefore unless they can shew any Proviso, or restriction in the second Covenant more then in the first, why life should not flow as immediately to the Elect from Christs obedience, as death did from Adams disobedience, the Argument will stand in force. But to return to my discourse with Mr. Warren: I added, That those Logical axioms, non entis, &c. have no force at all in the pre∣sent Controversie: It doth not follow that Christs Righteousness cannot be imputed to us, before we have an actual created Being, because accidents cannot subsist without their Subjects; for as much as imputed Righteousness is not an accident inherent in us, and consequently doth not necessarily require our existence. Christ is the Subject of this Righteousness, and the imputation of it is an act of God. Now the Apostle hath observed, That God in justi∣fying, and imputing Righteousness, calleth things that are not, as if they were, Rom. 4.17. As the Righteousness of Christ was actu∣ally imputed to the Patriarks before it was wrought; and our sins were actually imputed to Christ before they were committed; so I see no inconvenience to say, That Christs Righteousness is by God imputed to the Elect, before they have a Being. §. 7. As to his second Reason before mentioned, I excepted (as I conceive but justly) 1. Against his calling our union with Christ a personal union,
which seems to favor that absurd notion See D. Cham∣bers Animad∣vers. Sect. 11.., That a believer loseth not onely his own proper life, but his personality also, and is taken up into the Nature and Person of the Son of God. Divines do call our union with Christ, a Mystical and Spiritual union, because it is secret and invisible, to be apprehended by Faith, and not by Sense or Reason; but the Hypostatical or Personal union is proper unto Christ, in whom the Divine and Humane Nature do constitute but one Person. 2. Against his Assertion (proposed Universally,) That there is no manner of union between Christ and the Elect, before they do believe; for though there be not that conjugal union between them which consists in the mutual consent Consensus facit matrimonium. of parties, yet is there such a true and real union, that by means thereof, their sins do become Christs, and Christs Righteousness is made theirs. God from everlasting constituted and ordained Christ, and all the Elect to be (as it were) one Heap or Lump, one Vine, one Body or Spi∣ritual Corporation, wherein Christ is the Head, and they the Members; Christ the Root, and they the Branches; Christ the First Fruits, and they the residue of the Heap Heb. 2.11. He that sancti∣fieth, and they that are sancti∣fied (i. e. they whose sins were purged by his blood) are , where∣unto some do make , others , to be the Substantive. Vid. Jun. Paral. l. 3. God by his E∣lection from Everlasting amed a new body of Hu∣mane race (opposit to the first, whereof Adam was the Head) and appointed Christ to be its Head, Diodat. on Ephes. 1.4. All our Divines do define the Catholike Church to be Cas Praedestinatorum, The whole company of Gods Elect.. In respect of this union it is, That they are said to be given unto Christ, and Christ to them; to be in Christ, Ephes. 1. That they are called his Sheep, his Seed, his Children, his Brethren, before they are Be∣lievers: And by vertue of this union it is, That the obedience and satisfaction of Christ, descends peculiarly to them, and not un∣to the rest of mankinde. But here I was assaulted with an Ob∣jection, which the Reverend Minister of the Parish was pleased to move from Rom. 16.7. Where Paul speaking of Andronicus and Junia, saith, They were in Christ before me: From whence he would infer, That none are in Christ, or united unto Christ be∣fore they do believe. Whereunto I returned no Answer, but humbly desired him to leave the manage of the Conference unto him that had Preached: I did the rather pass it over, in regard there is so little difficulty therein; for it is evident, the Apostle speaks there, not of their Spiritual union with Christ, which is invisible to man, for God onely knows who are his, but of such a
a Being in Christ, as is by External Profession and Church Com∣munion See Diodate on Rom. 16.; in which respect the whole visible Church is called CHRIST, 1 Cor. 12.12. And Hypocrites, as well as the Elect, are said to be in Christ, and to be Branches in him, John 15.2, 3. And thus it is acknowledged, that one is in Christ before another, according as they are called, and converted, whether real∣ly or in appearance: It doth not follow that the union of the Elect to Christ is successive, or that it is an act done in time, depending upon conditions performed by them. §. 8. To prevent the like interruptions, I desired the Preacher to vouchsafe us the proofs of his third Ground (which in his Sermon he had but barely asserted) scil. That God hath made a Cove∣nant with Christ, that the Elect should have no benefit by his death, until they do believe; which I have often heard affirmed, but never proved. Whereunto he replyed, That I should pro∣duce some Scripture which sayes, That the Elect have actuall bene∣fit by Christ, before believing; wherein, if I had failed, it had been but a weak proof of his Assertion, for he having the Affirma∣tive, the Confirmation of it lay on him. However I readily con∣descended to his demands, and proposed an Argument to this effect. They with whom God hath declared himself to be wel-pleased and reconciled, have actual benefit by the death of Christ: But God hath declared that he is reconciled unto, and wel-pleased with all those for whom Christ hath died, Ergo. To confirm the As∣sumption which was then denied, I alledged Matth. 3.17. (in∣tending to have added divers other Scriptures, as 2 Cor. 5.19. Rom. 5.10, &c. when I had made out the force of the former place,) This is my beloved Son, in whom I am wel pleased. From whence I reasoned after this manner; If the wel-pleasedness of God, which is here declared, were not terminated to Christ per∣sonal, but to Christ mystical, then God was wel-pleased with all his Elect, (who are Christ mystical) when this voice came from Heaven, and consequently before many of them do believe: But the wel-pleasedness of God here declared, was not to Christ per∣sonal, Ergo. Here Mr. Good an Inn-keeper of this City put me that Question, which Mr. Woodbridge hath mentioned, Pag. 21. Whether God were wel-pleased with unregenerate men? To whom I did not Reply, as Basil did unto Demosthenes, the Clerk
of the Emperors Kitchin, when he affronted him for opposing the Arrian Faction, . Wish∣ing from my heart, That all the Lords people were Prophets; that private Christians would labor for a more explicite Faith in the Grounds of Religion: And therefore I answered, That this and other Scriptures do plainly declare, That he is wel-pleased with his Elect in Christ, whilest they are unregenerate; though he be not pleased with their unregeneracy, or any of their actions in their unregenerate estate. Then Mr. Woodbridge interposed, That the place aforecited did not prove the actual reconciliation or wel-pleasedness of God towards his Elect, but onely that he was wel-pleased with the person of Christ; or if we will extend it unto men, that then the meaning was, I will be wel-pleased, or I am wel-pleased, when I am wel-pleased, whensoever it is: Where∣unto I returned no Answer, but desired the Congregation to judge how well this gloss did agree unto the Text. I am wel-pleased, i. e. I will be wel-pleased. To say God is not wel-pleased, when he himself sayes expresly, That he is, is not to interpret Scripture, but to deny it; such a liberty to alter Tenses and Forms of Speech at our pleasure, will but justifie the Jesuites Hosius, l. 3. de Auth. Scrip. Pighius, l. 1. de Hier. Eccles. Csan. in Epist. ad Bohen. 2 & 7. blasphemy, That the Scriptures are but a Leaden Rule, and a Nose of Wax, which may be turned into any Form. In regard there were so many Speak∣ers at once, to avoid confusion, I proceeded no farther in that Con∣ference. §. 9. The next day Mr. Warren came unto my Lecture; and after Sermon was ended, though he had nothing to except against my Doctrine, yet he offered me some other Arguments to confirm his own, scil. That the Elect have no benefit by Christ, till they do believe: To which I returned such Answers, as I conceived ex∣pedient, to clear the truth; without giving him the least offence in word, or gesture, that I was aware of, notwithstanding the provo∣cations I received from him, both in the Language he gave me, a∣busing those words of our Saviour, Matth. 26.54. To compare himself unto Christ, and me unto Judas, &c. And in the chal∣lenges he made, to Dispute, Write, &c. whereunto I was willing∣ly deaf, least our Doctrinal Differennce might prove a Personal Quarrel. His Arguments and my Answers I shall here omit, in regard the same were urged by Mr. Woodbridge with much more
strength. The scanning of whose Book is my present intend∣ment. §. 10. On the Wednesday after (about half an hour before Sermon began) I was informed that Mr. Woodbridge was to Preach. In regard he was none of the Lecturers, I concluded he had abode in Town, and procured a turn purposely to blow the Coals, which Mr. Warren had kindled, and to foment the pre∣judices of the people, both against the truth, and my self. And therefore having begged direction of God, I was pressed in my spirit to go and hear him, and to bear witness to the truth, if it were opposed; and I bless the Lord his strength and assistance was not wanting to me. Had Mr. Woodbridge faithfully related the procedure of our Conference, I had not put my self to the trouble of this Reply. But seeing he hath represented my Judge∣ment in this point, with the Grounds thereof, in so ill a dress, I shall endeavor to set those things strait, which are cast by him into such a crooked frame: And that I may omit nothing which makes for him, and against my self, I shall give the Reader my sence of his whole Book. But before I proceed to the examen of his Ser∣mon, I must crave leave to premonstrate the Reasons of my Practise in this Publick Conference. CHAP. II. A Digression, concerning the proposing of Questions, and reasoning with Ministers publickly about the Mat∣ter of their Sermons. IT may seem strange to some, that I should so publickly except against my Brethrens Doctrine, seeing it hath been so seldom practised in our Congregations; and therefore I shall by way of Apology offer them the Reasons that moved me to it. 1. I did no more then what I have often desired should be done to me, if any were dis-satisfied in the Doctrine which I had taught. Hanc veniam damus, petimusquè vicissim. And of all men, Mr. Warren had least reason to be offended with it, who had
practised the very same thing in another place At Rumsy Toward one Mr. Symonds whom he char∣ged with sun∣dry Errors, a soon as he had ended his Ser∣mon, and de∣sired the peo∣ple not to be∣lieve a word which Mr. Symonds had taught, how justly I cannot tell.; unless he be re∣solved to take that liberty, which he will not give. 2. Having a Ministry committed to me in this place, by the ap∣pointment both of God and Man, I looked upon it as my duty, to witness against those Errors that intrench so nearly upon the Foun∣dation, as I conceive this doth, which I have engaged against. But some will say, I might have discharged my Conscience at an∣other time, and with more deliberation. I must confess, I have al∣wayes highly esteemed that saying of Aristides, who being de∣manded by the Emperor to give a sudden answer, unto something propounded, Replyed, Do you ask to day, and I will answer to morrow: And the like of Melancthon Melch. Adam. in vit. Melanct. p. 339. to Ecchius, who had put him a knotty Argument, Cras tibi respondebo. Indeed sud∣den Answers are seldom sold, especially in weighty matters. But the case here was such as would not admit delay; for I knew the greatest part of the Hearers (whose prejudices by this means were strengthned against me) would not vouchsafe to come at an∣other time▪ when I had more opportunity to speak unto them. I dare say, that all that were present at Mr. Woodbridges Sermon, knew that he had levelled his Discourse against my sef; now if I had kept silence then, and shewn my dislike of his Doctrine at another time, what ever I had said, would have been but little regarded; my Adversaries would have given forth, that I had spoken that behinde his back, which I was not able to maintain unto his face. 3. The Points which these Ministers handed, were Controver∣al; and surely Controversies are much better managed in a Con∣ference between the Parties dissenting then in a continued Discourse, when the same man shall frame both Arguments and Answers to his own advantage. 4. I see no inconvenience at all, that can come of this practise, but rather very much good, were it more generally received in our Congregations; That if a Minister do deliver any thing that is dubious, he should be desired after his Exercise is ended, to clear and explain it; or if any thing contrary to truth, he should by sound Doctrine be convinced thereof; which if it were done with that meekness and gravity as becometh Christians, without eering, railing, and such like personal provocations, it would very much tend unto godly edifying.
§. 2. And (first) on the Ministers part, it would make them more studious, and careful to weigh and ponder what they do de∣liver in Publick; were this course more frequently used, many would not do the work of the Lord so negligently as they are wont to do it, and especially when they think there is none that heeds them, or that durst to gain-say their crudest notions. Then (se∣condly) on the peoples part, it is a singular means (1) to increase their knowledge, and to maturate their judgements in the Articles of our Faith; for it is far easier to judge and discern of controvert∣ed Points, when they are debated in way of Conference, then when they are delivered in a continued Discourse; especially seeing the Speaker is seldom so ingenuous, as either rightly to search, or to urge the strength of his Adversaries Tenents. (2) To confirm and establish them in the truth, which they have already received, for Nihil tam certum, quam quod ex dubio certum. Men abide by those truths which they have throughly tryed. (3) To hinder the spreading of many dangerous Errors which are sometimes vented in our Publick Auditories, and which the common people are ready to swallow without chewing. (4) To prevent sundry mistakes which are occasioned through the obscurity, ambiguity, or narrowness of mens expressions. § 3. Though custom hath not brought it in credit amongst our selves, yet is it not any novel practise. 1. We finde that the Jewish Doctors (as bad as they were) gave liberty to the people, publickly to ask them Questions for the better understanding of the Doctrine which they taught; they would never else have allowed our Saviour,Mal. 2.7. being but a Childe of twelve years old, to have asked them Questions, and to make Answers and Replies to what they spake, as they did Luke 2.46, 47. For at another time when he did something which was un∣usual, they took him up with a quo jure, By what authority, &c. Matth. 21.23. It is observable, that this was done in the Temple, and not in a private House, and when a great Congrega∣tion was present; For (sayes the Text) all that heard him, mar∣velled, &c. 2. We have the example of the Apostles to justifie us herein, whom we finde as frequent in Disputing, Arguing, and Reasoning with them that opposed the truth, as in their continued Discourses
amongst the people, Acts 6.9. & 9.29. & 17.2, 17. & 18.4, 19. & 19.8, 9. & 15.7. amongst themselves. 3. We have also the practise of the Primitive Churches, going before us in this particular. In the Church of Corinth, not onely one, but any one (except women) was allowed to speak in the Pub∣lick Assemblies, for the edifying of himself, and others, 1 Cor. 14.29, 31. See Vers. 26. Upon which Text (especially) it was, that Archbishop Grindal grounded the Exercise of Prophesying, which he, with the consent of the other Bishops, set on foot in the Province of Canterbury, as appears by his Letter concerning that Matter unto Queen Elizabeth; the reviving of which, would not be the meanest peece of that Reformation which hath been at∣tempted. 4. Pauls dealing with Peter is very considerable, Gal. 2. the Text says, ver. 11 See Luther on Gal. 2.11.. That he withstood him to the face, and vers. 14. that he reproved him before them all, i. e. before the whole Congregation, though it were for a matter of fact, yet will it not follow, that we should be more indulgent unto Errors in Doctrine; no doubt, but Paul would have dealt as roundly with Peter, or any other, if he had taught any thing contrary to truth, we see his zeal for the simplicity of the Gospel. Vers. 5. To whom (scil. the false Apostles) we gave no place, no not for an hour, that the truth of the Gospel might continue with you. 5. It is more then once charged upon us Ministers, that we should convince gain-sayers, and stop their mouths, who teach things which they ought not (not by procuring the Magistrate to put them to silence, but) by sound doctrine, i. e. by clear and demonstrative Proofs from the Holy Scripture, Titus 1.9, 11. 6. And lastly, If every Christian ought to give a Reason of the hope that is in him, as it is enjoyned, 1 Pet. 3.15. and as it was wont to be publickly practised in the Primitive Churches Vid. Beza in Matth. 3.6.; much more ought a Minister of Christ (who should be apt to teach, 1 Tim. 3.2.) to be willing to satisfie his hearers concerning the Doctrine which he hath delivered. §. 4. Object. 1. All that I have heard objected against this practise is of little moment. As first, some have alledged, That the Disciples came privately to our Saviour to ask him Questi∣ons,
Mark 10.10. Mark 9.28. To which I Answer. Answ. 1. Though it were in a house,Answ. yet it was before all his Disciples, some did put to him these Questions before the rest; and I suppose, That they who dissent from us in this matter, do look upon all that come unto our Churches to be Disciples. 2. The Negative is weakly concluded from the Affirmative: It doth not follow, That because they came unto him privately, therefore they might have asked him these Questions in a Publick place; seeing our Saviour never forbad them to do this thing, before the people: Surely, he that so readily made answer to all the Cavils of his enemies, would not have refused to satisfie the Doubts, Cases, or Questions of his own Disciples, wheresoever they had put them to him. 3. Though Questions which are meerly for private satis∣faction, should be privately proposed, yet such as tend to the edifying of others, and to the clearing of such things as are openly delivered, are most conveniently moved in the Publick Assemblies. But 4. what is this instance to a Ministers witnessing against false and Erroneous Doctrines which are vented amongst the people committed to his charge? Object. 2. Others have alledged, That the Apostle reprehends  perverse disputings, 1 Tim. 6.5. Answ. True, and justly too! But will it follow from hence,Answ. That all Publick Disputations, and Reasonings about matters of Faith, are perverse Disputings? Was the Apostle to be charged with perverseness when he reasoned both with Jews and Gentiles, as his manner was? Those perverse Disputings, vers. 4. are called strifes of words; but such is not the matter which we do differ about, which on all hands is confessed to be of very great mo∣ment. Object. 3. Some have objected that prohibition of the A∣postle, Rom. 14.1. Receive him that is weak in the faith, but not to doubtful Disputations. Answ. 1. The scope of the Apostle,Answ. was not to prohibite Dis∣putations concerning matters of Faith, before such as are weak, but to exhort stronger Christians to be tender and charitable to their weaker Brethren, whom he would have them to receive, scil. Into Church Communion, and to own in the Fellowship of the Gospel, although they were not so fully informed as themselves
in the Doctrine of Christian Liberty, concerning the distinction of Meats, days, and other Mosaical Observations: Our Translators in the Margent render the last Clause, Receive him— not to judge his doubtful thoughts, q. d. Do not judge him an un∣believer, because of his Doubts and Scruples about these indiffer∣ent matters; or do not perplex and intangle him with Niceties, least his Faith in the main be utterly subverted: There is a vast difference between those adiaphora, which the Apostle speaks of, and the points which are in difference between us▪Epistle to the Reader. (Mr. Cranford says well) That these Controversies concerning our Justification, are no strife about Goats Wooll. 2. This prohibition makes as much against Preaching of those points which do stumble the weak, as against the discussing of them by way of a Conference whatsoever is necessary to be taught the people, is as necessary to be tryed and examined by them. §. 5. Object. 4. It hath been also alledged (which doth cast the greatest odium upon this practise) That these Publick Disputations do thwart with those Precepts which require us to seek and follow after Peace, as Rom. 12.18. & 14.19. & 15. 2. Eph. 4.3. Answ.Ans. For my own part, I see not the least contrariety between &them.Zuingl. Tom. 2. fol. 302. It was the Judgment of a great Divine, Haec unica eaque sola via est, qua ad concordiam proximè perveniri potest, &c. This is the one, and onely way, whereby we may most suddenly attain to concord; if whatsoever things may be, or are commonly said for any Opinion, or against it, be truly propounded in the Churches; so that the people be allowed free judgement in all things, &c. In my Opinion they take a wrong course to make Peace, that go about to stop mens mouths, and never satisfie their Judgements; for from hence innumerable Discords must needs arise. Me thinks Christians (who are sensible of their many mistakes) should not be so strait laced, as to resolve to be at Peace with none, but such as will jurare in verba, Say as we do. A late Writer sayes well,Mr. Baxter. Why may not Christians and Schollars write plainly against one anothers Judgement, with a loving consent? So say I, Why may we not Reason against each others Opinions in a friendly manner?Malum per acci∣dens non destruit bonum per se. But (2) if Discord and Dissention should arise by this means, yet is it not a Natural, but an Accidental Effect
thereof: And thus the Gospel it self doth sometimes cause disturb∣ance, as our Saviour foretold, Matth. 10.34, 35. But is the Gospel to be charged with these Dissentions? Or ought we there∣fore to forbear to Preach the Gospel? The proper cause of these Dissentions are mens own corruptions; it argues monstrous pride, when men cannot suffer their Opinions to be discussed land exa∣mined by the Word, but strait wayes their Passions are up in arms, and hold them for their Enemies that do differ from them; It is a sign they are more tender of their own credit, then of the truths of Christ. 3. Though Peace be a Jewel of great price, yet that Peace is far too dear which costs us the loss of Truth Pax est omni bello tristior, quae veritatis, & ju∣stitiae ruina con∣stat., I mean of any Saving, Necessary, and Fundamental Truth. For though in some lesser points, In quibus salvâ fide qua Christiani sumus, ignoratur verum, as Augustine speaks De Pec. Orig. cap. 23., we may for peace sake have our faith, or perswasions to our selves, Rom. 14.22 Dissidiis mag∣nis & contro∣versis, non sunt redimendae mi∣re istae veritates. Acont. Strata∣gem . Yet sure in those great and weighty matters of the Gospel, which are either Foundations, or else are adjacent to the Founda∣tion (as these Controversies about Justification are, it being articu∣lus stantis aut cadentis Ecclesiae, as Luther calls it) we ought not out of love to Peace, to betray the Truth. It is better that Offences should come, then that any vital truth should be lost or imbezel∣led Utilius scanda∣lum nasci per∣mittitur, quam ut veritas relin∣quatur. Greg. hom. 7 in Ezek. ex Aug. Jam. 3.17.; it is far more eligible to have truth without peace, then peace without saving truth; The wisdom which is from above, is first pure, and then peaceable. All those Precepts which do call for Peace and Unity, are bounded with a salva fide; as that Rom. 12.18. If it be possible; now Id solum possumus, quod jure possumus, nothing is possible, but what is lawful; so that if we may with a good Conscience, and without treachery to the truths of Christ, we ought to live peaceably with all men. So Rom. 14.19. it is not barely, Follow after peace; but peace and the things which make for edification, it must be an edifying, and not a de∣stroying peace; such as may promote, and not hnder the build∣ing up of the Church. Vid▪ Rom. 15.2. and 1 Cor. 14.29. The unity we are bid to strive for, Eph. 4.3. is the unity of the Spirit E enim sola ecclesiae pax est, quae Christi pax est Hilar. Gen 49 5. and not like that of Simeon and Levi, who were Brethren in ini∣quity. For as one Dr. Reynolds▪ observes well out of Basil the Great, If we once shake the simplicity of the Faith, Disputes and Conten∣tions will prove endless. 4. If Christians in their Publick Dis∣putes,
do so far forget the Rules of Sobriety and Moderation, as to betake themselves to those carnal Weapons, of Jeering, Scoffing, and Reviling each other, it is an iniquity to be punished by the Judge, because it tends so directly to the breaking of our Civil Peace, and is more scandalous in them, then in any others. Would the Civil Magistrate Interpose himself so far, as to be the Moderator of our differences in this behalf, these Publick Debates would be of singular use. CHAP. III. Being a Surveigh of Mr. Woodbridges Title Page, wherein the Opinion he opposeth, is cleared from the Aspersion of Antinomianism. IT is a common saying, Fronti nulla fides. We may no more judge of Books by their Titles, then of Strumpets by their Foreheads; or of Apothecaries Drugs by the Inscriptions of the Pots which do contain them, whose out-sides many times are Re∣medies, when the inside is stark poyson Tili remedia, ides veena.. The natures of things do not always answer the Names and Inscriptions which are put up∣on them. We read of Pompey, that he built a Theater Cum titulo Templi; and of Apolinarius the Heretick, That he had a School Cum titulo Orthodoxi. Nestorius also vailed himself . Montanus, who would have our Saviour to be , assumed unto himself the Title of Paracletus; nay, Apelles the Painter drew his filthy Strumpet, Cum titulo Veneris, with the Inscription of a Goddess, that so he might more easily bring men to the adoration of her. There is nothing more common, then for men to adorn their Errors with the Robe of Truth, and to deform the Truth with the Rags of Error. I hope therefore, that the Reader will be more wary, then to judge of this mans Doctrine by the specious Title, which he gives his own, or that black mark wherewith he hath branded the Opinion which he doth oppose. He calls his own Opinion [Justification by Faith] and the
Doctrine he opposeth, an [Antinomian Error] both which may be understood Per antiphrasin, for Justification by Works, and an Evangelical Truth. As for his own Opinion, he had more fitly stiled it [Justification by Works] taking Faith as he doth, in a proper sence, and attributing no more to Faith, then to other works of Sanctification, which in his sence do morally qualifie men for Justification, and Salvation. I cannot think him a hearty Advo∣cate for Justification by Faith, who holds, That we are not justi∣fied till the day of judgement; which I am credibly informed this Author hath Publickly maintained, since he Preached this Ser∣mon At Broughton before many Ministers, &c.: But how ill his Book doth deserve this Title, shall appear in discussing the parts of it. §. 2. And as for the imputation he hath cast on our Doctrine, (which he calls an Antinomian Error) I doubt not, but it will re∣dound more unto his shame, then unto ours. It hath been an old continued practise of Satan, to blast the truths and wayes of God with odious Nick-names, purposely to deter the simple from look∣ing into them; as few men will come near to a house which is marked for the Plague. It were easie to fill a Volume with those opprobrious Terms and Titles, which in all ages have been cast upon the Truth, and the Professors of it. Sure I am, Satan hath gained no small advantage by these Hellish means. Tertullian observes, That the Christians were hated and persecuted for no other crime, but the crime of their Name Nominis cri∣men. Tert. A∣pol.. So there are many things in these days generally decryed, that are onely guilty of an evil name. I doubt not but there will be found many a precious truth in those Bundles of Errors, which have been heaped together by some Godly-men in this last age. 'Tis but an easie Confutation to cry out Error and Heresie; and this I have often observed, That they who are most liberal with these loose invectives, are generally sparing of solid Arguments. Whether the Opinion which Mr. W. opposeth, be an Error, sub judice lis est; How well he hath acquitted himself in the proof of his charge, we shall see anon. For my own part, I dislike not his or any other mans Zeal against Errors and Heresies, provided they will allow that liberty unto others, which they assume to them∣selves; to witness against that which they conceive Erroneous. I cannot be perswaded by all that Mr. W. hath yet said, That this
Tenent of Justification in foro Dei, without Works or Conditions performed by us, is an Error, much less an Antinomian Error. If we may judge of it, by those general Diagnosticks, which Di∣vines have given us to discern between Truth and Error, I am sure it hath the complexion of a saving truth: That Doctrine which gives most glory unto God in Christ, is certainly true, and the contrary is as certainly false. Let that (sayes Bradwardine) be acknowledged for the true Religion, which gives most glory unto God, and renders God most favorable and gracious unto man Quae Deo ho∣orabilior, paci amicabilior, ho∣mini favorabili∣or.. Now let such as are least in the Church judge, which Opi∣nion gives most glory unto God; Either (1) that which ascribes the whole Work of our Salvation to the Grace of God, and the me∣ritorious purchase of Jesus Christ; or (2) that which makes men Moral causes of their own salvation; which ascribes no more unto Christ, then the purchasing of a new way, whereby we may be saved, if we perform the terms, and conditions required of us. If the former in his Judgement be Antinomianism, I shall freely profess, That by it alone (though he call it Heresie) I have hope of Life and Salvation.Acts 24 14. §. 3. I am sure he is greatly mistaken, if he derives the de∣scent of this Doctrine from the Antinomians, who were a Sect of Libertines, or carnal Gospellers, which appeared in Germany soon after the Reformation began, scil. about the year 1538 Hoc anno pro∣dit secta eorum qui dicuntur Antinomi. Sleid. Com. l. 12. fol. 159.. The Ring-leader whereof was Islibius Agricola, the Compiler of the Interim; they merited this name of Antinomians by their loose Opinions, and looser Practises, against whom Luther wrote several Books, and Calvin bitterly inveighed in his Instr. Ad∣versus Libertin. who (as I shall shew anon) are no Enemies to the Doctrine which I do here maintain. That sort of Christians in former times were called Eunomians, from Eunomius their Leader, of whom Saint Augustine De Haeresib. c. 54. gives us this Character, Fertur usque adeo fuisse bonis moribus, inimicus ut asseveraret, quod nihil cuique obesset quorumlibet perpetratio ac perseve∣rantia peccatorum, si hujus quae ab illo docebatun, fidei parti∣ceps esset. i. e. It is reported, That he was such an Enemy to all goodness; that he affirmed, though a man did commit or lie in any kinde of sin, it should never hurt him, if he had but that Faith which he taught. Of the same strain were the
Gnosticks, who for their filthy lives, were called Coenosi, The dirty Sect. Fide & Ope∣rib. c. 14. lb. q. 76. in Octoginta tribus quest. Augustine observes, That there were many of this spirit in the Apostles days, as the Nicholaitans, the Disciples of Simon Magus, Basilides, Valentinus, who abused some passages in the writings of Paul, to be as it were Panders to the flesh; who because the Apostle had affirmed, That a man is justified by Faith without works, concluded, That if men did believe, Etiamsi malè operarentur, & facinorosè, flagitioseve viverent, Though they lived never so wickedly, they should be saved: Which filthy Dreamers (as Jude calls them) occasioned the Epi∣stles of James, Peter, John, and Jude; the cheif scope of which is to shew the unsoundness of that Faith, which doth not work by love, and that they are not Believers who do not bring forth the Fruits of a holy life. Now me thinks Mr. W. should have more charity, then to rank his Antagonists with such filthy Swine. §. 4. Mr. W. is not ignorant, I dare say, that many Godly Learned Men have asserted the Justification of Gods Elect, in foro Dei, before Faith, who were never accounted Antinomians. I am sure Mr. Pemble hath hitherto been known by another name; I mention him the  because he was Divinity Reader in that Society Magdalen Hal in Oxon., where I my self, and this Author (for a while under me) had our education. In his Book of the Nature and Properties of Grace and Faith, he delivers his Judgement to this effect, Vind. Grat. p. 21. & 23. That the Elect, even whilest they are unconverted, they are then actu∣ally justified and freed from all sin by the death of Christ; and God so esteems of them as free; and having accepted of that satisfaction, is actually reconciled to them: And a little after; Our Justification in Gods sight, was purchased for us by Christ, long before we were born; for it is in vain to think with the Arminians, That Christs merits have made God onely Placabi∣lem, not Placatum, procured a freedom, That God may be re∣conciled if he will; and other things concur, but not an actual reconciliation: No it is otherwise, Full satisfaction to Divine Justice is given and taken; all the sins of the Elect are actu∣ally pardoned. This was concluded upon, and dispatcht between God and Christ, long before we had any being, either in Na∣ture or Grace; yet this benefit was ours, and belonged to us,
though we knew not so much, till after that by Faith we did ap∣prehend it, as Lands may be purchased, the Estate conveyed, and setled on an Infant, though he know nothing of it, till he ome of age. Mr. Rutherford, I dare say, was never suspected to be an Antinomian, yet in his Exercit. Apologet. (a Book which Mr. W. in my hearing heretofore, hath extolled to the skies) he hath said as much as any of us, against whom Mr. W. hath levelled this op∣probrious name: Rhaetorf. Ex∣ercite Apologet. pro Grat. p. 45. Sanc prius quàm electus credit, cessit, &c. Ve∣rily (saith he) before any of the Elect do believe the wrath of God, and all the effects of his wrath are removed from their persons by vertue of Christs satisfaction: And near the same place he speaks to this purpose,Pag. 43. Though we are not justified pas∣sively, or terminatively (i. e. The gracious sentence of God is not terminated in our Consciences) till we do believe, yet our justi∣fication actively considered, as it is in God (who is the onely justifier) was compleat and perfect, before we had a being; and in this sence Faith is not the Instrument of our Justification. Dr. Twisses Judgement in this point is sufficiently known. The Righteousness of Christ (saith he Vind. Grat. l. 1. p. 2. Sect. 25. . 5. p. 197.) was ours, before we did be∣lieve; ours, I say, in respect of right, because in the intenti∣on both of the Father, and the Son, it was performed for us; though not in respect of possession and enjoyment, because we have not the sence and knowledge of it, whereunto we do attain by Faith— For Faith coming (which the Spirit of God works in our hearts) the love of God to us in Christ is then perceived and acknowledged. Whence it is, That the Righteousness of Christ is said to be imputed unto us by Faith, because we cannot know and discern that it is imputed to us but by Faith; and then we are said to be justified with that kinde of Justification and Absolution from sin, which breedeth peace in our Consci∣ences. Where he also gives us two Arguments to prove, That Justification, in foro Dei, goes before Faith. Was this famous Doctor an Antinomian? Of all men Mr. W. (who is now enter∣ed upon his Labors, and reaps the Harvest of that Seed which the Doctor with much sweat and many Prayers hath sown at New∣bery) hath least reason to account him so. I must needs tell him, He will not honor himself, by aspersing the name of this blessed man. If Mr. W. had consulted with the Writings of his own fore∣fathers,
I suppose he would have given the adhearers to this Do∣ctrine more civil language. Mr. Parker his Grandfather (a man whom his Enemies Quem nos ju∣venes admiari solii, &c: Crakanth. Log. Praedic. ubi. admired for his Learning and Piety) in his Book Descensu Christi ad inferos, hath this excellent passage Lib. 3. sect. 30. p. 59., Justificatus Christus dicitur cum resurrexit, 1 Tim. 3.16. Nos{que} in eo resurgente justificati, Rom. 4. ult. quia ist solutio, i. e. Suscitatio patris, actualis justificatio fuit, illius quidem à pec∣catis aliorum pro quibus satis dedecit; Nostrum vero à pecca∣tis propriis pro quibus ille vadimonium praestitit. i. e. Christ is said to be justified when he rose from the dead, 1 Tim. 3.16. And we to be then justified in him, Rom. 4. ult. Because that discharge, to wit, His Fathers raising him from the dead, was an ACTUAL JUSTIFICATION of him from the sins of o∣thers, for which he had satisfied; and OF US from our own sins, for which he became a surety. It doth not a little justifie them, that drave away this Reverend man from his Native soyl, that a Grand-childe of his own, a Minister, and a Minister in these times, should brand him with Heresie. §. 5. To these might be added many more, who have not hither∣to been known by the name of Antinomians. Mr. Calvin saith, That our Justification, in respect of God, doth precede our Faith Fides porro ita justificationem, praecedit, t ta∣men Dei respectu sequatur, Calv. Antid. Conc. Triden. Sess. 6. p. 282.. Zanchius in his Explication of the Epistle to the Ephe∣sians, upon those words, Chap. 2.5. [He hath quickned us toge∣ther with Christ,] says, That all the Elect, who are the Members of Christ, when he by his death, had expiated their sins, were freed from the guilt of eternal death, and obtained a right to eternal life. Chamier hath much to this purpose, Nobis potius est persuasissimum, &c. We are most certainly perswaded, that our sins are pardoned before we do believe; for we deny that Infants do believe, and yet Infants have their sins forgiven Cham. Pan∣strat. Tom. 3. l. 13. c. 10. sect. 18.. And a little before, viz. Chap. 6. of the same Book Cap. 6. sect. 4., I deny (saith he) that Faith is the cause of our Justification, for then our Justification would not be of Grace, but of our selves; but Faith is said to justifie, not because it effecteth Justification, but because it is effected in the justified person. And in another place to the same purpose Lib. 22. c. 12. sect 5. & ect. 9▪. Faith doth neither merit, obtain, nor be∣gin our Justification; for if it did, then Faith should go before Justification, both in nature and time; which may in no wise
be granted, for Faith it self is a part of Sanctification; now there is no Sanctification, but after Justification; Quae re & natura prior, which is really, and in its own nature before it. Alstedius in his Supplement to Chamier saith Lib. 2. c. 11. sect. 6., That Faith con∣curs no otherwise to Justification, then in respect of the passive application, whereby a man applies the Righteousness of Christ unto himself; but not in respect of the active application, where∣by God applieth unto man the Righteousness of Christ, which application is in the minde of God, and consequently from eter∣nity. Dr. Macouvius, Professor of Divinity at Franeka, hath a whole Determination to this purpose Disputat. An. 162. Disp. 17., to prove that Justifica∣cation actively considered, or as it is the act of God, blotting out our sins, and imputing the Righteousness of Christ unto us, goes before Faith: Indeed he makes it to be, not an immanent, but a transient, declared act, which the Lord did, when he first promised to send his Son to be our Mediator, Gen. 3.15. Though one of our late Writers Mr. Baxter in Append. p. 147. mentions this Doctors Opinion, with much contempt and oscitancy, calling his Assertions, Strange, senceless, and abhorred (which is the less to be regarded, seeing he usually metes out the same measure unto all men else, whose notions do not square with his own mould, as to Dr. Twisse, Mr. Walker, and them that hold the imputation of Christs active Righteousness, whom he calls A sort of ignorant and unstudied Divines, &c.) Yet, as he hath merited fairer usage amongst Christians for his other Labors: So, I dare say, his Arguments in this particular, will not seem so weak and ridiculous, as Mr. Baxter ma them, to an indifferent Reader that shall compare them, with the Exceptions which he hath shaped unto them; sharp Cen∣sures are but dull Answers. Dr. Ames his Coleague Ames Med. l. 1. c. 27. sect. 9., sayes no less, who in his Marrow of Divinity, having defined Justification to be the gracious Sentence of God, by which he doth acquit us from sin and death, and account us Righteous unto life, he sayes, That this sentence was long before in the minde of God, and was pronounced when Christ our Head arose from the dead, 2 Cor. 5.19. And in another place Omnes illi pro quibus Christus ex intentione Dei satifecit, sunt Deo reconcilia∣ti. i e. In favo∣rem salutiserum aliquo modo re∣stitui, Antisi∣nod. p. 164., All they for whom Christ, in the intention of God, hath made satisfaction, are reconciled unto God. I might produce many others that are of eminent note▪ who have asserted, That all the Elect are reconciled and justified
before they believe. Now were all these Champions of Truth, a pack of Antinomians and Libertines? Hath Mr. Woodbridges humanity no better language to bestow upon them? If he shall say, he doth not mean them, yet his reproaches do fall upon them; for if Titius be an Antinomian, for saying, That the Elect are justified before they do believe; Sempronius is an Antinomian, who affirms the same. §. 6. Mr. Burges (a man somewhat profuse in this kinde of Rhetorick) seems willing to excuse some of those fore-mentioned Divines, who have asserted the Remission of sins before Faith Treat. of Just. p. 177., because they did it in a particular sence to oppose the Arminians, who maintain a reconciliability, and not a reconciliation by the death of Christ. But I believe he is not ignorant, that Divine Truths are not to be measured by mens intentions; let mens ends be never so good, they cannot make Error to be Truth; or if they are never so corrupt, they cannot make Truth to be Error. Nor do they, whom he calls Antinomians, assert Justification before Faith, in any other sence, then in respect of the absolute and immutable Will of God, not to deal with his people according to their sins; and in respect of the full satisfaction of Jesus Christ, who by that one offering of himself, hath perfected for ever,Heb. 10.14. them that are sanctified, i. e. them whose sins are purged by his blood. I could shew how frequently he and others have wounded some of our most eminent Divines, both for Learning and Piety, through the sides of Antinomians: Mr. Burges in his Book of Justif. p. 219. calls it An Antinomian Similitude, to say, That as a man looking on the Wall through Red Glass, conceives the Wall to be of the same colour; so God looking upon us in Christ, seeth nothing but the Righteousness of Christ in us, and no sin at all: Which Simili∣tude is used by Dr. Reynolds in his Excellent Treatise on the 110 Psalm Pag. 450., where he doth plainly assert that Doctrine which Mr. Burges condemns for Antinomianism. Mr. Baxters Character of an Antinomian, will bring all our Protestant Writers under this censure: For with him they are Antinomians, who hold, (1) That our Evangelical Righteousness is without us in Christ, or performed by him, and not by our selves Aphor. p. 109▪ 111.. Or (2) That Justifi∣cation is a free act of God, without any condition on our part, for the obtaining of it Ibid. p. 169▪ 170.: Or else (3) That Justification is an Imma∣nent
act Ibid. p. 173., and consequently from eternity Ibid. p. 93., which was the Judge∣ment of Alsted, Pemble, Twisse, Rutherford, &c. Or (4) That we must not perform duty for Life and Salvation, but from Life and Salvation; or that we must not make the attaining of Justification or Salvation, the end of our endeavors, but obey in thankfulness, and because we are justified and saved Saints Rest. p. 14. Append. p. 100., &c. Now let any man who is moderately versed in our Protestant Writers, but speak, on whom this Arrow falls. I might instance in many others, but I will not put the Reader unto so much trouble. §. 7. My business at present, is to acquit this Doctrine of Justi∣fication in foro Dei, before Faith, from Mr. Woodbridges charge of Antinomianism. And truly I wonder, that he should give it this name: For 1. It hath not the least affinity with the Antinomian Tenents, which as they are related by Sleiden, were, That the Law is not to be Preached to bring men to Repentance, or unto the sight of their sins; That what ever a mans life be, though it be never so impure and wicked, yet he is justified for all, if he doth believe the Promises of the Gospel Ipsi verò statu∣unt, quaecunque tandem sit ho∣minis vita, & quantumvis im∣pura, justificari tamen cum, si modò promissio∣nibus Evangelii credat, Sleid. loc. su. citat.: So that they held the necessity of Faith, (such as it was) they made it (as our Adversaries do) the condition of Justification. 2. Antinomianism is such an Error, as doth oppose, or is contrary to the Law of God: But surely, this is not such, it offers no manner of injury unto the Law; seeing that whensoever the Elect are justified, they are not justified without Righteousness, and such a Righteousness, as doth fully answer the Law of God, in respect both of the satisfaction and obedience, which it doth require. We say, that God cannot justifie a person without Righteousness, for then he should do that himself, which he forbids to us, and professeth his detestation of, Exod. 23.7. Isa 5.23. Deut. 25.1. Prov. 17.15. If God could have dis∣pensed with his Law in this behalf, Christ needed not to have died; the end of his coming was to bring in Everlasting Righteousness. Whomsoever God doth justifie, they have justice one way or other; for otherwise, the God of Truth should call darkness light, and evil good; they whom he accounteth just, are just and righ∣teous: But yet we say, That Faith is not that Rghteousness, that makes them so, either in whole or in part; but the perfect Righ∣teousness of Christ, which is put upon them. Now to say, That God imputes this Righteousness unto men before they believe, is
no ways contrary to the Law, seeing the Law prescribes not the rules of this imputation, it is altogether besides the cognizance of the Law: So that if it prove an Error, it must be an Anti-Evan∣gelical, and not an Antinomian Error. But I doubt not, but I shall be able to acquit it from this, as well as from that other im∣putation. CHAP. IV. Containing some Animadversions upon Mr. Cranfords Epistle to the Reader. MR. W. for the better grace of his Book, hath obtained a Commendatory Epistle from Mr. Cr. wherein some things are delivered contrary to truth, and most injurious to them, whom Mr. W. hath made his Adversaries. Its true, he begins his Epistle with a deserved Commendation of the Doctrine of Justification. That it exceedingly illustrates the glorious riches of Gods Free-grace, and magnifies his Justice, is the onely support of com∣fort to a wounded Conscience, takes away from man the cause of boastings, and is altogether above the invention and credu∣lity of Reason. Wherein I do cordially concur with him, account∣ing it (as Luther did) the Sun which enlightens the Church,Vid. Luth. in Psal. 130. the Paradise and Heaven of the Soul; therefore it was not without cause, that our first Reformers so earnestly contended for it, it be∣ing (as they have well observed) the sum of the Gospel,Calv. in Rom. 1.17. Luther Sup. and of all the benefits which we have by Christ; the principal point of the Doctrine of Salvation, the pure knowledge whereof doth pre∣serve the Church. How much short of them in this particular, is the zeal of some amongst our late Reformers, who have scoffingly called it, the Antinomians common place? Mr. Cranfords Testi∣mony therefore to the singular excellency of this Doctrine, is so much the more welcome, seeing there are so few that have it in a right esteem; though as he (and much more as Mr. W.) hath stated it, the beauty and lustre of it, is not a little obscured. It looseth all those praises which in Mr. Cranfords Parenthesis are
ascribed unto it. For (1) how doth the riches of Gods grace ap∣pear, if our Justification doth depend upon terms and conditions, performed by us? For as Mr. Walker Socinian. p. 24. hath noted, Whatsoever is covenanted and promised upon a condition to be performed, is not absolutely free, nor freely given. They are not justified by Grace, who are justified upon the performance of conditions. (2) What support is this for a wounded Conscience, to tell him that is conscious of his extream weakness, and inability, That God will forgive his sins, if he do perform such and such conditi∣ons; which he is no more able to do, then to remove a mountain? Mr. Calvin hath well observed, Nisi fidem tremere ac vacillare volumus Calv. Inst. l. 3. c. 2. sect. 29., &c. That unless we would have our faith to be al∣ways wavering and trembling, it ought to rest onely upon the free promise of Grace in Jesus Christ; And he gives this Rea∣son for it, Quoniam conditionalis promissio, &c. Because a con∣ditional promise which sends us to our own works, promiseth us life no otherwise, then if it were placed in our own power. Nor (3) doth this take from men the cause of boasting; Boasting (saith the Apostle) is not excluded by works,Rom. 3.27. call them by what name you will, either Legal or Evangelical; if they are our works, they give to us occasion of boasting;Rom. 4 4. for to him that worketh, the reward is not reckoned of Grace, but of Debt; a work or condi∣tion whensoever it is performed, makes the thing covenanted, a due debt, which the performer may demand, and the promiser is bound to give. (4) It is not above the invention and credulity of Reason, That God should justifie a Righteous man, but that God should justifie sinners, and meerly upon the account of an∣others righteousness; as heretofore it seemed foolishness both to Jews and Gentiles, so ever since it hath been a stumbling block to the wisdom of the flesh; it is such a mystery as will never con∣temper with the most rational principles of the natural man. Hence have arisen all those jarrings and contendings against this truth, in regard of its disproportion unto carnal Reason, which believes no other Gospel, but hoc fac & vives. §. 2. The Doctrine of the Gospel (sayes Mr. Cr.) concerning the Justification of a believing sinner, is plainly delivered in the Scripture. But by his favor, the Scripture no where calls Be∣lievers sinners, nor yet makes Believers the adequate subjects of
Justification. It is most true, That all Believers are justified, and it is as false that men are Believers, before they are justified: An unjustified Believer, and a justified Sinner, are expressions palpa∣bly guilty of Self-contradiction. We read in Scripture of Gods justifying the ungodly Rom. 4.5., reconciling the world 2 Cor. 5 19. i. e. Homines ex oto mundo electos ad salu∣tem. Vid. Esti∣um in loc. Electos vocat mundum, non solum quia in mundo, sed de mundo sunt, na∣tura nihil aliud quam mundus erant, i. e. Pec∣catores, damna∣ti, ac inimici Deo. Vid. Fe∣rum in Joh. 3.16., and enemies to himself Rom. 5.8, 10., and of his quickning them that are dead in trespasses and sins Ephes. 2.1, 5.. Now Believers (as hath been hinted Sup. cap. 1. sect 3.) are never called ungodly, or enemies to God; they are no where said to be dead in trespasses and sins; they have their name from their bet∣ter part, and from that esteem that God hath of them, who be∣holds them holy and righteous, without any spot or blemish of sin Cant 4.7. Psal. 51.7. Col. 1.22. Eph. 5.27.. §. 3. In the next place Mr. Cr. gives us in a List of all the causes which do concur unto our Justification; in the enumeration whereof, he will finde the Author he commends at a greater di∣stance from him, then those whom he opposeth. He may, if he please, compare his Doctrine with Mr. Baxter Notions (whom Mr. W. follows at the very heels) Thes. 56.26, 73, &c. in his Aphorisms, who denies, That Christs obedience is the material, the imputation of his Righteousness, the formal cause of our Justi∣fication, or that Faith is the Instrument, by which we do receive it; he plainly ascribes the same kinde of causality unto Christ, and Faith making them to differ onely secundum magis & minus; that Christ is the sine qua non principalis, and Faith the sine qua non minus principalis (he might have listed sin in the same rank; which too, is a sine qua non of our Justification;) That Faith and works in a larger sence, are meritorious causes of Life and Blessed∣ness. Now we say with Mr. Cr. (1) That God is the efficient cause, or the onely Justifier; that he hath no motive or inducement, but his own Grace and Love, to will not to punish us, and to give to us his Son, thorow whom we have Redemption and Deliverance from the curse of the Law.Deut. 7.7. Rom. 3.25. John 3.16. We say too (2) that Christ is the one∣ly meritorious cause of our Justification (taking Justification pro re volita, for a transient effect of the Will of God,) that Jesus Christ hath by his death and satisfaction, fully procured and merit∣ed our Discharge and Absolution from the penalty of the Law, which we deserved by sin: For which cause, he is said to have purged our sins by himself, i. e. Without the help and assistance
of other means, Heb. 1.3 Excludere vo∣luit omnia alia media vel admi∣nicula, cum pur∣gationis & prae∣tium & virtu∣tem in Christo statuit. Calv. in loc.. There are many who ore tenùs in word do acknowledge, That Christ is the meritorious cause of our Justification, that in deed do deny it: The Papists in the Councel of Trent Sess. 6. Can. 7. Bellarm. say, That God is the efficient, the glory of God the final, the death of Christ the meritorious cause of our Justification. But yet we know, that they allow not this effect unto it, unless other things do concur on our parts they say, That Faith, Charity, &c. do Impetrare remissionem, & suo quidem modo mereri; Obtain, and after a sort merit forgiveness, though not by their own worth and dignity, yet by vertue of Gods Cove∣nant and Promise. Too many of our Protestants (setting aside the word merit, which yet Mr. B. thinks may be admitted) do tread directly in their steps; they ascribe as much unto works, as Papists do. It is a poor requital unto Jesus Christ, to call him the Meritorious cause of our Justification, and in the mean while to deny the merit of his death, as to the immediate purchases there∣of, and to ascribe at least a partial meritoriousness to other things. (3) I shall go further with Mr. Cr. I freely grant him (which I believe Mr. W. will stick at) That Faith is the Instrument, by which we receive and apply the Righteousness of Christ unto our selves, whereby the gratious sentence of God, acquitting us from our sins, is conveyed and terminated in our Consciences. We say indeed, That Faith doth not concur to our Justification, as a proper Physical Instrument (which is a less principal Efficient cause.) Mr. Rutherford saith well Exercit. A∣pol. p 42., That Faith is not the Organical or In∣strumental cause, either of Christs satisfaction, or of Gods ac∣ceptation thereof on our behalf. By believing we do not cause, either our Saviour to satisfie for our sins, or God to accept of his satisfaction: Every true Believer is perswaded, That God hath laid aside his wrath and displeasure towards him for his sins, ha∣ving received a sufficient ransom and satisfaction for them in the death of his Son. Sed hoc fides non facit, (saith he) sed objectum jam factum praesupponit. Faith is a Receptive, not an Effective Instrument, an Instrument not to procure, but to receive Justifica∣tion and Salvation, which is freely given us in Jesus Christ. It is called an Instrumental cause of our Justification, taking Justifica∣tion passively,Alsted. in Sup∣plem. Cham. ut sup. not actively; or in reference to that passive Appli∣cation, whereby a man applies the Righteousness of Christ to him∣self,
but not to that active Application, whereby God applyeth it to a man, which is onely in the minde of God. Therefore Cal∣vin Calvin in Joh. 6.29. calls Faith, Opus passivum, a passive work. §. 4. Mr. Cr. proceeds, This Doctrine (saith he) hath in all ages been opposed and obscured, sometimes by open Enemies, sometimes by professed Friends, and such as would be accounted the great Pleaders for Free-grace. It is most true, That this Ar∣ticle of Free Justification hath, and will be a Bone of Contention to the worlds end. It is the cheif cause of all those contests and quar∣rels, which have arisen between the Children of the Free-woman, and the Children of the Bond-woman. Mr. Fox Epistle before Luther on Gal. hath well ob∣served, It is so strange to carnal Reason, so dark to the World, it hath so many enemies, that except the Spirit of God from above do reveal it, Learning cannot reach it, Wisdom is offended, Nature is astonished, Devils do not know it, Men do persecute it. Satan labors for nothing more, then that he may either quite bereave men of the knowledge of this truth, or else corrupt the simplicity of it. It is not unknown what batteries were raised against it, in the very infancy of the Church, how the Wits and Passions of men conspired to hinder it; what monstrous consequences, were charged upon the Doctrine; and what odious practises, were fa∣thered upon them, that did profess it; never was any truth opposed with so much malice and bitterness as this hath been, and by them especially that were most devout and zealous Acts 13.50. Rom. 10 pr.. But when it could not be withstood and stifled, Satan endeavored then to deprave and adulterate it, by mixing of the Law with the Gospel, our own Righteousness with Christs; which corruption the Apostle hath strenuously opposed in all his Epistles, and more especially in that to the Romans and Galatians;See Gal 5. pr▪ where he excludes all and singular works of ours, from sharing in the matter of our Justification: For the eluding of whose Authority, carnal Reason hath found out sundry shifts and distinctions, As that the Apostle excludes onely works of Nature, but not of Grace; Legal, but not Evangelical works; and that our works though they are not Physical, yet they may come in as Moral causes of our Justification. It is certain, That the most dangerous attempts against this Doctrine, have been within the Church, and by such as Mr. Cr. calls Professed Friends, who have done so much the more mischief, in regard
they were least apt to be suspected: Justification by works was generally exploded amongst us, whilest it appeared under the names of Popery and Arminianism, which since hath found an easie admittance, being vented by some of better note, such as would be accounted Pleaders for Free-grace. §. 5. Mr. Woodbridges Discourse (saith Mr. Cr.) deals not with the Errors of Papists, Socinians, Arminians, but with Antinomian Error. How unjustly our Doctrine is called Antino∣mian, hath been shewn before; and Mr. Cr. may be pleased to take notice, That Mr. Rutherford accounts the Opinion we oppose, the very cheif of the Arminians, Socinians, and Papists Errors about Justification, to wit, That no man hath his sins remitted before he doth actually believe Apologit. Ex∣ercit. p. 37. Arminianis nihil prius est in vo∣tis, &c.. As for his Allegation out of Mr. Shepherd. Mark those men that deny the use of the Law to lead unto Christ, if they do not fall in time to oppose some main point of the Gospel, &c. It doth not touch us, for we deny not the use of the Law to bring men unto Christ; we look upon the Law, as the Ordinance of God, to convince men of their sin and misery, and thereby to indear to them the Grace of the Gospel, Gal. 3.22, 24.1 Tim. 1.8. We say with the Apostle, The Law is good, if men do use it lawfully. i. e. In a way of subserviency, and at∣tendance upon the Gospel, the better to advance and make ef∣fectual the ends thereof. And as we deny not this use of the Law, so neither doth our asserting, That all the Elect before their con∣version, and Faith, stand actually reconciled to God, and justifi∣ed before him, obscure the Gospel. I doubt not but the judicious Reader will expect a better proof of this charge, then Cranfords word. Have all those Reverend Divines before mentioned, obscu∣red the Gospel? What is the Gospel, but the glad tidings, that Christ is come into the world to save sinners; that by his subject∣ing of himself to the curse of the Law, he hath freed them from the curse, who were given him by the Father? How is this truth obscured, by our saying, That God did everlastingly will▪ not to punish his Elect; and that in Christ he beholds them just and righteous, even whilest they are sinful, and wicked in themselves? Do not they much more obscure the Grace of the Gospel, who make it depending upon terms and conditions, performed by us, then we, that affirm it to be free and absolute? They that assign no
certain and actual effect, to the death of Christ; or we, that say (accor∣ding to the Scripture) that all the Elect were thereby freed from the Law, delivered from the Curse, reconciled unto God, made perfect and compleat in the sight of God? And therefore though Dr. Down∣ham doth call it, A strange Assertion, I shall not be ashamed to own it: The Lord complains, That the great things of his Law were counted strange, Hos. 8.12. We read in Eusebius, That the Christian Faith (though it were from the beginning) was called , New and strange. The multitude cast this aspersion upon our Saviours Doctrine, Mark 1.27. and the A∣thenians upon Paul, Acts 17.19, 20. The imputation of novel∣ty and new fangledness, hath been commonly cast upon the truths and ways of God: Many things are new in respect of Observa∣tion, which are not so in themselves See Bolton of Error, p. 147.. We have known, that godly men have looked upon some things as very strange, which in tract of time have been generally imbraced. Dr. Downham, no doubt, thought it strange, that any godly man should say the An∣gels of the Seven Churches were not Diocesan Bishops; and yet I believe Mr. Cr. is not of his Opinion. If it were the Doctors meaning, That this Assertion of Justification before Faith, was never heard to come from the mouth of a godly man, before Pemble; either his memory was very weak, or his charity was too much straitned. He could not be ignorant of what hath been alledged out of Calvin, Zache, Parker, Chamier; one of those passages in Chamier (before mentioned) is cited by the Doctor in that very Book N. Cov. p. 136. which Mr. Cr. quotes. He knew likewise, That all our old Protestant Divines have defined Justifying Faith, to be a certain perswasion, and full assurance of the pardon of our sins; from whence it must inevitably follow, That pardon of sin precedes our Faith, for every object is before its act. And as strange as it seemed unto this Doctor, he himself sayes Downh. of Justif. l. 6. c. 6. sect. 9. little less; for in answer to Bellarmine, (who would prove that a man may be justified without special Faith) he granteth, It is true in respect of our Justification in the sight of God; which special appre∣hension, or application of Christ (saith he Lib 6. c. 4. sect. 5.) though scorned by Papists, yet it is of all Graces the most comfortable, most profit∣able, most necessary, most comfortable; for the very life of this life, is the assurance of a better life; most necessary, because
without this special receiving of Christ, first by apprehension, and then by application we can have no other saving Grace: How can we love God, or our Neighbor for his sake? how can we hope, and trust in him? how can we rejoyce or be thankful to him, if we be not perswaded of his love, and bounty towards us? Most profitable, because from it all other Graces do pro∣ceed, and according to the measure of it, is the measure of them, &c. Doubtless, That Faith to which these properties do belong, doth best merit the name of Justifying Faith: So then according to this Doctors Judgement, the Assertion is not so strange as true. §. 6. Mr. Cr. goes on, and much faster then a good pace, [This Opinion (says he) that the Elect are actually reconciled to God before they believe, is confuted in this Treatise, and proved contradictory to Scripture, fit onely (1) to sow pillows under the elbows of prophane men; (2) to overthrow the comfort of Be∣lievers, destroying the ground, nature, and end of Faith.] How solidly it is confuted, the Reader will see anon, when the weight of his proofs shall come to be examined; I doubt not, but an im∣partial Judge will acquit it, both from being contradictory to Scripture, or guilty of those horrid Consequences which he hath cast upon it. I marvel, that so rational a man (as Mr. Cr. is held to be) should say, That all this charge is proved; part of which is not so much as mentioned by Mr. W. (who is liberal enough of his criminations,) which makes me to think, That he writ his Epistle, before he read his Author, or at least, That he is a man that will be satisfied with slender Proofs against persons, and Do∣ctrines which he doth not fancy. It is true, Mr. W. hath endeavor∣ed to obtrude upon us some ugly Consequences, which are as re∣mote from our Doctrine, as Earth is from Heaven. Mr. Cr. is not ignorant, how much peaceable and prudent men have dis∣liked this practise of wyer-drawing mens Opinions, and raking absurdities out of them (per nescio quas fidiculas consequenti∣arum, as Bishop Davenant Adhort. ad pacem. c. 12. p. 153. Vid. Chiling-worths Answer to Knots, p 39, 40. expresseth it) By small threds of consequencies, which they themselves do disclaim, and abhor from their whole heart; whereupon sayes that Learned Bishop, Good men ought to deal more fairly, then to fasten an Heretical sence on other mens words, when the Writers themselves, which
are the best Expounders of their own words, can, and use to reduce them to a Catholick sence. Mr. Cr. knows, That the very same Consequences are fathered upon the Doctrine of absolute Election, Justification by Faith alone, and the certain perseverance of true Believers.Faustus Rhegi∣ensis. The Semi-Pelagians of old would have forced this inference from Austins Opinion of absolute Predestination: If Gods decree be absolute, Nemo vigilet, nemo jjunet, nemo li∣bidini contradicet, &c. The Papists say, It follows, That if we be justified by Faith onely, then we need not do good works. The Remonstrants and their followers say See J. G. hi Animadversi∣ons on Loves Speech., That if a Believer can∣not fall from Grace, then need he not fear to commit any sin what∣soever. Nor do these Consequences flow any whit more naturally from our Tenent, then they do from these. Doth it follow, That because all the Elect are by means of Christs death, actually re∣conciled unto God, and freed from the condemnation of the Law, That therefore men may live as they list, that they need not hear, believe, and obey the Gospel? How doth this sow pillows under mens elbows, or lull asleep in security, more then the Doctrine of absolute Election? Seeing as all men are not elected, so neither are all men reconciled unto God; nor can any man know, That he is elected and reconciled unto God, but by, and thorow Faith; which Faith is wrought in men by the Preaching of the Word, and doth certainly produce a holy life Justificatus per filem, non potest nisi dein∣ceps justè opera∣ri, Aug. Let a Believer sin if he can, Preston N. C. p. 361.. §. 7. I confess, I am yet to seek of the Reason of his other Deduction, That this Assertion of actual reconciliation before Faith, overthrows the comfort of true Believers, and destroyes the ground, nature, use, and end of Faith▪ Is it an uncomfortable Doctrine to tell men, That we are not sharers with Christ in ef∣fecting of our peace with God, and in procuring the pardon of our sins; and that Christ hath finished this work before we knew it? Is it not much more comfortable to poor souls, that Christ hath ab∣solutely, and by himself obtained forgiveness for sinners, then that he hath procured this Gre but conditionally, upon condition we perform such and such , for which we have no strength or ability in our selves? Whence have the Saints drawn all their com∣fort? Surely, not from Faith, or any other work of theirs, but by Faith from Christ, and from the perfection and al-sufficiency of his Sacrifice: Not onely the Protestants, but the Papists themselves
(though in the Schools they contend for the dignity and congruity of works, that they are Moral causes, or necessary conditions of Justification and Salvation; yet on their death beds, they utterly renounce them, they) exhort men in distress of Conscience, to roul themselves wholly▪ upon Jesus Christ. In a form prescribed for visiting of the sick, the Priest or Minister was enjoyned to put these Questions to the sick party Vid. Bishop Ushers answer to the Jesuite, p. 568. Ib. in lib. de Succes. eccles. p. 191.. Dost thou believe to come to glory, not by thy own merits, but by the vertue and merit of the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ? And dost thou believe, That our Lord Jesus Christ did die for our salvation, and that none can be saved by his own merits, or by any other means, but by the merit of his passion? Whereunto, when the sick person answered affirmatively, I do believe it; the Priest is bid to exhort him, in this wise, Go to therefore, as long as thy soul remaineth in thee, place thy whole confidence in his death onely, have con∣fidence in no other thing; commit thy self wholly to his death, with this alone cover thy self wholly, intermingle thy self whol∣ly, wrap thy whole self in his death, &c. Dangerous (saith Bernard Bern. in Psal. qui habitat. Ser. 1.) is the habitation of those that trust in their own works: And in another place Ubi tuta firma∣que infirmis se∣curitas & re∣quies nisi in vul∣neribus salvato∣rū? Tantò illi securior habito, quanto ille po∣rutior ad sal∣vandum, in Cant. Ser▪ 61., Ubi tuta, &c. What safe est or security can the weak soul finde, but in the wounds of his Saviour? As he is mighty to save, so dwell I there with most safety. Parisiensis in his Book of Divine Rhetorick, Thou must beware (saith he) in thy striving with God, that thou dost not build upon a weak foundation, which he doth; that trusts in his own works. Gerson often inculcates this Part. 1. Serm. de nuptiis Christi. Tract. de distinct. vision. part. 2. de verbo Dom. & part. 3. do Consolat. Theolog., That before the tribunal of God, we must onely plead the merits of Christ: Bishop Gardner Foxes Acts & Monuments, Vol. ., though he would not have this gap to be open∣ed to the people, yet he acknowledged it to be the most comfort∣able Doctrine to such as were in his condition, he being then on his death bed: Which is the more to be observed, because in his life time, he had stickled so much for our Adversaries Conditional Justification 3. Vol. p. 525.. Bellarmine himself Bellar. l. 5. de Justif. c, 7▪, when he had written divers Books for Justification by Inherent Righteousness, in the end con∣cludes, That for fear of vain-glory, and by reason of the un∣certainty of our own works, Tutissimum est, &c. It is the safest way to place all our trust in the Mercy of God, and of Jesus Christ; so that we may say as Moses, Their rock is not
as our rock, our Enemies themselves being Judges, Deut. 32.31. §. 8. Mr. Cr. hath not the least reason to charge us with de∣stroying the Ground of Faith; for the Ground of Faith is either Fundamentum Quod, or Fundamentum Quo. Material and Per∣sonal, or else Doctrinal and Ministerial. We say with all true Christians, That the onely Material or Personal Foundation, where∣upon a poor soul can build securely for Life and Justification, is Jesus Christ 1 Cor. 3.11. Certum, propri∣umque fidei fun∣damentum Chi∣stus est. Aug. Euchirid c. 5.. Now the Doctrinal Foundation whereby our Faith is united to the former, we affirm with Calvin Instit. l. 3. c. 2. sect. 7. & 29. Opusc▪ 318. (and many more) that it is, Gratuita misericordiae in Christo promissio, The free promise of Mercy; in opposition to those Conditional Promises which send men partly to Christ, and partly to their own works; and therefore our Adversaries are much more obnoxious to this Censure, of Destroying the Ground of Faith, who allow it no other support, then Conditional Promises, whereby mens hope and confidence is made to lean more upon themselves, then it doth on Christ; much more upon their own works, then it doth upon his Righteousness. The forementioned Author Si quantula∣cunquè portio in opera nostra con∣feratur, cate vacillabit fides. Cal. Opusc. p. 280. Fidei nulla erit certitudo, si ope∣ribus nitatur sa∣lus hominum. Ib. p. 282: In hunc modum si distrahatur salutis fiducia, nihil poterit, quàm vacillare; quid hoc aliud est quàm subver∣tere ab imo fun∣damentum? Ib. p. 317. hath well ob∣served, That if our Faith doth relie never so little upon our own works, it cannot possibly stand fast; that soul will never attain to any setled assurance of his Salvation, that builds his Faith upon such a sandy foundation. §. 9. The nature of Faith receives not the least prejudice by our Doctrine; for if we define it (as most of our old Protestant Divines Melancthon, P. Martyr, Calvin, Perkins, &c▪ have done) Certa & indubitata persuasio; A firm and certain perswasion of the favor of God, and the pardon of our sins, it confirms our Tenent; for mens sins must be pardoned be∣fore they can believe it, or else of necessity they must believe a lie. All men know that the object doth precede the act, unless it be when the act gives a being to the object: Or if we make it to be fiducia, the trust or reliance of the soul upon Jesus Christ, it receives no small encouragement from this consideration, That Christ hath finished whatsoever was necessary by Divine appoint∣ment, for the Justification of sinners, not expecting the least con∣dition to be performed by us for that end: Our Faith is never so impregnable, as when it rests entirely upon Jesus Christ. And as for the ends and uses of Faith (which are cheifly to give us bold∣ness,
and confidence towards God; to purifie our hearts, and to work by love, &c.) They are all of them promoted and furthered by the Doctrine we teach; for what is it, that gives us boldness towards God, but the merit and perfection of Christs sacrifice? whereby the mouth of the Law is stopped, the accusations of Satan are all answered, and the justice of God is fully satisfied. Again, What other means is there so effectual, to purifie our hearts, to con∣strain us to love him, &c. as the freeness, absoluteness and immuta∣bility of his love to us; who whilest we were sinners, and enemies, reconciled us to himself by the Blood of the Cross, and blotted out our sins, as if they had never been committed? §. 10. Mr. Cr. censure of Curcellaeus's Opinion, is just and seasonable, who judgeth these Differences amongst Christians a∣bout Justification to be of so small concernment, that they ought not to breed a controversie: For surely they are none of those foolish questions and strivings, which we are bid to avoid; if there be any point in the whole Doctrine of Godliness, for which we ought , (as Saint Jude speaks) to contend earnestly. This challengeth our utmost zeal for the maintenance of it; seeing the glory of Gods Grace, the dignity of Christs Blood, and the comfort of our own souls lies at stake in the issues of it; our life, peace, and everlasting Salvation is concerned herein: There is no truth that the Apostle doth so frequently press, and so earnestly contend for, as this Article of our Free Justification; That no works of ours do concur to the procuring of it.De Reform. Eccles. ad In∣terim. Mr. Calvin hath observed, That if we were accorded with the Church of Rome, in all other points, save in this one particular, the distance between them and us is so great, That it is impossible we should ever be reconciled: And I must needs say, That I see no material differ∣ence, between them and our Adversaries, about this matter. §. 11. Mr. Cr. in the close of his Prefatory Discourse, tells the Reader, Thou art beholding to the Learned Author for the penning of this Tract; but for the publishing of it to another. And Mr. W. hath framed it in the form of a Letter to a private Friend, that the Reader might guess, he had no hand at all in pub∣lishing of it; whereas a near Kinsman of his, assured me, That Mr. W. in a Letter to himself, had confessed that his Sermon came a∣broad by his own appointment; which I do the rather believe,
knowing his relation to the Stationer, for whom it was Printed. However I am glad, that it is made publick, that this point may be the better cleared by a deliberate examination of the utmost that can be said against it; onely I wish, that this task had lighted up∣on some other man, who hath more leisure, and better abilities to undertake it; that so precious a truth might not suffer, through the unskilfulness of a feeble Advocate. How much the Reader is be∣holding to Mr. W. for Penning or Printing of his Sermon, will ap∣pear in the issue of this debate. CHAP. V. Wherein Mr. Woodbridges Introduction, Text, Do∣ctrine, and Proofs, are briefly considered. HAving passed Mr. Woodbridges Out-works, we shall now proceed to survey the Fort it self, which (in his own conceit) is built so impregnable, That nothing consistent with the Scriptures, can be brought against it. How ever, I am not discouraged from attempting it, knowing, That strong holds more unlikely to be vanquished, have been laid flat and level with the ground, Lam. 4.12. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. In his Preface, he tells the worthy Sir, to whom he communi∣cated his Notes, That he will not trouble him with his Intro∣duction to the Text; or the Applicatory part of his Sermon. It was very little that he spake in either; but I well remember, that he began and concluded with a great mistake. In his Intro∣duction he told us, that the scope of this Epistle was to prove, That we are justified by Faith, i. e. (as he explained it) That we are not justified in the sight of God, before we believe; and that Faith is the condition on our part to qualifie us for Justification; whereas the scope of the Apostle (as shall be shewn more largely hereafter) was not to assert the time of our Justification, but the matter of it; he intended not to shew when, but wherewith we are justified; to wit, not by Works, or Righteousness in us, but by the Righteousness of Christ freely imputed to us; which we
apprehend, and apply by Faith Calv. de vera Pacif. p. 317.. By taking Faith in a proper sense, as a condition required on our part, he accuseth the Apostle of Self-contradiction; who all along denies, That we are justified by works; seeing Faith considered as a condition, is a work of ours, no less then love. In that part of his Application, where he addressed himself to unbelievers, he told them, That Christ was not a High Priest or Advocate to them, and that they had no Court of Mercy to appeal unto; which was all one, as if he had said, Christ did not die for them; and that they had no more ground to believe in him, then the Devils themselves; and consequently that their case was desperate and irrecoverable, though final unbelievers have not Christ for their High Priest; for he neither died, nor prayed for them, Joh. 17.9. Yet he performed both acts of his Priesthood, scil. Ob∣lation and Intercession, for all that were given him by the Father, long before the Conversion of many of them. He laid down his life, not onely for those sheep that were called, but for those also that were not then gathered into his fold, Joh. 10.15, 16. And in the seventeenth of John, he says expresly, That he prayed not onely for them that did believe, but for them also that should be∣lieve in him. Vers. 20. Though it be true, That Christ shed not his Blood for Reprobates, yet we know not who are reprobated, until it shall be made manifest by their final unbelief. Indeed, we cannot say to an unbeliever, That Christ did die for him; and we have as little reason to say, That Christ did not die for him, seeing the Word doth reveal neither; and by affirming the latter, we do quite bar up the door of Hope, which ought to be held open to the worst of sinners. Our duty is to declare, That Christ is come into the world to save sinners, and to exhort all men every where to believe him. We were as good bid the Devils to believe, as those for whom Christ is not a High Priest; it is in vain for any to believe in Christ, if he never prayed, nor offered up himself a Sacrifice unto God for them; but seeing Mr. W. hath not trou∣bled his Friend with these passages, I shall not trouble the Reader any longer about them. §. 2. That the Saints, or true Believers (under which notion he writes to the Romans See Chap. 1.7.) are justified by Faith; We do readi∣ly yeeld it to be a truth, it being in terminis in the Text. I dare say,
no man that is called a Christian, did ever deny it; and therefore he might have spared his pains in transcribing any more places of Scripture for confirmation of it. But I do much marvel, That so learned a man as Mr. W. who pretends to be more then ordinari∣ly accurate, should take in hand a controverted Text, and never open the Terms, nor state the Question which he meant to handle; for though it be a sinful curiosity for men by Dicotomies and Trico∣tomies, Divisions and Subdivisions, to mince and crumble the Scriptures, till it hath lost the sense; yet surely, a workman that needs not to be ashamed, ought rightly to divide 2 Tim. 2.15.  quid sit. Bez. in loc. Full. Miscel. sac. l. 3. c. 16. the Word of Truth, explain things that are obscure and dubious; and where divers senses are given (as he knows there are of this Text) to disprove the false, and confirm that which he conceives is true. §. 3. There is a vaste distance between the Apostles Proposi∣tion [a man is justified by Faith,] and Mr. Woodbridges Infer∣ence, Ergo, Justification doth in no sence precede Faith. Justi∣fication by Faith, and Justification before Faith, are not opposita, but diversa; though they differ, yet they are not contradictory to each other: The Scriptures which prove the former, intend no strife, or quarrel against the latter; in a word, The proof of the one, doth not disprove the other. The Scripture which he made his theam, Rom. 5.1. Therefore being justified by Faith, we have peace with God, &c, concludes nothing at all against Justification before Faith; For (1) we may without any violence to the Text, place the Comma after justified, (as thus) Being justified, by Faith we have peace with God: This reading is agreeable both to the Apostles scope, and to the Context. His scope here was not to shew the efficacy of Faith in our Justification, but what benefits we have by the death of Christ Willet. in Rom. 5 p. 235. Paaeus. Ib. prima effic∣cia mortis Christ est justificatio. &c.; the first of which is Justificati∣on, and the consequent thereof is peace with God. Again, the Il∣lative Particle (Therefore) shews, that this place is a Corollary, or Deduction from the words immediately foregoing, which ascribed our Justification wholly to the Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ, Chap. 4 ult. The Apostle thence infers, Being justified q. d. Seeing we are justified freely, without works, by the death of Christ, by Faith we have peace with God; the Lord powerfully drawing our hearts to believe this, we have boldness and con∣fidence towards God, the cause of fear being taken away; or
as the Syriack and vulgar Latin read it, Let us have peace with God; let us by Faith improve this Grace, for the establishing of our hearts in perfect peace. Now according to this reading, his own Text will give in evidence against him, That Faith is not the cause or antecedent, but an effect and consequent of our Justifica∣tion, procured and obtained by the death of Christ. But (2) if we take the words, as commonly they are read, the sence comes all to one, scil. That being justified by Christ (who is the sole object of our Faith) we have peace with God; who by the Faith which he creates in us, causeth us to enjoy this reconciliation; by vertue whereof, our Conscience is so firmly grounded, that we are not moved by any temptation, or beaten down by any terror Diodat. in loc.. The Work of Faith is not to procure our Justification, but to beget peace in our Consciences. So then, the words being rightly understood, they neither deny Justification before Faith, nor assert Justification by the act or habit of Faith, which Mr. W. would conclude from thence. §. 4. The next Scripture, whose suffrage is desired against us, is Gal. 2.16. We have believed in Christ, that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ. Where (sayes Mr. W.) Justi∣fication is expresly made a Consequent of Faith. To which I An∣swer (1) That this doth no more infer, That we are not justified before we believe, then that of our Saviour, Matth. 5.44, 45. Love your enemies, &c. that ye may be the children of your Fa∣ther in Heaven,1. Pet. 2.9. infers, That works do go before adoption, contrary to Eph. 1.5, 6. 1 Joh. 3.3. the phrase [that ye may be] there, is as much, as that ye may be manifested and decla∣red; that ye may shew your selves; Diodat. on Matth. 5.45. or, that all men may know, that ye are the children of God, by practising a duty so much above the reach of Nature and Morality. A like place we have, Rom. 3.26. God set forth his Son to declare his Righteousness, that he might be just. Now shall we hence infer, That God was not just before?Ut se sanctum & justum declararet, seu ut gloriam justitia illustra∣ret. Pa in loc. or that Gods justice was a consequent of his sending Christ? Now if we can understand that clause, [that he might be just] That he might be known, and acknowledged to be just: Why may we not as well take this of the Apostle, [that we might be justified] in the same construction, that we might know that we are justified, and live in the comfort and enjoyment of it: So that,
not the Being of our Justification, but the Knowledge and Feel∣ing of it, is a consequent of Faith. Things in Scripture are then said to be, when they are known to be; so John 15.8. our Saviour tells the Disciples, That if they did bear much fruit, they should be his Disciples, i. e. They should be known and mani∣fested to be his Disciples, as Chap. 13.35. Our Saviour is said at his Resurrection, to have become the Son of God, Acts 13.33. Because, then (as the Apostle speaks) he was powerfully de∣clared to be the Son of God, Rom. 1.3. Again, things are sad not to be, which do not appear, as Melchisedec is said to be with∣out Father and Mother, &c. Heb. 7.3. Because his Linage and Pedigree, is not known; so we are said to be justified, or not justified, according as this Grace is revealed to us. But (2) in the Text it is, We have believed, that we might be justified by Faith; so that from hence it can be inferred onely, That we are not justified by Faith, before believing; and that the sentence of Justification is not terminated in our Consciences, before we do be∣lieve. §. 5. His next Proof is grounded upon the order of the words, Rom. 8.30. As glory (saith he) follows Justification, so doth Justification follow Vocation unto Faith. Whereunto I answer, () That the order of words in Scripture, do not shew the order and dependance of the things themselves: The Jews have a Pro∣verb, Non esse prius aut posterius in Scriptura Salom. Jarchi. in Gen. 6.3.. The first and last must not be strictly urged in Scripture; for that is not always set first, which is first in Nature: If we should reason from the order of words in Scripture, we should make many absurdities See Babing. on Gen. 4.., as 1 Sam. 6.14. It is said that they clave the Wood of the Cart, and offered the Kine for a burnt offering unto the Lord: And then in the next Verse it follows, That the Levites took down the Ark out of the Cart; as if they had clave the Cart before the Ark was taken down, which could not be. In 2 Tim. 1.9. it is said, God hath saved us, and called us; yet I suppose Mr. W. will not say, That men are saved, before they are called. So though Vocation be set before Justification, yet it doth not follow, that it precedes it in order of Nature. (2) The Apostles scope here, is not to shew in what order these Benefits are bestowed upon us, but how inseparably they are linked unto our Predestination;
and that it is Impossible, either sin or affliction should make them miserable, whom God hath chosen. (3) I see no inconvenience at all, in saying, That the Apostle here speaks of Justification, as it is declared and terminated in our Consciences, which some learned men Mr. Owen. Mr. Kendal a∣gainst Goodwin, cap 4. p. 138.145. do make the formale of Justification; and in this respect, I shall grant him, That Justification is a consequent of Voca∣tion. §. 6. Mr. Woodbridges next Allegation is from Rom. 4.24. Righteousness shall be imputed to us, if we believe. Ergo, It was not imputed before we did believe. I answer, That the con∣sequence is not necessary; for this Particle (if) is used sometimes declaratively: It doth not always propound the condition, by which a benefit is obtained, but sometimes it serves to describe the person to whom the benefit doth belong See Mr. Wal∣kers Socinia∣nism Discover∣ed, p. 224.. Descriptions are taken from Effects and Consequences, as well as from the Causes or Antecedent Conditions: As for instance, If a man (saith the Apostle) purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honor, 2 Tim. 2.21. The Papists infer from hence, That a man is made a vessel of honor, by purging himself, &c. Our Protestant Divines D. Sutcliff on Rom. 11. p. 61. do answer, That the place proves not, that a man is hereby made, or becomes a vessel of honor, but that hereby he is manifested and known to be a vessel of honor. So Heb. 3.6. Whose house are we, if we hold fast our confidence, and the rejoycing of the hope firm unto the end. Which we are not to understand, as if these things did make us to be the house of God, but that hereby we appear, and approve our selves to be the house of God Dr. Joes on e plate.. This Conjunction (if D. Dow. of Justif. l. 7. c. 4 sect. 16. . 473.) is many times annexed unto the Marks and Cognizances of such as shall be saved, or are happy, which do shew, Non propter quid beand sunt, vel servandi, sed quales beati sunt, quales servandi. Not upon what conditions, but what manner of persons are finally saved. I see no reason, but it may be so understood in this place; his Righteousness is imputed to us, if we believe, q. d. Hereby we may know, and be assured, that Christs Righteousness is imputed to us, that we, whether Jews, or Gentiles, are the persons to whom this grace belongs; if God hath drawn our hearts to believe, and obey the Gospel; in regard that none do, or can believe, but such as are ordained to life Acts 13.48. & 2.47., and to obtain salvation by Jesus Christ. The Lord works Faith
in none, but in them, to whom he hath imputed the Righteousness of his Son. §. 7. The other Scriptures he hath brought, conclude as weak∣ly against us, as any of the former, as Acts 10.43. Thorow his name, whosoever believeth in him, shall receive remission of sins. And Acts 26.18. That they may receive forgiveness of sins— who are sanctified by Faith; with Acts 13.39. By him all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses. To which (says Mr. W.) might be added, multitudes of other places. I confess his Con∣cordance would have furnished him with many such places, but no more to the purpose, then these he hath cited; which though they affirm, That Believers are justified, yet they deny not the Justifi∣cation of the Elect, before believing. In the former it is, Who∣soever believeth, shall receive remission of sins; it is not, By be∣lieving, we obtain remission of sins, or God doth not discount mens sins unto them, till they do believe. The giving of remissi∣on, and the receiving of remission, are two things; the former is Gods act, who is the onely Justifier, the latter is ours; the former is properly Justification, and not the latter; though it be called so in a passive and improper sence. We know a Prince pardons a malefactor when he gives his consent, That the Sentence of the Law should be reversed, and confirms it with his Hand and Seal: This Pardon is valid in Law, and secures the offender from punishment, though it come not to his hands for a good while after. So a Father gives, and bequeaths an Estate to his Childe that is an Infant; which by the donation of the Father, belongs to the Childe, though the Childe do not receive, and enjoy it, till he comes to age. So God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their sins unto them; Though no man doth receive and enjoy this Grace, till he doth believe; we obtain remission of sins by Christ alone, but we receive it by Faith. §. 8. In the 13 of the Acts 39 the Apostle shews the excel∣lency of the Gospel above the Law; or the priviledge of the Saints in the New Testament, above them that lived under the Old Ad∣ministration; Who (saith he) are justified from all things, &c. There was a cleansing and purgation of sin provided in the Law, but not like unto that which is revealed in the GospelZech 13.1.. For (1)
the Law did not cleanse them from all sins, for some sins it allowed of no Sacrifice at all; as for Blasphemy, sins of presumption, &c. But now the Blood of that Sacrifice, which is exhibited in the Gos∣pel, cleanseth us from all sin, 1 Joh. 1.7. Mark 3.28. (2) Those Sacrifices made them clean, but in an External Typical manner, as To the purifying of the flesh, Heb. 9.13. they could not make them perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience, Heb. 10.12. Whereas the cleansing which is made by the Blood of Christ, is Spiritual and Internal, It purgeth mens consciences from dead works, Heb. 9.14. They that are purged herewith, have no more conscience of sin, de jure, if not de facto, Chap. 10.2. They have the answer of a good conscience toward God, q. d. They can plead not guilty, 1 Pet. 3.21. (3) The legal cleansing was by Sacrifice after Sacrifice, Heb. 10.3. Whereas Christ by one Sacrifice, once offered, hath taken away all the sins of his people; or as it is in Daniel, hath made an end of sin: So that here is no∣thing at all of the time of our Justification, though he affirms, That they that believe, are thus perfectly justified; yet it follows not from this, or any other Text, That the Elect are not justified, before they believe; and much less, That a man is justified by the gratious act or habit of Faith. §. 9. Mr. W. Pag. 2. gives his Reader our Sence of these Scrip∣tures. The onely Answer (saith he) which is given to these, and the like Texts, is this, That by Justification we are to under∣stand a Justification in the Court of Conscience, or the Evidence and Declaration of a Justification already past before God: So that Faith is said to justifie us, not because it doth justifie us before God, but because it doth declare to our Consciences, that we are justified. Now because this report is very imperfect, I shall crave the patience of the Reader, whilest I declare our Judgement a little more fully, concerning this Matter, together with the Grounds and Reasons that do uphold it; and then I shall return to secure this Answer against the Exceptions Mr. W. hath made against it. But first, I shall shew the several Explications which Divines have given of his Proposition [A man is justified by Faith.]
CHAP. VI. The several Opinions of Divines, touching the mean∣ing of this Position, [A man is justified by Faith.] THe Question depending between me, and Mr. W. is not, Whe∣ther we are justified by Faith? which the Scripture frequent∣ly affirms, and no man that I know, denies it; Papists and Pro∣testants, Orthodox and Socinians, Remonstrants and Contra-Remonstrants, do unanimously consent, That we are justified by Faith. All the difference is, about the Sense and Meaning of this Proposition, A man is justified by Faith. Whether Faith therein, be to be taken Properly, or Tropically? For though there be great variety in Expression Vid. Stegm. Photin. p. 739, &c. amongst Divines, concerning this Matter, yet all their several Opinions and Explications may be re∣duced unto these two heads. The first takes Faith in sensu pro∣prio, for the act, or habit of Faith; the other takes Faith meto∣nymicè & relativè, for the object of Faith, (i. e.) The obedi∣ence and satisfaction of Jesus Christ. §. 2. Our Protestant Divines (who have hitherto been counted Orthodox) do take Faith in this Proposition [A man is justified by Faith] in a Tropical and Fgurative Sence; as thus▪ A man is justified in the sight of God, from all sin and punishment by Faith. i. e. By the Obedience and Righteousness of Jesus Christ, in whom we believe, and upon whom we relie for Life and Righteousness. Nor is this any unusual Trope, either in Scripture, or in other Au∣thors, to put Habitum, vel actum pro objecto, as Rom. 8.24. Hope that is seen, is not hope, i. e. The thing that is seen, is not hoped for. Christ is oftentimes called our Hope, our Joy, our Love, &c. because he is the object of these Acts and Affections; when the same thing is attributed distinctly, both to the act, and the object, it must needs be attributed to one, in a proper, and to the other, in an improper sence; and therefore (says Dr. Down∣ham
Of Just. l. 6. c. 15. sect. 2. Ib. p. 415.) When Justification is attributed to Faith, it cannot be attributed in the same sence, as to the death and obedience of Christ in propriety of Speech; but of necessity it is to be under∣stood by a Metonymy: Faith being put for the object of Faith, which is the Righteousness of Christ, &c. And holy Pemble Vind. Fid., If we list not to be contentious, it is plain enough (saith he) that in those places, where the Apostle treats of Justification by Faith, he means the Grace of God in Jesus Christ, opposing Works and Faith; that is, the Law and the Gospel, the Righte∣ousness of the Law, to the Righteousness of the Gospel, which is no other but the Righteousness of Christ. Thus (saith he) Faith is taken, Gal. 3.23. before Faith came. i. e. Before Christ came, and the clear exhibition of his Righteousness: And in this sence (as another hath observed) it is used at least thirteen times in this Chapter, where the Apostle expresly treats of our Justifica∣tion before God. De fide & Justi. Cont. 2. fol. 47. Albertus Pighius, though a Papist, was so far convinced of this truth, by reading of Calvins Institutions, that he acknowledged, If we speak formally and properly, we are justified, neither by Faith nor Charity, but by the onely Righ∣teousness of Christ communicated to us, and by the onely mercy of God, forgiving our sins. §. 3. Some of our Divines, who do utterly deny, That Faith in this Question is taken sensu proprio, or that the  credere, or act of believing is imputed to us for Righteousness, do yet ascribe an instrumentallity, or inferior causality unto Faith it self, in our Justi∣fication before God. They say, That we are justified by Faith in∣strumentally, and relatively; which terms, I confess, sound harsh∣ly in my ears, but I hope, I shall be excused, if I do not under∣stand them, seeing a far learneder man Dr. Hammonds Letters to Dr. C. p. 120. then my self, hath pro∣fessed, That they were not very intelligible to him. That Faith is taken relatively in this Question of Justification, to wit, For the object, it relates unto; Christ, and his Righteousness, I do readily grant; but that it justifies us Relatively, I cannot assent to it; for it seems to me, to carry this sence with it, either (1) that Faith doth procure our Justification, though not by its own worth and dignity, yet through the vertue, and merit of its object. As the Papists say of Works, That they do justifie and save us tincta sanguine Christi, being dipped in the Blood of Christ: Or (2) that Faith,
together with Christ its object, doth make us just in the sight of God; whereby it is made a social cause with the blood of Christ, which shall be sufficiently disproved anon. Again, that Faith is a passive Instrument of our Justification, to wit, such an Instru∣ment whereby we receive and apply this benefit to our selves, was shewn before Cap. 4. sect. 3.; but that it is an active efficacious Instrument to make us just and righteous in the sight of God, is no part of my Creed. For 1. it seems to me a contradiction to say, That Faith is not to be taken sensu proprio, but metonymicè, for the object thereof, and yet say, That we are justified by Faith instrumental∣ly; for it is not the object, but the act of Faith▪ which is an In∣strument: Faith considered as an Instrument, is taken sensu pro∣prio, and consequently the  credere, which they disclaim, must be said to justifie. 2. Mr. Baxter Aphoris. 56. p. 219. in my judgement disputes rati∣onally against this notion. If Faith (saith he) be the Instrument of our Justification, it is the Instrument either of God, or man; not of man, for Justification is Gods act, he is the sole Justifier. Rom. 3.26. man doth not justifie himself; not of God, for it is not God that believeth. To which I adde, that God neither needs, nor is capable of using an Instrument in the act of justifying; for though he useth Instruments to declare and reveal this Grace to sinners, yet not to will it to particular persons; the acts of his will are not wrought by any Organ, or Instrument, without himself. 3. By making Faith the Instrument of our Justification, Justifica∣tion is made the Effect, and Faith the Cause; and so consequent∣ly, a man shall be said to justifie himselfSee Mr. Bax∣ters Append. p. 121., whereas the Scripture every where ascribes our Justification unto God and Christ, making us totally passive in this work, Rom. 3.24, 26. & 8.33. Eph. 2.8. We can no more justifie our selves, then raise our selves from the dead, Eph. 2.1, 5. or then we could give our selves a being, when as yet we were not, Vers 10. Man is so far from be∣ing the total, or principal Cause of his Justification, that he is no cause at all; by ascribing the least causality, or efficiency to man, in his Justification, we derogate from the Grace of God in Jesus Christ. §. 4. Others do take Faith in a proper sence, as the Papists, Socinians, and Remonstrants; amongst whom, though there be some difference in Expression, yet they all agree in this, That by
Faith in this Proposition [A man is justified by Faith] is meant the act or habit of Faith, or such a Faith as is accompanied with faithful Actions. The Papists say, That Faith, and other inherent Graces, though in their own nature they do not deserve Justifi∣cation, yet through the merits of Christ, and Gods gracious ac∣ceptance, they do procure and obtain the forgiveness of our sins. Though they ascribe a meritoriousness to Faith, it is but in a qua∣lified sence. Faith (saith Bellarmine Bellar. de Just. l. 1. Quatuor ult. capit.) doth but Suo quidem modo mereri remissionem, after a manner merit remission, scil. By vertue of Gods Promise and Covenant, who hath annexed for∣giveness unto this condition. If a King (saith he) doth promise a Beggar a thousand pound a year upon no condition, then indeed the Beggar doth not deserve it; but if it be upon condition, that he do some small matter, as to come and fetch it, or to bring him a Posie of flowers, then he doth deserve it, because the promiser is bound unto performance: And in this sence Mr. B. Thes. 26. ascribes a meritoriousness to works. But the chief difference between them and us, lies in this: We say a man is justified by the imputation of Christs Righteousness; they, That we are justified by inherent Righteousness, or by doing of Righteous Actions, such as are Faith, Love, Fear, &c. Ipsa fides in Christum (saith Bel∣larmine De Justif. l. 1. c. 17.) est justitia. Faith it self is our righteousness; And that it doth justifie us, impetrando, promerendo, & inchoando ustificationem. Arminius, and the Remonstrants, though they have exploded the word merit, yet they attribute as much to Faith, and faithful Actions▪ as the Papists themselves. Dico (saith Ar∣minius Ep ad Hip. pol. & Resp. ad 31. Art. Art. .) ipsum fidei actum,  credere, imputari in justitiam, idquè sensu proprio▪ non metonymicè. The very same is affirmed by Vorstius, Bertius, Episcopius, and the rest of the Remonstrants. Their Opinion in brief is this, That God in the Legal Covenant re∣quired the exact obedience of all his Commandments, but now in the Covenant of Grace he requires Faith, which in his gracious acceptation stands instead of that obedience to the Moral Law, which we ought to perform; Which (say they) is procured by the merit of Christ, for whose sake God accounts our imperfect faith, to be perfect Righteousness. §. 5. Some of our late Divines (who seem to disclaim the Doctrine of the Papists and Arminians) say the very same; who
explain themselves to this effect, That Faith doth justifie as a condition, or antecedent qualification; by which we are made capable of being justified, according to the order and constituti∣on of God: The fulfilling of which condition (say they) is our Evangelical Righteousness, whereby we are justified in the sight of God. Mr. B. is so fond of this notion, That although in one place Epistle to th Reader before his Saint Rest, p. 7. he findes fault with the length of our Creeds and Confessi∣ons; yet he would have this made an article of our Creed, a part of our Childrens Catechisms, and to be believed by every man that is a Christian Aphoris. The 20. p. 109.; so apt are we to smile upon our own Babes. Though I honor Mr. Baxter for his excellent parts, yet I must suspend my assent to his new Creed. I shall prove anon Cap. 9., That Faith is not said to justifie, as an antecedent condition, which qualifies us for Justification; but at present, I shall onely render him the Reasons of my disbelief, Why I cannot look upon Faith as that Evangelical Righteousness, by which we are justified. I shall not insist upon it, though it be not altogether unconsiderable, that this notion is guilty of too much confederacy, with the afore∣named enemies of the Christian Faith; for though it is no good Argument to say, That Papists, Socinians, &c. do hold this, or that, therefore it is not true; yet it will follow, That such and such Tenents have been held by Papists, &c. and unanimously opposed by our Protestant Writers; therefore they ought to be the more suspected, and especially such Tenents of theirs, as are the cheif points in difference between us and them, as this is. Our Brethren that have started this notion, do take Faith, as the others do, in a proper sence, they attribute as much to the  credere, as Bellar∣mine, Arminius, or any other. Faith it self (says Mr. B.) is our Righteousness. There was never any Papist so absurd, as to say, That our Faith, Love, &c. are perfect Legal Righteousness, but that God judicio misericordiae, non justitiae, doth account and accept of it instead of perfect Righteousness. For my part I must confess, that I can see no dfference between them, but in Expressi∣on. The Papists do acknowledge the satisfaction of Christ, and that he is the meritorious cause of our Justification Counc. Trent. Sess. 6. c. 7.. They say indeed, That we are not justified by the Righteousness of Christ imputed▪ but by a Righteousness inherent in us, or righteous actions performed by us. And what do our Brethren say less
less then this? But I shall not follow the Parallel, any fur∣ther. §. 6. The Reasons which turn the Scales of my Judgement against this notion, That our Faith, or Faithful Actions are that Evangelical Righteousness by which we are justified, Are 1. If we are not justified by our own works, then our belie∣ving▪ &c. is not that Evangelical Righteousness by which we are justified; but we are not justified by our own works▪ Ergo. The Assumption is written with a Sun beam throughout the Scripture, Tit. 3.5. Not by works of Righteousness, which we have done. Rom. 11.6. If it be of Works, then were Grace no more Grace. It is the cheif scope of the Apostle throughout this, and the Epi∣stle to the Galatians, to prove, That we are not justified by works. The sequel of the Proposition is as evident, Because Faith, and Obedience to Gospel Precepts, are our works. It is man that be∣lieves and obeys, and not God, though we do them by his help and assistance, yet they are our acts or works; so that consequent∣ly, we are not justified by them in the sight of God. The Papists to elude the force of this Argument say. That the minde of the Apostle was onely to exclude from Justification, works of Na∣ture, and not of Grace; works which we our selves do, by our own strength, without the help of Grace, and not those works which we do by the aid of Grace. But Mr. Pemble answers well Vind. id. . 37.; This distinction of works done without grace, and works done by grace, was devised by one that had neither wit nor grace, being a meer trick to elude the force of such Scriptures, as do indefinitely exclude all works from our Justification, without distinguishing, either of the time when they are done, whether before or after; o of the aid and help whereby they are done; whether by Nature, or by Grace. Others say, that when the A∣postle denies, That we are justified by works, he means that we are not justified by the works of the Law; but yet by works requi∣red in the Gospel, such as are Faith and Faithful actions, we may be justified. To which I answer, (1) That the Apostle speaks in∣definitely; now the rule is, Non est distinguendum ubi Lex non distinguit: An indefinite Proposition is equivalent to a universal. A man is not justified by works, is as much as if he had said, A
man is not justified by any works of his own. (2) The Apostle excludes all works from our Justification, which do make the re∣ward to be a due debt, Rom. 4.4, 5. Now the works required in the Gospel (supposing it to be a Conditional Covenant) when they are performed, do make the thing covenanted a due debt, which the promiser is bound to give, no less then works required in the Law. (3) He denies expresly, that Abraham was justified by faithful actions, which he performed by the help and assistance of Gods Spirit, Rom 4.2. (4) They are the same works for the substance, which are commanded in the Law and the Gospel; there is no Precept enjoyned us in the New Testament, which is not also commanded us in the Moral Law; though the Law doth not ex∣presly command us to believe in Christ, yet virtually, and by con∣sequence it doth: The Law requires us to believe whatsoever God shall reveal, or propose to us to be believed; and conse∣quently to believe in Christ▪ when God in his Gospel shall reveal him to us. There is no reason therefore to interpret this Propositi∣on [A man is not justified by works] He is not justified by Le∣gal, but by Evangelical works, seeing they are for substance one and the same. (5) There would be no such opposition between Justification by Works, and Justification by Faith, as the Apostle makes, if we were justified by Evangelical works of our own per∣forming. All his disputing about Justification would amount but to meer Logomachy, or strife of words; for there was never any man so sottish, as to think, that a sinner can be justified by Legal works, unless the Law be mitigated, and the rigor thereof be in part remitted. The Apostle doth not dispute against Justification by works, which we cannot perform; but by works, which men presume they are able to perform: He excludes not onely perfect works, but all manner of works that are wrought by us. §. 7. 2. If the Righteousness whereby we are justified, be a perfect Righteousness, then we are not justified by our Obedience to Gospel precepts. But the Righteousness, whereby we are justi∣fied, is a perfect Righteousness, Ergo. The Sequel is evident, be∣cause our Obedience to Gospel precepts is imperfect and defective, at least in degrees; we do not believe, love, and obey so perfectly as we ought, the best of us may say with him in the Gospel, Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief, Mark 9.24. And when
we have done our utmost, that we are but unprofitable servants, Luke 17.10. Now this imperfection and defect in our Faith, and other vertues being defectus debiti in esse, is sinful and culpa∣ble Quamdiu au∣geri potest cha∣ritas, profecto illud quod minùs est, ex vitio est. Aug. ep. 29. ad Hieron. Peccatum est, cum charitas minor est quàm debet. Id. lib. de perf. justif. ad 15.; for which cause our Saviour oftentimes sharply reproved it, Matth. 6.30. & 8.26. & 14.31. & 16.8, &c. And we are oftentimes exhorted to increase our Faith, to abound in duties of Obedience, and to perfect holiness, Luke 17.5. 1 Thes. 4.1. 2 Cor. 7, 1. In this last place the Apostle hints, that the imperfecti∣on of our holiness ariseth from the filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and consequently it is a defiled, and sinful imperfection. The As∣sumption (that we are not justified by an imperfect righteousness) needs not, I suppose, any long proof; for surely, God will not ac∣count that for perfect justice, which is not so indeed; for as the Apostle sayes well, The judgement of God is according to truth, Rom. 2.2. It is certain, God will not justifie any man without Righteousness; and it is as certain, That God will not account that to be perfect Righteousness, which is imperfect and sinful; to say, That God doth not account our imperfect holiness to be Righteousness judicio justitiae, but onely judicio misericordiae, is a meer shift, which serves but to set the attributes of God at va∣riance between themselves, which in the Justification of a sinner do kiss and embrace each other, Psal. 85.10. When God judgeth according to mercy, he judgeth according to truth; his merciful judgement is a just, and a righteous judgement; the mercy of God is shewn, not in accounting a sinner perfectly righteous, for that Righteousness which is imperfect; but in accounting to him that Righteousness, which is not his own, the perfect Righte∣ousness of the Mediator In this judgement of God, Justice and Mercy do both meet; Justice, in that he will not justifie a sinner without a perfect Righteousness; Mercy, in that he will accept him for such a Righteousness, which is neither in him, nor performed by him, but by his surety the Lord Jesus Christ. Some of our Protestant Divines do call Inherent holiness, Evangelical Righte∣ousness, in respect of the principle from whence it flows, A heart purified by Faith; and to distinguish it from that Legal Righ∣teousness, which Reprobates and Unbelievers have attained to, be∣ing but the fruit of a Natural Conscience. I am sure it is no Pro∣testant Doctrine, that Inherent Sanctification (which on all hands
is acknowledged to be imperfect and defective) is that Evangelical Righteousness, whereby we are justified in the sight of God; which must needs be such a Righteousness, as God himself sitting on the Throne of his Justice can finde no fault with at all, but doth pre∣sent the person that hath it, just and perfect before Gods Tri∣bunal. 3. If the Righteousness, whereby we are justified, be the Righteousness of God, then we are not justified by our Obedi∣ence to Gospel precepts; but the Righteousness whereby we are justified, is the Righteousness of God, Ergo. The Sequel is clear, because our Obedience to Gospel precepts, is not that Righteous∣ness which the Scripture calls the Righteousness of God. For though we receive it from God, it being the gift of his Grace, yet it is every where called ours; as our Faith, Matth. 9.2, 22. Rom. 1.8. Hab. 2.4. Jam. 1.3. Our Charity, 2 Cor. 8.8, 24 1 Cor. 16.24. Philem. v. 1, 7. Our Hope, Phil. 1.20. 1 Thes. 2.19. Our good Works, Matth. 5.16. Revel. 2.2. Our Patience, Luke 21.19. 2 Thes. 1.4. Revel. 2.2. & 3.10. & 13.10, &c. Now the Scripture doth not call these Inherent Graces ours, to ex∣clude the Divine assistance in the working of them, as if they proceeded onely from our selves, the strength of Nature in us or the towardliness of our own wills: The Jews who went about to establish their own Righteousness, or Justification by their own works, did not deny that these works are the gift of God; the Pharisee expresly acknowledgeth as much, therefore gives thanks unto God for them, Luke 18.11 Agebat gratius Deo, de sua ju∣stitia, proinde à Deo eam se ha∣bere credebat. Bel. de Justif. l. 1. c. 8.. But they are called ours, be∣cause they are subjectively in us, and instrumentally wrought by us; and in opposition to the Righteousness of Christ, which is neither in us, nor performed by us; but is (as the Scripture rightly terms it) the Righteousness of God, not the Essential Righteous∣ness of God, as Osiander supposed, but the Righteousness of our Mediator, God-man; which though it be Inherent in the Humane Nature, and performed by it, yet is it truly called the Righteous∣ness of God, because it is the Righteousness of that Person, who is perfect God: And thus the blood by which we are redeemed, is called The blood of God, Acts 20.28. Or which is all one, The blood of the Son of God, 1 John 1.7. The life which was laid down for us, was the life of God, 1 John 3.16. The death by
which we are reconciled to God, is the death of his Son, Rom. 5.10. The Obedience by which we are constituted just, Rom. 5.19. is The Obedience of the same Son of God. See Gal. 4.4, 5. Christs Mediatorial Righteousness is called the Righteousness of God, to shew the dignity, and perfection of it, it being the Righ∣teousness of so great a person, who is not onely Man, but God: And that we should not think it to be any thing in us from God, it is sometimes called his blood, Rom. 5.9. sometimes his obedience, Vers. 19. By the imputation whereof we are made the Righte∣ousness of God in him, as he by the imputation of our sins, was made sin for us 2 Cor. 5.21.. And thus the godly learned, yea, and some of the Popish Doctors have expounded the Righteousness of God, men∣tioned in the 1, 3, and 10 Chapters to the Romans, of Christ and his Righteousness See Downh. of Justif. p. 130.; which, says Cajetan, is called the Righ∣teousness of God, Quia est in Deo personaliter, sum quia est apud divinum tribunal vera justitia, ad differentiam justitia∣rum nostrarum, quia apud divinum tribunal sunt velut pannus menstruatus, &c. i. e. Because it is personally in God, as also, because at Gods tribunal it is accounted Righteousness, and to distinguish it from our Righteousness, which in the sight of God, is as filthy rags. There is nothing more clear, then that our Obedi∣ence to Evangelical precepts, is not that Righteousness of God the Scripture mentions; which is not inherent in us, but imputed to us, being without us in Christ, God-man. The Assumption, That the Righteousness whereby we are justified, is the Righteous∣ness of God, is undeniably proved from Rom. 1.17. & 3.21. & 10.3. In which last place, the Apostle shews, there is such an opposition betwixt Gods Righteousness, and ours, in the point of Justification, That whosoever seeks to be justified by his own Righteousness, cannot be justified by the Righteousness of God; and therefore he himself professeth, that in the Question of Justi∣fication he utterly renounceth his own righteousness, desiring to be found in Christs Righteousness alone, Phil. 3.9. This Righte∣ousness of Christ, which is out of us in him, is properly called E∣vangelical Righteousness, because it is the matter, or substance of the whole Gospel; the Gospel doth reveal it, and not the Law. Rom. 1.17. If the  credere, or act of believing, were that E∣vangelical Righteousness, by which we are justified, this Scripture
would be guilty of a gross Tautology, The Righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to Faith; for then the meaning must be, our Evangelical Righteousness is revealed from Evangelical Righteousness to Evangelical Righteousness, which is absurd. §. 9.4. If we are not justified by two Righteousnesses, ex∣isting  two distinct subjects, then our Obedience to Gospel precepts is not that Righteousness, whereby we are justified: But we are not justified by two Righteousnesses existing in two distinct subjects. Ergo. The Sequel is manifest, in regard the Righteous∣ness of Christ is inherent in him, and obedience to Gospel pre∣cepts, is a Righteousness inherent in us. The Scripture sundry times declares, That we are justified by Christ, and his Righteous∣ness, Rom. 3.24. & 5.9, 19. Now if we were likewise justified by our Obedience to Gospel precepts, it would follow, That we are justified by two Righteousnesses existing in two distinct sub∣jects. But this is gain-said in the Assumption, which will be secured by this proof; If by Christs Righteousness alone we are made perfectly just, and righteous in the sight of God, then there is no other Righteousness which concurs with his to our Justification: For what needs an addition to that which is perfect? But by Christs Righteousness alone we are made perfectly just, and righte∣ous in the sight of God; as these, and many other Scriptures do witness, Heb. 1.3. & 10.14. Col. 1.22. & 2.10, 13. Again, if we are justified partly by Christs Righteousness, and partly by our own, our Faith for Justification must relie partly upon Christ, and partly upon our selves. Paul might have desired to be found in his own Righteousness; But our faith and trust for Justi∣fication, may not in any part relie upon our selves, Jere. 17.5. Phil. 3.3. Gal. 5.2, 3, 4. The Adversaries of Grace (as we shew∣ed before) acknowledge, that it is the safest course to trust and re∣lie upon Christ alone, and to fetch the comfort of our Justificati∣on from his perfect Obedience onely. §. 10.5. That which overthrows the main difference, between the Law and the Gospel, ought not be admitted; for the confound∣ing of them will open an in-let to innumerable Errors; nay by this means the Gospel it self will become a meer cypher. The A∣postle we see was exceeding careful to keep these Doctrines distinct each from other; and therefore throughout all his Writings he
still opposeth the Law and Grace. Works and Faith, our Righ∣teousness and Christs Righteousness; instructing us thereby, how needful it is they should be kept a sunder. But the making our O∣bedience to Gospel precepts, the Righteousness whereby we are justified, overthrows the main difference between the Law and the Gospel. Ergo. For herein (as Bishop Downham well obves Of Justif. l. 1. c. 4. sect 7.) standeth the chief Agreement, and Difference between the Law, and the Gospel; they agree in this, That unto Justification, both do require the perfect fulfilling of the Law; but herein they differ, That the Law requireth to Justification, a Righteousness inherent in us, and perfect Obedience to be performed in our own persons; the Gospel reveals for our Justification the perfect Righteousness of an other, even of Christ, which is accepted in their behalf, that do believe in him, as if it had been performed in their own persons. Now if Faith, and new Obedience be that Evangelical Righteous∣ness whereby we are justified, then doth the Gospel also propound for our Justification, a Righteousness inherent in us, and performed by us; and so consequently there remains no material difference between the Law and Gospel, especially seeing the same duties are prescribed in both. If any shall say, That the Gospel precepts do not require such exact and perfect Obedience, as those in the Law, their Assertion will want a Proof; nay, these and such like Scriptures, do prove it to be utterly false, 1 John 3.16. Matth. 5▪44, 45. 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. A defect in degrees is a sin against the Gospel, as well as against Legal precepts. To these I might adde all those Arguments, which our Divines have used against Justifi∣cation by Inherent Righteousness; but this may suffice to shew, That Faith and Obedience to other Gospel precepts, is not that Righteousness whereby we are justified in the sight of God. §. 11. Now briefly my sence of this Proposition [We are justified by Faith] is no other, then that which hath been given by all our Ancient Protestant Divines, who take Faith herein, Ob∣jectively, not Properly, and explain themselves to this effect. We are justified from all sin and death, by the satisfaction and obedience of Jesus Christ; who is the sole Object or Founda∣tion of our Faith, or whose Righteousness we receive and apply unto our selves by Faith. Yet I say it doth not follow, That it was not applied to us by God; or that God did not impute
Righteousness to us, before we had Faith: We that believe, are justified by the Righteousness of Christ; it is no good Conse∣quence, Ergo We were not justified in the sight of God, before we did believe; but now that we may , Speak the truth in love, I shall give the Reader a clearer account of my Judgement, concerning this Matter, in the following Chapter. CHAP. VII. Wherein the Question about the time of our Justification is distinctly stated; and these two Propositions [A man is justified before Faith] and [A man is justified by Faith] reconciled. THat we may avoid mistakes, I shall briefly declare, (1) What we do understand by Justification? (2) What, by being justified in the sight of God? And (3) when we are justified in the sight of God? As touching the first of these, It would be but , a needless expence of time, to enter upon a large discourse, concerning the signification of the word, and the differ∣ence between Justification and Sanctification. We all know, that Justification in general, is the making of one just and righteous: Now there are two ways, whereby a person is made or constituted righteous, viz. by Infusion, or by Imputation. 1. By Infusion, when the Habitual Qualities of Righteousness are wrought in a person, by any means whatsoever; and these habits are put forth in a universal and perfect Conformity to the rule of Righteousness: And thus no man was ever justified since the fall, for as the Apostle speaks, Rom. 3.10. There is none righ∣teous, no not one; no man, whether regenerate or unregenerate, is righteous with Inherent Righteousness, neither his Internal Habits nor External Actions, are exactly commensurate to the rule of Righteousness; the Church acknowledgeth, that her righteous∣nesses (i. e. Her best, compleatest, and exactest Righteousness)
were as filthy rags, Isa. 64.6. And the Apostle accounted his own Righteousness but loss and dung, in reference to his Justifica∣tion, Phil. 3.8, 9. Ipsa justitia nostra ad examen justitiae divinae deducta, inju∣stitia est, sordet in districtione judicis quod ful∣get in opinione operantis. Greg. l. 5. in 3. cap. Job. 2. By Imputation, or gracious Acceptation; as when God doth not account or charge a mans sins upon him, but accepts him as just and righteous, deals with him as a righteous person, or as if he had never sinned: This latter is that Justification which we are now treating of. God justifies a man, when he accounts and esteems him righteous. §. 2. The next thing propounded was, What is meant by the sight of God? This phrase is variously used. (1) Sometimes it relates unto the thoughts or knowledge of God, as Heb. 4.13. All things are naked, and manifest in his sight. i. e. God hath a clear and distinct knowledge of all things whatsoever: And thus a man is justified in the sight of God, when God knows and esteems him to be just and righteous. (2) The sight of God relates more peculiarly to his Legal justice; for although in arti∣culo providentiae, in the Doctrine of Divine Providence, Seeing and Knowing are all one, as Job 28.24. He looketh to the ends of the Earth, and seeth under the whole Heaven. i. e. He knows and takes notice of all things, both in Heaven and Earth; yet in articulo justificationis, in the Doctrine of Justification, they are constantly distinguished throughout the Scripture, and never promiscuously used the one for the other. God is never said, to cover, blot out, or wash away the sins of his people out of his knowledge, but out of his sight, Levit. 16.30. Psal. 32.2. and Rom. 4.2, 7. Psal. 51.9. God sees their sins, for whom his Law is not satisfied, Nehem. 4.5. Jer. 18.23. In regard that his truth and justice doth oblige him to take notice of, and punish them for their sins. Again, He sees not their sins, for whom he hath received a full compensation; because it is contrary to justice to enter into judgement against a person, who either by himself, or surety, hath made satisfaction for his offence Quod tegitur, non videtur, quod non vid tur, non imputaur; quod non impatatur, non punetui: Jeron. in Psal. 32. Vid. Aug. in Psal. 32. Si voluit tegere, noluit videre, &c. See Mr. Rey∣nolds his Simi∣litude, Sup c▪ 3. sect 6.. And in this respect God is said, not to see the sins of his people, which yet he knows to be in them; which doth not detract from his omnisciency, but exceed∣ingly magnifies his Justice, and that perfect atonement which Christ hath made in their behalf; so that all, that are cloathed with the Innocency, Righteousness, and Satisfaction of Christ,
they are justified in the sight of God. i. e. Divine Justice can∣not charge them with any of their sins, nor inflict upon them the least of those punishments which their sins deserve; but contrari∣wise he beholds them, as persons perfectly righteous, and accord∣ingly deals with them, as such, who have no sin at all in his sight▪ (3) A late Divine of singular worth Mr. Kendal against Good∣wn, cap. 4. p. 138., hath another Construction of this phrase, [In the sight of God,] who observes that the word [sight] though it be for the form active, yet for the substance of it, it is rather passive; and therefore it is not attributable to God, as it is to us, but in God it signifies his making of us to see; and we are said to be justified in his sight, when he makes it, as it were, evident to our sight, that we are justified. But with due respect to that learned man (whom I highly honor for his worthy Labors) I conceive this phrase must have some other meaning in this debate; for else, that distinction of Justification in foro Des, & in foro conscientiae, (which hath been made use of by all our Protestant Divines, and whereof there is great need in this present contro∣versie,) would be but a meer Tautology; for though it be the same Justification, wherewith we are iustified in the sight of God, and in the Court of Conscience; yet the terms are not equipollent and convertible, but do admit of distinct considerations: though he that is justified in foro conscientiae, is also justified in foro Dei; yet every one that is justified in foro Dei, is not justified in foro con∣scientiae. §. 3. Now according to these several Senses which are given of this forementioned phrase, it will be easie to resolve the third Query, concerning the time of our Justification, when we were justified in the sight of God? 1. If we take it in this last Con∣struction, I shall grant, That we are not justified in the sight of God, before we believe: We do not know, nor can we plead the benefits and comforts of this Blessed Priviledge until we do believe; it is by Faith, that the Righteousness of God is revealed to us; and it is by his knowledge (notitia sui,) that Christ doth justifie us,Rom. 1.17. Isai. 53.11. 1 Pet. 3.21. or inables us to plead, not guilty, to all the Indictments and Menaces of the Law. But 2. if we refer it to the justice of God, (which I conceive to be the most proper and genuine use of it) we were justified in the sight of God, when Christ exhibited, and God ac∣cepted the full satisfaction in his Blood, for all our sins; that ran∣some
of his set them,Gal. 3.13. 1 Joh. 1.7. Col. 1.22. Eph. 5.27. for whom he died, free from the Curse of the Law, cleansed them from all their sins, and presented them holy, blameless, and unreproveable in the sight of God; so that the eye of Divine Justice cannot behold in them the least spot of sin. This perfect cleansing, is the sole and immediate effect of the death of Christ, in regard that no other cause concurs therewith, in producing of it. 3. If we refer it to the knowledge of God, we were justi∣fied in his sight, when he willed or determined in himself, not to impute to us our sins, or to inflict those punishments upon us, which our sins deserve; but contrariwise to deal with us as righteous persons, having given us the Righteousness of his own Son. God doth certainly know whatsoever he wills: Now God having from all eternity, absolutely and immutably willed the Righteousness of his Son to all his Elect; he saw, or knew them to be righteous in his Righteousness, even when he willed it. §. 4. For the clearer understanding of the Point in question, I shall give in my Judgement concerning it, as distinctly as I can, in three Propositions. The first shall be this, That Justification is taken variously in the Scripture Fateamur ergo necesse est, justi∣ficationis nomen variè sumi, nisi velimus existi∣mare Apostolos à se dissentire, & pugnantia enun∣ciare, &c. Whit. Cont. 1. q. c. 9., but more especially, Pro volitione divina, & pro re volita, (as the Schools do speak.) (1) For the Will of God, not to punish, or impute sin unto his people; and (2) for the effect of Gods Will, to wit, His not punishing, or his setting of them free from the Curse of the Law. That Justification is put for the effect of Gods will, or the thing willed by that Internal Act, to wit, Our discharge from the Law, and deliverance from punish∣ment, I suppose there is none will question; the onely scruple that can arise, is, Whether the Will of God, not to punish, or charge sin upon a person, is, or may be called Justification? I confess, to the end that I might not offend the weak Facile est, imo & utile ut tace∣atur aliquod ve∣rum propter in∣capaces. Aug. de persever. Sanct. c. 15., I have been sparing of calling this immanent act of God, by the name of Justification, and the rather, because some gross mistakes have sought for shel∣ter under the wings of this expression. As (1) that absurd con∣ceit, That Christ came not to satisfie the justice, but onely to ma∣nifest the love of God; which yet hath not the least countenance from our Doctrine, seeing that notwithstanding the Will of God, not to punish his Elect, we say, That the Law must needs be satisfi∣ed for their sins, no less then for the sins of others. And (2) their
notion, who upon this ground have asserted the Eternal Being of the Creature, whereunto they were driven, because they could not answer that Consequence, Justificatus est. Ergo Est; which holds not in terminis diminuent ibus, whether à priori, as Electus est. Ergo Est; or à posteriori, Mortuus est. Ergo Est. Yet I must profess, That I look upon Dr. Twisse Remissio pecca∣torum si quid di∣tatem inspicias nihil aliud est, quàm punitionis negatio, aut voli∣tionis puniendi negatio. Sit ergo peccata remittere nihil aliud, quàm nolle punire. A hoc nolle punire, ut actus imma∣nens in Deo, fui ah aeterno. Vind. Grat. l. 1. p 2. sect. 25. & 1. in fol. p. 294. his judgement in this point, as most accurate, who placeth the very essence and quiddi∣ty of Justification in the Will of God not to punish. Mr. Ken∣dal See Kendals Vind. c. 4. p. 134. & 145., though he makes Justification to be a declared sentence, or transient act of God, yet he grants, That Gods Will or Decree to remit our sins, carries in it a remission of them tan amount; for who shall charge them on us, if God decree to remit them? And again, This Decree hath so much in it that looks so well, like unto Justification, that is may be called so without Blasphemy. But I see no inconvenience at all, but rather very much reason to adhere unto the Doctors definition, That Justification is the Will of God not to punish. 1. Because the definition which the Holy Ghost gives us of Justification, is most properly applied to this act of God. It is a certain rule, Definitum est, cui convenit definitio; that is Justification, whereunto the definition of Justi∣fication doth agree: The definition which the Psalmist, and from him the Apostle gives of Justification, is Gods non-imputing of sin, and his imputing of righteousness unto a person, Psal. 32.1, 2. Rom. 4.6, 8. Now when God willeth not to punish a person, he doth not impute sin to him. The original words (both in the Old and New Testament) whereby imputation is signified, do make it more clear; for both of them do signifie an act of the minde or will:  (which is used by the Psalmist) is properly, to think, repute, esteem, or account Vid. Pag. Buxtorf., and the word  hath the same signification Vid. Scap. Lex. ab Arith∣meticis desumi∣tur, &c. Taro∣vius., it is usually applied to Accountants, who when they have cast up many sums, do set down at the foot, what they do amount unto: So when a man hath accounted with himself the loss and benefit, conveniencies, and inconveniencies that may accrue unto him, the result and issue of his deliberation, is significantly expressed by this word, it notes a stedfast purpose and resolution, Quae quasi rationibus subductis & explicatis conclusa est, it is opposed unto a doubtful and uncertain opinion. It notes either the
purpose, or determination of one alone, or the consent and agree∣ment of two between themselves, whereof Camerarius Comment. in Rom. 4.4. gives us an instance out of Zenophon. This word is fitly used to signifie this immanent act of God; for though he doth not purpose and resolve, in that manner as men do, by comparing things together; or by reasoning and concluding one thing out of another, yet are his purposes much more firm and immutable, Mal. 3.6. Jam. 1.17. Numb. 23.19. The Lord therefore did non-impute sin to his people, when he purposed in himself, not to deal with them according to their sins, when the Father and the Son agreed, upon that sure and everlasting Covenant, That his Elect should not bear the punishment, which their sins would deserve. The Remon∣strants In Apol. p. 112. Nihil ali∣ud est quàm vo∣litio aut decre∣tum, &c. do acknowledge, That non-imputation, or remission of sin, is an immanent act in God, Quam Deus in sua ipsius mente effi∣cit. We are commanded to forgive one another, as God hath for∣given us; now we know that our forgiveness is principally an act of the heart, As when a man purposeth in himself, not to take re∣venge, he doth then forgive. But of this, we shall have occasion to speak more largely in our Answer to Mr. Woodbridges first Argu∣ment. 2. That which doth secure men from wrath, and whereby they are discharged and acquitted from their sins, is Justification; but by this immanent act of God, all the Elect are discharged and ac∣quitted from their sins, and secured from wrath and destruction, Ergo. The Assumption onely will need to be proved, which is abundantly confirmed (1) by those places which make mention of Gods unspeakable Grace and Love towards them, from ever∣lasting: For what is the Love of God, but his velle dare bonum; his fixed and immutable Will to bestow upon them the greatest good that they are capable of? Now, when God set his love up∣on them, he said unto them, Live? Ezek. 16.6. This Will of God did secure them from death and destruction; it was a real discharge from condemnation, But (2) more plainly from the words of the Apostle, Rom. 8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect. The Proposition is either a Universal Ne∣gative, No Elect person can be justly charged with sin; or a Universal Affirmative, All Elect persons are free from the charge of sin. Which way soever we take, it is evident, That the Propo∣sition
is Universal. Now if this priviledge did belong onely to E∣lect Believers (as some See Burges of Justif. p. 186. would limit the Text) the Proposition were false; for though all true Believers are Elect persons, yet all the Elect are not Believers: It is as if one should say, Omne ani∣mal is rationale, and to excuse it, say, That by Omne animal, he meant omnis homo; and to prove the Expression Legitimate, should alledge that homo is often called animal, which is true, but very impertinent to prove, that omne animal may be put for omnis homo. §. 5. All that I have yet seen alledged against this Member of the distinction, That Gods will not to punish, is not Justifi∣cation, is of little moment. It is objected, 1. That hereby Justification and Election are  confounded. I answer, That it follows not,Answ. they may be both of them imma∣nent, eternal Acts, and yet not confounded: For Election and Re∣probation are eternal, immanent Acts, yet they are not confounded. Indeed, all different immanent acts, are but one simple act in God, in whose Decrees there is no Priority or Posteriority; seeing (as Hilary De Trinit. l. 12. speaks) Omnia penès Deum aequabili aeternitatis in∣finitate consistunt. Yet in our consideration they receive sufficient distinction from their various Objects, and our various Applicat∣on of them: And thus Election and Justification are distinguished. Election includes both the end, which is the glory of Gods Grace, and all the means from the beginning to the ending conducing there∣unto. His will not to punish, includes precisely, and formally, one∣ly some part of the means. 2. It is objected, That Justification imports  change of the  persons state, to wit, Ab injusto ad justum, which cannot be at∣tributed to the simple and unchangeable Decrees of God. I answer, That if Justification be taken for the thing willed,Answ. viz. The delivery of a sinner from the curse of the Law, then there is a great change made thereby; he that was a childe of wrath by Nature, hath peace and reconciliation with God. But if we take it for the Will of God, not to punish, then we say, Justification doth not suppose any such change; as if God had first a will to punish his Elect, but afterwards he altered his will, to a will, not to punish them. The change therefore of a persons state ab in∣justo
ad justum ariseth from the Law; and the consideration of man in reference thereunto; by whose sentence the Transgressor is unjust; but being considered at the tribunal of Grace, and cloathed with the Righteousness of Christ, he is just and righteous; which is not properly a different state before God, but a different con∣sideration of one and the same person. God may be said at the same time to look upon a person, both as sinful, and as righteous; as sinful, in reference to his state by nature, and as righteous, in refer∣ence to his state by Grace: Now this change being but imputed, not inherent, it supposeth not the being of the Creature, much less any inherent difference in the state of the Creature; no more then electing love, makes any inherent present change: Though the state of the loved, and hated, are different in the minde of God, yet not in the persons themselves, till the different effects of love and hatred are put forth. 3. Others have objected, That hereby we make void the death of Christ; for if Justification be an immanent act in God, it is Antecedent, not onely to Faith, but to the merits of Christ; which is contrary to many Scriptures, that do ascribe our Justi∣fication unto his blood, as the meritorious cause. Answ.To which I answer, That although Gods will not to punish, be Antecedent to the death of Christ; yet for all, we may be said to be justified in him, because the whole effect of that will, is by, and for the sake of Christ. As, though electing Love precede the consideration of Christ, John 3.16. yet are we said to be chosen in him, Eph. 1.4. because all the effects of that love, are given by, and through, and for him: Gods non-punishing of us, is the fruit of his death, yet his will, not to punish, is Antecedent there∣unto. 4. Others say, we may as well call his will to create, Creation; and his will to call, Calling; and to glorifie, Glorification; as his will to justifie, Justification. Answ.We Answer. That there is not the same Reason for creating, calling, and glorifying; all which do import an Inherent change in the person created, called, glorified; which forgiveness doth not, it being perfect and compleat in the minde of God. §. 6. These things being weighed in the ballances of an equal Judgment, I suppose the phrase would not sound so harsh, as it doth
to many; however, were the thing it self granted, That there was in God from Everlasting, an absolute fixed and immutable will, never to deal with his people according to their sins, but to deal with them as righteous persons; this Controversie were ended. For (1) Gods non-imputation of sin, to his Elect, is not purely Negative; as the non-imputation of sin unto a Stone, or other Creatures, which are not capable of sinning; but Privative, being the non-imputation of sin, realiter futuri in esse, as the impu∣tation of Righteousness, is, Justitiae realiter futurae in existen∣tiâ: The difference between these, is as great, as between a mans will, not to require that debt, that shall, or is about to be con∣tracted, and his will not to require any thing of one, that never did, nor will ow him any thing. (2) This non-imputation of sin, is actual, though the sin, not to be imputed, be not in actual being; in like manner, the imputation of Righteousness, is actual, though the Righteousness to be imputed, is not actual: Man whose thoughts arise de novo, doth non-impute, usually, after the commis∣sion of a fault; but for God (who is without any shadow of change and turning) so to do, is absolutely impossible; for as much as there cannot arise any new will, or new thought in the heart of God See Kendals Vind. p. 134., (3) This act of justifying is compleat in it self, for God by his eternal and unchangeable Will, not imputing sin to his Elect, none can impute it; and he in like manner imputing Righteousness, none can hinder it. Neither doth this render the death of Christ useless, which is necessary by the Ordinance of God, as a meritorious cause of all the effects of this Justification; even as the eternal Love of God, is compleat in it self, but yet is Christ the meritorious cause of all the effects of it, Eph. 1.3, 4. And therefore we say. §. 7. 2. That if Justification be taken (as most commonly it  is) not for the Will of God, but for the thing willed by this im∣manent act of his, to wit, Our discharge from the Law, and de∣liverance from punishment; so it hath for its adequate cause and principle, the death and satisfaction of Jesus Christ. Though there be no cause of the former out of God himself Nihil movet voluntatem Dei nisi bonitas sua. Aquin. 1. p. q. 19. a. 2. ad 2. & art. 5. in c. (for the merits of Christ do not move God, to will, not to punish, or im∣pute sin unto us) yet is Christ the meritorious cause of the latter. It is from the vertue of his Sacrifice, that the obligation of the Law
is made void, and the punishments therein threatned, do not fall upon us. By his death he obtained in behalf of all the Elect, not a remote, possible, or conditional reconciliation, but an actual, ab∣solute, and immediate reconciliation, as shall be proved anon Cap. 14.. And in this respect, all that were given unto Christ by the Father, may be said to be justified at his death, not onely virtually, but formally; for the discharge of a debt, is formally the discharge of the debtor. Their discharge from the Law was not to be sub ter∣mino, or in Diem, but present and immediate, it being impossible that a debt should be discharged, and due at the same time. We acknowledge, That the effects of this discharge from the Law, may be said to be sub termino, or in Diem: As for instance, from that full satisfaction and perfect Righteousness, which Christ hath per∣formed, there arise these two things. One is, The non-execution of the desert of sin (which we continually commit) upon us: That whereas the Reprobate sin and upon their sin, the curse, with all the evils included in it, is upon them: The Elect likewise sinning, yet for Christs sake, the curse, or evil of suffering, is not inflicted upon them; which non-punishing quoad effectum, is forgiving, and not imputing sin: And in this sense, God is frequently said to for∣give, when he doth not inflict punishment; and in this sense also, he is said often to forgive. The other is, The imputation of Righteous∣ness, in the effects of it, whereby the effects of a true and perfect Righteousness come upon the people of God; to wit, All good things, both for this life, and that which is to come; yea, those things which seem to be evil, and hurtful (as their falls and afflicti∣ons,) are ordered by the over-ruling hand of a wise and powerful Providence, to work together for good unto them. These effects are immediate, in respect of causality, though not of time; for though God doth not presently bestow them, but as he sees fit, both for his own glory, and for their good; yet do they imme∣diately slow from the merit of Christ, in regard there is no other meritorious cause, that intervenes and concurs therewith, in pro∣curing of them. Notwithstanding we say, That our discharge from the Law must needs be immediate, and present, with the price or satisfaction that was paid for it, in regard, That it implies a contradiction, a debt should be paid, and discharged, and yet justly chargable. But of this we shall have occasion to speak more hereafter.
§. 8. 3. Justification is taken for the declared sentence of ab∣solution  and forgiveness: And thus God is said to justifie men, when he reveals, and makes known to them his Grace and Kind∣ness within himself. And in this sense do most of our Divines take Justification, defining it, The declared sence of absolution▪ and not improperly: For in Scripture phrase, (as was noted before Cap. 5. sect. 4.) things are then said to be, when they are declared, and manifested Non esse & non apparere, ae∣quiparantur in∣jure.; the declaring of things, is expressed in such wise, as if it made them to be; whereof many instances might be given; a very plain one there is, Gen. 41.13. Pharaohs cheif Butler, speaking of Jo∣sephs interpretation, Me (says he) he restored, and him, i. e. the Baker, he hanged; whereas he did but declare these successes unto them. So God is said to justifie his people, when he mani∣fests and reveals to them: that mercy and forgiveness, which before was hidden in his own heart, to wit, that he doth not impute their sins, but contrariwise, doth impute Righteousness unto them. Now the Lord at sundry times, and divers ways hath, and doth declare, and manifest this precious Grace unto his people; (1) More Generally, towards all his Elect; and (2) more Par∣ticularly, to individuals, or numerical persons. The former is done, (1) in the Word of God; and (2) in his Works and Actions. §. 9. First, God hath declared his immutable Will, not to im∣pute sin to his people, in his Word: The Gospel, or New Cove∣vant (being an absolute promise, as we shall shew anon,) may be fitly termed a Declarative Sentence of Absolution unto all the E∣lect, to whom alone it doth belong; the publication of the New Covenant is their Justification. For which cause Maccovius Disp. 17. n. 22. makes Justification to Commence from the first promise, which was pronounced before the curse: So that if Adam had not been a publick person, including both the Elect and Reprobate, there had been no curse at all pronounced, save onely upon the Serpent, or Satan; in reference to this promise it was, that the Apostle saith, The Grace of God, 2 Tim. 1.9. and eternal life, Tit. 1.2. was given to us, , which doth not signifie eter∣nity, (as our Translators carry it) but the beginning of time; it is of the same latitude with  2 Thes. 2.13. some
learned men Vid. Mead in Apoc. 14.6. Twi. Vind. grat. l. 1. p. 1. c. 5. have observed, that the phrase is most properly ren∣dered ante tempora secularia, i. e. ante multa secula, vel sub initio seculorum, to wit, in that famous promise of the womans seed, Gen. 3.15. Now what was that Grace, and Life, which was given us in the beginning of times, but the Grace of Free Justifi∣cation, whereby we are made to stand just and righteous in the sight of God? This Grace was revealed more clearly and distinct∣ly in after ages, it shined brighter and brighter, till the day spring from on high did visit us Luke. 1.78.. Whose coming made it perfect day, in comparison whereof former times were obscure darkness, Joh. 3.19. Eph. 3.5. 2 Cor. 3.18, &c. And therefore Grace and Life is peculiarly ascribed to the times of the New Testament, or the clear exhibition of the New Covenant at the coming of Jesus Christ, 2 Tim. 1.10. And the Gospel is said to cleanse and san∣ctifie men (i. e. to justifie them, or to purge them from an evil Conscience) John 15.3. & 17.17. §. 10. Secondly, God hath declared his gracious sentence of non-imputing sin, and imputing Righteousness unto his people in his Works and Actions, both towards Christ, and towards them∣selves: In his actions, or dealing with Jesus Christ, two ways. (1) In charging or transacting all their sins and iniquities upon him, Isai. 53.6. 2 Cor. 5.21. 1 Pet. 2.24. The Lord thereby declared his will and purpose, not to charge sin upon them, for whom Christ interposed himself a surety: His imputing of our sins to Christ, was formally the non-imputing of them to us; Gods accounting of them unto him, was a discounting of them unto us; for they could not be accounted, or charged upon both, without a manifest contradiction in the thing it self, and in the justice of God; as it is, that a debt should be wholly accounted to, and discharged by the surety, and yet the same debt afterward be justly accounted to, and charged upon him that first contracted it. I confess, a debt may be charged both upon the Principal and Surety, before it be discharged, though afterwards to neither: But the case was not so, between Christ and us; God did not take his Elect, and Christ joyntly to make satisfaction; or him, upon our failing; or us, upon his; but transacted the whole debt upon him alone. Now, I say, the Lord laying our iniquities, in such a manner upon Christ, singly, absolutely, and irrevocably, he plainly de∣clared
thereby, that it was his will, never to lay them to our charge. (2) In that publick discharge or acquittance, which he gave unto Christ at his Resurrection; the Lord by raising him from the dead, and (as it were) setting him free out of prison, openly de∣clared, That he had received full satisfaction, for all those sins which Christ as a surety had taken upon him, viz. For all the sins of all the Elect. And for this reason (as an eminent Divine observes Dr. Reyn. on Psal. 110. pag. 524.) the Lord sent an Angel to remove the stone from the mouth of the Sepulcher, not to supply any want of power in Christ, who could himself have rouled it away with one of his fingers; but as a Judge, when the Law is satisfied, sendeth an Officer to set open the prison unto him, who hath made that satisfaction: So the Father, to testi∣fie, that his Justice was fully satisfied, with the price which his Son had paid, sent an Officer of Heaven to open the prison doors, and to set him free. Christs Resurrection was a solemn judicial act, whereby God the Supream Judge justified both him and us See Cap. 3. sect. 4. Mr. Th. Goodwins Christ set forth sect. 3. c. 5., (1) Him, from all those sins which he had undertaken, whereunto our Divines do apply these following Scriptures. Isai. 50.8, 9. 1 Tim. 3.16. Acts 13.35. Heb. 9.21. (2) Us, from our own sins. The Resurrection of Christ, was (as Mr. Parker says well) an actual Justification, of all them, for whom he became a Surety; for (1) he was not justified from any sins of his own, be∣ing in himself just and innocent, but from those sins which were charged upon him in his death, which (saith the Prophet) were the iniquities of us all, Isa. 53.6. If a debt be discharged, it cannot without manifest injustice be charged again; the discharge of the Surety, is the discharge of the Principal. God by acquit∣ting Christ from the guilt of our sins, did also fully acquit us from the same. (2) Christ in his Death and Resurrection was a com∣mon person; as in his death he was condemned for our sins, so in his Resurrection he was justified from our sins: All the Elect were justified in his Justification; there is the same reason for their Justification in Christ, as there is for the Condemnation of man∣kinde in Adam. Therefore (sayes the Apostle, Rom. 5.18.) us by the offence of one, judgement came upon all men to condemnation; even so (or in like manner) by the Righ∣teousness of one (Man, Christ) the Free-gift came upon all
men, (viz. All in Christ) unto Justification of Life. §. 11. Besides the General Declaration of Forgiveness, un∣to all the Elect, this Gracious Sentence, is also declared to particu∣lar persons. 1. Externally, in foro Ecclesiae, by the Sacrament of Baptism, the Minister of Christ, standing in his stead 2 Cor. 5.20., by Dipping or Pouring water upon a person, doth in his Name, or by his Autho∣rity, declare and publish the washing away of his sins by the Blood of Christ: The principal thing which Baptism holds forth, is our Justification; it was ordained for the remission of sins, Luke 3.3. and Acts 2.38. not to obtain, or procure this benefit ex opere operato, but to declare, and obsignate unto men, their interest there∣in. In Rom. 6.3, 4, 5. we are said to be buried with Christ in Baptism, and to be implanted thereby into the similitude of his Death and Resurrection. The meaning is, That our Communion in the benefits of both, is hereby ratified and confirmed to us. Up∣on this ground, I conceive it was, That in the old Liturgy, persons baptised, are said, to be regenerated, or born again Christus Ju∣stificationem di∣cit esse regenera∣tionem, Me∣lancth. in Joh. 3., i. e. Tran∣slated into a new state, viz. From the old Adam, into the new Adam; From the power of darkness, to the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, Col. 1.13. Which Baptism doth not effect, but declare and seal; it having no other cause, but the Grace of God, and the Merits of Christ, Tit. 3.5. 1 Pet. 3.21. 1 John 1.7. The late Assembly in their Directory say as much, viz. That Baptism is a Seal of the Covenant of Grace, of our ingrafting into Christ, of our union with him, of our remission of sins, &c. It is strange to me, That they who say Baptism is a Seal of our Justification, and hold that Infants (who have not Faith) ought to be baptised, should deny, that Justification precedes Faith. Now though this Declarative Sentence be but ministerial, and meerly of order (like the power of loosing, John 20.23, applied to Hypocrites) to the greatest part of them that are baptised, whether they be Infants, or adulti; yet to all the Elect (to whom the effects of the Cove∣nant and Seals, do onely really belong Sacramenta in solis electis effi∣ciunt quod sigu∣rant. Aug. Communis est Baptismus omni∣bus baptizatis, sed non virtus Baptismi. Lom∣bard. l. 4. dist. 1. a. 6.) it is real and absolute. It is no other then the Sentence of God himself, declaring his non-imputation of sin unto them, and their deliverance from death by Jesus Christ See Diod. on Acts .38.. §. 12. 2. Internally, in foro Conscientiae, at their effectual
Vocation, when the Lord by the Preaching of the Gospel, doth powerfully perswade their hearts to believe in Christ; for the Elect themselves, before Faith, have no knowledge or comfort, either of Gods gracious volitions towards them, or of Christs undertakings and purchases in their behalf: In which respect, they are said to be without Christ, and without God in the world, Eph. 2.12. and Gal. 4.1. They are compared to an Heir under age, who dif∣fers nothing from a Servant, though he be the Lord of all: By Faith we come to see that everlasting love, wherewith we were loved; and that plenteous Redemption which Christ hath wrought for us; for which cause, Faith is called The evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1. And God is said thereby to reveal his Righ∣teousness from Heaven to us, Rom. 1.17. And to reveal his Son in us, Gal. 1.16. Now in this sence men are said to be justifi∣ed by the act of Faith, in regard Faith is the medium or Instru∣ment, whereby the Sentence of Forgiveness is terminated in their Consciences; which is daily made more plain, and legible, by the operation of the Spirit Amos Mod. l. 1. c 27. sect. 9., sealing, and witnessing unto them their peace and reconciliation with God Eph. 1.13. & 4.30. Rom. 8.16.5.5.. Whereas unbelievers look on God as their enemy, and consequently all their life time are held in bondage through the fear of wrath. A true Believer hath peace, liberty, and boldness towards God; he looks upon all the Promises, as his own inheritance; interprets the Providences of God (even those which Reason would construe in another sence) to be Fruits of Love, and not of Wrath. §. 12. Now because this Declarative Sentence, by Faith is like the name written in the White Stone, Revel. 2.17. Which no man knoweth, saving he that hath it: Many whom the Lord doth justifie, are accounted by the world to be but Hypocrites; others again are justified of men, who are not justified in the sight of God Luke 16.15.; the Lord therefore hath another way of justifying his people, to wit, In foro mundi, when he shall publickly, and in the hearing of the whole world, pronounce that gracious sentence, Come ye blessed of my Father, &c. Matth. 25.34. Where∣unto some have referred those words of the Apostle, Acts 3.19. Repent, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come, from the presence of the Lord. But who so pleaseth to consult with Erasmus, Beza, and
Ludovicus de Dieu upon the place, shall finde there is a great mistake in our English Translators, and that no such thing was intended there by the Holy Ghost: I grant, that the sins of the Elect may be said to be then blotted out, not that the remission of their sins shall be put off, or is not compleat, till the last day, and till they have performed all the conditions required of them, but because this gracious sentence shall be then publickly declared Diod. in loc., and shall bring forth its Eternal Effect of Life and Glory: And in this sence, I conceive, those Scriptures may be understood, which speak of our Justification, as a future thing, as Rom. 3.30. & 2.13, &c. §. 13. Now though we have ascribed Justification unto seve∣ral times or periods, yet do we not make many Justifications: Declared Justification (whether it be in foro Ecclesiae, in foro Conscientiae, or in foro mundi) is not another, from that in the minde of God, but the same variously revealed; as an Acquit∣tance in the heart of the Creditor, and in a Paper; a pardon in the heart of a Prince, and inrolled; is one and the same; this mani∣fested, and the other secret; and though there are never so many Copies written forth in several hands, they do not make many Ac∣quittances, or many Pardons, being but the Transcripts of one O∣riginal: So though God doth at sundry times, and in divers man∣ners declare his well-pleasedness towards his people; yet is their Justification but one and the same, which is perfect and compleat at once, being his fixed, and immutable will, not to deal with them according to their sins, but as Just and Righteous Persons. By that which hath been said, it doth appear in what sence we assert, The Justification of Gods Elect, before they believe: Now what little weight there is in those Objections, which are commonly brought against this Assertion, will be more manifest when we have examined Mr. Woodbridges Treatise. Whose first quarrel against us, is, for that, (as he conceives) we give too little unto Faith, P. 2. But as it is no disparagement to the Blood of Christ, that it doth not move, and incline God to love us, or to will not to punish us; so it is no disparagement to Faith, to say, That it doth not concur with the Blood of Christ in obtaining our Justification; but that by apprehending the Gospel, it reveals and evidenceth to us that Justification which we have in Christ, the proof whereof, is the
task of the next Chapter; wherein I doubt not, but I shall be able, through the help of God, to put by, all those wretched con∣sequences which Mr. W. hath endeavored to father upon this Position, That Faith serves to evidence to us our Justi∣fication. CHAP. VIII. Wherein Mr. Woodbridges Exceptions against our saying, [That Faith, or the act of believing, doth justi∣fie no otherwise, then as it reveals, and evidenceth our Justification] are Answered. THe first Charge which he brings against this Gloss (as he calls it,) is, That it is guilty of a contradiction to the Holy Ghost. It is well known (sayes he) that the Apostle in his E∣pistles to the Romans and Galatians, sets himself on purpose to assert the Doctrine of Justification by Faith, in opposition to Works. The Question between him and the Jews, was not, Whether we are declared, to be justified by Faith or Works; but, whether we are justified by Faith or Works, in the sight of God, or before God: And he concludes, That it is by Faith, and not by Works, &c. Though all this be granted, yet it proves no con∣tradiction to the Holy Ghost, in our Assertion: We acknowledge that the Question between the Apostle, and the Jews, was not about the declaring of our Justification; nor about the time when we are justified; no, nor about the condition, upon which we are justified; but concerning the matter of our Justification, or the Righteousness, whereby we are justified; or by which we are ac∣counted righteous. Now the result of his dispute is, That we are justified by Faith, and not by Works; but then the Question will be, How Faith is to be taken, whether sensu proprio, or meto∣nymico; whether we are to understand it of the Act, or of the Object of Faith? We have shewed before See c. 6. sect. 2., that the Apostle in his disputes about Justification in these fore-mentioned Epistles,
where he opposeth Faith to Works, he takes Faith in a Tropical sense for the Object, and not the Act of Faith; for else there had been no ground for him to make any opposition at all, between Faith and Works; and in affirming, That we are justified by Faith, he had contradicted himself in saying, That we are not justified by Works; seeing Faith, or the Act of Believing, is a work of ours, no less then love. And therefore, it is evident, that the Apostle, when he concludes, That we are justified by Faith, and not by Works, understands by Faith, the Object thereof, to wit, Righteousness imputed, and not inherent Paulus fidem accipt, Rom. 4.. non pro opere, sed pro objecto fidei— Nomine autem operum intellexit Apostolus, non solum externa bona opera à lege mandata, verùm omnes etiam in∣rnas virtutes, & fidem ipsam uatenus opus est quod dam intel∣lectus & volun∣atis, quod mani∣festum est cui∣quam in ea Epi∣stola (scil. ad Rom.) medio∣criter exercitato. Zanh. de Nat. Dei. l. 4. c. 2. Thes. 2.; which, by way of distinction and opposition to the other, he calls the Righteousness of God, because it is out of us, in Christ, God-man. The reason why the Apostle calls the Object by the name of the Act, Christs Righteousness by the name of Faith, (besides the elegancy of the Trope) is because Faith ascribes all unto Christ, it being an act of self-dereliction, a kinde of holy despair, a denying and renouncing of all fitness, and worthiness in our selves; a going unto Christ, looking towards him, and a roulling of our selves upon his Al∣sufficiency Nomen fidei & verbum credendi apertè docent, justi∣tiam nobis aliundè advenire▪ & eam in nobis realiter non esse; sed tantùm ejus cognitionem, sen∣sum & effecta; opu enim fidei est ea quae extra nos sunt apprehendere— Hac igitur vel unica loquutio, per Fidem, seu Fide nos justificari, satis esse deberet ad evincenium, nos non justificari opere, aut virtute aliqua in nobis existente, cqu n ips fide, ut virtus & opus est, sed re quae ex nos posita est. Favore scil. Dei & justitia Christi. Zanchius ubi supra.: So that in the Apostles sense, we deny not, That Faith justifieth in the sight of God; Faith (I say) taken objective∣ly, to wit, For Christ and his Righteousness; it is for his Merits and Satisfaction alone, that we are accounted Just and Righteous, at Gods Tribunal. But if Faith be taken properly for the Act of Believing, we say indeed, That it onely evidenceth that Justifi∣cation which we have in Christ. Nor is this any contradiction to the Holy Ghost, who ascribes our Justification in the sight of God, to Chrst alone. §. 2. Next he calls it, A most unsound Assertion, That Faith doth evidence our Justification before Faith. Is the Apostles de∣finition of Faith, Heb. 11.1. Faith is the evidence of things not seen; An unsound Assertion? Though some do ascribe more to
Faith, then an Act of evidencing, yet I never met with any one before, that did totally deny this use thereof. All the knowledge that we have of our Justification, is onely by Faith, seeing it can∣not be discerned by Sence or Reason; either we have no evidence of our Justification, and consequently do live without hope; or, if we have, it is Faith that doth evidence it to our souls. Now let our Justification be when it will, if Faith doth evidence it, it will fol∣low, That our Justification was before that Evidencing act of Faith; for actu pendet ab objecto, the Object is before the Act. But I will not anticipate Mr. Woodbridges Reasons. §. 3. If (sayes he) Faith doth evidence our Justification; it is either improperly, as an effect doth argue the cause, as laugh∣ing and crying, may he said to evidence reason in a Childe, &c. Or else properly; and thus either immediately and axiomatically or remotely and syllogistically. (1) Faith doth not evidence Justification improperly, as the Effect doth argue the Cause. I shall readily grant him, that Faith doth not justifie evidentially, as a mark, sign, or token, but as a knowledge, and adherence unto Christ, our Justifier;Isa. 53.11. John 17.3. Phil. 3.10. as that Or∣gan, or Instrument, whereby we look not upon our Faith, but up∣on Christ our Righteousness; and by the same Faith do cleave un∣to him. They that make Faith a condition of our Justification, use it but as a sign, or as an argument affected to prove, That a per∣son is justified; seeing, that where one is, the other is also; where there is Faith, there is Justification; and for this cause innume∣rable other signs, and marks, are brought in to evidence this sign; which are more obscure and difficult to be known, then Faith it self, nay, which cannot be known to be effects of Blessedness, but by Faith; whereby poor souls, either walk in darkness, live in a doubting, and uncertain condition all their days; or else compass themselves about with sparks of their own kindling,Isa. 50.10, 11. and walk in the light of their own fire; fetching their comfort, from Faith, and not by Faith, from Christ. Though I might fairly pass by this Branch of his Dilemma, it being none of my Tenent, and favored more by his own, then my opinion; yet I shall briefly give my fence of his Reasons, That Faith doth not evidence Justification as a sign. §. 4. His first Reason is, because then Justification by Faith, would
not necessarily be so much as Justification in our Consciences: A Christian may have Faith, and yet not have the evidence, that he himself is justified: Many Christians have that in them, which would prove them justified, whiles yet their Consciences do accuse and condemn them. To which I Answer, 1. That Mr. W. may be pleased to consider, how well this agrees with that pas∣sage of his, Pag. 15. Where he alledgeth the words of the Apo∣stle, 1 John 3.20. to prove, That if our hearts do condemn us, God doth much more condemn us. 2. I should grant him, That if Faith did evidence our Justification, onely as a sign, or some re∣mote effect thereof, like other works of Sanctification, it would be but a dark and unsatisfying evidence. 3. Whereas he sayes, That doubting Christians have something in them, that would prove them justified; either it is something that precedes Faith, or something that follows Faith, or else Faith it self. First, Nothing that precedes Faith, doth prove a man justified; secondly, No∣thing that follows Faith, is so apt to prove it, as Faith it self, be∣cause it is the first . Clem. Alex. Strom. l. . Prosper. ad Dub. 8. of all Inherent Graces; it is by Faith, that we know our Love, Patience, &c. to be Fruits unto God; whereas some make doubting to be a sign of Faith, they may as well make darkness a sign of light, it being in its own nature contrary there∣unto; and therefore it must be proved by Faith it self. 4. Though a true Christian may have a doubting, accusing Conscience (as doubtless there is flesh and corruption in their Consciences, as well as in their other faculties; and there is no sin, whereunto we have more, and stronger temptations, then to unbelief;) yet whereso∣ever there is Faith, there is some evidence of this Grace; as in the least spark of fire there is light, though not so much as in a flame: And the least twinkling Star gives us some light, though not enough to dispel the darkness, or to make it day: There are several de∣grees of Faith, there is  and , a strong Faith, and a weak Faith. Now the least degree of Faith, carries some light, and evidence therewith; and according to the measure of Faith, is the evidence, and perswasion of our Justification. §. 5. Secondly, He urgeth, If Faith did evidence Justifica∣tion, as an effect of it, then we might as truly be said to be faithed by our Justification, as to be justified by our Faith. I see no absurdity at all, to say, That Faith is from Justification
causally, and Justification by Faith evidentially: That Grace which justifies us, is the Cause and Fountain of all good things whatsoever, both of Spiritual and Temporal Blessings, and more especially of Faith, 2 Pet. 1.1. Phil. 1.29. Yet doth it not fol∣low, That [We must invert the order of the Gospel, and instead of saying, Believe, and thou shalt be justified; we must say hence forward, Thou art justified, therefore believe.] (1) Be∣cause it is not the priviledge of all men, to whom we Preach, but onely of the Elect of God: And (2) because we know not, who are justified, no more then who are elected; though Faith be an effect, or sign of Election, yet it doth not follow, that we must say to any, Thou art elected, therefore believe. (3) When the cause is not notior effectu, we must ascend from the effect to the cause, as in the present case. §. 6. Thirdly, He loads it with this seeming absurdity, That then it will unavoidably follow, That we are justified by works, as well as by Faith; for works are an effect of Justification, as well as Faith. (1) It follows unavoidably from his own opinion: For if Faith be taken in a proper sence, for the Act of Believing, it follows, That we are justified by a work of our own; or, if Faith be the condition of Justification, it will follow likewise, That we are no more justified by Faith, then by other works, as Repentance, Charity, &c. Which Mr. W. and others of his strain Dr. Hammond▪ Mr. Baxter., do make the conditions of their supposed Justification; so that he is like to father the Childe, which he hath sought to lay at our doors. (2) It is not denied, That Works do declare, and evidence our Justification; where the Apostle denies our Justification to be by Works, he speaks of our real and formal Justification in the sight of God, which he affirms, is by Faith, scil. Objectively taken, and not of the declaring or evidencing of our Justification; which Saint James in his Epistle attributes to Works, in reference to men; and other Scriptures to Faith, in reference to the Con∣science of the person justified, Romans 1.17. Galatians 2.16. (3) Though works be the effect of justification as well as faith, yet it will no follow, that works do evidence our justificationas well as faith doth. (1) Because every effect is not apt to evidence its cause; especially when the same effect may proceed from se∣verall causes; as smoak is not so certaine an evidence of fire as
light and heat is; because steems and mists are so like to smoak; so works do not evidence our justification so clearly and certainly  Faith doth, because works may proceed from principles of natu∣ral ingenuity and morality, &c. as those Heathens have performed. (2) Because every effect doth not evidence to every faculty a like, but this to one, and that to another; as for instance, forme, or Phy∣siognomy doth evidence a man to sence, but yet reason requires another manner of evidence; so conscience requires a better evi∣dence of our justification then works can give: Work do evidence it in the judgement of charity, and before men; but they do not evidence it in the judgement of infallibility, or with that clearnesse and demonstrative certainty which the conscience requires; consci∣ence will need a better evidence then works can give. Paul could plead his works before men, 2 Cor. 1.12. which yet he never men∣tions in the pleas of his conscience towards God, and that which conscience dares not plead before God, can bee no good evidence unto conscience. §. 7. The other horn of his Dilemma will be frayd as easily as the former. Faith (saith he) doth not evidence justification pro∣perly; for then it must doe it either immediately, and Axio∣matically, as it is an assent to this Proposition, [I am justified] or else remotely and syllogistically, by drawing a particular con∣clusion of our own justification, out of generall propositions. But Faith doth not evidence our justification Axiomatically, &c. For (1) There is no such thing written, the Scripture doth no where say, Thou Paul, thou Peter, or thou Thomas art justi∣fied; Ergo, Justification cannot be evidenced by Faith imme∣diately. Mr. W. here mistakes the nature of true justifying Faith, who (it seems) conceives it to be a bare intellectuall assent to the truth of a Proposition;See Down. of Just. l. 6. c. 5. sect. 3. and Downs nature of Justification p. 10. (such as Devils and Reprobates may attaine un∣to) contrary to all Orthodox Divines, who doe place Faith more in the Will then in the Understanding. Justifying Faith essentially include. 1. An assent of the understanding to the truth of the Scriptures, revealing the sole-sufficiency of Christ for the reconci∣liation of sinners, and the non-imputation of sin; as also the will and command of God, that all men should beleeve in him alone for life and salvation. 2, a Fiduciall adherence and reliance of the will up∣on
the same Christ, the understanding being made effectually to assent and subscribe to the fore-mentioned propositions, sub ratio∣ne veri, the will is also powerfully drawne to accept, imbrace, and adhere unto Christ sub natione boni. Our Divines Dr. Iackson o Faith, c· 9· an Down ut sup. Scientia affecti∣va Gerson, doe in∣clude both these acts in the definition of Faith making it to be fi∣ducialis assensus, or assensus cum gustu: such an assent unto the truths of the Gospell, as that withall, the soule tastes an ineffable sweetnesse in the same; and thereupon esteth, and relieth upon Christ for all the benefits of his death. They make the principall act of Faith to be the reliance of the heart or wil upon Jesus Christ, and therefore they determine, that the object of Justifying Faith is not a Proposition or Axiom, but Christ, & the mercy of God in ChristProprium ob∣jectum fidei ju∣stificantis est Christus, vel mi∣sericordia Dei in Christo, non pro∣positio vel axio∣ma, Amesius Bellar. Enerv. tom. 4. l. 5. c. . sect. 22. Actus credentis non terminatur ad axioma, sed ad rem, faentibus solasticorum clarissimis, &c. Ames. medul. Theol. l. 2. c. 5. sect. 24. on whom, whosoever rests and roules himselfe, upon the call of the Gospel, hath a certain evidence of his Interest in Christ, and in all the treasures of righteousnesse and remission that are in him; accord∣ing to the degree of his affiance, or his taste of sweetnesse in Christ, is his evidence or assurance of his owne interest and propriety in him; There is no sense that doth apprehend its object with more certainty then that of Tasting; as he that tastes hony, knows both the sweetnesse thereof, and that he himselfe injoyes it; So he that tastes the sweetnesse of the Gospell Promises, and of that preci∣ous Grace which is therein revealed, knows his interest and pro∣priety therein. It is observed of Jonathan, 1 Sam. 14.27. When he tasted a little hony, his eyes were inlightned; and the Psal∣mist exhorts us to taste and see how good the Lord is. The soule that tastes, i. e. beleeves the Gospell, and the goodnesse of God therein revealed to sinners, sees and knowes his interest therein; for all manner of sweetnesse, is a consequent and effect of some propriety which we have in that good thing that causeth it, unto which, the nearer our interest is, the greater is the sweetnesse which we find in it: The Soul cannot taste any reall sweetnesse in Christ, and the Gospel, but must needs have some evidence of his interest, propriety, and title to him. Now because (as Dr. Ames observes) by this act of Faith, wherewith we rest and rely upon Christ, pro∣posed to us in the Gospell, we doe immediately attaine to the as∣surance of this Truth [that my sins in particular are pardoned by Jesus Christ,] therefore some have seemed to speake as if this Proposition, [I am Justified, my sins are forgiven me]
were the proper object of Justifying Faith. I shall not stand to defend this Expression, though the Doctor doth highly approve of it Sicut Contar e∣nus optimè ob∣servavit. Ames. Bellar. Enervat. ubi sup.; Nor will I quarrell with Mr. W. about his Expression, though I conceive his terme, Axiomatical is somewhat too narrow; for Faith may be said to evidence our Justification immediately, though it doth it not. Axiomatically, but Organically, to wit, as it is the organ or Instrument whereby we doe apprehend and adhere unto Christ, by whom we are justified in the sight of God; the lat∣ter term is more adequate to the nature of Faith, which is not on∣ly the assent of the Mind, but the adhesion of the Will to the ob∣ject beleeved. But I shall yeeld him his term, and do say, that Faith may be said to evidence our Justification Axiomatically, yet not by assenting to that which is not revealed; but by assenting to, and withall, tasting and relishing, those indefinite and general Propositi∣ons, Invitations, and Promises, that are held forth to us in the Gospell, which by a secret and inscrutable worke of the Holy Spi∣rit, are applyed and made particular to the soule of a true belee∣ver See D. ckson of Faith sect▪ 1. c. 9 n. 4. p. 147. The Spirit makes the ge∣neral Call par∣ticular &c. Shep. Sound belee∣ver. p. 222., for otherwise he could never taste any sweetnesse in them. So that Mr. Woodbridges exclamation against a carnall, presump∣tuous, and soule-damning Faith, is altogether impertinent, see∣ing we doe not say, that a man is justified by his assent to written, and therefore, much lesse to unwritten verities: If Justifying Faith were no more then an Axiomaticall assent (as Mr. W. seems to in∣timate it is) I see no reason, why all they, that have such a Faith, as Devils and Reprobates, who beleeve with an historical assent, should not be justified; this is really, the carnall, presumptuous, damning Faith of the world. §. 8. His second reason against Faiths evdencing our Justifica∣tion Axiomatically, is nothing to the purpose [The Faith (saith he) by which we are justified, is the Faith which the Apo∣stles and Ministers of the Gospel are to preach to the whole world, and to presse it upon their consciences. Act. 20.21.13.38.39. But we cannot presse upon every man in the world to beleeve that he is Justified, &c.] Seeing we do not presse every man to beleeve that he is justified, though (according to our commission given us from Christ) we do presse all men to beleeve Rhetorf. Exer. Apol. ex. 2. c. 2▪ p. 228., 1. As∣sensu intellectus to acknowlege that there is a sufficiency of merit in Christ for the Justification of Sinners; that they themselves are
such, and that it is impossible for them to escape the curse by any other means. 2. Amplexu, vel motu voluntatis, to accept, em∣brace, and cleave unto Jesus Christ, being infinitely better for them, then all the world besides. By this it will appear, what little rea∣son. Mr. W. hath to charge us with pressing men to believe a lie, seeing we require no mans assent to any thing, which is not true. We do not press every man to believe, That he is justified, but to believe, that there is a sufficiency in Christ for his Justification, and to relie upon him, and him alone, for this Benefit. §. 9. So that there will be no need for Mr. Eyre to retract his Sermons as falshoods, which he hath formerly preached against Universal Redemption: For though the command of believing be to be pressed upon all men (in that manner as hath been shewn) yet it will not follow, that Christ died for all men. It seems Mr. W. is offended at those Sermons of mine, since he hath had a smack of Mr. B. notions, That Christ died conditionally for all men; yea, for the Reprobates themselves; which though it be countenanced with the names of Cameron, Testardus, and Amyraldus, & of some others, who are of great note amongst our own; yet (may I have leave to speak my minde) I conceive it to be very unsound: For 1. To say that Christ died for any, upon an impossible condition, is to say, That he died in vain, at least so far, or in respect of them, which the Apostle looks upon, as a gross absurdity, Gal. 2.21. 2. For whom Christ died, he without doubt purchased Faith, and all neces∣sary good things. This the Apostle accounts unquestionable, Rom. 8.32. He that spared not his own Son, but gave him to death for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? What is Mr. Woodbridges Judgement in this point, I cannot tell, nor doth it much matter that I should enquire. I need not inform him what advantage they that are for Universal Redemption in the grossest sence, do make of his Doctrine of a Conditional Justification, impetrated by the death of Christ: It is the onely  that they have to shelter their heads withal; when they are pressed, That if Christ died for all, then all shall be saved, be∣cause it must needs be, that Christ must have the purchases of his death, John 11.42. Isa. 53.11. No (say they Dr. Ham. Vind. of Pract. Cat p. 3, & 4. Quare etsi emo credidis∣set futurum, ta∣men fusse, ut fi∣nis mortis Christi constaret, omni∣no credimus— Christus exaudi∣tur semper, sive salvantur, sive no, quia orat cum ann xae sidei conditioe. Cor∣vin. in Mol. c. 27. sect. 1. & 4. Vid. c. 28. sect. 24.) it will not fol∣low, because some do not perform the condition required on their parts. [These two Propositions, Christ redeemed all men, and
yet the impenitent, unbelieving, and reprobate World, shall never be saved by him, may be easily reconciled; because the benefits of Christs death are given upon condition, not absolutely; and therefore they that do not perform the condition, shall never be saved by his death.] It were easie to shew that this salvability, or conditional Salvation, is the very Corner Stone in the Remonstrants building. §. 10. This passage puts me in minde of two absurdities which Mr. J. Woodbridge, my Antagonists Brother, (who a while after came and preached over his Brothers Arguments, with some small Additions) charged upon our Doctrine. The first was, That it doth necessarily infer Universal Redemption. Will it follow, That because the Elect are justified in for Dei, before they be∣lieve; therefore all men are redeemed, and justified? One may as well reason, Some men were elected before they believed, Ergo All men were elected. Perhaps he will say, we cannot press or exhort every man to believe, That he is justified, unless all men are justified: There is no more necessity, that we should press every man to believe that he is justified, then, that he is elected: This is pitifully inconsequent. The second was, That it raseth the Foundation of all actions, tending to the gathering and reform∣ing of Churches; why should any be excluded from Church Or∣dinances, if they are justified? (1) I must tell him, That I can∣not think him an hearty friend to the gathering and reforming of Churches, who deserted a Congregation in New England, where∣of he was Pastor, to become a Parish Parson in the Old; and not onely so, but hath stood to maintaine that Parishes are true Churches In a Sermon at an irregular Ordination in Sarum, where Ministers are ordained, not fixed to any Church; and some an hun∣dred miles di∣stant from the place of their Ministery.. It is like Barford in Old England, is (if not a purer Church) yet a better Parsonage then Andover in the New. We are not much beholding to New England for such Reformers. (2) If we may judge of a mans principles by his practise, we should then believe, that he himself holds Universal Justification, at least, within the bounds of his own Parish; for, as I am in∣formed, he makes no distinction at all in this behalf. I am ashamed to hear men to talk of Reformation, who tread Antipodes to it; especially, when they have liberty to follow the dictates of their Consciences. But (3) I had thought he had known, that de occultis non judicat ecclesia; and that Election and Justification, are not
the rule of admitting persons into Church Communion, but their found Profession, and suitable Conversation. A Reprobate, or un∣justified person, may lawfully be admitted into, and an Elect per∣son may as lawfully be excluded out of a Church. I dare not say, That the excommunicated person at Corinth, and others under that censure, were not justified: The evidence we have of mens Justification, is but the judgement of rational charity, and not of infallibility. But enough of this, I shall return again to his Brother B. W. who I suppose will not own such irrational conse∣quences. §. 11. The other part of his contradiction, is, [That Faith can∣not evidence Justification Syllogistically; to wit, By the dis∣course of Conscience after this, or the like manner, He that believeth, is justified, but I believe, Ergo, I am justified. Now (says Mr. W. magisterially enough) I affirm, that it is impossible for a man, by Faith, to evidence syllogistically, that he is justified before Faith.] Though I honor him highly, I cannot rest satisfi∣ed with his ; but, what Reason doth he bring for his confident affirmation? [1. Because there cannot be found a me∣dium before Faith it self.] Ans. Nor is it needful there should. (1) It is sufficient, that Faith itself is the medium; as thus, He that believeth, was justified before Faith; but I do believe, Ergo. The Major is proved, because his sins were laid on Christ, and thereby non-imputed to him. (2) To imagine any other medium before Faith, is frivolous; for that were to require, that Faith should evidence before Faith had a being. (3) Why may not Faith be a medium to evidence our Justification before Faith, as well as our Election before Faith? Seeing the same word which af∣firms, That all Believers were elected before the Foundations of the World, affirms also, That the Elect without exception are discharged, and acquitted of their sins, Rom. 8.33. Shall we rea∣son thus, Our Election cannot be evidenced before Faith. Ergo, We were not elected before Faith? Mr. Woodbridges Arguing makes as much against evidencing Election before Faith, as against the evidencing of our Justification before Faith: [Because there is no sort of persons, of whom ELECTION can be affirmed universally, but onely such as do believe; seeing all the world is distributed into Believers, and unbelievers; but E∣LECTION
cannot be affirmed of unbelievers universally.] It proves indeed, That neither Election, nor Justification, are evi∣dent to us, before we believe; it doth not prove, That by Faith we cannot evidence syllogistically, that we were both elected and justified, before we did believe. As for that mad Syllogism (as he calls it) which follows; All unbelievers are justified, but I am an unbeliever, Ergo. It is the off-spring of his own brain, hatcht on purpose to make the matter ridiculous: But we must excuse the luxuriousness of his wit, seeing Nullum est magnum ingenium sine mixtura insaniae. His other Syllogism, which he hath framed, to evi∣dence Justification by Election, as thus, All the Elect are justified. But I am elected; Ergo: was framed in the same mould. A meer man of clouts, which he himself created, to shew his valor in beat∣ing of him. We do not teach men to evidence Justification by E∣lection, but both Election and Justification by their Faith, pro∣ceeding from the Effect to the Cause, as we needs must, when the Effect is more evident then the Cause. Though I like not the Ar∣gument, yet by his leave, the Major is so far from being utterly false, that it is justified by the express Testimony of the Apostle, Rom. 8.33. But this is besides the purpose. That miserable circle into which he pretends the poor, restless, doubting soul is conjured by our Doctrine, is but a vertigo, and whimsie in his own Pericrany. We do neither bid men evidence their Justification by their Electi∣on, nor their Election by their Justification; but both Election, and Justification, by a stedfast adherence and reliance upon Jesus Christ; and from thence, to reason out our particular interest in these Blessed Priviledges, as we do the Being of Causes, by the proper Effects which flow from them. §. 12. His next Argument against Faiths evidencing Justifica∣tion syllogistically, if it be put into the scale of an impartial Judge∣ment, will appear as light as the former. It runs thus, [If we are said to be justified by Faith, because Faith doth evidence Justi∣fication syllogistically, then we may be said to be justified by Sence and Reason, as well as by Faith, which is absurd.] This Con∣sequence indeed is very absurd; for the conclusion is of Faith, and so adjudged by the Schools, if the Major be of Faith; else this conclusion (I shall rise again from the dead,) were not of Faith, because it is inferred, partly by Sence and Reason, as thus, All
men shall rise again, I am a man; Ergo, I shall rise again. Here the Major onely is of Faith, the Minor is of Sence; and yet the Conclusion is an act of Faith, and not of Sence. So in this Syllo∣gism, He that believes, is justified; But I do believe, Ergo, I am justified. Though the Assumption be an act of Sence, or spiritual Experience, yet the Conclusion is an act of Faith, because the Major is of Faith: For though in both these Deductions, Sence and Reason are made use of, yet they are but subfervient In∣struments, and not the Authors of the Conclusion. §. 13. Mr. W. hath added a third Argument, to prove, That Justification by Faith▪ is not meerly a Justification in our Consci∣ences, which, I question not, will prove as unsuccessful as the rest. But, by the way, I cannot chuse but take notice, that his spirit of contradiction is somewhat allayed: For hitherto he hath contend∣ed, That Justification by Faith, is not in any sence, a Justification in Conscience; now he tells us, it is not meerly a Justification in Conscience; and if this will satisfie him, it is like we shall agree; for, before we have shewn, that when Faith is objectively taken, Justification by Faith is Justification by Christ, and in the sight of God, and not onely in the Conscience. And therefore his suggesti∣on in the Minor Proposition, That we interpret the phrase of Ju∣stification by Faith, meerly of Justification in Conscience, is false and groundless. But let us weigh the force of his Argument a little more distinctly; the sum of it then, is this, Justification by Faith is not Justification in our Consciences; for then we should be concurrent Causes with God, in the formal act of our Justifica∣tion: The formal act of pronouncing us just, must be attributed unto us, which the Scripture attributes unto God alone, making us but passive therein, Rom. 8.33. & 4.6, 8. To which I an∣swer, That the pronouncing of us just, is not the formal act of Justification, but the imputing of Righteousness, and the non-imputing of sin, which is the act of God alone; whereas the pro∣nouncing of us just and righteous, is in Scripture attributed to others besides God, and yet no robbery is done to God: As for instance, the Minister of Christ pronounceth the Word of Grace, and For∣giveness, and therefore is said to remit and forgive sin, Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted, Joh. 20.23. Is he therefore joyned with God in the formal act of Justification? Yet all Protestants
grant him the office of pronouncing Remission, though they deny him the power of giving Real Remission, which would make him arrogate that, which is peculiar unto God: So, though we say, That Faith doth declare and reveal to our Consciences, the sen∣tence of Absolution; yet we do not thereby derogate from God, or attribute that to Faith, which belongs to God. We grant, that, as to our Justification in the sight of God, (which is properly Justification) we are meerly Passive, we contribute nothing at all, either Physically, or Morally, by way of Merit or Motive, That God should account us righteous, and not impute to us our sins. This work was done without us, and for us, by Christ with his Father See Heilder. on 51. Psal. Lect. 128. p. 604.; it hath no other cause, but the Grace of God, and the Merit of Christ. He, and he alone, purged, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, Revel. 1.5. Heb 1.3. Now in regard of our Passiveness in this act of our Justification, we say, That Faith hath no hand at all in procuring, obtaining, and instating us in this Grace; for if we did any thing, though never so little, in order to this end, we were not Passive, but Active: Yet we say, That as this gracious sentence of our Justification, is revealed and terminated in our own Consciences, so Faith hath an Instrumental efficacy; we are therein  agents with God, 2 Cor. 6.1. And the Spirit  beareth witness with our spirits, Rom. 8.16. And therefore, though we are no where exhorted to justifie, or to make our selves righteous in the sight of God; yet we are oftentimes bid to grow in Faith, and to press forward to more assurance in believing our peace, and reconciliation with God, 2 Pet. 1.5. & 3.18. Rom. 5.1. Pacem babea∣mus. Vulg. & Syr. §. 14. This Concession of Mr. W. [That a man is wholly Passive in his Justification,] gave occasion, to the first Argument I offered to his consideration, it being, as I conceive, a flat contra∣diction to the cheif scope, and intendment of his Sermon, which was to derive to Faith, at least, a Federal or Moral causality in our Justification. I am sorry I should have so much cause to complain of his injurious dealing, not onely in that unworthy language he is pleased to give me, but in casting my Argument into another form, then that, wherein I proposed it. In his report it runs thus [If we were altogether Passive in being justified, then we are justified before we believe.] In which form, I confess it is obnoxi∣ous
to more exceptions then one; for besides the Grammatical part, which is very harsh, the Logical consequence may be justly blamed: Though the consequent be true, yet it is not a true conse∣quence, it is not rightly inferred from the Antecedent: Though we are Passive in our Justification, yet it doth not follow from thence, That we were justified before we believed. A man is Passive in the first act of his Conversion, yet it were absurd to conclude; therefore a man was converted before he had a Being, or ever heard of the Gospel. But the Argument, as I proposed it, was as followeth. If we are wholly passive in our Justification, then our Faith doth not concur to the obtaining of it, or we are not justified by the act of Faith in the sight of God. But (according to you) we are wholly Passive in our Justification, Ergo, Faith doth not concur unto our Justification, or we are not justified by the act of Faith. His Answer hereunto I could not very well heed, by reason of my distance from him, and the rudeness of some people (who do go for Professors) that stood about me; but as I conceived, it was to this effect, That Faith doth necessarily concur to the Application of this Priviledge; whereunto I replied, But the Application of this Benefit is not Justification; the one being Gods act, the other ours. His Answer in Print, we are sure, is au∣thentick; let us see therefore, how well he hath now quitted him∣self from the guilt of this contradiction. 1. He calls the Argument A childish Exception, a peece of witchery, and wonders it should proceed out of my mouth. I must confess, I cannot but wonder to hear such language from a civil man, much more from a Mini∣ster, and more especially from one, who hath sometimes owed me more respect; let the prudent judge, whether there be any ground for this hideous clamor. 2. He shapes some kinde of an∣swer to the Sequel, That though Faith be a formal, vital act of the soul in genere Physico; yet the use of it in Justification, is but to qualifie us passively, that we may be morally capable of being justified by God. And again, Faith is required on our part; which though Physically it be an act, yet Morally it is but a Pas∣sive condition, by which we are made capable of being justified, according to the Order and Constitution of God. Now here 1. I shall desire the Reader to observe how much Mr. W. is be∣holding to a Popish Tenent (opposed by all our Protestant
Writers) to support his cause, which is, That Faith goes before Justification, to dispose us for it Concil. Trid. ess. 6. cn. 6. &c . Bellar. de just.  1, c. 12. &c., &c. Bellarmine Chamier Panst. . 3. l 22. c. 8. Ames Bel. ener. . 4. l. 5. c. 4. undertakes to prove that Faith doth not justifie alone; because there are other things, to wit, fear, hope, love, penitency, a desire of the Sacra∣ments, and a purpose of amendment of life: all which (sayes the Jesuite) doe prepare and dispose a man for Justification as well as Faith. Against whom all our Protestant Divines Willet contr. 19. . 991. Down. of Justif. l. 6. c. 7 . 10. Pemble ind. fid. c. 4. which my lit∣tle Library hath obtained, do unanimously affirme, That Faith doth not dispose, or prepare us for Justfication; Now were they all bewitched as well as we, who would not subscribe to this Popish Dictate? 2. I shall leave it to the Reader to judge, whe∣ther my Argument, or his Answer doth deserve this censure, when he hath weighed the reasons I shall give, That Faith cannot be said to Justifie by way of disposition, or as a passive condi∣tion, morally disposing us for Justification. CHAP. IX. That Faith doth not justifie, as a condition required on our part to qualifie us for Justification. IN regard that the main Point in difference between me and Mr. W. lyes at the bottom of this Answer, I shall make it ap∣pear we are not said to be Justified by Faith in a Scripture sence, because Faith is required of us as a passive condition, to qualifie us for justification in the sight of God. §. 1. That Interpretation of the phrase, which gives no more to Faith in the businesse of our Justification, then to other works of sanctification, cannot be true; The reason is, because the Scrip∣ture doth peculiarly attribute our Justification unto Faith, and in a way of opposition to other works of sanctification, Rom. 3.28. Gal. 2.16.3.11. But to interpret justification by faith meerly thus, That Faith is a condition to qulifie us for Justification, gives no more to Faith then to other works of sanctification, as to repentance, charity, and all other duties of new obedience; which Mr. W. and others of the same affirmation, make to be necessary antecedent conditions of Justification. Mr. B. includes all works
of obedience to evangelical precepts, in the definition of Faith Thes. 70., in which sene, I presume, no Papist will deny that we are justified by Faih alone, taking it as he doth, for fides formata, or faith ani∣mated with charity and other good works. And therefore, Bellarm. De Justif. l. 1 c. 17. disputing against Justification by Faith alone, sayes, that if wee could be perswaded, that Faith doth justifie, impetrando, prome∣rendo, & suo modo inchoando Justificationem (which is gran∣ted him, if Faith be an antecedent, federal condition, disposing us for it) then we would never deny that love, fear, hope, &c. did justifie as well as Faith. Dr. Hammond Pract. Cat. p. 28, 30. sayes expressely, That neither Paul nor James doe exclude or separate faithfull acti∣ons, or the acts of faith from Faith, or the condition of Ju∣stification, but absolutely require them as the onely things by which we are justified: Which in another place Vindic. Cat. p. 8. he goes about to prove by this argument, That without which we are not justi∣fied, and by which, joyned with Faith we are justified, is not by the Apostle excluded or separated from Faith, or the con∣dition of our Justification; but required together with Faith as the only things, by which, as by a condition, a man is justified. But without acts of Faith, or faithfull actions, we are not ju∣stified, and by them wee are justified, and not by Faith onely. Therefore faithfull actions, or acts of Faith, are not by the Apo∣stle excluded or separated from Faith, or the condition of our Justification; but required together with Faith, as the onely things, by which, as by a condition, a man is justified. It is evident that he, and other abetters to this notion, attribute no more to Faith in our Justification then to other works of sanctification, Now this was witnessed against, as an unsound opinion, a pernicious error, and utterly repugnant to the sacred Scriptures, &c. See Testim. to the truth &c. p 4 & 15. by Mr. Cranford amongst the London Subscribers, Decemb. 14. 1647, and by Mr. W. himselfe (if I mistake not) amongst the Subscribers in other Counties. It seems (by Mr. W.) they were bewitched when they gave their hands unto that Testimony. §. 2. That Interpretation of this phrase, which gives no more to Faith, then to workes of Nature, I meane such as may be found in naturall and unregenerate men, is not true: The Reason is, because a man may have such works, and yet not be ju∣stified. But to interpret Justification by Faith, that Faith is a ne∣cessary
antecedent condition of our Justification, gives no more to Faith then to workes of Nature, as to sight of sin, legall sorrow, &c. which have been found in naturall, and unregenerate men, as in Cain, Saul, Judas, &c. I presume Mr. W. will say that these are necessary antecedent conditions in every one that is justified; for if these be conditions disposing us to Faith, and Faith a condition disposing us to Justification; then are they also conditions dispo∣sing us to Justification, for causae causae, est causa causati, if these legall works are conditions of Faith, they must be (accor∣ding to Mr. Woodbridges Tenet) conditions of Justification, and consequently they are in eodem genere causae with Faith it selfe, quod erat demonstrandum. §. 3. 3 That by which we are justified, is the proper, efficient, meritorious cause of our Justification; but Faith considered as a meer passive condition, is not in the sence of our adversa∣ries a proper, efficient, meritorious cause of Justification; there∣fore wee are not said to bee justified by Faith as a passive condition, or qualification required to make us capable of Justification. The assumption is granted by our opponents, at least verbo tenus, who doe therefore call it a meer sine qua non (which Logicians make to be causa ociosa & nihil efficiens Philip. apud eckern. Log. p. 152.) and a passive condition to exclude it from all manner of causality in producing the effect; though for my own part, I look upon con∣ditions in contracts and covenants, as proper, efficient, meritori∣ous causes of the things covenanted, which do produce their effects, though not by their innate worth, yet by vertue of the compact and agreement made between the parties covenanting. But of this we shal have occasion to speak more by and by: It remains only that I should clear the major, that That by which we are justified is the proper▪ efficient, meritorious cause of our Justification; which ap∣pears 1. By the use of these Propositions, by, and through, in ordinary speech, which note that the thing to which they are attributed is either a meritorious, or instrumentall cause of the effect that fol∣lows; as when we say a Souldier was raised by his valor, it im∣ports, that his valor was the meritorious cause of his preferment; and when we say a Tradesman lives by his Trade, our meaning is, that his Trade is the means or instrument by which he gets his liv∣ing: So here in the case before us, when it is said a man is justified by Faith, it implyes, that Faith is either the meritorious, or in∣strumentall
cause of his Justification; as if it be taken objectively, for Christ and his merits, it is the meritorious cause of our Justi∣fication in foro dei; or if it be taken properly for the act of be∣lieving, it is the instrumental cause of our Justification in foro con∣scientiae. 2. From the contrary phrase, as when the Apostle denies that a man is justified by Works, and by the Law, without doubt his intent was to exclude Works from any causal influx into our Justification. Now that which he denies to Works, he as∣cribes to Faith, and therefore Justification by Faith, implies that Faith in his sense, hath a true causality, or proper efficiency in our Justification. 3 From other parallel phrases in holy Scripture, where we are said to be redeemed, justified, and saved, per Chri∣stum, per sanguinem, per mortem, per vulnera. All which doe signifie, That Christ, and his sufferings, are the true, proper, and me∣ritorious cause of these benefits; and so it must bee understood, when wee are said to be Justified by Faith; and not that Faith is but a sine qua non, or meer cypher in our Justification: Faith ob∣jectively taken, is a proper meritorious cause of our Justification. §. 4. 4 I shall make use of my adversaries weapon Nostra contra∣nos dimicat ar∣matura, Jer. ad. Johan. Hieros. of that very medium which Mr. W. last alledged page 8. That interpre∣tation of the phrase which makes us at least concurrent causes with God and Christ in the formall act of our Justification, is not true, because our Justification in respect of efficiency, is wholly attributed unto them, Rom. 8.33.4.6.8.3, 24. The internal moving cause, was his owne grace; and the onely externall procuring cause is the death of Christ; there is no other efficient cause besides these: We can be no more said to justifie our selves, then that we created our selves. But to make Faith a condition morally disposing us to Justification, maks us at least concurrent causes with God and Christ in our Justification. 1. We should not be justified freely by his grace, if any con∣dition were required of us in order to our Justification for a condi∣tion (as Mr. Walker observes well) whensoever it is performed, makes the thing covenanted a due debt, which the promiser is bound to give, and then as he infers, Justification should not be of grace, but of debt, contrary to the Apostle, in Rom. 3. and 4. 2. If Faith were a condition morally disposing us for Justificati∣on, we should then be concurrent causes with the merits of Christ
in procuring our Justification; for the merits of Christ are not a physical, but a moral cause, which obtain their effect, by vertue of that Covenant which was made between him, and the Father; now by ascribing unto Faith a morall, causall influx in our Justifi∣cation, we doe clearly put it in eodem genere causae with the blood of Christ, which I hope Mr. W. will better consider of, before he engageth too far in Mr. Baxters cause. §. 5. That interpretation of this phrase which makes Works going before Justification, not onely not sinful, but acceptable to God, and preparatory to the grace of Justification, without con∣troversie is not according to the minde of the holy Ghost; For as much as the Scripture frequently declares, that no mans Works are acceptable to God before his person is accepted, and justified; the Tree must be good, or else the fruit cannot be good, Gen. 4.4. Inprimis ad A∣bel & postca ad munera prop∣ter cum; Deus non homines propter munera, sed munera prop∣ter homines ac∣ceptat. Paris cap. de meritis. Ideo dicitur 1 R. 8.52. oculi sunt aerti ad preces servi, quia prius nos intuctur justifi∣catos in Christo, quam preces ex∣audit. See Ains. not: on Lev. 3.5. Luke 6.43, 44. Mat. 12.33. Joh. 15.5. Nihil viriditatis habet ramus boni operis, nisi a radice processit, qui est Christus. That of Aug. is sufficiently known, Opera non precedunt justificandum, sed sequuntur justi∣ficatum; the old orthodox doctrine taught in these Churches here in EnglandArt. 13. & Rogers thereupon. was, that works before Justification are not pleasing unto God, neither doe they make men meet (i do not qualifie, or morally dispose them) to receive grace; and we doubt not, but they have the nature of sin. I could muster up a legion of or∣thodox Writers to defend this Tenent, that no qualification, or act of ours before Justification doth prepare or dispose us for Justifi∣cation. Nay the Councel of Trent Nihil eorum quae justificationem precedunt, sive fides, sive opera, ipsam justificationis gratiam promeretur. Concil. Trident. Ses. 6. Can. 8. confesseth, that none of those things which precede Justification, whether it be Faith, or other Works, doe obtain the grace of Justification. But to interpret Justification by Faith, that Faith is a condition which doth qua∣lifie us for Justification, necessarily supposeth a Work, or Works before Justification, which have not the nature of sin, but are ac∣ceptable to God, and preparatory to grace, viz. the grace of Justi∣fication, which is most properly called Grace. See Down of Just. l. 3. c. 1. & 2. §. 6. That interpretation of any phrase of Scripture which in∣volves a contradiction, is not to be admitted; but to say Faith is a passive condition that doth morally qualifie us for Justification, im∣plies
a contradiction; Ergo, The proposition is undeniable, and the Assumption is to me as cleare; To be both active and passive in re∣ference to the same effect, is a flat contradiction. Now that is active which is effective Efficiens est unde pendet  effectus. which contributes an efficacy whether more or lesse to the production of the effect. A condition, though in the Logical notion of it, it hath not the least efficiency; and there∣fore Aristotle never reckoned this sine qua non, in the number of causes, yet in the use of the Jurists (as we are now speaking of it) it is a morall efficient cause, which is effective of that which is pro∣mised upon condition, Chamier hath well observed Tom. 3. l. P 5. c. 5. S. 2. That omnis conditio antecedens est effectiva, he that performes the least condition imaginable for having of any benefit, is active and passive in obtaining of it. We will look after no other instance then that which Mr. W. hath set before us: An offender against our Lawes that is saved by his Clergy, or by reading his Neck-verse, he is not passive, but active in saving of his life, he may properly be said to have saved himselfe, his reading being not onely a physicall act, but a morall efficient cause, which makes that favourable law to take effect. To say he is passive, because he made not the Law, nor sits as Judge on the Bench to absolve himselfe, is but a shift to blinde the eyes of the simple, seeing that when more causes then one concur to an effect, the effect may be denominated from the lowest, that which doth least is an active efficient cause; nay in this case the Malefactor doth more in saving of his life, then either the Law or Judge; for though pro forma, he acknowledgeth the grace of the State, and the courtesie of the Judge unto him: yet as the Welch-man that was bid to cry God blesse the King, and the Judge, cryed, God blesse her father and mother who taught her to read, intimated he was more beholding to his reading then to the courtesie of the Judge, for else the Judge would have been severe enough, his mercy would have deserved but little thanks. I must needs tell my Old Friend, Non loquitur ut Clericus. We say such a man is Passive in saving his life, who is not required to read or perferm any other condition, but receives a pardon of meer Grace: In like manner he is Passive in his Justification, that doth nothing at all towards the procuring of i; he that performs the least condition in order thereunto▪ is not onely Physically, but Mo∣rally active in obtaining this priviledge. For though he did not
make the Law, by, and according to which he is justified; nor pronounce the sentence of Absolution upon himself; yet he hath a subordinate, or less principal efficiency in producing the effect; nay, a learned man Mr. Kendal against Good∣win, cap. 4▪ 141. (whom I hope Mr. W. will not think more worthy to be derided, then disputed with) tells us, That he that performs conditions for Justification, doth more to his Justifi∣cation, then God, who made onely a conditional grant, not∣withstanding which, he might have perished; but he by per∣forming the condition, makes the grant to be absolute: And truly (sayes the same Author) whosoever makes Faith the con∣dition of the New Covenant, in such a sense as perfect Obedi∣ence was the condition of the Old, cannot avoid it; but that man is justified chiefly by himself, and his own acts; not so much by Gods Grace in imputing Christs Righteousness, but more by his own Faith, which is his own act, though of Gods work. God by making his supposed gracious conditional promise, doth not justifie any man Ib. p. 140., for that makes no difference at all amongst per∣sons: It remains therefore, that man must be said to justifie him∣self; for where there is a promise of a Reward made to all, upon condition of performing such a service, he that obtains the reward, gets it by his own service; without which, the promise would have brought him never a whit the nearer to the Reward. Thus a man ju∣stifies himself by believing, more a great deal, then God justifies him by his promulgation of the conditional promise, which would have left him in his old condition, had not he better provided for himself by believing, then God by promising: as in the old Covenant, it was not Gods threat that brought death upon the world, just so in the new (if it be a conditional promise) it is not the promise that justi∣fies a believer, but the believer himself. §. 7. Mr. W. may as well call the Blood of Christ a Passive condition in our Justification, because it did not make the Law, nor pronounce the sentence of Absolution; let the indifferent Reader consider, whether this be not (I will not say a childish, but) an impertinent answer, which draws his former Concession quite aside from the matter now under debate; for the question is not, whether man did concur in making the Law and Rule of his Justification; but whether he hath any causal influx in pro∣ducing the effect; or whether before Justification, he can, or doth
perform any condition, to which God hath infallibly promised this Grace? Which (if granted) will conclude, That he is not Passive, but Active in his Justification; when our Protestant Di∣vines say, That a man is Passive in his first Conversion: Their meaning is, That he can perform no condition at all, to which God hath inseparably annexed the Grace of Conversion: So Cameron Cam. Tom. 3 p 569. expresseth their sense and meaning, Vocatio nullam poscit in ob∣jecto conditionem; For though a man before conversion do perform many natural acts, which have a remote tendency to this effect, as Hearing, Reading, Meditating, &c. yet for all we say, He is Pas∣sive therein, because these are not such conditions, to which God hath promised saving Grace: So though a man doth never so many natural acts, or duties, whereunto God hath not immediately promised this priviledge, he is but Passive for all in his Justifica∣tion; but if he do perform any condition, to which Justification is promised, then he is active, and consequently may be said to justifie himself. §. 8. But says Mr. W. We do no more justifie our selves, then we do glorifie our selves, it is God alone doth both, and we are Passive in both, Pag 8. And again, It is God that glorifies us, and not we our selves; yet surely God doth not glorifie us be∣fore we believe, Pag. 10. First, I shall readily grant him, that we do neither justifie, nor glorifie our selves; seeing that we obtain neither of these benefits by our own works: From the very beginning, to the end of our Salvation, nothing is primarily or causally Active, but Free-grace Reynolds on Hos. 14. Serm. 4. sect. 18.; all that we receive from God is gift, and not debt: Glory it self is not wages, but Grace. For though it be called The recompence of Reward, Heb. 11.27. yet that is not to be understood in a proper sense, as when the Reward is for the Work, which may be two ways. First, When the work is proportionable to the wages, as when a Laborer receives a shilling for a days work, here the work doth deserve the wages, because the work doth him that payes the wages as much good, as the wages doth the worker. Now surely, no reward can come from the Creator to the Crea∣ture in this way, bcause no man can do any work that is profit∣able unto God, Psal. 16.2. Job 22.3. & 35.8. Rom. 11 35. The very Papists will not say, that Glory is a reward in this sense.
Works (saith Bishop Gardner Answer to G. oy, fol. 20. b.) do not deserve Salvation, as a Workman deserveth his wages for his labor. Secondly, When the work is not answerable to the wages, but yet the wages is due by promise upon the performance of it; as when a poor man hath twenty shillings for an hours labor, though the work be not worth it, yet is it a due debt, and he may challenge it as such, be∣cause it was promised him: In this sense, neither is Glory a Reward; for under the New Covenant, Blessedness is not to him that worketh, but to him that worketh not, Rom. 4.5. We are saved by grace, and not by works, Tit. 3.5. Eph. 2.5, 8. And saith the Apostle, If by grace, then it is no more of works, Rom. 1.6. But when Glory is called a Reward, we are to understand it improperly, as when a thing is called a Reward onely by way of Analogy and Resemblance, because it comes after, and in the place of the work; as the nights rest may be called the Reward of the days labor, because it succeeds it. Thus is that of the Apostle to be taken▪ 2 Thes. 1.7. And thus the Heir inheriting his Fathers Lands, hath a Recompence or Reward of all the labor and service he hath done for his Father; although he did not his service to that end, neither doth the enjoyment of that inheritance hang upon that condition. In this sense, Eternal Lfe and Glory may be called the Reward of our Works, because it is a consequent of them; not that our works have any influence, either Physical or Moral to obtain it: All things being given us, in, and for Christ alone, Rom. 8.32. Eph. 1.3. And therefore it is called by the Apostle A reward of Inheri∣tance, Col. 3.24. Which comes to us not by working, but by in∣heritance, as we are the heirs of God, and joynt heirs with Christ. If Glory were a Reward in a proper sense, we might properly be said to save and glorifie our selves, because we concurred to the Production of this effect; but Mr. W. sayes well, It is God that glorifies us; Eternal Life is called his gift in opposition to wages, Rom. 6.23. 2 Tim. 4.8. It is solely the effect of Gods grace, and Christs purchase; though God doth glorifie us after working, yt not for any of those works which we have wrought, though by the help and assistance of his own Spirit. §. 9. But yet secondly, Though God doth not glorifie us before we believe, yet it will not follow, that he doth not justifie us be∣fore we believe. For first, if we take Justification pro volitione
Dei, for the Will of God not to punish, he cannot but know, there is not the same reason of an immanent act of God, which is Eternal, and of a transient act which is in time; or secondly, if we take it pro re volita, as it is the fruit and effect of Christs death, it will not follow, that because we have not Glorification before believing, we have not Justification: For though all the Blessings of the Covenant are given us freely, and not upon con∣ditions performed by us, yet God hath his order and method in bestowing of them: He first gives us Grace imputed, then Grace inherent, and afterwards Eternal Glory. And thus some Benefits of the Covenant are by some (though improperly) made conditi∣ons of the rest, because they are first enjoyed. §. 10. That which Mr. W. addes, Pag. 10. and wisheth may be seriously considered, hath been considered already, more then once. If (saith he) Justification by Faith, must be understood of Justification in our Consciences, then is not the word Justifi∣cation taken properly for a Justification before God in all the Scriptures; from the beginning to the end, we read of no Justi∣fication in Scripture, but by Faith or Works. Mr. E. (sayes he) when the Scripture speaks of Justification by Works, under∣stands it of Justification before men; when it speaks of Justifi∣cation by Faith, he understands it of Justification in our Con∣sciences: Now neither of these is Justification in the sight of God, and verily neither of them of much worth in the Apostles judgement, 1 Cor. 4.3. The Antinomians may read out their eyes, before they produce us one Text, &c.] Had he reported my Judgement truly, there had been no room for this Exception. I have said indeed (and by all that Mr. W. hath said against it, I see no reason to change my minde) that when the Scripture attributeth our Justification to Works (as in the Epistle of James) it is to be understood of our Justification before men; when it ascribes it to Faith, Faith is taken either properly, or metonymically; if it be taken properly for the act of Believing, then it is to be understood of our Justification before God, terminated in our Consciences, or as it is revealed and evidenced, to our selves. Justification in Con∣science, is Justification before God, as an Acquittance in the heart of the Creditor, and in a Paper is one and the same; this mani∣fested, and the other secret. He that is justified in his Conscience, is
justified before God; and Faith apprehends that, which doth not onely justifie us in our Consciences but before God: Or if Faith be taken metonymically for its object, then Justification by Faith is Justification before God; for it is Justification by the Merits of Christ, to whom alone, without works, or conditions performed by us, the Holy Ghost ascribes our Justification in the sight of God; Rom. 3.24. Ephes. 1.7. and in many other such places. §. 11. But (says Mr. W.) Justification before men, and in our Consciences, are neither of them of much worth in the Apostles Judgement, 1 Cor. 4 3.] 1. I wish that Justification with men, were of less account with Mr. W. He best knows, whether Con∣science of vindicating the truth, or popular affectation, put him up∣on this engagement. I am sure, the former would not have temp∣ted him to those incivilities he hath offered unto me and others, whom (I doubt not) but God will know by other names, then he is pleased to cast upon us. If the later, or a desire of ingratiating himself with some of my Opposers, did spur him forward, though he hath Justification before men (which yet I assure him is not Universal, no not amongst many that do wish him well) I dare say, he is not justified in the Court of Conscience, and if our heart, &c. 1 Joh. 3.20. 2. But doth the Apostle account neither of these Justi∣fications much worth? Let Mr. W. judge in what account he had Justification before men, by what he sayes, 2 Cor. 1.12. 1 Cor. 9.15. And Justification in Conscience, by those blessed Effects he ascribes unto it, Rom. 5.1, 23. see 1 John. 3.21. 3. It is true, 1 Cor. 43. he sayes, That he cares not to be judged of mans judgement, or of mans day Vd. Vorst. Para. &  dat. Annot.. The meaning is, That he did not regard the sinister Judgements and Censures of carnal Christians, who praise and dispraise upon light and trivial inducements, like them Chap. 1. v. 12. Yea, (sayes he) I judge not my self, q. d. I am not solicitous, nor do I enter into consideration what degree of honor or esteem I am worthy of, amongst, or above my fellows. Now, what is this to the purpose? What is this to the Justifica∣tion of his person in the Court of Conscience by Faith, or the Ju∣stification of his Faith and Sincerity towards men by Works? I must needs say (with a very worthy Divine Mr. Owen a∣gainst Baxter,p 1.) That no small portion of favor consists in a Sence and Knowledge of the kindness of God in its actings, terminated upon the Conscience; however Mr W. is pleased to value it.
§. 12. In his next Passage he gives us a Youthful Frolick, to shew his gallantry, like Mr. Baxters challenge Aphor. p. 93., Let the Antino∣mians shew one Scripture which speaks of Justification from E∣ternity. The Antinomians (saith he, the Anti-Papists, and Anti-Arminians, he means) may read their eyes out, before they produce us one Text for any other Justification in Scripture, which is not by Faith, or Works. (1) Though the Antinomians are so blinde, that they cannot finde one Text for this purpose, yet he himself is such a quick-sighted Linceus, that he hath discover∣ed more then one: For Pag. 23. he tells us of a threefold Justi∣fication, and yet neither of them is by Faith or Works. I hope he hath not read out his eyes to finde them out. (2) In what sence the Scripture asserts Justification before Faith or Works, hath been shewn before; but (3) (if I may be so bold) I would ask how long the Anti-Gospellers may read before they produce one plain Text for any of those Dictates, they would thrust upon us, That Justification doth in no sence precede the act of Faith; that Christ purchased onely a conditional, not an absolute Justifica∣tion for Gods Elect; that our Evangelical Righteousness by which we are justified is in our selves; that the tenor of the New Covenant is, If thou believe, &c. That God hath made a Covenant with Christ, that none should have any benefit by his death, till they do believe. Cum multis aliis quae nunc, &c. §. 13. Mr. W. thinks he hath sufficiently cleared the coast of this Exception [That Faith in a proper sence is said to justifie, in respect of its evidencing property, or because it declares and applies to our Consciences, that perfect Justification which we have in Christ.] But by his leave, it is like to be a bone for him to pick, till the Index Expurgatorius hath rased out those Scriptures which ascribe our Justification unto Christ alone. For my own part, I see no such cause he hath to triumph, unless it be in the de∣jection of those feeble consequences, which he himself hath devised to make our Doctrine odious, which we have shewn before, are as remote from our principles, as the East is from the West. I con∣fess, neither he, nor I, are competent Judges in our own cause; let the Godly Reader judge between us, and hold fast that which comes nearest to the Analogy of Faith. I shall now address my self to san the force of those Arguments he hath brought to prove;
That the Elect are not justified in the sight of God before they be∣lieve. CHAP. X. Wherein Mr. Woodbridges first Argument against Justification before Faith, taken from the Nature of Justification, is answered. HIs first Argument is drawn from the Nature of Justification, Which (sayes he) is the absolution of a sinner from con∣demnation, by that gracious sentence and signal promise in the Gospel. [He that believes, shall not enter into condemnation.] The Argument he hath cast into this frame, If there be no act of grace declared and published in the Word, which may be a legal discharge of the sinner, while he is in unbelief, then no unbe∣lieving sinner is justified: But there is no act of grace, declared and published in the Word, which is a legal discharge of the sinner, whilest he remains in unbelief, Ergo. Whereunto I an∣swer, 1. That his Assumption is false; for the Gospel or New Covenant is a published or declared discharge of all the Elect. The sum of which is, That God hath transacted all their sins up∣on Jesus Christ, and that Christ by that offering of his hath made a full and perfect atonement for them; whereby the whole spiritual Israel, are really made clean from all their sins in the sight of God, as of old, carnal Israel were Typically clean, upon the atonement made by the High Priest, Levit. 16.30. Now though they can∣not plead it before they believe; yet is it a real discharge, because it frees them from condemnation: As a Pardon granted by a Prince, is a legal discharge, though the Malefactor doth not know of it. 2. The Sequel or Consequence of the Major stands upon a sandy bottom, a postulatum that will not be granted, to wit, That Justification is the discharge of a sinner, by a published, declared act. We have shewed before, That Justification consists in the non-imputation of sin, and the imputation of Righteousness, which is
an act of the Minde, or Will of God. It is a gross non sequitur, God doth not declare his non-imputing of sin to his Elect, before they believe, Ergo He doth account and esteem them sinners. The Question is not, whether this gracious sentence of Absolution, be declared; but whether it be not in the Brest of God, before it be declared? or, whether this immanent act of God doth not secure the sinner from condemnation? If so! then there is Justification, though there be no published, declared sentence. As Gods saying in his heart, That he would never drown the world any more, Gen. 8.21. did sufficiently secure the world from the danger of an other deluge, though he had never declared it; so Gods will not to punish, secures a person from condemnation, though this security be not declared. §. 2. They are but feeble proofs, wherewith he hath backed hs Assertion, That Justification is onely by the promise, as a declared discharge. We are not (says he, as if he sae in Pythagoras his Chair) to conceive of Justification, as an internal immanent act of God, resolving privately in his own Brest, not to prosecute his right against a sinner; but it must be some declared, promulged act, &c. But why are we not to conceive of it, as an internal, imma∣nent act? Instead of proofs he gives us Illustrations, which may pass in a Sermon, but are too weak for a dispute. As sin (saith he) is not imputed, where there is no Law, Rom. 5.13. So neither is Righteousness imputed without Law. Whereunto I answer, 1. Though men will not impute or charge sin upon themselves, where there is not a Law to convince them of it, For by the Law is the knowledge of sin, Rom. 3.20. & 7.9. Gal. 3.19. Yet it follows not, but God did impute sin to men, before there was any Law promulged, or before the sin was actually committed: For what is Gods hating of a person, but his imputing of sin, or his will to punish him for his sin? Now the Lord hated all that perish, ere ever the Law was given. The scope of the Scripture alleadged, Rom. 5.13. is not to shew when God begins to impute sin to a person, but that sin, in being, supposeth a Law; and consequently, That there was a Law, before the Law of Moses, else men could not have sinned, as it is confessed they did: As the Law it self had a being in the Minde of God, so the issues thereof were deter∣mined by him, before it was declared. 2. There is not the same
reason of our being sinners, and being righteous, seeing that sin is our act, but Righteousness is the gift of God. A man is not a sin∣ner, before he do commit sin, either by himself, or Representative, which necessarily supposeth a Law; For sin is the transgression of a Law, 1 Iohn 3.4. But a man may be righteous before he doth works of Righteousness, and consequently before any Law is given him to obey. Indeed, if we were made righteous by our own per∣sonal Inherent Righteousness, then our Justification would necessa∣rily require a Law; for as much as all our Righteousness consists in a conformity to the Law. But seeing we are justified by the im∣putation of anothers Righteousness, what need is there that a Law should first be given unto us. §. 3. Mr. W. goes on, [As our condemnation is no secret act, or resolution of God to condemn, but the very voice and sen∣tence of the Law [Cursed is he that sinneth;] (and therefore he whom God in his Eternal Decree, hath purposed to save, may yet for the present be under the sentence of condemnation; as the Ephesians, whom God had chosen to Eternal Life, Chap. 1.4. were yet sometimes the children of wrath, Chap. 2.3.) So on the contrary, our Justification must be some declared, promulged act, or sentence of God, which may stand good in Law, for the dis∣charge of the sinner against condemnation.] We say that con∣demnation (being taken, not for the Will of God to punish, or to inflict upon a person, the desert of his sin, but for the thing willed, or for the curse it self) it comes upon men by vertue of that Law, or Covenant which was made with the first Adam. So our Justi∣fication (being taken, not for the Internal Act of Gods will, not to punish, but for the benefit willed to us by that Internal Act, to wit, Our actual discharge from the Law) descends to us, by vertue of that Law or Covenant, which was made with the second Adam: He performing the terms of agreement between the Father, and himself, made the Law of Condemnation, to be of no force against us, Gal. 3.13. & 4.5. Which New Covenant, and not the Conditional Promise (as Mr. W. would have it) is called The Law of Faith, Rom. 3.27. And the Law of Righteousness, Ch. 9.31. It is called a Law, because it is the fixed and unalterable Sanction of the Great God; or else by way of Antithesis, or opposition to the Covenant of Works: The Law of Righteousness, it being
the onely means whereby men do attain to Righteousness, and are justified in the sight of God; and the Law of Faith, because it strips men of their own righteousness Diodat. on Rom. 3.27., to cloath them with Christs, and thereby takes from men all occasion of boasting in themselves; whereas, if men did attain to Righteousness by ver∣tue of this Conditional Promise, He that believes, shall be saved; they would have as much cause of boasting in themselves, as if they had performed the Law of Works. That saying of his, with which he closeth this Argument, is wide from truth, That every man is then condemned, or stands condemned in foro Dei, when the Law condemns him; for then all men living are condemned, seeing the Law condemns, or curseth every one that sins; and there is none that lives without sin. Either he must say,Gal. 3.10. Believers do not sin, and then Saint John will give him the lie, 1 Joh. 1.8. or else, That Believers are not justified; which is contrary to the Scrip∣ture last cited by himself, Joh 5.24. with a thousand more. In what sence the Elect Ephesians were called Children of wrath, will more fitly be explained in the next Chapter. §. 4. In the mean time we will adde a few Reasons against the main support of this Argument, That Justification is the discharge of a sinner, by a declared, published act; to wit, by that Signal, Conditional Promise, He that believes shall be saved. Which, when a man hath performed the condition, he may plead for his discharge. Against this Notion, I shall offer to the Readers serious consideration, these following Arguments. First, If Justi∣fication be not by works, then it is not by this or any other Condi∣tional Promise, which is a declared discharge onely to him that performs the condition, i. e. That worketh: But Justification is not by works Tit. 3.5. Rom. 4.5., which we have wrought, but an act of the freest grace and bounty, Col. 2.13. where the word  Verbum  ab ipsa gratia de∣duction, ut remis∣sionem gratuitam intelligamus ex parte nostra, nullo pretio à nobis numerato. Daven. in loc., which the Apostle useth to express the forgiveness of sin, ascribes it sole∣ly to the Grace of God, without Works or Conditions performed by us. §. 5. Secondly, If Justification be by that Signal Promise (He that believes, shall be saved,) then none were justified before that gracious sentence was published, which was not till our Saviours Ministery in the flesh; nor was there any sentence of Divine Re∣velation like it, which the people of God could plead for their
discharge from the Law, from the fall of Adam; until the publi∣cation of that subservient Covenant in Mount Sinai (which is the tenor of the Law of Works) the Lord never made any Condition∣al Promise, which they could plead for their discharge, and abso∣lution from sin; the promises to Adam, Noah, Abraham, were not conditional, but absolute. Now, if there were no Justificati∣on, till God had made some conditional promise, which men upon performing the condition, might plead as their legal discharge, I marvel into what Limbus▪ Mr. W. will thrust the Fathers of the Old Testament: For they that were not justified, were not saved. But the Scripture gives us more hope, shewing that they were sa∣ved by the same grace, as we are, Acts 15.11. God accepting them as righteous in Jesus Christ; who in respect of the vertue and efficacy of his death, is called The Lamb slain from the foun∣dations of the world, Revel. 13.8. For though this rich Grace were not revealed to them so clearly, as unto us, Eph. 3.5. 1 Pet. 1.12. Yet the Effects and Benefits thereof descended upon them unto Justification of life, no less then to the Faithful in the New Testament. The Argument in short is this. If the Fathers of the Old Testament were justified, who yet had not any such de∣clared discharge; then Justification is not by a declared dis∣charge; but the Fathers of the Old Testament were justified, &c. Ergo. §. 6. Thirdly, If Justification be onely by a declared discharge, then Elect Infants insensible of this Declaration, and unable to plead their discharge from any such promise, have no Justification, I hope Mr. W. is not such a durus pater infantum, as to exclude all those from Justification that die in their infancy, which he must necessarily do, if he makes Justification to consist in that which they are utterly uncapable of. §. 7. Fourthly, The making Justification a declared discharge, detracts from the Majesty and Soveraignty of God: For as much as it ascribes to him but the office of a Notary, or subordinate Minister, (whose work it is to declare and publish the sentence of the Court) rather then of a Judge or Supream Magistrate, whose Will is a Law. And by this means Justification shall be opposed, not to condemnation, but to concealing or keeping secret. §. 8. Fifthly, If Justification were by a Conditional Promise,
as a declared discharge, then it would not be Gods act, but our own; God should not be our Justifier, but we must be said to justifie our selves; For a Conditional Promise doth not declare one man justified more then another, but the performance of the con∣dition: So that a man should be more beholding to himself, then to God, for his Justification. §. 9. Sixthly, We may argue a pari: Forgiveness amongst men is not necessarily by a declared discharge, Ergo, Gods is not; for there is the same reason for both; and therefore we are bid to forgive one another, as God for Christs sake hath forgiven us, Eph. 4. ult. i. e. heartily, or from the heart, as the Apostle else∣where explains it, Col. 3.17. Not in word, or in tongue, but in deed, and in true affection. Mans forgiveness is principally an act of the Heart and Minde: A man forgives an injury, when he layes aside all thoughts of revenge, and really intends his welfare that did the same; his heart is as much towards him, as if he had not done it: And therefore Gods forgiving of a sinner, is not necessa∣rily a declared absolution. God may justifie or acquit a person, though he doth not declare his reconciliation with him. §. 10. Mr. Woodbridge foresaw the force of this Reason, and therefore hath wisely laid in this Exception against it. Indeed to our private forgiveness one of another, being meerly an act of Charity, there is no more required, then a resolution within our selves to lay aside our thoughts of revenge, &c. But the for∣giveness of a Magistrate, being an act of Authority, must be by some formal act of Oblivion, &c. A Vote in the house is no Le∣gal security to a Delinquent; so then, Gods forgiveness being an act of Authority, must neither be an hidden, secret purpose in his own heart, &c. but a formal promulged act. Answ. 1. I see no reason why God should not have as much power to forgive, without a promulged act, as man. It was a saying heretofore, Papa nunquàm sibi ligat manus; they that have supream and absolute power, love not to have their hands tyed. I wonder therefore, that Mr. W. should be so bold as to limit God, and to prescribe in what way and manner he must forgive sinners; I am sure, the Reason which he gives, is of little force; for Gods forgiveness is no less an act of Charity, then mans; as these Scriptures, Rom 5.8. Eph. 2.4. with many others do sufficiently shew. And though God in
the act of forgiveness, may be looked upon as a Judge, yet is he such a Judge, as proceeds by no other Law then his own Will. And therefore (2) we say, That though the forgiveness of Magistrates be by some published act of Oblivion, yet it doth not follow, That God must proceed in the same manner; because the promul∣gation of an act of Grace, is for the direction and limitation of Judges, and Ministers of State, that they do not execute the sen∣tence of the Law. Now in the Justification of a sinner, God hath no need of such an act, because he is the sole Judge and Justifier himself; and therefore the purpose of his Will secures the person sufficiently though his security be not declared, and makes the Law of condemnation (which depends wholly on the Will of God) to be of no force, in regard of the real execution of it, whether he do plead it, or no; as in Infants, and doubting Christians, whose hearts do condemn them; some of whom Mr. W. acknowledgeth to be justified, Pag. 3. & 15. A Judge that hath the Legislative power in his own brest, needs no published Edict to absolve an Offender. Now God is such a Judge, as doth not receive, but gives Laws unto all. (3) The publishing of acts of Grace, is for the comfort of the Offender, rather then for any need that the Supream Magistrate hath thereof, as to the compleating of his act; as for instance, the Act of Oblivion was a real Pardon, when it passed the house; for though Delinquents had no knowledge of their immunity from the penalties which they had incurred, be∣fore it was published in Print, yet the Vote or Sanction of the House did secure them from danger, and invalidate the Statutes that were in force against them; otherwise Delinquents would be more beholding to the Printer that published that act, then to the Parliament that made it: So the publication of the New Cove∣nant was for the comfort of Gods Elect, and not for their security, in foro Dei.
CHAP. XI. Wherein Mr. Woodbridges Second Argument against Justification before Faith, taken from our state by nature, is answered. HIs Second Argument seems to be most weighty, which if it be put into a just ballance, will likewise be found guilty of a minùs habens. The Argument runs thus, [They that are under condemnation, cannot at the same time be justified; but all the world is under condemnation before Faith. Ergo, None of the world are justified before Faith.] Here I shall (1) enter a Caveat against the Major, which notwithstanding his confident Asser∣tion [that it must needs be true] doth not appear so unto me, un∣less it be limited with this Proviso, That these seeming contraries do refer ad idem, I mean, to the same Court and Judicatory; their I shall grant, That he who is under condemnation is not justified; otherwise we know, it often falls out, that he that is condemned, and hath a Judgement upon Record against him in one Court, may be justified and absolved in another; he that is cast at the Common Law, may be quitted in a Court of Equity. Now the Law and the Gospel are, as it were, two several Courts and Judi∣catories; they that are condemned in the one, may be justified in the other; they that are sinners in the first Adam, may be looked upon as just and righteous in the second: There is nothing more ordinary, then for Christians, at the same time, to consider them∣selves under this twofold relation, to wit, Their state by Nature, and their state by Grace. In reference to the former it was, that Paul cryed out, O wretched man that I am! and yet in the same breath, he breaks forth into thankful Expressions for his escape and deliverance Rom 7▪ 24, 25.. I doubt not but Mr. W. hath heard many Ministers in their Confessions, adjudge themselves sinful and wretched Crea∣tures, and yet at the same time plead their Righteousness and A∣doption;though their translation from one estate to the other, was
not in that very instant:Rom. 3.19. The Law condemns all men living, for that all have sinned. The Law doth not consider men as Elect, or Reprobates, or as Believers or unbelievers, but as righteous or sinners: Believers have no more advantage by the Law, then un∣believers; the Law will not cease to threaten and condemn them, as long as they live: It is true, Believers can plead their discharge, which others may have, though they know it not. §. 2. But if Mr. W. do speak of an absolute condemnation, or of such as are condemned by the first Covenant, and have no be∣nefit at all by the second; we shall then let go the Major, and ar∣rest his Minor Proposition [But all the world are under condem∣nation before Faith.] For God doth not condemn his Elect Chil∣dren, for whom Christ hath died; the Holy Ghost witnesseth that Gods will, to wit, of good pleasure, was, That none of them should perish, or be condemned; and if the Judge will quit them, who else shall condemn them Rom. 8.33.? To whomsoever God doth will Life and Salvation, (his Will being absolute and immutable) they are not lyable to condemnation. §. 3. The Scriptures brought by him to prove his Minor, are forced to go beyond the intention of the Holy Ghost, as 1 Joh. 3.18. He that believeth not, is condemned already. He that believeth not, is as much, as he that never believeth, or he that believeth not at any time, as Chap. 8.24. If ye believe not (i. e. not at all) ye shall die in your sins. The scope See Mr. Tho. Goodwins Ser∣mon on John 6.37. of our Saviour was to obviate those suspitions and jealousies which are lurking in the hearts of men, as if God in sending his Son, intended not their good, but onely laid a design and ambushment for their further condemnation. It is no such matter (sayes our Saviour) God sent not his Son to condemn the world, Vers. 17. It is an evident sign, that God had no such end in publishing the Gospel, For he that believes, is not condemned; he knows that he is passed from death to life; and he that believes not, i. e. that finally rejects the Grace which is here offered, was condemned long before; viz. by the sentence of the Law, and by the just judgement of God, proceeding against them, according to the tenor of the first Covenant: So that God need not go about to entangle men, who were before fast bound in the shackles of sin and misery; the Law condemned them suffici∣ently, though their contempt of the Gospel will aggravate their
condemnation. Our Saviour had no intent at all to shew the state of the Elect, before believing; but the certain, and inevitable mi∣sery of them that believe not; by reason of the sentence of the Law which had passed upon them. §. 4. (2) His next Allegation is as impertinent as this, Verse 36. of the same Chapter, He that believeth not, the wrath of God abideth on him. It is evident, that our Saviour speaks there of a final unbeliever, and not of an Elect person before believing; the phrase of the abiding Notat con∣stantiam & pe∣vitissimam rei adhaesionem. Camer. of Gods wrath, is applicable to none, but unto Reprobates, who do perish for ever: And to say that the place hints, there is a wrath of God which is done away by be∣lieving, is but an attempt, to suborn the Spirit, to serve our turn. §. 5. (3) That which seemes to speak most fully to his cause, is Ephes. 2.3. where the Apostle tells the Ephesians (whom God had chosen to Eternal life, Chap. 1.4.) That they were by nature the children of wrath; even as others. To which I answer, (1) That the Text doth not say, that God did condemn them, or that they were under Condemnation, before Conversion. (2) The Emphasis of this Text (I conceive) lies in this clause [by nature.] So then the Apostles meaning is, That by nature, or in reference to their state in the first Adam, from whom by natural propagation they descended, They were children of wrath, they could expect nothing but wrath and fiery indignation from God: Yet this hin∣dered not, but that by Grace, they might be the Children of his Love; for so all the Elect are, whilest they are in their blood and pollution, Ezek. 16.4, 8. The Lord calls them his Sons and Chil∣dren before Conversion, Isai. 43.6. & 53.11. & 8.18. Heb. 2.9. For it is not any Inherent qualification, but the good plea∣sure of God, that makes them his Children, Ephes. 1.5. Rom. 8.29. John 17.6. Believers considered in themselves, and as they come from the loyns of Adam, are sinful and cursed Creatures, as vile and wretched as the Devil himself, though in Christ they be∣hold themselves made righteous and blessed. It is granted, That Elect Infants have the Righteousness of Christ imputed to them, though they know it not; and I see no reason that can be given, why it should not be imputed to the rest of the Elect before Con∣version.
§. 6. Although the Elect are freed from wrath and condemna∣tion; yet in some sence, they may be said to be under it, in regard that the Law doth terrifie and affright their consciences, Rom. 4.15. In which respect, it is called A ministration of wrath, and of death, 2 Cor. 3.7, 9. The wrath of God hath a threefold ac∣ception in the Scripture Znch. de Nat. Dei. l. 4. c. 6. q. r. Thes.. 1. It signifies the most just, and im∣mutable Will of God to deal with a person or persons according to the tenor of the Law, and to inflict upon them the punishment which their sins shall deserve: And in this sence, none but Repro∣bates are under wrath; who for this cause are said to be hated of God. (2) It notes the threatnings and comminations of the Law, Rom. 1.18. Psal. 6.1. Hos. 11.9. Jonas 3.9▪ &c. (3) It notes the execution of those threatnings, or the punishments threat∣ned, Ephes. 5.6. Luke 21.23. Matth. 3.7. Now in the first and third sence, the Elect never were, nor shall be, under wrath; God never intended to deal with them according to the tenor of the Law; nor doth he inflict upon them the least evil, upon that account, Christ having freed and delivered them from the Curse: But as wrath is taken in the second sense, for the comminations and threatnings of the Law, so they are under wrath, till they are able to plead their discharge and release, by the Gospel. The threatnings of the Law, do seize upon and arrest their Consciences, no less then others; and therefore the Law is compared to a rigid School-Master Gal. 3.24., which never ceaseth to whip and lash them, until they flye unto Christ. For though he hath freed them from the Curse, yet the Lord sees it fit they should for a while be held under the Peda∣gogy and Ministration of the Law, that they may learn to prize the Redemption which they have by Christ, Gal. 3.22. The Lord, when he published the Law in Sinai (as the Apostle observes, Gal. 3.17.) Did not repent him of his promise, made Typically with Abraham and his Seed, but really with Christ, and the Elect in him: But (sayes he) the Law was added, because of trans∣gression, i. e. To discover their sinfulness and misery by nature, and to render the Grace of the promise more desirable, Vers. 22. As the Saints in the Old Testament were Heirs of the Promise,Gal. 4.1, 2. had a real and actual Interest in all the Blessings of the New Covenant, whilest their Consciences were whipped and scourged by this mer∣ciless School-master; so all the rest of the Elect are partakers of
the same Grace of Life, though the Law doth terrifie and con∣demn them: The threatnings of the Law do not shew what is the state of a person towards God, or how God doth account of him; but what he is by nature, and what he hath deserved, should be inflicted upon him; which a man cannot chuse but expect, and fear, till his Conscience be secured by better promises: So that I shall not be afraid to say, That the Consciences of the Elect be∣fore Faith, are under wrath, and not their Persons; and though their Consciences do condemn them, yet God doth not. But against this Mr. W. hath sundry Exceptions. §. 7. The condemnation they are under, is the condemnation  of the Law; which pronounceth all men guilty, not onely in their own conscience, but before God, Rom. 3.19. Answ.Answ. That the voice or sentence of the Law, shews not who are condemned of God, but who are guilty and damnable in themselves, if God should deal with them by the Law, which is the scope of the A∣postle, Rom. 3.19, 20. That all the world might become guilty before God. So indeed are all men considered according to what is due by the Law, Psal. 143.2. But the Elect as considered in the Grace, and forgiveness of God, and the perfect satisfaction of Jesus Christ, are discharged from this rigorous Court, their cause is judged at another Bar. §. 8. The condemnation of an unbelievers conscience, is  either true or false; if true, then it is according to the judge∣ment of God, and speaks as the thing is, and so God condemns as well as the conscience, &c. Answ.Answ. The testimony of an un∣believers conscience  true, so far as it agrees with the written word; if it witnesseth to a man any thing, which is neither in the word, nor necessarily deduced from it; the testimony is false and sinful. For understanding whereof, we must know, that there is a threefold act of conscience about sin; the first, When it witnesseth to us concerning the desert of sin; the second, When it witnesseth to us concerning the act of sin, or the sins which we have done: the third is, When it witnesseth to us concerning our final state and condition before God. Now if Conscience doth bear witness to a man, concerning what he hath done, and what is his desert in so doing, it doth but its duty, Rom. 1.34. But if it tell a man, that for the sins which he hath done, he is a damned Creature, and must
perish everlastingly; such a Conscience is both penally and sinfully evil. The Conscience of an unbeliever accuseth truly, when it convinceth him of sin; that Death eternal is the wages of it; and that by the Law he can expect no other: But if it proceeds to tell a man, that his case is desperate, and without hope, it pronounceth a false sentence. For though he be a Reprobate, and consequently the sentence is true in it self, yet it is a false testimony in him, for as much as conscience witnesseth that, which it cannot certainly know; how much more is it a false testimony, when the Conscience of an E∣lect person doth make such a conclusion against himself, That God hath absolutely condemned him to Hell torments, it is false in it self, and false in him: If it were a true sentence, it were then impossi∣ble he should be saved; For condemnation (as Mr. W. confesseth a little after) is opposed to Salvation; and the Law saith not Now cursed, but cursed for ever, Matth. 25.41. And there∣fore, I say, If the Conscience of any sinner, either Elect or Repro∣bate, shall in this life, pass such an absolute and peremptory sen∣tence against himself, that the curse of the Law shall be inflicted upon him, he sins both against the Law, and the Gospel. (1) A∣gainst the Law, by applying the Ministery thereof to a wrong end, and not as God hath intended it; for the Law was not given ex pri∣maria intentione, to condemn men See Dr. Rey∣nolds three Treatises, p. 385., but to further and advance the Ministery of the Gospel; that men seeing what they are by nature, and what they have deserved, might flee for refuge unto Jesus Christ. Now when men, hearing the Curse of the Law, con∣clude, that surely this must be their portion, and that it is never the neerer for them, that the Son of God hath shed his Blood for sin∣ners, they sin against the Law; in regard the end of the Law is to cause them to flee unto Christ; so that by making the sentence of the Law absolute, they quite cross the design and intention of God in giving the Law. (2) They deny the very tenor and substance of the Gospel,1 Tim. 1.15. 1 Joh. 5 10, 11. which is, That in Christ there is life eternal for sinners; and for ought that they can know to the contrary▪ for them, as well as for others. §. 9. Though we say, That the sentence of condemnation, which men pass upon themselves in this life, is false and erroneous, yet are we innocent of those ugly consequences which Mr. W. would thrust upon us, Of blinding mens eyes, and hardening their hearts, and
searing up their consciences, &c. Which are more likely to fol∣low upon an indiscreet application of the Law, and mens making the voice thereof the definitive sentence of God, upon all Trans∣gressors; which is the ready way to make men quite desperate, and to harden their hearts in unbelief. We hold it necessary▪ That the Law should be preached to unbelievers in it strictness, rigor, and inexorable severity; that they may see there is no hope for them at all, by the works of the Law; yet we would have it preached as an Appendant to the Gospel, not to drive men to de∣spair, but to believe, and to flee to that Sanctuary which is opened in the Gospel; whereas if it be published alone, and as an absolute sentence, it is a bar to Faith: For if God doth condemn men, who shall justifie them? Christs merits will not save them, whom God doth condemn; witness Reprobate Men and Angels, Unto whom there remaineth no sacrifice at all for sin. §. 10. His third Exception is, That the condemnation with  which the unbeliever is condemned, is expressed John 3.36. by the abiding of Gods wrath upon him. Therefore we say,Answ. no Elect unbeliever is condemned of God, because the wrath of God doth not abide upon him. The condemnation wherewith the unbeliever, i. e. The final unbeliever is condemned, is indeed the abiding of Gods wrath, that is, he shall die everlastingly, for it is opposed to everlasting life; but what is this to the Elect, who are not final un∣believers? §. 11. His fourth and last is, That the condemnation of un∣believers  is opposed to Salvation, John 3.17. And surely the condemnation that is opposed to Salvation, is more then the con∣demnation of a mans own conscience, &c. I answer,Answ. 1. That the condemnation opposed to Salvation, is damnation; and then by Mr. Woodbridges Argument, the Elect, because they are sometimes unbelievers, must all be damned. But 2. this rather shews (as I said before,) that, by him that believeth not, is meant, he that be∣lieveth not at all.
CHAP. XII. Wherein Mr. Woodbridges third, fourth, and fifth Arguments are answered. HIs third Argument is drawn from the several comparisons by which Justification by Faith is illustrated. Sometimes it is compared to the Israelites, looking up to the Brazen Serpent for healing, Joh. 3.14. Numb. 21 8. As then, they were not first healed, and then looked up to see what healed them, but they did first look upon the Serpent, and then they were healed. Even so it is the Will of God, that whosoever seeth, and belie∣veth the Son, shall be justified, John 6.40. Sometimes Faith is compared to eating, and Justification to the nourishment which we receive by our meat, &c. To which I answer, 1. That com∣parisons prove nothing, unless they are framed by the Holy Ghost for the thing in question. Now I utterly deny that it was the in∣tent of the Holy Ghost, in either of these comparisons, to shew in what order, or method we are justified in the sight of God. 2. The stinging of the fiery Serpents did plainly shadow forth the effects of the Law in Conscience. The Law by revealing the wrath of God, against all unrighteousness Rom. 1 17. & 4.15., stings and wounds mens con∣sciences Prov. 18.14.; for which cause it is called, a fiery Law, Deut. 33.2. To wit, from its effects, because it doth, as it were, kindle a fire in mens bones; they have no rest in their souls, until these wounds are healed Psal 102.3. & 38.3.. Now as the Israelites when they were stung by those fiery Serpents, found no ease, till they looked up unto the Brazen Serpent: So the soul that is smitten and wounded by the Ministery of the Law, will never finde rest, till it looks unto him, in whose wounds and stripes is the healing of sinners Isai 53.5. John 3.1.. 3. This very comparison doth make against him; as the Israelites were alive, when they looked upon the Brazen Serpent, or else they could not have seen it: So they that ok upon Jesus Christ, i. e. Believe in him, are spiritually alive, or else they could not put forth such a
vital act. It is said indeed, Numb. 21.9. that when any man that was bitten, beheld the Serpent of Brass, he lived, i. e. He was healed, or had ease from his anguish; so they that by Faith look up unto the Antitype, they finde ease and rest for their wearied souls; they do then live, i. e. they have the comfort and enjoy∣ment of that life, which before they had in Christ. A man is said to live, when he lives comfortably and happily Vita non est vivere sed vale∣re. Non est beatus, qui so esse non putat. See Eccles. 6.2.. §. 2. 4. Mr. W. to make the comparison suit, hath falsified the Text, Joh. 6 40. The words are, It is the Will of God that every one that seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have everlast∣ing life; it is not (may be justified) as he corrupts it. (5) Where∣as he sayes, Faith is compared to eating, and Justification to nou∣rishment, Joh. 6.51. It is a mistake like the former, for it is Christ himself, who throughout that Chapter is compared to bread and food; whom by Faith we receive for our refreshment; consola∣tion, and spiritual nourishment. §. 4. His fourth Argument is drawn from the perpetual oppo∣sition between Faith and Works; from whence he reasons thus. What place and order works had to Justification in the Cove∣nant of Works, the same place and order Faith hath to our Justification in the Covenant of Grace: But Works were to go before our Justification in the Covenant of Works. Ergo, Faith is to go before our Justification in the Covenant of Grace. I an∣swer, That his Major is extreamly gross; I dare say, a more un∣sound Assertion cannot be picked out of the Writings, either of the Papists or Arminians, then this is. That Faith (taking it as he doth in a proper sence) hath the same place in the Covenant of Grace, as works have in the Covenant of Works. That I have not charged him too high, will appear to any one that shall consider these few particulars. First, Works in the first Covenant, are meritorious of Eternal life; he that doth the works required in the Law, may in strictness of Justice, claim the promise as a due debt, Rom. 4.4. Was ever any Protestant heard to say, That Faith and Faithful actions (which, as hath been shewn men of his notion do include in Faith,) do merit Eternal life? Secondly; Works in the first Covenant, are the matter of our Justification; he that doth them, is thereby constituted just and
righteous in the sight of God. Righteousness consists in a confor∣mity to the Law, so that whosoever keeps the Law, must needs be righteous: But now Faith is not the matter of our Righteousness, God doth not account men righteous, for their Faith; I confess, he hath Bellarmine and Arminius on his side, who say, that ipsa fides, or the  credere imputatur in justitiam Vid. sup. c. 6. sect. 4., but the Apostle hath taught us other Doctrine, Rom. 5.19. That by the obedience of one (i. e. of Christ) many are made righteous. And 2 Cor. 5.21. That we are made the Righteousness of God in him. Thirdly, If Faith hath the same place in the second Covenant, as Works in the first,Rom. 2.2. then must God account Faith to be perfect Righteousness, which is contrary to his Truth and Justice: To say that Faith is perfect Righteousness by the second Covenant, though not by the first, is but petitio principii; Legal and Evangelical Righteousness, being one and the same, as to the matter of Righ∣teousness, though they are inherent in divers subjects. The first Covenant requires a Righteousness in us, the second gives and ac∣cepts a Righteousness which is anothers. Fourthly, If Faith hath the same place in the second Covenant, as Works had in the first, then were the second Covenant, a Cove∣nant of Works, seeing Faith is a work, and a work of ours: So that by this means the two Covenants should be confounded, nor would the latter be any whit more of Grace, then the former. Fifthly, This Assertion makes Faith to be not of Grace, because not from the Covenant of Grace, seeing the Covenant it self de∣pends upon it. How contrary this Doctrine is to the sense of our Protestant Divines, hath in part been shewed before Cap. 6. sect. 2., who till this last Age have taught, that these two Propositions [A man is justi∣fied by Works] and [A man is justified by Faith] do carry meanings utterly opposite to one another Vid. Calv. In∣stit. l. 3. c. 2. sect 2. Pemb. Vind. sid. p. 24. in quarto.. The one is proper and formal, the other is metonymical and relative. In this Proposition [A man is justified by Works] we are to take all in a plain and lite∣ral sence, That God doth account him that hath kept the Law, ex∣actly in all points, a righteous person, and consequently worthy of Eternal life; but now that other Proposition [A man is justified by Faith] we must understand it Relatively thus; That a sinner is justified in the sight of God, from all sin and punishment by
Faith, i. e. By the Obedience and Righteousness of Jesus Christ, which we receive and apply unto our selves by true Faith. §. 4. Let us now hear what Mr. W. hath to say for the defence of his Major, which treads Antipodes to the current of all out Protestant Writers. If (saith he) the Minor be granted, the Major must be out of Question. I must confess, if confidence did prove, here were proof enough. That which he addes, hath as lit∣tle weight, as (1) Why should not, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shalt be saved, (which is the tenor of the New Cove∣nant, Rom. 10.6, 9.) plead as strongly for the antecedency of Faith to Iustification in this Covenant, as, do this and live, doth evince, that works were necessary antecedents of Justification in the Old Covenant? Answ. Here he takes for that granted, which will certainly be denied, scil. That, believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shalt be saved, is the tenor of the New Covenant; for (1) it is no where called so, (2) where the New Covenant is recited, as Jer. 31. Heb. 8. it runs quite in another strain, it doth not promise Salvation upon condition of Faith, but Faith and Salvation, and all other Blessings, present and future. That Text Rom. 10.6, 9. is not the tenor of the New Covenant, for that re∣quires Confession as well as Faith, and then the Justification of the New Covenant should be called Justification by Confession, as well as by Faith. The Apostle there describes the persons that shall be saved, they are such as do believe and profess the truth: His scope (as our Divines See Shepherds Sound Belie∣ver, p. 230. have noted) is to resolve that grand and important Question, How a man may know that he shall be saved? You need not (sayes he) to ascend into Heaven, or de∣scend into Hll, &c. to fetch Christ himself to tell you by imme∣diate Revelation, whether you shall be justified and saved; we have neerer and more certain evidences; He that believes with the heart, &c. In this Scripture he gives us two marks or characters of a true Christian; one Internal, known onely to the Christian himself, Believing with the heart; the other External, or visible to men, Confession with the mouth: But of this we shall have oc∣casion to speak more anon. §. 5. (2) He urgeth, That Faith and Works have the like order to Justification, in their respective Covenants, or else Justification by Faith, and Justification by Works, were not
opposed, as they constantly are in the Apostles Writings, &c. We grant, that there is a true and formal opposition between Faith and Works: The Affirmative, which the Jews pleaded for [That a man is justified by Works;] and the Negative, which the Apo∣stle contended for, [That a man is not justified by Works] but by Faith, are as opposite as East and West, and as impossible to be reconciled, as light and darkness: But then Faith must be taken Objectively, and not Properly; for that which is formally opposed to Works, is not the act, but the object of Faith, to wit, the Righteousness of Christ, which we apprehend and enjoy by Faith, for if by Faith, he had meant the  credere, or act of believing. there were no opposition at all between Faith and Works, and the establishing of Justification by Faith, will in no wise destroy Justi∣fication by Works; and consequently (to use Mr. Woodbridges Expressions) there would be nothing but falshoods and equivo∣cations in all the Apostles Disputations, against Justification by Works: How easily might the Jews, and the Apostle, I will adde the Papists and Protestants, be reconciled? They say we must be justified by Works, and these say we must be justified by Faith, which is a work of ours, and such as includes all other works of new Obedience; an easie distinction will salve the matter. We are not justified by Works, as they are conditions of the first Covenant, but we are justified by Works, as they are conditions of the second Covenant. We are not justified by Works, as they are our Legal Righteousness, but we are justified by Works, as they are our E∣vangelical Righteousness. Was it beseeming the gravity of so great an Apostle, to raise so sharp a contest about a trifle, as the denomination of Works from the first and second Covenant, when as the Works are the very same, in respect, both of the matter and subject? Would not all men have censured his Writings to be but strifes of words? §. 6. His fift Objection is raised from 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were some of you, but you are washed, but you are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus. Where (sayes he) there is an evident opposition between the time past, and present, in respect of their Justification. And thence he argues, Now you are justified, Ergo, not before, or befor you were unjustified. To which I answer, (1) That the words do not countenance this inference: He sayes
indeed, that in times past they were unsanctified, they had been Fornicators Idolaters, &c. i. e. As vile and wicked as the worst of men, for which sins they deserved to be shut out of the Kingdom of God, no less then they that are damned: He doth not say, that they were unjustified before Conversion; they were reclaimed or cleansed from those sins, by the Preaching of the Gos∣pel, but they were justified from those sins, in, or by the name, i. e. The Merit and Righteousness of Jesus Christ, which was imputed to them by God, whilest they lived in unbelief. But (2) if any man will strain this consequence from the words, You are justified, Ergo, You were not, whilest you lived in these sins; I shall then own the answer, which he rejects with so much scorn and contempt, That they were not justified before Conversion, either in foro Conscientiae, or in foro Ecclesiastico; not doubting, but that I shall sufficiently clear it from his Exceptions. §. 7. The first of which is, Why might they not be said to be  sanctified before Conversion, as well as justified. I answer,Answ. that there is not the same reason for a mans Sanctification before Faith and Conversion, as there is for his Justification. For (1) to say, That an unconverted person is sanctified, is, contradictio in ad∣jecto; but it is no contradiction to , That an ungodly or uncon∣verted person is justified, which is the expression of the Holy Ghost, Rom. 4.5. Sanctification consists in our Conversion, or turning unto God; but our Justification, in Gods accounting unto us the Righteousness and satisfaction of his Son; the one is a work or act of God done without us, 2 Cor. 5.19. but the other is the operation of God within us. God cannot sanctifie us with∣out holiness, because he cannot do contradictions; but God may justifie us, if he please, without Faith and Inherent holiness, be∣cause that, ex natura rei is no contradiction. Our Sanctification flows from Faith, as the principle and motive of it, 1 John 3.3. & 4.19. Gal. 5.6. But now our Justification hath not that de∣pendence upon Faith, seeing that is Gods act, and not ours; though we are said to be sanctified by Faith, yet not in that sense, that we are said to be justified by Faith. Faith is Active in the one, but Passive in the other; it is onely the Hand or Instrument that re∣ceives our Justification, it is the principle or efficient which ope∣rates and produceth our Sanctification. (2) Though Justification
be sometimes taken for the declared sentence of Absolution in the Court of Conscience; yet it follows not, that Sanctification should be so understood; because the sentence of Justification is termina∣ted in Conscience: But Sanctification is diffused throughout the whole man, 1 Thes. 5.23. Sanctification is not our knowing that we are sanctified, but the conformity of our faculties, and their operations to the rule of holiness: So that his Assertion, that [Nothing can be alledged for Justification before believing, which will not hold as strongly for Sanctification before belie∣ving] hath nothing but confidence to support it. §. 8. His next Exception is, That the Justification they now had, was that which gave them right and title to the Kingdom of God, which right and title they had not before they believed, &c. For if they had this right before they believed, then whe∣ther they believed, or no, all was one, as to the certainty of their Salvation; and they might have gone to Heaven, though they had lived and died without Faith.Answ. To which I answer, 1. That these Elect Corinthians had no more right to Salvation after their believing, then they had before: For their right to Salvation was grounded onely upon the purpose of God, and the purchase of Jesus Christ.Rom. 6.23. 1 Cor. 2.12. Salvation is a  freely bestowed upon us, and not a debt, or wages that becomes due to us upon the performance of conditions. 2. It will not follow from hence, That then they might have gone to Heaven without Faith; seeing Christ hath purchased Faith for his people, no less then glory, 2 Pet. 1.1. And God hath certainly appointed, that all that live to years of dis∣cretion, whom in his secret Justification he hath adjudged to life, shall have this evidence of Faith, Acts 13.48. & 2.47. §. 9. But (sayes Mr. W.) this evidence is of such necessity, as that if they have it not, they shall loose that life to which they are adjudged, or no: If not, then whether they believe, or do not believe, they shall be saved; if it be, then there is no abso∣lute Justification before Faith, and Justification, must be condi∣tional.Answ. Ans. 1. By this Argument, not onely Faith, but all other works of Sanctification, and perseverance in them, must be the conditions of our Justification; and consequently, we may be said to be justified and saved by them. The Scriptures speak the same things of works, as it doth of Faith, Mark 16.16. Prov. 28.18.
1 Tim. 4.16. Matth. 24.13. Now let him consult with our Protestant Divines, whether this be a good Argument, No man is saved, or glorified without works, Ergo, Men are saved by works? 2. This reason makes as much against absolute Election before Faith, as against absolute Justification: He may argue as well, Faith is of such necessity, that they, that have it not, shall loose the life, to which they are elected, or not: If not, then whether the Elect believe, or not, they shall be saved; if it be, then there is no absolute Election before Faith, and Election must be condi∣tional, contrary to many Scriptures, 2 Tim. 2.19. Rom. 9.11. Mark 13.22. But 3. to the Argument, we say, That Election and Justification are absolute, because they depend upon no ante∣cedent condition in the person elected and justified, not because they are absolute without the consequents that depend upon them, so that notwithstanding all that hitherto he hath brought, the O∣pinion he opposeth, will stand unshaken. We shall now proceed to the Anascheuastical part of his Discourse, and so weigh the strength of his Replies to those Arguments of ours, he is pleased to mention. CHAP. XIII. Wherein Mr. Woodbridges Answers to those Scriptures which hold forth [An immediate actual reconcilia∣tion of sinners to God, upon the death of Christ, without the intervention of Faith] are exa∣mined. THe Texts which he hath cited, as objected against him, are Matth. 3.17. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, viz. With sinners. And Rom. 5.10. we were reconciled unto God by the death of his Son. Which places were not once mentioned in the Conference, that I had with him: The former I alledged in the Discourse which I had with Mr. Warren (as hath been shewn before Cap. 1 sect. 8.) to which I had added sundry others, had I
not been interupted by the unseasonable (not to say, uncivil) inter∣posing of this Antagonist, who then cast in the Exceptions, which since he hath Printed, with some enlargements. His first Exception against the force of that Scripture, is, That the wel-pleasedness of God, need not to be extended beyond the person of Christ, Who gave himself unto death an Offering and Sacrifice unto God, of a sweet smelling favor, Eph. 5.2. Where∣unto I answer,Answ. (1) That he opposeth his single opinion against the judgement of all the Interpreters that I have seen, without one grain of Reason to counter-ballance them, as if he were,  Il. λ., or as David, 2 Sam. 18.3. worth a thou∣sand, such as Calvin, Beza, Paraeus, &c. who do extend it un∣to all those, for whom Christ exhibited himself a Mediator. It was the opinion of Musculus, Testimonium hoc Patris caelitus terris illatum, declarationem habet voluntatis ejus erga genus humanum Musculus in oc. apud Mar∣orat., &c. That this testimony of the Father doth mani∣fest the Will of God towards mankinde. God (sayes Calvin Calv. Harm. in Mat. 3.17.) by this testimony which he gave to Christ, declares he is a Fa∣ther unto us all. And a little after, Saint Paul doth best interpret this Text, Eph. 1.6. where he sayes, God hath made us accept∣ed in Jesus Christ. And again, In this clause [in whom I am wel-pleased] he gives us to understand, that his love is so great to Christ, that from him, it overflows upon us all. And Beza Beza Majores Annot in loc. more expresly, Significat enim Pater Christum, &c. The Father did hereby signifie, that Christ is he alone, whom when the Father beholds, he layes aside all his wrath and indignation, which we deserved; and that he is the onely Mediator and Reconciler. Which (sayes he) will be better understood by com∣paring this Text with Exod. 28.38. where we read, That Israel was made accepted to God by the High Priests appearing for them in the presence of God; which High Priest was undeni∣ably a type of Christ. The word  (saith he) though in the use of Sacred, and other Authors, it hath the significa∣tion of the Present tense; yet here it may as fitly be rendered by the time perfectly past. Ut declaret Pater se jam esse in filio homi∣nibus reconciliatum: That the Father might declare that he is already reconciled to men in his own Son; he plainly alludes to Isai. 42.1. Sensus est, &c. (saith Pareus Pareus in loc.) The meaning of
the place is, That this is my Son, for whose sake and merit, I do lay aside all my displeasure against mankinde, and do receive them into favor. This voice doth comprise the whole mystery of our Reconciliation with God, by, and for the sake of Christ. To these we might adde the suffrage of one of our own Countreymen Ward on Matth. 3.17.. This voice was uttered in respect of us, because of old God was angry with us for our sins, but now he is reconciled to us by Christ. And honest Ferus Ferus in Matth. 3. (who was more a Protestant in the Doctrine of Justification, then many of ours,) Haec verba ne∣dum Christo dicuntur, sed & nobis, &c. These words were not onely spoken unto Christ, but unto us. Let him that hath leisure look over more See Diodae on Matth. 3.17.. §. 2. (2) It is against the scope of the words to limit them to the person of Christ, they being a solemn declaration of Christs investiture in the glorious office of a Mediator; in which respect he is said to be a Son given, and born to us, Isa. 9. And therefore this  of God to men, was at his birth proclaimed by the holy Angels, Luke 2. All that grace or favor which at any time was manifested to Christ, as a Mediator, was for their sakes whom he represented, and to whom the benefits of his Mediatorship were intended. See John 12.30. That Text Eph. 5.2. which Mr. W. alledgeth for confining of this voice to the person of Christ, proves nothing less, where the Apostle shews the effect of Christs sacrifice towards us, thus, as when Noah offered up his burnt-offerings to God, The Lord smelled a sweet savor, &c. Gen. 8.21. So when Christ offered up himself a sacrifice of atonement, the Lord smelled a savor of rest, and was fully satisfied for the sins of his people. (3) There is no reason can be given, why those words should be terminated to the person of Christ,Joh. 17.24, 2. seeing that God was never displeased with him, nor had our Saviour any doubt, or suspition of it; and therefore it was altogether needless that God should declare his well-pleasedness to him in his own person. (4) The well-pleasedness of God is to be extended un∣to them, for whom Christ offered up his sacrifice; but Christ did not offer up his sacrifice for himself, but onely for sinners. Ergo. §. 3. Well, haec non successit, alia aggrediamur via: his next Exception therefore is, That if we should extend it unto men, the
words prove no more, then that it is through Christ, that God is well pleased with men, whensoever it be that he is well pleased. So that in his sense I am well pleased, is as much as I will be well pleased with them, when they have performed the terms and conditions required on their part. A gloss which (I dare say) was never dreamed of by any Expositor before himself. Here (1) let the Reader observe how bold he makes with the Holy Ghost; for when God tells us, he is well pleased, to say no, he is not, now, but he will hereafter, is not to interpret, but contradict the Scrip∣ture. (2) His gloss contradicts it self, for if our reconciliation with God, doth depend upon terms and conditions performed by us, then it is not through Christ alone, that God is well pleased with men, whensoever it is; and Christ is at most but a partial cause of our reconciliation. §. 4. But to render his Paraphrase more probable, he hath cited divers other places, where (as he pretends) Verbs and Partici∣ples of the Present tense have the signification of the future, Though (says he) the Verb in this place be not the Present tense, but the first Aorist; though it be the Aorist, what is that to the purpose, seeing (as every School-boy knows) the Aorists have the signification of the Preterperfect tense, and not of the Future; and if that enunciation will hold in the Preterperfect tense (as Beza grants) then is it much more true in the Present tense. But to his Allegations I answer, (1) That in most of his instances, there is no necessity to feign a change of Tenses, as John 4.25. Messiah cometh, i. e. The promise of the Messiah draws nigh to be ful∣filled. So Chap. 5.25. The hour is coming, and now is, &c. The dead did then hear the voice of the Son of man, both in his own, and in his Disciples Ministery. So 2 Cor. 3.16. the Verbs are most properly rendred in the Present tense, When Israel shall, or doth turn unto the Lord, the vail is taken away; for as Came∣ron Vid. Camer. Myothe. in 2 Cor. 3.16. & v. 13 & Pae∣ect. in Mat. 9.3. notes their Conversion to God, doth not precede the taking away of the vail, but both are at the same time. Rom. 8.24. By hope we are saved. The enunciation is true and emphatical in the Present tense; for in many other places the Saints are said to be saved, and to have eternal life, whilest they are in the body, John 3.36. & 5.24. & 6.54, 56. Col. 2.10. Eph. 2.5, 8. Tit. 3.5. 1 John 5.11, 12. They have here the beginnings, or
first-fruits of that Salvation; the complement and perfection whereof, they as yet do wait for; they have now the joy and comfort of their Salvation, thorough Faith and Hope, because Hope looks upon the promises of God, not as doubtful but as sure and cer∣tain, Heb. 11.1, 2. They are now sayed by Hope, or they shall never be saved by Hope, for Hope that is seen, is not Hope; in the world to come they are saved by sight, and not by Faith or Hope: So that Text 1 Cor. 15.57. is most properly rendered, Thanks be unto God that giveth, or hath given us the victory through Jesus Christ. For the Saints have already obtained victory over death, and the grave, in Christ their Head. Rom. 8.37. In all things we are more then conquerors. And John 16.33. Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world. So Heb. 10.35. Your confidence hath a great recompence of reward, to wit, In the present effects which it did produce, as inward peace, joy, &c. according to that of the Psalmist, Psal. 19.11. In keeping thy statutes, there is great reward. But (2) if I should grant, what he desires, that in all these places there were an Heterosis of Tenses, (for I acknow∣ledge this trope is frequent in Scripture) yet this great flourish will amount to nothing, unless he had shewn by the circumstances of the Text, or the nature of the thing, that it must be so ex∣pounded here; for if men had liberty to feign Enalloges of Numbers, Cases, and Tenses, at their pleasure, it were easie to elude the mean∣ing of the plainest Texts. §. 5. (3) Those words, Heb. 11.6. Without Faith it is im∣possible to please God, do not conclude what he would have them, to wit, That God is not wel-pleased with his Elect in Christ, be∣fore they do believe; for the Apostle speaks there of mens works, and actions, and not of their persons. No man can please God without Faith, no not Believers themselves; their Religious Ser∣vices are not pleasing to God, unless they are done in Faith, for bonum est ex causa integra Dyonis. de div. nom. part. 4. cerca med., Now Faith is a principal ingredi∣ent in the Saints obedience; for if it be not done in Faith, it is not done in love, Gal. 5 6. And consequently it is not fruit unto God, Rom 7.4. Gods wel-pleasedness with his Elect, is the immediate effect of the death of Christ, for that which raised a partition wall between God and them, was the breach of the Law; now when the Law was satisfied for their sins, this partition was broken
down, his favor had as free a current, as if they had not sinned: And therefore the blotting out of our sin, and our reconciliation with God, is ascribed, solely, and immediately to the death of Christ, as in many other Scriptures, so particularly, Ephes. 1.6, 7. & 2.13, 14. Col. 1.20, 21. & 2.13, 14. 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself; he did not onely act towards it, as Mr. W. glossed those words in his Sermon, but (saith the Text) he did not impute their sins unto them; for whom Christ died. The actual blotting out of sin (sayes Mr. Perkins Vol. 1. p. 110. Edit. 1608.) doth inseparably depend upon satisfaction for sins, and satisfaction with God doth necessarily imply the very real and general abolishment of the guilt and punishment of sin. That which makes our persons acceptable to God, is the Righte∣ousnes of Jesus Christ; but now our actions are not pleasing, un∣less they are conformable to the rule, and all necessary circumstances do concur; the cheif whereof, is Faith in the propitiation and a∣tonement of Jesus Christ, whereby their defects and obliquities are done away Levit. 17.. 1 Pet. 2.5.. §. 6. (4) Whereas he addes, That it was a poor answer which I gave to Mr. Good, [That God was well pleased with his Elect, whilest unregenerate, though not with their unregenera∣cy.] 1. As far as it concerns my self, I shall subscribe to his cen∣sure, I am poor, but he is rich, I am empty, but he is full 1 Cor. 4.8.. But 2. he may be pleased to take notice, that a far richer man then him∣self, in all kinde of learning, both Humane and Divine, hath given the very same answer unto this question. Mr. Pemble Vind. Grat. p. 19. distinguish∣eth between Gods love to our persons, and Gods love to our qua∣lities and actions: A distinction which (sayes he) parents are well skilled in, who put a difference between the vices, and per∣sons of their children; those they hate, these they love, even when for their vices they do chastise their persons. The case (sayes he) is the same between God and the Elect, his love to their persons, is from everlasting the same; nor doth their sin∣fulness lessen it, nor their sanctity increase it, because God in loving their persons, never considered them otherwise, then as most perfectly holy, and unblameable in Jesus Christ, &c. It is a strange inference which he draws from my words, That be∣cause I said, God is well pleased with the persons of his Elect,
whilest unregenerate, that afterwards he is well pleased with their unregeneracy also: He might as well impose this absurdity upon the Prophet, that because he saith, Ezek. 16.8. Thy time (to wit, of unregeneracy) was the time of love. Surely not of their unregeneracy, but of their persons then unregenerate, that therefore the Prophet supposeth, that after their Conversion God did love their unregeneracy, or that corruption of nature, which remained in them. Such quibbles are unbeseeming serious Christians. §. 7. I shall adde but a word to clear up the difference between the actions of regenerate and unregenerate persons; And first, we say that the best actions of unregenerate men are impure and sinful, which though they are pardoned unto all the Elect for the sake of Christ, yet they are not acceptable to God, but in themselves most abominable and loathsome in his sight, Prov. 5.8. Tit. 1.15. Isai. 1.13, &c. Secondly, Though (as the Orthodox acknow∣ledge) the best works of the best men, have not in them that Inhe∣rent purity and holiness, which can stand before God without the mediation of their High Priest Pronuncia Catholici nulladari in hac vita hominis peccato∣ris sanctificatio∣nem tantam uo non habeat ad∣mixtum pecca∣tum, & longe absit à perfecti∣one ad quam tendit. Cham. tom. 3. l. 10. c. 3. sect. 9. Vae etiam lauda∣bili vitae homi∣num, si remota misericordia dis∣cutias eam. Aug. Confes. l. 9. c. 13. See Dr. Rey∣nolds on 2 Cor. 7.1: p. 325., yet they may be said to be ac∣ceptable and pleasing unto God, not onely comparatively, because they are better then the works of unregenerate men, or then the sinful works of such as are regenerate; but absolutely, and that two ways. 1. Abstractly and in themselves, or as they ought to be done; and thus Faith, Hope, Love, &c. are acceptable to God, for they are that spiritual worship and service which God looks for, and delights in, Joh. 4.23. Micah 6.8. Gal. 5.5, 6. Phil. 3.3. And in this respect, a meek and a quiet spirit, is said to be of great price in the sight of God, 1 Pet. 3.4. 2. Concrete∣ly as they are acted by us, or do pass through our hands, and so they are acceptable to God, as they are washed and cleansed in the blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. Our spiritual sacrifices are made ac∣ceptable to God in Jesus Christ, or by his taking away the sin and defilement, that adheres unto them Exod. 28.38. Apoc. 8.3, 4.: Our High Priest doth not procure the acceptance of those works, which in their whole ab∣stract nature, are sinful, such as are all our works before Con∣version, and the fruits of the flesh after Conversion, he obtains forgiveness, but not acceptance for them: But now those works which come from the Spirit of God, and are sinful onely through
the mixture of our corruptions (as sweet water which passeth through a sink) these he makes acceptable to the Father, by taking away the imperfections and defilements that adhere unto them. §. 8. The next Scripture which Mr. W. hath brought in, by way of objection against himself, is Rom. 5.10. When we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son. To which he answers, That Christs death was the price of our reconciliation, and so it is through the death of Christ that we are reconciled, be it when it will be that we are reconciled. Against this answer of his, I shall offer these Exceptions. (1) It offers a manifest violence to the Text, to say, That we were re∣conciled, is as much as we shall be reconciled when we have per∣formed the terms and conditions required of us. (2) If our reconciliation to God, did depend upon terms and conditions per∣formed by us, then is it not through the death of Christ that we are reconciled unto God; we should be more the cause, of our reconciliation, then Christ is; for he that performs a condition, to which a benefit is promised, doth more to the procuring of it, then he that makes or obtains that conditional grant; notwithstanding which, he is never awhit the near of the benefit, unless his own act do concur. (3) The Apostle declares, That this reconciliation was made when we were enemies; Ergo, Before our believing, or the fulfilling of any condition on our part: For Believers are not enemies. (4) If his meaning were no more then this, that it is through the death of Christ, that we are reconciled, be it when it will, that we are reconciled; then this clause [when we were enemies] would be superfluous and redundant; whereas the main emphasis of the Text doth lie therein, as is evident from the grada∣tion which the Apostle makes, Vers. 6, 8, 10. (5) The Apostle in 2 Cor. 5.19. affirms, That our Saviour did not onely pay the price of our reconciliation, but that God did so far accept of, or ac∣quiesce therein, that upon the payment of it, he did not impute our sins unto us, i. e. he justified us; for the Apostle, Rom. 4. de∣fines Justification to be the non-imputation of sin. (6) And lastly, That which he grants, yeelds the matter in question, viz. The im∣mediate actual reconciliation of sinners upon the death of Christ; for if Christ by shedding of his blood, paid the total and full price,
for our deliverance from the curse of the Law, then were we actu∣ally set free from the obligation of it; for when the debt is paid, the debtor is free in Law; it is unjust to implead a person for a debt which is paid. §. 9. Secondly, To illustrate and confirm his Answer, he makes use of Grot. de Satis c. 7. p. 154. Oxon Grotius his distinction of three moments, or periods of the Will of God; (1) at Enmity, (2) Appeasable, (3) Ap∣peased. 1. Before the consideration of the death of Christ, God (saith he) is at enmity with the sinner, though not averse from all ways and means of reconciliation. 2. After the con∣sideration of the death of Christ; and now is the Lord not one∣ly appeasable, but doth also promise that he will be reconciled with sinners, upon such terms as he himself shall propose. 3. After Intercession on Christs part, and Faith on the sinners part; and now is God actually reconciled, and in friendship with the sinner. This Grotian and Vorstian Divinity is monstrous gross, which renders God as changable as a fickle Creature, and palpably denies his God-like nature, scil. His Simplicity, Eterni∣ty, Omnisciency, Immutability, &c. Arminius himself Armin. disp. pub. de Nat. Dei. Thes 51. was more modest, then to affirm a change in the Will of God; nay, Plato Vid. Aquin. p. 1. q. 19. art. 2. ad 3. & art. 5. in c. was a more Orthodox Divine in this point, who said, That the first mover can be moved of none, but by himself. The Will of God is not inclined or moved by any thing without him, unto any of his acts, whether Immanent or Transient; for that which is the cause of his Will, is the cause of himself; seeing that his Will, is his Essence. The death of Christ doth not cause any al∣teration in the Will of God Vid. Twiss. Vnd. Grat. l. 1. p. 2. digres. 1, 2, 3.; his Merits are not the cause, why God doth love us, or will to us the blessings of his Covenant, they did not change God, ex nolente in volentem, ex odio hbente in diligentem Rhaetof. Apol. c. 2. n. 16., as Greevenchovius dreamed: And the Reasons are, (1) Because God is unchangable, he neither ceaseth to will what at any time he intended, nor doth he begin to will what he did not always purpose: (2) Because no reason can be given of the Will of God, Aquinas says well, Nullum temporale Aquin. . p. q. 23. art 5. in c., &c. Nothing that hath its being in time, can be the cause of that which is eternal, for then the effect should be before the cause. Now that I may not actum agere, I shall desire the Reader to consult what Mr. Owen Answ. to Bax∣er, c. 6. p. 36. hath said in answer to this notion of Grtius; whereof, if
Mr. W. had vouchsafed to take any notice, he might have seen cause enough to decline from the steps of his admired Grotius. §. 10. Thirdly, he infers, That because the Apostle saith, Vers. 11. We have now received the atonement, or reconciliation. Ergo, Not before we believed. To which I answer, (1) He might as well reason, that because the Apostle saith, 1 Cor. 15.20. Now is Christ risen, Ergo, He was not risen before he writ that Epistle; and from Eph. 2.2. The Spirit that now worketh in the children of unbelief, Ergo, He did not work in them before. (2) If it be re∣ferred to our receiving, or apprehension by Faith, it doth not prove, that the reconciliation or atonement was not made before. There is a wide difference between the making or obtaining of reconcili∣ation▪ and our receiving of it; though we cannot receive or apply it to our selves any otherwise then by Faith, yet it follows not, That God did not account it unto us before. The Typical Sacrifices made a present atonement, much more the real, see Heb. 9.14. §. 11. Fourthly, He gives us his opinion concerning the imme∣diate effect of the death of Christ, Which (saith Mr. Baxter) is one of the greatest and noblest questions in our controverted Divinity; he that can rightly answer this, is a Divine indeed. And no doubt but Mr. W. deserves the Bell in his account. Let us therefore see what a glorious atcheivement he ascribes unto it. It is (saith he) through the death of Christ, that the promise of reconciliation is made, by, and according to which, we are actu∣ally reconciled unto God after we do believe; to wit, at the day of judgement, when we have performed that, and all other condi∣tions required of us; which in sum, is, as if he had said, That the death of Christ procured no certain or immediate effect at all: For notwithstanding his death, it is possible that none may be saved; for things obtained under condition, are as to their accom∣plishment altogether uncertain; for the condition may be fulfilled, or it may not be fulfilled. The utmost which hereby is ascribed to the death of Christ, is, That he hath obtaned a salvability for sin∣ners, or a way whereby they may become their own saviours; which in the old Popish English is, That Christ hath merited that we might merit Eternal life, or as the Remonstrants have refined the phrase, His death hath made God placabilem, but not placa∣tum. A shift (says Pemble) devised meerly to uphold the liber∣ty
of mans will, and universal Redemption. Whereunto the abettors of this notion do hie them apace. §. 12. But against it, I shall oppose these considerations. (1) The Scripture no where ascribes this effect to the death of Christ, That he died to obtain a conditional grant, that we by performing the condition, might be reconciled to God, but to obtain peace and re∣conciliation it self. Daniel doth not say that Messiah shall be cut off to obtain a promise, but to make an end of sin, &c. Chap. 9.24. Nor the Apostle, that Christ by the blood of the cross, hath ob∣tained a conditional promise of reconciliation, but that he hath made peace, Col. 1.20. broken down the partition wall, Ephes. 2.14. delivered us from the curse, Gal. 3.13. And our Saviour in that of Matth. 26.28. (which Mr. W. cites) doth not say, That he shed his blood to procure a conditional promise, whereby all men may obtain remission; but for the remission of the sins of many, i. e. of all the Elect. (2) If Christ by his death obtain∣ed onely a conditional promise, then was his death no more avail∣able to the Elect, then unto Reprobates, no more to Peter, then it was to Judas; whereas the Scripture shews us, That the effects of Christs death are peculiar onely to the Elect. See John 10.15, 16, 26. & 17.9, 20. (3) If Christ by his death obtained but a conditional promise, then do men more for their Salvation, then Christ hath done; for he that performs the condition, doth more to his Salvation, then he that obtained the conditional promise; notwithstanding which, he might have perished. (4) It makes Christ to have died in vain, at least, without any determinate end, in reference unto them, for whom he died; seeing that notwith∣standing his death, it was possible, that none at all might be saved. And thus (as Mr. Owen hath noted Answer to Baxter, p. 8.) he is made a Surety of an uncertain Covenant, a Purchaser of an Inheritance perhaps never to be enjoyed, a Priest sanctifying none by his Sacrifice; a thing we would not ascribe to a wiseman in a far more easie un∣dertaking. If Mr. W. shall say, that Christ is certain, that the Elect will perform the condition required, we shall demand whether this certainty doth arise from their wills, or his will. If he say from their wills, and his fore-sight of their well using of their natural abilities to fulfil the condition required, he shakes hands with Papists and Arminians, who make our Election and Redemption to be ex
praevisa fide: A conceit that hath been confuted over and over; if from his own will, because he hath purchased Faith for them, then he obtained more by his death, then a conditional pro∣mise. §. 13. Fifthly, The ground whereon he builds these Assertions, is a very sandy foundation, to wit, That the death of Christ was not solutio ejusdem, but tantidem; not the payment of that which was in the obligation, but of something equivalent; and therefore it doth not deliver us ipso facto, but according to the compact and agreement between the Father and him. I answer, (1) Whether the death of Christ be solutio ejusdem, or tantidem, as it is a satisfaction or payment of a debt, so the discharge thereby pro∣cured, must needs be present and immediate; for that a debt should be paid and satisfied, and yet justly chargeable, implies a contradiction. But (2) Mr. W. might have thought we would ex∣pect a better proof then his bare word, That the death of Christ is not solutio ejusdem, seeing the Holy Ghost shews, First, That Christ was held in the same obligation, which we were under, He was made under the Law, not an other, but the very same that we were held in, Gal. 4.3, 4. Ergo, he paid the same debt that we did ow. Secondly, That the Curse, or punishment which we deserved, was inflicted upon him, Gal. 3.13. The whole wages or curse that is due to sin, is Death; and this Christ under-went for us, Heb. 2.9, 14. Isai. 53.4, 5. What is it to die, or to bear chastisement for another, but to undergo that death which the other should have undergone? If it be objected, That the death which we de∣served, is Eternal, such as the damned endure; our Divines have answered long ago, That Christs death was such in pondere, though not in specie, in potentia, though not in actu: The dignity of his person raised the price of his temporary sufferings to an equipol∣lency with the other. Mr. Owen Ib. p. 30. says well, That there is a same∣ness in Christs sufferings with that in the obligation in respect of Essence, and equivalency in respect of the Adjuncts or Attenden∣cies. Thirdly, The laying of our sins upon Christ, Isai. 53.6. subjected him to the same punishment which our sins deserved. Fourthly, If God would have dispenced with the idem in the first obligation, Christ need not have died; for if the justice of God would have been satisfied with less then that penalty threatned in
the Law, he might as well have dispenced with the whole: So then his inference, That the death of Christ doth not deliver us ipso facto, (being destitute of this support) will fall to the ground of its own accord. §. 14. M. W. grants, That if the debtor himself do bring un∣to the creditor, that which he ows him, it presently dischargeth him, but the payment of a Surety doth not. And why not? A∣mongst men there is no difference, so the debt be paid, it matters not, whether it be by the Principal, or his Surety, the obligation is voide in respect of both: The case is the very same between Christ and us. Secondly, This Exception makes the payment of Christ, less efficacious for the discharge of our debt, then if it had been made by us, whereas it is infinitely more acceptable to God, then the most perfect righteousness performed by us. But (sayes he) the payment of a Surety is refusable] Not after that he is admitted by the creditor, and taken into Bond with, or for the principal debtor. It is true, God might have refused to be satisfied for our debt by a Surety; but seeing he ordained his Son to be our Surety, and entered into Covenant with him from everlasting, to accept his payment on our behalf; the debt which he hath fully satisfied, cannot be charged again, either upon the Party, or Surety, without manifest injustice. But the Father and the Son have agreed between themselves, that none should have actual reconciliation by the death of Christ, till they do believe.] Shew us this agreement, and we will yeeld the cause. As for the Scriptures which he hath men∣tioned, they speak of no such thing, John 6.40. This is the will of him that sent me, That every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting life. This Text, and others like it, do onely shew who have the fruition and enjoyment of the benefits of Christ, to wit, they that believe. The other Text, Gal. 5.2, 4. is palpably abused to serve his turn. The Apo∣stle doth not say, Without Faith Christ shall profit us nothing, but if we joyn any thing with Christ as necessary to attain Salva∣tion, we are not Believers, or true Christians, our profession of Christ shall profit us nothing; and the reason hereof is, because these two principles cannot be mixed See Di▪ on Gal 5.2.. A mans righteousness before God, is either all by Works, or all by Christ; and there∣fore,
whosoever attributes any part thereof to Works, he wholly renounceth Christ. At the sixth Verse he attributes that to Faith, which he denies unto other Works. In Christ Jesus (saith he) neither circumcision nor uncircumcision availeth any thing, but Faith which worketh by love. But as the Godly learned Vid. Perk. & Calv. in loc. have well observed, the intent of the Apostle here, was not to shew what it is that doth justifie, but what are the Exercises of Divine Wor∣ship, in which Christians should be conversant. He doth not say, That Faith working by love, is available to us before God, or in the sight of God, but in Christ, i. e. In the Church Sarcer. apud Marlorat. in loc. & Perkins., or King∣dom of Christ, which consists in Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; though neither Faith, nor Love, are available to justifie us, yet they are available, i. e. Acceptable to God as acts or duties of Spiritual Obedience, they are the onely acceptable service which we can perform to God. The last place he hath mentioned, is as little to the purpose, as the rest, 1 Joh. 5.11. He that hath not the Son, hath not life. True! he doth not say, That all who have not Faith (except final unbelievers) have not the Son, or any benefit by him. §. 15. But (says Mr. W.) if our Adversaries could prove, That it was either the Will of God in giving his Son, or the Will of Christ in giving himself to the death, that his death should be available to the immediate and actual reconciliation of sin∣ners, without any condition performed on their part, it were something to the purpose; but till this be done (which indeed can never be done) they were as good say nothing. Had not pre∣judice cast a mist before his eyes, the Scriptures which have been brought already, would be proof sufficient. What clearer Testi∣mony can be desired of the Will of God, and of Christ in this point, then those Sacred Oracles which shew us, First, That Christ by the Will of God, gave himself a Ransom and Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor unto God, in behalf of all the Elect, Joh. 6.27. Heb. 5.10. & 10.9, 10. Secondly, That this Ran∣som was alone, and by it self, a full adequate and perfect satisfacti∣on to Divine Justice, for all their sins, Heb. 1.3. & 10.10, 12, 14. 1 Joh. 1.7. Thirdly, That God accepted it, and declared himself well pleased and satisfied therewith, Matth. 3.17. Isa. 42.1. Insomuch, that God hath thereupon covenanted and
sworn, that he will never remember their sins, nor be wrath with them any more, Isa. 43.25. & 54.9, 10. Fourthly, That by this Ransom of his, they are freed and delivered from the curse of the Law, Gal. 4.4. & 3.13. Our Adversaries say, That he paid the price for their Redemption, but with no intent that they should be immediately and absolutely freed Baxters Ap∣pend. p. 152.; which is often, boldly af∣firmed, and as slenderly proved. But why not immediately and absolutely? There is (saith Mr. W.) a compact and agreement between the Father and the Son, when he undertook to be our Surety, that his death should not be available for the actual reconciliation of sinners, till they have performed the terms and conditions required on their part. Sed hoc restat probandum; and I am perswaded will, till the worlds end. Let them shew us this Covenant and Agreement, and we are satisfied; till this be done, we shall think our proofs sufficient; and that the force of those Allegations is no whit invalidated by this Crude Asserti∣on. I confess I have heard much talk of this Suspensive Covenant, but hitherto I have not had the hap to meet with that Author, that hath attempted to make it forth; though I might justly be excused from the labor of proving the Negative, seeing that it lies upon our Adversaries to clear it up, That there was such a compact and agreement made between the Father and the Son, that his death should not be available to the immediate reconciliation of sinners, but onely upon conditions performed by them. Yet because I in∣tend not any other Reply, and that Mr. W. may see I do not dissent, because he hath said, and not proved it; which in con∣troverted points, were ground enough; I shall offer him the Reasons, which as yet do sway my Judgement to believe the contrary.
CHAP. XIV. Of the Covenant between the Father and the Son, con∣cerning the immediate effects of Christs death. THe Reasons which perswade me to believe, That there was not any Covenant passed between God and Christ, to hinder the immediate and actual reconciliation of Gods Elect by his death, and to suspend this effect thereof, upon terms and condi∣tions to be performed by them; but contrariwise, that it was the will both of God and of Christ, that his death should be avail∣able to their immediate and actual Reconciliation and Justi∣fication, without any condition performed on their part, Are, as followeth. First, There is no such Covenant doth appear, Ergo, there is none. Non est Scriptum, Ergo, There is no such thing; hath hitherto been counted a good Argument amongst Christians: It is not possible (says Damascene Damas. de id. Orthod. l. 1. . 2. & Iod. Clictov. in loc.) , &c. To speak ought of God, beside the things which are divine∣ly manifested in the Old and New Testament. If there be any such Covenant, let our Adversaries shew it, and until they do, we shall rest securely in the Negative; they must pardon us, if we yeeld not up our Faith to unwritten Verities Omnes sciant, nemini quic∣quam, quàm quod scriptis probave∣rit, esse cre∣dendum. Cod. l. 1. Tit. 18. leg. uni. Grat. Valentinian. & l. 3. Tit. 1. leg. . Constant,. Secondly, The Covenant made between God and Christ, was, That upon giving up of himself to death, he should purchase a Seed like the Stars of Heaven, i. e. All the Elect of God, Isa. 53.10. And our Saviour Christ after that he had tasted death to bring many sons unto glory, boasts and glories in this atchievement. Heb. 2.13. Behold, I and the children, whom God hath given me. Ergo, It was the Will of God, that his death should be avail∣able for their immediate reconciliation; for they could not be the children of Christ, and the children of wrath at the same time. §. 2. Thirdly, If it were the Will of God, that the death of Christ, should be the payment of our debt, and a full satisfaction
for all our iniquities, then was it his Will that our discharge pro∣cured thereby, should be immediate; but it was the Will of God, that the death of Christ should be the payment of our debts, and a full satisfaction for our iniquities. Ergo. I suppose the Assump∣tion will not be questioned; for though the word satisfaction be not used in Scripture See Bull of the Covenant. p. 276, &c., yet the thing it self is plainly signified in those phrases of Redemption, Atonement, Reconciliation; and in like manner, all those places which declare that Christ died for us, and for our sins, and offences, do imply the same; scil. That the death of Christ, was the payment of our debts, and the punish∣ment of our sins; that thereby he satisfied the Law for all those wrongs, & injuries we have done unto it. Now the Sequel is evident, If God willed, that the death of Christ should be a full and satis∣factory payment of our demerits, then he willed that the discharge procured thereby, should be immediate and present; for it is con∣trary to Justice and Equity, that a debt when it is payed, should be charged either upon the Surety or Principal; and therefore though God did will, that the other effects of Christs death, as it is the meritorious price of Faith, Holiness, Glory, &c. should be sub termino, or in Diem, not Present but Future; yet he willed, that this effect of it, to wit, our discharge from sin, and the curse, should be present and immediate; because it implies a contradicti∣on, that the same debt should be paid, and not paid; that it should be discharged, and yet justly chargable: As when a man that is a Trespasser, or any one for him, payes a sum of money, which is sufficient both for discharge of his trespass, as also for the purchase of a peece of Land: From the trespass his discharge must be pre∣sent, if the satisfaction be full, though the enjoyment of the Land may be in Diem, as the Vendee and Purchaser can agree; the Case before us, is the very same. The death of Christ was both a price and a ransom, it served both to pay our debts, and to procure our hap∣piness; he did thereby purchase both our deliverance from sin and death, and all those Spiritual Blessings, present and future, which we stand in need of. The discharge of our debts, and deliverance from punishment, must needs be present and immediate upon the payment of the price, though those Spiritual Blessings be not re∣ceived till a long time after, as God and Christ shall see it fit to bestow them on us. To this I shall adde a fourth.
§. 3. Fourthly, If nothing hindered the reconciliation of the Elect with God, but the breach of the Law, then the Law being satisfied, it was the Will of God that they should be immediately reconciled; but nothing hindred their reconciliation with God, but the breach of the Law. Ergo. It was sin alone that made a di∣stance, or separation between God and them, Isa. 59.2. For which cause it is compared to a cloud or mist, Isa. 44.22. to a partition wall, Ephes. 2.14. It lay as a block in the way, that God could not (salva justitia) bestow upon them those good things intended towards them in his Eternal Election. The onely cause of Christs death was to satisfie the Law; he did not die to pro∣cure a new Will or Affection in the heart of God towards his E∣lect, nor yet to adde any new thing in God, which doth perfect and compleat the act of Election, as Wallaeus seems to intimate Apud Rhaetorf. Apol. p. 39.: But that God might save us in a way agreeable to his own Justice, that he might confer upon us all those Blessings he intended, with∣out wrong and violation to his holy Law; for God having made a Law, that the soul which sinneth, should die, the Justice and Truth of God required, that satisfaction should be made for the sins of the Elect, no less then of other men; which, they being un∣able to perform, the Son of God became their Surety, to bear the Curse, and fulfil the Law in their stead. God might will unto us sundry benefits, which he cannot actually bestow upon us without wrong to his Justice: As a King may will and purpose the deli∣verance of his Favorite, who is imprisoned for debt, yet he cannot actually free him, till he hath paid and satisfied his Creditor. So though God had an irrevocable, peremptory Will to save his E∣lect; yet he could not actually save them, till satisfaction was made unto his Justice; which being made, there is no let or impe∣diment to stop the current of his Blessings. As when the Cloud is dissolved, the Sun shines forth; when the partition wall is broken down, they that were separated, are again united: So the cloud of our sins being blotted out, the beams of Gods love have as free a passage towards us, as if we had not sinned. Now that Christ by his death removed this let and hinderance, the Scripture is as ex∣press as can be desired, as that he made an end of sin, Dan. 9.24. Blotted it out, &c. Col. 2.14 Diodate on Col. 2.14.. Took it quite away, (as the Scape-goat, Levit. 16.22.) John 1.29. And slew the enmity
between God and us, Ephes. 2.16. See Verses 13, 14, 15. §. 4. Fifthly, If it were the Will of God, that the sin of Adam should immediately over-spread his posterity, then it was his Will that the Satisfaction and Righteousness of Christ, should imme∣diately redound to the benefit of Gods Elect; for there is the same reason for the immediate transmission of both, to their re∣spective subjects Vid. Sup. cap. 1. sect. 6.; for (as the Apostle shews, Rom. 5.14.) both of them were heads and roots of mankinde. Now the sin of A∣dam did immediately over-spread his posterity; All men sinned in him, before ever they committed any actual sin, Rom. 5.12, 14. And therefore the Righteousness of Christ descended im∣mediately upon all the Elect for their Justification, Rom. 5.17, 18. Sixthly, If the Sacrifices of the Law were immediately avail∣able for the Typical cleansing of sins under that administration, then the Sacrifice which Christ hath offered was immediately available, to make a real atonement for all those sins for which he suffered. The reason of the consequence, is, because the Real Sacrifice is not less efficacious, then the Typical, Heb. 9.14. But those Legal Sa∣crifices did immediately make atonement, without any condition performed on the sinners part, Levit. 16.30. §. 5. Seventhly, If it be the Will of God that the death of Christ should be available, for the immediate reconciliation of some of the Elect, without any condition performed by them, then it was his Will, that it should be so for all of them; the reason is, because the Scripture makes no difference between persons in the communication of this Grace, The free gift (saith the Apostle) came upon all men, i. e. In omnes praedestinatos August., to Justifica∣tion of life, to wit, by the gracious imputation of God. But it is the Will of God, that the death of Christ should be available for the immediate reconciliation of some of the Elect, without con∣ditions performed by them, viz. To Elect Infants, or else they are not reconciled, and consequently they cannot be saved. Now if any shall say, That God hath a peculiar way of recon∣ciling and justifying Infants, or of communicating unto them the Benefits of Christs death; let them clear it up from Scripture; let them shew us the Text that saith, God gives Salvation unto In∣fants in one manner, and to men in another; to the one freely, and
to the others, upon conditions. If they say, Infants have the Seed, or Habit of Faith, the Scripture will contradict them, which af∣firmeth, (1) That they have no knowledge at all, either of good or evil, Deut. 1.39. And that they cannot so much as discern, between the right, and the left hand. And if so, how can they, who conceive not of things Natural, understand those things that are Heavenly and Spiritual? And therefore (sayes Augustine Epist. 57.) If we should go about to prove, that Infants know the things of God, who as yet know not the things of men, our own senses would confute us. And can there be Faith without knowledge? (2) That Faith cometh by hearing of the Word Preached. Rom. 10. Now Infants either hear not, or if they do, they un∣derstand not what they hear: We have sufficient experience, that no Children give any testimony of Faith, until they have been taught and instructed. Elect Children (which are afterwards mani∣fested to be such) are as obstinate and unteachable as any others: As for the instance of the Baptist, that he believed in his Mothers belly, because it is said, Luke 1.41. That he was filled with the Holy Ghost, &c. it doth not prove it; for (as one observes Downs of the Faith of In∣fants, p. 199.) it is not said, Credidit in utero, but onely, exultavit, which ex∣ultation or springing, Divinitùs facta est in Infante, non huma∣nitùs ab Infante; And therefore it is not to be drawn into an ex∣ample, or urged as a rule to us, what to think of other Infants. But if any shall say, that Infants do perform the conditions of Re∣conciliation and Salvation by their Parents; then it will follow, That all the Children of believing Parents, are reconciled and justi∣fied, because they perform the conditions, as much for all, as they do for one: But I suppose no man will say, That all the Children of believing Parents are justified; we may as well assert works of supererogation, as that one is justified by anothers Faith Ezek. 18.20. Hab. 2.4.. That any Infants are saved, it is meerly from the Grace of Election, and the free imputation of Christs Righteousness; of which, all that are elected, are made partakers in the same manner. §. 6. Eighthly, If it were the Will of God, that Christ should have the whole glory of our reconciliation; it was his will that it should not in the least depend upon our works or conditions; be∣cause that condition, or conditions will share with him in the glo∣ry of this effect; and our Justification would be partly of Grace,
and partly of Works; partly from Christ, and partly from our selves: Nay, it would bee more from our selves, then from Jesus Christ; seeing, that notwithstanding all that he hath done for us, we had been eternally miserable, unlesse we had also contribu∣ted our owne endeavours. How derogatory this is to Christ, and contrary to the Scriptures is sufficienly manfest. Ninthly, If it were the Will of God that his people should have strong consolations Heb. 6.18., and that their joy should be full 1 Joh. 1.4., then it was his Will that their peace and reconciliation, should not de∣pend upon termes and conditions performed by themselves. For (as was noted before out of Calvin Sup. cap. 4.) it is impossible that any soule should injoy a firme and settled peace, whose confidence to∣wards God is grounded upon conditionall promises; and,Rom. 4.16. sayes the Apostle, our Salvation is by grace, to the end that the promise might be sure unto all the seed; implying, that if it depended never so little upon our works, wee could not bee sure thereof, and consequently, wee must walke in darknesse and see no light. §. 7. Tenthly, If it were the Will of God that the death of Christ should be available for the reconciliation of his Elect, whilst they live in this world, then it was his Will that it should procure for them, immediate, and actuall reconciliation without the inter∣vention of those conditions supposed to be required of them; and the reason of this consequence is, because they cannot performe all the conditions required of them till their last breath, this being one, that they must persevere to the end; and the nature of conditi∣onall grants is such, that the benefit cannot be had, and injoyed, till all the conditions are performed: So that if the reconciliation of the Elect, did depend upon the conditions pretended, they should not only not have reconciliation before Faith, but not before death; which is contrary to innumerable Scriptures, which doe declare that the Saints are perfectly justified, and so immutably reconciled unto God, that nothing shall be able to separate them from his love; though their Sanctification be imperfect; yet their Justifi∣cation is as full and perfect as ever it shall be; it doth not grow and increase as the other doth, but is perfect at first See Hildersh. on Psa. 51. lect. 128. Ames. med. s. 1. c. 27.; And there∣fore baptisme which seals unto us the forgivenesse and washing a∣way of all our sins, not originall only, but actuall also, is admi∣nistred
but once in all our life time; to shew that our Justification is done all at once, at the very first instant, wherein the righteous∣nesse of Christ is imputed to us, Ezek. 16.8, 9. Act. 13.39. 1 Joh. 1.7. Col. 2.13, 14. §. 8. Eleventhly, If it were the Will of God that the death of Christ should certainly and infallibly procure the reconciliation of his Elect, then surely it was not the Will of God that it should depend upon terms and conditions on their part; because that which depends upon future conditions, is, as to the event, altoge∣ther uncertain Omnis condi∣tio in casu min∣certum tendt., it is possible it may never be, by the non-perfor∣mance of the condition. But this hath been alleadged before. Twelfthly, If God willed this blessing to his Elect by the death of Christ, but conditionally; then he willed their Reconciliation and Justification, no more then their non-Reconciliation, and Condemnation; and stood as it were indifferent to either event; but doubtlesse his heart was more set upon it then so: see John 6.38, 39. John 17.21, 22, 24. The consequence is cleare, for if he willed their Justification onely in case they should beleeve, and repent; then he willed their Damnation in case they doe not be∣leeve, and repent; and then it will follow that he willed their Ju∣stification, no more then their Damnation; nay, most probably; he willed it lesse, because we are more prone to Infidelity, then we are to Faith; and to hardnesse of heart, then, we are to repen∣tance. I adde to this. §. 9. Thirteenthly, If God willed unto men the benefits of Christs death upon any condition to be performed by them, it will follow that God foresaw in them an ability to performe some good, which Christ hath not merited. Conditionall reconciliation neces∣sarily supposeth Free-will. For either God willed it unto men up∣on a possible, or impossible condition; not upon an impossible condition, for that is inconsistent with the Wisdome of God; if up∣on a possible condition, the possibility thereof ariseth either from Gods Will, or from Mans; it is possible, either because God will bestow it, or because man can performe it. Our adversaries, cannot mean it in the former sence, for God will bestow upon us no∣thing, but what Christ hath purchased; and Christ hath purcha∣sed nothing, save what God hath promised in his Covenant. Now Mr. W. denyes that the promise of Faith is any part of the Co∣venant,
or any effect of it, p. 32. and others that are for this con∣ditional reconciliation look upon it as a ridiculous conceit Anne conditi∣onem quis seri & sapienter pre∣scribet alteri sub promisso praemii, & paenae gravis∣simae commina∣tione, qui eam in eo cui prescribit efficere vult, haec actio totae iudiora, & vix scoena digna est. Rem Apol. c. 9. p. 105. a. Nihil ineptius, nihil vaniùs quam fidem me∣rito Christi tri∣buere si enim Christus meritu est fidem, tum fides conditio esse non poterit▪ c. 8. p. 95., that God should promise men Salvation upon a condition, and that he should work this condition in them, and for them; so that in the upshot, we shall be beholding cheifly to Free Will, an opinion so absurd that in all ages it hath been exploded by humble and so∣ber minded Christians, it being palpably contrary to the Scriptures which shew that every man by nature is without strength, dead in treaspasses and sins, that we cannot so much as think a good thought, that it is God who worketh in us both to will and to do of his own good pleasure. If any shal say that God did will, that by Christ wee should have Faith, and after that, reconciliation; Though this be granted them, it will follow notwithstanding, that our reconciliation is an immediate effect of the death of Christ (as Mr. Owen hath invincibly proved in his answer to Baxter, p. 34.) and then all the controversie will be, about Gods order and method in conferring on us the effects of Christs death; and whether God doth enable a man to perform good works, before his person is re∣conciled to God. Some Reasons for the Negative have been given before. §. 10. Fourteenthly, If God did will that our sins should be accounted unto Christ without any condition on our part, then it was his Will that they should be discounted unto us without any condition, and the Reason thereof is, because the charging and ac∣counting of them unto him, necessarily includes our discharge; the imputing of our sins to Christ, was formally, the non-imputing of them unto us: Gods accounting of them unto him (as hath been shown) was a reall discounting of them from us, for they could not be accounted or charged upon both, without a manifest con∣tradiction in the thing it selfe, and in the Justice of God. But God willed that our sins should be accounted to, and charged up∣on Christ, without any condition performed by us, for he actually suffered for them, before we were. Ergo. §. 11. To these Arguments from Scripture, I mighr adde many plaine Texts, which doe declare that our reconciliation, is the actual and immediate effect of Christs death, as Col. 1.14. Eph. 1.7. We have redemption [not, we shall have] the forgive∣nesse [or non-imputation] of sins according to the riches of his
grace [not according to any condition performed by us] he hav∣ing obtained eternall redemption for us, Heb. 9.12. And 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. (a place which we have often mentioned) the Apostle shewes that Christ by his death, made such a reconciliation for us, as that God thereupon did not impute our sins unto us, which was long before any condition could be performed by us. Else∣where, That Christ by himselfe purged and expiated our sins, Heb. 1.3. and afterwards set downe, as having finished that worke, chap. 10·12. Now sin that is fully purged, and expiated, is not imputable to the sinner. The same Apostle addes, that Christ by his sacrifice hath for ever perfected all them for whom it was offered, Heb. 10.14. And in another place, that he hath made them compleat, as to the forgivenesse of their sins, Col. 2.10, 13, 14. In Rom. 8.33, 34. He argues from the death of Christ to the non-imputation of our sins, Who can lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect, it is God that justifieth, it is Christ hat dyed; whereas notwithstanding sin would have been charge∣able upon them, and they, condemnable if the death of Christ had not procured their discharge, without the intervention of any con∣dition performed by them. CHAP. XV. Wherein Mr. Woodbridges Replyes to the second Objecti∣on (as he cals it) concerning our being Justified in Christ as a common person, are examined. THe Argument was proposed by me at the time of our Confe∣rence, in this manner. They that were in Christ as a com∣mon person, before they beleeved, were Justified before they beleeved; But many were in Christ, as a common person, be∣fore they beleeved, Ergo: Mr. W. denyed both Propositions. The major I proved in this wise: If Christ was justified before many hat are in him doe beleeve; then they that are in him, were stified before they beleeved. But Christ was justified before ma∣ny
that are in Christ do beleeve, Ergo. His answer hereunto (as I remember) was, I deny all: And therefore the Assumption was confirmed from Isa. 50.8, 9. in this manner, Christ was justified at his resurrection, but that happened before many of them who are in Christ as a common person doe beleeve. Ergo, That Christ was justified at his resurrection, is clear from this Text, He is near that justifieth me, &c. Which words (I said) were utter∣ed by the Prophet in the person of our Saviour, in the time of his greatest humiliation, who comforted himselfe with this, that the Lord would shortly justifie him; which was to be done at his Resurrection See M. Goodw▪ Christ set forth sect. 3. c. 5., when the Lord publickly declared to all the world, that he was acquitted and discharged from all those sins which were laid upon him, and which he, as a Surety undertook to satis∣fie. The sequel of the major was also proved by this Enthymem. The acts of a common person doe belong unto them, whom he represents; whatsoever is done by, or to a common person, as such, is to be attributed to them in whose stead he stands; and therefore if Christ were justified, all that were in him were justified also: For seeing that he was not justified, from his own, but from the sins of others; all they whom he represents were justified in his Justification: Whereunto hee replyed, That Christ was not justified according to the tenor of the New Co∣venant, which did lead us to that discourse of the New Covenant which is afterwards mentioned, of which in its place. §. 2. We shall now take a view of his Replyes to this Argument, which we find in his printed copy. And 1. he distinguisheth of a threefold Justification, (1) Purposed, (2) Purchased, and (3) Ex∣emplified; all which are before Faith; So then by his own confession, Justification in a Scripture sense, goes before Faith; Which is that horrid opinion, he hath all this while so eagerly opposed. It may be he will say as Actualis pec∣catorum remis∣sio & justificati absque fide, &c. nemini contin∣gunt. Arminius doth, that neither of these were actuall Justification, which were a poor put off; for as Dr. Twisse Vind. Grat▪ l. 1. p. 2 sect. 25. observes, Omnis Justificatio simpliciter dicta, con∣gruenter exponenda est, de Justificatione actuali; Analogum per se positum stat pro famosiori significato: When we speak of Justification simply, there is no man but understands it of actu∣all Justification. And first, That which he cals Justification pur∣posed in the Decree of God, is reall and actuall Justification;
for if Justification be Gods will not to punish, or to deal with his Elect according to their sins (as both the Psalmist and Apostle do define it) then when Gods Will was in actual being, their Justifica∣tion was actual: It is absurd, to say, That God did decree or purpose to will any thing whatsoever, his Will being his Essence, which admits no cause, either within or without God. (2) We have shewn before, that, Justification being taken for the effect of Gods Will, to wit, our discharge from the Obligation of the Law, it was actually, because solely, and absolutely obtained by the death of Christ; there being no other cause out of God, which concurs to the producing of this effect. §. 3. The third Branch of his distinction, Justification exem∣plified, is, terminus redundans, a member that may well be spa∣red; for (1) there is not the least hint thereof in Holy Writ; the Scripture no where calls our Saviour, the example or pattern of our Justification. For though he is proposed to us as an example in acts of Moral Obedience See Reynolds 3. Treat. p. 4▪10., yet in his works of Mediation, he was not so; in these he was not an exemplary, but a meritorious procuring cause; an example is proposed to be imitated, and therefore we are frequently exhorted to imitate our Saviour in works of Sanctification Matth. 11.29. Joh. 13.15. Phil. 2.5. 1 Pet. 2.21.  John 2.6., but we are no where bid to imitate him in our Justification, or in justifying our selves. It was needless he should be a pattern of our Justification; for this pattern must be of use, either unto us, or unto God: Not to us, because we do not justifie our selves; not unto God, because he needs no pattern or example to guide or direct him. (2) He that payes our debts to the utmost farthing, and thereupon receives a discharge, is more then a pattern of our release: Our real discharge is in his, as our real debt was upon him. And therefore his Grand-father Parker Vid. Sup. c 3. said well, That Christs Resurrection was the Actual Justficati∣on, both of him and us. (3) If Christ were onely a pattern and example of our Justification, then was he justified from his own sins, and consequently was a sinner, which is the most horrid blas∣phemy that can be uttered. The reason of the consequence is evi∣dent; for if Christ were but a pattern of our Justification, then was he justified, as we are: Now we are justified from our own sins, which we our selves have committed, and therefore his Justifica∣tion must be from his own sins, or else the example and counter∣part
do not agree. (4) This expression intimates, that as Christ was justified by performing the conditions required of him, so we are justified by performing the conditions required of us; which in effect makes men their own Saviours, as before. (5) He re∣cedes very far, both from the meaning and expressions of all our Orthodox Writers, who do constantly call our Saviour a common person, but never that I finde, the exemplary cause of our Justifi∣cation. I shall onely refer the Reader to what his Grand-father Parker Park. de de∣scens. l 3. sect. 49, 50, 53. hath written of this matter, who hath copiously and learnedly proved both from Scripture, and the Fathers, That Christ no less then the first Adam, was made a common person by the Ordination of God, and his own voluntary undertaking; who took our sins upon him, as if they had been his own, and for the same made full satisfaction to Divine Justice, and consequently received as full a discharge in our behalf. (6) This expression of his, savors rankly, both of Pelagianism and Socinianism. The Pela∣gians as they made the first Adam a meer pattern and example, in communicating sin to his posterity; so they made the second A∣dam but the pattern and example of our reconciliation. Those words, 2 Cor. 5.18. Who hath reconciled us to himself [by Jesus Christ] they expounded, by his Doctrine, and by his Example Vid. Estium in loc., i. e. By our obedience to his Doctrine, and by imitatng his ex∣ample. The Socinians do speak the same Language Socin: part 1. de Servat. c. 2, 3, 4., Christus ideo servator noster dicitur, quod salutis viam nobis annuncia∣vit; quod salutis viam nobis confirmavit, miraculorum patra∣tione, sanguinis effusione, resurrectione à mortuis, quod vitae exemplo viam salutis nobis ostendit. Christ is therefore called a Saviour, because by his Life and Doctrine he hath shewed us the way of Salvation, and by his Miracles and Sufferings hath confirm∣ed the same Steg. Photin▪ Disp. 24 q 3.. I am sorry to hear the Language of Ashdod, from the mouth of a Protestant Minister. §. 4. The excuse which he gives, for calling our Saviour, the exemplary cause of our Justification, rather then a common per∣son, is both fallacious and impertinent. [I use (saith he) the term of an exemplary cause, rather then of a common person, be∣cause a common person may be the effect of those whom he re∣presents, as the Parliament of the Commonwealth.] 1. It is fallacious dealing, under pretence of giving a more sig∣nificant
term to leave out that, wherein the force of the Argument lay: He seems to intimate, that the phrases are of equal latitude, that an exemplary cause, doth express as much as a common per∣son, which is cleerly false; for the act of the Exemplar, is not the act of the Imitator; as the act of a common person, is the act of them whom he represents, which in Law, is accounted as if it had been done by them. Parents and Superiors are examples to their Children and Inferiors, they are not common persons, as Adam was to all his posterity, In whose loyns (saith the Apostle) we all sinned; and in this respect, he is made a figure of Christ, Rom. 5.14. Whose Righteousness is accounted unto them, for whom he died;Vers. 15, 17, 18. as Adams sin was accounted unto us, when as yet we were not. 2. It is impertinent, for though Christ be not the effect of them, whom he represents; yet that hinders not, but that his dis∣charge was theirs, no less then if he had been chosen by them. I can see no reason why the act of God, constituting and appointing his Son to be the Head, Surety, and Common Person, to all his Elect, should not be as effectual for the communication of his be∣nefits to them, as their own choice and election: We did not chuse Adam to be our common person, and yet his sin was im∣puted to us; so though we did not chuse the Lord Jesus to stand in our stead, that is no reason why his Righteousness and Satis∣faction should not be accounted ours. §. 5. The instances he hath brought from our Personal Resur∣rection, and Inherent Sanctification, to render this Argument absurd, have not the least force to conclude against the efficacy, of Christs Satisfaction, for our immediate discharge from sin and wrath. It doth not follow, that because we did not personally rise with Christ, and were not inherently sanctified in his Sanctificati∣on. Ergo. We had not in his Resurrection an actual discharge from the guilt of sin; there is not the like reason for these. For to our actual discharge, there needed no more then the payment of our debt, or satisfaction to the Law of God, but our personal re∣surrection necessarily supposeth both our life and death. Again, our Inherent Sanctification cannot be without our personal existence, and the use of those means which God hath appointed for that end; but our Justification is wrought without us, and for us,
Though Christ hath fully merited our Sanctification and Resur∣rection to glory (in which respect we are said to be crucified with him, and to be risen with Christ) as well as our Justification, yet it is not necessary that these benefits should be communicated to us at the same time, and in the same manner. It is no such absurdi∣ty to say, Christ hath purchased our Resurrection, though we are not risen, as to say, Christ hath purchased our discharge, and yet we are not discharged; for (as hath been shewn Cap. 14. sect. 2.) to say a debt is discharged, and yet that it is justly chargable, implies a contra∣diction. Let the Reader judge, whether the Assertion that fol∣lows, be not much more confident, then solid. [No man living can shew any reason of difference (as if he were master of as much Reason, as all men living) why we may not as justly infer, that our Resurrection is passed already, because we are risen in Christ; as that our Justication is passed before we believe, because we are justified in Christ. Enough hath been said to evict the dis∣proportion of these consequences. §. 6. 2. His next distinction, is, That Justification is either Causal and Virtual, or Actual and Formal; We were (saith he) causally and virtually justified in Christs Justification, but not actually and formally.] Our Protestant Divines do generally place the formale of Justification, in the non-imputation of sin: Now if our sins were formally imputed unto Christ, even to a full Satis∣faction, they could not formally be imputed unto us also, unless a debt discharged by a Surety, can be justly reckoned unto him that did first contract it. It is true, a debt may be imputed both to Principal and Surety, before it be discharged, but after to neither: It is granted by all Orthodox Writers, That our Saviour by giving himself to death, made full satisfaction to the utmost farthing, for all the sins or debts of Gods Elect. Now, I say, the discharge of a debt, is formally the discharge of the debtor, unless we speak of an outward formality, such as is by an Acquittance, which serves, but either against the unfaithfulness of the creditor, who other∣wise would deny the payment, or else against the ignorance of the debtor; who being not at the payment, might still look upon himself as a debtor, and lyable to all the consequences of his debts. In this sence, our Formal Justification is by the gracious sentence of the Gospel, terminated upon our Consciences; but otherwise, in∣trinsecally
and formally, the payment of our debt is our real dis∣charge. I shall grant him, That the death of Christ doth justifie us onely virtually; but yet I affirm, That the satisfaction in his death (being performed, and accepted for us) doth justifie us for∣mally; for the actual payment of a debt, is that which formally makes him that was the debtor, no debtor. And therefore, Christ dying for us, or for our sins; his reconciling us to God, and our being justified, are Synonima's in Scripture phrase, Rom. 5.8, 9, 10. Object.Object. But against this, some have alledged that of the Apo∣stle, 2 Cor. 5.21. where he saith, That Christ was made sin for us , that we might be made (he doth not say, that thereby we are made) the Righteousness of God in him. Whence they would infer, That the laying of our sins on Christ, is onely an Antecedent, which tends to the procuring of our Justification, and not the same formally.Answ. Whereunto we Answer, (1) That this phrase [that we might be, or be made] doth not alwayes signifie the final, but sometimes the formal cause: As when it is said, That light is let in, that darkness might be expelled; where the immis∣sion of light, is formally the expulsion of darkness. (2) Though the imputation of our sins to Christ, and of his Righteousness to us, do differ; yet the imputation of sin to him, and non-impu∣tation of it unto us, is but one and the same act of God; which was, when God was in Christ reconciling the world unto him∣self, not imputing their trespasses unto them, before the word of Reconciliation was given; and therefore before they believed, Vers. 19. (3) Though the imputation of our sin to Christ, and so the non-imputation thereof to us, have an antecedency in respect of imputation of Righteousness to us, yet it is of nature onely, and not of time. For though it be objected, That we were not then, and therefore Righteousness could not be imputed unto us, yet it follows not: They might as well object, Our sins were not then. Ergo, They could not be imputed unto Christ; whereas in this business of Justification,Rom. 4.17. God calleth things that are not, as though they were. But if Mr. W. had shewn what it is that formally justi∣fies us, besides the satisfaction made in Christs death, somewhat more might have been spoken to it. §. 7. The close of this Paragraph is such a dirty puddle, that I
intended to have stept over it in silence, seeing it is so hard to touch pitch, or pollution, and not be defiled with it; but yet for their sakes that do not know , I shall stay the Reader a little, whilest I wash off that dirt, which he hath thrown upon me, and others. [They are credulous souls, I will assure you, that will be drawn by such decoyes as these, into Schism and Faction, to the hard∣ning, and discomforting of more hearts in one hour, then the Opinion it self (should it obtain) will do good to, while the world stands.] I dare not allow my self , or to pay him in his own coyn, having perswaded my heart to follow better examples, even his, who when he was reviled, reviled not again, 1 Pet. 2.23. And theirs, who being reproached, returned bles∣sing, 1 Cor. 4.12. In these few words, there are a heap of slan∣ders packt together, both against my self and others, and (which is more grievous to be born) against the truths and ways of God, which we adhere to. 1. They that do embrace this Doctrine which I have taught, are aspersed with credulity and levity. I do verily believe there is not one of my charge, but is able to say as the Samaritans, John 4.42. We believe not, because of thy say∣ing; for we have heard him our selves, &c. I dare say, they are better setled, then to be shaken with the sophistry of this Assailant. I am sure, both they, and many more, will bear me witness, how frequently I do admonish them, of taking up matters of Faith, up∣on trust and credit: it being Idolatry in a high degree, to give the most Spiritual Worship of God, viz. Our Faith, to a weak and sinful man. He that believes a truth upon a Humane account, is no better Christian, then he that doth believe a lie. Let the prudent judge, whether they are not more justly obnoxious to this censure of abusing the credulity of simple souls, who will not endure that their hearers should bring their Doctrines to the touchstone. The tyranny and usurpation of the Popish Priests, is far more excusa∣ble, then the affected domination of some of ours; for they be∣lieve, that their Church is infallible, and cannot erre; ours confess, that they are fallible, and may erre, and yet expect subscription to their Dictates, no less then to the Canon it self: It is held a pia∣culum to question, or debate, what ever they say. 2. It is but an unhandsome character, he hath given my Arguments, which he calls decoyes. The Apostle, I take it, hath Englished his French,
Eph. 4.14. The sleight of men, who lie in wait to deceive. I dare say he knows me better, then in cold blood to accuse me of driving on such a devillish trade, as wittingly to deceive mens pre∣cious souls: And therefore, I shall call in no other Compurgator then his own Conscience. §. 8. As for his charge of Schisme and Faction, I am not care∣full to answer it, being the usuall foam of passionate men, who when they want Arguments to convince fall to downright railing Rationibus victi, dentibus vincunt, Bas. ep. 0. Haeretici argu∣mentis victi ca∣lumnias medi∣tantur. Athan. Istae sunt haereti∣corum machinae, ut convicti  perfidia, ad ma∣ledicta se confe∣rant. Hier. Apo. cont. Ruff.; Schisme (sayes a learned man Hale tr. of Schism.) in the common manage of the word is a meer Theologicall Scar-crow, wherewith they who uphold a party in Religion, seek to fright away others from en∣quiring into, and closing with that which they doe oppose: Both this and the other are most frequently in their mouthes, who are deepest in the guilt that is imported by them. Ahab by his sins brought down Plagues and Judgements upon Israel; yet he cals Elijah, the troubler of Israel, 1 King. 18.17. Athalia was the cheifest Traytor, and yet she was the first that cryed out Trea∣son, 2 King. 11.14▪ Tertullus was the Orator of the tumult, yet he inveighs against Paul, as a Ring leader of Sedition, Act. 24.5, 6. the Church of Rome, which hath fallen from the purity of the Catho∣lique Faith, brands them for Schismaticks who refuse to continue in the same Apostasie. Amongst our selves the late Innovators aspersed all those with Faction and Schisme who would not prostitute their Consciences to the Wils of men; and to this day ignorant and pro∣phane persons think all them to be Factious and Schismaticks who live more strictly, and religiously then themselves. I must needs say, they are lesse to be blamed▪ seeing Professors and Ministers do give them such an evill example. §. 9. I confesse though in common use, Schisme and Faction are but ridiculous termes, yet the things themselves are reall e∣vils; the one being an offence against Civill▪ and the other against Ecclesiasticall peace. If this Author had shewn wherein I had of∣fended against either of them, I doubt not but I should have clea∣red my selfe at a just Tribunal. For 1. I have ever been so far from factious Combinations, or attempting any thing against the Civil Peace, that (as I verily beleeve) it hath not been the least cause of my troubles, that I have alwayes prayed for, and pressed sub∣jection  Rom. 13.1., to the owers in being; had others of my
calling done the like, the disaffections of the people against the pre∣sent Government had not been so great as yet they are in these parts. 2. As for Schisme, I know no ground that he hath to charge me with it; for Schisme cannot be, but where communion is, or ought to be held: now to my best remembrance, I never refused to hold Christian comunimon with any person or persons, with whom by the Rules of Christ I conceived I ought. It is true, we receive not all within that Parochial circuit wherein we live, unto communion in Church Priviledges; because either they refuse to make Profession of their Faith, and to declare their subjection to the Ordinances of Jesus Christ: and so they separate from us, and not we from them; or else they are such as in their practises do contradict the profession which they seem to make, like them Tit. 1.16. And as for Members of other Churches, we are ready to give them the right hand of fellowship, unlesse the person, or the Church to which he belongs, lyes under the guilt of any publick scandal See Mr. Cot∣tons way of the Churches, p. 78 &c.. If he doth accuse me of Schsm, because I have refrained going to some Lectures that are preached in this City: I doubt not but the wise will be satisfied with a just Apology. I doe not conceive that Christians are bound to frequent every Lecture that is preached near them; the obligation to this Duty must needs be determined by Christian prudence; and we ought to follow that which we conceive hath the greatest tendency to Edification. Now I confesse I have rather chosen to deprive my selfe of that benefit, which sometime I might injoy, then to wound my Conscience by keeping of silence when I hear the Truths and Servants of God declaimed against Dr. Jackson Treat. of the Church, cap. 14 (a man large enough in the point of communion) grants, that there is just cause to separate from the communion of a visible Church (our practise doth not amount so high) when we are urged or constrained to professe or beleive some points of Doctrine, or to adventure upon some Practises, which are contrary to the Rule of Faith, or Love of God; and in case we are utterly deprived of freedome of Conscience, in professing what we inwardly beleeve, for which he cites 1 Cor. 7.23. Yee are bought with a price, be yee not Servants of men; For (sayes he) although we were perswaded that we might com∣municate with such a Church without evident danger of damna∣tion; yet in as much as we cannot communicate with it upon any
better termes, then Servants and Bondslaves doe with their Masters, we are bound in Conscience, and religious discreti∣on, when lawfull occasions or opportunities are offered, to use our Liberty, and seek to our Freedom, rather then to live in bon∣dage. Let them allow us that liberty (which we offer to them) to discusse and examine the Doctrines which they do deliver, and if they shall be found erroneous, to professe against them, I shall not often decline such opportunities. §. 10. But says Mr. W. the contending about this matter [will harden and discomfort more soules in an houre, then the opi∣nion it selfe will doe good to, while the world stands] 1. It seems he is of Curcaelleus his mind, that the matter in question is of so small concernment, that it ought not to breed a controversie: I marvel then, he should offer himselfe a Champion on either part, especially in a place where he had so little to doe, and where his humility might suppose there were others as able as himselfe to defend the notion which he stickles for. No man will imagine that he ingaged in this controversie upon conscientious principles, if he judgeth the Point in question to be of little moment. For my part I cannot looke upon that as such a trifle, which doth so nearly concern the glory of Gods Grace, the vertue and efficacy of Christs Blood, upon which alone poor Souls can with confidence and security build their hopes of Eternall life. 2. I have shewed before, that the Doctrine it selfe is guiltlesse both of hardning, and discomfor∣ting the soules of men, and if these effects doe insue the pressing of it in a Christian way, they are accidental, and consequent∣ly ought not to be charged upon the Tenent. I know none that are discomforted by these Debates but such as the Apostle speaks of 2 Tim. 3.7. Who are ever learning, and never able to come to the know∣ledge of the Truth. For having pinned their Faith on the sleeves of others, they are jealous of their credit, least they should be thought to have builded on a sandy foundation.
CHAP. XVI. Of Mr. Woodbridges Answer to the third Objection, which he hath framed concerning our being in Co∣venant with God before beleiving. THis last he scoffingly cals the great Argument, which as he hath proposed it, was none of mine. We fell upon our dis∣course of the Covenant See before, cap. 15., upon his saying that Christ was not justified according to the tenor of the New Covenant; whereunto I replyed; If the New Covenant were made with Christ, then Christ was justified according to the tenor of the New Cove∣nant; But the New Covenant was made with Christ, Ergo. He denyed the Assumption. But by the way let me give the Rea∣der the Reason of the Sequel, which is as followeth; The New Covenant containes all the Promises which God hath made to the Head and the Members, both to Christ Personal, and to Christ Mystical; the same Covenant is conditional to him, and absolute to us; a Covenant of Works to him, but a Covenant of Grace to us. Now if it be one and the same Covenant, by which Christ and we are Justified, (though in a far different manner) scil. he by Works, and we by Grace, he by his own Righteousnesse, and we by his; then his Justification was by vertue of the New Cove∣nant, that we are justified by. We read but of one Covenant that was made with Christ, by, and according unto which he was ju∣stified, when he had paid the debt which he had undertaken. To confirme the Assumption, That the New Covenant was made with Christ, I alleadged (1) the Judgement of the late Assembly, who in their larger Catechisme pag. 7· have laid down this Proposition, in terminis, The Covenant of Grace was made with Christ as the second Adam, and in him, with all the Elect as his seed. First he denied the Allegation, (though I beleeve at another time he would have taken my word for a greater matter) I desired Mr. C. an Assembly man, (who sat next unto him) to de¦clare,
whether it were not so; but he refused to speak, though I urged him twice: Had he remembred the words of our Saviour, John 8.37. I dare say, he would not have refused to perform so just an office: At length a Gentleman Mr. R. H. that stood by (one of the Parish Elders) ingenuously acknowledged, That I had truly al∣ledged it. Then Mr. W. denied their authority, saying, It was a Humane testimony. I accepted his Answer, and desired the peo∣ple to remember what Mr. W. had told them (knowing that many present would receive it sooner from him, then they would from me) That the Authority of the Assembly, is but Humane, and not Divine, and Infallible; and consequently, That their Votes, and Determinations, are of no greater force, then the Proofs and Reasons which do confirm them. And therefore, I immediately offered him Divine Authority, in the Argument following: If they with whom God did make the New Covenant, when it was first revealed and exhibited, were in that federal Act or Relati∣on, the types and figures of Jesus Christ, then the New Cove∣nant was made onely with Christ. For that which is attributed to a person, as a type, or figure, belongs properly and peculiarly to the Antitype. But all they with whom the New Covenant was made, when it was first exhibited, were in that federal Relation the types of Christ, Ergo. The Minor was proved thus, The New Covenant was made with Abraham; but Abraham in his federal Relation, or in receiving that Covenant, was a type of Christ, Ergo. Whereunto (if it had been needful) I had added divers other Instances; as of Noah, Phinehas, David, &c. who in the respective Covenants, which God made with them, were also types and figures of Jesus Christ. The Covenant made with Noah, Gen. 9.9. was, (as our Divines Iun. orat. 2. de foed. novo. Rivet. in loc. Quamvis faedus illud videatur tantùm spectare praesentem vitam, tamen altiùs conscendendum est ad rem signi∣ficatam; est enim foedus gratiae, &c. have observed) the Covenant of Grace; and that Scripture it self doth make it manifest, Isai. 54.8, 9. Now Noah in receiving the Covenant, was a type of Christ; for it followed immediately upon the offering up of his Sacrifice, Chap. 8. v. 20, 21. which clearly signified, That all the effects of Gods Covenant are procured for us, by that Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor, which Christ hath offered, Eph. 5.2. So Phinehas his Covenant concerning the everlasting Priesthood, Num. 25.12.13. was the very same which was confirmed by oath unto Christ, Psal. 110.4. it was made with Phinehas as a Typical Mediator,
because he stood in the gap, to turn away Gods wrath, Verse 11. In like manner the Covenant made with David, was the Cove∣nant of Grace, 2 Sam. 23.6. And therefore it is called The sure mercies of David, Isai. 55.3. Now that David in receiving that Covenant, was a type of Christ, is evident from Acts 13.34. Psalm 89. verses 3, 4, 19, 20, 24, 28, 34, &c. But I must return to Mr. W. who denied the Major, viz. That the Covenant made with Abraham, was the New Covenant; which I proved in this wise. If the whole New Covenant be comprised in this one promis, I will be thy God, and the God of thy Seed, then the New Covenant was made with Abraham: But the whole New Covenant is comprised in this promise, I will be thy God, &c. Ergo. He answered, I deny all: I replied to him, That the Sequel is evident; forasmuch as this promise is the sum of the Covenant made with Abraham, Gen. 17. And the Assumption is acknowledged by all Divines Haec promissio, Ero Deusts, &c. bevissimae quidem verbis, led sensu am∣plissm, ad hanc im eferntur omnes quae in scripturis spaersae sut promissio∣nes, raeseim quae sunt de sa∣lute eterna, &c. Zanch. de Nat. Dei. l. . c. 5. q. 2. sct. 5. Hoc foedere, ju∣stificationis gra∣tia contieur Pisc. Anal. in Gal. 3 6. Cum multis aliis. that ever I met with; nay the Apo∣stle himself calls it the Gospel, Gal. 3.8. If my memory fail not, he affirmed, That the Covenant made with Abraham, was onely concerning temporal blessings as the Land of Canaan, &c. where∣of Circumcision was a Seal. I well remember, That upon his often affirming, that the New Covenant made with us, is, this Condi∣tional promise, If thou believest, thou shalt be saved; I offered him this Argument, to evict the contrary; If we are in Covenant, or do partake of some benefits of the Covenant before we do be∣lieve, then that conditional promise is not the New Covenant; but we do partake of the same benefits of Covenant, before wee doe believe. Ergo. The reason of the Sequel, is, because the condtion must be performed, before the benefit, which is pro∣mised upon condition, can be received. The Minor was proved by a medium, which Mr. Rutherford Nihil falsius est dogmate ist Arminian, e∣minem diligi in Christo, nisi actu existentem in o per fidem, nam per & propter Christum datu Spiritus Sanctus, per cujus gratiam credimus, Joh. 7.36. & 1.16. Exercit. p. 38. makes use of, for the same purpose. The Spirit which works Faith, is given us before we do believe; but the Spirit which works Faith, is a blessing of the New Covenant, and given us by vertue of the Covenant. Ergo, We do partake of some blessings or benefits of the New Cove∣nant before we believe. He denied, That the Spirit which works Faith, is given us by vertue of the New Covenant, which I proved
from the Tenor of the New Covenant mentioned, Heb. 8.10. I will put my Laws in their minde, &c. and they shall all know me. He denied, That this was a promise of the Spirit which works Faith, but rather of the Spirit of Adoption, which follows Faith: That it is a promise of the Spirit which works Faith, was proved from John 6.45. where our Saviour, having shewn that none do believe, but by a Divine and Supernatural power, No man can come to me, except the Father draw him, he addes, It is written in the Prophets, they shall be all taught of God, i. e. God will give his Spirit unto all that are ordained to life, which shall enable them to believe: The places in the Prophets, where this is written, or promised, are Isa. 54.13. and Jere. 31.34. which is cited by the Apostle, Heb. 8. Then he denied, That this was the New Covenant made with us; whereunto I replied, The New Cove∣nant which is made with Spiritual Israel, is the Covenant made with us; but this Covenant is made with Spiritual Israel, Ergo. His Answer was, I deny all; Though the Major be as clear as the Sun, That all the Elect, whether Jews or Gentiles, are Spiritual Israel, or the Seed of Abraham. See the Ninth, Tenth, and Eleventh Chapters to the Romans, and Gal. 3.26, 29. And the Assumption is in the Text, This is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel in those days, &c. And therefore I rejoyned, Contra negantem principia, non est disputandum; and so our Conference brake off. I have here given the Reader a true Narrative of our Discourse concerning this matter, wherein I take the Lord to witness, I have not wittingly concealed, or added a syllable, to vary either from his sence, or my own. §. 2. I shall now return to his Printed Discourse, and take things in the same order as they lie before us. The Argument, as he hath formed it, runs thus: If we are in Covenant before we be∣lieve, then we are justified before we believe; but we are in Covenant before we believe, Ergo. Wherein (1) he blames the Proposition; For (sayes he) though it were supposed that we are in Covenant before Faith, yet it will not follow, That we are justified: His Reason is, Because the blessings of the Covenant have an order and dependance one upon another, and are enjoyed successively one after another. But by his favor, the Sequel is not invalidated by this Reason; for though a man be not sanctified,
and glorified before Faith; yet if he be in Covenant with God, i. e. One of the Elect, to whom the Grace of the New Covenant appertains, he is certainly justified: For (1) God from all eter∣nity, did will, not to punish his Elect ones; which (as hath been shewn) is real Justification, it being forgiveness in the heart of God: Or (2) taking it for an effect of his Will, Justification is the first benefit that doth accrew to us by the death of Christ. God hath promised from thence forth to remember the sins of his people no more, Isa. 43.25. & 54.9. and in Ezek. 36.25. He first promiseth to cleanse us from all our filthiness, (which must be meant of our Justification; for by Sanctification, our inherent filthiness is not perfectly cleansed in this life,) and then to give us a new heart. And Chap. 16. he first sayes unto the Soul, Live, (which is the sentence of Justification) and then he a∣dorns it with the precious gifts of his holy Spirit. It is sufficiently known, That the generality of our Protestant Divines, in comparing the blessings of the Covenant, have given the preceden∣cy to Justification; some have ascribed to it, a priority of time, but all of Nature, before the rest, Perperàm & absurde prorsus inter effecta Sanctificationis numeratur Justificatio, quae illam natura praecedit, &c. Justification (sayes Tilenus Syntag. p. 2. c. 45. Thes. 38.) is most absurdly made an effect or consequent of Sanctification, which in nature doth go before it: A man cannot be sanctified, until he is first justified; for the tree must be good, before it can bring forth good fruit. Bishop Downham New Cov. p. 289. accounts it a gross error, to say, That Sanctification goes before Justification; For (sayes he) Sanctification is the end and fruit, &c. So that if they have right to any benefit of the Covenant before Faith, it must be to Justification; for Faith is a part of Sanctification, and the same thing cannot be before it self. §. 3. (2) He denies the Assumption, viz. That we are in Covenant with God, or, that we have any right and title to any blessing of the Covenant, before we believe: But before he will give his Reasons for the Negative, he is willing to hear mine for the Affirmative. This seeming civility, ushers in a notorious slan∣der, That [I was so obstreperous in our Conference, that I would not give him a fair hearing,] which hath been sufficiently dis∣proved in another place See the Epi∣stle to the Rea∣der before my Sermon, on Psal. 45.6.; nay, his own mouth did acquit me, in
the close of that discourse, before (I belive) a thousand witnesses. I wonder, though his Conscience was asleep when this fell from his Pen, that his memory should fail him Oportet— esse memorem.: Me thinks he should have been more tender of his own reputation, then to contradict himself, though he had a desire to blast mine; but, as if it were not enough to mis-report my actions, he takes upon him the office of God, to judge my heart. I believe (sayes he) he is resolved to give it unto no body else, whiles the judgement of the cause must be left to the people. Yes to himself, or any one else, when I have an occasion for the like essay. I am sure he hath not found me heretofore, of so morose a spirit, as not to weigh and yeeld unto better reason; he is no fit champion to defend the Faith, who is so much a stranger to the rules of Charity, which thinketh no evil▪ but hopes the best 1 Cor. 13.5, 7.. I confess, I am yet to seek for the Reason of his next clause [whilest the judgement of the cause must be left to the people.] One would think, that he who leaves the judge∣ment of his cause unto the people, should be most willing, they should have a fair hearing of whatsoever can be said, either pro or con, or else he cannot expect their Votes should be for him. The people are apt to think he hath the better cause, whose mouth is stopt. But perhaps it sticks in his stomack, That in our Confe∣rence, I desired the people to weigh and judge of some interpreta∣tions of Scripture, which were given by him. It was far from my thoughts to refer the decision of the Question unto most voices, either of Ministers, or people. The Judgement desired, was that of private discretion, and not of publick determination; though the latter ought not to be usurped by Minsters, whose Reasons, and not their Votes, must satisfie mens Consciences; yet the former ought not to be denied to the meanest Christians, who are required to judge for themselves Iob 5.27., to prove 1 Thes 5.21., and try 1 Ioh. 4.1. Acts 17.11., the Doctrines which are brought unto them. Now why this expression should be faulted, I see no cause, unless men would have the people to content themselves with an implicite Faith, such as the Romanists do allow their disciples, who use them as Babes, which must swallow whatsoever their Nurses do put into their mouths Vid. Dave. de judice, &c. .16.. The Church of Christ (saith Optatus) is rationabilis, she hath the use both of Natural and Supernatural Reason. Did Christians more gene∣rally see with their own eyes, make use of that Light and Reason
which God hath given them, they would never acquiesce in many of those Dictates, which are imposed upon them: will any man that hath a spark of Reason beleeve that [I am] doth signifie [I will bee.] §. 4. Well, now he hath heard my Reason, That we are in Covenant, or have a right and title to the blessings of the Co∣venant before we beleeve, because some benefits of the Cove∣nant, to wit, the Spirit which workes Faith, is given us before we beleeve: What hath he to say against it? 1. He undertakes to explaine (that which is plain enough) the word [Give] as that it is taken (1) for constituting, or appointing, and (2) for the actual collating of a benefit, so as that it is received, and pos∣sessed by him, to whom it is given. 2. He tels us of sundry ways, how the Spirit is said to be given (1) Essentially, (2) Personally, (3) Operatively. All which, is nothing at all, to the matter in hand; but serves meerly to raise a dust to blind the unwary Rea∣der. The termes need neither distinction nor explication, being easie enough to be understood by the weakest capacity. When we say, That the Spirit which works Faith, is given us before wee beleeve; none can well imagine that we meant it of Gods pur∣pose, or decree to give the Spirit▪ but of the actuall sending, or bestowing of him; nor yet of an Essentiall, or Personal giving of the Spirit, so as to be Hypostatically united to us as the God-head of the Son is to the Humane nature; though some godly men Cottons answ. to Baily. p. 36., have affirmed, that the person of the Spirit dwels in the Saints, from those Texts, John 14.16, 17, 26.15.26. 2 Tim. 1.14. Rom. 8.11. 1 Cor. 6.19.3.16. Yet none (that are sober) ever affirmed, that the person of the Spirit, dwelleth in us in such a manner, as to make us one person with himselfe, or to commu∣nicate his personal Properties to us; so that I may say of this Ar∣gument, as Maldonate of a certain Text in the Gospel, hic locus facilior esset, si nemo cum exposuisset, it had been more plain and perspicuous, if these distinctions had been omitted. I see not how a man could imagine any other sence then this, That God accor∣ding to his gracious Covenant doth in his appointed time, give, or send his Spirit, in the preaching of the Gospell, to work Faith in all those that are ordained to life; So that the Spirit is the cause, and Faith the effect. It matters not how he is given, whe∣ther
Personally or Operatively; for if the Spirit which works Faith be given us by vertue of the New Covenant, then some benefit of the Covenant is bestowed upon us before we beleeve; Quod erat demonstrandum. §. 5. Though the Spirit be not given us (as he saith) one atome of time before we beleeve; yet that weakens not the force of the Argument; it is enough for my purpose that it hath a precedency in order of nature, though not of time; and that Faith is not be∣fore the Spirit, for then Faith is not the condition of the Covenant, (seeing the condition goes before the thing conditioned) and con∣sequently, that conditional Promise If thou beleeve, &c. is not the tenor of the New Covenant: Either he must say (1) That the Spirit doth not work Faith; and that it is a work of Nature, to wit, of our own Free will, contrary to innumerable Scriptures. Or (2) That the Spirit which works Faith, is not given us by vertue of the New Covenant; which was disproved by comparing. Joh. 6.45. with Jer. 31.34. & is contrary to those Scriptures, which affirmed that all spi∣ritual blessings are given us in and through Christ, Eph. 1.3. Rom. 8.32. Or (3) that there is some other condition of the Covenant, besides and before Faith, as they Dr. Ham. let. to Dr. Cheyn. p. 118. that make , ingenuity and towardlinesse of nature, the condition of con∣version, or (4) that there are two New Covenants; one absolute, and the other conditional; one, wherein Faith is promised without condition; the other, wherein all things else are promised upon condition of Faith; of which more in its place. §. 6. Whereas he chargeth me with often abusing that received maxime, Posita causa ponitur effectus. Leting passe his uncivil language, I say (1) that in our discourse, I did not so much as mention it nor at any time else, but with such cautions and limita∣tions, as Artists Keck▪ syst. log. p. 145. give, understanding it of causa proxima & completa; and then I conceive causa posita in actu, the effect must necessarily follow. (2) I cannot see that it is any abuse to ap∣ply it to the death of Christ, in effecting our Justification, or de∣liverance from the curse; his death and satisfaction being the ade∣quate and immediate cause therof, for when the debt is paid, the ob∣lgation is no longer in force. (3) Though I understood this maxime never so well, it would little advantage Mr. Woodbridges cause, That Faith is the condition of having the Spirit in our first
conversion, unlesse it would prove that the cause is produced by its immedate effect. §. 7. That which follows is altogether impertinent, as a man (saith he) doth first build himselfe an house, and then dwels in it, so Christ by his Spirit, doth build, organze, and pre∣pare the Soule to be an house unto himselfe, and then by the same Spirit dwels in it immediately. What is this to prove, that no man hath interest in the Covenant, before he beleeves; or that the Spirit, which workes Faith, is not given us before Faith? We grant that Christ by his Spirit doth  Heb. 3.3. build or prepare the Soule to be his house, and then dwels in it 2 Cor. 6.16. Joh. 14.23., vouchsafes more sensible effects of his presence; but is not that organizing, preparing act of the Spirit, one benefit of the Covenant? and is not the Spirit in that act, the cause of Faith? if so! then wee have an interest in the Covenant before Faith, for he that hath jus in re, doubtlesse hath jus ad rem; when wee have the benefits of the Covenant, it cannot bee denied but wee have a right and title to them. I find that Of Justif. p. 183. Mr. Burges mentions this answer, but (saith he) it is not safe to go this way, for that grand promise, Ezek. 36.26. Doth evidently argue the habits or internall principles of grace, are before the actions of grace. §. 8. His next passage gives us little evidence of a heart prepa∣red, and organized by the Spirit of Christ, it being false and slan∣derous, This (saith he) is that which I would have spoken publickly in answer to the Argument, if Mr. E. had not been beyond measure obstreperous. (1) I dare say such as know Mr. Woodbridges tongue and forehead, will not easily beleeve, that he would be hindred from speaking his whole mind: But (2) my innocency in this matter hath been cleared by persons See the Ep. before my Ser. more worthy to be beleeved then Mr. W. especially when be speaks in his owne cause. (3) I shall adde, that I verily beleeve, he then spake near as many words, I am sure, as much to the purpose, as this which he hath Printed; I well remember some passages which are here omirted, as that saying▪ anima fabricat sibi domicilium, the Soul formes the Body, and then dwels in it; as the soul works first efficiently, that afterwards it may act formally, so doth the spirit in our conversion, &c. (4) If he spake no more it was his owne fault; for all that were present, doe know, that the onely an∣swer
I could get unto divers Syllogismes was, I deny all: But this he intended, rather to vilifie me, then to excuse himselfe. CHAP. XVII. Concerning the Covenant, wherein Faith is promised, and by vertue whereof it is given to us. MR. W. in the next place, propoundes this Question, Whe∣ther Faith it selfe be not given to us by vertue of the Covenant made with us? Which he answers negatively, Faith is not given us by vertue of the Covenant made with us, but by vertue of the Covenant made with Christ; His Answer im∣plies, that there are two distinct Covenants of Grace, one made with Christ, and the other with us; which will need a clearer evi∣dence, then yet he hath given us. We deny not, but Faith, yea, and all other blessings are promised in the Covenant, which was made with Christ, the promise of giving him a seed, and that this seed shall be blessed, doth include no lesse; All the Promises, both of this life, and that which is to come, are but so many expli∣cations, of the grand promise, Gen. 12.3. All the Nations or Fa∣milies of the Earth [i. e. all the Elect, whom God hath chosen out of every kindred,Rev. 5.9. and tongue, and People, and Nation,] shall be blessed in him▪ Mr. W. should have proved that these Pro∣mises were not made with us in Christ; he should have shewed us any other Covenant made with the Elect, then that which was made with Christ. We say with the Apostle, that all the Pro∣mises of God are yea and amen in him, 2 Cor. 1.20. and with the late Assembly, that the Covenant of Grace was made with Christ and with us in him, With him actively, as the person that per∣formed all the conditions, upon which the Promises thereof are grounded; with us passively, as the persons to whom the benefit of those Promises doth belong See M. Kend. vind. c 18. p. 7.. If one man promise another, that in case he shall bear so many stripes, indure so long imprisonment, or performe any other condition, be it what it will, he will then take care of and provide for his children, doth not this promise which was made with the Father, most properly belonging unto his
children? The case is the same between Christ and us; he per∣formed the conditions, and we receive the benefits of the New Covenant; the same Covenant is made with both, and conse∣quently Faith is given us, not onely by vertue of the Covenant made with Christ, but by vertue of the Covenant made with all the Elect; which might be further proved by many Reasons. §. 2. 1. If there be but one Covenant of Grace, which is made both with Christ and us, then Faith is given us by vertue of the Covenant made with us: But there is but one Covenant of Grace, Ergo. The Sequel is undeniable, I doubt not but our adversaries will grant, that Faith is given us by vertue of the Covenant of Grace; and the Assumption is as evident, that there is but one Covenant of Grace; though there are many promises, yet is there but one Covenant: For as much as all the promises have the same ground and foundation, scil. the merit and purchase of Jesus Christ; and therefore they are said to be yea, and amen in him. The Scripture makes mention but of two Covenants; the Cove∣nant of Works; and the Covenant of Grace; the former was made with the first Adam, and his Seed; the other with the se∣cond Adam, and his Seed, and is commonly called the New Cove∣nant. I confess this latter hath been variously administred in the times of the Old and New Testament: In which respect it hath been looked upon by some, as two distinct Covenants, and distin∣guished by the names of the Old and New Covenant. But this controversie is easily reconciled, if it be considered, that the Old Covenant is sometimes put for the promise vailed, and sometimes for the vail it self. (1) When it is put for the vail it self (as doubt∣less it is, when it is said to have waxen old, and to vanish, to be changed, abolished, disannulled Vid. Calv. Inst. l. 2. c. 2. sect 4., &c. Which things cannot be affirmed of the promise, which is an Everlasting Covenant, and al∣ways remains one and the same) it may be said to be a distinct Covenant from the Covenant of Grace, exhibited in the times of the New Testament. But (2) when it is taken for the promise vailed, there is no doubt, but it is the same in substance with that in the New Testament; for though this Grace was then but dark∣ly revealed, and as it were covered out of sight by the Mosaical Administration, yet it brought upon them the same Righteous∣ness and Salvation, which is now enjoyed by the children of Faith,
Acts 15.11. John 8.56. Gal. 3.8. and Heb. 11.14. But be the Old and New Testament Administration, one, or two Cove∣nants, it matters not much to our Question; it lies on Mr. W. to prove, that there are two New Covenants, or two distinct Cove∣nants of Grace in the times of the New Testaments; one made with Christ, and another with the Elect; one, in which God doth promise us Faith; the other, in which he doth promise, all other Blessings, that follow Faith; which, I suppose, he will finde to be somewhat difficult. §. 3. 2. If Christ merited nothing for himself, but onely for the Elect, then all the promises made to him do belong to them, or the Covenant which was made with him as Mediator, is made with them: But Christ merited nothing for himself, Ergo. The Minor is the unanimous Tenent of our Protestant Divines, who have sufficiently cleared it from the Scriptures. And for my own part, I see not what can be rationally excepted against the conse∣quence of the Major; for if he merited nothing for himself, then all the promises made to him, do belong to others: In this regard he is called The Mediator of a better Covenant, Heb. 8.6. and the Mediator of the New Covenant, Chap. 12.24. Now a Me∣diator doth not act for himself, but in their behalf, whose Media∣tor he is. I suppose Mr. W. will not deny, but Faith is bestowed upon us by vertue of that Covenant whereof Christ is the Media∣tor: Now Christ is Mediator of the Covenant made with us, and not of a Covenant, made singly and particularly with himself, for a man cannot properly be called a Mediator for himself. The Apostle is express, That we obtain Faith by the same means, whereby we obtain all good things else, to wit, By the Righteous∣ness of Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.1. Eph. 1.3. Rom. 8.32. So that consequently it is one and the same Covenant, by vertue whereof, Faith, and all other Spiritual Blessings are bestowed upon us. I adde therefore. §. 4. 3. If Faith be given to us by vertue of that Covenant, whereby Justification, Sanctification, Perseverance, and Glory, are bestowed upon us, then Faith is given us by vertue of that Cove∣nant which is made with us; But Faith is given us by vertue of the same Covenant, wherein Justification, Sanctification, &c. are pro∣mised and bestowed upon us, Ergo. Neither Sequel nor Assump∣tion,
do need any proof: In the same Covenant wherein God pro∣miseth to cleanse us from our filthiness, to cause us to walk in his ways, &c. He promiseth to circumcise our hearts, to write his Laws in our inward parts, and that we shall be taught of God (i. e. Made to believe, John 6.45.) Ezek. 36.25, &c. Jere. 31.34. §. 5. 4. If Faith be given to us by vertue of that Covenant which was made with Abraham, and his Seed, then is it given by vertue of the Covenant made with us: For the same Covenant which God made with Abraham, is made with all the faithful to the end of the world; and therefore they are called the children of Abraham, Gal. 3.7, 29. Now God in promising to be his God, and to be a Sun, and a shield, &c. promised also to give Faith, whereby the Refreshing Beams of this Sun are conveyed into the soul, and this shield is managed for our best advantage, Ephes. 6.16. 5. (Which was the medium I made use of, at our Conference) If Faith be given us by vertue of the Covenant made with the House of Israel, then is it given us by vertue of the Covenant made with us; for the House of Israel is the whole company of Gods Elect, who are therefore called Spiritual Israel, Rom. 9.6. But Faith, or the Spirit which works Faith, is promised in the Covenant made with the House of Israel, Jere. 31.31. Heb. 8.19. §. 6. Whereunto Mr. W. answers (1) by way of retortion, If Mr. E. (saith he) will urge the words of this Text rigorously, they would prove more then he would have: I hope there is no hurt in that, though the place doth prove more, that doth no whit invalidate its force, as to the purpose for which we alledged it; but what is that, which it proves more? It is manifest (says he) that this Covenant contains a promise of sending Christ into the world, to die for our sins, as the Apostle proves, Heb. 10.14.15, 16. So that we may as well infer from hence, that we are in Covenant with God before the death of the Mediator, as that we are in Covenant before we believe; and then his death shall serve not to obtain all, or any of the blessings of the Covenant, but onely (as the Socinians) to declare and confirm, &c. If he please to admit of a Reply, we say, (1) That he mistakes
the inference, that was drawn from hence: The Proposition to be concluded, was not, That we are in Covenant before we believe; but, that Faith, or the Spirit which works Faith, is given us by vertue of the Covenant made with us, which is sufficiently se∣cured by these Texts; for if by the House of Israel be meant, all the Elect (as undoubtedly they are) and the Spirit which works Faith, is promised in the Covenant which is made with the House of Israel, then the Spirit, and Faith, are given by vertue of the Covenant which is made with us, we being in the number of Gods Elect. (2) It is not so manifest (as he pretends) that these Texts do contain a promise of sending Christ to die for us. The pro∣mises here mentioned, do express onely what benefits do accrew to us by the Death of Christ: I grant, that this Covenant supposeth the Death of Christ, as the onely meritorious, procuring means, by which these benefits do flow down unto us; and therefore it is said, In those days, or after those days, meaning the days of the Son of Man, when the Messiah, whom God had promised, should be exhibited; which in Scripture are called, The last days, the last times, and the world to come, &c. Though the Apostle men∣tions the Covenant, Heb. 10.15. it is not to prove, That God would send his Son to die, but that being come (as these believing Hebrews acknowledged, though they saw not the vertues of his death, as to the abolishing of other Sacrifices) he hath offered up a perfect Sacrifice, Verse 10, 12, 14. and consequently they need∣ed no other Sacrifice to take away sin; for otherwise God had not made such ample promises, in reference to the times of the Mes∣siah, as you finde he hath, Jere. 31. That he will remember the sins and iniquities of his people no more, &c. For (says the A∣postle) when there is such a full remission, there needs no more offering for sin, Verse 18. §. 7. 3. Though we should grant him that this Text, Jere. 31. contains a promise of sending Christ; what were this to the purpose, to weaken our inference, That Faith is given by vertue of the Covenant made with us? May not God in the same Co∣venant, promise both Christ and Faith? But (sayes Mr. W.) it will follow then, that this Covenant was made with us, or that we were in Covenant with God, not onely before we believe, but before the death of Christ. I am so far from looking upon it as
an absurdity, that I shall readily own, and acknowledge it as an undeniable truth, That the New Covenant was made with all the Elect in Christ, before the foundations of the world were laid See Dr. Rey∣nolds on Psal. 110.4.; it being, the fixed and immutable Will of God, concern∣ing all those good things, which in time are bestowed upon them; and therefore it is called an Everlasting Covenant; 2 Sam. 23.5 Gen. 17.7. 2 Chron. 13.5. Psal. 89.34. & 28. Isa. 54.9. & 55.3. Jere. 33.20.. not onely a parte post, but a parte ante; as it shall have no end, nor be changed: So it had no beginning, God having from all eter∣nity, immutably purposed in himself, to bestow upon them all those blessings which they do receive in time; yet we say there are more especially three moments, or periods of time, wherein God may be said to make this Covenant with us; As (1) immediately upon the fall of Adam, when he first published his gracious pro∣mise of saving all his Elect by the womans Seed, Gen. 3.15. The first Covenant being broken and dissolved, the Lord immediately published that other Covenant which cannot be broken; and here∣unto (as hath been shewed) do those Scriptures relate, Tit. 1.2. 2 Tim. 1.9. (2) At the death of Christ; because thereby all the benefits willed to us by the Everlasting Covenant, were merited and procured for us, the full price which was paid for them, was then exhibited; for which cause, the New Covenant is called , a Testament, which was confirmed by the death of the Testator Jesus Christ, Heb. 9.17. And the Blood which he shed, the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13.20. and the Blood of the New Testament, Matth. 26.28. So that his charge of Socinianism, doth not touch us; for though we do not say, That Christ procured the Covenant, or that God should will to us hose mercies which are therein promised; yet we say, the effects of the Covenant, or the mercies themselves, were all of them ob∣tained by the Blood of Christ, as our deliverance from the curse, inherent holiness, &c. (3) The Covenant is said to be made with men, when God doth confer upon men the benefits which are therein promised, or at least makes them to know and understand their interest and propriety therein. Thus is that to be understood, Isai. 55.3. I will make an Everlasting Covenant, i. e. I will ful∣fil my Everlasting Covenant, or bestow upon you, all those mer∣cies which I have promised, and which my Son hath purchased by shedding of his Blood. And thus we grant, That God makes
his Covenant with his people, when he gives them Faith, when he enables them to lay hold of it, and to plead it at the Throne of Grace: now though in this sence God may be said to take men into Covenant, when they doe beleeve, yet will it not follow that the Spirit and Faith are not given by vertue of the Covenant which is made with us; so that his retortion is pittifully unsuccessefull, it gives not the least wound to the cause which we maintain. §. 8. The second branch of his Answer is, That upon a most se∣rious perusall of these Texts, I finde them so contradictory to Mr. Eyres purpose, that I cannot but wonder what hee means to shelter his Opinion under the protection of it: I must needs say, that after a most serious perusing of his papers, I cannot be perswaded to be of his mind, to think that these places are contra∣dictory to the purpose, for which I brought them; but rather that they doe give in full evidence to the Proposition which I was to prove, viz. That the spirit, which works Faith is given us by vertue of the Covenant made with us; But how doth Mr. W. prove the contradiction? We shall find (saith he) in these words three things of distinct consideration; the Conclusion of which is the only support of this feeble Argument. I cannot but wonder (and so I dare say doth the impartiall Reader) that Mr. W. should say the Text is contradictory to my purpose, and yet confesse, that it affords support unto my Argument; for though no more then that, which he cals, the Conclusion of the Text doth afford it shelter, yet is that sufficient to clear it from the guilt of a contradiction. But what are the three things which he finds in these Texts to ground his charge on? 1. (says he) There is the matter and blessings of the Covenant on Gods part, I will be their God and they shall be my People; in which words, as many blessings temporall, and eter∣nall are promised; so peculiarly pardon of sin, &c. 2. There is expressed the bond and condition of it, on our part, and that is Faith, which is signified in those words, of putting Gods Laws in our minds, and writing them in our hearts. In these two things is the tenor, and formality of the new Covenant; they that be∣leeve, the Lord will be their God, and they shall be his People. But 3. (says he) there is also a promise that God will worke this condition, by which men shall have an interest in this Co∣venant, and a right and title to the blessings of it; I will put my
Laws into their minds, i. e. I will give them faith; which Faith is not promised as an effect of the Covenant already made, but as the means by which we are brought into Covenant, and there∣by invested in a right to all the blessings of it, &c. should I grant all that he saith, yet would it not one whit weaken our Assertions, that this Covenant is made with us, who are meant by the house of Israel; and that the Spirit which works Faith, is promised in this Covenant, which Mr. W. cannot deny, though hee would thrust it behind the doore, saying, that it is promised in the Co∣venant, but not as a part of the Covenant; I might easily shew, that there are not so many lines as mistakes, in this short discourse; I professe I cannot but wonder at his boldnesse, that he durst for his advantage to wrest, and falsifie the words and tenor of the Co∣venant, excluding the promise of Faith from the matter and bles∣sings of it, which is expressed more then once in these few words, as in this clause, ver. 33. I wil put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, by his own confession: And in that also ver. 34. They shall know me, which our Saviour expounds of beleeving in him. But to take things as they lie. 1 We deny that the whole matter, and all the benefits of the Co∣venant on Gods part are confined to these words, I will be their God, and they shall be my people; for though omne bonum, est in summo bono, and when this promise is put alone, it may com∣prehend as much as Mr. W. speaks, yet when other promises are joyned with it, it denotes on ticular blessing; either it relates to the formall part of mans happinesse, which consists in the frui∣tion and enjoyment of God, or the knowledge of our interest and propriety in him Dr. Stough. Ser. on Ps. 4.6.; Thus, I will be their God, is as much as, they shal know that I am their God, and that they are my people Hos. 2.23. Cant. 2.16.; Or else, I will be their God, &c. imports as much as, I will pro∣tect them, and they shall worship me Calv. Diodate.. But say this Promise be as large as Mr. W. would make it, though all blessings temporall and eternal be more generally included in it, yet that hinders not, but the other promises annexed thereunto, doe also exhibit the matter and blessings of the New Covenant Vid. Calv. i Jer. 32.38, 39.. The same things of∣ten times in the Scripture are expressed, first more generally, and then more particularly. §. 10. 2. It is apparently false, that in these words, I will put
my Laws in their mindes, and write them in their hearts, is expressed the bond and condition of the Covenant on our part; for the words are a promise, and not a precept; the Lord declares what he himselfe will doe for them. If Mr. W. sees a condition in these words, he hath found more then all the Divines that ever I met with. Dr. Twisse (his Predecessor) in his Answer to Arminius's Preface Sect. 8. not. 6., reciting the tenor of the Covenant, as it is in this place of Jeremy, Isa. 32. and Ezek. 36. challengeth him to shew vel levissimam mentionem conditionis, Dr. PrestonSerm. 2. of Faith p 38. speaking of the Covenant which God hath made with his Elect, sayes, that it is Absolute, and not conditionall; for which he alleadgeth this place of Jeremy, Ezek. 36. &c. A learned man of the late As∣sembly in a Sermon before the Parliament then sitting Mr. Strong Ser. on 1 Sam. 2.30., declared, That all the promises of the New Covenant are absolute, not onely citra meritum, but citra conditionem, without any pre-required conditions of us; amongst many other places he cites this Text. Besides this, I might adde abundance more. But I beleeve Mr. Baxter is instar omnium with Mr. W. Now he acknowledgethAppend p 41, 42., that this Text. with the like, doth expresse an absolute Covenant. Mr. W. might as well say, that the bond and condition of the Covenant on our part is expressed in these words, they shall be my people, or in the other clause, I will be their God, interpreting it by that of Hosea 2.23. They shall say, I am their God; which one (I remember) would have to be the condition of the Covenant on our part; so that according to their  Interpretations, the New Covenant shall consist only of conditions, or of precepts imposed upon us, without so much as one Promise of mercy to us; and consequently, the Covenant of Grace shall exhibit no Grace at all; or at most, much lesse then the Covenant of Works doth. If the Lord had meant that these words, I will write my Laws in their hearts, &c. should be the bond of the Covenant on our part, he would have expressed it in such a manner, If my Lawes be written in your hearts, I will be your God; the words are plain∣ly a promise of Sanctification, which is one principall benefit of the New Covenant. §. 11. Whereas he adds, That God doth here promise to work Faith, which Faith is not promised as an effect of the Covenant, but as the means, by which we are brought into Covenant; It being
so crudely asserted, a bare denial might serve the turn. But (1) I shall appeal to the indifferent Reader, whether it doth not sound very harshly, That the same words should be formally, both a pre∣cept and a promise, and that God should require a condition of us, and yet promise to work it in us? How shall we distinguish between precepts and promises? Mr. W, may be pleased to con∣sider, what some Grand Assertors of Conditions have said there∣of Sup. c. 14. sect. 9.. (2) I would ask, whether this promise of Faith be not a part of the New Covenant? All the promises of God do belong, either to the Covenant of Works, or to the Covenant of Grace: It is no part of the Covenant of Works. Ergo, It is a part of the Covenant of Grace. Now if the promise be a part of the New Covenant, the thing promised is an effect of the Covenant; or a benefit given, by vertue of it. (3) I would ask, whether the promise of Faith, be not an effect of Christs death? If it be, then is it an effect of the Covenant already made; for all the ef∣fects of his death, are effects of the Covenant, which was con∣firmed by his death; who, for this cause is called the Covenant, Isa. 42.6. & 49.8. implying, That all the benefits of the Co∣venant, are the fruits and purchases of his death; and that Christ hath not purchased any thing for us, but what is promised in the Covenant; the effects of the Covenant, and the effects of Christs death are of equal latitude. (4) The Scripture no where affirms, That Faith is promised as a means to bring us into Covenant, or to invest us with a right and title thereunto. That which gives men interest in the Covenant, is the good pleasure of God, willing those blessings to them; and the purchase which Christ hath made in their behalf, who hath performed whatsoever was necessary by Divine constitution, in order to our having of them. We grant, That Faith is the means whereby we come to know our interest in the Covenant, and in all the benefits thereof: But their saying, That hereby we have, or do obtain our interest and title to the Covenant, hath not any ground that I finde in the Written Word. If any shall infer it from hence, because it is said, Believe, and thou shalt be saved; they may as well make Baptism, Sanctifi∣cation, Perseverance, &c. (to which the promise of Salvation is sometimes annexed) means, to bring us into Covenant, or to invest us with a right and title to the benefits of it, and consequently no
man shall have any interest in the Covenant as long as he lives, and till these conditions be performed. To conclude, If the promise of Faith be a part of the Covenant, (as hath been shewed) then is it not a means to bring us into Covenant, or to invest us with a title to the benefits of it, because it is impossible that the same thing should be the means, or cause of it self. CHAP. XVIII. Wherein Mr. Woodbridges Exposition of the New Covenant, (mentioned Jere. 31.33. and in other pla∣ces) is further examined. THe Tenor of the New Covenant, in the Prophet (whose words are punctually cited by the Apostle, Heb. 8.) runs thus, This is the Covenant that I will make with the House of Israel; after those days, saith the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people; and, &c. But now Mr. W. renders it thus, [This is the Covenant which I will make with the House of Israel; when I shall write my Laws in their hearts, I will be their God, &c. or, This is the Cove∣nant, which I will make, saith the Lord, that giveth his Laws into their mindes, and writeth them in their hearts, &c.] I know not what can be called wresting of the Scripture, if this be not: If men may take the liberty, to chop and change, to adde or diminish from the Word, at their pleasure, nothing can certainly be concluded thence; nay, the Scripture might be made a shelter for the foulest Errors. It savors not of a spirit, that trembles at the Word, and believes that threatning, Revel. 22.18. to make so bold with the Oracles of God. The word [when] is neither in, nor agreeable to the Hebrew, or Greek Text, though he would make his Reader believe, that it is in both. The Verbs in the first clause, are not in the Present, but Future tense, as in the rest which follow. Besides his Paraphrase, chargeth the Holy Ghost, with a
gross tautalogy, if not a flat contradiction. The time of making this Covenant is signified in these words, [After those days] which undoubtedly ought to be referred unto the days of the Messiah, in opposition to the times before, when the Grace of this Covenant was not so clearly revealed; so that it was needless he should adde [When I put my Laws, &c.] And if God makes not his Cove∣nant with Spiritual Israel, till he writes his Laws in their hearts, then the former clause [After those dayes] must either stand for nothing, or else imply a falshood. In a word, The unsoundness of this gloss, doth appear from hence, that these words are not onely here, but in many other places, mentioned as a distinct promise of the New Covenant, and not as a bare connotation of the time, or a Periphrasis of the person, that makes the Covenant, as Mr. W. carries it. See Deut. 30.6. Ezek. 36.26, 27. Jere. 32.38, 39. where that promise, which Mr. W. calls, The matter or substance of the Covenant on Gods part, is put first, and the other which he calls the Condition, is made as it were, the Consequence of the former. §. 2. The Scriptures he hath brought to countenance his new found interpretation of the Covenant, will by no means shelter it; as Jere. 24.7. I will give them a heart to know me, that I am the Lord, and they shall be my people, and I will be their God; for they shall return unto me with their whole heart. [Where (says he) the condition on the peoples part of the Lords being their God, is, their returning with their whole heart.] The af∣firmation is not so clear, as not to need a proof; that promise, I will give them a heart to know me, is (as hath been shewed,) one principal blessing of the New Covenant, the immediate effect whereof is, Mens returning unto God with their whole heart. Now to call their returning unto God, the condition of Gods be∣ing their God, is as unhappy a mistake, as his, That set the Cart before the horse. Could they have returned to God, unless God had returned to them 1 John 4.10, 19.? Are not Faith and Repentance, the fruits of our Reconciliation, by the blood of Christ? God having given us his Son, hath with him given us all things else, Rom. 8.32. Mr. alvin calls this blessing, of Gods being our God, Causam & principium omnium bonorum, i. e. The cause and fountain of all other blessings; and particularly, of the renewing
of our hearts, and our returning unto God. Now the conse∣quences and Effects of a Blessing, are not the Conditions of it. §. 3. His next Allegation from Heb. 10.14, &c. hath the fate, to fall as short of the mark, as the former did. For the Apostles scope there, is not to shew in what order and method, the benefits of the Covenant are bestowed upon us, but that there needs no other Sa∣crifice for sin, besides the Sacrifice which Christ hath offered; which he proves, because God in that Covenant, which he promised to make with his people in the times of the New Testament, de∣clares, That he will not onely give them a new heart, but their sins and iniquities shall not be remembred any more. Now where there is no more remembrance of sin, there needs no more Sacri∣fice for sin; so that the words expressed, are sufficient to compleat the sense without understanding of [then he saith] or [then it fol∣loweth] which Mr. W. hath added in the close of the sixteenth Verse. We may take them as they lie, from Verse the fifteenth. Whereof (to wit, of Christs perfect Sacrifice, mentioned Vers. 14.) the Holy Ghost is a witness to us; for after he, i. e. the Holy Ghost, had said before, This is the Covenant that I will make with them,Pareus. Ion. s. D. ko. after those dayes, (to wit, of the Old Testament, which are now expired) The Lord saith, (viz. The Holy Ghost, who is the Lord Jehovah, and with the Father, and Son, the Au∣thor of the New Covenant.) I will put my Laws into their hearts, and in their mindes will I write them; and their sins and ini∣quities will I remember no more: So that I say, there is no need that either of those clauses [Then he saith, &c.] should be foisted in between the 16 and 17 Verses. It seems to me, That the Copu∣lative [And] is set as a bar, to keep it forth, shewing that the words in the 17 Verse, ought to follow immediately upon the six∣teenth. I grant that the promise of Remission, is one of the most special, and noble Blessings, contained in that general promise, I will be their God; yet it doth not follow, that Regeneration or In∣herent holiness is required or promised, as the means or qualifica∣tion, to obtain this Blessing. Pareus his Note upon the place is very sound, That the Apostle here, doth ground the promise of remis∣sion of sins,Vid. Calv in loc. upon that perfect oblation which Christ hath offered, and not upon works of Sanctification, which (according to
Mr. Woodbridges Doctrine) is the immediate principle, from whence it follows. §. 4. His next Assertion [That in the New Covenant, the giving of the first Grace, is always promised, not as a part of the Covenant, but as a means and qualification on mans part, for his entrance into Covenant,] is justly obnoxious unto more then one Exception. 1. The work of Conversion, or the renewing of our hearts, i unfitly called The first Grace; For (1) to speak properly, the first Grace, is that, which is Grace indeed Dowh of Justif. l 3. c. 2., to wit, the Everlasting Love, Favor, and Good-pleasure of God towards his people; for this is the rise and fountain of all those mercies, which we re∣ceive in time, yea, of Christ himself, John 3.16. Or (2) if by Grace, we understand the Fruits and Effects of this Grace, then certainly the precedenc or priority must be given unto Jesus Christ, for whose sake all other blessings are bestowed upon us, Ephes. 1.3. Or else (3) if by Grace we understand the Fruits and Effects of Christs death, or the benefits which are freely given us for his sake, even in this sense, Inherent Sanctification is unduly put in the first place, which is a consequent, both of Justificati∣on and Adoption, Gal. 4.5, 6. Though it be promised in that place of Jeremy, before Remission of sin, yet in other places it is put after it; as Ezek. 36.25, 26. Jere. 32.38, 39. The Reason why this promise is sometimes put first, may probably be, be∣cause the Grace of Sanctification is most apt to affect our senses, we do apprehend and perceive it, before we come to know our Justification. §. 5. 2. It is utterly false, That the giving of a new heart, is not promised as a part of the Covenant; but as a means on mans part, for his entrance into Covenant: For (1) the Scripture no where affirms it; and it is weakly concluded hence, because it is sometimes mentioned, first in the recital of the Covenant, which is all he hath to pretend for this notion, seeing that in other places, the promise of Sanctification, follows that of Justification; from whence he may as well conclude, that Justification is promised not as a part of the Covenant, but as a means to intitle us unto Sancti∣fication; so that not onely, the promise of Faith, but of Remis∣sion also shall be excluded from being a part of the Covenant.
(2) The promise of a new heart, includes not onely the first act of Faith and Repentance, but the continuance and increase of these Gifts; so that either he must say, that all the Promises of Sancti∣fication, which are included therein, are no part of the Covenant; or that the same promise is both a means to bring us into Covenant; and a part of the Covenant, i. e. it is a part, and no part. I must confess, that I never yet met with that man, who had the forehead to deny, that the promise of Faith, and Repentance, is a part of the New Covenant. (3) It seems to me an undeniable truth, that the promises of Sanctification, as well as of Justification, are parts of the Covenant, considering (1) that they have the same ground and foundation, to wit, the merit and purchase of Jesus Christ; Christ hath merited Faith and Repentance, no less then remission of sins. Now whatsoever Christ hath purchased, the Covenant pro∣miseth: All the effects of his death, are equally parts of the New Covenant. (2) Both these promises have the same end and design, viz. The glory of God. Faith and Repentance, are not promised onely subserviently for our benefit, but ultimately for the praise of his glory, Tit. 2.14. 1 Thes. 4.3. (3) They are promised in the same manner, as distinct, and not as subordinate benefits; he doth not say, I will write my Laws in their hearts, that I may pardon their sins and iniquities. But, I will write my Laws, &c. and their sins and iniquities, I will remember no more. §. 6. 3. It sounds harshly, That God promiseth Faith, as a means on our part, to bring us into Covenant; for if God doth promise to bestow Faith, it cannot properly be called a means on our part, it were a means on our part, if we performed it our selves, and by our own strength, as the condition required of. A∣dam, should have been. For the removing of this rub, I shall make it to appear; that in the New Covenant, there is no conditi∣on required on our part, to give us a right, and title to the bles∣sings of it: But before we proceed, we will give the Reader a brief account of those other Scriptures which Mr. W. hath alledged to prove, That Faith is promised, not as a part of the Covenant, but as a means on our part, to obtain the remission of sins: All which I finde have the same misfortune as the rest, not to be able to bring forth the conclusion, which his fancy hath begotten on them.
That in Ezek▪ 36.25, 26▪ 27, 28. makes quite against him; for there the Lord first promiseth to justifie us, in those phrases of pouring out clean water upon us, and of cleansing us from all our filthinesses, Verse 25▪ nd then to renew, or sanctifie us, Vers. 26, 27. So that there is no colour to infer from hence, that Sanctifi∣cation, or any part thereof, is promised as a means to intitie us to Justification. §. 7. The other two Texts, are much to the same purpose, scil. Ezek. 11.19, 20. and chap. 27.23, 24, 26, 27. where the Lord after he had promised unto his people many particular blessings (as that he would give them a new heart, take away their stony heart, make them walk in his Statutes and Ordinances, that they should no more defile themselves with Idols, that David, i. e. Christ, should be their King and Shepherd, that his Ta∣bernacle should be with them▪ i. e. He would dwell in them, and walk in them, 2 Cor. 6.16.) He tells them, That he will be their God, and they shall be his people; from whence Mr. W. would gather, That God promiseth Faith, not as a part of the Covenant, but as a means to bring us into Covenant, that God may be our God. How rational this Deduction is, let the Reder judge, for if that promise, I will be their God, must be taken exclusively; so that the promises preceding, are no part of the Covenant, then the promises of Justification, Sanctification, Perseverance, &c. must be excluded from being parts of the Covenant. If he sayes, that it onely excludes Faith, I would ask quô jure, what reason is there▪ that it should exclude Faith, more then the other promises preceding? If it includes the rest, why not this? But to draw to a conclusion, we say, that this promise, I will be their God, and they shall be my people, may be taken, either (1) more generally, as comprehending all good things whatsoever, as if the Lord after the enumeration of many particular benefits, had summed up all in this. I will be their God, q. d. They may expect as much good from me, as the living God can bestow upon his people, even this that hath been mentioned, and all things else; and in this sence the promise of Faith, or the Spirit which works Faith, is included in it; or (2) it may be taken more restrictively, as noting some particular benefit and priviledge distinct from the rest, as that they shall worship him, and he will protect and provide for
them; or else, that they shall not onely have an interest in God, but that they shall know it, and live in the comfort of it. §. 8. In the next place, Mr. W. offers me his service, to new mold my Argument, and to cast it into a better form, as thus, They concerning whom God hath promised, that he will give them Faith, they are in Covenant before they believe; but con∣cerning the Elect, God hath promised that he will give them Faith, Ergo. But pace tanti viri, I shall not accept his courtesie, if he hath any minde to it, as I have framed it, the Law is open, he may try his skill; onely he may be pleased to remember, that these Texts, Jere. 31.8. Heb. 8. were not brought to prove that we are in Covenant before we believe; but that the Spirit which works Faith, is given by vertue of the Covenant made with us: As for that Argument which from these Texts he hath advanced against us, together with the Auxiliaries, which he hath placed in the rear, I shall presently attend their motion, having first given in my evidence, to the cause depending, That the New Covenant is not conditional, and that in it, God doth not require any resti∣pulation from us, to intitle us to the blessings of it: The con∣trary Assertion, I conceive, is the  of his whole dis∣course: For if there be no condition, or restipulation required in the New Covenant, there will be no need, to make Faith the mears of our entrance into Covenant, nor any absurdity in saying that our Justification in the sight of God precedes Faith. CHAP. XIX. Wherein is shewn, That in the New Covenant there are no conditions required of us, to invest us with a Right and Title, to the blessings of it. BEfore I do give the Reasons of this Assertion, I must crave the Readers patience, whilest I tell him (1) what I mean by the New Covenant, and (2) what I understand by a condi∣tion. 1. By the New Covenant, I mean that engagement which God
hath laid upon himself, to bestow on them for whom Christ hath died, all good which is commensurate to their nature, and by vertue whereof all blessings Corporal, Spiritual, and Eternal, do flow down unto them. I call it an Engagement, because God by promising makes himself a debtor, though not to us, yet unto him∣self; being bound in justice to perform his Word and Promise. There are two principal Engagements, which God hath laid upon himself, in order to our Eternal Happiness, to one of which all his promises may be reduced. The first is that Covenant which he made with the first Adam in the time of his innocency; wherein God promised us life, upon condition of our perfect obedience: This is called a Covenant of Works, because the effects thereof do depend upon our works; the promise is not in force, nor have we any right to the Blessings, until all those works are performed which are here required. Now this Covenant (saith the Apostle) became weak through the flesh, i. e. It was altogether unable to give us life, by reason of our default, and not performing the con∣dition required of us; we have no benefit at all by this engage∣ment, and therefore the Lord made another Covenant with the second Adam, that upon the making of his soul an offering for sin, he would give unto his Seed, viz. All the Elect, Eternal life, i. e. All good things whatsoever which they stand in need of. Now this we call The New Covenant, because it succeeded in the place of the other; and the Covenant of Grace, because all the effects thereof, do flow down unto us, meerly from the favor of God, and the merit of Christ. All the mercies we receive, they are the fruits and effects of this engagement, Zech. 9.11. It is the onely plea we can use to God, both for the things of this life, and that which is to come; and by vertue hereof, we may claim and confidently expect from him all things whatsoever which we stand in need of, and are good for us. Now I say, that Promise or Covenant by ver∣tue whereof, we obtain both Grace and Glory, good things, pre∣sent and future, is not conditional to us; I say, to us; for to Christ it was conditional, though to us it be free; to him it was a Covenant of Works, though to us it be a Covenant of pure Grace; there is not so much as one blessing doth descend to us, but he hath dearly bought it, even with the price of his own blood; for which cause he is called the Mediator, Witness, and Surety of the New Covenant.
§. 2. 2. When we say the New Covenant is not conditional, we understand a condition in its proper and genuine sense, as the Jurists use it, in reference to mens contracts and bargains. A con∣dition (saith Dr. CawelInterpreter verbo, conditi∣on.▪) is a rate, manner, or Law annexed to mens acts (or grants) staying and suspending the same, and making them uncertain, whether they shall take effect, or no. And our English Papinian J. Cook on Littleton, l 3. c. 5., Conditio dicitur cum quid, in ca∣sum incertum, qui potest tendere ad esse, aut non esse, confertur. To the same purpose, the Expositor of Law terms Verbo Conditi∣on., A condition is a restraint or bridle, annexed and joyned to a promise, by the performance of which, it is ratified and takes effect, and by the non-performance of it, it becomes voide, the person to whom it is made shall receive no commodity or advantage by it: Hence is that Maxime amongst Lawyers, Conditio ad impleri debet, pri∣usquàm sequatur effectus, i. e. The condition must be perform∣ed, bfore the Grant or Promise becomes valid. In this sense we say▪ The Covenant which God made with Adam was conditional, God annexed to the promise of Life, the condition of Obedience. Do this, and thou shalt live; The stability, and success of that promise, did depend upon his performing of the condition; he failing in his part, the promise became voide. Now we deny, that the blessings of the New Covenant, do depend upon this, or any other condition to be performed by us. Lawyers do distinguish of a twofold condition, (1) Antecedent, and (2) Consequent. The Antecedent condition being performed, doth get, or gain the thing, or estate made upon condition; the Consequent condition doth keep and continue it. As for instance, If I fell a man a Farm, on condition he shall pay me five hundred pounds present, and forty shillings, nay, be it but six pence per annum for the future; the payment of the five hundred pounds is the Antecedent condition, which gives him possession of the Farm; the forty shillings or six pence per annum is the Subsequent condition, and that continues his possession; and if he fail in this latter, the Estate is forfeited, and in Law I may re-enter upon the Farm, as if no such bargain had been made between us. Now we say further, That the Blessings of the New Covenant require not onely no Antecedent, but no Subse∣quent condition to be performed by us; there is nothing on our parts that procures our Right and Interest, nor yet that continues
and maintains our interest in them; The Lord Jesus is both the Author and the Finisher of our Salvation; it is by, and through him, that we are made Sons, and doe continue Sons; are made Righteous, and doe continue Righteous; that we Obtain, and do Injoy all the effects of the New Covenant. §. 3. I am not ignorant that the word Condition is sometimes taken improperly, for that which is meerly an Antecedent, though it con∣tributes not the least efficiency, either natural, or morall, towards the production of that which follows it: A condition properly taken, is a moral efficient cause, which produceth its effect by vertue of some compact, agreement, or constitution between persons, omnis conditio antecedens est effectiva, a condition properly so called, is effective of that which is promised upon condition. Now I say, not onely conditions in a proper sense, but all certaine and constant Antecedents (though they are not expressed or included in their Federal constitution, so as that the Promise doth depend upon them) may in a vulgar sense, be called conditions of those things that follow them; and in this sense our Divines doe commonly call one benefit of the Covenant a condition of the another; as that which is given first, of that which is given after. Thus Dr. Twisse Vind. l. 1. part 3. sect. 7. . 1. & alib. saepe. makes inherent holinesse to be causa dispositiva, or the sine qua non, (not of Justification) but of Salvation, or Glorification, because the one alwaies precedes the other: Many other do expresse them∣selves in the same manner. It is evident that some benefits of the New Covenant in their execution and accomplishment doe follow others; though we have a right unto them all at once (for as much as that flowes immediately from the purchase which Christ hath made) yet we have not possession of them all at once, but in that order and manner as God is pleased to bestow them: Christ hath procured both Grace and Glory for his Elect, yet he gives Grace, i. e. Gracious Quallifications, as Knowledge, Faith, Love, &c. be∣fore he brings them to the possession of Glory; in which sense, I conceive, it is that the Scripture annexeth Salvation unto Faith, and other works of inherent Holinesse, Matth. 5. pr. Heb. 12.14. &c. because these are certain and infallible Antecedents in all that shall be saved See Down. of Justif. p. 471.; none (who live to years of understanding) are saved, but they that doe beleeve the Gospell, and shew forth the fruits of it in a suitable conversation: If in this sence onely, Faith and Re∣pentance be called conditions of the Covenant, to wit, because they
are wrought in all those that do injoy the ful effect of the Covenant, I will not contend. §. 4, Yet I think it fit rather to forbear this expression, (1) Be∣cause it is so improper, to call a part of the Covenant, the conditi∣on of it, Chamier, though he often useth the expression, yet hee acknowledgeth that Faith is called a condition, verbis minus pro∣priis Tom. 3. l. 15. . 3. sect. 27.; And a little after, Ib. c. 5. sect. 16 Fidei conditio, non est antecedens sed consequens, non est causa salutis, sed instrumentum apprehen∣dendi gratiam, i. e. Faith is not a proper antecedent condition, but an improper or consequent condition, it is not a cause of sal∣vation, but only the instrument whereby we receive and apply it. Mr. Rutherford himselfe, though he cals them Libertines and Antinomians, who say the Covenant of Grace is not conditionall, yet almost in the same breath he hath let fall these words Trial of Faith  61.: To buy without mony, and to have a sight of sin, is the condition of our having the water of Life, but the truth is, it is an impro∣per condition, for both wages and worke is Free Grace. I con∣fesse improper locutions ought to be borne with, when they serve to illustrate truth; but this I conceive doth exceedingly darken it. (2) Because of the advantage which the adversaries of the Gospel doe make of this expression; were most of the ancient Fathers now alive, to see what use the Papists and others doe make of their un∣wary sayings, to patronize their Errors, I am perswaded, they would fill the world with their retractations and apologies. Have we not cause then to be careful in this matter, when we see so ma∣ny profligated Errors, as Free-Will, and Universall Redemption, sheltering themselves under this expression? But (3) That which moves me most, is compassion to our vulgar hearers; who when they hear men say, that Faith, Repentance, &c. are conditions of the Covenant, understand it no otherwise then in the most common ac∣ception, and as the term Condition is used in reference to mens Con∣tracts, and as Obedience was the condition of the first Covenant; whereby, (as Luther hath observed Com. on Gal. 4.) they live stil in bondage, not daring to take hold of the Promise, because they doubt whether they have the condition; All their endeavors after Faith, and Holi∣nesse are but mercinary and selfish, they would not do the work, but to get the wages. §. 5. But this is not the matter, that is now in question, Our difference is not about words, but things, The Reader I suppose
is sufficiently informed in what sence we deny, that the New Cove∣nant is conditional, to wit, in that manner as the first Covenant was, which was properly conditional: and this perswasion I cannot but ad∣here to (notwithstanding al that I have seen or heard to the contrary) That in the New Covenant wherein God hath promised Life and Salvation unto sinners, for whom Christ hath shed his blood; and by vertue whereof they do obtain all good things present and future, there is no condition required of them to obtain or pro∣cure the blessings that are therein promised; For though God doth bestow upon us one blessing before another, yet he gives not any one for the sake of another, but all of them (even to our finall sit∣ting down in Glory) are given us freely for the sake of Christ; Glory it selfe is not only not for, but not according to our works, as the principle or rule, by which God proportions his reward, but ac∣cording to his owne Mercy and Grace. My Reasons for the Thesis are. §. 6. 1. Because in all those places, wherein the nature or te∣nor of the New-Covenant is declared, there is not (as Dr. Twisse Sup. c▪ 17. sect. 10. hath observed) any mention at all of the least condition, as Jer. 31.33. Ezek. 36.25. &c. Hos. 2.18, 19, 20. in all which places, with the like, God promiseth to doe all in them and for them; upon the last of those Texts Zanchius observes Tom. 5. fol· in Hos. p. 42. and 55., Non ait si non resipueris, recipiam te in gratiam, & desponsabo, sed absolute [ego te desponsabo] est igitur absolutissima promissio, qua sine ulla conditione promittit▪ Deus, s sum populum, in gratiam re∣cepturum, & servaturum, &c. i. e. He doth not say, if thou wilt repent, I will receive thee into favor, and betroth thee; but absolutely [I will betroth thee &c.] It is therefore a most absolute Covenant, wherein God, without any condition, doth promise that he will receive his people into favor, and save them. The same Author in another place De natura Dei in meo. p. 491., speaking of the Covenant which God made with Abraham, Gen. 17.7. It is to be noted (saith he) that this Promise is altogether free, absolute, and without any condi∣tion, which he proves by two Arguments, one of which is, Quo∣niam nullam plane in verbis foederis conditionem legimus, i. e. Be∣cause in the words of the Covenant we finde no condition. And long before him that noble Champion of Grace against the Pela∣gians, Prosper of Aquitan De Vocat. Gen. l. 1. c. 9. (who lived about the year 445.)
Manet prorsus & quotidie impletur quod Abrahae dominus sine conditione promisit sine lege donavit: The Covenant (saith he) is still in force, and is daily fulfilled, which the Lord pro∣mised unto Abraham, without any condition, and established without a restipulation. Now if any shall say that these, and such like Texts do not comprize the whole, but onely a part of the New Covenant, because God doth not say, it is the whole Co∣venant. I Answer, (1) That it is a meer shift, like that of the Papists Bellar. apud. Ames T. 4. l. 5. c 4. sect 9. against Justification by Faith alone, because the word [Alone] is not found in those Scriptures, which the Protestants doe bring to prove it. Our Divines answer, it is there virtually, and by necessary consequence, though not formally or litterally; So say I, when the Lord saith expressely, This is my Covenant; It is all one, as if he had said, This is my whole Covenant. Let our Adversaries shew us one place, where any conditional Pro∣mise is called the New Covenant, either in whole or in part. (2) That which they would make the Condition of the Covenant on our part, is expressely promised to us, no lesse then any other blessing; and their saying that it is promised in the Covenant, but not as a part of the Covenant, hath been sufficiently disproved before. §. 7. 2. Because all those Covenants which God made to pre∣figure this Covenant, were free and absolute, without any Condi∣tion; therefore the Covenant it selfe, which was figured by them, is much more so: It is not to be questioned but the substance hath as much Grace as the shadow. Now I say in those tipicall Co∣venants, which God made with Noah, Abraham, Phineas, Da∣vid, &c. there are no Restipulations Vid. Jun. orat. 2 de foed.. The Covenant with Noah, doth not run like that with Adam, Do this, and live, but, I will not destroy the earth, &c. Gen. 9.11. I confesse Rivet In loc. saith, the condition on Noahs part, was ut justè, & intigrè ambularet. But (1) God doth not say so; the Lord doth not say, I will make this Covenant with thee, if thou wilt walke uprightly. (2) This Covenant was made not onely with Noah, but with every living creature, Vers. 12. Now sensitive creatures could not performe any such Condition. (3) If the benefit of that Covenant had de∣pended upon Noahs upright walking, then upon Noahs fall, V. 21. the World should have been drowned again; as death entred
into the world upon the non-performance of Adams condition. The Covenant with Phinehas, Num. 25. is not like that which God made with Eli, which was but a conditional and uncertain Covenant, 1 Sam. 2.30. So the Covenant which God made with David, concerning the Kingdom, is not like the Covenant which he made with Saul, which was quickly voide, because it depend∣ed upon his obedience, 1 Sam. 13.13, 14. which Davids did not; and therefore the Covenant which God made with David, is called The sure mercies of David, Isa. 54.3. God promised mercies unto Saul as well as unto David, but they were not sure mercies Preston of Gods Immu∣tab. p. 86., because they were conditional, they were promised upon conditions to be performed by him; but the Covenant with David, was sure and stedfast, Psal. 89.28. because it depend∣ed not upon conditions on his part; and therefore, though he started aside as well as Saul, yet the Covenant made with him was not thereupon dissolved, and broken. §. 8. 3. Because if there were any condition required in the New Covenant to intitle us to the Blessings of it, it would not be a Covenant of pure Grace; so that the asserting of conditions in the New Covenant, doth by necessary consequence overthrow the na∣ture of it; for as Austine hath observed, Grace is not grace, unless it be every way free, and the Apostle before him, Rom. 11.6. If by grace, then is it no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace; but if it be of works, then is it no more grace. Our Salvation is ascribed to Grace, not onely inclusively, but ex∣clusively, Ephes. 2.8, 9, Tit. 2.5. All the Blessings of the New Covenant are called Gifts, Rom. 5.17, 18. & 6.23. and gifts that are given freely, 1 Cor. 2.12. Rom. 3.24. To give a thing freely, and conditionally, are contradictories; he that parts with any thing upon conditions, doth as it were sell it. The works and conditions which men perform, in the Prophets phrase, are their money. Isai. 55.1, 2. A condition performed, makes the thing covenanted for a due debt, which the promiser is bound to give; so that if the Blessings of the Covenant, did depend upon conditi∣ons, they would not be of grace, but debt; and men by perform∣ing those conditions, would be, at least in part, their own Saviours. Now what can be imagined more derogatory to the Grace of God?
Object. Object. True may some say, it would derogate from the grace of God, if we attributed such a meritoriousness unto these conditions, as the Papists do unto works; but we do not do so. To which I answer,Answ. (1) That the Papists assert no other works and conditions to be necessary to Justification and Salvation, then what our Adversaries do. (2) Neither Papists nor Arminians do ascribe any more meritoriousness to works, then our opponents: They grant there is such an infinite distance and disproportion be∣tween the Blessing promised, and the conditions required of us, that in strictness of Justice they do not deserve it, onely expacto, seeing God is pleased to promise so largely upon condition of so small a pittance of service, we may be said to merit by performing the condition; and in this sence, Mr. Baxter Aphor. Thes. 26. will tell you, That the performers of a condition, may be said to merit the reward. The Papists never pleaded for merit upon any other account; Mr. Cal∣vin Qui belle se absurda omnia evasisse pua∣runt, cum dice∣rent, non intrin∣seca sua bonitate valere opera, ad salutem cmeren∣dam, sed expac ratione. Calv. Inst. l. 3. c. 17. sect 3. observed long ago, how much they please themselves with this simple shift, supposing that hereby they shall evade whatso∣ever Arguments are brought against them: Though Mr. B. seems to mince the matter, calling his conditions but a sine qua non, and a Pepper corn Aphor. Thes. 23. p. 127., &c. he attributes as much, if not more to works, then the Papists, Arminians, and Socinians, have done; the Pa∣pists will not say, That works do merit in a strict and proper sence. Smalzius Apud. Steg∣man. in Photin. calls their fides formata, a meer sine qua non; and a known friend to the Remonstrants Doctrine amongst our selves Dr. Hamm. 9 Ser. p 140., dubs it with no better name, then a sleight, unconsiderable, de∣spicable Pepper corn, most pitifully unproportionable, to the great rent which God might require, and to the infinite treasure of glory he makes over to us: And again, That mite of Obedi∣ence, Faith and Love. But now Mr. B. goes a step beyond them, in that he ascribes a meritoriousness to works, which the Armini∣ans, and Socinians have not dared to do. (3) I would ask whe∣ther the condition required of Adam, were meritorious of eternal life? I presume no man will say it was, in a strict and proper sense, there being no proportion between the work and the wages; but yet that condition did lessen the freeness of Divine Grace: The Grace of God was not manifested so much in saving man in that way, as in giving life unto him freely. And therefore to put our Justification and Salvation upon the same terms,
must necessarily eclipse the Grace of God in the New Covenant. Object. But some may say there is a great difference, the conditions required of Adam were legal conditions;Object. but the conditions which we stand for, and assert in the New Covenant, are Evangelical Conditions. I answer,Answ. That the sound of words doth nothing at all alter the nature of things; all conditions per∣formed for life, are legal conditions: The precepts both of Law and Gospel, have the same matter, though not the same end; but when Gospel duties are made conditions of Justification and Sal∣vation, there is no difference. Object. Yes, may some say,Object. Evangelical conditions are more facile and easie, then the Legal were. Are they so!Answ. Let them consider again, whether it be more easie for a man that is dead in trespasses and sins, to believe in Christ, to love God, to hate sin, to mortifie his lusts, &c. then it was for Adam in his innocency (when he had a natural inclination to obey God) to abstain from the fruit of one Tree, when he had a thousand besides, as good as that; there can be no condition imagined more facile and feasable, then Adams was. But if it were so, yet would the reward be debt, and not grace: As he that hath his peny by contract, hath as much right to it, though he labored but an hour, as if he had en∣dured the heat of the whole day. We say, Gradus non variat spe∣ciem, it is not more grace, but all grace, that doth denominate the Covenant, a Covenant of Grace. §. 9. To these Reasons there might be added many more; which because they have been mentioned before, upon another occa∣sion, I shall not stand upon them. 4. Because all the pretended conditions of the Covenant, are promised in the Covenant: Now it is absurd to make any thing a cause of itself, or a means and condition whereby it is procured. 5. Because the asserting of conditions in the Covenant, attributes unto men a power and ability to do good, not onely before they are justified; but before they believe: For if all the promises of the Covenant are conditional, then the promise of Faith is conditional, and consequently a man must be supposed able to perform some good and acceptable work to God before he believes, whereas without Faith, it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. Condi∣tions in a proper sence, do necessarily infer the liberty of mans will
unto that which is good; for as the Remonstrants do define it, A condition is a free act which we absolutely may perform, or not perform, by Freewil not acted, by the predeterminating grace of God. A Conditional Covenant and Freewil, are inseparable; the former supposeth the latter: Whether Mr. W. will own the Con∣sequence, I am not able to say; however, that there is no such power, or ability in the Natural man to do that which is good, might be irrefragably demonstrated from sundry Scriptures, as Gen. 6.5. Eph. 2.1, 2. 1 Cor. 2.14. 2 Cor. 3.5. Rom. 7.18. Phil. 2.13, &c. 6. Because if the Covenant were conditional, no man in this life, could attain to any assurance of his own interest in the blessings of it, but must live always in a wavering and uncertain estate, as to the hope of eternal life; that hope of Salvation which is built upon conditional promises, is (as Calvin observes) always waver∣ing and tottering; for conditional promises belong to none, but un∣to them who have performed the condition: If remission of sins were promised unto us, not absolutely but conditionally, as upon condition that we do believe, repent, and persevere. Tum (says Rutherford Exerc. Apol. p. 36. & 34) remissa nulla omnino peccata sunt in hac vita, &c. i. e. Then it must follow that no mans sins are remitted in this life, no man is justified here, which is contrary to many plain Scriptures, as Rom. 4.10. & 5.1. & 8.30. Ephes. 1.7. 1 Cor. 6.11. §. 10. 7. Because the Scripture shews, that there is the same proportion, between Adams conveying sin to his seed, and Christs conveying Righteousness to his Seed, Rom. 5.16. The imputation of Adams sin did not depend upon the personal sinful acts of his posterity, so neither doth the imputation of Christs Righteous∣ness depend upon the good works and actions of Gods Elect; but as by Adams sin, all his posterity became actually sinners, even they that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams trans∣gression, i. e. Actually in their own persons; even so by Christs Righteousness all the Elect to the end of the world, are constituted righteous, before they have performed any works, or conditions in their own persons. 8. Because if the Covenant were conditional, then Infants and Ideots, though elected, could have no interest in any of the bles∣sings
therein promised, in regard they cannot perform the conditi∣ons, upon which they do depend; and consequently, dying with∣out Faith, they must needs be damned. §. 11. . and lastly, If they to whom the Covenant belongs, had a right and title to all the blessings of the Covenant, before their be∣lieving, and turning unto God, then are there no conditions requi∣red on our part to intitle us to the blessings of it. But they to whom the Covenant belongs, scil. the Elect, had a right and interest in all the blessings of the Covenant before their believing, &c. Ergo. The Assumption shall be proved in our Answer to that Argument which Mr. W. hath retorted upon us from Jere. 31. wherewith we shall enter the lists in the next place. CHAP. XX. Wherein Mr. Woodbridges chief Argument against the Absoluteness of the New Covenant, is answered; and this Position [That God is the God of his people, before they do believe and repent] rescued from his contradictions. FRom the Scriptures before mentioned, wherein the tenor of the Covenant is recited, Mr. W. hath advanced this Argument a∣gainst us, If God be not the God of any, nor they his people be∣fore they believe, then none are in Covenant with God before they believe; but God is not the God of any before they believe. Ergo. As for the Proposition (says he) he is destitute of sense that shall deny it; I say so too, if that clause of Gods being the God of any, be taken comprehensively, and in its full latitude, for their having interest in God, and in all the blessings which God hath intended to his people; but if it be taken for the actual enjoyment and possession of any one, or more, of those blessings (as sometimes it is) he is as much destitute of sense that shall affirm it; for then the sense of it, is this, If none do know, or have the comfort of this priviledge, that God is their God before they believe, then
none are in Covenant with God before they believe; this conse∣quence is false; for there is a wide difference between having an interest in God, and the blessings of his Grace; and our knowledge thereof, or our enjoyment of those blessings. Interest and Pos∣session, are not equipollent and reciprocal; God may promise some one benefit, in order to our possession, and enjoyment of others, though not to give us a right and interest in them. We say, that by Faith we have the knowledge and comfort of that reconciliation which Christ hath made between God and us, though we cannot say, that we obtain a right and interest therein by Faith: Thorough Faith we come to know, that God is our God, though our belie∣ving doth not make him to be our God. But the Assumption, viz. That God is not the God of any before they believe, is obvious unto just Exception, which he hath endeavored to prove after this manner; If God promise to give Faith, that we may be his peo∣ple, and he our God, then till that Faith be given, he is not our God, nor we his people: But God promiseth to give Faith, that he may be our God, and we his people, Jere. 31.33. Heb. 8.10. Ezek▪ 11.19.20. & 36.25, &c. & 37.23, 24, 26, 27. We have shewn before, that the Scriptures mentioned do utterly refuse to protect the Minor; and that all the particular promises con∣tained in them, are parts or effects of the Covenant, and not means to bring us into Covenant. The having of a new heart doth not make God to be our God; but because he is our God, he gives us that blessing, and all things else. §. 2. That God is the God of his people before they do believe, and are converted, is evident unto me from these grounds. First, If God be their God, whom he doth peculiarly love, and whom he hath chosen, and separated to himself from the rest of mankinde, then is the Lord a God unto some before they believe; the consequence is clear, because God hath loved and chosen some in that manner from everlasting, Jere. 31.3. Eph. 1.4. Now this was not an ordinary common love, such as he bears unto all Crea∣tures, but a peculiar distinguishing love, whereby he willed to them the greatest good, even that  mentioned Eph. 2.4. See John 17.23, 24. But God is their God whom he doth pecu∣liarly love, and hath chosen and separated to himself, Ergo. For what is it to have the Lord for our God, but to be appropriated
to God, to have such an interest in God, as others have not, to be the objects of his speciall love? It was Israels prerogative a∣bove all the Nations of the world, that they had the Lord to be their God; now the Lord became their God, by setting his love upon them, and chusing them to be a peculiar people to himself, Deut. 7.6, 7, 8. and by separating them from other people, Lev. 20.24, 25. The Lord, Ezek. 16.8. declares concerning spirituall Is∣rael, that they became his, whilst they were in their blood, that ere ever they were washed and adorned (had any amiable qualities in them) he sware unto them, and entred into Covenant with them; which swearing as it refers to spiritual Israel must be un∣derstood of that Oath which he made to Christ, concerning the blessing of his seed. The Prophet infers this their relation un∣to God from his everlasting love, Jer. 31.1.3. The Apostle like∣wise Rom. 8.31. grounds the Saints interest in God, or their having God to be with them, upon his eternall and unchangeable good will, towards them, even before he spared his Son to dye for them. So 2 Tim. 2.19. The foundation of God standeth sure; the Lord knoweth them that are his; Implying, that the election, and fore-knowledge of God doth make men his. §. 3. Secondly, If the Lord be a God, not onely to his people, but to their seed also, then is he a God to some before they beleeve; But he is a God not onely to his people who are called, and doe beleeve, but to their seed who are not called, and do not yet beleeve, Ergo. The Lord promised Abraham, that he would be, not only his God, but the God of his seed; the seed of Abraham did not then beleeve, yet the Lord stiles himself their God. And the Apostle tels those converts Act. 2.39. That the Promise was to them, and to their children: Now what was that Promise, but Ero Deus tuus & seminis tui? If our opposers say, That God was not the God of their children, untill they were called, they will be guilty of the same Tautalogy which they charge upon the Anti-pedo-baptists: upon this ground it is, that the children of beleeving Parents are admitted to baptisme, before they beleeve; because God hath declared, that hee is their God. §. 4. Thirdly, They whom the Lord hath purchased to be a pecu∣liar people to himselfe, have the Lord to be their God; But God
hath purchased some to be a peculiar people to himself before they beleeve, Ergo. The major is evident, for when a man makes a Purchase, he obtains a legall right and propriety in the thing pur∣chased; Quod venditur transit in potestatem ementis. And therefore the Apostle concludes from hence, that we are not our own but Gods, because, we are bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20, The minor is undeniable, That God did purchase us before we do beleeve, even when he gave himselfe , a Ransome for us, 2 Tim. 2.6. he bought us (saith the Apostle) with his precious blood, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. thereby we were made , a peculiar people, Tit. 2.14. Though he had not immediately upon the payment of the price, the possession of us, yet thereby he obtained a right to us; we became his in right, though not in injoyment; It was here, as with a man that buyes a Living, and payes down the price, he hath immediately a right to it, though he hath not the present possession of it; he may call it his own, though it be not in his hands. §. 5. Fourthly, If we recive all good things from God; yea, Faith it selfe, upon this account, because we are his people, then God is our God before wee beleeve; But wee receive all good things from God, even Faith it selfe, meerly upon this account, because we are his people, as Gal 4.6. Because yee are Sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son, into your hearts. They were Sons before they received the Spirit of his Son. So Isa. 48.17. I am the Lord thy God which teacheth thee to profit, scil. By my word and works; by which means men are brought to Faith and Repentance: No reason can be given why one man profits by the Word, and another doth not, but because the Lord is a God to one, and not to the other; he hath chosen one, and not the other, Act 13.48. as many as were ordained unto eternall life, i. e. chosen and separated from the rest of mankind, to be a peculiar people unto God; beleeved. §. 6. Fifthly, If none can, or do Beleeve and Repent, but they to whom the Lord doth manifest this Grace, That he is their God, then the Lord is our God before we beleeve and repent; But none do or can beleeve and repent, but they to whom God doth reveale and manifest this Grace; Ergo. We chuse him, because hee hath chosen us; and love him, because he hath loved us first,
Joh. 15.16. 1 Joh. 4 10.19. In Hos. 2.23. saith the Lord; I will have mercy upon her, that had not obtained mercy; and I will say to them which were not my people, thou art my people, and they shall say, Thou art my God. I have observed that Ex∣positors generally, doe take notice of the order of the words. As Mr. Burroughs Bur. on Hos. 1 Vol. p. 674., God must begin with us, we cannot begin and say, Thou art my God; but God must begin with us first, and say, You are my people. And Dr. Rivet In loc. obs. 6. p. 101., Hic ord est consi∣derandus, &c. The order of the words ought diligently to be observed, It is God that begins and calls them his people: who being made his people through Grace, doe by Faith give their consent, and own him for their God. And Zanchy Tom. 5. in Hos. p 57. to the same purpose, The order of the words shewes, That God doth first prevent us with his Grace, and makes us his people, then follows the assent of our Faith, whereby we acknowledge and im∣brace him for our God. So that our Faith, doth not make him to be our God, but suppose he is so. §. 7. Sixthly, They to whom God is a Father, and a Shepherd, have the Lord for their God; But God was our Father, and Shep∣herd before we beleeved, Ergo. All the Elect are the Sheep, and Children of Jesus Christ. They are his Sheep, Joh. 10.15. I lay down my life for my Sheep, he laid down his life, not onely for them that were then called, but for them that were to be called afterwards, so ver. 16. Other sheep I have, which are not of this fold; The Elect Gentiles were his sheep, before they were brought into his Fold, scil. the visible communion of Saints. They are also called his Seed and Children, Isa. 53.10. and Heb. 2.13. Behold I, and the children which God hath given mee: Hee speaks of all those Sons, whom he was to bring unto Glory, ver. 10. So Jer. 3.19. Thou shalt call me, my Father; Their calling him Father, did not make, but suppose him to be their Father, and in this respect he is called an Everlasting Father, Isa. 9.6. §. 8. Mr. W. tels us, That he hath onely one observation to adde, which the most learned among the Jewish, and Christian writers, doe often take notice of, and that is this, [That God is never said to be our God in reference to his giving of the first Grace, but onely in reference to the blessing, which he promi∣seth to them that have Faith] Heb. 11.16. He is not our God,
that he may give us Faith, but is every where said to give us Faith, that he may be our God, 1 Pet. 2.10. I acknowledge that Mr. W. is a learned man, yet I know it is much above his reach to determine, who are the most learned amongst the Jewish, and Christian Writers; who as yet hath not looked into the tenth part of either: As for the Jewish Doctors, I suppose no man will think them competent Judges of Gospel verities; and I must confesse, that too many of our Christian Writers are leavened over-much with a Jewish legal spirit; However if he had pointed to the Au∣thors that make this Observation, I should have weighed the grounds whereon they lay it; the names of men, though never so learned, weigh lighter then a feather in matters of Faith. If hee took up his Observation upon trust from Grotius (as I suspect he did) I shall presume once more, to advice him to take heed of tampering with the Notions of that learned Apostate. §. 9. I have shewed already that sundry Godly and Learned men are of another mind, who exclude all manner of Conditions from the New Covenant, and consequently do make Faith a part of the Covenant, and not the means to bring us into Covenant; to which there might be added many more, as Luther In Gal 4.25. fol. 218., The Promises of the Law are conditionall, promising life, not freely, but to such as fulfill the Law, and therefore they leave mens Consciences in doubt, for no man fulfilleth the Law; But the Promises of the New Testament have no such Condition joy∣ned unto them, nor require any thing of us, nor depend upon any Condition of our worthinesse, but bring, and give unto us freely, Forgivenesse of sins, Grace, Righteousnesse, and Life everlasting for Christs sake, &c. Melancton speaks as fully to the purpose Melanct in Rom. 3. Vulgo inginantur ho∣mes evangeli¦um esse promissi∣onem conditio∣natem, at ab hac imaginatione, adducendi sunt, &c., Men commonly (saies he) doe imagine that the Gospell is a conditionall Promise; but this conceit is to be rooted out of them. —The Gospell offers remission of sins and Eternal Life, without the Condition of our works. And again Ib. in Rom. 4., Our Obedience is neither the Cause, nor the Con∣dition, for which wee are accepted before God. So P. Martyr Nos negamus Testamentum Dei de remissione peccatorum, ha∣bere adjunctam conditionem loc com. de Justif. fid. sect 65 p. 387., Wee deny (sayes he) That the Covenant of God concerning the remission of sinnes hath any Condition an∣nexed unto it. And Olevian Tota substantia fedeis est sie conditione, D. N. foed. sect. 1, The whole frame, or substance of the New Covenant, is without any Condition.
Estius puts this question Comment. in Heb. 8.10., How the New Testament can be called a Covenant, seeing it contains onely a most free promise, whereas Covenants do consist of conditions on both parts? We may not answer (says he) that good works are the condition thereof, seeing that works themselves are contained in the pro∣mise of the New Testament: But (says he) the word [Berith] doth not onely signifie a Covenant in a strict sense, which con∣sists of mutual conditions, but it single promise which is free from all conditions; and such a Covenant is that which we call the New Testament, viz. Promissio Dei prorsus absoluta & gratuita; to wit, That promise of God which is altogether free and absolute. With him agrees Dr. Ames Coronis ad Col. Hig Edit. 6. p. 400., who addes, That the New Covenant is more properly called a Testament, then a Covenant; because a Will or Testament bequeaths Le∣gacies, without any office or condition of the Legatees. And Beza Beza in Gal. 3.14., The word  used Gal. 3.14. doth not signifie (says he) any promise, but that which is altogether free, in which respect it is opposed to the Law; for the promises of the Law have conditions annexed to them; and therefore the word  whereby the New Covenant is signified, is better rendred Pro∣mise, then Covenant. But to avoide proliity, I shall desire the Reader at his leisure to peruse Junius his Second Oration De foe∣dere novo, prefixt to his Enarrations on the four first Psalms, who being so great a Linguist and Lawyer, his Judgement in this point, ought the more to be regarded. It may be Mr. B. and Mr. W. will place them but in the form of ignorant and unstudied Di∣vines; Though they do, it hath been sufficiently confirmed, with the authority of a greater Doctor. And if we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater, 1 John 5.9. §. 10. The Scriptures which Mr. W. hath brought, do no whit help him, as Heb. 11.16. where it is said, God was not ashamed to be called the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who were believers; Ergo, (says he) God is not the God of any, before they do believe: He might reason as well, a Father acknow∣ledgeth and stands by his son, when he is in distress, Ergo, He was not his father before. The scope of the place, is not to shew when God did become their Father, but rather the faithfulness and conde∣scendence
of God towards his people in their low estate See Dicksons Com., for though they were pilgrims and strangers in the world, hated, and despised of all, yet God did own, and honor them. See Psal. 105.12, 13, 14, 15. So that, in 1 Pet. 2.10. (where the Apostle speaking to the Saints, says, In times past, you were not a people, but are now the people of God,) is to be understood, in reference to the external administration of the Covenant, and not the real participation, or interest in the blessings of it: Indeed, in the first consideration, none are the people of God, but they that do profess the fear and worship of the true God,Micah 4.5. who walk in the name, i. e. In the Laws and Ordinances of God. In which respect the Elect before Faith, are said to have been without God in the world, Eph. 2.12. And in this sense, all that do profess the truth, are the people of God, though many of them are Hypocrites; who are therefore said to be of Israel,Rom. 9.6. Joh. 15.2. though they are not Israel; and some that are but fruitless branches, are notwithstanding said to be in Christ; which must be understood in respect of external pro∣fession, and not of internal implantation. But in the later considera∣tion, none are the people of God, but they that do belong to the Election of Grace, who are the Spiritual Seed, and Israel in truth: And thus, all the Elect, whether called or uncalled, are the people of God; though before conversion, they have not the com∣fort, yet they have a good right and title unto all the purchases of Christs death. God knows them to be his people, though they know not, that he is their God.
CHAP. XXI. Wherein the remaining Arguments which Mr. Wood∣bridge hath brought to prove, That the New Cove∣nant is not an absolute Promise, and that the Elect have no right to the Covenant before they believe, are answered. MR. W. towards the close of his Book, hath cast in three, or four Arguments more, for the confirmation of his Opinion, which he thinks superfluous. I might (saith he) spare the pains of further proof. And truly, I think so too, unless he had bestowed his pains in a better cause: I must tell him, That when he hath said all that he can, in defence of this cause, he will at last sit down a looser; for when the day shall come, which shall try every mans work of what sort it is; this hay and stubble of mans righteous∣ness, and mens pleadings for it, shall be consumed to ashes; though I am perswaded better things of him, and such as do ac∣company Salvation; In the mean time, I shall gladly hear the ut∣most that he hath to say, in the defence of his Opinion. §. 2. His first Argument, of this last rank, is grounded upon those words, Isa. 55.3. Come unto me, (that is, Believe in me, John 6.35.) and I will make an Everlasting Covenant with you. Ergo, The New Covenant is not an absolute promise, and none have any interest in the Covenant, before they believe. To which, I answer (1) the Particle [Vau] may be taken Illatively, (as in some other places it is) thus [For] I will make an Ever∣lasting Covenant; so that the Covenant is the ground of our coming, and not è contra: Or (2) if we take it Copulatively, as our Translators do, no prejudice can come thence, unto our Asser∣tion; for, I will make an Everlasting Covenant, is all one, as if he had said, I will perform, or give to you, all other benefits promised in my Everlasting Covenant, even the sure mercies of David, as the Apostle expounds it, Acts 13.34. Those pro∣mises
which are proposed conditionally by the Prophets, are ren∣dred absolutely by the Apostle; as for instance, that of the Pro∣phet, Isa. 59 20. The Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob. The Apostle, Rom. 11.26, renders it, Then shall come out of Zion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob; implying that Faith and Repentance, are parts of the Covenant, which God will give unto them, for whom Christ hath procured them. §. 3. His second Argument is, That the voice of the Gospel, which is the Covenant of Grace, is every where [Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shalt be saved] in opposition to the Covenant of Works, which saith, [do this and live.] Ergo, before believing, none have interest in the Covenant. We grant, that this precept or exhortation, Believe in the Lord Jesus, is frequently found in the New Testament, but that this doth formally contain the tenor of the Gospel, or New Covenant, we have before disproved. The Gospel properly and strictly taken, consists neither in the precepts, nor promises of the New Testament, but in the declaration of these glad tidings, that the promises which God made unto his people in the Old Testament are now fulfilled Act. 13.32, . Luke 1.54, 55, 69, 70. Acts 26.22, 23. Luke 4.18, 21.; to wit, the pro∣mises concerning the coming of the Messiah, and the clear exhibi∣tion of all the fruits and effects of his Mediatorship. So that the sum of the Gospel is rather comprized in this 1 Tim 1.15. Heb. 10.14., That Jesus Christ is come into the world to save sinners, yea, the cheif of sinners. That by his one offering, he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified. Now they that are sent forth to publish and de∣clare these glad tidings, are to invite and command all men every where to believe in him whom God hath sent; assuring them in the Name of God, That all that do believe in him, shall not perish, but have everlasting life: The command of believing, with the promise of life to Believers, are parts of our Ministery, they are not the tenor of the Gospel, or New Covenant. The Covenant whereof Christ is the Mediator, is said to be better then the for∣mer, because it doth consist of better promises, Heb. 8.6. Now what those better promises are, he tells them immediately out of Jeremy, I will put my Laws into their hearts, &c. wherein the Lord promiseth all good things unto them, without the least resti∣pulation from them. It is said indeed, they that are called, i e. do
believe, shall receive the promise of the eternal inheritance. It doth not follow, that their calling unto Faith, was the condition whereby they obtained the inheritance; no more, then because it is said, Chap. 5.9. Christ is the Author of Salvation to them that do obey him. Ergo. Works and Obedience are conditions on our part to obtain Salvation: Which places do describe the per∣sons that are saved, but not the tearms or means by which they do obtain Salvation; they that are called do receive, i. e. Enter into the promised inheritance; he doth not say, that by vertue of their calling, they do enter, or were invested with a right and title thereunto; the repeating of his Consequence, is answer enough: They that are called, shall receive the eternal inheritance; Ergo, None have any interest, in the Covenant before believing, or the New Covenant is not an absolute promise. §. 4. His next Argument is to this effect, The Covenant of Grace is to be preached to every man; but the absolute promise is not made to every man. Ergo, The Covenant of Grace is not an absolute promise. Answer, The Argument is faulty, both in Matter and Form; the Assumption should be, But the absolute promise (scil. of Mercy and Forgiveness, without Works and Conditions performed by us) is not to be preached to all men, which is false. But we will take things as they lie before us. The Covenant of Grace is preached to every man, and every man called upon to fulfil the conditions of it, that he may receive the blessings of it, which condition is Faith, Heb. 4.1, 2. Here is a grain of Corn, in a heap of chaff: It is true, that the Gospel, or Covenant of Grace, ought to be preached unto every Creature, Mark 16.15. Matth. 28.19. But it is not true, that the Preaching of the Gospel is to call upon men to fulfil the conditions of the Covenant, or that Faith is the condition of it: The place alledged sayes no such thing, the words are an Exhorta∣tion to sincerity and perseverance in our Christian Profession, by a similitude taken from foolish Racers, who by giving over before they come to the Goal, do lose the Crown. We also have a race to run, there is a Crown set before us, and therefore we ought to take heed, least by any means we fall short thereof; though no man shall enter into the Heavenly Canaan without Faith, yet it follows not, that Faith is the condition whereby we
get an interest either in that, or the other blessings of the Cove∣nant. The Absoluteness of the New Covenant is no ways incon∣sistent with the Preaching of the Gospel unto every Creature: For what is it to Preach the Gospel? But (1) to publish these joyful tidings, That the Son of God is come into the world to save men from their sins; that in the Sacrifice which he hath offered, there is plenteous Redemption for the cheif of sinners. (2) To press and exhort all men without exception to believe in him. 1. With the assent of their mindes, that all things which are written of him, cheifly concerning the merit of his sufferings, and the efficacy of his death, are true and infallible. 2. With the imbraces of their hearts, to wit, With such affections as are suit∣able to so great a good; and more particularly to trust, relie, and roul themselves upon him, for all the purchases of his death; and in so doing, confidently to expect the fruition of them in the fittest times. Now the Absoluteness of the New Covenant is so far from being any impediment to Faith, as that it affords men the greatest encouragement to believe, both to cast themselves into the arms of Christ, and to put on a strong confidence of inheriting all the promises, seeing that in their accomplishment, they de∣pend not upon Works and Conditions performed by them∣selves. §. 5. Mr. W. demands, (1) Whether there be an absolute promise made to every man, that God will give him grace? Though there be not, yet are the general promises of the Cove∣nant, a sufficient ground for our Faith, for as much as Grace therein, is promised indefinitely to sinners; which all that are or∣dained to life, shall believe, and lay hold of? But, says Mr. W. is it sense to exhort men to take hold of Gods Covenant, or to enter into Covenant with God, if the Covenant be onely an ab∣solute promise on Gods part? &c. What contradiction is there unto sense in either of these? For 1. what is it to lay hold of the Covenant, but (as Benhadads Servants did by Ahabs words, 1 Kings 20.33.Exod. 34 6, 7.) to take up those gracious discoveries which God in his Covenant hath made of himself to sinners, and to resolve with the woman of Cannan, not to be beaten off with any discou∣ragements? Which act of Faith is called The taking of the King∣dom of Heaven by violence, Matth. 11, 12. Which is, when a
Soule appropriates generall Promises to himselfe in particular , Chri∣sost., And against Hope, beleeves in Hope. The Apostle calls it, Fleeing for refuge to lay hold on the Promise, Heb. 6.18. which Promise, is the same which God confirmed by an Oath, Vers. 17. Now wee doe not finde that God did ever confirme any Conditionall Promise with an Oath, but onely those Ab∣solute Promises of his Grace See Reyn: on Psa. 110. p. 385, Isai. 54.9, 10. Psal. 89 34, 35. As for the other phrase of entering into Covenant with God, Though wee never find it in the New Testament, that the Apostles did exhort men to enter into, or to make a Co∣venant with God, yet I conceive that it may bee used in reference to the Externall Administration of the New Cove∣nant; Men may bee said to enter into Covenant with God, when they take upon them the profession of Christianity, and give up themselves to bee the Lords People. In this respect wee may exhort men, as the Apostle doth, To give up themselves a living Sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto God, and to abide stedfast in the Covenant of God; or rather, as the Apostles phrase is, To hold fast their Profession firme unto the end, Hebr. 3.6. It were absurd to exhort men either to make, or to concurre to the making of the Covenant of Grace, which is his act alone, who sheweth mercy unto whom he will. §. 6. His next Interogative is a very strange one, he asks us, Whether if the Covenant be an absolute Promise, it be sense, to accuse, blame and damne men for unbeleefe, and rejecting of the Gospell? Was it ever known that men should be counted worthy of death, for not being the objects of an absolute Promise? By his favor, who did ever say▪ that men are damned for not being objects of an Absolute Promise? We say, the condemnation of Re∣probates doth inevitably follow, upon their not being included in that Covenant, which God hath made with Christ, or Gods not giving them unto Jesus Christ; but this is, antecessio ordinis, non causalitatis; their exclusion from this Covenant, is but an An∣tecedent, and not the cause of their destruction. Men are damned for not beleeving that Grace which God hath manifested to sinners, for not receiving it with that esteem, and such affections as it doth deserve; so that formally, the cause of their damnation, is not
their non-being objects of Gods absolute Promise, but their dis∣obedience to the Command of God. If he say (as the Remonstra∣tors have done before him. Credere jubet & fidei nullum objectum ponit.) That they are unjustly blamed and damned for unbeleefe, seeing they have no Object for their Faith, no Christ to beleeve in; We shall Answer, That there is a reall Object proposed to their Faith, though there be no such absolute Promise that God will give Grace to every man in particular; the Object of Faith is the Written Word, and more especially the Free Promises of Mercy unto wretched sinners, for the sake of Christ, which all men are commanded to beleeve, both assensu intellectus, & amplexu voluntatis, and for their unbeleefe they perish everlastingly. If he shall ask, Why God doth command them to beleeve in Christ, seeing he never intended they should have any good or benefit by Christ? I must say with the Apostle, Rom. 9 20. O man, who art thou that disputest against God? We ought to look to his Commands, and not curiously to search into his Councels, Deut. 22:29. We know that the Preaching of the Gospell was ordained principally for gathering Gods Elect; now because Ministers know not who are Elected, and who are not, It was necessary that the offer of Grace, and command of Be∣leeving should be universall, which will be imbraced and obeyed by all that are ordained to life. § 7. His fourth and last Argument against the absolutenesse of the New Covenant, is, If the Covenant of Grace be an absolute Promise, then no men in the world, but wicked and ungodly men, are in Covenant with God. To which I Answer, (1) It is very true, That the Covenant of Grace is made with Christ in behalfe of sinners, and none else, Matthew 9.13. The whole need not a Phisitian but the sick. If men were not sin∣ners, and ungodly, there would be no need at all of the Covenant of Grace, the Covenant of Works would have been sufficient; either it is made with sinners or none. (2) It will not follow, that when men are in Covenant, or doe partake of some blessings of the Covenant, that immediately the Covenant ceaseth; when we are in Glory, the Covenant shall not cease, for the continuance of Glory is promised in the Covenant, no lesse then Glory it selfe, for which cause it is called an Everlasting Covenant, So that his inference is very irrationall, If the Covenant be an absolute Pro∣mise,
then none but wicked, i. e. unregenerate persons are per∣fectly in Covenant with God; It followes rather from his owne opinion, for if the Covenant be a conditional Promise, when the condition is performed, the Covenant is so far forth fulfilled, and the Preformers of it, so far forth doe cease to be in Co∣venant; and so consequently, none but wicked men, i. e. such as have not yet fulfilled the Condition, shall be the objects of the Covenant, or the persons to whom it doth belong. Or else it must follow, that none at all are perfectly in Covenant with God; the Performers of the Condition are not, because the Condition being performed, the Covenant is fulfilled, and there∣by ceaseth to be a Covenant; and the non-performers of the Condition are not, for till the Condition be performed, men have no right or interest in the blessings promised. By this Sophistry a man may soon dispute himselfe out of the Covenant, and conse∣quently out of hope. §. 8. I have now (through the assistance of a good God, and the advantage of a good Cause) followed Mr. W. to the end of his race. Hee seems weary of his walke as well as I. It is (saies he) beyond my purpose, and worke, to follow this pur∣suit any further, i. e. I have no more to say; for I dare say, if he could have thought upon any thing else, either to colour his own, or to vilifie the cause which he doth oppose, he would not have held it in; his last Argument sufficiently shews, he hath pum∣ped to the bottom. I must confesse I am as glad as he, that I am arrived so near to my journeys end; though the passage hath not been very difficult, yet I must needs say, it hath been to me some∣what (more perhaps then ordinary) troublesome, in regard I have so little time and strength to bestow upon these paper con∣flicts. And therefore though my adversary (who, I know, wants neither words, nor confidence) shall offer a Reply, I shall not in∣gage to make a Rejoynder: Having declared my judgement; with the Reasons of it, I shall submit my selfe to the censures of the godly Reader; beseeching the Father of Lights, to lead both him, and me into all truth, and more especially into a fuller manifestati∣on of our Free Redemption by Jesus Christ. §. 9. But before I can take my leave of the Reader, I must re∣quest
his patience, whilst I take notice of a passage or two, in Mr. Woodbridges conclusion to his Worthy Sir, First, He tels him [though it is likely, something is, or will be said against my Sermon (which at this distance I am never like to hear of▪) yet sure I am, that nothing can be answered consistent with the truth of Scripture.] Concerning his Sermon, I have said no more in his absence, then I was ready to have spo∣ken unto his face, had the time, and the patience (I had al∣most said the passions of some of his friends) given me leave; I confesse I had not made my Replies so publick, had he not of∣fered such open wrongs both unto the Truth and to my selfe. His Bravado [sure I am, that nothing can be answered, &c.] argues rather his conceit of himselfe, then the soundnesse of the Doctrine which he would maintain; A bold face is usually the last refuge of a bad cause, which the Advocate puts on to uphold his credit amongst the simple, who are apt to thinke that hee hath the strongest Argument, who shewes the greatest con∣fidence Ingenium ho∣minu metiuntur ex audacia, & dextram putant fronti geminam. Kend. Ep. ad Ac. Oxon.. I remember Campian the Jesuite, in his Epistle to the Universities tels them, he was as sure he had gotten the victory, as that there is a God, a Heaven, a Faith, a Christ. I shall not answer Mr. W. as Dr. Whitaker doth the Jesuite, Pu∣det vanitatis jactationis arrogantiae tune audes promittere, &c. But I must needs say that he talks at too high arate, and not as a man sensible, in how many things wee offend all; doth he know as much as all men besides? Or can he judge of mens Answers before he hath heard them? Had Parker, Twisse, Pemble, &c. nothing at all to say in defence of their Doctrine? Doth he think this Sermon such a solid peece, that all men living will be struck dumb therewith? Though I am not conscious of deviating a sil∣lable from the sence of the Scripture in this Discourse, yet I dare not say, That nothing can be answered unto what I have writ∣ten; I shall say of my writings, as the Apostle of himselfe, 1 Cor. 4.3. I know nothing in them inconsistent with the Scrip∣tures, yet are they not hereby justified: All that I desire is, that the Reader would bring them to the Standard of Truth, and hold fast that which they shall finde agreeable thereunto. This I am as sure of as Faith can make mee (whose certain∣ty is greater then that of Science) that the whole glory of our Justification and Salvation ought to bee given to the Grace of
God, and the Merits of Christ; which would not be done, if either of them did depend, and were obtained by Works and Con∣ditions performed by us. §. 10. Next he tells him, How sorry he is, for the breaches that are amongst us. Truly, if he be not, I think he may, having contributed, not a little, to the widening of them; for before his Sermon, we were upon the matter agreed, concerning the point which is now in difference; we had oftentimes Friendly and Christian communion; which ever since hath been interrupted. It was not a moneth before, that I had Conference privately with my Reverend Neighbor (my first Antagonist) about this thing, who told me, That he held the New Covenant to be Condition∣al, no otherwise, then in respect of Gods order, and method, in bestowing the blessings of it. To whom I replyed, That if he asserted Conditions in the Covenant, in no other sense, we were agreed: And he knows, that in the Letters which had passed be∣tween us, I had yeelded as much, to wit, That in improper speech, the Covenant may be called Conditional; though for the causes before mentioned, I use not the phrase. And therefore, if any new breach hath hapned about this matter, the guilt of it must rest on others, and not on me. For my own part, I am not conscious in my self of the least breach in Affection with any of my Neighbors; being ready to serve them in love, as oppor∣tunity is offered; though some of them have used me spitefully, refusing (as of old the Jews did towards the Samaritans) to have any dealings with me, so much, as in Civil Affairs. I confess, I have forborne some of their Lectures, because I would not, by my silence, give Testimony to that which I know to be hete∣rodox and unsound: And I thought good a while to desist from making open Exceptions, until I had given a more publick ac∣count of my practise in this particular: For the future, I shall not put my self to the trouble of writing more Books, unless it be to answer the Exceptions of my Reverend Neighbor (who first engaged me in this Controversie) either against my Doctrine or Practise: But if in any Congregation of this City (where a charge of Souls is incumbent on me) I am present, when these Fundamental Truths of the Gospel, are darkned and undermined by strangers, or others, I shall (God willing) put on the Apostles
resolution, (though the weakest and unworthiest of my Brethren) Not to give place to them by subjection, no, not for an hour; that the truth and simplicity of the Gospel may continue amongst us; and yet with due respect unto all mens persons: Let any man do the like by me, I shall not account it a breach of peace. If Mr. W. had any intent to heal our breaches, I must needs say, he was very unhappy in the choice of Means. No prudent man will judge it a probable way to compose differences, to use calumnia∣ting and opprobrious Language towards them that dissent; or to lay unto their charge, such things as they abhor. But to Mr. Woodbridges Prayer for Peace, in the close of his Discourse, I shall adde mine, both for him, and my self, That we may do nothing against the truth, but for the truth. Matth. 11.19. Wisdom is justified of her Children. FINIS.
The Printers Postscript. SInce these Sheets were wrought off at the Press, the Author had neither health, nor leisure to Revize them; I hope there are no such Errata, as can disturb the Rational Reader, those that are, if thy Judgement doth Correct them, and thy Charity cover them, thou shalt much oblige both the Author, and me, to serve thee in all Christian Offices. R. I.
