F2229 R21277 12682096 65674
THE FRIENDLY VINDICATION OF Mr. DRYDEN From the CENSURE of the ROTA BY His CABAL of WITS. Danda est hellebori nostro pars magna Poetae, Nescio an Anticyram ratio illi destinet omnem. CAMBRIDGE, Printed in the Year M.DC.LXXIII.
The Friendly Vindication OF Mr. DRYDEN, &c. THe excellent Mr. Dryden taking into serious consideration the Affairs of Wit, and having made an Assignation to that purpose with some flourishing Ingenuities, no less con∣scious than admirers of his Fame: One of the for∣wardest urged the immediate discussing the severe Censure of the Rota of Oxford; which, though seem∣ing only to point at Granada, did collaterally reflect on all his Plays and Poems whatsoever. Mr. Dryden, not a little surprized to hear of Critical Engines levelled at his Sieges, Conquests, and the like, was meekly fal∣ling into a swound almost past recovery by tweaking of his Nose; till one of his ingenious Friends putting him in mind how the King had made him his Laureat, and how his Muse had accomplished him for her Hero, in both which respects it did not become him to dis∣cover that she had placed her Ensigns of Wit in so un∣steady and pusillanimous a Brain as his might appear to be, (did he not suddenly recollect his Spirit accor∣ding to that Expression in his Maiden-Queen, spoken by her Handmaid Astrea, Act. 1.) You were gay humour'd, and you are Now pensiveMelancholick in the first Impression.— Once calm and now unquiet—
Not to say that few Poets besides Mr. Dryden, ever treated a Queen with so light and homely an Enter∣tainment of Words, as, Gay-humour'd, and the rest in these two ridiculous lines. A Knavish Wit here, that had a good mind to have been nibling at the fore-going Expression, which signified no more in all those words, than to say that the Queen was at some one time in better humour than at another: yet as he was of Mr. Drydens Ca∣bal, said, he should rather infuse into his soul (in this Conjuncture) some Doses of Maximins and Alman∣zors Heroical Bravery, and not give himself up to his Pursuers: like that simile of the Hare in Annus Mi∣rabilis, of which two whole Stanza's are paraphrasti∣cally, and somewhat more compendiously rendred, thus, Ev'n as the fearful Hare, when cours'd on Plain, And longer can't her flight maintain, By the fierce Dog, with flix turn'd up does lie, Who though not kill'd, yet cannot flie. The Reader may suppose that Mr. Dryden was in almost as cold a fit as the Hare he describes, wherefore not in a condition to be asked by what reason he calls fearful, so timorous a Creature as a Hare naturally is; since no man ever heard of a valiant Hare: or why he presumed to apply this mean simile to Prince Ruperts Ship and some others, when disabled in their fight with the Dutch; which if allowed, does rather imply that the Prince and the rest, had run away like the Hare at first, and would have done so afterwards, in imitation of a Hare, had it been in their power; and not have encountred the Enemy with that magnanimity that
appeared throughout this action. But though this simi∣le squar'd so ill with the gallantry of the Action; a fault not to be pardoned in Poetry, since its Illustrations and Metaphors should not only suit, but endeavour to exalt, (and not depress, as it is observable in Mr. Dry∣den) the greatness of the Subjects it treateth of; Ac∣cording to this of Horace, Incoeptis gravibus plerumque & magna professis, Purpureus late qui splendeat, unus & alter, Assuitur pannus.— Yet this Gentleman who spake last was so indulgent to Mr. Drydens Repute, that he advised him, rather than yeild to any thing that could be objected against his Poetry, to turn the line in his first Part of Grana∣da, mentioned by the Rota, This is my will, &c. into This is my wit, and this my wit shall be. Adding, that he conceived his Muse had not made a more useful conversion for him of any Verse of his. That he had proved they had kindness enough to justi∣fie what he had, or could write, though they barked for his sake, at better Wit than any of his. At which, some conflict passed betwixt the Pale and Vermilion of his Cheek, (a thing very incident to such Complexions, when made Creatures of Fame) as also some melancholy puffs and swellings against the Rota, as if he had been inclinable to break silence with this pathetick and Courtly Expression delivered by his Maiden-Queen—
I must tell you, it is a sawcyome say  first Copy  consuming stead of cy, not ch a better ithet join'd  Boldness. Boldness thus to press on my Retirements. Here one made a Querie, whether Sawcie was not a pretty Sawce-box word annexed to boldness. Ano∣ther of his Comrades, who had Authority enough over his Person and Muse, to pass his Raillery, said, that his restauration of spirit in this Issue of his affairs, put him in mind of that Poetical Expression of his in Maximin, Pag. 4. Midst this was heard the shrill and tender crie Of well pleas'd Ghosts, which in the storm did flie, Danc'd too and fro, and skim'd along the ground, 'Till to the Magick Circle they were bound. Here one took notice how excellently Mr. Dryden had described the Voices, Musick, and Dancing of Ghosts; or if you please, an Antimask of Ghosts in the Air. But why shrill and tender should be the pleasing ornament of their Voices, since in it self no delightful way of speaking, or singing, was to be left to the discussion of Ghosts and Mr. Dryden alone: though they could not but condescend, that Mr. Dryden did deserve a tender Rebuke at least, for this harsh and gentle fiction, which his Pen had so musically bestow∣ed on Ghosts. That it was true, that out of their respects to him, they had often endeavoured to blind the World from observing the incongruity of such Metaphors, (as sawcy boldness, shrill and tender, and the like,) not seldom used by him in this inconsistent manner of Expression, the better to wing his Muse to her height; or that she might flie in any storm, or
dance to and fro, or skim along the ground, as he and she thought best: since he had merited that kindness from them, by his most ingenious converse and writing (besides some other more secret obligations) as also to cry up and preserve the honour of the Laurel conferred on him. Wherefore considering the Opposition which he and they have had, or may have; especially at this time, when his Muse is so perniciously attaqued by the Rota, and other malignant Criticks: they thought fit to desire him for the better strengthening of himself, to apply these Verses likewise of his Maximin to his present dangers, They Cour∣sing it, that is to say, The Rota coursing his Muse.They coursing it, as he were fenc'd within And saw this dreadful Scene of Fate begin. which is his very conjuring expression, placing, as he were, in stead of, while we were. Another said ingeniously enough, that the Censure of the Rota, or its Author, passed on his Poems and Plays, did very pertinently metaphor the volubility and rotation of Poetical fortune in neglect of his Wit; which it became him confidently to resent according to this in Maximin, where his Muse had often threat∣ned bombast-vengeance on Gods and Men: Provoke my rage no further, least I be Reveng'd at once, upon the Gods and Thee. At this some could not chuse but smile (though his Entire Admirers) to think what a supreme Divinity Mr. Drydens Muse was, that durst thus threaten all Powers, Divine and Human. Mr. Dryden being pretty well refreshed by swallow∣ing
these Cordials extracted from his Muses Limbecks, after he had cleared some drops of cold sweat from his forehead, and rubbed it to some Confidence, with due Obeysance made to these his Friends and Applau∣ders, together with some pangs of thought, (not much unlike his Inspirations) Replied, That be must always acknowledge the support his Wit received from the Esteem and Vogue they allowed though his Enemies called making his Party and Faction, it had been hitherto his good providence: nay added, That (among themselves) he had no reason to expect ap∣plause without it. That he still implored the same favourable Aspects from them, and that they would dare all Eyes which should observe or read his Wri∣tings with any reflections on their faults: though they may believe that it troubled not a little his Consci∣ence, that notwithstanding their assignation of favour to his late New Play called Love in a Nunnery, the Town should conceive it Justice to condemn both his and their Endeavours. Upon which, he more in∣stantly desired them for the future to clap and hawl more exceeding for his sake, lest he sink by the Cen∣sure of the World, as well as the Rota's: that what∣soever was his, might be reverenced as a Play, and so voted, though without Intrigue or Wit. And since they had put him into a way to strengthen himself with his own Lines, he uttered these in Maximin, (a Play fruitful enough for such quotations) for their more kind memorial, using the word Plays, in stead of Wars, We are not sure to morrow will be ours, Plays, have like Love, their favourable hours; Let us use all, for if we lose one day, That white one in the Crowd may slip away.
He desired them to forgive the large extent of this Petition, though perhaps the Rota might conceive it Non-sense amongst the rest; it being not usual in the English Tongue, to call a fair, serene, or prosperous day, a white day: That he desired them to impute this Inspiration to a Dream he had of white Money, to be shared in the Play-house. Adding, that no∣thing less could square with his profit, than wholly appropriating the fame and perquisits of Wit, (at least of one Play-house) to himself: for which purpose, he could not but with all humility, implore their Em∣bargo on all others Poets that might possibly impair his repute, and Trade of Writing, though their Con∣sciences were so guilty as to believe his Plays the worst. That the Drama did require too many drams of Wit (he hoped they would excuse his Clinch) to be compounded by his Genius; which in the beginning of his undertaking he sufficiently observed, as was evi∣dent to them and the World, in his Practises to gain Proselytes to his Muse. As also his humble and sup∣plicant Addresses to Men and Ladies of Honour, to whom he presented the most of his Plays to be read, and so passing through their Families to comply their Censures before-hand: confessing ingeniously, that had he ventured his Wit on the Tenter-hooks of For∣tune (like other Poets, who depended more on the merit of their Pens,) he had been more severely in∣tangled in his own Lines long ago. To this, one of his Associate Wits replied, That he thought it reasonable (were his profit not too deeply concerned) to perswade him to desist from Writing, as some Poets had discreetly and timely observed, like that of Juvenal,
Frange Miser Calamos— since he was as egregious already as black and white could make him. But however, if he were taken for no good Comick-Poet, or Satyrist; he had found a way of much easier License, (though more remark∣able in the sense of some) which was, not only to Li∣bel mens persons, but to represent them on the Stage too: That to this purpose he made his observations of men, their words and actions, with so little disguise, that many beheld themselves acted for their Half Crown: yet after all, was unwilling to believe, that this was not both good Comedy, and no less good manners. Besides, that he had been so frankly ob∣liging as (where he could not use a Character, or ap∣prehended the License) to assign it to some other Poet of his Cabal, or exchange one Part for another, it may be Club Wit too, the better to set men forth: That this was a Sir Positive Truth Mr. Dryden had not fore-head enough to denie. At which, there being observed a guilty variety in his Countenance— A certain Gallant stept forth and said, that what was past, was past: besides, that Mr. Dryden had made his submissions and recantations most ingeniously both by word and writing: that he conceived a person of Honour, had a Letter dedicated to the Fire, even by the Hangmans hands, if the injur'd should think it necessary; therefore what was done was candid enough as to that particular. If Mr. Dry∣den courted more his security than honour, he was not to be blamed, if his temper found it convenient: Or it might be interpreted his Kindness, in not being willing to put so much Wit as his own to hazard, espe∣cially
since he proved it so dear to his Admirers. That it was enough to Cajole the fiercest Hector, im∣ployed on any such account to him; as perhaps it succeeded with Sir Fretchevil Hollis, from this Verse in Annus Mirabilis, Young Hollis, on a Muse by Mars begot. No less than Youth, Wit, and Valour, chained together in one line; besides such a way to beget a Hero as is not to be found in any Poet; except that of his Al∣manzor, as extraordinarily begot by Mr. Dryden on his Muse. Here he extolled the charming Wit of Mr. Dryden, that could so prepossess the hearts of men. In a word, where he had figured any on the Scene, or Press, he was no less plyant to take them off as dexterously again: That it was Mr. Dryden's Bizarre in Wit, and Poets must be allowed so much variety, as sometimes to exceed the limits of Moderation and regular Characters. Mr. Dryden was in some disorder here, as indeed the mention of Regular parts and Characters could not but concern all his Plays, and did most especially at this time put him in mind of his dear beloved Al∣manzor; in honour to whom, he had adorned the Frontispiece of Granada with, —Major rerum mihi nascitur Ordo, Majus opus moveo. and was now no inwardly lamented by him, as suf∣fering by the Academick Rota, not only as an abomina∣ted Hero, but as one who with his untruly Lines had
broke most scornfully the Right Reverend Priscians head, with some other deformities— he was go∣ing to add, a gloomy smile arose, but that it appeared by Mr. Dryden, —Cited by the Rota out of the Granada.That the more he heard, A more severe and sullen Joy appear'd. Another was saying that Mr. Dryden's Wit could be both blunt and sharp; and that the edge of day might possibly have this operation on his Muse when she awak'd his Verse too early, or out of humour; wherefore he advised Mr. Dryden to trie what Effect the edge of Night would have on his Imagination; and perhaps the Metaphor might be better allowed going to Bed, or Drunk: desiring him to recollect what time of the natural Day it was, that he writ the Pro∣logue before the Maiden Queen, beginning thus, He that writ this, not without pain and thought, From French and English Theatres has brought The exactest Rules, by which a Play is wrought. Whether Mr. Dryden was no confident enough, in puting such a Panegyrick of himself before a Play writ∣ten with so feminine an Intrigue and Genius, as may be perceived by what hath been instanced already, in stead of troubling the Brain with further Remarques. At which another replied briskly, that it was Mr. Dryden's Interest to be allowed to speak, write, censure of Men and Wit as he pleased; that he had done it hitherto fortunately enough, and that for his sake they must so applaud him, which was well e∣nough  before by himself.
That it must be granted on all sides that Mr. Dry∣den has Wit, or was to be thought witty— Here one of his Comrade-wits cried, Hold, That it was not good to proceed on that ground, because it was fallacious, and would be answered by many, in saying, That he never had that Judgment or Wit he pretended to, for a Reason mentioned by the Rota, and such a one as Mr. Dryden could not deny. Wherefore the Logick of the Argument being in effect no more but this, Either you have a Gig, or have lost a Gig, Which may be answered by saying, You never had a Gig. But he forbore to apply it to Mr. Dryden. He pro∣ceeded to shew, That whatsoever was Mr. Dryden's Wit, it was well enough proportioned to receive what praises they could bestow upon it; or what could be given by himself, to himself: To which purpose, his dealing with Ben Jahnson (though dead, and of Immortal Fame with the judicious) was very observable, in that Mr. Dryden, who had at one time thought fit to call his Comedy, with the rest of his Time, mean, low, or as you have it in this hobling Verse of his mentioned by the Rota, Then Comedy was faultless, but 'twas course, (not to examine the consistency of course and faultless,) At another time had otherwise sung a Parallel of his Muses Fame with Ben. Johnson's, as in his Prologue
to the Maiden Queen, where he vain-gloriously enough calls that Play —a mingled Chime Of Johnsons humour, and Corneille's Rhime. But how Johnsons humour, could make such Musick with Corneille's rhyme, is not to be understood other∣wise, than as Mr. Dryden hath made his own Commen∣dation and it chime together. Which may be called another Bizarre in Mr. Dryden. As for his Comedy, it was objected by some, that it was as great an offence to good Morality, as his Maximin was to Christianity. That his Marriage a la Mode, and his Love in a Nunnery, were most ex∣cellent Collections of Bawdery. But the wonder was, how Mr. Dryden came to conceive his fulsome Con∣ceits to be refin'd Wit; as he had suggested to his Friends, since Bawdery had never that repute, before Mr. Dryden writ it. That in good Comedy, there were innumerable Excellencies relating to Wit and Manners, to which there was some fear that his Ge∣nius would never arrive: which shews, that if his Invention be not free and airy enough for that purpose, his Imagination (whatsoever his person is) was suffi∣ciently lascivious. But perhaps Mr. Dryden conceives of the success of Plays, as Martial did of some licen∣tious Writings of his: Non possunt sine mentula placere. or which is all one, the Dildo of Mr. Drydens Muse, so neatly applied to the females of the Town. He that said this, though a great favourer of Mr. Dry∣den,
could not but grant that there were a great many Contradictions and Mistakes in the management of his Muse. Here another took up the Discourse, saying, That since they were now met thus, it was not unfriend∣ly to proceed to some Reformation of Mr. Drydens Wit and Manners together; as well as they had hi∣therto in a headlong manner vindicated him to the World. In order to which, it was to be told Mr. Dry∣den that he in the sense of some, with no less Arro∣gance and Ignorance, taxed Virgil the Prince of La∣tine Poets, then he had injured Ben Johnson the best of English; that in his Preface to his Annus Mirabi∣lis, notwithstanding to adorn that miraculous Poem he had transversed many things of the incomparable Virgils, (as may be seen by his acknowledgment, and Marginal Notes to that purpose,) yet he there says thus of him: Though he describes his Dido well and naturally, in the violence of her passions, yet he must yield to Ovid in that of Myrrha, the Biblis, the Althea of Ovid. And a litte after, That if I see not more of their souls, then I see of Di∣do's, at least I have a greater concernment for them. He added, That he could not chuse but reprehend this soloecism of commendation in Mr. Dryden: won∣dring with what Brow he could say, that if he saw not more of their souls then he saw of Dido's, yet he had a greater concernment for them. How this would pass, or could quadrate with any favourable allowance of sense, he could not imagine. For to say that Dido's was the more large, the more heroick, the more pas∣sionate Soul, yet must not concern Mr. Dryden's In∣genuity so far as the others, he thought fit to under∣stand
it amongst the rest of Mr. Dryden's Bizarrs in Wit and Judgment. And that he would not chuse his Panegyricks of most Poets, since they were either Impertinent, or Contradictory to what he could wish in him. Wherefore he would mind him of what some Criticks may retort upon him, (who though they take it not well, yet do not judge it worth their labour to vindicate the matchless Wit of Virgil) that if they see not more of his Love, than was to be seen in his Eliza the Maiden Queen, or what they saw in his St. Catherine, or his Light buskin'd Queen Almahide; (that made Boabdalin her Cully, though her King and Husband, in order to the Embrace of her more stre∣nuous Almanzor,) or if they perceived the same ef∣fects of his Muse in Maximin and Almanzor, as also throughout those Plays convertibly varied, he was not to believe they could be much concerned with his Characters; or that most of his Friends would not wish that Mr. Dryden would either improve his Muse, or give over writing. At this Mr. Dryden began to be in a cold Sweat again; till promised that the discussion of Maximin and Granada should be deferred to a farther debate, if his concern required it. Which a forward Wit of his Party perceiving, said, That the Gentleman that spoke last (though he could not contradict his Judgment) had mistaken the In∣trigue that Mr. Dryden endeavours to hold with the World: that Mr. Dryden writ as well as any man that could write no better; and was no less himself in his last Play, called Love in a Nunnery; the fate whereof had occasioned him to confess, that he some∣times by their help had slured a Play on the Au∣dience, and that it was his utmost expectation and de∣sire,
that they would continue still so kind as to que∣stion nothing of his; that it had been likewise acknow∣ledged by him, that he intended the same, for this last Catholick Intrigne of his, which he called pawming of a Play on the Town. The Expression was something odd, it was yielded, and represented his hearers no less than Sots and Gulls, to be bubbled thus of their Understandings by him. That Mr. Dryden's Education was not so exact, as that no mixture was to be found in his Manners as well as Wit: that he was a Poet in Olivers time, and some∣thing more subservient to his Principality; but these were things to be handled at another meeting, if Mr. Dryden thought fit: adding that he did write more for Profit than Reputation, or collaterally for both. The first of which, he allowed to be the more absolute Mistress of his Muse, as was hinted by him∣self before? though it is true that as an Ambidexter in Wit, he intended to engross both solely to himself. But he was to know that Mr. Dryden's words did not always declare his meaning, and were varied as best served his turn; sometimes for money, sometimes for both money and fame; another time for fame See the con∣clusion of his Letter to Sir R. H. be∣fore his An. Mirab. above all things, who by no means must be allowed other than the best Poet in England, and had so caused him∣self to be given out by his Friends; which cannot but be acknowledged another quaint variety in Mr. Dry∣den. One asked whether upon the before-mentioned di∣versities observed in Mr. Dryden, he might not heroick∣ly describe himself by saying this Verse in Maximin, I reel and stagger, and am drunk with light.
That it must be acknowledged, that Mr. Dryden could not deserve less than to be soberly blamed; and so they had done and should do farther, as occasion of∣fered. He said, that it had been granted already that Mr. Dryden had been held an odd man enough always, by some who had proved him. Notwithstanding, if his merit was small, they were sorry he had taken so much pains to divulge it; which they did unwilling∣ly instance to him at this time, considering he was something pensive and indisposed, as being under a gloomy sullen Censure of the Rota's; and his Muse to undergo a severe penance for his assignations of Love in a Nunnery; all which it was hoped he would suffer with a shrill tender asiness of mind, if she could not inspire him with a more proper and secure reme∣dy. As likewise, not to be enraged from these gen∣tle stroakings of his Friends, or hope from thence more safely to kick at their Counsels, like this of Horace, Hunc male si palpere, recalcitrat, undique tutus. When on the other side, it is but taking advice from his own Verse, and receive this noise and hubbub about his Wit, no more disturbed then if A horrid stillness did invade his Ear. For his Plays, it was unanimously accorded, that though they wished them well, they resolved hence∣forth to be more just to his failings than they had hi∣therto appeared, and not endeavour the pawming of them on the Town, if his Wit had no better a trick to thrive by.
Asking some pardon of the World for so long con∣cealing his defects, or mistaking his Wit, to the ne∣glect of better: That if he did imploy some vacant hours of his Muse for his vindication against the Rota, they thought it not amiss (at least before he writ any more Plays) since his Audience was resolved to con∣strue his sense a little better than yet they had done. And since Mr. Dryden and his Muse, are best ex∣tolled by his own Pen, it was thought fit to annex this honourable and pacifick Wish to his future Produ∣ctions of Wit; (taken out of his Maximin) using only the word Writing in stead of Thousand, Thus, So may'st thou live thy Writing Years in Peace, And see thy Airy Progeny increase. FINIS or not FINIS As Mr. Dryden pleaseth.
