G1055 99832869 37344
GOOD NEWES FROM Colonel Hollis HIS REGIMENT: Declaring the proceedings of the Voluntiers that set forth with him from London, in an over∣throw given to the Cavaliers, and putting them to flight neer Vxbridge. Also a relation of great store of ammunition found under a Hay-mow in Salisbury-Court in London, and brought into Guild-Hall, Aug. 19 Likewise the true Copie of a Letter sent from Leicestershire by M. Burton, a Messenger be∣longing to the Parliament-House, to a Gentleman in London. Wherein is declared how three wain-load of ammu∣nition was taken from the Cavaliers, and sent to Coventry, as it was intended to have been sent from Leicester to Warwick. H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. Printed for Io. Iohnson. August 20. 1642.
JOYFULL NEWES FROM COLONELL HOLLIS HIS REGIMENT. ALSO A Relation of four carts loads of ammunition taken in Salisbury-Court Aug. 19. SInce the setting forth of the Voluntiers that went under the command of Colo∣nell Hollis, they have performed courgi∣ously the charge which they under∣tooke, unanimously & cheerfully march∣ing towards the towne of Vxbridge, not doing the least harm to either man, woman or child; but in their march one evening being late, they
were set upon by a great number of Cavaliers who suddenly issued out of a wood; but the Voluntiers having their muskets charged, by reason they were benighted, immediately gave fire against them, the Diers and Butchers being in the foremost ranks neere the front, who so fast sent the bullets amongst them, that the Cavaliers were glad to betake them to flight, leaving behind them twenty or thirty brave horses which were wounded. Never was any Kingdom more infested with monsters then this of ours in these distempe∣red and disasterous times, wherein (like Africa) it abound with new monsters, which viper-like even teare out the bowels of their mother-nati∣on that first gave them being. There is scarce a day wherein some State-ruining plot or other is not detected. Their deeds of darknesse are for the most part (blessed be the Father of lights) brought to light. See an example of it in this dayes discovery: in Salisbury-Court in London the 19. of this present August, in a Lords stable under a great hay-mow was found foure cart loads of all sorts of ammunition for war, which was taken away and carried into Guild-Hall. There were also three carts loaden with ammunition powder and shot taken from the Cavaliers (and carried into Coventry) as it was carrying out of Leicestershire to Warwick, the manner wherof you may see in this ensuing Letter.
The true Copie of a Leter sent from Leicestershire by William Burton a Messenger of the Parli∣ament to a Gentleman in London. IN the first place give me leave in a sociable way to cōmmend my best respects to your selfe and your kinde wife, hoping of your peaceable quietnesse, though you intend de∣fence, both for your selves, and us here in Leicester, Warwicke, and Northamptonshire. All which Counties are now in such distra∣ctions as they despaire for want of reliefe and aid from you, I meane the Head at Westmin∣ster, on whom our shoulders relied to stand, for want whereof many are revolted: some stand still, and more in desperate feare for want of encouragement: So that upon Friday last when I was at Daventry, I understood that many Ca∣valiers were come to Warwick, and there assaul∣ted the Castle so farre, as two men within the Castle were slaine, presuming to do more mis∣chiefe with the foure peeces they got from my Lord Brook at Banbury: but (as God would have it) by overcharging two of them broke, and the third (as is supposed) was poysoned, so they did no more hurt: the fourth, being so little, could not reach the Castle, though they had before the overcharging shot down one of the Church pinacles. Againe, the Cavaliers the same day came to two or three little villa∣ges neere Rugby in Warwick shire, and disarmed
the inhabitants of Muket, Pike, and other war∣like provision: but one little towne (called Kily) withstanding them, the Cavaliers shot three of hem to death, and ransackt the town, and took away all armour and ammunition whatsoever, and carried it to Warwik. Vpon which affright there have divers women died since, one ran stark mad, and two by miscarri∣age. These Cavaliers take away all the am∣munition in every village town in Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire, Leicestershire, Warwickshire, and Nrthamptonshire. They have yet spared the trained bands: but yesterday night came a Warrant for all trined men to appeare at Lei∣cester on tuesday being the 16▪ of this moneth: but the Warrant having no hand to it (though it was supposed to come from M. Hastings) they are resolved not to go. And this day here at Hinckley we understand that he meanes to dis∣arme the trained band, and take the armour in∣to his own possssion, for His Majesties use, who is expected to be at Leicester on wednes∣day next, and from thence to Warwick, and so to Alesbury, where His Majestis purpose is to set up his Standard, as here we are informed. And most of the Gentry in all the said Coun∣ties are solely for the King, especially the Cler∣gie in generall: as some fifty pound and one horse, some thirty pound and two horse, some twenty, fifteen, ten, and eight pounds apiece,
none under eight, yet all in generall contribu∣tarie. The Earle of Essex his delay is strangely admired here; insomuch as I suppose if he were here, all the Cavaliers might be surprized: For, M. Hastings, M. Chamberlain, and M. Purfie, who were sending each of them a great Cart load, the one powder and shot, the other mus∣kets, the third bullets and pikes for warre: they were all intercepted and sent to Coventry, which is replenished with hundreds of Volun∣tiers for the Parliaments side. I heard that the Commission of Array was yesterday (being Sunday) and to day at Leicester set up: where∣upon is demanded the tenth of every mans estate, lands or goods, and is to be seized, and so by consequence at pleasure hereafter, if the Parliament relieve it not. I am determined to go to Coventry to morrow, and the next day to Licester, from whence I shall informe you furthr as occasion and experience shall offer i slfe. And so I rest, Yours as ever I was, William Burton. Hinckley in Leicester Shire, August 17. 1642. His Maiesty having commanded all his lo∣ing subiects to repaire unto him that will aid an asst him, the chiefest of the Gentry of Yokshire do refuse to obey the said command,
and are resolved to assist the Parliament against all that shall oppose them, profering their own persons to both Houses to maintaine the said Cause. And they seeing that His Maiesty is resolved to set up his Standard, they humbly desired His most sacred Maiesty to change His intention from so doing: resolving to the ut∣termost of their power to resist those persons that shall animate His Maiesty to engge this Kingdome in a civill warre. The Lords and Commons in Parliament declare, That all such persons as shall, upon any pretence whatsoever, assist His Maiesty in this Warre, with Horse, Arms, Plate or Money, are Traytors to His Maiesty, the Parliament and Kingdome, and shall be brought to con∣digne punishment for so high an offence. Ordered to be forthwith published & printed, H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. FINIS.
