G2028 12764782 93559
Master Grimstons ARGVMENT Concerning Bishops: With Mr. Seldens Answer. Also severall Orders newly made in Parliament concerning CHVRCH GOVERNMENT. Printed 1641.
Master GRIMSTONS Argument con∣cerning Bishops. 1. THat Bishops are Iure Divino is a question. 2. That Arch-Bishops are not Iure Divino is out of question. 3. That Ministers are Iure Divino there is no question. Now if Bishops which are questioned whe∣ther Iure Divino, and Arch-Bishops which out of question are not Jure Divino, should suspend Ministers that are Iure Divino, I leave it to you Master Speaker.
Master Seldens Answer. 1. That the Convocation is Iure Divino is a question. 2. That Parliaments are not Iure Divino is out of question. 3. That Religion is Jure Divino there is no question. Now Master Speaker, that the Convocati∣on which is questioned whether Iure Divino, and Parliaments which out of question are not Iure Divino, should meddle with Religi∣on, which questionlesse is Iure Divino, I leave to you Master Speaker. Master Grimstons Reply. But Arch-Bishops are no Bishops. Master Seldens Answer. That's no otherwise true then that the Iudges are not Lawyers, and Aldermen are not Citizens. Severall Orders concerning Church Government. 1. Every severall Shiere of England and Wales to be a severall Circute or Diocesse for the Ecclesiastick Iurisdiction excepting York∣shiere,
which is to be divided into three. 2. A constant Presbitry of twelve choyce Di∣vines, to bee selected in every Shiere or Diocesse. 3. A constant President to bee established as a Bishop over this Presbitry. 4. This Bishop in each Diocesse to ordaine, sus∣pend, deprive, degrade, and excommunicate by and with the consent and assistance of seaven Di∣vines of his Presbitry, then present and not else. 5. The times of Ordination throughout the Land to be foure times in the yeare, viz. 1. May 1. August 1. November, 1. February. 6. Every Bishop constantly to reside within his Diocesse, in some one prime or chiefe City or Towne within his Diocesse as in Particular. 7. Every Bishop to have one speciall particular Congregation to be chosen, out of the most con∣venient place for distance from his chief residence, and the richest in valew that may be had, whee he shall duely Preach, unlesse he be lawfully hindred, and then shall take care his Cure be well supplyed by an other. 8. No Bishop shall romove, or bee translated from the Bishopricke which hee shall first un∣dertake. 9. Vpon every death, or other avoydance of a Bishop, the King to grant a Conge De Cleire to
the whole Clergy of the whole Diocesse, and they to present three of the Presbitry aforesaid, and the King to choose and nominate whom he pleaseth of them. 10. The first Presbiters of every Shiere to be named by the Parliament, and afterwards upon the death or other avoydance of any Presbiter, the remaining Presbiters to choose one other out of the parish Ministers of that Shiere, and this to bee done within one moneth next after such death or avoydance. 11. No Bishop or Clergy man to exercise or have any temporall Office, or Seculer imployment but onely for the present to hold and keepe the probate of Wills, untill the Parliament shall other∣wise resolve. 12. The Bishop once a yeare (at Midsomer) to summon a Diocesan Synod, there to heare, and (by generall Vote) to determine all such matters of scandall in life, and Doctrines amongst Clergy men, as shall be presented unto them. 13. Every three yeares a Nationall Synod to bee, which (for persons) shall consist of all the Bishops in the Land, and of two Presbiters to bee chosen by the rest out of each Presbitry, and of two Clerkes to be chosen out of every Diocesse by the Clergy thereof. 14. This Nationall Synod to make and or∣daine
Cannons, for the goverment of the Church, but they not to bind untill they bee confirmed by Parliament. 15. Every Bishop to have over and above the Benefice aforesaid, a certaine constant Rent al∣lowed, and allotted proportionall to the Dio∣cesse wherein hee is to Officiate. That is to say— 16. Every Presbiter to have a constant yeare∣ly profit above his Benefice. As for the Revenew of the Bishops, Deanes, and Chapters, &c. a strict survey to be taken of all their Rents and profits, and the same to bee represented at the beginning of our next convencion, and in the meane time no Lease to be renewed, nor Timber to bee felled. FINIS.
