H2442 09523293 43436
THE PHAENIX HER Arrival & Welcome TO ENGLAND. It being an Epithalamy on the Marriage of the KINGS Most Excellent Majesty with the Most Royal and Most Illustrious DONNA KATHARINA Of PORTUGAL. By SAMUEL HOLLAND. LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1662.
To the most Excellent and most Heroical Prince, PRINCE RUPERT. May it please Your Highness, THe Eyes of all knowing Persons, not only in this Nati∣on, but all Europe over, and beyond it also, are fixed on Your Highness: You attract them by Your Candour, and oblige them by the Inimitable Example of Your Courage: And amongst the number of those who dayly do throng in to admire and honour You, it is my Glory to be one, who having received my best Encouragements from the Influence of Your Heroick Greatness, shall make it my dayly business accordingly to declare it, and to endeavour to be worthy of it. May it please Your Highness, The late War in many Testimonies of Incomparable Valour shew∣ed how much You honoured the Late King; and in some Testimonies again, it shewed how much we (who were Your Souldiers) honoured You, whose Spirits You so often rouzed up to the out-daring of all Dangers by the admirable Example of Your height of Fortitude: Then I endeavoured to serve You with my Sword, as I have done since with my Pen, and have been in both as elaborate as Resolution, and Art can make me. May it please Your Highness, I modestly do presume that this Piece on His Majesties most Happy Marriage with the Princess of Portugal will not be unacceptable to Your Highness; It hath received the happiness to be much applauded by Persons of Eminent Judgment who have perused it: May it me∣rit the Honour to be protected by Your Highness, to whom most pre∣cisely it doth devote it self, his Desires and Ambition are crown'd, who is, (May it please Your Highness) Your most affectionate and most humble Servant, S. HOLLAND.
THE PHAENIX HER Arrival & Welcome TO ENGLAND. It being an Epithalamy on the Marriage of the KINGS Most Excellent Majesty with the Most Royal and Most Illustrious DONNA KATHARINA Of PORTUGAL. WOnders get Wonders, and their glorious Birth Increase new numbers both in Heav'n and Earth; Though Charles the First this present Age did call A Mirrour, and a Miracle to all; Yet 'twas the top and height of his Renown He got so brave a Prince to heir his Crown; And 'tis the Joy and Honour of his Son To trace those Glories Charles the First had done; To his Renown it was he did advance The English Lyons with the Flow'rs of France,
And to the Honours of his Son we all Ascribe this Marriage made with Portugal. Great CHARLES the Second, who is King of Hearts And King of Arms, as well as King of Arts, To bless this Nation by a Knot divine Is married to the matchless KATHARINE. Great CHARLES the Second whom Fames Trumpet rings To be the Wonder and Delight of Kings, Is joyn'd to Her whom Heav'ns rich Mint did coyne For Englands Queen, the Noble KATHARINE. Great CHARLES the Second, Second unto none In Goodness, Greatness, and Religion, Hath met a Noble Parallel, whose Line Answers His own, the Accomplish'd KATHARINE. Great CHARLES the Second, like another Sun Whose radiant Glories through all Europe run, Hath chose One with Him in His Orbe to shine Bright as Himself, the Beauteous KATHARINE. But since the Course of Heav'n and Nature shuns The levelling Splendour of two equal Suns; Therefore their Rival Lustres to attone, Wedlock hath ty'd these Sacred Lights in one: And now since Venus is new joyn'd to Mars, Be they the Envy of all other Stars; Let them on Earth of Blessings find such store, Till Earth can ask, or Heav'n scarce grant them more. Loe where that Tagus who but lately roll'd His glittering waters intermixt with Gold, And proudly flowing with a vain Desire In his own Channels did himself admire, Now pale with Grief, he his own Joyes disclames, To see his Glories in the lap of Thames; His richest treasure, and more precious far, More pure in substance, and in show more fair, Then all the glory of the weighty Oare That shines in spangles on his wealthy shore,
Is now (transported) from fair Lisbon come, This Isle to make the Queen of Christendome. See where she comes her Beauties do adorn, And lend new splendors to the blushing Morn, The Vigour of her rays, which conquering flyes, Dazzles the Sun to look upon her eyes; There needs no Ribbands to adorn her hair, The laughing Stars in knots are radiant there. The Graces are her Ushers, and do strow Roses before her where so e're she go, And a long train of Virtues hand in hand In Order all behind her do attend. No sooner shipp'd for England, she set sail, But Neptune sent forth a tempestuous Gale, When loe her Beauties i'th Seas highest Rage Soon strook a Calm, and did their wrath asswage. At which loud Triton did his suit prefer To entertain him for her Trumpetter, And many a Mermaid did attend upon her And humbly crav'd to be her Maids of Honour; The Dolphins near her shoal'd, and with their train Swept the salt foame, and cut the curled Main; So great the Tumult, one might well suppose From Love, not Rage, the late high Tempest rose; The Waves t'enjoy her sight no pains did spare To leap into the Element of Air, The Air to bear so fair a burden fain, Would change it's place and nature with the Main, Whiles Winds that struggled who should most have crown'd her, So sinn'd in Zeal, that they almost had drown'd her. And now arriv'd, Saint Michaels Mount must be The place of Fame, where happy Destinie Decree'd that first this Princess should be found To plant her foot upon the English Ground. Now all things smil'd, and did conspire outright To mingle Royal Greatness with Delight;
The Month is May, and the dress'd Spring doth stand In all it's pride to welcome her to land. Here having taken some days rest to ease Her Body weary of the churlish Seas, A winged Grove of Frigots doth convay Her Sexes Glory unto Portsmouths Bay: Here did our Fears cast Anchor, to implore The Pilots Conduct on the Seas no more; Now Bon-fires heat the Air, Healths drench the Earth, Portsmouth the Center, and the Stage of Mirth; Some use their tongues, and speak their Mirth in Fancies, Others their feet, and tread their Joys in Dances: Now Youth, and Beauty, State, and Pomp do greet, And Peace and Plenty walk in every Street, And from above, Heav'ns Blessings more t'unfold, It hails down Pearls, and rains down riguous Gold. Portsmouth's the place where first His Majestie His Royal Spouse Queen Katharine must see; For though 'twas Cornwal to the Queen did bring The happy sight of England, yet the King (But when her Picture did present the same) Ne're saw his Queen till she to Portsmouth came. The holy knot was ty'd here in a blest And solemn Marriage, here the King possest Earth pure as Heaven, and stain'd with no Alloy, Braganzaes Glories, and Terezaes Joy. Now like two glorious Lamps may their Flames rise Pure, and erect, until they touch the Skies; May their rich splendour be by Age more bright, And grace the World with their United Light; May their Loves be a Sacrifice t'attone Their Peoples Rage, and make their hearts but one: May the Church flourish in her Truth, and Train, And be as white as Innocence again: May those who scorn'd us in our late distress Now fear, and wonder at our Happiness;
May every Street, and every Countreys Green Ring with the Trophies of our King and Queen; And may the thunder of their Armes chastise And judge 'twixt all both Friends and Enemies, T'advance the Good, and humble those are Fierce, And give new Laws unto the Universe. FINIS.
