H2688A 99828146 32573
THE Petty Schoole. SHEWING A way to teach little Children to read English with delight and profit, (espe∣cially) according to the New Primar. By C. H. LONDON, Printed by J. T. for Andrew Crook, at the Green Dragon in Pauls Church Yard, 1659.
THE Petty Schoole. CHAP. I. How a childe may be helped in the first pro∣nounciation of his Letters. MY aim being to discover the old Art of teaching Schoole, and how it may be improved in every part suteable to the years and capacities of such children as are now commonly taught; I shall first begin my discourse concern∣ing a petty-Schoole, & here or else where I shall not busie my self or Reader about what a childe of an extraordinary to∣wardliness, and having a teacher at home, may attain unto, and in how short a space, but onely shew how a mul∣titude of various wits may be taught all together with abundance of profit and delight to every one, wch is the proper and main work of our ordinary Schooles. Whereas then, it is usual in Cities and
greater Towns to put children to Schoole about four or five years of age, and in Country villages, because of further di∣stance, not till about six or seven; I con∣ceive, The sooner a child is put to School, the better it is, both to prevent ill habits, which are got by play and idleness, and to enure him betimes to affect learning and well doing. Not to say, how the great un∣certainty of parents lives, should make them careful of their Childrens early e∣ducation, which is like to be the best part of their patrimony, what ever good thing else they may leave them in this World. I observe that betwixt three and four years of age a childe hath great pro∣pensity to peep into a book, and then is the most seasonable time (if conve∣niences may be had otherwise) for him to begin to learn; and though per∣haps then he cannot speak so very di∣stinctly, yet the often pronouncia∣tion of his letters, will be a means to help his speech, especially if one take no∣tice in what organ or instrument he is most defective, and exercise him chie∣fly in those letters which belong unto it. Now there are five organs or instru∣ments of speech, in the right hitting of which, as the breath moveth from with∣in,
through the mouth, a true pro∣nunciation of every letter is made, viz. the lips, the teeth, the tongue, the roof of the mouth, and the throat; Accord∣ing to which if one rank the twenty four letters of our English Alphabet, he shall find that A, E, I, O, Ʋ, proceed by degrees from the throat, along betwixt the tongue and the roof of the mouth to the lips contracted, and that Y is somewhat like I, being pronounced with other let∣ters, but if it be named by it self, it re∣quireth some motion of the lips. B, F, M, P, W, and V consonant, belong to the lips. C, S, X, Z, to the teeth. D, L, N, T, R, to the tongue. B, H, K, Q, to the roof of the mouth. But the sweet and natural pronunciation of them is gotten rather by imitation then precept, and therefore the teacher must be care∣ful to give every letter its distinct and clear sound, that the childe may get it from his voice, and be sure to make the child open his mouth well as he uttereth a letter, lest otherwise he drown or hinder the sound of it. For I have heard some foreiners to blame us Eng∣lish-men for neglecting this mean to a plain and audible speaking, saying, that the cause, why we generally do not speak so fully as they, proceeded from an ill
habit of mumbling, which children got at their first learning to read; which it was their care; therfore to prevent or re∣medy betimes, and so it should be ours, seeing Pronounciation is that that sets out a man, and is sufficient of it self to make one an Oratour. Chap. II. How a childe may be taught with delight to know all his letters in a very little time. THe usual way to begin with a child, when he is first brought to Schoole, is to teach him to know his letters in the Horn-book, where he is made to run o∣ver all the letters in the Alphabet or Christ-cross-row both forwards & back∣wards, until he can tel any one of them, which is pointed at, and that in the Eng∣lish character. This course we see hath been very ef∣fectual in a short time, with some more ripe witted children, but othres of a slower apprehension (as the most and best commonly are) have been thus learning a whole year together, (and though they have been much chid and beaten too for want of heed) could scarce
tell six of their letters at twelve moneths end, who, if they had been taught in a way more agreeable to their meane apprehensions (wch might have wrought more readily upon the senses, and affe∣cted their mindes with what they did) would doubtlesse have learned as cheer∣fully, if not as fast as the quickest. I shall therefore mention sundry ways that have been taken to make a childe know his letters readily, out of which the discreet Teacher may chuse what is most likely to suit with his Learner. I have known some that (according to Mr. Brinsly's direction) have taught lit∣tle ones to pronounce all the letters, and to spell pretty well, before they knew one letter in a book; and this they did, by making the childe to sound the five vowels a, e, i, o, u, like so many bells up∣on his fingers ends, and to say which finger was such or such a vowel, by chan∣ges. 2 Then putting single consonants before the vowels, [leaving the hardest of them till the last] and teaching him how to utter them both at once, as va, ve, vi, vo, vu, da, de, di, do, du. 3. and a∣gain, by putting the vowels before a consonant to make him say, as, es, is, os, us, ad, ed, id, od, ud. Thus; they have pro∣ceeded from syllables of two or three, or
more letters, till a child hath been pret∣ty nimble in the most. But this is rather to be done in a private house, then a publick Schoole; how ever this manner of exercise now and then amongst little Scholars will make their lessons more fa∣miliar to them. The greatest trouble at the first en∣trance of children is to teach them how to know their letters one from another, when they see them in the book altoge∣ther; for the greatnesse of their number and variety of shape do puzle young wits to difference them, and the sence can but be intent upon one single object at once, so as to take its impression, and commit it to the imagination and memo∣ry. Some have therefore begun but with one single letter, and after they have shewed it to the childe in the Alpha∣bet, have made him to finde the same any where else in the book, till he knew that perfectly; and then they have proceed∣ed to another in like manner, and so gone through the rest. Some have contrived a piece of ivory with twenty four flats or squares, in eve∣ry one of which was engraven a several letter, and by playing with a childe in throwing this upon a table, and shewing him the letter onely which lay uppermost,
have in few dayes taught him the whole Alphabet. Some have got twenty four pieces of ivory cut in the shape of dice, with a let∣ter engraven upon each of them, and with these they have played at vacant hours with a childe, till he hath known them all distinctly. They begin first with one, then with two, afterwards with more letters at once, as the childe got knowledge of them. To teach him like∣wise to spell, they would place conso∣nants before or after a vowel, and then joyn more letters together so as to make a word, and sometimes divide it into syl∣lables, to be parted or put together; now this kind of letter sport may be profitably permitted among you beginers in a School & in stead of ivory, they may have white bits of wood, or small shreads of paper or past-board, or parchment with a letter writ upon each to play withall a∣mongst themselves. Some have made pictures in a little book or upon a scroll of paper wrapt upon two sticks within a box of iceing-glass, and by each picture have made three sorts of that letter, with which its name be∣ginneth; but those being too many at once for a childe to take notice on, have proved not so useful as was intended.
Some likewise have had pictures and let∣ters printed in this manner on the back side of a pack of cards, to entice children, that naturally love that sport, to the love of learning their books. Some have writ a letter in a great cha∣racter upon a card, or chalked it out up∣on a trencher, and by telling a child what it was, and letting him strive to make the like, have imprinted it quick∣ly in his memory, and so the rest one after another. One having a Son of two years and a half old, that could but even go about the house, and utter some few gibber∣ish words in a broken manner; observ∣ing him one day above the rest to be busied about shells, and sticks, and such like toys, which himself had laid toge∣ther in a chair, and to misse any one that was taken from him, he saw not how, and to seek for it about the house; became very desireous to make experiment what that childe might presently attain to in point of learning; Thereupon he devi∣sed a little wheel, with all the Capital Romane letters made upon a paper to wrap round about it, and fitted it to turn in little a round box, which had a hole so made in the side of it, that onely one let∣ter might be seen to peep out at once;
This he brought to the childe, & showed him onely the letter O, and told him what it was; The childe being overjoyed with his new gamball, catcheth the box out of his Fathers hand, and run's with it to his playfellow a year younger then himself, and in his broken language tell's him there was an O, an O; And when the other asked him where, he said, in a hole, in a hole, and shewed it him; which the lesser childe then took such notice of, as to know it againe ever after from all the other letters. And thus by playing with the box, and en∣quiring concerning any letter that ap∣peared strange to him, what it was, the childe learnt all the letters of the Alpha∣bet in eleven dayes, being in this Cha∣racter A B▪ C, and would take pleasure to shew them in any book to any of his acquaintance that came next. By this instance you may see what a propensity there is in nature betimes to learning, could but the Teachers apply them∣selves to their young Scholars tenuity; and how by proceeding in a cleare & facil method, that all may apprehend, every one may benefit more or less by degrees. According to these contrivances to for∣ward children, I have published a New Primr; in the first leafe, whereof I have
set the Roman Capitalls (because that Character is now most in use, & those let∣ters the most easie to be learn't) and have joyned therewith the pictures or images of some things whose names begins with that letter, by which a childs memory may be helped to remember how to call his letters; as A, for an Ape, B. for a Bear, &c. This Hieroglyphicall devise doth so affect Children (who are gene∣rally forward to communicate what they know) that I have observed them to teach others, that could not so readily learn, to know all the letters in a few houres space, by asking them, what stands A. for? and so concerning other letters backwards and forwards, or as they best liked. Thus when a childe hath got the names of his letters, & their several shapes with∣all in a playing manner, he may be ea∣sily taught to distinguish them in the fol∣lowing leaf, which containeth first the greater, and then the smaller Roman Characters, to be learned by five at once or more, as the childe is able to re∣member them; other Characters I would have forborn, till one be well acquain∣ted with these, because so much variety at the first doth but amaze young wits, and our English characters, (for
the most part) are very obscure, & more hard to be imprinted in the memory. And thus much for the learning to know letters; we shall next (and according to Order in Teaching) proceed to an easie way of distinct spelling. Chap III. How to teach a childe to spell distinctly. THe common way of teaching a childe to spell, is, after he know's the let∣ters in his Alphabet, to initiate him in those few syllables, which consist of one vowell before a consonant, as, ab, eb, ib, ob ub, &c. or of one vowel after a consonant, as, ba, be, bi, bo, bu, &c. in the Horn-book, & thence to proceed with him by little and little to the bottom of the book, here∣ing him twice or thrice over till he can say his lesson, and then putting him to a new one. In which course I have known some more apt children to have profited prety well, but scarce one often, when they have gone thorow the book, to be able to spell a word that is not in it; And some have been certaine years daily exercised in saying lessons therein, who after much endeavour spent, have been accounted
meer block-heads, and rejected alltoge∣ther as uncapable to learn any thing; whereas some Teachers that have assayed a more familiar way, have professed, that they have not met with any such thing as a Dunse amid a great multitude of lit∣tle Schollars. Indeed it is Tullies observation of old, and Erasmus his assertion of latter years, that it is as natural for a childe to learn, as it is for a beast to go, a bird to fly, or a fish to swim, and I verily beleeve it, for the nature of man is restlessely desi∣rous to know things, and were discou∣ragements taken out of the way, and meet helps afforded young learners, they would doubtless go on with a great deal more cherefulness, and make more proficiency at their books then usually they do; And could the Master have the discretion to make their lessions familiar to them, children would as much delight in being busied about them, as in any other sport, if too long continuance at them might not make them tedious. Amongst those that have gone a readi∣er way to reading, I shall onely mention Mr. Roe, and Mr. Robinson, the latter of whom I have known to have taught lit∣tle children not much above four years old to read distinctly in the Bible, in six
weekes time, or under; their books are to be had in print, but every one hath not the art to use them. And Mr. Cootes English-School-Master seem's rather to be fitted for one that is a Master indeed, then for a Scholar. Besides the way then which is usuall, you may (if you think good) make use of that which I have set down in the new Primar to help little ones to spell readi∣ly, and it is this. 1. Let a childe be well acquainted with his vowells, and made to pronounce them fully by themselves, because they are able to make a perfect sound alone. 2. Teach him to give the true va∣lour or force of the consonants, and to take notice how imperfectly they sound, except a vowel be joyned with them. Both these are set apart by themselves. (p. 2.) 3. Proceed to syllables made of one consonant set before a vowel (Sect, 5.) and let him joyne the true force of the consonant with the perfect sound of the vowel, as to say, ba, be, bi, bo, bu, &c. Yet it were good to leave ca, ce, ci, co, cu, and ga, ge, gi, go, gu, to the last, be∣cause the valor of the consonant in the second and third sylables doth differ from that in the rest.
4. Then exercise him in syllables made of one vowel set before one consonant, (Sect. 6.) as to say, ab, eb, ib, ob, ub, &c. till he can spell any syllable of two let∣ters, backwards or forwards, as, ba, be; bi, bo, bu; ab, eb, ib, ob, ub; ba, ab; be, eb; bi, ib; bo, ob; bu, ub; and so in all the rest comparing one with another. 5. And if to any one of these syllables you adde a letter, and teach him how to joyne it in sound with the rest, you will make him more ready in spelling; as, if before a b you put b, and teach him to say bab; if after ba, you put d, and let him pronounce it bad, he will quickly be able to joyne a letter with any of the rest, as, nip, pin, but, tub, &c. To enure your young-Scholar to any, even the hardest syllable, in an easie way. 1. Practise him in the joyning of con∣sonants that begin syllables, (Sect. 7.) so as that he may give their joynt forces at once; thus, Having shewed him to sound bl or br together, make him to pronounce them, and a vowel with them, bla, bra, ble, bre, and so in any of the rest. 2. Then practise him likewise in con∣sonants that end syllables, (Sect. 8.) make him first to give the force of the
joyned consonants, and then to put the vowels before them; as, ble with the vow∣els before them sound able, eble, ible, oble, uble, to all which you may prefix other consonants and change them into words of one syllable, as, fable, peble, bible, noble, bubble: (with a b inserted or the like. Where observe that e in the end of many words, being silent, doth qualifie the sound of the foregoing vowel, so as to make words different from those that have not e; as, you may see made, diffe∣reth quite from mad, bete from bet, pipe from pip, sope from sop, and cube from cub. Whereby I think them in an error, that leave out e in the end of words, and them that in pronouncing it make two syllables of one, in stable, bible, people, &c. which judicious Mr. Mulcaster will not allow. In this exercise of spelling you may do well sometimes to make all the young beginners stand together, and pose them one by one in all sorts of syllables, till they be perfect in any; and, to make them delight herein, 1. Let them spell many syllables toge∣ther which differ onely in one letter; as, and, band, hand, land, sand. 2. Teach them to frame any word of one syllable, by joyning any of the con∣sonants
which go before vowels, with those that use to follow vowels, and put∣ting in vowels betwixt them; as, black, block; clack, clock. And this they may do afterwards a∣mongst themselves, having severall loose letters made and given them, to com∣pose or divide in a sporting manner, which I may rightly terme the Letter-sport. When a childe is become expert in joyning Consonants with the vowels, then take him to the Diphthongs (Sect. 9.) and there, 1. Teach him the naturall force of a Diphthong (which consists of two vow∣els joyned together) and make him to sound it distinctly by it self; as, ai, ei, &c. 2. Let him see how it is joyned with other letters, and learne to give its pro∣nountiation together with them, mind∣ing him how the same Diphthong differs from its self sometimes in its sound, and which of the two vowels in it hath the greatest power in pronouncation, as, in people e seemeth to drown the o. And besides those words in the Book, you may adde others of your own, till by many examples the childe do well ap∣prehend your meaning, and so, as that he can boldly adventure to imitate
you, and practise of himself. Thus after a childe is throughly exer∣cised in the true sounding of the vowels and consonants together, let him pro∣ceed to the spelling of words, first of one syllable (Sect. 10.) then of two (Sect. 11.) then of three (Sect. 12.) then of four (Sect. 13.) in all which let him be taught how to utter every syllable by it self truly and fully, and be sure to speak out the last. But in words of more sylla∣bles, let him learn to joyne and part them according to these profitable rules. 1. An English syllable may sometimes consist of eight letters, but never of more, as, strength. 2 In words that have many syllables, the consonant between two vowels be∣longeth to the latter of them; as, Hu-mi-li-tie. 3. Consonants which are joyned in the beginning of words, are not to be par∣ted in the middle of them; as, My-ste-ry. 4. Consonants which are not joyned in the beginning of words, are to be parted in the middle of them; as, for-get-ful-ness. 5. If a consonant be doubled in the middle of a word, the first belong's to the syllable foregoing, and the latter to the following; as, pos-ses-si-on.
6. In compound words, every part which belongeth to the single words, must be set by it self; as, In-a-bi-li-ty. And these rules have I here set down rather to informe the less skilful teacher, how he is to guide his learner, then to puzle a childe about them, who is not yet so well able to comprehend them. I have also divided those words in the Book, to let Children see how they ought to divide other polysyllable words, in which they must alwayes be very carefull (as I said) to sound out the last syllable very fully. To enable a child the better to pro∣nounce any word he meets withall in reading, I have set down some more hard for pronuntiation; (Sect. 14▪) in often reading over which he may be ex∣ercised to help his utterance; and the Master may adde more at his own dis∣cretion, till he see that his willing Scho∣lar doth not stick in spelling any, be it never so hard. And that the child may not be amu∣sed with any thing in his book, when he cometh to read, I would have him made acquainted with the pauses, (Sect. 15.) with the figures, (Sect. 16.) nume∣rall letters, (Sect. 17.) Quotations (Sect. 18.) and Abbreviations Sect. 19) which
being but a work of few houres space, may easily be performed after he can rea∣dily spell, which when he can do, he may profitably be put to reading, but not before; for I observed it a great de∣fect in some of Mr. R. Scholars, (whose way was to teach to read presently with∣out any spelling at all) that when they were at a losse about a word, they made an imperfect confused sound, in giving the force of the consonants, which if they once missed they knew not which way to help themselves, to find what the word was, whereas if after a childe know his letters, he be taught to gather them into just syllables, and by the joy∣ning of syllables together to frame a word, (which as it is the most antient, so certainely it is the most naturall me∣thod of teaching) he will soon be able, if he stick at any word in reading, by the naming of its letters, and pronouncing of its syllables to say what it is, and then he may boldly venture to read without spelling at all, touching the gaining of a habit whereof, I shall proceed to say somewhat in the next chapter.
Chap. IIII. How a child may be taught to read any Eng∣lish Book perfectly. THe ordinary way to teach children to read is, after they have got some knowledge of their letters, & a smatter∣ing of some syllables and words in the horn-book, to turn them into the ABC. or Primar, and therein to make them name the letters, and spell the words, till by often use they can pronounce (at least) the shortest words at the first sight. This method take's with those of promp∣ter wits, but many of more slow capa∣cities, not finding any thing to affect them, and so make them heed what they learne, go on remissely from lesson to lesson, and are not much more able to read, when they have ended their book, then when they begun it. Besides, the ABC. being now (I may say) gene∣rally thrown aside, and the ordinary Primar not printed, and the very fun∣damentalls of christian Religion (which were wont to be contained in those books, and were commonly taught chil∣dren at home by heart before they went to Schoole) with sundry people (almost
in all places) slighted, the matter which is taught in most books now in use, is not so familiar to them, and therefore not so easie for Children to learn. But to hold still to the sure foundation, I have caused the Lords Prayer (Sect. 20.) the Creed (Sect. 21.) and the ten Commandements (Sect. 23.) to be prin∣ted in the Roman character, that a childe having learned already to know his letters and how to spell, may also be ini∣tiated to read by them, which he will do the more cheerfully, if he be also instructed at home to say them by heart. As he read's these, I would have a childe name what words he can at the first sight, and what he cannot, to spell them, and to take notice what pauses and numbers are in his lesson. And to go them often over, till he can tell any tittle in them, either in or without the book. When he is thus well entered in the Roman character, I would have him made acquainted with the rest of the characters now in use (Sect. 23.) which will be easily done, by comparing one with another, and reading over those sentences, Psalms, Thankesgivings, and Prayers (which are printed in greater
and lesse characters of sundry sorts) till he have them pretty well by heart. Thus having all things which con∣cerne reading English made familar to him, he may attaine to a perfect habit of it. 1. By reading the single Psalter. 2. The Psalmes in meeter. 3. The Schoole of good manners, or such like easie books, which may both profit and de∣light him. All which I would wish he may read over at lest thrice, to make the mat∣ter, as well as the words, leave an im∣pression upon his mind. If any where he stick at any word (as seeming too hard) let him marke it with a pin, or the dint of his nayle, and by looking upon it againe, he will remember it. When he can read any whit readily, let him begin the Bible, and read over the book of Genesis, (and other remark∣able Histories in other places of Scrip∣ture, which are most likely to delight him) by a chapter at a time; But acquaint him a little with the matter beforehand, for that will intice him to read it, and make him more observant of what he read's. After he hath read, aske him such generall Questions out of the Story, as are most easie for him to answer, and he will the better remember it. I have
known some, that by hiring a child to read two or three chapters a day, and to get so many verses of it by heart, have made them admirable proficients, and that betimes, in the Scriptures; which was Timothies excellency, and his Grand∣mothers great commendation. Let him now take liberty to exercise himself in any English book (so the matter of it be but honest) till he can perfectly read in any place of a book that is offered him; and when he can do this, I adjudge him fit to enter into a Grammar Schoole, but not before. For thus learning to read English per∣fectly, I allow two or three years time, so that at seven or eight years of age, a child may begin Latine. CHAP. V. Wherein children, for whom the Latine tongue is thought to be unnecessary, are to be em∣ployed after they can read English well. IT is a fond conceit of many, that have either not attained, or by their
own negligence have utterly lost the use of the Latine Tongue, to think it alto∣gether unnecessary for such children to learn it, as are intended for Trades, or to be kept as drudges at home, or em∣ployed about husbandry. For first there are few children, but (in their playing-years, and before they can be capable of any serious employment in the meanest calling that is) may be so far grounded in the Latine, as to finde that little smattering they have of it, to be of sin∣gular use to them, both for the under∣standing of the English Authors (which abound now a dayes with borrowed words) and the holding discourse with a sort of men that delight to flant it in Latine. Secondly, Besides I have heard it spoken to the great commendation of some Countries, where care is had for the well education of children, that eve∣ry Peasant (almost) is able to discourse with a stranger in the Latine tongue; and why may not we here in England obtain the like praise, if we did but as they, continue our children at the Latine Schoole, till they be well acquainted with that language, and thereby better fitted for any calling.
Thirdly, And I am sorry to adde, that the non-improvement of childrens time after they can read English any whit well, throweth open a gap to all loose kinde of behaviour; for being then (as it is too commonly to be seen, especially with the poorer sort) taken from the Schoole, and permitted to run wildeing up and down without any control, they adventure to commit all manner of lewdnesse, and so become a shame and dishonour to their Friends and Coun∣trey. If these or the like reasons therefore might prevail to perswade them that have a prejudice against Latine, I would advise that all children might be put to the Grammar-Schoole, so soon as they can read English well; and suffered to continue at it, till some honest calling invite them thence; but if not, I would wish them rather to forbear it, then to become there an hinderance to others, whose work it is to learn that profitable Language. And that they may not squander away their time in idleness, it were good if they were put to a Writing-Schoole, where they might be, First helped to keep their English, by reading of a chapter (at least) once a day; and
second. taught to write a fair hand; and thirdly afterwards exercised in Arith∣matique, and such preparative Arts, as may make them compleatly fit to un∣dergoe any ordinary calling. And be∣ing thus trained up in a way of disci∣pline, they will afterwards prove more easily plyable to their Masters com∣mands. Now, forasmuch as few Grammar-Schooles of note will admit children in∣to them, till they have learn't their Acci∣dents; the teaching of that book, also be∣cometh for the most part a work for a Pet∣ty-Schoole, where many that undertake to teach it, being altogether ignorant of the Latine Tongue, do sorrily performe that taske, and spend a great deal of time about it to little or no purpose. I would have that book, therefore by such let a∣lone, and left to the Grammar-School, as most fitting to be taught there onely, be∣cause it is intended as an introduction of Grammar, to guide children in a way of reading, writing, and speaking Latine, and the Teachers of the Gram∣mar-Art are most deeply concerned to make use of it for that end. And in stead of the Accidents, which they do neither understand nor profit by, they may be
benefitted in reading Orthodoxal Ca∣techismes and other Books, that may in∣struct them in the Duties of a Christian, such as are The Practise of Piety, The Pra∣ctise of Quietnesse, The whole duty of Man; and afterwards in other delightful books of English History; as, The History of Queen Elizabeth; or Poetry, as Herberts Poems, Quarl's Emblems; and by this means they will gain such a habit and delight in reading, as to make it their chief recreation, when liberty is afford∣ed them. And their acquaintance with good books will (by Gods blessing) be a means so to sweeten their (otherwise sowr) natures, that they may live com∣fortably towards themselves, and ami∣ably converse with other persons. Yet if the Teacher of a Petty-Schoole have a pretty understanding of the La∣tine Tongue, he may the better adven∣ture to teach the Accidents, and proceed in so doing with far more ease and profit to himself and learner, if he observe a sure method of grounding his children in the Rudiments of Grammar, and pre∣paring them to speak and write familiar Latine, which I shall hereafter discover, having first set down somewhat how to remedy that defect in reading English,
with which the Grammar-Schooles are very much troubled, especially, where there is not a good Petty-Schoole to dis∣charge that work afore-hand. And be∣fore I proceed further, I will expresse my minde in the two next chapters touch∣ing the erecting of a Petty-Schoole, and how it may probably flourish by good Order and Discipline. CHAP. VI. Of the founding of a Petty-Schoole. THe Petty-Schoole is the place where indeed the first Principles of all Re∣ligion and learning ought to be taught, and therefore rather deserveth that more encouragement should be given to the Teachers of it, then that it should be left as a work for poor women, or o∣thers, whose necessities compel them to undertake it, as a meer shelter from beg∣gery. Out of this consideration it is (per∣haps) that some nobler spirits, whom
God hath enriched with an over-plus of outward means, have in some places whereunto they have been by birth (or otherwise) related, erected Petty-Schoole-houses, and endowed them with yearly salaries; but those are so inconsi∣derate towards the maintenance of a Master and his familie, or so over-cloyed with a number of Free-Scholars, to be taught for nothing, that few men of parts will daigne to accept of them, or continue at them for any while; and for this cause I have observed such weak foundations to fall to nothing. Yet if any one be desireous to contri∣bute towards such an eminent work of charity, my advice is, that he erect a Schoole and dwelling house together, a∣bout the middle of a Market-Town, or some populous Country-Village, and a∣comodate it with a safe yard adjoyning to it, if not with an Orchard or Garden, and that he endow it with a salery of (at least) twenty pounds per annum, in consi∣deration whereof all such poor boyes as can conveniently frequent it, may be taught gratis, but the more able sort of neighbours may pay for childrens teach∣ing, as if the Schoole was not free; for they will find it no small advantage to
have such a Schoole amongst them. Such a yearly stipend and convenient dwelling, with a liberty to take young children to board, and to make what ad∣vantage he can best by other Scholars, will invite a man of good parts to un∣dertake the charge, and excite him to the diligent and constant performance of his duty; especially, if he be chosen into the place by three or four honest and discreet Trustees, that may have power also to remove him thence, if by his uncivil behaviour, or grose neglect he render himself uncapable to perform so necessary a service to the Church and Common-Wealth. As for the Qualifications of one that is to be the Teacher of a Petty-Schoole, I would have him to be a Person of a pious, sober, comely and discreet behaviour, and tenderly affectionate towards chil∣dren, haveing some knowledge of the Latine Tongue, and abilitie to write a fair hand, and good skil in Arithmetick, and then let him move within the com∣passe of his own orb, so as to teach all his Scholars (as they become capable) to read English very well, and afterwards to write and cast accounts. And let him not meddle at all with teaching the Acci∣dents,
except onely to some more preg∣nant wits, which are intended to be set forwards to learn Latine, and for such be sure that he ground them well, or else dismisse them as soon as they can read distinctly, and write legibly, to the Grammar School. I should here have closed my discourse; and shut up this Petty-Schoole, were it not that I received a model for the maintain∣ing of Students from a worthy friends hands (& one that is most zealously and charitably addicted to advance Learn∣ing, and to help it in its very beginnings to come forwards to its full Rise) by which I am encouraged to addresse my remaining words to the Godly-minded Trustees and Subscri∣bers for so good a work, (especially to those amongst them that know me, and my School-endeavours) and this I hum∣bly request of them, that as they have happily contrived a Model for the edu∣cation of Students, and brought it on a suddain to a great degree of perfection, so they would also put to their hands for the improvement of Schoole-learning, without which such choise abilities as they aim at in order to the Ministry can∣not possibly be obtained. And for the
first foundation of such a work, I pre∣sume to offer my advise, that in some convenient places, within and about the City, there may be Petty-Schooles erected, according to the number of wards, unto which certain poor children out of every Parish may be sent, and taught gratis, and all others that please to send their children thither may have them taught at a reasonable rate, and be sure to have them improved to the ut∣most of what they are capable. And I am the rather induced to propound such a thing, because that late eminent, Dr. Bathurst lately deceased, Mr. Gouge and some others yet living did out of their own good affection to learning, endea∣vour at their own charge to promote the like.
CHAP. VII. Of the discipline of a Petty-Schoole. THe sweet and orderly behaviour of Children addeth more credit to a Schoole then due and constant Teach∣ing, because this speaketh to every one that the Childe is well taught, though (perhaps) he learn but little; and good manners indeed are a main part of good education. I shall here therefore take occasion to speak somewhat concerning the Discipline of a Petty-Schoole, leav∣ing the further Discourse of Childrens Manners to Books that treat purposely of that subject: as, Erasmus de moribus, Youths Behaviour, &c. 1. Let every Scholar repair to Schoole before eight a clock in a morning, or in case of weaknesse before nine; and let him come fairly washed, neatly combed, and hansomly clad, and by commend∣ing his cleannesse, and shewing it to his fellowes, make him to take pleasure be∣times
of himself to go neat and comely in his clothes. 2. Let such as come before Schoole∣time take liberty to recreate themselves about the Schoole, yet so as not to be suffered to do any thing, whereby to harm themselves, or Schoole-fellowes, or to give offence, or make disturbance to any neighbour. 3. When Schoole-time calleth, let them all go orderly to their own places, and there apply themselves diligently to their books, without noyse, or running about. 4. When the Master cometh into the Schoole, let them all stand up, and make obeysance so likewise when any stranger cometh in) and after notice taken who are absent; let one that is most able read a chapter, and the rest attend, and give some littlt account of what they heard read; Then let him that read, say a short prayer fitted for the Schoole, and afterwards let every one settle to his present taske. 5. The whole Schoole may not unfit∣ly be divided into four formes; whereof the first and lowest should be of those that learn to know their letters, whose lessons may be in the Primar. The se∣cond
of those that learn to spell, whose lessons may be in the Single-Psalter. The third of these that learn to read, whose lessons may be in the Bible. The fourth of those that are exercised in reading, writeing, and casting accounts, whose lessons may be in such profitable Eng∣glish-Books as the Parents can best pro∣vide, and the Master think fittest to be taught. 6. Let their lessons be the same to each boy in every form, and let the Ma∣ster proportion them to the meanest ca∣pacities, thus those that are abler may profit themselves by helping their weak∣er fellowes, and those that are weaker be encouraged to see that they can keep company with the stronger. And let the two highest in every forme give no∣tice to the Master when they come to say, of those that were most negligent in geting the lesson. 7. When they come to say, let them all stand orderly in one or 2 rowes, & whilst one sayeth his lesson, be sure that all the rest look upon their books, and give li∣berty to him thats next to correct him that is saying if he mistake, and in case he can say better, let him take his place, and keep it till the same boy or another
win it from him. The striveing for places (especially) amongst little ones, will whet them all on to more diligence, then any encouragement that can be gi∣ven them; and the Master should be ve∣ry sparing to whip any one for his book, except he be sullenly negligent, and then also I would chuse rather to shame him out of his untowardnesse by com∣mending some of his fellowes, and ask∣ing him why he cannot do as well as they, then by falling upon him with ra∣ting words, or injurious blowes. A great care also must be had that those children that are slow witted and of a tender spi∣rit, be not any way discouraged, though they cannot make so good performance of their task as the rest of their fel∣lowes. 8 On Mundayes, Wednesdayes and Fridayes they may say two lessons in a forenoon and two in an afternoon; and on Tuesdayes and Thursdayes in the forenoons they may also say two lessons; but on Tuesdayes and Thursdayes in the afternoons, and on Saturday morn∣ings I would have the time spent in ex∣amineing, and directing how to spell and read a right, and hearing them say the Graces, Prayers, and Psalms, and espe∣cially
the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and the Ten Commandements (which are for that purpose set down in the New-Pri∣mar) very perfectly by heart. And those that can these well may proceed to get other Catechisms, but be sure they be such as agree with the Principles of Christian Religion. 9. Their lessons being all said, they should be dismissed about eleven a clock, and then care must be taken that they go e∣very one orderly out of the Schoole, and passe quietly home without any stay by the way. And to prevent that too too common clamour, and crouding out of the Schoole door, let them rise out of their places one by one with their hat, and book in their hand, and make their honours to their Master as they passe be∣fore his face, one following another at a distance out of the Schoole. It were fittest and safest that the least went out the foremost, that the bigger boyes fol∣lowing may give notice of any misde∣meanour upon the way. 10 Their return to Schoole in the after-noon should be by one of the clock, and those that come before that hour, should be permitted to play with∣in their bounds till the clock strike one,
and then let them all take their places in due order, and say their lessons as they did in the fore-noon. After les∣sons ended, let one read a chapter, and say a Prayer, and so let them again go orderly and quietly home, about five a clock in the summer, and four in the winter season. 11. If necessity require any one to go out in the School time, let him not in∣terrupt the Master by asking him leave, but let him leave his book with his next fellow above him, for fear he should else spoile it, or loose it, and in case he tar∣ry too long forth, let notice be given to the Monitor. 12. Those children in the upper form may be monitors, every one a day in his turn, and let them every evening af∣ter all lessons said, give a bill to the Ma∣ster of their names that are absent and theirs that have committed any disor∣der; and let him be very moderate in correcting, and be sure to make a differ∣ence betwixt those faults that are viti∣ously enormous, and those that are but childish transgressons; Where admoniti∣ons readily take place, it is a needlesse trouble to use a rod, and as for a ferula I wish it were utterly banished out of all Schooles.
If one, before I conclude, should ask me, how many children I think may be well and profitably taught (according to the method already proposed) in a Petty-School; I return him answer, that I con∣ceive fourty boyes will be enough throughly to employ one man, to hear every one so often as is required, and so many he may hear and benefit of him∣self, without making use of any of his Scholars to teach the rest, which how∣ever it may be permitted, and is practised in some Schooles, yet it occasioneth too much noyse and disorder, and is no whit so acceptable to Parents, or plea∣sing to the children, be the work never so well done. And therefore I advise, that in a place where a great concours of children may be had, there be more Ma∣sters then one employed according to the spatiousnesse of the room, and the num∣ber of boyes to be taught; so that every fourty Scholars may have one to teach them; and in case there be boyes enough to be taught, I would appoint one sin∣gle Master, to attend one single forme, and have as many Masters as there are forms, and then the work of teaching little ones to the height of their best improvement may be throwly done,
esecially if there were a writeing-master employed at certain houres in the Schoole, and an experienced Teacher encouraged as a supervisor, or inspector, to see that the whole Schoole be well and orderly taught, and discipli∣ned. What I have here writ concerning the Teaching and ordering of a Petty-Schoole, was in many particulars expe∣rienced by my self with a few little boyes, that I taught amongst my Gram∣mar-Scholars in London, and I know those of eminent worth, and great learn∣ing that upon tryal made upon their own children at home, and others at Schoole are ready to attest the ease and benefit of this method. Insomuch as I was resolved to have adjoyned a Petty-Schoole to my Grammar-Schoole at the Token-house in Lothbury London, and there to have proceeded in this familiar and pleasing way of Teaching, had I not been unhansomly dealt with by those whom it concerned, for their own pro∣fit sake to have given me lesse discou∣ragement. Neverthelesse, I think it my duty to promote Learning what I can, and to lay a sure foundation for such a goodly structure as learning is; And
though (perhaps) I may never be able to effect what I desire for its advancement, yet it will be my comfort, to have im∣parted somwhat to others that may help thereunto. I have here begun at the ve∣ry ground work, intending (by Gods blessing) forthwith to publish The New Discovery of the Old Art of Teaching, which doth properly belong to a Grammar-Schoole. In the mean time I intreat those into whose hands this little work may come, to look upon it with a single eye, and whether they like or dislike it, to think that it is not unnecessary for men of greatest parts to bestow a sheet or two at leasure time upon so mean a subject as this seem's to bee. And that God which causeth immense rivers to flow from small spring-heads, vouchsafe to blesse these weak beginings in tender age, that good learning may proceed hence to its full perfection in riper years.
FINIS.
