H706 R9916 11811128 49521
A DESCRIPTION OF THE Last Voyage TO BERMUDAS, In the Ship MARYGOLD, S. P. Commander; By J. H. Begun Nobember the twelfth, 1670. And ending May the third, 1671. With Allowance. London, printed for Rowland Reynald at the Sun and Bible in the Poultrey 1671.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE Governor and Company OF LONDON, For Plantation of the Summer Islands. AS richest Diamonds when en∣shrin'd in Gold, And set in darkest Foyls, more Rays unfold, So stands that beauteous ISLE on Rocks and Sands, Encircled with Great Neptune's watry Bands;
Who when impell'd with Gusts, make haste before, Dashing themselves, Enamel all the Shore: This pleasant PILE's the Subject of my Muse, That late from raging Seas suffer'd abuse, Now enters Port, and after dreadful Toyls, To You (Renowned Sirs) gives up her Spoyls. The Matter, Place, Occasion, every Section Are Yours, and therefore claims your just Protection. Accept (Great Sirs) Your own; for by Your Eye These Cabbin Sea-sick Lines must live or die. Your Honors most humble Servant, John Hardy.
To his Honored Friend, CAPTAIN S. P. Commander of the Good Ship MARYGOLD, 1670/71. MOst noble Captain, under whose Com∣mand, I have been Servant both by Sea and Land, Peruse these Lines, which though they do not show Wonders unto you, yet they'r true, you know, Your self enduring many a bitter Blast, From the first of the Voyage, to the last. Read and accept them, so desires your Friend Who is, and will be, till his Life doth end. John Hardie.
To his loving Friends, Mr. T. H. and P. H. Masters Mates of the Ship MARYGOLD. MOst loving Friends, to you I do indite This my small Journal, you being in sight Of what is mention'd in it: Don't expect Here Signs and Tangents, or a Course direct Unto this Island: If so, I a fool Should be by you accounted, in the School Of Mathematicks never being bred, Nor ever heard Mysterious Lectures read Concerning Navigation: Idle times Was the true Product of these foolish Rhimes, Which craves Acceptance from your friendly hand, By him who is your Friend for to command, John Hardie.
The Prologue. ASsist Great Jove, and help my wandring Muse, Poetick Strains into my Quill infuse, To sing the Truth, the Praises, and the Fame Of th' Isle Bermuda, call'd so from the Name Of Spanish Jam. Bermudas: According to Heylin's Cosmography it was found out by a Spaniard, who was there cast away; then by an English-man, whose name was Forbisher; lastly inhabited by Captain Summers, who dying in this Island was Embalm'd, and his Body carryed into England, but his Bowels buried at St. Georges Island near the State-House, as they name it: It hath not been long since Inhabited; for there was found Engraven on a Palmeta-Tree these Words, which are set up in the Governors Hall over his Chair: though of late Its Name was chang'd by Summers happy fate, Whose Heart and Bowels buried there, to be A Witness of it to Eternity.
CONDITUR IN HOC LOCO NAVIS PER RICHARDUM FRO∣BISHERUM ONERIS 70. QUAE VIRGINIAE DESTINATOR NOS OMNES HINC TRANSPORTA∣BAT. ANNO 1610. MAY 4.
OUR VOYAGE Outward bound. WHen cold November with a hoary Head, The fertile Earth with Snow had overspread, Joyn'd with white Frost, upon its twelfth day, we Set sayl from Gravesend, being bound to see Bermudas, in th' Ship Marygold; which Flower O' all the Deities take in your Power, And from all Dangers safely her defend, Granting her Voyage may have happy end.
Into the Hope we got, and there make stay Two Nights, when with a fair wind we weigh Our Anchors, setting Sail into the Downs, Where shortly we arriv'd, which was the Bounds For Shipping granted then, till mighty Jove Sent a cold quaking North-wind from above; After twice seven days space again we set Our Sayle, and in the term of two days get Near to a point of Land is call'd the Start, From which in the dark Ev'ning we did part, Jove's aid imploring, for now nothing we Behold, but briny Billows of the Sea: When shortly, for not fifty Leagues or more, We gotten had from Noble Englands shore, But Aeolus that too incoastant God, Thought good to punish us, the blustring Rod Of West winds Fury, and dark Nights together Made cloudy, cold, and too inconstant weather: Now Neptune with his furious Waves doth kiss, And toss our Marygold, but 'tis our bliss She's good condition'd, though Skies-mounting waves Do threaten death, & seem to make our Graves
In it's in satiate Bowels, her rib'd Sides Over the white curl'd Billows swiftly glides; And although over all salt Seas she takes, Yet little water then she's wont she makes; It being Winter time, Reason doth guide Unto the Southward Mariners to slide, To make the Proverb good, He that doth run The farthest way about, is neerest home. Unto which purpose we our Course do take, Some of the Charibby Islands for to make, And cross Thinking to cross the Tropick Cancer, and make Anguilla Sombrero, or some of the Virgin-Islands. the Tropick Cancer, but the winde Prov'd to us more auspicious and kinde Than we expect, to our Port we incline, So straight our Course as if it were a Line For many days, when as that at the last, Bold Boreas from his Den sends cruel blast From the Western Islands, at which rocky Land I think he keeps his Court, and doth command
All Winter time, for near't we always must Expect to have sharp storms, & thundering gust A week or more expir'd in this same weather, A pleasant day came, and fair wind together; So Dolphins swiftly through the Ocean glide, To prey on flying Dolphins when once struck and brought into the Ship, change their colours very often, till at the last they die, and remain a dunnish colour, and are of this form. Fifish so near the side; depiction of a flying fish The Saylors with a Fish-gig deeply wound Their tender bodies, that a deadly sound The form of a Fish-gig. depiction of a fishing harpoon Possesseth all their parts throughout, the which Small time a Proteus change of colours reach.
Though Fortune hath been churlîsh at the best, Yet now we're paid with double Interest; For within four times seven fair days, we Long wish'd for Summer Islands plainly see; When as our Captain caus'd a To fire a Piece of Ordnance, the usual custom to give warning to the Pilot and Inhabitants that there is the Magazine Ship on the Coast, whose duty it is to convey into Harbour. In Kings-Castle Harbor, about a Mile and a half from the Shoar. roaring Gun For to be fir'd, which once being done A Pilot came aboard, through dangerous Rocks Us safely carrying without any knocks, Into Kings Castle Harbor, where doth stand Two Castles, entring ships for to command; After salutes to either we at last Near Captain Hubbarbs Bridge our Anchor cast; So Januaries twenty seventh put end To dangere outward, which us did attend;
We now our Sails unbend, and Top-mast lo're, And in short time our Goods The custom there is to fetch and bring their Goods aboard, and their Seamen to be at no trouble, as in other places of the West-Indies. are fetcht ashore. The Description of the Island. WEll at Bermudas we arrived are, After great trouble, pains, gusts, storms, and care; And now the ship seems rightly nam'd to be A Magazine, as term'd, for you may see Some selling Linnen cloath, with other knacks, Which Pedlars use to carry in their Packs; Some Brandy buy, and such like liquid ware, Others of new Tobacco-pipes have care To store themselves, whilst others do agree Good to exchange for such Commodity The Countrey doth afford, and some are willing To sell their Goods at three pence on the shilling
This time it lasts not long, when suddenly Must work all hands, the Island-Boats we see Deep loaden with Tobacco, which they bring Unto the side, from whence we take it in. To give description of these same The Islands Boats after this Form, carrying five or six Chests of Tobacco, or more. They lie so near the Wind, that they will fetch the same place they look up∣on, close hal'd. Boats, With tripple corner'd Sayls they always float depiction of a ship About the Islands, in the World there are None in al points that may with them compare But leave we now the ship till fill'd, take view Of th' Land, to try if what you heard be true;
Then to begin; there's Rocky Hills so high, They seem for to out-dare the cloudy Sky; And fertile Vallies during all the year, Continual Liveries of green do wear; In which no poysonous Creature e're hath been No Adders, Serpents, Toads, or Snakes are seen To prejudice mans health, but it is stor'd With Bieves, Goats, Oxen, Sheep which doth af∣ford Fine woolly fleeces, with such things as these Thou dost abound, ty'd Tye all their Cattel, as Horses, Asses, Hogs, Goats, Sheep, &c. to Trees, where they feed on the Melli∣lot, and Fennel, round about them. to Palmeta-trees, Whose uses are so many, not unfold Them all can any man; from Winters cold It keeps their Houses thatch'd with 't, & its mats For bedding makes, with baskets, brooms, & hats Nay more, it Cordage doth afford, in 'ts top A Cabbage grows, for meat, and do but lop Or bore a hole in't, you may plainly see A pleasant Liquor flowing from the Tree;
It's fruit is luscious, whose stone's black as Jett, Will make neat Buttons, if with Silver set; And its dry Leaves will serve in darksom night In stead of Torches, Travellers to light. Of all the Trees that is, or The Palmeta Tree is a straight Tree, about the height of an Apple Tree, growing with broad Leaves at the top, closed together in manner of a Fann, which they put to several uses more than I can here relate. ever were, None to the straight Palmeta may compare. The lofty fragrant Cedars here Cedar Gumm as hath been often experienc'd, is good for Gonorrhea's, the Berries which are like Ju∣niper Berries, are of the same nature as Juniper Ber∣ries are, they boyl them in water and make Drink for their constant use of it. do grow, The Vertues of whose Fruits and Gums to know Requires a larger time; here you may see The Lime, the Lemmon, and the Orange tree; So fam'd throughout the world, here at one time Buds, blossoms, green, & ripe Fruit in the prime;
Pomgranates, Gwavers, Papawes, Fig-trees too, Whereof a Pleasant kinde of Drink they brew, With Mulberries likewise; but if I may Call it a Tree, the Pine bears Pine are much after the Figure of a Sceth Thistle, and in my minde taste most like a Peach, or Mali∣gotoon; they grow in low marshy Grounds. all away, Whose crowned tops & bottom compast round, Seems as if it were with green Garland crown'd. But Oh! its delicious taste surpasseth words Deep utterance; this onely Fruit affords All taste of others in't you think upon, Pears, Apples, Peaches, Cherries, every one Appears int's taste; here grows the prickle Pear Whose in-side of a scarlet Prickled Pears are of a most rare scarlet colour, but its Juice will not stain, for by water it may soon be washt away; 'tis thought by some that Cochinele is produced of it. colour are. Here's Roots as well as Trees, Potatoes good For sustenance of man to make pure blood.
And here Cassawder, to which, though it's Juice Be Poyson, yet they now have a device To press and grate it, so in time of need And sometimes else, they safely on it feed Being bak'd in form of Bread; here's Indian-Corn Whose weighty Eares on a long stalk is born; In thickness like a Cane, it Nature roul'd Close up in Leaves, to keep it from the cold; Which being groun'd & boyl'd, Mush they make Their hungry Servants Hunger for to slake: But let me tell you, that there cannot be A profit without discommodity; For though no poysonous Living thing indeed Inhabits there, yet grows a Poyson-Weed, a shrub which runs up Trees as the Ivy, and hath poysoned abundance of People, especi∣ally in wet, foggy, rainy, weather, as my self can witness, and poysoned some that hath onely lookt upon it, as many can testifie. Poyson-Weed, Whose very sight infects some, and its Juice Will make men itch, as if a thousand Lice
About their bodies creep, in painful Wheals And Pimples at the last it self reveals, But never kills; Its Counterpoyson is Sage of the Mountain, which you cannot miss At all times for to finde, in places where This Weed is, for it grows to't very near. Of Fowls they have enough, such as are Hens, Capons, Ducks, Turkies kooped up in Pens; Wild Pidgeons, and other feathered Brood, Some bad for nourishment, yet some are good; With Tropick Longtails, of Tropick Birds are call'd Longtails, from one or two Feathers longer than the rest, about a foot or more. whose Nest there be Amongst the rocks, a hundred Leagues to Sea They fly: and also near unto the Shore Plenty of Fish is, which the They have many more fishes, such as Greyhound-fish, Rainbow-fish, Anchoves, though I think not the right; Cragfish as big as Lobsters; Oysters, where in sometime they find small Pearl. People store,
As Pilchards, Sinnets, Gruats, and Salmon Peal, With Rock-fish, Porgoes, and the slippery Eel, And Mullets plentiful are in the sound, The water flowing to them under ground, Being most salt, and all I believe the Island is hollow, for there is some holes that none can find the end of them, some hot as a Stove upon the Northerly wind, as that near Tuc∣kers Town; and that there is water in them may be proved; by the Coopers Hole, the Devils Hole, and a place near Walsingham-Bay, &c. which water though a good distance from the Sea, is as briny and as salt as it is, which may prove a passage from one into the other. along the shore There are dark Caves, of a Miles length or more Extending under ground, in which there be Deep holes with water, though no one can see A passage for it in: Which dreadful Lakes, Some sort of Fish do for their Refuge take; Beside the foresaid Fish, with The Grains are like an English Prong. grains they strike The horned Cuckold, Cunny, and one like
The prickled Hedge-Hog: Angel-fish, by light They carry in their Boats in darkest nights; And Groopers too, none of the meanest size, Which salted, they do send for Merchandize To the West-Indian Islands, with their Beef, Which yields the Inhabitants there much relief; Here in the time of year, the The Whales here though they be of an indifferent large size, the Gills are not above one or two foot long at most, from whence the Whale-bone comes; some say that Sperma Ceti is the Spawn, others think that it lies in the head, but it is certainly found to be the fat of the Whale, for being put into a Lamp, and burned, it will turn to Sperma Ceti, which several in the West-Indies have proved to be true, that after the Oleus part is consumed, the substance call'd vulgarly Sperma Ceti, remains. mighty Whale Appears upon the Coast, who with his Tayl Small Boats can over-set, out of whose Nose Hogsheads of water gushes when he blows; Which being seen on Land, in Boats they haste Towards him, and their Lances sharp make fast
In his fat sides, who being hurt, along The Boats draw with him dangerous Rocks among, Changing the water with his purple gore, To red, which of a pale green was afore, Tyring himself, till at the last to Death He stoops, and roaring yieldeth up his breath, When into Harbor near unto the shore Being tow'd, they cut him up themselves to store With Oyl out of his Blubber, which they burn In Lamps, and unto other uses turn It on occasion: but this sort of Fish Is not the same for which they all do wish; No Whale Bones in its Gill or in its Head, No Soveraign Sperma Ceti here is bred; The difference lying, others mouths are fill'd With rowes of Teeth, whereas this none doth yield. Here's also Sharks, whose head affords a Gelly, Good for the Cholick, and gripes of the Belly; Sharks are here in abundance, whose Back-bone looks most like a Japan, and its wide mouth stands so, that he is fain to take his Prey lying on his back; in the cavity of his head there is a substance, which being dry'd is good for abundance of Diseases, but more es∣pecially for Gripes, and easy bringing women to Bed, which the Inhabitants have approved even to admira∣tion, when all things else have fail'd.
Being dry'd and powder'd, this same Fish they take As well as Whales, Oyl of his fat to make. Besides these, many more Fishes are found About the main Land, being compass'd round With four hundred small Islands, rather more, Some one, some two Miles distance from the shore. And now to write a little of the State Of this same Land, its Climate's temperate, Which doth produce long Life, and its degree Abating thirty Minutes, It's Latitude is 32 Degrees, 30 Minutes, and it's Longitude 316 Degrees. thirty three
Is found for Latitude, and some men say, Three hundred and sixteen Degrees make way From the Azores to it, to incline By way of Longitude, unsearched Line; A Governor there is, who's always sent By th' Honoured Company, to the intent To put in force, whatever they think fit T' nact for good, when in the Court they sit; Their Judges, Justices of Peace, and Shrief, Constables, Marshals, Bayliffs, who relieve The oppress'd, and there's Captains who de∣light Themselves in Arms, with daring Foes to fight. But I forget the Ministers, who preach In Churches, where young Children some do teach; But cease my Muse, for no man can unlock This Rock of Wonders, or this wondrous Rock, Which though but two Miles broad, and twenty long At most, it framed is so mighty strong
By Art and Nature, none but them who see, Can think that such a place in the world to be; If Armies come against it, they may rest Free from all fears, if Treason in their Brest Do not lie lurking: But behold the Ship Which for to fill, our Seamen will not slip Any occasion, But with Cedars Chest, And Ravens-foot Tobacco in Ravensfoot Tobacco, call'd so from its blackness and brightness, a common Proverb amongst them, for the better Stowage. them prest, The Ship's Hold fills, but whatsoever be In Cask to stow between Decks they agree; And now the Ship's near full, we all prepare Our selves for going homeward, some take care For Fowls, fat Hogs, Corn, and Potatoes sweet, Oranges, Limes, and Lemmons for to eat With our Provision homewards, some do think Of Sugar, and of Liquor for to drink In time of need, but all of us take care Our Cabbins with Oranges filled are;
Others of Rarities which in the Sea Grows, such as Feathers, Black-rods, Coral be, Provide themselves to give unto a friend, Which when arrived they unto them send. Homeward bound Voyage. THE Ship now quite full, and a Western Gale, The Anchors being up, now fills her Sail, When that the glorious Raies of the bright Sun Through one Sign of the Zodiack had not run, The Pilot at the Boltsprit Pilot stands at the Boltsprit end because there is no Land-marks, and he cuns the Ship in by the Rocks under water, luffing for one, and bearing up for a∣nother; they usually chuse to Pilot them in or out at the Suns rising or setting, because then the Sun hath the least reflexion. end doth stand, Giving from thence the strict Word of Com∣mand,
For Port or Starboard, which he thinks most fit Her over the Sharp-pointed Rocks to get; The Castles at our parting, once again We do salute, while by them to the Main A Mile or two from Shore we softly hie, Trimming our Sails on purpose to lie by, Unbending Cables, we our Anchors stow, And hoise our Boats in, then away we go Our Course for East, North-East we bravely steer, The wind North-West is, and the weather cleer, So Marches twenty second about Night, Of Summers Island we did lose the sight; But we not sail'd a days time at the least, The Wind it came unto the East, South-east; We tack about, and to the Northward stand, Where as they say, the West-Winds have com∣mand Most of the year, but we it found not so, For East South East, and South Winds over blow Putting us by out Sayls we lie a hull, The briny Waves her almost filling full;
Upon our upper Decks, where above Hens, And Ducks, with Turkeys, are shut up in Pens; Which was for fresh Provision in store, Of these are drown'd in four hours or more, Full sixty seven, but at the length we find The Storms to asswage its fury, and the wind To cease a little, so again we set Our Courses reefed, till the Seas do get Abated, which are grown so vast and high, They seem to mount us to the Cloudy Sky; One of which stormy Afternoons about Four of the Clock, we saw a Water-Spout So fear'd by Mariners, which passed by Us with a Circling in the muddy Sky. These Winds after about a Fortnights stay In these same blustring Corners, came away Unto the Westward board, where it doth blow So hard, again we forced are to go Before it with our Fore-Sail, which we tend With Braces aft, until the Storms do end; The Sea running so deep, we're forc'd to cun, Winding with Quarters, the Waves beat upon;
To answer't with our Helm, and Brace, which keeps Her right afore it, through the boystrous heaps Of Waters, these Storms eighteen hours or more Not lasts, but presently a sudden Showre Of Rain is poured down, when as the South. Wind opens loud his wide and blustring Mouth Thunder and Lightning, mixt with Hail and Rain, Unto the North-West brings it back again; So that it once more seems, and doth appear As if the Weather would be fair and clear; But all our Hopes soon vanisht, for so hard It puffs, we take in all Sayls, lo're our Yard Till better comes, and this I dare affirm Ne're worser Weather's for a three Weeks term, In which space never having any Weather We could count fair, for thirty Hours together; Our onely comfort was, the Moon shines bright During this gusty time, most part of Night;
But dreadful Storms, not always cruel Fate, To us poor Saylors, did predestinate; For when fair Weather was to make us glad, Our Oranges so rotten, caus'd a sad And heavy Countenance, scarce being found One amongst twelve, which we may call sound As to keep home, for since the World began See such a Hodge-Podge ne're did any man; Most part being pickl'd up in such a state, We bad from good with Shovels separate, We took them in with Care bestowing Pains To place them lightly, now as much again We take, for Baskets with the bad we fill To fling away, though sore against our Will; And now the Western Islands once more we Repass with a fair Wind, hoping to see No such bad Weather as we had before, To which end, we the Deities implore, And surely they our Orisons did hear, Most of the Weather being fair and clear; Though that the fresh Gales oftentimes were ran∣ging From one unto another, changing
Till Luna came so full butt at her wane, A South, and South South-west wind came again Which though 'twas for us fair, yet it was joyn'd With dirty Weather, as 'twere interloin'd For us, amongst the rest, one foggy day A Bristol Ship we meet, for th' Isle of May Being bound, there Salt to load, who did us tell Affairs in England went then very well When she came out, with France we having Peace, And all War with our Neighbouring Nations cease, He told us also, how that England bore From us of Leagues, about two times fourscore Upon the North-East Point, and having sent Letters by us to's Friends, away he went; And now we're near our wish'd-for Port, we pray For Sol's bright Splendor, in the midst of day, An Observation that we may take Before our Native Land, again we make,
But those our wishes we could not obtain, For misty Clouds to us yet still remain, With gusts, but th' water changing, we did sound On Easter Ev'ning, and had the ground At ninety Fathom, Greekish Shelly-sand, Reckoning our selves then threescore Leagues from Land; And seeing the warm Sun us debars Of sweetest sight, at Noon the Northern Stars We do observe, with his two Guards most bright, Which glistred on Sunday and Mundy Night; Which tho' 'twas truly done, next day we had A Solar Observation, vvhich us glad Did make (although the Wind contrary blew; For by't how Scilly bore w' exactly knew, And that they Channel's open, the Degree Being forty nine, with Minutes nine times three, At which time vve let run the Lead, and found That sixty Fathom reached to the Ground. Another certain sign is, that the Shore Not many Leagues is off; for Weeds great store,
Call'd Brittain Beds, upon the Seas do float, Which unto Seamen is a certain Britain Beds are Weeds like to Laces, which grow upon the Coast of Britain, and so are washt off from the Rocks into the Sea. Note Of being in our Channel, all Night we Bare in, and about twelve at Noon we see The Lizard, which we past by with a Gale So gentle, that we carry all the Sail Which we can make, and parted about Night From sight of Falmouth, and by it was light We're near unto the Start, having past by Portland, the Wight, and also Beachy-High, With Fairly, Foulstone, Dover, without stay, A Pilot came aboard, us to convey, So we hoyse up our Sails atrip, and came To Westgate-Bay, and anchored in the same Till the next morning, when our Sails we set And the same Tide over the Flatts we get Up to the Rivers Mouth, from thence to Lee, So to Whole Haven, and to Tilbury;
But cease my Muse, the Voyage it is done, At Gravesend let it end, as there't begun. Finis Itineris Maritini. The Epilogue. NOthing doth remain, but to give Praise To God, who to us Mortals many days His Favours and his Blessings did bestow On whatsoe're we do, where e're we go, By Land, by Sea, in Storms, most bitter Blasts, In Thunder, Lightning, and in Nights o're-cast With dismal Clouds, and from the briny Waves Most dreadful Fury, with what e're we crave
Hath granted to us, then let's with one near Set forth his Praise till this Life we depart; Let all Hands say Amen, Amen say I, So be it done to Immortality. Finis Coronat Opus. J. H. FINIS.
