J1034 12305334 59232
LONDON IN ITS SPLENDOR: CONSISTING Of Triumphant PAGEANTS, whereon are Represented many Persons Richly Arrayed, Properly Habited, and significant to the Design. With several SPEECHES, and a SONG, Suitable to the SOLEMNITY. All prepared for the Honour of the Prudent Magistrate, Sir WILLIAM HOOKER Kt. Lord MAYOR of the City of LONDON: At the Peculiar Expences of the Worshipful COMPANY of GROCERS. As also, a Description of His Majesties Royal Entertainment at Guildhall, by the City, in a plentiful Feast, and a glorious Banquet. Written by THO. JORDAN. LONDON: Printed by W. G. for Nath. Brook and John Playford. 1673:
To the Right Honourable, Sir WILLIAM HOOKER Kt, Lord Mayor of the City of LONDON. MY LORD, SInce Wisdom, Wealth and Legal Succes∣sion have unanimously conspired to fix You in the Supreme Seat of this Metropolis, your Merit and antient Custom doth invite me to Congratulate your deserved Dignity, and to wish you Joy: For I am informed by Fame, that the worthiest and numerous part of this City are fill'd with great Expectation of your Pious per∣formances in prudent Government; and that, to confirm their Security, you will faithfully joyn Integrity with your Authority, and make the progress of your limited Rule, a Year of Jubile, to God's Glory, the King's Honour, the Cities Safety, and Your own Renown; which is also the prayers, wishes and hopes of Your Lordships obedient Servant, THO. JORDAN.
To the deservedly Worshipful, The Ancient Corporation and Company of GROCERS. GENTLE MEN, ACcording to my Obligation and the Civility of Custom, I do once more Salute You with my faith∣ful Service in a brief display of your chargeable Tri∣umphs, which ye have Nobly undergone these Two Years without intermission, and is the Fourth time of Per∣formance since the Happy Restauration of His Sacred Majesty. In such Splendid actions, although some Diminution of your Treasure, they are, and will be plentifully recompensed in the Addition of your Fame, which when Time is five hundred years older will shine bright in the Eyes of Posterity, and prove a President for good men not only to Admire, but Imitate. In the interim, with many devout Wishes for your Advance∣ment and Duration, I assume the confidence of ho∣nouring my self with the honest title of Gentlemen, Your really humble Servant, THO. JORDAN.
The Movements of the Morning. THE generous Citizens selected for the Order of this dayes Triumph, (consenting with Antient Presidents,) come together about Seven of the Clock in the Morning, according to Custom. 1. The Masters, the Wardens, and Assistants in Gowns faced with Foyns, and their Hoods. 2. The Livery in their Gowns faced with Budge, and their Hoods. 3. The Batchelors, a part thereof in Gowns faced with Foyns, and their Hoods. 4. Budg-Batchelors, in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods 5. Fifty Gentlemen-Ushers in Velvet-Coats, each of them a Chain of Gold about his shoulder, and in his hand a White Sraff. 6. Twelve other Gentlemen, for bearing Banners and Colours; some in Plush-Coats, and some in Buff; they also wearing Scarffs about their shoulders of the Companies Colours. 7. Thirty-six Trumpets; the Serjeant-Trumpet, with his Scarff of his Lordship's Colours, and of a Crimson about his shoulder, and a Leading-Staff in his Hand. 8. Fourteen Drums; the Drum-Major with a Crimson Scarff about his waste, his Leading-Staff in his hand, and three Fifes with Banners. 9. Divers Drums and Fifes, with Red Scarffs and the Colours of the Company. 10. The two City-Marshals, each of them riding on Horse-back, with Six Servitors to attend them, with Scarffs and Colours of the Companies. 11. The Foot-Marshal, and Six Attendants with the like Scarffs and Colours. 12. The Master of Defence, with the same Scarff and Colours, having persons of his own Science to attend him. 13. Threescore and six Poor-men. Pensioners, habited with Gowns and Caps, each of them imployed in bearing Standards and Banners. 14. Ninety other Pensioners in Red Gowns, White Sleeves, and flat Caps; each of them carrying a Javelin in one hand, and a Target in the other, wherein is painted the Coat-Armour of their Benefactors.
These Persons are set apart for the Duty of the Day, who meeting at the Time and Place aforesaid, proceed as followeth. The Foot-Marshal ranks them out, two and two, beginning with the Pensioners in Gowns, and in the Front of them placeth the Companies Ensigns, Four Drums, and one Fife; in the Rere of them falls in Six Drums and one Fife. After, the several Pensioners in Coats, bearing several Banners and Standards; after them, Six Trumpets; after them the Gryphon and Camel, Ensigns, Six Gentlemen-Ushers; after them, the Budg-Batchelors, which conclude this Division. In the Rere of those, fall Six Trumpets, after them Two Gentlemen bearing Two Banners, the one of the Cities, the other of the Compa∣nies; after them follow Eight Gentlemen-Ushers, and then the Foins-Batchelors, concluding this Division. In the Rere thereof first falls in, the King's Drum-Major and Four other of the King's Drums and Fife; after them Two Gentlemen-Ushers bearing Two Banners, the one the Kings, the other the Cities; after them Ten Gentlemen-Ushers, habited as is set down before; and after them the Livery, which endeth that Division. In the Rere of them fall others of the City-Trumpets, after them Two Gentlemen bearing the Banners of the City and the Lord Major, Twelve Gentlemen-Ushers appointed as aforesaid follow them, and after the Court of Assistants, and put a period to that Division. In the Rere of them falls the Serjeant-Trumpet, after him Sixteen other of the King's Trumpets and Kettle-Drums; after them three other Gentle∣men, bearing the King's, the Duke of York's, and St George his Banner; after them Fourteen Gentlemen-Ushers, to follow them are appointed Four Pages; and after them, The Master and Wardens, which termi∣nate the First and Chief Division. Thus Accomplish'd, they March from their place of meeting to Clothworkers Hall, beginning with the Pensioners, until the Marshal comes and makes a Halt at the Gate, till such time as his Lordship and the Aldermen are mounted. Which being done, the whole Body move toward Guildhall, where the Lord Mayor Elect joyneth with the Old Lord Mayor and his Re∣tinue; so all of them march through King's-street down to Three-Crane-Wharf, where the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and their Attendants take Barge; also the Grocers Company do likewise Embarge; whil'st the Residue re∣main behind, viz. the Gentlemen-Ushers; the Budg-Batchelors and Foins-Batchelors repair to places of Refreshment. The Lord Mayors, the Grocers, and the several Companies Barges hasten for Westminster, and near the Temple, his Lordship is accosted with
Two Pinnaces rigg'd and mann'd like Men of War, and beautified with divers Flags and Streamers, who Saluteth his Lordship with several great Guns. Which being past, His Lordship, the Aldermen, the Company of Grocers, and other Companies landing at Westminster, have a Lane made them, through which they pass to Westminster-Hall, and there having performed several Ceremonial and Customary Duties and Obligations, as, an Oath to be True and Faithful to His Majesty and Government esta∣blished; Sealing of Writs in the Court there held, and having taken leave of the Lords and Barons of the Exchequer, &c. and doing some Cha∣ritable offices to the Poor of that Place, return to their Barges; a Lane being made, as before, for their passage to the Water-side, and there orderly Embarge. His Lordship, with those attending him (the Companies,) Land at Pauls-Wharf and other places, in order to their Stands in Cheapside; Where He and They are Saluted with three Vollies, by (the Military Glory of this Nation) the Company of Artillery-men, under the Conduct of the Worshipful Sir Thomas Player; they being all in their Accomplishments of Gallantry, as Souldiers. From Pauls-Wharf they march before my Lord Mayor and Aldermen, through Cheapside to Guildhal. Those that went not to Westminster, viz. the Pensioners and Banners being set in order, ready to March, the Foot-Marshal leads the way, and in the Rere of the Artillery-Company, up Pauls-Wharf Hill to St Pauls, where his Lordship is entertain'd by the first Scene or Pageant. A Description of the First Pageant, Which is upon this Stage: In the Front is erected the Crest of the Worshipful Company of Grocers, being the figure of a Camel of magni∣tude, lively carved, and aptly painted, on whose bunch-back (in a riding posture) sitteth a Negro-Boy, beautifully Black, betwixt two Silver Panyers that are fraught with several sorts of Fruits, as Raysons, Almonds, Figs, Dates, Prunes, and other variety of Grocery Wares; which, when the succeeding Speech is spoken, he scattereth abroad amongst the People. This Negro holds in one hand a Banner of the Kings Arms, his Bridle Red and White Ribon, the Companies Colours, on his Head a Garland or Wreath of Feathers; at each side of him, on his Right hand, sitteth a beautiful Virgin-Lady representing Tellus the Goddess of the Earth, in a Green Mantle, and a Blossom-colour'd Robe, a Garland of Roses; in one hand a Banner, in the other a Shield painted with Trees and Flowers. On his Left hand standeth a well-featured Virgin who doth prefigurate Labour, in a Robe of Ash-colour fringed with Silver, a Mantle of Carnation e
with Gold, a White Straw-Hat turn'd up on one side, with a great Knot of Scarlet and Silver Ribon; in one hand a Silver Spade, in the other a Golden Sickle or Pruning-hook. And, in the Rere of this Camel, in a sublime Seat of Soveraignty, sitteth PALLAS the Goddess of Arts and Arms, with long, thick, bright, curl'd Hair; on her Head a Silver Helmet, on which is stuck a tall flou∣rishing Plume of Red Feathers, consisting of a Sprig and divers Falls, with Silver Armour, and a Golden Gantlet; Carnation Bases Embroydered with Gold; and from the right Shoulder to the left Side is a Blew Scarf trimm'd with Silver; a short Sword by her side, with a rich Hilt: on her Feet Silver Buskins laced with Scarlet Ribon, in one Hand a Lance, in the other a Book open; and on several Descents beneath Her, in equal order, sit Six Figures, viz. ASTREA the Goddess of Justice, in a Crimson Mantle trimm'd with Silver, over a sad-coloured Robe; on her Head a Wreath of Bayes, in one Hand a Sword, and in the other a pair of equal Scales. Next to her is seated PRUDENCE, in a Purple Robe em∣broydered with Silver, a Mantle of Cloth of Gold, a Chaplet of divers-colour'd Flowers, bearing in her right Hand a Caduceus, and in her other a Banner. Next to her sitteth FORTITUDE, in a Vest of Silver; about her Neck a Corslet of Gold, holding in one Arm a Pillar of Marble, and in the other Hand a Shield Vert, charged with an Arm'd Citadel or Tower, Argent, bearing a Flag on the Battlements, Gules. On the Left hand of Pallas, in Correspondent Order, sitteth, first, LAW, a proper Lady, aptly attired, having on her a long, Sable, plain Robe, with a Mantle of Scarlet, and on her Head (adorn'd with long, curl'd Brown Hair) a round flat Velvet Cap, turn'd up with a Rose of Diamonds: next to her sitteth PIETY, in a White Robe, with a Black Mantle, a Book in one Hand, and an Hour-glass in the other; and on her Head a bright, long Silver Vail reaching all over her Shoulders: and next to her sittteth a Sober person representing GOVERNMENT, in a Scarlet Robe faced with Furrs; about her Neck a Chain of Gold, and on her Head a Cap of Maintenance; in one Hand the Kings Banner, in the other the Cities. His Lordship being fixed in the posture of attention, Pallas riseth up, descendeth to the Stage, and maketh Address in these Expressions. The First SPEECH, spoken by Pallas. I Am the Deity of Arts and Arms, That do by Sciences and loud Alarms Give Orders to the Ʋniverse, from me Doth issue both Art and Artillerie; My Name is Pallas, by me Men are endu'd With Justice, Law, Prudence and Fortitude.
