J853 12576771 63610
VICTORIOUS NEWES FROM IRELAND Brought over, Aug. 24. Wherein is declared three Victorious Battels, obtained by these Worthies, Namely, The Lord MOORE. The Lord INCHQVID. And Colonell VAVASOR. Neere the City of Trim and Dungarvan, wherein was slaine above 200. of the Rebels, and not above 20. of the Protestant Partio. Likewise, another Famous Victory obtained by the Lord Moore against the Rebels, with the num∣ber of those that were slain on both sides. Which happy tydings was read in the House of Commons, and immediately Or∣dered to be printed. Hen. Elsyng, Cler. Parl. D. Com. Aug. 27. Printed for I. Rider. 1642.
Good Newes from IRELAND. VPon our returne I have sent you a re∣lation of what hap∣ned on the march upon the 10. of Au∣gust there went a∣bout 2000. Foot with some Horse towards Trim, upon Tuesday following we marcht after them, the second day we lay 4. miles short of Trim, where we heard the Van of our Army, with some Forces out of the Garrison in Trim, had
taken in the Castle Knock, lying 4. miles to the left hand, wee lost 30. men, for they stood it out to the last man. Upon Friday all the Army met two miles be∣yond Trim, wee had 51. Colours flying and about 1000. Horse, wee marcht to the Castle of Baramore, which is the nighest way 42. miles from Dublin, and never saw an Enemy, onely the Enemy made us returne and goe more upon the left hand by burning a Bridge, so that we could not passe that way, there was a∣nother Bridge the Wayne marcht, and a pretty Towne, but forsaken and burnt by us, as we did all other Townes and Ca∣stles all the way we went, the Enemy has left the Townes, but their Goods they have hid in the Bogges, or else conveyed them into the County of Weekley; the Rebels had made a very strong breast Worke against the Bridge, and were 500 men to man it, but in the morning for∣sooke it: The Castle of Baramore where
wee rested one day before our returne is a place naturally fortified with a great Bogge, only one way to come to it, where they had made strong Workes, yet durst not make them good; from thence my Lord Jones and Sir Michael Earnely their two Regiments went alone, which is ten miles further, and are to keepe Gar∣rison in Canaught and thereabouts. The next day wee marcht straight for Dub∣lin with the remainder of our Army, finding no opposition, onely one day we past by one of the Enemies Castles, which wee could not stay to take in, by reason we wanted pieces of Battery and bread for our men if wee should stay; when the Reare of our Army was past which wee had upon our March that day▪ some quantitie of the Enemies Horse very well mand came rushing out of a Wood, which caused us when wee were over the Bogge to fall about and make a sudden stand, expecting that
they would have charged us, but they onely staid for straglers, the next day we was to passe a morasle, where there was but a narrow Causey, which way the Enemy thought we would have marcht from Dublin, and had therefore made a strong breast work, and to hinders us had made a double ditch, halfe pike deepe, and cast all the loose earth in the midst, which did hinder us in respect we wanted timber, and the ground was so base, as it was long ere the Carriages durst venture over; that night we marcht to Kilcock a very pretty Towne 12. miles from Dublin, the onely Towne wee left unburnt, it was lately built by the Eng∣lish; all the way of our march what per∣sons soever, as men, women, or children that our Souldiers met, they gave no quarter they were so enraged that the Enemy would not fight. I never saw finer Countries in all my life then we were thorow, store of Corn
growing, and that spetiall in all parts, and after the two first dayes march wee wanted not for good beefe, and excellent Cheese, but not a drop of drinke for 3. or 4. dayes together, and then but a lit∣tle by chance for the Officer. I never in my life time in England knew greater and colder raines in winter then we had every day but one with us, I protest I doe verily think we did not come 3. nights all the march to our quarter but our men were wet to the skin, and then the good earth was our lodging, and we came usually so late as the men had scarce time to help themselves, and to get rest, for wee was to march by 4 or 5. in the morning; it had bred much sicknesse a∣mongst our fresh Souldiers, wherein I have a part, being brought to extreame weaknesse with the Countrey disease, for which I this day take Physicke. I had much adoe to finish my Letter, I will conclude with the tender of my duty
to your selfe and my Mother, with my prayers for your happy preservation. My humble service to my Lady Alesbury with the rest of that worthy family, my Cousin Lowing and his wife, my love to my brother with the rest of my Friends, so I rest, Your obedient Sonne, THO. JOHNSON. Dublin 19. Augu. 1642. My service to my Cousin Tucker, and I pray let him see this Letter, that hee may know the just reason I doe write to him by this Post, but he may by this understand all the Newes, I know onely thus much more, we have no pay, nor have little hopes, by reason of the manifold troubles with you. Ordered that this be printed and published, H. Elsyng, Cler. Parl. D. C. FINIS.
