L3339B 13415148 99475
The Loyal Caution To all the KINGS Friends; OR, Parson Faringtons Misfortune in getting his Landlady to Rub his Back. A SONG. I. LEt Plotters never be forgotten, let Traytors be Lasht with the Laws, Let Trimmers whose hearts are yet Rotten, and mourn for the Dying Old Cause: Let the Verge of Court be Cleared, Let never a Whigg come near it, A Sacred Place, For Princes Ordained, For none that envies the just Royal Race▪ II. Search every Corner and Cavern, the Cock-Pit as well as the rest, Examine the Court-Celler-Tavern, a Brood of Caballers there Nest. Expell 'em out, a Vengeance, For they are dangerous Engines, Treason in Grain, They Plot to Unhinge us, They'r wheeling about to Charge us again. III. We fear not their Arms nor their Numbers, all Traytors are Cowards in their hearts, In blackest Surprizes and Murthers, consisteth the best of their parts: Then Halter up each Traytor, Just like the Four-Legg'd Quaker, That Cover'd the Mare, It is in the Nature, Of Rebels and Beasts to Couple and Pair. IV. Look sharp, for the Non-Cunning Preachers, the Pest and Pox of the Town, Makes Taylors and Tinkers turn Teachers, to share in the Spoils of a Crown: O Parson Faringtons Itching, When he came home from Bitching, His Flames to Revile, With Fawning and Stretching, Then just like a Cat he turn'd up his Tayl. V. To his Landlady made his Addresses, who had a kind Husband below, She cry'd out against his Caresses, her Husband ran up for to know: And asking what was the Matter, She shew'd him how he run at her, A Bloody Saint, Between Wind and Water, But her Husband was Loyal & gave him a Cant. VI. He handed him o're the Bellcony, poor Whigg squabb'd down in the street, To try if this Cat that lov'd Coney, had th' Art for to fall on his Feet: Now he advises the Godly, Not to use their Tallent so oddly, But with the Saints Wives, And Daughters that wou'd be Done over & Sainted as leif as their Lives. VII. O Parson, Read the Heel-Mender, an Eminent Whigg and a Fool, Now lets his Communion-Chamber, to his Sisters for a Dancing-School: Let Kent-Street and Wapping be searched, There's many a Plot has been hatched, Let Hodsdon be Burn'd, I'th way to New-Market, That Rumbold i'th midst of the flames may be turn'd. VIII. Now two Loyal Sheriffs are Elected, without either Riot or Noise, Which shews the Old Cause is Detected, no Voting for Pillion and Bois; Brave Daniel and Dashwood Professors, For King and his Lawful Successors, These let us sing, For Loyal Addressors, We'l drink their good Healths and pray for the King. London, Printed for J. Dean, in Cranborn-street near Newport-House, in Leicester-Fields.
