L928 12328778 59604
A DISCOURSE Upon Sr WALTER RAWLEIGH's Great Cordial; BY N. le FEBVRE, Royal Professor in Chymistry and Apothecary in Ordinary to his MAIESTY's most Honourable Houshold. Rendred into English by PETER BELON, Student in Chymistry. LONDON, Printed by J. F. for Octavian Pulleyn Junior, and are to be sold at the Sign of the Bible in S. Paul's Church-yard near the little North door. 1664.
TO THE KING'S Most Excellent MAJESTY. SIR, I Have elaborated, ac∣cording to Your MA∣JESTY's order, the Prepa∣ration
of Sr Walter Raw∣leigh's Great Cordial, with so much circumspection and with such exact and se∣rious meditation on all that enters in the Composition of this precious Remedy, that I thought it my duty to pre∣sent to Your MAJESTY what I have gathered out of
most particular in this my Labour, and to give accor∣dingly the reasons, which prove the great advantages that the modern Phar∣macie carrieth legitimately above the ancient, by reason that it is enlightned with the glorious lights of Chymi∣stry. And indeed, SIR,
that onely is capable to sepa∣rate exactly the pure from the impure, to preserve the virtue of whatsoever it works upon, without any loss of its volatil parts, and to draw out of the very centre of the most fix'd things  Na∣ture hath therein implanted most essential and most spe∣cifick.
Your MAJESTY knoweth so well this diffe∣rence, and reasoneth so just∣ly on all the Productions of Nature and Art▪ that one may say with a real and sin∣cere truth, That You unfold with an incomparable Neat∣ness of Judgment the pro∣foundest Questions of the
Naturalists and Chymists, in the Royal Laborato∣ry, with as much facility as Your MAJESTY un∣tangles in all Your Coun∣sels the Intrigues of the most refined Policy. I shall continue, SIR, to work as I have done with the same zeal and the same activity,
that I may contribute what is of my Art and Study, to effect those Sublime and Royal Intentions which Your MAJESTY hath for the common good of Your Sub∣jects, whom Your Royal Bounty desires should be eased and delivered from their Diseases and Evils.
Wherefore I do present and dedicate to Your MAJES∣TY with humility and all submissive respects the Dis∣course which I have made on this Great Cordial, and humbly beseech Your MAJE∣STY to protect it, since it was brought forth under Your MAJESTY's Shelter
and Command, being now, as I will be all the rest of my life, inviolably, SIR, Your MAJESTY's most dutiful, most humble and most faithful Servant, N. le Febvre.
Alterations, with some Mistakes in Printing. PAge 8. l. 17. reade, at the latter end of. l. 20. r. Balsa∣mick. pag. 12. l. 12. r. which is formed. p. 15. l. 11. de∣le, as. l. 13. r. and which. p. 17. l. ult. r. Preparation there∣of. p. 24. l. 15. r. virtuous. p. 39. l. 7. dele them. l. 15. r. peritive. p. 42. l. 21. r. this Cordial. p. 43. l. 11. r. mella∣ginous. p. 59. l. 23. r. Transpiration. p. 61. l. 3. r. Petri∣fication. p. 97. l. 12. r. this Great.
Imprimatur. JOH. HALL, R. P. D. Episc. Lond. à Sacr. Domest. Apr. 23. 1664.
A DISCOURSE Upon Sr WALTER RAWLEIGH's Great Cordial. MANY Praises have been given in all Ages not onely to the Remedies worthy of the Closets of Kings and Princes, but to those also that have been capa∣ble of indifferent use to all persons which compose the Civil Society. We have examples thereof both in the Treatises of the ancient and mo∣dern Physick, as also in History;
where we observe, that those which have been the most recommended in this Art, and that had a Science more distinct then others, have endeavour'd with all their possibility to give the Publick those good Remedies which they had attain'd to by Practice and Experience. Thus the great Mithridates, King of Pontus and Bithynia, hath conse∣crated his Name to Posterity by that excellent Opiate which bears it. The∣riaca puts us incessantly in mind of Andromachus who is the Author of it. And the celebrated Andrew Matthio∣lus hath made himself famous by his Antidote, which all Germany admires. Raymondus Lully, Basil Valentine, Paracelsus, Arnoldus de Villa nova, Quercetan, Zwelferus, and many others, which I omit, have rendred themselves illustrious by Panacea's, Elixirs, Tinctures, Magisteries and Essences: so that it seems as if the old and new Physick, as well as both the
Pharmacies, had been in Emulation to out-doe one another, to make appear to their off-spring those Knowledges and Lights which they have attained to, by the Seeking and Anatomy that each of those delicate and worthy Pro∣fessions had made of the preparation of Natural things, and of the virtue they conceal and hide in their Interiour parts, as in a Central Point, whose Exteriour (to speak properly) is but the Circumference, of no other use but as a place of abode, its Bark or Shell, which hides and covers from us the Wonders that this Celestial and Lu∣minous point contains: for, as the great Paracelsus says, Domus est sem∣per mortua, sed eam Inhabitants vivit. Of all those that have made them∣selves worthily famous amongst the Moderns, by gathering together that which Nature furnishes of Best and most useful to Man for his Health, I find none more worthy of praise then this Illustrious Knight, Sir Walter
Rawleigh: because that he hath not onely made choice of what is most pre∣cious and full of virtue in the three Fa∣milies of Animals, Vegetables and Minerals; but hath also made ap∣pear so much Art and so much Ex∣perience, for the preparation of this great and admirable Cordial which doth immortalize him, that I have thought I should give to his honour and glory those Elogies which he hath more then deserved, by the noble labour and beautiful study that hath made him at∣tain to the sublime Knowledge he had of all he hath inserted in this Incom∣parable Remedy. And whereas the King did com∣mand me to apply my self wholly to its preparation in the beginning of the last year's Spring: I thought I ow'd to the Learned Curiosity of this great Monarch, the Meditations and Notes which my study and the work have made me do, with all the necessary re∣flexions to the clearing and to the re∣commendation
of a Medicine so useful to the publick good of the People of his Kingdoms. And because that Order and Me∣thod do establish and make those things one undertakes to discourse of to be the better known, and that Confusion on the contrary is the ruine of it; we therefore must give also to this Dis∣course the Essential Parts, which will discover the most evidently, and the most clearly we can possibly, all that this wonderful Cordial hath of Excel∣lency. First, by the Choice or Ele∣ction of the Materials that compound it. Secondly, by the most studied and most exquisite Preparation of this Composition above all those which ever did precede it. Which will also shew how much Art helps Nature. In the third place, we will make appear by proofs and reasons, that this Remedy is absolutely proper and useful to the Nations bordering on the Seas, by reason of the Scurvy which torments
them very frequently. In the fourth place, the Excellency of this Remedy appears, in that it is not onely proper and specifick to drive away the venom that causes the already-produced Dis∣eases; but also especially because it is sufficient to maintain that beautiful and admirable Harmony that causes Health, since it is capable to correct and remedy all the faults of Indigesti∣ons and ill Fermentations which are made in the Stomach, that are in us the Causes, the Spring and the Beginning of the worst Diseases. And we shall conclude this Discourse with the ex∣position of the Dose, the time and me∣thod of using it with benefit: For all the world knows, that the Abuse and the Excess of the best things do com∣monly produce the most perillous and surprising Effects. We have said heretofore that Sir Walter Rawleigh's Great Cordial contain'd in it self the choice and Epi∣tome of what is of greatest Excel∣lencie
amongst all the simple Cordials, which the three Natural Families of Animals, Vegetables and Minerals furnish us with; of which we must make the deduction and the represen∣tation to the eyes of the Reader's un∣derstanding, to insinuate more and more into them, that this admirable Genius could make a most worthy choice of the Matters which compose his Remedy, which do possess every one in particular a great deal of Spirit and volatil sulphureous Salt in their Centre, from whence do result all those rare Effects that it daily produces as much towards the healthful as towards the sick. Now we shall begin the de∣scription of all these things by the Or∣der of Nobleness and Excellency of those that have possess'd the Animal Life; we shall continue by those that have had the Vegetable Life; and we shall end by the last, that have enjoyed but a more obscure and imperfect Life, which is the Mineral Life.
The Hart's Horn enters into our Noble Cordial, and that for many rea∣sons: for there are but few Animals that can equal the Hart for length of life, since he lives whole Ages. This Animal is most swift, which betokens a fine Harmony and a good disposition of the inward and outward parts, which furnish sufficient Vigour, and by consequence Spirits, to hold out to the length of the Course, that serves for delight and divertisement to the greatest Monarchs. But is there any thing that proves so well the abundance of Spirits and Salt which reside in this Beast, as the shedding and re-production of its Horns? which it lays down at the be∣ginning of Winter, by reason the Ali∣ments of which it did live had no longer in them that Balsamie Spirit and Salt, which serves for Oil to the Lamp of the Radical Moisture, and that main∣tains the Natural Heat: But as soon as the Spring furnishes the Hart with the first blade of the herbs and the buds
of the trees, he draws from the middle Life of those things a renewed being, so efficacious and powerful, that it re∣produceth in him a most extraordinary heat and chearfulness, which causeth him to lay down his useless arms, to produce new ones, which are all li∣ving and juicy, and which at last digest and harden themselves, to furnish us in its proper time a Horn replenish'd with a great abundance of volatil Salt. The thing remarkable in the choice of this Horn for its excellency is, that it must be taken from an Animal of a middle age, and that has been chaced, because the Course heats the Animal, and makes it to drive all its vigour and spirits from the Centre to the Cir∣cumference, which is remarked by the weight and closing of the parts. The true time to take the Hart's Horn for Physical use is between the fifteenth of August and the twentieth of Septem∣ber. The general virtues of the Hart's Horn are, to resist the corruption and
putrefaction of the Humours which constitute humane bodies, and their malignancy; to provoke Sweat, to strengthen and augment the natural Balsam of life: which gives us to un∣derstand that it is with a great deal of judgment that our Author hath given it place in his Great Cordial. The second thing which comes from an Animal, and makes one of the best parts of this Remedy, is the Stone of the Oriental Bezoar, an Animal that partakes of the Hart and the Goat. The best is found in Persia and the East-Indies; although that which comes from America is not to be slighted, if the Dose be augmented. It is a Stony Concretion, which forms and engen∣ders it self by the property of the vo∣latil saline portion which is in the Plants of which these Animals live, and which coagulates it self in their se∣cond Ventricle, where it augments it self yearly bed upon bed and shell up∣on shell, by the magnetick attraction
that the first kernel makes of what is analogical to its substance in the half-digested aliment which is in the sto∣mach of that Beast; as is seen and proved by the straws and the remain∣der of chewed herbs which are found in the Centre of the true Oriental and Occidental Bezoar, which without doubt hath been the first occasional cause of the Concretion of the Stone. Now the Indians and Persians say that this Animal lives particularly of a Plant which hath of it self a great deal of virtue. But as this Stone is a true natural Magistery which comes from the animal and vegetable substances, which unite together by the digestion in the Animal's second Ventricle; so must we believe that the Bezoar-stone contains more eminently the virtue from them produced. The principal are to strengthen, to provoke Sweat, to combat Poisons, the Plague, and malignant Fevers: it remedies the Faintness of the Heart and its Palpita∣tion;
it kills the Worms; 'tis good against the Epilepsie, against the Jaun∣dise, the Stone, the Dysentery, the re∣tention of the Menstrua, and finally it facilitates and accelerates Child∣birth. So that we conclude that it is one of the principal Pillars of our Incompa∣rable Cordial. Musk is the third thing that the Animal furnishes to our Cordial, which digests and bakes it self in an abscess, which forms it self, and makes eruption about the navil of a Beast like unto a Goat, which is found in many Kingdoms of the East-Indies, and specially in those of Cathay and Pegu. It is to be observed that Nature doth not work about this precious Drug but when the Animal is in his heat and Rutting-time: so that this eruption being made by an effect of natural Heat, and by an Effervescency of the mass of Bloud and of the Spirits, which are driven towards the Emun∣ctories destinated to them, their heat
makes attraction and causes pain, which causes this Animal to rub his belly against the Stones and against the bodies of Trees, to open the Impo∣stume, and make the matter issue out, which the Sun doth throughly con∣coct, and digest that which in fine pro∣duces to us the Parent and Soul of all the most excellent and most agreeable Perfumes. Which is a thing most worthy the speculation of a Naturalist and a Chymical Artist; since that this change of a corrupted matter into a substance of a sweet favour, and of great efficacy inwardly and outwardly, teach∣eth Art to follow Nature's tracks for the bettering and correcting of things. But we shall speak more fully of this when we shall reason of the beauty of the perfection of our Sovereign Re∣medy. We shall here content our selves to relate in general the virtues of Musk, which have oblig'd our Au∣thor to give it place in his Composi∣tion. It heats gently, it dries, attenu∣ates,
and dissipates what there is of gross and malignant in the body; it is Cordial, Alexitery and Cephalick; it is specifick against all the Affections of the Heart, and specially against the Palpitations: it maintains, recreates and restores the animal and vital Spi∣rits: it excites to Love, and re-fur∣nisheth the natural Heat: it recreates the Senses, and strengthens Memory; which shews that it is most worthy of our Great Cordial. The counsel and approbation of Sir Kenelm Digby, and Sir Alexander Fraiser his Majesty's chief Physician, hath made us adde to the number of the Ingredients of this Remedy, the Flesh, the Heart, and the Liver of Vipers, though the first prescription doth not mention them. But this Reptil is replenished with so many rare virtues, and possesses a volatil Salt so much an enemy to Poisons which at∣tach the Heart and the Brains, that it is with most just reason that it has been
added. The Viper is a kind of Serpent, the most venomous of all, which heats and irritates it self easily, so that in a moment or the twinkling of an eye it drives from the Vesicle or Bladder of its gall to the gums a Poison so spiri∣tuous and so subtil, by an almost im∣perceptible Chanel, when it is angry: which insinuates and communicates it self so suddenly to our Spirits and to the natural Heat, that it as suddenly stupifies the part that has been bit; which communicates it self immedi∣ately to the Heart, and from thence to the Brain, by the means of the Circu∣lation. But if this venom is astonishing and surprising, the remedy which is had from the same Animal is as it were divine and miraculous, which doth not onely combat its proper Poison, but beats off and enervates the strength and efficacy of all the other venoms that both the Families of Vegetables and Minerals do furnish, provided it be well prepared, and administred in
time and place. We must give notice by the bye that Vipers glide and thrust themselves between stones, and in holes of the Earth, yearly in the end of Autumn, whenas their pasture fails them, there to abide till the beginning of the Spring; and that then they are stupid and languishing, by reason of the thickness and hardness of their skin: but as soon as they have relished and digested the blades of Herbs, and the Sun and Air have furnished them with heat and aliment, they slide and rub themselves against rugged places to strip off their old skin; which is no sooner off but that this Animal is pre∣sently possest with the pride thereof, for it crawls nimbler then before, and signifies by its gaiety, by the quick∣ness of its motions and by the beau∣tious colours of its new skin, that it is really renew'd, and that the remedy which it yields may also produce in us Renewing Principles and Faculties. The general and principal virtues
which the Viper possesses are, to com∣bat strongly the Venoms, and above all that of the Plague, and of all the malignant and venomous diseases; it is good against Leprosie and the Ve∣nereal disease; against Consumptions and the Hectick Fever, and finally against the Scurvy, by reason that the volatil Salt of this Animal drives out powerfully the malignant Serosities which infect the mass of the Bloud, and which are the cause and mainte∣nance of this popular disease, which makes such strange wastes in all the maritime Countries, and especially in England: so that it is lawfully placed in this Cordial. We are now come to the Pearls, which constitute another part of this Great Cordial, and that augment really its rare qualities. We shall mention in this place nothing but their origine, their choice, and their virtue; to speak of them more exactly when we shall reason upon the Preparation. Pearls
are nothing else but the concretion into a Stone of the purest substance of the muscilaginous slime that the Oyster, or Fish that inhabits two shells, which he hath appropriated and formed for his abode and for his conservation, in∣genders. Now this Animal draws to himself for his maintenance the purest part of the Sea-water, which contains the embryonated Salt, which is the bal∣sam of Nature, and as it were the prin∣ciple of all generations, which is found impregnated and replenish'd with the light of the Sun and of the Stars, which is communicated to it by means of the Air. It seems also as if this poor Fish had drain'd himself of the purest portion of his life and natural bal∣sam, when he has ingendred several Pearls, since that this precious Jewel is found but in the rugged and unequal Shells, whose inward Fish is languish∣ing and flabby by reason that he is de∣prived of that sweet sulphureous milk, and of that volatil, insipid and inodo∣rous
Salt, which make together the coagulation of that beautiful object of Luxury and Curiosity; but which is much more considerable for its fine Physical Properties, which it incloses in it self. Since that both the ancients and moderns acknowledge Pearls for one of the noblest Cordials, which is capable of freeing the natural Balsam from oppression, to re-establish the dissipated and abated strength, to re∣joyce the Spirits, augment Courage, resist Poisons, the Plague and the corruption of the Humors, and finally to wipe out and abolish the evil Chara∣cters both of the fix'd and running Gout; by reason that they kill, by the sweetness of their Milk and Sulphur, the ill Impressions of the sharp, Pontick and saline Serosities, which prick and irritate the membranous and nervous parts that serve for sensibility and motion, which they perform by the resolution of their bodies, commu∣nicating then that virtue which
sweetens and wipes out the acid sharp∣ness that did cause those diseases: which thing they also efficaciously produce in Rheumatisms and the Scurvy. It is this defective and dead-seeming Power and Efficacy that Paracelsus speaks of in the sixth Book of his Archidoxes. We have thought fit to put the Amber-griece next to the Pearls, both because it comes from the Sea, and that we can place it neither in the Classis of Animals, nor in that of Vegetables, no more then in that of Minerals, because it seems as it were a roving Individual, which can∣not be lawfully comprised in either of these three Categories. For Amber-griece is nothing else but the most pre∣cious of Bitumens, that come from the bottom of the Sea, where, according to some, it is liquid; but hardens, di∣gests and concocts it self both by the coagulative facultie of the maritime Salt, and by the action of the heat of
the Sun, which resolves into vapours what there is in it of most subtil, and that works and concludes the redu∣ction of the Amber-griece to that con∣dition it is found in on the surface of the Sea-water in the East-Indies, and sometimes also in America. It is with a great deal of knowledge and light that our Author hath inserted this no∣ble Bitumen in his Great Cordial, since it is one of its principal Ingredients: and that its virtues are to heat, to dry up, and resolve; to strengthen the Heart and the Brains; to recall, re∣establish and augment the vital and animal Spirits, by the sweet and plea∣sant exhalation of its volatil and sul∣phureous Salt, which communicates, joyns, and unites it self mildly and im∣mediately to our nature, and that pe∣netrates into the very last digestions by the Organs of Respiration, and by those of the Circulation of the bloud and spirits: It is the true comforter of the Viscera, and is very useful to fa∣cilitate
Generation, since it is capable to correct those defects which happen by that subject both in male and fe∣male, because it heats, strengthens and rejoyces the one, and that it dries the moistures and ordinary superfluities of the other, when it is well and duly prepared, and administred with an exact knowledge. Let us come to the parts of the Vegetables, which help to the fabrick and virtue of our Great Cordial, and begin with the Roots, which we shall name in particular: and we shall not speak of their virtues but in general, except there be some remarkable thing worthy reflexion which will oblige us to regard it, to render by that means this Remedy and its Author the more recommendable to those at present living, and to posterity hereafter. We have ten Roots that enter this Composition; which are the Angelica, the round Birth-wort, the Fraxinella or white Dittany, the Carline, the
Contra-Yerva, the Gentian, the Ser∣pentary of Virginia, the Tormentil, the Valerian, and the Zedoary. One may boldly say that these few Roots con∣tain what there can be of virtue in al∣most all the others, and especially in what concerns the Cordial virtue and the Counter-poison: for they all to∣gether and every one in particular tend to the Author's aim by their efficacy, for they are Bezoardic and Cordial in the highest degree, because they abound in Spirit, in Salt and in Sulphur, which are volatil and piercing, as their smells and bitterness witness. They provoke Sweat, they are Vulneraries, they open the Obstructions of the Womb, cause the dead Child to issue out, and appease its Irritations and Suffocations; they are good against all Poisons, and admirable against all malignant Diseases, and especially against the Plague; they are excellent against the bitings of mad Dogs, and kill universally all sorts of Worms,
that ill Nourishment or want of Di∣gestion may breed in us. Above all we may admire the strength and vir∣tue of three Roots which have been added to this Remedy, which are the Carline, the Contra-Yerva, and the Serpentary of Virginia, according to the sense and approbation of two ex∣cellent persons here above mentioned. For the Carline is a real gift from Hea∣ven against the Plague and malignant Diseases: It serves also as a Philtre and Loadstone to attract the strength of those that suck in the Air, which is fill'd with the odour and vitious a∣toms which those that have eaten some of it breath forth. The Contra-Yerva is not less considerable, since it beareth this Spanish name which sig∣nifies Counter-poison: but for the ex∣cellency of its virtues and of the won∣derful effects it doth produce, Monar∣des a Portuguez Physician says to its commendation, that it is not onely useful to drive away all manner of
Poisons, (Corrosive sublimate onely excepted) and hinder their malignity, but moreover that this Root is able to unbind and root up the charm and tie of the amorous Philtre. We cannot well specifie the virtue of the Serpentary of Virginia, because it has not as yet been written, and that Ex∣periments have not been made of all its faculties: it sufficeth that its odour and taste do sufficiently manifest its virtues, besides those which have been found by those that have put it in practice, or them that have learn'd it viva voce from the Inhabitants of the American Islands, amongst whom it is in great request against Poisons and Fevers; but especially against the bitings of venomous and malignant Serpents, in which these Islands a∣bound. The time for gathering the Roots we have here is in the be∣ginning of the Spring, when they are as it were big with the Idea of all the Plant, which they then contain, with
all its principal virtues; it sufficeth then to know them by a little bud proceed∣ing from the Earth. The second Classis of the Plants which make part of this Remedy are six in number; namely, the Betony, the Carduus Benedictus, the Dittany of Creet, the Marjoram, the Mints, and the Water-Germander. All these Plants are chosen for this Cordial with an exquisite judgment, for there is not one of them but hath some specifick virtue, besides what they possess of Cordial and Alexitery in common with the others. For the Betony is Vulnerary, and particularly dedicated to the Wounds of the Head, although it be Hepatick, as also Splenetick and Hysterick, because it opens Ob∣structions, and drives out by Urines what is gross and impure. The sur∣name of holy or blessed that has been given to the Carduus that enters in this Remedy witnesses enough how much it is recommendable amongst
the Physicians and with the vulgar, and chiefly in Germany, where the common people imploy it with very great success against most part of those Diseases which assault them, taking it in powder in warm wine, which pro∣vokes very much Sweat and Urine. But I find that the English people do use it also very efficaciously in those drinks which they call Possets. In fine, its bitterness doth witness the abun∣dance of its essential Salt when as yet it is juicy, and the quantity of its vo∣latil Salt when it is grown up, and that this Plant is between its flowers and seed; for it is properly from thence that it derives its cordial, sudorifick, an∣tivenomous virtue, which is particular and specifick to it. There are but few Poets and Rhetoricians that have not made use of the virtues of the Dit∣tany, and of the Hart's instinct in seeking it after he is wounded, by which to make some rich Compa∣rison; for we must acknowledge that
it is an admirable Plant in its effects, since there is attributed to it that of attracting, and driving the strange bo∣dies out of Wounds, of being a great Counter-poison, of hastning the diffi∣cult delivery in Child-birth, and being a remedy against the Insultations of the Womb. It was not in the first Receit, no more then the white Dit∣tany or Fraxinella root, but these two Simples have been added to it upon counsel, by reason of their specifick Excellencies and Proprieties. The agreeable odour of the Marjoram, which pleases equally all those that smell it, clearly witnesses that our Spi∣rits attract from it some Sulphur and subtil Spirit which recreates them: and whereas the functions of the Spi∣rits are made by the means of the membranous and nervous Organs, which have some relation and sympa∣thy with the Brain, the Stomach and the Womb; it is particularly to those parts that the subtil portion of its vo∣latil
sulphureous Salt is consecrated, which strengthens, unburthens and re∣creates them. There is no Nation which culti∣vates the Mints with greater care and that makes better use thereof then the English. For as it is subject to Indige∣stions either by the weakness or by the over-burthening of their stomach, so have they their principal refuge to this specifick, stomachical Vegetable, which they use in their Broths, or Pos∣sets, and their Burnt-wine. There∣fore we shall mention nothing more to recommend it, since that its virtues and effects are sufficiently known of all. We must now say something of the Scordium or Germander, which is really a Plant that ought to enter in a great Cordial and Counter-poison, therefore our Author hath not omitted it. This Plant is famous in all the good Antidotes, and above all in that ex∣cellent Remedy called Diascordium Fracastorii, of which the Physicians of
England make daily frequent use with most happy success. And we must needs confess that this good Vegetable has but few that can be compared to it: for since that it keeps the dead bo∣dies from corruption, as Galen relates, with much more reason ought it to be capable of keeping those that are li∣ving which are healthy, and contribute to the Cure of them when they are sick. We shall not particularize any thing of its virtues, but onely say that it is one of the principal and most ex∣cellent Counter-poisons and Sudori∣ficks that the vegetable reign possesses. These above-named Plants ought to be gathered in their full estate, that is to say when that they are in their flowers below, and that the top or end of the stalk begins to make an embryonated seed to appear; for then it is that they contain all the accom∣plishment of their virtue: and if they were gathered before that time, they would abound in an herbal and indi∣gested
Juice, which is not as yet exalted to an essential Salt, somewhat volatil, and half sulphurated; and if one should stay longer then the said time, all the virtues of the Plant would abandon the stalk to re-unite and re-inclose them∣selves in the seed, and then it would be too concentred, and could not be so soon reduced from power to act by our natural heat. Furthermore these Plants must be gathered in that time which Paracelsus commands, Balsa∣mico tempore, which is a little after Sun-rising, and in a dry and serene day, and not after Rain. The third Classis is that of Flowers, which are also most worthy of the Cordial, and of the choice that amongst the rest its Author has made of them; for it seems as if he had pick'd out from that beautiful Enamel all which did possess the principal Cordial and Balsamick virtue, which is the Flower of Borrage, and that of Bugloss, the Clove-July-flower, the Mace, the red
Rose, the Rosemary-flowers, the Ros Solis, the Saffron, the Marigold, and the Elder-flowers. There is then first of all the Flow∣ers of Borrage and Bugloss, which would not seem worthy of this Cor∣dial by reason that they have no smell at all; but whosoever shall consider more narrowly the Plants that bear those Flowers, will find that they abound in a nitro-tartarous Juice; which communicates to them the vir∣tue of purifying the venal and arterial bloud, and of rooting and wiping out the melancholy and black Ideas that the spirit of Life had suckt from the Spleen and Hypochondres, so that their blew flowers recreate the Sight and the Heart; which is the reason that they have been inserted by all in the number of Cordial flowers. We could wish that other Nations did know as well as the English the wor∣thy virtue of the Clove-July-flowers; without doubt they would also re∣ceive
the same benefit from it: for this Flower is replenished with a Sulphur and Mercury, which are so friendly to our Spirits, that they restore and re∣establish the principal functions of the Heart and of the Brain, since that their virtue prevails against the Syncopes, the weaknesses and palpitations of the Heart, and remedies the giddiness and swimming of the Head, the Apoplexy, the Falling-sickness or Epilepsie, and several other defects of the Nerves, and of the Brains their origine. The Flower of Nutmeg or Mace and its Fruits is one of the most pre∣cious and most healthful Aromaticks that the East-Indies furnish us with; and I wonder that they were forgot in this Cordial, since that this Nation knows and esteems them so much: Nevertheless their rare virtues have obliged us to joyn them to it, by the counsel of the wisest and most experi∣enced. For Mace and Nutmegs are stomachical, and they are relatively Ce∣phalic
and Hysterical, they drive out the Wind, help Digestion, correct the ill smell of the mouth, rejoyce and strengthen the Child in the Mother's womb, take away the swelling of the Spleen, appease Loosness, and re∣medy the faintness and palpitations of the Heart. 'Tis all those things which render them really worthy our Great Cordial. We have inserted the red Rose among the Flowers which com∣pose this Cordial, because that our Author requires the Syrup of dried red Roses to help to the consistence of this Composition, and that with much reason, since that the virtue of the red Rose cannot but very much augment its rare qualities; for this Queen of Flowers recreates and strengthens the Senses and the Spirits, and is useful many ways against many diseases both within and without, which seem to be indifferent according to the several Indications that are taken from it by the Learned Doctors in Physick. Fur∣ther
it is to be noted, that there is not one Simple in all Physick which fur∣nishes us with a greater number of Compositions for the Shop, all which bear its name, for they amount to the number of thirty seven, which do not onely serve as Ornaments, but may also be imployed to many different good Uses. If the Rose addes any thing that is good to our Cordial, assuredly the Rosemary-flower does not contri∣bute little to it, since that its odour and faculties give it among the Greeks the name of , as one should say a Flower by excellency. One may sin∣cerely say that this Flower and the leaves of the Plant that bears it are a Balsamical Epitome, since that they are most specifick remedies against the diseases of the Brain and Nerves that are derived from it, that they strength∣en the Stomach, and correct the stench of the Breath, resolve and open the Ob∣structions of the Liver, the Spleen, the Womb, the Mesentery, and of
the Pancreas: in fine, they are sove∣reign remedies against Contusions, and above all to prevent the accidents that happen after some Concussions of the Brain; as Experience shews by the rare Effects which that admirable Wa∣ter of the Queen of Hungaria pro∣duces every day, which is nothing else but Spirit of Wine alkoholizated, digested and distilled three or four times upon Rosemary-flowers. We have put the Ros Solis among the Flowers, although its leaves do enter also in this Composition and make the best part thereof. It seems as if that pretty little Plant were more beloved of the Sun then many others, since that he never dries her up in his most violent heats, but on the contrary it is seen that every particle of that Down which covers its leaves, and that is as it were the beams of them, is loaden with small drops of a subtil, piercing and spiritual dew; and this during the highest rage of the Dog-star, and at
high Noon, when all the other Plants languish and faint, it tricks up it self, and grows proud with the splendour of that beautiful Planet whose name it bears. And its virtues are so consi∣derable, that many great Philosophers, and amongst the rest Isaac of Holland, have treated of it as of a little Miracle worthy the meditation of the most skilful. This Plant is Vulnerary, Cor∣dial and Hepatick. It is believed that it is an assured specifick against the Con∣sumption of the Lungs, and against the other diseases of the Breast: it is a preservative against the Plague, and serves also to cure it: in fine, it is, as many certifie, a Planetary and Magne∣tick Plant, which produces many sur∣prizing effects by merely wearing it about one. Saffron is one of the rich∣est and most necessary morsels of our dish; and that is absolutely necessary to our Great Cordial, by reason of those admirable virtues that this Flower hides in it self. For it must needs be
that Saffron has something above the other Drugs, since that after it hath been dried by Art, it seems as if it had some inward magnetick virtue, which recalls to it self the Balsam of the Air, which gives it again the same weight, the same vivacity of co∣lour, and the same activity of odour; which is a thing worthy enough con∣sideration. It is a sovereign Cordial, and esteemed to be the soul of the Lungs, by whose action the virtue of this Flower is carried unto the last Di∣gestions by the Circulation and Re∣spiration. It appeases pains, and gen∣tly procures Sleep; it cleanses the Womb, helps Child-birth, and purges the Woman: in fine, it is a little Pa∣nacea against the Plague, and against all other malignant diseases; it is also most happily used against the Jaun∣dise. The Marigold, which is a Solar Flower and very Cordial and Alexi∣tery, was not to be forgotten. This
Plant seems to be a friend to almost all the seasons of the year, since there are but few months wherein she produces not her flowers; which have the vir∣tue of helping the Lunary Purgations, to cause Delivery, to provoke Sweat, and succour them them that are af∣flicted with the Jaundise. There re∣mains the Elder-flower, the last that enters in our fine Medicament's dis∣pensation. It is of a subtil and pene∣trating virtue, as its odour testifies, which makes that it resolves and dissi∣pates the gross matters by Sweats; it is also anodyne and apertive: and though it has many other Properties inwardly and outwardly, we will be silent, be∣cause it has them in common with the other things of which we have spoken heretofore. We have no more to say of the Flowers, but onely to in∣form of the true time of their gather∣ing, and two words more to prove that they ought not to be dried for this Cordial, although the Receipt com∣mands
it. And whereas these Flowers appear in divers months of the Spring, Summer and Fall, I desire no other ob∣servation but that those that would have them good ought always to take the first, and cause them to be gathered in dry and serene weather just at Sun-rising; provided that it hath not rain'd the day before: for it is to be noted that the first production of the Plant brings forth always the best-coloured and most odoriferous Flowers: and, more∣over, one must have a care that the Sun may have had the necessary time to wipe off and digest the superfluous moisture that the Rain may have fur∣nished the Earth and the Plant withall, and by consequence the Flower also. But whereas all these Flowers are odo∣riferous and subtil, and that their virtue resides in a volatil sulphureous and bal∣samick Salt, which exhalates easily by the exiccation in the shade; as it may easily be perceived by those that come into a place in which they are inclosed;
I am of opinion, with the counsel of the wisest and best-knowing, to put these Flowers in Spirit of Wine in a Vessel close stopp'd with another, as fast as nature and the season furnishes them, since that the subtil and gross ex∣traction of them must be made, as we shall shew more fully when we shall reason of the Preparation of all that composes our Cordial. The fourth Classis of Vegetables are the Fruits, the Berries, and the Aromatick Seeds, which are but six, namely, the Cardamome, the Cubebes, the Kermes-berries, the Juniper-berries, the Cloves and the Nutmeg. We shall not here repeat needlesly the virtues that these Aromaticks have in common with the other parts of Plants, of which we have already made the description: we shall onely say two words by the bye concerning dry'd Kermes-berry, which the Author causes to enter in this Remedy, which is found to be all worm-eaten, insipid, ino∣dorous;
which witnesses that it is de∣prived of all the virtue that is attri∣buted to it; therefore we have taken in its place the fresh Juice of the Kermes-berries as it comes from Mont∣pellier, which is also called the Syrup of Kermes, and which serves through∣out all Europe for to make up the Con∣fection Alkermes, which is so re∣nowned for its cordial virtue, which without doubt ought to yield to that of our Great Cordial, though the vir∣tue of the Kermes-berry helps Wo∣men in labour, re-establishes the Vital Spirits, dissipates the ill Vapours, serves to remedy the wounded Nerves, and brings forth the Small∣pox. We are furthermore to give notice, that we have added Cloves to this Cordial, as one of the best foun∣dations of its Cordial, being of a Sto∣machical and Alexitery virtue; which we have not done but with the know∣ledge and consent of the most Renown∣ed in the Art. Now since we have
not the conveniency of gathering the Fruits and the Aromatick Seeds, we must content our selves with the choice we can make of them at the Drugsters that sell them; and we can∣not judge of their age and goodness but by the Taste and by the Smell, and sometimes also by the Colour and by the Weight. But as for the Juniper-berries, they must be chosen black and shining, and having inwardly a mala∣ginous viscosity, sweet in the begin∣ning of their taste, but which degene∣rates afterwards into a balsamick and bitter savour. These remarks are ne∣cessary, because that these Berries con∣tain in themselves a small Treacle, and are replenished with many rare virtues, which adorn our Cordial, and augment its forces and Operation. The fifth Classis of Vegetables con∣tains the Barks, of which there is but that of Sassafras wood required in the Receipt. We have been counselled to adde to it the Cinnamon, the Limon∣pill,
and that of Oranges, by reason that there is nothing that doth so sud∣denly rejoyce the Heart and the Brains, and that more resists Poisons and Cor∣ruption, then these noble Barks or Rinds, when they are well chosen, and employ'd before they have lost that excellent smell which resides in their superficial skin, which is nothing but an Oil and a volatil Salt glewed toge∣ther with a little moisture, in the Li∣mon and Orange; but the Cinnamon has nothing but its pure aethereal Spi∣rit animated with a Sulphur and a Salt, that have not their like amongst all the Aromaticks, by reason of their subtilty and sphear of activity, of their odour and virtue, which has with ju∣stice acquired to them the right of en∣tring in this Great Cordial, since that the Author himself wills that the Sy∣rup of Juice of Limons be added to it, to help its preservation and consistence. As for what concerns the Sassafras and its Bark, I am of opinion to put its
Wood in also, by reason that the Bark furnishes not sufficiently alone; for I have made the anatomy of this Wood by distillation, and found that the Wood did yield a spirituous Water, and an Oil far more abounding and more excellent then the Bark alone, which has lost upon the Sea that which it had of most subtil and best, in lieu that the rest of the virtue hath pre∣served, and concentred it self in the Wood. The sixth Classis yields us the Woods of Aloes, and of Sassafras which we have newly mentioned: we shall have but two words to say in this place in praise of the virtues of the Wood of Aloes, by reason of its scar∣city, since there are many hundreds of Apothecaries which have never han∣dled any, and that know it but by hear-say, and by the reading of their Dispensatory. But I confess that it is more common here in London then in many other places, and that it is had
here a great deal better, and better qualified, and especially at Mr. Box's, a Drugster in Cheapside, in whose Shop I have always found what there is of most rare and most precious in Druggistry. The Arabians and the Germans call it Paradise-wood, by rea∣son of its Excellency. It grows in Zei∣lan, Malaca, Sumatra, and through all the Coast of Choromandel, where the Indians prize it and rate it equal with Gold and Silver, according to its divers degrees of goodness. This Wood abounds in an oleaginous and gummy substance, which is almost of the same nature with a sort of Benza∣min, but much more Cordial, Stomachi∣cal & Cephalick: for it generally streng∣thens all the Viscera, and especially the Brain; it rejoices and re-animates the spirits of the Heart, and those of the Womb; it remedies the Syncopes and Languishings, and has the property of killing all sorts of Worms (which en∣gender in the body) by the abundance
of its bitter volatil Salt. It is put in the Cephalick powders to be applied out∣wardly, and in the Epithemes that are applied upon the Heart, and upon the Pulses of the Temple-Arteries, and those of the Arms, because that it recreates the Senses by the excellency of its smell; which is the reason that our Excellent Author hath put it in good quantity in his Cordial, by the knowledge he had of its rare proper∣ties and admirable virtues. We have as yet two other matters to speak of which are taken from the Vegetables, that enter in our Remedy, and help toward its preparation; which are Sugar and the Spirit of Wine. The first serves as a body to receive and re∣tain the dry things and the extractions which compose this Cordial, and to preserve its virtue, as we shall say here∣after: and the second serves for that Liquor that the Chymists call Men∣struum, to extract the virtue of all the parts of the Vegetables which
compound it. We shall not speak of it in this place but in general terms, be∣cause that we reserve to speak of it with more advantage when we shall treat of the Preparation. Sugar is come to be at present one of the greatest delights of the Table: and truly it is not without reason, since that this sweet Salt which doth so sud∣denly vegetate, and that is found shut up in its time and place within a Reed or Cane, participates of abun∣dance of rare Proprieties: for we daily experiment, that this Indian Salt is capable of receiving in its self the odor, the taste and the colour of Fruits, and of preserving them from one year to another, and longer, as is very well known by those that excel in the Art of Preserving. But if the Sugar pro∣duces so rare an effect for pleasure, what doth it not doe also in the Pharmacie for the useful part, whenas the Apo∣thecary cannot make any Conserves, Syrups, Trochisks, Electuaries, Con∣fections,
and many other things which are most necessary for the sick, with∣out that pleasant Medium, which pre∣serves and receives the virtue of all the species that Art entrusts to its custo∣dy? The choice is of that which is the most purified, and that retains less of the greaziness and gross viscosity which does accompany it in its origine be∣fore its preparation. Therefore our Author hath commanded to take the white Sugar-candy, whose lucid and clear Crystallization proves evidently the purity thereof. It is of an incisive, attenuating, detersive virtue; it lenifies the harshness of the Throat and of the Trache-artery, gently consumes the slimes and viscosities of the Stomach, cleanses the Breast and the Lungs, and appeases the painful insultations of the Cough. These are the Motives which have driven Sir Walter Rawleigh to render this delightful Salt the deposi∣tory of the substance and virtue of that which makes the making up of his Great Cordial.
The Aqua-vitae, or Spirit of Wine, is nothing else but the spirituous and aethereal part of that charming Liquor which is prest from the Grapes of the Vine, and that has been exalted by the means of fermentation. There have been several names given to this admi∣rable Spirit, by reason of its excellency and wonderful effects: for it has been dignified with that of most Subtil and Incorruptible Essence; not forgetting that of Water of Life, that all the world attributes to it, of Spirit of Wine, Ce∣lestial Sulphur, Bezoardical vegetable Sulphur, The Celestial Menstruum, Heavenly Water, The Heaven of Ray∣mondus Lully, The Key of the Philoso∣phers, An Aethereal Body compounded of Fire and Water, Universal Balsam or Liquor, The Life of the great Vege∣table, and different other Nomina∣tions, which sufficiently prove, with those we have already named, that this Spirit is the fittest Liquor of all those which are either Natural or Artificial,
that is capable of extracting the vir∣tues of that which enters in this Cor∣dial, without any loss of their seminal faculties, and without leaving behind in the substance of the vegetable things which compound it any remnant of their middle life's virtue; as we shall prove it with more Energie when we shall treat of its Preparation. We shall content our selves for the present to make known that its virtues have oblig'd our Author to make use of it to that purpose. All those that know this Spirit well, say that it has a most piercing virtue, but that it is not quite so hot as the vulgar imagines, since that it resolves the hottest Tumors, and appeases the pains of Burning. Its incorruptible nature renders it recom∣mendable, both because it preserves it self, and that it preserves also all other animate or inanimate Beings: for it re∣sists Rottenness, Corruption, and the simple Alteration, since that it pre∣serves also the tenderest and moistest
Fruits from that disunion that is next and infallible to them. It hinders the Coagulation of the Bloud in Sprains, and Contusions, if it be suddenly ap∣pli'd, and resolves with ease that which was already coagulated, if its applica∣tion has been too long retarded. It dissipates and volatilizes that which is most gross, hardest, which is called Schirrous, and that which is most run∣ning and material, without borrowing of any other assistance then its proper virtue. So that we may lawfully con∣clude, that the Spirit of Wine is a mere Epitome of what there is of most ex∣cellent and virtuous in all the Vegeta∣ble Reign: and that it is for that same reason that our Excellent Author hath made use of it for the Extractions of this Great and Rare Remedy. Having ended the description of the Vegetables, we must also give that of the Minerals that enter in this Cele∣brated Remedy, which are five, name∣ly, the Oriental Bole, the Coral, the
Unicornu minerale, the Gold, and the Sealed Earth. There are some De∣scriptions of this Cordial in which Gold doth not enter: but that De∣scription which is lawfully attributed to our Author contains a preparation of Gold; which is the reason we would not omit it, since that what we shall say concerning this noble Metall will make appear that it ought absolutely to enter in this Composition. We have also added to it the Mineral Unicorn, for those Reasons that we shall pro∣duce hereafter when we shall mention it. And because that there is found such a numerous difference of Species of Sealed Earth, we have thought fit to associate some Oriental Bole, well chosen, to that Earth which will have been found to be the best, to the end that the virtue of the one should rather be augmented, then fail in any of the points of the exact proportion that the one and the other may contribute to our Great Cordial.
The Oriental Bole, or the Bole of Armenia, is a kind of pale reddish Earth, impregnated with Mineral, So∣lar and Martial Vapours, from whence are derived to it its principal· Faculties and its most excellent Operations, by reason of the nobility of the embryo∣nated Sulphur which this Earth con∣tains. The best is that which doth not participate of Sand, but that melts down easily like quick Lime when Water is cast on it, or that resolves and melts like to a fat substance when it is once moistned in the mouth. It dries much, it is astringent, it streng∣thens; therefore it is happily used to stop a Flux of what nature soever it be, to thicken and fix the liquid and fluid Humours, to resist Corruption, and to beat back the strengths and at∣taches of Poison. All that has been said of it is the reason why it is employ'd so usefully against the Diarrhoea, against the Dysentery, the immode∣rate Flux of Women, Catarrhs, the
spitting of Bloud, and against the flux of Bloud both of the Nostrils and Wounds. And whereas the Sealed Earth is but a sort of Bole, reduced into little Pellets or small Cakes, which are marked with some figure or chara∣cter; that which is had in the Island of Lemnos, which we have by the com∣merce of Constantinople, of a reddish or grayish colour, is chosen to be the best. The Reddish is named by some the Fat or Greace of the Sun, or Gold, by reason of the portion of the em∣bryonate Solar Sulphur of which it participates: and the Grayish is named the Fat or Greace of the Moon, or Sil∣ver, because of the embryonate Lu∣nary Sulphur which communicates its virtue to it. The first is consecrated to the Heart, and the second to the Liver and Brains. Besides all the virtues that they have in common with the Ori∣ental Bole, they have over and above that of being truly Cordial, of driving out Poisons, to resolve the curded
Bloud, strengthen the Heart, the Brains and the Ventricle, dilate and clarifie the mass of Bloud, and to pro∣voke Sweat. Insomuch that its prin∣cipal uses are against the Plague, against malignant Fevers, against the biting of venomous Animals, and to take away the venomous impression of Wounds: which proves invincibly that it is not one of the smallest pieces of this Great Cordial. We shall not idlely spend our time here in relating the frivolous opinions of those that have thought, or yet be∣lieve, that Coral is soft in the bottom of the Sea, since that we are most cer∣tain of the contrary, by the relation of those that dive for it. The Coral there∣fore is nothing else but a stony vege∣tation which degenerates into a Tree. The most excellent is the Red, al∣though there be some White, and some Black, and also of other colours, as may be seen in the Closets of the Curious. One must chuse that which
is of the deepest colour, esteemed to be the Male, as the White is called the Female. The virtues of Coral are, to drie, to cool, it is astringent, to strengthen, especially the Heart, and then the Ventricle and the Liver; it purifies the Bloud; it is by conse∣quence excellent and specifick against the Plague, against Poisons, and against all sorts of malignant Fevers: It rejoices Man, it stops and appeases all Fluxes either of the Belly, the Womb, or of the other parts which are dedicated for generation. It is reported also that if ten grains of it be given in Woman's Milk to a Child newly born, that it is a precaution against the Epilepsie and Convulsion. There are many Naturalists, and amongst the rest Paracelsus, that say that the red Coral hung about the Neck prevails against Frights, against Witchcraft, Inchantments, Poisons, the Epilepsie, Melancholy, the insultations and at∣taches of Daemons, and against Thun∣der.
It is for certain in the Red Coral that a Solar Tincture is to be found, since that all the rare effects that it pro∣duces cannot be had else-where but from that Sulphur mineral and em∣bryonated, which the Gold commu∣nicates to it in abundance; which ren∣ders it most worthy to be in our Great Remedy, and causes those brave lights which our Author did possess to be the more remarked. Gold is without contradiction the most desirable and the most precious portion of Metalls, which are the fruits of the Mineral predestination. It is doubtless the most perfect of those Children of the Earth. It is most solid, yellow, compact and close in it self, and is compounded with principles that are digested in the most sovereign degree, and which are by consequence fix'd and permanent, as its Incorruptibility proves. The Chymists give it the name of the Sun, because that they believe it hath some correspondency and har∣monical
relation not onely with the Celestial Sun of the Great world, but also by reason that it has a sympathe∣tical affinity with the Sun of the Little world, which is the Heart of Man. They call it also the King of Metalls, because it is their Prince, as that which is the most pure and most fix, as also that which possesses the most eminent and most necessary virtues, since that it is wholly dedicated to the Heart, which is the King of the noblest Fun∣ctions of Life. For Gold is held for the most sovereign Cordial, because it re-establishes and augments the radical Moisture and the natural Heat, which have their principal seat in the Heart: which is the reason that it may be given with success in all diseases in which the Spirits are dissipated and the strength weakned. It purifies also the mass of the Bloud, since that it dissipates and drives out by sensible and insensible In∣spiration that which there was of naught and corrupted in that which is called
the Humours, and which are, to speak properly, nothing else but those things which result from the diversity of the alterations of the Bloud, that tends by this ill disposition to Corruption and Rottenness, and by consequence to the destruction of the Subject which it nourishes and vivifies. But this noble Metall must be so prepared and decor∣porated, that it may doe the Emana∣tion of the rays of the virtue of its Cen∣tral Sulphur, as we shall reason upon it, when we shall discourse of the Pre∣paration. The last we are to treat of is the Unicornu Minerale, otherwise called White Load-stone, and some would have it to be the Unicorn's Horn. But we must speak but merely of its gene∣ration and virtues, in no wise medling with that diversity of opinions that the most eminent Authors have had con∣cerning this Subject. For the most skilfull and best knowing have thought it fit that this Mineral pro∣duction
should be added to the Great Cordial, though it was not inserted in the first Descriptions, notwithstanding those wonderful properties it is en∣dow'd with render it most worthy. This wonderful Mineral Drug is no∣thing else but the Concretion or Pe∣trifaction of a fluid milky substance, which contains in it self the congealing and lapidifying ferment, which slides and insinuates it self in the Cavities of the womb of the Earth, where it in∣vests it self with the figure, odour, colour and consistence, according to the nature of the things that it finds there: as it is proved by the Colle∣ctions that the most curious observers of Nature have made of it; as also by the experience of its rare virtues, which are equal with those of the Oriental Bole, and those of the Sealed Earth, since the Grandees are agreed that it resists Poisons, the Plague and ma∣lignant Fevers, insomuch that a Phy∣sician of this Age did make the pou∣der
of this mixt pass for a Specifick against all Fevers, and got repute in the City of Paris by several rare ef∣fects. We shall speak no more of it, to prevent tedious repetitions, and so pass from the description of all the In∣gredients of our Remedy, to what we have promised to say concerning its General and Particular Preparation. If we have had hitherto just cause to praise Sir Walter Rawleigh for ha∣ving caus'd so many good things, and which possess so many virtues, to en∣ter into his Cordial; we must never∣theless confess, that we have far more reason to augment his Elogies, by rea∣son of the Science and Experience which he hath shewn in the Prepara∣tion and perfecting of this grand Re∣medy. But considering that it is com∣posed of things which are of different natures, and that are more or less fix or volatil, it has been necessary to work with a great deal of Art, and with a most exact reflexion upon all
that composes this Remedy, to pre∣serve that which ought to be of good in the most subtil, and withall to ex∣tract the essential virtue which was concentred in the grossest. Now we have said heretofore that there were three Classes in this Composition, which contain the Animal, the Vege∣table, and the Mineral: We must also now make appear those reasons which have oblig'd our celebrated Author to prepare them in that manner; to which we shall adde also the Meditations and Thoughts that we have had on this Subject, for the better preserving the volatil, and to open the most fix; that the union of the virtue of the pro∣ductions of these three Families should be made with all the exactness therein required, according to his Majesty's Command, and the Intentions of those Illustrious Persons which we have for∣merly named. Whereas no intire Animals do en∣ter into our Cordial, therefore we shall
not speak here but of the parts of those Animals which contribute to this brave and sovereign Composition. We shall treat therefore of the prepa∣ration of Harts-horns, of that of Vi∣pers, of that of Musk and Pearls, and, in fine, of that of Amber-griece. We shall not say any thing concerning the Bezoar-stone, since we have already said that it is a Magisterium perfected in the Ventricle of that Animal which produces it; and that besides this Stone has no need of any other prepa∣ration then to be reduced into an im∣palpable Pouder, for this Operation. Now whereas the Receipt of this Re∣medy requires Harts-Horn burn'd or calcin'd to whiteness; we cannot won∣der enough at this way of proceeding, since that those of the least capacity know that the Calcination carrieth away the volatil Salt from the calcined body, and that by consequence it strips it from all its cordial virtue, which cannot be contain'd but in this Sul∣phureous
and volatil Salt: For the most skilful Naturalists, and the most experienced of all Artists, who have grown old in the meditation, and in the labour to make the Anatomy of Natural things, thereby to know the better the virtue, say all with one voice, That the Soul and Virtue of all these sublunary Mixts resides pro∣perly and perfectly in what they con∣tain of volatil Salt, and that it is parti∣cularly and chiefly in the Animals that this is found; since the proof of it is clearly evident in their Distillations, which furnish a great abundance of Spi∣rit, Oil and volatil Salt, and which leave behind nothing in the bottom of the Retort, after the last action of Fire, but that which may be called legiti∣mately a mere Caput mortuum, or dead Earth; since that this calcined body contains nothing that participates of the Saline nature, which is the Foun∣dation and the Centre of all the powers and virtues, by reason that all
Salt is nothing but a close Spirit, as also all Spirit but an open'd Salt. For all the Seminal powers and all the chief∣est virtues of Animals, and of their parts, proceeds from Light as from the Father, from the Air as from the Medium, and from the Salt as from the Son, and all three together concur to the Generation of the Products of Nature. We have advanced all this onely to make it appear the better, that it is needless (if not without rea∣son) that all the ancient Dogmatists, and Sir Walter Rawleigh after them, have introduced the burn'd Harts-horn in almost all Cordials. Now what we have newly said makes ap∣pear that the Cordial virtue is no lon∣ger there, and therefore cannot be imploy'd in them but as an astringent Earth, and a spongeous body, rarefi'd and drie; the better to retain and pre∣serve the volatil, spirituous, sulphure∣ous and saline matters, which are ex∣tracted out of other Ingredients. It
may be also objected, that the calcined Harts-horn is not incapable of virtue, since it can alter the ill Fermentations of the Stomach, cure the Diarrhoea's, and also stay the Bloudy-fluxes: but she produces these effects onely by rea∣son that she kills and mortifies the Sharpness and Acidities which pro∣ceed from the Indigestions and base Fermentations, in the same manner that she quells the Acidity of Saline and Vitriolick Spirits and that of Vi∣negar, when they have been digested together, and drawn off again by di∣stillation, as insipid as water, by reason that this rarefi'd, dry and spongeous body is deprived of all Saltness, and de∣sire of re-furnishing it self with that Salt which did make the Acidity in those Liquors. It is therefore for this onely reason that it has been put in the Composition of this Cordial. But since that the volatil Salt of Harts-horn is Alexitery and Cordial, and that it most powerfully contributes to the
rare virtues of this Cordial, we have also added to it some Harts-horn Phi∣losophically Calcined, in the Vapours of the Digestions, Extractions, Di∣stillations and Circulations of Spirit of Wine, which serves for Menstruum to extract the virtue of the parts of the Vegetables which compose it; in which place this Horn softens it self by little and little, swells and dilates, by the moist and spirituous subtility which penetrates it, and renders it friable and capable of being put in pouder with ease, with the preservation of its cor∣dial virtue. But whereas there are some that think that the greatest part of the volatil Salt is gone out of it, and has communicated it self to the Spirit of Wine, which is very likely, it has been thought necessary to adde to it the pouder of Harts-horn rasp'd with∣out any other preparation, that the vo∣latil Salt, which is the true Counter∣poison and the true Cordial, should not be wanting. Not but that one
might adde to it the volatil Salt of Harts-horn drawn by distillation: but it was not put in by reason of its Em∣pyreumatick and most ungrateful taste. The Author of our Great Cordial, and those that after him have work'd in the composition of this Remedy, have almost always added the prepared Pearls to this Cordial, and also some∣times they have open'd and dissolved the bodies of the Pearls by means of fixed Acides, as distilled Vinegar, juice of Limons, Spirit of Sulphur, and that of Vitriol; and did pretend to have reduced by these means the Pearls into a Salt, or into a dissoluble Magi∣stery, which were more capable of making their virtue appear. But all those Liquors that are endow'd with a fixed Acidity, do intimately joyn themselves unto the Bodies of the dissolved Pearls, and their Salt remains, which augments the weight of the dissolved Body by a fourth part and better: which thing makes it appear
that it is not a true Cordial Magistery. Therefore we have thought fit to pro∣ceed in another manner, which is to dissolve the Pearls with a Menstruum, which may be drawn off again with the same taste and the same dissolving virtue that it had before. And whereas this Spirit leaves behind it its odour and taste in the Magistery of Pearls, it must be dissolved again in equal parts of Cinnamon and Rose-water, which must be drawn off again in Mary's Bath: and thus reiterate the same with new waters, until the Magistery have lost the smell and taste of the volatil Spirit of Venus, which is that admira∣ble Menstruum, onely capable of fur∣nishing to Physick, dissoluble, plea∣sant and subtil Magisteries, capable of penetrating unto the very last Digesti∣ons, and carrying along with them the virtue of those Cordials to which they are associated. And it is in this manner that we have prepared the Pearls for the composition of this Great Cordial.
We have no other observation touching the Vipers, but onely that they must be stript of their skins, and put to drie with the Hearts and Li∣vers in a Glass bottom in Mary's Bath, until they be fit to be pou∣dered. We say they must be thus used, because that this kind of drying takes little or nothing of their volatil Salt from them, and that in case there were any thing exhaled from them, the Chymical Apothecary may retrive it in the water which drops from the head that covers the Body. But when the Vipers are dried in an Oven, there scarce remains any virtue in the flesh, which remains tough like Hemp, and almost insipid; whereas that which has been dried in Mary's Bath is easily put in pouder, and has a taste which de∣clares that its Salt is still in it. Part of it is put with the Vegetables to be ex∣tracted, and there is some of it added also to the Pouders, to give a Body, and augment the virtue of the Remedy,
as we have already mentioned in the discourse concerning Harts-horn. The Musk now remains, which ought to be put in pouder with some white Sugar-candy in a marble Mortar, the better to disunite its parts; and af∣terwards open it by digestion and cir∣culation in a vaporous Bath with Spi∣rit of Wine in a Pelican: then the Spi∣rit must be drawn off again with a most gentle heat of the same Bath, unto the consistency of a thick Syrup, or half Extract, which after must be mixed with the other things. As concerning Amber-griece, it must also be pouder'd in a Stone-Mortar with some white Sugar-candy, and that so long till there be as it were a perfect union of those two substances, which are not without great trouble allied together without a good uniting Medium, by reason that Sugar is a ve∣getable Salt which can be dissolved and inseparably joyn'd with water, which thing cannot be done with
Amber-griece, because it is a fat and melting Bitumen, which has more con∣nexion and analogie with Oils. Now this Medium can be nothing else but the subtil and fiery Oil of rectified Wine, and thrice passed over most pure Salt of Tartar in Mary's Bath. Therefore this mixture of Sugar and Amber-griece must be put in a Glass Bottle, and pour over it of this no∣ble Menstruum until it over-tops it the breadth of four fingers: then close the Vessel, and place it in the vaporous Bath until all be united by dissolution: then it must be filtrated through Cot∣ton into a glass Vial; and as soon as it is cooled, those three Bodies united together make a Butter or Cream which is most delicious and pleasing, which unites it self to all sorts of Li∣quors, and which of it self is already a great Cordial. And thus the Amber-griece must be prepared for our Ope∣ration. All the sorts of Vegetables which
enter in this Cordial are almost of the same nature, since they are almost all endow'd with some pleasant and aro∣matick smell, which together with their bitter and piercing taste prove that they participate of a good quantity of sulphureous volatil Salt: therefore we must have recourse unto some Men∣struum which may be of power to ex∣tract this Salt, and disunite the muci∣laginous, Balsamick and Resinous Juice, which retains and preserves the virtue of the different parts of the Plants even after their Exsiccation. This Menstruum can be nothing else then Aqua-vitae or Spirit of Wine, which burthens it self most easily with the essential tinctures of Vegetables. Therefore all this different gathering must be put into a gross pouder, if the materials are drie; or if green, cut them very small with a pair of Shears, and cast it all in a great vessel of Glass with a narrow mouth, and pour upon it for the first time some Spirit of Wine very
well rectifi'd, that it may load it self with the chief virtue and with the pro∣per Balsamick Tincture of the Ingre∣dient. It must be digested in Mary's Bath, in a moderate heat, during two natural days. Then it must be strained and prest cold, and the residue of the Expression be put in the Glass-vessel again: then the Spirit of Wine must be extracted from the Tinctures in the vaporous Bath, until it have acquired the consistence of an Extract somewhat liquid. Then pour upon the Expressi∣on the Spirit which has been drawn off, so digest and extract as before; and thus continue till the Species af∣ford no more Tincture. Then the rest must be boiled in a good quantity of water in a Still, and distill it, that in case there were some remnant of vo∣latil virtue, it might be received in the Receiver. And when the distilled water comes forth without smell and taste, cease the fire, for it is a sign that there is nothing left but what is fix,
which concentres it self in the Deco∣ction left behind in the Still. This De∣coction must be strained and pressed warm, then evaporate the Decoction in a brass Pan upon an open fire to the consistence of an Extract somewhat liquid, and it will be found filled with a salted bitterness, which shews that the water has dissolved and extracted by the violence of the Ebullition all the fixed Salt which was in the Vegeta∣bles. Which thing hath appeared to be very true in this Operation: for whereas our celebrated Author re∣quires but the Extraction with Spirit of Wine, he doth also desire that the rest should be calcined, and the fix Salt extracted out of it to be joyned to the Extract, that he might have the whole virtue of those things which he imploys in his Remedy. But if he had known the Vegetables very well, and under∣stood also that the Sulphur being once separated by the Spirit of Wine, there were nothing left that could hinder
the dissolution of the fix Salt by means of the water, he had most assuredly acted in the same manner we have done: for after the Exsiccation and Calcination of the remainders, we have made a Lye of the Ashes, and there was not a scruple of Salt remaining, which is twenty grains out of all that great heap of Vegetables, because that it was all passed into the Extract with the water. This gross Extract being finished, it must be mixed with the first, and put them both together in a body or a great Bottle, and pour over them to the height of twelve inches of that Spirit which served in the Extraction, and digest and circulate them together in the gentle heat of the vaporous Bath during four and twenty hours, then filtre the Liquor, and put the Lees into the Vessel again; and thus con∣tinue to digest, circulate, extract and filtrate, until the rest of the Extract communicate nor give any more co∣lour
to the Menstruum. After this all the filtrated Tincture must be put in a body, and draw off the Spirit from it in Mary's Bath, in a very mild heat, so that the head do not heat, and this for two reasons. The first is, That the Spirit that mounts is thereby the more subtil; and the other, That the same Spirit should not carry away with it self by means of a more vigorous heat the best part of the Sulphur and vola∣til Salt of the Extract, which is kept down by virtue of the fix Salt, which has joyned and united it self with them by means of digestion and circulation with the Menstruum, which has been the uniting means of it. This Extract made after this manner is the Basis or Foundation of our Cordial, and it con∣taineth radically the Essence of all the Vegetables which have been imployed to make it. We want nothing more now but to make a necessary remark upon the Pre∣paration and Extraction of the Wood
of Aloes and Aromaticks, which a∣bound in a volatil Salt, Oleaginous, Sulphureous, Balsamick and Resinous; which cannot be extracted out of Bo∣dies of this nature, but by the means of a pure and subtil Spirit, such as that which has been drawn off from the course Extracts: for this Spirit will dissolve by its subtil and penetrating faculty the Rosins of this said Wood and Aromatick. So that to perform it well, there needs but to proceed sim∣ply on, in the same manner as has been done before, in the digestion and fil∣tration of the last Extract. There is nothing left then unspoken but a Caution which must be given concerning the Mixture of this Re∣sinous Extract with the Sugar, the Ex∣tracts, the Pouders and the Syrups; which must be performed by dissol∣ving it gently with some of its proper Spirit in a Pan, and thus unite it gently with some Syrup before it be joyned to the rest, otherwise it would remain
in lumps, and would not dissolve in the Stomach with ease enough to commu∣nicate the rays of its virtue, as it is ne∣cessary it should be, citò, tutò, & ju∣cundè, when it is necessary to cause a Counter-poison or Cordial to operate. We have but the third Classis of our Materials, which are the Minerals, upon which we have to treat of the order and dignity of their Preparation; which are the Bole, the Coral, the Gold, & the Sealed Earth. But we shall speak here but of the Bole and of the Sealed Earth, which go hand in hand in their preparations, which are done both the same way. Then we shall speak also of Gold, the principal subject, which will make appear how much Art helps Na∣ture. For we shall say nothing of the Co∣ral's preparation, because that we should to that effect hint on that we have al∣ready said in the Classis of Animals or of their parts, when we have discours'd of Pearls and of their preparations. We shall not mention any thing in
this place concerning the nature of these Earths, since we have treated of it heretofore: we shall onely say; that there must be had some of the first li∣quid Extraction of those Vegetables which enter in our Great Cordial, and with it water these two Earths in a glass body, till they be reduced into a liquid pap, then draw off again this Liquor by Distillation with the gentle heat of a vaporous Bath, and thus con∣tinue for seven times, or rather till the Artist can find out by the taste of these Earths that they are sufficiently im∣pregnated with the savour and virtue of the sulphureous volatil Salt of the Cordial Plants: and then it is time to leave off, drying what is in the Vessel in the same degree of heat, till there appeareth no more moisture in the head of the Lembick, nor a drop of liquor pass through the neck of the Lembick. These Earths thus impreg∣nated must afterwards be put in a Glass Vial, which must be stopped very
well, to enter them afterwards in our Composition. This operation is to separate and open the compact and close parts of those Earths, and to im∣bibe and replenish with an Alexitery virtue the Atomes which constitute them, that they may the sooner be re∣duced from power to act by the action of the Stomach, when it is necessary to make use of the Remedies. Before we begin to speak of the Preparation of Gold, it seems to be necessary to speak two words before∣hand, to give to understand that this Metall may be so well opened by the means of Chymistry, as to be capable of producing some virtue in us, al∣though it might be reduced again to its first metallick body: for there are many which are of opinion, that though this fix Body be dissolved and altered by Preparation, nevertheless it is reducible into its body, and by consequence not capable to produce in us that virtue which the Ancients
and Moderns do attribute to it. But we must clear this business by the de∣monstration of the dissolution of other Metalls into Salt, or rather into Vi∣triol, as Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead and Iron, which nevertheless are most commonly capable of being reduced again into Metall: which hinders not but that the most skilful Physicians make of it daily more and more, by reason that their study and experience makes them discover those rare vir∣tues which these open'd Metalls pro∣duce in Chronical diseases, which are the most rooted and stubborn. Now all these Metallick Vitriols have diffe∣rent tastes and colours, as also they have all some specifick virtues, as it ap∣pears by their effects. Which obliges us to say, that since Gold, though of a fix nature, can be so prepared and opened by the means of certain things which are daily used both as Aliments and Medicaments, and that it can be reduc'd into a vitriolick Salt, which hath
its colour and its specifick taste and virtue; why should it be deprived of being put in use, because of its redu∣cibility into Metall? Not but that we believe, with the wisest, that if this noble Metall was once so opened and radically dissolved, in such wise that it could never be reduced in∣to Metall again by any Chymical artifice, I say, we should believe that Gold thus uncorporified and volati∣lized would acquire a far more am∣ple sphere of activity and virtue: but notwithstanding all this, we do not omit to attribute to the other Prepa∣ration that virtue which has been known by redoubled experiences, first having been well and duly pre∣pared, and moreover first imbu'd, impregnated and fill'd with the inter∣nal and central Sulphur of Antimony, which is had in the true tincture of the Glass of that Mineral, extracted ac∣cording to Basilius Valentinus. And it is of this Preparation of Gold which
we have disposed in one part of this Great Cordial, to render it accom∣plish'd in all respects. We shall now lay down some of those Remarks which are necessary to this operation, which may very well pass for one of the most pleasant and most considera∣ble of all the rare Chymical Pharmacie. The Artist therefore must chuse the purest Gold, which yet ought to have in it something of allay; and therefore he must pass it or melt it down with Antimony, whose Sulphur consumes all which is heterogeneal to it, as its great sweetness, ductibility, high colour and splendour does evidently testifie, after it has passed this Examination. But he must not stop there; for this metallick Body is too fix and compact, to be dissolved without the help of the most corroding Spirits, which we will not use. He must therefore open and separate that strong union of this Bo∣dy, and reduce it into a spongeous
and penetrable Body, whose atomes may be penetrated and dissolved by means of common water, enriched or endowed with ordinary Salts: which cannot be done but by the amalga∣ming with crude Mercury, and re∣iterated Calcination with the com∣mon Sulphur, which dilate the Gold, and render it so spongeous and open'd, that one Ounce of this Metall so pre∣pared makes a greater quantity then half a Pound of Gold in an Ingot or Wedge. Gold being brought to this pass, must be dissolved with that ami∣able and familiar Dissolvent, by a sim∣ple digestion, and a light Ebullition towards the end, in a Glass body in Sand; and there will not remain a grain undissolved. The Liquor must be fil∣trated: and if any be desirous to make a fine Crocus of Gold, or a Pouder of Gold impalpable and subtil, let them take one part of this filtrated Liquor, and precipitate it with volatil Spirit
of Wine, and the Liquor that was yellow will change it self into a green colour, and the Gold will precipitate it self to the bottom of the Vessel, into a brown Pouder, which must be e∣dulcorated by several reiterated lo∣tions, until it become insipid, and af∣terwards it must be digested by three natural days in tartarized Spirit of Wine in a gentle heat of Mary's Bath, and lastly it must be kept during three days in Rose & Cinnamon-water, then filtrate and drie it. This Pouder thus prepared is a great Sudorifick and Cor∣dial: but what we are going to men∣tion is far better. The remainder of the filtrated Liquor, which contains the dissolved Gold, must be evaporated in a Glass vessel of a flat and large form, until all the Salts be very drie; then they must be put in pouder and thrown in a Glass circulatory; then pour over them to the height of four fingers of Tartarized Alkohol of Wine,
place the Vessel in a heat of Bath, and this Spirit will attract to it self all the dissolution of the Gold, and invest it self with a gilded yellow very pleasant: which must be separated from the Salts by Inclination or Filtration; and pour upon them some new Spirit, and di∣gest, extract and filtrate so often that the Menstruum be no more tinctured. Then must all the Liquors be mixed together, and draw off the superfluous Spirit in Mary's Bath, in a most gentle heat, and there will remain in the bot∣tom of the Vessel a yellow Tincture of a high colour, imbu'd with the vi∣triolick Salt of the Gold, as its crabbed and bitter taste doth witness clearly. And I durst say that those who have made use of this rare Remedy, have always seen and taken notice of its most surprising effects: For sometimes this noble Medicament purgeth by Stools, sometimes by Vomits, and sometimes it doth neither, but power∣fully
provokes Urines and Sweats; and most commonly it acts by no sen∣sible operation at all: but its virtue must be taken notice of in augment∣ing the strength of the sick, and thus Natura corroborata est omnium mor∣borum medicatrix. Those that under∣stand the Fixedness of Gold will won∣der, it may be, at the dissolving of this Metall in common water, and with corporal Salts: but they are far more wonderfully surprised, that the Spirit of Wine, which in no wise acts upon the Salts, doth nevertheless attract to it self all that Gold which they had dissolved, and which render it capable of being mixed with the Drinks, and all the poor sick person's other Reme∣dies, in whose bodie it penetrates and insinuates it self to the extremities, thereby to correct what might be there of hurtful, and by that means re-esta∣blish Health. And if this simple Pre∣paration produces such rare effects,
what may not be expected from those noble and high Operations which vo∣latilize Gold in such a manner, that it is impossible to bring it to a Body again? But this being beside our pre∣sent subject, we shall mention it no farther. But we cannot conclude with∣out giving notice, that it is with little benefit that in several places Gold in Leaf is used in Confections and in Cordial Powders, without any fore∣going Preparation, which augments rather their price then their virtue: Except some would say that there are found in the Stomach such strange fer∣mentations and alterations, that they produce Liquors that are capable of acting upon this Metall in Leaf, and reduce it from power to act. But that is too far forth, and we want proofs of these pretended effects. We believe that what we have newly said justifies in some manner our Author, or those that have added Gold well
prepared to this noble Remedy of which we treat. And all that we have said concerning the Preparation both of the Animal, Vegetable and Mine∣ral, doth evidently shew how much Alt is capable of helping Nature, since there are things in these three Reigns, which constitute her, which cannot communicate their virtue, nor make the Irradiation of their inward powers, if they have not first been opened by the Keys of Chymical Ope∣rations, with the preservation of their Seeds and Power, and especially in what concerns the Minerals and Me∣talls. Let us now come to our third Proof, which is to shew that this Great Cordial is absolutely necessary to the Maritime and Northerly Nations, and especially to the inhabitants of Islands, which we must establish by Reasoning in general, and by Demonstration in particular. What we have to say in
general is, That the Sea-bordering and Northerly Countries, and, above all, Islands, are exposed to an inconstancy of Winds, which agitate the Air in so many different manners, that it is impossible for the Heat of the Sun to act with all the reach of its power, for the production of Vegetables in ge∣neral, which is the allotted aliment for Animals both Rational and Irrational: which is prov'd in that those Coun∣tries produce no Grapes ripe enough to make Wine withall, which is the Juice that participates most of a volatil sulphureous Spirit. This is proved al∣so, by reason that the Climate is not capable of giving time necessary for the ripening of the best Fruits, and specially those which ought to have some high Relish, some kind of Per∣fume and exquisite Smell, which are nothing else but the results and true tokens of the Exaltation of the Salt and Sulphur, and of the perfect ripen∣ing
of those Fruits, that do languish in those cold Countries, and that are replenished but with a superfluous and excremental Moisture, which cannot be dissipated, much less digested, by reason of the weakness and little du∣rance of the heat of the Day, and by reason also chiefly of the coldness, moistness and freshness of the Night. Now if we have demonstrated that the Vegetables cannot be perfect, by rea∣son of the imperfection of their volatil Salt and embryonated Sulphur; we may also say the same of the Brutes, which are ingendred in the compass of those Regions, and which are nou∣rished and entertained with those Ve∣getables that grow there: for although those Animals be fat and tender, yet do they not contain a nourishing juice, having the taste and virtue to nou∣rish and maintain, as those of the more Easterly Countries; therefore their flesh is more flabby, more viscous, and
fuller of Moisture, it is sooner corru∣pted, by reason that it is not fur∣nished sufficiently with this Balm of life, which is that volatil sulphureous Salt, proceeding from Light and Heat, which could not be concentred in them, by reason of the situation of their native Soil. There are also to be considered in general the qualities of most part of those Waters which wa∣ter those Countries, and which serve for nourishment to the Plants and Ani∣mals: for whereas they are not en∣lightned and purified by a lively light of the Sun, and by a serenity of the Heavens, by reason of the almost con∣tinual opposition of the Vapours a∣rising from the freshness and moisture both of the Territory and Seas that compass it round, they also are not furnished with that subtilizing, ig∣neous, Celestial and vital Spirit, which is the radical Balsam of Nature in ge∣neral, and of every individual in par∣ticular;
which is the reason that they are more crazie and weightier, and re∣plenished with a dull and hurtful Salt, since they are not deprived of the bad impressions and evil ferments which the Indigestion, Alteration, and the Corruption of those matters which are daily consumed have printed in them, and of which they cannot be deprived but by a competent degree of heat. Now if the Water is ill qualified, there is no doubt but that the Air is also less pure then else-where, since that as it is the Medium between the Seat and the purifying heat proceeding from Heaven, it is also fill'd in reference to the Climes, with so many gross and indigested Vapours, that this heat hath not power enough to dissipate and re∣ctifie, during the fairest day, those sluggish, gross and viscous Vapours which are furnished by the cloudier days, as also by the night, which hin∣der that brave and excellent action of
Heat, which is absolutely necessary to produce the goodness and purity in Beings. This preceding Reason causeth this natural Conclusion, That the Inha∣bitants of the Countries which are Northerly and bordering upon the Seas must needs be subject to many diseases popular and particular to their Climat, which are scarcely known by the people of other Regions, and by the Physicians that govern them. For since that they breath in an intempe∣rate air, and fill'd with the gross and humid atoms of the Vapours; that they drink indigested Waters, that are hea∣vy, and fill'd with a Salt that is dull and ill-fermented; that they eat Ve∣getables and Animals, which already partake in themselves of the defects of these general springs; it also implies of necessity that they must partake of those bad productions which result thereof, according to more or less of
the ill impression made in them, both in the moment of their Birth, and in the course of their Life. Therefore it is absolutely necessary to make use of something that may be able to com∣bat all those evils which we have new∣ly mentioned, both to preserve the Health of those that enjoy it, and to correct and re-establish the Health of those which do but linger and languish under these Inconveniences. Which causes us to say, that the Great Cordial is wholly necessary for the Northerly and Sea-bordering people, and specially for the Inhabitants of Islands, by rea∣son that all its Ingredients are filled with a concentred Light, which can remedy all their evils. But after this general Reasoning, we must come to a particular Demonstration, which we shall apply by Examples, with the same order in which we have spoken in general. In the first place, as concerning the
Air and the Winds that reign with a perpetual inconstancy, all those that live in those Countries know too well by their own experience, that the Fogs and the humid Vapours of the Morn∣ing, as also those in the Evening, which the French call the Sereine, do so alter the Head and Breast, that one can scarcely be cautious enough, in whatsoever season it be, to prevent Defluxions and Rheums, Catarrhs, troublesome Coughs and Colds, which commonly draw after them Rheuma∣tisms, wandering pains, Asthma's, the Lungs disease and the Consump∣tion. Now all this proceeds onely from the defect of Digestion, which takes its beginning from a hurtful su∣perfluity which is mix'd with the Air; which men take in and breath out con∣tinually, there being never a part of the Body of Man, be it never so close and obscure, but what is replenish'd with the Air we take in, be it good
or bad. And to this purpose one of the greatest Philosophers of this Age hath most learnedly said, Est in aere occultus vita cibus, when it is well pu∣rified, and abounding in a balsamick, subtil and during Salt, which comes to it from Light: but when it is troubled to receive it, and that it is fill'd on the contrary with an indigestive, gross and malignant Salt, it then can be nothing else but a principle of Diseases, and, in consequence, of Death, if its defects are not corrected in the Stomach, which is the seat where the first Di∣gestion is performed. And it is from the defect of this first Fermentation that all the others are derived, which alter and corrupt the mass of Bloud, whence flow out, as from their Spring, the Scurvy, the Rickets, the King's-evil, and all other diseases which are of this kind of nature. This renders also the people the sooner subject to the venomous impressions of the Pox and
its consequences, and hinders them also from being so easily cured of the Ve∣nereal Plague as those men that are more Easterly. This is evidently pro∣ved by the experience of those which cross the Seas on purpose to breath an∣other Air, and receive thereby that comfort which they hope from it, and that they are sensible of. Now let us come to the Water which draws from the Earth a certain slime that is subtil, dull and viscous, which contains in it an heterogeneal Salt, which alters the property of the volatil and acid Salts: not that this is found equally every where; but there is notwithstanding every where some defect of Digestion, by the defect of Heat, and by too much moisture. Let us adde to this, that the Vegetables participate of these evils; for all that they furnish us for Kitchin-use and for Physick hath nei∣ther the taste nor smell that the Herbs of other hotter Climes have, which is
noted specially in those which ought to abound in a volatil sulphureous Salt; which manifests it self by the taste and smell, since we have found by our pro∣per experience, that they do not yield in distillation such a quantity of Oil and Spirit as do those of warmer Countries. Notice must be taken also, that the meat by which they live is not furnish'd with Salt and Spirits to be capable of nourishing in so little quantity as it doth else-where, where it is firmer and closer: which is most evidently proved by those that make Broths, strong Broths and Jellies, for they find that of necessity there is required a dou∣ble quantity of flesh to give the same strength and taste to that which is de∣stinated for the pleasure of the Palate, or to sustain the weakness of the sick. This is also palpably found in the juice of Roasted meats, for it is not anima∣ted, neither with the smell, taste nor colour of the meats of the same nature
that are in hot Countries, where the juice of the roasted meats bears its Salt along with it, as its taste doth witness. Now as those people take notice of the defects of the Aliments and those Indigestions that follow them, they arm themselves against them by the common use of Spices and Aromatick Herbs, which they continue and aug∣ment by an unavoidable necessity. All that has been hitherto spoken doth clearly make appear, that Sir Wal∣ter Rawleigh hath endeavoured to de∣serve well from the inhabitants of his Native Soil, since he hath given the receipt of a Remedy that is capable to remedy all the defects which may cause in the Stomach of his Country-men the Indigestions of their Aliments and their natural Constitution, which par∣ticipates also of the General defect. For the Remedy which he has given to the publick is not onely able to pre∣vent the evil impressions which may
be contracted during the time of Health; but it is also powerful enough to seek out the Evil to the very centre of the Bloud and Spirits, in which Life doth reside, and from whence they de∣rive, as from their proper source, both Health and Sickness. There doth it kill, by its Alexitery and Cordial vir∣tue, the venome which caused the Dis∣ease, and there it blots out (if I may say so) the false Idea and evil Character of which the Archeus, principal director of the functions of life, was impreg∣nated, and as it were bound up with∣all. For this noble Remedy doth make its presence to be felt as soon as it is in the bottom of the Stomach, where at first sight it strengthens the natural Heat, that reduces it from power to act; so that it makes and drives the irradiation of its power and virtue all over, it strengthens the Spirits, and disingages them from the bonds of the Matter, and causes them to act with
more liberty. And thus Nature find∣ing her self strengthned and eas'd, she drives out by the Emunctories that which annoy'd her, sometimes by Sweats and by Urines, and sometimes also by an insensible and mild Transpi∣ration. There is no wondering at the sudden operation of this Cordial; for considering that it is composed but of things which are essencified, it cannot chuse but produce sudden effects, by reason of the subtil & quick penetration of the Salts and Spirits which compose it, which are all of them friends to our Nature: which causes us to conclude, that it is not onely healing, but also preserving, and a maintainer of present Health, as well as it is able to restore that which is already altered. We have nothing else to speak of now but of the proper and convenient time in which our Great Cordial ought to be fitly administred, to receive there∣of the succour which it is able to give,
and that is hoped for from it: as also of the Dose, proportion of weight and quantity of this noble Remedy, be it taken simply, for the entertaining and preservation of Health, or that it be used for the recovery and restauration of the same Health when it is out of order, and that its fine and pleasing Harmony is troubled and hindred; which is none of the least considerable parts of this Discourse. For it often happens, & almost always, through the fault of an accustomed popular Errour, that most persons take upon them to administer Remedies without suf∣ficiency of skill to know the conveni∣ency of Time, the fit Dose, and least of all the necessary disposition that is required to the Subject that is to re∣ceive the benefit of it. Which causes many abuses, and that the Remedy is blamed sometimes, though the fault proceeds but from the want of a good and legitimate appropriation: as is most
learnedly observed by our Great Para∣celsus, in the Preface to the Tenth Book of his Archidoxes. To prevent all these disorders, it is not sufficient onely that the Remedies be well and duly prepared, but it is also necessary for those that would reap benefit by them, to know how they should be administred; which belongs onely to the true Physician, who knows not onely the sphere of the activity of the Remedy and of its Ingredients, but be∣sides this examines the disposition of the Subject, in health or sick, who is to receive it, and makes those lawful and necessary reflexions which are to be done upon the time and dose, ac∣cording to the age, sex, temper, native place, and upon all the other circum∣stances, which ought to make him con∣clude the application or suspension of the exhibition of the Remedy. Therefore to find some Medium that may help to the want of skill of
the one, and to the presumption of the others, we must give some general notes, which may prevent failing when any will make use of our Cordial, be it to preserve and maintain Health, or to repair and restore it when it is altered or lost. In the first place is to be con∣sidered whether the person be Costive or no; because the retention of the Excrements does always cause some disturbance, for they heat commonly the Liver and Spleen, the Breast and Brains: insomuch that if this Remedy be given before the Evacuation of these Excrements, the disturbance and augmentation of the Heat doubtless will be attributed to the action of the Remedy, although the true cause pro∣ceed from the retention of the Excre∣ments. Therefore it is most necessary gently to loosen the Belly of those to whom would be given essensified and volatilized Remedies, that nothing may hinder their good effects. It is to
be considered in the second place, whe∣ther those that would make use of this Remedy have their Stomach subject to sudden Alterations, and to irregular Fermentations, which do commonly cause Nauseousness, Palpitations, Sweats and Restlesness, by reason of some sharp and malignant matters that sojourn and lurk in the bottom of the Ventricle. In that case the Stomach must be cleansed and scour'd with a sim∣ple, natural and gentle Vomit; that the Insultations and Counter-times which these matters cause may not be attri∣buted to the Remedy. After these precautions, our Great Cordial may be made use of in all seasons and for all sorts of persons of what sex or age so∣ever, provided one hath likewise at that time the counsel and direction of the learned Physicians; and then will be tried those virtues and efficacy which this great and rare Remedy con∣ceals in it self. We shall not specifie
here the general nor particular Diseases that it is able to combat and destroy, since we have sufficiently discoursed of it, when we gave the relation of the Ingredients which compose it, which is sufficient to give an able instruction, thereby to put it in practice, and make use of it with benefit. Its Dose is from six Grains to half a Dram, as a Preser∣vative and maintainer of Health; and from half a Scruple or twelve Grains to a Dram, or four Scruples, when it concerns the Cure of those divers Dis∣eases to which it is able to give help. It may be given in all sorts of Wines, in Broth, in Posset, in cordial De∣coctions, and in simple or compounded distilled Waters, according to the pa∣lat of the healthful or sick person, and according as the learned and experienced Physicians will judge it most conveni∣ent and necessary. God grant that what we have done and said upon this Great and Admirable Cordial redound to the
common good of all Sick persons, and to the augmentation of the Glory and Splendour of rare Physick and law∣ful Pharmacy, according to the most generous and most laudable Intentions of that Great and Generous Monarch, who commanded me to make and per∣form this Noble Remedy. Amen. FINIS.
