M1370 13675419 101230
A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE-HALL, ON JANUARY the 30th, 1681. By HENRY MAURICE, B. D. Chaplain to His Grace the Lord Archbishop of CANTERBURY. Published by His Majesties Special Command. LONDON, Printed by Samuel Roycroft, for Robert Clavell at the Peacock in S. Pauls Church-yard, 1682.
ISAIAH XXXVII. 3. This is a day of Trouble, of Rebuke, and Blasphemy. IT was the manner of the Ancient Christians to ob∣serve the Anniversaries of their Martyrs, not with the mournful Rites of a Funeral, nor the dejectedness of Fa∣sting and Humiliation, but as the days of their Birth and Coronation, with the highest expressions of Joy and Thanksgiving, with the same chearfulness and serenity that they had suffer'd. Nor could it be conceiv'd proper to remember them with Tears, whose happy condition was rais'd above the assi∣stance and charity of the Church's Prayers; for those glorious Spirits take sanctuary un∣der the Heavenly Altar, where no Persecu∣tion, no Sacriledge can invade them. Those
as the Fellow-sufferers of Christ, have the special priviledge of immediate admission into Paradise: and tho the passage be rough and boysterous, yet the speed and the dis∣patch is proportionable; and the Fire as it hastens to destroy, becomes at the same time a swift and rapid Chariot to transport the Martyrs into glory. What wonder then, if when one Member be so eminently ho∣nour'd, the whole body take occasion to rejoyce with it? But besides this recompence of the Suffe∣rers, which the Church was wont to congra∣tulate with a joyful Remembrance, the ho∣nour done to Religion by those who own'd it with their dying Confessions, and sub∣scrib'd it with their Blood, requir'd yet a far∣ther Acknowledgment and Thanksgiving. For what were the Passions of the Martyrs, but so many Victories of the Christian Faith, that proclaimed it to be stronger than Principalities and Powers: stronger than the Counsel and Indignation of Men: stronger than the desires of Life, or Terrors of Death? By these Conquests was the Kingdom of Christ enlarged; by these Invincible Suffer∣ings
was the perversness of the Nations re∣duc'd. When Christians knew how to die better than to dispute, but none understood yet how to rebel for their Religion: What then can the Commemoration of these Vi∣ctories be, but the common Triumph of Christianity? How then are we departed from this an∣cient and reasonable Practice? How comes this black and melancholy appearance to ob∣scure, and as it were eclipse this Day of our Royal Martyr? Is the Crown of Martyrdom now become less glorious? or, is it not at least an equal recompence for the loss of Earthly Kingdoms? or the Cause for which he suffer'd, the Cause of God, and of his People, was it not sufficient to entitle him to the dignity of Martyrdom? This part ad∣mits of no suspicion, for the Title of the Martyr, as it is more honourable, so it is no less clear and undoubted than that of the King: Nay, the Malice of his Enemies, pro∣phetick as that of Caiaphas, foretold this his heavenly Inauguration, and accomplished their own prediction, by making him a glo∣rious Prince indeed.
We bewail not him therefore at this time, but weep for our selves and for our Coun∣try, stain'd with this Innocent and Royal Blood, which was shed not by the hands of a Pagan Invader (for so some of our Kings became Martyrs in the defence of their Re∣ligion and their People) but by a new and unhear'd of Treason of his own Subjects. And had the Conspiracy of a few desperate Wretches prevail'd against him, the sudden∣ness and secresie of the stroke might have been our Excuse, and cover'd the Nation from the guilt and infamy of the Fact: But this Treason usurp'd the name of the Senate and People of the Land; and as if the Fears and Astonishment of the Nation had been taken for their consent and approbation, Murder was drest up in the form of Publick Execution, and the Coronation of the King was not more solemn, had hardly more Spe∣ctators than that of the Martyr. Had he fallen in the day of Battel by the blind and undiscerning fury of Rebellion, or after∣wards in the dark recesses of his Prison; the reproach had been common to us with many other Nations: But this was the first
time that Treason affected to make it self a Spectacle, and grew Impudent and de∣sperate enough to undergo the horrour and envy of a Publick Regicide. And not content to trample all Earthly Majesty un∣der foot, the name of God and of Religion, and what is our more peculiar disgrace, of Reform'd and Protestant Religion, were brought to suffer together with our late So∣vereign, while they were abus'd into a pre∣tence to carry on, and to justifie the Wicked∣ness of this day. These are the sad Reasons of our present affliction, that render the remembrance of this Martyrdom so bitter. These are the Clouds that overcast the day, and give it so different an appearance from the Feasts of the Ancient Martyrs. 'Tis this in fine which renders it so exactly agreeable to the descri∣ption of the day in the Text; A day of Trou∣ble, of Rebuke, and Blasphemy. The Trouble, as St. Jerom explains these words, belongs to us whose was the loss, whose was the sin. The Rebuke proceeds from God, whose Judgment this was. The Blasphemy is the part of our Enemies, who are
glad of this occasion to insult us and our Religion. It is the Echo and repercussion of that execrable stroke, return'd upon us with the censures and reproaches of the World. Of these I shall speak severally, ac∣cording to the order of the Text, and begin with the Trouble of the day. (1.) Of all the Blessings God is pleased to bestow upon a Nation, there is none either more beneficial or more magnificent than a good King; who represents not only the Authority of the Universal Monarch, but the affection and tenderness of our Heaven∣ly Father; and is the Image of the love and goodness, no less than of the Power and Ma∣jesty of God. What happiness may not a People enjoy under a Prince after Gods own heart? How must Religion flourish under his protection? how must Vertue reign in his Laws, and triumph in his Exam∣ple? what Peace and Prosperity must adorn his Reign? what Security and Content must possess his Subjects, whose Power is suffici∣ent to secure them against foreign depreda∣tions, and whose Justice and Clemency in∣terpose between them and the Terrours of
his own Power? This Condition of all things seems to approach nearest to that of Gods Heavenly Kingdom, where the Saints do not Obey so much, as Reign together with their King. But when it shall please God to recall this great Instrument of Hu∣mane Welfare; when this mighty Vessel, that contained so many, and such variety of Blessings, shall be drawn up again into Hea∣ven, and this Earthly God comes to die like other Men, the Joy and Delights of the People expire with him; and it is not an ordinary Affliction and Mourning that he leaves behind him, nor is any Loss lamented with more sincere or more obstinate Tears. The Heathen were so sensible of this Trou∣ble, that to relieve themselves they ran head∣long into Idolatry, and chang'd their Alle∣giance into Adoration. Nor would they be perswaded, that the best of their Kings did Die like one of the Common People, but that Death made them Invisible and Divine: neither would they be comforted otherwise than by this perswasion, That they still re∣mained under the Government and Prote∣ction of their belov'd Princes. Thus Assyria,
Egypt, and almost all the Nations of the Earth were first distracted into Superstition, and the People of Rome would not be satis∣fied for the loss of their first King, before the Senate had decreed Worship, for him they were suspected to have destroy'd. Nay, sometimes this Trouble grew too strong for all the amusements of Superstition; and O∣syris, notwithstanding the Opinion of his Di∣vinity, was remembred with perpetual La∣mentations. But be this the Extravagance, and Mad∣ness of Heathen Zeal. Even the People of God himself were not above the reach of this Trouble; and though they were taught, that the same Providence did always watch over them under all the differences of Go∣vernment, yet they could not sustain the loss of a good Prince without some jealousie, that God was going to desert them; at least∣wise, not without singular Trouble and Affliction. When Moses, the Great Prince of Israel, whose mighty Scepter commanded the Sea, and made it a Bulwark and Defence for his People on the Right hand, and on the Left; in whose time plenty came down from Heaven in
Bread and Flesh, and Rivers ran in dry places; Moses, the prodigy of Wisdom and Modesty, of great Ʋnderstanding, and greater Mistrust of it; slow indeed of Speech, but wonderful in his Writings; Moses, the Meekest Man upon Earth, easie to forgive Injuries (and happy were it, if the same Vertue that is so forward to par∣don, could as easily reclaim the Offender;) easie in the Concession of his own Prerogatives, and sharing his Authority with the Elders of the Congregation; Such a Prince in short, whose Government had more in it of the Father, than the King: When he came to take his leave of the People in order to go to the place where he must die, with how sad a Countenance, with what discontented Murmuring was he answer'd? He found their Affection now more querulous and ungovernable than all their former Seditions. And tho Corah and his Faction had represented him odiously, as one that affected Arbitrary Dominion, yet when he came to Die, such was the Peoples resentments of that Loss, that God seem'd to grow Jealous, and to mistrust their Affe∣ctions towards Himself, and therefore thought fit to conceal him by a private
Interment at some distance from the Camp, on a high Hill, from whence is the fairest Prospect over all the Land of Canaan. Nor could all this prevent the Grief and Lamen∣tation of Israel for so great a Loss; for, notwithstanding they were upon the point of taking possession of the Promis'd Land yet, they deserred to accept the fruit of For∣ty years labour and expectation, till they had paid a Sorrowful Duty to the Memory of Moses, whom they bewayl'd Thirty Days in an extraordinary manner; and Josephus adds, that they were never so much afflicted for any loss. JOSIAH, the good, but unfortunate King of Judah, who had repayr'd the Temple of the Lord in Jerusalem, and restor'd the neglected and prophan'd Service of God into its ancient Purity and Splendor, having been unhappily slain in Megiddo, was lamented in an Un∣usual manner by the Inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem; nor was the Mourning en∣ded within the accustomed time, but trans∣mitted to Posterity. Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, and all the Singing Men and Singing Women spake of Josiah in their Lamentations
unto this day, and made it an Ordinance in Is∣rael. And after the Return of the Captivity from Babylon, when one would think that all their former Sorrows had been forgot, yet this Grief was still fresh and undiminish'd; and the Prophet Zachary, when he would have described the Mourning of the Chil∣dren of the Bride-Chamber, when Christ their Bridgroom should be taken from them, could not find a greater Instance than that for Josiah: It shall be like the Mourning of Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Me∣giddo. But this is the least part of our present Trouble, nor would it be just to remember that Loss with so much Affliction, which God hath long since so gloriously repair'd: Had our late Sovereign therefore dy'd the death of Moses or Josiah, and the course of Nature, or the chance of War, or any thing else than our own Sin and Madness depriv'd us of so great a Blessing, the Trouble of this Day might have ceas'd before this time: but when we consider the Manner, and the Hands by which He fell, His Blood (like that of Murder'd Persons, upon the approach of
the Murderer) seems to run still afresh, and to fly in the face of this Guilty Nation, threatning it with yet more severe Judg∣ments. For if the Sin of Corah, which pro∣ceeded no farther than Insolent Expressions against Moses and Aaron, (the lowest step of this days guilt, and scarcely to be reckon'd in the Computation of it) was punish'd with Fire and Pestilence; How much sorer Punish∣ments shall we expect, whose oblique Con∣tempt of Authority was soon improv'd into open Insolence, and (since no Faction did ever Insult a Prince they did not mean to destroy) that Insolence was asserted by Re∣bellion, and this carried on through Rapin, and Devastation, and Blood? And the suc∣cess of that Rebellion rendring it still more daring and wicked, the Guilt grew up with wonderful Increase, and exceeded all Com∣putation and the Power of Discourse; for who can express the succeeding Treatment of Captiv'd Majesty, the Indignities of His Imprisonment, of His Trial, of His Death, but with Tears, unless the greatness of the Trouble intercept even those Expressions? Who can reflect upon so barbarous a Fact
without the greatest disorder and tumult of Thoughts? And now, if we yet retain any thing of English Nature and Affections, How can we look upon this Land thus de∣fil'd with Royal Blood, and laden with such crying Aggravations, and not weep over it? How can we reflect upon the Singula∣rity of this Guilt, and not be troubled with the apprehension of some Exemplary Ven∣geance, as new and singular as the Crime? But why are We concern'd in this Trou∣ble, who have no share in the Guilt? For how many here present may justly boast their Services to that Excellent Prince, and the honour of Suffering with him? How many here present are the Noble Off-spring of that brave, but unfortunate Loyalty, that contended so long with a Prosperous Re∣bellion, with unequal Force? How many more are wholly unconcerned in the Sin, who were yet unborn when this accursed thing was committed? Yet none above the reach of this Trouble, none beyond the ne∣cessity of this Humiliation: For Publick Sins of such Example and Scandal as this,
like the first Rebellion of Man, may remain a Debt upon Posterity, and involve more in the unhappy Consequences of it than the Seed of the Evil Doers. For when God upon this Occasion comes to reckon with a Na∣tion, and to call all their Sins to Remem∣brance, who can endure the Visitation? Noah, and Job, and Daniel, may save their own Souls indeed by their Righteousness in such General Calamities; but few, I am a∣fraid will be able to make use of their Plea, and stand upon their Righteousness and In∣tegrity. They were but few, in compari∣son of the whole Body of the Jewish Na∣tion, that were immediately concern'd in putting our Saviour to Death: they were not many, and perhaps but a Mercenary Rabble, that Petition'd for his Crucifixon, and undertook to Answer all the Appeals of His Blood at their own, and their Childrens peril; yet when the time of their Visitation came, (which was not till Forty years after the Killing of their King, when most of his Betrayers and Murderers were dead) every Age, and Sex, and Family, did share alike in the Common Calamity, and the Famine,
and Pestilence, and Swords of the Romans, had no Commission to distinguish; only the Christians are said to have escaped: And lest We might presume, and grow secure with this Example, we must remember, that the holiness of their Lives was no less won∣derful than their Preservation. And if the Post-nati, such as had yet done neither Good nor Evil, may have reason to apprehend the Consequence of this Day, the Remains of the Last Generation cannot be unconcern'd in this Trouble; for they were all in some measure Accessory to this Evil; and if they were not the Instruments, yet were they the Occasion of what we now bewail, and by contributing every one his part to the general Provocation, help'd to draw down this heavy Judgment upon us. Many, whose Arms and Affection waited upon the Royal Standard, fought against it more effectually by their Sins; and like the Soul∣diers of Ptolomy, the last of that Race, while they follow'd their pursu'd King, sunk the Vessel on which he was Embarqu'd. In short, All had joyn'd to provoke the Wrath of God, and Fanatick Fury was but the In∣strument
to Execute it. Therefore we will no longer regard those wretched Authors of this Cruelty, whose Memory is as odious and abhorr'd, as the Prophane Reliques of their Carcasses; but we will look a little far∣ther into the Nature of this Calamity, and in God's permission of so barbarous, and un∣natural Wickedness, read the severity of his Judgment, and the sharpness of his Rebuke, the Second Part of this Days Character. It is a day of Rebuke. 2. As it is a high Presumption to Inter∣pret all the Acts of Providence, and Un∣christian to resolve every Calamity into a Judgment; yet on the other side there are some so remarkable, so manifest Instances of Gods Indignation, that there needs no Hand-writing nor Prophet to explain them. There may be a mighty Wind, and yet God may not be in that Wind; there may be a Fire and Earthquakes, and God be in nei∣ther of them: But when Fire and Brimstone shall come down from Heaven to destroy Wicked Cities, Fire as prodigious and un∣natural as the Lusts that kindled it; when an Earthquake, which is a kind of Sedition
in nature, shall overwhelm the Seditious Corah and his Accomplices, and single them from the rest of the Congregation of Israel; there is no room either for Infidelity that believes nothing, or for Charity that be∣lieves all things, to dispute such Demonstra∣tions of Gods Judgments. Nor may we understand the Rebuke of God only from such Acts of his immediate and flaming Hand; but many of those Judgments which are Executed by the hands of Men are no less manifest. But of all the Evil Symptoms of God's Displeasure towards a Nation, there are few more certain, or more fatal, than the Murmuring and Sedition of the People. And tho this may be of less Con∣sequence when it is natural, and the effect of Tyranny or Oppression: yet when it is without Reason, and all hope and prospect of Advantage; when it is as unaccountable as the Misunderstandings of Babel, like Thun∣der in a clear Sky, it is to be accounted a Prodigy, and the Voice of God. When the happiest People on Earth, had They but a due sence of their happiness, secur'd with favourable Laws, and a more favourable
Prince: When a Nation Wealthy and Pros∣perous, to the Envv of all their Neigh∣bours, shall grow Discontented and Cla∣morous, fancy themselves oppress'd; as Cor∣pulent Persons imagine they are Hag-ridden: When they shall give themselves up to be∣lieve Lies, as Incredible as they are Malicious, and affect a Change when they know not what to wish; we must conclude with Elias, that this Evil is from the Lord, and that his hand is in the Infatuation. But the Judgment of God may be yet more visible in the success of these Disor∣ders, from his permitting them to proceed to Extremities, to Acts of unusual Violence and Cruelty. The Malice of the Devil, and the Wickedness of Men, are always contri∣ving Mischief and Disorder in the World; and that their Designs do not take effect, is owing to those Invisible Chains of Divine Providence, that checks and restrains them. Therefore whenever these Furies are let loose, and permitted (for they need no other Commission) to destroy without Controul; whatsoever Ravage they commit, we must impute not so much to their Malice, which
is always the same, as to the removal of the Divine Protection; and look upon the Ef∣fects of their Cruelty, as the Execution of some Secret Judgment pronounc'd upon us. But the Divine Judgment is never more remarkable, than when he gives way and permission to such things as he most of all detests, and casts away without regard such things as were wont to be most dear to him: so that where Treachery and Fals∣hood, where impudent and fulsom Hypo∣crisie, when Perjury and Rebellion come to prevail and triumph over a Righteous Cause, there Wrath, we may be sure, is come to the uttermost: When God has recourse to such odious Instruments of our Pu∣nishment as these, the more vile or wicked they are, the more plain and more grievous is the Judgment. They that are overcome by the force of an Ambitious Conqueror, are a Lions Prey, and fall by a Noble Fury; but for a great and generous People to be∣come the portion of Foxes, to be devour'd like Jezabel by sordid and Domestick Fury, to be made a Sacrifice to Hypocrites and Apes, the ridiculous Counterfeit and Bur∣lesque
of Men and Christians, is to be pu∣nish'd with the most Insolent Blasphemers of God, mention'd in the Second Psalm, not on∣ly with the fierceness of his Wrath, but with his Contempt and Derision. But when God shall forsake the Tabernacle in Shilo, and the Tent he has pitch'd among Men; when he shall deliver up Religion, and Royal Majesty, the most Sacred things on Earth, to the Insolence of Treason and Sa∣criledge, it is too clear, that he is wroth with his Inheritance. It is no Common Event; it is no Casual concourse of things; but by the Common Consent of Mankind, it is the manifest Rebuke and Judgment of God. The Heathen fancy'd sometimes, that they had fix'd their gods so surely to the Tem∣ples and Altars dedicated to their Honour, that it was not in their power to forsake those Places of Sacrifice and Incense: But yet, when the Temples themselves were de∣stroy'd by Lightning, and the Altars and Images were struck from Heaven, they be∣gan to apprehend, that the Indignation of the gods against the Wickedness of the
Worshippers, might prevail over all their affection and fondness to the Place and Rites of their Worship. And the Jews thought God so wedded to their Church and Nation, that it was not possible for him utterly to forsake them: For how could he relinquish his People whom he had Cho∣sen, the Seed of Abraham his Friend? How could he forsake the Ark of the Covenant, and the Law written with his own hands? How could he cast away the Crown of David, which he had promis'd to preserve to his Posterity in a perpetual Succession? How could he abandon the House called by his own Name, the most happy Magnificent Habitation he had upon Earth? Or, could he forget all these things, yet surely he could not forget Himself; his Honour was so far engag'd, he must for his own sake preserve what he had establish'd. But if all these Considerations are neglected, and this Peo∣ple, together with their Religion, come to fall under the Feet of Heathen Oppressors, and all those Holy Things in which they trusted come to be carried away, to adorn the Tri∣umphs of Assyrian or Roman Idols, the
Judgment is then as manifest as the Cala∣mity, and the Wrath of God becomes a bright and shining, as well as a Consuming Fire: Nor can the Provocation be ordi∣nary, when God takes such Extreme Reso∣lutions as these, against all the Reluctance and Contradiction of his own Goodness. Thou art Gilead unto me, and the top of Leba∣non; but I will make thee a Wilderness, and Cities without Inhabitant; and in another place, Tho the King of Judah, were the Sig∣net on my Right hand, yet would I pluck him off. Yet all former Instances of Divine Judg∣ments seem to be surpass'd by the Rebuke of this Day: when the World, that was grown Old under the Tautologies of Sin, and the Circulations of repeated Judgments, was surpriz'd with a New thing, which it could not have imagin'd, either that Men should ever be so wicked as to Attempt, or God so angry as to Permit. For this Day, a holier Religion than that reveal'd to Moses, was expos'd to Contempt and Derision; and a Church more dear to God than that of the Jews, given up to Sacriledge and
Oppression; a Church honour'd with the first Royal Defender of the Christian Faith; preserv'd amidst the Corruptions of the World, and the Contradictions of Heresie and Schism; a Church lately Rescu'd from the Rust of a tedious Superstition, and the Tyranny of an Insolent and Powerful Im∣postor. And what is more singular, both in the Punishment, and the Sin, the Head, the Mortal and Earthly Head of this Church, an Orthodox and Holy Prince, whose Ver∣tues rais'd him higher above the People than his Throne, and the least of whose Ti∣tles was that of a KING; Such a King, such a Man, was this day given up a Sacri∣fice, to a prevailing Rebellion; and as a Sacri∣fice led in Procession thrô pretended Courts, and the formalities of a Process, thrô in∣finite Indignities, to a Solemn and Ceremo∣nious Slaughter. Pass over to the Isles of Chittim, and see: go unto Kedar, and consider diligently, and see whether there be any such thing. And we may Answer in the words of Joel, There never was any such thing, nor ever shall be. And as the first part is sufficiently veri∣fi'd in the Singularity of this Judgment: so
We beseech God the Promise may belong to us too, That there never may be any such thing; and that God would put his Bow in the Clouds, and declare, That he would never destroy us after this manner any more. And now, tho the Loss may be Repair'd, and the Guilt done away by Repentance and Pardon; tho Judgment may turn again into Mercy, and the Terrors of this Rebuke cease; yet who can wash away the Reproach and Infamy? who can silence the Blasphemy of this Day? which is the Last Part of the Character of the Day, It is a Day of Blas∣phemy. The English Nation had been long held in singular Reputation, for good Natur'd and Loyal Courage; and not only the Neigh∣bouring Nations, but the more remote Parts of the Earth have been Witnesses of Their Dutiful Affection to their Kings, whom they follow'd in their Expeditions with forward and unwearied Duty. But alas! the Blas∣phemy of this Day has silenc'd all our Ancient Praise, and the Stains of this Royal Blood has Blemish'd all the Glories of our former Loy∣alty; and that Name which was once the
Praise and the Dread of the Nations, by this Act became a Proverb of Reproach, a Detesta∣tion, and a Hissing among all People: Nay, We our selves were almost asham'd of it, nor could we own the Name of English without Distinction or Excuse, without Diffidence and Blushing. And, what was there once left of the Name that we could own? the Honour and Majesty of it had been Igno∣miniously put to Death with our Martyr'd Sovereign; and the Sordid name of Common Wealth had defac'd the Royal Image and Inscription of our Ancient Monarchy: nor could we tell our selves whose the Vile Su∣perscription was, and could not but be a∣maz'd with our own Blasphemy and Degra∣dation of our selves. Pontius Pilate, willing to give some check to the Importunate Malice of the Jews, who demanded the Crucifixion of our Lord, puts this harsh and dishonourable Question to them, Shall I Crucisie your King? That Name contains, if not always the whole Power and Authority, yet at leastwise all the Honour and Dignity of a People: He cannot be Cru∣cifi'd, but Your Name must be Crucifi'd
with him in the Inscription of his Titles. This was a Wickedness too great for the tender Consciences of Scribes and Pharisees directly to own: This was a Dishonour Jews could not digest; then, and ever since, the most Vile and Abject Race of Human Kind: Wherefore they first Disown him, and then desire he should be Crucifi'd; We have no King but Caesar, and therefore cannot be concern'd in the Disgrace of this Person. And their Ignorance was their Excuse; They had never submitted to the Government of Christ; they never understood his Title. But the Blasphemy of this Day receives none of these Excuses; here can be no plea of Ignorance or Mistake: The Superscription of the Cross is here own'd, as well as the Crucifixion; and the Treason was grown too Impudent and Vainglorious to dissemble or extenuate. And now, all that we can answer to this Blasphemy, is, but Repentance and Restitution, or rather the Mercy and Compassion of GOD, who has restor'd Us to our Ancient Honour and Dignity, by the Restauration of our Gracious Sovereign.
And tho all this Reproach and Obloquy may be justly come upon us, yet what has our Innocent and Holy Religion done to be Involv'd in the same Blasphemy? The rest of the Calamity was grievous enough, and like the Arrows of God sticking in the Flesh; but this breaks the Bones, according to the Ex∣pression of the Royal Psalmist, My Bones are smitten asunder, as with a Sword: while mine Enemies that hate me, cast me in the Teeth. Nor was it any Personal Reproach that wounded him so deep, but the Dishonour of God: Namely, while they daily say unto me, Where is now thy God? And I would to God, the E∣nemies of our Religion had wanted so fair an occasion to Blaspheme it: just, there can be none; and this is but too plausible. For, when Religion was made the Disguise of a most Unnatural Treason; and the most Wicked Wretches upon Earth did Impropriate to themselves the Name of Saints, together with all the Sacred Functions of the Ministry, and took a singular delight in the style of a Preaching and Praying People: When Prayer and Fasting was made the Prologue to some Bloody Tragedy, and serv'd as the Eve or
Vigil to the Day of Sacrifice: When Scri∣pture was alledg'd in Defence of the greatest Villanies, even that of this Day; and where Scripture could not be colourably perverted, Immediate Revelation was pretended, and Special Commission from God: In sum, When all the Mischiefs which We now bewail, were carried on under the disguise of Conscience and Religion, what wonder is it if the Name of God, upon this occasion, be Blasphemed a∣mong the Gentiles? Great and grievous was the Blasphemy, and too fatal was the Influence it had upon Weak Minds, that had been Trayn'd up in the Opinion of Christian Re∣ligion. Many began to run away from all Form and Appearance of Religion, and were afraid to make any shew of Piety, for fear of being suspected for Rebels and Impostors: Many were asham'd of that Profession that was cover'd with so much Infamy and Re∣proach; and True Piety was almost out of Countenance, and forc'd to hide it self. Yet, after all this, The Blasphemies of Irreligion are but false, and mistaken Triumphs. For if a True Jewel lose nothing of its Value, be∣cause there are many Counterfeits; if the
sincere and precious Metal preserve its E∣steem, notwithstanding all secret practice to Embase it; If an Angel of Light cannot lose his Integrity and Honour, because Satan transforms himself into his Likeness; why should Christian Religion, why should Holi∣ness and Vertue suffer for the Wickedness of detected Hypocrisie? Nay, on the contrary, it is clear, that the Real Value of any thing makes Men so industrious to Counterfeit; and if there were not some great Excellency in True Godliness, Evil men would never take the pains to pursue the Shadow of it, and to carry on their Wicked Designs under that Disguise. But, besides the Common Enemies of Christian Religion, the Peculiar Adversaries of the Reformation are not wanting to so fair an Occasion of Blaspheming it. The Church of Rome, which we charg'd but too truly with the Treasonable Doctrine of Killing Kings, and Practices correspondent, do not neglect to return the Charge with Insolence and Triumph, and appeal to this day for the Loyalty of Protestant Religion. It cannot but be a great grief to any one, who owns
the least Affection to that Name, under which so many Noble Churches united against the Common Oppressour, that any who make Profession of it, should give the Enemy so great occasion to Blaspheme. But Men will take what Appellations they please, and Act afterwards as they think fit; and it would be too hard measure to charge the Crimes of some Usurpers upon the whole Denomina∣tion: the Lewdness of the Gnosticks might have been as reasonably charg'd upon Chri∣stianity; and the Piracy which the Turks ex∣ercise under the Counterfeit of our Colours, may with the same Justice be imputed to Us. And this is our Comfort in the present Case, That whatever Agreement the Authors of this Days Wickedness may own with other Churches, they have done us the Favour to disown Us. And doubtless We have great Reason to own the Kindness of their Sepa∣ration. They went out from Us, and would not be of Us; because Our Doctrine was too Loyal and Passive for Men of so fiery Temper: and the greatest Tyranny they found in Our Religion, was the Restraint that it laid on the Conscience of Men from
resisting against the Higher Powers: This was, nay is yet, more grievous to them than all the pretended Oppressions of the Hierarchy; This is a more real and greater grievance to their Consciences than all the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church: And had they been Enemies only to the Dignity of our Church, or the Decence of our Wor∣ship, some Accommodation might be ex∣pected; but alass, these things are but Pre∣tences, to cover the Restless and the Factious Spirit, and to disguise their Practices a∣gainst the Government. 'Tis this we know not how to reconcile to our Communion; 'Tis this which no honest Comprehension can admit: Nor is this a new Charge rais'd by Zealots of Our Church to render them odious to the Government: For a Great Statesman of this Nation, and reputed no Ill Friend to the Party, has long ago acquit∣ted Us from any note of Persecution on their Account, and confesses Their Sedition to have been the sole ground of all those Laws that have been made against them; and adds, in behalf of the Government then, That it was Wise enough to distinguish between
Conscience and Faction. And how much Wiser, at leastwise more Knowing in that Point, sad Experience has made us since, I need not say, This Day shall speak it for me. But now to Return to the Blasphemy of the Church of Rome: If Community of Name be not so much to be regarded, as Agreement in Doctrine, our Accusers will be found to have a greater part in these Sectaries, than We; for both Agree in the Fundamentals of Rebellion, and the Law∣fulness and Merit of Resisting the Higher Powers. And if we Trace backward the Footsteps of our Troubles, we may easily see, that it was from thence the Faction bor∣row'd their Arguments; and from their Catholick Authors, the Semons and Speeches of the Party, had deriv'd all the Art and Colour of Their Treason. But, this is not a Time to Justifie, but to Humble our selves; nor is it so material, from whence these Barbarous Men deriv'd their Principles of Disloyalty, since it is too certain that they owe all their Success and Advantages to our Sins; as these Increase, so do They; they
have both one Common Fate, they mul∣tiply and decrease together. Our Propha∣ness and Contempt of Religion, begets in them a Contempt of Authority and the Laws; and the Neglect of that Holy Service we pre∣tend to Extol, adds greater Numbers to our Enemies, than all their Arts and Industry can pervert. If we would weaken that Faction, let us take away the Support they have a∣mong our selves, the Open scandal and Vici∣ousness of our Lives; and then they are lest without Pretence, and fall without our Trouble. Let us confute their Reproaches by a Reformation of our Manners, and de∣tect their Hypocrisie, not by washing off the Paint with Satyr, but by Confronting their Pretence and Form with solid and sincere Piety: Without this, all other Means will be to little purpose. Without this, Loyalty is but Affectation, a thing no less Un∣serviceable, than it will be Uncertain; for he who Fears not God, will have but little Reverence for a Man, whatever Title or Au∣thority he may bear; and he who has no due Conscience of his Duty to his Prince, and Obeys not for Gods sake, but his Own, is a Ser∣vant
but during his own Pleasure or Advan∣tage: Or, if the Treacherous foundation do not betray that frail Faith to Change and Ruine, yet what Fruit can be hop'd from the Services of those who are at defiance with GOD, upon whom all the Success does de∣pend? Be not deceiv'd, God is not mock'd, espe∣cially not by an open and profest Contempt: and if the different Mockeries of Hypocrisie and Prophaness should come to Contend for Victory; who can tell, but that God should rather Incline to favour the Shadow and Resemblance of Religion, rather than a Wan∣ton Contempt of all that is Sacred and Good; and that Scribes and Pharisees, Hy∣pocrites of transparent Disguise, may yet be preferr'd to Sadduces and Libertines, that believe neither a Spirit, nor a Resurrection, and Live, as if neither Body nor Soul were to ren∣der any Account? And now let us Learn from this Ʋnhappy Day, (and how shall we Learn, if this cannot Teach us) the Necessity of Joyning Religion to Loyalty, to Fear God and the King together. It is the same Power that is to be Reveronc'd in both, they can∣not be separated but to the manifest Dis∣advantage
of all Human Authority. Let us Lastly, out of a due Sense of the Trouble, Rebuke, and Blasphemy of this Day, Learn, to detest all the plausible Beginnings and Witchcrafts of Rebellion, and Confirm our selves with stedfast Resolutions of perpe∣tual Obedience to our Sovereign: And fur∣ther, Since it is not the Affection and Loyalty of Men, but the Favour of GOD that sup∣ports the Royal Throne; Let us Beseech Al∣mighty God, That he would Protect the Person of his Anointed, and make the Go∣vernment to Prosper in his Hands; that at length He would Recompence all the Suffer∣ings of the Royal FATHER, with Double Blessings of Prosperity upon the SON, Our Dread Sovereign, that under him We may live Quiet and Peaceable Lives, in all Godliness and Honesty, in all humble Obedience and Loyalty. FINIS.
