M1790 12678135 65607
A GEOGRAPHICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE WORLD. WITH A brief Account of the several Em∣pires, Dominions, and Parts thereof. As also the Natures of the People, the Customs, Manners, and Commo∣dities of the several Countreys. With a Description of the Principal Cities in each Dominion. Together with a short Direction for Travellers. LONDON, Printed for William Leake, at the Crown in Fleet-street, between the two Temple-Gates. 1671.
A GEOGRAPHICALL DESCRIPTION of the WORLD. Sold by William Leake at the Crowne in Fleetstreet.
THE BOOKSELLER TO THE READER. THis Piece is not pub∣lish'd so much for the Profit of the
Book∣seller, as of the Reader: For it is but a Little One; and there is but Little to be gotten by it: So that with∣out any other Recommenda∣tion, I shall leave the Work  to speak for it self. The Drawing of the WORLD into this Epitome, is out of pure good Will to such as have Curiosity enough perchance, but neither Time nor Money to take a View of it more at large. And this Charitable Intention of the Abstracter, hath been accompanied with a singu∣lar Care in the manner of Doing it; and to supply in Weight, what is want∣ing in Bulk: That is to say,
Here is a most exact Account given of the Ʋ∣niverse it self, and of  every Part of it; the Sci∣tuation of all the King∣doms in it; States, Pro∣vinces, Cities and Domi∣nions: together with their respective Limits and Ju∣risdictions; their Growth and Commodities; with the principal Rivers, Palaces, and other things remarka∣ble: The Quality of the Soyl, the Temperature of the Climate, with the Re∣ligion, Manners, Disposi∣tions, Laws and Customs of the People: and some Touches upon their Inte∣rests, Alliances, and De∣pendences.
To which are added, certain Advices for Tra∣vellers. This is the Brief of this Compendium; and the Bookseller hath nothing more to say, but that he wishes Health to the Rea∣der. W. L.
A TABLE of the Names of the principal Places contained in this Book. A. ADriatick Sea Page 286 Africa 214 African Isses 333 Alpes 25 America 255 American Islands 338 Arabia 162 Armenia 158 Asia 115 Assyria 166 B. Baleares 296 Barbary 216 Britain 299 Burgundy 20
C. Candia 280 Cathaie 189 Chaldea 169 China 206 Cimbrick Chersonese 87 Corsica 294 Creta 279 Cyprus 330 D. Dacia 135 Denmark 85 Directions for Travellers. 345 E. East-India 192 Egean Sea 274 Egypt 247 England 300 Ethiopia Superior 234 Ethiopia Inferior 240 Europe 1 Euxinus 271
F. Florence 42 France 11 G. Geneva 23 Genoa 50 Germany 64 Greece 123 H. Hebrides 314 Hungary 109 I. India Extra Gangem 202 Ionian Isles 282 Ireland 310 Isles of the Ocean 298 Islands of the Virginian Ocean 339 Italy 26
L. Limbourgh 56 Lorrain 21 Low Countreys 60 Lucca 52 Lybia 227 M. Madagascar 334 Malta 291 Mantuan 47 Media 179 Mediterranean Sea 288 Mesopotamia 167 Mexicana 256 Millain 46 Moscovy 97 N. Naples 29 Narsinga 194 Natolia 138 Negroes Land 230 Netherlands 53
Northern Isles 319 Norwey 91 Numidia 227 O. Orcades 313 Oriental Islands 321 P. Palestine 150 Papacy 33 Parma 50 Parthia 182 Persia 171 Peruana 263 Poland 102 Pontus 271 R. Rhodes 332 S. Sardinia 295 Savoy 22
Sclavonia 113 Scotland 306 Sicilia 289 Sorlings 315 Spain 3 Sporades 316 Swedeland 93 Syria 145 T. Tartaria 185 Transilvania 111 Turky 118 V. Venice 36 Urbin 49 W. Wales 304
ERRATA. Page 310. line 1. for Virginia, read Vergivian.
OF THE WORLD: And First of EUROPE. The WORLD is divided into four Parts; Europe, Asia, Africa, America. LONDON, Printed for William Leake, at the Crown in Fleet-street. 1671.
OF Europe.
EƲrope, the least, (as being in length but 3800 miles, and in breadth but 1200) is yet of most renown a∣mongst us: 1. Be∣cause of the temperature of the Air. 2. From the fertility of the Soyl. 3. From the study of all Arts. 4. Be∣cause  of the Roman and Greek Mo∣narchies. 5. From the purity, and sincerity of the Christian Faith. It is joyn'd to Asia by that space of earth betwixt Tanais, and Duina. Asia is joyn'd to Africa by the E∣gyptian Istmus; and America is divi∣ded from all of them. Europe is se∣parated from Asia by Duina, Tana∣is, Palus Maeotis, Pontus, Propontis, Hellespont, and the Aegean Sea. Asia is parted from Africa by the Red Sea. Africa from Europe by the Mediterranean. Africa is great∣er than Europe; Asia than Africa; and America bigger than all. Europe is divided into Continent, and Islands. The Continent is sub∣divided into Spain, France, Italy, Belgia, Germany, Denmark, Nor∣way, Sweden, Moscovia, Poland, Hungaria, Dacia, Sclavonia, and Greece. The Islands are also in ge∣neral either dispersed in the Greek Sea, Aegean, Cretan, Jonian, Adria∣tick, Mediterranean, the British, or the Northern Seas. Europe is so call'd of Europa, Daugh∣ter
to Aegenor King of the Phaeni∣cians, brought hither (as the Po∣ets feign) by Jupiter, in shape of a Bull. Of Spain. THe most Western Countrey of the Continent of Europe, is Spain, invironed on all sides with the Sea, except toward France, from which it is separated by the natural strength of the Pyrenean Mountains, and the artificial Fortresses of Pampe∣lune on the North-West, and Perpigna on the South-East. Situation.The whole circuit of this Coun∣trey is 1893 English miles. It is situate in the more Southerly part of the Nor∣thern temperate Zone, and almost in the midst of the four and six Cli∣mates; the longest day being fifteen hours in length.
Natures, and Man∣ners of the People.They are a people much given to Women; impudent braggers; ex∣treme  proud, and in their gate ve∣ry stately and majestical. But other∣wise they are people very grave in their carriages, and in offices of pie∣ty very devout; to their King very obedient; and of their civil duties to their betters, not unmindfull; of an unmoved patience in suffering adver∣sities, accompanied with a setled re∣solution to overcome them. The Women are sober, loving their Husbands or Friends; wonder∣full delicate; curious in painting, or perfuming. Fertility.This Countrey is enriched with Sacks, Sugars, Oyl, Metals, Liquoras, Rice, Silk, Lamb-skins, Wool, Cork, Rosin, Steel, Oranges, Raisons, and fruit of the like nature, which owe most of their being to heat; but in Corn it is very defective, and recei∣veth from Italy, France, and Sicily. Diet.The Cattel hereof are neither fair, nor many; so that their fare for the most part is on Sallets, and Fruits of the earth; every Gentleman being limited what flesh he shall buy for himself and his family.
Division.This Kingdome is divided into twelve Provinces, which were anci∣ently Kingdomes, (viz.) 1. Leon, and Oniedo. 2. Navarr. 3. Corduba. 4. Gallicia 5. Biscay. 6. Tolledo. 7. Murcia. 8. Castile. 9. Portugal. 10. Valentia. 11. Catelogue; and 12. Aragon. Of which in order. Leon Oni∣edo.This Kingdome hath on the East and South, Biscay and Castile; North, the Ocean; and West, Gal∣licia. The chief Towns of it are, 1. Aviles. 2. Palenza. 3. Oniedo. 4. Astorga. 5. Leon. Navarr.This is the second Kingdome for antiquity in Spain. It hath on the East, the Pyrenean Mountains; West, Iberus; North, Biscay; and South, Aragon. It is a woodless Champain Countrey, or Field, naturally fen∣ced about with Trees. The chief Cities of this Kingdome are, 1. Vi∣ctoria. 2. Viana. 3. Sanguessa. 4. Pampelune; the strength of which City is made use of by the Spaniard, as a Bulwark against France, whose King hath the title, though not the possession of it.
Corduba.This Kingdome comprehendeth Andaluzia, the Countreys of Gra∣nada, and Estremedura. This is the most rich and fertil Countrey in all Spain; the chief City is Corduba: Hence comes our true Cordovan-Leather, made of the skin of a Sardinian Beast; and near unto this City is a Wood of thirty miles in length. 2. Xeres, whence cometh our Sherry Sack. 3. Sevil, the fair∣est City in all Spain; it is in compass six miles, invironed with beautifull Walls, and adorned with magnificent and stately Buildings: Hence come our Sevil-Oranges. 4. Granada, from whence come our true Granada Stockings. 5. Mallaca, from hence come our Mallaca Sacks. 6. Almeria, a great Haven Town. 7. Guadalcanal, famous for her Mines of gold & silver.
Gallicia.Gallicia hath on the East, Astu∣ria; West and North, the Sea; and South, the River Nimius. This Countrey is very mountainous, and al∣most inaccessible. The chief Cities are, Compostella, the Seat of an Arch∣bishop, called St. Jago in honour of  St. James, who lyeth buried here. 2. Baionna. 3. Coronna. Biscay.Biscay is betwixt Navarr, East; old Castile, South; Leon, West; and the Cantabrean Ocean, North. The chief Cities are, 1. Tholosa. 2. St. Sebastians. 3. Fonterabia. 4. Bilbo, from whence come our best Blades, called Bilbo Blades. It is a Town of great traffick, and great riches; the Countrey is mountainous and woody, out of whose Hills arise 150 Rivers, of which Iberus and Duerus are chief. Tolledo.Tolledo is now accounted part of new Castile, and extendeth over the South-East of Castile, now call'd Campo de Calatrava, and so down∣ward toward Murcia. The chief Cities of it are, 1.
Tolledo, seated on the River Tagus, is passing well inhabited, as well of Noblemen, who reside there for pleasure, as of Merchants, who resort thither for Commodity. It is now the Seat of an Archbishop, who are the chief Prelates of Spain, their revenue a∣mounting to 300000 Crowns year∣ly. The second is Calatrava, seated  on the River Ava. The third is Talboia, seated on Tagus, a very neat Town. Murcia.Murcia is invironed with Tolledo, West; Granada, South; Valentia, North, and the Mediterranean Sea. The chief Towns are, 1. A∣licante, from whence comes our true Alicante Wines, made of the juice of Mulberries. 2. Murcia, on the River Segourg. 3. Nova-Car∣thago. Castile.Castile is bounded on the East with Navarr, Aragon, and Tolledo; West, with Portugal; North, with Astu∣ria; and South, with Andaluzia. It is divided into the old and new. Old Castile.The old Castile is situate on the North of the new. The chief Cities are, 1. Soria. 2. Segovia, a Town famous for Cloathing. 3. Valadolis; here is a Colledge for the education of young English Fugitives. 4. Sala∣manca, the famousest Academy of this Countrey. New Ca∣stile.It is on the South of the old. The chief Cities are, 1. Madrid, the Kings Seat. 2. Alcala. 3. Alcantara.
Portugal.This Kingdome is about 320 miles long, and 60 broad; the Air is very healthfull; the Countrey for the most part hilly, and bare of Corn, which defect is recompenced with abundance of Honey, Wine, Oyl, Allum, Fruits, Fish, white Mar∣ble, Salt. Note, that Portugal is at present under a King of their own. The chief Cities are, 1. Lisbon, upon Tagus, a famous Ci∣ty for traffick; it is in compass seven miles, and contains 20000 Houses, all of neat and elegant building. 2. Miranda. 3. Braga, the Metro∣polis of Portugal. 4. Conimbra, Porto, or Portus Galloram. Valentia.Valentia is invironed with Ara∣gon, Castile, Murcia, and the Sea. The chief Cities are, Valentia, gi∣ving name to the whole Countrey. 2. Cullera, a Sea-Town standing at the mouth of the River Kucar. 3. Segorbe. Catelogne.Catelogne is between Iberus, South; Aragon, West; the Sea, East; and Pyrenean Mountains, North. The chief Cities of it are, Tyronne, the title of the Aragonian Prince, seated on the River Betulus; and 2. Barcelone.
Aragon.Aragon hath on the East, Catte; West, Castile; North, Navarr; and South, Valentia. The River Iberus runneth through the middle of the Countrey. The chief Cities of it are, 1. Lerida, seated on the River Cinga. 2. Moson. 3. Torde∣sillo; and 4. Saragossa. Thus much of Spain. The Pyre∣nean Hills.Betwixt Spain and France are the Mountains call'd Pyrenei, and are that neck of Land which tyeth Spain to the Continent, the highest part whereof is Mount Canus, whereon if one stand in a clear day, he may see both the Seas. The French side of these Hills is naked and barren; the Spanish very fertil, and adorned with Trees. On this side standeth the Roncevals, so famous for the Battel betwixt the French-men and the Moors, in which 20000 of the French were put to rout, together with Rowland, Cousin to Charles the Great.
France. FRance is bounded on the North, with Low-Germany; on the North-west, it is washed with the British Ocean; on the West, with the Aquitain Sea; on the South, it is thwarted by the Pyrenean Moun∣tains, which part it from Spain; be∣ing toward the East-lickt with the Mediterranean Sea, and on the full East the Alpes divide it from Italy. The figure of it is almost square, each side of the Quadrature contain∣ing 600 miles. Situation.The Air hereof in the Northern part of France is purer than that of England, and being not covered with Clouds drawn out of the Sea, as
England is; for that cause it becomes more cold in Winter, and more hot in Summer, and far less annoyed with mists and rainy weather. But the parts of France lying towards  the Pyrenei, and near the Equinocti∣al Line, are subject to intemperate, yet often allayed by the Winds blow∣ing from the Sea, and by the shadow of the Mountains. Fertility.It aboundeth with all manner of good Fruits, beside store of fresh Fish; but the chiefest things which draw forrein Coyns unto them, are four especially, Wine, Salt, Linnen coarce Cloth, and Corn. They have plenty of Flax and Hemp, whereof they make Canvs, Sails, Ropes and Cables; neither want they Wool, whereof they make Cloth, though not in quantity to be export∣ed. It also yields Saffron and Oad, for Dying; besides other things of less moment.
Natures, and man∣ners of the peple.The French are very various and unconstant, and in nothing more they shew it, than in their familiarity, with whom a stranger cannot be so soon at his House, but he will be ac∣quainted with him, and as suddenly without occasion loose him again. Also they are great scoffers, and can∣not away with patience and modesty.  Likewise he is wondrous talkative, so willing is he to make himself ridicu∣lous. Diet.As well the Gentlemen as the Citi∣zens live more sparingly than the English, in their ordinary private Diet. They dine most with sodden and liquid meats, and sup most with roast; but their feasts are more sump∣tuous than ours, and consist for the most part of made fantastical meats, and Sallets, and sumptuous Composi∣tions, rather than of flesh or Birds. Their temperancy I cannot com∣mend; for besides dinners and sup∣pers, they use Breakfasts and Bevers, which they call Collations, and Gou∣ster, so eating four times a day. Apparel.In general Men and Women (ex∣cepting Courtiers, and some of the Gentry) wear light stuffs, and ra∣ther delicate than sumptuous Gar∣ments. Your Countrey people wear close Dublets, with large Breeches, with a large Coat hanging down to their knees, all of light stuffs, and their Wives in like sort attired, have their Heads all over wrapped in linnen.
Buildings.Concerning their Buildings, they are magnificent and stately; for in general all the Towns and Cities in France are fairer than ours in Eng∣land. Provinces.The divers Provinces of this Kingdome are many; of which are, Picardy, Normandy, the Isle of France, Beavois, Poictu, Aquitain, Bretaign, Daulphin, Languedock, Provence, Champaigne, Burgundy: Of these in order. Picardy.Picardy is invironed with Nor∣mandy, Belgium, Champaigne, and the Sea. It is divided into the higher and lower; in the higher are the Towns of Calice, distant from Dover about 28 or 30 miles. 2. Bullen, taken by our Henry the Eight. In the lower Picardy are S. Qui∣neus, Abenile, and Amiens. Nomandy.Normandy hath on the South, Main, and the Isle of France; East, the River Some; and other parts, the Ocean. This Dukedome contains divers fair Cities and Towns; the chief
whereof are, 1. Constance. 2. Cane. 3. Bayeux. The chief Haven-Towns are Harflew, Deepe, and New-Ha∣ven. Isle of France.This Isle is sited in the circlings and confluences of Seine, and other petty Brooks. The chief City of it is Paris, the Metropolis of all France, the circuit of which (excluding the suburbs) is said to be six miles. The buildings of this City is for the most part stately, of unpolished stone, with the out-side plastered and rough cast; and the Houses for the most part are four stories high, and in some places six. The streets are somewhat large, and among them the fairest is that of St. Dennis; the 2. St. Honore; the 3. St. Antonie; and the 4. St. Martine. The Market-places which are in this City, are 11 in number.
The chiefest building in this City is the Cathedral Church of the blessed Virgin, vulgarly call'd, Notredam. It is supported with 120 pillars, whereof 108 are less, and 12 very great, being all of free-stone. The  Chauncel is in the midst of the Church, which hath 174 walking paces in length, and 60 in breadth. It hath 45 Chappels in the circuit thereof, which are shut with grates of iron. In the front it hath 2 dou∣ble doors, with fair statues of 28 Kings. Upon the sides are 4 Tow∣ers, or Belfreys, 34 cubits high. The greatest Bell, called S. Mary, requires 24 Men to ring it. The second Town of note is S. Dennis. . Charenton. Here is in this Isle the royal Palace of Foun∣tain-bleau, the fairest House, not of France, but (as they say) of all Christendome. Labeausse.This Province hath on the East, France, or the Isle; West, Main; North, No mandy; and South, the Loyre. The chief Cities are, 1. E∣stampes. 2. Chartres. The third and principal City of it is Orleance: It is seated on the Loyre, and is one of the most pleasantest Cities in all France. Poictou.Poictou hath on the North, Brit∣tain and Anjou; East, the Duke∣dome
of Berry; South, Xamtoign and Guieon; West, the Aquitain Sea. The chief Cities are Poicters, seated on the River Claive, being next to Paris for greatness. 2. Mail∣say. 3. Lasson. Aquitain.Aquitain containeth the Provin∣ces of Gascoign and Xantoign. It is bounded with the Pyrenean Hills, the Aquitain Ocean, and the Garond. The chief Cities are, 1. Tholouse. 2. Bourdeaux, a Town famous by the general concourse of Merchants, tra∣ding for French Wines. Bretaigne.Bretaigne is invironed with Main, Tourein, and the Sea. The chief Cities hereof are, 1. Nantes on the Loyre. 2. Rhenes. 3. S. Breine. 4. Rho∣an, seated on the North side of the River Seine, partly in a plain, part∣ly on the side of Hills, and the build∣ing is for the most part of free∣stone. Daulphine.Daulphine is environed with A∣vergn, West; Provence, South; Savoy, East; and Bress, North. The chief Cities are, 1. Lyons, a famous Mart-Town, and University. 2. Va∣lence. 3. Vienna.
LanguedockIs almost encompassed with the Pyrenean Hills. The chief Cities are, 1. Narbon. 2. Montpelier, seated on the side, and is an University. Berry.This Countrey is invironed with Poictu, Toureine, Labeause, Cham∣paign, Bourbon, and Limosin. The chief City is Burges. The Citizens at six Fairs in the year sell great quantity of woollen Cloth. 2. San∣cerre. 3. Argent. Tourein.On the South-East of Anjou, betwixt it and Berry, lyeth Toureine. The chief City of it is Tours. 2. Amboys. 3. Bloys. Provence.Provence is invironed with Lan∣guedock, Daulphine, Piedmont, and the Mediterranean Sea. The principal Towns are, 1. Mar∣seilles, a famous Mart-Town. 2. Aix. 3. Arles, the Metropolis of the Bur∣gundian Kingdome. 4. Aveignon, a very fair City, seated on the Rhosne, famous in that it was the seat of the Popes for 70 years. ChampaignChampaigne, so called because it is a Champain Countrey. It is invi∣roned with Picardy, Belgium, Lor∣raine, the Burgundy, Berry, Bourbon, and the Isle.
The chief Cities are, 1. Rheims. 2. Treys. 3. Brir; and 4. Chalons. Within Rheims is a Colledge for the education of young English fugi∣tives. Burgundy Dutchy.This Dutchy is invironed with Champaigne, the County of Bress, and Bourbonoys. The chief Cities are, 1. Digion. 2. Autum. 3. Beaulne, where there is an Hospital, equal to the Palace of any Prince in Europe. Labress.On the South-East of Burgundy Dutchy, and North of Savoy, is the Countrey of Labress. The chief Towns of it are, 1. Castilion 2. Mon∣keal, and 3. Bourge, an exceeding strong Town. Within the limits of France are four Provinces, which as yet ac∣knowledge not the French Com∣mand viz The 1. Seignury of Gene∣va. 2. Savoy. 3. Lorrain. and 4. the County of Burgundy.
Burgundy County. THis County is invironed with Champaign, Lorrain, Switzer∣land, Bress, and the Dutchy. The length of it is 90 miles, the breadth 60. The people are much renowned for warlike affairs, marching under the colours of divers Princes, under the name of Walloons. The Ground is so exceeding fertil, that as France may be call'd the Gar∣den of Europe, so this may be ac∣counted the fairest flower of that Garden. The chief City is Besanson, the Metropolis of both the Burgundies. 2. Dole, a Town for strength, riches, and beauty, to be prefer'd before any in Burgundy. 3 Salines, rich in salt-Fountains 4. Castillion. Here also are more than 26 walled Towns, and 160 Lordships.
Lorrain. THis Dukedome is compassed about with part of Belgium, Alsatia, the County of Burgundy, and Champaigne. The length of it is a∣bout four dayes journey; the breadth almost three. Fertility.It aboundeth with Corn, and Wine, an excellent race of Horses, plenty of Mines, and store of salt Fish. The chief Towns of it are, Nan∣cy, seated on the Meuse, the Dukes Seat This City is strongly fortified, and the Houses are fairly built of free∣stone. 2. S. Nicholas, a strong Town. 3. Vancoleur Manners.In Manners these people much re∣semble the French and German; the French in their courtesie and civility, and the German in their drinking.
Savoy. THe County of Savoy is confin'd with Daulphin, Bress, Switzer∣land, and Peidmont. Also it com∣prehendeth under it almost all Peid∣mont on the Italian side of the Alpes. The chief Towns of it are, 1. Chambiers, the seat of the Duke when he so journeth in these parts. It is seated in a pleasant valley among the Mountains, and is full of neat Houses, belonging to the Gentry of this Province. 2. Tarantaise, 3. Ag∣nabelle. Piedmont.Piedmont is a Countrey now whol∣ly under the Savoyen and Mantuan Dukes; of this Countrey the Man∣tuan possesseth Montferat, and the Savoyen possesseth the rest. This Countrey is seated at the foot of the Mountains, and is bounded on the East, with Millain; West, with Sa∣voy;
North, with the Swizzers; and South, with the Mediterranean Sea. It is wondrous fertil, and con∣tains besides Lordships and Bar∣ronies, 52 Earldomes, and 15 Mar∣quisates. The principal Towns belonging to the Savoyen are, 1. Turin, the Dukes Seat. 2. Aoste. 3. Niza, a Haven Town. 4. Susa. 5. Saluzzes, a Marquisate, and Bishops See. The Signeury of Geneva. VVIthin the limits of Savoy, towards Labress, stand∣eth the famous Signeury of Geneva, the territories of it being yet not 8 leagues, out of which they raise a re∣venue of about 60000 Crowns.
The Town standeth at the end of the Lake Lemanus, and by the hosne; is divided into two parts, the lower part of which, call'd vul∣garly La bas rue, is seated in a  plain, and the rest upon a hill. The Buildings are of free-stone; the low∣er part thereof on the North-side, lyes close to the South-side of the Lake, is a little Haven for Gallies, which they have built to keep free the passage of the Lake; and on the same side is a strong Fort, and there the River Rodanus coming out of the Lake, enters into the City, and runs through the lower part thereof, having two Bridges for passage. Fertility.It aboundeth with all manner of good fruits, besides store of fresh fish. It also standeth well for trade of Merchandise, by reason there are many great Merchants, especially Italians, who deal here; the Inha∣bitants being most mechanical per∣sons, making excellent good Mus∣kets and Calevers. They likewise work Sattin, Velvet, and Taffaty. The people are very civil both in their behaviour, speech, and apparel, all licentiousness being severely cor∣rected. Thus much of France.
The Alpes. THe natural bounds betwixt Germany, France, and Italy, are the Alpes, Mountains which re∣quire 5 dayes to be ascended. There are 5 passages out of these hills into Italy, viz. 3 out of France, and 2 out of Germany. The 1. from France is through Provence, and so close upon the Tyrhenean Seas, through Liguria, which is the easi∣est. The 2. is through the hill call'd Geneara, into the Marquisate of Sa∣luzzes, and so to Lombardy. The 3. is over Mount Cenis, and through the County of Turin▪ he 1. way out of Germany into Italy is through the Countrey of the Grissons, by the Countrey of Valtolin▪ The other way is through Tyrolis, by the Towns of Inspruch and Trent.
Italy. ITaly is a most fruitfull and goodly Region, situate under a Clime most temperate, commodious for traffick, and most fertil for Corn and Herbage. It contains in length 1020 miles, and in breadth at the broadest not above 410. It is an Island almost in shape of a Mans Leg, being bounded on the East, with the Adriatick Sea; South and West, with the Tyrrene Seas; and North, with the Alpes. Fertility.It aboundeth with Corn, Wine, and Oyl; yields plenty of Orange∣trees, and the like fruit, as Citrons, Limmons, and Cedar-trees: and of these fruits they transport great store into foreign parts. Also they have Woods of Chesnut-trees, little e∣steemed amongst them, only the poor people eating some of them, and with the rest they seed their
Hogs. Also they have plenty of Almond-trees, and some Pomegra∣nates; and also the Cyprus, Poplar, and the Oake, so that you would say, the whole Province were but as one Garden. Natures and man∣ners of the pple.The people for the most part are honourable, courteous, prudent, and grave withal; to their superiors o∣bedient; to equals respective; to inferiors courteous; to strangers af∣fable, and desirous by kind offices to win their love; and in expence and love of his money very wary. Apparel.In apparel they are modest; in furni∣ture of house, sumptuous.
Diet.In their Diet, compared with the English or French, they are most spa∣ring; generally they require small pre∣paration or furniture of their table; they eat neatly and modestly; they seldome make feasts, but if they make any, they make them sumptu∣ous, and that much more than ours. Their greatest expences are about their Gardens, in fitting places for birding, in drawing water to them, and adorning the Conduits head  with Imagery, in Chappels, and o∣ther buildings. The usual division is into 6 parts, Lombardy, Tuscany, the Land of the Church, Naples, Genea, and the Land of Venice. But according to the present divers Principalities that are, it is divided into The greater, as The Kingdome of Naples. The Papacy. The Commonwealth of Venice. The Dukedome of Florence. The Dukedome of Millain. The lesser, as The Dukedome of Mantua. The Dukedome of Urbine. The Principality of Parma. The State of Genoa. The State of Luca.
The Kingdom of Naples. THis Kingdom is separated from the Land of the Church, by the River Axofenus; on the other parts it is invironed with the Sea: the compass of it being 1468 miles. Fertility.This Kingdom is the fertilest place in all Italy, abounding with Mines of divers Metals, Saffron, Silk, Oyl, and Wine. This Kingdom contains the Pro∣vinces of Lavoro, Calabria, Inferior and Superior Otranto, Apulia, Pug∣lia, and Abruzzo.
Lavoro.Lavoro: This Province contains in it the City of Naples, being the chief of the whole Kingdom. Near unto this City is the Mountain Vesu∣vius, now call'd Somma. This Mountain is most high, and the top is dreadfull, where is a Gulf casting out flames; the rest of the Mountain aboundeth with Vines, and Olive∣trees.  This City is seated at the foot of Hills and Mountains, extending in length from the North-East to the South-West, or rather seemeth to be triangular. The Houses of this City are 4 roofs high, but the tops lye almost plain, so as they walk upon them in the cool time of the night. The Buildings are of free-stone, and the windows are all covered with paper or linnen cloth, for glass windows are most rare in Italy. It hath 3 fair, broad, and long streets, namely, La Toletano, la Lapuana, and la Vicaria; the rest are very narrow. There be 8 Gates towards Land, and as many towards Sea; amongst which the Capuan Gate is decked with Monuments and Statuaes. There be in this City many Pala∣ces of Gentlemen, Barons, and Prin∣ces.
There be 4 publick Houses, call'd Segii, in which the Princes and Gen∣tlemen have yearly meetings; and there also is the daily meeting of Mer∣chants.  The exceeding delightfull having Gardens on all sides, as well within the City, as near the same; and the Fields are no less fruitfull, bringing forth abundantly all things for the use of Man. Also within this Territory are ma∣ny famous Antiquities, and wonder∣full things to be seen. 2. Capua. This City is of little compass, but it hath a fair Senate House, and a fair Church, calld l'Annonciata, with a fair Altar. 3. Cuma, the oldest Ci∣ty in all Italy. 4. Baiae, an ancient City. The situation is most sweet, but all the Houses near the shore are drowned, except the Bathes. 5. Nola, built on the ruines of Old Forma. Calabria.Calabria is another Region be∣longing to the Kingdom of Naples. It is bounded with the River Iano, the Tyrrene, and Ionian Seas. It is in compass about 500 miles, and is divided into the higher and lower. In the higher, the chief Cities are, 1. Consensia. 2. Salernum, famous for the study of Physick. In the low∣er is Caterzara, a strong City.
Otranto.Otranto hath on the West, Puglia; and on the other 3 parts, the Sea. The chief Towns are, 1. Tarentum. 2. Brundusium, glorying in one of the best Havens in the world. 3. O∣tranto. 4. Gallipolis. Apulia.Apulia: This Province extendeth from the confines of Brunduse, to the River Fortore. It is divided in∣to 2 Provinces, the one call'd Bari, the other Puglia. The chief City is Manfredoin; it lyeth under the Hill St. Angelo. Puglia.Puglia is another Province of this Kingdom. It is bounded with the River Fortore, and the River Tron∣to. It is a fruitfull Countrey, in the midst rough and mountainous. The chief Cities of it are, 1. Barlet. 2. Cannae; the wealth thereof consists in Cattel, and Saffron. Abruzzo.Abruzzo is another Province in this Kingdom. The chief Cities of it are, 1. Aquino, the birth-place of Tho∣mas Aquinus. 2. Sulmo, Ovid's birth-place.
The Papacy. THe Estate of the Pope is two∣fold; the one consisteth in his temporal dominion, the other in his spiritual jurisdiction As touching his temporal dominion, he is Lord of a great part of Italy; as of all that lyeth between the River Fiore and Cajetta, between Preneste and the Truentian Streights, (except the Dukedom of Ʋrbin.) In that com∣pass are incircled the Provinces of Romandiola, Marchia, Spoletto, and St. Peters Patrimony. RomandiolaThis Province extendeth from the Rubicon East, to the Venetians West. The chief Cities are, 1. Bgononia, the chief University of Italy, and the retiring place of the Popes. 2
Fer∣rara. This City is seated in a plain, and compassed with a fenny bank, and is of a triangular form. In the  of the City is a large Market∣place. The Streets are broad, and very dirty in winter, and no less sub∣ject to dust in the summer. The Houses are built of free-stone, and not near one to another, but with pleasant Gardens between. The whole circuit of this City is said to contain 7 miles 3. Ravenna This is a most ancient City; the buildings hereof are of Brick and Flint-stone, and are so old, as they seem ready to fall▪ On the East-side the Sea lyes some 2 Italian miles distant, where is the Haven for Ships, so much spoken of in the Roman Histories. Marchia.Marchia reacheth from Tronto to Puglia, between the Apenine and the Sea. It is divided into little Hills and plains. It is rich in Wine, Oyl and Corn. The City of great∣est trading is Ancona, by reason of the Haven, to which many Eastern Merchants do resort. It is a very fair City, encompassed with three Mountains, and hath the form of an half Moon. The streets of it are nar∣row, and ill paved with flint. The
Haven is of a triangular form, about which is pleasant walking; and the place where Merchants meet, called la Loggia, lying upon the Sea, is a most sweet open room, but narrow. 2. Ascoli, a very fair City; and 3. Firmo, a strong City. Spoletto.Spoletto, of old called Ʋmbria. The chief Cities of it are, 1. Spolet∣to. 2. Onietto, seated on a high Rock. 3. Asis, where S. Francis was born. This Province is abundantly stored with Wine, Cattel, and some Saf∣fron. St. Peters Patrimony.This Province contains all Latium, (or Campagna di Roma.) In this Countrey are the Mountains called Gallicanum. The chief City is Rome, seated on Tyber. It is in compass 11 miles, within which is not a little waste ground. The Inhabitants are about 200000, 2 parts of them being Clergy-men and Curtezans. The most worthy places in it are the Church of St.
Peter, which were it once finished, would be the rarest building in the world. Then the Ca∣stle  of St. Angelo, impregnable, unless by famine. Next the Popes Palace, called Betuidere. And lastly, the Library of the Hill Vatican, cal∣led commonly the Vatican Library. 2. Tiber. 3. Preneste 4. Veii, a Ci∣ty of great wealth and compass. The Commonwealth of Venice. IN the very bottome of the Adria∣tick, called at this day the Gulf of Venice, is a ridge of Land, reach∣ing from the Lime-kilns, called by them Fornaci, to the mouth of the River Pi, in form of a Bow, and containeth inlength 35 miles, and in breadth 2, where it is broadest. This Ridge is cut into 7 principal Islands,
the Ports of Brondolo, Chi∣ozzo, Malam Occo, of the 3 Castles of St. Erasmus, the Lito Maggiore, and the Troports. Between the part of this Ridge call'd Lito, and the Continent, standeth the Lake of Ve∣nice, in compass 90 miles; and in this Lake is seated the City of Venice upon 72 Islands, distant from the shore 2 miles, and from the firm Land 5. This stately City is in com∣pass 8 miles, and hath 70 Parishes, wherein each Church hath a little Market-place, for the most part four square; and a publick Well, for the common sort use Well-water, and Rain-water, kept in cisterns. It hath 31 Cloisters of Monks, and 28 of Nuns, besides Chappels and Alms∣houses. Channels of water pass through this City, (consisting of many Islands) so that a Man may pass to what place he will both by land and water. The great Chan∣nel is in length about 1300 paces, and in breadth 40, and hath only one Bridge called Rialto. The passage by this Channel is very plea∣sant, being adorned on both sides with stately Palaces. And that Men may pass speedily, besides this Bridge, there be 13 places, called Traghetti, where Boats attend, cal∣led
Gondotr, which being of incredi∣ble number, give ready passage to all Men. The rest of the Channels be narrow, and over them is many Bridges to be passed under. The Buildings of this City are very rare, there being at least 100 Houses (or rather Palaces) sit to entertain any Prince. The magnificentest Buildings of this City are the Church of St. Mark, which Saint is the protecting Saint of this City. The Building hereof is become admirable, for the singular Art of the Builders and Painters, and the most rare pieces of Marble, Porphry, and Ophites, (stones so called of speckles like a Serpent) and like stones. 2. The Market-place of St. Mark, being pa∣ved with Brick, and consists of
4 Market-places joyned in one. A∣gain, the Houses opposite to the Pa∣laces of the Procurators of St. Mark, are call'd the Houses of State, and they belong to the Church of St. Mark, having some 50 shops under the Arches of the upper roofs; these  yield great Rents to the Church. Also the Steeple or Belfrey of St. Mark, distant some 80 foot from the Church, and set over against it; it is to be admired not only for the foundation strangely laid, but for di∣vers other causes. There is also in the second Market∣place of the Palace, the Library, whose Building is remarkable. Also in the said Market-place is the stately Palace of the Duke, all covered with Marble, and most sumptuous in the carved Images and Pictures, and in the pillars of the arched Walk on the out-side. The fourth square Mar∣ket-place of Rialto, is compassed with publick Houses; under the arches whereof, and in the middle partly∣ing open, the Merchants meet. About this City are seated 75 o∣ther Islands, the chief whereof are, Onurano, and Barano, especially Mucano, which aboundeth with goodly Orchards and Gardens, and 1000 other objects of delight and pleasure. Also here are the famous Glass-houses.
The whole Dominion of the Ve∣netian Signeury, is divided into firm Land and Sea. On the Land they possess in Lombardy, Marca Trevi∣giana, Friuli, and Istri. Again, it is divided into Conti∣nent and Island. In the Continent they have Istria, Dalmatia, Sclavo∣nia, and Albania, or some parts thereof. The Islands are Corfu, Cephalonia, Zant, Candia, Conigo, and other in the Adriatick Sea. Marca Tre∣vigiana.The State of the firm Land con∣tains Marca Trevigiana, lying East of Frinli, and the Gulf of Venice.
The chief City is Padua, a very fair City, the Building whereof is with arches of stone, hanging over the Street, under which they walk dry in the greatest rain; but the Streets are thereby made narrow, and in the midst very dirty. 2. Bres∣cia, the Seat of an Archbishop, who is an Earl, a Marquess, and a Duke. The Cities Building is of Brick; the Streets are large, and paved with flint. 3. Bergamo, a City seated on a  Mountain; and 4. Vicenza. Friuli.Friuli, environed with Histria, the Alpes, Trevigiana, and the A∣driatick. The length of it is 50 miles, and in the breadth as much. The chief Town of it is Palma, built by the Venetian, 1583. and the best fortified of any in Italy. Istria.The greatest Territory of this Continent is Istria, and the best, unless it were for that the Air is na∣turally unwholesome, especially a∣bout Nolo. It yields great abun∣dance of Oyl, Fish, and Salt. The chief Cities are, 1. Istinopolis. 2. Po∣la.
The Dukedom of Florence. THe Dukedom of Florence con∣taineth the greater part of Tuscany, parted from Genoa by the Magra; and the West, from Ro∣magna, and Ancona; by the Alpe∣nine, on the North; by the Pisseo, East; and the Pyrhene Sea, South. The chief City is Florence, seated nigh the Confluence of Arnus. This City is of a round form, and upon the Walls thereof lye 8 Forts, whereof the greatest and strongest lyes to∣wards the South. The Houses after the manner of Italy, are built with a low roof, excepting the Palaces, which are stately built of free-stone, engraven. The Streets are most broad, and have an open Air, and the Pavement is of very broad and fair free-stone. The River Arno running from East to West, divides this City, but into unequal parts, the
greater part lying on the North, and the Bridge to pass from one to the other is almost in the midst of the City. Also there be 3 other Bridges over Arno, but far less in bigness and magnificence than the former. Towards the North and East this City is encompassed with pleasant Hills, planted with excellent fruits; and behind them the high Mountains of the Apenine somewhat removed, are instead of strong Walls to the Ci∣ty. Also on the South side are the like Hills and distant Mountains; but to∣wards the West it lyes open to the most pleasant Valley Arno. On all sides without the Walls, Palaces of Gentlemen are most frequent, and Houses of Citizens, not distant above three or four Closes one from the o∣ther. Within this City the Duke hath two Palaces, the one call'd Palazzo Dipitti, the other Palace of the Duke is seated in the corner of the Market∣place of Piazza della Signoria, it be∣ing
the fairest and largest Market∣place within this City; there being four more, (viz.) Merchato Vec∣chio, S. Spirito, Santa Croce, and Maria Novella. 2. Pisa; the River Arno runs through this City, from East to West. It is seated in a plain, and toward the North-west-by-North is a Gate, and a fair Cathedral Church, paved with Marble, and most curi∣ously wrought. In the midst of this City, upon the Bank of Arno, is the Palace of the Duke of Florence. 3. Si∣enna; the situation of this City is most pleasant upon a high Hill; all the Pavement of the Street is of brick, which lasteth the longer because there be neither Carts nor Coaches, but all burthens are carried on the backs of Asses. It is vulgarly said, that Sienna abounds with Fountains, Towers, and fair Women. There is no better place to live in through all Italy, than the State of Florence, and more especially this City of Sien∣na. Besides it is commended for the best Language in all Italy.
4. Massa, famous for her quar∣ries of white Marble. 5. Ligorne; this City is seated in a plain, being somewhat longer from North to South, than it is broad from East to West, and the Sea lyes upon it partly on the North, partly on the South, and altogether on the West-side; and it hath one Tower on the North-side, and another on the South, reaching into the Sea; and between these two Towers, full on the West-side, there is a Ha∣ven for great Ships; farther out into the Sea, and also near the City, and compassed with the Walls there∣of, are two Havens for Gallies and small Barks. In this City our En∣glish Factors do reside for the traffick of Italy.
The Dukedom of Millain. THe Dukedom of Millain hath on the East, Mantua and Parma; on the South, Liguria; North,
Trevigiana; and on the West, Piedmont. It is in circuit 300 miles. The chief Cities are, 1. Pa∣via: This City lyes in length from East to West, and a new fair street divides it in the midst from the North to the South. On the West-side are two Market-places, one greater than the other. The Buildings of the Ci∣ty are of Brick, and seem to be of great antiquity. 2. Alexandria. 3. Cremona: The form of this City is like unto a Cardinal's Hat, with broad brims; seated in a plain. Within this City is a Tower built of Brick, which requires 492 stairs in the Ascent. 4. Millain: This Ci∣ty is of a round form, and hath 9 Gates; the Building shews antiquity,  and the Houses are of Brick, and low built, excepting some stately Palaces. The Streets are broad, and the Pave∣ment of Brick, raised in the midst with broad stones. In this City is thought to be inhabited 200000 souls, of the best Artizans in Italy. The Dukedom of Mantua. THe Dukedom of Mantua hath on the East, Romagna; West, Millain; North, Trevigiana; and South, Parma and Placentia. The chief Cities are, 1. Mirabella. 2. Mo∣dena. 3. Lucera; and 4.
Mantua; a very strong Town, being invironed on three sides with a Water, being a quarter of a mile broad. The form of this City is round, save that the foresaid Lake on the North and East∣sides, enters into the City in form of a half Moon. The Buildings are partly of Brick, and partly of free∣stone; and the Streets are large and  clean. In the midst of this City is a large Market-place, wherein the Jewes have there, and sell all manner of Wares; for all traffick is in their hands, growing rich by the poverty of the Citizens. It is unlawfull to wear a sword without licence of the Magistrate, either at Millain, Cre∣mona, or Mantua, or almost in any other City of Italy; only at Venice and Padua, and the Cities of that State, strangers may wear swords; and only the wearing of Pistols or short Guns is forbidden.
The Dukedom of Vrbin. THe Dukedom of Ʋrbin lyeth in the midst of the Papal Territo∣ries, having on the North, the A∣driatick; on the South, the Ape∣nine; on the West, Romagna; on the East, Marca Aconitana. The length of it is 60, the breadth 35 miles. Here are in this Dukedom 200 Castles, and 7 Towns; the chief of the seven being Ʋrbin, seated on the bottom of the Apenine, and built in the fashion of a Miter. 2. Pi∣sauro, a good Haven. 3. Belforto, seated in the Mid-land. The chief of the Castles are the Rock of St. Leo, and Marivola.
The Principality of Parma. THis Principate hath on the North, Mantua; and on the South, the Apenine; on the West, Millain; and on the East, the Countrey of Modena. The City of Parma is seated on the River Pirnia. Placentia is seated on the Po. To this Principate belongeth Mirandu∣la, with her territories. The State of Genoa. THe State of Genoa was once very great, but now they have no∣thing left but Liguria and Corsica. Liguria hath on the East, the Ri∣ver Varus; West, the River Ma∣gra, by which it is parted from
Tus∣cany; North, the Apenine; and  South, the Ligurian, or Tyrhene Seas. The chief Towns are, 1. No∣li. 2. Sarazena. 3. Savona. And 4. Genoa. This City is seated upon the sides of Mountains, declining from the highest Mountain on the West-side toward the East, and to the Sea-side. On the South side is the outward Haven, in form of an half Moon; upon the horn thereof, towards the East, lyes the Sea-bank, called Lamola, about 600 paces long, which keepeth off the waves of the Sea that beat upon the City. On the East-side, and in the midst of this Bank, is a Fort built to defend the Navy. The whole circuit of this Ci∣ty is said to be 8 miles. The streets are narrow, but the Palaces are state∣ly, built of Marble, and the Houses of free-stone, 5 or 6 stories high; and the Windows are glazed, which is rare in Italy; the streets are paved with flint, and the Houses of the sub∣urbs are almost as fair as within the City.
The State of Lucca. THe State of Lucca is situate in Tuscany, and comprehendeth the Territory and Town of Lucca. This Town is seated in a plain, and strongly fortified, and compassed with Mountains on all sides, but some what distant, and only lyes open on the Sea-side towards Pistoia, be∣ing 3 miles in compass. The streets are narrow, and paved with broad free-stone, most easie to be walked on. The Palaces of the chief Gen∣tlemen are built of free-stone, but with a low roof, after the Italian fashion, and they have many plea∣sant Gardens within the Walls. Within this City no Man may wear any weapon, no not a Knife, except the point be blunt. Thus much of Italy.
Netherland. ON the North-west of Italy lyeth Germany, which is divided in∣to the higher and the lower; this latter is called Netherland. It is bounded on the East, with Ems, and part of Germany; on the West, with the German Sea; on the North, with East-Friezeland; and on the South, with the Some, Champaigne, and Lor∣rain. The situa∣tion.The Air of this Countrey is very intemperate, the winter-cold being excessive, and the summers-heat far exceeding the ordinary heat of that Clime. Natures of the peopleThe Men for the most part are well proportioned, much given to our English Beer, being excessive in their drinking, so that you shall hardly find a
Dutch-man sober in an afternoon. The Women generally are of a good complexion, well pro∣portioned,  especially in their leg and foot; honourers of virtue; active, and familiar; both within doors and without they govern all. Diet.In their Diet, Butter is the first and last dish at the table, whereof they make all sauces; as well your Men as Women passing from City to City to trade, carry with them Cheese, and Boxes of Butter, for their food. They use no Spits here, but see the little pieces of flesh with Roots, and Gobbets of fat mingled, without any curiosity; or else bake them in earthen Pipkins. Fertility.They have abundance of Butter, Cheese, and Roots for Corn, they have not sufficient for their own use, yet by traffick at Dantzick they fur∣nish themselves and many other Na∣tions therewith. They have little plenty of River fish, but Sea fishes salted and dryed, they make great traffick therewith. There is great abundance of Sea-fowl, and they want not Land-fowl.
Commo∣dity.The Commodities in which they most abound, are Tapistries, Sayes,  Searges, Worsteds, Frigadoes, and divers sorts of linnen Cloth, with abundance of other small trifles. This Countrey is divided into se∣venteen Provinces, viz. Into 4 Dukedoms, 1. Limburg. 2. Luxenburg. 3. Gelderland. 4. Brabant. 1 Marquisate, Of the Holy Empire. 7 Earldoms, 1. Flanders. 2. Artoys. 3. Hainault. 4. Namurre. 5. Zutphen. 6. Holland. 7. Zealand. 5 Baronies, 1. West-Friezl. 2. Ʋtretch. 3. Overysell. 4. Machlyn. 5. Groyning.
Limburg. THe Dukedom of Limburg hath Mastrich for the chief City, and the Bishoprick of Leige pertains to it, wherein the City of Leige is the Bishops Seat. This City is seated on the Meuse. The Buildings of this Town are very fair, especially the Monasteries and Abbeys. This Bishoprick comprehends in it 24 walled Towns, and 1800 Villa∣ges. Also the Eastern part (which is properly call'd the Dukedom of Limburg) contains in it 5 Towns, and 23 Villages. The chief of these is Limburg▪ LuxenbugLuxenburg is bounded with Lim∣burg, on the North; Lorrain, South; the Bishoprick of Triers, Est; and the Meuse, West. It is in circuit 240 miles, in which are contained 1169 Villages, and
2  walled Towns; the chief whereof is, 1. Luxenburg, on the River Asnu∣tius, or Elze. 2. Bostonake, a fair Town. 3. Danvillers. The Inhabi∣tants of the upper part of this Duke∣dom are Germans, but the lower part are French, both in language and man∣ners. Near to this Dukedom is the Fo∣rest of Arden, once 500 miles in compass, now scarce 90 round. Brabant.Brabant hath on the East, North, and South, the Meuse; and West, the Schald. It is in length 75 miles; in breadth 60, comprehending un∣der it 700 Villages, and 26 Towns; the chief being Lovain. It is in compass within the Walls 4 miles, and 6 without; within which com∣pass are many goodly Gardens, Val∣leys, Mountains, Meadows. It is a famous University, in which are 20 Colledges. 2. Bruxels, the Dukes Seat. 3. Bergenapzone; this City is strongly fortified, and is seated in Brabant. 4. Breda. The Mar∣quisate.The Marquisate of the Empire is contain'd in Brabant. The chief
Town is Antwerp, being in circuit 7 miles. It was a Town of infinite tra∣ding, but now the Hollander hath so blockt up the Haven, that the tra∣ding is removed from hence to Am∣sterdam. Flanders.Flanders is divided into Imperia∣lem Gallicam, & Teutonicam; this last is severed from the other two by the River Ley. The chief Towns of it are, 1. Gaunt, whose Wall is in compass 7 miles, in which there lyeth much waste ground. 2. Burgis. 3 Y∣pres, a strong Town. The four principal Ports are, 1. Dunkirk. 2. Scluse; it hath a very fair Haven, able to contain 500 good ships. 3. Newport 4. Ostend. Imperial Flanders is severed from Brabant by the River Dender. The chief Towns are, 1. Alost, on the Dender. 2. Dendermond, on the mouth of the said River. 3. Hulst. Gallic Flanders; so called, be∣cause it properly belongs to France. The chief Towns are, 1. Lisle, the third Town of traffick in all the Ne∣therlands. There are in all
Flanders  35 Towns, and 1178 Villages. It is in length 95 miles, and in breadth much less. Artoys.Artoys contains 754 Villages, and 12 Towns; the chief being, 1. Ar∣ras; whence comes our Cloth of Arras. 2. Lilliers. The chief of the frontier Towns between this and Pi∣cardy, are Hedinfert, a very defen∣sible Town. Hainalt.The length of this Province is 60 miles, the breadth 48; in which space are 950 Villages, and 24 Towns. The chief are, 1. Mons, strong, ancient and rich. 2. Valenci∣ens, so seated that it cannot be be∣sieged but with three Armies at once. 3. Conde Namarre.The County of Namarre, so cal∣led of the chief City, hath Mines of Iron, and plenty of stony Coal, con∣trary to ll other Coals, in that it is quenhed by the infusion of Oyl, and burns more clear having water cast upon t. This Countrey hath also quarries of fre stone, and Marble of divers colours.
Machlyn.Machlyn is a Town in Brabant, and contains besides it self 9 Villages. It is a goodly strong Town, and seat∣ed in the midst of the waters of the River Dele, that it may on all sides be drowned. The States of the Low-Countreys. THe Provinces united are these, Zealand, Holland, Ʋtretch, Over-Issel, Zutphen, Groningen, ¾ of Gelderland, with some pieces of Bra∣bant and Flanders. This Union was made 1581. the Fleets and Forces of which Confede∣ration are from the chief Province, call'd altogether Hollanders. Zealand.The first of these Provinces is Zea∣land; broken it is into seven Islands: the chiefest of the seven is Walcheren; the chief City whereof is Middleburg, famous for traffick; and the Staple for
Spanish and French Wines. Near  this City is Ʋlisbing, strongly forti∣fied. 3. Vere. All these Islands are fertil, and yield excellent good Corn, more plentifull than any o∣ther Province. Madder for dying of Wool grows plentifull here, which likewise they export; as likewise Spanish and French Salt, and like traffick Holland.The Countrey of Holland is in si∣tuation the second of the United Pro∣vinces, but the first in dignity; the Cities whereof are, 1. Amsterdam, famous for traffick. 2. Rotterdam. 3. Leyden, and an University. 4 Har∣lem. 5. Dort, the Staple for the Rhenish Wines. And 6. Delph; all very fair Cities. And there is like∣wise the most pleasant Village of the Hage, call'd Gravenhage. Utretch.Ʋtretch contains 70 Villages, and 5 Towns; the chief whereof are, Ʋtretch, Rhenen, and Mont∣foort Overissel.Overissel contains 101 Villages, and 11 Towns, the chief whereof are, Swall, Campene, and Deven∣tree.
Zutphen.Zutphen is a Town in Gelderland, which long hath been an Earldom; it is seated on the River Issel, and is a Town of very great strength: It was subdued by the States Army 1591. GelderlandThis Dukedom contains 300 Vil∣lages, and 24 Towns; the chief be∣ing, 1. Nimegue, seated on that part of the Rhene which is called the Wha∣el. 2. Ruremond. 3. Arnheim; this Countrey is fit for feeding of Beasts, which grow so great and fat, that anno 570. a gelt Bull was at Ant∣werp which weighed 3200 l. Groyning.Groyning is a Town of West-Friezeland, containing under her command 45 Villages; the chief being Odhavn and Keikirk. FreizelandIt containeth 45 Villages, and 11 Towns; the chief are, 1. Le∣warden. 2
Harlingem. 3 Zwichen. This territory aboundeth with excel∣lent pastures, for fatting of the great∣est heards of Cattel, and yieldeth it self all kinds of Cattle of extraordi∣nary higess. Also near unto this Province is the Islank Sekelink, the  shores whereof are plentifully sto∣red with Dog-fish Although this be the lesser part by far, and more poor in respect of the Soyl, yet it is more popu∣lous, and by the industry of the people far more rich. Thus much of Netherland.
Germany. GErmany is bounded on the West, with France and Belgium; on the North, with Denmark, and her Seas; on the East, with Prussia, Poland and Hungaria; and on the South, with the Alpes. The compass of this spatious Coun∣trey is 2600 English miles: the fi∣gure of it is almost an exact square, each side containing 650 miles. Situation.It is situate in the Northern tem∣perate Zone, under the 7 and 11 Climates; the longest day being 17 hours and an half. Of all Europe this is the greatest Countrey, and beautified with the best and richest store of Cities, Towns and Castles, and Religious places. Fertility.It also doth abound with many things necessary for life, and many things to be transported. They
have Corn sufficient, and for Cat∣tle they want not of all kinds, but they are commonly lean and little: so are their Horses many in number, but little in stature. Commo∣dity.The Commodities wherewith it is inriched, are Mines of silver, and other inferior Metals: Wines, which they transport into other Countreys, together with fresh Fish, Linnen, Quick-silver, Allum, Armors. Natures of the peo∣ple.The Inhabitants for honesty of conversation, probity of manners, assurance of loyalty, and confi∣dence of disposition, setting aside their imperfect customes of drinking, excelling all people. Upper Ger∣many, con∣taining Swizzer∣land.Germany is divided into the higher, and lower; the upper lying on the Alpes is subdivided into Austria, Ba∣varia, Suevia, Helvetia, (or Swiz∣zerland,) and Alsatiae. Austria.Austria: This is a goodly and rich Countrey, yea the best of all Ger∣many, both for Corn, Cattel, Wine, and Fish. It is separated on the East, from
Hungaria, by the River Leire; West, from Bavaria, by the  Ems; North, from Moravia, by the Tems; and South, from Styria, by the Muer. The chief Cities of it are, 1. Wi∣en, or Vienna, a famous Fort against the Turk. The City is of a round form; the Streets are narrow, but the Buildings are stately of free-stone; two Towers of the Church is curi∣ously engraven, the like whereof is not in Germany, except Strasburg. 2. Emps, so call'd on the River Ems, on whose Banks it is seated. 3. S. Leopold. 4. Neustat. 5. Hamburg. 6. Crems. It containeth the Provinces of Sty∣ria, Carinthia, Tyrolis, and Car∣niola. Styria.Styria is a small Region in the midst of the Alpes. The chief Ci∣ties are, 1. Marpurg. 2. Hall. 3. Greits, the chief City. Carinthia.Carinthia: this Countrey is 75 miles in length, and 5 in breadth. The chief Towns are, 1. Vellach. 2. Spittal. 3. Veit, the Metropolis of this Countrey.
Tyrolis.Tyrolis: this Countrey is 72  miles in length, and as many in breadth. It hath on the bast, Ca∣rinthia; West, the Grisons; North, Schwaben; and South, Marea Tre∣vigiana. The Soyl of this Countrey is very good, and full of silver Mines. The chief Towns are, . Inspruch. 2. Tyrol. 3. Trent, on the River O∣defis. Carniola.Carniola: this Countrey is 150 miles long, 45 broad; it is environ∣ed with Sclavonia, East; Italy, West; Carinthia, North; and I∣stria, South The chief Cities are, 1. Newmarcht. 2. Esting, upon the Sanus. Bavaria.Bavaria: this Dukedom hath on the East. Austria and Styria; West, the Leike; North, Danubius, and part of Franconia; and South, Ty∣rolis and Carinthia. This is a large, rich, and goodly Countrey, lying in great length on both sides the Danu∣bius. The chief Cities are, 1. Mun∣chen, upon the River Aser, the Dukes Seat. 2. Ingulstad, on Danu∣bius, an University. 3. Ratisbone, seated on the
Donaw. 4. Passaw.  5. Saltzbourg; it is seated on the Ri∣ver Saltzech▪ This City is honour∣ed with a Bishoprick, ve∣nue is the greatest in Germany. 6. Frising. The whole number of Cities in Bavaria are 34. besides 46 great walled Towns, the Soyl about which is sufficiently fruitfull in all things, saving Wines, with which they are supplyed from Austria. Rhetia.Rhetia, or the Countrey of the Grissons, hath on the East, Tyrolis; West, Swizzerland, North, Sue∣via; and South, Millain. This Countrey is half in Germany, and half in Italy, so that they use both Languages. The chief Towns are, 1. Coyra, the Metropolis of the Gris∣sons, seated about half an hours jour∣ney from the Rhene. For form it is triangular; the Houses indifferent handsome, but not uniform, one within another. 2. Musocco. 3. Bor∣mia. In this Countrey they have free use of Religion, both they of the Romish, and they of the Reformed Churches. Suevia.Suevia, or
Schwaben, hath on  the East, Bavaria; West, Danubius; North, Franconia; and South, Tyrolis, and the Grissons. The chief Towns are, 1. Ʋlm, so call'd from the company of Elms which inviron it. 2. Lindair: this is a free City, and it is almost an Island, seated in the Lake called Acronius. 3. Auspurg: this is a stately City, the beauty whereof lyeth on the West-side; the Houses being built upon a Hill, are of free-Stone, six or seven roofs high. Also there be many Palaces built of the Fugares, and other Citizens; but in other places it is more poorly built. 4. Norlingen. 5. Wherlingen. 6. Ra∣vensperg, all Imperil Towns. Helvetia.Helvetia, (or Swizzerland) is almost situate among the Alpes, and therefore supposed to be the highest Region in Europe; and the rather, because the most famous Rivers in those parts of the world, (viz.) Rone, Rhodan, and Po, falling from those high placs, disperse their chan∣nels through Christendome▪ It is bounded on the East, with Tyrolis; North, with Lorrain; West, with
France; and South, with Italy. The length of it is 240 and the breadth 180 miles. The chief Ci∣ties are, 1. Zurich: this City is one of the Cantons of Swizzerland, and is divided in the midst by the Lake Zurechsea, having three Bridges for pssage the greater whereof the Merchants use for heir meetings. The Streets are narrow, and the Houses built of timber and clay, and the City it self is seated upon and be∣tween Hills. 2. Basil, now one of the Swizzers Cantons. Herein was that famous Council held by Euge∣nius the Pope, in the year 1431. 3. Constance, seated on the Bodeuse, over against
Lindaw It is within the Confines of Swizzerland, but be∣longeth to the House of Austria. This Town is famous by a Council held there, where John Hus was con∣demned of Heresie, and burned. Near unto the City in a fair Meadow, is the Stone to which he was bound when he was burnt; where also his fellow, Jerom of Prague, was burnt in September the year following.  4. Berne: this City is built upon a Mountain, yet it seems to be seated on a Valley, because it is compassed with Mountains. The Houses are uniformly and fairly built of free-Stone; and round about this Moun∣tain the Citizens have their Gardens, so that it is a most fair and pleasant City. 5. Baden, seated in the midst of the Countrey, and is for that cause the place of meeting for the Councel of Estate. Near unto this City are the famous hot Bathes, be∣ing 30 in number. Alsatia.Alsatia hath West, Lorrain; South, Helvetia; East, the Rhene; and North, the Palatinate. The chief City is
Strasburg: this City is in circuit three hours walking; the Buildings and Churches are fair and high, of free-stone; most of the Streets are narrow, but those divi∣ded by the water are broader. Ma∣ny things in this City are remarkable, but especially the Steeple of the Ca∣thedral Church, which is counted one of the 7 miracles of the world: the Clock hereof is of all other the  most famous. 2. Psaltburg. 3. We∣senberg. The Pro∣vinces of Lower Ger∣many, a∣mong which Bo∣hemia is reckoned.The Lower Germany is divided in∣to Franconia, Bohemia, and its terri∣tories; the three Electorates of the Palatinate, Brandenburg, and Saxo∣ny, with its members; Pomerania, Medenburg, Brunswick, Luneberg, Hassia, East-Friezeland, Westphalia, Cleveland, and Veteravia, or Wete∣raw. Franconia.Franconia is an ancient and noble Nation; it is bounded on the East, with Bohemia and Saxony; West, with Elsas; North, with Hassia; and South, with Bavaria. This Province hath many ancient and fair Cities, as namely,
Bam∣berg, a Bishops Seat: Weirztberg, and Mentz, or Metz, both Bishops Seats; the latter whereof is the Seat of the chief Elector Bishop, and is a fair City, and well fortified: it is seated on a Hill, and in a fertil Soyl, fruitfull of Corn. The free Cities in this Province that belong to the Em∣perour, are 1. Norimberg: this Ci∣ty is seated in a barren sandy ground,  yet is very rich by the Citizens indu∣stry. This is a most stately City; the Buildings whereof are of free-Stone, six or seven roofs high. In this City is a Granary, which is so large, as divers years provision may be laid up therein. It hath also ten Churches, whereof only four are used for Prayer and Preaching. 2. Rottenberg, a very fair City. 3. Francford: this City is famous for the Electors meeting here to choose the Emperour, and for two yearly Fairs. It is compassed strong∣ly with a double Wall; upon the East-side the Jewes have a Street, who are permitted to dwell in this fa∣mous Mart-Town. This City is of a round form, seated in a large plain; the Streets are narrow, and the Hou∣ses being built of Timber and Clay, the foundation of some being laid of free-Stone. All the Province (ex∣cepting the free Cities, and the three Cities belonging to the Bishops) is subject to the Marquess of Branden∣burg. Bohemia.The Kingdom of
Bohemia con∣taineth  Bohemia, the Dukedom of Silesia, the Marquisates of Lusatia, and Moravia. It is in a manner round, and incompassed with great Mountains. It contains in circuit 550 English miles; in which compass are comprehended 780 Cities, wal∣led Towns, and Castles, and 32000 Villages. Fertility.The Soil is pleasant and fruitfull, abounding with Corn, Wood, Wine, and Grapes, and affords Gold and Silver, Copper, Iron, Tin, and Lead, great quantity. Natures of the peo∣ple.The people for the most part live in great plenty and delicacy, much resembling the English. The Wo∣men be very beautifull, but some∣what luxurious, and that with con∣sent of their Husbands. The chief Cities are, 1. Prage, the Metropolis of Bohemia, seated on the River Mulda. It is a very great City, as being three Towns in one, each divided from other by the River
Mulda, and all three conjoyn'd to∣gether by a wooden Bridge of 24 Arches. The Streets of this City are  filthy; there be divers Market-pla∣ces; the Buildings of some Houses are of free-Stone, but the most part of Timber and Clay, and are built with little beauty or art. The se∣cond Town of note is Egra, and the third is Budweis. Silesia.Silesia is in length 240, and in breadth 80 miles. It is a most deli∣cate and plentifull Countrey, divi∣ded in the midst by the River Oder. The chief Cities are, 1. Breslaw, a Bishoprick. 2. Jagendorf. 3. Glo∣gaw. Lusatia.Lusatia: this Countrey although but little, to arm 20000 Foot as good as any in Germany. The chief Cities are, Gorlitz and Trabell, on the River Nisse. Moravia.Moravia: this Countrey is the most fertil in Corn in all Germany; it aboundeth also with good and pleasant Wine; besides it hath also no small store of Myrrh and Frankin∣cence. The chief Towns are, 1.
Brinne, the seat of the Marquess. 2. Almutz, an University. This Countrey is very mountainous and  woody; the people are very war∣like and fierce, especially the Moun∣tainers. The Ele∣ctorate of the Pala∣tinate.The Electorate of the Palatinate: His Dominion contains the upper and lower; the lower being the chief of the two, as being both rich∣er and larger, and the Seat of the Elector. It is called the lower, to distinguish it from the upper. This Palatinate is said to be the most plea∣sing and delicious part in all Germa∣ny, stored with all Fruits and Metals, abounding with those Wines which with us are called, Rhenish Wines It is adorned with many gallant Towns; the chief whereof is, 1. Heidleberg, the Seat of the Pals∣grave It is incompassed with high Mountains on the South, East, and North sides; but towards the West it hath its Suburbs, being longer than the City. 2. Openheim. 3. Crutz∣nach. 4. Frankendate. On the East∣side of this Countrey standeth Win∣heim and Lauden; on the West-side are the Towns of Newstat and Kei∣fers.
Upper Pa∣latinate.Ʋpper Palatinate: this Countrey lyeth East and North of Bohemia. The chief Towns of it are, 1. Am∣berg, the birth-place of the present Elector, whose silver Mines yield yearly unto the Prince's Coffers 60000 Crowns. 2. Newberg. 3. Ca∣stel, where the Palatinates of the Rhene when they journey in this Countrey, use to keep their Court. The Ele∣ctorate of Saxony.Saxony is bounded on the East, with Lusatia; West, with Hassia; North, with Brunswick; and South, with Franconia and Bohemia. It containeth the Countreys of Turin∣gia, Misnia, Voitland, and Saxony. Turingia is invironed with Hassia, Franconia, Misnia, and Saxony. The chief City is, 1. Erdford, the Dukes Seat. This City is large and ancient, and one of the free Cities of the Em∣pire. 2. Jene, an University of Phy∣sitians. Misnia is invironed with Bohemia, Voitland, Thuringia, and Saxony. The chief Towns are, 1. Dresden, seated on the Albis. This City is very fair, and strongly forti∣fied, in which the
Elector keeps his  Court. It is of a round form, seat∣ed in a plain, running between two Mountains, but somewhat distant; and the Houses are fair built of free-Stone, four or five roofs high, where∣of the highest roof after the Italian fashion, is little raised in steepness. 2. Leipzich, a famous University for Philosophers and Physitians. It is seated in a plain of most fruitfull Corn-ground; the Streets are fair; the Market-place large and stately; and such are the chief Houses, built of free-Stone, four roofs high. 3. Rlits. 4. Misn; and 5 Wit∣tenberg, seated in a plain sandy ground: one Street lyes the whole length of the Town, being all the beauty thereof. Voitland is a little Countrey, South of Misnia; whose chief Cities are, 1. Olnitz. 2 Werda. This Dukedom is seated almost in the midst of Germany; all of it together is imagined to be about the bigness of a third part of England. The Ele∣ctorate of Brandenburg.The Electorate of Brandenburg: this Marquisate is limited on the East, with Poland; West, with
Saxony;  North, with Pomerania; and South, with Lusatia. It is in circuit 520 miles; in which are contained 50 Cities, and 64 walled Towns. The chief is, 1. Brandenburg. 2. Franc∣fort and Oderam. It is an University, and situate in a Soyl most plentifully stored with Corn and Wines It is most famous for the Mart here kept. 3. Berlin, the Prince's Seat; it is si∣tuate on the River Spre. 4. Havel∣bourg, the Seat of a Bishop. This Marquisate is divided into the new and old; the River Odera watering the last; the Albis the first. Pomerania.Pomerania hath on the East, the River Vistuta; West, Meclenburg; North, the Baltick Ocean; and South, Brandenburg. The chief Towns are, 1. Stetin, the Prince's Seat, and the Metropolis of the Countrey. 2. Wolgast. 3. Wallin, once a famous Town, and flourish∣ed in traffick, but now decay'd. 4 Gripswald. 5. Newtrepon, a Sea-Town. To this Province belong three I∣slands, Rugia, Wisedonia, and Voli∣nia.
Meen∣bourgh.Meclenbourg is on the West-part of Pomeren. The chief Towns of it are, 1. Malchaw. 2. Sternberg. 3. Wismar. 4. Rostock, an Univer∣sity. Brunswick. Lunebourg.Brunswick, Lunebourg: these two Dukedomes are bounded on the East, with Brandenburg; West, with Westphalen; North, with Denmark; and South, with Saxony and Hassia. The chief Cities are, 1. Brunswick. It is a free City of the Empire, strongly fortified, and not any way subject to the Emperour. 2. Wolfe∣haiten, where the Duke keeps his Court. 3. Halberstad, a Bishops See. 4. Lunebourg. 5. Cella, the Seat of the Duke of Lunebourg. Hassia.Hassia: this Lantgravedom is in∣vironed on the East, with Saxony; South, with Franconia; and West, and North, with Westphalen. The chief Towns are, 1. Dorm∣stad, the Seat and Inheritance of the youngest House of the Lantgraves. 2. Marpurg, an University, and the Seat of the second House of the Lant∣graves. 3. Dryes. 4. Frankenburg;
and 5. Cassels, three Towns belong∣ing to the elder House of the Lant∣graves, whereof Cassels is chief, as being the Seat of their residence. This City is seated in a fruitfull Coun∣trey, and is well fortified with strong earthen Walls, and deep Ditches; yet are the Houses of no great beau∣ty, being composed for the most part of Wood, Thatch, and Clay. Unto this Province belongeth the County of Waldeck and Corbach. East-Friezeland.East-Friezeland hath on the West, the Ems; East, the Weser; South, Westphalia; and North, the Sea. The chief Towns are, 1. Emden. This City lyes in the utmost borders of the Empire, and is only divided by the River Ems, from the United Province of the Netherland. This City is fairly built of Brick, and is almost of a round form. It is an Earldom of it self. 2. Oldenburg, which hath an Earl of its own. Westphalia.Westphalia is bounded on the East, with Brunswick; West, with Belgi∣um; North, with the Sea; and South, with Hassia.
The Northern part of this Coun∣trey is called Bremen, from the chief City Brem, the Bishop whereof is Lord of this Tract. The next part belongeth to the Duke of Saxony. The chief Cities of which are, Clap∣penburg, Exenberg, and Alsdrop. The other parts belong to the Bishopricks of Cullen, Munster, and Triers. 1. The Bishoprick of Cullen con∣taineth a great part of Westphalia. The chief City is, 1. Collen; the Archbishop whereof is said to be the second special Elector of the Empire, and Chancellour of Italy. 2. Er∣nace, or Andernach. 3. Lints. 4. Bon∣na, where the Bishop hath a Palace, esteemed to be one of the fairest Houses of Germany. The chief Towns under the Bishop of Munster are, 1. Warendorp. 2 Munster, seated on the Ems. The chief Towns belonging to the Bishop of Triers are, 1. Bopport, seated on the Moselle. 2 Engers. 3. Coblents. 4. Triers. This is the Seat of the Chancellour of France, and third spiritual Elector; it is built on the Moselle.
Cleveland.Cleveland: this Dutchy contain∣eth Cleve, Gulick, Berge. The Dutchy of Cleve conjoyneth to Guel∣derland. The chief Cities are, 1. Cleve. 2. Calker. 3. Wesel. 4. Em∣merick. 2. The Dutchy of Gulick: The chief Cities are, Aken, where the Emperour after his election is invest∣ed with a silver Crown. The Dutchy of Berge or Monte, is in compass 130 miles. The chief Towns are, 1. Duseldorp. 2. Hat∣tingen; and 3. Arusberg. VeteraviaVeteravia: On the South-West of Hassia is the Countrey of Vetera∣via, or Weteraw containing among others the County of Nassaw, Han∣naw, and the free City of Friberg, situate in the midst of most pleasant and delicious Corn-Fields. The City Hannaw is distant from Franc∣ford and Moenum ten miles, and is a County of it self. The next Town of note to it is Windeck
As for the County of Nas∣saw, it hath in it many prime Towns; as 1. Dillinbourg, the  principal. 2. Nassaw. 3. Cat∣zenelbogen, an Earldom of it self; and 4. Hebron. Thus much of Germany.
Denmark. DEnmark hath on the East, Ma∣re Balticum; on the West, the German Ocean; on the North, Sweden; and on the South, Germa∣ny. Situation.It is situate near the Artick Cir∣cle, and therefore must needs be sub∣ject to great cold; howsoever the misty Air caused by the frequent Isles, doth in some sort mitigate the extremity thereof. Fertility.The Soyl of the Countrey is ra∣ther fit for pasture than herbage; for in regard of the Clime it cannot be expected that Fruits should grow here, which are only ripened by the heat of the Sun. They have Corn sufficient; and likewise feed such a multitude of Oxen, that 50000 are said to be sent hence yearly into Ger∣many.
Commo∣dity.Their other Commodities are  Fish, Tallow, Furniture for Shipping, Armors, Ox-Hides, Buck-skins, Wainscot, Firwood, Filbeards, and the like. Natures of the PeopleThe People are naturally good Souldiers both by Sea and Land, fit∣ter for the Sea than the Field. The Magistrate is wise rather by experi∣ence, than study; the old Man cove∣tous; the young Man thrifty; and the Merchant ambitious. The Wo∣men are of the same conditions as the Women of Belgium. Diet.Their Diet is much like the Ger∣mans, and their Neighbours the Saxons. Their dainties are Bacon, and salt-Meats; but the common people feed most on dryed Fishes. It containeth the Cimbrick Cher∣soness, the Islands of the Baltick, and part of Scandia.
The Cimbrick Chersoness. THis Chersoness hath on the South-West, the Albis; on the South-East, the River Trave; on the South, a little piece of Germany; and on all other parts, the Sea. It is in length 120 miles, and in breadth 80, and containeth 28 Cities, 4 Bishops Sees, and 20 royal Castles or Palaces. It is divi∣ded into the Provinces of Holsatia, Dithmars, Slesia, and Juitland. Holsatia.Holsatia is the most Southern Pro∣vince of Denmark, towards Germa∣ny, having on the North, Slesia, and on the other sides, the Sea. The chief Towns are, Niemunster, and Bramstede. Upon the Confines of Holst lye the fair Imperial Cities of Lubeck and Hamburg. Dithmars.Dithmars taketh up the West-side of this Chersonesus. The principal Towns of it are, Marnes, and Mel∣dorp. Slesia.
Slesia hath on the North, Juit∣land; and South, Holst The chief Towns are, Sleswick, Goterpe, and Londen, an Haven-Town situate upon the River Ender. Juitland.Juitland is the most Northern part of this Chersoness. The chief Towns of it are, Rincopen, Nicopen, Halne, and Arhausen. The Baltick Islands.The Baltick Islands are in number 35, and are so called, because they lye dispersed in the Baltick Sea. Of these, four are of more especial note, viz. Seeland, Fionia, Bornholme, and Finera. 1. Seeland is in length 64 miles, and in breadth 52. It containeth 7 strong Castles belonging to the King, and about 13 Cities. The chief is Haffen, or Hafnia, call'd by the Germans, Copenhagen. It is the Kings Seat, yet of no great beauty. It is of a round form; and the Hou∣ses are of Timber and Clay. It hath a fair Market-place, and is reasona∣ble well fortified. The Castle of the King is built of free-Stone in a Qua∣drangle. 2. Helsinura, standing on
the Sea-side. At this Town, the Mariners which are to pass the Sound, use to pay their Custome. 3. Ros∣chilt, the Sepulchres of the Danish Princes; it is not walled, yet hath it the title of a City. 2. Fionia contains in it 8 Towns; the principal whereof are, Ottoni∣um, or Osel, and Sweinbourgh. 3. Bornholmia is situate on the Baltick Sea, not far from Gothland. The chief City is called Bornholm. 4. Finera is that Island in which Tychobrahe, that famous Mathema∣tician, built an artificial Tower, wherein are many rare Mathemati∣cal Instruments. The chief Town is Petersborne. Scandia.Scandia is invironed with the Seas, save where it is joyned to Moscovy. It lyeth part on this side, part be∣yond the Artick Circle; so that the longest day in the more Northern part is about three moneths. It con∣tains the Kingdoms of Denmark, Norwey, and Swedeland That part which belongeth to Denmark is situ∣ate on the South of this
Peninsula,  and is divided into three Provinces, viz. Hallandia, Scania, and Bles∣cida. 1. Hallandia hath on the North, Swedeland; and South, Scania. The chief Town is Halaenego. 2 Scania hath on the South, Hallandia; on all other parts, the Sea. It is in length 72 miles, and 48 in breadh, and is the pleasantest Countrey in all Denmark, most a∣bundant in Fruits, and most rich in Merchandize. The chief Towns are, 1. Londen, a great Haven-Town. 2. Elbogen. 3. Falskerbode. Here is Elsimbourg, one of the Keyes which openeth into the Sound. 3. Blescida hath on the North, Swedeland. It is a mountainous and barren Countrey▪ The chief Towns are, 1. Malmogia. 2. Colmar, a strong Fortress against the Swede∣lander.
Norwey. NOrwey on the East, respecteth Denmark; on the West, it is bounded with the Ocean; on the South, lyeth Suevia; and on the North, it is separated from Lap∣land. Fertility.The Land of it self is not sufficient∣ly fruitfull, and toward the North yieldeth no sort of Corn, therefore the Inhabitants instead of Bread eat dryed Fish, called by us, Stock-Fish, which is transported through Europe, in exchange of Corn. Commo∣dity.The Countrey, especially the Southern part, transports rich Furrs, Tallow, Butter, Tann'd-Leather, Train-Oyl, Pitch, Clap-boards, all sorts of Timber-Works, and Masts, Firr-wood, and that with great ease and little charge.
Natures of the people.Their Buildings are base and poor; the Inhabitants honest; lovers of  Strangers; liberal of gift; and most serviceable. Amongst them are nei∣ther ilchers, Thieves, nor Pirats. Their chief Towns are, 1. Nidrosia, the See of an Archbishop, who is Metropolitan of Norwey. 2. Bergen, one of the four ancient Mart Towns of Europe. 3. Ansloyn, a Bishops See. Thus much of Denmark and Norwey.
Swedeland. Swedeland is bounded on the East, with Moscovy; on the West, with the Dofrine Hills; on the North, with the frozen Seas; and on the South, with the Baltick Seas. This Countrey alone without the ad∣jacent provinces of Lappia, Scricfinia, and Biarmia, is little less than Italy, and France, joyned together; and with the additions of the said Nati∣ons, is bigger by a tract of 900 miles. Fertility.The Soyl is so fertil, that to see a Beggar is a difficult matter; and the Air is so healthfull, that it is ordina∣ry to see Men of an 130 or 140 years of age. Commo∣dity.It aboundeth with Mines of Lead, Copper, and Silver, which are transported into other Nations; together with Hides of Bucks, Goats, and Oxen, Tallow, Tare, Barley, Malt.
Natures of the peo∣ple.The People participate much in nature with the Norweians, hospita∣ble and valiant as they. It containeth the Provinces of Lapland, Finland, Gothland, and Sweden. Lappia.Lappia is the most Northern part of all Scandia, and is divided into the Eastern, containing Biarmia and Co∣relia, which belongeth unto the Duke of Russia; and the Eastern comprehending Lappia and Scricfi∣nia, which are under the King of Sweden. These two Provinces use to give worship and divine honour to that living creature, what ere it be, which they see at their first going out of their doors in the morning; and are so poor, that they pay unto the King of Sweden for tribute, rich Skins and Furrs.
Finland.Finland is situate between the Baltick Sea, and the Finland Bay. The chief Towns are, 1. Abo, a Bi∣shops Seat. 2. Narve, a place of great strength; Rangina and Augo, both famous Mart-Towns; Vames,  Viburg, and Casteholme, places of good strength. Gothland.Gothland is the best and richest Province of the North. It is divided into Island and Continent; the I∣sland is seated in the Baltick Seas, being in length 18 miles, and 5 in breadth. The Continent of Gothia, is the hithermost part of Scandia, next to Denmark. The chief Cities are, 1. Stockholme, seated after the manner of Venice. 2. Lodufia, a Town of great traffick. 3. Wald∣bourge, a well fortified piece; and 4. Colmar, famous for its impregna∣ble Castle. Sweden.Sweden is situate on the South of Gothland. The Countrey is very fruitfull and delicious, unless in some places, where the cragginess of the Mountains maketh it more barren, and less pleasant. The chief Cities of it are, 1.
Ʋpsal, a famous Bi∣shoprick. 2. Nicopia, a Sea-Town of good strength. 3. Copperdell, fa∣mous for its abundance of Brass. There is also Finmach, bordering on the Northern Ocean, whose Inhabi∣tants  be Witches, and Idolaters; they use to sell windes to Mer∣chants, to carry their Ship to any Port. Bodia is also under his Dominion; whose chief Town is Helsinga, honoured with the title of a Dukedom. Thus much of Sweden.
Moscovy. MOscovy is bounded on the East, with Tartary; on the West, with Lyvonia, Lituania, and part of Sweden; on the North, with the Frozen Ocean; and on the South, with Mare Caspium, the Turks, and Palus maeotis. This Countrey containeth in length from East to West 3300 miles, and in breadth 3065 miles. Situation.It is situate partly in Europe, part∣ly in Asia, which separation is cau∣sed by the River of Tanais, bounder of Asia, and running through the middle of the Countrey.
The People are for the most part of a square proportion; broad, short, and thick; gray-ey'd, and brod-berded; the Commons live in miserable subjection to the No∣bles, and they again in as great sla∣very to the Duke or Emperour. Natures of the peopleThey are persidious, unnatural, and malicious; altogether unlearned; even the Priests themselves are mean∣ly indoctrinated; it being cautiona∣ted by the great Duke that there be no Schools, lest there should be any Scholars besides himself. The Wo∣men are private, fearfull to offend, but once lascivious, intolerably wanton. It is the fashion of those Women to love that Husband best which beateth them most, and to think themselves neither loved nor regarded, unless they be soundly swadled two or three times a day. Cities.The chief City of this Kingdome is Mosco, where both the Emperour and Patriarch resideth. Roscovia and Novogrod are the Seats of Arch∣bishops; the latter of these two con∣taineth about 20000 Housholds, and was one of the four ancient Mart-Towns of Europe. Vologda, Smo∣lensko, and Plescovia, the only walled Town in Muscovy; Mosayco, St. Nicholas, Sugana, Ʋstium, Gargapo∣lia, are Bishopricks.
The Soyl, and Cli∣mate.The Soyl of this Countrey is of a  slight, sandy mould, yet very much different one place from another, for such things as grow out of the earth. Northwards towards the parts of St. Nicholas, and Chola; and North-Eastward towards Siberia, it is bar∣ren, and full of desart Woods, by reason of the Climate, and extremi∣ty of cold. So likewise along the River Volga, betwixt the Countreys of Casan and Astrachan, notwith∣standing the Soyl be fruitfull, it is ill inhabited, saving that upon the West-side the Emperour hath some few Castles and Garrisons in them. From Vologda, that lyeth almost 1700 versts from the Port of St. Ni∣cholas down towards Mosco, and so towards the South-part that border on the Crim, containing the like space of 1700 versts, it is a very pleasant and fruitfull Countrey, yielding pa∣sture and Corn, with Wood, and Water, in great store and plenty. The like is between Rezan, (lying South-East from Mosco) to
Novo∣grode and Vobsco, that reacheth far∣thest towards the North-West. So  betwixt Mosco and Smolensko, (that lyeth South-West towards Lituania) is a very fruitfull and pleasant Soyl. For the most part it is covered with Woods and Lakes. Here grow the goodliest and tallest Trees of the world; an unspeakable deal of Rozin distilleth from them. Here is the never-wasting Fountain of Wax and Honey; for without the industry of Man, the Bees make their Hives in the barks and hollows of trees. Here is also plenty of Cattel and wilde Beasts, as Bears, Mastins, Wolves, and black Foxes, whose skins do bear high prices. Riches and Com∣modities.The native Commodities are, Furrs, Wax, Honey, Tallow, Hides, Train-Oyl, Cavear, Hemp, Flax, Tar, Slad, Salt-peter, Brimstone, and Iron. These Wares they barter for Cloth, and divers other Commodities, which the Armenians bring to
Astra∣chan by the Caspian Sea, and the English to St. Nicholas, by the Bay of Graduicam. They will not suffer any Stranger to enter into their Countrey, further than the necessity  of venting their Commodities, and taking in of forreign doth inforce them. Govern∣ment.This Government is more tyran∣nical than any other Prince in the world; for he is absolute Lord and disposer both of the bodies and goods of his Subjects. In matter of Ceremony they fol∣low the Greek Church. The Priests marry, and maintain adoration of Images; fast, and compell to Con∣fession. Thus much of Moscovy.
Poland. POland is limited on the East, with Boristhenes, which part∣eth it from Moscovy; on the West, with Vistula, which parteth it from Germany; on the North, with the Baltick Sea, and Sinus Finnicus; and on the South, with Hungary. Sitation.In general, Poland is subject to as great cold as the lower part of Ger∣many, lying under the same parallel; and the Countreys as they lye more Northerly, so they suffer more cold. They use stones heated with earthen Ovens, for remedy against the cold, as the Germans do. Fertility.Poland aboundeth with Beasts, as well wilde as tame, and yieldeth excellent Horses, not great, but quick and stirring; neither do the Gentlemen more delight in any thing than in their Horses, so as they hang gold Chains and Jewels at their
ears, and paint them half over with exquisite colours. It likewise a∣boundeth with Flesh, Whit-meat, Birds, fresh-water Fish, (it being far within Land) and all kind of Pulse, as pease, and the like. It hath some Mines of gold and silver, to∣wards the Carpatian Mountains of Hungary. The na∣tural Com∣modities.The chief Commodities that go from hence are, Wax, Flax, Linnen Cloathes made thereof, Hemp, Pitch, Masts for Ships, Boards, and Timber, rich Furrs, Salt digged out of Pits, Amber, Sope-ashes, and all kind of Grain, especially Rye, which hath made Dantsick famous for relie∣ving all Nations there with in time of dearth.
Natures of the people.The People are very industrious and studious of all Languages, espe∣cially the Latin, in which they are so devoted, that you shall hardly find a mean Man which is not able in some measure to express himself in that tongue. They are according to their abilities rather prodigal than truely liberal; and are generally  good Souldiers. The Gentlemen free; the Peasants in miserable sub∣jection to their Lords; proud they are, and impatient; delicious in Diet, and costly in their attire. The Women are for the most part indifferently fair, and rather witty, than well-spoken. The chief Provinces of this King∣dome are, 1. Livonia. 2. Lituania. 3. Volinia. 4. Samogitia. 5. Podolia. 6. Russia Nigra. 7. Mazovia. 8. Prussia. 9. Podlassia; and 10. Po∣land. Livonia.Livonia hath on the East, Mosco∣vy; on the West, the Baltick Sea; North, Finland; and South, Litua∣nia. It is in length 500, in breadth 160 miles, and is a Countrey ex∣ceeding mountainous and fenny, yet withall so abundantly fruitfull, that no small store of provision is sent hence into other Countreys. The chief Towns are, 1. Riga, an Arch∣bishops See. 2 Derpt, a Town of great commerce. 3. Rivallia, a strong Fort in the hands of the Swedelander; so also is Narve.
Lituania.Lituania is a most large Province, fenny and woody, so as in summer∣time there is no passage into it; but in the winter when the Fens are fro∣zen, Merchants trade with the Inha∣bitants. The chief Cities are, 1. Vil∣na, the Metropolitan City, the Seat of a Bishop, and an University. 2. Vilcomire 3. Brestia. They have plenty of Honey, Wax, wilde Beasts, and rich Furrs, but they scarce know the use of money. Volinia.Volinia is invironed with Lituania, Podolia, and Russia; the People are strong and warlike. The chief Towns are, Kiovia, and Circassia, on the Banks of the River Neiper; it is a small woody Province, but ve∣ry fertil. Samogitia.Samogitia, whose Inhabitants are most dolaters. It hath no wal∣led Town, but the People live in Cot∣tages, being rude, and of great stature. It is a Northern Region, having Livonia, North; and the Baltick Sea, West. It is very woody, and in the midst of the trees is found excellent Honey.
Podolia.Podolia aboundeth with excellent pastures, and the ground is so fertil, that of one sowing they have three harvests. The chief Cities are, 1. Camienza, seated on a rock. 2. Orkzacow. 3 Winiecza. Russia ni∣gra.Russia nigra hath on the East, Po∣dolia; West, Poland; North and South, Hungary. The chief Towns are, 1. Leopolis, or Lemburg. 2. Gro∣deck. 3. Luckzo. It is a very fruit∣full Countrey, well stored with fair Houses, and numerous herds of Cattel. Prussia.Prussia, or Borussia hath South, Mazovia; North, the Baltick Sea; East, Lituania; and West, the River Vistula. This Countrey yieldeth abundance of Amber. The chief Cities are, 1.
Dantzick, where are daily sold 1000 measures of Wheat; it is sited in Pomerania, but subject unto the Polonian. This is a very fair City; the Houses for the most part are built of Stone or Brick, six or seven roofs high. The Garners for laying up of Corn are very fair, and very many lying together, in  which the Citizens lay up Corn, brought out of Poland, and accor∣ding to the wants of Europe, carry it into many Kingdoms. 2. Mons Re∣gius, call'd by the Germans, Konings∣berg, and by us, Regimount. It is the most famous University in these parts. 3. Holsperg. 4. Mancburg; and 5. Culme. Podlassia.Podlassia hath East, Lituania; and West, Mazovia. The chief Towns are, 1. Tycockzin, a Fort well fur∣nished with Munition, as being the place wherein the Kings treasure is reserved. 2. Biesco. 3. Knissen, where the Kings of Poland have a fine retiring House, as being well furnished with fishing-Ponds, and Parks abundantly stored with Game. Mazovia.Mazovia lyeth West of Podlas∣sia. The chief City is Warsaw, where the Parliaments of this King∣dom are held. Poland.Poland hath on the East, Lituania; West, Germany; North, Mazovia; and South, Podolia. The Metropolis is,
Cracovia, seated on the Banks of Vistula; here the King and Coun∣cel reside. The Buildings are very fair, of free-Stone, four roofs high, but covered with tiles of wood for the most part. It is of a round form, but somewhat longer from the East to the West. In the midst of the Ci∣ty is a large Market-place, wherein is a Cathedral Church; and in the midst of the Market-place is the Se∣nate-house for the City, about which are many Shops of Merchants▪ 2. Lublin. 3. Guisna, an Arch∣bishoprick. 4. Bosnau; and 5. La∣disiavia, seated on the River Vistula. Thus much of Poland.
Hungary. HƲngary is bounded on the East, with Transilvania and Walla∣chia; on the West, with Austria; North, with Poland; and South, with Sclavonia. It was formerly called Panonia In∣ferior, to distinguish it from Austria, which was called, Panonia Supe∣rior. Situation.It is situate in the Northern tem∣perate Zone, under the seven and nine Climates.
Fertility.The Soyl is wonderfull fruitfull, yielding Corn there thrice in a year; the Grass in some places (as in the Island of Comera) exceeding the height of a Man, which doth feed such a number of Cattel, that this Countrey alone is thought to be able to feed all Europe with Flesh. Al∣so they have Deer, Partridge, Phea∣sant, in such abundance, that any  Man that will may kill them; which in other places is prohibited, these creatures being reserved as Game for Gentlemen. The other Commodities which are transported, are Gold, Silver, Fish, Copper, Wine. Turk.This Kingdom now standeth di∣vided betwixt the Turk and Hunga∣rian; the former having 1. Buda, once the Metropolis of the Coun∣trey, and Court of the Kings. 2 Gyu∣la, a strong Town in the Confines of Transilvania. 3. Pest, over against Buda. 4 Alba Regalis, call'd by the Germans, Weisenberg. 5. Quinque Ecclesie; and 6. Jaurinum, or Rab. Emperour.In the Emperours part the chief Towns are, 1 Presberg, seated hard upon the edge of Austria; it hath been the Metropolis of Hungary, since the taking of Buda by the Turks. 2. Strigonium, or Gran. 3. A∣graria. 4. Comora, in an Isle so cal∣led. 5. Tectax. 6 Camsta. 7. Al∣kenbourg. 8. Neuheusel.
Transilvania. THis Countrey hath nature it self both fortified and honoured; for the Woods and Hercynian Moun∣tains do round about inviron it. The length of it is 225 English miles, and the breadth 200. It is bounded on the North, with the Carpathian Hills; on the South, with Wallachia; on the West, with Hungaria; and on the East, with Moldavia. Their chief Towns are, 1. Weisen∣berg. 2. Clausenberg. The whole Count ey is fruitfull in one Commo∣dity or other; Corn, Beeves, Fish, and Mutton, they have great plenty, and very cheap. It is very rich in Salt-pits, Stone-quarries, and Mines both of gold and silver, Iron, Quick∣silver, and other Metals. Thus much of Hungary and Transilvania.
Sclavonia. SClavonia hath on the East, the River Drinus; and a line drawn from thence to the Sea, on the West∣part of Italy; on the North, Hun∣gary; and on the South, the Adri∣atick Sea. Situation.It is in length 480 miles, and 120 in breadth. It is situated under the six and seven Climates; the longest day being fifteen hours and an half. Fertility.This Countrey is more fit for gra∣zing than for harvesting; for the Sheep and other Cattel bring forth young twice a year, and are shorn four times. The People are couragious, proud, and stubborn, and use their own Sclvonian tongue. They are of the Christian Faith, and follow the Greek Church. It is divided into Illiris, Dalmatia, and Croatia.
Illiris.Illiris was once the name of the  whole Province, but it is now ac∣commodated to one part. It hath on the East, Danubius; West, Car∣niola; North, with Dravus; and South, with Savus. The chief Ci∣ties are, 1. Zatha, on Danubius. 2. Zakaocz. 3. Windishgretz, on Dravus; and 4. Sagonna, nigh unto Savus. This is now a member of the Kingdom of Hungary. Dalmatia.Dalmatia hath on the East, Dri∣nus; West, Croatia; North, Sa∣vus; and South, the Adriatick Sea. The chief Cities are, 1. Ragusi, situ∣ate on the Adriatick Sea; a City of great traffick and riches; it is tribu∣tary to the Turks. 2. Sebenicum, or Sicum, standing on the Sea-shore. 3 Zara, or Jadera, on the same shore. 4. Scodra, or Scrutary; and 6. Lis∣sa. It is now divided betwixt the Venetians, (who keep the greatest part) and the Turk Croatia.Croatia, called by the Ancients Liburnia, and Valeria, hath on the East and South, Dalmatia; North, Savus; and West, Istria, and Car∣niola. The chief Towns are, 1.
Gar∣diska,  situate on Savus. 2. Bruman. 3. Novigrod, situate on the Savus al∣so, hard upon Germany; and 4. Sis∣seghk. The Croatians are generally called Crabats. Their Countrey hath the title of a Dukedom, and is subject partly to the Austrian, and partly to the Venetian. Thus much of Sclavonia.
Turky. THe great Turk, commonly cal∣led the Gran Seigneur, for wealth, territory, and command of Souldiery, all other Princes come short of him; witness the Countreys which he possesseth: His Coun∣treys in Europe.In Europe he possesseth all Dacia, Grecia, all the Aegean Isles, and the Taurica Cher∣sonesus. In Asia.In Asia he possesseth wholly Asia minor, now Natolia; with all the Regions within the Propontis and Hellespont, as Phrygia, Galatia, Bi∣thinia, Pontus, Lydia, Caria, Paphla∣gonia, Lycia, Magness, Capadocia, and Comogena. Near the Caspian he hath Georgia Menteglia, and Arme∣nia; next hath he Assyria, Syria, Palestine, Mesopotamia, Judea, the three Arabies: to which if you adde the Empire of Trebisond, you shall find him great Controller of the
black Sea. Likewise all the Islands of the Archipelago, except Candie, and some few others, are under his subjection. In Africk.In Africk he possesseth Aegypt, and the Kingdoms of Tunis and Al∣giers, and whatsoever he hath taken from Prester John. Fertility.The fertility of the Soyl generally through this vast Empire, is excee∣ding great, yet have they less plenty of all things than Europe; for they very sparingly, and only to serve ne∣cessity, set, plant, or sow, by reason they have no free fruition of their own Goods, in the great tyranny under which they live, as well of the Emperour, as under-Governours, and the general rapacity and licenti∣ousness of the Souldiers. They have divers kinds of Grain, as Wheat, the Grain call'd Milet, By, Oats, Rye, Pease, and all ks of Pulse, which for the kinds are like those of urope, but for the bigness preferred befor
the Fields. They have good plenty of all kinds of Cattel, yet are they no more industrious in graing and feed∣ing, than in sowing and planting. They have Hens, Ryce, Honey, Fruits, and Bread, for daily food: they desire no other dainties, nor greater riches, since they can neither enjoy their Goods while they live, nor yet bequeath them at death; and nothing is more dangerous than to be accounted rich. Natures of the peo∣ple.The Turks are generally well com∣plexioned; of good stature; propor∣tionably compacted; no idle talkers; no doers of things superfluous; hot and venerious; servile to their Em∣perour; and zealous in Religion. They nourish no Hair on their Heads, and therefore keep on of all sides, counting it an opprobrious thing to see any uncover their Head. In their familiar salutations they use to lay their Hands on their Bosome, and a little decline their bodies; but when they accost a Person of Rank, they bow almost down to the ground, and kiss the hem of his Garment.
They prefer as they pass the Streets th eft hand before the right, as be∣ing master of his Sword with whom they walk. The Women are small of stature; for the most part ruddy, clear, and smooth, as never ruffled with the weather; and often frequenting the Baths: they seldome go abroad, and then masked; lascivious; with∣in doors pleasing in matters of incon∣tinency; and they are accounted most beautifull, which have the greatest Eyes, and are of the blackest hue. These Women live in great awe and respect of their Husbands, never sitting with him at the table, but waiting till he hath done, and then withdrawing into some by∣room.
Diet.In their Diet they are very spa∣ring, and negligent, not using any pomp or magnificence. The richer sort sit like Taylors (bending with their knees) upon Carpets, or on the Grass; and their table is so low, that they may well reach it sitting on the ground: they use no Knives,  but seethe their Meat untill it be very tender, that they may break it with their fingers; neither have they va∣riety of Dishes, but one, all sitting in a round circle, fall upon one Dish, and talk not whilst they eat, but silently fall hard to work. All the Turkish Houshold-stuff consists in one poor Pot to seethe Meat in; one Spoon of wood; one Cup of leather or wood, to drink in; a poor Bed or Mattress; yea often a single Coverled, and the Earth, serves them for Bedstead, Ta∣ble, and Stools.
Of those Countreys which the Turks term Romania, anciently known by the Names of Greece and Dacia. GReece is bounded on the East, with the Aegean Sea, the Hellespont, Propontis, and Thrace Bosphorus; on the West, with Ita∣ly, and the Adriatick Sea; on the North, with the Mountain Hamus; and on the South, the Ionian Sea. The situation of this Countrey is in the Northern temperate Zone, under the five and six Climates.
Natures o the Greeks.The Greeks were once brave Men; sound Scholars; and addicted to the love of virtue, and civil behaviour; but now are they an unconstant Peo∣ple; destitute of learning, and the means to obtain it; uncivil; rio∣tous;  and so lazy, that for the most part they endeavour their profit no further than their Belly compells them. The Women for the most part are brown-complexioned; ex∣ceedingly well-favoured; and exces∣sively amorous. Painting they use very much, to keep themselves in grace with their Husbands; for when they once grow wrinkled, they are put to all the drudgery of the House. The more natural Commodities that this Countrey affords, and from hence are transported into other Countreys, are Wine, Oyl, Copper, Vitriol, some Gold and Silver, Vel∣vets, Damasks, and Tarquess-Gro∣grams. The ordinary division of this Countrey is into Peloponesus, Acbaia, Epirus, Albania, Macedonia, and Thessalia, Migdonia, and Thra∣cia. PeloponesusPeloponesus is a Peninsula rounded with the Sea, except where it is tyed to the main Land of Greece, by an Isthmus of six miles in breadth.
This Peninsula is in compass 600 miles, and is at this day called Mo∣rea. In this Countrey are contained the Provinces of Aelis, Messenia, Arca∣dia, Laconia, Argolis, and Achaia propria. 1. The Countrey of Elis hath East, Arcady; West, the Ionian Sea; North, Achaia propria; and South, Messenia. The chief Cities are, 1. Elis. 2. Olympicum, famous for the Statue of Jupiter Olympus, one of the seven wonders, being in height 60 cubits, composed of Gold and Ivory. 2. Messenia hath East, Arcady; North, Elis; South and West, the Sea. It takes name from the Metropolis, Messene, now called Golfo di Co∣ron. 2. Pilon, now Navarino. 3. Arcadia hath East, Laconia; West, Elis and Messene; and North, Achaia propria. The chief Cities are, 1. Psophis. 2. Mantinea. 3. Megalopolis. 4. Laconia hath East and South, the
Sea; North, Argolis; and West, Arcadia. The chief Cities are, 1. Lacedemon, once a famous Com∣monwealth. 2. Thalana, nigh un∣to which is the Lake Lerna, where Hercules slew the Monster Hydra; and the Mount Tenarus, from whence he drew the three-headed Dog Cerberus. 5. Argolis, so called from the chief City Argos. It hath East and North, the Sea; West, Achaiapro∣pria; and South, Laconia. The 2d. City is Micene; and 3. Nema, where Hercules slew the Lions. 6. Achaia propria. The chief City is Corinth, seated at the foot of the Acro Corinthium Hills. Achaia.Achaia hath on the East, the Aegean Sea; on the West, Epirus; on the North, Thessaly; and South, with Peloponesus. It is divided into Attica, Megaris, Boetia, Phocis, Aetolia, Doris, and Locris. The chief City of this Countrey is Athens, seated in Attica. This City hath been famous for ma∣ny things; especially
1. For the fa∣mous Scholars that are here taught,  and flourish. And 2. For the ex∣cellent Souldiers it hath brought forth. 2. Megaris is a small Region; the chief City was Megaria. 3. Boetia is a very large Region; the chief City whereof is, 1. The∣bes, built on the Brook Cephisus, by Cadmus the Phenician. 2. Au∣lis. 3. Platea. 4. Phocis; the chief Towns whereof were Delphis, seated at the foot of the Mountain Pernassus, ha∣ving the Temple of Apollo. 5. Locris; this is a small Region. The chief City is now called Lepan∣to, which once belonged to the Ve∣netian, but now to the Turk; near unto which the Christian Navy gave a great overthrow to the Turkish Navy. 6. Aetolia is divided from Epi∣rus by the River Pindus. The chief Towns are, 1. Chalcis. 2. Ther∣mum, the Parliament-City of all Aetolia. 7. Doris pertains to the Region of Locri. The chief Cities are, 1. Am∣phissa.
Epirus.Epirus was once a famous Pro∣vince, and had in it 70 Cities, now most of them destroy'd; but the chief of the remainder are, 1. An∣tigonia. 2. Cassiope. 3. Toronna; and on the Western part is Nicopolis, and Actium. Albania.Albania hath East, Macedonia; West, the Adriatick Sea; North, Sclavonia; and South, Epirus. The chief Cities are, 1. Albinopolis. 2. Sfetigrad. 3. Durazzo; and 4. Croya. MacedoniaMacedonia hath on the East, Migdonia; West, Albania; North, Misia superior; and South, Epirus and Achaia. The chief Towns are, Scydra, Andaristus, Aedessa, all mid-land Towns; Eribea on Alba∣nia side, now called Pressa; and Pidna, seated on the Influx of the Rier called Alaicmon, into the B call'd Sinus Thermaicus.
Thessalia.The Southern part of Macedon is Thessalia, a fruitfull and pleasant Countrey. Here is the Olympium, of such an infinite height, that it seemed to transcend the clouds.  Here is also the Hills Othris, and the Hills Pelion and Ossa, about which the Centaurs dwelt; and here lived the Myrmidons, over which at the siege of Troy Achilles was Captain. The chief Towns are, 1. Tricca. 2. Lamia. 3. Pharsalia, nigh unto which was that bloody Battel fought between Cesar, and Pompey 4. Phi∣lippi. Migdonia.Migdonia: this Countrey is by some accounted a part of Thrace. Herein is the Hill Athos, which is 75 miles circuit, three dayes journey in ascent, and casteth a shadow as far as Lemnos, which is 40 miles distant. The chief Cities are, 1. Nicalidi. 2. Apolonia. 3. Pallene. 4. Neo∣polis; and 5. Thessalonica, vulgarly Salonichi, seated in the Sea, a Town of great traffick; to the People of this City St. Paul wrote two of his Epistles. It is a populous City, re∣plenished with Christians, Turks, and Jews, in which there is abun∣dance. Thrace.Thrace hath on the East, the Eux∣ine Sea, Propontis, and
Hellespint;  West, Macedon; on the North, the Hill Hamus; and South, the Aegean Sea. It is a most noble Province; cold, plain, and admirable populous; sto∣red with Grain, Pulse, and excellent Wine toward the Sea-side, whereof Sestos on the Hellespont (just over against Abidos) not above two miles different, the one being in Asia, and the other Europe. The Castle of Sestos is seated in a most fertil Soyl; here the Ships that come from Constantinople use to be detained some three dayes, to the end that if they carry away private mens slaves, the Masters may have time to follow them: likewise the searchers and customers look that they carry no prohibited wares; nei∣ther can the Ship nor any Passengers be suffered to pass these Castles, ex∣cept they bring the Pasport of the great Turk, which is granted by the chief Visziere, or Basha. 2. Abdera. 3. Cardia, seated in the Thracian Chersonesus, now called St. George's Arm. 4. Lysimachus. 5.
Callipo∣lis,  situate on the Northern Pro∣montory of the Chersonesus, and the first Town that the Turks had in Eu∣rope. 6. Trajanopolis, founded by Trajan. 7. Adrianople, built by Adrian. 8. Constantinople, seated in a most commodious place for an Em∣pire, over-looking Europe and Asia▪ It was built (663 years before Christ was born) by Pausanias a Lacedemonian, and was first called Bizantium. The
Turks took this City from the Christians 1453, and by them is at this day called Stam∣bolda. It is built in form of a trian∣gle, whereof two sides towards the North and East lye upon two Seas; and towards the West it lyes upon the Continent of Greece. For many causes this City is famous, and for two especially may be preferred to any in the world known to us; namely, for pleasantness of situati∣on, and the largeness and safety of the Haven: the fruitfulness of the Fields, the sweetness and beauty of the Flowers, and the goodness of the Fruits, cannot sufficiently be  praised. The Haven will receive an huge number of Ships; and upon both the banks of the City, and Gal∣lata, Ships of 500 tun once unload∣ed, may so lye with their Cables fast∣ned on the Land, as they can pass from the Ships to the Land without any Boats. The Buildings of this City have no magnificence, being partly of a mat∣ter like Brick, but white, and (as it seems) unhardned by fire; part∣ly of Timber and Clay, excepting some few Palaces which are of free-Stone, but nothing at all so stately built as may be expected from the pride and riches of the great Turks servants; and these Houses are built two stories high, with a low roof, without any windows, after the manner of Italy. The Streets of this City are narrow, and shadowed with Pent-houses of wood, and up∣on both sides the y rised some foot high, but of
breadth, and paved for Men and Women to pass; the midst o the Street being left low, and un-paved, and no broader than  for the passage of Asses, or Beasts loaded. There are two Houses for the same use as the Exchange is at London, but not to be compared to it for the Buildings, where Merchants use to meet for the selling of wares; they are called the great and less Bezestan, and use to be opened for certain dayes of the week, and for some six hours; at which time are to be sold, Jewels, Semiters, or Swords, pieces of Velvet, Sattin, Damask, and the like: and the Market-place is not far distant, where captives of both sexes are to be sold; and the buyers if they will may take them into a House, and see them naked, and handle them, to know their fatness and strength. The chiefest Buildings of this City, are the Palace of the great Turk, the Church of St. Sophia, now made a Mosche, the stately Mosche (or Turkish Church) built upon the Palace, which of old belonged to the Grecian ∣triarch; the Mosches and ∣chers
of the Turkish Emperours; amongst which that of Soly∣man is numbred amongst the Mi∣racles of the world. Thus much of Greece.
Dacia. DAcia of old belonged to the Kingdom of Hungary, but at this day is tributary to the Turks. It is bounded on the West, with Hungary; on the East, with the Euxine Sea; North, with the Car∣pathian Mountains; and South, with Hemus, by which it is divided from Greece. The People are generally stubborn and untractable; they read like the Jews, from the right hand to the left; and are of the Christian Faith, following the Greek Church. The Countrey is sufficiently fruit∣full, abounding with Mines and Horses, whose Manes hang down al∣most to the ground. It is divided into Transilvania, Moldavia, Wallachia, Servia, Rascia, Bulgaria, and Bosnia.
Of Transilvania I have already  spoken in the Kingdome of Hun∣gary. Moldavia.Moldavia is seated on the North∣end of Transilvania, and extendeth to the Euxine Sea. The chief Ci∣ties are, Occazonia, Fucciana, and Falezing. It is exceeding fertil in Corn, Wine, Grass, and Wood. It afford∣eth great plenty of Beef and Mutton; a fat Ox being sold here for 30 s. and a Sheep for 3 s. To this Mol∣davia belongeth the little Countrey of Bessarabia: It lyes between Mount Hemus, South; and Litua∣nia, North; and is seated very com∣modiously on the black Seas. The chief Towns are, 1. Kilim. 2. Cher∣men, or Moncastrum, the Seat of a Turkish Sanziack. Wallachia.Wallachia is a plain fertil Coun∣trey, stored with excellent Horse, Cattel, Mines of gold and silver. The chief Cities are, 1. Sabrinum. 2. Prailaba. 3. Tergovista, the Vaivods Seat. Servia.Servia lyes between Bosnia and Rascia. The chief Cities are, 1.
Sto∣nibourgh.  2. Samandria. 3. Bel∣grade, on the Danubius. Rascia.Rascia lyeth between Servia and Bulgaria. The chief City is Boden, famous for her annual Fairs. Bulgaria.Bulgaria hath East, the Euxine Sea; West, Rascia; North, Danu∣bius; and South, Thrace. The chief Cities are, 1. Sophia, the Seat of the Beglerbeg of Greece. 2. Ni∣copolis. Bosnia.Bosnia hath East, Servia; and West, Croatia. The chief Cities, Gazachium the residence, and Lai∣za the Sepulture of the Bosnian Kings. Thus much of Dacia, and of the Continent of Europe.
Of Asia. ASia is the greatest and vastest part of the world, exceeding Europe and Africk both in largeness and circuit. Upon three parts it is bounded with the Vast Ocean, sirnamed, the Orient; on the South, with the Indi∣an; upon the North, with the Scy∣thian; upon the West, it is some∣where dis-joyned from Europe and Africk with the Red Sea; some∣where with the Mediterranean; somewhere with the Euxine; and somewhere with the River Tana∣is.
Generally it enjoyeth a most excellent temperature of Air, and is so rich and fertil, that it ex∣celleth all Countreys whatsoever: For here are to be found divers sorts of living creatures, and Plants, the like whereof the whole world  affordeth not, as Balm, Sugar-Canes, Frankincence, Myrth, Cas∣sia, Cynamon, Nutmegs, Pep∣per, Saffron, sweer Wood, Musk, and divers other sorts of Drugs and Odours; excellent Gold, all sorts of Minerals and precious stones. Of Beasts it affordeth the Ele∣phant and Camel, with divers strange sorts, both wilde and tame. The People are of excellent wits, exceeding rich, and happy in all good things. This Countrey hath worn the Garland of super-eminency: 1. Be∣cause here Man was created. 2. Here was our Saviour Christ born; wrought his divine mira∣cles; and suffered for our salva∣tion. 3. Here were done the Actions memorized by the ho∣ly Pen-Men, mentioned in the Old and New Testament. The principal Regions are, 1. Natolia. 2. Syria. 3. Pale∣stine. 4. Armenia. 5.
Arabia.  6. Media. 7. Assyria. 8. Me∣sopotamia. 9. Chaldea. 10. Per∣sia. 11. Parthia. 12. Tarta∣ria. 13. China. 14. India. 15. The Islands; a great part of which Regions are at this day possessed by the Turk.
Natolia. NAtolia was formerly called Asia minor: It hath on the East, the River Euphrates; on the West, the Thracius Bosphorus, Pro∣pontis, Hellespont, and the Aegean Sea; on the North Pontus Euxi∣nus; and South, the Rhodian and Lycian Seas. This Countrey was once of great fertility, but is now laid waste and desolate. The people were once va∣liant and industrious, but now given over to luxuriousness and effemi∣nacy. Here once flourished the Faith of Christ; and here likewise stood the seven Churches, to whom St. John dedicated his Revelations: All which are long since removed, so that few Christians remain, and they which are, follow the Church and Commu∣nion of Greece.
This Region comprehendeth the Provinces of Cilicia, Pamphilia, Lycia, Caria, Ionia, Lydia, Aeolis, Phrygia major, & minor, Bythinia, Pontus, Paphlagonia, Gallacia, Capa∣docia, Lycaonia, Psidia, and Armenia minor. Cilicia.On the South-East of Anatolia, is Cilicia: It lies under the Mountain Taurus, under the bosome of the Mediterranean Sea, or Iecian Gulf, where Alexander the Great over∣came Darius, he having but 30000 and the other 600000 men. The chief Cities are, 1. Nicopolis, built by Alexander. 2. Pompeiopolis, built by Pompey. 3. Alexandria, built also by Alexander. 4. Tarsus, the birth∣place of St. Paul. The Inhabitants are given for the most part to feed∣ing of Goats, of whose sleece they make their Chamblets. Pamphilia.On the West-side of Cilicia, lyeth Pamphilia. The chief Cities are, 1. Seleucia. 2. Perga. 3. Faselis. In this Countrey are woven these fine Clothes which we call Chamblets, watered and unwatered.
Lycia.Lycia lies upon the Sea, between Pamphilia and Caria. The chief Cities are, 1. Patras. 2. Isaurus. 3. Phaselis. Caria.On the West-side of Lycia, is Caria. The chief Cities are, 1. Min∣dum. 2. Halicarnassus, in which was the Sepulchre of Mausolius the King, held for one of the seven miracles of the World. 3. Magnesia. These four Countries are now called Caramania, and is a Turkish Zan∣ziackship. Ionia.On the North-side of Caria, is Ionia, whose chief Cities are, 1. Mi∣letum. 2. Smyrna. 3. Colophon. 4. Ephesus, where Timothy was Bi∣shop: to the people of this City did Paul direct one of his Epistles. This Town is famous for the burial of St. John, and for the Temple of Diana, which was accounted one of the Worlds wonders; it was 200 years a building. In this Countrey is the Hill atinus, the dwelling place of Endymion. Lydia.On the North-East of Ionia, is Lydia. This Countrey is watered
with the Rivers Caestrus and Maean∣der; the first is famous for its abun∣dance of Swans. The chief Cities are, 1. Sardis. 2. Pergamus, where Ga∣len was born. 3. Laodecea. 4. Thea∣tyra. 5. Philadelphia: of these Sar∣dis was the strongest, but now are they only known in their names and ruines. Phrygia mino.On the East-side of Phrygia major, is Phrygia minor. The chief Towns are, 1. Adramitium, mentioned in the 17th. of the Acts. 2. Trajano∣polis. 3. Sigeum, the Haven-Town to Troy. 4. Ilium, or Troy, a fa∣mous Town. Aeolis and Mysia.On the North of Lydia, is Aeolis. The chief Towns are Merina, and Hidra: nigh to this Province are both the Mysias, whose chief Towns are Lampsachus, and Cyzichus. Phygia major.Phrygia major lyeth East of Phri∣gia minor. The chief Towns are, 1. Gordion. 2. Mideium. 3 Colosse, where dwelt the Colossians, to whom St. Paul directed his Epistles.
Bthia.On the North-side of the Phry∣gias, is seated Bithinia. The chief  Towns are, 1. Nicomedia. 2. Phasso. 3. Heraclia. 4. Nice, where the first General Council was held. 5. Chal∣cedon, where the fourth General Council was held, to repell the He∣resie of Nestorian. 6. Prusa, or Bursa, where the Turks eldest Son is sent untill he be dead. Pontus.Pontus lyeth on the North-East of Bithinia. The chief Towns are, 1. Tomos, to which Ovid was ba∣nished. 2. Claudiopolis. 2. Pithius, where Chrysostome lived in exile: This Countrey, together with Bithi∣nia, are now called Bursia Paphlago∣nia.On the East-side of Pontus, is Paphlagonia. The chief City is Pom∣peiopolis, built by Pompey the Great. 2. Sinope, famous for its plenty of Brass and Lead. 3. Amisus, a Sea-Town, now called Simoso. Galatia.On the South-side of Paphlago∣nia, is Galatia; to this Province did St Paul direct one of his Epistles. The chief Cities are, 1. Gutia. 2. Ancyra, (now Angauri) famous at this time for the making of Chamblets. 3. Pisius, a Town of
great Traffick; and 4. Tavium. This Countrey yieldeth the Stone called Amethists, which are said to preserve the man that wears them from Drunkenness. Capadocia.On the East-side of Galatia, is Capadocia. The chief Cities are, 1. Erzyrium, situate on the confines of the greater Armenia. 2. Amasia. 3. Mazaca, where St. Basil lived. 4. Sebastia; and 5. Trapesus, or Trapezond, once the Imperial seat of the Comneni. This Empire contained the Provinces of Pontus, Galatia, and Capadocia; here the Amazones are said to have lived, from the destructi∣on of Troy, to the time of Alexander the Great. Lycaonia.On the South of Capadocia, lyeth Lycaonia. The chief Cities are, 1. Iconium. 2. Lystra, where Ti∣mothy was born; where Paul and Barnabas were adored for Gods, Paul for Mercury, and Barnabas for Jupiter. 3. Derbe.
Psidia.On the East-side of Lycaonia, is Psidia, whose chief City is, 1. Antiochia, mentioned in the  13th. of the Acts. 2. Lysi∣mia. Armenia minor.Eastward from Psidia, is Armenia minor, thought to be the Land of Ararat, upon whose Mountains the Ark of Noah rested after the Deluge. The chief Town is Malexona, whose territory abounds in Oyl and Wine.
Syria. SYria hath on the East, Euphrates; on the West, the Mediterranean Sea; on the North, Cilicia; and on other parts, Asia minor. The Inhabitants of this Countrey are either Mahumetans, or Christi∣ans: these later are divided into the Sects of Melchies, Jacobites, and Maronites: these last inhabit only Mount Libanus, so much renowned for its goodly Cedars. In this Countrey, between it and Armenia minor, live a certain people whom they call Cardi, or Coordes. These men worship the Devil, and with good reason, as they think, because God is a good man, and will do no man harm; but the Devil is a Knave, and must be pleased. This Countrey is divided into three Provinces, viz. Phoenicia, Coelo-Syria, and Syro-Phoenicia.
Phoenicia.Phoenicia lyeth South towards Ca∣naan. The chief Cities are, 1. Acon, seated in a fair plain, within a Creek of the Sea of the same name, and compassing the City: And such a plain lies all along the Coast from Joppa to Trippoli. This City was fa∣mous for the Armies of Europe passing to conquer these parts. 2. Sa∣repta, where Elias was sustained in a Famine by a Widdow. 3. Sydon, once a famous City, now contracted into a narrower compass. 4. Tyre, the ruines whereof witness the old magnificence. This Countrey a∣boundeth with Wheat, Honey, Oyl, and Balm. Coelo-Syria.The second Province is Coelo-Syria, whose chief Cities are, 1. Hie∣ropolis, famous for the Temple and worship of the Syrian Goddess. 2. Damascus: this City is seated in a very fruitful soyl, bearing Grapes all the year long, and girt round with most curious and odoriferous Gardens. The Syrian Kings men∣tioned in the Bible, were of this Syria.
Syro-Phoe∣nicia.The third Province is Syro-Phoe∣nicia, whose chief Cities are, 1. Be∣ritus, a famous Mart-Town, nigh unto which St. George is said to have delivered the Kings Daughter, by killing the Dragon; in memory whereof there was a Castle and an Oratory built in the same place, and dedicated to St. George. 2. Aleppo; this City was of old called Aram-Sohab, (mentioned in the 2 Sam. 8. chaep. and 3. vers.) The Traffick in this place is exceeding great, so as the Goods of all Asia, and the Eastern Islands, are brought hither, or to Cayro in Egypt. This City lies within Land, (the Port whereof (called
Alexandretta by the Christians, and Scanderona by the Turks) I shall hereafter de∣scribe.) The building of this City, as of all houses of Syria, is one roof high, with a plain top plastered to walk upon, and with arches before the houses, under which they walk dry, and keep Shops of Wares. This City is well fortified, pleasantly seated, and hath many fair Gardens.  The air here is exceeding hot and subtile, so as the Christians coming hither from Scanderona, (a most un∣healthfull place, choaked with Fens) commonly fall sick and dye; and this is the cause the English Factors im∣ployed here, seldom return into England. Within this City the English Merchants have three houses, as it were Colledges, where they live. In these parts they have Sheep, the tail of one wreathed to the ground, doth weigh 30 or more pounds in fat and wool. The 3. City is Biblis. 4. Tripolis, (so called for difference from Tripoli in Africk:) The Haven lies on the West-side, and is compassed with a Wall, wherein were many little Barks, and some Ships of Marseils in France. The Haven is fortified with seven Towers, and upon it are built many Store-houses for Merchants. The City lies some half a mile from the Haven, and is seated on the side of a Hill; near unto this City lies Mount Libanus; this Mountain is very pleasant, abounding in fruitfull
Trees, and with Grapes yielding a rich Wine; upon the North-side without the Gates, they keep many Silk-worms, in most pleasant Gar∣dens. The building of Tripoli, is like to the other buildings in Syria. The Street which leads to Aleppo is broad, the rest narrow; and the air and waters are unhealthfull. The chief Traffick of this City is for the most part removed to Damascus and Aleppo. The 5. City is Antiochia, the Metropolis of all Syria.
Palestine. PAlestine hath on the East, Eu∣phrates; on the West, the Me∣diterranean Sea; on the North, Phoenicia; and on the South, Ara∣bia. This Countrey was first call'd the Land of Canaan, from Canan, the Son of Cham. 2. The Land of Promise, because the Lord promised it to Abraham. 3. Israel, from the Israelites. 4. Judea, from the Jews. 5. Palestine, quasi Phili∣stin. 6. The holy Land, because here was wrought the work of our salvation. It is in length 200 miles, and not above 50 in breadth, yet of that sa∣lubrity of Air, and fertility of Soyl, that it maintained the two potent Kingdoms of Israel and Juda, where∣in David reckoned 1300000 fighting Men, besides the tribes of Levi and Benjamin.
The People hereof are now ac∣counted a perjured, vagabond Nati∣on, and great Usurers. It is divided into the four Provin∣ces, viz. Galilea, Judea, Idumea, Samaria, and is watered with the Rivers Cedron and Jordan. Galilea.Galilea is the most Northern part of all Palestine: it is divided into the higher and lower; the higher Gali∣lea contained the tribes of Asher and Nepthali, and part of the tribe of Dan; in Asher the chief Cities were, 1. Acon. 2. Tyre. 3. Sydon. 4. Sa∣repta; all which we have before men∣tioned in the description of Phoeni∣cia. 5. Aphek, whose falling down slew 27000 of Benhadad's Souldiers. 6. Giscala, the birth-place of Jehu. In the tribe of Nepthali the princi∣pal Towns are and were, 1. Jabin. 2. Capernaum. 3. Genasareth. The chief Cities of that part of Dan, are Hamath and Ramath. The lower Galilea contains the tribe of Zabulon and Isacher. In the tribe of Zabulon the chief Cities are, 1. Hippopolis. 2. Cana, where
our Saviour turn'd water into wine. 3. Bethsaida, the brith-place of Pe∣ter, Andrew, and Philip. 4. Tiberias, on the Sea of Galilea. 5. Nazareth; in this tribe is the Brook Chison, and Mount Tabor. In the tribe of Isa∣cher the chief Cities are, 1. Tari∣chea. 2. Enbadda; near this Saul slew himself. 3. Daberoth, seated in the valley of Israel: in this lower Galilea was our Saviour very conver∣sant. Samaria.Samaria is here taken for that part of Palestine seated between
Judea and Galilea; the People whereof were the descendants of such Assyrians as were by Sallamanser sent hither to possess the Inheritance of the captive Israelites. This Province of Sama∣ria contained the tribes of Ephraim, Gad, Reuben, and the two half tribes of Manasses, the one situate on the Mediterranean, the other beyond Jordan. In the half tribe of Ma∣nasses on the Mediterranean, the chief Cities are, 1. Bethsan. 2. Thebes. 3. Ephra, where Gedeon dwelt. 4. Endor, where Saul consulted with  the Witch. 5. Jesreel. 6. Cesarea Philippi, seated in a plain 25 miles distant from Joppa, now for the most part ruin'd. 7. Antipatris, whither the Souldiers led Paul, by command of Lysias. 8. Megiddo. In the tribe of Ephraim the chief Cities are, 1. Samaria, the Metropolis of the Kingdom of Israel. 2. Bethel. 3. Sichem. 4. Lidda. 5. Arimathea. 6. Silo. On the other side Jordan was the Habitation of the children of Gad, and Reuben, and the other half of Manasses: the Countreys of these last was called Basan, whose last King was Ogg. The chief Cities are, 1. Edry, the Seat of King Ogg. 2. Astaroth. 3. Gaulon; and 4. Hus, the birth-place of Job. The chief Cities of the Gadits are, 1. Gergesa. 2. Gilead. 3. Succoth. 4. Ramoth-Gilead, where Jacob and Laban swore. 5. Rabba, now Philadelphia, under the Walls whereof Ʋriah was slain by the command of David. In the tribe of Reuben the chief Cities are, 1. Macherus; in this Town was John the Baptist slain. 2. Beth∣bara,
where Moses made his divine exhortations to the People. 3. A∣bel-Sittim, seated in the plains of Moab. 4 Ramath-Baal, to which place Baleck brought Balem to curse the People. Idumea.Idumea was the Habitation of the Edomites, the off-spring of Esau, who also inhabited the Countrey called Mount Seir, in which the children of Israel were stung with the fiery Serpents. This Countrey of Idumea contain∣ed the tribes of Dan and Simeon. The chief Cities of the tribe of Dan are, 1. Joppe, now Jaffa, a famous Mart-Town, situate very pleasant upon a Hill declining towards the Sea: here the Prophet Jonas took Ship to fly to Tarsus. 2. Gath, the Countrey of that huge Giant Goliah. 3. Ecron, where Belzebub was wor∣shipped. 4. Asotos, where a Tem∣ple was built in honour of the Idol Dagon. 5. Ciriatharim, where the Ark of the Lord was kept 20 years. The chief Cities of Simeon are, 1. scalon. 2.
Gaza, a very fair  and strong Town. 3. Beersheba, where Abraham and Abimelech swore to each other, where Hagar wandred with her Son Ismael. Judea.Judea is of the same extent now, as it was when it was the Kingdom of Juda, containing the two great tribes of Juda and Benjamin. The chief Cities of the tribe of Juda are, 1. Carioth, the birth-place of Judas Iscariot. 2. Maresa, the native Soyl of the Prophet Micah. 3. Hebron, the Seat of the Giants called the Anakims: adjoyning to this Town is the Plain of Mamre, where Abraham was visited by the Angels. 4. Tecoa, the City of Amos the Pro∣phet. 5. Libna, seated in the wil∣derness. 6. Ziph, in the wilderness wherein David hid himself from the fury of Saul. 7. Bethlem, where Christ was born: this Village is from Jerusalem some three miles. In this Countrey also are the Hills of En∣gaddi, in a Cave of which David cut off a lap of
Saul's garment. In the tribe of Benjamin the chief Ci∣ties are, 1. Gilgal,  unto which  Joshua pitched the twelve stones, as a memorial that the waters of Jordan divided themselves, to give passage unto the children of Israel. 2. Mispah. 3. Geba. 4. Ai, a strong Town. 5. Gib∣beon. 6. Jericho, destroy'd by the sounding of Rams Horns. 7. Mispah. 8. Jerusalem, the City of the Lord, built by Melchisedeck Prince and Priest of Salem. This City is strong∣ly seated on Mount Sion, encom∣passed with stately Walls of red and black Stone, more than an ell long, and about half an ell broad. Here are seven Gates well fortified with Ordnance, and is strong enough against sudden tumults, although no way able to hold out a siege. The Houses here, as in all parts of Asia; are built very low, of Flint-stone, only one story high, the top whereof is plain and plastered, and hath Battle∣ments almost a yard high. All the Citizens are either Taylors, Shooe∣makers, Cooks, or Smiths, and in general poor rascal People, mingled of the scum of divers Nations, partly Arabians, partly
Moors, and partly  the basest Inhabitants of neighbour-Countreys. In this City are still to be seen divers of the places mention∣ed in the Old and New Testament, or the ruines of them, if you will credit your Guides, which shew them unto such Travellers and Strangers as come to behold this City: but let a Man believe no further than his own judgement will warrant him.
Armenia. ARmenia hath on the East, Me∣dia, and the Caspian Sea; on the West, Euphrates, and the Euxine Sea; on the North, Tarta∣ry; and on the South, Mesopotamia, now Dierbechia. This Countrey is very mountai∣nous, which are reputed to be those parts of the Hills Taurus and Anti∣taurus, which are called Periadres, Scodrisci, and Amamus.
The People hereof are more fa∣mous for nothing, than their want of all things; stour, cruel, and warlike; maintaining themselves by hunting and stealing, as Men living in so bar∣ren a Soyl, that Husbandry were vain and foolish. They are general∣ly good Archers; merry; careless of honour; desirous of ease; great∣bodyed; comely and willing to be soothed. The Women tall, but  homely; having Children common∣ly at ten years old; it is accounted a great credit unto them if they can please and be acceptable to such Guests as the Husbands bring in. The whole Countrey is divided in∣to three Provinces; 1. Colchis. 2. Georgia; and 3. Turcoma∣nia. Colchis.Colchis lyeth on the Euxine Sea, towards the North and the East. The People are barbarous, de∣fending themselves from the Turks by the rough Hills, and ragged po∣verty; they are so inhumane, that they sell their own Children to the Turks. The Countrey of it self is very fertil; but the People are so careless, that they neither plant nor sowe to any purpose. The chief Towns are, 1. Alvati. 2. Phasis, or Phassum; and 3. Dios∣curias. Georgia.Georgia: this Countrey is now call'd Mengrelia Georgia; is bound∣ed on the East, with the Caspian Sea; West, with Colchis; North,
with the Tartars of Astracham; and South, with the greater Arme∣nia. In this Countrey is a thing mon∣strous and wonderfull; for in it there is a Province called Hamsem, con∣taining in circuit three dayes jour∣ney; and so far is it covered with an obscure darkness, that none can see any thing, nor dare enter into it: the Inhabitants thereabouts affirm, that they have often heard the voice of Men howling, Cocks crowing, neighing of Horses; and by the pas∣sage of a River it appears to have signs of habitation. This Province was formerly called Iberia: the chief Towns of it are, 1. Lori. 2. Basca∣pan. 3. Teflis, exceeding well forti∣fied by the Turks. 4. Tomanis. For the greater part this Countrey is co∣vered with mountains, woods, and thickets; it is notwithstanding fe∣til, and adorn'd with many large plains and valleys. Turcoma∣nia.Turcomania is seated on the South of Colchis and Iberia: the chief Towns are, 1.
Albanopolis. 2. Van,  a strong Bulwark against the Persi∣ans Invasions. 3. Arnimig, the Me∣tropolis of the Countrey. 4. Ar∣taxata, now Coy. 5. Sebastia, the residence of the Patriach of Arme∣nia. This Countrey was formerly called Armenia the great, to distin∣guish it from a less in Natolia; is now vulgarly called Turcomania. It is invironed with Mountains, and beautified with Plains, amongst the which Chalderan and Mons niger are most renowned. The People by nature are much given to theft and spoil; some of them inure themselves to tillage, and mechanical trades, in weaving of Chamblets and Hangings, watered and unwatered.
Arabia. ARabia is bounded on the East, with the Persian Gulf; on the West, with the Red Sea; on the North, with Mesopotamia and Pa∣lestine; and on the South, with the Ocean. The People hereof are extreamly addicted to theft, which is the bet∣ter part of their living. They are mean of stature; swift of foot; raw-boned, and tawny: they are indifferently called Arabians, Sara∣cens, or Moors. Those that are the true Arabians live out of Cities in Tents dispersed over Syria, Aegypt, and Africk; these give themselves to feed Cattel, and droves of Camels. Those which inhabit the Cities are called Moors; these are dispersed over all the Southern part of Asia, as Pedia, East-India; and likewise are advanced to divers Kingdomes,
famous Cities, and worthy Mart-Towns; yea and over all the South∣coast of Africk. This Countrey is 4000 miles in compass: the People use the Arabick Language, which extends it self through Palestine, Sy∣ria, Mesopotamia, Egypt, and all Barbary, excepting Morocco. It is divided into Deserta, Petrosa, and Felix. Arabia De∣sta.The Desart Arabia hath a name answerable to the nature of it, being in great part without Inhabitants for the barrenness of the Soyl; only to∣wards the River Euphrates, and the Mountains of Arabia Felix, it hath some Towns, and is frequented with Merchants; other-where fed with such roving Arabians, as having no Houses wander to and fro, seeking where to find pasture for their Beasts, and lodge in Tents. Bosra the City. Petrosa.Arabia Petrosa joyneth on the West and North to Syria; on the East, to the Desart Arabia; and South, to the Happy, nigh to Syria. This is somewhat fertil, but other∣where
exceeding barren. Both in this part and the former they had need go strong and well accompanied, for fear of robbery and spoil which the Arabians attend. This part is famous for the passage of the Israe∣lites through the same, and abode therein forty years. The memora∣ble things herein, are the Mountains Sinai and Horeb; upon the former whereof is built a Monastery of Chri∣stians, following the Greek Church, and the only Receptacle (or Inn) for wayfaring Christians; other place of relief there is none. With∣in this Countrey are good store of Dromedaries, which will carry a Man an hundred miles a day: here is also good store of Ostriches. The chief Towns are, 1. Petra. 2. Aresh. 3. Ezion geber, on the coast of the Red Sea, where Solomon's Navy kept station before they put forth to the Land of Ophir. Felix.Arabia Felix containeth a Penin∣sula, girt almost round with the
Persian Gulf, the Red Sea, and the Ocean. In this Countrey is the Phe∣nix,  which growing old burneth her self to ashes, and from the ashes another Phenix is ingen∣dred. This is the most fruitfull and pleasant Countrey in all Asia, abounding with Gold and Pearl, Balsamum, Myrrh, and Frankin∣cence, besides Cassia and Cyna∣mon. This seemeth to be the Countrey wherein Saba stood, the chief City of the Sabeans, whose Queen visited Solomon. 2. Medina. 3. Mecha, where Christians are not permitted to enter. Within this City is the Body of Mahomet inclosed in an iron Chest. 4. Oran, the Key of the South-Ocean. 5. Elter, the only Town of Arabia, where the Christians are of the greatest num∣ber. Besides it is full of Villa∣ges, especially toward the Sea-side, where are many excellent places of trade.
Assyria. ASsyria hath on the East, Me∣dia; on the West, Mesopota∣mia; on the North, Armenia ma∣jor; and on the South, Susiana, a Province of Persia. It is a custome in this Countrey, that the Maids which are marriage∣able, are yearly brought forth in publick, and set to sale to such as would marry them, and the money which was given for the fairest, was given to the most deformed for their portions. The chief Cities were and are, 1. Nineve. It was once a great City, containing 66 miles in circuit, but now almost ruin'd to nothing. To this City was Jonah sent to preach. 2. Arzeri, whence the whole Re∣gion is called Arzeri. 3. Arvela, nigh unto which Alexander fought his third and last Battel against
Da∣rius.  4. Mosull, the Seat of the Nestorian Patriarch. This City is in fame for its Cloth of Gold, and Silk, and for its fertility. Mesopotamia. MEsopotamia hath on the East, Tygris; on the West, Eu∣phrates; on the North, the Hill Caucasus; and on the South, Chal∣dea. This Countrey in the Scrip∣tures is called Padan Aram: It is invironed with the Rivers Tigris and Euphrates, which over-flow the Countrey, as Nilus doth Egypt, making it very fertil; and now it is called Dierbeck. Fertility.The Soyl is exceeding fertil, yield∣ing in some places two, and in some three hundred increase. Here was Abraham born; hither sent he his Servant to choose a Wife for his Son Isaac; and hither Jacob fled from his Brother
Esau; and here Para∣dise  is by most Men affirmed to have stood; and as some think, in an Island made by the River Tigris and Euphrates. The chief Cities are, 1. Rechiais, formerly Edessa. The second Town of note is Caramit, the Seat of a Turkish Bassa, who is of great command in those parts; it is the Mother-City of the Countrey, and is said to be twelve miles in com∣pass. Between this City and Orpha was the Paradise of Aladeules, where he had a Fortress destroy'd by Selim. 3. Madrin.
Chaldea. CHaldea is bounded on the East, with Assyria; on the West, with Syria; on the North, with Armenia; and on the South, with Arabia Deserta. The chief Cities were, 1. Ʋr, now Horrea, where Abraham de∣parted when he went to live at A∣ram. 2.
Erech. 3. Accad. 4. Bag∣det, built out of the ruines of Baby∣lon: this City standeth upon the Ri∣ver Euphrates, and is a great, rich, and strong City, with mighty strong Walls, whereon are planted 120 pieces of brass Ordnance. It is a Town of great traffick, between which and Aleppo Carriers travel ve∣ry often with many hundred Camels laden with Commodities. There are only two Venetian Factors, who trade for inestimable wealth of all sorts: also some small number of  Armenians, which are all the Chri∣stians that are there resident. They have a custome here of sending Post Pidgeons, or sending by Pidgeons Letters of all Occurrences in hast. The chief Rivers of this Countrey are, 1: Euphrates. 2. Tygris. Out of Chaldea the three Wise Men are thought to have come, who worshipped Christ, and presented Gifts unto him: Thus much of Chaldea, and the Continent of the Turkish Empire in Asia. The Islands, and his other Domi∣nions, subject unto him, shall be mentioned in their due places.
Persia. PErsia is bounded on the East, with the River Indus; West, with Tygris, and the Persian Gulf; North, with the Caspian Sea, and the River Oxus; and on the South, with the Main Ocean. Natures and Man∣ners of the People.The people of this Countrey are for the most part valiant and pro∣per, being Olive-coloured; they have no hair on their head, nor their Chin, only on their upper lip they have it very long, and turned down∣wards; their eyes are generally black, their noses high, as be their foreheads. Apparel.In their Apparel they are very phantastical; about their heads they wynde great rowls of Callico, some of Silk and Gold. Their outward Garment is commonly of Callico, quilted with Cotton; some wear them of party-coloured Silks, some
of Sattin, and some of rich Gold or Silver Chamblets. The Women likewise are gor∣geous in attire; their stature is mean, but strait and comely; their hair black and curled, their fore∣head high, their cheeks fat, round, and painted; they look wantonly, drink strongly, and covet mens mo∣neys really. Houshold Furniture.Their Houses, to speak generally, within are poor and sordid; a Car∣pet, a Pan, and a Platter, epitomizes all their Furniture. The better sort sleep on Beds two foot high, matted or done with girth'-web, on which is a shagg or yopanger, which riding serves as an Ʋmbrella against rain, and sleeping, for a Bed and Cover∣ture. Diet.They feed most on Rice, boiled with Butter; also Mutton, Hens, and Almonds: The better sort sit on Carpets, cross-legged, using nei∣ther Spoon nor Knife; for the poorer fort, they feed most on Roots, as Melons, Garlick, Opium, and Honey.
They hate Swines-flesh, Veal, Beef, Hares, and Buffles, because Mahomet forbids it them. Provinces.This Empire containeth the Pro∣vinces of Persis, Susiana, Carama∣nia, Gedrosia, Drangiana, Aria, Arachosia, Parapomisus, Saca, Hir∣cania, and Ormus. The chief Cities of this Kingdom are, 1. Persepolis, now called Siras, standing within the Province of Per∣sis. This City continued the mighti∣est in Asia 230 years, at which time Alexander the Great gave a period to its greatness, by the Whorish counsel of the Athenian Lais. It is in compass now some eight or nine miles, and seated at the North-West end of a large Plain, some twenty miles long and six broad; the sides environed with mighty Hills, under one of which this City is placed. The prime beauty of this City, is her Churches and Gardens: there are some 14 or 15 Churches, most of which are round like Theatres; their outside tyling pargetted with Azure Stones; two of these have
two Pillars or Steeples as high as Pauls in London, covered and wrought with Blew and Gold. Their Houses are of Sun-burnt Brick, flat on the top; the windows trelized very curiously; and though generally within they have no orna∣ment, yet some peculiar Houses, as the Dukes and some others, may be Competitors for delicacy with most in Europe. The Gardens within this City abound in all kinds of Fruits. In a word, for all delicacy this City may compare with any part of Persia. The 2. City of note is Sushan, deriving her name from the Pro∣vince wherein she stands: This was once one of the three Royal Palaces of the Median Emperor, one being at Babylon, and another at Ecba∣tana. Here it was that Ahashuerus made a Feast, mentioned 1 Hester; and yearly to this day the King celebrates a Feast of Roses, and the Duke of Shiras, who is Lord of Sushan, a Feast of Daffadillies of like continuance.
3. Caramania, famous for Cloth of Gold, and the best Scymitars. 4. Gedrosia, or Geste. 5. Sige. 6. Aria; most of them deriving their names from the Provinces wherein they stand. Hyrcania.Hyrcania: This is now made a Province of the Persian Kingdom. It hath on the North, the Caspian Sea; South, Mount Taurus; East and West, Media: this people are of late civilized by the Persians. The Countrey of old, and yet, abounds with Tygers, Wolves, Ly∣ons, Wild-Cats, Bears, and Scor∣pions. It is full of Woods, which both befriends them against Winters cold, and Summers heat, which in their seasons are extreme. The prime Cities of this Kingdom are, 1. Asharaff; she hath in her some 2000 Houses, and is seated in a Plain not above two miles from the Caspian Sea. The Buzzar in this Town is but homely, nor enjoys she any Mosques or Prophets to be spo∣ken of. 2. Farabant is a very fair City; this lies one mile from the
Caspian Sea, and five miles West from Asharaff: It is yet the best Town for beauty, greatness, and wealth, in the Kingdom of Hyr∣cania. It is furnished with some long deep Prams sowed together with Hemp and Coord, (but unpitch'd or calk'd) in these the Muscovian Merchants sail down Volga, over the Caspian Sea, and arrive at Farabant, to traffick for raw Silks. This City glories in her two large and beautifull Buzzars, and fragrant Gardens, and in a sumptuous Palace of the Kings. 3. Omoall is built un∣der Mount Taurus; it hath 3000 Houses, and inhabited by divers Na∣tions. In this City is a Church or Mosque, wherein is intombed 444 Princes and Prophets of that King∣dom: the people of this City are very courteous, and beautified with com∣plements, and dainty feature. The people of this Kingdom speak the language of the
Persians; their apparel is like the Irish Trooses: their   are very kind and loving unto Tra∣vellers, and upon any signal will re∣ceive them; and hold it a point of rudeness in their Virgins, if they be coy or disdainfull unto Strangers. Ormus.Ormus is an Isle within the Gulf, it is in circuit 15 miles; at the end of this Isle appears yet the ruines of that late glorious City, built by the Portugals, and lately taken from them by the Persians, with the help of some of our English Ordnance; so that it is now utterly ruined, and not worth the owning, which was but 15 years ago the only stately City of the Orient; it is now dis∣robed of all her bravery, the Persi∣ans each month conveying her ribs of Wood and Stone to aggrandize Gombroone, not three leagues distant, out of whose ruines she begins to triumph.
Gombroone is by the Natives called Bander, (or Port-Town) it is di∣stant from Ormus nine English miles. It is seated on the Gulf, and in the Ormusian Kingdom: It containeth well-near 1000 Houses. In January  here arrive Ships from India, Eng∣lish and Dutch; and here the Eng∣lish Agent receives Custom of all Strangers; that honour being granted for their good service done at Ormus. The English and Dutch Merchants have their Houses here: this Town in Winter is inhabited by sundry Na∣tions, as Persians, Indians, Arabs, Jews, all which fly away in the Sum∣mer, to avoid the intollerable heat. In the Winter season there is abun∣dance of all things necessary, chiefly of Fruits and Flowers. In the Town also is some Moschees, and Syna∣gogues of Jews.
Media. MEdia is limited on the North, with the Mountain Taurus; on the South, with Parthia; East, with Aria, or Sablestam; and West, with Armenia minor. Fertility.This Countrey is generally barren, especially in the Northern parts; so that they make their Bread for the most part of dryed Almonds, their Drink of the Roots of certain Herbs, and feed ordinarily on Venison. The great Cities of Media are Casbeene, Tabris or Taurus, Orda∣vill, Tyroan, Cashan, and Coom.
Tyroan is situate in the midst of a fair large Plain, which although on some parts is environed with Hills of stupendious height, yet some wayes it affords an ample Horizon. The building is of Sun-burnt brick, and it is watered with a small Stream, which runs in two parts through the  Town, and mellows most of the Gardens and Groves within it. The Town is most beautified with a vast Garden of the Kings, succinct with a large to wred Mud-wall, larger than the circuit of the City. The Houses are open at the tops, whereon are spread Carpets, where each Man sleeps Carpets, where each Man sleeps with his Seraglio; some have three, some six, and some twelve sleeping by them. It containeth some 3000 Houses, and hath in her a Caravans Lodge, which exceeds her Mosque. Tauris, or Ecbatana, derives her Name from the Mountain Taurus, and is now a City both great and fa∣mous; her circuit is six miles; it is placed by a River, and is shaded by the Hill Baretano, and to the South sheweth a large Plain; 'tis well peo∣pled, and much resorted to for traf∣fick, which makes it famous through∣out all Asia: it hath a small Mud∣wall of little service; the Houses are flat above, and built of Brick dryed in the Sun; her best ornament is a Garden built toward the South-East, planted by Shaw Tamas.
Cazbeene was of old called Arsa∣tia: this City is situate in a fair even place, no Hills being near it. The compass of this City is seven miles; her Buzzar is large and pleasant; the Kings House and Seraglio are near the Market, built of raw Bricks, but painted and varnished very rare∣ly with blew, red, and yellow: the Mosques and Hummums are very re∣splendant with the Azure paint wherewith they are ceruleated; for their other Buildings they are of no great magnificence. Coom is a pleasant City, standing in the half-way betwixt Cazbeen and Spahawn, and in front of both. 'Tis a pleasant, fruitfull, and healthy City, and the People courteous: it hath in her 2000 Houses well built, sweet, and well furnished; her Streets are wide; her Buzzar fair; and her Mosque of most honourable esteem among them. It is watered with a sweet, but small River, and hath plenty of all Fruits.
Parthia. PArthia is bounded on the East, with Aria; West, with Me∣dia; North, with Hircania; and South, with Carmania. The chief City is Spahawn, it be∣ing the Imperial City; it is situate in a fair and pleasant Horizon; 'tis by some called Hispaan. It is a City both great, antient, and famous; it is of an Orbicular form, and is some nine miles in compass; her Inhabi∣tants some 300000 Souls. The chief Ornaments of this City, are the My∣dan, (or great Market) the Hum∣mums, (or Hot-Houses) the
Mos∣chees, the Kings Palace, and Gar∣dens. The Mydan is in the heart of the City; and to say truth, all the beauty, concourse, wealth and trade, is comprised in her. It is built in form of Royal Exchange, with four Isles, and Court within called  the Hypodromo: It is stored with all Merchandizes, chiefly Drugs; and to this place daily resort most Nations, as English, Dutch, Portugall, Ara∣bians, Turks, Jews, Armenians, Muscovians, and Indians; there are many great Surroyes, where are Houses made of purpose for laying in and keeping Merchants Goods, and to harbour and lodge them∣selves, and their Camels, Horses, and other Cattel. Within this Mydan is nothing sold but things of great va∣lue, as Cloth of Gold, Silver, and Tissue, Sattins, Velvets, Jewels, and Pearls. In one end are nothing but raw Silks; in another end are twisted and wrought Silks; and in another those that sell all sorts of Apparel, ready made after the Persian fashion, very rich, as Sutes of Cloth of Gold, Silver, and the like. The buildings of their Mosques or Churches, are large and handsom. In this City is a Column compact of several Heads of Men and Beasts; 'tis at the base above 20 foot in compass, and the height is three times as much.
Cashan is also a famous City in Parthia; the antiquity of it is not much in this name. It is well seated, well peopled, and well built; the people are orderly, and more given to Trade than in some Towns about her. Silks, Sattins, Cloth of Gold, are here in abundance, at reasonable prizes. The Caravans-Raw, the Mosque, and Hummums, are her only Ornaments, of which the Cara∣vans-Raw exceeds any in Persia: It was built by Abbas for Travellers to lodge in upon free-cost, by act of Charity This City is distant from Spahawn some nine miles. Divers other Cities there are, but of less note. Thus much of Parthia, and of the Persian Kings Dominion.
Tartaria. TArtaria is bounded on the East, with the Eastern Ocean; on the West, with the Muscovy; on the North, with the Frozen Sea; and on the South, with Mare Caspium; the Hill Taurus; and the Wall of China. It extendeth it self from East to West 5400 miles; and from North to South 3600. It was of old known by the name of Scythia. Natures and Man∣ners of the People.They are generally of a swarthy complexion; square stature; broad faces; hollow-ey'd; thin beards; and ugly countenances; barbarous in behaviour, especially in Antiqua Asciatica; for their Religion, some are Pagans, and some Mahumetans. They are given to Divinations, Auguries, Sooth-sayings, Inchant∣ments; and when they receive an∣swer from the Devil, they attribute
the same to God, whom they call Stoga: they marvelously fear and reverence him, offering him many oblations. The Women are suitable to the Men, wanting, and scorning Mo∣ney; adorning themselves with Gew-gaws of Copper, Feathers, and Latton. Division.It is now usually divided into the Provinces of Precopensis, Asciatica Antiqua; Zagathay, and Ca∣thaia. Procopen∣fis, or Tar∣taria minorIt containeth all Taurica Cher∣sonesus, and the Asciatican Banks of Tanais. The chief Cities are, 1. Precops. 2. Crim, the ancient Seat of the Tartarian Rulers. 3. Ozaclow, the residence of the present Princes. 4. Capha, (anciently Theodosia) a Town of great traffick. Asciatica, or
Deserta.Asciatica, or Deserta: This call'd also Moscovitica Deserta, (as anciently Sarmatia Asciatica) is situate about the Banks of the River Volga. The People here for the most part live in Tents made of Beasts skins; and account it a great misery  to stay longer in one place than the pasture affords meat for their Cattle. They sowe no Corn, but make Horse-flesh their chief food, either warm'd a little at their Saddle-bow, or rosted in the Sun, and drink sowr Mares-Milk. The chief Cities are, 1. Cashan. 2. Noyhan. 3. Charayckzicke. 4. Astrachan, a Town well frequent∣ed by Merchants. Tartaria Antiqua.Tartaria Antiqua is the old Habi∣tation of the Tartars, from whence they dispersed themselves over Eu∣rope and Asia. The People are of the same life and condition with them of Asciati∣ca, and lye farthest North, extend∣ing beyond the Polare Circle. They have some few Cities, as 1. Coras, famous for the Sepulchers of the Tar∣tarian Kings. 2. Caracora. 3. Cam∣panion; these Cities belong to the Kingdom of Tenduc: the People hereof account it a great honour to have their Wives and Sisters at the please of such as they entertain.
In this Countrey is the Desart of Lop: and in this Countrey groweth Rheubarb, an Herb of that excellent nature, that the whole World is be∣holding to these Barbarians for it, as a sovereign help for many diseases. Zagathai.Zagathai: this Countrey was of old Scythia intra montem imanum. It is situate East from the Caspian Sea: they are now called Jeselbas, from the colour of their Turbants. They inhabit the ancient Countreys of Bactria, Sogdiana, and Margi∣ana; in times past the Habitation of the Massagetes, so famous in Arms. These are the most honourable People of the Tartars; indifferent civil; given to Arts; and Lords of many fair Cities; as 1. Istigias, one of the most pleasant Cities of the East. 2. Samarchand, which gave both a Cradle and a Grave to the mighty Tamerlain.
Cathaie. CAthaie is bounded on the East, with the Oriental Ocean; on the West, with the other Tartarian Provinces; North, with the Scy∣thick Sea; and South, with China; this is thought to have been the anci∣ent Habitation of the Ceres. It is said of this People, that they have neither whore nor thief amongst them. Fertility.The Soyl aboundeth with variety of Fruits; superfluously furnished with Rice, Grain, Wool, Silk, Hemp, Rheubarb, Musk, and excellent fine Chamblets, so that it scorneth to give precedency to any of the flou∣rishing Provinces of Europe. Natures of the People.The People are fearless of the greatest dangers; and patient of la∣bour; they are of a very good wit; dress themselves gorgeously; and on occasions fare very sumptuously.
The chief Cities are, 1. Caraian, where the Women use to guild their teeth. 2. Tebeth, famous for her abundance of Corral. 3. Cambaln, seated on the River Polysanga, ho∣noured with the great Cham's resi∣dence, enriched with a mighty con∣fluence of Merchants of all sorts: be∣side other Merchandize, there are every year 10000 Carts loaded with Silks sent thither ftom China. It is in compass 28 miles, besides the Sub∣urbs, which beside other Inhabitants, are 50000 Astrologers, or rather Fortune-tellers. 4. Xamdu: with∣in this City did Cublai Can build a stately Palace, encompassing 16 miles of plain ground with a Wall, where∣in are fertil Meadows, pleasant Springs, delightfull streams, and all sorts of Beasts of chase and game; and in the midst thereof a sumptuous House of pleasure, which may be removed from place to place: here he doth abide in the moneths of June, July, and August.
Govern∣ment.The Government of this Empe∣rour is tyrannical, the Great Cham  being Lord, and in his tongue con∣sists life or death: he is called by the simple People the shadow of Spirits, and Son of the immortal Gods; and by himself is reputed to be the Mo∣narch of the whole World. At the Funeral of some of these great Monarchs, they use to kill some of his Guard-Souldiers, whereof he hath 12000 in continual pay. These Chams for the most part are severe Justices, and punish almost every small fault with death, especi∣ally theft, lying, and adultery. Thus much of Tartaria.
Of India, commonly called East-India. INdia is bounded on the East, with China; on the West, with the River Indus, from whence it takes its denomination; on the North, with Tartary; and on the South, with the Ocean. This is the biggest Countrey, comprehended under one name, of any in the World, except Tartary and China. Rivers.The chief Rivers of it are, Indus and Ganges: Fertility.abound it doth in all manner of Minerals, except Copper and Lead; and stored with all sorts of Cattle, except Horses; Riches.more particularly with Mines of Gold, pretious Stones, Spices of all sorts, and Civet; Wheat only and Vines are wanting.
Natures of the People.The People are indifferent civil, and ingenious; both Men and Wo∣men imitate a majesty in their frame  and apparel, which they sweeten with Oyl and Perfumes, adorning themselves with Jewels, Pearls, and other ornaments befitting. Several Nations in India.They are a Nation composed of five several sorts of People: 1. The Indians, or Natives, which are in part Gentiles, in part Christians. The second sort are Mahumetans, Persians, Tartars. The third Jews. The fourth Arabians, or Moors: and the fifth Portugals. The River Ganges divideth the Countrey into two parts, (viz.) India intra Gangem, and India extra Gangem. India intra Gangem.India intra Gangem, called In∣dustan, is divided into 47 Provinces or Kingdomes; whereof two have yet their proprietary Kings; namely, Narsinga, and Calecute; the rest are under the Command of the Great Mogull. The chief of the 47 Pro∣vinces are, 1. Narsinga. 2. Malla∣bar. 3. Balassia. 4. Cambaia. 5. Mandao. 6. Bengala. 7. Oristan. 8. Canora; and 9. Delli.
Narsinga. NArsinga hath on the East, the Gulf of Bengala; West, the Mountain Guate; North, the Moun∣tain Guadaverno; and South, the Promontory of Comari. It is in compass 3000 miles; and hath a King acknowledging no superiour command: he keepeth in continual pay 40000 Nairos, and is able to bring into the Field many thousands more, as his expeditions in War have specified. Natures of the People.The People hereof use to burn their Wives when their Husbands are dead; the cause some ascribe to their Wives wonted custome to poyson their Husbands, before this Law. In these parts the chief City is St. Thomas, or
Malleaper, where they say St. Thomas was martyred, and burnt; to his Sepulcher the Indian Christians go on Pilgrimage, carry∣ing  a little of the earth with them for a great relique. The Portugals now inhabit this Town, almost desolate; the Jesuits also have here a residence. There is also Narsinga and Bisnagar, fair and great Towns, standing with∣in this Kingdom. Mallabar.Mallabar containeth the Western part, which of old was called Aurea Chersonesus. It is full of People, di∣vided into many States by variety of Rivers, which causeth many Croco∣diles, enriches the Soyl, and yields easie transportation of Commodities, which are Spices of divers kinds. The chief Kingdoms in this Tract are, 1. Kanonor. 2. Calecute. 3. Cranganor. 4. Cochin. 5. Cariolam; and 6. Travancon. Calecute is the chief of these Cities; the City is not walled, nor fair built; the ground not yielding firm founda∣tion. Fertility.This Kingdom hath not above 25 leagues of Sea-coast, yet rich both by the fertility of the Soyl which yieldeth Corn, Spices, Cocos, Jaceros, and many other Fruits; and by the
situation, as the Staple (especially before the Portugals unfriendly Neighbourhood) of Indian Mer∣chandize, and therefore in her va∣riety of Merchants being a Map (as it were) of all the Eastern World. The Egyptians, Persians, Syrians, Arabians, Indians, yea even from Catay, the space of 6000 miles, had here their trade and traffick. The People here do yield divine honour to divers of the deceased Saints, and build Temples unto Beasts. The Gentlemen and Merchants have a custome to exchnge Wives, in token of great friendship. Some Women amongst them have six or seven Husbands, fathering their Children on which of them she best pleaseh. The Men when they marry get others to use them (if they be Virgins) 15 or 20 dayes, before they themselves do bed them. Cranganor is a small Kingdom: the Inhabitants of this City are Chri∣stians of St. Thomas profession, about 70000 in number. Cochin is now grown great by the
Portugals traffick and friendship; of the rest there, there is not much worth recital. The King of Coulam's Dominion stretcheth some 80 miles, in which there is some 23 walled Towns. Balassia.Balassia, or the Kingdom of Bo∣can, is famous for its inexhaustible Mines of Gold and Silver. The chief Cities of it are, 1. Balassia. 2. Bocan. 3. Senergian. Cambaia.Cambaia is also called Guzant, containing in length from the River Bate to Circam, a Persian Region, 500 miles of Sea-coast, being on other parts invironed with the King∣doms of Dulcinda and Sanga; on the North, Mandao; on the East, and on the West, the Gedrosians; the Sea, and confines of Decan, are the Southerly bounds▪ It hath in it by estimation 60000 inhabited pla∣ces, watered with many streams; the chief whereof is Indus. Fertility.This Countrey is very fertil, not yielding to any other in India, in the Fruits which the Trees and Earth bring forth, beside the store of Ele∣phants,
Gems, Silk, Cotton, and such like. Natures of the Peo∣ple.The People are of an Olive-co∣lour; go naked, except about their privy parts; they eat no Flesh, but Rice, Milk, Barley, and other lifeless creatures. Their chief Sea-Towns are Da∣man, Bandora, Curate, Ravellum; and within Land, Cambaia, Malla∣bar, Campanel, and Tanaa. Cambaia hath bestowed the name on the whole Kingdom, which they call the Indian Cairo for the excellen∣cy thereof; it standeth three miles from Indus. The Inhabitants of it are a mixture of Mahometans, Moors, Persians, Bannyans, and from Arabia: they are crafty and deceit∣full; the Priests are singularly repu∣ted of the Women proper, but vailed; and obscure in their best aspect, their faces; they colour their teeth black, thinking that shews most delight and beauty, ard to differ from Dogs, whose teeth are white; their Apparel is like the other Indians.
Mandao.Mandao: this Kingdom is so cal∣led of the chief City, 1. Mandao, which being 30 miles in compass, held out a siege of twelve years. 2. Molta, where the Women ride booted and spur'd. 3. Scernus. 4. Polymbothia. Bengala.Bengala: the Kingdom of Benga∣la is very large, and hath a coast 120 leagues, and as much within Land; the River Chaberis watereth it. Riches.It is plentifull in Rice, Wheat, Sugar, Ginger, Long Pepper, Cotton, and Silk, and enjoyeth a very wholesome Air. The Inhabitants near the shore are for the most part Mahu∣metans; Gouro, the State-Royal, and Bengala, are fair Cities; Chatigan is also reckoned among the Ci∣ties. Natures of the Peo∣ple.They are a most subtil and wicked People, and are esteemed the worst slaves in all India; for that they are all Thieves, and the Women Whores; although this fault is common through all India, no place excepted. Here are found great abundance of Rhinocerots, whose Horn and all
other parts is good against poyson. Oristan.Oristan: the Kingdom of Oristan hath on the Sea-coast 350 miles, be∣twixt the richer Kingdoms of Benga∣la, and Bisnagar; poor of Ports and traffick; Raman is the Royal City. The Inhabitants (except a few Moors) are Gentiles, little or no∣thing differing in Rites from their Neighbours. Canora.Canora: the chief Cities of this Kingdom are, 1. Ʋltabat. 2. Dang∣gar. 3. Lispoe, famous for her quar∣ries of Adamant. Six leagues from Decan is a Hill out of which the Dia∣mond is taken; this Hill is kept by a Garrison, and walled about. Dellie.Dellie: the Kingdom of Dellie is Northerly, subject to cold and frosts, as in Europe. The chief Cities of this Kingdom are, 1. Dellie. 2. Bes∣mer, famous for the study of Ma∣gick. 3. Tremell; and 4. Ful∣tabar.
This Prince liveth in great state, having a Revenue correspondent thereunto: his Subjects do reve∣rence him exceedingly, making it  Holy-day when he cutteth his Hair, or shaveth his Beard. He is alwayes carried on Mens shoul∣ders, in a pompous Chair adorn∣ed richly. Thus much of India intra Gangem.
India extra Gangem. INdia extra Gangem hath on the East, China; West, the rest of India. This India hath formerly been divided amongst 12 Potentates, but now by the prosperous fortune of the Kings of Siam and Brama, it is wholly subject to their command. The most remarkable of these 12 Kingdoms are, Machin, Arachan, Camboia, Cauchin-China, Brama, Siam, and Pegu. Machin.Machin: This Kingdom is ac∣counted famous for the Wood called by us Aloes, by the Latin Writers Lignum Vitae: this Wood is valued at its weight in pure Silver. The chief City is Machin. Arachan.Arachan: This Kingdom is en∣vironed round with Mountains, and impenetrable Woods. The chief Cities are, 1. Arachan. 2. Ava, fa∣mous for her abundance of Gems.
Camboia.Camboia: This is a great and po∣pulous Countrey, full of Elephants, and Abadas, (this Beast is the Rhi∣neceros.) The chief City is Camboia, a Town of great Traffick and Com∣merce, for its plenty of Gold, Silver, and Aloes, and other Commodities of great worth. Treache∣rous peo∣ple.They are a treacherous people, as may appear by their dealing with the Hollanders in 160. whom they in∣vited to the shore with promise of certain Buffs, and then cruelly slew them. Cauchin-China.Cauchin-China: This Kingdom is situate between the River Cantan, and the Kingdom of Siam, divided into three Provinces, and as many Kings. Riches.It aboundeth with Gold, Silver, Aloes, Porcelane, and Silk. Their chief City is Cauchin-hina, situate on the Sea, much frequented by Merchants for Porcelan, or China-Dishes here made. Brama.Brama: Of this Kingdom of Brama, the City-Royal is Pegu; the Nation where began the great∣ness of the late Kings, not long since.
This Kingdom was of no estimation, but now hath he made all his Neigh∣bours his Homagers, having sub∣jected to his Seigniory 12 King∣doms, being all of them rich in the best Commodities that the Indians afford. Siam.Siam: This was not long since the Queen or Lady of this part of India, but now is subject to the King of Brama. The principal Cities are, 1. Malaca, now subject to the Por∣tugals; they have there their Bi∣shop, and a Colledge of Jesuits, be∣sides the Castle. It is situate in a very unwholsome air, yet a Town of great resort unto for Traffck of Spices 2. Siam, whose stateliness giveth name to the whole Kingdom; there are besides the Natives, 30000 of Arabian Housholds. 3. Odia, consisting of 400000 Families; it is the Seat of the Kings of Brama. Patane is also another City, standing between Malaca and Siam, chief of that Kingdom whereto it giveth name, in the height of 7 Degrees: The buildings are of Wood and
Reed, but artificially wrought; the Hollanders have had much Trading here of late. Pegu.Pegu: This Kingdom is blessed with a rich Soyl, and a harbourous Sea-shore, extending 300 miles in length, in which the principal Haven is Martabane. As for the City Pegu, it is the most fair and elegant City in all India; it is distant from the Sea 25 miles. This King lives in extra∣ordinary great riches and Majesty; he keepeth four Elephants, three milk-white, and one black, all which he divinely worships. Thus much of India.
China. CHina hath on the North, Catay, and the Tartars; on the South, Cauchin-China; on the East, the Sea; and on the West, Brama. It reacheth from 17 Degrees to 42 of Northerly Latitude, and lyeth after their own description almost four∣square. On the West it is separated and secure from unneighbourly Na∣tions, by a Sandy Wilderness. On the North, by a Wall, which Nature hath framed partly of high Moun∣tains, and Art hath supplyed with the nature and industry of men.
Natures of the people.The people are in composition of their body, short nosed, and small black eyes; their beards are thin, not having above twenty hairs: They are white, but not so much as in Europe; the men as well as the women suffer their hair to grow long, colour it, and gather it into a  Net or Cawl on the top of their head; those which are unmarried, wear their hair curled on the top of their foreheads. They are for the most part an ingenuous and politick people, much delighting in the exer∣cise of manual Arts. The air is very temperate, the soyl pleasant andFertiliy. fertil; they have two, and some∣where three Harvests in a year. It aboundeth likewise in Rice, Wool, Cotton, Olives, Vines, Flax, Silk, all kinds of Metal, Fruits, Cattel, Sugar, Honey, Rheubarb, Porcelyne Dishes, Camphir, Ginger, all kinds of Spices, Wood, Musk, and Salt. The Countrey is for the most part plain, in so much that they have Coaches and Carts driven ordina∣rily with Sails; few Mountains, but plains of an hundred miles compass. Diet.They eat thrice in a day, but spa∣ringly, not touching their meat with their hands, but with two sticks of Ivory, Ebony, and the like.
Provinces.China is of wonderfull bigness, well-nigh equalizing all Europe; it is said to be 3000 leagues in com∣pass,  and 1800 leagues in length. As for the name of China, it is only used by us, the Inhabitants calling themselves Tamans, and Tabencos. It is divided into 15 Provinces, to the least of which our European Countreys cannot admit comparison. Six of these border on the Sea, Cantan, Foquien, Chequiam, Nan∣quin, Xantam, Paquin; the other nine be In-land, Quiansi, Huquam, Honan, Xiensi, Xansi, Suchnon, Queichen, Junan, Coansi; some reckon these names somewhat diffe∣rently. The King holdeth his Court in Naquin; his Predecessors before the Tartarian Conquest, are said to have resided in Nanquin, or as some say in Quinsay. They have 244 Cities, of name dignified by the title Fu; and as many smaller Cities, entituled Cheu, with their several Jurisdictions: and a third sort called Hieu, as big as the meaner Cities of Spain, above 1120. Two sorts of Castles, both for Fortification and Habitation, with priviledges also of Markets; the greater sort named
Huy, 293: the less of greater num∣ber, 2593: their Villages are in∣numerable. The Cities generally are like one another, except in greatness; the Streets are strait, yielding prospect from one Gate to the other. Canton is accounted the least of the Metro∣politan Cities, yet the Walls of it have 83 Bulwarks; the Streets so broad, that ten men may ride in front, and paved and adorned with many triumphant Arches and Shops on both sides; the Bridges here and elsewhere are many, of large Free-Stones, very costly; the High-wayes which lead to the Cities, very state∣ly; and the Kings Houses for the publick Officers, very magnificent, after their manner.
Nanquin is some eight or ten leagues from the Sea, with a River leading thither. It hath three fair brick-walls, with large and stately Gates; the Streets are of two leagues, or of two and a half in length, wide, and paved; the compass is at least eleven or twelve leagues, and  containeth by conjecture 200000 houses. It equals or exceeds four of the fairest Cities in Europe; there are divers other Cities within a dayes journey hereof, which are great and famous for Traffick, of which Han∣cheum and Sucheum are chief, which are of the Chinians called Paradise, for the plenty of all things. Sucheum is seated as Venice is, having her Streets part by water, and part on land; so rich in Traffick, that 12 millions of Revenue do accrue from hence to the King yearly. Quinsay, heretofore the Royal Seat of the Kings of Mangi; the situation of it is in the midst of China, and near the Sea; but now this famous City, containing here∣tofore 100 miles in compass, having 12000 Bridges, and 1600000 Hous∣holds, hath bequeathed her Land and greatness unto Nanquin, and her Sea-treasures unto Sucheum, both succeeding, but not together equalling this great and famous City.
These Cities of China want that  elegance and magnificence, which stately Temples and sumptuous build∣ings do afford to our Cities of Eu∣rope: Their Houses are low, without the ornament of Porches, Galleries, Windows, and prospect into the Streets: besides these habitations, there are many which dwell on Land, but in their Ships; for their Shipping is of two sorts, one for sail, and ano∣ther for habitation also: these also meaner or fairer, according to the wealth of the Owner: In the one side they carry their Families, in the other their Passengers. Many Barks are as Victualling-houses by the way, and likewise as Shops of Merchan∣dize. They buy and sell not with Gold, but Silver, and that not coyn∣ed, but every one hath his Scales with him to the Market, to weigh his Silver; and they are subtle and deceitfull, if men be not wary. Things are there exceeding cheap, a hundred pound of Sugar may be bought there for nine or ten six∣pences, and other things propor∣tionable.
Tamen.This Kingdom is called Tamen, and the Inhabitants Tamegines; China is a meer stranger in China. Revenue.The King is absolute Monarch, and in Revenue exceedeth all the Princes in Europe and Africk together; his whole Revenue being reckoned, ari∣seth together to 150 millions: His expences are exceeding great, all the Mandarines, Eunuchs or Courtiers, Souldiers, Hospitals, and Priests, re∣ceiving Stipends out of his Exche∣quer. The King hath one Wife, but many Concubines, whose Children inherit if the lawfull Wife be barren. These women are not suffered to go abroad, nor likewise to speak unto their Kinsfolks. His Courtiers are Eunuchs, whom their poor Parents have gelded in their youth, in hope of Courtly preferment; of these there are supposed to be in the Court some 16000. Burials.When any of these
Chinoys dye, they clothe him in his best Apparel, set him in his best Chair, and there all his hindred kneel before him, and take their leave with tears; when he  is Coffined, they place him in a room richly furnished, and set by him a Table full of Viands and good chear, with Candles continually burning; and when he hath layn thus 15 dayes, he is carried forth to his Funeral, where they burn his Body, Men, Cattle, and Provision for his attendance and sustenance. Thus much of China, and of the Continent of Asia.
Of Africa. AFrica is a Peninsula, encom∣passed almost round with the Red Sea, on the East; the Atlantick Ocean, on the West; the Southern Ocean, on the South; and the Medi∣terranean, on the North. Where the Sea is defective to make it an Island, there is a little Isthmus which tyeth it to
Asia, which is but 60 miles in length. The form of Africk is like a Pyramis reversed, the Basis whereof is in breadth 1920 miles, but from the Pyris to the Basis it extendeth it self 4155 miles; being much less than Asia, and far bigger than Europe, and yet not so well peopled; Nature having made here her solitary place of retiring, at∣tended here by scorching heats, and showers of Sands, such are the many Desarts in Africa; fertil only in barrenness, yet in some places be∣yond  admiration for fertility. Many are the Creatures which Africa yieldeth, not usual in our parts: Elephants are there plenty, and keep in great Herds together; also Lions, Leopards, Crocodiles, Sea-horses, Hyenas, and such like. The usual division of this Coun∣trey is into Barbary, Numidia, Lybia, the Land of Negros, Ethiopia Inferior, Ethiopia Exterior, Egypt, and the Islands.
Barbary. ALl the Tract of Land between Atlas and the Sea, (stretch∣ing in length from Egypt to the Straights) is called Barbaria. It comprehendeth both Mauritanias, Africa minor, Lybia exterior; be∣sides Cyreniaca, and Marma∣rica. Division.It is bounded on the East, with Cyreniaca; West, with the Atlan∣tick Ocean; North, the Mediterra∣nean; and South, the Hill Atlas. It is divided into four Kingdoms, Tunis, Algier, Fez, and Morocco; all which are of the like fertility, and peopled with the like Inhabitants; on∣ly the Cities speak the Arabick, but not pure, and the Countrey use the old African tongue. Fertility.The fertility consists in Fruits, Figs, Olives, Dates, Sugar, and Horses of excellent beauty, strength, and service.
Natures of the People.The Men are of a duskish colour; comely of body; stately of gate; implacable in hatred; constant in af∣fection; laborious, and treache∣rous. The Women are sumptuous in Jewels; beautifull in blackness; having delicate soft skins. Tunis.Tunis: the Kingdom of Tunis containeth all that which the Anci∣ents called Africa propria, or minor, and Numidia antiqua. The Soyl is healthfull, especially the West-part; the Inhabitants are sound and healthfull; seldom vexed with any sickness: hereof are reckoned five parts, Bugia, Con∣stantia, Tunis, Tripolis, and Ezab; this Ezab is the most Easterly-part, having many Towns and Regions, amongst which some account Mesra∣ta: from these parts unto Capes is the Tripolitan Region. The chief Town is Tripolis, where the Turk hath his Bassa, or Viceroy, a recep∣tacle of the Pirates which rove and rob in those Seas. This Region was named so of three Cities, whose Co∣lonies planted it,
Abrotonum, To∣phia,  and Leptis; from Capes to Guadilbarbar is the Tunetan Terri∣tory. The chief City is Tunis; it is a great City since the ruines of Car∣thage, near unto which it standeth. It hath in it about 10000 Housholds; it hath many Temples, especially one of singular beauty and greatness. Bizerta is also an ancient City, supposed by some to be Ʋtica, where Cato slew himself; from thence unto the Mountain of Con∣stantia, is that Region hereof bearing name. Constantia is the chief City; it is an ancient City, containing 8000 Families, and many sumptu∣ous Buildings, a great Temple, two Colledges, and three or four Mona∣steries, much resorted to by Mer∣chants; every Trade having their peculiar Streets. In this Region is situate Bona, someime called Hippo, where St. Austin was Bishop. Bu∣gia, so called of Bugia the principal City, extends it self 150 miles: this Bugia was once adorned with Tem∣ples, Monasteries, Hospitals, and Col∣ledges of Students in the
Mahume∣tan  Law. Ezab is the most Easter∣ly part of the Tunetan Kingdom; the chief Province whereof is Mes∣rata. The Inhabitants are rich, and pay no tribute: there grow Dates and Olives; and they traffick with the Numidians, to whom they carry the Wares which they buy of the Venetians. The Great Turk swayeth with his Ottoman Scepter at this present the Kingdom of Tunis, and all Africa, from Bellis de Gomora to the Red Sea, (except that little which the Spaniard hath.) Algier and Telensin.Algier and Telensin: these King∣doms were of old called Maurita∣nica. The Kingdom of Telensin con∣taineth in length from East to West 380 miles, in breadth not above 25. It hath two frequented Haven-Towns, Oram and Mersalcabir, both taken and holden by the Spani∣ards. Oran is a fair City, having in it about 10000 Families. Algier is subject to the Turks: here is the Seat of a Turkish Viceroy or Beglerbeg, and of
Turkish Ro∣vers.  It containeth about 4000 Fa∣milies; the Buildings very sumptu∣ous; Inns, Bath-stones, and Tem∣ples, very beautifull; every Occu∣pation hath a several place by it self. It hath adjoyning Plains very pleasant and fertil one whereof is 45 miles long, and 30 broad; it was some∣time subject to the Kingdom of Te∣lensin. Within these Kingdoms standeth the Desart of Angad, where∣in are store of Roes, Deer, and Ostriches, Arabian Thieves, and Lyons. Guaguido and Tegdemit are two Cities belonging to this King∣dom. Fez.Fez: this Kingdom of Fez stretch∣eth from Azamor to Tangier; and from the Atlantick Ocean to Muldia. This River is the Eastern Border; on the North, it is washed with the Sea; on the South, is the Kingdom of Mo∣rocco; and on the West, the River Ommicabili: the Rivers Sube, Luccus, and others water it; therein are numbred seven Provinces, Temesna, the Territory of Fez, Azgar, Elha∣bet, Errif, Garet, and Chaus; every of
which had in old times their several Governours. The City of Fez is now the Royal Seat; it hath this golden title given it, because the first day of the foundation of it, there was found some quantity of Gold. This City is now both great and strong; and for the sweet situation of it, both Nature and Art have played their parts; for it is watered with a deli∣cate River, which disperseth it self by manifold channels into every Street and corner of the City, and by Conduit-Pipes closely visiting every Temple, Colledge, Inn, Hospital, yea and almost every private House, from whence with an officious ser∣vice it carryeth away the filth. Their Buildings are stately, to admi∣ration; the roofs of their Houses are adorned with Gold and Azure, and other excellent colours; they are made flat for the Inhabitants use and peasure, whose Houses are richly furnished within; besides the ex∣quisiteness of the Portals, Pillars, Cisterns, and other parts of this Ci∣ties furniture, there are above  700 Moschees, Temples, and smal∣ler Chappels within this City, which are adorned with Marble Pillars, and other ornaments; the Chapters thereof wrought with Mosiaque and carved work; every one hath his foundation of Marble, or of other Stones; the Floors are covered with Mats, as are the Walls, a Mans height, lyned therewith. There is one principal or Cathedral Church, called the Temple of Carven, con∣taining about a mile and half in cir∣cuit; it hath 31 Gates, great and high; the roof is 150 yards long, and little less than 80 broad; the roof hereof is exceeding high, sup∣ported with 38 Arches in length, and 20 in breadth; round about are certain Porches on the East, West, and North, in length 40 yards, and in breadth 30, under which are Store-houses, wherein are kept Lamps, Oyl, Mats, and other necessa∣ries. Every night are lighted 900 Lamps, for every Arch hath his Lamp. About the Walls are Pul∣pits of divers sorts, wherein the  Masters teach to the people such things as pertain to their Faith. The Revenues of this Temple are 200 Duckats a day. In this City are two principal and stately Colledges of Scholars, adorn'd with Mosiaque and carved works; one of which is most beautifull, adorned with a goodly Fountain of Marble, and a stream continually running; the Gates of the Colledge are of brass, fairly wrought; in the great Hall where they say their prayers, is a Pul∣pit, which hath Stairs all of Ivory and Ebony. All the Colledges in Fez have some resemblance to this; and in every of them are Readers, and Professors of divers Sciences. There are many Hospitals in Fez, not inferiour to the Colledges, where Learned Men and Gentlemen receive entertainment, and poor Men relief. There is another Hos∣pital for diseased Strangers, which have their Diet, but not their Phy∣sick. Inns here are almost 200, built three stories high, and have 120 Chambers a piece; but here is no  provision of Bed nor Board for Stran∣gers. These Inn-keepers are so odi∣ous, that (unless base fellows) none of the better sort will speak to them. Each Trade in Fez hath his Street alotted thereto. In the Suburbs of Fez are 150 Caves, hewn out of excellent Mar∣ble, the least of which will hold 1000 measures of Corn: this is the sink of Fez, where every one may be a Vintner, and a Bawd. Another Suburb hath 200 Families of Lepers, which are there provided for. In New Fez the Jews have a Street, wherein they have their Houses, Shops, and Synagogues. The other Cities of this Kingdom, Septa, now in the hands of the King of Spain, Tangier, and Alguer, nigh unto which the three Kings, Sebasti∣an King of Portugal, Mahomet, and Abdelmelech, Competitors for this Kingdom, were slain in one day. Moocco.Morocco: this Kingdom is divided into seven Provinces, Hea, Sus, the Region of Morocco, Gazzula, Ducca∣la, Hscora, and
Tedles. Morocco is  the chief City, and was once the Metropolis of Barbary, as contain∣ing 100000 Housholds, but now in∣feriour unto Fez for populousness, spaciousness, and beauty. The chief Buildings hereof are the Church and the Castle; the Church is big∣ger, though not so beautifull as that at Fez, and hath a Tower so high, that the Hills of Azafi being 120 miles distant, may be thence easily discerned. The Castle is very large, and on a Tower thereof stands three Globes made of pure gold, weighing 130000 Barbary Duckats; divers Kings have gone about to take them down, but have desisted, by reason of some misfortune or other that have befallen them. The other Towns of note are Ton∣govista, Fisedet, and Massa, abound∣ing in Amber. Revenue.The Revenue of the
Xeriffs are ve∣ry great, which they levy out of the tenth of their Subjects gains; be∣sides a Duckat for every Pole, male and female, above 15 years of age. In Merchandize of a Citizen he re∣ceives  two in the hundred; of a Stranger, ten; Church and Col∣ledge-Lands are escheated to him. Thus much of Barbary.
Numidia and Lybia. BEfore we come to Numidia, we must pass over Mount Atlas, (now called Anchisae, or Montes Clari) a Hill of that height, that the top of it cannot be seen. It is bounded on the East, with Egypt; West, with the Atlantick Ocean; North, Atlas; and South, Lybia. Natures of the People.The people to this day spend their lives in Hunting, and stay but three or four dayes in a place, as long as the Grass will serve their Camels. This is the cause the Countrey is so ill peopled, the Towns so small in them∣selves, and so remote from others; for Teffet, a great City in their esteem, contains but 400 Housholds, and hath no Neighbours within 300 miles of it.
Fertility.This Countrey aboundeth with Dates, which is the chief Diet of  the people; but this sweet meat hath sowr sauce, for it commonly rotteth their teeth betimes. The air is of that nature, that if any one be trou∣bled with the French Disease, he shall here find remedy. Peoples.Of the Numidians and Lybians are five peoples, Zenaga, Guenzaga, Terga, Lemta, and Berdeua, and live all after the same manner and order, that is, without order or man∣ners at all. Apparel.Their Garments are of base Colth, scarce covering half their bodies: The Gentlemen to be distinguished from the rest, wear a Blue Jacket with wide sleeves: their Steeds are Camels, which they ride without saddle or bridle: their Beds are Mats made of Rushes, and their Food is oft-times Patience with an empty belly. This Countrey aboundeth with Serpents and Scorpions, so that daily some are found dead by their venomous biting. Their chief Cities are Staphilet, Dansen, Dara, and Techoret, a Town very courteous to Strangers.
Lybia.Lybia hath on the East, Nilus; West, the Atlantick Ocean; North, Numidia; and South, the Land of the Negros. This Countrey is a Desart, dry and sandy, utterly void of Springs and Ri∣vers, so that a man may travel eight dayes or more without finding water. The Desarts are of divers shapes, some covered with Gravel, others with Sand, both without water; here and there is a Lake, sometimes a shrub, or a little Grass. The Mer∣chants that travel to Tombuto, or other places this way, carry water with them on Camels; and if water fail, they kill their Camels and drink the water which they wring out of their guts. They live without form of Law, in manner of brute Beasts; they are most notorious Thieves, and very dangerous to Merchants; yet there live among them many Afri∣cans, civil, courteous entertainers of Strangers. Thus much of Numidia and Lybia.
Of the Land of Negros. NIgrarum Terrae, or the Land of the Negros, either is so called of the River Niger, or of the black colour of the Inhabitants. It hath on the East, Ethiopia Superior; West, the Atlantick Ocean; North, Lybia; and South, the Kingdom of Mani∣congo in Ethiopia Inferior. Natures of the People.The Inhabitants at most want the use of reason; most alienate from dexterity of wit, and all Arts and Sciences; prone to luxury, and are for the greater part Idolaters. Riches.The Countrey is abundantly stored with Gold and Silver, very fine and pure. The River Niger here, as the River Nilus in Egypt, overfloweth the adjacent Fields for the space of 40 dayes, and in so many more re∣collects his waters into his proper Channels.
The chief Provinces or Kingdoms  (of which here are 25) are, Kingdoms or Pro∣vinces.Gualata; this Province was sub∣dued by the King of Tombuto; a beggarly, thievish, lying Countrey, as any is in the World; they anoint their hair every day with the fat of Fish, for great gallantry, whereof they stink exceedingly. The women esteem it their chiefest parts of goodly feature, to have large breasts, which by art and stretching some have them hanging to their Navel. Guinea confineth with Gualata; here there is neither Town nor Ca∣stle, but Mina, built and fortified by the Portugal, for their better trading here. They have some Snakes here of 30 foot long; Spi∣ders as big as the palm of ones hand; slore of Camelions, blue Parrots, and many sorts of Apes. They esteem it a great part of beauty to have a flat Nose. Tombutum: this is the richest Prince in all this part of Africk, keeping a Royal Palace; he hath some Scepters that weigh
13000 pound weight a piece: The King  will admit no Jews into the City, he hateth them so, yet he loveth and maintaineth a great number of learn∣ed men. Melli, a Countrey of 300 miles in length, hath the richest, civilest, and industriousest Inhabitants of any amongst these Negrites. Cano is a Countrey abounding in Lemmons and Pomegranates. Gialofi; the people hereof are of that admirable nimbleness, that they will leap on a Horse when he gallop∣eth, and stand upright when he runs fastest. Benin; here the people go naked untill they are married, and then are clothed from the wast to the knees: the King hereof hath 600 Wives, with all which twice a year he goeth in pomp; the Gentlemen have some 80, some 90, the meanest 1: Men and Women pinck their bodies, put∣ting thereon grease mixed with co∣lour; here they offer their Wives to Strangers. Nubia stretcheth from Gaoga un∣to
Nilus, having the Egyptian con∣fines  on the North, and the Desarts of Goran on the South: Dangala is their chief Town, and hath 10000 Families; but ill built, their Houses being Chalk and Straw: the Inha∣bitants with their Traffick to Cairo become rich; there is in this King∣dom great store of Corn, Sugar, Civet, Sandal, and Ivory. They have a strong poyson here, the tenth part of a Grain whereof will kill a man in a quarter of an hour; one Ounce is sold for 100 Ducats. Bornum; here the people have neither Children, Wives, nor Names, but are distinguished by some exter∣nal accident. Gaoga; this Kingdom hath nei∣ther civility, letters, nor Govern∣ment. The chief Towns of these Provinces are Tombutum, Genni, Agadez, Guangara, Songum, and Choninam, the third City in estima∣tion of all Africk. Thus much of the Land of the Negros.
Ethiopia Superior, or the Empire of Prester John. THis is the greatest and power∣fullest Prince in all Africk; his Dominion begins at the entrance of the Red Sea, and stretcheth to the entrance of the Island of Seine, North; East, on Egypt, and the Desarts of Nubia; and on the South∣side, on Monemugi. It contains in compass 4000 Italian miles. Fertility.The Region is scarce in Wheat, but plenty in Rice, Barley, Pease, and Beans: They have abundance of Sugar, Mi∣nerals of all sorts, and infinite Herds of Oxen and Sheep; they have no coyn of Gold or Silver, Salt is the most currant money. The Moun∣tains and Woods are full of Bassill, and other odoriferous Plants:
Natures of the People.The people are much inclined to Barba∣rism, destitute of learning, not to be credited, unless they swear by the  life of their Prince: they hate a Smith equally with the Devil; their colour is generally Olive-tawny. Rivers.Their chief Rivers are Abas, Totcasis, and Nilus. There are in this Empire 70 tri∣butary Kingdoms, the chief whereof are, Barnagasso; this Kingdom is si∣tuate upon the Red Sea; it stretch∣eth from Suachen almost to the mouth of the Streits; it hath no other Port on the Red Sea but Erocco, neither hath the Prester any other Port in all his Dominion but this; and of late the Turk hath taken this, with that of Suachen, and forced the Governour of this Pro∣vince to compound for the yearly sum of 1000 ounces of Gold. Tigramahon; this Kingdom ly∣eth between Nilus, Marabo, An∣gote, and the Sea. It hath in it Ca∣zunio, supposed to be the Royal Seat of that Queen that visited Solomon. Angote is between Tigramahon and Amare; in this Kingdom Iron and Salt is currant money.
The Hill Amarah.Amara is situate in the midst of the Countrey; here is a steep Hill dilating it self in a round form, many dayes journey in compass. It is si∣tuate in a Plain, extending it self every way without other Hill in the same, for the space of 0 leagues; the form is round; the height is such, that it is a dayes work to ascend from the bottom to the top; the air above is wholesome and delectable, and they live there very long without sickness; there are 34 Palaces on the top, spacious, sumptuous, and beau∣tifull, where the Princes of the Royal blood have their abode, with their Families. Xoa; this Kingdom hath store of Corn and Cattle. Goyame; this Kingdom hath plenty of Gold; here only, and in the Hills of the Moon, is found the Unicorn, which is seldom seen, only the Horn is found, which he casteth in manner of the Hart. Fatigar; in Fatigar is a Lake on the top of a high Mountain, 12 miles in compass, stored with Fish; and
thence run many Rivers stored with the same Fish. Guegere was sometime called Me∣ro; the Inhabitants are confederate with the Turks and Moors against the Abassines: it is an Island situate in the Rive Nilus. The chief Cities of this Kingdom are Saba and Zambra; besides these two there is none have above 3000 Houses in them, but these are populous and magnificent, with Towers, Temples, triumphant Arches, Obelisks, Pyramides, and the like tokens of Industry, Antiquity, and Majesty. Saba was founded by the Queen which visited
Solomon, and was the Mother-City of the Empire. It hath 5000 Houses, great and sumptu∣ous; the Streets spacious, with Por∣tals and Pent-houses; it hath four choice Gates, all Alablaster and Jasper, wrought with antique works; the great doors of Cedar, curiously carved; the wayes that lead to these Gates for the space of two leagues, are set with Palms,  Planes, Oranges, Cedars, Cypress, and other Trees, on both sides, for shade and fruit. Near to this City are Mines of Gold, Gardens, and other places of pleasure and profit. Zambra is greater, containing 30000 Houses, and innumerable concourse of people. It stands in the Kingdom of Caffates, and near the great Lake, called hereof Zambra, where the Emperour leaving his wonted manner of removing up and down in Tents, hath fixed his Court-Royal; and yet without the City are many Tents belonging to the Court. The other Cities are Cossonum, Za∣meta, Aruma, Eranco, and Suachen; besides the Kings Court, which is as a wandring City; for with his Tents and Pavilions belonging to him, he covereth no less than ten miles. Buildings.Their Houses in Ethiopia are for the most part round; all of Earth; flat-roofed; covered with Thatch; compassed with Yards. They sleep on Ox-Hides; they have neither Table nor Table-Clothes, but have their Meat served in on wooden
Platters; some eat Flesh raw; others broyl it. The Person of this Emperour is very much honoured; nay adored by the common People, to whom he sheweth himself but thrice a year, (viz.) Christmas, Easter, and Holy-Rood. Thus much of the Ethiopian Empire.
Of Ethiopia Exterior. EThiopia Inferior, called also Ex∣terior, hath on the East, the Red Sea; West, the Aethiopian Ocean; North, Terra Nigrarum; and South, the Southern Ocean. Division.The usual division of this Region is into five parts, (viz.) Aian, Benomotapa, Zanzibar, Cafaria, and Congo. Aian.Aian after the Arabian account, containeth all that Region that lyeth between the mouth of the Red Sea, and Quilimanci, being for the most part on the Sea-coast inhabited by the said Arabians; but in the In∣land-part thereof are People of a black heathenish Nation. It comprehendeth two Kingdoms, Adel and Adea; the former of which extendeth it self from the mouth of the Red Sea, to the Cape Guardasu, South and West; it bordereth on
the Dominion of Prester John, about the Kingdom of Fatigar. Fertility.It aboundeth with Flesh, Honey, Wax, Corn, Gold, Ivory. The chief City is Arar; Zeila also and Barbo∣ra pertain to this ingdom, Cities without the Streit on the Sea, much frequented by Merchants. It is sto∣red with variety of Merchandize, and yieldeth some representation of Antiquity in building thereof, con∣sisting of Lime and Stone. Adea is situate between Adel, Abassia, and the Sea, to which last it is tributary. The chief Towns are Brava, Pate, and Gogia; these two last belong to the Portugal. Zanzibar.Zanzibar extendeth from the Ri∣ver Quilimanci to Benomotape: It is a low, fenny, woody Countrey, with many Rivers, which by the ex∣tremity of moisture causes the Air to be intemperate. From the Waste upward they go naked. Herein are contained the Territo∣ries of Melinde, Mombara, Quiloa, Mozambique, and others. Melinde is the name of a King∣dom,
and of the chief City thereof. The Inhabitants near the Sea are Moors, and build their Houses after the manner of Europe. Quiloa is the name of a City and Island, which is a Kingdom of the Moors, and extendeth her Domini∣on far in the Coast. The People of this Island use when they have fe∣male-Children born, to sew up the private passages of nature, leaving only a small passage for the Urine; and if they want this sign of their Vir∣ginity when they are married, they are disgracefully sent home to their Parents, and by them as opprobi∣ously received. Here are divers other Kingdoms also, as Mombara, Mozimba, Ma∣cuas, Embeve; and against them the Promontory Prassum. Mozambique; by this name is signified a Kingdom in the Continent and Island, also with a safe harbour.
Mozambique Island is inhabited by Portugals, which have there a strong Castle. Here the Portugal Ships winter; they have Trade in the Con∣tinent,  in Sena, Macura, Sofala, and Cuama. Sofala is a rich Kingdom, and abounds in Gold and Ivory; it lyeth between Cuama and Magnice, two Rivers. Here the Portugals have on a little Island a Port and Factory of very rich Trade, the People bring∣ing great quantity of Gold for their Cloth and other Commodities; it is supposed that it amounteth to two millions yearly. Orfe is of opinion that this Sofala is that which in Solo∣mon's time was called Ophir. Besides these Kingdoms before∣mentioned, here are Gorova, Colta, Norzuge, Moneulo, Baduis, and Mo∣noemagi, which is rich in Gold. BenomotopaBenomotopa is almost invironed round with Waters, having on the West and South, the River calld Rio D'Infanto; on the East, the Ocean; and on the North, the Ri∣ver Quama.
This Countrey is in compass 450 miles, and aboundeth with such store of Elephants, that no less than 5000 are yearly killed for their Teeths  sake. Here are said to be 3000 Mines of Gold; the chief being Manica, Boro, and Quitiani. The Mines nearest to Sofala are those of Manica, which are in wide Cham∣paignes, compassed with Mountains, 90 miles in circuit. The places where the Gold is, ap∣pear and are known by the dryness and barrenness of the Soyl. In the Mines of Boro and Quiticui, and in the Rivers, is found Gold, but not so pure. The chief Provinces are Motana, Tocoa, Melchucha, Quinibebe, Ber∣faca, and Banagall. The chief Cities are Benomotopa, Zimbas, and Tongum, the Kings Seat. Natures of the Peo∣ple.All the People of this Region are of curled Hair, and are more inge∣nious than those which are against Mozambique, Quiloa, and Melinde; among whom are many that eat Mans Flesh, and let their Kine blood to satisfie their thirst. They punish nothing more than Witch-craft, Adultery, and Theft.
Cafraria.Cafraria hath on the East, Rio D'Infanto; West and South, the Ocean; and North, Lune Montes. The People live like Beasts, and are as black as Pitch. Here are in this Countrey besides great herds of Oxen and Sheep, abundance of Deer, Antilopes, Baboons, Foxes, Hares, Ostriches, Cranes, Pelicans, Herons, Geese, Ducks, Phesants, Partridges. In this Countrey near the Cape of good Hope, the People esteem so much of Brass or Iron, and other trifles, that they would exchange their Cowes and Sheep for a piece of old Iron scarce worth four pence. Congo.Congo hath on the East, Aubassia; West, the Ethiopian Ocean; North, the Land of Negros; and South, the Hills called Lune Montes. The Provinces of this Kingdom are, 1. Matama: this is a King∣dom great and mighty; the Air thereof is wholsome; Fertility.the Earth out∣wardly furnished with store of Fruits; inwardly with Mines of Christal, and other Metals.
Angola was sometime a Province  of this Kingdom, but it is now a Kingdom of it self, and very popu∣lous. Here are Mines of Silver, and most excellent Copper. They have many Kine, but love Dogs better than any other Flesh, and fat them to the Shambles. These Countreys are very popu∣lous, insomuch that they sell to the Portugals yearly 28000 Slaves. The chief Towns are, 1. Benza, call'd by the Portugals S. Savours. 2. S. Pall, lying on the Sea-shore. It is the principal Haven in these parts. Thus much of Ethiopia Exterior.
Egypt. THis Kingdom is confined on the East, with the Arabian De∣sarts; those of Bara, Lybia, and Numidia, West; South, it is divi∣ded from Ethiopia by the great Ca∣taract; and North, with the Egyp∣tian Sea, being part of the Medi∣terranean. A Coast dangerous and unhospitable, full of flats, having no Haven but that of Alexandria, which is by a Desart divided from the rest of the habitable Countrey; so that it is neither by Sea nor Land to be in∣vaded, but with much difficulty. It is said to extend from North to South, 560 miles, and in breadth from Rosetta to Damietta, 140. Fertility.The wonderfull fertility of this Soyl, is rather to be admired than expressed; in times past reputed the Granary of the whole World. A∣mongst other Commodities which
this Earth doth yield, and are fetched hence by Foreigners, are Riches.Sugar, Flax, Rice, all manner of Grain, Linnen Cloth, Hides, Salt; Butargio and Cassia being now the principal. Nilus.The fertility of this Countrey pro∣ceeds from the Inundation of Nilus, which from the 15. of June, over∣floweth the Countrey for the space of 40 dayes, and in as many more gathers his waters again; if it flow not the height of 15 Cubits, then is the Earth deficient of her abundance of encrease, for want of moisture; and if above 17, it cannot produce its natural operation: but if the mean be granted, there is no Coun∣trey can brag of such abundance; the Corn being all inned before the first of May: During this Inunda∣tion the Cattle lye on Hills and in the Towns, to which they are driven before hand; as for the Towns and Villages, they stand all on the tops of Hills; Commerce and entercourse is not a jot diminished, for Skiffs and like Boats supply the places of Horses and Camels.
The chief Cities of this Kingdom are, 1. Alexandria, once the Me∣tropolis of Africa, but now hath nothing left her but her ruines, and those ill witnesses of her perished beauties; only the Walls remain, one within another imbattled, and garnished with 68 Turrets, rather stately than strong. The buildings as they are now, are mean and few, erected on the ruines of the former; that part that lyeth along the shore inhabited only, the rest desolate; the Walls almost quadrangular, on each side a Gate; one opens to∣wards Nilus, another regards Ma∣riotis, a third the Desarts of Bracha, and the fourth the Haven. Inhabited it is by Moors, Turks, Jews, Christians, Heathens, and Gre∣cians, more in regard of Merchan∣dize, (for
Alexandria is a free Port both for friend or enemy) than for the conveniency of the place, being seated where they have neither Til∣lage nor Pasturage. They keep good store of Goats, with ears hanging to the ground, which feed amongst the  ruines. In the Isle of Pharos stands a Castle, which defends the entrance of the Haven; ten in the hundred is to be paid for all the Commodities that is there brought a shore, only Moneys pay but one and a half; whereof they take an exact account, that thereby they may aim at the value of the returned Commodities, then paying eleven in the hundred even for such Commodities as are in value unaltered; at so high a rate is this free Traffick purchased, the Mahumetan paying as much as the Christian; the Jews pay unto the Bassa for Custom 20000 Maidens a day; but the Traffick of the Por∣tugal, English, and Dutch hither, is not discontinued, they bringing such Wares to their several homes by the back-side of Africk. 2. Rosetta is another City stand∣ing on a branch of the River Nile; the Houses here are all Brick, flat roofed, as they are generally in those hotter Countreys, for the Moors use much to lye on the tops of their Houses: Raw-hides are here an ex∣cellent
Commodity, from hence transported into Italy. 3. Cairo, a City of marvelous strength, seated on the East-side of the River, at the foot of the Rocky Mountain Muccat; it is in compass about 8 miles: the Streets narrow, the Houses high, built all of Stone almost to the top; at the end of each Street is a Gate, making the Streets as defensive as a Castle: The Houses are more beautified without, than commodious within, being ill contrived, with cumber∣some passages; they are flat, and plastered; above the wall surmount∣ing the roof commonly of single brick; their Locks and Keys be of Wood, even to doors that are pla∣ted with Iron; their Mosques ex∣ceed in magnificency, of which there are a great number in this City; here are also divers goodly Hospi∣tals, both for building, revenue, and attendance; the next to these in beauty, are the Great Mens
Se∣raglios, by which if a Christian ride, they pull him from his Ass with  indignation and contumely. The Streets are unpaved, and exceed∣ing dirty after rain, which seldom happens here. In the heart of the Town stands a spacious Cane, which they call a Besestan, in which are sold all kind of Wares of the finer sort. Three principal Gates there be in this City, Beb Anfre, toward the Red Sea; Beb Zueila, leading to Nilus, and the old Town; and Bebell Futuly, on the North of the City, opening toward the Lake Esbiky. This City is inhabited by Moors, Turks, Negroes, Jews, Copties, Greeks, and Armenians, who are here the poorest, and every where the honestest; most of the Inhabi∣tants consist of Merchants and Ar∣tificers, and though they frequent no Foreign Marts, yet they have great Commerce with divers other Nations, for Silks, Fruits, Wax, and the soveraign Balsamo good for all sorts; besides many other Commodities of Cotton, Wool, rich Stuffs, of Cloth of Gold and
Silver, and the best Sattins, Damasks, Taffaties, and Grograms, that are in the whole World: But the main Commodity which comes hither, is brought over-land by Caravans from Mecha, as precious Stones, Spices, Stuffs of India, Indico, Gums, Amber, all sorts of Perfumes; our English have but ill utterance for their Cloths in these hot Countreys. Some four miles from this great City stand the Pyramids surnamed the Worlds Wonder. The other Cities of note in this Kingdom are, Sues a Haven-Town, standing on the North end of the Red Sea▪ Damietta, a Port-Town. There stand also the two antient fa∣mous Cities of Thebes and Memphis, now known only in their ruines. On the East-side of Egypt stand∣eth the Red Sea, so called of the co∣lour of the Sand. It is fam for the passage of the Israelites through it. Cyrene.Cyrene, and the Isle Pharos, are reckoned as parts of this Kingdom: Cyrene hath East, Egypt; West, the Kingdom of
Tunis; North, the  Mediterranean; and South, the Hill Atlas. In this Countrey stood the Oracle of Jupiter Ammon, whither when Alexander travelled he saw for four dayes space neither Man, Beast, Bird, Tree, nor River. The chief Cities are Cyrene, Arsinoa, and Ba∣ria; the Soyl is barren of water and Fruits; the people are uncivil, and Theftuous. Isle Pharos.Pharos is a little Island over against Alexandria, in which for the benefit of Sailors was built a Watch-Tower, reckoned one of the seven Wonders of the World. Revenues.The Revenue which the Turk re∣ceiveth hence, is three millions year∣ly, two of which is distributed to sup∣port the charge of his Vicegerent Bashaw, and presidary Souldiers. Thus much of Egypt, and the Continent of Africk.
Of America. AMerica is so called, because Americus Vespusius discovered it. The most usual name among the Mariners is the Western Indies, be∣cause of the West situation; and In∣dia, because by that name they ex∣press all wealthy, if remote Regi∣ons. This new World is very plentifull in Spices, Fruits, and such like Crea∣tures as the old World never knew; burdened with such store of Kine and Bulls, that the Spaniards have killed thousands of them yearly for their Hides and Tallow; blest with such abundance of Gold, that the Spani∣ards found in their Mines more Gold than Earth; a Metal which the Ame∣ricans exchanged for Hammers, Knives, Axes, and the like tools of Iron.
America is commonly divided by  that Isthmus, or neck of narrow pas∣sage of Land at Darien, into two parts: the one call'd Northern Ame∣rica, or Mexicana; the other Southern America, or Peruana. Mexicana. Provinces.MExicana containeth the Nor∣thern Tract, and compre∣hendeth the distinct Provinces of Mexico, Quivira, Nocaragua, Incu∣tan, Florida, Virginia, Norumbega, Nova Francia, Corterialis, and Esto∣tilandia. Mexico.Mexico giving name to half Ame∣rica, is now called Nova Hispania. In this Countrey is that excellent Tree called Mett, which hath forty kinds of Leaves, which serve for ma∣ny uses.
Riches.It aboundeth with golden-sanded Rivers, and is very much furnished with Gold, and glorieth in the Mountain Propochampeche, which is  of the same nature as Aetna and Ve∣savius. It hath on the East, Incutan; West, Calformio; South, Peruana; the Northern bounds are unknown. It is divided into four parts: The first part is Gallicia Nova; the principal Cities whereof are, Xalis, Guadaliara, New Mexico, Coanum, Compostella, S. Esprit, S. Mi∣chael, where is a Colony of Spani∣ards; stony it is, and rough, yet yieldeth Mines good plenty. 2. Mechuachan, containing in circuit 80 leagues, is one of the best Countreys in New Spain, abound∣ing in Mulberry-Trees, Silk, Honey, Wax, black Amber. The Men are tall, strong and active, and some to be of a good wit. The chief Towns are, Smsoige, Pascuar, Colima, and Valedolit. The chief Havens are St. Anthonies, and St. James, or St. Jago.
3. Guastachan, which is most poor in the natural Commodity. The chief City is Tlascalan, the chief City in all these parts next to  Mexico. 2. Villeriche, a Port-Town very wealthy, because all the traffick of old and new Spain do pass through it. The Spanish have in it two Colonies. 4. Tremistatan, or Mexico; this is the greatest and noblest of all these four: In it are the Cities of 1. Villa∣rucha. 2. Antithero. 3. Meccioca. 4. Ottopan; and 5. Mexico, the Seat of an Archbishop, and of the Spanish Viceroy. It is in compass six miles, and contains 6000 Houses of Spaniards, and 60000 of Indians. The People are witty and industri∣ous; good hardy craftsmen; and rich Merchants. Quivira.Quivira is seated on the most Western part of America, over against Tartary. It is full of Her∣bage, and enjoyeth a temperate Air. The People hereof are desirous of Glass more than of Gold: the chief Riches of this Countrey are their Kine, which to them are both Meat, Drink, and Cloth. Her Provinces are Cibola, and Nova Albion. 1. Cibola lyeth on the East-side,
and taketh its name from the chief City; the next is Tetontoa. 2. Nova Albion lyeth on the West towards Tartary. It was dis∣covered by Sr. Francis Drake, and by him called Nova Albion. The Countrey is aboundant in fruit; the People are given to hospitality, but withall to Witch-craft, and adorati∣on of Devils. The chief City is No∣va Albion. Nicaragua.Nicaragua is South-East from Mexico, with whom it agreeth in nature both in Soyl and Inhabitants. The Countrey is pleasing to the eye, and abounding in all things ne∣cessary: it is as plentifull in Parrots, as England is of Crowes. The chief Cities are, 1. New Granada. 2. Leo, a Bishops See. Incutan.Incutan; this Countrey of Incu∣tan is 900 miles in circuit, and is a
Peninsula: it is situate over against the Isle Cuba, and is divided into three parts. Incutan: Cities of greatest worth are, 1. Campechium, Sida Lancum. 2. Guatimala; whose chief Towns are Guatimala,  Cassuca, and Giapa. 3. Acasamill, vulgarly called Santa Cruza. The chief Town whereof is Santa Cruza. Florida.Florida hath on the East, Mare del Nort; West, Mexico; North, Nova Francia; and Sourh, Virgi∣nia. This Countrey aboundeth in Fruits, and hath good quantity of gold and silver. Emeralds are also found here; and here are Tur∣quoypes and Pearls. The principal Cities are Arx, Carolina, St. Helens, St. Matthews. Here are also three strong Ports held by the Spaniard, viz. St. James, St. Phillip, and St. Austin. Virginia.Virginia hath on the East, Mar¦el Noort; North, Norumbega; South, Floridia; and West, we know not what limit. It is so fruit∣full, that two Acres of Land will return 400 Bushels of Corn. There is said to be rich Veins of Allum, Pitch, Tar, Rosin, Turpentine, store of Cedar, Grapes, Oyl, plenty of sweet Gums, Dies, Timber-trees, Mines of Iron and Copper, and abundance of
Fruit, Fishes, Beasts, Fowl, and of that Herb or Grain which they call Maize. The chief Towns are, 1. Requoghton. 2. James-Town. 3. Dalefegilift. New-Eng∣land.The Northern part of this Virginia is called New-England, full of good Towns and Forts, and is like to prove the greatest, best, and happiest Plan∣tation of all this Western Conti∣nent. Norum∣bega.Norumbega hath on the North, Nova Francia; and South, Virginia; the air is of a good temper, the soyl fruitfull, and the people indifferent civil; the chief Town is called Norumbega, and is possessed by the French. Nova Francia.Nova Francia hath on the North, Terra Cortelialis; and South, No∣rumbega; the earth is barren, the people barbarous: it is inhabited, besides the Natives, with some few Frenchmen: The chief Towns are Canada, Sangunai, and Hochelagi. Terra Cor∣telialis.Terra Cortelialis, or di Laboro∣dora, hath on the North, Estoitland; and South, the River Canada: the
men are barbarous, of colour brown, swift of foot; the chief of their Vil∣lages are Breste, Cabo Marzo, and Santa Maria. Estoitland.Estoitland hath on the South, Terra Cortelialis: the Soyl is enriched with natural endowments; the Inhabi∣tants are endowed with a greater readiness of wit, and soundness of judgement, than the other Ameri∣cans. This Province is called by us English, the New-Found-Land. Thus much of Mexicana.
Peruana. PEruana containeth the Southern part of America; it is tyed to Mexicana by the Isthmus or Streight of Darien, being no more than 17 miles broad; others make it but 12 only: It comprehendeth Castella Aurea, Guiana, Peru, Brasile, and Chile. Castella Aurea.Castella Aurea, so called for the abundance of Gold, containeth the Northern part of Peruana, and part of the Isthmus: It is admirably sto∣red with Silver, Spices, Pearls, and Medicinal Herbs; and is divided into four Provinces, (viz.) Castella del Oro, Nova Andaluzia, Nova Granada, and Cartegana. Castella del Oro, is situate in the very
Isthmus. It is not very popu∣lous, by reason of the unhealthfulness of the air, and the noysomness of the standing Pools. The chief Cities are,  Nombre de Dios, on the East; and Pa∣nama, on the West; through these Towns cometh all the Traffick that cometh between Spain and Peru. Nova Andaluzia hath on the North, Castello del Oro; and on the South, Peru. The best Cities are Toccio, now St. Margarets, and Santa Estritta. Nova Granada is situate on the South-side of Cartegana. The chief Cities are Fungia, Tochannum, Po∣paian, S. Foye, Palma, and Merida. This Countrey is very strong, by reason of the situation amongst stony Rocks which environ it. It yieldeth much Fruit, and hath some Mines of Gold and Silver. Cartegana hath a fruitfull Soyl, in which groweth a Tree which if any one touch, he will hardly escape poysoning. The chief Cities are Cartegana, S. Martha, and Ven∣zuela, built on a plain Rock, in the waters of a Lake.
Guiana.Guiana hath East and South, the River Maragnon, called also Ama∣zon; and West, the Mountain of  Peru: this Countrey is the fruit∣fullest part in all Peruana; the In∣habitants in Winter dwell in Trees, for fear of Inundations, making on them many artificial Villages, and ranges of buildings. The like they have in Brasile, and the Golden Castle. The chief Towns are, Marequito, a safe Harbour; Wini∣capora, nigh unto it is reported that there is a Mountain of Chrystal; Manoa, called also Eldorado, the greatest City of America, situate on a Lake of Salt-water 200 leagues in length; and is by the Spaniards cal∣led Eldorado, or the Guilded City, from the abundance of Gold, both in Coyn, I late, Armour, and other Furniture, which Diego Ordas saw there; the other City of note is S. Thome. Peru.Peru hath on the East, the Peruian Mountains; West, Mare Pacificum, or del Zur; North, Castella Aurea; and South, Chile.
The Soyl is luxuriant in all man∣ner of Grain, fortunate in the civility of her Inhabitants, and salubrity of  Air; here is great store of Tobacco. The People hold opinion, that Men after they are dead and buried, eat, drink, and wantonnize with Women; and therefore commonly at the death of any, they kill some of his ser∣vants. This Province above any other in America is aboundant in gold and silver; the Mines whereof in silver; the Mines whereof in divers places yield more of this Metal than of Earth: by which abundance, not Spain only, but all Europe, is stored with more pure and fine Gold, than former∣ly it was. The chief Cities of Peru are, 1. St. Michael. 2. Arequipa, seated on the River Plata, and the Haven-Town to Cusco. 3. Li∣ma, distant about two leagues from the Sea; the Port that serveth it being called Collao. It is an Archbishops See, and resi∣dence of the Peruvian Viceroy. 4. Cusca, the Seat of the anci∣ent Kings of this Nation. 5. Gia∣cha. 6. Portoneio. 7. Tomobam∣ba,
glorying in her fair Palaces; and 8. Caxemalcha. Brasile.Brasile hath on the North, Guiana; on the South, Rio de la plate, and Chile; on the East, the Virginian Ocean; and on the West, the Mountains of Pe∣ru, called the Anadees. These Hills are high, craggy, and very barren; full of ravenous Beasts, and poysonous Serpents. Here also live a Mountain-People, be∣ing hairy all over, going al∣together naked, and live with∣out Houses, or Bedding.
The Air here is of a healthfull tem∣per; the Earth fat, and alwayes flourishing; great store of Sugars, and wonderfull rich Mines, are the sinews of this Region. Hence com∣eth our red Wood, which we use in dyeing of Cloathes, called Brasile; the Trees of which are of that big∣ness, that whole Families live in the Arms of one; every Tree being as populous as many of our Villages: for which purpose the Cities here are neither many, fair, nor populous,  The chief are S. Anna, Equitum As∣censio, Pernambucco, from whence comes that Brasile-Wood, which with us is call'd Fernanbuck-Wood, which they use in dyeing of red Cloathes. The People of this Coun∣trey have two ill qualities, as being mindfull of injuries, and forgetfull of benefits; the Men cruel without measure, and the Women infinite laseivious.
Chile.Chile hath East, the Virginian Ocean; West, Mare dell Zur; North, Peru; and South, the Streights of Magellanus. It taketh its denomination from the vehemen∣cy of the cold here. The Countrey toward the mid-land is mountainous, and unfruitfull; toward the shore le∣vel, fruitfull, and watered with divers Rivers. The Spaniards find here good plenty of Gold, abundance of Honey, store of Cattel, and Wine enough for their own use. The People are very warlike, and of a Giant-like stature, as being (some of them) 11 foot high. The chief Towns are Arequipoum, St. James,  built by the Spaniard; Cocim∣bam, Villadives, and the Impe∣rial. Thus much of America; and of the Continent of the whole World.
The Islands and Seas. Having thus discoursed of the Con∣tinent, and its particular King∣doms; I will say somewhat of the Seas, and the par∣ticulars which lye dispersed in them. First, the Grecian Seas, and Isles in them. They being dispersed in the Gre∣cian, Cretan, Ionian, Adria∣tick, Mediterranean, Bri∣tish, Northern. And first of such as are about the Coasts of Greece.
Pontus Euxinus. THis Sea is called also the Black Sea, because of the dark mists thence arising; or more commonly Mare Maggiore, for its greatness. It is a very dangerous shore, full of Rocks and Sands; and for this cause there is on the top of an high Tower, a Lanthorn, in which there is a great Pan full of Pitch, Rosin, and Tallow, and the like, in dark nights continu∣ally burning, to give warning to Ma∣riners how near they approach the shore of this Sea. The chief Isles are Thinnus, and Erinthus, little famous. From hence the Sea bend∣ing Southwards, is brought into a narrow bounds, not being fully a mile broad, called Thracius Bospho∣rus, scite near Thrace, and hath no Isle worth naming.
This Streight having continued 26 miles in length, openeth it self  into the Propontis, 330 miles in com∣pass, now called Mare di Marmora, from the Island Marmora, so called for the abundance of Marble there gotten. The Sea having gathered her wa∣ters into a lesser course, is called Hellespont, or the Sea of the two Castles, the one standing in Europe, and the other in Asia; Sestos and Abdos.in the same place where once stood Sestos and Abidos, in which the fair Hero and her beloved Leander dwelt. Here the Turks search and exa∣mine all Ships that pass that way, staying the Ships three dayes, to the end if any Slave have run away from his Master, or if any Thief have stoln any thing, they may in that place be pursued and apprehended. Here also they receive the Grand Seigniors Customs, and in effect these two Castles are the principal strength of Constantinople. Tenedos.In this Hellespont is the Island Tenedos, an Island not very big, but exceeding fertil, lying some three miles from the place where
Troy  stood. It hath a City called Tene∣dos, having a Castle, and a gallant Haven for all sorts of Vessels. It produceth good store of excellent good Wines. The much of the Grecian Seas.
The Aegean Sea. HEllespont of 40 miles compass, expatiateth its waters into the Aegean Sea. The chief Islands are Samothracia, Lemnos, Lesbos, Chios, Euboea, Soyros, Salamis, the Spo∣rades, and the Cyclades, or the Isles of the Arches. Samothra∣cia.Samothracia; this is a small Isle, and little famous; the chief Town is Samia, beautified with a goodly Har∣bour, which now by the Pyrates often infesting, is almost left desolate. Lemnos.Lemnos; this Isle contains in cir∣cuit 100 miles: Fertility.The Countrey is plain and barren, if compared with the adjacent Islands: The Western part is dry and barren, the Eastern part more fruitfull. The chief Cities of it are
Lemnos, or Meryna, yet continuing, though with no great beauty. It hath also 75 Villages, in∣habited by the Greeks, except three,  which are fortified by the Turks, who are Lords of this Isle, and call it Stalimene. This Isle is famous for a kind of Earth digged here, called in Latin Terra Sigillata. Chios, or Sio.Chios, or Sio; this Isle is in com∣pass 100 miles, and famous for the Medicinable Mastich that groweth there on Trees. Fertility.This Countrey yieldeth great plenty of Oranges, Lemmons, Apples, Prunes, Pears, Figgs, Olives, Apricocks, Dates, with Cypres and Mulberry-Trees; and exceeding good Silk is made here. The chief City is Sio, built by the Genoeses, but now detained by a strong Garrison of Turks: It con∣tains 100 fire-houses, some where∣of are Greeks, some Genoeses, some Turks, and some Moors; the City it self is unwalled, yet a populous and spacious place, spread along by the Sea-side, having a goodly Harbour for Ships. The Women of this City are most beautifull Dames, greatly given to Venery, and for the most part are exceeding proud and sumptuous in
their Apparel; the Artificers Wives going in their Sattin, Taffaty, and some in their Cloth of Gold and Silver, adorned with precious Stones and Gems; their Husbands are their Panders, for when they see a Stran∣ger arrive, they will presently ask him whether he will have a Mistress, and so make Whores of their own Wives. Lesbos, or Mytelene.Lesbos, or Mytelene; this Isle is in compass 146 miles; the East parts of it are level and fruitfull, but the West and South parts mountainous and barren; the chief Cities are Mittilene and Methimnos. Euboea, or Nigropont.Euboea, or Nigroponti; this Isle is in circuit 346 miles, and is separated from the Land of Thessaly by a nar∣row Channel, over the which in one place there is a Bridge, that passeth between the Isle and the Continent. This Isle bringeth forth all things necessary for humane life, and is de∣cored with many good Villages. The chief Cities of it are Nigropont and Calchos.
Scyros.Scyros; this Isle is famous for  nothing but that it was the Birth∣place of Pyrhus, and the lurking place of Achilles, where in Womans attire he was brought up amongst the Kings Daughters, and deemed a Maid, till by getting Pyrhus on Dedamia, it was proved the con∣trary. Salamis.Salamis; this Isle is near, unto Megaris, famous for the overthrow of Xerxes Army, by the Athenians, and their Confederates. Sporades.Sporades; these Isles called the Sporades are in number twelve; the principal whereof are Milo, Canaton, Assine; and of these Milo is of most note. It is in form round, and in circuit 80 miles; the Soyl is suffici∣ently fruitfull of Grain and Oyl, de∣ficient only in Wine. Here is good store of Marble curiously spotted, and store of Mill-stones: here is also great quantity of Pitch and Brim∣stone, and some Sulphury, or hot Springs, good for many diseases. Cyclades.The Cyclades, so called because they lye in a circle round about
De∣los, are in number 53. They are  also called the Isles of the Arches, because they lye in the Sea call'd Archipelago. They stand so near together, that in a clear day a Man may see twenty of them together at one time; for which cause it is a dangerous place for Saylers in a storm. The chief of these Cyclades are Delos, Samos, Coos, whose chief Town Coos is inhabited by Turks, only the Villages by Grecians. Patmos also, where St. John the Evangelist wrote his Revelation, be∣ing confined by Domitian. The Island is harbourous, but the Coun∣trey it self is barren. Gioras is another of the Cyclades: Into this Isle the Romans used to ba∣nish Delinquents. These Islands lye part in Asia, part in Europe, all in that part of the Aeigean, which is called the Icarian Sea. The other Islands lye dispersed about the Greekish, and yield nothing worth relation. Thus much of the Grecian Islands.
Creta. THis Island now known by the name of Candie, hath to the North, the Egean Sea; West, the Ionian Sea; South, the Libique; and East, the Carpathian Sea.
It is of circuit 650 miles. Can∣dia, Canea, Rethimes, and Sittia, are the chief Cities of it; and in every one of these is a Governour, and two Councellors sent from Venice every two years. It is divided into four parts, under the jurisdiction of these four Cities, for the better ad∣ministration of justice: and they have a General, who commonly remains in the City of Candie,Note that since the writing of this Book, Candie is fallen un∣der the Ju∣risdiction of the Grand Sig∣nior. which is a large and famous City, situate in a Plain by the Sea-side, having a goodly Haven for Ships, and a fair Arsenall, wherein are 36 Gallies. It is exceeding strong, and daily guarded with 2000 Souldiers; the  Walls in compass are about three leagues. The Inhabitants are not costly in their apparel; the Men for the most part wearing but linnen Clothes, and use no Shooes, but Boots of white Leather. The Wo∣men imitate the Men, wearing Breeches as they do, and Boots af∣ter the same manner. The second City is Canea, a City very strong and populous. It hath a Castle containing 97 Pallaces, in which the Rector and other Venetian Gentlemen dwell; there lye in it continually seven Companies of Souldiers, who keep sentinel on the Walls, and guard the Gates and Market-places of the City. Rethima stands about the mid-way betwixt Candie and Canea. It is somewhat ruinous and unwalled; but the Citizens have lately built a strong Fortress, to keep them from the invasion of Pirats.
Fertility.The Soyl of this Island is very fruitfull, especially of Wines, which we call Muscadels, of which they transport yearly 12000 Butts; to∣gether  with Sugar-candy, Gums, Ho∣ney, Sugar, Olives, Dates, Apples, Oranges, Lemmons, Raisins, Mellons, Citrons, Pomegranates; yet it is not a little deficient in Corn, the most or greatest part of which is brought hither yearly from Peloponesus. Natures of the People.The Island in general is very popu∣lous, the People being much addict∣ed to envy, malice, and lying. The Islands in this Sea of less note are 1. Claudi, mentioned Acts 27. 16. 2. Dio. 3. Aegilla, of which nothing is famous. Thus much of the Cretan Islands.
The Ionian Isles. THe principal Islands of this Sea are Cytherea, the Strophodes, Zacynthus, the Echinades, Cephale∣nia, Corcyra, Ithaca, Leucadia. Cytherea, or Serigo.Cytherea, or Serigo; this Isle is in compass 60 miles, and about some five miles distant from Cape malo in Peloponesus. It was formerly called Porphyrus, from the abundance of Marble, whereof the Mountains yield good plenty: defended it is by Rocks, in themselves inaccessible. It hath but one Castle, which is kept by a Venetian. In this Isle is the Village Capsalo, which is a Haven for small Barks. StrophadesStrophades; these are two Isles, now called Strivalli, lying against Messenia, famous for nothing but Harpies. Zant.Zant; this Island is not above 60 miles in compass, yet is unspeakable
fruitfull, producing the best Oyl in the World. It hath a City of great strength, bordering along the Sea∣side, the chief Seat of the Isle: on the top of a Hill near the Town standeth a strong Fortress, wherein the Governour liveth. This City in the Moneth of October and November is subject to fearfull Earthquakes, which oft-times subverteth the Hou∣ses, for which cause they build them very low. Riches.It produceth good store of Currans, Olives, Pomegranates, Citrons, Oranges, Lemmons, and Grenadiers. Natures of the People.The Islanders are Greeks, a kind of subtil People, and great dissem∣blers. The Echi∣nades.The Echinades are certain little Islands, or rather great Rocks, now called Curzalari. These Islands are in number five, and are famous for nothing but the Battle of Lepanto fought nigh them. Cephalonia.Cephalonia; this Isle is in circuit 156 miles, and in length 48. It is very mountainous, yet exceeding fertil, Riches.yielding Maluasie, Muskadine,
Vino Leatico, Raisins, Olives, Figs, Honey, Sweet Water, Mulberry, Pine, Date, and Cypress-Trees, and all sorts of Fruits in abundance; the commodity whereof redounds year∣ly to the Venetian, for they are Seig∣niors hereof. The chief Towns of it are Argastuli, Guiscardo, and Nollo. Corfu; this Isle is in length 52 miles, in breadth 37, and in compass 120. It is no less strong than beau∣tifull: the Inhabitants are Greeks, and the Governour a Venetian. The City Corfu is situate at the foot of a Mountain, whereon are built two Fortresses, and invironed with a na∣tural Rock; the one is called For∣trezza Nova, and the other For∣trezza Vechia. The Governour of these two Castles are sworn not to communicate, nor to write one to another for the space of two years, which is the time of their Govern∣ment; for if these two Castles were taken, the Trade of the Venetian were of no account.
Riches,This Isle pro∣duceth good store of Wine, Oyl,  Wax, Honey, and delicate Fruits. Ithaca.Ithaca; this Isle now called Valde Compare, lyeth North-East of Ce∣phalonia, being in compass 56 miles, famous for the Birth of Ʋlysses. Leucadia.Leucadia; this Isle (now called St. Maure) is only inhabited by Jews: the chief City is St. Maure, not long since subject to the Vene∣tian, but of late lost unto the Turks. Thus much of the Ionian Isles.
The Adriatick Sea. THis Sea extendeth 700 miles in length, and 140 in breadth. The Islands of this Sea are neither many, great, nor famous. The chief Islands of this Sea are Lesina, Lissa, and Carzola. Lesina.Lesina; this Island of Lesina is the biggest in the Adriatick Sea, and is in circuit 150 miles. It is exceeding fertil, and yieldeth all things neces∣sary for the sustenance of Man. The City is unwalled, and of no great quantity; but they have a strong Fortress, which defendeth the Town, the Haven, and the Vessels in the Rhode. Lissa, or Clissa.Lissa, or Clissa; this Island is of length 20, and in circuit 60 miles. It is beautified with two profitable Sea-Ports, and is subject to the Ve∣netian.
Curzola.Curzola; In this Island the chief  Town is Curzola; it hath two strong Fortresses, and is commodious both for the Traffick of Merchandize they have, and also for the fine Wood that groweth there, whereof the Vene∣tians make their Ships and Gallies; it is in compass 90 miles, being no less pleasant than profitable, and the most populous of all the rest. The Governour hereof is changed every 18 months by the States of Venice. The other Islands in this Sea are Absirtides, Cheros, Wegger, Grissa, and Arbe, the only Havenless Island of the whole Sea, which defect is recompenced by its natural pleasant∣ness. Thus much of the Adriatick Sea,
The Mediterranean Sea. THis Sea is so called, because it hath its course in the middle of the Earth. The chief Islands of it are Sicilia, Malta, Corsica, Sar∣dinia, and the Baleares.
Sicilia. THis Island is environed round with the Sea, and hath in cir∣cuit 700 miles. Fertility.The Soyl is incredible fruitfull, ex∣celling in all sorts of Grain, as Corn, Wheat, Wine, Sugar, Rice, Oyl, Salt, Aum, all kinds of Fruit, and exceeding good Silk; exquisite Mines of Metal, and the best Coral in the World is found here. The most of the Towns and Villages within land, are built on the highest Hills, and greatest heights in the Countrey, by reason it is a great de∣fence in the time of Carsary Invasion, and from the salubrity of the air. There are divers Grounds (in this Island) and Valleys that a∣bound so in Wheat, that the Inha∣bitants recoyle 100 measures for one. In this Countrey is the Hill Hibla, famous for Bees and Honey;
and the Hill Aetna, which continu∣ally sendeth forth flames of fire. Natures of the Inhabi∣tants.The Inhabitants of this Island are very humane, ingenious, eloquent, and talkative; pleasant they are, and effeminate, but generally wondrous kind to Strangers. The chief Cities of this Island are, 1. Palermo, the Seat of the Vice-roy, situate in the North-West part, over against Sardinia: It is a spacious City, and well watered with delicate Fountains, having goodly buildings, and large Streets, whereof Strado reale is principal. The 2. City is Messina, toward the East; it is impregnable, and graced with a famous Haven, having three invincible Castles, the chief whereof is St. Salvator by the Sea side. In this City is held a Fair every year in August, wherein all sorts of Merchandize are to be sold, especi∣ally Raw-Silk in abundance. The 3. City is Syracusa, standing in the Southern Coast; a renowned City, and sometime the Metropolitan Seat.
The 4. City is Trapandy, in the West, over against Biserta in Bar∣bary; it yieldeth passing fine Salt. The Marine here excelleth in Ruby and Coral, which setteth half the Town at work, which being refined is dispersed over all Christendom. The other Cities of note are Ca∣tania, placed at the Marine foot of Mount Aetna; Nicosia and Emma, two mid-land Towns; Rudazza, Franca Villa, Bronzo, and Argenti, once Agrigentum, where the Tyrant Phallaris lived.
Malta. THis Island was formerly called Melita, and is the place where the Viper leaped on Pauls hand, mentioned Acts 28. 2. Fertility.This Isle may properly be termed the Fort of Christendom, yet a barren place, and of no great bounds, yield∣ing neither Corn nor Wine, which are daily brought in Barks from Si∣cilia; yet it yieldeth store of Pome∣granates, Citrons, Cottons, Oranges, Lemmons, Figgs, Mellons, and other excellent Fruits. This Island is 10 leagues in length, and 3 broad, the Earth whereof be∣ing but 3 foot deep, is the cause of its not being so fertil. There are in this Island 60 Villages, and 4 Cities, namely Valletta, the Town and Ca∣stle of St. Hermes, la Insula, and Malta, seated in the midst of the Island upon a Hill, formed like an
Escutcheon; held of no great impor∣tance, yet kept by a Garrison. The Inhabitants are of the African com∣plexion and language, and follow the Romish Church. The Soyl produceth no Grain but Barley; Bread made of it, and O∣lives, is the Villagers ordinary Diet; with the Straw they sustain their Cattel; Riches.Cummin-seed, Annis-seed, and Honey they have in abundance, of which they Merchandize, and an indifferent quantity of Cotton Wool.
Corsica. THis Island is situate against Ge∣noa, in the Ligurian Sea: It is in circuit 325 miles. The Soyl by reason of the Mountains is less fruitfull, producing Corn in less plen∣ty, but the best Wines; Riches.it produ∣ceth also Figs, Raisins, and Honey: it aboundeth also with Allum, Box-Trees, and Iron-Mines. The chief Cities are Bastia, seated on the North-East part of the Countrey, on a commodious Haven, where the Genoensian Governour hath his resi∣dence, and a strong Garrison The other Cities are Marian, Gallera, and Pila; the principal Havens hereof are St. Florence, in the Northern part, and St. Boniface, just opposite to it in the South-corner, both of good safety, and capable of the great∣est Vessels that frequent the Mediter∣ranean.
Sardinia. Fertility.THis Island is South from Cor∣sica, and distant from it but 7 miles; it is in circuit 560 miles, and is abundant in Corn, and well stored with all sorts of Cattle. Natures of the People.The people are small stature, la∣borious, given to Hunting, indiffe∣rent peaceable among themselves, and in some measure courteous to Strangers. The principal City is Calliaris, enjoying a goodly Haven, and much frequented by Merchants, the Seat of the Viceroy, and an Ar∣chiepiscopal Sea. The other Towns are Bossa, S. Raparata, and Aqui∣lastro.
The Baleares. THese Islands are divided into the greater or lesser, Majorca and Minorca. Majorca is about 60 miles distant from Spain, and is 300 miles in cir∣cuit. The chief Cities are, 1. Ma∣jorca, an University. 2. Palma. Minorca is distant from Majorca 9 miles, and is 150 miles in circuit; the Soyl is in some places barren, but generally fruitfull. The chief Towns are Minorca and Jana. Nigh unto these Baleares are two small Islands; the first is called E∣brisa, distant from the Coast of Spain 50 miles, and is 100 miles in circuit; the chief City is Yvica; the chief Commodity of it is Salt. Some 10 miles hence is Olhiusa, 70 miles round.
The lesser Islands that lye dis∣persed about, are 1. The Vulcanian  or Aeolian Islands, lying on the Coast of Sicilie, and are in number eleven; the chief is Lipara, 10 miles round, from whence the rest are cal∣led the Liparean Islands. 2. Vulcania. 2. The Isles of Naples, which are in number 18. The chief are Ischia, 18 miles round; the chief Town whereof is Ischia. The second is Caprae; and the third is Aenaria, 3. The Ligurian Islands; the chief of which are Elba, whose Me∣tropolis is Cosmopolis. The second Isle of note is Gallinaria. Thus much of the Mediter∣ranean Isles.
The Isles of the Ocean. THe chief Islands of it are first those of Zealand and Den∣mark, which we have already de∣scribed; the other undescribed are those in the British and the Northern Seas. The British Islands. They are divided into the Greater, as England, Wales, Scotland, Ireland. Lesser, as Orcades, Sorlings, Hebrides, Sporades.
Britain. THis Island of Great Britain is in compass 1836 miles; it is the most famous Island of the whole World. It is divided into England, Wales, and Scotland, each differing from other in Language, Manners, and Customs.
England. ENgland is bounded on the East, with the German Ocean; South, with the British Ocean; West, with the Irish; and North, with the Ri∣ver Twede, and a line drawn from it to the Solway Westward. Division.It is divided into 39 Shires, wherein are many fair Cities and Towns: the chief whereof are, 1. London, the Seat of the Britains Empire, and the Chamber of the Kings of England It is in compass about 8 miles: the little City West∣minster, of old more than a mile distant, is now by fair buildings joyned to London, and is famous for the Church, (wherein the Kings and Nobles have stately Sepulchers) and for the Courts of Justice at
West∣minster-Hall, where the Parliaments are extraordinarily held, and ordi∣narily the Chancery, and Kings-Bench;  also it hath the Kings stately Palace called Whitehall; to which is joyned the Park and House of St. James. The City of London hath the sumptuous Church of St. Paul, beautified with rich Sepulchers; and the Burse, or Exchange, a stately house built for the meeting of Merchants; a very sumptuous and wonderfull Bridge, built over the Thames; many fair and stately Pa∣laces, whereof great part lye scatter∣ed in unfrequented places. 2. York, the second City in Eng∣land, and the Seat of an Arch∣bishop. 3. Bristol, a famous City standing on the Sea; it is encompassed with a double Wall, and hath so fair build∣ings both publick and private, as next to London and York it may be pre∣ferred before any City in Eng∣land. 4. Norwich; this City dserves to be numbred among the chief of England, for the riches, populous∣ness, beuty of the Houses, and the fair buildings of the Churches.
5. Coventry, a large, fair, and walled City, and at this day is the fairest City within Land. There are besides these, divers fair Cities in this Kingdom, as Can∣terbury, the Seat of an Archbishop; Exeter, a Bishops See; Salisbury, a fine City, and pleasantly seated, and is beautified with a Cathedral Church, and the Colledge of the Dean and Prebends; also the two Cities of Oxford and Cambridge, containing in them the two famous∣est Universities in Christendom. Riches.The Riches of this Kingdom con∣sists in the unexhaustible Mines of Tinn, Lead, Copper, Iron, and Coals; most delicate Cloths are woven here, which are transported into Germany, Poland, Denmark, Swedeland, Italy, Turky, and the Indies, where they are in high re∣quest; yea infinite quantity of Beer is transported hence into Belgium, as also Pelts-Hydes, Tallow, and Sea-coal. This Island is never without the resort of
Portugal, Spanish,  French, Flemish, and Easterling Merchants. Fertility.The Soyl is very fruitfull and plen∣tifull, yielding store of provision for the Inhabitants, both of Corn, Wild-fowl, Fish, and Flesh. For Wine this Land affordeth none, but hath it transported hither from Spain, France, and the Canaries. Natures of the People.The people are for the most part tall of stature, fair of complexion, and of their disposition courteous, much resembling the Italian in habit and pronunciation. The Women are most amiable and beautifull, and attired in most comely fashion.
Wales. VVAles is bounded on all sides with the Sea, ex∣cept on the East, where it is separa∣ted from England by the River Dee, and a line drawn to the River Wie. Division.This Countrey is divided into 13 Shires, wherein are some fair Cities, but divers great Towns. The chief Cities are, 1. Caerdiff, where there is a commodious Haven. 2. Caer∣maden, where Merlin was born, begot by an Incubus, whom the common People took to be a most famous Prophet. 3. Caernarvan, a walled City, and hath a fair Castle, built by Edward the First, wherein his Son Edward the Second was born. Here in the County of Pembroke is Milford-Haven, than which Europe hath not a more noble, or more safe, or more large, with many Creeks, and safe Roads.
Fertility.The Soyl of this Countrey, espe∣cially that which joyneth toward the Sea, is most fertil both for Man and Beast; but for the major part it is more barren, and less fruitfull. Natures of the Peo∣ple.The Men are of a faithfull carri∣age, one especially towards another in a strange Countrey, and to Stran∣gers in their own. They are of a temper much inclining to Choler, being quickly moved, and soon ap∣peased, being of all angers the best and noblest.
Scotland. SCotland is the Northern part of Great Brittain, and separated from England by the River Tweede, and Solway, and the Hills extending from the one to the other. It is in length 480 miles, but of small breadth, no place being distant from the Sea above 60 miles.
Division.This Countrey is divided into 25 Shires; the Cities and Towns where∣of are neither fair nor many: the chief of those that are, are 1. Eden∣burgh, once the Seat of the Kings of Scotland, and the place wherein the Seat and Courts of Justice were held. It is seated in a fruitfull Soyl, and wholesome Air, having many No∣blemens Houses lying about it, and abounds with many Springs, and sweet Waters. The Buildings are of unpolished Stone, but the Galleries of Timber, built upon the fronts of  the Houses, do rather obscure than adorn them. The City consists es∣pecially of one broad and fir Street, which is in length from East to West about a mile, and is the sole orna∣ment thereof; the rest of the Streets and Allies being of very poor Build∣ing, and inhabited with very poor People. At the end towards the East is the Kings Palace, joyning to the Monastery of the Holy Cross; and at the other end towards the West is a Castle, which the Scots hold to be inexpugnable. 2. Leith is about a mile distant, and is a most commodious Haven, upon the narrow Scottish Gulf, vul∣garly called Edenburgh-Frith. 3. S. Andrews, seated in Fife, and well known as an University and Seat of an Archbishop, and Metro∣politan of all Scotland. 4. Glascow, the Seat of an Arch∣bishop, and a little University. 5. Striveling also is a little City, where the King hath a strong Castle, upon the brow of a steep Rock. In general, their Towns and Ci∣ties
for number, building, or pleasant∣ness, are not comparable to those in England; neither are their Gentle∣mens or Noblemens Houses so fre∣quent, or so stately built, as the better sort of the English. For their Villages, they are of Clay, covered with Straw, being much more fre∣quent than in England, yet not so commodious within. Among the Kings Palaces, that of Edenburgh and Sterling for building, and Fawlkland for pleasure of hunting, are chief. Fertility.On the West-side of this Coun∣trey are many Woods, Mountains, and Lakes; on the East-side toward the Sea it is fruitfull in Corn, especi∣ally in Barley and Oats. It abounds in Fish, and hath plenty of Cattel, yet not so big as ours; their Horses are little, but full of spirit, and pa∣tient of labour.
Natures of the People.The People in general are much given to Venery: those that inhabit the South, are the best, and civillest, and speak the English Language; but those in the Northern part are  savage and uncivil, termed Sil∣vesters. About Scotland in the Irish Ocean are above 40 Islands, termed Me∣rania and Hebrides: the biggest of these in length exceeds not 30 miles, and in breadth not above 12; the chief whereof is Pomonia, well known by the Episcopal Seat, and yielding both Tin and Lead. Thus much of Great Brittain.
Ireland. THis famous Island in the Virgi∣nian Sea is by the English at this day called Ireland, and by the Irish Bardes at this day Banno. It standeth between the Greater Brit∣tain and Spain; being dis-joynd on the East from England by a tempe∣stuous Sea, termed Hiberniam, not above one dayes sayling; upon the West beateth the vast Ocean; upon the North it hath an Island, dis∣joyn'd no further than a Ship may sail in one day; and on the South it beholdeth Spain, not distant above three dayes sayling. Division.It contains in length 400, and in breadth 200 miles; and is divided into five parts, (viz.) Moun∣ster, which is sub-divided into six Counties:
Lemster, divided into ten Counties: Meath, divided into two Counties: Connaght divided in∣to  four Counties: and Ʋlster, di∣vided into ten Counties. The chief Cities of this Countrey are, 1. Dublin, standing within the Province of Lemster, and in the County Dublin: it is by the English called Divelin. It is the chief City of this Countrey, and Seat of justice, fairly built, and frequently inhabit∣ed, and adorned with a strong Ca∣stle, 15 Churches, an Episcopal Seat, and a fair Colledge, and in∣dowed with many Priviledges. The Houses of this City, as also of the City Waterford, are for the most part of timber, clay and Plaister; yet are the Streets beautifull, and the Houses commodious within. 2. Armach; it is the Seat of an Archbishop, and the Metropolitan City of the whole Island. 3. Tredagh; a fair and well in∣habited Town. The fourth City is Corke, consist∣ing almost of one long Street, but well known and frequented. The Houses of this City, as of Galloway and Limrick, two other Cities, are
of unwrought free-Stone, or Flint, or unpolished Stones, built some two Stories high, and covered with Tiles. Natures of the Peo∣ple.The People of this Countrey are generally strong, and nimble of Bo∣dy; haughty of heart; careless of their lives; patient of cold and hun∣ger; implacable in enmity; con∣stant in love; light of belief; and greedy of glory. In a word, if they be bad, you shall hardly find worse; and if good, you shall no where find better. Fertility.The Soyl in general is sufficiently fruitfull, but through the idleness of the Inhabitants it is made barren. Amongst other rarieties of this Island this is one, that it breedeth no vene∣mous thing; neither will any brought from other Regions live here. Thus much of Ireland.
The lesser Islands are, Orcades, Sorlings, Hebrides, Sporades. The Orcades. THese Isles are in number 32, and are situate against the most Northern part of Scotland; Pomonia.the chief of which is Pomonia, whose prime Town is Kirkwall, honoured with a Bishops Seat, and strengthen∣ed with two Castles. This Island is well stored with Tin and Lead, and is by the Inhabitants at this day cal∣led Mamland. Hethy.Hethy; the second Island of note is Hethy. The People of this Island are great drinkers, but no drun∣kards: they use the Gothish Lan∣guage, which they derive from the Norwegians, in whose possession they once were, and of whose qua∣lities they yet retain some smack.
The Hebrides. THese Islands are situate on the West-side of Scotland, and are some 44 in number; Ila.the chief of which are, 1. Ila, 44 miles long, and 16 broad; plentifull in Wheat, and Cattel, and herds of red Deer. Iona.The second is Iona, famous for the Sepulchers of the Scottish Kings; whose chief Town is Sodore. Mula.The third is Mula, which is 25 miles bigger than the other. The People both in language and behavi∣our resemble the wilde Irish, and are called Red-Shanks.
The Sorlinges. THese Islands called by the En∣glish Silly, are situate over against the Western Cape of Corn∣wall, from which they are distant 24 miles. They are in number 145, of which ten only are of estimation, viz. Armath, Agues, Sampson, Silly, Bresar, Rusco, S. Helens, S. Martins, Arthur, and S. Maries, the chief of all the rest, as being 8 miles in com∣pass, sufficiently fruitfull, and strengthened with a Castle call'd Stella Maria. These Islands are well stored with Grass, Grain, and Lead.
The Sporades. THe chief of these Islands are Man, Anglesey, Jarsie, Gern∣sey, and Wight. Man.Man; this Isle is situate just over against the Southern part of Cumber∣land, from which it is distant 25 miles: it is in length 30, and in breadth 15 miles. The People hate theft and begg∣ing: they use a Language mixt of the Norwegian and Irish Tongues. The Soyl is abundant in Flax, Hemp, Oats, Barley and Wheat, with which they use to supply the de∣fects of Scotland. The chief Towns are Balacuri and Russin, or Castle-Town, the Seat of a Bishop. Jsie.Jarsie; this Island of Jarsie is in compass 20 miles, and contains 12 Towns or Villages; the chief being S. Hillary, and S. Malo.
The ground is plentifull in Grain and Sheep, most of them having four Horns, of whose Wool our true Jarsie Stockings are made. Anglesey.Anglesey; this Island is in length 20 miles, and in breadth 17, con∣taining in former times 360 Towns and Villages; of which the chief are Beumaish Newberg and Abersraw. This Island is abundantly fertil in all things necessary to preserve the life of Man. Gernsey.Gernsey is distant 20 miles from Jarsey, to whom it is far inferiour in respect of fertility and largness, but more commodious because of her safe harbours: it contains ten Parishes; the chief being St. Peters. The Peo∣ple use the French Tongue, and in their Ecclesiastical Discipline follow the Church of Geneva.
Wight. Wight; this Isle is severed from Hampshire by a little, narrow, and dangerous Streight of the Sea: it contains 20 miles in length, and 12 in breadth. The Soyl is fruitfull; the Sheep bear delicate fine Wool, and the Trees store of Fruit. Here  are two Parks and one Forrest; as also 36 Towns and Villages, the principal being Newport, Yarmouth, and Brading. The Island is very strong, especially toward France; it is fortified with three Castles, in one of which is Armour for 5000 Men. There are divers other Islands, as Demry, Londay, and Chaldey, in the Severn Sea; Thanett and Sheppy, near Kent; and Holyfarne and Coc∣kat, on the Confines of Northum∣berland. Thus much of the Brittish Islands.
The Northern Islands. THe principal Islands dispersed in this Sea are Groaenland, Island, Freezland, Nova Zemla, and Sr. Hugh Willobyes Island. Groaenland.Groaenland; this Island is situate under the Northern cold Zone; the longest day in Summer being three moneths and a half: it is in length more than 600 miles: The chief Towns are S. Thome and Alba. In this Island the Londoners have met with a good trade of Fishing. Island.Island is about 400 miles in length, and a damnable cold Countrey. The People hereof use dryed Fish instead of Bread; their best Com∣modity is their Fish, which they ex∣change with forreign Merchants for other things.
The Island Ling is famous over all Europe: the chief Towns are Hall and Schshlten. This Island is the  Hill Hecklefort, vomiting flames of fire like Etna in Sicilie. Freezland; the only riches of this Island is their Fish, for which Com∣modity it is never without the Ships of Flemmings, Danes, Scots, Hans∣men, and English, much frequented by the last. It is almost as big as Ireland, and subject to the King of Denmark. Nova Zemla.Nova Zemla; this Island lyeth on the North of Muscovy and Lapland, and is famous for nothing but the Pigmies, which are here supposed to inhabit. Sr. H. W. Island.Sr. Hugh Willougbies Island is so called, because he first discovered it, and because he was thereabouts fro∣zen to death. Thus much of the Northern, and of the European Islands.
The Oriental Islands. THe Islands of Asia are either in the Mediterranean Sea, as Rhodes and Cyprus, or in the Ori∣ental Ocean, as Japan, Zeilan, Mo∣liccoes, Java Major, & Minor, Summatra, Burneo, and the Phi∣lippine. Japan.This Island on the East is situate over against China, Natures of the People.of whose nature and qualities the Inhabitants do some what participate: It is in length 200 leagues, and in breadth in some places 30 in others not above 10. It is devided into 66 Shires or petty Kingdoms. Fertility.The Soyl is not very fruitfull subject to much Snow, but the air is very wholesome, and the Bowels of the Earth inriched with divers Metals
n this Island are two high Moun∣tains, one of which casteth forth  Flames, on the top whereof the De∣vil useth to shew himself in a bright Cloud, to them that by long fasting have prepared themselves for the sight. The other called Figeniaris is by some leagues higher than the Cloud. The chief Cities are Meaco and Bandum an University▪ This Island is said to be frequent∣ed by the Jesuites of whom 200 is said to live here. Zylon.Zelon; this famous Isle is not far di∣stant from the point of India called Ca∣pe Comrein; It is in form resembling an Egg, Fertility,and for fertility may be compa∣red to any Country in the whole Universe; It abounds in Odorife∣rous Aromatical Spices, with whole Woods of the best Cynamon, that ver the Sun saw, besides fruits, Oranges, Lemmons, surmounting those of Spane, also here are found the best Smargads, Rubies, and Amber-Greese through Asia. Natures of tha PeopleThe Inhabitants are egregious Pa∣nyms, they hold that on the high Peak (called by the Europeins) Columbo, Adam was there created,
and lived there and hither do their Pilgrims resort apace, where on the top of a high mount is conspicuously set the Idea of a horrible Caco Dae∣mon, is invelloped with a Cloud of Arms and sedulously looked unto. The Mo∣luccoes.The Moluccoes are usually reckon∣ed 5. but many other Islands are sub∣ject to them, the chief whereof is the King of Ternate, who is said to have had 70 Islands under his sub∣jection, none of these Islands are above 6 leagues in compass, Riches.inriched with Cloves, but of other fruits-barren and poor; in Ternante is an exceeding high Hill which lifts his head above the Airy Regions of the Clouds, and and seems to conjoyn with the fiery Elements; it casts out continually bright Flames mixed with a dark smoake. The In∣habitants.The Moluccoes are better pro∣portioned than any other Indians, Brown of colour and mean of Sta∣ture, and for Vallor they have not their like in India, especially those of Ternante choosing rather to dye than flee.
Amboya is a fertile Island produ∣cing Orenges, Citrons, Lemmons, Cloves, Coquos, Bonanus, Suger∣canes, and other fruits being a very fertil Island, the Inhabitants are sim∣ple, live sparingly, and attired like other the Moluccans. Banta is distant from Amboya some 24 Dutch miles, and compre∣hend about 5 miles, the chiefe City is Nera which is chief not only of Banda but of the Moluccoes: In this Island are more store of Nutmegs than elsewhere in the Moluccoes, for which cause they resort hither from Java, China, and Mallaca. Java Major.Java is an Isle both great and fa∣mous, judged to stand in the Gulfe of Bengala; In it are many Kings most of which are tributary to the Emperor, entitled Mataran, it is oval in form, and in circuit not much inferior to England, Riches.abounds with sort of Aromatique Spices of which store, Pepper is the best and most feasable Merchandize. Ihabi∣tants.The Inhabitants are for the most part
Mahomitans, their colour is  black, so is their Actions; they are dismal, strong, impatient, and sub∣tle, strong limmed, and excellent Swimmers Their chief Cities are Fortam, Sarrabaia, Tuban, Matura, but Bantam is of most Traffick frequen∣ted by Portugals, Dutch, and En∣glish, in which every day are three several Markets, here Merchants when they come may buy a Woman for their fleshly and worldly business, which at their departure they sel again.
The King of Turban is the richest King and mightyest in all Java. They have many Horses of which they make great account, they deck them with furniture of Gold, Silver and the counterfeits of Dragons and Devils on their Saddles, they ride and mannage them with great skill. North from Java is Madara a fertil Island of Rice, Arosbay is their chief City, the people are theevish and given to spoil, they captived some of the Hollanders that went thither on Shore to buy Commodities. Here in these parts they have Bats as big as  Hens which the people rost and eat. Also near Java is the Isle of Baly, abounding in Bulls, Buffols, Goats, Swine, with many kind of Fowls, Fruits and Metals. Here the Women are burned with their dead Hus∣bands. Burneo.Burneo; In this Island they are partly Moors, and partly Gentiles: they worship the Sun and Moon, whom they think to be Man and Wife, and the Stars their Children: they salute the Sun at his rising, and handle all their publick affairs in the night. In it they have two Kings, and two Royal Cities situate in Salt-Water. Sumatra.Sumatra; this Island by some is esteemed the greatest of the Eastern Islands, stretching almost 700 miles in length, and 200 in breadth. The Air is not very wholsome, by reason of its situation under the Line. Riches.The Inhabitants feed on Rice, Millet, Sagu, and Fruits. Their Riches are Pepper, Ginger, Cassia,
Silk, Benioyn, Gold, Tin, and Iron. This Island is divided into several Kingdoms; the chief whereof is cheen, who as he precedes the rest in state, riches, and power, so is he formost in tyranny. In the Mountains of Sumatra live Man-Eaters, which use the Skuls of their eaten enemies instead of mo∣ney, exchanging the same for their necessaries. The Attendants of this King are for the most part Women, who are expert at their weapons, using both Peeces and Swords. Phillippi∣nas.Phillipinas; these Islands are ma∣ny in number, and some of them are very rich in Rice, Honey, Fruits, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Gold; enriched further with trade from China. 70 of these Islands are Subjects of friends to the Spaniard. The Spaniards have here a Bishop and Archdeacon, and besides other religious Men, as Augustinians and Franciscans, they have seven Col∣ledges of Jesuits. Inhbi∣tants.The People wor∣ship the Devil, who oft-times ap∣pears to them in conference in most ugly shape.
There is amongst them an Island of Negroes, inhabited with black Peo∣ple, almost as big as England. Here are also those black People cal∣led Os Paupas, Man-eaters, and Sorcerers, among whom Devils walk familiarly; and if these wicked spirits find one alone, they kill him, wherefore they use alwayes to have company. Before I leave these Eastern Islands, I will give you a short survey of those Towns and Castles which the Spaniard hath got into his possession, not only in these Islands, but also on the Continent. And 1. In Cambaia they have the Towns of Tana, Basa, and Daman; as also the Island of Di. 2. In Decan or Canora they have Chaul, and Goa, the Spanish Viceroy's residence. 3. In Malla∣var they have Chalen and Colan, two places of good strength. 4 In Zeilan they have fortified Columbus, bragging of one of the best Havens in the World 5. In Siam they are Lords of Mallaca, and the adjoyn∣ing Castle. And last of all, to se∣cure
their Spice-trade in the Moluc∣coes, they enjoy Terenante: yet for all these Fortresses the English and Hollander will not be hindred from traffick with these Indies. Thus much of the Oriental Islands.
Cyprus. THis Island is of length 200, large 60, and in circuit 600 miles. Fertility.This Island yieldeth infinite Canes of Sugar, Cotton-Wool, Honey, Oyl, Corn, Turpentine, Allum, Ver∣degrease, Grogram, store of Metals, and Salt, besides all sorts of Fruits and Commodities in abundance. This Isle lyeth in the Gulf between and Syria; having Egypt to the West; Syria to the South; Cilicia to the East; and Pamphillia North. Natures of the People.The Inhabitants are generally strong; nimble; of great civility; hospitality to their Neighbours; and exceeding affectionate to Stran∣gers. The principal Cities of this Isle are, 1. Nicosia, environed with Mountains, wherein the Beglerbeg
remaineth. It is circular in form, and five miles in circumference; the Buildings are low, flat-rooft; the en∣trance little, for the most part as∣cending by stairs, for the more diffi∣culty in entring. 2. Famagusta, the chief strength and Sea-Port in it. It is seated in a Plain between two Promontories, in form well nigh quadrangular, in∣differently strong, and containing two miles in circumference; it stands almost opposite to Trippoly. Selina, Melisso, Paphos, Fontana, and Morosa, are the other four special Towns in this Island. The greatest imperfection of this Isle is scarcity of Water, and too much plenty of scorching heat, and sabulous ground. Thus much of Cyprus.
Rhodes. RHodes is situate in the Carpatian Sea over against Caria a Pro∣vince of lesser Asia, it is in circuit 120 miles and takes denomination from Rhodes the chief City, which is situate on the East part of the Isle on the bottom of a Hill and the brink of Sea, so that it injoyeth a fair and safe Haven for Commodities and for strength, it hath two Walls, 13 high Towers, five Bulwarks, besides di∣vers sconces and outworks. It is In∣habited only by Turks and Jews; the Christians having free Commerce and Traffick in it al the day time, but on pain of death leaving it at night. West of Rhodes lyeth Scarpanto an Island of 70 miles compass. Thus much of Rhodes and the Islands of Asia.
The Affrican Isles. These are In the Aethi∣opick Sea as Madagasker. Zocotora. In the At∣lantick Sea as S. Thomas. The Princes Isles The Gorgades. The Canaries, Azores and Hesperides
Madagascar. THis Isle is by the Portugal de∣nominated St. Lawrence. It is one of the greatest in the Universe, extending in length 1000 English miles; the breadth in some places being 230 miles. The best known Bay is that of Augustine, where our Ships ride.
Natures of the Peo∣ple.The Inhabitants are exceeding black, and have limbs of great strength and composure. Both Sex go naked, only a linnen Cloth about their middles: they use pinking and cutting their Breasts and Faces: Gold and Silver is of no value amongst them, but the Beads of Aggats, Bracelets, Glasses, Bells, and such like, they esteem well of. They have Cattle both great, many, and good, and for a Bead or two of two pence price, you may buy Sheep and Beeves of good bigness and taste.  The Sheep here have their Tails weighing 16 or 20 pound. Riches.The Isle abounds in all good things necessary for Mans use, as Copper, Gold, Iron and Silver. Their Towns of note are Roma Augustine, Santo Jacobo, Matatana, Angoda, and Herendo. Socotora.Socotora; this Isle lyeth just at the entrance of the Red Sea, and in length 60, and in breadth 24 miles. Riches.It is rich in Aloes, Gums and Spices; yet it wanteth most things conveni∣ent for vital sustenance. Inhabi∣tants.The Inhabitants are tall of stature, and ashy colour. he Portugals have here fortified two Towns, Coro, and Benin. S. Thomas.S. Thomas; this Isle is in compass 180 miles, and is so fruitfull in Su∣gar, that forty Ships are laden with it every year. The prime City is Pavoason, an Episcopal See, inha∣bited by Portugals and Negroes. The Prin∣ces Island.The Princes Island; this Island lyeth nigh unto the Isle of S. Helen, and are both under the Command of the Spaniard.
The Gor∣gads.The Gorgads; these Islands are in number nine, and are called In∣sulae Capitis viridis: they all do abound with Goats; the chief of them is St. James, whose chief Town is Riberia, at this time fortified by the Spaniard. The Canary Islands.The Canary Islands; these Islands in former ages call'd Fortunate, are in number seven, (viz.) Grand Canaria, La Palma, Teneriffa, Lan∣caerota, Hierro, La Gomera, and Forte Ventura; they are now subject to the King of Spain. Grand Canary precedes the rest in greatness and excellency, for thither all the other Isles repair for tryals, and justice: Teneriffa is thought to equal it in wealth and circuit. This Island is the highest Land in the World, being 15 miles high. This Isle is distant from the Grand Cana∣ry 60 English miles.
Azores.Azores; these Islands are in num∣ber nine, of which Tercera is chief. They are abounding in no rich Com∣modity, only they afford much Oad, which hath made them most  famous, and best enriched them. The names of the other eight Islands are S George, S. Michael, S. Mary, Fayall, Pyco, Gratiosa, Flores, and Corno. Hesperyds.Hesperyds; these Islands are situ∣ate not far from the Gorgades. These Islands are supposed to be they where the Daughters of Atlas dwelt, where grew the golden Ap∣ples, kept by a Dragon, and taken hence by Hercules: and here was suppos'd to be the abode of the bles∣sed Creatures, said to be called the Elysian Fields, so oft memorized by the Poets. These Islands are called Mayo, Sal, and Bonanista; they are distant from the Continent of Africk some 10000 furlongs. Thus much of the African Isles.
The American Islands. THe American Isles are either in the Virginia Sea, as Mare del Nort; or in the Pacifick Sea, as Mare del Zur. The Islands in the Pacifick Ocean are, 1. Insulae Solomonis, which are in number many, the three greatest being Guadalcanal, S. Thome, and S. Isabel. The Islanders are of a yel∣lowish colour, and go naked.
The Islands of the Virgi∣nian Ocean. ARe Margarica Cubagna, the Baccaloes, Boriquen, Jamaica, Cuba, Bermude and Hispaniola. Margarica Cubagna.Margarica Cubagna; these two Islands are situate nigh unto Castella Aurea: they are deficient in Corn, Grass, Trees, Water, but they abound in precious Stones, which make some amends for these defects. Nigh un∣to these is the Island Trinadado, well stored with Tobacco of the best. Boluccoes.Boluccoes; these are certain Islands lying against the Influx of Ca∣nada, nigh unto Corterialis. The People of these Islands in a formal expression of reverence use to rub their Noses, or stroke their Fore∣heads.
Boriquen.Boriquen, or St. Johns, is 300 miles long, and 70 broad, traversed  with a rough Mountain, which yields many Rivers. The Spaniards have there some Towns; the chief where∣of are St Johns, and Port Rico. Jamaica.Jamaica is almost as large as Bo∣riquen: it is extreamly troubled with such terrible gusts of Wind, that nothing can resist them, turn∣ing up Trees, and over-turning Houses, transporting Ships from Sea to Land with a terrible confusi∣on. The Inhabitants here are of quicker wits than the other Islands. Ciba.Ciba; this Island is more Norther∣ly, and extends it self 300 leagues in length, and 20 in breadth, full of Mountains, Woods,
ens, Rivers, Lakes both salt and fresh: the Woods are replenished with Swine and Kine; the Rivers with golden Sands; and the Soyl is replenished with Ginger, Cassia, Mastick, Aloes, Cynamon, Sugar. The chief Cities are S. Jago, a Bishops See; and Ha∣nana, a safe road for Ships, and the Staple of Merchandize. Here rides the King of Spain's Navy, till time of year and conveniency of wind serve  to waft them homeward. The other Towns of note are S. Christophero, and S. Trinity. Not far hence are the Lucacy, above 400 in num∣ber. Hispaniola.Hispaniola is East-ward from Cu∣ba: it is called by the natives Haiti; it containeth in compass 550 leagues, enjoying a temperate Air, and fertil Soyl, rich in Mines, Amber, and Su∣gar. This Island hath many high and craggy Hills, over-looking the deep and dark Valleys; but in many places it is most beautifull and flou∣rishing. It seemeth to enjoy a per∣petual Spring, the Trees alwayes flourishing, and the Meadows clo∣thed in green. The chief Towns are Dominigo, S. Jago, S. Thome, S John, and Portoroyo. Thus much of the American Islands. And also of all the Islands through∣out the whole Universe.
Certain Precepts & Observations for those that do intend to TRAVELL.
Let him that intends to travell, observe these Precepts. IN the first place let him solicite God daily for his protection, and let all his actions take beginning in him; let him omit no day where∣in he offers not up his Orisons to God, for his gracious protection in his intended purposes: let him be sure to observe this well, to keep constant to his God, and he shall find him to be a special friend in his greatest extremity.
2. Let him have a special care be∣fore he go, to leave a carefull riend at home, that will keep credit with the Merchant that furnishes him with  money abroad, lest his Friend's ill payments at home drive him to wants abroad: and for an ordinary expence to one that will live mode∣rately, some 50 or 60 l. sterling will serve to defray a Travellers Diet, and necessary Apparel.
3. For his outward Necessaries, which are Cloathes, Books, and Money, let him carry no more with him than necessity requires. For his Apparel, let him not charge himself with overmuch luggage; and let him be sure in what Countrey soever he comes, (unless he will make himself ridiculous) that his Cloathes be in fashion. For his Books let them be few or none, es∣pecially such as are prohibited, lest upon suspition he be searched, (as they are at every Gate in Italy) be may bring himself into danger: Al∣so for the more caution, let the Notes of his Observations be taken in Ciphers or Characters; but pro∣vided that he be alwayes ready to give a fained interpretation. And for his money, let him carry no  more with him than will defray his charge unto the next place he is to have his Bill payd; and let him be wary he shew not any quantity at any time about him, since Thieves have commonly their Spies in all Innes, to enquire after the conditions of Passen∣gers. 4. Let him also before he go, learn some knowledge in the Art of Cosmography, for if he be ignorant of that, he will not know where he is, nor which foot to set forward: And also if he desire to learn the Lan∣guage of each Kingdom, (that is in most use in his own Countrey) let him resort to those places where the best Language is spoken; those are, Leipzich in Germany, Orleance in France, and Florence in Italy. 5. For his Observations, when he cometh into each Kingdom, let him observe the fruitfulness of each Countrey, the Commodity and ra∣rity wherewith each Countrey aboundeth and is adorn'd: Let him observe the policy of each State, and therein the Courts of each King or
Prince, with the Courtiers, Enter∣tainments, Offices and Fees: Let him also observe the traffick of Merchan∣dize, and the Commodity they car∣ry out, and most want, with their Havens, Roads for Ships, and the value of Coyn in each Countrey, and the several currant Pieces. Likewise in the observation of any City, if the Traveller may without suspition, let him climbe up one of the highest Steeples, where having taken the situation of the City, he may at his coming to his Inne, draw the form of it. 6. Let the Traveller take these Precepts along with him: If he in∣tend a journey to any place, let him take the seasonablest time of the year, and fittest time to travel, which is Spring and
Autumn; and he shall do well to go to cold Climes in Sum∣mer, and hot Climes in Winter: And if the journey he takes be long, let him not acquaint, no not his Companions nor Friends in his jour∣ney, the furthest end thereof, but rather from City to City, and pro∣fess  he intends to go no further; and instead of a Companion, let him have alwayes such Books as may fitly accord with his travels, which he may carry without danger. Let him also when he comes to any City, enquire for the best Inne, es∣pecially in Germany, and also at right in Italy, for he may take a short Dinner at any Inne in Italy, so he lodge safe at night. In all Innes, especially in suspected places, let him bolt or lock his Chamber-door; let him take heed of his Chamber∣fellow; and let him have alwayes his Sword by his side, or his Bed∣side; let him lay his Purse under his Pillow, but alwayes folded with Gar∣ters, or something he first useth in the morning.
7. Before he takes any journey, if it be in the morning, let him eat a small Breakfast, that ill smells may not offend him; and let him dine sparingly, lest his after-noons motion hinder his digestion; but let him sup freely. The season of the year and nature of the Clime is to be re∣spected  in Diet; in cold Regions let him take hot comfortable things; and in Summer and hot Regions, let him take such things as will cool the Blood; it is dangerous to drink when his Body is heated, unless he first make water and wash his mouth; and when he is heated, let him not suddenly expose himself to cold. In the Inne let him have a care to dry his Feet or his Neck if he be wet; and it is not amiss if he hath the skill.
7. Likewise I advise a Traveller to be so wary whereever he comes, not to venture on any new thing, till the example of another give him confi∣dence. Let him reprove nothing in another Mans House, much less in a Commonwealth; in which kind it is not amiss to seem dumb, or tongue∣ty'd, so he diligently imploy his Eyes and Ears to observe all profita∣ble things. Let him be courteous to all, especially to his Hoste, the Children, and his fellow-so journers in the House; but in all actions let baseness be shunned, and decency  embraced: If he apply himself to the custome of those amongst whom he lives, he shall gain their loves. And as he ought to be humble with decency, and without baseness, so in Germany he shall do well to seem, though not to be proud, where they will take a Man to be of base condi∣tion, if he be too courteous and of∣ficious. 8. And as a Traveller ought to have a slow tongue, and his mind locked up, so let him have a clear and chearfull countenance; let him speak sparingly, and seldom speak of his own Commonwealth, or private Estate, or good qualities; and let him take this for a general Rule, that nothing doth more preserve a Traveller out of dangers, or sooner deliver him in danger, than a mode∣rate and discreet use of his tongue; let him shun a talkative companion, or not seem to hear their questions; let him not enquire after the secrets of Religion, nor desire to be present at those Rites. Also I advise a Tra∣veller to avoid all combats or single
Duels, especially in Italy; but if it be so that he must needs adventure his Body, let him provide means be∣fore-hand how to escape after victo∣ry. 9. To conclude, these things are very requisite in a Traveller; the Eye of a Hawk, (to see afar off) the Ears of an Ass, (to hear the least whispering) the Face of an Ape, (to be ready to laugh in soothing) the Mouth of a Hog, (to eat what∣ever is set before him) the Back of a Camel, (to bear burthens patiently) the Leg of a Hart, (to fly from all dangers) and a full Purse, to defray all charges liberally. FINIS.
Books Printed for William Leak at the Crown in Fleet-street, between the two Temple-Gates. BOoks written by the Reverend Father in God, William Lord Bishop of Gloucester. ΕΚΘΕΣΙΣ ΠΙΣΤΕΩΣ; or an Exposition of the Apostles Creed, delivered in several Sermons, folio; price Bound 16 s. David's Harp strung and tuned; or an Analysis of the Book of Psalms, cast into such a method, that the summe of every Psalm may be quick∣ly collected and remembred; with a devout Prayer and Meditation at the end of every Psalm, folio; price Bound 14 s. An Apology in defence of the Church of England, in Answer to the Admonitory Letter, quarto; price bound 5 s. Books in Folio. The Union of Honour, contain∣ing the Arms of the Nobility of
England; with the Arms of the Lin∣colnshire Gentlemen, By James Yorke; price Bound 12 s. An Exact Abridgement of the Records in the Tower of London, from the Reign of King Edward the Second unto King Richard the Third, of all the Parliaments in each Kings Reign, and the several Acts in each Parliament; together with the Names of the Peers summoned to the said Parliaments. Collected by Sir Robert Cotton; Revised and Enlar∣ged by William Prynne of Lincolns-Inne, Esq price Bound 20 s. A Commentary or Exposition up∣on the divine second Epistle general, written by the blessed Apostle St. Peter. By Thomas Adams; price Bound 30 s. Books in Quarto. A Bible of a very large fair Roman Letter.
Man become Guilty; or the cor∣ruption of nature by sin: Written originally in French by John Francis Senault; translated into English by  Henry Earl of Monmouth; price Bound 5 s. The Reading of the famous and learned Gentleman Robert Callis Esq Serjeant at Law on the Statute of Sewers, price Bound 4 s. The Result of false Principles; or Errour convicted by its own evi∣dence. By Lawrence Womack D. D. price Bound 3 s. Paris and Vienna, an excellent Romance; price Bound 2 s. Skene de significatione verborum, a Treatise of Scotch Laws; price Bound 2 s. The Posing of the Eight Parts of Speech; price Stitcht 1 s Elements of Laws of England By my Lord Bacon; price Bound 2 s. Playes. The Maids Tragedy. Philaster. A King and no King. All three by Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher; each price 1 s. Othello, the Moor of Venice.
The Merchant of Venice. These  two by William Shakespear; each price 1 s. The Wedding. The Gratefull Servant. These two by James Shirley; each price 1 s. The Hollander; price 1 s. The strange Discovery; price 1 s. Octavo's. Nye's Gunnery and Fire-Works, the second Edition; price Bound 2 s. 6 d. Le Prince de Amour; or the Prince of Love; with a Collection of several choice Songs and Poems; price Bound 1 s. 6 d. The making use and description of an Horizontal Dial. Composed by de la Main, Student in the Mathe∣maticks; price Bound 3 s. The Vision of Theodorus Verax. By Bryce Blair; price Bound 1 s. 6 d. Lazarillo de Tormes; or the Hi∣story of the witty Spaniard. Tran∣slated out of Spanish, price Bound 1 s 6 d.
The Fort-Royal of the holy Scrip∣tures; or a new Concordance of the  chief heads of Scripture common∣placed; the third Edition. By J. H. price Bound 2 s. 6 d. Corderius Dialogues. Gramma∣tically translated by John Brinsley; price Bound 2 s Meteors; or a plain description of all kind of Meteors, as well fiery and aiery, as watry and earthy. By William Fulke D. D. price Bound 1 s. Mel Helliconium; or Poetical Honey. By Alexander Ross; price Bound 1 s. 6 d A Tragedy written by Hugo Gro∣tius, called Christus patiens; En∣glished by George Sandes; price Bound 1 s. 6 d. The Rights of the People concern∣ing Impositions. Stated in a learned Argument by a late eminent Judge of this Nation; price Bound 1 s. Trotman's Abridgement of my Lord Cooks Reports; price Bound 4 s. 6 d. Books in 12o.
Cato Major; or the Book of old Age, with Annotations. By Wil∣liam  Austin Esq price Bound 1 s. Flamma sine Fumo; or Poems without Fictions. By Rowland Watkins; price Bound 1 s. The Mount of Olives; or solitary Devotions; with an excellent Dis∣course of the blessed Estate of Man in Glory. By the Reverend Father Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury; price Bound  s. 6 d. A Guide for Constables, Church-Wardens, Overseers of the Poor, Surveyors of the High-wayes, &c. shewing the extent of their Offices; the second Edition. Collected by George Meriton; price Bound 1 s. 6 d.
