M694 11871364 50130
THE PURITY OF Gospel Communion, OR Grounds and Reasons FOR SEPARATION From Persons of Corrupt Manners, &c. WHen the Lord of old brought up the Children of Israel out of the Land of Egypt, he separated them from other Nations, to be his People in a peculiar Covenant; and by his Laws he san∣ctified them from all Uncleanness;Lev. 11.25. Lev. 5.2, 3. Ch. 11.24, &c. Numb. 19.11, 13. Deut. 23.10, to 19. insomuch that whoso bore the Carkass of any unclean Beast, he was to wash his Cloaths and be un∣clean until the Even. And whoso touched the Body of a Dead Man, & purified not himself, he defiled the Tabernacle of the Lord; & that Soal was to be cut off from Israel, because the
Water of Separation was not sprinkled upon him.Exod. 12.19. Lev. 22.3, to 8. Numb. 15.30, 31. And whosoever eat the Passover with un∣leavened Bread, or went unto the Holy things, having his uncleanness upon him; that Soul was to be cut off from the Congregation of Is∣rael, and from the presence of the Lord. And the Soul that dispised the Word of the Lord, and brake his Commandments, that Soul was utterly to be cut off, & his Iniquity should be upon him. Now those Separations and these, and many other legal cleansings were sha∣dows of Gospel things, whereby the Purity of the New Testament Church was set forth. And to the end it should be a Royal Priest∣hood,1 Pet. 2.9. an Holy Nation, a peculiar People to shew forth the Praises of him, who hath called us out of darkness into his marvellous Light. He hath left us Holy Laws for the Govern∣ment of his Church,1 Cor. 5.6, 7. Gal. 5.9. and for the purging out of the old leaven of Unrighteousness, for a little leaven leaveneth the whole Lump, as it consequently follows; that such who bear with Sin in one, cannot avoid bearing it in another; and by opening of this Sluce, a Flood of Sin and Iniquity will quickly sweep away the beauty of a Gospel Church; and turn the noble Vine that was planted wholly a right seed,Jer. 2.21. into the degenerate plant of a strange Vine, to the dishonour of God, the reproach of true Religion, the stumbling of weak Christians and the hardning of one another in their Sins, and Disobedience against the most Soveraign Majesty of Heaven and Earth. To prevent which evils, I shall therefore Treat
of the way and means appointed by Christ, who loved the Church,Eph. 1.4. Ch. 5.25, 26, 27. Tit. 2.14. and gave himself for it: That he might sanctifie and cleanse it with the washing of Water, by the Word. That he might present it to himself a glorious Church; not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that we should be holy, and without blame be∣fore him in Love. And in order thereunto, I shall here Premise, that forasmuch as the Church of Christ is said to be the pillar and ground of Truth, And that it is Gods building:1 Tim. 3.15. 1 Cor. 3.9. Heb. 8.5. 1 Pet. 2.4, 5. Eph. 2.20, 21, 22. Ch. 4.4, 5. Judge 20. It cannot be so, unless it be erected accord∣ing to the Pattern shewed in the Holy Mount and recorded for the Example of after A∣ges. That every stone should be a lively Stone by Regeneration, built up together a spiritual house in one most Holy Faith; for as there is one Body and one Spirit, so there is one Faith: And it is the Duty of every Christian to help build up Gods spi∣ritual Temple, according to the pure Pri∣mitive and Apostolical Pattern, and to this end they should come out from among them and be separate,2 Cor. 6.16, 17. and joyn themselves to such a Congregation of Believers, where they may continue together in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, (tho' not personal∣ly with them) and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers. For the Church of Christ should not be a mixed Building (tho' on Christ the true Foundation) as the Apo∣stle warneth us saying, Ye are Gods building,1 Cor. 3.9, 10, 11. according to the Grace of God which is given un∣to me, as a wise Master-builder, I have laid
the Foundation, and another buildeth thereon, but let every Man take heed how he buildeth thereupon; for other Foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. Now if any man build upon this Foundation, Gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble: E∣very mans work shall be made manifest — and the fire shall try every mans work, of what sort it is. If any mans work abide which he hath built thereupon, he shall receive a reward. If any mans work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss. So that the Gospel Church is not to be for∣med of such mixed and combustible matter as men please,Rev. 1.20. 1 Pet. 1.7. Exod. 25.81. Rev. 3.18. but of pure Gold, yea of such as is tryed in the Fire. But to pro∣ceed, First, I shall prove, that it is the Duty of a Church of Christ to withdraw their Communion from, yea, and to purge out those Persons that are (without Repen∣tance for it) guilty of corrupt Manners or evil Actions;1 Cor. 5.1, to 6. 1 Tim. 1.20. and that not only for com∣mitting the grosser sort of Sins, as Fornica∣tion or incestuous Marriages, Blasphemy or other notorious Evil, but for smaller offen∣ces. And first our Lord hath commanded us saying,Math. 18.15, 16, 17. If thy Brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: If he shall hear thee, thou hast gain∣ed thy Brother. But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that in the Mouth of two or three Witnesses every Word may be established. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church: but if he
neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen Man and a Publican. To which I shall only here say, that as this trespass mentioned in the Text, must be some breach of the Moral Law,Mat. 7.12 in not doing to others, as we would that others should do to us; because it is a trespass against a Bro∣ther: So it is plain, that for such a cause of doing wrong, if satisfaction be not given by Repentance, the offender should be unto us as an Heathen Man and a Publican, with whom it was not lawful to hold any Church Communion, unless they were con∣verted. 2. It is said, 2 Thes. 3.6. Now we com∣mand you, Brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every Brother that walketh disorderly, and not after the Traditions which he received of us. Here we have a general command to withdraw from all disorderly Persons, which because I design to open it more at large in some fol∣lowing part of this Treatise, I shall at present only note this Scripture, as a positive Law to preserve the Purity of Church Commu∣nion, and the Words of our Lord before reci∣ted are for the same end,Math. 18 15, &c. tho' they more par∣ticularly respect corrupt Manners, or immo∣ral Wrongs and offences of Brethren against Brethren; comprehending a Prohibition of lesser as well as grosser Evils, as appears from the Authority of other Scriptures, Exod. 23.1. Thou shalt not raise a false report, put not thine hand with the Wicked to be an un∣righteous
Witness.Psal. 15.2, 3. And David shews us, who shall abide in the Lords Tabernacle, and who shall dwell in his Holy Hill: He that walketh uprightly — he that backbiteth not with his Tongue, nor doeth evil to his Neighbour, nor taketh up a reproach against his Neighbour, &c. And Psalm 101.5. Whoso privily slan∣dereth his Neighbour, him will I cut off. And the Apostle saith, Rom. 3.8. And not rather as we be slanderously reported, and as some af∣firm that we say, let us do evil, that good may come? whose Damnation is Just. And in 2 Thes. 3.11, to 15. we are commanded to have no company with such, as through Idleness eat not their own Bread, but are busie Bodies. And 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new Lump, as ye are unleavened. For even Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us. Therefore let us keep the Feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness: And ver. 11. He saith, I have written unto you, not to keep Company, if any man that is called a Brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an Ido∣later, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extor∣tioner, with such an one not to eat. And in Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.See also 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. 1 Tim. 1.9, 10. Col. 3.9. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery, for∣nication, uneleanness, laseiviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulation, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings and such like, (as all lyars, Rev. 21.8.) of the which I tell you be∣fore, as I have also told you in time past, that
they which do such things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. And then surely none of those evils (tho' of the lesser sort of them) when known to us should be suffered in the Communion of a Gospel Church. And in Math. 7.12. Therefore all things whatsoever, ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the Law and the Pro∣phets. So that whatsoever wrong is done to any contrary to this general precept, it is a breach of the Moral Law,Math. 19.19. Thou shalt love thy Neighbour as thy self. And therefore such Offenders should not (without Repentance for their Sin) be suffered in our Holy Com∣munion at the Lords Table. But some may think that all those parti∣cular evils, in Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. come not under the Cognizance and Judgment of the Church for excluding of those who are guil∣ty of them from Communion. To which I shall briefly say, That tho' there may be some kind of immoral Variance, Emulation, Wrath and Strife, that may not arise to so high an offence, if they be only suddain pas∣sions that are soon over, yet where there is a sixed Variance between Brethren, that shews it self to proceed from immorality; Or Emulation from a striving to exceed in Envy, or Disdain, or in Wrong to another; or malicious anger without a cause, there we have ground for Exclusion from Communion, as our Saviour saith,Mat. 5.22, to 25. Whoso∣ever is angry with his Brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the Judgment. — Therefore
if thou bring thy Gift to the altar, and there re∣membrest that thy Brother hath ought against thee; leave there thy Gift before the altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then come and offer thy Gift. These Words (notwithstanding there are some old Testa∣ment Terms used) were spoken for Dire∣ction to us under the Gospel, for Christ in this Sermon was Gospelizing the Law. And therefore I gather from them, that in Case a Person trespasseth against his Bro∣ther, he should not offer his spiritual Gift in publick Church Worship, till he hath re∣conciled himself to him; and then it conse∣quently follows, that the same trespass which debars him from offering his Gift up∣on the Altar, whatever is meant by it, does also debar him from his full Communion at the Lords Table. And seeing from this Scripture, he ought of himself to forbear his Communion, till he be reconciled; there is likewise Reason for the offended Brother or the Church if the Case be known to it, to forbear his Communion with him or with∣draw it from him, till he giveth satisfaction by Repentance for the same immoral Tres∣pass, which forfeits his present Priviledge to Minister in publick Church Worship, does also forfeit his Priviledge of Commuion with it at the Lords Table. Moreover it is worth our Observation, that the Word [There∣fore] if thou bring thy Gift to the Altar, re∣fers the Reason of this Exclusion from Com∣munion, to the Evils in the foregoing Verse
as the cause thereof, which is for being An∣gry with a Brother without a cause, for say∣ing to his Brother Raca, that is, dull, bloc∣kish,See Dutch Annot. or vain, or thou fool, in disdain, re∣proach and envy. So that as on the one hand we are forbidden on forfeiture of our Church Communion, to cast contempt re∣proach and scorn upon any Brother, for his weakness in the Faith, or for his natural Infirmities, and to bear a sixed anger with∣out a cause: So on the other side, nothing is here intended by our Saviour, to forbid an intelligible expressing of our Detestation and Abhorrence of that which is Evil as we are commanded,Rom. 12.9. 2 Cor. 7.11. Ch. 10.6. and as also we are allowed to use a holy Indignation and Revenge a∣gainst all disobedience, yet so as to consist with Love and Pity to Mens Persons. 3. Under this Head of Diseourse con∣cerning corrupt Manners or evil Actions, we may bring many other particular Ca∣ses, for which Offenders ought to be with∣drawn from, and without Repentance for their Sin, they should not be suffered in the Communion of the Visible Church of Christ. As 1. For breaking the Christian Sabbath in disobedience to the Fourth Command∣ment, and the Example of Christs Apostles, and the Primitive Churches. 2.Eph. 6.1, 2, 5. For being disobedient to Parents and Masters in Law∣ful and Reasonable things. 3. For a Re∣bellious breaking Covenant with a Church of Christ, when it is not in Case of Consci∣ence, of Moral Necessity, nor of real Ex∣pediency.
4. For taking the Holy Name of the Lord our God in vain.Gal. 5.19, 21. 2 Tim. 3.2, to 6. 5. For Lasci∣viousness (mentioned before) which is Lecherousness or Wantonness in Behaviour, and for many other Sins, some of which are particularly expressed, and others are in∣cluded under the general Head of Trespas∣ses against the Moral Law. Secondly, It is the Duty of Christians to withdraw their Communion in Church Fel∣lowship from all those that hold erroneous Doctrine in or against Matters of Faith Es∣sential to Salvation. For 1.2 Tim. 2, 22. We are commanded to follow Righte∣onsness, Faith, Charity, Peace with them that call on the Name of the Lord out of a pure Heart; but such as Err in fundamentals of Salvation, thereby declare their Hearts to be unwashed with Regeneration, and the Renewings of the Holy Ghost, and there∣fore we should not hold our Communion with such at the Lords Table. 2. It farther appears to be the Duty of Christians to separate themselves from the Communion of all those that hold such Er∣roneous Doctrine, Col. 2.20. Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the Rudiments of the World; why, as tho' living in the World, are ye subject to Ordinances. Touch not, taste not, handle not; (which all are to perish with the using) after the Commandments and Doctrines of Men; which things have indeed a shew of Wisdom in Will-worship and Humility, and neg∣lecting of the Body, not in any Honour, to the sa∣tisfying
of the Flesh. Here I shall observe, that the Apostle having in the foregoing part of this Chapter, warned the Colossians against the Traditions of Men, and the Ru∣diments of the World, viz. to beware of Phylosophy and vain Deceit of the Jewish Ceremonies, and other voluntary Worship and Humility; he delivers them a general command, that they should not Touch, Taste, nor Handle, viz. no ways to meddle with that which others perish with the using af∣ter the Commandments and Doctrines of Men, tho' others use them; yet we are strictly prohibited in the least to Touch or Taste of their practical Ordinances, or of their Doctrines, for these also are there for∣bidden, because the command hath a refe∣rence to the Rudiments of the World,Ver. 20. which signifieth the first Teaching or Instruction, a beginning a Principle, and hath respect to Matters of Faith.Ver. 3. to 10. Seeing therefore we are forbidden to Touch, Taste or Handle the Commandments and Doctrines of Men; then surely we ought not to be in full Com∣munion at the Lords Table, with Persons that hold such Erroneous Principles; for our Assenting to their right of Communion with us, is an owning their Principles as truly fundamental to Salvation; and so we either virtually deny our own to be such, or confound the true Profession of our Faith to the hazard of Mens Souls; or else admit of Persons to partake of the Holy Supper, that apparently have no right to it, for want of
those Gospel Principles that are essential to their visible Interest, in the Obedience, Suf∣ferings, and Resurrection of Jesus Christ, either of which is a Sin. 3. It appears from Gal. 1.6, 7, 8. that we should not hold Communion at the Lords Table, with Persons that hold such errone∣ous Principles; for the Apostle saith, I mar∣vel, that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the Grace of Christ, unto another Gospel: Which is not another, but there be some that trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ. But tho' we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you, than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed: And in the following Verse, he repeats it o∣ver again; and in Chap. 5.12. he saith, I would they were even cut off which trouble you. Now if we duly search after the Cause of this censure, we may plainly see that it was not for bringing in of another Gospel; but as the Apostle saith, because there were some that troubled the Church of Galatia with perverting the.Gal. 6.12. Chap. 5.3. Gospel of Christ, by constraining them to be circumcised; and so to become Debtors to do the whole Law. And we find by the Apostles Discourse, that they sought to be justified by the Works of the Law,Chap. 2, &c. as Chap. 2.16. Knowing that a man is not justified by the Works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believ∣ed in Jesus Christ; that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the Works of the Law: for by the Works of the Law shall no
Flesh be justified. And Chap. 4.21. Tell me, ye that desire to be under the Law, do ye not hear the Law? So that the pervert∣ing of the Gospel before mentioned, was by bringing in of the Works of the Law for Justification; and this we find was made a Matter of Separation, the Apostle wishing the Persons even cut off or accursed, that so troubled the Church of Christ, which to ap∣ply to some in our present day, I shall here note, that altho' those Jewish Christi∣ans that held it needful to be circumcised, and so endeavoured to bring the Gentiles un∣der the Law for Justification to Eternal Life, did it in a Mcsaical formal way, which Christians now repugn, by denying that formal Obligation to keep the old Law; yet as their Principles oblige them to seek for Justification by works of Obedience to a new Law under the Gospel, which they have no Power in themselves to perform, their Principle with the case of the Church of Galatia, respecting the effect, is in sub∣stance the same; and therefore there is Rea∣son founded on Scripture for us to withdraw or remove our Communion from all Per∣sons that are leavened with the works of the Law for Justification; whether it be un∣der the form of the Law or of the Gospel Administration:Gal. 5.9. 1 Cor. 5.8. For that being called Lea∣ven, seeing Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us, we are commanded (tho' on a diffe∣rent occasion) to keep the Feast not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and
wickedness; but with the unleavened Bread of of Sincerity and Truth. Observe it well, we are here forbidden to eat the Christian Pas∣sover or Lords Supper with the old leaven, &c. and are commanded to keep it with Truth. And therefore we should not have Communion in that Ordinance with funda∣mental Errors in the Christian Faith. 4. The Apostle saith, Rom. 16.17. Now I beseech you, Brethren, Mark them which cause Divisions and Offences, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have Learned; and avoid them.1 Tim. 6.3, 4, 5. And Paul commanded Timo∣thy to withdraw from such as taught other∣wise, and consented not to wholsome Words, even the Words of our Lord Jesus Christ; and to the Doctrine which is according to Godliness, &c. And we are exhorted ear∣nestly to contend for the Faith which was once delivered unto the Saints:Jude 3. Phil. 1.27. And to stand fast in one Spirit, with one Mind, striving together for the Faith of the Gospel; and therefore we are not to unite our selves into one Body with Persons, that erre from the true Faith; for as two cannot walk together except they be agreed,Amos 3.3. so if we are not united in one Faith, we shall quickly be contending and striving with each other, and not together for the Faith of the Gospel. 5. It is said by way of Politive Command, A Man that is an Heretick,Tit. 3.10, 11. after the first and second Admonition, reject: Knowing that he that is such, is subverted, and sinneth, being condemned of himself. Now an Heritick is
one that stisly maintains false opinions a∣gainst the Scriptures, in matters of Faith fundamental to Salvation; which tho' we should be tender of judging such Christians to be Hereticks, as there is Reason to hope have more the shew in weak expressions of some such like salse Principles, than a being under the Power and Conduct of them; see∣ing the Scripture saith,Jude 22. we should of some have Compassion, making a difference; and o∣thers save with fear pulling them out of the Fire, hating even the garment spotted by the Flesh. Yet our Charitable Thoughts of such Chri∣stians, while they are under their cloudy Profession of such Errours (tho' crouded amongst other Truths, whereby they are the more concealed) are no warrant nor allow∣ance for us to hold Communion with them, till we can plainly see them delivered from those Errours, seeing they are clearly pro∣hibited in the Scriptures. Thirdly, It is the Duty of Christians to withdraw their Communion from all disor∣derly Persons in false Worship, or in cor∣rupt Administrations of Gospel-Ordinances. And 1. Our Lord saith, The hour cometh,John 4.23, 24. and now is, when the true Worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth: For the Fa∣ther seeketh such to worship him. God is a Spi∣rit, and they that worship him must worship him in Spirit and in Truth. From hence I ob∣serve, that true Worshippers must worship the Father both in Spirit and in Truth, o∣therwise
therwise they are not true Worshippers: And then if we find by the Word of Truth (as we are commanded to try the Spirits, whither they are of God) that they are such who separate themselves,1 Joh. 4.1. Jude 19. sensual, having not the Spirit, or that do not worship in Truth, but with erroneous Matter, or in a false Man∣ner: I say, then we should withdraw our Communion from such, as disorderly Per∣sons in Divine Worship:Mat. 15.9. And our Lord al∣so tells us, that in vain they do worship him, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men. So that to keep our selves from the Guilt of vain Worship, we should not by our selves,Isa. 29.19. nor with any others worship God after the Commandment of Men, but according to Gospel-Institutions. 2. The Apostle saith, 1 Cor. 11.2. I praise you, Brethren, that you remember me in all things, and keep the Ordinances, as I deli∣vered them to you: On this Text Mr. Will. Kissin noteth,See his Book called A Sober Discourse of right to Church-Communi∣on, in his Presace. That our Translation of the Greek Word  (rendring it Or∣dinances) is excepted against by some Papists — who would have it translated (Traditions) to countenance the Ro∣mish Opinion; to which (saith he) shall be opposed, that the Greek Word signi∣fieth indeed Tradition, that is in English, a Delivery, viz. of Doctrines, Ordinan∣ces, Instructions, or Institutions, 2 Thes. 2.15. by those Evangelical Preachers to their Auditors, which is nothing else but the Doctrine of the Gospel first preach∣ed,
and afterwards committed to writing by the Evangelists and Apostles, as stand∣ing Records to future Ages so that any Traditions, besides what is written, are justly to be excepted against, and (in matters relating to Divine Worship) to be esteemed Apocryphal. Now as the afore∣said Author saith, What was praise-wor∣thy in those Primitive Christians, to whom the Apostle Paul writes, — can be no blemish, but really a Duty in other Christians in after times, to imitate. To which I add, That to corrupt the wor∣ship of God with mens Traditions, contra∣ry to the Apostolical Pattern, is a Sin and Disorder to be purged out by the Church of Christ; as farther appears in the next Section. 3. It's said, 2 Thes. 3.6. Now we com∣mand you, Brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every Brother that walketh disorderly, and not after the Tradition which he received of us. 1. This general Command to the Church of the Thessalonians, appears from the fol∣lowing Verses, to be occasioned from some particular disorders that were amongst them, (as Ver. 11, 12, 14, 15. For even when we were with you, this we commanded you, that if any would not work, neither should he eat. For we hear that there are some which walk among you disorderly, working not at all, but are busie bodies. Now them that are such we command, and exhort by our Lord Jesus
Christ, that with quietness they work, and eat their own Bread. — And if any Man obey not our Word by this Epistle, note that Man, and have no Company with him, that he may be asha∣med. Yet count him not as an Enemy, but ad∣monish him as a Brother.) But yet this in∣stance lest us on sacred Record, may give us light into other Cases; for seeing we are commanded to withdraw our Commu∣nion, so as to have no Company with such a disorderly Brother, that through Idleness (when he may have work) eateth not his own Bread, and is a busie body (who may have this to plead against such an Act of the Church, that he hath not stolen nor defrauded any, but getteth his Meat from House to: House amongst his Christian Friends) then there is ground and com∣mand for us to withdraw our selves from all those that offend in other things of the like Nature, and that are guilty of frand or deceit and wrong to any Person. And that this command in Ver. 6. is general, including all disorders in Manners, Do∣ctrine, and false Worship, and so is a Con∣firmation of all I have said before for proof thereof, appears as followeth. 1. Because in Ver. 7, 8. there is a plain Intimation, that the command, Ver. 6. To withdraw from every Brother that walketh dis∣orderly, does respect other disorders besides the particular Case of eating other Mens Bread for nought. For the Apostle saith, Ver. 7, 8. Your selves know how ye ought to fol∣low
us: for we behaved not our selves disorderly among you, neither did we eat any Mans Bread for nought. Observe the Word [Neither] imports a different disorder to what he im∣plyed before in Opposition to his Example: So that to me it's plain, that the command in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, was to withdraw from those disorders that were contrary to the Apostles examples, and which were not after the Tradition which they received of them, and therefore it is a general command, as was said before. 2. I shall give a brief Citation, of what is said on the same Text in a Book intitled, Asober Discourse of Right to Church Commu∣nion, in Page 5. it's said,Written by Mr. Will. Kiffin. quoting 2 Thes. 3.6. Now we command you Brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye with∣draw your selves from every Brother that walk∣eth disorderly, and not after the Tradition which he received of us. Which last Phrase  (the Word [Paradosis] signifi∣ing not only Doctrine delivered, Math. 15.2, 3. but also a Command, Ordinance or Institution, as before, 2 Thes. 2.15.) plainly makes out, that they were not only to withdraw from Persons of disor∣derly Conversation, or defective in Mo∣rals, but also from such as were corrupt in Doctrine, or disorderly in their Gospel Administrations, that being as great a Violation of Gospel Order, and as per∣nitious to Christians as Immorality: Which must be granted, or else there
is no Authority given to the Church to deal with Members of corrupt Principles, &c. Now this Command (saith he) being general, includes all disorders of any kind, in Manners, Doctrine, or Practice, and is a sufficient warrant (were there no more) for our Obedience, to ex∣clude such as disorderly practise the Or∣dinance of Baptism, from our immediate Communion at the Lords Table, tho' not from our Love and Affections. Having hitherto been discovering the Scripture Grounds of Separation from Church Communion with all disorderly Persons, in Manners, Doctrine, false Wor∣ship or irregular Administrations of Gospel Ordinances, I shall now proceed as follow∣eth: 1. To Answer the chiefest Objections I find against such Gospel Separation. 2. To give a particular Instance of some confused Matter about Communion, alrea∣dy Printed amongst us with several Queries thereupon. 3. I shall present my humble Advice to some of our Baptized Churches. And 4. I shall leave some few things to the serious Consideration of those that have re∣ceived a Gracious Discovery of the Love and Favour of God unto their Souls, or that have good Hope thro' Grace of Eter∣nal Life; and yet are walking at large out of the Communion of a Gospel Church: As
also an Exhortation in another Case con∣cerning Gospel Communion. Lastly in a Postscript, I have shewed, that it is the Duty of all true Believers in Order to Church Communion, to subject themselves to the Ordinance of Water Bap∣tism, and have also discoursed against ex∣cess of apparel, and then made a general Conclusion of this Treatise. Objections Answered. I. Object.Rev. Chap. 2. Chap. 3. None of the seven Churches of Asia in the Epistles, to them were com∣manded to withdraw their Communion, or separate themselves from any of those Per∣sons among them, which the Holy Ghost charged with Evil. And therefore neither Churches from any of their Members, nor any Members from their Churches, should separate themselves from one anothers full Communion at the Lords Table, unless it be for gross and scandalous Evils. Answer: If this Argument holdeth good and warrantable for Persons and Churches to keep their Communion at the Lords Ta∣ble, under the Guilt and Non-repentance of lesser Evils; it will also justifie such Communion with those that are guilty of grosser Sins. For the Church of Pergamos had them that held the Doctrine of Balaam,Ch. 2.14. who taught Balak to cast a stumbling block be∣fore the Children of Israel, to eat things sacri∣ficed unto Idols, and to commit Fornication.
And this was also the Sin of the Church in Thyatira,Ver. 24, 25. to whom its said, That unto the rest in Thyatira, as many as have not this Doctrine, and which have not known the depths of Stan, as they speak, I will put upon you none other burthen. But that which you have already hold fast till I come. And therefore, seeing the Church of Thyratira suffered that Woman Jezebel to seduce the Servants of Christ,Ver. 20. to commit Fornication, and to eat things sa∣crificed to Idols (which must be meant in honour to them,1 Cor. 8.9, 10. Ch. 10.27, 28, 29. for otherwise Meats sacri∣ficed to Idols were not unlawful to eat, tho' sometimes not expedient for the sake of weak Brethren) then surely the rest that escaped those Pollutions, and had no other burthen put upon them, than to hold fast that they had already, cannot rationally be thought then to be in the same Communion with those Idolaters and Fornicators,Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. for such have no Inheritance in the Kingdom of God.1 Cor. 5.2, 4, 5. Besides, we have an Instance of a Fornicator that was separated from the Church, or delivered up unto Satan. So that tho' there is no express command in the Epistles to those seven Churches of Asia, for withdrawing their Communion from a∣ny evils mentioned therein; yet doubtless it was their Duty from other Precepts then written, to cast out those that were guilty of such notorious Sins, as were in some of those Churches: And those Christians of Thyatira, which the Holy Ghost commen∣ded, that were in the same City with those
that were reproved (and perhaps originally in full Communion together in one Body) it is rational to believe were separated from their Communion, for Dr. Hammond in his Margin reads in Ver. 24. thus: But un∣to [you, I say the rest] in Thyatira, &c. for the Kings, M. S. reads it so. See also the Bibles Prin∣ted by the Deputies of Chris. Bar∣ker, 1599. and by Ro∣bert Bar∣ker, 1607. Ch. 2.2. , which im∣ports another distinct Church or People in that City. And the Reason why Christ threatned those defiled Christians, which were the Church to whom the Epistle was primarily directed, was because they suf∣fered those evils, when they should have purged out such Offenders, as the Church of Ephesus did, for what else can be meant by those Words: I know thy Works — how thou canst not bear them which are Evil: and thou hast tried them, which say they are Apo∣stles, and are not; and hast found them liars, who were therefore doubtless rejected from their Communion. But if any say, that these Words, thou canst not bear them which are evil, have only respect to the following Words. And thou hast tryed them, which say they are Apostles, and are not; and hast found them lyars: I have this to Answer, 1. That if it were so, yet it shews that this Church did not bear with such Lyars in their Communion, otherwise they could not be properly commended for not bear∣ing with them. 2. The Word [and] thou hast tryed them, &c. implieth a parti∣cular different thing, or other Persons to those preceding Words in general: And
how thou canst not bear them which are evil; like as we find in the same Verse, that the Word [and] thy Labour, [and] thy Pa∣tience, denoteth different things to each o∣ther, and particulars of the general Word (I know thy) [Works.] So that the Text does clearly demonstrate, that the Church of Ephesus did neither bear those that were Evil, nor those false Apostles in their Com∣munion, which Exposition is confirmed by the Dutch Annotations on those Words, and how thou canst not bear them which are evil, that is, say they, such as are scandalous in Life and Doctrine. Thus their Zealis commen∣ded here in the Evercise of Ecclesiastical Disci∣pline. So that the aforesaid Objection, That none of the seven Churches of Asia, were commanded in their Epistles to sepa∣rate themselves from any of those Persons, which the Holy Ghost charged with evil, is invalid. And considering also, that his si∣lence may be improved (if we give ear to such a groundless Argument) for holding Communion with grosser as well as lesser Sins; we have Reason to believe, that some of those Churches and Christians, that were concerned in those Epistles (from the Authority of some other part of the Holy Scriptures) did separate themselves from those offenders, that by the Laws of Christ they were not to bear in their Communion. And that those Churches, who suffered themselves to be polluted, through the neglect of their Duty in bearing with those
evils they should have purged out, did thereby bring themselves under the anger and displeasure of God for it, as appears in their Epistles. II. Object. Is from Phil. 3.15, 16. Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus mind∣ed: and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you. Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same Rule, let us mind the same Thing. That these Words give no allowance for a∣ny to hold a corrupt Communion, is very plain, because the Apostle is not here argu∣ing to prove the Resurrection of the Dead, or any fundamental Article of our Faith, or on any essential part of Divine Worship, or of such practical Obedience, as that the failure thereof is to be noted as disorderly walking: But he is Treating in the pre∣ceding Verses, that he had not attained, but was following after the Resurrection-state of Perfection, and of his pressing to∣wards the Mark, for the Prize of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus; and then it follows, Let us therefore, as many as be per∣fect, be thus minded: and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this un∣to you. As if he should fay, Let us there∣fore, as many as be [perfect] that is,1 Cor. 3.1. 1 Joh. 2.14. Heb. 5.12, 13, 14. 1 Cor. 2.6. as are not [babes] in Christ, that have need of [Milk] but are [strong Men] of [full Age] [skilful] in the Word of Righte∣ousness, who by Reason of use have their Senses exercised to discern both good and evil. Per∣fect,2 Tim. 3.17. Col. 4.12. Jam. 3.2. Eph. 3.18, 19.
throughly surnished unto all good Works. Perfect and compleat in all the Will of God. To be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and heighth; and to know the Love of Christ, which passeth Knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fulness of God. Now consider, that as we cannot know that which passeth Knowledge, but as the Apostle saith, we know in part,1 Cor. 13.12. and as none but Christ was ever filled with all the fulness of the Perfe∣ction of God; but of the Knowledge of his Will, and Love to us in all its parts ne∣cessary to a Holy Life of Faith, the true Worship of God and Eternal Life: So if any came short of this kind of Perfection, the Apostle told them, God should reveal even this unto them. And therefore the Text does not any ways prohibit a Sepa∣ration from such aforesaid Errours, that are noted in Holy Writ, as disorders in Manners, Doctrine or Worship. But it containeth a comfortable Promise to those that are rather free from them; that tho' they are weak in Faith, and Babes in the Knowledge of Christ, yet sincerely mind∣ing the some things which according to Rule they have attained to, and labouring to grow in Grace,2 Pet. 3.18. and in the Knowledge of Christ, they shall have in due Season a more full discovery of that perfect Love,1 Joh. 4.12, 18. which casteth out fear, and of the Will of God in the Revelation of the Gospel, and shall be built up in their most Holy Faith
from a babe-like-state to a perfect Man in Christ Jesus, in some Scripture Sense. So that there is nothing in the Text, that im∣plieth a Prohibition of Separation in the aforesaid Cases of corrupt Manners, Erro∣neous, Doctrine, false Worship, or irre∣gular Administrations of Gospel Ordinan∣ces. III. Object. Is from, 1 Pet. 4.8. and Math. 18.21, 22. And above all things have fervent Charity among your selves: for Charity shall cover a Multitude of Sins. And Peter said, Lord, How oft shall my Brother Sin a∣gainst me; and I forgive him? till seven times? Jesus said unto him, I say not unto thee; until seven times: but, until seventy times seven; from which Scriptures, some may think that Christians should bear with Sins in Communion with one another, and cover them all in Love. Answer, Our Lord himself shews plainly us, what is meant by those Scriptures, Luke 17.3. Take heed to your selves: If thy Bro∣ther trespass against thee, rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive him. And if he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee, saying, I repent, thou shalt forgive him. From whence it appears, 1. That we are to rebuke our Brother for his Trespass. 2. To forgive him, but mind it well, it must be if he re∣turn and repenteth; he must turn again as well as say he repenteth; and so tho' Charity should cover a multitude of Sins,
that are turned from and repented of, yet it should cover none from the Church which ought to come under her Cognizance, for our Charity should consist with our Obedi∣ence to the Procepts of Christ. IV. Object. It is said, Rebuke not an Elder, and therefore there should be a difference between dealing with an Elder of a Church and a private Member, for Sin. Answer,1 Tim. 4.12. The Apostle Paul in this Epistle to Timothy, saith, Let no Man despise thy Youth. And in Chap. 5.1, 2. he exhorteth him saying, Rebuke not an Elder, but intreat him as a Father, and the younger Men as Bre∣thren; the Elder Women as Mothers, the younger as Sisters with all Purity. And Chap. 3.14, 15. These things write I unto thee, — that thou mayest know how thou oughtest to be∣have thy self in the House of God. In these Scriptures the Apostle instructed Timothy, that young Servant of Christ, and in him others, how they should behave themselves, in reproving not only Elders, but younger Brethren and Sisters; that as an Elder Bi∣shop or Pastour, which is the same in Of∣fice,Tir. 1.7. should not be [soon angry] so Timothy, and others should not in an angry Spirit, rebuke either Elders or younger Brethren and Sisters, but rather reprove them by in∣treaties. It's true, it's also said, Let the Elders that Rule well, be counted worthy of dou∣ble Honour: But yet by Sin, they may lose and justly forfeit their double and single Honour too;Ver. 19.20, 21. for its said, Against an Elder
receive not an. Accusation, but before (or as it is in our Margin under) two or three wit∣nesses. Them that Sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear: I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect An∣gels, that thou observe these things without pre∣ferring one before another, doing nothing by par∣tiality. So that it seems to be implyed, that the Christians in those Primitive times were so zealous to preserve the Reputation of the Gospel-Ministry, and the Purity of their Communion; as that they were ready to receive an Accusation against an Elder sooner, and on lesser evidence than against a private Member; insomuch as the Apo∣stle thought it needful, to charge them not to receive an Accusation against an Elder, under the legal Evidence of two or three Witnesses. Moreover, we see how strictly the Apostle charged Timothy, that he should not use partiality in any Case of Sin, to pre∣fer one before another, whether Elders (as there were sometimes several in one Church) or private Members;Tit. 1.5. Act. 20.17. Gal. 2.11, 14. but them that sinned should be rebuked before all, i. e. those whose Sins could not be privately covered for want of their Repentance, they who∣ever they were should be rebuked before all, viz. so as the rebuke should reach as openly as the Sins were known, and that others might also fear. And therefore, there is not the least Reason from Scrip∣ture, for any to imagine that an Elders Sin should be more favourably dealt with
than a private Members, or that there is a different Rule for judging of them; but that the Precepts of Christ for purging out the Leaven of Unrighteousness, are to all a∣like;Eph. 6.9. Col. 3.25. Lev. 10.1, 2. Deut. 1.17. for as the Lord respecteth no Mans Person, no not for Office-sake: So he hath commanded us, saying, Ye shall not respect Persons in Judgment. V. Object. We ought not to leave a Church, till Christ be departed from it. Answer 1. If this be true, then no Bapti∣zed Congregation should receive a Member from our Brethrens Communion of the In∣dependant Churches: For who can say that Christ hath left them, so as not to succeed their Ministry with true Conversion of Souls, and so as not to give something of his gracious presence to them and others, that are sound in the fundamental Princi∣ples to Salvation; who truly fear the Lord and sincerely obey him according to their Light, tho' the Mist of Mens Traditions may not be clearly wiped from off their Eyes. I think none can be so uncharitable and censorious as to affirm it: But yet we may safely say, the more we come up in our Obedience to the perfect Rule of Christ, the greater our Peace and Comfort shall be, and the more or the presence of God, we shall enjoy in the gracious discoveries of his Eternal Love unto our Souls. 2. If Christ hath not left our aforesaid Brethren (and others that are not of our Communion) without some gracious Ma∣nifestations
of his Presence among them. And if therefore, according to the Obje∣ction, their Members ought not to leave their Churches, do not then those Baptists which plead this Argument for a mixed Com∣munion among themselves, and yet receive the Members of those Independant Church∣es, condemn themselves thereby; as Coun∣tenancers, Abetters and Receivers of disor∣derly Persons, and as such, who according to this Objection, have little or nothing more to say for their Separation, and keep∣ing up a distinct Church-state from them, then for a private and worldly Interest. And therefore away with such Pretensions for they are but a shame to us. 3. If we ought not to leave a Church, 'till Christ is departed from it, it must be meant, either of a partial or total depar∣ture: If it be understood of Christ's Partial departing from a Church, we must either allow it lawful for a Member to leave his present Communion, when Christ hath in part forsaken that Church, so as for their Declension of Spirit they are suffered to fall into such corrupt Manners, erroneous Do∣ctrine, false Worship, or irregular Practi∣ces, which the Lord hath commanded to be purged out from among them; or else that the Church it self has Power to prescribe Limits of Communion, according as she shall judge, (without regard to the written Pre∣cepts of Christ) that his presence doth bound it. But as I believe, no Baptized Churches will
open their Mouths in favour of such an ab∣solute Authority within themselves, for that we own the Scriptures to be our Rule; so it cannot be denied, but that it is lawful for Members to remove their Communion to a Church which is more Pure, for the same causes; as a Church should withdraw their Communion from a single Member, if for any cause at all. But if they mean, that we should not separate from a Church, till Christ is wholly departed from it; then it may be also argued, that a Church should not withdraw their Communion from a Member, till Christ be wholly departed from him. Besides, if a single Member should not depart from a Church, till Christ be wholly departed from it, then the Que∣stion is, Whether Christ may be said total∣ly to depart from a Church, till at least it is manifest, that she is absolutely apostati∣zed in her Spirit from some one Article of our Christian Faith, which is essential to Salvation; and if till then it be unlawful for single Persons to separate their Com∣munion from a Church of Christ, than if their Church worshippeth God in a false manner, so it be not in fundamentals of Salvation, and maketh void a Command∣ment of God through Mens Traditions, and are corrupted in their Morals, they must still hold their Communion with such a People; and it's hard to tell how far a Church may be guilty of these Evils, and not loose the Essentials to Salvation. But
if such a corrupt Communion ought to be held, rather than a Persons Separation from it should be allowed lawful, the conse∣quents of it naturally tends to the over∣throw and Extirpation of our Baptized Churches; for then what Obligation of Conscience is there for Baptized Believers to set up by themselves such a Church-state, which is despised and rendred obnoxious to many Christians, and which is accompanied with divers discouragements and outward disadvantages more than others. Besides, unless it be lawful for a Member, or the smaller number of a Church, to separate from their corrupt Communion, many Christians cannot reform nor worship God with the Church, or in the Administrati∣on of all Gospel-Ordinances, according to their Consciences; for generally Reformers are the fewest number, and if these should continue in their irregular Communion, their Light will be hid and smoothered in the croud of corrupt Professors, and rather put under a Bushel than on a Gospel Can∣dlestick,Mat. 5.14, 15, 16. to shine more clearly to those that are round about them. VI. Object. We are (say some Persons) for Charity and Union, and therefore we are for Communion at the Lord's Table with Christians, as such: If we believe them to be but real Christians, we ought to hold our Communion with them. Answer 1. To our Brethren of the Con∣gregational or Independant Churches of
whom some have argued with me after the Nature of this Objection, as if we were too strait in our Charity, for not holding Com∣munion with them. To whom I have this to say: 1. That I think we may fairly ga∣ther from what they have published (with their Confession of Faith) of the Instituti∣on and Order of Churches, that they do not admit any unbaptized Christians to their Communion at the Lord's Table, for in Article the seventh, speaking of a particular Church gathered and compleated according to the Mind of Christ. In Article the eighth, they say, The Members of those Church∣es are Saints by Calling, visibly manifest∣ing and evidencing — their Obedience unto that call of Christ, who being fur∣ther known to each other by their Con∣fession of the Faith, wrought in them by the Power of God — do willingly Con∣sent to walk together, according to the appointment of Christ, giving up them∣selves to the Lord, and to one another, by the Will of God, in professed Subjecti∣on to the Ordinances of the Gospel. So then, if the Members of a compleat Church do willingly consent to walk together in professed Subjection to the Ordinances of the Gospel, none that do not subject them∣selves to the Ordinance of Baptism in their Sence can be orderly admitted by them, as compleatly quallified to their full Commu∣nion; and so if they will not hold Commu∣nion with such unbaptized Persons, they do
not hold it, as some of them pretend, with Christians meerly as such; but only with such Christians, which are qualified with Water-Baptism to receive the Lords Sup∣per. But 2. If they own, that our baptizing Per∣sons on Confession of Faith, by way of dip∣ping, is also right Baptism according to Go∣spel-Rule: and so for this Reason, they can freely hold their Communion with us. Yet this is no Corrector, that their Charity is more universal then ours, because then they receive us not meerly on the account of their Charity, but as Christians sitly qualified with Water-Baptism. But the Case is dif∣ferent, respecting us, for seeing we deny their Infant-sprinkling to be true Baptism, or to be of God; and so they being to us as unbaptized Persons; our having sull Com∣munion with them, would be not only con∣trary to the Light of our own Consciences, but witnessed against by their practice of sprinkling for Baptism, as a qualification to full Communion. And therefore, we have equal Reason to say, that our refu∣sing Church-Communion with them, is not for want of Charity towards them as Chri∣stians, any more then it is for want of it in themselves to other Christians, that are not sprinkled or any ways baptized; if they refuse Communion with them, as some have done in their private Conference, ac∣cording to what is gathered as their Mind in Print before. So that I see no Reason,
why our Brethren should in the least be of∣fended at us, for keeping our selves from their Communion, when otherwise, so far as I can perceive, their Practice, as well as our own Consciences would condemn us for so doing. 3. Our aforesaid Brethren of the Inde∣pendant Churches (however some of their Members have in their private Con∣verse reflected on us) have fairly granted,See their 28 Article of the Insti∣tution of Churches at the end of the Congre∣gational Confession of Faith. that a Person where he cannot continue in any Church without his Sin, may depart from the Communion of one Church to another. For they say, Persons that are joined in Church-fellowship, ought not lightly or without just cause to withdraw themselves from the Communion of the Church whereunto they are so joined: Nevertheless, where any Person cannot continue in any Church without his Sin, either for want of the Administration of any Ordinances instituted by Christ, or by his being deprived of his due Privi∣ledges, or compelled to any thing in Pra∣ctice not warranted by the Word, or in case of Persecution, or upon the account of Conveniency of Habitation, he con∣sulting with the Church, or the Officer, or Officers thereof, may peaceably de∣part from the Communion of the Church wherewith he hath so walked, to join himself with some other Church, where he may enjoy the Ordinances in the Pu∣rity of the same, for his Edification and Consolation.
Now seeing they grant, that we may leave our Communion with a Church, to join our selves with some other Church, where we may enjoy the Ordinances in the Purity of the same; then none of them ought to blame us, for not holding our full Communion with them; as if they were the standard of Truth, who we believe are not in the compleat Order and true Admi∣nistration of all Gospel Ordinances. See∣ing we walk by their Rule of Communion according to our Consciences, tho' we have not the same Light to walk with them. 2. For any of our Baptized Brethren to plead for mixed Communion, from the Obligation of universal Charity, for Chri∣stians as they are such, does rather betray their want of real Love;Gal. 5.22. 1 Joh. 4.19. for that is a Fruit of the Holy Spirit, flowing first from the Faith we have in the Love of God to us; which is the cause of Love in us to him,1 Joh. 5.1. and so to our Brethren which are begotten of him; and then our universal Love to Chri∣stians depending on our Love to God, it must consist with sincere Obedience to his Will, so far as we are inlightned. For this is the Love of God,Joh. 14.21, 23. 1 Joh. 5.2, 3. that we keep his Command∣ments; and his Commandments are not grievous. And by this we know that we Love the Children of God, when we Love God and keep his Com∣mandments. And therefore, whatsoever Love is pretended, which is inconsistent with sin∣cere Obedience to Christ, 'tis rather to be suspected than counted real. But in Charity I
must conclude, it is not for want of Love to the Institutions of Christ, but for want of Light that you plead for Communion at the Lords Table with unbaptized Christi∣ans. However you do thereby virtually de∣ny your own Baptism to be essentially ne∣cessary to a regular Gospel-Church, and make void that Holy Ordinance of Christ, which in Obedience to him you have subje∣cted to. Besides, why may you not then al∣so say, that you ought in Charity to Chri∣stians, meerly as such, (altho' they be not yet baptized,) to call any gifted Christian to administer the Ordinances of Preaching, Prayer, and breaking Bread in the Church; and in Charity to those Members that walk disorderly, and break the Commandments of Christ, forbear the Execution of his Or∣dinance of withdrawing your Church-Com∣munion from them, because you believe them still to be real Christians; as if we could not Love Mens Persons, unless we fa∣vour their Sins, and thereby perhaps through the neglect of our Duty to them, harden their Hearts therein: And so under the Notion of Christian Charity, the true Order of a Gospel-Church may be quite destroyed. VII. Object. But some may think, I open the door of the Church too wide, and give too great incouragement for Persons to wan∣der from Church to Church, or to leave their present Communion to imbody them∣selves into a distinct Church-state. Answer 1. The same causes as will justi∣fie
a single Persons removing his Commu∣nion to another Church, will also justisie a Parties Separation to sit down by them∣selves in a Church-state; otherwise there is no erecting of Reformed Churches to be allowed, where there was none before: Which if it be there lawful to reform, as surely it cannot be denied, there is nei∣ther Scripture nor Reason, as I can find, to debar a reforming party from settling them∣selves in the Order of a Regular Gospel-Church, where there is one already, if they find it expedient for them. But 2. To prevent such misapprehensi∣ons of giving Church-members too great a Liberty. I shall here remind the Reader, that if he duely considers, what I have said in this small Discourse, he will not find the least al∣lowance for Persons to remove their Com∣munion out of Novelty, or meerly for their Pleasures-sake, or for Trivial Matters and Pretences; for herein the Church is bound (in faithfulness to Christ, and the Souls that are under her special care) to use the means directed to in the Scripture, for pre∣serving her mutual Peace and Welfare. But for real Conscience-sake, Separation should be allowed to keep themselves pure from corrupt and sinful Manners, Erroneous Do∣ctrines in essentials to Salvation, and from false Worship and irregular Ordinances; and unless there be a Moral Necessity, or a real Expediency for it, no Separation else is lawful; for every Member is (or should
be) in Covenant with the Church, to walk in the ways of the Lord together with them. But yet when a Church of Christ shall alter in any part of their Faith or Practice essential to a regular Church, the Members thereof are free from their former Cove∣nant: Not simply, because the Church has broken the Conditions of it; (for that were to acknowledge her Members to be under an absolute tye, while she makes no Alteration of her Faith and Practice.) For as none of our Churches in Covenanting with their Members, by giving them the right hand of fellowship, does intend thereby ab∣solutely to bind themselves from any future Alteration of their Faith or Practice, if in Conscience they should be otherwise inform∣ed; so the like Liberty is but equitable for the Members to have, and therefore, as there is the same Reason for it, so it ought to be equally taken for granted in their Co∣venanting with the Church, that each Member in Covenant hath an equal Reser∣vation of Liberty of Conscience to the Church, and neither side ought to impose on each other, for that is a making them∣selves the perfect standard of Religion, like the Church of Rome. 3.2 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3. The Apostle Peter exhorteth the El∣ders to take the oversight of the Flock, Not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy Lu∣cre, but of a ready Mind. [Neither as be∣ing Lords over Gods Heritage, but being en∣samples to the Flock.] And Paul saith, That
to spare you, I came not as yet unto Corinth.2 Cor. 1.23, 24. 1 Tim. 6.2, 5. 2 Tim. 2.22. Chap. 3.5. Not for that we have Dominion over your Faith, but are helpers of your Joy. And Timothy was commanded as a single Person, to with∣draw himself from those Professors of Re∣ligion, that were corrupt in Doctrine. Now if the Apostles, who were the in∣fallible Pen-men of sacred Scripture, dis∣claimed Lordship over the Saints, and Do∣minion over their Faith, Why should any hold such Principles, as will naturally as∣sume such a regal Power over the Consci∣ences of their Brethren, as tendeth to en∣thral them in divers troubles; when they go about to remove their Communion from them for Conscience-sake, considering al∣so they themselves are but lately delivered from the Yoak of Persecution? And for such who make it their frequent Practice to receive Members, that remove for Consci∣ence-sake from other Congregations (that are true Churches of Christ, as to their vi∣sible Matter, and part of their Form,) to hold such Principles as will deny their own Members Liberty of Conscience, without their Censures, Snares or Inthralments to frighten their weak Brethren to continue in their Communion against the Light which they have received, is consequently assu∣ming such an Arbitrary Dominion over their Faith and Consciences which neither God nor Nature hath given to them, and is not Consonant to the Law, for doing to others as they would have others do to them in the
like Case. And to speak the plain Truth of such a Principle and Practice, it is no better then claiming a right of Impositi∣on on the Consciences of their Brethren, and a holding fast all they have, and all they can so get right or wrong. And therefore seeing, the Light of Scrip∣ture and Reason with common Equity, is repugnant to such an Arbitrary Dominion over the Faith and Consciences of the Saints, and that this Principle of denying a single Member his Liberty of Communion accord∣ing to his Light, is also a bar to Religious Reformation: I conceive none should go about to hinder a single Persons removing from them for Conscience-sake any other ways, than by Arguments from the Scrip∣tures for the Regularity of their Commu∣nion; and if herein they cannot satisfie his Mind, I believe the Church should do no more, then (if they please) to enter him in their Book departed from them, for the cause for which he leaveth them, for as much as his Principles are not opposite to any of their Essentials of Communion. And in Case they were, yet if he holdeth no Error in fundamentals to Salvation, it better suits with the Grace of Love and universal Cha∣rity to one another, to let him peaceably remove his Communion, than by a harsh and sower Spirit, to widen the Differences that are between Saints and Saints, and to fright a weak and tender Conscience with the Censure of a Church; which if it be not
according to Christs Institutions, it is nei∣ther bound in Heaven, nor should it be binding on our Consciences. But if a single Member should alter in his Faith or Pra∣ctice, from any of his Church Essentials of Communion, and yet seek to continue in the same Church, then to prevent the spreading of his Leaven to the Pollution of the Body, or their being defiled with his Errour by Participation in full Communion with him, they have ground on Non-repen∣tance to withdraw from him; and if he persisteth in such an Errour, to purge him out from their Communion. But to con∣clude the aforesaid Objection: What spiritual Comfort can any have in Church-Communion, where there is not an agree∣ment in the Essentials thereof? doth not the sweetest Communion depend on the great∣est Union in Faith and Practice? why then should any Christians be kept in Bondage, and be deprived of the chiefest ends of Church-Communion, which are to glorifie God in the purest worship they can attain to the Knowledge and Practice of, and to enjoy the comfortable Communion of Saints in the Unity of Faith and of the Spirit, which is the bond of Peace? Secondly, I shall present you with a parti∣cular instance of the confused Matter which is already Printed among us, in Mr. Keaches Book, intitled the Breach Repaired, and of several Queries made upon it in my Reply to him, with some Additions to them. To
proceed therefore, I shall premise some par∣ticular things in Mr. Keaches Gold Refined, or Treatise of Baptism, Page 181, 182. where he saith thus, Let me conclude all with one Use of Caution to my Brethren, that are Baptized as Believers, and yet take Liberty to walk in Communion with such Churches as dissent from them, in respect of this Ordinance, and sprinkle Babes. I am more concerned about you than any other People, because you seem to pull down with one Hand that which you build with the other — ought you not to follow the best and highest Reforma∣tion, and clearest discovery of God, and to be in the most perfect and compleat Order of the Gospel, you are able to arrive to the Knowledge of — is not Truth and Righteousness to be joined with Peace and Love? Nay, and doth not my Love run out to our Brethren, in a cleaner Chan∣nel than yours. And in his Treatise of Laying on of Hands, Page 99. he hath these Words. Can we comfortably have Com∣munion with such that oppose a Holy O∣racle, or Command of God? — Ought not Communion to flow from Christian Union, especially in all fundamental Prin∣ciples of Church-Constitution? Ought we not in these things to be agreed, be∣fore we can in an orderly way sit down together? But notwithstanding Mr. Benjamin Keach thus refuseth Communion with those that
are not under Believers-Baptism,See my Ep. to my Reply to Mr. Keach's Breach Re∣paired, p. 10, &c. and lay∣ing on of Hands, yet in his general Epistle to his (pretended) Answer to my Appen∣dix, Page 9. he saith; We do not say our dissatisfied Brethren shall sing with us, or we will have no fellowship with them: No, God forbid we should impose on their Consciences: We do not look up∣on Singing, &c. an Essential of Commu∣nion; it is not for the being, but for the Comfort and well being of the Church. To which I there Reply to Mr. Keach, Let me ask you in your own Words,See his darkness, &c. Van∣quished or Truth in its Primitive Purity, p. 96. Why should you have a greater esteem for one than for ano∣ther Institution? If it be as you say, that your way of Singing is a Gospel-Ordinance, for the Practice of the Church: Is there any Church Ordinance of Divine Worship, that is not essential to her orderly being, as well as for her Comfort and well Being? Who gave you Power to dispence with any one Ordinance more than others? And in Page 13. of my Epistle, I farther tell Mr. Keach, that there are divers things that I and others cannot reconcile to the Word of God, and his confused Principles of Com∣munion, some of which I offer to his Con∣sideration by way of Query. 1. Whether it be lawful for a Christian to withdraw (or remove) his Communi∣on at the Lords Table, from a Church that practiseth any one Ordinance of Divine Worship, or of Church-Constitution, in a false Manner, to join with a Church that
is more pure? And whether it is his Duty, if enlightned therein, so to do? 2. Whether there is any Liberty given in the Word of God, for a Christian to have Communion with a Church that pra∣ctiseth any one Ordinance of Gospel-Wor∣ship, or of Church-Constitution, in a false Manner, more than of any other such Or∣dinances so performed? and if there be, which it is, or which they are, and where the allowance is given? 3. Whether thanking and praising of God, be as much an Ordinance, and of as high a Nature, as Prayer to him? 4. Whether [the Mode of Singing] the Praises of God, be also as much an Ordi∣nance, and of as high a Nature, as Prayer? 5. Why it is not as unlawful to have Communion with a Church that practiseth Singing the Praises of God in a false Man∣ner, as with a Church that performeth Prayer in a false Manner? 6. Seeing you have made a Common Praise-Book (so I call it) wherein you say is con∣tained some hundred of Sacred Hymns, out of which as I hear, is sometimes read and sang an Hymn in your Congregation for publick Worship: So if another Ministring Brother of your own or of another Congregation, in full Communion with you at the Lords Table, should also make prestinted set Forms of Prayer, and read them, or say them in the Church for publick Worship; I Query, Whether you would nevertheless hold and
continue your full Communion with such a Person or Church as so useth such humane prestinted Forms of Prayer? 7. Whether it be not a worshipping of God in a false Manner, and so unlawful, and a Sin for any of our Brethren alone by them∣selves, to pray in their own or anothers set humane prestinted form of Words, and if it can be proved against him, that he u∣seth such private Prayers; Whether the Church should still hold their full Communi∣on with him, without Repentance for it? 8. Whether it be not unlawful for any of our Churches to hold full Communion with a Brother at the Lords Table, who some∣times useth to pray with another different People, in a false Manner, in a set humane prestinted form of Words; and if this be unlawful, whether it is not equally un∣lawful for a Church to hold such Communion with a Brother, who tho' he cannot practice Singing the Praises of God in as false a Manner in his own Church, yet he sometimes as false∣ly singeth in other Congregations? 9. Whether [the Mode of Singing] an Hymn is a piece of Worship, Essential to the Regular and Compleat Administration of the Lords Supper? If our Singers deny this, why do so many of them make such a stir about it, and commend that practice of Singing,See the Re∣ply to Mr. Steed's E∣pist. pag. 8.40, 41, 45, 47, 49. as they boldly say, from the Example of Christ and his Disciples, as a perfect Pattern and Rule for us to follow? And if they be∣lieve in their Consciences, that [the Mode
of Singing] an Hymn is so Essential to that Ordinance; How can any of those Gospel-Ministers, as I have heard say, administer the Lords Supper without it, and contrary to the Light of their own Consciences di∣spense with that which belongs, as they be∣lieve, to Christs Ordinance, as if they choose to please Men rather than God in his Wor∣ship? I have added the more Queries, because such stating of the matter divers ways, will lay a greater Necessity on any who may pre∣tend to answer them, either to discover the Discord and Confusion of their Principles of Communion, and the natural tendency of them, or to unmasque the farther designs of those that are apostatizing from the true Worship of God. Thirdly, I shall here humbly present my Ad∣vice to some of our Baptized Churches. And 1. To those whose sixed Pastours and Mi∣nisters differ from their Churches in some Principles, Essential either to the true Man∣ner of praising God in publick Worship, or to the Regular Constitution of a Gospel-Church, my humble Advice to you, is. That notwithstanding, if they rightly administer all Gospel-Ordinances, according to the Prin∣ciples of their Churches, for the present ne∣cessity, you continue as you are: And as their Office is to watch over you in the Lord,Heb. 13.17. 1 Thes. 5.12. so your Duty is to obey them so far as they rule by the Laws of Christ; and to continue your Affections, and abound in
Love to them and all the Saints. But yet if they put such different and erroneous Principles in practice, and thereby inter∣rupt the pure Communion of their Churches, contrary to their Faith and settled Order, or go about to disturb your Peace with any of them; then as ye are bound to follow your Pastours and Ministers, only so far as they are followers of Christ and his Apo∣stles,1 Cor. 11.1. Phil. 3.17. so it is your Duty to use all Diligence to preserve the Peace and right Constituti∣on of your Churches against their Innovati∣ons; and rather than to have your Commu∣nion corrupted by them, you are to part with them and all things else, tho' never so near and dear to you. 2. To those Churches which are destitute of a settled Pastour: I shall offer this to your serious Consideration, That it is a weak Ima∣gination to think that honest and sincere hearted Ministers, tho' naturally of a mild and peaceable Temper, will not labour to promote the practice of those things in their Churches, which they believe to be the Will of God, for if they are faithful Men they will do it in Obedience to Christs Com∣mission; wherein they are required to teach all Nations whatsoever he hath commanded them.Math. 28.20. And therefore if you expect that such a Minister as you design to call to set∣tle with you, will not for the sake of some in the Church who differ from him, declare and promote according to his Conscience, the practice of all things which God re∣quires,
you have equal Reason to ex∣pect that for the sake of those Persons, he will not be faithful to his Principles; and then how can any think he will be faithful to his Church, or any thing else he takes in hand, any farther than it suits with his pri∣vate interest; so that whatever Love, Peace and Union, a Church may propose to them∣selves, under the care of such a fixed Pa∣stour as differs in his Principles from it, in any Essentials of a Regular Church. viz. Ei∣ther in Doctrinals to Salvation, Practicals in Divine Worship, or in Administrations of Gospel-Ordinances, such a Church does on∣ly delude themselves with an Expectation of that which they lay a Foundation to de∣stroy; for if such a Pastour be faithful to his Principles (it being irrational to con∣ceive that a whole Church will be for alter∣ing their former Settlement of Communion) they will then find that his differing Princi∣ples will breed Division among them, and so destroy the bond of Peace and Love, which they promised to themselves from the peaceable Temper of such a Pastour: And instead thereof, those faithful Members that are still for their former Settlement, may fall into a Labyrinth of Troubles; and if they are the smaller part of the Church, the others will be apt to count them the disturbers of its Peace; and perhaps when it is too late to recover the Truth and Purity of Gospel-Worship and Communion that was once among them, they will mourn un∣der
their Troubles and Temptations, and for their weakness in choosing or accepting of such a Pastour, as thereby to betray the Trust committed to them by Jesus Christ, so far as to loose of those things he hath wrought among them, insomuch as respect∣ing their publick Trust of the Gospel,2 John 8. as Members of a visible Church of Christ, they will come so short of holding fast that which they have received,Rev. 3.11. that no Man take their Crown, as that they cannot give so good an account of their Stewardship, as that evil Servant did,Math. 25, 25, 26. who rendred again what he had received of his Lord. Therefore knowing the aptness of many People to follow others Examples, from their Affections to them, more than from the real Judgment and Understanding they have of their Principles; and considering the ex∣perience some have had of the restless en∣deavours of their Ministers, to leaven their Churches with those Principles wherein they differ from them; and the Obligation of Conscience they are under, according to their Light, to declare the whole Counsel of God to the People under their care;Acts 20.26, 27. I conclude it highly concerns those Churches that have yet their choice to make for the Ministration of Gospel-Ordinances, to seek for such Persons as are one with them in the Unity of the Faith, and of the Know∣ledge of Gospel-Institutions. For whatso∣ever Affections you may have to any Person, yet above all things you ought to be faith∣ful
to the Truth, as ye have received it in your Consciences, and not by any means to be led aside to betray the Purity of the Gospel committed to your Trust, so far as to put∣it into the Power of any Person to be conti∣nually working (perhaps while you and o∣thers are lull'd asleep in the pretended Bed of Charity) the overthrow and confusion of any essential part of the Religion you profess. Besides, a Pastour should be qua∣lified, according to the Word of God, which saith, A Bishop must be blameless, as the Steward of God — holding fast the faith∣ful Word, as he hath been taught, that he may be able by sound Doctrine, both to exhort and to convince the gain-sayers.Tit. 1.7, 9, &c. For there are many unruly, and vain-talkers, and Deceivers, espe∣cially they of the Circumcision: Whose Mouths must be stopped. Now consider, that one great qualification of an Elder, is to be able to stop the Mouths of Gain-sayers. And therefore none who differ from their Church in any essential Principles of her Communi∣on, are fit for the Office of an Elder in it, for such a one in the Matters of difference, is principled rather to gain-say the Church, than other Persons that oppose the Faith or Practice of it. Moreover the Zeal of others, which are for the common way of Singing, should pro∣voke us to promote the pure Interest of Christ among our Churches, for they have used di∣ligence to improve the Benesit of the pub∣lick Fund, for Learning of such young Bre∣thren
the Knowledge of the Tongues, the better to sit them for the Gospel Ministry; who have sucked in that apostatizing Prin∣ciple of Singing, and I have been told that some of them have gone to School to learn it by Art in and about Bristol, or the We∣stern parts of this Land, and if I am not misinformed, there were eight in number for common set form singing, two of which were advanced by more private means, then the publick Fund; and Mr. Keach has pleaded so much for Art in Divine Worship,See his Book inti∣tled, the Breach Re∣paired in Gods Wor∣ship, Page 183, 184. that if the Spirit of the Lord does not lift up a spiritual standard against it, we may fear the increase of Artificial Worship in our Churches; for he saith, There is I must 'tell you, an Art in speaking; and no Man but has need to learn, and be instru∣cted to speak as he ought — especially when he speaks about Divine Things. — Also there is an Art in preaching; and all young Men when they begin to take upon them that work, need Instruction how to handle a Doctrine. And (saith he) so I may say in Praying too. So that we see, how naturally the Art of singing, which he is there pleading for, does draw Men in to plead for an Art in Praying too. And as I have said in my Reply to him,See my Book, Page 18. is not this a forward step (for him or others that may (if the Lord of his Mercy does not pre∣vent) hereafter build upon this Foundati∣on,) to bring into use a prestinted Form of Prayer for Gospel-Worship; for if Nature
and Grace may and ought to be improved by Art, to express the Matter of our Pray∣ers to God; what Art can he mean, or can any others think is best for Prayer, than to use an Artificial Form of Words? I menti∣on these things to shew the danger that we are in of loosing the true spiritual Worship of God, by the apostatizing of some in our Profession to the Errour of prestinted Forms of Singing. And if we do not incourage such gracious Brethren, as may be found among us better principled (whether with or without the Knowldge of other Tongues) to improve their Gifts, which through the Blessing of God may be fit for the pub∣lick Service of our Churches, many of them are like to crumble away for want of Mini∣sters suitable to their Principles; and those others, which have been advanced to the Ministry by the publick Fund, will have the greater opportunity through the necessities of our Churches to infect our Profession with their Error of common set form Sing∣ing (and I fear with mixed Communion too, which seem like twins to go hand in hand together.) As for their [Mode] of of Singing, I have largely shewed, that which was never answered by any of them, and plainly proved in my Reply to Mr. Benjamin Keaches Book of Singing, Intitled the Breach Repaired, &c. That we have no Command nor Example, neither under the Law, nor under the Gospel for the Mi∣nisters, and all the People to sing with u∣nited
Voices together in the settled worship of God in his Church. And that his com∣mon way of Singing, is not that Mode of spiritual singing which was used in the A∣postles time, nor is it the natural, but an Artificial Mode of Worship: And also that we have not the least ground to conclude, that Christ and his Disciples at or after the Lords Supper did sing the Hymn or Praise, which they gave to God, for those Texts, Math. 26.30. Mark 14.26. and Acts 16.25. are not rightly translated in our last Bibles, which are witnessed against by many of our old English Bibles, and many learned Au∣thours, as I have abundantly shewed in my a∣foresaid Reply to Mr. Keach. But to re∣turn. It is therefore high time for all that have any Love for the Truth and Purity of Gospel-worship, to awake out of sleep; for the necessities of many Churches call upon us earnestly to seek the Lord by Humilia∣tions, Fastings and Prayers; that he would graciously raise up Ministers, not only sound in the Faith, but in all their Principles of Divine Worship, in the Spirit of Love and Meekness. And tho' we may find some of our Ministers, and other Brethren, that are for the new Modelling of our Churches with their formal Worship, and mixed Commu∣nion to decline this Work with us, by Rea∣son their different Principles cannot join with our particular Requests relating there∣unto; yet this should in no wise hinder our People from flocking together, and crying
fervently to the Lord for the pourings forth of the Holy Spirit (according to his promise) to bear a lively Testimony against all un∣righteousness and false worship,Isa. 44.3, to 6. Ch. 59.21. Eph. 4.11, 12, 13. Isa. 59.19, 20, 21. Jer. 3.15. and to give us Pastours according to his heart, which shall feed his People with Knowledg and Understanding, even such as shall worship him in Spirit and Truth, without any mixture of humane Forms and meer Inventions of men. For if instead of sound Elders we should have only those for the publick ser∣vice of God that are for a piece of false wor∣ship and mixed communion, what else can be expected from new Converts and those who joyn themselves to our Churches, but that through Love and Affections to their Ministers they will suck in their Erroneous Principles, as sad Experience hath shewed, and so in time will overturn the former or∣der and settlement of our Churches, and put back that blessed Reformation which God has wrought among us, and which many pre∣cious Saints have suffered for, that the Puri∣ty of the Gospel (which some are now betray∣ing) might be handed down to future ages. Fourthly, I shall leave a few things to the serious consideration of those who have re∣ceived the manifestation of the special Grace of God in Christ to their souls, through faith which worketh by love, and yet are walk∣ing at large in neglect of his holy Ordinan∣ces, as if they were left to Christians liber∣ty to obey or reject them at their pleasures. Let me ask a few Questions for thee to an∣swer
in thine own Conscience,Rom. 2.15, 16. which shall either accuse or else excuse thee in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to the Gospel. Why art thou partial in Gods laws or in Christs institutions,Mal. 2.9. so as to pick and choose which of them thou wilt obey? Remember,Psal. 119.6. David saith, Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy Commandments. Wilt thou partake of the Benefit of the publick Prayers of the Saints, and of the Ministration of the Gospel of Christ in his Church, and not put to thy helping hand to support it in the World, and to convey it down to future ages? what had become of thy precious soul, and many thousands more, if our late Re∣formers had bin of thy Mind? how should the true worship of God have bin maintain∣ed, and how little preaching should we have in our present day, if Christians did not im∣body themselves into Societies to encourage the Gospel Ministers? for where can their light best appear if not on a Gospel Candle∣stick? No marvel, Soul, if thou hast not peace of Conscience and strength of Grace against the power of Sins and Temptations, if thy feet are not found in the ways of Christ, whose ways are ways of pleasantness,Prov. 3.17. Ch. 10.29. Isa. 64.5. and all his paths are peace and strength to the up∣right. There God has said he meets his people that remember him in his ways, and Christ has much intailed his gracious pre∣sence on the faithful obedience of his Saints. He that hath my Commandments,Joh. 14.21. and keepeth
them, he it is that loveth we: And he that lo∣veth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest my self to him. — If a man love me, he will keep my words: And my Father will love him; and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. And therefore the more obedient a Soul is, the more of Christs fulness he shall receive,John 1.16. and Grace for Grace. But 2. If thou standest off from Church-Communion, because thou thinkest thy self unworthy of it, or unmeet for it, or till thou hast a special inspiration to thrust thee forth in thy duty; my Answer is, that in this snare I was intangled my self for di∣vers years, but at last I was satisfied in my Conscience; that seeing I had true sa∣ving Faith and Light in Gospel Ordinances, my personal unworthiness through the in∣firmity of Nature was no sufficient Ground for me to neglect the Institutions of Christ, and that I could not rationally expect any extraordinary motions to do that which the Word of God did plainly express to be my Duty. Besides, for Christians to wait for a more than ordinary impulse of Spirit, to thrust them forth in their Duty, when clearly exprest in the Holy Scriptures, is thro' weak∣ness of Faith, a Tempting God to confirm his written Will by extraordinary Inspira∣tion, which is a Sin, Math. 4.7. Moreover, I shall farther remove this ob∣jection from 1 Cor. 11.27. Whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord un∣worthily,
shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord. This unworthiness cannot re∣spect our natural infirmities, for then the best of men would be excluded from that Ordi∣nance; but the unworthiness there mentio∣ned is described to us in the same Chapter to be, Divisions and Drunkeness,See ver. 18.20, 21, 22, 33. and such like Disorders as should not be suffered in a Gospel-Church, or that shew they de∣spise the Church of God. And therefore Christians having light in Gospel Ordinan∣ces, tho' they are but weak in Faith and Babes in Christ, and have not yet attained to the Faith of Assurance of their Election,2 Pet. 1.10. or to the clear witnessings of the Spirit of God with their Spirits,Rom. 8.16. that they are the Children of God, yet having the true Faith of cleaving to Christ with full purpose of heart, and of reliance on his death and me∣rits for Salvation and eternal life, those have a right to full Communion with the Church, at the Lords Table and we are bound to re∣ceive them,Rom. 14.1. but not to doubtful Disputati∣ons: But. If thou art one within the visible pale of the Church, and such a wonderful and hor∣rible thing is therein, or shall happen, as was in Israel, tho' in a different manner, the Prophets prophesied falsly,Jere. 5.31. and the Priests bear Rule by their means, and the people loved to have it so. As the Lord said to them, so will I say to thee, if then thou art of their Spirit, what wilt thou do in the end thereof, when the Lord shall visit for
these things? canst thou bear, yea like and plead for an Alteration in thy Church-Constitution, or in Gods worship, because thy Pastour will have it so. Take heed lest thou givest ground to say of thee as it was said to Israel:Isa. 3.12. Ch. 9.16. O my People, they which lead thee, cause thee to err, and destroy the way of thy paths. — and they that are led of them are destroyed.1 Cor. 10.22. Brethren, beware lest ye provoke, the Lord to Jealousy! are ye stronger than he?Deut. 12.32. hath he not said, what things soever I command you, observe to do it? Thou shalt not add thereto, nor diminish from it. And have we not divers instances of his sore Displeasure for breaking his Rule of Wor∣ship, as in Nadab and Abihu,Lev. 7.11, to 19. who for offe∣ring of strange fire, died before the Lord? And might not some have thought it a small matter to have eaten of the Peace or Thank-offering after the first day, or of the Vow-offering, if any of it had been left on the third day, but we see how great an offence it was to make so small an Addition to Gods Ordinance, as that it should not be accept∣ed, neither should it be imputed to him that offered it: It should be an Abomination, and that soul should bear his iniquity. Moreover, we read how the Lord smote above fifty thousand of the men of Beth-she-mesh for but looking into his Ark, and how Ʋzzah lost his life for touching the Ark of God,2 Sam. 6.6. 1 Sam. 6.19. 2 Chr. 26.16. because they sought him not after the due manner: And how Ʋzziah the King for medling with Gods Ordinance, and burning
incense before the Lord,1 Chr. 15.13. contrary to his re∣vealed Will, was smote with leprosy unto his dying Day. And Christ tells us,Mat. 159. that in vain they do worship him teaching for Do∣ctrines the Commandments of Men. There∣fore to the Law and to the Testimony:Isa. 8.20. If they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no light in them,Joh. 4.24. and let us keep the Commandments of God and worship him in Spirit and in Truth,1 Tim. 4 8. for Godliness is profita∣ble unto all things, having promise of the Life that now is, and of that which is to come. Postscript. AFter I had penned the preceeding Trea∣tise, meeting with some other Motives, I thought it necessary to add a brief Dis∣course on two particular Cases: The First to shew, that it is the Duty of Gospel-Ministers and all true Believers, in Order to Church-Communion, to subject themselves to the Or∣dinance of Water-Baptism. The Second is a∣gainst Excess in Apparel. And First, I shall premise some few things that are worth our Observation which I find in Mr. William Kif∣fins Book, Intitled A Sober Discourse of Right to Church-Communion: Where in his Epistle he saith, The sence I have of my own weak∣ness and inability, would have been a Bar to me to appear in this publick way, did I not
see a necessity lying upon me for the Truths sake, and the sakes of many, by reason of some that have lately risen up to weaken, if not make void that great Ordi∣nance of Baptism, by endeavouring to maintain, that all Persons that believe, altho' they never did, nor do practice the same, may partake of the Ordinance of the Lords Supper, and all other Gospel instituted Duties: A Notion, not only contrary to the primitive Pattern, but the constant Practice of all that ever prosessed the Christian Religion, or that own the Scriptures to be the Rule of Faith and Pra∣ctice. And speaking somewhat of the like nature in p. 3. he also saith, We shall therefore direct this Discourse to our dis∣senting Brethren, of the baptized way on∣ly. And in page 13, 14. he argueth, say∣ing, If unbaptized Persons may be admit∣ted to all Church Priviledges, does not such a Practice plainly suppose that it is unnecessary? — The Baptists (if once such a Belief prevails) would be easily tempted to lay aside that reproachful Pra∣ctice. — And challenge their Church Com∣munion by Vertue of their Faith only; and such as baptize Infants would be satis∣fied to discontinue the Practice, when once they are perswaded, that their Children may be regular Church-members without it; — and by consequence be in a likely condition to loose one of the Sa∣craments, which would easily make way
for the loss of the other, both having an equal sanction in Scripture; and the Ar∣guments that disanul the one, will destroy the other, and consequently all Ordinan∣ces, and Modes of Worship, and lastly, Re∣ligion it self. And in page 118. In answer to an Objection, he saith, This Objection supposes things very dangerous. As, that holiness without Baptism invests a right to other Ghurch-Ordinances, which is not to be supposed, for Christ the Lamb of God was holy in the highest de∣gree, and in him was found no sin, yet he was baptized before he entred upon his publick Ministry, which is a most illustri∣ous Example, and the Pattern which the Saints followed; for in a word, the great Apostle Paul and all those primitive Saints recorded by the Spirit to be Believers, and therefore holy; were nevertheless Bapti∣zed, which might have been forborn, but that it was an indispensable Duty. And Secondly, It seemeth strange to me, that any professing Obedience to Gospel-Or∣dinances should so far countenance others in the neglect of a positive Institution of Christ, as to plead for Church-Communion with Christians, without Baptism, when our Lord hath plainly commanded his Apostles and Ministers to the end of the World say∣ing, Go ye therefore and teach all Nations,Math. 28.19, 20. Baptizing them, — teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: And , I am with you alway even unto the end of the
World. For seeing the Disciples of Christ were commanded to Baptize as well as to Preach, and to teach others successively to do the same; It is undeniably clear, if Scripture and Reason may take Place, that the Gospel Ministers ought to Baptize those that obey their Doctrine;Acts a. 38, 41. as Peter said, Repent, and be baptized every one of you — then they that gladly received his Word, were Baptized; and the same day there were added unto them a∣bout three thousand Souls. And they continu∣ed stedfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellow∣ship, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayer. Here we find those new Converts were com∣manded every of one them to be Baptized, and this way they were added to the Primitive Church of Christ at Jerusalem; which was the Pattern for all Gospel-Churches to fol∣low in after Ages. For there were the twelve Apostles, who were endowed with the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Spirit, to shew us the perfect pattern of Gods House: And this was the Church that said, It seemeth good to the Holy Ghost,Acts 15.22, 28. and to us, to lay upon you no greater Burthen then these ne∣cessary things; and from this Pattern (given as it were in the Mount of God) we find Baptism was commanded as the entring Or∣dinance into Church Communion, or upon Confession of Faith before it; for baptized Believers (tho' the true visible matter of a Gospel-Church) were not always imme∣diately formed into a Gospel-Church Or∣der, for this was sometimes a work of time,
as we have an Instance, how Paul baptized the twelve Disciples at Ephesus, and went into the Synagogue,Acts 19.1, to 10. and spake boldly for the space of three Months, before he sepa∣rated the Disciples from the Multitude. Moreover, we have several other Pre∣cepts and Examples, that do confirm the Ordinance of Baptism, immediately to fol∣low Conversion and Faith in Christ:Acts 8.35, to 39. As when Philip Preached unto the Eunuch, and he believed, he was immediately Baptized. And when Cornelius and his Friends were Converted,Act. 10.44, 48. Act. 16.14, 15, 32, 33. Ch. 18.8. Peter commanded them to be Baptized: And so we find Lydia and her Houshold, and the Jaylor and his Houshold were Baptized, immediately after their Con∣version. And all these instances plainly shew, that Water-Baptism was administred to Converted Believers, before they were in Church-Order to receive the Ordinance of the Lords Supper; and 'tis called a put∣ting on Christ, viz. by a visible Profession; and signifieth our dying unto Sin,Gal. 3.27. Col. 2.12. Rom. 6.3, to 7. Joh. 3 3.5. Mark 16.15, 16. and living in newness of Life unto God: As also our being born of the Spirit; and all these de∣note Baptism to be the first visible Sign of a Believer in Christ, and it is appointed to accompany the Preaching of the Gospel, as a Christian Badge on all that shall believe. And it was called a Foundation-Principle, viz. of a visible Church-state,Act. 2.38, 41. Ch. 8.12. Ch. 18.8. the matter whereof was, and still should be baptized Believers. And there being not the least in∣stance in the New Testament, of any one
Person that was ever added to a Gospel-Church without Water-Baptism, nor that any Gospel-Church was ever gathered, but of baptized Believers; to exclude it as no entring Ordinance into Church-Communion, against so many clear Commands and Exam∣ples on Sacred Record; which shews it is immediately to follow believing in Christ, will lay a Foundation to deny all Gospel-Ordinances, and the Holy Scriptures them∣selves to be of use to us, to discover the Truth of Gospel-Worship and Obedi∣ence. I. Object. Is from Rom. 14.1. Him that is weak in the Faith receive you. Answer, To this Scripture Mr. Will. Kif∣fin in his aforesaid Sober Discourse, saith, The weakness spoken of in the Text, hath Relation only to those Mistakes that did attend some of them, touching a Liberty of eating, or not eating of Meats, or the keeping or not keeping of Days, which were things in themselves of an in∣different Nature, the doing or not doing of which was not Sin, as the Apostle in that Chapter plainly shews; and hath no Relation to the Order of Worship prescri∣bed by Christ, much less to the Practice, or not Practice of Ordinances, for then the meaning of the Apostle should be, if they did Practice, or not Practice, it was all one, there was no Sin in the Matter. — But to bring this Text, to prove a law∣fulness of receiving any that are Christi∣ans,
altho' never so ignorant of the Ordi∣nances, and instituted Worship of Christ, and the Order prescribed by him, is to wring Blood out of it, and not that pre∣cious Truth that is manifested by it. II. Object. Is from 1 Cor. 12.13. For by one Spirit are we all Baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be Bond or Free, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit. Here is (say some) a Bap∣tism mentioned, by which they are brought, or initiated into this Body, viz. the Church;Ver. 28. but say they, it is the Baptism of the Spirit, and not of Water. Answer, That which is called the Baptism of the Holy Ghost,Acts 1.5. Ch. 2.12 were those extraordina∣ry Gifts of the Holy Spirit which Christ had promised his Disciples they should re∣ceive not many days hence, and was fulsil∣led on the day of Pentecost,Acts 10.44, 45, 46 and given to others afterwards. And we no where find the common Gifts and Graces of the Holy Spirit, called Baptism: And therefore this Baptism in the Text (having some Relati∣on to these excellent Gifts, as appears in the preceeding Verses) it must be understood either only of those extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit in the Ministry, whereby the Pri∣mitive Gospel Ministers were qualified, to break down the middle Wall of Partition, and unite all, both Jews and Gentiles, Bond and Free, that were Effectually called, into one Body or visible Church-state; or rather thus, that the Apostle speaks of the Gentiles
with himself, and other Jews, that through the extraordinary Ministration of the Spirit were baptized with Water-Baptism into one Body. For seeing it cannot rationally be supposed, that those of the Church of Co∣rinth to whom the Apostle could not speak as unto Spiritual,1 Cor. 3.1, 2. but as unto Carnal, even as unto Babes in Christ: Or that every individu∣al Believer included in the Text, was Bap∣tized [with] the Spirit, but as its said [by] the Spirit, as the efficient cause. It then follows, that the Baptism in the Text, must be taken for Water-Baptism; consi∣dering also,1 Cor. 12.1. that those Brethren the Apostle wrote unto with himself and other Jews, are said in the Text in Distinction to Bap∣tism, to have been all made to drink into one Spirit; which Expression is far short of be∣ing all personally baptized with the Baptism of the Spirit; and therefore to me it clearly appears, that the Baptism spoken of in the Objection, must be taken for Water Bap∣tism as its said,Act. 18.8. that when the Corinthians had the Gospel preached to them, many of them hearing believed and were Baptized, viz. not many of the Church then already formed into an orderly Church-state,Ver. 10. 1 Cor. 3 6, 10. Ch. 1.12. but many of the People of that City Believed and were Baptized, and so the Apostle laid the Foundation of the Church of Corinth, and planted the same, which Apollo water∣ed. III. Object. The Apostle Paul saith, That Christ sent him not to Baptize, but to preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1.17.
Answer, The Apostle Paul was Baptized himself,Eph. 4.4, 5. and he tells us, that there is one Body, one Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, viz. one Water-Baptism, because it is here distinguished from the Spirit, as pertaining to the Body, or dwelling in its Gifts and Graces in the Church. And he also instructed the twelve Disciples at Ephe∣sus to be Baptized,Acts 19.3, 4. tho' they were Baptized before with Johns Baptism. And he Bapti∣zed Crispus and Gaius, and the Houshold of Stephanus, so that if he were not sent to Bap∣tize,1 Cor. 1.14, 16. he acted beyond his particular Com∣mission, and had not so much Authority as other Gospel Ministers received from the ge∣neral Commission given to them; and there∣fore the Apostles meaning is, That tho' his Commission to Preach and Baptize was as large as others, yet his work was not so much actually to Baptize and spend his time in that Service, as to preach the Gospel, he being extraordinarily Gifted thereunto; for he was counted the chief Speaker,Acts 14.12. and those Ministers that were his Companions being qualified to Baptize, were doubtless helpful to him in that Service; for when he preach∣ed to the Corinthians, it is said (not only Crispus, and all his House believed, but) ma∣ny of the Corinthians believed and were bap∣tized. So that Pauls Expression, that he was not sent to Baptize, is to be expounded as its said of Christ,Joh. 4.1, 2. that tho' he made and haptized more Disciples than John, yet Je∣sus himself baptized not, but his Disciples,
and as when Peter had preached there were other Gospel Ministers with him, who did Baptize, otherwise Peter himself could not have baptized in one day about three thou∣sand Souls. And so we find,Acts 2.41. that Paul had Silas and Timotheus with him at Corinth, when so many of them were Baptized, and that as a Son with the Father, so had Ti∣mothy served with him in the Gospel. And therefore the Text being fairly and most properly thus expounded, the aforesaid Ob∣jection is invalid, and cannot prove an Ad∣mission to Church Communion, without the Ordinance of Water-Baptism. IV. Object. Gal. 3.27. As many of you as have been Baptized into Christ, have put on Christ: From whence it hath been said that some of the Members of those Churches, were not Baptized. Answer, To explain the Mind of the Ho∣ly Ghost, I shall here recite the preceeding Words, Ver. 26. For ye are all the Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus; and then it follows, Ver. 27. For as many of you as have been Baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. From whence I observe, that the Word [all] ver. 26. is in ver. 28. put for the same Persons to shew there is no Distin∣ctions of Acceptance of Persons, in Christ Jesus, whether Jews or Greeks, Bond or Free, Male or Female, all are one, and by Faith in Christ are alike, the adopted Children of God, and so the Word [all] must be understood in ver. 26. as hav∣ing
Relation to ver. 28. and not of every individual Member of those Churches of Ga∣latia, for who can think they were all, viz. every individual Person of them really the Children of God, seeing they were so far Apostatized, as that the Apostle said he was afraid of them, least he had bestowed on them labour in vain. And then,Ch. 4.11. if the Word [all] must be restrained to all those only, or to so many as were the Children of God by true Faith in Christ, it is put for no more than the Word [many] viz. for so many or all of them, as had received both the inward Grace, as well as the outward putting on the visible Profession of it by Wa∣ter-Baptism. And the like instance we have that the Word [all] is restrained [to many] Rom. 5.18. compared with ver. 19. And therefore the aforesaid Scripture can be no Proof that any Persons were admitted into Church-Communion without Water-Baptism. And farther to clear this Objection, from Rom. 6.3. There is this to say, that that Epistle was written to all that were in Rome, beloved of God, called to be Saints, which comprehendeth a Direction of that Epistle,Rom. 16.5, 14, 15. not only to one or more particular Church∣es in the Order of the Gospel, but to all the Saints in Rome, beloved and called of God, whether within, or for want of time and growth of Grace and Knowledge, were then waiting on the Ministry of the Gospel for farther Light, without the Pale of the Visi∣ble
Church; and therefore the Apostle might properly say, that so many of us, viz. of all those Saints in general, as were ga∣thered into a Church-state, and baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into his Death,Ver. 4, 5. viz. into the likeness of his Death by Water-baptism; and thus the Word [many] may be taken in its most proper Sence, without the least implication that unbaptized Christians were admitted to full Communion with the Church at the Lords Table. V. Object. The Church in the Wilderness received Members the way which was not prescribed, but directly against the revealed Mind of God, yet stood a true Church and their Members true Members. For this Church had Circumcision for their entring Ordi∣nance,Gen. 17.13, 14. Exo. 12. and the uncircumcised were utterly forbidden to eat the Passover, yet this Church received Members without and o∣therwise than by this entring Ordinance, they also admitted them to the Passover so long as forty Years without it. Answer, It is expresly said, That all the People (viz. the Males) that came out (of Egypt) were Circumcised,Josh. 5.4, to 8. Exod. 14.10, 11, 12. but all the People that were born in the Wilderness by the way, as they came forth out of Egypt, them they had not circumcised. — because they had not circum∣cised them by the way. From whence I ob∣serve, that seeing the Children of Israel were not Circumcised by the way, and yet that all were Circumcised that came out of
Egypt, it must needs follow, that they were Circumcised in Egypt, as the Lord comman∣ded Moses, Exod. 12.48, to 52. which tho' it is there rehearsed, after the account of the Destruction of the first-born of Egypt, &c. yet Circumcision was commanded be∣fore, as appeareth by the two last verses of that Chapter.Gen. 17.9, 10. And so it was from its first Institution to Abraham, again renewed by Moses, as an entring Ordinance into a Visi∣ble Church-state, and the Priviledges there∣of; but the occasion of the disuse of this Or∣dinance afterwards in the Wilderness, not being expressed as I can find in any part of the Scriptures, we must conclude, that as God never approved of the Wilful neglect of the least of his Commandments, and see∣ing he again commanded Israel to be Cir∣cumcised, when they were entring in to pos∣sess the promised Land of Canaan, we have not the least incouragement from Israels Ex∣ample of Disobedience in the Wilderness (which is so much in general,1 Cor. 10. Heb. 3.8, &c. as well as in some particulars complained of in the Holy Scriptures) nor from Gods renewing his Command to Israel for Circumcision, to Countenance the neglect of any Gospel Or∣dinance, but contrariwise in Case of any Declension among Believers, to stir up one another to a Reformation, according to the Institutions of Christ, and the Primitive Pattern of Gods spiritual House on Sacred Record. VI. Object. It is farther said, that Aaron
let the offering for Sin be burnt,Lev. 10. Ch. 6.26. that should have indeed been eaten; yet because he could not do it to his Edification, Moses was Con∣tent. Answer, Moses was content not simply, because Aaron had done contrary to the Commandment, but because Aaron had such things befallen him that day, as that it would not have been accepted of God for him to eat the Offering, as we find by Aa∣rons Answer to Moses, Lev. 10.19. And this being on the extraordinary occasion of Aa∣rons loosing his two Sons,Lev. 10.1. Nadab and Abihu, who died before the Lord for Offering of strange Fire; it is most likely, either this Sin of his House, or thereby was occasioned some unholiness, or some other uncleanness happened to Aaron (tho' it is not particu∣larly expressed) as did by Law prevent him from eating of the Holy Sacrifice, Lev. 6.18, 27. And so it is under the Administrati∣on of the Gospel, that in case of Sin, or any Uncleanness, prohibited the Communion of the Church by the Laws of Christ, the Of∣fender (until there be Repentance to take it off) ought not to partake of the Holy Supper, tho' it be commanded as a Gospel-Ordinance; yea, a whole Church may su∣spend it for a season, rather then to partake of it with such evils as are prohibited their Communion by the Laws of Christ; and who will say, that such a Suspension of the Ordinance will be charged as her Sin, if she be necessitated thereunto, for want of a Per∣son
or Ministring Brother gifted and qua∣lified for that Service. And therefore from what hath been here said, we may conclude, that the aforesaid Old Testament Cases have no. Example in them, as shadows to justifie any Believers admittance into Church-Com∣munion without Water-Baptism; but that those and all other Scriptures must be ex∣pounded, so as to preserve the Concord of Sacred Writ with the plain and positive In∣stitutions of Christ and his Apostles, and their Examples with the Primitive Church∣es, who clearly witness to the Ordinance of Water-Baptism preceeding Church-Com∣munion. Against Excess in Apparel. THat Ornaments of Apparel in a Scrip∣ture Sence may be allowed, so far as they suit and rather tend to the Credit and Re∣putation of the Gospel, and that a difference in Apparel is not unlawful, according to the State and Circumstances of the Saints, is not denyed. But yet whatever Ornaments are inconsistent with Modesty, Gravity and Sobriety, and are a scandal to Religion, ought to be cast off, as being a defilement to Believers, and an Abominaton in the sight of God,Isa. 3.16. Zeph. 1.8. who reproved and brought his Scourge upon the Daughters of Zion, for
the Bravery, Haughtiness and Pride of their Attire, and by the Prophet hath said, he would punish all such as were cloathed with strange Apparel. And the Apostle saith, I will therefore that — Women adorn themselves in modest Apparel,1 Tim. 2.8, 9. with Shame-facedness and So∣briety; not with Broidered Hair, or Gold, or Pearls, or costly Array; but (which becometh Women professing Godliness) with good works. — And whose adorning,1 Pet. 3.3, 4, 5. let it not be the out∣ward adorning, of Plating the Hair, and of Wearing of Gold, or of putting on of Apparel; but the Ornantent of a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in the sight of God of great Price: For after this manner in the old time, the Holy Wo∣men also who trusted in God adorned themselves. — And doth not even Nature it self teach you,1 Cor. 11.14. that if a Man have long Hair, it is a shame unto him. And we are not to be conformed to this World,Rom. 12.2, 17. 2 Cor. 8.21. 1 Pet. 1.14. but we are commanded to provide things honest in the sight of all Men; and as obedient Children, not fashioning your selves according to the former Lusts, in your Ignorance: But as he which hath called you is Holy, so be ye Holy in all Manner of Conversation;1 Cor. 10.32. and to give none offence, neither to the Jews nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God. But as the Apostle saith, whatso∣ever things are true,Phil. 4.8. honest, just, pure, lovely, of good report, if there be any Vir∣tue, and if there be any Praise, think on these things. Now from these Scriptures, we may conclude, that tho' our present ex∣cessive fashions are not all expresly forbid∣den,
yet if any kind of adornings are pro∣hibited, and if those Texts were written for our Instruction, as I think none can doubt thereof, or be so bold to deny it, that have any Sence of true Religion; then surely they require all the Saints, both Men and Women, at least to abstain from all those excesses in Apparel which are not of good report among sober Men, and who∣ever putteth on such Attire or Ornaments of Apparel, as are not of good honest and modest report, they are guilty of breaking the Commandments of Christ, and so are to be dealt withal by the Church as disorderly Persons, who bring a scandal upon their Holy Profession. Besides, it is not only a grief for sober Christians to see such Pride of Spirit appear∣ing in their Communion, but its also a stum∣bling to others which are well inclined, to walk in the ways of the Lord with them, as I have found by my own experience: For when I was first awakened to seek the Lord, and the good of my Soul, the extravagant Dresses of some Professors among whom I heard the Gospel preached, occasioned me to think there was the less Religion in them, and that they looked not as if they were Christs People; and for this cause alone (I having then no Light in Gospel-Ordinances of Communion) I departed to another Church, which appeared more like sober Christians, and there I have continued about five and twenty years. And considering the Scrip∣ture
saith, the Lord hateth a proud look — And God resisteth the proud,Prov. 6.16, 17. Jam. 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5. Math. 16.24. Rom. 6.4. but giveth Grace unto the Humble: And that the Commandments of Christ require our Con∣formity in all things suitable to his Name and Truth, and those Holy and Self-denying Principles we profess, how can such excesses in Apparel which even gives their Professi∣on the Lie, consist with their sincere Obedi∣ence to him?Jam. 2.18. How do they shew their Ho∣ly Faith therein by their Works, but rather as it is said of her that liveth in Pleasure, that she is dead while she liveth.Gal. 6.7. Be not de∣ceived, God is not mocked, for whatsoever a Man soweth, that shall he also reap. For he that soweth to his Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap Corruption: but he that soweth to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life Everlasting. To conclude, our Baptized Churches that are for particular Election and final Perse∣verance in the same Faith and Order of the Gospel in full Communion together; they (nor many others) have not any Reason to reflect on the true design of this Treatise, or on the Matters contained therein, as any ways tending to the Interruption of our Peace, on the settled Principles of our Churches, but to the purging out the leaven of unrighteousness, that may be found a∣mong them; nor can any Person in our Com∣munion appear against the plain Contents of this Treatise, but they must at the same time appear for and Countenance such sinful Man∣ners, Erroneous Doctrine, false Worship,
and corrupt Administration of Gospel-Or∣dinances, as the Word of God, and the general Profession of our Churches does plainly witness against; and consequent∣ly they will apparently shew themselves opposers of Reformation, or such as la∣bour to weaken and confound the Baptist Churches and our pure Religion. Yea far∣ther, if corrupt Manners which is ma∣nifestly sinful by the Moral Law of God, or such Erroneous Doctrine, false Worship, or irregular Administrations of Gospel Ordinances as are prohibited our Communion by the Holy Scriptures, should be knowingly suffered therein, it is a visible Mark of Degeneration; and thereby the Church partakes of the Sins of particular Members, Lev. 19.17. Thou shalt not hate thy Brother in thine Heart, thou shalt in any wise rebuket thy Neighbour, and not suffer Sin upon him: Or as it is in our Margin, that thou bare not Sin for him. And Paul saith to Timothy, Lay Hands suddenly on no Man,1 Tim. 5.22. neither be partakers of other Mens Sins, keep thy self Pure. Besides, it is shewed before, what warrant and command we have in the New Testament, for withdrawing our Communion in the aforesaid Cases of Sin, and from disorderly Persons: And therefore when a Church persisteth in a wilful neglect of this Duty, she brings her self under the guilt of Sin for breaking of Christs Commandment; but in Case this were faithfully performed, yet the
Church should still endeavour,2 Thes. 3.14, 15. Tit. 3.10. by due ad∣monishing of such Offenders, to reduce them to their Obedience; and if no Re∣pentance be found,Gal. 5.12. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. 1 Tim. 1.20. she ought to proceed to a farther Act of Authority, and cut them wholly off from her fellowship. But if any plead, that so strict a Dis∣cipline, as hath been argued for in this Treatise, cannot be duely observed with∣out indangering their Church-state: It deserves our Noting, either as a Carnal Reflection on the Holy and Righteous Precepts of Christ, and on his Wisdom, as not prescribing such Laws which con∣duceth most to the Glory of God, and the good of his People here on Earth; or it is a sign that such a Church has been so long in the neglect of their Duty to∣wards Christ and one another; and are so far degenerated in their Spirits, as that they seem to be past recovery: And if this be the State of some, who perhaps may have as high a Conceit of themselves as the Church of the Laodiceans had, and say,Rev. 3.17, 18, 19. I am Rich, and increased with Goods, and have need of nothing; and knowest not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked; Christ coun∣selleth such to buy of him Gold tried in the Fire, that thou mayest be rich, and white Raiment, that thou mayest be Cloathed, and that the shame of thy Nakedness do not ap∣pear, and anoint thine Eyes with Eye-Salve, that thou mayest see. And saith our Lord,
As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: Be zealous therefore and repent; least he come and fight against thee with the Sword of his Mouth. Behold,Rev. 2.16. (saith he) I stand at the Door and knock: If any Man hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. Be not afraid therefore to go about this good work of Reformation, do thy Duty and leave the success to God, whose Bles∣sing you may expect, and whose awful presence may so far attend the Authori∣ty of Christ by which you Act, as to stop the Mouth of carnal Reasonings; inso∣much that instead of indangering the loss of your Church-state,Math. 16.18. Jam. 4.8, 9, 10. you may rather ex∣pect, and find the Lord will strengthen, establish and settle it on the Rock of A∣ges, against which the Gates of Hell shall not prevail. To close, Altho' I have used the Word [withdraw] in the Case of a Private Members removing Communion from a Church, which may not be done in so so∣lemn a Manner as when a Church with∣draws her Communion from a Member; (be∣cause this is done by an Act of Duty and Authority given to the Body, and the o∣ther is done as an Act of Liberty and Duty pertaining to a Member, and war∣ranted by the Scriptures, as hath been shewed;) yet the Word withdraw, being it self of a harmless and indifferent Signifi∣cation, it cannot be excepted against; un∣less
it be for want of other Matters to Cavil at: However I have also this to say that the Word [with-draw] was thought proper to be used in the same Case in the Congregationals twenty eighth Article of the Institution of Churches before re∣cited. FINIS. ADVERTISEMENTS. THere is Published by the same Author, a Book Intitled, Truth soberly Defended, in a serious Reply to Mr. B. Keach's Book called, The Breach Repaired in Gods Worship, &c. As also a Vindication of a Book, Intitled, Prelimited Forms of Praising God, vocally Sung by all the Church together, proved to be no Go∣spel-Ordinance; with a Narrative, wherein is detected Mr. Keach's Abuses, under the Hands of several Elders and other Brethren. By Isaac Marlow, Price Bound 1s. There is likewise Published, a Treatise of the Holy Trin unity, Asserting the Deity of Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit in the Unity of Essence with God the Father. By I Mar∣low, Price Bound 9 d. Moreover there is Published, A Tract on the Sabbath day, wherein the keeping of the First-day of the Week a Sabbath is justified, by a Divine Command and a Double Exam∣ple, contained in the Old and New Testa∣ment, &c. By Isaac Marlow, Price 1s.
