M884 12367183 60436
Imprimatur, Apr. 17. 1678.
REMARKS Upon a Late Disingenuous DISCOURSE, Writ by one T. D. Under the pretence DE CAVSA DEI, And of Answering Mr. Iohn Howe's Letter and Postscript OF GOD'S PRESCIENCE, &c. Affirming, as the Protestant Doctrine, That God doth by Efficacious Influ∣ence universally move and Deter∣mine Men to all their Actions, even to those that are most Wicked. By a PROTESTANT. LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by Christopher Hussey, at the Flower-de-luce in Little-Brittain. 1678.
REMARKS Upon a Late Disingenuous Discourse WRIT By one T. D. &c. OF all Vocations to which men addict themselves, or are dedicated, I have al∣waies esteemed that of the Ministry to be the most noble and happy Imployment; as being more peculiar∣ly directed to those two great Ends, the advancement of God's Glory, and the promoting of Man's Salvation. It hath seemed to me as if they who have chosen, and are set apart for
that Work, did, by the continual op∣portunity of conversing with their Maker, enjoy a state like that of Pa∣radise; and in this superiour, that they are not also, as Adam, put in to dress and keep a Garden; but are, or ought to be, exempt from the neces∣sity of all worldly avocations. Yet, upon nearer consideration, they likewise appear to partake of the common in∣felicities of Humane condition. For, although they do not, as others, eat their Bread, in the sweat of their brows (which some Divines account to be, though in the Pulpit, undecent,) yet the study of their brain is more than equivalent; and even the Theo∣logical Ground is so far under the Curse, that no Field runs out more in Thorns and Thistles, or requires more pains to disincumber it. Such I un∣derstand to be those peevish questions which have overgrown Christianity; wherewith men's minds are only rent
and intangled, but from whence they can no more hope for any wholsom nourishment, than to gather Grapes from Thorns, or Figgs from Thistles. And (if I may so far pursue the Allegory) this Curse upon Divinity, as that up∣on the Earth, seems to have proceed∣ed also from tasting that forbidden Fruit, of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. For, in general, many Divines, out of a vain affectation of Learning, have been tempted into Enquiries too curious after those things which the Wisdom of God hath left impervious to Humane Under∣standing, further than they are revealed. And hence, instead of those allowed and obvious Truths of Faith, Repen∣tance, and the New Creature, (yet these too have their proper weeds that pester them,) there have sprung up endless Disputes concerning the un∣searchable things of God, and which are agitated by men, for the most
part, with such Virulence and Intri∣cacy, as manifest the Subtilty and Malice of the Serpent that hath sedu∣ced them. But, more particularly, that very Knowledge of Good and Evil, the disquisition of the Causes from whence, and in what manner they are derived, hath been so grateful to the Controversial, Female, Appe∣tite, that even the Divines have taken of it as a Fruit to be desired to make them Wise, and given to their people, and they have both eaten, at the peril of God's Displeasure and their own Happiness. Whereas that second Chapter of Genesis contains the plain History of Good and Evil, and (not to mention so many attestations to it of the Old and New Testament,) what other Comment needs there, for what belongs to Good, than that, Iam. 1. 17. that it is from God only, That every Good Giving, and every Perfect Gift descendeth? And, as to Evil, that
also of St. Iames, is sufficient convi∣ction, cap. 1. v. 13, 14. Let no man say, when he is tempted, I was tempted of God; God cannot be tempted with Evil, neither tempteth he any man: But every man is tempted, when he is drawn aside by his own lusts and enticed. Or that of the same Apostle, cap. 4. v. 1. From whence come Wars and Fightings among you? (and even that Logomachia, I fear, with which this question is vexed,) Come they not hence? even from your lusts that fight in your members. And there is no examining Christian but must find both these Truths evidently witnessed by his own Conscience. Nevertheless, the Theologants of former and later times, not content with what is held forth in Scripture, have attempted to clamber and palm up higher, by the Philosophy of that School where each of them hath first practised, and have drawn God's Pre∣science and Predetermination, upon
this occasion, into debate; arguing upon such points as no man, unless he were Prior and precedent to the First Cause, can have the Understand∣ing to comprehend and judge of: and most of them do but say and unsay; and while in words they all deny God to be the Author of sin, yet in effect, and by the manner of their reason∣ing, they affirm it; I therefore, being both apprehensive of the danger in such Arguments, and more particu∣larly conscious of mine own weak∣ness, shall not presume to interpose my Opinion in the differences about this matter, further than to say; That if men by this fansied opening of their Eyes, have attained to see more clear∣ly, and acknowledge the wickedness of their own Actions, it resembles the modesty of our First Parents, discern∣ing their Nakedness: But, if men shall also assert a Predeterminative Concourse of God to our Evil, it seems to have
too much of Original Perverseness, and of that faln shortness of Reason, whereby they would have found a Nudity in the Creator, and did impli∣citely reject their fault upon him, for the Serpent that He had made, and the Woman that He had given. But, if any man there be that can reconcile this Controversie, and so ma∣ny more that arise out of it; (for all the most important Doctrines of Chri∣stianity serve on the one side, and all the fiercest questions of Religion on the other, depending for Truth and Fals∣hood upon the success of this Engage∣ment,) if he can extinguish all those Ill Consequences, Dull Distinctions, and Inconsistent Notions, which have been levied in this quarrel, and reduce each Party within the due limits of Scripture and Saving Knowledge; such a person indeed deserves all com∣mendation. And such an one I thought I had met with, nor yet see
reason, notwithstanding all the late attempts upon him, to alter my Opi∣nion; in a Book intitled; The Recon∣cileableness of God's Prescience of the sins of Men, with the Wisdom and Sincerity of his Counsels, Exhortations; and whatsoever other means He uses to prevent them. In a Letter to the Honourable Robert Boyl, Esquire; and in a Postscript to the late Letter of the Reconcileableness of God's Prescience, &c. by John Howe, the Author of that Letter. Yet there was one passage in the close of his Letter, p. 154. which seem'd, as I thought; to lay open to censure; where he askt pardon, as having hudled it up mostly in the intervals of a troublesome long Iourney. It seem'd a piece too well elaborate to have been perfected amidst the hurry of the Road, the noise of Inns, and the Nau∣sea of the Packet-boat. And how could he hope, after saying this, in so capti∣ous an Age as we live, to escape some Reflexion? but that at least men
would inquire whether he went by Stage-coach, or on Horse-back; both which are professed enemies to Medi∣tation and Judgment? (for it is pro∣pable he had not that ancient accom∣modation of Horse-litters, wherein, without any impediment to their thoughts, men travelled with all the privacy and equipage of a Closet,) whether he had not lost his way, or faln among Thieves, and how he found himself after his Journey? with all the questions that men are subject to at their arrival home, and which even when ask'd in civility, yet are trouble∣some. He might, had it not been for the jogging, have remembred how unfortunate most Writers have been in such excuses, and what advantage ill-natur'd men have taken to misin∣terpret them. So he that apologiz'd for using a Forein tongue, was told, that no man had prohibited him his Native Language in his own Country.
Others, alledging that they had at the same time a Fit of the Stone, Gout, or other Distemper, have been taxed, as lying under no obligation of publish∣ing their Infirmities, but who might however, have cur'd themselves of that of Writing. And he that pre∣tended to treat at once of a Serious, while he was amused with a more Com∣fortable Importance, was advertis'd, that he ought therefore to have so long ab∣stained either from the one or the o∣ther. But, in earnest, this confession of Mr. How's, is so far from any such Arrogance, that it rather argues his modesty. For, if some can even in Riding name all the contrary motions, till they have by memory plai'd out a Game at Chess, (which was first in∣vented as an emblem of Predetermina∣tion) why should it be more difficult, or less allowable, to one of Mr. How's abilities, in the interruptions of travel, to give a Mate also to that question?
The worst therefore that can be said of him, in allusion either to his Let∣ter or his Journey, is—at poterat tutior esse domi. Yet seeing this was the grea∣test fault that I remarked in reading him over, I would not pass it by with∣out notice, lest I might have cause to suspect my self of a Partiality, which I desire not that others should exercise in mine own particular. But for the rest, whereas the things considerable in all Discourses are the Subject, the End, the Reasoning, the Method, and the Style; I must pro∣fess that, as far as I understand, I have met with few manual Treatises, that do in all these respects equal it. For the Subject, it appears in the Title, than which there was none of greater dignity to be handled, or of greater use, if rightly explain'd and compre∣hended. And no less is that of Pre∣determination, which he only treats of collaterally, and upon which there∣fore,
in hope to find him less prepa∣red, he hath been attaqued, as in the Flank, with most vigour. His End was most commendable, being to make the Paths streight, and remove those stumbling-blocks which the aspe∣rity of others had laid in the way to Heaven; to rectifie mens apprehen∣sions concerning God, and leave them without pretence for negligence in their Duties, or despair of perfor∣mance; much less for despight against the Creatour. His Arguing then is plain and solid, for Evidence, rather than Dispute; nor does he either throw the Dust of antique Distincti∣ons in the eyes of his Readers, to blind them; or yet raise the Spectres of an∣cient Authors, or conjure their vene∣rable Names, to fright men out of their senses and understanding; but declares against all the Prejudice or Advantage by such proceeding, as un∣lawful Charms, and prohibited Wea∣pons
in the Controversie. His Me∣thod thereafter is direct and coherent, his Style perspicuous and elegant: So that it is in short, a Manly discourse, resembling much, and expressing the Humane Perfection; in the Harmony of Language, the Symmetry of Parts, the Strength of Reason, the Excellen∣cy of its End, which is so serious, that it is no defect in the similitude with Man, that the Letter contains no∣thing in it suitable to the property of Laughter. All which put together, and al∣though it does, and must every where partake also of Humane Imperfection, it might have been hoped capable of that civility which men, and especially Learned men, but most of all Di∣vines do usually, or should allow, to one another. That it should not be made ridiculous, being writ in so good earnest; nor assaulted, being so inof∣fensive; much less that it should be
defaced, mutilated, stabb'd in so ma∣ny places, and the Author through it, which is even in writing a kind of Fe∣lony. Yet this hath been its misfor∣tune in a Rencounter with an im∣modest and hectoring Discourse, pre∣tending to the Title, De Causa Dei: Or a Vindication of the Common Doctrine of Protestant Divines concerning Prede∣termination, viz. The Interest of God, as the First Cause, in all the Actions, as such, of Rational Creatures, from the In∣vidious Consequences with which it is bur∣thened, by Mr. John How, in a late Letter and Postscript of God's Prescience; by T. D. By which first Letters, see∣ing it appears that he desires to pass Incognito, I will so far observe good manners, as to interpret them only The Discourse, heartily wishing that there were some way of finding it Guilty, without reflecting upon the Author; which I shall accordingly indeavour, that I may both preserve
his, whatsoever, former Reputation, and leave him a door open to Ingenui∣ty for the future. But The Discourse justifies it self, as if it had been typi∣fied by Paul's withstanding Peter to his face, when he came to Antioch, (so easy is it to patronize humane Pas∣sions under the pretence of the Cause of God, and Apostolical example) T. D. p. 23. whereas it rather re∣sembles in the Bravery, though not in the Occasion, that Exploit of Peter's Matth. 26. 51, 52. for which our Sa∣viour, though done in his defence, re∣buked him. adding, They that take the sword, shall perish by the sword: And the taking the Pen hath seldom better suc∣cess, if handled in the same manner. I therefore, having had the leisure to read it over, and thereby the oppor∣tunity of a second Caution, how the unruly Quill is to be managed, have thought that I could not at present ren∣der a better account of that time to my
self or others, than by publishing these Remarks; that, as Mr. How's Letter may serve for a Pattern of what is to be imitated, so The Discourse may re∣main as a Mark (the best use it can be put to) of what ought to be avoided in all writing of Controversies, espe∣cially by Divines, in those that con∣cern Religion. The nature of this matter would admit of no better me∣thod, than that the Errours observable should be distinguished under several Heads, to each of which the particu∣lar Instances are referred. The first Article that I prefer against the Dis∣course, is; It's Trifling and Cavilling about Words, when they affect not the Cause. First Instance. Mr. Howe, on pur∣pose to prevent any such idle Practice, had in the last page of his Postscript, plainly summ'd up the constant sense
both of that and his Letter which he would abide by. That God doth not by an Efficacious Influence universally move and determine Men to all their Actions, even those Actions which are most wicked. Here was the Subject ready stated, against which, if any thing, The Discourse ought to have directly apply'd. But, instead of that T. D. p. 1. It saith, Mr. Howe gives us his sense in various terms, and such as seem repugnant to each other. One while that which he denies, is a Predeterminative Concurrence, and Predeterminative Concourse; another while, 'tis Predetermining Influence, and a Determinative Influence, and Ef∣ficacious Influence. This is the same in T. D. as if Its concurrent Wherry-men, p. 27. after they had taken in their Fare, should be long pulling off their Doublets, and then carry a man to another Stairs than they were directed. The one shows that they had but little heart to their labour; the other, that
they know not the River, unless per∣haps they have a design, if they can find a place convenient to rifle the Passenger. For Mr. Howe had expresly pitch'd upon that one term of Effica∣cious Influence. But, as for those o∣ther repeated by The Discourse, they were such as Mr. Howe found in the Controversie, not of his own making, nor therefore is he accountable for them: But, however, it was his Inge∣nuity to mention them; and having done so, to bind himself to a point, to one Word of the most certain signifi∣cation, as a place where any adver∣sary might alwaies be sure to speak with him. Yet It, to find out matter for Discourse, and to show Its great Reading, tells us, as if that were the business, what Strangius saith, and what Doctor Twisse concerning Predetermi∣nation and Concourse; and again, what Strangius, of the Difference between Concourse and Influence, p. 2. and saith
that, as for those two Phrases, Predeter∣minative Concurrence, and Predeter∣minative Concourse, they are in effect, Contradictie in Adjecto. And so let them be, upon condition that not Mr. Howe, (as The Discourse would have it) but the first Inventer my be bound to answer for it. For the truth is, the Brothers of Dispute do usually so handle their matter, and refine so far, till they want at last either words to express their meaning, or meaning to express in words. And so it hath faired with these Imaginers of the Predeterminative Concourse or Concurrence. 'Tis very well that this Scene of Debate lies in Oxford (or London) for, upon these terms, it would be impossible at New-Market, where Prae and Con run their heats, to decide any Match with∣out sending for a Judge to the next University, and it is less difficult for Pro and Con, or for Con, and Non-con, to set their Horses together. Yet sup∣pose,
as the Discourse affirms, that this Predeterminative Concourse or Concurrence had been words of Mr. Howe's own choosing; whereas he on the contrary rejects them for that of Efficacious Influ∣ence, the Impropriety however therein had not been greater, than of that Phrase which T. D. p. 25. uses, and hath right to, Simultaneous Concourse, which is, if I mistake not, as much as to say, Conconcourse. The same (if greater be the same) Trifling and Cavilling about Words that af∣fect not the Cause, it is to say, T. D. p. 2. As for that latter Phrase, Influence, which Mr. Howe makes equipollent with the for∣mer Concourse in these words, Post. p. 29. I here affect not the Curiosity to di∣stinguish these two Terms, as some do; I had rather he should hear Strangius again than me, blaming his not affecting that Curiosity of Distinction: and then It cites Strangius de Vol. Dei, lib. 1. c. 11. p. 59. assigning the difference be∣tween
them. This is a trivial litiga∣tion about words, where the thing in∣tended is sufficiently understood (or rather is intelligible) and, whether it be said Influence or Concourse makes no more to the business, than the Impro∣priety objected to Predetermining, or previous Concourse, which any indiffe∣rent Reader can see to have been spo∣ken generally, of a priority of the sup∣posed Influence on God's part, not in Time, but in Nature and Causality. Strangius, indeed, writing a large Treatise concerning that Subject, di∣stinguished all the Terms more accu∣rately: But Mr. Howe, it being there done to his hand, and writing on the by only two or three pages, had not the space or the occasion to en∣large upon them. And it is an Infir∣mity which Mr. Howe, I observe, is much subject to, that he seldom useth any notional Terms or Distinctions, where he can make men comprehend
him better without them: And at that indeed he hath a singular faculty. His very saying that he affected not, there, the Curiosity to (distinguish those two Terms, as some do, shows it: But with∣all, that he was not ignorant of them, and that he also could distinguish when he saw reason, and in time and place convenient. The Discourse might with more cause have accused him of Ambiguity, and raised scruples about his Curiosity: for that is taken in many several significations. As for example; sometimes it is used for a commend∣able Exquisiteness in things consider∣able, and worth the labour. Other∣whiles it is described, Quoties plus Di∣ligentiae quam oportebat impendimus rebus, vel Nostris, vel Alienis. Nostris, quam minima quaeque disquirimus & nullius fru∣gis: Alienis, quum de rebus caeterorum oc∣cultioribus non satis cum pudore perscruta∣mur aut interrogamus. So not Strangius, nor Doctor Twisse, but Cicero. Which,
that I may do equal right to the Dis∣course in translating Latine, is to say, That is called Curiosity, when men use an im∣pertinent Diligence in things relating to themselves or others: To themselves, when they are busie about every trifle, and what is of no moment: To others, when they ex∣ercise a scrutiny, or ask questions beyond modesty, concerning their private Affairs. And I had rather It should hear Cicero again, than me blaming It for this latter sort of Curiosity. Reperiam multos, vel innumerabiles potius, non tam curiosos, nec tam molestos quam Vos estis. That is; I could find many, or rather innumerable men, neither so Troublesome, nor so Curious as You are. And Quintillian explains it further. Est etian quae Parergia vo∣catur, supervacua, ut sic dixerim, Operosi∣tas: Ut a Diligente Curiosus, & a Reli∣gione supestitio distat, i. e. There is also that which is called Parergia, a superfluous and laborious Nicety; as a Curious man differs from a Diligent, or Superstition
from Religion. But besides all this, Cu∣riosus signifies an Informer: in which sense, I suppose, both Mr. Howe, and T. D. would be loath to accept it. Yet perhaps I may gratifie them in the Authority or Quotation. Suet. Aug. c. 27. Nam & Pinarium, Equitem Ro∣manum, quum Concionante se, admissa tur∣ba Paganorum, apud Milites, subscribere quaedam animadvertisset, Curiosum & Spe∣culatorum ratus, coram confodi imperavit. Which Text, if a little help'd in the translating, might serve them to no∣table purpose: But however so it is, that, taking the Knight to be a Spy and an Informer, he caused him forthwith to be slain in his presence. And lastly in the Code, Tit. de Curiosis & Stationariis: Curiosus is a Post-master, if Mr. Howe be dispos'd at any time to take another long troublesome Iourney, and do not disaffect also that Curiosity. It had been much more to the purpose to have learnt these several acceptations of Cu∣riosity,
than to have exercised it in the worst sense, in such needless dis∣quisitions, when a question stated in other terms was in expectation every minute to be disputed. But to say that in those words: I here affect not the Curiosity to distinguish these two Terms of Concourse or Influ∣ence, as some do, was to make the lat∣ter Phrase Influence equipollent with the former Concourse is gratis, or rather in∣gratiis dictum, and ought not to have been but upon consultation first with Mr. Howe, to have had his concurrence; no nor then neither. For should Mr. Howe be never so much of opinion, as he seems otherwise, that they are Equipollent, yet it can never be true that these words do infer it. As sup∣pose that I should say, I affect not here the Curiosity to distinguish be∣twixt the Candor and the Acuteness of The Discourse in this particular, do I therefore think them Equipollent, or
that one of them hath not the stronger ingredience? though indeed there is little of either. Another (for this hath been too pregnant to say a second) Instance to the same Head is where The Discourse, p. 26. tells us; It is an unaccountable in∣advertency, (for to salve his honour, so I will call it, rather than a slip of Iudgmemt) to produce Cursing and Swearing for instances of Actions downright, or for the substance of them Evil, &c. This indeed is Cu∣riosity in the highest degree of perfe∣ction, if (for I must be aware too of such exactness) there be degrees of Perfection. And an heavy Charge it is, which I know not whence it could light upon Mr. Howe, but that the Curious are likewise given for the most part to be Censorious, where they have no reason. For Mr. Howe Post. p. 33, 34. examining an Argument used by some for God's Predeterminative Concurrence to Wicked Actions, because there are no
Actions of Man on Earth so good, which have not some mixture of sin in them, &c. (see Postscript, p. 32.) saith, This Argument must be thus conceived. That if God concur by Determinative Influence to the imperfectly good Actions of Faith, Repentance, Love to himself, Prayer, therefore to the Acts of Enmity against himself, Cursing, Idolatry, Blasphemy, &c. And is it not a mighty consequence, if to Actions that are good quoad Substantiam, therefore to such as are in the Substance of them Evil? We our selves can in a remo∣ter kind concur to the Actions of others. Because you may afford your self your lead∣ing concurrence to Actions imperfectly good, therefore may you to them that are down∣right evil? because to Prayer, therefore to Cursing and Swearing? and then ruine men for the Actions you induced them to? You'l say God may rather, but sure he can much less do so than you. How could you be se∣rious in the proposal of this Question? For this Argument had been proposed by
way of question, and I have on pur∣pose set down Mr. Howe's answer at length, that it might be evident, with∣out further brangling, how little, I mean how no, cause there was for this Animadversion upon him, speaking expresly of such Cursing and Swear∣ing only as is Evil Quoad Substantiam. For certainly those Acts of Enmity against God himself, which Mr. Howe there enumerates, Cursing, and then Idolatry, Blasphemy, &c. are, and were so under∣stood by him, and by all but such as take care to the contrary, as much Evil in themselves as that Adultery which The Discourse it self owns to be so, p. 72. because no end or circumstance can make it good. So that this ado is made for Mr. Howe's not saying Pro∣phane Cursing and Swearing: indeed a very hainous and notorious omis∣sion: even as it would be for a man, so often as he uses the words And or The, not to distinguish or tell his Reader,
that he intends And in an Exegetical sense, or The in an Emphatical; or whether in their ordinary capacity. How unac∣countable soever this Inadvertency were in Mr. Howe, it is well The Discourse did, not call our Saviour to account, Matth. 5. 34. for forbidding Swearing in ge∣neral terms, nor St. Iames, cap. 5. v. 12. for the same as to Swearing, or c. 3. v. 9, 10. because the same Apostle does not there descant upon Cursing more distinctly, and add Prophane to its Character. But had the Discourse done so, it would have been obvious to every man, that the Pen deserv'd the same Brand which is set upon the Tongue in that Chapter. I wonder how in this Lyncean perspicacity It oversaw a more remarkable errour of Mr. Howe's about Actions in their Sub∣stance Evil; where in the same pages, 33, 34. he writes it Qoad Substantiam, which could not be Mr. Howe's Inad∣vertency; for in that Paragraph he
also spells Conseqence and Qestion in the like manner, and therefore must by the same Consequence as that of Curs∣ing and Swearing, have been a slip of his Judgment. But, had It con∣tinued to be so unmercifully accurate, Mr. Howe might perhaps have told It it's own; where p. 27. It mentions that Evil Act of Adam's eating a Tree (for I see we are all mortal) which is a Phrase of very hard Digestion. Other proofs of this Head I reserve till further occasion, two or three in∣stances upon each, being like so many Witnesses sufficient for It's Conviction. The second Article follows. It's Ignorance and Confusion about the Matter that is in Controversie. First Instance. The Discourse, p. 3. saith; The Ambiguity of Mr. Howe's Phrases removed, and the sense of them being brought to a certainty, I assert the
Contradictory to his Proposition: the term Efficacious suiting well enough if Mr. Howe intend by it an Infallibility of the Event, or the certain Production of those Actions which God hath and Influence upon. Now, for the better understanding of this, it is fit to observe that Mr. Howe's Proposition is this; God doth not by an Effecacious Influence universally move and determine Men to all their Actions, even those Actions that are most wicked. They that assert the Contradictory, must therefore affirm that God does: and much good may it do them. But The Discourse in the words before ci∣ted, capitulates that Mr. Howe should by Efficacious intend Infallibility, &c. It might almost as well have said Tran∣substantiation, which we shall meet with, p. 35. hereafter. Now it is indeed fit that a Respon∣dent should gratifie his Opponent as far as may consist with Civility and Safety. But here arises a Case of Con∣science;
Whether a man may give another leave, that desires it, to speak Non-sense. I say no. For Non-sense and Idle words are of the same no∣tion. But if he be one that I have no power over, and whom I can by no amicable means hinder from speaking Non-sense, I, after having used all good indeavours, am excused. But here the Case is stronger, where one shall not only take the Liberty him∣self, but oblige me too to speak Non-sense. To this I say, that to the best of my understanding, I never will, nor ought to do it in respect to any man. Yet no less a favour, or favours, doth The Discourse demand of Mr. Howe, in requiring that the term Efficacious may be expounded by Infallibility, that is, in effect, the most potent Influence by no Influence: For what Influence hath Infallibility upon the Actions of another, or upon any thing? And this, if it should yet obtain it of Mr. Howe,
yet would consist as ill with his own following words, or Certain Production; wherein he more than implies that Infallibility and Cer∣tain Production are all one: whereas a man may certainly and infallibly know what he never produces, and some too, we see, produce what they never understand. But if The Dis∣course shall still opiniatre in this matter, let It, to try how well it suits, strike Efficacious, for experi∣ment, out of the Question, and in∣sert instead of it, Infallibility and Certain Production, and then see if there be any sense in it or Grammar. Second Instance. The Discourse, p. 9. pretends to give a Definition of Predetermination. Predetermina∣tion, It saith, is thus defin'd; A Transient Action of God, which ex∣cites every Creature to Act. Now it is generally known, that the two most perfect Creatures in all Lo∣gick,
are a Demonstration and a Definition. How good The Dis∣course is at the first shall afterwards be remonstrated. But as to a De∣finition, it alwaies consists, as being a Dialectick Animal, of a Body which is the Genus, and a Difference, which is the Soul of the thing de∣fined; but this will in neither of these appear to be Perfect or Ra∣tional. For the Genus here is Action, and yet a few lines below It saith, that Predetermination is to be con∣ceived of per Modum Principii, un∣der the Notion of a Principle, or Cause of the Creatures Acting, but Concourse only per Modum Actionis. Prede∣termination was but even before un∣der the Genus of Action, and now of Cause: so that The Discourse hath been very liberal indeed of Body to the Definition, having given it two rather than fail, though commonly we account such births
to be Errours of Nature, and mon∣strous. Had the Discourse interposed some pages, it might have only ar∣gued a default of Memory; but this inconsistence at one sight, and before It's Pen could be taken off, shows that defect not to have been, as with some persons, recompensed in Judgment. And then for the Difference that is assigned in this Definition, it happens here, as usu∣ally where there is most Body, that there is least Soul. For there is no∣thing else left to be the Difference, but, whereby God excites every Crea∣ture to Act. If this be all, The Dis∣course might indeed very well say, p. 7. that Mr. Howe would be forc'd to grant Predetermination; for how could he possibly avoid it, when the Antagonist defines it in Mr. Howe's own words? who saith, Postscript, p. 45. In reference to sinful Actions; by this Influence God doth not only
sustain men who do them, and con∣tinue to them their natural faculties and powers whereby they are done; but also, as the first Mover, so far excites and actuate those powers, as that they are apt and habile for any congenerous Action, to which they have a natural designation, and whereto they are not sinfully disin∣clin'd. Whereby God Excites the Creature to Act, saith The Discourse, whereby God Excites and Actuates those Powers to, &c. saith Mr. Howe very fully here, and in all other places to the same sense; so that if The Discourse either understood Mr. Howe or It self, either Its own Definition, or the common Que∣stion, what place was there left for arguing, unless to debate for De∣bates sake? Usually when both parties say the same thing, there is an end of the discourse, but how∣ever of the Dispute: There is as
far as I see, no doubt to be made but Mr. Howe, as he hath, will grant this Predetermination even without being forced, but yet upon condition, and it is but reasonable that The Discourse will retract Its own fore∣going words, p. 5. This Act of God is called Predetermination, because it limits the Creature to this Action rather than to that. This indeed will serve The Discourse for argu∣ment either of Discourse or Dis∣pute with It self; being Definition in effect against Definition to pre∣vent monstrosity, supplying hereby two Souls to the two Bodies. But till It be better agreed with it, and can come to a clearer understanding with It self, no third person needs or can be interessed in the Contest further than as a Spectator of some strange sight for his money, like the double Child from Sussex. Third Instance. The Discourse
cites Mr. Howe, Postscript, p. 41. for having there said concerning God's exciting Man to act those fore∣going words that I come last from mentioning. But those words are not p. 41. but 45. and the mistake in the citation is probably any an errour only of the Printer's. Though indeed in that page 41. Mr. Howe with much perspicuity declares the same Sense and Opi∣nion which he gives in other ex∣pressions, p. 45. For p. 41. he saith, It hath been the care and designment of the Divine Wisdom so to order the way of Dispensation towards the se∣veral sorts of Creatures, as not only, not ordinarily to impose upon them what they could not be patient of, but so as that their powers and faculties might be put upon the exercises whereof they were capable, and to provide that neither their Passive capacity should be overcharged, nor
their Active be unimployed. But the words repeated and excepted against are to be found in his p. 45. and upon them it is that, The Discourse sixes this unreasonable and ill in∣terpretation and censure; If by Ex∣citing and Actuating the powers he means that God reduces them to Act, he hath taken a large jump from Du∣randus to Twisse: and so goes on to prove that ill-favour'd and worse conceiv'd suggestion. It ought suf∣ficiently to have prevented this usage that Mr. Howe's Letter, p. 43. hath said, That which hath too appa∣rently had greatest actual efficacy with many in asserting Predetermination, hath been the authority of this or that man of reputation, and the force of that Art of imputing a Doctrine al∣ready under a prejudicial doom to some or other ill-reputed former Wri∣ter, I profess not to be skill'd in the use of that sort of Weapons. And
therefore, not being himself the Ag∣gressor, but challenged and defied by another, he ought to have had the choice of them. What signi∣fies Durandus here, but to call a man ill names instead of coming to the Point? and what Dr. Twisse, but to wear mail, or bring a second when Mr. Howe comes naked and single? It is not what this or that man, but what Truth saith that is to he regarded: what liberty soever The Discourse here takes to the con∣trary. It can by no means be made true, that Mr. Howe by these words, God as the first Mover so far excites and actuates those powers, as that they are apt and habile for any con∣generous Action; professes himself of Doctor Twisse's opinion, no more than that he is of Durandus's after having thus declared his own as clearly as it is possible for any man's meaning to be minuted or explain'd.
For Durandus holds only a meer Conservation of the Faculty, Doctor Twisse a Predetermination. But Mr. Howe, to avoid Durandus on the one hand, saith, that in refe∣rence to sinful actions (for of these is the Question) God doth not only su∣stain men who do them, and continue to them their natural faculties and powers (which was all Durandus pre∣tended to) but also so far Excites and actuates those powers as that they are apt and habile for any congeeruous action, &c. whereas, if he would have spoke with Doctor Twisse, he must have said, but also excites and actuates those, powers determinately to this or that action, which would have differ'd the whole breadth of Heaven from Mr. Howe's Hypothe∣sis. And certainly such an actual influence as Mr. Howe describes, added to the Natural Faculty, is, if men look near, very distinguishable
from meer Conservation of that Fa∣culty on the one, and Predetermi∣nation on the other side. For a Fa∣culty conserved, as a Faculty, in Actu Primo, (as men call it) includes no such hability and present promp∣titude in it self to Action, as Mr. Howe proposes; since then it could never suffer a Privation of it but what were irrecoverable. Where∣as common experience shews Facul∣ties may be sometimes unapt for Action, and may be supposed al∣waies so, if every moment when they act they be not rendred apt by a superadded Influence, which may habilitate them for Action, without Determining them to This or That. So that all the Confusion herein objected to Mr. Howe, is to be referred to that Head upon which I have charged it; and the great Iump is no more than what brain-sick Passengers, being carried
alongst by the Wind and Sea, in the heaving of their Vessel imagine of the Trees and Steeples. For he is still in the same place, but no man knows whither away The Discourse may be driven, or what part It is bound to, and whether it do not sail without Steerage, Compass, or Anchor. A Fourth Instance of It's Igno∣rance and Confusion about the matter in Controversie, is It's va∣rying, and that so often and so ma∣terially, the Terms of the Question. First of all, It told us that It as∣serted the Contradictory of Mr. Howe's Proposition; which must be therefore by undertaking to prove (as was said formerly) That God doth by Efficacious Influence universally Move and Determine Men to all their Actions, even those Actions that are most Wicked. T. D. p. 3. yet immediately after having
joyn'd Issue upon this, It hath a second device, p. 4. and better likes Strangius his state of the Question, viz. Whether God does Determine or Predetermine all Creatures to all and each of their Actions. And then Thirdly, p. 5. It tells us more fully what the Question is, and how Its Predetermination is to be under∣stood, explaining it thus (though not fully enough) viz. an Act of God's by which he limits the Crea∣ture to this Action rather than to that. Such an Act The Discourse hath granted at last, and 'twere to be reasonably expected, that, after having transformed the Question thus oft to Its own understanding and convenience, this Contradicto∣ry at least to Mr. Howe's Proposal should be adhered to as far as it goes, and maintained: For otherwise what occasion was there, or what imployment is there left for this
Spirit of Contradiction? unless to rattle through the Air, make vain Apparitions, or in a calm day on a sudden to stir up a Tempest. But if this be The Discourses Anti-proposi∣tion, I that intermeddle not as an Opinionist either way, but endea∣vour only to comprehend as far as I can It's meaning, shall for that purpose put a Case in It's own terms. Suppose a man to meet with some afflicting calamity which tends to provoke, among other his Passions, that of Aversion or Hatred. He considers this or that man may have contributed to his calamity: He considers also that God may have had an hand in bringing it upon him: He considers, perhaps, (and is yet Undetermined, till God at least Determine him) whether to put forth one Act of Hatred toward this man, or another, toward that
man, or another, toward God, or whether only to hate the Evil it self that afflicts him. (For it can∣not be that he should Hate this man by the same Act of Hatred with which he Hates another man, nor can he Hate God by the same Act whereby he Hates either of them, or the afflicting Evil that hath be∣faln him.) At last he is limited to this rather than another Action, and apprehending with that pro∣phane person, 2 King. 6. 33. Behold this Evil is from the Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any longer? He pours out his Hatred against God himself. The Question now is, who limits him to this Action rather than to another? shall we say it is God? The Discourse, hold∣ing the Affirmative, must say it is God. This is indeed a dreadful re∣presentation of the Case, but a true one.
Nor is it therefore to be wondred, the Question being so frightful, that The Discourse starts and runs away from it so often; and after all this, p. 9. would forget that Predetermi∣nation is an Act by which God li∣mits the Creature to this Action ra∣ther than that, and undertakes to define it, exclusively to those words, (for the Definition includes the whole nature of the thing defined) no more but a Transient Action of God which excites every Creature to Act. And yet Fourthly, Considering that the Cause required no less; after tak∣ing breath, and comforting Its spi∣rits, The Discourse returns again in part to the Question, telling us in the bottome of the same page, 9. That it is in plain words whether God does Move men to all their natural Actions, and so to one rather than a∣nother. And thus now we have a fourth State of the Question, but
yet very different from the First; the Affirmative of which was under∣taken to be defended. In short, the main Controversie is about Determin∣ing; but this Fourth Question does not so much as mention it either in word or in sense. For the Determining in Mr. Howe's Proposition imports and is so express'd, not only a Mo∣ving men, but an Efficacious Moving them. (There are many Motions which may be Ineffectual.) Nor only a moving them to This Action rather than to That, but also to do this Wicked Action (for of such is the Controversie) rather than for∣bear it. What kind of practice is this? It is a worse thing to adulte∣rate Truth than Mony. The Terms of the Question are the Standard. But at this rate no man can know what is Meum or Tuum, which is his own Hypothesis, and which his Ad∣versaries, while what he issued in
currant sense and weight is return'd him Clipp'd or Counterfeit. But the observation of this manner of dealing hath put me upon another thought much differing, and which at first perhaps may seem something extravagant. The Camel is a beast admirably shap'd for Burthen, but so lumpish withall, that nothing can be more inept for feats of Activity. Yet men have therefore invented how to make it danse, that, by how much unnatural the spectacle might appear more absurd and ridiculous. Its Keeper leads it upon a Pavement so throughly warmed, that the Crea∣ture, not able to escape nor abide it, shifts first one foot, and then a∣nother to relieve it self, and would, if possible, tread the Air on all four, the ground being too hot for it to stand upon. He in the mean time traverses and trips about it at a
cooler distance, striking some vo∣lunteer Notes on his Egyptian Kit, like a French Dansing-Master. But, knowing that his Scholar is both in too much pain, and too dull to learn his measures, he therefore up∣on, frequent observation accords a tune to its Figure and Footing, which comes to the fame account. So that, after daily repeating the Lesson in private, they seem both at last to be agreed upon a new A∣rabick Saraband. Having thus far succeeded, he tries next whether what he taught by torture be not confirm'd by custom, and if a cool Hearth may not have the like effect. The Camel no sooner hears his Fiddle, but, as if it's ears burned with the musick, and it's memory were in it's feet, the Animal bestirs forthwith it's long legs, and, with many an Antick Motion, and ill-favour'd Coupe, gratifies the Masters
patience and expectation. When he finds, upon constant experiment, that it never fails him, he thenceforward makes it publick, and, having com∣pounded with the Master of the Re∣vels, shows it, with great satisfaction to the Vulgar, every Bartholomew-Fair in Grand-Cairo. I would not too much vex the similitude, but was run upon this by a resemblance it hath with some, who, not being fram'd at all for Controversie, and finding the Que∣stion too hot for them, do, by their flinching and shuffling from it, repre∣sent a Disputation, till it is grown ha∣bitual to them, and they change ground as often, and have the fame apprehension of the sound of an Argu∣ment, as the Camel of an Instru∣ment. And yet the Discourse hath a Fifth loose Foot to clap on at need, as if Four had not sufficed to praevaricate with, p. 11; where It exercises It's
uncouth nimbleness in syllogizing: but never was any thing more ridiculously aukward. Mr. Howe had, Letter p. 35. mentioned an argument used by those who hold the Affirmative of Predeter∣mination; That it necessarily belongs to the Original and Fountain-Being to be the First Cause of whatsoever Being, and conse∣quently that what there is of Positive Being in any the most Wicked Action; must princi∣pally owe it self to the Determinative Pro∣ductive Influence of this First and Soveraign Cause, otherwise it would seem that there were some Being that were neither Primum, nor a Primo. This was as plain and di∣stinctly laid out as possible, but must for sooth be cast into a Logical Figure, where the officiousness argues the fraud, as of those who make false Plate imbezilling part of the Metal, and yet make the Owner pay more∣over for the Fashion. This is the Discourses Syllogism. All Positive Be∣ings are Effects of the First Cause. All sin∣ull
Actions (for, It adds, this is our li∣mitation) are Positive Beings; Ergo, All sinfull Actions, as Actions, are Effects of the First Cause. So that here, by a Syl∣logistical Legerdemain, that term so essential in their Argument, as cited by Mr. Howe, the Determinative Productive Influence of the First and Soveraign Cause, is cleanly conveyed away out of sight; the Proposition undertaken to be main∣tained, that God doth by an Efficacious Influence universally Move and Determine Men to all their Actions, even those Actions that are most Wicked; or, as It lately va∣ried, Limits Men to This Action rather than to That, is turned out of doors by it's own foster-father, the keeping of it being grown it seems too chargeable; and all now that is inferred is only that all sinfull Actions, as Action, are Effects of the First Cause. And what is that to the purpose? If Mr. Howe must neither be allowed the use of his own Wea∣pons, nor upon the Ground which
they both were agreed on, it appears that his Challenger, notwithstanding all It's bravades, had no design, or but little disposition to meet him. The whole of this may in a just sense be granted without prejudice to Mr. Howe's Cause. For it matters not that they are Effects, unless it be also said and proved that they are Effects produced by God's Determinative Influence. Yet how much Powder is spent without doing the least execution! First a Categori∣cal, then an Hypothetical Syllogism fired at him, then forces him to distin∣guish, which is among Disputants next to crying quarter, but will not give it him; runs him through with three Replies to his Distinction, and leaves him dead upon the place. While the Proposition is all this while un∣toucht, Mr. Howe is out of Gun-shot, and his Adversary (if one that only skirmishes with himself, deserves to be called so) is afraid to take aim, and
starts meerly at the Report of his own Musquet. Thus hath The Discourse Five several times altered the Proper∣ty of the Question; which is my Fourth Instance of It's Ignorance and Confu∣sion about the matter in Controversie; unless it ought to be interpreted as an argument rather of a strong brain, af∣ter so many times, and suddenly turn∣ing round, not to have faln down sens∣less. A Fifth Instance to the same Head, Mr. Howe, Letter, p. 36, 37. had said, It seems infinitely to detract from the Per∣fection of the Ever Blessed God, to affirm that he was not able to make a Creature of such a Nature, as being continually sustained by him, and supplied with power every mo∣ment suitable to it's Nature, should be ca∣pable of acting, unless what he thus inables he determine (that is, for it can mean no less thing, impel) it to do it also. To this The Discourse replies p. 15. If we should take liberty of judging things by their ap∣pearanee
at first sight, without giving our selves the trouble of a strict Disquisition (take whether you will, the Liberty or the Trouble, only talk not so magi∣sterially) we mght easily be seduced into an imagination that it does no less infinitely de∣tract from the Divine Perfection to affirm; that God was not able to make a Creature of such a Nature, as that it might continually sustain it self, without a supply of power every moment from God. For that opinion seems to tye God to a shorter Tedder (how trivial and irreverently spoken!) than an ingenious Artificer who can raise an Edi∣fice that shall last many years without any need of his help for reparations. Compare now these two together, and mark what this Reasoning of The Discourse amounts to. Mr. Howe conceives (else it were very hard) that a Creature may Act, being inabled by a continual supply of power from God every mo∣ment. Therefore quoth It, A Crea∣ture may Be, without being sustained
or supplied from God any moment. But this parhaps was only to show how in∣genious. It's first apprehensions, and how candid are It's first inclinations; and whether It were easily seduced It self, or had a mind to seduce others, It likes this conceit so well that It cannot yet let it go, but subjoyns immediate∣ly; And this I the rather take notice of, be∣cause I find it the sentiment of the most acute Suarez, &c. But, whereas others find their second Thoughts to be the more judicious, It's judging thus at First Sight, seems more accurate then It's Second Seeming: They, ib. who de∣ny God's immediate operation in every action of the Creature, (which Mr. Howe seems to do in his Answer now under dis∣cussion) will doubtless be compelled to deny that the Creature does depend immediately up∣on the Actual Influence of God. So It quotes the most acute Suarez. Met. Disp. 20. This is a most exemplary and Primitive Charity, whereby The
Discourse hath sold all its own acuteness to give it to the poor Suarez; so that it hath reduced it self to that desperate and utmost dulness, as herein to say, They who deny what Mr. Howe seems by this Answer to do, that is as much as to say, They who suppose with Mr. Howe that a Creature may act being inabled by God every moment, without being impelled, (which he above, and al∣waies modestly asserts) will doubtless be compell'd to deny that the Creature de∣pends immediately upon the Actual Influence of God, which is tantamount in sense, which useth to be the mean∣ing, as to say, It seems to be denied that the Creature does depend, because it is affirmed to depend. Ought not Bills to be put up for men affected with so peculiar a distemper? I can∣not in the whole Common Prayer find any that is proper for this oc∣casion. Another Instance (for they do so
multiply on me in reading, that I for∣get to number them, and yet they are so signal in their kind, that they are not to be omitted) is p. 96. and on∣wards: the vain attempt to reconcile God's Predetermining by Efficacious Influence to Wicked Actions with his Wisdom and Sincerity by the same Mediums that were used by Mr. Howe to reconcile his Prescience of them, yet this is undertaken to be done from p. 96. for several pages forward, and with the same confidence which is alwaies necessary to such as promise impossibilities. But it is in the mean time an high contempt of all other men, and presumption of ones own Understanding that can imbolden to such an Argument. Who is there, un∣less Adam gave him his Name, but sees the difference between having an Influ∣ence upon Men's Wicked Actions, and having no Influence, which Prescience, as such, cannot signifie him to have
hat foreknows? But nevertheless Mr. Howe hath expresly enough assert∣ed and explained the Influence God hath on all Humane Actions. For further Instance, see what The Discourse saith, p. 61. and so along, struggling to bring the immediate Concourse, which Mr. Howe speaks of and avows, under the same prejudice with Predetermination, which he dis∣claims and argues against: For all that idle indeavour might have been saved and prevented by a small supplement of Understanding or Memory. For Mr. Howe alwaies distinguishes (and so might any ordinary capacity for him, should he have trusted either that or men's common Ingenuity) between Concurring, though never so Imme∣diately, by an Influence which doth but Inable to an Action, and by that which doth Determine to it, or impell. If any man do but carry this about with him, as Mr. Howe does thorow his
whole troublesome Journey, it is a certain remedy against all Gauling, at least by this Argumentation. One thing I could not but remark here, p. 61. of The Discourse in pas∣sing, how jovial It is and bucksom, which is just the humour of Ty∣rants, bloodily cruel, and yet at the same time full of dissoluteness and laughter. I will pause a little with the Readers leave, and try my skill what answer I can excogitate for Mr. Howe, which will not be a com∣mon friend to us both (pleasant) as we have been hitherto one to ano∣ther, and I hope shall remain notwith∣standing this Publick Contest. Dear Damon, doubtless. But I perceive not that Mr. Howe hath yet had any Contest with you, nor, if I can per∣swade him, is he likely to have for the future, but will avoid you for several reasons. Is this your friend∣ship? what then and how terrible
is your Malice? The Ancient Con∣tests of Friendship, and which made some pairs so illustrious, were which of them should die for the other, not which should cut the others throat. The utmost that I have ob∣served upon such Publick Contests, or that I think a man is bound to in Christianity, hath been to pardon such a Friend, and bid him do his office. Here is to be seen or play'd T. D. indeed, or Amity a la Mode. But go on, This Distinction is an open Friend to us, and to which there∣fore upon all fit occasions we pay our respects. This is prity, and most softly said, as if it were by the Great Mogul lying upon a silken-bed, and leaning upon Cushions. And be∣sides, 'tis a new Invention, being the first time this that ever I heard of a man that contracted Friendship with a Distinction; but most wise men, (and so I think should Mr. Howe,)
have been used to distinguish with whom they contract it. To pro∣ceed, speaking of Determination and Concurrence, these are the words; But that it waits a fitter time to speak out Her mind, She could say that She conceives not how She can compel the Will, &c. (of this compelling the Will, I shall have occasion also to speak out my mind hereafter). What use was to be made of a She in this place, I cannot well Imagine. At last The Discourse grows perfectly wanton. If imme∣diate Concurence thinks Her self disobliged to satisfie an inquisitive Cu∣riosity as to the Modus or manner how She joyns with the Creature in an Action to which Sin does necessa∣rily adhere, &c. What would a man think of this? A Female! An Im∣mediate Concurrence! What sport were here prepar'd for that which is by our Moderns called Wit, but
is no more than the luxuriant sterility of Land, nor broken up or manur∣ed! In the mean time, if The Dis∣course be really at so much ease, as It would seem by this way of talk∣ing, 'tis but a security of understand∣ing, like that of Conscience where∣with guilty persons confirm and de∣ceive themselves for the present. I shall now come to the last In∣stance of this Article. Not that I want abundance of more, or might not produce the whole Book in evi∣dence, but because it were time that I came to some period: And lest The Discourse should think I avoided It's main strength, I shall there ex∣amine It, where It pretends to no less than Demonstration. For never was there thing so dreadfully ac∣coutred and armed Cap-a-pe in Lo∣gick, Categorical and Hypothetical Syllogisms, Majors, Minors, Enthy∣mems, Antecedents, Consequents,
Distinctions, Definitions, and now at last Demonstration, to pin the basket: Terms that good Mr. Howe as a meer novice is presum'd to be unacquainted with, and so far from being able to endure the ratling of The Discourses Armour, that as those Roman Legions once bragg'd, even the sweaty smell of It's Arm-pits would be sufficient to rout him. But some Creatures are as safe by their weaknesse, as others by their strength, from being medled with by a considerable Adversary. I that cannot boast of any extraordinary faculty for Disputation, nor yet confess my self void of common un∣derstanding, am therefore the most proper perhaps to try the force of this Demonstration; and whether The Discourse be not therein as feeble, as it was lately short in De∣finition. It p. 25. quotes Mr. Howe, Postsc. p. 28. that he does really be∣lieve
God's Immediate Concourse to all Actions of his Creatures both Im∣mediatione Virtutis & Suppositi, yet not Determinative to Wicked Acti∣ons; then The Discourse proceeds: We shall adventure a Demonstration that it implies a Contradiction for God to make a Creature that can Act with∣out Predetermination, i. e. applying it to Action and to one rather than to another Action. And 'tis this, That such a Creature would be but Ens Se∣cundarium, a Second Being, not (Causa Secunda, a Second Cause, or, (which is all one) God should be but Ens Primum, not Causa Prima, the First Being, not the First Cause, which it proves thus; 1. If God does con∣cur only by Simultaneous (an ele∣gant term of The Discourse's own production) Concourse, and not by Predetermination, or Previous Mo∣tion, then God cannot be the Cause of the Actions of the Creatures, as they
proceed from them: But the Conse∣quent is absurd, and It presumes Mr. Howe will not own it. What Mr. Howe may do, being thus hard put to it, I will not undertake: but surely there was never any thing affirm'd with less truth or sense than The Discourse here doth, that God should be the Cause of the Actions of the Creatures, as those Actions pro∣ceed from them. One would think the Creatures themselves should be the Causes of the Actions as they proceed from them; (for how other∣wise are they Causes at all of those Actions?) and God the Cause of those Actions as they proceed from him. Now how they proceed from him Mr. Howe hath sufficiently shown his own conception of it, viz. as they are done by a sufficient Influ∣ence, which God Immediately affords to inable the Creature to do them, not to Determine it thereto. And is not
God to be entitled a Causa Prima as well as Ens Primum, in reference to what is done by his Influence in the way before expressed? Where∣as, if God be the Cause of the Actions of the Creatures, as those Actions proceed from Them, the Action must be done by his Influ∣ence alone, and then he should not be Causa Prima, because then there were no Causa Secunda. But this was only sure The Discourses Demon∣and the next that follows it-stration. Mr. Howe had, as before cited, Postsc. p. 28. avowed God's Imme∣diate Concourse to all Actions of his Creatures, both Immediations Virtu∣tis & Suppositi. Upon which Con∣cession of his It argues thus (with this prelusory vaunt, p. 26. He is twice killed that is killed with his own Weapon, so that no less than sudden Death is to be expected in the case.) If there be an Immediate Concourse,
then there is a Predetermination or putting the Creature upon Action be∣fore it Acts: or else the Creature is the First Mover of it self to Action. This is so unimaginably dull an ar∣gument, that really it requires a proportionable dulness in the Rea∣der, or an extraordinary acuteness to comprehend it, and how it should be deduced from Mr. Howe's Con∣cession of Immediate Concourse. For the argument so put receives not the least strength, not any, from that Concession of Mr. Howe's, but rather from his Non-concession, and that he hath not yielded enough, and as much as The Discourse would have him, which pretends that Im∣mediate Concourse alone is not suf∣ficient to exclude the Creature from being the First Mover of it's own Actions. For, whether Immediate Concourse be granted, or not grant∣ed, the case is all one as to this ar∣gument
while so much is not granted whereby an account may be given how God and the Creature joyn in one in∣dividual Action rather than another, as The Discourse would have it, p. 27. if Mr. Howe could have been per∣swaded to be thus Demonstrated out of this Reason. The Illustration of It's plausible Consequence, as 'tis called p. 27. may perhaps be noted, and shall hereafter in it's due place, but the Demon∣stration carries the Bell away, and I must yet follow it's tinkling. And thus it goes on p. 27, 28. An account how the particular Actions of any ra∣tional Creatures Will come to be De∣termined, upon the exclusion of Pre∣determination, I know none can be given. And how is thus proved? for sure to affirm it is not Demon∣stration. Why, thus. Not by Chance: (unless this saying so be an Instance that it may in some cases) no body
dream'd of any such thing but this was put in, I suppose, only for more harmony, & to run Division. A good slight it is, by proving first a thing which no man denies to make it more credible that the argument upon the Subject in Controversie will be as cogent. For the Question is upon It's Second Member, Not by the Creatures Self-determining Power, and here The Discourses main strength comes upon trial. For that, as such, is indeterminate as to the Acts to which we conceive it must be some way or other Determined. Admirably good! so it is indeed till the Crea∣ture, as Mr. Howe conceives, have Determined it self: and so it will be too if God be to Determine it, Indeterminate till he have Deter∣mined it. But if the Creature do Determine it self (which if it never do, how does The Discourse call it a Self-determining Power?) then I hope it is not Indeterminate. So
that the whole stress of the Cause which was to prove that the Crea∣ture (so Influenced and Actuated by God Immediately for any congenerous Action, as Mr. Howe hath exprest it) cannot Determine it self, is left in the lurch, and no Demonstration hath been given hitherto, but of that Confusion and Ignorance with which I have charged The Discourse in this Article, about the matter in Controversie. But It argues further, p. 28, 29. and, with the same Demonstration, from a second Concession (it were methinks more ingenuous, to call it a Declaration or Assertion) of Mr. Howe's of God's Immediate Con∣course and Predetermination to the Production of Good Actions, and the necessity thereof, pretends to infer the Necessity of God's Immediate Concourse and Predetermination likewise to all (that is, even to the most Wicked) Actions. But this
beside the ridiculousness, is so odi∣ous an undertaking, that any pious man, should he be superiour in the contention, would repent of his Victory; I shall here wave it; but if The Discourse pride it self herein, I give It the Joy as It deserveth. This Demonstration I had assign∣ed as the last Instance of this Head; but I think I may be dispensed with to add another, it being an Act of Charity. For there are yet behind six Aricles more, some of them of a more criminal and hainous nature than those two that hitherto I have insisted upon. 1. It's Falsifications and Fictions of what Mr. How hath not said. 2. It's Injurious Perverting of what he hath said. 3. It's Odious Insinuations con∣cerning what there is no colour to object against. 4. It's Insolent Boasting and
Self-applause upon no occasion. 5. It's Gross Absurdities, Incon∣sistencies, Self-contradictions, and Vn∣safe Expressions. 6. The Wrath and Virulence of It's spirit. And oftentimes it chances that one and the same Instance is ap∣plicable, and may be reduced to se∣veral of these Heads. But therefore, as oft as I can impute any thing which might receive an higher ac∣cusation to It's Ignorance, Confu∣sion or Dulness (which it is lest in any man's self-determining power to remedy) I rather chuse to state it upon this more innocent account. And that hath been the Cause which hath swell'd this Head beyond equality: my intention, being to be briefer on those that follow. I say therefore, that it is out of Charity that I here attribute It's Indifference between the Modus of God's Pre∣science, and God's supposed Prede∣termination
to Wicked Actions to It's stupidity rather than any o∣ther Article, or make a new one for it on purpose. The thing is thus. Mr. Howe Letter, p. 47, 48, 49, 50. had, taking notice of an Argument which some use from God's Pre∣science for his Predetermination, said, among other things, very pious∣ly; This supposed Indetermination of the Humane Will, in reference espe∣cially to Wicked Actions, is far from being culpable of inferring that God cannot therefore foreknow them, &c. And after, upon consideration what others had endeavoured towards ex∣plaining or perplexing this matter, modestly adds, For my own part, I can more easily be satisfied to be igno∣rant of the Modus or Medium of his Knowledge, while I am sure of the thing, &c. It cannot therefore be so af∣frightful a thing to suppose God's Foreknowledge of the most Contingent
Future Actions well to consist with our Ignorance how he foreknows them, as that we should think it necessary to overturn and mingle Heaven and Earth rather than admit it. But The Discourse, p. 32, 33. signifies, and then by quoting some of these words would confirm it, that we need not be more sollicitous, and are no more concerned to satisfie our selves of the Modus of Prede∣termination to sinful Actions, so as to separate them from the sinfulness of them, (for to hold the Conclu∣sion is with It Demonstration) than about the Modus of God's Prescience of them. Which must argue (what∣ever else) a palpable shortness of discourse to think there is no odds betwixt a thing so plainly reveal'd in the Word of God as his Pre∣science is, and so agreeable to all rational apprehension, and a Notion so altogether unrevealed as this uni∣versal
Predetermination yet appears, and so contrary if not to the whole scope and design of Divine Revela∣tion, yet to all common understand∣ing and genuine sense of right Rea∣son. But whensoever there shall be so clear proof made that there is such a thing as The Discourses Pre∣determination, as may soon be brought of Prescience, when it shall be as duly stated among the Divine Attributes, then, and not till then ought men to practise the same de∣vout resignation of their reasoning about it, as Mr. How hath laudably done in that of Prescience: but in the mean time it may be handled not as Causa Dei, but Causa Homi∣nis, it is lawful to plead against it, and not to pay mens belief, but to afford their Charity to its abetters. There was one called Antipheron, whose name therefore seems rather to have been given him by the
people from a natural defect they observed in him than by his God-fathers: He had a peculiar shortness of sight, but which turned him to account, and saved him the expence of sending to Malamocco or Lambeth to the Glass-house. He needed not so much as contemplate himself in Polyphemus his mirrour, the water. He carried his Looking-glass alwaies with him, the next Air supplied all, and serv'd him not only to breath, but to see his face in, without any danger of staining or breaking it. A great convenience thus to be able every minute to blow himself a new Looking-glass. But how happy were it, if, what the shortness of his sight, the dulness of mens minds could have the same effect, to object to them continually their own Image, and make it unnecessary for others to represent them. Then might The Discourse also have excused me
from this labour, and upon reflexion with it self, have discern'd it's own un∣fitness and ignorance to manage this or any other Controversie. For want of such an immediate in∣spection on It's own defects, It's natu∣ral undistinctness seems to perceive faults in others, and to find a mote in their eye, neglects the Beam in It's own. It overlooks so gross a practice as in it's p. 47. to translate out of Strangius into English Doctor Twisse's Argumentation about the same Pre∣science of God of future Contingen∣cies, undertaking still to demonstrate, p. 46. (that is the word) that this Foreknowledge depends upon the Di∣vine Decree, while in the mean time It never gives us, though the Book was in It's hand, Strangius his full and ar∣ticulate answer to it in the same place, lest any man should know of it; but, to conceal it's own disability for any reply to it, challenges Mr. Howe to
answer Doctor Twisse's irrefragable Argument over again. But p. 16. in Mr. Howe It can find two unpardon∣able faults in a man of Learning and Inge∣nuity. First, Anticipation, For, he having Letter, p. 36, 37. said, unless he Deter∣mine (that is to say, for it can mean no less thing, Impel,) that is the word accu∣sed, the Creatuue to do it; this is made so hainous, that I thought at first it had been the Anticipation of the Revenue, but, when all comes to all, I see it is nothing but the explaining a word of less obvious import by another more obvious: and nothing is more usual in The Discourse it self, and among men of Learning. And The Discourse it self adds here in the same minute Impelling, i. e. Compelling (for that is Mr. Howe's sense of the term, as will appear ere long) which is methinks as early, and a more perverse Anticipation than Mr. Howe is unpardonable for, by how much It
does by these last words own that Im∣pel, unless it signifie Compel, is al∣lowable, but affirms that in Mr. Howe's sense it is Compel, as will appear ere long, which is moreover false, and therefore I will be so subtile as to take out my pardon in time for calling this Anticipation; for indeed that which neither is, nor ever can appear, ere long or short (as for Mr. Howe, to mean Compel) cannot be Antici∣pated. But the second unpardonable fault of Mr. Howe's is his immodest begging the Question: And wherein? I may well call it so (quoth The Discourse) because he knows we neither can nor will grant his Ar∣gument without ruining our Hypothesis. This is all the proof assigned of his begging the Question. I do indeed confess that Mr. Howe was much to blame in urging an Argument to the ruine of their precious Hypothesis; but I think it falls not under that Predicament of
begging, though this does of robbing the Question: and however his crime is more excusable, because, in common probability, Mr. Howe, having writ his Letter and Postscript before The Discourse replied to him, might be ig∣norant that it was It's dear Hypothesis. For my part I take the very first Title of the Book de Causa Dei, to be more notoriously guilty both of Anticipation and Begging the Question, than that Mr. Howe could have any thing upon either account herein justly imputed or objected to him. The third Artice of which I shall Catalogue some, it being endless to enumerate, all the Instances. It's many strange Falsifications & Fictions of what Mr. Howe hath not said, and then discoursing of them as if they were said. As for a first Instance. In it's E∣pistles, p. 10. Mr. Howe is accused of
having denyed God's Immediate Concurrence to all Actions, because Letter p. 36. he saies (not, as The Discourse cites it, it sufficiently salves, but) it may well be thought sufficiently to salve the rights (and priviledges, omitted) of the first Cause that no Action can be done but by a power derived from it, which, in reference to for∣bidden Actions, intelligent Creatures may use or not use as they please. Is any thing said here that implies any denial of Im∣mediate Concurrence? Why may not that Power derived be Immediate to the Action? Is any thing said to the contrary, or which accords not well with what is pretended to be said ex opposito? But, to make this Accusation good, It conceals another passage in the very same Paragraph. Besides that it seems infinitely to detract from the perfe∣ction of the Ever Blessed God, to affirm he was not able to make a Creature of such a nature, as, being continually sustained by him, and supplied with power every moment
suitable to its nature, should be capable of Acting, unless whatsoever he thus Inables he Determine it to do also. So that the charge is founded meerly upon Mr. Howe's not having used the express word Immediate Concurrence in that sentence, and in concealing disingenu∣ously what he had expressed, and what fully includes Immediate Concurrence in the sense that he afterwards asserts and explains it, Postsc. p. 28. to be both Immediatione Virtutis, and Suppositi to all Actions, though not Determinative to Wicked Actions. Although it would be something ridiculous to say, that The Discourse read one part of this with It's eyes shut, and the other part with It's eyes open; yet 'tis more false that Mr. Howe did there, or any where else deny God's Immediate Concurrence; and 'tis the best excuse of which this (otherwise Forgery) is capable. Second Instance. It feigns in the same p. 10. that Mr. Howe hath Postsc.
P. 39. affirm'd Predetermination to all Actions. It were strange if he should, but pretended to be proved by these his words, The Active Providence of God about all the Actions of Men, consists not meerly in giving them the natural powers, whereby they can work of themselves, but in a real Influence upon those powers. This is (to speak the most softly, and indeed more softly than the thing will admit) an unking Interpretation, after what Mr. Howe hath been quoted to say in my former Instance: but especially, if The Discourse can or would be pleased to consider (after It's invidious and de∣ceitful generality in citing Letter, from p. 32, to 50. and the Postscript, with∣out assigning one word) that Mr. Howe's asserting here of God's real In∣fluence upon mens natural powers does not at all imply that Predetermi∣nation, which he there all along op∣poses. For can there be no Influence but such as is Determining? He hath
shown there both may be and is. How often is there such Influence by the operation of Common Grace as doth not Determine? Third Instance. In the same p. 10. Because Mr. Howe hath Letter, p. 32. said, Some Actions of the Creatures are in themselves most malignantly wicked, and Letter, p. 46. Intrinsecally Evil; there∣fore It, falsly enough, reproaches him to have by these words denied that all Actions have in them a Natural Goodness: Whereas Mr. Howe here speaks of Actions as they are Morally Evil or Wicked, that is, as specified by dire∣ction to an undue Object. Is not such a specifying Direction Intrinsecal? Is not the specification of every thing In∣trinsecal to it? And so are not such Actions truly said to be Evil in them∣selves which so specified can by no Cir∣cumstances be made good. But Postsc. p. 36. (which is produced to argue him of Inconsistence) he owns that there is
not any Action so sinful, but hath some na∣tural good as the substract matter thereof, abstractly and physically considered, (and yet so they can never be pro∣duced by God or Man, but concreted with their Individuating Circumstan∣ces; nor doth the Affirming the one, infer the Denial of the other. If it did, The Discourse it self hath done the same thing, p. 72. Thus some Actions are said to be in themselves Evil, when they are Evil in regard of their Object, &c. Thus the Hatred of God and Adultery are in them∣selves Evil, &c. But I suppose 'twould judge it hard dealing to say that here∣by It denies (though it be an hard say∣ing to affirm) that natural good which is the substrate matter thereof, and which alwaies at a dead lift It, hath recourse to. Fourth Instance. From Mr. Howe's having Letter, p. 33. said, Nothing is more apparently a simple and most strictly natural impossibility, than not to do an Action where∣to
the Agent is Determined by an Infinite Power. It Epist. p. 11. hath the ridi∣culous grosness to charge Mr. Howe with there affirming that Predetermi∣nation forces the Will; as if nothing could make a thing naturally impos∣sible to a man but force: he cannot make a new Sun: but what force hinders him? This is indeed Force, or rather Fraud; for otherwise it is impossible to deduce it. But whether of them be used against a chosen ad∣versary, makes it seems no scruple in a Conscience diverted with Disputa∣tion. Another Instance. It calumniates Mr. Howe, p. 87. to have asserted the Positivity of Sin, and there calls it, the foundation of his Hypothesis, proceeding with great pains to disprove it borrows one Argument, to lead him with, from the most Learned Dr. Barlow, the now renowned Bishop of Lincoln, urges the Minor, then the Major, and draws up a
whole Process, as if it were in the Spiritual Court, against him, and T. D. were become his Chancel∣lour. There is none in England, nor especially Mr. Howe, as I ima∣gine, but would reverence the Au∣thority of that Excellent Person in all points of Learning or Contro∣versy. But The Discourse is too bold to make use of his Power without his Commission, in a Case where Mr. Howe hath not said one word to affirm such Positi∣vity. A further Instance. With the same Truth that is Falshood It feigns, and that often, that Mr. Howe by God's having Irresistible Influence upon the Will means God's Forcing of the Will unto the most Wicked Actions. As for example, p. 39. from Mr. Howe's, p. 40. Irre∣sistibly, that is in his sense Forcibly. Where∣as Mr. Howe there objects to his Ad∣versaries, their holding such an Irre∣sistible
Determination of the Will, but Forcing of it no where. Yet at what expence of Learning, and with how much loss of Ink and Ingenuity does The Discourse argue that the Will can∣not be forc'd! which Mr. Howe, ha∣ving denied that Irresistible Influence must of necessity disown for it's fur∣ther absurdity, had he thought his Ad∣versaries guilty of it. But he appears to have been far from imagining it of them, nor could any but The Discourse have imputed it to him as his sense, that God does by Force whatsoever he does Irresistibly. What Law of Rea∣son is there, or how can The Discourse justifie such a Falsification but by Custom? If that shall be a sufficient Plea, It will never want Instances further to warrant the Practice. As in this fol∣lowing (Forgery I may not call it, ha∣ving to do with such exactness, but) Ra∣sure, Mr. Howe, having been upon the
Argument of the Will of God concern∣ing those that perish, had Letter p. 12. said, The Resolve of the Divine Will in this matter, was not concerning the Event, what he shall do (i. e. abstractly and singly, as these next following words shew) but concerning his Duty what he should, and concerning the connexion be∣tween his Duty and his Happiness. Here∣upon what does mean The Discourse? p. 116. It refers to those words of his, p. 112. and recites a further passage of his Letter, p. 115, 116. to argue them of repugnancy these to the former, but to that purpose conceals Mr. Howe's last Clause, but concerning his Duty what he should, and concerning the Con∣nexion between his Duty and his Hap∣piness, which being taken in, as it ought, there could have been no pretence of Inconsistency. And it adds that Mr. Howe's Answer Letter. p. 116. that Imperfection is no way imputable to the Di∣vine Will meerly for not Effecting every
thing whereto it may have a Real Propen∣sion, is no Answer to the Objection: upon this strange pretence, that, a Real Pro∣pension of Will is no Will, as if it were a thing impossible that Propension should be either Habitual or Actual. So also for continual Instance. The Discourse p. 118, 119. feigns a Que∣stion to have been proposed by Mr. Howe, Whether it be fitting for God efficaciously to overpower all men into a com∣pliance with the overtures he makes to them in Common: and then It creates also an Answer for him; It is not fit for God to overpower men without making any over∣tures to them at all; and, to make a song of three parts, judicially decides: the Answer is not fitted to the Question. I must confess that upon some former expe∣riments I doubted of the Rectitude of It's Judgment, but I was not wary enough to suspect a Falshood, which must be so notorious, as that there should be no such Question or Answer.
But in good truth none there is that I can find of Mr. Howe's mark. The Question no where in Terms, but the Answer neither in terms nor sense, nor any thing like it. So that The Discourse is not to be allowed in any Court ei∣ther as a Competent Judge, or a Legal Witness, but may deserve to be tryed for this as a Criminal before any Lo∣gick-tribunal. Nor needs there any other Evidence against it for Convi∣ction, than those very words of Mr. Howe, that It there hath cited. Grace sometimes shows it self in preventing exer∣tions, and in working so heroically as none have beforehand [in the neglect of it's ordi∣nary method] any reason to expect. Letter p. 138. Now look back upon the supposititious Answer, to whom God makes no overtures at all; Then compare Mr. Howe's words in the neglect of it's ordinary methods: And now let any man judge of the Honesty of such an Ad∣versary. For can they be said to neg∣lect
God's ordinary methods to whom he makes no overtures at all? Nor is the second scheme of It's Question and Answer which immediately follows any whit better, but guilty of as per∣fect Forgery as the first, and so ill contriv'd, that it neither agrees with the former, nor with the Book, though pretending to be a true Copy. And an Instance it is of the same Fraud to feign, p. 119, 120. that Mr. Howe in his Letter hath, abstractly from the more fit course that God hath taken, determin'd the unfitness of God's giving grace and salvation to all men. All that Mr. Howe hath said therein amounts only to assert the course which is not taken to be less fit, and that God doth from the perfect rectitude of his own nature, take that course which was to be taken most wisely, and do that which was most congruous and fit to be done, Letter p. 149. What can better become us than to judge so of
the waies that God hath pitched upon, and wherein we have God's own choice to precede and be a guide to our judgment? I shall conclude this Article with It's quotation, p. 44. out of Dr. Man∣ton's Comment on Iames 1. 13. p. 101. as if that Learned Divine had affirmed the disputed Predetermination by those words. Many who grant Pre∣science, deny Preordination, (viz. quoth The Discourse, the Decree whereof Pre∣determination is the execution, so I understand him) lest they should make God the Author of sin; and It forsooth understands him so, but I hope with∣out any obligation to better and sin∣cerer judgments. For what one word is there here that can imply that Pre∣ordination to be executed by the way of Predetermination? It is no won∣der if Mr. Howe be not secure while yet living, when those that are at rest cannot escape so notorious a practice.
This is the same as to cut off a dead man's hand to subscribe with it to a Forgery. There needed no less it seems than Doctor Manton's good name, which is like a precious oint∣ment, to give a better odour to those putid suggestions and expressions of Protestantism grown of late weary of it self, &c. bestowed on Mr. Howe on this occasion. And yet (for it made me curious) there are Witnesses above exception that also Dr. Manton con∣sented with Mr. Howe in this point, and exprest a great sense of the danger of the contrary Opinion. And when∣soever The Discourse signifies it's doubt of it, I will undertake to make out their Evidence.
The Fourth Article that naturally succeeds the former Falsifications. It's vain, but most injurious Attempts to pervert what Mr. Howe hath said. As for a First Instance, where p. 45. It represents Mr. Howe's words; Letter p. 29, 30. to imply an affirmation of a Foreknowledge of Christ's Death antece∣dent to God's Decree concerning it. The words are these (which It ushers in with (Let us hear if our patience can hear this exercise, whether Mr. Howe's gloss upon Act. 4. 28. doth not corrupt the Text. If they had known they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory.) That is, God foreseeing wicked hands would be prompt and ready for this tragick enter∣prize, his soveraign Power, and wise Coun∣sel concurred with his Foreknowledge, so only and not with less latitude, to define or deter∣mine the bounds and limits of that malignity than to let it proceed unto this execution.
What common sense or ordinary inge∣nuity could have found less in these words than that Mr. Howe doth therein at least profess the Foreknowledge and the Decree to have been sunul & seniel, which is far from affirming the Fore∣knowledge to be antecedent? But Mr. Howe had moreover, immediate∣ly before these words cited, said; It was a thing which God's Hand and Counsel had determined before to be done. But this The Discourse conceals, lest It self should be detected of such a wilful perver∣sion, and the better to make Doctor Twisse's censure (which otherwise had been nothing to the business) take place upon Mr. Howe p. 46. Those Ie∣suitical dictates of the foreseen Determina∣tion of the Humane will before God's De∣cree, are not the Dictates of Divines Dis∣puting but Dreaming. There was not any colour in Mr. Howe's words for any such imputation; though I doubt not that Mr. Howe believes God's
Decree in this case to be but suit∣able to that Agency which he every where supposes him to have in things of that nature. A Second Instance of the same dealing is upon Mr. Howe's Asser∣tion, Postsc. p. 28. of God's Imme∣diate Concourse to all Actions of his Creatures. For p. 55. thence It pretends that it follows, and that Mr. Howe implies that God affords men a leading Concurrence to Actions downright Evil. And yet Mr. Howe had but Postsc p. 29. explain'd and limited that concession, saying, The Concourse or Influence, which I deny not to be Immediate to any Actions, I only deny to be Determinative as to those which are Wicked. Agreeably to what he saith also Postsc. p. 45. n. 9. But that limitation The Dis∣course takes not any notice of, pre∣tending not to understand a diffe∣rence between inducing men to
Actions which God will reward, and to those for which he will ruine them. And upon this presumption it falls into the usual fit of boasting vain-gloriously over Mr. Howe. For where Perversion may go for Inge∣nuity, Insolence may also pass for Reason. I cannot but observe also how in pursuit of this Subject, because Mr. Howe Postsc. p. 35. cited Luk. 6. 9. with Hosea 13. 9. to shew the diffe∣rence, and how much more agree∣able it was to the Nature of God to induce men by Determinative In∣fluence to Imperfectly good Actions which yet lead to Salvation and Blessedness, taen to such as are downright Evil, and tend to their ruine: It hereupon p. 58. frames a Chain of Syllogistical Argumenta∣tions, all of It's own devising, which yet It hath the face to father upon Mr. Howe. I call it the rather a
Chain, because I remember to have read of one who had so singular a faculty of linking one Lye artifi∣cially upon another, that they cal∣led him at Rome by a new Nick∣name Catena: and the dexterity of The Discourse, in almost as sinister a quality, might pretend to the same denomination. The Samoiedes wear Guts about their necks, but swallow them at last down their throats. The same natural Links serving them first for ornament, and then for nutriment: and were The Discourse obliged to eat It's own words, and feed upon It's own Chain of Syllogisms, 'twere a diet, though slender and unclean, yet fit enough for a Barbarian. There is nothing can be more savage and in∣humane, than to personate Mr. Howe here arguing, If it be unlawful for Man to destroy Life, then it is unlaw∣ful to God. And then, as if it were
a formed Dispute, and wherein Mr. Howe maintain'd the Affirmative, It denies the Antecedent, the Conse∣quent, and the Connexion of It's own (not, as is pretended Mr. Howe's) Enthymeme, and laboriously pro∣ceeds to disprove the whole Argu∣ment thorow the several members. Let but any man have recourse to that place of the Postsc. p. 35. and consider whether there be any co∣lour thence to suppose that Mr. Howe intended there, or gave any occasion for such arguing; and whe∣ther all the Blasphemies or Heresies that ever were invented, might not be imputed to him with as much reason. I find my self so concern'd hereat (not in behalf of Mr. Howe, but of all common morality among mankind) that I think fit to repress my self, and rather leave the Crime to any Readers, or to The Discourses own Censure; for, notwithstanding
this and all It's other Errours, I con∣ceive It yet to have some intervals both of Understanding and Con∣science. But a most undecent thing it was for It to trifle in a matter so se∣rious, and it had been far more be∣coming to have given a clear ac∣count of It's own Belief in this point, than to have forged argu∣ments for others, create shadows for It self to sport with, and to act in one personage the Cause, the Judge, the Witness, the Plaintiff, and the Defendant. After all those To and Fro's, Up and Downs of so many tedious pages that It obliges us to, if we will go along with it thorow this particular, might I not in recom∣pence crave leave to be solemnly and soberly answered upon two or three Questions arising upon this debate for my own better informa∣tion? First, whether It do not con∣scienciously
believe that God doth punish men for doing Actions which in such and such circumstances he hath forbidden them to do? Next, whether it be not manifest that according to It's opinion God must Determine men to those Actions in those circumstances, that is in the same circumstances wherein they are done? And lastly, whether that Determining Influence can be with∣stood? If It once affirm all these, as I see no tolerable evasion indea∣vour'd, but that It holds them all pro confesso, how can It with all It's Logick and Metaphysicks extricate It self from maintaining that absur∣dity that God ruines men for what he hath induc'd them to, that is not simply to destroy life (as It vainly strives to shift off the business) but to destroy it upon such terms? And then how frivolous will all those Answers, p. 55. and so forward appear
to Mr. Howe's argument mention'd on a former occasion, Postsc. p. 33. 34. We our selves can in a remoter kind concur to the Actions of others: Yet it doth not follow that because we may afford our Leading Concurrence to Actions imperfectly good, that there∣fore we may afford them to afford to those that are downright Evil; be∣cause to Prayer, therefore to Cursing and Swearing, and then ruine men for the Actions me have induced them to: You'l say, God may rather, but sure he can much less do so than you. Now The Discourse calls this (and would blame it upon that account, as comparing God and the Creature) Mr. Howe's argument a Pari: But it is methinks a Fortiori, and therefore more reverent. If a well-natur'd man would not do so, it is much more disagreeable to God's Nature. In all these things Mr. Howe (and 'tis that makes me like him the bet∣ter)
declares his own sense plainly however, while the other never speaks out, unless to give ill words, and seems to search not for the Truth, but meerly for Contention. The last Evidence of this Article shall be where It p. 111. takes oc∣casion to say Mr. Howe p. 106. pro∣fesses his dislike of the common distin∣ction of Voluntas Beneplaciti & Sig∣ni, in this present Case [viz. to ex∣plain how God Wills the Salvation of all, and yet only of some] under which such as coined, and those that have much used it, have only rather (I doubt not) concealed a good meaning, than expressed an ill one. Thus far it quotes Mr. Howe, but there stops and saith, the rest is not worth the trouble of transcribing; but I there∣fore suspect the more that that it worth it, and out of some cunning fetch omitted, and shall the rather take that trouble upon me. It seems,
I confess, by it's more obvious aspect, too much to countenance that ignomi∣nious slander, which prophane and atheistical dispositions would fasten upon God and the course of his pro∣cedure toward men, &c. as though he only intended to seem willing of what He really was not; That there was an appearance to which nothing did subesse. And then why is the latter call'd Voluntas, unless the meaning be, he did only Will the Sign, which is false and impious? &c. But upon the former quotation out of Mr. Howe, wherein he only excepts against the Distinction in the present Case, and signifies that a good mean∣ing was intended by it; The Dis∣course p. 116. represents him as meaning the same thing with Dr. Twisse (who also notes the impro∣priety of the latter member Voluntas Signi, as improperly called a Will, and only signifying Man's Duty)
and blaming himself yet in blaming him: When Mr. Howe had in plain words approved the meaning of the Distinction. The gentlest imagi∣nation a man can frame to himself hereof, is that It's own brain was perverted before Mr. Howe's inten∣tion. The Fifth Article is, It's Odious Insinuations concerning what It hath no colour to object or except against. Of this I shall give three Instan∣ces in one Paragraph. T. D. p. 103, 104. where It pretends first to be at a strange loss for an Antecedent to a Relative in Mr. Howe's Letter, p. 67. Neither yet was it necessary that effe∣ctual care should be taken they should actually reach all, and be applied to every individual person. The loss is indeed a strange one, and I condole
it. For It hath herein suffered great damage of Eye-sight, Understanding, Memory and Ingenuity, very sen∣sible disasters, and with great diffi∣culty to be repaired. Mr. Howe's immediate words in the foregoing period were that the Divine Edicts should be of an Vniversal tenour as they are, the matter of them being of Vniversal concernment, and equally suitable to the common case of all men. Now add to these words as it fol∣lows in that place, Neither yet was it necessary they should actually reach all, and then say whether any man else would not have seen that the They here was Relative to the Divine E∣dicts: beside that the whole Tract of the foregoing Argument leads and refers continually to them. But then, when after a long loss It hath, casting about even to Postsc. p. 35. and 40. out of love to Mr. Howe's person and the Truth, hit it at last to
be the Divine Edicts of which pos∣sibly Mr. Howe meant it, yet then It suggests from those words of his, Neither yet was it necessary (that is to the purpose Mr. Howe was speak∣ing of, the Vindicating of God's Wisdom and Sincerity, as any sober Reader will easily see) as if they were thought not at all necessary. If this be candour, what is black∣ness? It is as much as to say, that, unless it be necessary for the Vin∣dication of God's Wisdom and Sin∣cerity to provide that every man should have a Bible and read it, it is no way necessary for man's sal∣vation. The Second Instance in the same Paragraph is to quote Mr. Howe Let∣ter, p. 69. And thus how easily and even naturally (by Messengers run∣ning from Nation to Nation, some to communicate, others to enquire after the tidings of the Gospel) would the
Gospel soon have spread it self through the World? and hereupon to suggest as if Mr. Howe thought the seeds of the Gospel were in men by nature. Un∣less Understanding and Wilful Ig∣norance be the same thing, no man could have avoided the sense of the word Naturally here, to be, easily, and of course. But if that term had been intended in the strict sense (though the mollifying of it by that particle, even, shows it was not) how could the Inquiry after a thing new, and said to be of common con∣cernment, be Natural, although the thing it self were not? And the Third is; Whereas Mr. Howe had, Letter, p. 75, 76, 77. enu∣merated many Instances of God's Clemency and Bounty to Men in general, and added that, they might by these understand God to have fa∣vourable propensions towards them; and that though they have offended
him, he is not their implacable enemy, and might by his Goodness be led to Repentance, that hereupon The Dis∣course p. 104. having nothing to al∣ledge against any particular of what is there said, brings in Mr. Iohn Good∣win to have writ somewhat of the like import in his Pagans Debt and Dowry; and the like quotations it cites afterwards from Mr. Hoard, which is all for spight, but nothing to the purpose. Could It have laid down an Antithesis to any thing that Mr. Howe here said, 'tis pro∣bable it would have gone that way to work, and not have used this Pagan invention of baiting Mr. Howe in the skins of others; or daubing him over with pitch to serve for Torch-light, and put out the light of the Gospel. But 'tis more pro∣bable It would have proceeded both waies; for It's Zeal for the Truth seems not greater than It's Animo∣sity
against Mr. Howe, whencesoever it arises. But It durst not adventure to say that Mr. Howe hath made Mr. Iohn Goodwin's ill use of this notion. Had there been any such thing, The Discourse seems not in humour to have past it over, and that calumnious figure of Meliora Spero, hoping the best of him, but suggesting the worst, would have been changed to a plain accusation. If It would have dealt fairly, here was the proper place to have spo∣ken out, and have told us distinct∣ly It's own opinion in so weighty a matter. Does it know what God (though most unobliged) might do to furnish such with what might be sufficient, if they seriously desired such mercy at his hands? Will It think It self bound to tear Rom. 2. 4. out of It's Bible, because Iohn Goodwin hath cited it? Or, will It adventure to be the Heathens Com∣purgator
at the day of Judgment, that they have no more considered the tendency of the Divine Goodness? These indeed would have been worthy Atchievements, and proper to one of so great enterprize; but to throw upon Mr. Howe an undeser∣ved obloquy of other mens names in this manner, how base a thing, was it? considering besides how It's own name (though hitherto stu∣diously concealed,) might in the vi∣cissitude of humane affairs, serve men hereafter for a more infamous quotation. I shall add no more than p. 108. It's citing Mr. Howe's Letter, p. 89, 90. That which God's declarations do amount to is, &c. that, if they which finally perish, neglect to attend to those external discoveries of the Word, &c. they are not to expect he should overpower them by a strong hand, and save them against the con∣continual
disinclination of their own Wills, upon which It saith, I am not able to make sense of the last words, for I under∣stand not what overcoming by a strong hand (in a sinner's case) God can make use of that leaves the Will under disinclination to Satvation. What reason or occasion do Mr. Howe's words give for making this puzzle? Could it not understand that some men are so unreasonable as to expect Salvation, while yet at the same time they are disaffected to the means of it? And that some, because they dislike the ordinary means, please themselves with an hope that God will at last cast use some extraordinary, to overcome that disaffection? The Sixth Article. It's most unseemly and insolent boastings and self-applauses upon no occasion. Yet therefore the more frequent, as his killing Mr. Howe with his own
weapon, p. 26. in It's Argument about Mr. Howe's two Concessions, the vanity whereof as to the first I have before noted: And now as to what he brags of against the second as a Triumphant Evidence, I shall no less shew It's impertinency. The Argu∣ment is It's own, p. 30. If it be the In∣determination of the Power to Individual Actions that makes an Excitation of them, to one rather than to another, necessary. Stay here: It takes this for granted, and as it is in it self destitute of strength, so It leaves it very unkindly without any proof or assistance to shift as well as it can. Whereas It knows that 'tis said on the opposite part, That it is not In∣determination meerly (which the Self-deter∣mining power of the Will can remove) but aversion to good Actions (which gracious Habits do lessen, but not remove) that makes God's holy Determining Influence necessary. Now let it go on, and the possibility of Action contained in the Powers that makes
the reducing of that possibility to Action no less necessary to good Actions: If there be any sense in this, it is very recondite, and would require a spirit that can dis∣cover hidden treasure; Can Possibili∣ty of Action make Action necessary? It must be as false as it is true, that an Argument can be drawn from Power to Act, affirmatively. Indeed, should it have said, where there is only a pos∣sibility of Action, that possibility must be reduced to Action, before there can be any Action, it were true, but then it is one of these things that are Nimus vera, and which it is ridiculous to put into any proposition, much more where it is to no purpose. As here it is manifestly to none; for we are still left as uncertain, as if no such thing had been said, what it is that must re∣duce that possibility to Action. But that it should be added no less necessary to good Actions, is beyond the power of Witchcraft to understand what it
should mean here. Doth it pretend to be discoursing with any one that thought Determination to good Actions less necessary? I thought it's present part was to oppose one that said it was more necessary. And yet this most insignificant Scheme of Dis∣course is shut up with a Quod erat De∣monstrandum, and with the Phantastry of claiming to it evidence equal to what the Apostles words carry, Rom, 11. 36. For it was to those words that My. Howe's Letter, p. 62. gave those lofty Epithets of Triumphant Evidence, which The Discourse cavils at, and bor∣rows, with no mind to restore them, to adorn the street-pageantry of this pitiful Argument. Another Instance may be It's Jovial rant, p. 37. What is now become of Mr. Howe's thin Sophistry, and collusive Ambi∣guity? &c. It is necessary to read up∣on this occasion from It's p. 32. l. 12. at least to p. 37. l. 14. for it is too
long to insert here such a parcel of stuff, but there you may have it. It's business here is to defend the Prede∣terminers Opinion against the charge of God's necessitating men to sin, and of attempting to alleviate it by God's being above Law, but Man under it. Let me conjure any Reader by the most potent charms of perswasion, by all that is ridiculous in It's whole Book, or in mine, but to peruse at leisure how miserably those points are there along managed. It owns at first that it is an hard Province to answer to all the Objections, then softens it, as fire mollifies clay, and at last, after having confessed and begged, comes off with that glorious exaltation over Mr. Howe's thin Sophistry. It were needless to exemplifie all the like pas∣sages, where it arrogates Commenda∣tion to it self beyond what any friend, and vilifies Mr. Howe below what any other enemy would offer at both equal∣ly undeserved.
The Seventh Article. It's very gross Absurdities, Self-contradi∣ctions, and Inconsistencies, to which may be added divers unsafe Expressions, not a little reflecting on God and Religion. As first p. 18. It discourses con∣cerning the security of good Angels by God's determining Influence, which no man that I know will quarrel for, and by which I doubt not it supposes their Immutability, but p. 20. speak∣ing of Man, It saith, that God made him Mutable (and how could he do otherwise, unless he should have made him a God?) what then, doth it conceive that the good Angels are Gods? Such like was It's absurdity, p. 27. of the neces∣sity of Predetermination, because God's Immediate Concourse could not determine Adam's Will. Than which, what can be more notorious? the Controversie being, Whether God
doth determine Men to Wicked Acti∣ons, but It's Argument to this Effect; That, if God do not determine Men to such Wicked Actions by Concourse, he doth it, as elsewhere it calls it, by Precourse. Whereas it should have known the thing denied by Mr. Howe to be, that God doth by Efficacious Influence determine to them at all. And so It's Argumentation there sig∣nifies only that if God do not deter∣termine to them, he doth determine to them. A third Instance is where p. 40. Mr. Howe having Letter p. 17. 47. said that the Argument from the pretended Im∣possibilty of God's foreknowing Sinful Acti∣ons, if he did not determine the Agent to them, will not infer, that if he determine not to them, he cannot foreknow them, but only that we are left ignorant of the way. It collects thence p. 41. (and thinks Mr. Howe hath much overshot himself) that he universally denies our knowledge of
the way how God foretells future Contingen∣cies. Whereas Mr. Howe Letter p. 35. stated their Argument in express words, that it were otherwise impossible God should foreknow the Sinful Actions of men, and here 47. only saith, the Argu∣ment infers so much and no more, as to Wicked Actions, yet It makes this an universal denial as to all Actions: Hereby it is easie to judge, which of the two is the better Archer, or came nearer the mark, which shot home, and which over. That for a Fourth is what you please for to call it, p. 70. but a pretty innocent thing of the like nature Irre∣sistible Imports, It saith, A Relation of the Action of the Agent to some resistance, which is pleasant, by how much im∣possible to imagine how that which cannot be resisted imports that which is resisted. But this p. 76. is a most refined ab∣surdity, while in the same place It
taunts Mr. Howe for gratifying his own unscholastick homour. Something is said to be Impossible respectively, as if a man will fly that he should have wings. But this among duller men hath hitherto been thought an instance of what is quite contrary, to wit, of Hypothe∣tical Necessity. And if It should find It self hereafter obliged to fly from It's adversary, I suppose that It would think a pair of wings to be pertinent and highly convenient, if not necessary. I have before upon occasion, and in passing, noted how he undertakes to prove that there are no Actions of free Agents Evil in themselves, when never∣theless it had p. 72. affirmed the ha∣tred of God and Adultery to be in themselves Evil. Such is that too elsewhere touched, p. 63. where it cites Mr. Howe, Postsc. p. 36. intimating that some Actions are Evil quoad Substantiam, that is, morally Evil or Wicked; and It
would have it to be a Contradiction to own that any such have natural good in them. How wisely? As if it were not possible for the same Action to be morally Evil, and naturally Good. Or did It never hear of the Substance of an Act in the moral sense? And doth not a forbidden Action use to be called Evil in the Substance of it? When, if the Action be not forbidden, but commanded, and only the undue man∣ner or end forbidden, as in It's own Instance of Alms-giving for vain-glo∣ry, it is said to be Good, quoad Sub∣stantian? It is to be wondred that it summoned not here it's Logick to prove that an Action hath no Sub∣stance; but that would have spoiled It's Learned Note that follows, where Mr. Howe, Postsc. p. 36. to the Que∣stion, Is there any Action so sinful, that hath not not some natural Good as the sub∣strate matter thereof? Answers, True, and what, shall it therefore be inferr'd, that
God must by a Determinative Influence pro∣duce every such Action whatsoever reason there be against it? One might better argue thence the necessity of his producing every hour a new World, in which there would be a great deal more of Positive Entity, and natural Goodness. It hereupon under∣takes p. 65. to prove that there is as much Entity and natural Goodness in a sinful Action, as there would be in Myriads of Worlds, should God create every hour a new World; and saith, that to deny this were unworthy a Philosopher: and It's proof is, If Substantia non recipit magis & minut, or if Ens & bonum sit con∣vertibile, then an Action hath as much Entity as a World. But how much doth It reflect upon God and that Religious sense which we ought to cherish of him, p. 27. when it makes God to have determin∣ed Innocent Adam's Will to the choice of eating the fruit that was forbidden him? This seem'd so horrid at first,
that It self startles a little at it, inter∣posing in a Parenthesis (suppose be∣fore the Prohibition past upon it) and yet, because It's cause required no less, and appetite gathers with eating, it takes courage afterward to assert God's Pre∣determination of Adam's Will to the Act of eating, which was not till after the Prohibition: and to Illustrate (as it pretends) so black a thing, it parallels God's moving him to that Act rather than to another, with a Writing-Master's directing his Scholars hand. If the Cause be not to be defended upon better terms than so, what Christian but would rather wish he had never known Writing-Master, than to sub∣scribe such an Opinion; and that God should make an innocent Crea∣ture in this manner to do a sorbidden Act, for which so dreadful a venge∣ance was to insue upon him and his posterity? No less pregnant with impious ab∣surdity
is it to assert p. 29, 30. the equal necessity of Predetermining Influence to Wicked Actions as to Good; and that dangerous Insinua∣tion, p. 19. that God's promises convey no right to them to whom they are made, For, 'tis a ruled case, it says, in the Schools, that God cannot properly be said a Debter to his Creatures; and then adds of It's own, no not when he hath passed a Promise to them, and pursues this so far as to say, if he should (to suppose an Impossibility) which, con∣sidering what follows had been therefore better omitted, break his word, he would be but Mendax, non Injustus, and puts it too in English, a Lyer, not Unjust. What dis∣pensation have some men to speak at this rate, or what dangerous points do they run themselves upon, and their Readers? I remember there is a Picture before that Ruler
of the Case his Book with this Ad∣dition, bene scripsisti de me Dive Thomas. But let God be True and Iust to his word, and every man (that saith otherwise) a Lyer. For the last I shall only tran∣scribe a few lines of it's idle Ha∣rangue, p. 35. in which I know not whether the malice against Mr. Howe, or irreverence towards our Saviour do predominate thorow the whole absurdity. We might al∣so observe upon his Rhetorical Ampli∣fications of his Argument, that he seems to be no ill-willer to Transub∣stantiation: for if the natural notions of God's Goodness should be infinitely dearer to us than our senses, I see not why the notion of God's sincerity that he means as he speaks, should not challenge a share in our Indearments, and so why hoc: est corpus meum, should not assure us that the bread is transubstantiated, though our sen∣ses,
&c. joyn in a Common Testimony against it. Viciously and wantonly said, as if God, wheresoever he speaks in a figure, were guilty of In∣sincerity. The Eighth and last Article a∣gainst The Discourse, shall be The Virulence of It's Spirit. Whereof one Instance may fuf∣fice, p. 122. where, closing the Book, It saith, that Mr. Howe's Doctrine opens a wide door for A∣theism, and reckons him by strong Im∣plication, among those who acknow∣ledge God in Words, but deny him in Deed: Whereas, what is it that Mr. Howe hath denied, but that God doth determine men by Efficacious Influence to those very Actions which he forbids, and for which he will punish them? But I spare my hand, The Dis∣course all along boiling over, foam∣ing, frothing and casting forth the
like expressions, which I refrain to enumerate, that I may not incur the fate of him that stirs the Indians Poison-pot, who when he falls down dead with the steam and stench, they then throw the doors open, and dip their Arrows.
I Should now therefore have con∣cluded, were there not some∣thing yet in It's Prefatory Epistle so fordid, that I reserved it for behind, as the most proper place it could be applied to. Nor shall I therein only have marshall'd it according to It's dignity, but do hope moreover, as the Head of the Viper is a speci∣fick against It's Venom; so to find out a Remedy against the Book in the Preface; wherein it shows so peculiar a malice and despight to Mr. Howe, and insinuates the same to the Reader, as requires a parti∣cular Preservative. And, had I not already been at the pains of the foregoing Remarks, here was, I see, a more compendious occasion, but sufficient to have administred me the same observations. For all the other faults that I have objected a∣gainst the bulk of The Discourse might as easily have been discovered
in It's Preface, as a good Physiogno∣mist can by the Moles in the face assign all those that are upon any other part of the body: But among them all It's superlative Dulness is here especially the more manifest (as usually happens in such cases) by how much It endeavours most at Acuteness and Elegancy; so palpable, that even It self could not be whol∣ly insensible of it: but p. 3, 4. feel∣ingly confesses both in Latine and English, that in reading Mr. Howe's Letter and Postscript, Obstupuit ste∣teruntque Comae; and a double Asto∣nishment under which It laboured: This doubtless it was, like the dis∣affections derived from the Head to the Nerves, which propagated that horrid stupidity that I have already noted thorow It's whole Treatise. But that Quality is here so exalted, Nature it seems, having given It that Torpor for a Defence) that in
touching it thus lightly, I perceive a numness to strike up thorow my Pen into my Faculties, and shall there∣fore point at some particulars, ra∣ther than adventure to handle them. Mr. Howe had in passing, Postsc. p. 22. glanced upon an improper re∣dundance of words used by a former Adversary. The Divine Independent Will of God; as he might with good reason take notice of it, being as much sense as to have said the Hu∣mane Dependent Will of Man. But hereupon The Discourse p. 9. having for revenge turn'd over his whole Letter and Postscript to find out the like absurdities, highly gratulates It self in three Instances, but all of them curtaild from the coherence to make for the purpose. One Letter p. 42. In which sense how manifest it is that the perfect (all this omitted) Rectitude of God's own holy gracious Nature (is an eternal Law to him
omitted.) The second; Letter p. 59. God satisfies himself in himself, and takes highest complacency in the perfect Goodness, Congruity, and (all this omitted) Rectitude of his own most holy Will and Way; and for these Mr. Howe is arraigned upon a Crime, by a Greek word of Law called Pleonasme. The third is Acti∣ons Malignantly Wicked (which The Discourse saith is the same as Wicked∣ly Wicked) Postscript p. 22. and 32. as It quotes, but is in Letter; 32. and here, It leaves out also the word most, which would have spoiled the exception taken against it; for what Mr. Howe there saith is, even those Actions that are in themselves most malignantly wicked. Are there not some Actions, some Men, more malignantly wicked than others? Or will The Discourse apply It's old end of Latine here—aliquando bonus dormitat Homerus to Paulus, Rom.
7. 13. sin, exceedingly sinful? It was time therefore in all reason to con∣clude this exercise with saying; But these are childish Criminations, unfit to be bandied from hand to hand by sober persons; owning It self at once to have been guilty herein of an In∣temperate, Inept, and Unmanly kind of procedure. Neither can I pass by unregarded that new Invention of rearing up Pillars to mens Infamy; but which have sometimes, and may now also, turned to the disgrace of the Archi∣tect. It cuts out p. 10, 11. several Lines here and there, out of the whole Letter and Postscript, to post them up in Columns, and Mr. Howe upon them as a common notorious Self-contradicter: Whereas, if any man will take the pains to restore those sentences to their first situa∣tion and coherence, (as I have for∣merly done) there will not be found
the least Inconsistency in them: But if this Practice be allowable, there is not any Chapter in the Bible out of which It may not with the same integrity extract either Blasphemy or Nonsense; though I am far from suspecting The Discourse of such an undertaking. For indeed It assigns the True Reason, (and fit to be in∣scribed over the Portico) non est in∣genii mei hosce nudos dissolvere, and as faithfully translates it; I have not the wit to untie these knots, which is now the third publick Confession of of It's stupidity, in the Preface. Yet will I not do It the affront to ascribe it either to It's Modesty, Ingenuity, or Self-Conviction; for It intended them doubtless all to the contrary. Only the same Dulness, that first occasioned It's errours and mistakes, did likewise lead It to these omi∣nous expressions, and like those that discern not the Back from the
Edge, to wound It self in cutting at the Adversary. It's Dulness therefore, or as it is expressed p. 8. the consciousness of It's own disabilities, being so oft at∣tested under It's own hand, and to which, if necessary, It might have another Thousand Witnesses, I shall not further pall my Reader on this Subject, but return rather from this digression to my first design of ob∣viating that in the Preface, which hath all the marks upon it of Ma∣lice, except the Wit wherewith that vice is more usually accompanied. Of that the very Title is an Argu∣ment. De Causa Dei, or a Vindica∣tion of the Common Doctrine of Pro∣testant Divines concerning Predeter∣mination, &c. from the Invidious Consequences with which it is bur∣thened by Mr. John Howe, in a late Letter and Postscript of God's Pre∣science. By T. D. Who would have
thought that T. D. should have be∣come the Defender of the Faith, or that the Cause of God were so for∣lorn, as to be reduced to the neces∣sity of such a Champion. It seems much rather to be the Fallacy of Non Causa pro Causa, and usurped only the better to prepossess against Mr. Howe such, Readers as would be amused by the Frontispiece. The Cause of God! Turn I beseech you It's whole Book over, and show me any thing of that Decorum with which that should have been man∣aged. What is there to be found of that Gravity, Humility, Meek∣ness, Piety or Charity requisite to so glorious a pretence? (Graces wherewith God usually assists those that undertake his quarrel, and with which Mr. Howe on all occasions appears to be abundantly supplied.) But a perpetual eructation there is of humane Passions, a vain ostentation
of mistaken Learning, and a causeless Picking of Controversie. To that Title, under which Mr. Howe is so injuriously proscribed, suc∣ceeds forsooth an Epistle Dedica∣tory, To the Reverend Mr. John Howe, Author of the late Letter and Postscript of God's Prescience. An additional Civility and Compella∣tion invented by The Discourse only for greater mockery. And a manyfine words It bestows upon him at first, to miscall him presently with the more Emphasis, praises the Author, and then the Book; but no otherwise then, as a person to be degraded is brought forth in publick attired in all his Formalities, to be stripped of them again with further Igno∣miny. Nay, even Mr. Boyle himself can∣not wholly escape It's Commenda∣tion: which I do not object as if any thing could be well said of him that
is not due to his merit. But there are a kind of Sorcerers that praise where they intend to do most mis∣chief. And the Occasion, the Place, the Manner, the Person that gives the Commendation make alwaies a difference, and cause a great alte∣ration in that matter. Nor is it less here. For, Mr. Howe having taken the Pen on this Subject, as The Dis∣course also observes, upon that ho∣nourable Gentleman's command, the officious mentioning of Mr. Boyle p. 1. seems as if It had a mind too to try his mettle; or at least would reproach him for having imployed one so unfit for the service, and that was to be so shamefully (or rather shamelesly) treated for his perfor∣mance. But the summe of all It's Malice, whereby It endeavours to outlaw Mr. Howe, not only from Mr. Boyle's patronage, but from all Protestant
protection, is to represent him un∣der a Popish Vizard. As p. 2. Old Popish Arguments drest up A-la-mode. An averment of the Old Po∣pish Calumny. An Affidavit of a Pontificial Accusation. Trampling p. 4. on the Venerable Dust, which was sometimes animated by truly heroick souls, and bore the names of Zuing∣lius, Calvin, Beza, Penkins, Pemble, Twisse, Davenant, Ames, &c. Then p. 12. still objects to him the opi∣nion of Durandus, though Mr. Howe had in his Postscript so fully vindi∣cated himself against it, that his first Accuser hath let it fall out of perfect ingenuity. Draws a parallel between his and the Papists Arguments against Predetermination. And p. 13. erects another pair of Columns to that purpose, betwixt which Mr. Howe is to look out as thorow a Pillary. Af∣this p. 14. saith, the point under de∣bate between It and Mr. Howe, is a
stated Controversie between the Pa∣pists and Protestants. Gives It self a little pleasure mixed with disdain, that because there was no Smith to be found throughout all the Land of Israel, he was fain to go down to the Philistines to sharpen his Ax and his Mattock, 1 Sam. 13. 19, 20. Imitates Bradwardins Piety, therefore intituling It's Book de Causa Dei, the Cause of God being that which It de∣signs to secure from the impetuous As∣saults of its' Adversaries, among which It is heartily sory Mr. Howe should be numbred as to this instance. This kind of proceeding does argue rather the strength of Malice, than of the Cause. For although we live un∣der a rationall jealousie alwaies of Popery, yet whatsoever is said by any Author of that perswasion, is not forthwith therefore to be cla∣morously rejected. Have not there constantly been among them, men
fit to be owned for Holy Life, Good Sense, Great Learning? And in many points we agree with them, and shall in all, whensoever Our Eyes shall be shut, or Theirs shall be opened. The Discourse had indeed done something to the purpose, could It have shown the Doctrine of Predetermination to be one of those Discriminating Causes upon which we have made a separa∣tion from that Church, that it is an Article of Faith in which our Creeds differ, and that it were a fit Test to be imposed upon them in order to their more speedy Conviction. Which last, if It can bring about for them, so that they may be ac∣quitted upon Renouncing this Do∣ctrine imputed to them, (instead of the Transubstantiation, (which Mr. Howe too escaped so narrowly.) I presume they would, notwithstand∣ing all the Popery, take it for an high obligation. For indeed, whereas The
Discourse affirms this of Predeter∣mination to be a stated Controver∣sie betwixt the Papists and the Prote∣stants; the Papists against, the Prote∣testants for it; there is not through It's whole Book a more notorious Falshood. For this Debate arose first among the Papists, some of them be∣ing of one, others of the contrary Opinion; so that the Controversie was stated betwixt themselves. But that which is now T. D's. was first the Dominican Doctrine; and I wonder therefore the less if It continue here∣in the Dominican Spirit. Since, and from that original, the same Argu∣ment hath indeed been also diffused among the Protestasts, and they like∣wise have differ'd about it with one another; but it was never taken, in holding it either way, to be the Pro∣testant Character. The Predetermi∣native Concourse is not to be found in any Confession of the several Re∣formed
Churches; But this matter hath been left entire to euery man's best Judgment, and one Party is as much Papist in it as the others What two men of equal Capacity can argue against Predetermination, but they must have the same Apprehensions in some measure, in matters so obvi∣ous? and it ought not to be impro∣ved to eithers prejudice, no more than for two to speak the same words in discoursing of one subject. Charron, whose Wisdom, p. 1. Bradwardine, whose Piety, p. 14. and especially, Caesar Borgia, whose Chalk, p. 15. T. D. makes use of, were none of the best Protestants: And yet I am far from taxing It therefore of Popery, or giving my self a little pleasure mixed with disdain, that it was fain to go down to them to sharpen It's Howe or It's Mattock. Let It rather solace It self in that Lordly posture of mind; nor will I envy It; especially, seeing to take
that satisfaction in a thing which. It makes so Criminous, is the only Joy of which I think the Evil Spirits are capable. And as to It's saying, p. 2. that Mr. Howe a vers the Old Popish Calumny, that by the Protestant Doctrine God is made the Author of Sin. And p. 4. that he tramples upon the venerable dust, &c. of Zuinglius, Calvin, Beza, Perkins, Pemble, Davenant, Twisse, Ames, &c. it proceeds from the same malice, and may therefore receive the same answer: For I have shown, first, that this Predetermination is not the stated Doctrine of Protestants, nor hath there yet any General Council of them been held, where T. D. hath presided: but if there should at any time hereafter, It is so unhappy and singular in expressing It's sense, in this matter, that I much fear lest the Plu∣rality of Votes should affix the dan∣gerous Greek name to It's Religion.
And as to those Worthies whom It cites by rote, It draws them indeed within the reach of both Old and New Calumny, by pretending they were of It's Opinion; whereas one may safely affirm at adventure, that they were all of them too well in∣lightned to have ever thought or spo∣ken after It's manner. What it may have extorted from them by Necro∣mancy, I know not; but they had not the happiness to have read It's De Causa Dei in their life-time: Nor do I think that Death corrupts mens Minds as their Bodies. Of these, whom The Discourse enumerates, Calvin and Beza, have been reproachfully charged by Bellarmine and other Romanists, as making God the Author of Sin, but yet there is not to be found in all their works an assertion of God's Determi∣native Concurrence. How far some of the rest of them have taken scope on this subject, I have no obligation here
more than The Discourse, to particu∣larize: neither did Mr. Howe name any man, as being the fairer way by much, arguing only against the Opi∣nion. But seeing T. D. hath made bold with Bishop Davenant, I will ask no better: For that truly venerable, dust, which It hath stirred will flie in T. D. eyes; if I be not mistaken. Dis∣sert de Predestinatione & Reprobatione, it is thus, Deus, Agens ex Deoreto Prae∣destinationis, operatur haec priora (scil. Fidem, Sanctitatem, Perseverantiam) per Influxum Gratiae Efficacis, As ex Decreto Reprobationis nihil agit quo Deterior ef∣ficiatur Reprobatus— That is, for it is well worth the translating: God, acting according to his Decree of Predesti∣nation, works these things in the first place, (to wit, Faith, Holiness, and Perseve∣rance) by the Influence of Efficacious Graces; but, according to his Decree of Reproba∣tion he acts nothing by which the Repro∣bate should be made worse. Methinks,
as T. D. will have the Bishop to be of It's, so, in all reason, It should be also of the Bishop's Opinion, and if It intends no more, as Mr. Howe no less than is here said, I cannot see why there might not be an end of The Discourse, and of this Controversie. But however, I hope that I may have done a good work, if upon sight of these unexpected Remarques, Mr. Howe, though fitted doubtless for a much better and fuller Reply, would deliberate before he makes this Ad∣versary so considerable as to blot Pa∣per on It's occasion. Let It, in the mean time, venditate all It's Street∣adages, It's odd ends of Latine, It's bro∣ken shreds of Poets, and It's musty lumber of Schoolmen. Let It enjoy the ingenuity of having unprovoked fallen upon a person, whose parts It acknowledged, for whom It had such an Affection, with whom It had so many
years Academical Society, and so long friendship: but whom It now must num∣ber among God's Adversaries. Let It value It self upon these things: for all these considerations do heighten the Price of an Assassinate. But may Mr. Howe still continue his Sobriety, Simplicity, and Equality of Temper: glorifying God rather in the exercise of Practical Christian Vertues, than af∣fecting the honour of a speculative Question. But if he had a mind to be Vindictive, there is no way to despight the Adversary more sensibly, than, as clamorous women, by giving them no answer. Till men grow in∣to a better humour, and learn to treat of Divinity more civilly, they are unfit for conversation. Another, I see, who is now his Third Aggressor, hath already as∣saulted him, though less barbarously, in a Letter to a Friend, &c. Yet even
he introduces his Book with Iob 13. 7. Wilt thou speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him? What shall Mr. Howe do in this Case? Is the Bible therefore to be turned into a Libel? and shall he search the Scrip∣tures to find out a Text equally cut∣ting? He need not go far, were he of that mind, to retaliate. How easie were the parallel betwixt Iob's three Friends (to whom those words were spoken) and three such comfortable Gentlemen! And why may not Mr. Howe nick them as well out of Iob, c. 12. v. 3, 4. But I have un∣derstanding as well as you; I am not infe∣riour to you; yea who knoweth not such things as these? I am as one mocked of his neighbour, who calleth upon God, and he answereth him. The just upright man is laughed to scorn. Or, if he would be yet severer, the same, chap. 13. v. 4, 5. will hit them home. But ye are For∣gers
of Lyes; ye are all Physicians of no value. O that you would altogether hold your peace, and it should be your Wisdom. And then at last, to determine the whole Dispute, He might conclude with Iob 42. 7. The Lord said to E∣liphaz the Temanite, My wrath is kindled against thee, and against thy two Friends; for ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right as my servant Job hath. After all which, what more seasonable, in order to Reconciliation, than the verse following? Go to my servant Job, unto offer up for your selves a burnt offering, and my servant Job shall pray for you (for him will I accept;) lest I deal with you af∣ter your folly, in that you have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my ser∣vant Job hath. But the Word of God is not so to be turned into the Re∣praach of Man, though the Allusion may seem never so happy; nor have I instanced thus far, otherwise than
to show the frivolousness, though too usual of that Practice. But therefore I would advise Mr. Howe, though not to that excusable sullenness and silence, with which some have chastised the World for having used them unworthily; nor to that tacite contempt of his Adversa∣ries, in which he were hitherto justi∣fiable; yet, that, having made a lau∣dable Attempt, of which several good men are it seems not capable, he would, for peace sake, either wholly surcease this contest, or forbear at least till they have all done. For it is more easie to deal with them all than single; and, were they once imbodied, come to a consistence among themselves, or had agreed who should speak for them, they had right to his Answer. But until then, Mr. Howe is no more obliged in whatsoever is called Ho∣nour, Reason, or Conscience, than if
every hair of T. D. that stands an end, should demand particular satisfaction. It is the same for a Divine, as he, to turn Common Disputant, as for an Architect to saw Timber, or cleave Loggs, which, though he may some∣times do for health or exercise, yet to be constant at it, were to debase and neglect his Vocation. Mr. Howe hath work enough cut out of a nobler na∣ture, in his Living Temple, in which, like that of Solomon, there is neither Hammer, nor Axe, nor any Tool of Iron to be heard, 1 King. 6. 8. nothing that can offend, all to edifie. And this I heartily wish that he may accomplish: But therefore, as he hath not hitherto sought, so that he would avoid all Contention; lest, as David, for having been a man of blood, was forbid to build the Temple, 1 Chron. 22. 8. so he, as being a man of Controversie. As for my self, I expect in this li∣tigious
Age, that some or other will Sue me for having Trespassed thus far on Theological Ground: But I have this for my plea, that I stepped over on no other Reason than (which any man legally may do) to hinder one Divine from offering violence to ano∣ther. And, if I should be molested on that account, I doubt not but some of the Protestant Clergy will be ready therefore to give me the like As∣sistance. FINIS.
ERRATA'S. PAge 8. l. 14. lye, p. 24. l. 11. speculatorem, p. 36. l. 5. actuates, p. 38. l. 7. leave out, any, p. 43. l. 6. port, p. 82. l. 15. Articles; last line Epistle, p. 87. l. 2. substrate; p. 88. l. 21. load; p. 9. l. 10. me, p. 95. l. 1. the, p. 100. 1. 18. then.
