O794 09570318 43643
A Practical EXPOSITION ON THE 130th. Psalm. WHEREIN The Nature of the Forgiveness of Sin is declared, the truth and reality of it asserted. AND, The Case of a Soul distressed with the Guilt of Sin, and relieved by a disco∣very of Forgiveness with God, is at large discoursed. By John Owen, D. D. John 5. 39. Search the Scriptures. LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Nathaniel Ponder, at the Sign of the Peacock in Chancery-Lane, near Fleet-Street. 1669.
TO THE READER. Christian Reader, THE ensuing Exposition and Discourses are intended for the benefit of those, whose spi∣ritual state and condition is represented in the Psalm here explained. That these are not a few, that they are many; yea, that to some part or parts of it, they are all who believe, both the Scriptures and their own Experience will bear Testi∣mony. Some of them it may be will inquire into, and af∣ter their own concernments as they are here declared. To be serviceable to their Faith, Peace, and Spiritual consolation, hath been the whole of my design. If they meet with any discovery of Truth, any due application of it to their consciences, any declaration of the sense and mind of the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures suitable unto their condition, and usefull to their edification, much
of my end and purpose is obtained. I know some there are that dislike all discourses of this nature, and look upon them with contempt and scorn. But why they should so do, I know not, unless the Gospel it self, and all the mysteries of it be folly unto them. Sin and Grace in their original causes, various respects, con∣sequents, and ends, are the principal subjects of the whole Scripture, of the whole Revelation of the Will of God to Mankind. In these do our present and eternal concernments lye, and from and by them hath God designed the great and everlasting exaltation of his own Glory. Upon these do turn all the trans∣actions that are between God and the souls of men. That it should be an endeavour needless, or super∣fluous, to inquire into the Will of God about, and our own interest in these things, who can imagine? Two waies there are whereby this may be done. First, Speculatively, by a due investigation of the nature of these things, according as their Doctrine is declared in the Scripture. An endeavour according to the mind of God herein, is just and commendable, and com∣prehensive of most of the chief heads of Divinity. But this is not to be engaged in for its own sake. The knowledge of God and spiritual things have this proportion un∣to practical Sciences, that the end of all its notions and Doctrines consists in practice. Wherefore, Se∣condly, These things are to be considered practically, that is, as the souls and consciences of men are actually concerned in them, and conversant about them. How men contract the guilt of sin, what sense they have, and ought to have thereof, what danger they are liable unto thereon, what perplexities and distresses their souls and consciences are reduced to
thereby, what courses they fix upon for their relief, as also what is that Grace of God whereby alone they may be delivered, wherein it consists, how it was prepared, how purchased, how it is proposed, and how it may be attained; what effects and consequents a participation of it doth produce, how in these things Faith and obedience unto God, dependance on him, submission to him, waiting for him, are to be exer∣cised, is the principal work that those who are called unto the dispensation of the Gospel ought to enquire into themselves, and to acquaint others withall. In the right and due management of these things, whe∣ther by writing, or oral-instruction, with prudence, diligence, and zeal, doth consist their principal use∣fulness in reference unto the Glory of God, and the everlasting welfare of the Souls of men: And they are under a great mistake, who suppose it an easie and a common matter to treat of these practical things usefully, to the edification of them that do believe. Because both the nature of the things them∣selves, with the concerns of the souls and consci∣ences of all sorts of Persons in them, require that they be handled plainly, and without those inter∣mixtures of secular Learning, and additions of orna∣ments of speech, which discourses of other natures may, on ought to be composed and set off withall; some judging by meer outward appearances, especi∣ally if they be of them from whom the true nature of the things themselves treated of are hid, are rea∣dy to despise and scorn the plain management of them, as that which hath nothing of wisdom or learn∣ing accompanying of it, no effects of any commendable
ability of mind for which it should be esteem∣ed. But it is not expressible how great a mistake such persons through their own darkness and ig∣norance do labour under. In a right spiritual understanding, in a due perception and comprehen∣sion of these things, the things of the sins of Men and Grace of God, consists the greatest part of that wisdom, of that soundness of mind, of that know∣ledge rightly so called, which the Gospel commands, exhibits and puts a valuation upon. To reveal and declare them unto others in words of Truth and Soberness, fit and meet to express them unto the un∣derstandings of men opened and enlightned by the same spirit, by whom the things themselves are ori∣ginally revealed, to derive such sacred spiritual Truths from the Word, and by a due preparation to communicate and apply them to the Souls and Con∣sciences of men, contains a principal part of that ministerial skill and ability which are required in the dispensers of the Gospel; and wherein a severe exercise of sound learning, judgement, and care is necessary to be found, and may be fully expressed. Into this Treasurie towards the Service of the House of God, it is, that I have cast my mite in the en∣suing Exposition and discourses on the 130th. Psalm. The design of the Holy Ghost was therein to express and represent in the Person and condition of the Psalmist the case of a soul intangled, and ready to be overwhelmed with the guilt of sin, relieved by a discovery of Grace and Forgiveness in God, with its deportment upon a participation of that re∣lief. After the Exposition of the words of the
Text, my design and endeavour hath been only to enlarge the Pourtraicture here given us in the Psalm, of a Believing soul in and under the condi∣tion mentioned; to render the lines of it more vi∣sible, and to make the Characters given in its de∣scription more legible; and withall to give unto others in the like condition with the Psalmist, a light to understand and discern themselves in that Image and representation, which is here made of them in the Person of another. To this end have I been forced to enlarge on the two great heads of Sin and Grace; especially on the latter here called the forgiveness that is with God. An Interest herein, a participation hereof being our principal concernment in this World, and the sole founda∣tion of all our expectations of a blessed portion in that which is to come, it certainly requires the best and utmost of our endeavours, as to look into the nature, causes, and effects of it, so especi∣ally into the wayes and means whereby we may be made partakers of it; and how that partici∣pation may be secured unto us unto our peace and consolation; as also into that Love, that Holiness, that obedience, that fruitfulness in good works, which on the account of this Grace God expecteth from us, and requireth at our hands. An Explicati∣on of these things is that which I have designed to ensue and follow after in these discourses, and that with a constant eye, as on the one hand to the sole rule and Standard of Truth, the Sacred Scriptures, especially that part of it which is under peculiar consideration; so on the other
to the Experience and Service unto the edifica∣tion of them that do believe, whose spiritual bene∣fit and advantage without any other consideration in the World, is armed at in the publishing of them. Imprimatur, Octob. 12. 1668. Rob. Grove. R. P. Humph. Dom. Episc. Lond. à sac. Dom.
AN EXPOSITION UPON PSALM CXXX. Psalm 130. OUt of the depths have I cryed unto thee, O Lord. Lord, hear my voyce, let thine ears be atten∣tive to the voyce of my supplications. If thou, Lord, shouldst mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? But there is forgiveness with thee: that thou maist be feared. I wait for the Lord, my soul doth wait, and in his word do I hope. My soul waiteth for the Lord, more than they, that watch for the morning, I say, more than they that watch for the morning. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous Redemption. And he shall redeem Israel from all his Iniquities.
A PARAPHRASE. Verse 1, 2. 1. Out of the depths have I cry∣ed unto thee, O Lord.2. Lord, hear my voice, let thine ears be atten∣tive to the voyce of my suppli∣cations.O Lord, through my manifold sins and provocations I have brought my self into great distresses. Mine Iniquities are alwayes before me, and I am ready to be overwhelmed with them, as with a flood of waters, for they have brought me into depths, wherein I am ready to be swallowed up. But yet although my di∣stress be great and perplexing; I do not, I dare not utterly despond and cast away all hopes of relief or recovery. Nor do I seek unto any other remedy, way or means of relief, but I apply my self to thee Jehovah, to thee alone. And in this my Application unto thee, the greatness and urgency of my troubles makes my soul urgent, earnest, and pressing in my supplications. Whilst I have no rest, I can give thee no rest; Oh therefore attend and hearken unto the voyce of my crying and supplications. Ver. 3. 3. If thou, Lord, shouldst mark ini∣quities, O Lord, who shall stand?IT is true O Lord, thou God great and terrible, that if thou shouldst deal with me in this Condition, with any man living, with the best of thy Saints, according to the strict and exact te∣nor of the Law, which first represents it self to my guilty Consci∣ence, and troubled soul; If thou shouldst take notice of, observe, and keep in Remembrance, mine, or their, or the Iniquity of any one, to the end that thou mightest deal with them, and recom∣pence unto them according to the sentence thereof; there would be neither for me, nor them, any the least expectation of deliverance; all flesh must fail before thee, and the spirits which thou hast made, and that to Eternity; for who could stand before thee, when thou shouldst so execute thy displeasure.
Ver. 4. 4. But there is forgive∣ness with thee: that thou maist be feared.BUt O Lord, this is not absolutely and universally the state of things between thy Majesty and poor sinners; Thou art in thy Nature infinitely Good and Gracious, ready and free in the purposes of thy will to receive them. And there is such a blessed way made for the exercise of the holy inclinations and purposes of thy heart towards them, in the mediation and blood of thy dear Son, That they have assured foundations of concluding and belie∣ving, that there is pardon and forgiveness with thee for them; and which in the way of thine appointments they may be par∣takers of. This way therefore will I, with all that fear thee per∣sist in: I will not give over, leave thee, or turn from thee, through my fears, discouragements, and despondencies; but will abide constantly in the observation of the worship which thou hast pre∣scribed; and the performance of the Obedience which thou dost re∣quire; having great encouragements so to do. Ver. 5. 5. I wait for the Lord, my soul doth wait, and in his word do I hope.ANd herein, upon the account of the forgiveness that is with thee, O Lord, do I wait with all patience, quietness and perseverance. In this work is my whole soul engaged; even in an earnest expectation of thy approach unto me, in a way of grace and mercy. And for my encouragement therein, hast thou given out unto me a blessed word of Grace, a faithful word of promise, wherein my hope is fixed. Ver. 6. 6. My soul waiteth for the Lord, more than they, that watch for the morn∣ing, I say, more than they that watch for the morn∣ing.YEa, in the performance, and discharge of this duty, my soul is intent upon thee, and in its whole frame turned towards thee, and that with such diligence and watchfulness in looking out after every way, and means of thy appearance, of thy manifestation of thy self, and coming unto me, that I excell therein those who with longing desire, heedfulness, and earnest expectation, do wait and watch for the appearance of the morning; and that either that they may rest from their night watches, or have light for the duties of thy Wor∣ship in the Temple, which they are most delighted in.
Ver. 7, 8. 7. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous Redempti∣on.8. And he shall re∣deem Israel from all his Iniquities.HErein have I found that Rest, peace, and satisfaction unto my own soul, that I cannot but invite and encourage others, in the like Condition to take the same course with me. Let then all the Israel of God, all that fear him, learn this of me, and from my experience. Be not hasty in your distresses; despond not, despair not, turn not aside unto other remedies; but hope in the Lord; for I can now in an especial manner, give testimony unto this, that there is mercy with him suited unto your relief. Yea, what∣ever your distress be, the Redemption that is with him, is so bounteous, plenteous and unsearchable, that the undoubted issue of your performance of this duty will be; that you shall be deli∣vered from the guilt of all your sins; and the perplexities of all your troubles.
General Scope of the whole Psalm. General Scope of the whole Psalm.THE design of the Holy Ghost in this Psalm is to express in the Experience of the Psalmist, and the working of his faith, the state and condition of a soul great∣ly in it self perplexed, relieved on the account of Grace, and acting it self to∣wards God and his Saints, suitably to the discovery of that Grace unto him. A great design, and full of great Instruction. And this general Prospect gives us the parts, and scope of the whole Psalm: for (1.) We have the state and condi∣tion of the soul therein represented, with his deportment in and under that state and condition, in ver. 1, 2.Out of the depths have I cryed unto thee O Lord, Lord, hear my voyce, let thine ears be attentive to the voyce of my supplications. (2.) His enquiry after relief; and therein are two things that present themselves unto him; the one whereof, which first offers the consideration of its self to him in his distress, he deprecates, ver. 3.If thou Lord shouldst mark iniquity, O Lord who shall stand? The other he closeth withal, and finds relief in it, and sup∣portment by it, ver. 5.But there is forgiveness with thee that thou mayest be feared. Upon this his discovery and fixing on relief, there is the acting of his Faith, and the deportment of his whole Person; 1. Towards God; ver. 5, 6.I wait for the Lord, my soul doth wait, and in his word do I hope. My soul waiteth for the Lord, more than they that watch
for the morning, I say more than they that watch for the morning. 2. Towards the Saints, ver. 7, 8.Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous Redemption. And he shall redeem Israel from all his Iniquities. All which parts, and the various concernments of them, must be opened severally. And this also gives an account of what is my design from, and upon the words of this Psalm; namely, to declare the perplexed intanglements which may befall a gracious soul, such a one as this Psalmist was; with the nature and proper workings of Faith in such a condition: Principally aiming at what it is, that gives a soul relief and supportment in, and af∣terward deliverance from, such a perplexed estate. The Lord in Mercy, dispose of these Meditations in such a way and manner, as that both he that writes, and they that read, may be made partakers of the benefit, relief, and consolation, intended for his Saints in this Psalm by the Holy Ghost. The State and Condition of the soul represented in the Psalm. The two first Verses opened. The two first Verses opened.The State and Condition of the soul here represented, as the Basis on which the process of the Psalm is built; with its de∣portment, or the general acting of its Faith in that state, is expressed in the two first Verses.Out of the depths have I cryed unto thee O Lord. Lord hear my voyce; let thine ears be attentive to the voyce of my supplications. 1. The present state of the soul under consideration is included in that expression, out of the Depths. Some of the Antients, as Chrysostom, suppose this expression to relate unto the depths of the heart of the Psalmist; ; not from the mouth or tongue only, ; but from the depth and bottom of the heart; , from the deepest recesses of the mind. And indeed the word is used to express the depths of the
hearts of Men; but utterly in another sense; Psal. 64. 6. The heart is deep. But the obvious sense of the place, and the constant use of the word will not admit of this Interpretation: è Pro∣fund is, from  profundus fuit, is  in the plural number, Profunditates, or depths. It is commonly used for Vallies or any deep places whatever, but especially of Waters. Vallies and deep Places, because of their Darkness and Solitariness, are accounted places of horror, helplesness and trouble, Psal. 23. 4. When I walk in the Valley of the shadow of Death, that is, in the extremity of danger and trouble. The Moral use of the word, as expressing the state and con∣dition of the souls of men, is metaphorical. These Depths then, are difficulties, or pressures, attended with fear, horror, danger and trouble. And they are of two sorts: 1. Providential; in respect of outward distresses, Calami∣ties, and Afflictions, Psal. 69. 1. Save me O God, for the waters are come in unto my soul; I stick in the mire of the deep, and there is no standing, I am come, , into the depths of waters, and the flood overflows me. It is trouble and the ex∣tremity of it, that the Psalmist complains of, and which he thus expresseth. He was brought by it into a condition like unto a man ready to be drowned; being cast into the bottom of deep and miry waters; where he had no firm foundation to stand upon, nor ability to come out: as he farther explains himself, ver. 15. 2. There are internal Depths. Depths of Conscience upon the account of sin, Psal. 88. 6. Thou hast laid me in the lowest pit, in darkness, in the deeps. What he intends by this expres∣sion, the Psalmist declares in the next words, v. 7. Thy wrath lyeth hard upon me. Sense of Gods wrath upon his conscience upon the account of sin, was the deep he was cast into. So v. 15. speaking of the same matter; saith he; I suffer thy ter∣rors, and v. 16. Thy fierce wrath goeth over me. Which he calls water, waves, and deeps; according to the Metaphor before opened. And these are the deeps that are here principally intended.
Clamat sub molibus & fluctibus iniquitatum suarum, sayes Au∣stin on the place. He cryes out under the weight and waves of his sins. This the ensuing Psalm makes evident. Desiring to be de∣livered from these depths out of which he cryed; he deals with God wholly about mercy and forgiveness; and it is sin alone, from which forgiveness is a Deliverance. The Doctrine also that he preacheth upon his Delivery, is that of Mercy, Grace and Redemption, as is manifest from the close of the Psalm. And what we have deliverance by, is most upon our hearts when we are delivered. It is true indeed, that these deeps do oftentimes concurr: as David speaks, Deep calleth upon deep, Psal. 4. 2. 7. The deeps of Affliction, awaken the Conscience to a deep sense of sin. But sin is the Disease; Affliction only a Symptome of it; and in attending a Cure, the disease it self is principally to be heeded, the symptome will follow, or depart of its self. Many Interpreters think that this was now Davids conditi∣on; by great trouble and distress, he was greatly minded of sin; and we must not therefore wholly pass over that intend∣ment of the word, though we are chiefly to respect that, which he himself in this address unto God, did principally regard. This in general is the state and condition of the soul man∣naged in this Psalm; and is as the key to the ensuing discourse, or the hinge on which it turns. As to my intendment from the Psalm: That which ariseth from hence, may be compriz∣ed in these two Propositions. 1. Gracious souls, after much Communion with God, may be brought into inextricable depths and intanglements on the account of sin. For such the Psalmist here expresseth his own conditi∣on to have been; and such he was. 2. The inward root of outward distresses, is principally to be at∣tended in all pressing tryals; sin, in Afflictions.
Depths of trouble on the ac∣count of Sin. Gracious souls may be brought into depths on the account of sin. What those Depths are. Before I proceed at all in the farther opening of the words; they having all of them respect unto the Proposition first laid down, I shall explain and confirm the truth contained in it; that so it may be understood, what we say, and whereof we do affirm in the whole process of our Discourse. It is a sad Truth that we have proposed unto consideration. He that hears it ought to tremble in himself, that he may rest in the day of trouble; It speaks out the Apostles advice, Rom. 11. 20. Be not high minded, but fear: and that also, 1 Cor. 10. 12. Let him that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall. When Peter had learned this truth by woful experience, after all his boldness and forwardness, he gives this Councel to all Saints: that they would pass the time of their sojourning here in fear, 1 Pet. 1. 14. Knowing how near in our greatest peace and serenity, evil and danger may lye at the door. Some few instances of the many that are left on record, wherein this Truth is exemplified may be mentioned. Gen. 6. 9. Noah was a just man, perfect in his Generation, and Noah walked with God. He did so a long season, and that in an evil time, amidst all sorts of Temptations, When all flesh had corrupted its way upon the earth, ver. 12. This put an eminency upon his obe∣dience; and doubtless rendred the Communion which he had with God in walking before him, most sweet and precious to him. He was a gracious soul upon the redoubled Testimony of God himself. But we know what befell this holy Person. He that shall read the story that is recorded of him, Gen. 9. 21. will easily grant, that he was brought into inextricable distress on the account of sin. His own drunkenness, ver. 21. with the consequent of it, gives scandal unto, and provokes the unna∣tural lust of his Son, v. 22. and this leads him to the devoting of that Son, and his Posterity unto Destruction, v. 24, 25. all which, joyned with the sense of Gods just indignation, from whom he had newly received that tremendously miraculous
deliverance; must needs overwhelm him with sorrow and anxi∣ety of Spirit. The matter is more clear in David. Under the Old Testa∣ment none loved God more than he, none was loved of God more than he. The Paths of Faith and Love wherein he walked, are unto the most of us, like the way of an Eagle in the Air, too high and hard for us. Yet to this very day, do the cryes of this Man after Gods own heart, sound in our Ears. Some∣times he complains of broken bones, sometimes of drowning depths, sometimes of waves and water-spouts, sometimes of wounds and diseases, sometimes of Wrath, and the sorrows of Hell, every where of his sins, the burden and trouble of them. Some of the occasions of his, Depths, Darkness, Intanglements and Distresses, we all know. As no man had more Grace than he, so none is a greater instance of the power of sin, and the effects of its guilt upon the conscience than he. But Instances of this kind are obvious, and occurr to the thoughts of all, so that they need not be repeated. I shall then shew, Depths of Sin, where∣in they consist.First, What in particular is intended by the depths and intan∣glements on the account of sin, whereinto gracious souls after much Communion with God may be cast. Secondly, Whence it comes to pass, that so they may be, and that oftentimes so they are. First, For the First, some or all of these things following do concurr to the Depths here complained of. First, Loss of the wonted sense of the Love of God which the soul did formerly enjoy. There is a twofold sense of the Love of God, whereof Believers in this world may be made partakers. There is the transient affecting of the heart by the Holy Ghost, with ravishing unspeakable joyes, in apprehension of Gods Love, and our Relation unto him in Christ. This, or the immediate effect of it, is called, joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8. The Holy Ghost shining into the heart, with a clear evidence of the souls interest in all Gospel Mercies, causeth it to leap for joy, to exult, and triumph in the Lord; as being for a season carried above all sense and thought of sin, self, temp∣tation, or trouble. But as God gives the bread of his House
unto all his Children, so these dainties, and high Cordials he re∣serveth only for the seasons, and Persons, wherein, and to whom he knows them to be needful, and useful. Believers may be without this sense of Love, and yet be in no depths. A man may be strong and healthy, who hath wholsom food, though he ne∣ver drink Spirits and Cordials. Again, There is an abiding, dwelling sense of Gods Love upon the hearts of the most of those of whom we speak, who have had long communion with God, consisting in a prevailing Gospel perswasion, that they are accepted with God in Christ. Rom. 5. 1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God. I call it a prevailing perswasion, denoting both the opposition that is made unto it, by Satan and unbelief, and its efficacy in the con∣quest thereof. This is the root from whence all that peace, and ordinary consolation which Believers in this world are made partakers of, do spring and grow. This is that which quickens and enlivens them unto Duty, Psal. 116. 12, 13. and is the salt that renders their Sacrifices and Performances savoury to God, and refreshing to themselves. This supports them under their tryals, gives them peace, hope and comfort in Life and Death. Psal. 23. 4. Though I walk in the valley of the shaddow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me. A sense of Gods Pre∣sence in Love, is sufficient to rebuke all anxiety and fears, in the worst and most dreadful condition. And not only so, but to give in the midst of them, solid Consolation and Joy. So the Prophet expresseth it; Hab. 3. 17, 18. Although the Fig-tree shall not blessom, neither shall fruit be in the Vines, the labour of the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat; the flocks shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls; yet I will rejoyce in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. And this is that sense of Love, which the choicest Believers may lose on the account of sin. This is one step into their depths. They shall not retain any such Gospel apprehension of it, as that it should give them rest, peace, or consolation; that it should influence their souls with delight in Duty, or supportment in tryal; And the Nature hereof will be afterwards more ful∣ly explained. Secondly, Perplexed thoughtfulness about their great and wretch∣ed
unkindness towards God, are another part of the Depths of sin-intangled souls. So David complains, Psal. 77. 3. I remem∣bred God, saith he, and was troubled. How comes the Remem∣brance of God to be unto him a matter of trouble? in other Places he professeth, that it was all his relief and sup∣portment. How comes it to be an occasion of his trouble? All had not been well between God and him; and whereas for∣merly in his Remembrance of God, his thoughts were chiefly exercised about his Love and Kindness, now they were wholly possest with his own sin and unkindness. This causeth his trou∣ble. Herein lyes a share of the intanglements occasioned by sin. Saith such a soul in its self; foolish creature, hast thou thus re∣quited the Lord? Is this the return that thou hast made unto him for all his love, his kindness, his consolations, mercies? Is this thy kindness for him, thy love to him? Is this thy kindness to thy Friend? Is this thy boasting of him, that thou hadst found so much Goodness and Excellency in him and his Love, that though all men should forsake him, thou never wouldst do so? Are all thy Promises, all thy Engagements which thou madest unto God, in times of distress, upon prevailing obligations, and mighty impressions of his Good Spirit upon thy soul, now come to this, that thou shouldst so foolishly for∣get, neglect, despise, cast him off? Well! now he is gone; he is withdrawn from thee, and what wilt thou do? Art thou not even ashamed to desire him to return? They were thoughts of this nature, that cut Peter to the heart upon his fall. The soul finds them cruel as Death, and strong as the Grave. It is bound in the chains of them, and cannot be comforted, Psalm 38. 3, 4, 5, 6. And herein consists a great part of the depths en∣quired after. For this consideration excites, and puts an edge upon all grieving, straightning, perplexing Affections, which are the only means whereby the soul of a man may be in∣wardly troubled, or trouble it self; such are sorrow and shame, with that self-displicency and Revenge wherewith they are at∣tended. And as their Reason and Object in this case do tran∣scend all other occasions of them, so on no other account do they cause such severe and perplexing reflections on the soul as on this.
Thirdly, A revived sense of justly deserved wrath, belongs also to these depths. This is as the opening of old wounds. When men have passed through a sense of wrath, and have obtained deliverance and rest through the blood of Christ, to come to their old thoughts again, to be trading afresh with Hell, Curse, Law, and Wrath, it is a depth indeed. And this often befalls gracious souls on the account of sin, Psalm 88. 7. Thy wrath lyeth hard upon me, saith Heman. It pressed and crushed him sorely. There is a self-judging as to the desert of wrath, which is consistent with a comforting perswasion of an Interest in Christ. This the soul finds sweetness in, as it lyes in a subser∣viency to the exaltation of Grace. But in this case, the soul is left under it without that relief. It plungeth it self into the Curse of the Law and flames of Hell, without any cheering sup∣portment from the blood of Christ. This is walking in the val∣ley of the shadow of death. The soul converseth with death, and what seems to lye in a tendency thereunto. The Lord also to increase his perplexities, puts new life and spirit into the Law; gives it a fresh Commission as it were to take such a one into its Custody; and the Law will never in this world be wanting unto its Duty. Fourthly, Oppressing Apprehensions of temporal Judgements, concurr herein also; for God will Judge his People. And Judge∣ment often begins at the House of God. Though God, saith such a one, should not cast me off for ever, though he should pardon my iniquities, yet he may so take vengeance of my inventions, as to make me feed on gall and wormwood all my dayes Psal. 119. 120. faith David, My flesh trembleth for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgements. He knows not what the great God may bring upon him; and being full of a sense of the guilt of sin, which is the bottom of this whole condition, every Judgement of God is full of terror unto him. Sometimes he thinks, God may lay open the filth of his heart, and make him a scandal and a reproach in the world; Psal. 39. 8. Oh, saith he, make me not a reproach to the foolish. Sometimes he trembles lest God should strike him suddainly with some signal Judgement, and take him out of the world, in darkness and sorrow; so saith David, take me not away in thy wrath. Sometimes he fears lest he shall be
like Jonah, and raise a storm in his Family, in the Church whereof he is a Member, or in the whole Nation. Let them not be ashamed for my sake. These things make his heart soft as Job speaks, and to melt within him. When any Afflction or publick Judgement of God, is fastned to a quick living sense of sin in the Conscience, it overwhelms the soul; whether it be only justly feared, or be actually inflicted; as was the case of Joseph's Brethren in Aegypt. The soul is then rolled from one deep to another. Sense of sin, casts it on the consideration of its Affliction; and Affliction turns it back on a sense of sin. So deep calleth unto deep, and all Gods billows go over the soul. And they do each of them make the soul tender, and sharpen its sense un∣to the other. Affliction ens the soul; so that the sense of sin cuts the deeper, and makes the larger wounds; and the sense of sin weakens the soul, and makes Affliction sit the heavier, and so encreaseth its burden. In this case, that Affliction which a man in his usual state of spiritual peace, could have embraced as a sweet pledge of Love, is as goads and thorns in his side, de∣priving him of all rest and quietness; God makes it, as thorns and briars wherewith he will teach stubborn souls their duty, as Gideon did the Man of Succoth. Fifthly, There may be added hereunto, prevailing fears for a season, of being utterly rejected by God, of being found a Repro∣bate at the last day. Jonah seems to conclude so, Chap. 3. 4. Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight. I am lost for ever, God will own me no more. And Heman, Psalm 88. 4, 5. I am counted with them that go down into the pit: Free among the dead, like the slain that lye in the grave, whom thou remembrest no more, and they are cut off from thy hand. This may reach the soul, un∣til the sorrows of Hell encompass it, and lay hold upon it; un∣till it be deprived of comfort, peace, rest, untill it be a terror to its self, and be ready to choose strangling rather than life. This may befall a gracious soul on the account of sin. But yet be∣cause this fights directly against the Life of Faith, God doth not, unless it be in extraordinary cases, suffer any of his to lye long in this horrible pit, where there is no water, no refresh∣ment. But this often falls out, that even the Saints themselves are left for a season to a fearful expectation of judgement, and
fiery indignation, as to the prevailing apprehension of their minds. And, Sixthly, God secretly sends his Arrows into the soul that wound and gall it, adding pain, trouble, and disquietness to its disconsola∣tion. Psalm 38. 2. Thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presseth me sore. Ever and anon in his walking, God shot a sharp piercing arrow, fixing it on his soul that galled, wound∣ed, and perplexed him, filling him with pain and grievous vexation. These arrows are Gods rebukes, Psal. 39. 11. When thou with rebukes dost correct man for iniquity. God speaks in his Word, and by his Spirit in the Conscience, things sharp and bit∣ter to the soul, fastning them so as it cannot shake them out. These Job so mournfully complains of, Chap. 6. 4. The Lord speaks words, with that efficacy, that they piecce the heart quite through; and what the issue then is, David declares, Psal. 38 3. There is no soundness, saith he, in my flesh, because of thine anger, nor is there any rest in my bones because of my sin. The whole person is brought under the power of them, and all health and rest is taken away; and Seventhly, Unspiritedness and disability unto Duty, in doing or suffering, attend such a condition, Psal. 40. 12. Mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up. His spiritual strength was worn away by sin, so that he was not able to ad∣dress himself unto any communion with God. The soul now cannot pray with life and power; cannot hear with joy and profit; cannot do good and communicate with cheerfulness and freedom; cannot meditate with delight and heavenly minded∣ness; cannot act for God with zeal and liberty; cannot think of suffering with boldness and resolution; but is sick, weak, feeble and bowed down. Now, I say, a gracious soul after much communion with God, may on the account of sin, by a sense of the guilt of it, be brought into a state and condition, wherein some, more, or all of these, with other the like perplexities, may be its portion. And these make up the Depths whereof the Pfalmist here com∣plains. What are the sins, or of what sorts, that ordinarily cast the souls of Believers into these depths shall be afterwards declared. I shall now shew both whence it is, that Believers
may fall into such a condition; as also whence it is that often∣times, they actually do so. The Na∣ture and Extent of supplies of Grace ac∣cording to the Cove∣nant.Whence it is that Believers may be brought into depths on the ac∣count of sin. Nature of the supplies of Grace given in the Covenant. How far they extend. Principles of the power of sin. First, The Nature of the Covenant wherein all Believers now walk with God, and wherein all their whole provision for obedi∣ence is enwrapped, leaves it possible for them to fall into these depths that have been mentioned. Under the first Covenant, there was no mercy or forgiveness provided for any sin. It was necessary then that it should exhibit a sufficiency of Grace to preserve from every sin, or it could have been of no use at all. This the Rigteousness of God required, and so it was. To have made a Covenant wherein there was no provision at all of pardon, and not a sufficiency of Grace to keep the Covenanters from need of pardon, was not answerable to the Goodness and Righteousness of God. But he made man upright who of his own accord sought out many inventions. It is not so in the Covenant of Grace; There is in it pardon provided in the blood of Christ; It is not therefore of indi∣spensible necessity that there should be administred in it, Grace ef∣fectually preserving from every sin: Yet is it on all accounts to be preferred before the other. For besides the relief by pardon which the other knew nothing of, there is in it also much provision against sin which was not in the other. First, There is provision made in it, against all and every sin that would disannull the Covenant, and make a final separation be∣tween God and a soul that hath been once taken into the bond thereof. This provision is absolute; God hath taken up∣on himself the making of this good, and the establishing this Law of the Covenant, that it shall not by any sin be disannulled, Jor. 32. 40. I will (saith God) make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good, but I will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. The security hereof depends not on any thing in our
selves. All that is in us is to be used as a means of the accom∣plishment of this Promise; but the event or issue depends ab∣solutely on the faithfulness of God. And the whole certainty and stability of the Covenant depends on the efficacy of the Grace administred in it, to preserve men from all such sins as would disanull it. Secondly, There is in this Covenant provision made for constant peace and consolation, notwithstanding, and against the guilt of such sins, as through their infirmities and temptations believers are daily exposed unto. Though they fall into sins every day, yet they do not fall into depths every day. In the tenour of this Cove∣nant, there is a consistency between a sense of sin unto humili∣ation and peace, with strong consolation. After the Apostle had described the whole conflict that Believers have with sin, and the frequent wounds which they receive thereby, which makes them cry out for deliverance, Rom. 7. 24. He yet concludes, Chap. 8. 1. that there is no condemnation unto them, which is a sufficient and stable foundation of Peace. So 1 John 2. 1. These things have I written unto you, that you sin not; and if any man sin we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous. Our great business and care ought to be, that we sin not; but yet when we have done our utmost, if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, Chap. 1. 8. What then shall poor, sinful, guilty creatures do? why let them go to the Father, by their Advocate, and they shall not fail of pardon and peace. And saith Paul, Heb 6. 17, 18. God is abundantly willing that we might have strong consolation who fly for resuge to lay hold on the hope set before us. What was his condition who fled of old to the City of refuge for safety, from whence this expression is taken? He was guilty of blood, though shed at unawares; and so, as that he was to dye for it, if he escaped not to the City of Refuge. Though we may have the guilt of sins upon us, that the Law pronounceth death unto, yet flying to Christ for refuge, God hath provided not only safety, but strong consolation for us also. Forgiveness in the blood of Christ, doth not only take guilt from the soul, but trouble also from the conscience. And in this respect doth the Apostle at large set forth the Excellen∣cy of his Sacrifice, Heb. 10. The Sacrifices of the Old Law, he
tells us, could not make perfect the worshippers, v. 1. which he proves, v. 2. because they did never take away, throughly and really, Conscience of sin, that is, depths or distresses of conscience about sin; But now, saith he, Jesus Christ in the Covenant of Grace hath for ever perfected them that were sanctified, v. 14. providing for them such stable peace and consolation, as that they shall not need the renewing of Sacrifices every day, v. 18. This is the great mysterie of the Gospel in the blood of Christ; that those who sin every day, should have peace with God all their dayes. Provided their sins fall within the compass of those infirmities, against which this consolation is provided. Thirdly, There is provision made of Grace, to prevent and pre∣serve the soul from great and enormous sins, such as in their own nature, are apt to wound conscience, and cast the person into such depths and intanglements as wherein he shall have neither rest nor peace. Of what sort these sins are, shall be afterwards declared. There is in this Covenant Grace for Grace, Joh. 1. 16. and abundance of Grace, administred from the All-fulness of Christ. Grace reigneth in it, Rom. 6. 6. destroying and crucify∣ing the body of sin. But this Provision in the Covenant of Grace against peace-ru∣ining, soul-perplexing sins, is not as to the administration of it, absolute. There are Covenant Commands and Exhortations, on the attendance whereunto, the administration of much Cove∣nant-Grace doth depend. To watch, pray, improve faith, to stand on our guard continually, to mortifie sin, to fight against temptations, with stedfastness, diligence, constancy, are every where prescribed unto us; and that in order unto the ensurance of the Grace mentioned. These things are on our part, the condition of the Administration of that abundant Grace, which is to preserve us from soul-entangling sins, So Peter informs us, 2 Ep. 1. v. 3. The divine power of God hath given unto us all things that pertain unto life and godliness. We have from it an habitual furnishment and provision for obedience at all times. Also saith he, v. 4. He bath given unto us great and pretious pro∣mises, that by them we might be partakers of the Divine Nature; What then is in this blessed estate and condition required of us, that we may make a due improvement of the provision made
for us, and enjoy the comforting influence of those Promises? that he prescribes unto us, v. 5, 6, 7. Giving all diligence, add to your faith vertue, and to vertue knowledge, and to knowledge tem∣perance, and to temperance patience, and to patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness charity; That is carefully and diligently attend to the exercise of all the Graces of the Spirit, and unto a conversation in all things becoming the Gospel. What then shall be the issue, if these things are attended unto? v. 8. If these things be in you, and abound, ye shall be neither barren nor unfruitful, in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. It is not enough that these things be in you; that you have the seed and root of them from and by the Holy Ghost; but you are to take care that they flourish and abound; without which, though the root of the matter may be in you, and so you be not wholly devoid of spiritual life, yet you will be poor, barren, sapless, withering creatures, all your days. But now suppose that these things do abound, and we be made fruitful thereby: Why then saith he, v. 10. If you do these things ye shall never fall: What never fall into sin? Nay, that is not in the Promise; and he that sayes, when he hath done all, that he hath no sin, he is a Lyar. Or is it ne∣ver fall totally from God? No, the preservation of the Elect, of whom he speaks, from total Apostasie, is not suspended on such conditions, especially not on any degree of them, such as their abounding imports. But it is that they shall not fall into their old sins from which they were purged, v. 9. Such Consci∣ence wasting, and defiling sins, as they lived in, in the time and state of their Unregeneracy. Thus though there be in the Covenant of Grace through Jesus Christ, Provision made of abundant supplies for the souls preservation from entangling sins; yet their Administration hath respect unto our diligent attendance unto the means of receiving them appointed for us to walk in. And here lyes the latitude of the New Covenant; here lyes the exercise of renewed Free-will. This is the field of free voluntary obedience under the Administration of Gospel Grace. There are extreams which in respect of the event it is not con∣cerned in. To be wholly perfect, to be free from every sin, all
failings, all infirmities, that is not provided for, not promised in this Covenant. It is a Covenant of mercy and pardon, which supposeth a continuance of sin. To fall utterly and finally from God, that is absolutely provided against. Between these two extreams of absolute perfection, and total Apostasie, lyes the large Field of Believers obedience and walking with God. Many a sweet heavenly passage there is, and many a dangerous depth in this field. Some walk near to the one side, some to the other; yea, the same person may sometimes press hard after Perfection, sometimes be cast to the very border of destruction. Now between these two, lye many a soul-plunging sin, against which no absolute provision is made, and which for want of giving all diligence to put the means of preservation in pra∣ctice, Believers are oftentimes overtaken withal. Fourthly, There is not in the Covenant of Grace, Provision made of ordinary and abiding consolation, for any under the guilt of great sins, or sins greatly aggravated, which they fall into by a neglect of using and abiding in the forementioned con∣ditions of abounding actual Grace. Sins there are, which ei∣ther because in their own nature they wound and waste con∣science, or in their effects break forth into scandal, causing the name of God and the Gospel to be evil spoken of, or in some of their circumstances, are full of unkindness against God, do deprive the soul of its wonted consolation. How, by what means, on what account such sins come to terrifie conscience, to break the bones, to darken the soul, and to cast it into inex∣tricable depths, notwithstanding the relief that is provided of pardon in the blood of Christ, I shall not now declare; that they will do so, and that Consolation is not of equal extent with safety, we know. Hence God assumes it to himself as an act of meer Soveraign Grace, to speak peace and refreshment unto the souls of his Saints in their depths of sin entanglements, Isa. 57. 18, 19. And indeed if the Lord had not thus pro∣vided, that great provocations, should stand in need of special re∣liefs, it might justly be feared, that the negligence of Be∣lievers, might possibly bring forth much bitter fruit. Only this must be observed by the way, that what is spoken relates to the sense of sinners in their own souls, and not to the
nature of the thing it self. There is in the Gospel, consolation provided against the greatest, as well as the least sins. The dif∣ference ariseth from Gods Soveraign communication of it, according to that tenor of the Covenants Administration, which we have laid down. Hence because under Moses's Law there was an exception made of some sins, for which there was no Sacrifice appointed, so that those who were guilty of them could no way be justified from them, that is carnally, as to their interest in the Judaical Church and Polity; Paul tells the Jews, Acts 13. 38, 39. That through Jesus Christ was preach∣ed unto them the forgiveness of sins, and that by him all that believe are justified from all things, from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses. There is now no exception of any particu∣lar sins, as to pardon, and peace; but what we have spoken relates unto the manner and way, wherein God is pleased to administer consolation to the souls of sinning Believers. And this is the Evidence which I shall offer to prove, that the souls of Believers, after much Gracious Communion with God, may yet fall into inextricable depths on the account of sin; whence it is that actually they oftentimes do so, shall be farther de∣clared. The Power of Indwel∣ling Sin.The Principles of this Assertion, are known, I shall therefore only touch upon them. First, The nature of Indwelling-sin, as it remains in the best of the Saints in this life, being a little considered, will evidence unto us, from whence it is that they are sometimes surprized, and plunged into the depths mentioned. For, First, Though the strength of every sin be weakned by Grace, yet the root of no sin, is in this life wholly taken away. Lust is like the stubborn Canaanites, who after the general conquest of the Land, would yet dwell in it still, Judg. 17. 12. Indeed when Israel grew strong they brought them under tribute, but they could not utterly expell them. The Kingdom and Rule belongs to Grace; and when it grows strong it brings sin much under; but it will not wholly be driven out. The Body of Death, is not utterly to be done away, but in and by the Death of the Body. In the flesh of the best Saints there dwelleth no
good thing, Rom. 7. 8. but the contrary is there; that is the root of all evil. The flesh lusteth against the Spirit, as the Spi∣rit lusteth against the flesh. Gal. 5. 17. As then there is an Uni∣versality in the actings of the Spirit in its opposing all evil, so also there is an Universality in the actings of the flesh for the furtherance of it. Secondly, Some Lusts or branches of original corruption, do obtain in some persons such advantages, either from Na∣ture, Custom, Employment, Society, or the like Circumstances, that they become like the Canaanites that had iron Chariots; it is a very difficult thing to subdue them. Well it is, if War be maintained constantly against them, for they will almost al∣wayes be in actual Rebellion. Thirdly, Indwelling-Sin though weakned, retaineth all its properties; the properties of a thing follow its nature. Where the nature of any thing is, there are all its natural properties. What are these properties of Indwelling Sin, I should here de∣clare, but that I have handled the whole power and efficacy, the nature and properties of it, in a Treatise to that only pur∣pose. In brief they are such, as it is no wonder, that some Believers are by them cast into depths; but it is indeed, that any do escape them. But hereof the Reader may see at large my Discourse on this particular subject. Secondly, Add hereunto, the power and prevalency of tempta∣tion; which because also, I have already in a special Discourse to that purpose insisted on, I shall not here farther lay open. Gods So∣veraignty in dealing with Be∣lievers in their sins.Thirdly, The Soveraign pleasure of God in dealing with sin∣ning Saints must also be considered. Divine Love and Wis∣dom work not towards all in the same manner. God is pleased to continue Peace unto some with a non-obstante, for great provocations. Love shall humble them, and rebukes of kindness shall recover them from their wandrings. Others he is pleased to bring into the depths we have been speaking of. But yet I may say generally signal provocations, meet with one of these two events from God. First, Those in whom they are, are left unto some signal bar∣renness,
and fruitlesness in their Generations; they shall wither, grow barren, worldly, sapless, and be much cast out of the hearts of the people of God. Or Secondly, They shall be ex∣ercised in these depths, from whence their way of deliverance is laid down in this Psalm. Thus I say, God deals with his Saints in great variety: Some shall have all their bones broken, when others shall have only the gentle strokes of the rod. We are in the hand of Mercy, and he may deal with us as seems good unto him; but for our parts, great sins, ought to be attended with expectations of great depths and preplexities. And this is the state of the soul proposed in this Psalm, and by us, unto consideration. These are the depths wherein it is en∣tangled; these the wayes and means whereby it is brought in∣to these depths. Its deportment in, and under this state and condition, lyes next in our way. But before I proceed there∣unto, I shall annex some few things, unto what hath been de∣livered, tending to the farther opening of the whole Case before us. And they are (1.) What are, or of what sort those sins are which usually cast the souls of Believers into these depths; and then (2.) Insist on some Aggravations of them. Sins occa∣sioning great di∣stresses.What sins usually bring Believers into great spiritual distresses. Aggravations of those sins. First, Sins in their own nature wasting Conscience are of this sort. Sins that rise in opposition unto all of God that is in us; that is the light of Grace and Nature also. Such are the sins that cast David into his depths. Such are the sins enumerated 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Be not deceived, saith the Apostle, neither Forni∣cators; nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with Mankind. Nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drun∣kards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. Certain it is, that Believers may fall into some of the sins here mentioned. Some have done so, as is left on record. The Apostle says not, those who have committed any of these sins, but such sinners shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; that is, who live in these, or any of these sins, or any like unto them. There is no provision of mercy made for such sinners. These and the
like are sins which in their own nature, without the considera∣tion of aggravating circumstances, (which yet indeed really, in Believers they can never be without) are able to plunge a soul into depths. These sins cut the locks of mens spiritual strength; and it is in vain for them to say, we will go, and do as at other times. Bones are not broken without pain; nor great sins brought on the Conscience without trouble. But I need not insist on these. Some say that they deprive even true Believers of all their interest in the Love of God, but unduly; all grant that they bereave them of all comforting evidence, and well grounded Assurance of it. So they did David and Peter, and herein lyes no small part of the depths we are searching into. Secondly, There are sins which though they do not rise up in the conscience with such a bloody guilt, as those mentioned, yet by reason of some circumstances and aggravations, God takes them so unkindly, as to make them a root of disquietness and trouble to the soul all its dayes. He sayes of some sins of ungodly men, as I live this iniquity shall not be purged from you until ye dye? If you are come to this height, you shall not escape, I will not spare you. And there are Provocations in his own People, which may be so circumstantiated, as that he will not let them pass, before he have cast them into depths, and made them cry out for deliverance. Let us consider some of them. First, Miscarriages under signal Enjoyments of love and kindness from God, are of this sort. When God hath given unto any one expressive manifestations of his Love, convinced him of it, made him say in the inmost parts of his heart, this is unde∣served love and kindess, then for him to be negligent in his walk∣ing with God, it carrieth an unkindness with it, that shall not be forgotten. It is a remark upon the miscarriages of Solomon, that he fell into them after God had appeared unto him twice. And all sins under or after especial mercies, will meet at one time or other especial rebukes. Nothing doth more distress the conscience of a sinner, then the remembrance in darkness of abused light; in desertions of neglected love. This God will make them sensible of. Though I have redeemed them, saith
God, yet they have spoken lyes against me, Hos. 7. 15. So Chap. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7. When God hath in his Providence dealt graci∣ously with a Person, it may be delivered him from straights and troubles, set him in a large place, prevented him with ma∣ny fruits and effects of his goodness, blessed him in his Person, Relations, and Employments, dealt well with his soul, in giv∣ing him a gracious sense of his love in Christ; for such a one to fall under sinful miscarriages, it goes to the heart of God, and shall not be passed over. Undervaluations of Love are great pro∣vocations. Hath Nabal thus requited my kindness saith David? I cannot bear it. And the clearer the convictions of any in this kind were, the more severe will their reflections be upon them∣selves. Secondly, Sins under, or after great Afflictions, are of this importance also. God doth not afflict willingly, or chasten us meerly for his pleasure. He doth it to make us partakers of his Holiness. To take so little notice of his hand herein, as under it, or after it, not to watch against the workings and surprizals of sin, it hath unkindness in it; I smote him, saith God, and he went on frowardly in the wayes of his own heart. These provo∣cations of his Sons and Daughters, he cannot bear with. Hath God brought thee into the Furnace, so that thou hast melted under his hand, and in pity and compassion hath given thee enlargement; if thou hast soon forgotten his dealings with thee, is it any wonder, if he mind thee again, by troubles in thy soul? Thirdly, Breaking off from under strong convictions, and dawn∣ings of Love before Conversion, are oftentimes remembred upon the conscience afterwards. When the Lord by his Spirit shall mightily convince the heart of sin, and make withal some dis∣coveries of his Love, and the Excellencies of Christ unto it, so that it begins to yield, and be overpowred, being almost per∣swaded to be a Christian; if then through the strength of lust, or unbelief, it goes back to the world, or self righteousness; its folly hath unkindness with it, that sometimes shall not be passed by. God can, and often doth put forth the greatness of his power, for the recovery of such a soul; but yet he will deal with him, about this contempt of his Love, and the Excel∣lency
of his Son, in the dawnings of them revealed unto him. Fourthly, Suddain forgetfulness of endearing manifestations of speci∣al Love. This God cautions his people against; as knowing their proneness thereunto. Psal. 85. 8. God the Lord, will speak peace to his People and his Saints; but let them not turn again to solly. Let them take heed of their aptness to forget endearing manifesta∣tions of special Love. When God at any time draws nigh to a soul by his Spirit, in his Word, with gracious words of peace and love, giving a sense of his kindness upon the heart by the Holy Ghost, so that it is filled with joy unspeakable and glo∣rious thereon; for this soul, upon a temptation, a diversion, or by meer carelesness and neglect, which oftentimes falls out, to suffer this sense of Love to be as it were obliterated, and so to lose that influencing efficacy unto obedience which it is accom∣panied withal, this also is full of unkindness. An account here∣of we have, Cant. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. In the first Verse the Lord Jesus draws nigh with full provision of Gospel Mercies for his Beloved; I am come unto thee, saith he, O my Sister; I have brought myrrh and spice, honey and Wine with me: What ever is spiritually sweet and delightful; Mercy, Grace, Peace, Conso∣lation, Joy, Assurance, they are all here in a readiness for thee, v. 2. The Spouse in her drowsie indisposition takes little notice of this gracious visit; she is diverted by other matters, and knows not how to attend fully and wholly to the blessed Com∣munion offered unto her; but excuseth her self as otherwise engaged. But what is the issue? Christ withdraws, leaves her in the dark, in the midst of many disconsolations, and long it is before she obtain any recovery. Fifthly, Great opportunities for service neglected, and great gifts not improved, are oftentimes the occasion of plunging the soul into great depths. Gifts are given to trade withal for God. Opportunities, are the market dayes for that trade. To napkin up the one, and to let slip the other, will end in trouble and dis∣consolation. Disquietments and perplexities of heart, are worms that will certainly breed in the rust of unexercised Gifts. God looseth a revenue of glory and honour by such slothful souls; and he will make them sensible of it. I know
some at this day, whom omissions of opportunities for service, are ready to sink into the grave. Sixthly, Sins after especial warnings, are usually thus issued. In all that variety of special warnings which God is pleased to use towards sinning Saints, I shall single out one only. When a soul is wrastling with some Lust or Temptation, God by his Providence causeth some special word, in the Preaching of the Gospel, or the Administration of some Ordinance thereof, pe∣culiarly suited to the state and condition of the soul, by the wayes of rebuke, or perswasion, to come nigh and enter the in∣most parts of the heart. The soul cannot but take notice that God is nigh to him, that he is dealing with him; and cal∣ing on him to look to him for assistance. And he seldom gives such warnings to his Saints, but that he is nigh them in an emi∣nent manner to give them relief and help, if in answer unto his call, they apply themselves unto him; but if his care, and kindness herein be neglected, his following reproofs are usually more severe. Seventhly, Sins that bring scandal, seldom suffer the soul to escape depths. Even in great sins, God in chastening takes more notice oft-times of the scandal, than the sin: as 2 Sam. 12. 14. Many professors take little notice of their worldliness, their pride, their passion, their lavish tongues; but the world doth, and the Gospel is disadvantaged by it; and no wonder if them∣selves find from the hand of the Lord, the bitter fruits of them in the issue. And many other such Aggravations of sins there are which heighten provocations in their own nature, not of so dreadful an aspect as some others, into a guilt plunging a soul into depths. Those which have been named may suffice in the way of instance; which is all that we have aimed at, and therefore forbear enlargements, on the several heads of them. Aggrava∣tions of sins causing distresses.The consideration of some Aggravations of the guilt of these sins, which bring the soul usually into the condition before laid down, shall close this discourse. First, The soul is furnished with a Principle of Grace, which is continually operative and working for its preservation from such sins.
The new Creature, is living, and active for its own growth, in∣crease and security, according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace, Gal. 5. 17. it lusteth against the flesh. It is naturally active for its own preservation and increase; as new born Chil∣dren, have a natural inclination to the food that will keep them alive, and cause them to grow, 1 Pet. 2. 2. The soul then cannot fall into these entangling sins, but it must be with an high neglect, of that very Principle, which is bestowed up∣on it, for quite contrary ends and purposes. The labourings, lustings, desires, crying of it, are neglected. Now it is from God, and of God, and is the Renovation of his Image in us; that which God owneth and careth for; the wounding of its vi∣tals, the stifling its operations, the neglect of its endeavours for the souls preservation, do alwayes attend sins of the importance spoken unto. Secondly, Whereas this new Creature, this principle of life and obedience is not able of it self to preserve the soul from such sins as will bring it into depths; there is full provision for continual supplies made for it, and all its wants in Jesus Christ. There are treasures of relief in Christ, whereunto the soul may at any time repair and find succour against the incursions of sin. He sayes to the soul as David unto Abiathar; when he fled from Doeg: Abide with me, fear not; he that seeketh my life, seek∣eth thy life, but with me thou shalt be in safety. Sin is my Ene∣my no less than thine; it seeketh the life of thy soul, and it seeketh my life; abide with me, for with me thou shalt be in safety. This the Apostle exhorts us unto, Heb. 4. 16. Let us come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. If ever it be a time of need with a soul, it is so when it is under the assaults of provoking sins. At such a time there is suitable and seasonable help in Christ for succour and relief. The new Creature beggs with sighs and groans, that the soul would apply it self unto him. To neglect him with all his Provision of Grace, whilst he stands calling unto us, open unto me, for my head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night, to despise the sighing of the poor Prisoner, the new Creature, by sin appointed to dye, cannot but be an high provocation. May not God complain and say; see
these poor creatures; they were once intrusted with a stock of Grace in themselves; this they cast away, and themselves into the utmost misery thereby. That they might not utterly pe∣rish a second time, their portion and stock is now laid up in ano∣ther; a safe Treasurer; in him are their lives and comforts se∣cured. But see their wretched negligence; they venture all, ra∣ther than they will attend to him for succour. And what think we is the heart of Christ, when he sees his Children giv∣ing way to conscience wasting sins, without that application unto him, which the life and peace of their own souls calls up∣on them for. These are not sins of daily infirmity which can∣not be avoided; but their guilt is alwayes attended, with a neglect more or less, of the relief provided in Christ against them. The means of preservation from them is blessed, ready, nigh at hand; the concernment of Christ in our preservation great, of our souls unspeakable; to neglect and despise, means, Christ, souls, peace and life, must needs render guilt very guilty. Thirdly, Much to the same purpose may be spoken about that signal provision that is made against such sins as these in the Covenant of Grace, as hath been already declared. But I shall not farther carry on this discourse. And this may suffice, as to the state and condition of the soul in this Psalm represented. We have seen what the depths are wherein it is intangled, and by what wayes and means any one may come to be cast into them. The next thing that of∣fers it self unto our consideration, is the deportment of a gra∣cious soul in that state and condition; or what course it steers towards a delivery.
The Duty and Actings of a Believer under distresses from a sense of sin. His Application unto God. To God alone. Ear∣nestness and intention of mind therein. The se∣cond Verse opened.The words of these two first Verses declare also the deport∣ment of the soul in the condition that we have described; that is, what it doth, and what course it steers for relief. I have cryed unto thee O Lord, Lord hear my voice, let thine ears be atten∣tive to the voyce of my supplications. There is in the words a General Application made in a ten∣dency unto relief; wherein is first to be considered, to whom the Application is made; and that is JEHOVAH. I have cryed unto thee Jehovah. God gave out that Name to his peo∣ple to confirm their faith in the stability of his Promises; Exod. 3. He who is BEING himself, will assuredly give being and subsistance to his promises. Being to deal with God, about the promises of grace, he makes his Application to him under this name. I call upon thee Jehovah. In the Application it self, may be observed, First, The Anthropopathy of the Expression. He prayes that God would cause his ears to be attentive: after the manner of men who seriously attend to what is spoken to them, when they turn aside from that which they regard not. Secondly, The Earnestness of the soul in the work it hath in hand, which is evident both from the Reduplication of his re∣quest, Lord hear my voyce, let thine ears be attentive to my voyce, and the Emphaticalness of the words he maketh use of. Let thine ears saith he, be  Diligently Attentive. The word signifies the most diligent heedfulness and close attention; let thine ears be very attentive; and unto what;  to the voice of my supplications: deprecationum mearum generally say Interpreters; of my Deprecations; or earnest prayers for the averting of evil, or punishment. But the word is from  Gratiosus suit; to be gracious or merciful; so that it signi∣fies properly supplications for grace. Be attentive, saith he, O Lord, unto my supplications for grace and mercy, which accord∣ing to my extream necessity, I now address my self to make
unto thee. And in these words doth the Psalmist set forth in general the frame and working of a gracious soul, being cast into depths and darkness by sin. The foundation of what I shall farther thence pursue, lyes in these two Propositions. First, The only attempt of a sinful entangled soul for relief lyes in an application to God alone. To thee Jehovah have I cry∣ed, Lord hear. Secondly, Depths of sin intanglements will put a gracious soul on intense and earnest application unto God; Lord hear, Lord attend. Dying men do not use to cry out slothfully for relief. What may be thought necessary in general for the direction of a soul in the state and condition described, shall briefly be spoken unto from these two Propositions. Actings of a Believer under di∣stress from sin.First, Trouble, danger, disquietment, arguing not only things evil, but a sense in the mind and soul of them, will of them∣selves put those in whom they are upon seeking relief. Every thing would naturally be at rest: A drowning man needs no Exhortation to endeavour his own deliverance and safety. And spiritual troubles will in like manner put men on attempts for relief. To seek for no remedy, is to be senslesly obdurate or wretchedly desperate, as Cain and Judas. We may suppose then that the principal business of every soul in depths, is to endeavour deliverance. They cannot rest in that condition, wherein they have no rest. In this endeavour what course a gracious soul steers, is laid down in the first Proposition, ne∣gatively and positively. He applyes himself not to any thing but God, he applyes himself unto God. An eminent instance we have of it in both parts; or both to the one side and the other, Hos. 14. 3. Ashur, say those poor distressed returning sinners, shall not save us, we will not ride upon Horses, neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, ye are our Gods, for in thee the fatherless findeth mercy. Their application unto God, is at∣tended with a renunciation of every other way of relief.
False ways of reliev∣ing souls in distress.Several things there are that sinners are apt to apply them∣selves unto for relief in their perplexities, which prove unto them as waters that fail. How many, things have the Romanists invented to deceive souls withal? Saints, and Angels, the Blessed Virgin, Wood of the Cross, Confissions, Rennances, Masses, Pil∣grimages, Dirges, Purgatories, Papal Pardons, Works of Compensa∣tion, and the like, are made entrances for innumerable souls in∣to everlasting ruine. Did they know the terror of the Lord, the nature of Sin, and of the mediation of Christ, they would be ashamed and confounded in themselves for these abominations; they would not say unto these their Idols, ye are our Gods, come and save us. How short do all their contrivances come of his, that would fain be offering Rivers of Oyl, yea, the fruit of his body for the sin of his soul, his first born for his transgression, Mich. 6. 7. Who yet gains nothing, but an Aggravation of his sin and misery thereby: Yea, the Heathen went beyond them in devotion and expence. It is no new enquiry what course sin perplexed souls should take for relief. From the foundation of the world, the minds of far the greatest part of mankind, have been exercised in it. As was there light or darkness, such was the course they took; Among those who were ignorant of God, this Enquiry brought forth all that Diabolical Superstition which spread it self over the face of the whole world. Gen∣tilism being destroyed by the power and Efficacy of the Gospel, the same enquiry working in the minds of darkned men in conjunction with other lusts, brought forth the Papacy. When men had lost a spiritual acquaintance with the Covenant of Grace, and Mysterie of the Gospel, the design of eternal love, the efficacy of the blood of Christ, they betook themselves in part, or in whole for relief under their entanglements, un∣to the broken Cisterns mentioned. They are of two sorts: Self, and other things. For those other things, which belong un∣to their false Worship, being abominated by all the Saints of God, I shall not need to make any farther mention of them. That which relates unto self, is not confined unto Popery, but extends it self to the limits of Humane Nature, and is predo∣minate in all that are under the Law; that is, to seek for relief
in sin distresses by self-endeavours, self-righteousness. Hence many poor souls in straights apply themselves, to themselves. They expect their cure, from the same hand that wounded them. This was the life of Judaism, as the Apostle informs us, Rom. 10. 3. And all men under the Law, are still animated by the same principle. They return, but not unto the Lord. Finding themselves in depths, in distresses about sin, what course do they take? This they will do, that they will do no more; this shall be their ordinary course, and that they will do in an extraordinary manner; as they have offended, whence their trou∣ble ariseth, so they will amend, and look that their peace should spring from thence, as if God and they, stood on equal terms. In this way some spend all their dayes; sinning and amending, amending and sinning, without once coming to repentance and peace. This the souls of believers watch against. They look on themselves as fatherless; in thee the fatherless findeth mercy; that is, helpless; without the least ground of hopes in them∣selves, or expectation from themselves. They know their re∣pentance, their amendment, their supplications, their humilia∣tions, their fastings, their mortifications; will not relieve them. Repent they will, and amend they will, and pray, and fast, and humble their souls, for they know these things to be their du∣ty; but they know that their goodness extends not to him with whom they have to do, nor is he profited by their righteous∣ness. They will be in the performance of all duties, but they expect not deliverance by any duty. It is God, say they, with whom we have to do: our business is to hearken what he will say unto us. There are also other wayes whereby sinful souls destroy themselves by false reliefs. Diversions from their perplexing thoughtfulness pleaseth them. They will fix on something or other, that cannot cure their disease, but shall only make them forget that they are sick. As Cain under the terror of his guilt, departed from the presence of the Lord, and sought inward rest in outward labour and employment; he went and built a City, Gen. 4. 6. Such courses Soul fixed on; first Musick, then a Witch. Nothing more ordinary than for men thus to deal with their convictions. They see their sickness, feel their wound,
and go to the Assyrian, Hos. 5. 13. And this insensibly leads men into Atheism. Frequent Applications of Creature diversions un∣to convictions of sin, are a notable means of bringing on final impenitency. Some Drunkards had it may be never been so, had they not been first convinced of other sins. They strive to stifle the guilt of one sin, with another. They fly from them∣selves, unto themselves, from their consciences unto their lusts; and seek for relief from sin by sinning. This is so far from Be∣lievers, that they will not allow lawful things to be a diversion of their distress. Use lawful things they may and will, but not to divert their thoughts from their distresses. These they know must be issued between God and them. Wear off they will not, but must be taken away. These rocks, and the like whereof there are innumerable, I say, a gracious soul takes care to avoid. He knows it is God alone who is the Lord of his Conscience, where his depths lye; God alone against whom he hath sinned; God alone who can pardon his sin. From dealing with him he will be neither enticed, nor diverted. To thee O Lord, saith he, do I come; thy word concerning me must stand; upon thee will I wait; if thou hast no delight in me I must perish. Other re∣medies I know are vain. I intend not to spend my strength for that which is not bread. Unto thee do I cry. Here a sin-in∣tangled soul is to fix its self. Trouble excites it to look for relief. Many things without it present themselves as a diversi∣on; many things within it, offer themselves for a remedy. Forget thy sorrow say the former; ease thy self of it by us, say the latter; the soul refuseth both, as Physitians of no value; and to God alone, makes its Application. He hath wounded, and he alone can heal. And untill any one that is sensible of the guilt of sin, will come off from all reserves to deal immedi∣ately with God, it is in vain for him to expect relief. Earnestness of a distres∣sed soul in its Appli∣cations un∣to God.Secondly, Herein it is intense, earnest, and urgent, which was the second thing observed. It is no time now to be sloathful. The souls All, its greatest concernments are at the stake. Dull, cold, formal, customary Applications to God will not serve the turn. Ordinary actings of saith, love, servency; usual seasons, oppor∣tunities, duties, answer not this condition. To do no more
than ordinary now, is to do nothing at all. He that puts forth no more strength and activity for his deliverance when he is in depths, ready to perish, than he doth, or hath need to do, when he is at liberty in plain and smoorths paths, is scarcely like to escape. Some (in such conditions) are careless and negli∣gent; they think in an ordinary course, to wear off their di∣stempers; and that although at present they are sensible of their danger; they shall yet have peace at last; in which frame there is much contempt of God. Some despond and languish away under their pressures. Spiritual sloth influenceth both these sorts of persons. Let us see the frame under consideration exemplified in another. We have an instance in the Spouse, Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3. She had lost the presence of Christ; and so was in the very state and condition before described, v. 1. It was night with her, a time of darkness and disconsolation; and she seeks for her Beloved: By night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loveth. Christ was absent from her, and she was left unto depths and darkness upon that account. Wherefore she seeks for him; but as the most are apt to do in the like state and con∣dition. She mends not her pace, goes not out of, or beyond her course of ordinary duties; nor the frame she was usually in at other times. But what is the issue? saith she, I found him not. This is not a way to recover a sense of lost Love; nor to get out of her entanglements. And this puts her on ano∣ther course; she begins to think that if things continue in this estate, she shall be undone; I go on indeed with the per∣formance of duties still, but I have not the presence of my Be∣loved; I meet not with Christ in them. My darkness and trouble abides still; if I take not some other course, I shall be lost. Well saith she, I will rise now, v. 2. I will shake off all that ease and sloth, and customariness, that cleave to me. Some more lively, vigorous course must be fixed on. Resolutions for new, extraordinary, vigorous, constant Applications unto God, are the first general step and degree, of a sin intangled soul acting towards a recovery, I will rise now. And what doth she do when she is thus resolved? I will, saith she, go about the streets, and in the broad wayes, and seek him whom my soul loveth. I will leave no wayes or means unattempted, whereby I may
possibly come to a fresh enjoyment of him. If a man seek for a Friend, he can look for him only in the streets and in the broad wayes; that is either in Towns, or in the Fields. So will I do saith the Spouse; in what Way, Ordinance, or Instituti∣on soever, in or by what duty soever, publick or private, of communion with others, or solitary retiredness, Christ ever was, or may be found, or peace obtained, I will seek him, and not give over until I come to an enjoyment of him. And this frame, this Resolution, a soul in depths must come unto, if ever it expect deliverance. For the most part, mens wounds stink and are corrupt because of their foolishness. As the Psalmist complains, Psal. 38. 5. They are wounded by sin; and through spiritual sloth they neglect their cure; this weakens them, and disquiets them day by day; yet they endure all, rather than they will come out of their carnal ease to deal effectually with God in an extraordinary manner. It was otherwise with David, Psal. 22. 1, 2. Why, saith he, art thou so far from helping me, and from the words of my roaring! O my God, I cry in the day time, and in the night season, and am not silent. What ayles the Man? Can he not be quiet night nor day? never silent, never hold his peace? And if he be somewhat disquieted, can he not contain himself, but that he must roar, and cry out? Yea, must he roar thus all the day long, as he speaks, Psal. 32. 3. and groan all the night, as Psal. 6. 6. What is the matter with all this roaring, sighing, tears, roaring all the day, all night long? Ah let him alone, his soul is bitter in him; he is fallen into depths; the Lord is withdrawn from him, trouble is hard at hand, yea, he is full of anxiety on the account of sin; there is no quietness nor soundness in him; and he must thus earnestly and restlessy ap∣ply himself for relief. Alas, what strangers for the most part are men now adayes to this frame? How little of the workings of this Spirit is found amongst us? And is not the reason of it, that we value the world more, and Heaven and heavenly things less than he did? that we can live at a better rate without a sense of the love of God in Christ, than he could do? and is it not hence that we every day see so many withering Professors, that have in a manner lost all Communion with God, beyond a lit∣tle lip-labour, or talking; the filthy savour of whose wounds
are offensive to all but themselves; and so will they go on rea∣dy to dye and perish, rather than with this holy man thus stir up themselves to meet the Lord. Heman was also like unto him, Psal. 88 11; 13. What sense he had of his depths, he de∣clares, v. 3. My soul, saith he, is full of troubles, and my life draw∣eth nigh unto the grave. And what course doth he steer in this heavy, sorrowful, and disconsolate condition? Why saith he, O Lord God of my salvation, I have cryed day and night unto thee, let my prayer come before thee, encline thine ear unto my cry, v. 1, 2. Day and night he cryes to the God of his salvation, and that with earnestness and importunity. This was his business, this was he exercised about all his dayes. This is that which is aimed at; if a gracious soul be brought into the depths before mentioned and described, by reason of sin, when the Lord is pleased to lead him forth towards a re∣covery, he causeth him to be vigorous, and restless in all the du∣ties whereby he may make Application to him for deliverance. Now wherein this intensness and earnestness of the soul in its Applications unto God, doth principally consist, I shall briefly declare, when I have touched a little upon some considerations and grounds that stir it up thereunto. Grounds of ear∣nestness in Applicati∣ons un∣to God.First, The greatness of mens concernments may well put them on this earnestness. Men do not use to deal with dull and sloth∣ful spirits about their greatest concerns. David tells us, that he was more concerned in the light of Gods countenance, than the men of the world could be in their Corn and Wine, Psal. 4. 6, 7. Suppose a man of the world, should have his house, wherein all his stock and riches are laid up, set on fire, and so the whole be in danger under his eye to be consumed; would he be calm and quiet in the consideration of it? Would he not bestir him∣self with all his might, and call in all the help he could ob∣tain? and that because his portion, his all, his great concernment lyes at stake. And shall the soul be slothful, careless, dull, se∣cure, when fire is put to its eternal concernments? when the light of Gods countenance, which is of more esteem unto him, than the greatest increase of Corn and Wine, can be to the men of the world, is removed from him? It was an argument of prodi∣gious
security in Jonah, that he was fast asleep when the Ship wherein he was, was ready to be cast away for his ke. And will it be thought less in any soul, who being in a storm of wrath and displeasure from God, sent out into the deep after him, shall neglect it, and sleep, as Solomon sayes on the top of a Mast in the midst of the Sea? How did that poor creature whose heart was mad on his Idols, Judg. 18. 24. cry out, when he was deprived of them? You have taken away my Gods, saith he, and what have I more? And shall a gracious soul lose his God, through his own folly, the sense of his love, the consolation of his presence, and not with all his might follow hard after him? Peace with God, joy in believing, such souls have formerly ob∣tained; Can they live without them now, in their ordinarily walking, can they choose but cry out with Job, O that it were with us, as in former dayes, when the candle of the Lord was upon our Tabernacle, Chap. 29. 2, 3, 4. and with David, O Lord restore unto me the joy of salvation, Psal. 51. 12. for Oh my God, I re∣member former enjoyments, and my soul is cast down within me, Psal. 42. 6. They cannot live without it. But suppose, they might make a sorry shift to pass on in their pilgrimage, whilst all is smooth about them; what will they do in the time of outward tryals and distresses; when deep calleth unto deep, and one trouble excites and sharpens another: Nothing then will support them, they know, but that which is wanting to them; as Hab. 3. 17, 18. Psal. 23. 4. So that the greatness of their concernment, provokes them to the earnestness mentioned. Secondly, They have a deep sense of these their great concern∣ments. All men are equally concerned in the Love of God, and pardon of sin. Every one hath a soul of the same immortal constitution, equally capable of bliss and wo. But yet we see most men are so stupidly sottish, that they take little notice of these things. Neither the guilt of sin, nor the wrath of God, nor death, nor Hell, are thought on or esteemed by them; they are their concernments, but they are not sensible of them. But gracious souls, have a quick living sense of spiritual things. For, First, They have a saving spiritual light whereby they are able to discern the true nature of sin, and the terror of the Lord.
For though they are now supposed to have lost the comforting light of the Spirit; yet they never loose the sanctifying light of the Spirit; the light whereby they are enabled to dis∣cern spiritual things in a spiritual manner, this never utterly departs from them. By this they see sin to be exceeding sinfull, Rom. 7. 13. By this they know the terror of the Lord, 2 Cor. 15. 11. And that it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10. 31. By this they discover the excellency of the love of God in Christ, which passeth knowledge, the pre∣sent sense whereof they have lost. By this they are enabled to look within the vail, and to take a view of the blessed conso∣lations which the Saints enjoy, whose communion with God was never interrupted. This represents to them all the sweet∣ness, pleasure, Joy, Peace, which in former dayes they had whilst God was present with them in Love: By this, are they taught to value all the fruits of the blood of Jesus Christ, of the enjoyment of many whereof they are at present cut short and deprived. All which, with other things of the like nature and importance make them very sensible of their concern∣ments. Secondly, They remember what it cost them formerly to deal with God about sin; and hence they know it is no ordinary matter they have in hand. They must again to their old work; take the old cup into their hands again. A recovery from depths is as a new conversion. Oft-times in it, the whole work, as to the souls apprehension, is gone over afresh. This the soul knows to have been a work of dread, terror and trouble, and trembles in it self, at its new tryals. And, Thirdly, The Holy Ghost gives unto such poor souls, a fresh sense of their deep concernments, on purpose that it may be a means to stir them up unto these earnest Applications unto God. The whole work is his, and he carries it on, by means suited to the compassing of the end he aimeth at. And by these means is a gracious soul brought into the frame menti∣oned. Now there are sundry things that concur in and unto this frame.
Earnestness &c. where∣in it con∣sisteth.First, There is a continual thoughtfulness about the sad condi∣tion wherein the soul is in its depths. Being deeply affected with their condition they are continually ruminating upon it, and pondering it in their minds. So David declares the case to have been with him, Psal. 38. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presseth me sore; there is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger, neither is there any rest in my bones because of my sins; for mine iniquities are gone over mine head, as an heavy burthen they are too heavy for me, my wounds stink, and are corrupt, because of my foolishness; I am troubled, I am bowed down, I go mourning all the day long; I am feeble and sore broken, I have roared for the disquietness of my heart. Rest∣lestness, deep-thoughtfulness, disquietness of heart, continual heaviness of soul, sorrow and anxiety of mind, lye at the bot∣tom of the Applications we speak of. From these Principles their prayers flow out; as David adds, v. 9. Lord all my desire is before thee, and my groaning, is not hid from thee. This way all his trouble wrought. He prayed out of the abundance of his meditation and grief. Thoughts of their state and condition lye down with such Persons, and rise with them; and accompany them all the day long. As Reuben cryed, The child is not, and I whither shall I go? So doth such a soul; the Love of God is not, Christ is not, and I whither shall I cause my sorrow to go? God is provoked, death is nigh at hand, re∣lief is far away, darkness is about me; I have lost my peace, my joy, my Song in the night; what do I think of duties? Can two walk together unless they be agreed? Can I walk with God in them, whilst I have thus made him mine enemy? What do I think of Ordinances? Will it do me any good to be at Jerusalem, and not see the face of the King? to live under Or∣dinances, and not to meet in them with the King of Saints? May I not justly fear, that the Lord will take his holy Spirit from me, until I be left without remedy? With such thoughts as these are sin-entangled souls exercised, and they lye rolling in their minds, in all their applications unto God. Secondly, We see the Application it self consists in, and is made by the prayer of Faith; or crying unto God; now this is
done with intenseness of mind; which hath a twofold fruit or property; (1.) Importunity; and (2.) Constancy. It is said of our blessed Saviour, that when he was in his depths, about our sins, that he offered up prayers and supplicati∣ons with strong cryes and tears, Heb. 5. 7. Strong cryes and tears, express the utmost intension of Spirit. And David expres∣seth it by roaring, as we have seen before; as also by sighing, groaning and panting. A soul in such a condition lyes down before the Lord, with sighs, groans, mourning, cryes, tears and roaring, according to the various working of his heart, and its being affected with the things that it hath to do; and this produceth, First, Importunity. The power of the importunity of Faith our Saviour hath marvelously set out, Luke 11. 8, 9, 10. as al∣so, Chap. 18. 1. Importunate prayer is certainly prevailing. And importunity is as it were made up of these two things: fre∣quency of interposition, and variety of arguings. You shall have a man that is importunate come unto you, seven times a day about the same business, and after all, if any new thought come into his mind, though he had resolved to the contrary, he will come again. And there is nothing that can be imagined to relate unto the business he hath in hand, but he will make use of it, and turn it to the furtherance of his plea. So is it in this case. Men will use both frequency of interposi∣tion, and variety of arguings, Psal. 86. 1. I cry unto thee daily, or rather, all the day. He had but that one business, and he at∣tended it to the purpose. By this means we give God no rest, Isa. 62. 7. which is the very character of importunity. Such souls go to God; and they are not satisfied with what they have done; and they go again; and somewhat abideth still with them, and they go to him again; and the heart is not yet emptied; they'l go again to him; that he may have no rest. What va∣riety of arguments are pleaded with God in this case, I could also manifest in the same David. But it is known to all; there is not any thing almost that he makes not a plea of; the Faith∣fulness, Righteousness, Name, Mercy, Goodness and kindness of God in Jesus Christ; the concernment of others in him, both the friends and foes of God; his own weakness, and helplesness,
yea, the greatness of sin it self: Be merciful to my sin, saith he, for it is great. Sometimes he begins with some Arguments of this kind; and then being a little diverted by other consi∣derations, some new plea is suggested unto him by the Spirit, ane he returns immediately to his first employment and de∣sign, all arguing great intension of mind and spirit. Secondly Constancy also flows from intenseness. Such a soul will not give over, untill it obtain what it aims at, and looks for: as we shall see in our process in opening this Psalm. And this is in general the deportment of a gracious soul in the condition here represented unto us. As poor creatures love their peace, as they love their souls, as they tender the glory of God, they are not to be wanting in this duty. What is the reason that controversies hang so long between God and your souls, that it may be you scarce see a good day all your lives? Is it not for the most part from your sloth and despondency of spirit? you will not gird up the loyns of your minds, in deal∣ing with God, to put them to a speedy issue in the blood of Christ. You go on and off, begin and cease, try and give over; and for the most part, though your case be extraordinary, con∣tent your selves with ordinary and customary Applications unto God. This makes you wither, become useless, and pine away in and under your perplexities. David did not so; but af∣ter many and many a breach made by sin, yet through quick, vigorous, restless actings of Faith, all was repaired, so that he lived peaceably and dyed triumphantly. Up then and be do∣ing; let not your wounds corrupt because of your folly; make through work of that which lyes before you; be it long, or dif∣ficult, it is all one, it must be done, and is attended with safety; What you are like to meet withal in the first place shall nextly be declared.
Verse 3. The words of the Verse explained; and their meaning opened. Verse 3. opened.THE general frame of a gracious soul in its perplexities about sin, hath been declared. Its particular actings, what it doth, what it meets withal, are nextly represented unto us. First, Then in particular it cryes out, If thou Lord shouldst mark iniquities, O Lord who shall stand? There is in the words a Supposition; and an Inference on that Supposition. In the Supposition; there is, first, the Name of God that is fixed on as suited unto it. And Secondly, The thing it self supposed. In the Inference, there is expressed the matter of it; to stand; and the manner of its proposal; Where∣in two things occur, (1.) That it is expressed by way of Interrogation: (2.) The Indefiniteness of that Interrogation; Who shall stand? If thou Lord; He here fixes on another name of God; which is Jah. A name though from the same root with the former, yet seldom used, but to intimate and express the terrible Ma∣jesty of God. He rideth on the Heavens, and is extolled by his name Jah. Psal. 68. 4. He is to deal now with God about the guilt of sin; and God is represented to the soul as great and ter∣rible; that he may know what to expect and look for, if the matter must be tryed out according to the demerit of sin. What then saith he to J A H?  If thou shouldst mark iniquities.  is to observe and keep as in safe custody. To keep, preserve and watch diligently. So to remark and observe, as to retain that which is observed, to ponder it, and lay it up in the heart, Gen. 37. 11. Jacob observed Josephs dream: that is, he retained the memory of it, and pondered it in his heart. The marking of Iniquities then here intended, is Gods so far considering and observing of them, as to reserve them for pu∣nishment and vengeance. In opposition unto this marking, he is
said not to see sin, to overlook it, to cover it, to forget it, or remember it no more; that is, to forgive it, as the next Verse declares. I need not shew that God so far marks all sins in all persons, as to see them, know them, disallow them, and to be displeased with them. This cannot be denyed without taking away of all grounds of his fear and Worship. To deny it, is all one as to deny the very Being of God; deny his Holiness and Righte∣ousness, and you deny his Existence. But there is a day ap∣pointed, wherein all the men of the world shall know, that God knew and took notice of all and every one of their most se∣cret sins. There is then a double marking of sin in God, neither of which can be denyed in reference unto any sins, in any per∣sons. The first is Physical, consisting in his omniscience whereun∣to all things are open and naked. Thus no sin is hid from him; the secretest are before the light of his countenance. All are marked by him. Secondly, Moral; in a displicency with, or displeasure against every sin, which is inseparable from the nature of God, upon the account of his Holiness. And this is declared in the sentence of the Law, and that equally to all men in the world. But the marking here intended, is that which is in a tendency to Animadversion and punishment ac∣cording to the tenor of the Law. Not only the sentence of the Law, but a Will of punishing according to it is included in it. If saith the Psalmist, thou the great and dreadful God, who art extolled by thy glorious name Jah, shouldst take notice of iniquities, so as to recompence them unto sinners that come unto thee according to the severity and exigence of thy holy Law. What then? It is answe∣red by the matter of the Proposal, who can stand? That is, none can so do;  sayes Chrysostom; This WHO, is NONE. No man, not one in the world.  quis stabit, or consistet; who can stand, or abide and endure the tryal? Every one on this supposition must perish, and that eternally. This the desert of sin, and the Curse of the Law, which is the Rule of this marking of their iniquity, doth require. And there is a notable emphasis in the interragation, which contains the manner of the Inference. Who can stand? is more than if he had said, none can abide the tryal, and escape
without everlasting ruine. For the Interrogation is indefinite; not how can I? but, who can stand? When the Ho∣ly Ghost would set out the certainty, and dreadfulness of the perishing of ungodly men, he doth it by such a kind of ex∣pression, wherein there is a deeper sense intimated into the minds of men, than any words can well cloath or declare. 1 Pet. 4. 17. What shall be the end of them that obey not the Gospel? and v. 18. Where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? So here. Who can stand? there is a deep insinuation of a dreadful ruine, as unto all, with whom God shall so deal, as to mark their iniquities. See Psal. 1. 5. The Psalmist then addressing himself to deal with God about sin, layes down in the first place in the general how things must go, not with himself only, but with all the world, upon the supposition he had fixed. This is not my case only; but it is so with all mankind, every one who is partaker of flesh and blood; whether their guilt answer that, which I am oppres∣sed withal or no; all is one; guilty they are all, and all must perish: How much more must that needs be my condition, who have contracted so great a guilt as I have done. Here then he layes a great Argument against himself, on the supposition before laid down. If none, the Holiest, the humblest, the most believing soul, can abide the tryal, can endure; how much less can I, who am the chiefest of sinners, the least of Saints, who come unspeakably behind them in holiness, and have equally gone beyond them in sin? This is the sense and importance of the words; Let us now consider how they are expressive of the actings of the soul whose state and condition is here represented unto us, and what directions they will afford unto us, to give unto them who are fallen into the same state.
What first presents it self to a soul in distress on the account of sin. This opened in four Propositions. Thoughts of Gods marking sin according to the tenor of the Law full of dread and terror. Propositi∣ons from Verse 3.What depths the Psalmist was in, hath been declared; in them, what Resolution he takes upon himself to seek to God alone for relief and recovery, hath been also shewed; and what earnest∣ness in general he useth therein; Addressing himself unto God in that frame, with that purpose and resolution, the first thing he fixeth on in particular is the greatness of his sin, and guilt, according to the tenor of the Law. It appears then, that, First, In a sin perplexed souls addresses unto God, the first thing that presents it self unto him, is Gods marking sin according to the tenor of the Law. The case is the same in this matter with all sorts of sinners; whether before conversion, or in relapses and entanglements after conversion. There is a proportion between Conversion and Recoveries. They are both wrought by the same means and wayes; and have both the same effects upon the souls of sinners, although in sundry things they differ, not now to be spoken unto. What then is spoken on this hed, may be applyed unto both sorts; to them that are yet unconverted, and to them who are really delivered from their state and condition; but especially unto those who know not whether state they belong unto, that is, to all guilty souls. The Law will put in its claim to all. It will condemn the sin, and try what it can do against the sinner. There is no shaking of it off; it must be fairly answered, or it will prevail. The Law issues out an arrest for the debt; and it is to no purpose to bid the Serjeant be gone, or to entreat him to spare. If payment be not procured, and an acquittance produced, the soul must to pri∣son. I am going unto God saith the soul. He is great and terrible, a marker of sin, and what shall I say unto him? This makes him tremble, and cry out, O Lord who shall stand? so that it appears hence, that, Secondly, Serious thoughts of Gods marking sin according to the
tenor of the Law, is a thing full of dread and terror to the soul of a sinner. But this is not all; he is not swallowed up in this amazement, crying out only who can stand? there is included in the words, a through sincere Acknowledgement of his own sin, and the guilt thereof. Mentioning the desert of sin, in his own case, he acknowledgeth his own. So that, Thirdly, Sincere sense and Acknowledgement of sin, with self∣condemnation in the Justification of God, is the first peculiar especial working of a gracious soul rising out of its entanglements. All this is included in these words. He acknowledgeth both his own guilt, and the Righteousness of God, if he should deal with him according to the demerit of sin. And these things lye in the words absolutely considered; But the state of the soul here represented, carries us on farther. He rests not here, as we shall see in the opening of the next Verse, the chief thing aimed at in the whole. And as a transition from the one to the other, that we may still carry on the general design at the entrance laid down; we must take along with us this farther observation. Fourthly, Though self-condemnation be an eminent preparation for the discovery of forgiveness in God, yet a poor distressed soul is not to rest in it, nor to rest upon it, but to pass on to the embracing of forgiveness it self. There is yet a general proposition lying in the words, that we may make use of in our passage; and it is this, Gods marking of iniquities, and mans salvation are everlastingly inconsistent. I mean his marking them in the persons of the sinners, for the ends before mentioned. Of some of these I shall farther treat, according as the hand∣ling of them conduceth to the purpose in hand. That which I shall begin withal, is that which was first laid down about the effects of serious thoughts concerning Gods marking sin according to the tenor of the Law; which as I said, is the first thing that presents it self unto a sin entangled soul in its addresses unto God. But this shall not pass alone. I shall draw the two first Ob∣servations into one, and make use of the first only in the confir∣mation of the other; which will express the sense of the words
absolutely considered. The third and fourth will lead us on in the progress of the soul, towards the relief sought after, and proposed. That therefore which first is to be insisted on, comes up to this Proposition.In a sin perplexed souls addresses unto God, the first thing that presents it self unto him is, Gods marking of sin according to the Tenor of the Law, which of its self is apt to fill the soul with dread and terror. I shall first somewhat speak unto it in This; as considering in its self, and then enquire into the concernment of the soul in it, whose condition is here described. Terror arising from a sense of the guilt of sin.The Lord speaks of some who when they hear the words of the curse, yet bless themselves, and say they shall have peace; Deut. 29. 19. Let men preach, and say what they please of the terror of the Lord, they will despise it; which God threatens with utter extermination: And he notes it again, as an amazing wick∣edness, and the height of obdurateness, Jer. 36. 24. General∣ly it is with sinners, as it was with Gaal the Son of Ebed, Judg. 9. when he was fortifying of Sichem against Abimelech; Zebul tells him that Abimelech will come and destroy him. Let him come saith Gaal, I shall deal well enough with him, let him bring forth his Army, I fear him not; but upon the very first appearance of Abimelech's Army, he trembleth for fear, v. 36. Tell obdurate sinners of the wrath of God, and that he will come to plead his cause against them; for the most part they take no notice of what you say; nor have any serious thoughts about it; but go on as if they were resolved they should deal well enough with him. Notwithstanding all their stoutness, a day is coming wherein fearfulness shall surprise them, and make them cry out, who amongst us shall dwell with devour∣ing fire, who amongst us shall inhabit with everlasting burnings? Yea, if the Lord be pleased in this life in an especial manner to draw nigh to any of them, they quickly see, that their hearts cannot endure, nor can their hands be strong, Ezek. 22. 14. Their hands hang down, and their stout hearts tremble like an aspen leaf.
He who first sinned, and had first occasion to have serious thoughts about Gods marking sin, gives us a notable instance of what we have assirmed. And the first in every kind, is the measure of all that follows in the same kind, Gen. 3. 8. He heard the voyce of God: so he had done before without the least trouble or consternation of Spirit; He was made for communi∣on with God; and that he might hear his voice was part of his blessedness. But now saith he, I heard thy voice and was afraid, and hid my self. He knew that God was coming in the inquest of sin, and he was not able to bear the thoughts of meeting him; could he have gone into the bowels of the earth from whence he was taken, and have been there hid from God, he would not have failed to have attempted it. Things are now altered with him; in that God whom he loved before, as a good, holy, powerful, Righteous Creator, Preserver, Bene∣factor and Rewarder, he saw nothing now, but wrath, indig∣nation, vengeance and terror. This makes him tremble out those dreadful words, I heard thy voice, and was afraid, and hid my self. The giving out of the Law afterwards, evinces what effects the consideration of Gods proceeding with sinners, according to the tenor of it, must needs produce, Exod. 20. 18, 19. All the people saw the thundrings and the lightnings, and the voice of the trumpet, and the Mountain smoaking; as the Apostle also describes it, Heb. 12. 18. In this manner came forth from the Lord that fiery Law, Deut. 33. 2. So that all who were con∣cerned in it, did exceedingly quake and tremble. And yet all this respects but the severity of the Law in general, without the application of it unto any soul in particular. There is a solemnity, that carrieth an awe with it, in the preparation of an Assize to be kept and held by poor worms like our selves; but the dread of it, is peculiar to the Malefactors, for whose tryal and execution all this preparation is made. When a soul comes to think, that all this dreadful preparation, this appear∣ance of terrible Majesty, these streams of the fiery Law are all pointed towards him, it will make him cry out, Lord who can stand? And this Law is still in force towards sinners, even as it was on the day wherein it was given on Mount Sinai.
Though Moses grew old, yet his strength never failed. Nor hath his Law, the Law given by him, lost any thing of its strength, power, or Authority towards sinners. It is still accompanied with thundrings and lightnings as of old. And it will not fail to represent the terror of the Lord to a guilty soul. Among the Saints themselves I could produce instances to manifest that they have found it to be thus. The cases of Job, David, Heman are known. I shall only consider it in Christ himself. From himself he had no occasion of any discou∣raging thought; being holy, harmless, undefiled. He fulfilled all Righteousness, did his Fathers will in all things, and abode in his Love. This must needs be attended with the highest peace, and most blessed Joy. In the very entrance of his tryals, he had a full perswasion of a comfortable issue and success; as we may see, Isa. 50. 7, 8. But yet when his soul was exercised with thoughts of Gods marking our iniquities upon him, it was sorrowful unto the death. He was amazed and very heavy, Mark 14. 33. His Agony, his bloody sweat, his strong cryes and supplications, his reiterated prayers, if it be possible let this cup pass from me, his last dreadful cry, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me, all manifest what apprehensions he had, of what it was for God to mark iniquities. Well may poor sin∣ners cry out, Lord who shall stand? when the Son of God him∣self, so trembled under the weight of it. In serious thoughts of Gods marking sin, he is represented unto the soul under all those glorious terrible Attributes and Excel∣lencies which are apt to beget a dread and terror in the hearts of sinners, when they have no relief from any Covenant en∣gagements in Christ. The soul looks upon him as the great Law-giver, James 4. 12. able to revenge the breach of it, by destroying body and soul in Hell fire; as one terrible in holiness, of purer eyes than to behold iniquity; So also in Greatness and in power; the Living God, into whose hands it is a fearful thing to fall; as attended with vindictive Justice, saying Vengeane is mine, and I will recompence, Heb. 10. 30. Now for a soul to consider God, cloathed with all these dreadful and terrible Ex∣cellencies, coming to deal with sinners according to the te∣nor of his fiery Law, it cannot but make him cry out
with Moses, I exceedingly quake and tremble. These things work on their minds the conclusion mentioned before, as asserted in these words; namely, that Gods marking of sin according to the tenor of the Law, and mans salvation, are utterly inconsistent; a conclusion, that must needs shake a soul, when pressed under a sense of its own guilt. Gods marking sin, and mans sal∣vation in∣consistent.When a Person who is really guilty, and knows himself to be guilty, is brought unto his tryal, he hath but these four grounds of hope that his safety and his tryal may be consistent. He may think that either (1.) The Judge will not be able to find out, or discover his crimes; or (2.) That some one will powerfully intercede for him with the Judge: or (3.) That the Rule of the Law is not so strict as to take notice of his mis∣carriages; or (4.) That the penalty of it, is not so severe but that there may be a way of escape. Cut him short of his expectations from some, one, or all of these, and all his hopes must of necessity perish. And how is it in this case? First, Of the Judge we have spoken somewhat already. The present enquiry is, whether any thing may be hid from him or no; and so a door of escape be opened to a sinner. The Apo∣stle tels us, that all things are open and naked unto him, Heb. 4. 12. and the Psalmist, that there is not a thought in our hearts, nor a word in our tongue, but he understandeth it asar off, and knoweth it altogether, Psal. 139. 2, 4. What the sinner knows of him∣self, that may cause him to fear, that God knows. And what he knows not of himself, that deserves his fear, that God knows al∣so; for he is greater than our hearts, and knoweth all things, 1 John 3. 20. When God shall not only set in order before the sinner, the secret sins, which he retains some remembrance of; but also brings to mind and represents unto him, that world of filth and folly, which either he never took any real notice of, or hath utterly forgotten, it will trouble him, yea confound him. Secondly, But may not this Judge be intreated to pass by what he knows, and to deal favourably with the sinner? May not an Intercessor be obtained to plead in the behalf of the guilty soul? Eli determines this matter, 1 Sam. 2. 25. If one man sin
against another, the Judge shall judge him; but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall intreat for him? There is not, saith Job be∣tween us  one that might argue the case, in pleading for me, and so make up the matter, laying his hand upon us both, Job 9. 33. We now consider a sinner purely under the Administration of the Law; which knows nothing of a Medi∣ator. In that case who shall take upon him to intercede for the sinner? Besides, that all creatures in Heaven and Earth are engaged in the quarrel of God against sinners; and besides the greatness and terror of his Majesty, that will certainly deterr all or any of them from undertaking any such work; what is the request that in this case must be put up unto God? Is it not that he would cease to be Holy, leave off from being Righteous, relinquish his Throne, deny himself, and his Soveraignty, that a Rebell, a Traytor, his cursed enemy may live and escape his Justice: Is this request reasonable? Is he fit to intercede for sin∣ners that shall make it? Would he not by so doing prove him∣self to be the greatest of them? The sinner cannot then expect any door of escape to be opened unto him? All the world is against him; and the case must be tryed out nakedly between God and him: but, Thirdly, It may be the Rule of the Law whereby the sinner is to be tryed, is not so strict, but that in the case of such sins as he is guilty of, it may admit of a favourable Interpretation; or that the good that he hath done, may be laid in the ballance against his Evil, and so some relief be obtained that way. But the matter is quite otherwise; There is no good Action of a sinner, though it were perfectly good, that can lye in the bal∣lance with, or compensate the evil of the least sin committed. For all good is due on another account, though no guilt were incurred. And the payment of money that a man owes, that he hath borrowed, makes no satisfaction for what he hath stole; no more will our duties compensate for our sins. Nor is there any good Action of a sinner, but it hath evil and guilt enough attending it, to render it self unacceptable; so that men may well cease from thoughts of their supererrogation. Besides where there is any one sin, if all the good in the world might be supposed to be in the same person, yet in the indi∣spensible
order of our dependance on God, nothing of that good could come into consideration, until the guilt of that sin were answered for unto the utmost. Now the penalty of every sin, being the eternal ruine of the sinner, all his supposed good can stand him in little stead. And for the Law it self, it is an issue of the Holiness, Righteousness, and Wisdom of God; so that there is not any evil, so great or small, but is forb dden in it, and condemned by it. Hereupon David so states this whole matter, Psal. 143. 2. Enter not into Judgement with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. That is, if things are to be tryed out and determined by the Law, no sinner can obtain acquitment; as Paul declares the sense of that place to be, Rom. 3. 20. Gal. 2. 16. but yet, Fourthly, It may be the sentence of the Law is not so fierce and dreadful, but that though guilt be found, there may be yet a way of escape. But the Law speaks not one word on this side death to an offendor. There is a greatness, and an Eternity of wrath in the sentence of it; and it is God himself who hath undertaken to see the vengeance of it executed. So that on all these accounts the conclusion mentioned must needs be fixed in the soul of a sinner, that entertains thoughts of drawing nigh to God. Though what hath been spoken, may be of general use unto sinners of all sorts, whether called home to God, or yet stran∣gers to him, yet I shall not insist upon any general improvement of it, because it is intended only for one special end or pur∣pose. That which is aimed at, is to shew what are the first thoughts that arise in the heart of a poor intangled soul, when first he begins to endeavour a recovery in a returnal unto God. The Law immediately puts in its claim unto him, and against him. God is represented unto him, as angry, dis∣pleased, provoked; and his terror more or less besets him round about. This fills him with fear, shame, and confusion of face; so that he knows not what to do: These troubles are greater or lesser, according as God seeth it best for the poor creatures present humiliation, and future safety. What then doth the sinner? What are his thoughts hereupon? doth he think to fly from God, and to give over all endeavours
of recovery? Doth he say this God is an holy and terrible God, I cannot serve him, it is to no purpose for me to look for any thing but fury and destruction from hira; and therefore I had as good give over, as persist in my de∣sing of drawing nigh to him? It cannot be denyed but that in this case, thoughts of this nature will be suggested by un∣belief: and that sometimes great perplexities arise to the soul by them. But this is not the issue and final product of this exercise of the soul; it produceth another effect; it calls for that which is the first particular working of a gracious soul arising out of its sin intanglements. This is, as was de∣clared; a sincere sense of sin, and acknowledgement of it, with self condemnation in the justification of God: This is the first thing that a soul endeavouring a recovery from its depths is brought and wrought unto. His general resolution to make serious and through work, with what he hath in hand, was before unfolded. That which in the next place we are directed un∣to in these words, is the Reflection on its self, upon the con∣sideration of Gods marking iniquity, now mentioned. This is Faiths great and proper use of the Law; The nature whereof shall be farther opened in the next discourse. The first particular actings of a soul towards a recovery out of the depths of sin. Sense of sin, wherein it consists. How it is wrought. Acknowledgement of sin; its nature and properties. Self-condemnation. The souls. actings to∣wards a Recovery.What is the frame of the soul in general, that is excited by grace, and resolves in the strength thereof to attempt a reco∣very out of the depths of sin entanglements, hath been declared. We have also shewed what entertainment in general such a soul had need to expect, yea, ordinarily shall be sure to meet with∣all. It may be he goes forth at first like Sampson with his locks cut, and thinks he will do as at other times; but he quickly finds, his peace lost, his wounds painful, his Conscience restless, God displeased, and his whole condition, as to the utmost of his own Apprehension, hazardous. This fills him with the thoughts expressed in this third Verse, and fixes the conclusion in his
mind, discoursed of before. He finds now that he hath the Law afresh to deal withal. Thence ariseth that sense and ac∣knowledgement of sin, that self-condemnation, in the Justifica∣tion of God, whereof we now speak. He grows not sullen, stubborn, displeased, and so runs away from God; he doth not utterly saint, despond and give over; he pleads not any thing in his own Justification, or for the extenuation of his sin and guilt; he quarrelleth not with, he repineth not against the Holiness, Severity and Righteousness of the Law of God; but reflects wholly on himself, his own unworthiness, guilt and desert; and in a sence of them lyes down at the foot of God, in expectation of his word and sentence. Sense of sin, where∣in it con∣sists.Three things in this condition we ascribe unto such a soul. First, A sincere sense of sin. There is a twofold sense of sin. The one is general and notional, whereby a man knows what sin is, that him∣self is a sinner; that he is guilty of this or that, these or those sins; only his heart is not affected proportionably to that discovery and knowledge which he hath of these things. The other is active and efficacious. The soul being acquainted with the na∣ture of sin, with its own guilt in reference unto sin in general, as also to this or that sin, is universally influenced by that ap∣prehension unto suitable Affections and Operations. Of both these we have an instance in the same person. Da∣vid before Nathans coming to him, had the former, afterwards he had the latter also. It cannot be imagined but that before the coming of the Prophet, he had a general knowledge and sense not only absolutely of the nature of sin, but also, that himself was a sinner, and guilty of those very sins which afterwards he was reproved for. To think otherwise is to suppose, not only that he was un-sainted, but un-manned also, and turned into a Beast. But yet this wrought not in him any one Affecti∣on suitable to his condition. And the like may be said of most sinners in the world. But now when Nathan comes to him and gives him the latter efficacious sense whereof we speak, we know what effects it did produce. It is the latter only that is under consideration; and that also is twofold: (1.) Legal or Antecedaneous unto conver∣sion;
(2) Evangelical, and previous to the recovery from depths, whereof we treat. How these two differ, and how they may be discerned one from the other, being both of them in their kind sincere, is not my business to declare. Nature and Causes of Gospel convicti∣ons of sin.Now this tast, which we assign as the first duty, work, or acting of a returning soul, is a deep and practical apprehension wrought in the mind and heart of a believing sinner by the Holy Ghost, of sin and its evils, in reference unto the Law, and Love of God, the Cross, and blood of Christ, the communion and consolation of the Spirit, and all the fruits of Love, Mercy, or Grace, that it hath been made partaker of, or on Gospel grounds. hoped for. First, The principal efficient cause of it is the Holy Ghost. He it is who convinceth of sin, John 16. 8. He works indeed by means. He wrought it in David by the Ministry of Nathan; and he wrought it in Peter, by the look of Christ. But his work it is. No man can work it upon his own soul. It will not spring out of mens rational considerations. Though men may exercise their thoughts about such things, as one would think were enough to break the hearts of stones, yet if the Holy Ghost put not forth a peculiar efficacy of his own, this sense of sin will not be wrought or produced. As the waters at the Pool of Bethesda were not troubled, but when an Angel de∣scended and moved them; no more will the Heart for sin, without a saving elapse of the Holy Ghost. Secondly, It is a deep Apprehension of sin, and the evils of it. Sleight transient thoughts about them, amount not to the sense of which we speak. My sorrow, saith David, is continually be∣fore me, Psal. 38. 17. It pressed him alwayes and greatly. Hence he compares this sense of sin wrought by the Holy Ghost, to arrows that stick in the flesh, v. 2. They pain sorely, and are alwayes perplexing. Sin in this sense of it, layes hold on the soul, so that the sinner cannot look up, Psal. 40. 12. And it abides with him, making his sore run in the night with∣out ceasing, Psal. 77. 2. and depriveth the soul of rest; my soul saith he, refused to be comforted. This Apprehension of sin, lyes down, and rises with him in whom it is. Transient thoughts
attended with infrequent sighs and ejaculations, little be∣come a returning soul. And Thirdly, It is Practical. It is not seated only in the specu∣lative part of the mind, hovering in general notions; but it dwel's in the practical understanding, which effectually influ∣enceth the Will and Affections. Such an Apprehension as from which sorrow and humiliation are inseparable. The acts of the practical understanding, do so necessarily produce, together with them suitable acts of the Will and Affections, that some have concluded that those are indeed proper acts of the Will, which are usually ascribed to the Understanding. It is so in the mind, as that the whole soul is cast into the mould and likeness of it, humiliation, sorrow, self-abhorrency, do live and dye with it. Fourthly, It hath in the first place, respect unto the Law of God. There can be no due consideration of sin, wherein the Law hath not its place. The Law calls for the sinner, and he wil∣lingly gives up his sin to be judged by it. There he sees it to be exceeding sinful, Rom. 7. 17. Though a Believer be less under the power of the Law than others, yet he knows more of the Authority and nature of it than others. He sees more of its spirituality and holiness. And the more a man sees of the excellency of the Law, the more he sees of the vileness of sin. This is done by a soul in its first endeavour for a recovery from the entanglements of sin. He labours throughly to know his disease, that he may be cured. It will do him no good, he knows, to be ignorant of his distemper, or his danger. He knows that if his wounds be not searched to the bottom, they will stink and be corrupt. To the Law then he brings him∣self and his sin. By that, he sees the vileness of the one, and the danger of the other. Most men lye still in their depths, because they would willingly escape the first step of their rising. From the bottom of their misery, they would fain at once be at the top of their felicity. The soul managed in this work by the Holy Ghost doth not so. He converseth with the Law; brings his sin unto it; and fully hears the sentence of it. When the sin is throughly condemned, then he farther takes care of the sinner. As ever you desire to come to rest, avoid not this
entrance of your passage unto it. Weigh well, and attend un∣to what the Law speaks of your sin and its desert, or you will never make a due application to God for forgiveness. As ever you would have your souls justified by Grace, take care to have your sins judged by the Law. Secondly, There is a respect in it to the Love of God. And this breaks the heart of the poor returning sinner. Sorrow from the Law, shuts it self up in the soul, and strangleth it. Sor∣row from the thoughts of the Love of God opens it, and caus∣seth it to flow forth. Thoughts of sinning against the Love of God, managed by the Holy Ghost; what shall I say? their ef∣fects in the heart are not to be expressed. This made Ezra cry out, O my God I blush and am ashamed to lift up my face to thee, Chap. 9. 6. and v. 10. What shall we say after this? After what? why all the fruits of love and kindness they had been made partakers of. Thoughts of love and sin laid together, make the soul blush, mourn, be ashamed and confounded in its self. So Ezek. 36. 31. Then shall you remember your own evil wayes, and your doings that were not good; When shall they do so? when thoughts and apprehensions of love shall be brought home to them; and saith he, then shall you loath your selves in your own sight. The soul now calls to mind, what Love, what kindness, what mercy, what grace, what patience hath been exercised towards it, and whereof it hath been made partaker. The thoughts of all these now come in upon him as streams of water. Such Mercy, such Communion, such Priviledges, such hopes of Glory, such tastes of Heaven, such Peace, such Consolation, such Joy, such Communications of the Spirit, all to a poor, wretched, cursed, lost, forlorn sinner; and all this despised, neglected, the God of them all provoked, forsaken. Ah saith the soul, Whither shall I cause my sorrow to go? This fills him with shame and confusion of face; makes him mourn in secret, and sigh to the breaking of the loyns; and then, Thirdly, The blood and Cross of Christ is also brought to re∣membrance by the Holy Ghost. Ah, saith the soul, have I thus re∣quited the wonderful astonishing Love of my Redeemer? Is this the return, the requital, I have made unto him? Are not Heaven
and Earth astonished at the despising of that Love, at which they are astonished? This brake Peters heart upon the look of Christ. Such words as these from Christ, will in this conditi∣on, sound in the ears of the soul. Did I love thee, and leave my glory to become a scorn and reproach for thy sake? Did I not think my life, and all that was dear unto me too good for thee, to save thee from the wrath to come? Have I been a Wilderness unto thee, or a land of darkness? What could I have done more for thee; when I had nothing left but my life, blood and soul, they went all for thee that thou mightest live by my death, be washed in my blood, and be saved through my souls being made an offering for thee? And hast thou thus requited my love? to prefer a lust before me, the world before me, or by meer sloth and folly to be turned away from me; go unkind and unthankful soul, and see if thou canst find another Redeemer: This overwhelms the soul, and even drowns it in tears and sorrow. And then the bitterness also of the sufferings of Christ, are brought to mind. They look on him whom they have pierced and mourn, Zech. 12. 10. They remember his gall and wormwood; his cryes and tears; his agony and sweat, his desertion and anguish; his blood and death; the sharpness of the Sword that was in his soul, and the bitterness of the Cup that was put into his hand. Such a soul now looks on Christ, bleeding, dying, wrestling with wrath and curse for him, and seeth his sin in the streams of blood that issued from his side. And all this encreaseth that sense of sin whereof we speak. Also, Fourthly, It relates to the communion and consolations of the Holy Ghost, with all the priviledges, and fruits of Love we are by him made partakers of. The Spirit is given to Believers upon the promise of Christ to dwell in them. He takes up their hearts to be his dwelling place; to what ends and purposes? that he may purifie and sanctifie them, make them holy, and de∣dicate them to God; to furnish them with Graces and gifts, to interest them in priviledges; to guide, lead, direct, comfort them; to seal them unto the day of Redemption. Now this Spirit is grieved by sin, Ephes. 4. 30. and his dwelling place de∣filed thereby, 1 Cor. 6. 19. and 3. 17. Thoughts hereof great∣ly sharpen the spiritual sense of sin in a recovering soul. He considers, what Light, what Love, what Joy, what Consola∣tion,
what Priviledges it hath by him been made partaker of; what motions, warnings, workings to keep it from sin, it hath found from him; and sayes within it self; What have I done, whom have I grieved, whom have I provoked; what if the Lord should now for my folly and ingratitude utterly take his holy Spirit from me? What if I should have so grieved him that he will dwell in me no more, delight in me no more? What dismal darkness and disconsolation, yea, what utter ruine should I be left unto? However, what shame and confusion of face belongs to me for my wretched dis∣ingenuity, and ingratitude towards him? This is the first thing that appears in the returning souls act∣ings and frame; a sincere sense of sin on the accounts mentioned wrought in it by the Holy Ghost. And this a soul in the depths described, must come unto, if ever it expect or look for deliverance, and a recovery. Let not such persons expect to have a renewed sense of mercy, without a revived sense of sin. Acknow∣ledgement of sin, the true nature of it.Secondly, From hence proceedeth an ingenious, free, gracious Acknowledgement of sin. Men may have a sense of sin, and yet suffer it to lye burning as a fire shut up in their bones, to their continual disquietment, and not be able to come off unto a free soul opening acknowledgement. Yea, confession may be made in general, and mention therein of that very sin where∣with the soul is most intangled, and yet the soul come short of a due performance of this Duty. Consider how the case stood with David, Psal. 32. 3. When I kept silence, my bones waxed old through my roaring all the day long. How could David keep silence, and yet roar all the day long? What is that silence which is consistent with roaring? It is a meer negation of that duty, which is expressed, v. 5. that is intended. I acknowledge my sins unto thee, and mine iniquities I have not hid. It was not a silence of submission and waiting on God that he intends. That would not have produced a wasting of his spiritual strength, as he complains, this silence did; My bones waxed old; nor yet was it a sullen, stubborn and contumacious frame that was upon him; but he notes, saith Calvin, (and he sayes well) affectum qui medius est inter tolerantiam & contumaciam, vitio & vertuti affinis; An affection between patience and stubborness bordering on
the one and other. That is, he had a deep sense of sin; this dis∣quieted and perplexed him all the day long; which he calls his roaring; It weakned and wearied him, making his bones wax old, or his strength decay; yet was he not able to bring his heart to that ingenious gracious acknowledgement, which like the launcing of a festered wound, would have given at least some ease to his soul. Gods children are oft-times in this matter like ours. Though they are convinced of a fault, and are really troubled at it, yet they will hardly acknowledge it. So do they. They will go up and down, sigh and mourn, roar all the day long; but an evil and untoward frame of spirit under the power of unbelief and fear, keeps them from this duty. Now that this acknowledgement may be acceptable unto God it is required, First, that it be free, then that it be full. First, It must be free and spiritually ingenious. Cain, Phara∣oh, Ahab, Judas, came all to an acknowledgement of sin; but it was whether they would or no. It was pressed out of them; it did not flow from them. The confession of a person under the convincing terrors of the Law, or dread of imminent Judgements, is like that of Malefactors on the rack; who speak out that, for which themselves and friends must dye. What they say, though it be the truth, is a fruit of force and tor∣ture, not of any ingenuity of mind. So is it with meerly con∣vinced persons. They come not to the acknowledgment of sin with any more freedom. And the Reason is because all sin hath shame; and for men to be free unto shame, is naturally impos∣sible, shame being natures shrinking from it self, and the posture it would appear in. But now the returning soul, hath never more freedom, liberty and amplitude of spirit, than when he is in the acknowledgement of those things whereof he is most ashamed. And this is no small evidence that it proceeds from that spirit which is attended with liberty, for where the Spirit of God is, there is liberty, 2 Cor. 3. 17. When David was delivered from his silence, he expresseth this frame in the performance of this Duty, Psal. 32. 5. I acknowledged my sin, and mine iniquities. I have not hid; I said I will confess my transgression. His mouth is now open, and his heart inlarged. And he multiplies one ex∣pression
upon another, to manifest his enlargement. So doth a soul rising out of its depths, in this beginning of his address unto God. Having the sense of sin, before described wrought in him by the Holy Ghost, his heart is made free and inlarged unto an ingenious acknowledgement of his sin before the Lord. Herein he pours out his soul unto God; and hath not more freedom in any thing, than in dealing about that, whereof he is most ashamed. Secondly, Full also it must be. Reserves ruine confession. If the soul have any secret thought of rolling a sweet morsel under its tongue, of a bow in the house of Rimmon, it is like part of the price kept back, which makes the whole robbery, instead of an offering. If there be remaining a bitter root of favouring any one lust or sin, of any occasion of, or temptation unto sin, let a man be as open, free, and earnest as can be imagined in the acknowledgement of all other sins and evils, the whole duty is rendered abominable. Some persons when they are brought into depths and anguish about any sin, and are thereon forced to the acknowledgement of it, at the same time they are little concerned, with their other follies and iniquities, that it may be, are no less provoking unto God, than that is from whence their present trouble doth arise. Let not, as James speaks in another case, such a man think, that he shall receive any thing from God. It must be full and comprehensive, as well as free and ingenious. And of such importance is the right performance of this du∣ty, that the promise of pardon is oft-times peculiarly annexed unto it, as that which certainly carries along with it, the other duties which make up a full returnal unto God, Prov. 28. 13. 1 John 1. 9. and that place in Job is remarkable, Chap. 33. 27, 28. He looketh upon men, and if any say I have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it profited me not; He will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see the light. He shall not only be made partaker of pardon, but of consolation also, and joy in the light of Gods coun∣tenance.
Self-con∣demnati∣on, where∣in it con∣sists.Thirdly, There yet remains, self-condemnation with the Justi∣fication of God, which lyes expresly in the words of the Verse un∣der consideration, and hereof are two parts. First, Self-abhorrency or dislike. The soul is now wholly di∣spleased with it self, and reflects upon it self with all affecti∣ons of regret and trouble. So the Apostle declares it to have been with the Corinthians when their godly sorrow was work∣ing in them, 2 Cor. 7. 11. among other things, it wrought in them indignation and revenge; or a reflection on themselves with all manner of dislike and abhorrency. In the winding up of the Controversie between God and Job, this is the point he rests in. As he had come in general to a free, full, ingenious acknow∣ledgement of sin, Chap. 40. 4, 5. So in particular he gives up his whole contest, in this abhorrency of himself, Chap. 42. 6. I abhor my self and repent in dust and ashes. What a vile wretched creature have I been, saith the soul; I blush and am ashamed to think of my folly, baseness and ingratitude; is it possible that I should deal thus with the Lord? I abhorr, I loath my self, I would fly any where from my self, I am so vile and loathsome; a thing to be despised of God, Angels and Men; and Secondly, There is self-judging in it also. This the Apostle invites the Corinthians unto, 1 Ep. Chap. 11. 31. If we would judge our selves we should not be judged. This is a persons pro∣nouncing sentence on himself according to the tenor of the Law. The soul brings not only its sin, but it self also to the Law. It puts it self as to merit and desert under the stroke and severity of it. Hence ariseth a full justification of God, in what sentence soever he shall be pleased to pronounce in the case before him. And these three things which we have passed through, compose the frame and first actings of a gracious soul, rising from its depths. They are all of them signally expressed in that place where we have a signal recovery exemplified, Hos. 14. 1, 2, 3, 4. And this makes way for the exaltation of grace, the great thing in all this dispensation aimed at by God. Ephes. 1. 6. That which he is now doing, is to bring the soul to glory in him, 1 Cor. 1. 31. which is all the return he hath
from his large and infinitely bountiful expence of Grace and Mercy. Now nothing can render Grace conspicuous and glo∣rious, until the soul come to this frame. Grace will not seem high, until the soul be laid very low. And this also suits or prepares the soul for the receiving of mercy, in a sense of par∣don, the great thing aimed at on the part of the sinner. And it prepares it for every duty that is incumbent on him in that condition wherein he is. This brings the soul to waiting with diligence and patience. If things presently answer not our expectation, we are ready to think, we have done what we can; if it will be no better we must bear it as we are able; which frame God abhors. The soul in this frame is con∣tented to wait the pleasure of God, as we shall see in the close of the Psalm? Oh saith such an one; if ever I obtain a sense of Love, if ever I enjoy one smile of his countenance more, it is of unspeakable Grace. Let him take his own time, his own season; it is good for me quietly to wait, and to hope for his salvation. And it puts the soul on prayer; yea a soul alwayes in this frame, prayes alwayes. And there is nothing more evident, than that want of a through engagement into the performance of these duties, is the great cause why so few come clear off from their en∣tanglements all their dayes. Men heal their wounds slightly; and therefore after a new painful festering, they are brought into the same condition of restlesness and trouble, which they were in before.
Grounds of miscarriages when persons are convinced of sin and humbled. Resting in that state. Resting on it. Miscarri∣ages in persons convinced of sin.The soul is not to be left in the state before described. There is other work for it to apply it self unto, if it intend to come unto Rest and peace. It hath obtained an eminent advantage for the discovery of Forgiveness. But to rest in that state where∣in it is, or to rest upon it, will not bring it into its harbour. Three things we discovered before in the souls first serious ad∣dress unto God for deliverance; sense of sin, acknowledgement of it, and self-condemnation. Two evils there are which attend men oftentimes, when they are brought into that state. Some rest in it, and press no farther; some rest upon it, and suppose that it is all which is required of them: The Psalmist avoids both these, and notwithstanding all his pressures reacheth out towards forgiveness, as we shall see in the next verse. I shall briefly unfold these two evils, and shew the necessity of their avoidance. First, By resting or staying in it, I mean the souls desponding through discouraging thoughts that deliverance is not to be ob∣tained. Being made deeply sensible of sin, it is so overwhelmed with thoughts of its own vileness and unworthiness, as to sink under the burden; Such a soul is afflicted and tossed with tempests and not comforted, Isa. 54. 11. until it is quite weary. As a Ship in a storm at Sea; when all means of contending are gone, men give up themselves to be driven and tossed by the Winds and Seas at their pleasure. This brought Israel to that state wherein he cryed out, My way is hid from the Lord, and my judgement is passed over from my God, Isa. 40. 27. and Zion; The Lord hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath forgotten me, Chap. 49. 14. The soul begins secretly to think there is no hope; God regardeth it not; it shall one day perish, relief is far away, and trouble nigh at hand. These thoughts do so op∣press them, that though they forsake not God utterly to their destruction, yet they draw not nigh unto him effectually to their consolation. This is the first evil that the soul in this condition is enabled
to avoid. We know how God rebukes it in Sion. Sion said the Lord hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath forgotten me, Isaiah 49. 14. But how foolish is Sion, how froward, how unbeliev∣ing in this matter; what ground hath she for such sinful de∣spondencies, such discouraging conclusions? Can a woman, saith the Lord, forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb, yea, they may forget, but I will not forget thee. The like reproof he gives to Jacob upon the like complaint, Chap. 40. 28, 29, 30. There is nothing that is more provoking to the Lord, nor more disadvantagious unto the soul, than such sinful despondency. For, First, It insensibly weakens the soul, and disenables it, both for present duties, and future endeavours. Hence, some poor creatures mourn, and even pine away in this condition, never getting one step beyond a perplexing sense of sin all their dayes. Some have dwelt so long upon it, and have so in∣tangled themselves with a multitude of perplexed thoughts, that at length their natural faculties have been weakned, and ren∣dred utterly useless; so that they have lost both sense of sin and every thing else. Against some, Satan hath taken advan∣tage to cast in so many intangling objections into their minds, that their whole time hath been taken up in proposing doubts and objections against themselves; with these they have gone up and down, to one and another, and being never able to come unto a consistency in their own thoughts, they have spent all their dayes in a fruitless, sapless, withering comfortless condition. Some with whom things come to a better issue, are yet for a season brought to that discomposure of Spirit, or are so filled with their own apprehensions, that when the things which are most proper to their condition are spoken to them, they take no impression in the least upon them. Thus the soul is weakned by dwelling too long on these considerati∣ons; until some cry with those in Ezek. 33. 10. Our sins are upon us, we pine away in them, and how should we then live? Secondly, This frame, if it abides, by its self, will insensibly give countenance unto hard thoughts of God, and so to re∣pining, and weariness in waiting on him. At first the soul
neither apprehends nor fears any such issue. It supposeth that it shall condemn and abhorr it self, and justifie God, and that for ever. But when relief comes not in, this resolution begins to weaken. Secret thoughts arise in the heart, that God is austere, inexorable, and not to be dealt withall. This sometimes casts forth such complaints, as will bring the soul unto new complaints, before it comes to have an issue of its try∣als. Here, in humiliations antecedaneous to conversion, ma∣ny a convinced person perisheth. They cannot wait Gods sea∣son, and perish under their impatience. And what the Saints of God themselves have been overtaken withal in their depths and tryals, we have many examples and instances. Delight and Expectation are the grounds of our abiding with God. Both these are weakned by a conquering prevailing sense of sin, without some relief from the discovery of forgiveness, though at a distance. And therefore our perplexed soul stayes not here, but presseth on towards that discovery. Secondly, There is a resting on this frame, that is noxious and hurtful also. Some finding this sense of sin, with those other things that attend it wrought in them, in some measure, begin to think that now all is well, this is all that is of them required. They will endeavour to make a life, from such ar∣guments of comfort, as they can take from their trouble. They think this a ground of peace, that they have not peace. Here some take up before conversion, and it proves their ruine. Because they are convinced of sin, and troubled about it, and burdened with it, they think it shall be well with them: But were not Cain, Esau, Saul, Ahab, Judas, convinced of sin, and burdened with it? Did this profit them? Did it interest them in the promises? Did not the wrath of God overtake them notwith∣standing? So is it with many daily, they think their conviction is conversion; and that their sins are pardoned, because they have been troubled. This then is that which we reject, which the soul in this condition doth carefully avoid; so to satisfie it self with its humiliation, as to make that a ground of supportment and con∣solation, being thereby kept off from exercising faith for for∣giveness, For this is,
First, A fruit of self-righteousness. For a soul to place the spring of its peace or comfort in any thing of its own, is to fall short of Christ, and to take up in self. We must not only be justified, but glory in him also, Isa. 45. 25. Men may make use of the evidence of their graces; but only as mediums to a farther end; not as the rest of the soul in the least. And this deprives mens very humiliations of all Gospel humility. True humility consists more in believing, than in being sensible of sin. Thats the souls great self-emptying and abasing; this may consist with an obstinate resolution to scamble for something upon the ac∣count of self endeavours. Secondly, Though Evangelical sense of sin, be a Grace, yet it is not the uniting Grace, it is not that which interests us in Christ, not that which peculiarly, and in its own nature exalts him. There is in this sense of sin, that which is natural, and that which is spiritual; or the matter of it, and its spirituality. The former consists in sorrow, trouble, self-abasement, dejecti∣on and anxiety of mind, with the like passions. Of these I may say as the Apostle of Afflictions, they are not joyous but grievous. They are such as are accompanied with the aver∣sation of the object which they are conversant about. In their own nature they are no more but the souls retreat into it self, with an abhorrency of the objects of its sorrow and grief. When these Affections are spiritualized, their nature is not changed. The soul in and by them, acts according to their nature; and doth by them as such, but retreat into it self with a dislike of that they are exercised about. To take up here then, must needs be to sit down short of Christ; whether it be for life, or consolation. Let there be no mistake. There can be no Evangelical sense of sin, and humiliation, where there is not Union with Christ, Zech. 12. 10. Only in its self, and in its own nature it is not availing. Now Christ is the only rest of our souls: in any thing, for any end or purpose, to take up short of him, is to lose it. It is not enough that we be prisoners of hope, but we must turn to our strong hold, Zech. 9. 12. not enough that we are weary and laden, but we must come to him, Matth. 11. 27, 28. It will not suffice that we are weak, and know we are
weak, but we must take hold on the strength of God, Isa. 27. 4, 5. Thirdly, Indeed pressing after forgiveness, is the very life and power of Evangelical humiliation. How shall a man know that his humiliation is Evangelical, that his sorrow is according to God? Is it not from hence he may be resolved, that he doth not in it, as Cain did, who cryed his sin was greater than he could bear, and so departed from the presence of God; nor as Judas did, who repented, and hanged himself; nor as Fe∣lix did, tremble for a while, and then return to his lusts; nor as the Jews did in the Prophet, pine away under his iniquities, be∣cause of vexation of heart; nor doth he divert his thoughts to other things, thereby to relieve his soul in his trouble; nor fix upon a Righteousness of his own; nor slothfully lye down un∣der his perplexity; but in the midst of it, he plyes himself to God in Christ for pardon and mercy. And it is the souls Application unto God for forgiveness, and not its sense of sin, that gives unto God the glory of his Grace. Thus far then have we accompanied the soul in its depths; it is now looking out for forgiveness; which what it is, and how we come to have an interest in it, the principal matter in this discourse intended, is nextly to be considered.
Verse 4. The Words explained, and the design or scope of the Psalmist in them discovered. The fourth Verse opened.THe state and condition of the soul making Application unto God in this Psalm is recounted, v. 1. It was in the depths; not only Providential depths of Trouble, Affliction, and per∣plexities thereon; but also depths of conscience, distress on the account of sin, as in the opening of those words hath been de∣clared. The Application of this soul unto God, with restless fervency and earnestness, in that state and condition; its consideration in the first place of the Law and the severity of Gods Justice in a proceedure thereon; with the inevitable ruine of all sinners, if God insist on that way of dealing with them, have also been opened and manifested from the foregoing Verses. Being in this estate, perplexed in its self, lost in and under the consideration of Gods marking iniquity according to the tenor of the Law; that which it fixes on, from whence any relief, stay or supportment might be expected in such a condition, is laid down in this Verse. Ver. 4.But there is forgiveness with thee, that thou maist be feared. I shall first open the words as to their signisication and im∣portance; then shew the design of the Psalmist in them, with reference to the soul whose condition is here represented; and lastly propose the general Truths contained in them, wherein all our concernments do lye. There is forgiveness,  say the LXX. and Hierom accor∣dingly Propitiatio; propitiation: which is somewhat more than venia, or pardon, as by some it is rendred. condonatio ipsa; forgiveness its self. It is from
to spare, to pardon, to forgive, to be propitious: and is opposed to , a word composed of the same letters varied (which is common in that Language) signifying to cut off, and destroy. Now it is constantly applyed unto Sin, and expresseth every thing that concurrs to its pardon, or forgiveness. As, First, It expresseth the Mind or Will of pardoning, or Gods gracious readiness to forgive, Psal. 86. 5. Thou Lord art good  and ready to forgive; ; benign and meek; or sparing, propitious. Of a gracious merciful heart and na∣ture. So Nehem. 9. 17. Thou art O God  propitiati∣onum, of propitiations or pardons; or as we have rendered it, ready to forgive; a God of forgivenesses; or all plenty of them is in thy gracious heart, Isa. 55. 8. So that thou art alwayes ready to make out pardons to sinners. The word is used again Dan. 9. 9. to the same purpose. Secondly, It regards the act of pardoning; or actual forgive∣ness it self, Psal. 103. 3.  who forgiveth all thine iniqui∣ties; actually dischargeth thee of them: which place the Apostle respecting renders the word by , Col. 3. 13. Having freely forgiven you (for so much the word imports) all your trespasses. And this is the word that God useth in the Covenant, in that great Promise of Grace and Pardon, Jer. 31. 34. It is warrantable for us, yea necessary to take the word in the utmost extent of its signification and use. It is a word of fa∣vour, and requires an interpretation tending towards the en∣largement of it. We see it may be rendered  or pro∣pitiation;  or Grace; and venia or pardon; and may de∣note these three things. First, The gracious, tender, merciful Heart and Will of God; who is the God of pardons and forgiveness; or one ready to forgive, to give out mercy, to add to pardor. Secondly, A respect unto Jesus Christ, the only , or propitiation for sin, as he is expresly called, Rom. 3. 25. 1 John 2. 2. And this is that which interposeth between the gracious heart of God, and the actual pardon of sinners: All forgiveness is founded on propitiation.
Thirdly, It denotes condonation or actual forgiveness it self, as we are made partakers of it; comprizing it both actively, as it is an Act of Grace in God, and passively as terminated in our souls, with the deliverance that attends it. In this sense as it looks downwards, and in its effects respects us, it is of meer Grace; as it looks upwards to its causes and respects the Lord Christ, it is from propitiation or attonement. And this is that pardon which is administred in the Covenant of Grace. Now as to the place which these words enjoy in this Psalm, and their Relation to the state and condition of the soul here mentioned, this seems to be their importance. O Lord, although this must be granted, that if thou shouldst mark iniquities according to the tenor of the Law, every man living must perish, and that for ever; yet there is hope for my soul, that even I who am in the depths of sin-entanglements, may find acceptance with thee; for whilst I am putting my mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope; I find that there is an Attonement, a propitiation made for sin, on the account whereof thou sayest thou hast found a Ransome, and wilt not deal with them that come unto thee according to the severity and exigence of thy Justice; but art gracious, loving, tender, ready to forgive and pardon, and dost so accordingly; THERE IS FORGIVENESSE WITH THEE. The following words, therefore thou shalt be feared, or that thou maist be feared, though in the Original free from all Ambigui∣ty, yet are so signally varyed by Interpreters, that it may not be amiss to take notice of it in our passage. The Targum hath it, that thou mayst be seen. This answers not the word, but it doth the sense of the place well enough. God in his displeasure is said to hide himself, or his face, Isaiah 8. 17. The Lord hideth his face from the house of Jacob. By forgiveness we obtain again the light of his countenance. This dispels the darkness, and clouds that are about him; and gives us a comfortable prospect of his face and favour. There is forgiveness with him that he may be seen. Besides, there is but one letter different in the Original words; and that which is usually changed for the other. The LXX. render them, ; for thy names sake; or thy own sake, that is, freely, without any respect unto
any thing in us. This also would admit of a fair and sound construction, but that there is more than ordinary evidence of the places being corrupted. For the Vulgar Latin, which as to the Psalms was translated out of the LXX. renders these words, propter legem tuam; for thy Laws sake; which makes it evident, that that Translator reads the words , and not , as now we read. Now though this hath in its self, no proper sense (for forgiveness is not bestowed for the Laws sake) yet it discovers the original of the whole mi∣stake.  The Law, differs but in one letter from  that thou maist be feared; by a mistake whereof this  for thy Law sake, crept into the Text. Nor doth this any thing countenance the corrupt figment of the novelty of the Hebrew Vowels and Accents; as though this difference might arise, from the LXX. using a copy that had none, that is before their invention, which might occasion mistakes and diffe∣rences; for this difference is in a Letter as well as the Vowels; and therefore there can be no colour for this conceit, unless we say also, that they had Copies of old with other Conso∣nants than those we now enjoy. Bellarmine in his Exposition of this place, endeavours to give countenance unto the reading of the Vulgar Latin; for thy Laws sake; affirming that by the Law here, not the Law of our Obedience, is intended; but the Law or Order of Gods dealing with us; that is his Mercy and Faithfulness; which is a meer new Invention to countenance an old error, which any tolerable ingenuity would have confessed, rather than have justified by so sorry a pretence. For neither is that expression, or that word, eyer used in the sense here by him faigned, nor can it have any such signification. Hierom renders these words, utsis terribilis; that thou maist be dreadful or terrible, doubtless not according to the intend∣ment of the place. It is for the relieving of the soul, and not for the increasing of its dread and terror, that this observation is made; there is forgiveness with thee. But the words are clear, and their sense is obvious;  therefore thou shalt be feared, or that thou maist be feared. By the Fear of the Lord, in the Old Testament, the whole
Worship of God, moral and instituted, all the Obedience which we owe unto him, both for matter and manner, is intended. Whatever we are to perform unto God, being to be carried on and performed with Reverence and godly fear, by a Metonymy of the Adjunct, that name is given to the whole. That thou mayst be feared, then, is that thou maist be served, worshipped; that I who am ready to faint and give over on the account of sin, may yet be encouraged unto, and yet continue in that Obedience which thou requirest at my hands; And this appears to be the sense of the whole Verse; as influenced by, and from those foregoing. Although O Lord, no man can approach unto thee, stand before thee, or walk with thee, if thou shouldst mark their sins and fol∣lies according to the tenor of the Law, nor could they serve so great and holy a God as thou art; yet because I know, from thy Revelation of it, that there is also with thee on the account of Jesus Christ the propitiation, pardon and forgiveness; I am encouraged to continue with thee, waiting for thee, worshipping of thee, when without this discovery, I should rather chuse to have Rocks and Mountains fall upon me, to hide me from thy presence. But there is forgiveness with thee, and therefore thou shalt be feared. The words being thus opened, we may take a full view in them of the state and condition of the soul expressed in this Psalm; and that answering the experiences of all who have had any thing to do with God, in and about the Depths and Entanglements of sin. Having in, and from his great depths, v. 1. addressed himself with servent redoubled cryes, yea, outcryes, to God, and to him alone for relief, v. 1, 2. having also acknowledged his iniqui∣ties, and considered them according to the tenor of the Law, v. 3. he consesseth himself to be lost and undone for ever on that ac∣count, v. 3. But he abides not in this state of self-condemnation and dejection of soul; He sayes not there is no hope, God is a jealous God, an holy God, I cannot serve him; his Law is a fiery Law, which I cannot stand before, so that I had as good
give over, sit down and perish, as contend any longer! no, but searching by faith into the discovery that God makes of him∣self in Christ through the Covenant of Grace, he finds a stable foundation of encouragement, to continue waiting on him, with expectation of mercy and pardon. Propositions or Observations from the former Exposition of the words. The first proposed to confirmation. No encourage∣ment for any sinner to approach unto God, without a disco∣very of forgiveness. Doctrinal Observati∣ons from V. 4.From the words unfolded as they lye in their contexture, in the Psalm, the ensuing Propositions do arise. 1. Faiths discovery of forgiveness in God, though it have no pre∣sent sense of its own peculiar interest therein, is the great supportment of a sin perplexed soul. 2. Gospel Forgiveness, whose discovery is the sole supportment of sin distressed souls, relates to the gracious heart, or good will of the Father, the God of forgiveness, the propitiation that is made by the blood of the Son, and free condonation or pardon according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace. 3. Faiths discovery of Forgiveness in God, is the sole bottom of adherence to him, in acceptable Worship and reverential obedience. The first of these, is that whose confirmation and improve∣ment I principally aim at; and the other only so far as they have a coincidence therewith, or may be used in a subserviency to the illustration or demonstration thereof. In the handling then of this truth, that it may be of the more advantage unto them whose good is sought, and intended in the proposal and management of it, I shall steer this course, and shew, 1. That there is not the least encouragement to the soul of a sinner to deal with God without this discovery. 2. That this discovery of forgiveness in God is a matter great, holy and mysterious; and which very few on Gospel abiding grounds, do attain unto. 3. That yet this is a great, sacred and certain Truth, as from the manifold Evidences of it, may be made to appear.
4. That this is a stable supportment unto a sin distressed soul, shall be manifested; and the whole applyed, according to the se∣veral concernments of those who shall consider it. No ap∣proaching unto God, without a discovery of forgive∣ness.First, There is not the least encouragement for the soul of a sinner, to entertain any thoughts of approaching unto God without this dis∣covery. All the rest of the world, is covered with a deluge of wrath. This is the only Ark whereunto the soul may re∣pair and find rest. All without it, is darkness, curse and terror. We have an instance and example of it, beyond all excepti∣on in Adam. When he knew himself to be a sinner, and it was impossible for him, as we shall shew afterwards, to make a dis∣covery of any such thing as forgiveness with God, he laid aside all thoughts of treating with him; the best of his foolish contrivance was for an escape; Gen. 3. 10. I heard thy voyce (saith he to God) in the Garden, and was AFRAID, because I was naked; and I HID my self. Nothing but thou shalt dye the death, founded in his ears. In the morning of that day, he was made by the hand of God: a few hours before, he had converse and communion with him, with boldness and peace; why then doth nothing now but FEAR, Flying and HIDING possess him? Adam had sinned, the Promise was not yet given, no Revelation made of forgiveness in God, and what other course, than that vain and foolish one, to fix upon, he knew not. No more can any of his Posterity without this Revelation. What else any of them hath fixed on in this case, hath been no less foolish than his hiding; and in most, more pernicious. When Cain had received his sentence from God, it is said he went out  from the presence or face of the Lord, Gen. 4. 16. From his providential presence he could never subduct himself: So the Psalmist informs us at large, Psal. 139. 7, 8, 9. The very Heathen knew by the light of nature, that guilt could never drive men out of the reach of God.
Quo fugis Encelade, quascun{que} accesseris oras Sub Jove semper eris. They knew that  (the Vengeance of God) would not spare sinners; nor could be avoided, Acts 28. 4. From Gods Gracious Presence, which he never enjoyed, he could not depart. It was then his Presence as to his Worship; and all outward acts of Communion that he forsook, and departed from. He had no discovery by faith, of forgiveness, and therefore resolved to have no more to do with God, nor those who cleaved to him; for it respects his course, and not any one particular action. This also is stated, Isa. 33. 14. The sinners in Sion are afraid, fearfulness hath surprised the Hypocrites; who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who amongst us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? The persons spoken of are sinners, great sinners and Hypocrites; conviction of sin, and the desert of it was fallen upon them; a light to discern forgiveness they had not; they apprehend God as devouring fire and everlasting burnings only; One that would not spare, but assuredly inflict punishment according to the desert of sin; and thence is their conclusion, couched in their Interrogation, that there can be no entercourse of peace between him and them; there is no abiding, no enduring of his Presence. And what condition this consideration brings the souls of sinners unto, when conviction grows strong upon them, the Holy Ghost declares, Mich. 6. 6, 7. Where∣with shall I come before the Lord, and how my self before the high God? shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with Calves of a year old? will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Ramms, or with ten thousands of Rivers of Oyl? shall I give my first born for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? Sense of sin presseth, forgiveness is not discovered, (like the Philistins on Saul, Samuel not coming to his direction) and how doth the poor creature perplex it self in vain, to find out a way of dealing with God? Will a sedulous and diligent observation of his own Ordinances and Institutions relieve me; Shall I come before him with burnt-offerings and Calves of a year old? Alas thou art a sinner, and these Sacrifices cannot make thee
perfect or acquit thee, Heb. 10. 1. Shall I do more than ever he required of any of the Sons of men? O that I had thousands of Ramms, and ten thousands of Rivers of Oyl to offer to him? Alas, if thou hadst all the Bulls and Goats in the world, it is not possible that their blood should take away sins, v. 4. But I have heard of them who have snatched their own Children from their Mothers breasts, and cast them into the fire, until they were consumed, so to pacifie their consciences in expiating the guilt of their iniquities; shall I take this course? Will it relieve me? I am ready to part with my first born into the fire, so I may have deliverance from my Transgressions. Alas, this never came into the heart of God to approve, or accept of. And as it was then, whilst that kind of Worship was in force, so is it still as to any duties, really to be performed, or imaginarily. Where there is no discovery of forgiveness; they will yield the soul no relief, no supportment; God is not to be treated upon such terms. Greatness and rareness of the Discovery of Forgiveness in God. Reasons of it. Testimonies of Conscience, and Law against it, &c. Forgive∣ness a great Mysterie.Secondly, This discovery of Forgiveness in God is great, holy and Mysterious, and which very few on Gospel grounds do attain unto. All men indeed say there is; most men are perswaded that they think so. Only men in great and desperate extremities, like Cain, or Spira, seem to call it into question. But their thoughts are empty, groundless, yea, for the most part wicked, and Atheistical. Elihu tells us, that to declare this aright to a sinful soul, it is the work of a Messenger, an Interpreter, one among a thousand, Job 33. 23. that is indeed, of Christ himself. The common thoughts of men about this thing are slight and fool∣ish; and may be resolved into those mentioned by the Psalmist, Psal. 50. 21. They think that God is altogether such a one as themselves. That indeed he takes little or no care about these things, but passeth them over as slightly as they do them∣selves; That, notwithstanding all their pretences, the most of men never had indeed, any real discovery of forgiveness, shall
be afterwards undeniably evinced; and I shall speedily shew the difference that is between their vain credulity, and a Gra∣cious, Gospel discovery of forgiveness in God. For it must be observed, that by this Discovery, I intend, both the Revelation of it made by God, and our understanding, and Reception of that Revelation to our own advantage, as shall be shewed im∣mediately. Now the grounds of the difficulty intimated, consist partly in the hinderances, that lye in the way of this discovery; and partly in the nature of the thing it self, that is discovered; of both which I shall briefly treat. But here before I proceed, somewhat must be premised to shew what it is, that I particularly intend by a discovery of for∣giveness. It may then be considered two wayes; First, For a doctrinal, objective discovery of it in its truth; 2. An experimen∣tal subjective discovery of it in its power. In the first sense, for∣giveness in God, hath been discovered ever since the giving out of the first Promise: God revealed it in a word of Promise, or it could never have been known, as shall be afterwards declared. In this sense after many lesser degrees and advancements of the light of it, it was fully and gloriously brought forth by the Lord Jesus Christ in his own Person; and is now revealed, and preached in the Gospel, and by them to whom the Word of Re∣conciliation is committed. And to declare this is the principal work of the Ministers of the Gospel. Herein lye those un∣searchable Treasures and Riches of Christ, which the Apostle esteem∣ed as his chiefest Honour and Priviledge that he was intrusted with the declaration and dispensation of, Ephes. 3. 8, 9. I know by many it is despised, by many traduced, whose Igno∣rance and blindness is to be lamented. But the day is coming which will manifest every mans work of what sort it is. In the latter sense how it is made by faith in the soul, shall in its pro∣per place be further opened and made known. Here many men mistake, and deceive themselves. Because it is so in the Book, they think it is so in them also. Because they have been taught it, they think they believe it. But it is not so; They have not heard this voyce of God at any time, nor seen his shape; it hath not been revealed unto
them in its power; to have this done is a great work: For, Testimony of a natu∣ral consci∣science, against the forgiveness of sin.First, The constant voyce of Conscience lyes against it. Conscience (if not seared) inexorably condemneth, and pronounceth Wrath and Anger upon the soul that hath the least guilt cleaving to it. Now it hath this advantage; it lyeth close to the soul, and by importunity, and loud speaking it will he heard in what it hath to say. It will make the whole soul attend, or it will speak like thunder. And its constant voyce is, that where there is guilt there must be judgement, Rom. 2. 14, 15. Conscience naturally knows nothing of forgiveness. Yea, it is against its very trust, work, and office to hear any thing of it. If a man of courage and honesty be entrusted to keep a Gar∣rison against an Enemy, let one come and tell him, that there is peace made between those whom he serves, and their Ene∣mies, so that he may leave his Guard, and set open the Gates, and cease his watchfulness; how wary will he be, lest under this pretence he be betrayed? No saith he, I will keep my hold, until I have express order from my Superiours. Consci∣ence is entrusted with the power of God in the soul of a sin∣ner, with command to keep all in subjection with reference unto the Judgement to come; it will not betray its trust in be∣lieving every report of peace. No! but this it sayes, and it speaks in the name of God; Guilt and punishment are inseparable twins. If the soul sin, God will judge. What tell you me of forgiveness, I know what my commission is; and that I will abide by; you shall not bring in a Superior Commander, a cross Princi∣ple into my trust; for if this be so, it seems I must let go my Throne; another Lord must come in; not knowing as yet how this whole business is compounded in the blood of Christ. Now whom should a man believe if not his own Conscience, which as it will not flatter him, so it intends not to affright him, but to speak the truth as the matter requireth. Con∣science hath two works in reference unto sin; one to condemn the Acts of sin: another to judge the Person of the sinner; both with reference to the Judgement of God. When forgiveness comes, it would sever and part these employments, and take
one of them out of the hand of conscience. It would divide the spoil with this strong one. It shall condemn the fact, or every sin; but it shall no more condemn the sinner, the Person of the sinner; that shall be freed from its sentence. Here Con∣science labours with all its might to keep its whole dominion; and to keep out the power of forgiveness from being enthroned in the soul. It will allow men to talk of forgiveness, to hear it preached, though they abuse it every day; but to receive it in its power, that stands up in direct opposition to its dominion; in the Kingdom, saith Conscience, I will be greater than thou; and in many, in the most, it keeps its possession, and will not be deposed. Nor indeed is it an easie work so to deal with it. The Apostle tells us, that all the Sacrifices of the Law could not do it, Heb. 10. 2. they could not bring a man into that estate, wherein he should have no more conscience of sin; that is, Consci∣ence condemning the Person; for conscience in a sense of sin, and condemnation of it, is never to be taken away. And this can be no otherwise done but by the blood of Christ, as the Apostle at large there declares. It is then no easie thing to make a discovery of forgiveness unto a soul, when the work and employment which Conscience upon unquestionable grounds challengeth unto it self, lyes in opposition unto it. Hence is the souls great desire to establish its own Righteousness, whereby its natural Principles may be pre∣served in their power. Let self-righteousness be enthroned, and natural conscience desires no more; it is satisfied, and pacified. The Law it knows; and Righteousness it knows, but as for for∣giveness it sayes, whence is it? Unto the utmost, until Christ per∣fects his conquest, there are on this account secret struglings in the heart against free pardon in the Gospel, and fluctuations of mind and Spirit about it. Yea, hence are the doubts and fears of believers themselves: They are nothing but the strivings of Conscience to keep its whole dominion; to condemn the sinner as well as the sin. More or less it keeps up its pretensions against the Gospel, whilst we live in this world. It is a great work that the blood of Christ hath to do upon the Conscience of a sinner; for whereas, as it hath been declared, it hath a
power, and claims a right to condemn both sin and sinner, the one part of this its power is to be cleared, strengthened, made more active, vigorous and watchful, the other to be taken quite away. It shall now see more sins than formerly, more of the vileness of all sins than formerly, and condemn them with more abborrency than ever, upon more, and more glori∣ous accounts than formerly; but it is also made to see an interposition between these sins, and the Person of the sin∣ner, who hath committed them; which is no small or or∣dinary work. Testimony of the Law against the forgiveness of sin.Secondly, The Law lyes against this discovery. The Law is a beam of the Holiness of God himself. What it speaks unto us, it speaks in the name and Authority of God; And I shall briefly shew concerning it these two things. 1. That this is the voyce of the Law; namely, that there is no forgiveness for a sinner. 2. That a sinner hath great reason to give credit to the Law in that Assertion. 1. It is certain that the Law knows neither mercy nor for∣giveness. The very sanction of it lyes wholly against them: The soul that sinneth shall dye. Cursed is he that continueth not in all things written in the Book of the Law to do them, Deut. 27. 26. Hence the Apostle pronounceth universally without exception, that they who are under the Law, are under the curse, Gal. 3. 10. And saith he, v. 12. The Law is not of faith. There is an in∣consistency between the Law, and believing; they cannot have their abode in power together. Do this and live; fail and dye; is the constant immutable voyce of the Law. This it speaks in general to all; and this in particular to every one. 2. The sinner seems to have manifold and weighty Reasons to attend to the voyce of this Law, and to acquiesce in its sen∣tence. For, 1. The Law is connatural to him; his Domestick, his old ac∣quaintance. It came into the world with him, and hath grown up with him from his Infancy. It was implanted in his heart by nature; is his own Reason; he can never shake it off, or part with it. It is his Familiar, his Friend, that cleaves
to him as the flesh to the bone; so that they who have not the Law written, cannot but she forth the work of the Law, Rom. 2. 14. 15. and that because the Law it self is inbred to them; and all the faculties of the soul are at peace with it, in sub∣jection to it. It is the bond. and ligament of their union harmony and correspondency among themselves, in all their moral actings. It gives life, order, motion to them all. Now the Gospel, that comes to controll this sentence of the Law, and to relieve the sinner from it, is forraign to his nature, a strange thing to him, a thing he hath no acquaintance or familiarity with; it hath not been bred up with him; nor is there any thing in him, to side with it, to make a party for it, or to plead in its behalf. Now shall not a man rather believe a Domestick, a Friend, indeed himself; than a forraigner, a stran∣ger, that comes with uncouth Principles, and such as suit not its Reason at all, 1 Cor. 1. 18. 2. The Law speaks nothing to a sinner, but what his Con∣science assures him to be true. There is a constant con∣currence in the Testimony of the Law and conscience. When the Law sayes, this or that is a sin, worthy of death, conscience sayes it is even so, Rom. 1. 42. And where the Law of it self, as being a general Rule, rests, Con∣science helps it on, and sayes, This and that sin, so worthy of death, is the soul guilty of; then dye saith the Law as thou hast deserved. Now this must needs have a mighty efficacy to pre∣vail with the soul to give credit to the report and Testimony of the Law; it speaks not one word but what he hath a wit∣ness within himself to the truth of it. These witnesses al∣wayes agree; and so it seems to be established for a truth, that there is no forgiveness. 3. The Law, though it speak against the souls interest, yet it speaks nothing but what is so just, righteous and equal, that it even forceth the souls consent. So Paul tells us, that men know this voyce of the Law to be the Judgement of God, Rom. 1. 32. They know it, and cannot but consent unto it, that it is the Judgement of God; that is, good, righteous, equal, not to be controlled. And indeed what can be more righteous than its sentence? It commands Obedience to the God of life and
death; promiseth a Reward, and declares that for non-perfor∣mance of duty, death will be inflicted. On these terms the sinner cometh into the world, they are good, righteous, holy; the soul accepts of them, and knows not what it can desire better or more equal. This the Apostle insists upon, Rom. 7. 12, 13. Wherefore the Law is holy, and the commandment holy and just and good; was then that which was good made death un∣to me? Godforbid; but sin that it might appear sin, working death in me, by that which is good; that sin by the commandment might become exceeding sinful. Whereever the blame falls, the soul cannot but acquit the Law, and confess that what it says, is righteous, and uncontrollably equal. And it is meet things should be so; Now though the Authority and credit of a Wit∣ness, may go very far in a doubtful matter; when there is a concurrence of more witnesses it strengthens the Testimony; but nothing is so prevalent to beget belief, as when the things themselves that are spoken are just and good, not liable to any reasonable exception; And so is it in this case; unto the Authority of the Law, and concurrence of conscience, this also is added, the Reasonableness, and equity of the thing it self pro∣posed, even in the Judgement of the sinner; namely, that eve∣ry sin shall be punished, and every transgression receive a meet recompence of reward. 4. But yet further. What the Law sayes, it speaks in the name and authority of God. What it sayes then, must be believ∣ed, or we make God a Lyar. It comes not in its own name, but in the name of him who appointed it; you will say then, is it so indeed? Is there no forgiveness with God? for this is the constant voyce of the Law, which you say speaks in the name and Authority of God, and is therefore to be believed. I an∣swer briefly with the Apostle; What the Law speaks, it speaks to them that are under the Law. It doth not speak to them that are in Christ, whom the Law of the Spirit of life, hath set free from the Law of sin and death; but to them that are under the Law it speaks, and it speaks the very Truth; and it speaks in the name of God, and its Testimony is to be received; It sayes there is no forgiveness in God, namely, to them that are under the Law; and they that shall flatter themselves with a contra∣ry
perswasion will find themselves wofully mistaken at the great day. On these and the like considerations, I say, there seems to be a great deal of Reason, why a soul should conclude that it will be according to the testimony of the Law; and that he shall not find forgiveness. Law and Conscience close together, and insinuate themselves into the thoughts, mind, and judgement of a sinner. They strengthen the Testimony of one another, and greatly prevail. If any are otherwise minded, I leave them to the tryal. If ever God awaken their Consciences to a through performance of their duty; if ever he open their souls, and let in the light and power of the Law upon them, they will find it no small work to grapple with them. I am sure, that eventually they prevail so far, that in the preach∣ing of the Gospel, we have great cause to say, Lord who hath believed our report? We come with our Report of forgiveness; but who believes it? by whom is it received? neither doth the light, nor conscience, nor conversation of the most, allow us to suppose it is embraced. Thirdly, The ingrafted notions that are in the minds of men, concerning the Nature and Justice of God, lye against this discovery also. There are in all men by nature indelible characters of the Holiness and purity of God; of his Justice and hatred of sin, of his invariable Righteousness in the Government of the world, that they can neither depose nor lay aside. For notions of God, whatever they are, will bear sway and rule in the heart, when things are put to the tryal. They were in the Heathens of old; they abode with them in all their darkness; as might be ma∣nifested by innumerable instances. But so it is in all men by nature; their inward thought is, that God is an Avenger of sin; that it belongs to his Rule and Government of the world, his Holiness and Righteousness, to take care, that every sin be pu∣nished; This is his Judgement which all men know, as was ob∣served before, Rom. 1. 32. They know, that it is a Righteous thing with God to render tribulation unto sinners. From thence is that dread and fear which surprizeth men at an apprehension of the Presence of God; or of any thing under him, above them, that may seem to come on his errand. This notion of
Gods avenging all sin, exerts it self, secretly, but effectually. So Adam trembled, and hid himself. And it was the saying of old, I have seen God, and shall dye. When men are under any dreadful Providence; thundrings, lightnings, tempests, in dark∣ness, they tremble, not so much at what they see, or hear, or feel, as from their secret thoughts that God is nigh, and that he is a consuming fire. Now these inbred notions lye universally against all Appre∣hensions of forgiveness; which must be brought into the soul from without doors; having no Principle of nature to pro∣mote them. It is true! Men by nature have presumptions, and common in∣grafted notions; of other properties of God, besides his Holiness and Justice; as of his Goodness, Benignity, Love of his Crea∣tures▪ and the like; But all these have this supposition inlaid with them in the souls of men; namely, that all things stand between God and his Creatures, as they did at their first Cre∣ation; and as they have no natural notion of forgiveness, so the interposition of sin, weakens, disturbs, darkens them, as to any improvement of those Apprehensions of Goodness and Be∣nignity which they have. If they have any notion of forgive∣ness, it is from some corrupt Tradition, and not at all, from any universal Principle, that is inbred in nature; such as are those, which they have of Gods Holiness, and Vindi∣ctive Justice. And this is the first ground from whence it appears, that a real, solid discovery of forgiveness, is indeed a great work; many difficulties and hinderances, lye in the way of its accom∣plishment.
False Presumptions of Forgiveness discovered. Differences between them, and Faith Evangelical. False Pre∣sumptions of Forgive∣ness.Before I proceed to produce and manage the remaining Evi∣dences of this Truth, because what hath been spoken, lyes ob∣noxious and open to an Objection which must needs rise in the minds of many, that it may not thereby be rendered useless unto them, I shall remove it out of the way, that we may pass on to what remains. It will then be said, doth not all this lye directly contrary to our daily experience? Do we not find all men full enough, most too full of Apprehensions of Forgiveness with God? What so common as God is merciful? Are not the Consciences, and Convictions of the most stifled, by this Apprehension? Can you find a man that is otherwise minded? Is it not a common complaint that men presume on it, unto their eternal ruine? Certainly then, that which all men do, which every man can so easily do, and which you cannot keep men off from doing, though it be to their hurt, hath no such difficulty in it as is pre∣tended. And on this very account hath this weak endeavour to demonstrate this Truth been by some laughed to scorn; men who have taken upon them the teaching of others, but (as it seems) had need be taught themselves, the very first Principles of the Oracles of God. Answ. All this then I say is so, and much more to this pur∣pose may be spoken. The solly and presumption of poor souls herein, can never be enough lamented. But it is one thing to embrace a cloud, a shadow, another to have the truth in reality. I shall hereafter shew the true nature of for∣giveness, and wherein it doth consist, whereby the vanity of this self-deceiving will be discovered and laid open. It will appear in the issue that notwithstanding all their pretensions, that the most of men know nothing at all, or not any thing to the pur∣pose of that which is under consideration. I shall therefore for the present, in some few Observations, shew how far this de∣lusion of many, differs from a true Gospel discovery of for∣giveness, such as that we are enquiring after.
First, The common notion of forgiveness that men have in the world, is twofold. (1.) An Atheistical Presumption on God, that he is not so Just and Holy, or not Just and Holy in such a way and manner as he is by some represented, is the ground of their perswasion of forgiveness. Men think that some Declarations of God, are fitted only to make them mad. That he takes little notice of these things, and that what he doth, he will easily pass by, as they suppose better becomes him. Come, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. This is their inward thought, the Lord will not do good, nor will he do evil; which sayes the Psalmist, is mens thinking that God is such a one as themselves, Psal. 50. 21. They have no deep nor serious thoughts of his Greatness, Holiness, Purity, Severity, but think that he is like themselves; so far as not to be much moved with what they do. What thoughts they have of sin, the same they think God hath. If with them a slight ejaculation, be enough to expiate sin, that their consciences be no more troubled, they think it is enough with God, that it be not punished. The generality of men make light work of sin; and yet in nothing doth it more appear what thoughts they have of God. He that hath slight thoughts of sin, had never great thoughts of God. Indeed mens-undervaluing of sin, ariseth meerly from their contempt of God. All sins concernments flow from its Relation unto God. And as mens apprehensions are of God, so will they be of sin, which is an Opposition to him. This is the frame of the most of men; they know little of God, and are little troubled about any thing that relates unto him. God is not reverenced, sin is but a trifle, forgiveness a matter of no∣thing; who so will may have it for asking. But shall this Atheistical wickedness of the heart of man be called a discovery of forgiveness? Is not this to make God an Idol? He who is not acquainted with Gods Holiness and Purity, who knows not sins desert and sinfulness knows nothing of for∣giveness. Secondly, From the doctrine of the Gospel commonly preached and made known, there is a general notion begotten in the minds of men, that God is ready to forgive. Men I say from hence, have a doctrinal Apprehension of this truth, without any
real satisfactory foundation of that Apprehension, as to them∣selves. This they have heard, this they have been often told, so they think, and so they are resolved to do. A general per∣swasion hereof, spreads it self over all to whom the sound of the Gospel doth come. It is not fiducially resolved into the Gospel, but is an Opinion growing out of the Report of it. Some relief men find by it, in the common course of their Conversation, in the duties of Worship which they do perform, as also in their troables and distresses, whether internal and of conscience, or external and of Providence, so that they re∣solve to retain it. And this is that which I shall briefly speak unto; and therein manifest the differences between this common prevailing Apprehension of forgiveness, and Faiths discovery of it to the soul in its power. First, That which we reject is loose, and general, not fixed, ingrafted, or planted on the mind. So is it alwayes, where the minds of men receive things, only in their notion, and not in their power. It wants fixedness and foundation: which defects accompany all notions of the mind that are only re∣tained in the memory, not implanted in the Judgement. They have general thoughts of it, which they use as occasion serves. They hear that God is a merciful God, and as such they intend to deal with him. For the true bottom, rise and foundation of it, whence or on what account, the pure and holy God who will do no iniquity, the Righteous God, whose judgement it is, that they that commit sin are worthy of death, should yet par∣don iniquity transgression and sin, they weigh it not, they con∣sider it not; or if they do, it is in a slight and notional way, as they consider the thing it self. They take it for granted that so it is; and are never put seriously upon the enquiry, how it comes to be so; and that because indeed they have no real concernment in it. How many thousands may we meet withall, who take it for granted, that forgiveness is to be had with God, that never yet had any serious exercise in their souls, about the grounds of it, and its consistency with his holiness and justice. But those that know it by faith, have a sense of it fixed parti∣cularly and distinctly on their minds. They have been put up∣on
an enquiry into the rise and grounds of it in Christ; so that on a good and unquestionable foundation they can go to God, and say, there is forgiveness with thee. They see how, and by what means, more glory comes unto God by forgive∣ness, then by punishing; of sin; which is a matter that the other sort of men are not at all solicitous about. If they may escape punishment, whether God have any glory or no, for the most part, they are indifferent. Secondly, The first Apprehension ariseth without any tryal upon enquiry in the Consciences of them in whom it is. They have not by the power of their convictions, and distresses of Consci∣ence, been put to make enquiry whether this thing be so or no. It is not a perswasion that they have arrived unto, in a way of seeking satisfaction to their own souls. It is not the result of a deep enquiry after peace and rest. It is antecedent unto Tryal and Experience, and so is not Faith, but Opinion. For al∣though Faith be not Experience, yet it is inseparable from it, as is every practical habit. Distresses in their consciences have been prevented by this Opinion, not removed. The reason why the most of men are not troubled about their sins to any purpose, is from a persuasion that God is merciful and will pardon; when indeed none can really, on a Gospel account, ordinarily, have that perswasion, but those who have been troubled for sin, and that to the purpose. So is it with them that make this discovery by faith. They have had conflicts in their own spirits, and being deprived of peace, have accomplished a diligent search, whether forgiveness were to be obtained or no. The perswa∣sion they have of it, be it more or less, is the issue of a tryal they have had in their own souls, of an enquiry how things stood between God and them, as to peace, and acceptation of their Persons. This is a vast difference; the one sort might possibly have had trouble in their consciences about sin, had it not been for their Opinion of forgiveness; this hath prevented, or stifled their convictions, not healed their wounds, which is the work of the Gospel; but kept them from being wounded which is the work of security. Yea, here lyes the ruine of the most of them who perish under the preaching of the Gospel. They have received the general notion of pardon; it floats in their
minds, and presently presents it self to their relief, on all occa∣sions. Doth God at any time, in the dispensation of the Word, under an Affliction, upon some great sin against their ruling light begin to deal with their consciences; before their conviction can ripen, or come to any perfection, before it draw nigh to its perfect work, they choak it, and heal their consciences with this notion of pardon. Many a man between the Assembly, and his dwelling house is thus cured. You may see them go away shaking their heads, and striking on their breasts, and be∣fore they come home, be as whole as ever: Well! God is mer∣ciful, there is pardon, hath wrought the cure. The other sort, have obtained their perswasion, as a result of the discovery of Christ in the Gospel, upon a full conviction. Tryals they have had, and this is the issue. Thirdly, The one (which we reject) worketh no Love to God, no Delight in him, no Reverence of him, but rather a con∣tempt, and commonness of Spirit in dealing with him. There are none in the world that deal worse with God, than those who have an ungrounded perswasion of forgiveness. And if they do fear him, or love him, or obey him in any thing, more or less, it is on other motives and considerations, which will not render any thing they do acceptable, and not at all on this. As he is good to the Creation they may love, as he is great and powerful they may fear him; but sense of pardon, as to any such ends or purposes, hath no power upon them. Carnal boldness, formality, and despising of God, are the common issues of such a notion and perswasion. Indeed this is the generation of great sinners in the world; men who have a general apprehension, but not a sense of the special power of pardon, openly, or secretly, in fleshly or spiritual sins, are the great sinners among men. Where faith makes a discovery of forgiveness, all things are otherwise. Great Love, Fear, and Reverence of God, are its attendants. Mary Magdalen loved much, because much was forgiven. Great Love will spring out of great forgiveness. There is forgiveness with thee, saith the Psalmist, that thou maist be feared. No unbeliever, doth truly and experimentally know the truth of this inference. But so it is when men fear the Lord, and his Goodness, Hos. 3. 5. 1
say then, where pardoning mercy is truly apprehended, where faith makes a discovery of it to the soul, it is endeared unto God, and possessed of the great springs, of Love, Delight, Fear, and Reverence, Psal. 116. 1, 5, 6, 7. Fourthly, This notional apprehension of the pardon of sin, be∣gets no serious through hatred and detestation of sin; nor is pre∣valent to a relinquishment of it; nay, it rather secretly insi∣nuates into the soul encouragements unto a continuance in it. It is the nature of it to lessen and extenuate sin, and to sup∣port the soul against its convictions. So Jude tells us, that some turn the Grace of God into lasciviousness, v. 4. and sayes he, they are ungodly men; let them profess what they will, they are ungodly men; But how can they turn the grace of our God into lasciviousness? Is Grace capable of a conversion into Lust or Sin? Will what was once Grace, ever become Wanton∣ness? It is Objective not Subjective Grace; the Doctrine, not the real substance of Grace, that is intended. The Doctrine of for∣giveness, is this Grace of God, which may be thus abused. From hence do men who have only a general notion of it, ha∣bitually draw secret encouragements to sin and folly. Paul al∣so lets us know, that carnal men coming to a doctrinal acquain∣tance with Gospel Grace, are very apt to make such conclu∣sions, Rom. 6. 1. And it will appear at the last day, how un∣speakably this glorious Grace hath been perverted in the world. It would be well for many, if they had never heard the name of forgiveness. It is otherwise where this Revelation is received indeed in the soul by believing, Rom. 6. 14. Our being under Grace, under the power of the belief of forgiveness, is our great preservative from our being under the power of sin. Faith of forgiveness is the Principle of Gospel Obedience, Titus 2. 11, 12. Fifthly, The general notion of forgiveness brings with it no sweetness, no Rest to the soul. Flashes of joy it may, abiding rest it doth not. The truth of the Doctrine fluctuates to and fro in the minds of those that have it, but their Wills and Af∣fections, have no solid delight nor rest by it. Hence not with∣standing all that profession that is made in the world of for∣giveness, the most of men ultimately resolve their peace and com∣fort
into themselves. As their apprehensions are of their own doing good or evil, according to their ruling light whatever it be, so as to peace and rest are they secretly tossed up and down. Every one in his several way pleaseth himself with what he doth in answer unto his own convictions, and is disquieted as to his state and condition, according as he seems to himself, to come short thereof. To make a full life of contentation upon pardon, they know not how to do it. One duty yields them more true repose, than many thoughts of forgiveness. But faith finds sweetness and Rest in it; being thereby apprehend∣ed, it is the only harbour of the soul. It leads a man to God as Good, to Christ as Rest. Fading evanid joyes, do oft-times attend the one; but solid delight, with constant Obedience, are the fruits only of the other. Sixthly, Those who have the former only, take up their perswasion on false grounds, though the thing it self be true; and they cannot but use it unto false ends and purposes, be∣sides its natural and genuine tendency. For their grounds they will be discovered when I come to treat of the true nature of Gospel forgiveness. For the End, it is used generally only to fill up what is wanting. Self-righteousness is their bottom; and when that is too short, or narrow to cover them, they piece it out by forgiveness. Where conscience accuses, this must supply the defect. Faith layes it on its proper foundation; of which afterwards also; and it useth it to its proper End; namely to be the sole and only ground of our Acceptation with God. That is the proper use of forgiveness, that all may be of Grace; for when the foundation is pardon, the whole superstructure must needs be Grace. From what hath been spoken it is evi∣dent, that notwithstanding the pretences to the contrary, in∣sinuated in the Objection now removed, it is a great thing to have Gospel forgiveness discovered unto a soul in a saving manner.
The true Nature of Gospel forgiveness. Its Relation to the Good∣ness, Grace, and Will of God. To the blood of Christ. To the Promise of the Gospel. The Considerations of Faith about it. The true Nature of Gospel forgiveness.The difficulties that lye in the way of faiths discovery of for∣giveness, whence it appears to be a matter of greater weight and importance, than it is commonly apprehended to be, have been insisted on in the foregoing Discourse. There is yet re∣maining another ground of the same Truth. Now this is taken from the Nature and Greatness of the thing it self dis∣covered, that is, of forgiveness. To this end I shall shew, what it is, wherein it doth consist, what it comprizes and relates un∣to, according to the importance of the second Proposition before laid down. I do not in this place take forgiveness, strictly and precisely, for the act of pardoning; nor shall I dispute what that is, and wherein it doth consist. Consciences that come with sin en∣tanglements unto God, know nothing of such disputes. Nor will this Expression, there is forgiveness with God, bear any such restriction, as that it should regard only actual condonation or pardon. That which I have to do, is to enquire into the na∣ture of that pardon, which poor convinced troubled souls seek after; and which the Scripture proposeth to them, for their relief and rest. And I shall not handle this absolute∣ly neither, but in Relation to the Truth under consideration; namely, that it is a great thing, to attain unto a true Gospel dis∣covery of forgiveness.
Forgive∣ness, as it relates to the Nature of God.First, As was shewed in the opening of the words, the for∣giveness enquired after, hath Relation unto the Gracious Heart of the Father. Two things I understand hereby. 1. The Infinite Goodness and Graciousness of his Nature. 2. The Soveraign purpose of his Will and Grace. There is considerable in it, the infinite Goodness of his nature. Sin stands in a contrariety unto God. It is a Rebellion against his Soveraignty, an Opposition to his Holiness, a Provocation to his Justice, a Rejection of his yoke, a casting off, what lyes in the sinner, of that dependance which a Creature hath on its Crea∣tor. That God then should have pity and compassion on sinners, in every one of whose sins, there is all this evil, and inconceivably more than we can comprehend, it argues an infinitely Gracious, Good, and loving heart and nature in him. For God doth no∣thing, but suitably to the Properties of his Nature, and from them. All the Acts. of his Will, are the Effects of his Nature. Now what ever God proposeth as an encouragement for sinners to come to him, that is of, or hath a special influence into the Forgiveness that is with him. For nothing can en∣courage a sinner as such, but under this consideration, that it is, or it respects forgiveness. That this Graciousness of Gods nature, lyes at the head or spring, and is the root from whence forgiveness doth grow, is manifest from that solemn Proclamation which he made of old of his name, and the Revelation of his nature therein, (for God assuredly is; what by himself he is called,) Exod. 34. 6, 7. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth, keep∣ing mercy for thousands, forgiving iniuity and transgression and sin. His forgiving of iniquity flows from hence; that in his na∣ture, he is merciful, gracious, long-suffering, abundant in goodness. Were he not so, infinite in all these, it were in vain to look for forgiveness from him. Having made this known to be his Name, and thereby declared his Nature, he in many places proposeth it as a relief, a refuge for sinners, an encouragement to come unto him, and to wait for mer∣cy from him, Psal. 9. 10. They that know thy name, will put their trust in thee. It will encourage them so to do; others
have no foundation of their confidence; but if this name of God be indeed made known unto us by the Holy Ghost, what can hinder why we should not repair unto him, and rest upon him. So Isa. 50. 10. Who is among you, that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of his Servant, that walketh in dark∣ness, and hath no light, let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. Not only sinners, but sinners in great di∣stress are here spoken unto. Darkness of state or condition, in the Scripture denotes every thing of disconsolation and trou∣ble. To be then in darkness, where yet there is some light, some relief, though darkness be predominant is sad and discon∣solate; but now not only to be, but also to walk, that is to continue a course in darkness, and that with no light, no dis∣covery of help or relief; this seems an overwhelming condi∣tion; yet sinners in this estate are called to trust in the name of the Lord. I have shewed before, that nothing but forgiveness, or that which influenceth it, and encourageth to an Expectati∣on of it, is of any use unto a sinner, much more one in so great distress upon the account of sin: yet is such an one here sent only to the NAME of the Lord, wherein his gracious heart and nature is revealed; That then is the very Fountain and Spring of forgiveness. And this is that which John would work a sense of upon our souls, where he tells us, that God is Love, 1 Ep. Chap. 4. 8. or one, of an infinitely Gracious, Tender, Good, Compassionate, Loving Nature. Infinite Goodness and Grace is the soyl wherein forgiveness grows. It is impossible this flower should spring from any other root. Unless this be revealed to the soul, forgiveness is not revealed. To consider pardon meerly as it is terminated on our selves, not as it flows from God; will bring neither profit to us, nor Glory to God. And this also (which is our design in hand) will make it appear, That this discovery of forgiveness whereof we speak, is indeed no common thing, is a great discovery. Let men come with a sense of the guilt of sin, to have deep and serious thoughts of God, they will find it no such easie and light mat∣ter, to have their hearts truly and throughly apprehensive of this loving and gracious nature of God, in reference unto pardon.
It is an easie matter to say so in common, but the soul will not find it so easie to believe it for it self. What hath been spoken before concerning the ingrafted notions that are in the minds of men about the Justice, Holiness and severity of God, will here take place. Though men profess that God is Gracious, yet that Aversation which they have unto him, and communion with him, doth abundantly manifest that they do not believe what they say and profess; if they did, they could not but delight and trust in him, which they do not; for they that know his name will put their trust in him. So said the sloth∣ful servant in the Gospel, I knew that thou wast austere, and not for me to deal withal; it may be he professed otherwise before, but that lay in his heart when it came to the tryal. But this I say, is necessary to them, unto whom this discovery is to be made; even a spiritual apprehension of the gracious, loving heart and nature of God. This is the spring of all that follows; And the fountain must needs be infinitely sweet from whence such streams do flow. He that considers the glorious fabrick of Heaven and Earth, with the things in them con∣tained, must needs conclude that they were the product of infinite Wisdom and Power; nothing less, or under them could have brought forth such an effect. And he that really consi∣dereth forgiveness, and looks on it with a spiritual eye, must conclude, that it comes from infinite Goodness and Grace. And this is that which the Hearts of sinners are exercised about, when they come to deal for pardon. Psal. 86. 5. Thou Lord art good and ready to forgive. Nehem. 9. 17. Thou art a God rea∣dy to pardon, gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness. And Micah 7. 19. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardoneth iniquity—because he delighteth in Mercy. And God encourageth them hereunto, whereever he says, that he forgives sins and blots out iniquities, for his own sake, or his names sake; that is, he will deal with sinners according to the Goodness of his own Gracious Nature. So Hos. 11. 9. I will not execute the fierceness of mine Anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim, for I am God, and not Man. Were there no more Mercy, Grace, Compassion, to be shewed in this case, than it is possible should be treasured up in the heart of a man, it would be impossible that Ephraim should be spared; But saith
he, I am God and not Man; Consider the infinite largeness, bounty, and goodness of the heart of God, and there is yet hope. When a sinner is in good earnest seeking after forgiveness, there is nothing he is more solicitous about than the heart of God to∣wards him; nothing that he more labours to have a discove∣ry of; There is nothing that Sin and Satan labour more to hide from him; This he rolls in his mind, and exercises his thoughts about; and if ever that voyce of God, Isa. 27. 4. Fury is not in me, sound in his heart, he is relieved from his great distresses. And the fear of our hearts in this matter, our Saviour seems to intend the prevention or a removal of, John 16. 26, 27. I say not that I will pray the Father for you, for the Father himself loveth you. They had good thoughts of the tender heart and care of Christ himself, the Mediator, towards them; but what is the heart of the Father, what acceptance shall they find with him? Will Christ pray that they may find favour with him? Why, saith he, as to the Love of his heart there is no need of it; for the Father himself loveth you. If this then belongeth to forgiveness, as who ever hath sought for it, knoweth that it doth, it is certainly no common discovery to have it revealed unto us. To have all the clouds and darkness that are raised by sin, be∣tween us and the Throne of God, dispelled; to have the fire and storms, and tempests that are kindled and stirred up about him by the Law removed; to have his glorious face unvailed, and his holy heart laid open, and a view given of those in∣finite treasures and stores of Goodness, Mercy, Love and Kind∣ness, which have had an unchangeable habitation therein from all Eternity; to have a discovery of these eternal springs of sorbearance and forgiveness, is that which none but Christ can accomplish and bring about, John 17. 6. Forgive∣ness as it relates to the free Acts of Gods Will.Secondly, This is not all. This eternal Ocean that is infi∣nitely satisfied with its own fulness and perfection, doth not naturally yield forth streams for our refreshment. Mercy and pardon do not come forth from God, as Light doth from the Sun, or Water from the Sea, by a necessary consequence of their natures, whether they will or no. It doth not necessa∣rily follow that any one must be made partaker of forgiveness, be∣cause
God is infinitely Gracious. For may he not do what he will with his own? Who hath given first unto him that it should be recompenced unto him again? Rom. 11. 35. All the fruits of Gods Goodness, and Grace, are in the sole keeping of his own Soveraign Will and pleasure. This is his great Glory, Exod. 33. 18, 19. Shew me thy glory, saith Moses. And he said, I will make all my Goodness pass before thee, and I will proclaim the name of the Lord before thee; and I will be Gracious to whom I will be Gracious. Upon that proclamation of the name of God, that he is merciful, gracious, long-suffering, abundant in goodness, some might conclude that it could not be otherwise with any but well; he is such a one, as that men need scarce be beholding to him for Mercy; Nay saith he, but this is my great glory, that I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious. There must be an interposition of a free Act of the Will of God, to deal with us according to this his abundant goodness, or we can have no in∣terest therein. This I call the purpose of his Grace; or the good pleasure that he hath purposed in himself; Ephes. 1. 9. or as it is termed, v. 5, 6. The good pleasure of his Will, that he hath purposed to the praise of his glorious grace. This free and gracious pleasure of God, or purpose of his Will to act towards sinners according to his own abundant goodness, is another thing that influences the forgiveness of which we treat. Pardon flows immediately from a Soveraign Act of free Grace. This free purpose of Gods will and Grace, for the pardoning of sinners, is indeed that which is principally intended, when we say, there is forgiveness with him. That is, he is pleased to forgive; and so to do is agreeable unto his nature. Now the Mysterie of this Grace is deep; It is eternal, and therefore in∣comprehensible. Few there are whose hearts are raised to a contemplation of it. Men rest and content themselves in a general notion of mercy, which will not be advantagious to their souls; freed they would be from punishment, but what it is to be forgiven they enquire not. So what they know of it, they come easily by, but will find in the issue, it will stand them in little stead. But these fountains of Gods actings, are revealed that they may be the fountains of our comforts.
Now of this purpose of Gods Grace, there are several Acts, all of them relating unto Gospel forgiveness. First, There is his purpose of sending his Son to be the great means of procuring, of purchasing forgiveness. Though God be infinitely and incomprehensibly gracious, though he purpose to exert his Grace and Goodness toward sinners, yet he will so do it, do it in such a way, as shall not be prejudicial to his own Holiness and Righteousness. His Justice must be satis∣fied, and his holy indignation against sin made known. Wherefore he purposeth to send his Son, and hath sent him, to make way for the exercise of Mercy; so as no way to eclipse the glory of his Justice, Holiness, and hatred of sin. Better we should all eternally come short of forgiveness, than that God should lose any thing of his glory. This we have, Rom. 3. 25. God set him forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past. The Remission of sins is the thing aimed at; but this must be so brought about, as that therein, not only the mercy, but the Righteousness of God may be declared; and therefore must it be brought forth by a propitiation, or making of an Attonement, in the blood of Christ. So John 3. 16. 1 John 4. 9. Rom. 5. 8. This, I say, also lyes in the mysterie of that forgiveness that is administred in the Gospel; It comes forth from this eternal purpose of making way by the blood of Christ to the dispensa∣tion of pardon. And this greatly heightens the excellency of this discovery. Men who have slight thoughts of God, whose hearts were never awed with his dread or greatness, who ne∣ver seriously considered his purity and holiness, may think it no great matter that God should pardon sin. But do they consider the way whereby it was to be brought about; even by the sending of his only Son, and that to dye, as we shall see af∣terwards. Neither was there any other way whereby it might be done. Let us now lay aside common thoughts, Assent upon reports and tradition, and rightly weigh this matter. Doubt∣less we shall find it to be a great thing, that forgiveness should be so with God, as to be made out unto us, (we know some∣what what we are) by sending his only Son to dye. Oh how little is this really believed, even by them who make a pro∣fession
of it? and what mean thoughts are entertained about it, when men seek for pardon? Immunity from Punishment is the utmost that lyes in the aims and desires of most, and is all that they are exercised in the consideration of, when they deal with God about sin. Such men think and will do so, that we have an easie task in hand; namely, to prove that there is forgiveness in God; but this ease lyes in their own ignorance and darkness; If ever they come to search after it indeed, to en∣quire into the Nature, Reasons, Causes, fountain and springs of it, they will be able to give another account of these things. Christ is the center of the mysterie of the Gospel, and forgiveness is laid up in the heart of Christ, from the love of the Father; in him are all the Treasures of it hid. And surely it is no small thing to have the heart of Christ revealed unto us. When Believers deal about pardon, their faith exercises it self about this, that God with whom the soul hath to do, hath sent the Lord Christ to dye, for this end, that it may be freely given out. General notions of impunity they dwell not on, they pass not for: They have a closer converse with God than to be satisfied with such thoughts. They enquire into the graciousness of his Nature, and the good pleasure of his Will, the purpose of his Grace; they ponder, and look into the myste∣rie of his Wisdom and Love in sending his Son. If these springs be not clear unto them, the streams will yield them but little refreshment. It is not enough that we seek after salvation; but we are to enquire and search diligently, into the nature and manner of it. These are the things that the Angels desire to bow down and look into, 1 Pet. 1. 11, 12, 13. And some think, if they have got a form of words about them, they have gotten a sufficient comprehension of them. It is doubtless one Reason why many who truly believe, do yet so fluctuate about forgiveness all their dayes; that they never exercised saith to look into the springs of it, its eternal fountains; but have meerly dwelt on actual condonation. However, I say, these things lye utterly out of the consideration, of the com∣mon pretenders to an acquaintance with the truth we have in hand. Secondly, There is another Soveraign Act of Gods Will to
be considered in this matter; and that is his eternal designation of the persons who shall be made partakers of this mercy. He hath not left this thing to hazard and uncertainties, that it should as it were be unknown to him who should be pardoned, and who not. Nay, none ever are made partakers of forgiveness, but those whom he hath eternally and graciously designed thereunto. So the Apostle declares it, Eph. 1. 5, 6, 7. the rise is his eternal Predestination; the end, the glory of his Grace, the means, Redemption in the blood of Christ; the thing it self forgiveness of sins. None ever are, or can be made partakers thereof, but by vertue of this Act of Gods Will and Grace; which thereupon hath a peculiar influence into it, and is to be re∣spected in the consideration of it. I know this may be abused by pride, profaneness and unbelief; and so may the whole work of Gods Grace; and so it is, even the blood of Christ in an especial manner; but in its proper place and use, it hath a signal influence into the glory of God, and the con∣solation of the souls of men. There are also other Acts of this purpose of Gods Grace, as of giving sinners unto Christ, and giving sinners an in∣terest in Christ, which I shall not insist upon, because the nature of them is sufficiently discovered in that one explained already. Forgive∣ness as it hath re∣spect to the blood of Christ.Secondly, Forgiveness hath respect unto the Propitiation made in and by the blood of Christ the Son of God. This was de∣clared in the opening of the words. Indeed here lyes the knot and center of Gospel forgiveness. It flows from the Cross, and springs out of the Grave of Christ. Thus Elihu describes it, Job 33. 24. God is gracious unto him, and saith, deliver him from going down to the pit, I have found a ransom. The whole of what is aimed at, lyes in these words. (1.) There is Gods gracious and merciful heart to∣wards a sinner; He is gracious unto him. (2.) There is Actual Condonation it self, of which we shall treat afterward; He saith, deliver him from going down to the pit. And (3.) There is the center of the whole, wherein Gods gracious heart and actual pardon do meet; and that is the ransome, the propitiation or at∣tonement
that is in the blood of Christ, of which we speak, I have found a ransome. The same is expressed, Isa. 53. 11. My rightoous servant shall justifie many, for he shall bear their iniquities. Of the justifica∣tion of sinners, Absolution or pardon is the first part. This ariseth from Christs bearing of their iniquities. Therein he finished the transgression, made an end of sin, and made Reconcili∣ation for iniquity; Dan. 9. 24. Even all the Sacrifices, and so consequently the whole worship of the Old Testament, evinced this Relation between forgiveness and bloodshedding; whence the Apostle concludes, that without shedding of blood there is no remission, Heb. 9. 22. that is, all pardon ariseth from bloodshed∣ing, even of the blood of the Son of God. So that we are said in him to have Redemption, even the forgiveness of sins, Ephes. 1. 17. Our Redemption in his blood is our forgiveness; not that we are all actually pardoned in the blood of his Cross, for thereunto must be added Gospel condonation, of which af∣terwards; but thereby it is procured, the grant of pardon is therein sealed, and security given, that it shall in due time be made out unto us. To which purpose is that discourse of the Apostle, Rom. 3. 24, 25, 26. The work there mentioned, proceeds from Grace, is managed to the interest of Righteous∣ness, is carryed on by the blood of Christ, and issues in forgiveness; now the blood of Christ relates variously to the pardon of sin. First, Pardon is purchased and procured by it. Our Redempti∣on is our forgiveness; as the cause contains the effect. No soul is pardoned but with respect unto the blood of Christ as the procuring cause of that pardon. Hence he is said to have wash∣ed us in his blood, Rev. 1. 5. In himself, to have purged our sins, Heb. 1. 3. by one offering to have taken away sin, and for ever to have perfected them that are sanctified, Heb. 10. to be the ransome and propitiation of our sins, 1 John 2. 2. to have made an end of sin, Dan. 9. 24. and to have made Reconciliation for the sins of his people, Heb. 2. 17. God hath enclosed his rich stores of pardon and mercy in the blood of Jesus. Secondly, Because in his blood the Promise of pardon is ra∣tified and confirmed, so that nothing is wanting to our com∣pleat forgiveness, but our pleading the Promise by faith in
him, 2 Cor. 1. 20. All the Promises of God, are in him Yea, and in him Amen; that is, faithfully, and irrevocably, and im∣mutably established. And therefore the Apostle having told us, that this is the Covenant of God, that he would be merciful to our sins and iniquities, Heb. 8. 12. He informs us, that in the undertaking of Christ, this Covenant is become a Testament, Chap. 9. 15, 16, 17. So ratified in his blood, that mercy and forgiveness of sin is irrevocably confirmed unto us therein. Thirdly, Because he hath in his own Person as the Head of the Church, received an acquitment for the whole body; His Personal discharge upon the accomplishment of his work, was a pledge of the discharge which was in due time to be given to his whole mystical body. Peter tells us, Acts 2. 24. That it was impos∣sible he should be detained by death. And why so? because death being penally inflicted on him, when he had paid the debt, he was legally to be acquitted; Now for whom, and in whose name and stead he suffered, for them, and in their name and stead, he received his acquitment. Fourthly, Because upon his death, God the Father hath com∣mitted unto him the whole management of the business of forgive∣ness, Acts 5. 31. He (now) gives repentance and the forgive∣ness of sins. It is Christ that forgives us, Col. 3. 13. All for∣giveness is now at his disposal, and he pardoneth whom he will; even all that are given unto him of the Father, not casting out any that come to God by him. He is intrusted with all the stores of his Fathers purpose, and his own purchase; and thence tells us, that all things that the Father hath are his, John 16. 15. In all these respects doth forgiveness relate to the blood of Christ. Mercy, Pardon and Grace, could find no other way to issue forth from the heart of the Father, but by the heart blood of the Son, and so do they stream unto the heart of the sinner. Two things are principally to be considered in the respect that forgiveness hath to the blood of Christ. (1.) The way of its Procurement; (2.) The way of its Administration by him: The first is deep, mysterious, dreadful. It was by his blood; the blood of the Cross, the travel of his soul; his undergoing wrath and curse. (2.) The other is gracious, merciful and
tender; whence so many things are spoken of his mercifulness, and faithfulness, to encourage us to expect forgiveness from him. This also adds to the mysterious depths of forgiveness; and makes its discovery a great matter. The soul that looks after it in earnest, must consider what it cost. How light do most men make of pardon? What an easie thing is it to be ac∣quainted with it? and no very hard matter to obtain it. But to hold Communion with God, in the blood of his Son, is a thing of another nature than is once dreamed of by many, who think they know well enough what it is to be pardoned. God be merciful is a common saying; and as common, to desire he would be so for Christs sake. Poor Creatures are cast into the mould of such expressions, who know neither God, nor Mercy, nor Christ, nor any thing of the mysterie of the Gospel. Others look on the outside of the Cross; to see into the mysterie of the Love of the Father, working in the blood of the Mediator, to consider by faith the great transaction of Divine Wisdom, Justice and Mercy therein, how few attain unto it? To come unto God, by Christ for forgiveness, and therein to behold the Law issuing all its threats and curses in his blood, and loosing its sting, putting an end to its obli∣gation unto punishment in the Cross, to see all sins gathered up in the hand of Gods Justice, and made to meet on the Me∣diator; and eternal love springing forth triumphantly from his blood, flourishing into Pardon, Grace, Mercy, Forgiveness, this the heart of a sinner can be enlarged unto only by the Spirit of God. Forgive∣ness as it relates un∣to the Pro∣mise.Thirdly, There is in forgiveness, free condonation, discharge, or pardon, according to the tenor of the Gospel; and this may be considered two wayes. First, As it lyes in the Promise it self; and so it is Gods gra∣cious declaration of pardon to sinners, in and by the blood of Christ; his Covenant to that end and purpose; which is variously proposed, according as he knew needful for all the ends and purposes of ingenerating faith, and communicating that consolation which he intends therein.
This is the Law of his Grace; the declaration of the mysterie of his love, before insisted on. Secondly, There is the bringing home, and Application of all this mercy to the soul of a sinner by the Holy Ghost; wherein, we are freely forgiven all our Trespasses, Col. 2. 13. What faith respects in Forgive∣ness.Gospel Forgiveness I say, respects all these things, these Principles, they have all an influence into it. And that which makes this more evident, wherewith I shall close this consi∣deration of the nature of it, is, that Faith in its Application of it self unto God about and for Forgiveness, doth distinctly ap∣ply it self unto, and close with, sometimes one of these seve∣rally and singly, sometimes another; and sometimes jointly takes in the consideration of them all expresly. Not that at any time it fixes on any or either of them exclusively to the others; but that eminently it finds some special encouragement at some season, and some peculiar attractive from some one of them, more than from the rest; and then that proves an in∣let, a door of entrance unto the treasures that are laid up in the rest of them. Let us go over the severalls by Instances. First, Sometimes faith fixes upon the Name and infinite Good∣ness of the nature of God, and draws out forgiveness from thence. So doth the Psalmist, Psal. 86. 6. Thou Lord art good and ready to forgive. He rolls himself in the pursuit and ex∣pectation of pardon, on the infinite goodness of the nature of God, So Nehem. 9. 17. Thou art a God of pardons, or ready to forgive; of an infinite, gracious, loving nature; not severe and wrathful; And this is that which we are encouraged unto, Isa. 50. 10. to stay on the name of God, as in innumerable other places. And thus Faith oftentimes finds a peculiar sweetness and encouragement in and from the consideration of Gods gracious nature. Sometimes this is the first thing that it fixes on, and sometimes the last that it rests in; and oft-times it makes a stay here, when it is driven from all other holds; It can say, however it be, yet God is gracious; and at least make that con∣clusion which we have from it, Joel 2. 13, 14. God is gracious
and merciful, who knoweth but he will return. And when faith hath well laid hold on this consideration, it will not easily be driven from its expectation of relief and forgiveness, even from hence. Secondly, Sometimes the soul by saith addresseth it self in a peculiar manner to the Soveraignty of Gods Will; whereby he is gracious to whom he will be gracious, and merciful to whom he will be merciful, which as was shewed, is another considerable Spring or Principle of forgiveness. This way Davids faith steared him in his great streight and perplexity, 2 Sam. 15. 25, 26. If I shall find favour in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again; but if he thus say, I have no delight in thee, behold here am I, let him do unto me as seemeth good unto him. That which he hath in consideration is, whether God have any delight in him or no; that is, whether God would gra∣ciously remit and pardon the great sin against which at that time he manifested his indignation. Here he layes himself down before the Soveraign Grace of God, and awaits patiently the discovery of the free Act of his Will concerning him; and at this door, as it were, enters into the consideration of those other springs of pardon, which Faith enquires after and closeth withal. This sometimes is all the cloud that appears to a distressed soul, which after a while fills the Heavens by the addition of the other considerations mentioned, and yields plentifully refreshing showers. And this condition is a sin en∣tangled soul oft-times reduced unto in looking out for re∣lief; It can discover nothing but this, that God is able, and can if he graciously please relieve and acquit him. All other supportments, all springs of relief are shut up, or hid from him. The springs indeed may be nigh, as that was to Hagar, but their eyes are withheld, that they cannot see them. Where∣fore they cast themselves on Gods Soveraign pleasure, and say with Job, though he slay us, we will put our trust in him, we will not let him go. In our selves we are lost, that is, un∣questionable; how the Lord will deal with us we know not; we see not our signs and tokens any more; evidences of Gods Grace in us, or of his Love and favour unto us, are all out of sight. To a present special interest in Christ we are stran∣gers;
and we lye every moment at the door of Eternity; what course shall we take, what way shall we proceed? If we abide at a distance from God, we shall assuredly perish; who ever hardned himself against him and prospered? Nor is there the least relief to be had but from and by him; for who can forgive sins but God? We will then bring our guilty souls into his presence, and attend the pleasure of his Grace; what he speaks concerning us, we will willingly submit unto. And this sometimes proves an Anchor to a tossed soul; which though it gives it not rest and peace, yet it saves it from the rock of despair. Here it abides until Light do more and more break forth upon it. Thirdly, Faith dealing about forgiveness, doth commonly eye in a peculiar manner its relation to the mediation and blood of Christ. So the Apostle directs, 1 John 2. 2. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. If any one hath sinned, and is in depths and entanglements about it; what course shall he take, how shall he proceed to obtain deliverance? why he must unto God for pardon; but what shall he rely upon to encourage him in his so doing? saith the Apostle, consider by faith the Attonement and propitiation made for sin by the blood of Christ, and that he is still pursuing the work of Love to the suing out of pardon for us; and rest thy soul thereon. This I say most commonly is that which faith in the first place immediately fixes on. Fourthly, Faith eyes actual pardon or condonation. So God proposeth it as a motive to further believing, Isa. 44. 22. I have blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins; return unto me, for I have redeemed thee. Actual pardon of sin is proposed to faith, as an encouragement unto a full returning unto God in all things, 2 Sam. 23. 5. And the like may be said of all the other particulars which we have insist∣ed on. There is not any of them, but will yield peculiar re∣lief unto a soul dealing with God about forgiveness, as having some one special concernment or other of forgiveness in wrap∣ped in them. Only as I said, they do it not exclusively, but are the special doors, whereby believing enters into the whole.
And these things must be spoken unto afterwards. Let us now take along with us, the end for which all these considerations have been insisted on. It is to manifest, that a real discovery of Gospel Forgiveness, is a matter of greater conse∣quence and importance than at first proposal, (it may be) it ap∣peared unto some to be. Who is not in hopes, in expectation of pardon? Who thinks not that they know well enough at least what it is, if they might but obtain it? But men may have general thoughts of impunity, and yet be far enough from any saving acquaintance with Gospel mercy. Forgiveness discovered, or Revealed only to Faith. Reasons thereof. Forgive∣ness disco∣vered to Faith alone.For a close of this Discourse, I shall only add, what is in∣cluded in that Proposition which is the foundation of the whole; namely, that this discovery of forgiveness is, and can be made to faith alone. The nature of it is such, as that nothing else can discover it or receive it. No Reasonings, no enqui∣ries of the heart of man can reach unto it. That guess or glimpse which the Heathens had of old of somewhat so called, and which false Worshippers have at present, is not the forgive∣ness we insist upon, but a meer imagination of their own hearts. This the Apostle informs us, Rom. 1. 17. The Righteousness of God, is (in the Gospel) revealed from faith to faith. Nothing but faith hath any thing to do with it. It is that Righteousness of God whereof he speaks, that consists in the forgiveness of sins by the blood of Christ, declared in the Gospel. And this is revealed from the faith of God in the Promise, to the faith of the Believer; to him that mixes the Promise with faith. And again more fully, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entred into the heart of man the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. The wayes whereby we may come to the knowledge of any thing, are by the seeing of the eye, or the hearing of the ear, or the Reasonings and meditations of the heart; but now none of these will reach to the matter in hand; by none of these wayes can we come to an acquain∣tance
with the things of the Gospel that are prepared for us in Christ. How then shall we obtain the knowledge of them? that he declares, v. 10. God hath revealed them unto us by his Spi∣rit. Now it is faith only that receives the Revelations of the Spi∣rit; nothing else hath to do with them. To give evidence hereunto, we may consider, that this great mysterie, 1. Is too Deep, 2. Is too Great, for ought else to discover: and 3. That nothing else but faith is suited to the making of this discovery. First, It is too deep and mysterious to be fathomed and reach∣ed by any thing else. Reasons line is too short to fathom the depths of the Fathers Love, of the blood of the Son, and the Pro∣mises of the Gospel built thereon, wherein forgiveness dwells. Men cannot by their rational considerations launch out into these deeps, nor draw water by them from these Wells of Sal∣vation. Reason stands by amazed, and cryes how can these things be? it can but gather Cockle shells, like him of old, at the shoar of this Ocean; a few Criticisms upon the outward letter; and so bring an evil report upon the Land, as did the Spies. All it can do, is but to hinder faith from venturing into it; crying spare thy self, this attempt is vain, these things are impossible. It is among the things that faith puts off, and layes aside, when it engageth the soul into this great work. This then, that it may come to a discovery of forgiveness, causeth the soul to deny it self, and all its own Reasonings, and to give up it self to an infinite fulness of Goodness and Truth. Though it cannot go into the bottom of these depths, yet it enters into them, and finds rest in them. Nothing but faith is suited to rest, to satiate, and content it self, in mysterious, bottomless, unsearchable depths. Being a soul emptying, a Reason denying Grace, the more it meets withal beyond its search and reach, the more satisfaction it finds. This is that which I looked for, saith Faith; even for that which is infinite and unsearchable: When I know that there is abundantly more be∣yond me that I do not comprehend, than what I have attained unto; for I know that nothing else will do good to the soul.
Now this is that which really puzzles and overwhelms Reason, rendring it useless. What it cannot compass, it will neglect or despise. It is either amazed and confounded, and dazled like weak eyes at too great a light; or fortifying of it self by in∣bred pride and obstinacy, it concludes, that this preaching of the Cross, of forgiveness from the Love of God, by the blood of Christ is plain folly, a thing not for a wise man to take notice of, or to trouble himself about; So it appeared to the wise Greeks of old, 1 Cor. 1. 24. Hence when a soul is brought un∣der the power of a real conviction of sin, so as that it would desirously be freed from the galling intanglements of it, it is then the hardest thing in the world to perswade such a soul of this forgiveness. Any thing appears more rational unto it; any self Righteousness, in this world, any Purgatory here∣after. The greatest part of the world of convinced Persons have forsaken forgiveness on this account; Masses, Penances, Merits, have appeared more eligible. Yea, men who have no other desire but to be forgiven, do chuse to close with any thing ra∣ther than forgiveness. If men do escape these Rocks, and re∣solve that nothing but pardon will relieve them, yet it is im∣possible for them to receive it in the Truth and power of it, if not enabled by faith thereunto. I speak not of men that take it up by hearsay, as a common report; but of those souls who find themselves really concerned to look after it; When they know it is their sole concernment, all their hope and relief; when they know that they must perish everlastingly without it, and when it is declared unto them in the words of truth and soberness, yet they cannot receive it; What is the Reason of it; What staves off these hungry creatures from their proper food? Why, they have nothing to lead them into the mysteri∣ous depths of eternal Love, of the blood of Christ, and Pro∣mises of the Gospel? How may we see poor diseased souls standing every day at the side of this Pool, and yet not once venture themselves into it all their dayes. Secondly, It is too Great for any thing else to discover. For∣giveness is a thing chosen out of God from all Eternity, to exalt and magnifie the glory of his Grace; and it will be made appear
to all the world at the day of Judgement to have been a great thing. When the soul comes in any measure to be made sen∣sible of it, it finds it so great, so excellent and astonishable, that it sinks under the thoughts of it. It hath dimensions, a length, breadth, depth and height, that no line of the rational soul can take or measure. There is exceeding Greatness in it, Eph. 1. 19. That is a great work which we have prescribed, Ephes. 3. 19. Even to know the Love of Christ that passeth know∣ledge. Here, I suppose, Reason will confess it self at a stand, and an issue; to know that which passeth knowledge, is none of its work. It cannot be known saith Reason, and so ends the matter. But this is faiths proper work; even to know that which passeth knowledge. To know that, in its power, vertue, sweetness, and efficacy, which cannot be throughly known in its nature and excellency; to have by believing all the Ends of a full comprehension of that which cannot be fully compre∣hended. Hence, Heb. 11. 1. It is said to be the  of things not seen: their subsistence; though in themselves absent, yet faith gives them a present subsistence in the soul. So it knows things that pass knowledge; by mixing it self with them it draws out, and communicates their benefit to the soul. From all which is evident, what in the third place was proposed; of faiths being only suited to be the means of this discovery, so that I shall not need farther to insist thereon. Discovery of Forgiveness in God a great supportment to sin entangled souls. Particular Assurance attainable. Discovery of Forgive∣ness a great support∣ment.There yet remains a brief confirmation of the Position at first laid down, and thus cleared, before I come to the improvement of the words especially aimed at. I say then, this discovery of forgiveness in God, is a great supportment for a sin entangled soul, although it hath no special perswasion of its own particular interest therein. Somewhat is supposed in this Assertion, and somewhat affirmed.
Particular Assurance attainable.First, It is supposed that there may be a gracious perswasion and Assurance of faith, in a man, concerning his own particular interest in forgiveness. A man may, many do believe it for them∣selves; so as not only to have the benefit of it, but the com∣fort also. Generally all the Saints mentioned in Scripture had this Assurance, unless it were in the case of depths, distresses, and desertions, such as that in this Psalm. David expresseth his confidence of the Love and favour of God unto his own soul hundreds of times. Paul doth the same for himself, Gal. 2. 20. Christ loved M E and gave himself FOR ME, 2 Tim. 4. 8. There is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which God the righteous Judge shall give me at that day. And that this boasting in the Lord and his Grace, was not an enclosure to himself, he shewes Rom. 8. 38, 39. Nothing can be more vain, than what is usually pleaded, to remove this Sheat Anker of the Saints Consolation; namely that no mans particular name is in the Promise. It is not said to this or that man by name, that his sins are forgiven him. But the matter is far otherwise. To think that it is necessary, that the names whereby we are known among our selves, and are distinguished here one from another, should be writ∣ten in the Promise, that we may believe in particular every one for himself, is a fond conceit. The new name of every Child of God is in the Promise. And believing makes it ve∣ry legible to him. Yea, we find by Experience that there is no need of Argumentation in this case. The soul by a direct Act of faith believes its own forgiveness, without making inferences or gathering conclusions; and may do so, upon the Proposition of it to be believed in the Promise. But I will not digress from my work in hand; and therefore shall only observe one or two things upon the Supposition laid down.
Duty of Believers to endea∣vour As∣surance.First, It is the duty of every Believer, to labour after an As∣surance of a Personal interest in forgiveness; and to be diligent in the cherishing and preservation of it when it is attained. The Apostle exhorts us all unto it, Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw near in full Assurance of faith; that is, of our Acceptance with God through forgiveness in the blood of Jesus. This he plainly discourseth of. And this Principle of our faith and confidence, he would have us to hold fast unto the end, Chap. 3. 14. It is no small evil in Believers not to be pressing after perfection in believing and obedience. Oft-times some sinful indulgence to self or the world or sloth is the cause of it. Hence few come up to Gospel Assurance. But yet most of our Priviledges, and upon the matter all our comforts depend on this one thing. A little by the way, to encourage unto this duty, I shall desire you to consider both whence this Assurance is produced, and what it doth produce; what it is the fruit of, and what fruit it bears. Causes and Effects of Assurance.First, It is in general the product of a more plentiful commu∣nication of the Spirit than ordinary, as to a sense and partici∣pation of the choice fruits of the death of Christ, procured for those who are justified by their acceptance of the Attonement. It flourisheth not without his sealing, witnessing, establishing, and shedding abroad the Love of God in our hearts. See Rom. 5. 2, 3, 4, 5. And what Believer ought not to long for, and press after the enjoyment of these things. Nay to read of these things in the Gospel not experiencing them in our own hearts, and yet to sit down quietly on this side of them, with∣out continual pressing after them, is to despise the blood of Christ, the Spirit of Grace, and the whole work of Gods Love. If there are no such things, the Gospel is not true: if there are, and we press not after them, we are despisers of the Gospel. Surely he hath not the Spirit, who would not have more of him, all of him that is promised by Christ. These things are the hundred fold that Christ hath left us in this world, to counter∣poise our sorrows, troubles and losses: And shall we be so fool∣ish as to neglect our only abiding riches and treasures? In
particular, it is the product of an exercised, vigorous, active faith. That our faith should be such, alwayes, in every state and condition, I suppose it our duty to endeavour. Not on∣ly our comforts, but our Obedience also depends upon it. The more faith; that is true, and of the right kind, the more obe∣dience. For all our obedience, is the obedience of faith. (2.) For its own fruit, and what it produceth, they are the choicest actings of our souls towards God; as Love, delight, rejoycing in the Lord, Peace, Joy, and Consolation in our selves, readiness to do, or suffer, chearfulness in so doing; If they grow not from this root, yet their flourishing wholly de∣pends upon it. So that surely it is the duty of every Believer to break through all difficulties in pressing after this particular Assurance. The Objections that persons raise against them∣selves, in this case, may afterwards be considered. (2.) In ordinary dispensations of God towards us, and deal∣ings with us, it is mostly our own negligence and sloth that we come short of this Assurance. It is true, it depends in a pe∣culiar manner on the Soveraignty of God. He is as absolute in giving Peace to believers, as in giving Grace to sinners. This takes place, and may be proposed as a relief, in times of tryals and distress. He createth light, and causeth darkness, as he pleaseth. But yet considering what Pro∣mises are made unto us; What encouragements are given us, what love and tenderness there is in God to receive us, I cannot but conclude, that ordinarily the cause of our coming short of this Assurance is where I have fixed it. And this is the first thing that is supposed, in the foregoing As∣sertion. Saving Faith where there is no Assurance.Secondly, It is supposed, that there is, or may be a saving per∣swasion or discovery of forgiveness in God, Where there is no As∣surance of any particular interest therein; or that our own sins in particular are pardoned. This is that which hath a Promise of gracious Acceptance with God, and is therefore saving, Isa. 50. 10. Who is among you that feareth the Lord, and obeyeth the voyce of his Servant, that walketh in darkness and hath no light; Let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon
his God. Here is the fear of the Lord and Obedience, with a blessed encouragement to rest in God, and his Alsufficiency, yet no Assurance, nor light, but darkness, and that walked in, or continued in for a long season. For he cannot walk in dark∣ness, meet with nothing but darkness, without any beam or ray of Light, as the words signifie, who is perswaded of the Love of God in the pardon of his sins. And yet the faith of such an one, and his Obedience springing from it, have this Gracious Promise of Acceptance with God. And innumera∣ble testimonies to this purpose might be produced, and in∣stances in great plenty. I shall only tender a little Evidence unto it, in one Observation concerning the nature of faith, and one more, about the proposal of the thing to be believed, or forgiveness. And, 1. Faith is called, and is a cleaving unto the Lord, Deut. 4. 4. Ye that did cleave, or adhere unto the Lord; that is, who did be∣lieve. Josh. 23. 8. cleave, or adhere unto the Lord your God. The same word is used also in the New Testament, Acts 11. 23. He exhorted them that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord, or continue stedfast in believing. It is also often ex∣pressed by trusting in the Lord, rolling our burden, or casting our care upon him, by committing our selves, or our wayes unto him. Now all this goes no further than the souls Resignation of it self unto God to be dealt withall by him according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace, ratified in the blood of Christ. This a soul cannot do without a discovery of forgive∣ness in God. But this a soul may do, without a special Assu∣rance of his own interest therein. This faith that thus adheres to God, that cleaves to him, will carry men to conclude, that it is their Duty, and their Wisdom, to give up the disposal of their souls unto God, and to cleave and adhere unto him as revealed in Christ, waiting the pleasure of his Will; It ena∣bles them to make Christ their choice; and will carry men to Heaven safely, though it may be at some seasons not very comfortably. 2. The Revelation and discovery of forgiveness that is made in the Gospel, evidenceth the same truth. The first proposal of it, or concerning it, is not to any man, that his sins are
forgiven. No but it is only that there is Redemption and for∣giveness of sins in Christ. So the Apostle layes it down, Acts 13. 38, 39. Be it known unto you therefore Men and Brethren, that through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins, and by him all that believe are justified from all things; from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses. All this may be believed, without a mans Assurance of his own personal in∣terest in the things mentioned. Now where they are believed with the faith the Gospel requires, that faith is saving, and the root of Gospel acceptable Obedience. The Ransome, I say, the Attonement by Christ, the fulness of the Redemption that is in him, and so Forgiveness in his blood for Believers, from the Good Will, Grace, and Love of the Father, is the first Gospel disco∣very that a sinner in a saving manner closeth withal. Parti∣cular Assurance ariseth, or may arise afterwards, and this also is supposed in the Assertion. Discovery of forgive∣ness a great support∣ment to in∣tangled souls.2. That which is affirmed in it, is, That a discovery of forgive∣ness in God, without any particular Assurance of personal interest therein, is a great supportment to a sin entangled soul. And let no man despise the day of this small thing, small in the eyes of some, and those good men also, as if it did not deserve the name of faith. Now as hath been made to appear, this disco∣very of forgiveness, is the souls perswasion, on Gospel grounds, that however it be with him, and whatever his state and con∣dition be, or is like to be, yet that God in his own Nature is infinitely gracious, and that he hath determined in a Soveraign Act of his Will from Eternity, to be gracious to sinners; and that he hath made way for the Administration of forgiveness by the Blood of his Son, according as he hath abundantly ma∣nisested, and declared in the Promises of the Gospel. How∣ever it be with me, yet thus it is with God; There is forgive∣ness with him. This is the first thing that a soul in its depths riseth up unto: And it is a supportment for it; enabling it unto all present duties until consolation come from above. Thus hath it been to, and with the Saints of old, Hos. 14. 3. Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon Horses, neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, ye are our Gods, for in
thee the fatherless findeth mercy. A solemn Renunciation we have of all other helps, Reliefs or Assistances, Civil or Religious, that are not Gods. Therein a solemn Resolution in their great di∣stress of cleaving unto God alone. Both which are great and blessed effects of faith. What is the bottom and foundation of this blessed Resolution? namely, that Proposition, in thee the fatherless findeth mercy; that is, there is forgiveness with thee, for helpless sinners. This listed up their hearts in their depths, and supported them in waiting, unto the receiving of the bles∣sed Promises, of Mercy, Pardon, Grace and Holiness, which ensue in the next Verses. Until they came home unto them in their Efficacy and Effects, they made a Life on this; in thee the fatherless findeth mercy. The state and condition of things seems to lye yet lower in that proposal we have, Joel 2. 13, 14. Rend your hearts, and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God, for he is graci∣ous and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repenteth him of the evil, who knoweth if he will return, and repent, and leave a blessing. That which is proposed to the faith of those here spoken unto is, that the Lord is gracious and merciful; that there is forgiveness in him, The Duty they are provoked unto hereupon, is Gospel Repentance. The Assent unto the Pro∣position demanded, as to their own interest amounts but unto this, who knowes, but that the Lord may return and leave a blessing, or deal with us according to the manifestation he hath made of himself, that he is merciful and gracious. This is far enough from any comfortable perswasion of a particular interest in that Grace, mercy or Pardon. But yet saith the Prophet, come but thus far, and here is a firm foundation of dealing with God about further discoveries of himself, in a way of Grace and Mercy. When a soul sees but so much in God, as to con∣clude; well, Who knoweth but that he may return, and have mer∣cy upon me also, it will support him, and give him an entrance in∣to further light. The Church in the Lamentations gives a sad account of her state and condition in this matter. For she maketh that hard conclusion against her self, Chap. 3. 8. My strength and my hope is perished from the Lord. And when I cry and shout, he shuts out
my prayer, v. 18. So far is she from a comfortable perswasi∣on of a particular interest in Mercy and Acceptance; that un∣der her Pressures, and in her Temptations, she is ready positively to determine on the other side; namely, that she is rejected and cast off for ever. What course then shall she take? Shall she give over waiting on God, and say there is no hope? no saith she, I will not take that way; for v. 26. It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of God. But yet there seems small encouragement for her so to do, if things be with her as was expressed; Things indeed, saith she, are very sad with me, My soul hath them still in remembrance, and is bowed down in me, v. 20. but yet, somewhat I recall to mind, and therefore have I hope, v. 21. It is of the Lords mercy that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not. There is mer∣cy and never failing compassion in God; so that though my own present condition be full of darkness, and I see no deliverance, Yet I purpose still to abide waiting on him: who knows what those infinite stores and treasures of mercy and relief that are with him, may at length afford unto me: and many instances of the like kind might be added. We may observe by the way, how far this Relief extends it self; and what it enables the soul unto. As, Effects of the Disco∣very of Forgive∣ness in God.1. The soul is enabled thereby to resign it self unto the disposal of Soveraign Grace, in self-abhorrency, and a Renunciation of all other wayes of Relief. Lam. 3. 29. He putteth his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope. What God will, is his Lan∣guage. Here he lyes at his disposal, humble, broken, but abiding his pleasure. Though he slay me, saith Job, yet I will trust in him, Chap. 13. 15. It is all one, how he deals with me; whatever be the event I will abide cleaving unto him. I will not think of any other way of extricating my self from my distress. I will neither fly like Jonah, nor bide like Adam, nor take any other course for deliverance. Saith the soul, God is a God that hideth himself from me, Isa. 45. 15. I walk in darkness and have no light, Chap. 50. 10. My flesh faileth, and my heart faileth, Psal. 73. 26. So that I am overwhelmed with trouble. Mine Iniquities have taken such
hold on me, that I cannot look up, Psal. 40. 12. The Lord hath for∣saken me, and my God hath forgotten me; Every day am I in dread and terror, and am ready utterly to saint, and no relief can I obtain. What then shall I do? Shall I curse God and dye? or cry this evil is of the Lord, why should I wait for him any longer? Shall I take the course of the world, and seeing it will be no better, be wholly regardless of my latter end? No; I know what ever my lot and portion be, that there is forgiveness with God: This and that poor man trusted in him, they cryed unto him, and were delivered. So did David in his greatest distress, he encouraged his heart in the Lord his God, 2 Sam. 15. 25, 26. It is good for me to cast my self into his arms; it may be, he will frown; it may be he is wroth still; but all is one, this way I will go; as it seems good unto him to deal with me, so let it be: And unspeak∣able are the Advantages which a soul obtains by this self Re∣signation, which the faith treated of, will infallibly produce. 2. It extends it self unto a Resolution of waiting in the condi∣tion wherein the soul is. This the Church comes unto, Lam. 3. 26. It is good that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord. I will not give over my expectation, I will not make haste, nor limit God; but I will lye at his foot, until his own appointed time of mercy shall come. Expectation and Quietness make up waiting. These the soul attains unto, with this supportment. It looks upwards, as a servant that looks to the hands of his Master, still fixed on God to see what he will do, to hear what he will speak concerning him; missing no season, no opportunity wherein any discovery of the Will of God may be made to him. And this he doth in qui∣etness, without repining, or murmuring, turning all his com∣plaints against himself and his own vileness, that hath cut him short from a participation of that fulness of Love and Grace which is with God. That this Effect also attends this Faith, will fully appear in the close of the Psalm. 3. It supports unto waiting in the use of all means for the at∣tainment of a sense of forgiveness, and so hath its Effect in the whole course of our obedience. There is forgiveness with thee, that thou maist be feared. To fear the Lord, is an
expression comprehensive of his whole Worship; and all our duty. This I am encouraged, saith the Psalmist unto, in my depths; because there is forgiveness with thee, I will abide in all duties, in all the wayes of thy Worship, wherein thou maist be found. And however it be for a while, the latter end of that soul who thus abideth with God, will be peace. Let us then nextly see by what wayes and means it yields this supportment. Means whereby a Discovery of Forgive∣ness yields support∣ment.1. It begets a liking of God in the soul; and consequently some love unto him. The soul apprehends God, as one in∣finitely to be desired and delighted in by those who have a share in forgiveness. It cannot but consider him as good and gracious, however its own estate be hazardous, Psal. 73. 1, 2. Yet God is good to Israel, to such as are of a clean heart, as for me, my feet were almost gone, my steps had well nigh slipt. How∣ever the state stands with me, yet I know that God is good, good to Israel; and therewith shall I support my self. When once this ground is got upon the soul, that it considers God in Christ as one to be delighted in, and loved, great and bles∣sed effects will ensue. (1.) Self-abhorrency and Condemna∣tion, with Resignation of all to God, and permanency there∣in, do certainly attend it. (2.) Still somewhat or other in God will be brought to mind to relieve it under faintings, some new springs of hope will be every day opened. (3.) And the soul will be insensibly wrought upon to delight it self in dealing with God. Though in its own particular, it meets with frowns, chidings and repulses, yet this still relieves him, that God is so as hath been declared; so that he sayes, how∣ever it be, yet God is good; and it is good for me to wait up∣on him. Without this discovery the soul likes not God, and whatever it doth with respect unto him, it is because it dares do no otherwise, being overawed with his terror and great∣ness. And such Obedience God may have from Devils. 2. It removes sundry overwhelming difficulties, that lye in the souls way before it close with this discovery of forgive∣ness. As, 1. It takes away all those Hinderances that were formerly insisted on, from the Greatness, Holiness and severity of God,
the inexorableness and strictness of the Law, and the natural actings of conscience, rising up against all hopes of forgive∣ness. All these are by this faith removed, and taken out of the way. Where this faith is, it discovers not only forgiveness, as hath been shewed, but also the true nature of Gospel forgiveness. It reveals it as flowing from the Gracious Heart of the Father, through the blood of the Son. Now this Propitiation in the blood of the Son, removeth all these difficulties, even antece∣dently unto our special sense of an interest therein. It shews how all the properties of God may be exalted, and the Law fulfilled, and yet forgiveness given out to sinners. And here∣in lyes no small advantage unto a soul in its approaches unto God. All those dreadful Apprehensions of God, which were wont to beset him in the first thoughts of coming to him, are now taken out of the way; so that he can quietly apply himself unto his own particular concernments before him. 2. In particular, it removes the overwhelming consideration of the unspeakable greatness of sin; This presseth the soul to death when once the heart is possessed with it. Were not their sins so great, such as no heart can imagine, or tongue declare, it might possibly be well with them, say distressed sinners. They are not so troubled that they are sinners, as that they are great sinners; Not that these, and those sins they are guilty of, but that they are great sins attended with fearful aggra∣vations. Otherwise they could deal well enough with them. Now though this discovery free men not from the entangle∣ment of their sins as theirs; yet it doth, from the whole en∣tanglement of their sins, as great and many. This considerati∣on may be abstracted. The soul sees enough in God to for∣give great sins, though it doth not as yet, to forgive his sins. That great sins shall be pardoned, this discovery puts out of Question. Whether his sin shall be pardoned, is now all the enquiry. Whatever any faith can do, that this faith will do, unless it be the making of particular Application of the things believed unto it self. The soul then can no longer justly be troubled about the greatness of sin; the infiniteness of forgive∣ness that he sees in God will relieve him against it. All
that remains, is, that it is his own sin, about which he hath to deal; whereof afterwards. These, and the like difficulties are removed by it. 3. It gives some Life in, and Encouragement unto duty. And that (First) Unto duty as duty; Eying God by faith in such a fulness of Grace, the soul cannot but be encouraged to meet him in every way of duty, and to lay hold upon him thereby. Every way leading to him, as leading to him, must be well liked and approved of; and (Secondly,) To all du∣ties; and herein lyes no small advantage. God is oftentimes found in duties; but in what, or of what kind he will be found of any one in particular, is uncertain. This faith puts the soul on all: So it did the Spouse in the parallel to that in hand. Cant. 3. 2, 3, 4. Now what supportment may be hence ob∣tained is easily apprehended; supportment not from them, or by them, but in them, as the means of entercourse between God and the soul. From these Effects of this discovery of forgiveness in God, there things will ensue, which are sufficient to maintain the spiri∣tual life of the soul. 1. A Resolution to abide with God, and to commit all unto him. This the word, as was observed, teaches us; There is for∣giveness with thee, and therefore thou shalt be feared. Because this I found, this I am perswaded of, therefore I will abide with him in the way of his Fear and Worship. This our Saviour calls unto, John 15. 4. Abide in me; except you do so, ye can hear no fruit. So the Lord representing his taking of the Church unto himself, under the Type of the Prophets taking an Adul∣teress in vision, doth it on these terms, Hos. 3. 3. Thou shalt abide for me many dayes; Thou shalt not play the Harlot, and thou shalt not be for another man, so will I also be for thee. Now this abiding with God, intimates two things: (1.) Oppositions, Solicitations, and Temptations unto the contrary: (2.) For∣bearing to make any other choice, as unto that end for which we abide with God.
Abiding with God, wherein it consisteth.1. It argues Oppositions. To abide, to be stable, and perma∣nent, is to be so, against Oppositions. Many discouragements are ready to rise up in the soul against it: In Fears especially that it shall not hold out, that it shall be rejected at last, that all is nought and ypocritical with it; that it shall not be for∣given, that God indeed regards it not, and therefore it may well enough give over its hopes, which seem often as the giving up of the Ghost, will assault it. Again, Oppositions arise from corruptions and temptations unto sin, contrary to the Life of faith. And these often proceed to an high degree of prevalency, so that the guilt contracted upon them is ready to cast the soul quite out of all expectation of mercy: I shall one day perish, by these means, saith the soul, if I am not already lost. But now where faith hath made this discovery of forgiveness, the soul will abide with God against all these discouragements and Oppositions. It will not leave him, it will not give over waiting for him. So David expresseth the matter in the in∣stance of himself, Psal. 73. 2. But as for me, my feet were al∣most gone, my steps had well nigh slipt: and v. 13. Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain; but yet after all his conflicts, this at last he comes unto, v. 26. Though my flesh and my heart faileth, yet (v. 28.) It is good for me to draw near unto God. I will yet abide with God, I will not let go his fear, nor my profession. Although I walk weakly, lamely, unevenly, yet I will still follow after him. As it was with the Disciples, when many upon a strong temptation went back from Christ, and walked no more with him; Jesus said unto them, will ye go away also? to which Peter replyes in the name of the rest of them, Lord, to whom shall we go, thou hast the words of Eternal Life, John 6. 66, 67, 68. It is thus and thus with me, saith the soul, I am tossed and afflicted, and not comforted; little life, little strength, real guilt, many sins, and much disconsolation. What then, faith God by his word, Wilt thou go away also? no, saith the soul, there is forgiveness with thee, thou hast the words of Eternal Life, and therefore I will abide with thee. 2. This abiding with God argues a forbearance of any other choice. Whilst the soul is in this condition having not attain∣ed
any evidences of its own special interest in forgiveness: Ma∣ny Lovers will be soliciting of it to play the harlot by taking them into its embraces. Both self-righteousness and sin will be very importunate in this matter. The former tenders it self as exceeding useful to give the soul some Help, Assistance, and supportment in its condition. Samuel doth not come saith Saul, and the Philistins invade me, I will venture and offer Sa∣crifice my self contrary to the Law. The Promise doth not come to the soul for its particular relief, it hath no evidence as to an especial interest in forgiveness: Temptation invades the mind; try thy self, sayes it, to take relief in somewhat of thine own providing. And this is to play the harlot from God. To this purpose self-righteousness variously disguises it self, like the Wise of Jeroboam when she went to the Prophet. Sometimes it appears as duty, sometimes as signs, and tokens; but its end is to get somewhat of the faith and trust of the soul to be fixed upon it. But when the soul hath indeed a disco∣very of forgiveness, it will not give ear to these solicitations. No saith it, I see such a Beauty, such an Excellency, such a desire∣ableness and suitableness unto my wants and condition, in that forgiveness that is with God, that I am resolved to abide in the Gospel desire and expectation of it, all the dayes of my life; here my choice is fixed; and I will not alter. And this Reso∣lution gives glory to the Grace of God. When the soul without an evidence of an interest in it, yet prefers it above that which with many reasonings and pretences offers it self as a present relief unto it, Hereby is God glorified, and Christ exalted, and the spiritual life of the soul secured. Waiting on God from a Discove∣ry of For∣giveness.2. This discovery of forgiveness in God with the effects of it before mentioned, will produce a Resolution of waiting on God for peace and consolation, in his own time and way. He that believeth will not make haste, Isa. 28. 16. not make haste; to what? not to the enjoyment of the thing believed. Haste argues precipitation and impatience; this the soul that hath this discovery is freed from, resolving to wait the time of Gods appointment, for peace and consolation; God speaking of his accomplishment of his Promises, sayes, I the Lord will hasten
it, Isa. 60. 22. Well then, if God will hasten it, may not we hasten to it? nay, saith he, I will hasten it, but in its time. All oppositions and impediments considered it shall be hastned, but in its time, its due time, its appointed time. And this the soul is to wait for, and so it will. As when Jacob had seen the beauty of Rachel and loved her, he was contented to wait seven years for the enjoyment of her to be his wife; and thought no time long, no toyle too hard that he might obtain her; so the soul having discovered the beauty and excellency of forgiveness, as it is with God, as it is in his gracious Heart, in his eternal purpose, in the Blood of Christ, in the Promise of the Gospel, is resolved to wait qui∣etly and patiently for the time wherein God will clear up unto it, its own personal interest therein; Even one experimen∣tal embracement of it, even at the hour of death, doth well de∣serve the waiting, and obedience of the whole course of a mans life. And this the Psalmist manifests to have been the Effect pro∣duced in his heart and spirit; For upon this discovery of for∣giveness in God, he resolveth both to wait upon him himself, and encourageth others so to do. Discovery of Forgive∣ness pre∣pares the soul to re∣ceive it.3. This prepares the soul, for the receiving of that consolation and deliverance out of its pressures, by an evidence of a spe∣cial interest in forgiveness, which it waiteth for. 1. For this makes men to hearken after it; It makes the soul like the Merchant who hath great Riches, all his wealth in a far Country, which he is endeavouring to bring home safe unto him. If they come he is well provided for; if they miscarry, he is lost and undone. This makes him hearken after tydings that they are safe there; and as Solomon sayes, Good news in this case from a far Countrey is as cold water to a thirsty soul, (Prov. 25. 25.) full of refreshment. Though he cannot look upon them as his own, yet absolutely because he hath them not in possession, he is glad they are safe there. So is it with the soul; These Riches that it so values are as to its apprehensions in a far Country: So is the Promise, that he shall behold the Land that is very far off, Isa. 33. 17. He is glad to hear newes
that they are safe; to hear forgiveness preached, and the Pro∣mises insisted on, though he cannot as yet look upon them as his own. The Merchant resis not here, but he hearkeneth with much so∣licitousness after the things that should bring home his riches, especially if they have in them his All. Hence such Ships are called Ships of desire, Job 9. 26. Such a man greatly desires the speeding of them to their Port. He considers the Wind and the Weather, all the occasions and inconveniences and danger of the way; And blame him not; his All is at stake. The soul doth so in like manner; it hearkneth after all the wayes and means whereby this forgiveness may be particularly brought home unto it; is afraid of sin, and of Temptation, glad to find a fresh Gale of the Spirit of Grace, hoping that it may bring in his Return from the Land of Promise. This prepares the heart for a spiritual sense of it, when it is revealed. Secondly, It so prepares the soul, by giving it a due Valuation of the Grace and Mercy desired. The Merchantman in the Gospel was not prepared to enjoy the Pearl himself, until it was discovered to him to be of great price; then he knew how to purchase it, procure it, and keep it. The soul having by this acting of faith upon the discovery of forgiveness insisted on, come to find that the pearl hid in the field is indeed precious, is both stirred up to seek after possession of it, and to give it its due. Saith such a soul, How excellent, how precious is this forgiveness that is with God? Blessed, yea ever blessed are they who are made partakers of it! What a life of Joy, Rest, Peace, and Consolation do they lead? Had I but their Evidence of an interest in it, and the spiritual consolation that ensues thereon, How would I despise the world, and all the temptations of Satan, and rejoyce in the Lord in every condition? And this Apprehension of Grace, also ex∣ceedingly prepares and fits the soul, for a receiving of a bles∣sed sense of it, so as that God may have glory thereby. 3. It fits the soul by giving a Right Understanding of it; of its Nature, its Causes, and Effects. At the first, the soul goes no further, but to look after impunity, or freedom from punish∣ment, any way. What shall I do to be saved, is the utmost it
aims at, Who shall deliver me, how shall I escape? And it would be contented to escape any way; by the Law, or the Gospel, all is one, so it may escape. But upon this discovery of forgive∣ness treated of, which is made by faith of Adherence unto God, a man plainly sees the nature of it, and that it is so excellent that it is to be desired for its own sake. Indeed when a soul is brought under trouble for sin, it knows not well what it would have. It hath an uneasiness, or disquietment that it would be freed from; a dread of some evil condition that it would avoid. But now the soul can tell what it desires, what it aims at, as well as what it would be freed from. It would have an interest in Eternal Love, have the gracious kindness of the heart of God turned towards it self; a sense of the ever∣lasting purpose of his Will shed abroad in his heart; have an especial interest in the precious blood of the Son of God, whereby Attonement is made for him, and that all these things be testified unto his Conscience in a word of promise mixed with faith. These things he comes for, this way alone he would be saved and no other; It sees such a Glory of Wisdom, Love, and Grace in forgiveness, such an Exaltation of the Love of Christ in all his Offices, in all his undertaking, especially in his Death, Sacrifice, and bloodshedding whereby he procured or made Reconciliation for us, that it exceedingly longs after the participation of them. All these things in their several degrees, will this discovery of forgiveness in God, without an evidence of an especial inte∣rest therein produce. And these will assuredly maintain the spiritual life of the soul, and keep it up unto such an obedi∣ence as shall be accepted of God in Christ. Darkness, sorrow, storms, they in whom it is may meet withal, but their eter∣nal condition is secured in the Covenant of God; their souls are bound up in the bundle of life. From what hath been spoken, we may make some Infe∣rences in our passage concerning the true notion of believ∣ing. For,
Vain pre∣tences of Faith dis∣covered.(1.) These Effects ascribed to this faith of forgiveness in God and alwayes produced by it, make it evident that the most of them who pretend unto it, who pretend to believe that there is forgiveness with God, do indeed believe no such thing. Although I shall on set purpose afterwards evince this, yet I cannot here utterly pass it by. I shall then only demand of them who are so forward in the profession of this faith, that they think it almost impossible that any one should not believe it; what Effects it hath produced in them, and whether they have been by it enabled to the performance of the duties before mentioned? I fear with many, things on the account of their pretended faith are quite otherwise. They love sin the more for it, and God never the better; supposing that a few barren words will is∣sue the controversie about their sins, they become insensibly to have slight thoughts of sin, and of God also. This perswasi∣on is not of him that calls us. Poor souls, your faith is the Devils greatest Engine for your ruine; the highest contempt of God and Christ and forgiveness also, that you can be guilty of; a means to let you down quietly into Hell; the Pharisees Moses, trusted in, and will condemn you; As none is saved but by faith, so you if it were not for your faith, (as you call it) might possibly be saved. If a mans Gold prove counterfeit, his Jewels painted Glass, his Silver lead or dross, he will not only be found poor when he comes to be tryed, and want the benefit of Riches, but have withal a fearful aggravation of his poverty by his disappointment and surprizal. If a mans faith which should be more precious than Gold, be found rotten and corrupt, if his light be darkness, how vile is that faith, how great is that darkness? Such it is evident will the faith of too many be found in this business. 2. The work we are carrying on, is the rising of a sin en∣tangled soul out of its depths, and this we have spoken unto, is that which must give him his first relief. Commonly when souls are in distress, that which they look after is Consolation. What is it that they intend thereby? that they may have As∣surance that their sins are forgiven them, and so be freed from their present perplexities. What is the issue? Some of them
continue complaining all their dayes, and never come to Rest or Peace; so far do they fall short of Consolation and Joy. And some are utterly discouraged from attempting any progress in the wayes of God. What is the Reason hereof? Is it not, that they would fain be finishing their building, when they have not laid the foundation. They have not yet made through work in believing forgiveness with God, and they would imme∣diately be at Assurance in themselves. Now God delights not in such a frame of Spirit; for, 1. It is selfish; The great design of faith is to give glory unto God, Rom. 4. 20. The end of Gods giving out forgive∣ness, is the praise of his glorious grace, Ephes. 1. 6. But let a soul in this frame have peace in it self, it is very little solici∣tous about giving glory unto God. He cryes like Rachel, Give me children or I dye; give me peace, or I perish. That God may be honoured, and the forgiveness he seeks after be rendred glorious, It is cared for in the second place, if at all. This selfish earnestness, at first to be thrusting our hand in the side of Christ, is that which he will pardon in many, but accepts in none. 2. It is impatient. Men do thus deport themselves, because they will not wait. They do not care for standing afar off for any season, with the Publican. They love not to submit their souls to lye at the foot of God, to give him the glory of his Goodness, Mercy, Wisdom, and Love, in the disposal of them, and their concernments. This waiting comprizeth the uni∣versal subjection of the soul unto God, with a resolved Judge∣ment that it is meet and right that we and all we desire and aim at, should be at his Soveraign disposal. This gives glory to God; a duty which the impatience of these poor souls will not admit them to the performance of; and both these arise, 3. From weakness; it is weak; it is weakness in any condition that makes men restless and weary. The state of Adherence is as safe a condition, as the state of Assurance; only it hath more combats and wrestling attending it. It is not then fear of the event, but weakness and weariness of the combat that make men anxiously solicitous about a deliverance from
that state, before they are well entered into it. Let then the sin entangled soul remember alwayes, this Way, Method, and Order of the Gospel, that we have under consi∣deration. First, Exercise faith on forgiveness in God, and when the soul is fixed therein, it will have a ground and foundation whereon it may stand securely, in making Application of it un∣to it self. Drive this principle in the first place unto a stable issue upon Gospel evidences; Answer the Objections that lye against it, and then you may proceed. In believing, the soul makes a conquest upon Satans Territories. Do then as they do, who are entring on an Enemies Countrey; secure the passages, forti∣fie the Strong holds as you go on, that you be not cut off in your progress. Be not as a Ship at Sea which passeth on, and is no more possessed or Master of the Water it hath gone through; than of that whereunto it is not yet arrrived. But so it is with a soul, that fixeth not on these foundation princi∣ples; he presseth forwards and the ground crumbles away un∣der his feet, and so he wilders away all his dayes in uncertain∣ties. Would men but lay this principle well in their souls, and secure it against assaults, they might proceed though not with so much speed as some do, yet with more safety. Some pretend at once to fall into full Assurance, I wish it prove not a broad presumption in the most. It is to no purpose for him to strive to flye, who cannot yet go; to labour to come to Assurance in himself who never well believed forgiveness in God. Now that we may be enabled to fix this perswasion against all op∣position, that which in the next place I shall do, is to give out such unquestionable evidences of this Gospel truth, as the soul may safely build and rest upon: And these contain the confir∣mation of the principal Proposition before laid down.
Evidences of Forgiveness in God. No inbred Notions of any free Acts of Gods Will. Forgiveness not revealed by the Works of Nature, nor the Law. Essential properties of Gods nature how made known.1. The things that are spoken, or are to be known of God are of two sorts: (1.) Natural and Necessary; such as are his Essential properties, or the Attributes of his nature, his Good∣ness, Holiness, Righteousness, Omnipotency, Eternity, and the like. These are called, , Rom. 1. 19. That which may be known of God. And there are two wayes, as the Apo∣stle there declares, whereby that which he there intimates of God may be known, (1.) By the inbred light of Nature; , v. 19. It is manifest in themselves; in their own hearts; They are taught it by the common conceptions and presumptions which they have of God by the light of na∣ture. From hence do all mankind know concerning God, that He is, that he is Eternal, infinitely Powerful, Good, Righteous, Holy, Omnipotent. There needs no special Revelation of these things that men may know them. That indeed they may be known savingly there is; and therefore they that know these things by nature, do also believe them on Revelation, Heb. 11. 6. He that cometh unto God must BELIEVE that he is, and that he is a rewarder. Though men KNOW God by the light of nature, yet they cannot COME to God by that knowledge. 2. These Essential properties of the nature of God are re∣vealed by his WORKS. So the Apostle in the same place, ver. 20. The invisible things of God from the creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his Eternal Power and Godhead: See also, Psalm 19. 1, 2, 3. And this is the first sort of things that may be known of God.
Free Acts of Gods Will, how they may be known.2. There are the free Acts of his Will and Power; or his free eternal purposes, with the temporal dispensations that flow from them. Now of this sort, is the forgiveness that we are enquir∣ing after; It is not a property of the Nature of God, but an Act of his Will, and a Work of his Grace. Although it hath its rise and spring in the infinite Goodness of his Nature, yet it proceeds from him, and is not exercised but by an absolute free and Soveraign Act of his Will. Now there is nothing of God, or with him, of this sort that can be any wayes known, but only by especial Revelation: For, 1. There is no inbred notion of the Acts of Gods Will in the heart of man, which is the first way whereby we come to the knowledge of any thing of God. Forgiveness is not revealed by the light of nature. Flesh and blood, which nature is, declares it not: By that means, No man hath seen God at any time, John 1. 8. that is, as a God, of mercy and pardon, as the Son re∣veales him. Adam had an intimate acquaintance, according to the limited capacity of a creature, with the properties and excellencies of the nature of God. It was implanted in his heart, as indispensibly necessary unto that natural worship, which by the Law of his creation he was to perform. But when he had sinned, it is evident, that he had not the least ap∣prehension that there was forgiveness with God. Such a thought would have laid a foundation of some further treaty with God about his condition. But he had no other design but of flying and hiding himself, Gen. 3. 10. so declaring that he was utterly ignorant of any such thing as pardoning mercy. Such, and no other, are all the first, or purely natural conceptions of sin∣ners; namely, that it is , the Judgement of God, Rom. 1. 32. that sin is to be punished with death. It is true, these conceptions in many are stifled, by Rumors, Reports, Tra∣ditions, that it may be otherwise; but all these are far enough from that Revelation of forgiveness, which we are enquiring after. 2. The consideration of the Works of Gods creation will not help a man to this knowledge; that there is forgiveness with God. The Apostle tells us, Rom. 1. 20. what it is of God that
his works reveal; even his eternal power and Godhead; or the Essential Properties of his nature; but no more: Not any of the purposes of his Grace, not any of the free Acts of his Will; not pardon and forgiveness. Besides God made all things in such an estate and condition, namely, of Rectitude, Integrity, and Uprightness, Eccles. 7. 29. that it was impossible they should have any respect unto sin, which is the Corruption of all, or to the Pardon of it, which is their Restituion, whereof they stood in no need. There being no such thing in the world, as sin, nor any such thing supposed to be, when all things were made of nothing, how could any thing declare or reveal the forgiveness of it. 3. No works of Gods Providence can make this discovery. God hath indeed born Testimony to himself and his Goodness in all Ages from the foundation of the world in the works of his Providence: So Acts 14. 15, 16, 17. We preach unto you, that you should turn from these vanities, unto the living God, which made Heaven, and Earth, and the Sea, and all things that are therein; who in times past, suffered all Nations to walk in their own wayes: nevertheless he left not himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain from Heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness: , He left not himself without witness; that is, by the works of his Providence there recounted, he thus far bare Testimony to him∣self, that he is, and is good, and doth good, and ruleth the world, so that they were utterly inexcusable who taking no notice of these works of his, nor the fruits of his goodness, which they lived upon, turned away after , vain things, as the Apostle there calls the Idols of the Gentiles. But yet these things did not discover pardon and forgiveness. For still God suffered them to go on in their own wayes, and winked at their Ignorance. So again, Acts 17. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. Whom you ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you, God that made the world, and all things therein, seeing that he is the Lord of Heaven and Earth, dwelleth not in Temples made with hands, neither is worshipped with mens hands, as though he needeth any thing, seeing he giveth unto all life and breath, and all things, and hath made of one blood all Nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the
Earth (where by the way there is an allusion to that of Gen. 11. 8. the Lord scattered them abroad upon the face of the Earth) and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation, that they should seek the Lord, if happily they might seek after him, and find him, though he be not far from every one of us. By Arguments taken from the works of God both of Creation and Providence; the Apostle proves the Being and properties of God. Yea, he lets them know with whom he had to do, that God designed by his works so far to reveal himself unto them, as the true and living God, the Maker and Governour of all things, as that they ought to have enquired more diligently after him, and not to look on him alone as the Unknown God, who alone might be known: all their Idols being vain and nothing. But of the discovery of Pardon and for∣giveness in God by these wayes and means, he speaks not; yea, he plainly shews that this was not done thereby. For the Great Call to saving Repentance is by the Revelation of for∣giveness. But now by these works of his Providence God called not the Gentiles to saving Repentance. No saith he, he suffered them to walk still in their own wayes, Chap. 14. 16. and winked at the times of their ignorance; but now, that is, by the Word of the Gospel, commandeth them to Repent, Chap. 17. 30. Forgiveness not reveal∣ed by the work of Provi∣dence about the first sin.II. Whereas there had been one signal Act of Gods Pro∣vidence about sin, when man first fell into the snares of it: It was so far from the revealing forgiveness in God that it rather se∣verely intimated the contrary. This was Gods dealing with sinning Angels. The Angels were the first sinners; and God dealt first with them about sin. And what was his dealing with them, the Holy Ghost tells us, 2 Pet. 2. 4. , he spared not the sinning Angels, he spared them not; It is the same word which he useth where he speaks of laying all our iniquities on Christ, he undergoing the pu∣nishment due unto them, Rom. 8. 32. , he spared him not; that is, he laid on him the full punishment that by the Curse and sanction of the Law was due unto sin. So he dealt with the Angels that sinned; he spared them not but inflicted on them the punishment due to sin, shutting them up under
chains of darkness for the Judgement of the great Day. Hither∣to then God keeps all thoughts of forgiveness in his own Eter∣nal Bosom. There is not so much as the least dawning of it upon the world. And this was at first no small prejudice against any thoughts of forgiveness. The world is made, sin en∣ters by the most glorious part of the Creation, whose recove∣ry by pardon might seem to be most desirable, but not the least appearance of it is discovered. Thus it was hid in God from the foundation of the world, Eph. 3. 9. III. God gave unto Man a Law of Obedience immediately upon his Creation. Yea, for the main of it, he implanted it in him by, and in his Creation. This Law it was supposed that man might transgress. The very nature of a Law pre∣scribed unto free Agents, attended with Threatnings and Pro∣mises of Reward, requires that supposition. Now there was not annexed unto this Law, or revealed with it, the least inti∣mation of pardon to be obtained, if Transgression should ensue. Gen. 2. 17. we have this Law, In the day thou eatest thou shalt surely dye: dying thou shalt dye; or bring upon thy self assuredly the guilt of death temporal and eternal. There God leaves the sinner under the power of that commination. Of forgiveness or pardoning mercy there is not the least intimation. To this very day, that Law, which was then the whole Rule of life and Acceptance with God knows no such thing. Dying thou shalt dye, O sinner, is the precise and final voyce of it. From these previous considerations, added to what was formerly spoken, some things preparatory to the ensuing discourse may be inferred: as, 1. That it is a great and rare thing to have forgiveness in God discovered unto a sinful soul. A thing it is, that, as hath been shewed, Conscience and Law, with the inbred Notions that are in the heart of man about Gods Holiness and Vindictive Ju∣stice do lye against. A matter whereof we have no natural presumption; whereof there is no common notion in the mind of man. A thing which no consideration of the Works of God, either of Creation or Providence will reveal, and which the great Instance of Gods dealing with sinning Angels renders deep, admirable and mysterious. Men who have common and slight
thoughts of God, of themselves, of Sin, of Obedience, of the Judgement to come, of Eternity, that feed upon the ashes of rumors, reports, hearsayes, traditions, without looking into the reality of things, may, and do take this to be an ordinary and acknowledged truth, easie to be entertained, which upon the mat∣ter no man disbelieves. But convinced sinners, who make a tryal of these things, as running into Eternity, have other thoughts of them. And as to that which it is pretended every one believes, we have great cause to cry out, Lord who hath believed our report, to whom hath this arm of the Lord been revealed? 2. That the discovery of forgiveness in God, being a matter of so great difficulty, is a thing precious and excellent, as being the foundation of all our Communion with God here, and of all undeceiving Expectation of our enjoyment of him hereafter. It is a pure Gospel truth that hath neither shaddow, footstep, nor intimation elsewhere; the whole creation hath not the least obscure impression of it left thereon; so that, 3. It is undoubtedly greatly incumbent on us to enquire dili∣gently as the Prophets did of old into this Salvation; to consider what sure Evidences faith hath of it, such as will not, as can∣not fail us. To be slight and common in this matter, to take it up at random, is an Argument of an unsound rotten heart. He that is not serious in his enquiry into the Revelation of this matter, is serious in nothing wherein God or his soul is concerned. The Holy Ghost knows what our frame of heart is, and how slow we are to receive this blessed truth in a gra∣cious saving manner. Therefore doth he confirm it unto us with such weighty considerations, as Heb. 6. 17, 18. God wil∣ling more abundantly to shew unto the heirs of promise the immuta∣bility of his counsell, confirmed it by an oath; that by two immu∣table things in which it was impossible for God to lye, we might have strong consolation. It is of forgiveness of sin that the Apostle treats, as hath been made evident by the description of it before given. Now to give evidence hereunto, and to beget a belief of it in us, he first engages a Property of Gods Nature in that business. He with whom we deal, is —as Tit. 1. 2. The God that cannot lye, that cannot deceive, or be
deceived. It is impossible it should be so with him. Now as this extends it self in general, to all the Words and Works of God, so there is peculiarly in this whereof he treats , an especial immutability of his counsel. Men may think that although there be words spoken about forgiveness, yet it is possible it may be otherwise; no saith the Apostle, it is spoken by God, and it is impossible he should lye. Yea, but upon the manifold provocations of sinners he may change his mind and thoughts therein; no, saith the Apo∣stle, there is a peculiar immutability in his counsel concerning the execution of this thing, there can be no change in it. But how doth this appear that indeed this is the counsel of his will? Why, saith he? he hath declared it by his Word; and that given in a way of promise; which as in its own nature it is suited to raise an expectation in him or them to whom it is made or given; so it requires exact faithfulness in the discharge and performance of it, which God on his part will assuredly an∣swer. But neither is this all; but that no place might be left for any cavilling Objection in this matter, , he interposed himself by an oath; Thus we have this Truth de∣duced from the veracity of Gods nature, one of his Essential Ex∣cellencies, established in the immutable purpose of his Will, brought forth by a word of promise, and confirmed by Gods interposing himself against all occasions of exception, (so to put an end unto all strife about it) by an Oath, swearing by himself that so it should be. I have mentioned this only to shew what weight the Holy Ghost layes upon the delivery of this great Truth, and thence how deeply it concerns us to enquire dili∣gently into it, and after the grounds and evidences which may be tendred of it, which among others are these that follow.
Discovery of Forgiveness in the first Promise. The Evidence of the Truth that lyes therein. And by the Institution of Sacrifices. Their Use and End. Also by the prescription of Repentance unto sinners. Forgive∣ness disco∣vered in the first Promise.The first Discovery of forgiveness in God, (and which I place as the first Evidence of it) was made in his first dealing with our Parents after their shameful sin and fall. Now to make it appear, that this is an evidence that carryes along a great conviction with it, and is such as faith may securely rest upon and close withall, the ensuing Observations are to be considered. The first sin in the world, was on many accounts the greatest sin that ever was in the world. It was the sin as it were of Humane Nature, wherein there was a conspiracy of all Individuals; omnes eramus unus ille homo; in that one man, or that one sin, we all sinned, Rom. 5. 12. It left not God one subject as to mo∣ral obedicnce on the earth, nor the least ground for any such to be unto Eternity. When the Angels sinned the whole race or kind did not prevaricate. Thousand thousands of them, and ten thousand times ten thousands continued in their obedience, Dan. 7. 10. But here, all and every individual of mankind (he only excepted which was not then in Adam) were imbarked in the same crime and guilt. Besides it disturbed the Government of God in and over the whole Creation. God had made all things in number, weight, and measure, in order and beauty: pro∣nouncing himself concerning his whole work that it was  exceeding beautiful and good, Gen. 1. 31. Much of this beauty lay in the subordination of one thing to another, and of all to himself by the mediation and interposition of man, through whose Prayses and Obedience the rest of the Crea∣tion being made subject unto him, was to return their tri∣bute of Honor and Glory unto God. But all this Order was destroyed by this sin; and the very creation made subject to vanity, Rom. 8. 20. On which, and the like accounts, it might be easily made to appear that it was the greatest sin that ever was in the world.
2. Man who had sinned subscribed in his heart and consctence unto the righteous sentence of the Law. He knew what he had deserved, and looked for nothing but the immediate Execution of the sentence of death upon him. Hence he meditates not a defence, expects no pardon, stayes not for a tryal, but flyes and hides, and attempts an escape. Gen. 3. 10. I was afraid, saith he, and hid my self; than which never were there words of greater horror in the world, nor shall be until the day of Judgement. Poor Creature, he was full of expectation of the vengeance due for a broken Covenant. 3. God had newly declared in the sinning Angels what his Ju∣stice required, and how he could deal with sinning man without the least impeachment of his Government, Holiness or Goodness. See 2 Pet. 2. 4. 4. There was nothing without God himself that should move him in the least, so much as to suspend the execution of his wrath for one moment; he had not done so with the Angels. All things lay now under wrath, curse, confusion, and disorder: nothing was left good, lovely, or desirable in his eye. As in the first Creation, that which was first brought forth from nothing was  without form and void, empty of all order and beauty; nothing was in it to induce or move God to bring forth all things in the glory that ensued, but the whole design of it, proceeded from his own infinite Good∣ness and Wisdom; so was it now again. There was an Emp∣tiness and Vanity brought by sin upon the whole creation. Nothing remained that might be a motive unto a merciful Restoration, but all is again devolved on his Soveraignty. All things being in this state and condition wherein all doors stood open to the Glory of Gods Justice in the punishing of sin, nothing remaining without him to hold his hand in the least; the whole creation, and especially the sinner himself lying trembling in Expectation of a dreadful doom, what now cometh forth from him? the blessed word which we have, Gen. 3. 15. The seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head. It is full well known that the whole mysterie of forgiveness is wrapt up in this one word of promise. And the great way of its coming forth from God by the blood of the Messiah, whose
heel was to be bruised, is also intimated. And this was the first discovery that ever was made of forgiveness in God. By a word of pure Revelation it was made, and so faith must take it up and receive it. Now this Revelation of forgiveness with God in this one Promise, was the bottom of all that Worship that was yielded unto him by sinners for many Ages. For we have shewed before, that without this, no sinner can have the least encouragement to approach unto him; and this will continue to the end of the world, as a notable evidence of the truth in hand a firm foundation for faith to rest and build upon. Let a sinner seriously consider the state of things as they were then in the world laid down before, and then view God coming forth with a word of pardon and forgiveness, meerly from his own Love, and those counsells of peace that were between the Father and the Son, and he cannot but conclude under his greatest difficulties, that yet there is forgiveness with God that he may be feared. Let now the Law and Conscience, let Sin and Satan stand forth and except against this Evidence; enough may be spoken from it, whatever the particular case be, about which the soul hath a contest with them, to put them all to silence. Sacrifices an Evi∣dence of Forgive∣ness.II. God revealed this Sacred Truth by his Institution of Sacri∣fices. Sacrifices by blood, do all of them respect Attonement, Expiation, and consequentially forgiveness. It is true indeed, they could not themselves take away sin, nor make them perfect who came unto God by them, Heb. 10. 1. but yet they undenia∣bly evince the taking away of sin, or the forgiveness of it, by what they did denote and typisie. I shall therefore look a little back into their Rise and Intendment. 1. The Original and first spring of Sacrifices is not in the Scripture expresly mentioned, only the practice of the Saints is recorded. But it is certain from infallible Scripture Evi∣dences, that they were of Gods immediate Institution and Ap∣pointment. God never allowed that the Will or Wisdom of man, should be the spring and Rule of his Worship. That solemn word where with he Fronts the command that is the Rule of his Wor∣ship,  Thou shalt not make to thy self, which is the life of the command, (that which follows being an explanation
and confirmation of the Law it self by Instances) cuts off all such pretences, and is as a flaming sword turning every way to prevent mens arbitrary approaches to Gods Institutions. God will not part with his glory of being the only Law-giver as to the whole concernment of his Worship, or any part of it, unto any of the sons of men. 2. Neither is the time of their Institution mentioned. Some of the Papists dispute (as there are a generation of philosophi∣ disputers amongst them, by whom their tottering cause is supported) that there should have been Sacrisices in Paradice, if man had not sinned. But as in all their opinions, our first enquiry ought to be, what do they get by this or that, their whole Religion being pointed unto their carnal interest; so we may in particular do it, upon this uncouth Assertion, which is perfectly contradictious to the very Nature and End of most Sacrifices; namely, that they should be offered where there is no sin. Why, they hope to establish hence a general rule, that there can be no true Worship of God in any state or condition with∣out a Sacrifice. What then I pray? Why then it is evident that the continual Sacrifice of the Mass is necessary in the Church, and that without it there is no true Worship of God; and so they are quickly come home to their advantage and profit; the Mass being that inexhaustible Spring of Revenue which feeds their pride and lust throughout the world. But there is in the Church of Christ an Altar still, and a Sacrifice still, which they have rejected for the a bominable figment of their Mass; name∣ly, Christ himself as the Apostle informs us, Heb. 13. 10. But as the Sacrifices of Beasts could not have been before the entrance of sin, so it may be evidenced that they were instituted from the foundation of the world, that is presently after the entrance of sin. Christ is called the Lamb of God, John 1. 29. which he was in reference unto the Sacrifices of old, as 1 Pet. 2. 18, 19. whence he is represented in the Church, as a Lamb slain, Rev. 5. 6. or giving out the efficacy of all Sacrifices to his Church. Now he is said to be a Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, Rev. 13. 8. which could not be, unless some Sacrifice prefiguring his being slain had been then offered. For it de∣notes not only the efficacy of his Mediation, but the way. Be∣sides
the Apostle tells us, that without shedding of blood there was no remission, Heb. 9. 22. That is, God to demonstrate that all pardon and forgiveness related to the blood of Christ from the foundation of the world, gave out no word of pardon, but by and with blood. Now I have shewed before, that he reveal∣ed pardon in the first promise, and therefore there ensued thereon the shedding of blood and Sacrifices; and thereby that Testament or Covenant was dedicated with blood also, ver. 18. Some think that the Beasts, of whose skins God made garments for Adam, were offered in Sacrifices. Nor is their conjecture vain. Yea, it seems not to want a shaddow of a Gospel My∣sterie; that their nakedness which became their shame upon their sin, (whence the pollution and shame of sin is frequently so termed) should be covered with the skins of their Sacrifices. For in the true Sacrifice, there is somewhat answerable there∣unto. And the Righteousness of him whose Sacrifice takes away the guilt of our sin, is called our cloathing, that hides our pollution and shame. 3. That after the giving of the Law, the greatest, most no∣ble, and solemn part of the Worship of God consisted in Sa∣crifices. And this kind of Worship continued with the appro∣bation of God in the world about four thousand years; that is, from the entrance of sin until the death of the Messiah, the true Sacrifice, which put an end unto all that was typical. These things being premised, we may consider what was the mind and aim of God in the Institution of this Worship. One instance, and that of the most solemn, of the whole kind, will resolve us in this enquiry, Lev. 16. 5. Two Kids of the Goats are taken for an offering for sin. Consider only (that we do not enlarge on particulars) how one of them was dealt withal, ver. 20, 21, 22. He shall bring the live Goat, and Aaron shall lay both his hands on the head of the live Goat, and confess over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their transgression in all their sins, putting them upon the head of the Goat, and shall send him away by the hand of a fit man into the Wilderness, and the Goat shall bear upon him all their iniquities unto a Land not inhabited. Let us see to what end is all this Solemnity, and what is de∣clared
thereby. Wherefore should God appoint poor sinful men to come together, to take a Goat or Lamb, and to confess over his head all their sins and transgressions, and to devote him to destruction under that confession? Had men invented this themselves, it had been a matter of no moment. But it was an Institution of God which he bound his Church to the observation of upon the penalty of his highest displeasure. Certainly this was a solemn declaration that there is forgiveness with him. Would that God who is infinitely Good, and so will not, who is infinitely True, holy and faithful, and so can∣not deceive, call men out whom he loved, to a solemn Represen∣tation of a thing wherein their chiefest, their eternal concern∣ment did lye, and suffer them to feed upon Ashes? Let men take heed that they mock not God; for of a Truth God mocketh not man, until he be finally rejected by him. For four thou∣sand years together then, did God declare by Sacrifices, that there is forgiveness with him, and lead his people by them to make a publick Representation of it in the face of the world. This is a second uncontrolable Evidence of the Truth as∣serted, which may possibly be of use to souls that come in∣deed deeply and seriously to deal with God; for though the Practice be ceased, yet the Instruction intended in thern con∣tinues. Forgive∣ness with God, ma∣nifested by his Prescri∣ption of Repen∣tance.III. Gods appointment of Repentance unto sinners, doth reveal that there is forgiveness in himself. I say the prescription of Re∣pentance is a Revelation of forgiveness. After the Angels had sinned, God never once called them to Repentance. He would not deceive them, but let them know what they were to look for at his hands; he hath no forgiveness for them, and therefore would require no Repentance of them. It is not, nor ever was a duty incumbent on them to repent. Nor is it so unto the damned in Hell God requires it not of them, nor is it their duty. There being no forgiveness for them, what should move them to repent? Why should it be their duty so to do? Their eternal anguish about sin committed, hath no∣thing of Repentance in it. Assignation then of Repentance is a Revelation of forgiveness. God would not call upon a sinful
creature to humble it self and bewail its sin, if there were no way of recovery, or relief. And the only way of recovery from the guilt of sin, is pardon, so Job 33. 27, 28. He looketh on men, and if any say, I have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it profited me not; he will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see the light. In the foregoing Verses he declares the various wayes that God used to bring men unto Repentance. He did it by dreams, ver. 15, 16. by Af∣flictions, ver. 19. by the preaching of the Word, ver. 23. What then doth God aim at in and by all these various wayes of teachings? It is to cause man to say, I have sinned, and pervert∣ed that which was right. It is to bring him to Repentance: What now, if he obtaine his end, and man cometh to that which is aimed at? Why then there is forgiveness for him, as is declared, ver. 28. To improve this evidence, I shall confirm by some few obvious considerations these two things. 1. That the prescription of Repentance doth indeed evince that there is forgiveness with God. 2. That every one in whom there is Repentance wrought to∣wards God, may certainly conclude that there is forgiveness with God for him. 1. No Repentance is acceptable with God but what is built, or leans on the faith of forgiveness. We have a cloud of witnesses unto this Truth in the Scripture. Many there have been, many are recorded who have been convinced of sin, perplexed about it, sorry for it, that have made open confession and acknowledge∣ment of it, that under the prssing sense of it, have cryed out even to God for deliverance, and yet have come short of mercy par∣don and acceptance with God. The cases of Cain, Pharaoh, Saul, Ahab, Judas, and others, might be insisted on. What was want∣ing that made all that they did abominable? Consider one instance for all: It is said of Judas that he repented, Mat. 27. 3. , he repented himself; but wherein did this repen∣tance consist? he was convinced of his sin in general; , saith he, I have sinned, ver. 4. 2. He was sensible of the parti∣cular sin whereof he stood charged in conscience before God. I have saith he, betrayed innocent blood: I am guilty of blood, innocent blood, and that in the vilest manner, by treachery;
so that he comes (3.) To a full and open confession of his sin: (4.) He makes Restitution of what he was advantaged by his sin, he brought again the thirty pieces of silver, v. 3. all testifying an hearty sorrow that spirited the whole. Methinks now Ju∣das his Repentance looks like the young mans Obedience, who cryed out, all these things have I done; Is there any thing yet lacking? Yea, one thing was wanting to that young man, he had no true faith nor love to God all this while, which vitiated and spoyled all the rest of his performances. One thing also is wanting to this Repentance of Judas; he had no faith of forgive∣ness in God; that he could not believe; and therefore after all this sorrow instead of coming to him, he bids him the utmost defiance, and goes away and hangs himself. Indeed saith of forgiveness, as hath been shewed, hath many degrees. There is of them, that which is indispensibly ne∣cessary to render Repentance acceptable. What it is in particu∣lar, I do not dispute. It is not an Assurance of the Acceptance of our persons in general. It is not that the particular sin wherewith it may be, the soul is perplexed, is forgiven. A general, so it be a Gospel discovery that there is forgiveness in God, will suffice. The Church expresseth it, Hos. 14. 3. In thee the fatherless findeth mercy, and Joel 2. 14. Who knows but he will return and repent. I have this ground, saith the soul; God is in himself gracious and merciful; the fatherless, the destitute and helpless that come to him by Christ, find mercy in him. None in Heaven and earth can evince but that he may return to me also. Now let a mans convictions be never so great, sharp, wounding, his sorrow never so abundant, overflowing, abiding, his confession never so full, free or open, if this one thing be wanting, all is nothing but what tends to death. 2. To prescribe Repentance as a duty unto sinners, without a foundation of pardon and forgiveness in himself; is incon∣sistent with the Wisdom, Holiness, Goodness, Faithfulness, and all other glorious Excellencies and Perfections of the na∣ture of God: for, 1. The Apostle layes this as the great foundation of all con∣solation; that God cannot lye or deceive, Heb. 6. 18. And again, he engageth the faithfulness and veracity of God to the same
purpose. Tit. 1. 2. God who cannot lye hath promised it. Now there is a lye, a deceit in Things as well as in Words. He that doth a thing, which in its own nature is apt to deceive them that consider it, with an intention of deceiving them, is no less a lyar, than he which affirms that to be true, which he knows to be false. There is a lye in Actions as well as in Words. The whole life of an hyocrite is a lye; so saith the Prophet of Idolaters, there is a lye in their right hand, Isa. 44. 20. 2. The proposal of Repentance, is a thing fitted and suited in its own nature, to beget thoughts in the mind of a sinner that there is forgiveness with God. Repenting is for sinners on∣ly. I came not, saith our Saviour, to call the righteous, but sin∣ners to repentance. It is for them, and them only. It was no duty for Adam in Eden; it is none for the Angels in Heaven, nor for the damned in Hell. What then may be the language of this appointment? O sinners, come and deal with God by Repen∣tance: Doth it not openly speak forgiveness in God? and if it were otherwise could men possibly be more frustrated or de∣ceived? would not the Institution of Repentance be a lye? Such a delusion may proceed from Satan, but not from him who is the fountain of Goodness, Holiness and Truth. His Call to Repentance, is a full Demonstration of his readiness to for∣give, Acts 17. 30, 31, 32. It is true, many do thus deceive themselves. They raise themselves unto an expectation of immunity, not on Gospel grounds; and their disappointment is a great part of their punishment. But God deceives none: whoever comes to him on his proposal of Repentance, shall find forgiveness. It is said of some indeed, that he will laugh at their calamity, and mock when their fear cometh, Prov. 1. 26. He will aggravate their misery, by giving them to see what their pride and folly hath brought them unto. But who are they? only such as refuse his Call to Repentance, with the Pro∣mises of Acceptation annexed. 3. There is then no cause, why those who are under a Call to Repentance, should question whether there be forgiveness in God or no. This concerns my second Proposition. Come, saith the Lord, unto the souls of men; leave your sinful wayes, turn unto me, humble your selves with broken and contrite hearts: Alas,
say poor convinced sinners, we are poor, dark and ignorant creatures; or we are old in sin, or great sinners, or back∣sliders, or have fallen often into the same sins; can we expect there should be forgiveness for us? Why you are under Gods Invitation to Repentance; and to disbelieve forgiveness, is to call the Truth, Holiness and Faithfulness of God into question. If you will not believe forgiveness, pretend what you please, it is in truth because you hate Repentance. You do but deceive your souls when you pretend you come not up to Repentance, because you cannot believe forgiveness. For in the very Insti∣tution of this duty God engageth all his Properties to make it good that he hath pardon and mercy for sinners. 4. Much less cause is there to doubt of forgiveness, where sincere Repentance is in any measure wrought. No soul comes to Repentance but upon Gods call. God calls none but whom he hath mercy for upon their coming. And as for those who sin against the Holy Ghost, as they shut themselves out from forgiveness, so they are not called to Repentance. 5. God expresly declares in the Scripture, that the forgive∣ness that is with him, is the foundation of his prescribing re∣pentance unto man. One instance may suffice, Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way ( a perverse wicked one; ) and the man of iniquity his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy, and to our God, for  he will multiply to pardon. You see to whom he speaks; to men perversely wicked, and such as make a trade of sinning. What doth he call them unto? plainly to Repentance, to the duty we have insisted on. But what is the ground of such an invitation, unto such profligate sinners? Why, the abundant forgiveness and pardon that is with him, super-abound∣ing unto what the worst of them can stand in need of: as Rom. 5. 20. And this is another way whereby God hath revealed that there is forgiveness with him: and an infallible bottom for saith to build upon in its approaches unto God it is. Nor can the certainty of this Evidence be called into question, but on such grounds as are derogatory to the Glory and Honour of God. And this connexion of Repentance and forgiveness is that prin∣ciple
from whence God convinces a stubborn unbelieving people, that all his wayes and dealings with sinners are just and equal, Ezek. 18. 25. And should there be any failure in it they could not be so. Every soul then that is under a call to Repentance, whether out of his natural condition, or from any back-sliding into folly after Conversion, hath a sufficient foun∣dation to rest on, as to the pardon he enquires after. God is ready to deal with him on terms of mercy; if out of love to sin, or the power of unbelief, he refuse to close with him on these terms, his condemnation is just. And it will be well that this consideration be well imprinted on the minds of men. I say notwithstanding the general presumptions that men seem to have of this matter; yet these principles of it ought to be in∣culcated. For, Confirma∣tion of the Truth of Forgive∣ness neces∣sary.1. Such is the Atheism that lyes lurking in the hearts of men by nature, that notwithstanding their pretences, and professi∣ons, we have need to be pressing upon them Evidences of the very Being and Essential Properties of God. In so doing we have the assistance of inbred notions in their own minds. which they cannot eject, to help carry on the work. How much more is this necessary in reference unto the free Acts of the Will of God, which are to be known only by meer Revelation. Our Word had need be line upon line: And yet when we have done, have cause enough to cry out, as was said, Lord who hath believed our report, and to whom hath this arm of the Lord been revealed? 2. What was spoken before of the obstacles that lye in the way hindring souls from a saving reception of this Truth, ought to be remembred. Those who have no experience of them between God and their souls, seem to be igno∣rant of the true nature of Conscience, Law, Gospel, Grace, Sin and Forgiveness. 3. Many who are come to a saving perswasion of it, yet having not received it upon clear and unquestionable grounds, and so not knowing how to resolve their faith of it into its proper principles, are not able to answer the Objections that lye against it in their own Consciences, and so do miserably fluctuate
about it all their dayes. These had need to have these prin∣ciples inculcated on them. Were they pondred aright, some might have cause to say with the Samaritans, who first gave credit to the report of the woman, John 4. They had but a report before, but now they find all things to be according unto it, yea to exceed it. A little experience of a mans own unbelief, with the Observation that may easily be made of the uncertain progresses and fluctuations of the spirits of others, will be a sufficient conviction of the necessity of the work we are engaged in. But it will yet be said, that it is needless to multiply Argu∣ments and Evidences in this case. The Truth insisted on being granted as one of the fundamental principles of Religion. As it is not then by any called in question, so it doth not appear that so much time and pains is needful for the confirmation of it. For what is granted and plain, needs little confirmation. But several things may be returned in Answer hereunto: all which may at once be here pleaded for the multiplication of our Argu∣ments in this matter. Necessity of pro∣ducing Arguments to prove forgiveness.That it is generally granted by all, is no Argument that it is ef∣fectually believed by many. Sundry things are taken for granted in point of opinion, that are not so believed as to be improved in practice. We have in part shewed before, and shall after∣wards undeniably evince, that there are very few that believe this Truth, with that faith that will interest them in it, and give them the benefit of it. And what will it avail any of us, that there is forgiveness of sin with God, if our own sins be not forgiven? no more than that such or such a King is rich, whilst we are poor and starving. My aim is not to prove it as an opinion, or a meer speculative Truth; but so to evidence it in the principles of its Being and Revelation; as that it may be believed, whereon all our blessedness depends. 2. It needs never the less confirmation because it is a plain funda∣mental Truth; but rather the more; and that because both of the Worth and Weight of it. This is a faithful saying, saith the Apostle, worthy of all acceptation, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. So say I of this, which for the substance
of it, is the same with that. It is worthy of all acceptation, namely that there is forgiveness with God. And therefore ought it to be fully confirmed. Especially whilst we make use of no other demonstrations of it, but those only which God hath furnished us withal to that purpose; and this he would not have done, but that he knew them needful for us. And for the plainness of this Truth, it is well if it be so unto us. This I know, nothing but the Spirit of God can make it so. Men may please themselves and others sometimes with curious no∣tions, and make them seem to be things of great search and attainment, which when they are well examined, it may be they are not true, or if they are, are yet of a very little consequence or importance. It is these fundamental Truths that have the mysteries of the Wisdom and Grace of God in wrapped in them; which who so can unfold aright, will shew himself a workman that needs not be ashamed. These still waters are deep; and the farther we dive into them, the greater discovery shall we make of their depths. And many other Sacred Truths there are, whose mention is common, but whose depths are little searched, and whose efficacy is little known. 3. We multiply these Evidences, because they are multitudes that are concerned in them. All that do believe, and all that do not believe are so. Those that do believe, that they may be established; and those that do not believe, that they may be en∣couraged so to do. Among both these sorts some evidences may be more profitable and useful, one to one, some to another. It may be amongst all, all will be gathered up, that no fragments be lost. They are all (I hope) instruments provided by the Holy Ghost for this end; and by this Ordinance do we endea∣vour to put them into his hand, to be made effectual as he will. One may reach one soul, another another, according to his pleasure. One may be of use to establishment, another to consolation, a third of encouragement, according as the ne∣cessities of poor souls do require. However God who hath provided them, knows them all to be needful. 4. They are so also upon the account of the various condi∣tions wherein the Spirits of Believers themselves may be. One may give help to the same soul at one season, another at ano∣ther;
one may secure the soul against a temptation, another stir it up to Thankfulness and Obedience. These things have I spoken, that you may not think we dwell too long on this consideration. And I pray God that your Consolation and Establishment may abound in the reading of these Meditations, as I hope they have not been altogether without their fruit in their preparation. Further Evidences of Forgiveness with God. Testimonies that God was well pleased with some that were sinners. The Patience of God towards the world; an evidence of For∣giveness. Experience of the Saints of God to the same purpose. Some sin∣ners actu∣ally pardo∣ned and accepted with God.IV. Let us then in the fourth place, as a fourth Evidence of this truth, consider those, both under the Old Testament and the New, concerning whom we have the greatest Assurance that God was well pleased with them, and that they are now in the enjoyment of him. And this Argument unto this purpose the Apostle insists upon, and presseth from sundry instances, Heb. 11. How many doth he there reckon up who of old obtained a good report, and this Testimony, that they pleased God: ver. 2. 5. All these inherited the Promises through believing; that is, obtained the forgiveness of sin. For whereas by nature they were children of wrath, and under the Curse as well as others, obtaining an infallible interest in the favour of God, and this Testimony, that they pleased him, it could no otherwise be. For without this, on a just account, every one of them would have continued in the state wherein Adam was, when he heard the voyce of God and was afraid. Wherefore it being evident that some persons in all Generations, have enjoyed the friendship, love and favour of God in this world, and at their departure out of it have entred into Glory; it makes it evident that there is forgiveness of sin with him, without which these things could not be. Let us, after the example of the Apostle, mention some parti∣cular instances in this matter. Look unto Abraham. He was the friend of God, and walked with God; God made a solemn Covenant with him, and takes it for his memorial throughout
all generations, that he is the God of Abraham. And he is doubtless now at rest with God. Our Saviour calls the place or condition whereinto blessed souls are gathered, Abrahams Bosom; He is at rest with whom others are at rest. The condition was the same with Isaac and Jacob. They also are Heaven, being alive unto, and with God. Our Savi∣our proves it from the tenour of the Covenant, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. God is not the God of the dead but of the living, Matth. 22. 32. They are yet alive, alive unto God, and with him, by vertue of the Cove∣nant; or after their death, God would not be said, to be their God. This is the force of our Saviours Argument in that place; that after their death, God was still their God. Then death had not reached their whole persons. They were still alive with God in Heaven; and their bodies by vertue of the same Covenant, were to be recovered out of the dust. The same is the state with David. He was a man after Gods own heart, that did all his Will, and fulfilled all his pleasure. And although he dyed and his body saw corruption, yet he is not lost, he is with God in Heaven. Hence he ended his dayes trium∣phantly in a full apprehension of Eternal Rest, beyond what could in this world be attained, and that by vertue of the Co∣venant. For these are the last words of David, Although my house be not so with God, yet he hath made with me an Everlasting Co∣venant, ascertaining unto him sure and eternal mercies, 2 Sam. 23. 5 Peter also is in Heaven. Christ prayed for him that his faith should not fail; and in his death he glorified God, John 21. 19. So is Paul. He also is in Heaven; he knew that when he wis dissolved he should be with Christ. Here then we are encompas∣sed about with a cloud of witnesses. For, 1. It is most certain, that they were all sinners; They were all so by nature; for therein there is no difference between any of the Children of men. And personally they were sinners al∣so. They confessed so of themselves, and some of the sins of all of them stand upon record. Yea some of them were great sinners, or guilty of great and signal miscarriages. Some be∣fore their Conversion, as Abraham who was an Idolater,
Josh. 24. 2, 3. and Paul who was a Persecutor and a Blasphemer. Some after their Conversion. Some in sins of the flesh against their Obedience, as David; and some in sins of Profession against saith, as Peter. Nothing then is more evident, than that no one of them came to rest with God but by forgiveness. Had they never been guilty of any one sin, but only what is left upon Record concerning them in Holy Writ, yet they could be saved no other way. For he that transgresseth the Law in any one point is guilty of the breach of the whole, James 2. 10. What shall we now say? Do we think that God hath for∣giveness only for this or that individual person? No man que∣stions but that all these were pardoned. Was it by vertue of any especial personal priviledge that was peculiar unto them? Whence should any such priviledge arise, seeing by nature they were no better than others, nor would have been so personally, had not they been delivered from sin, and prepared for Obe∣dience by Grace, Mercy and Pardon? Wherefore they all ob∣tained forgiveness by vertue of the Covenant from the forgiveness which is with God. And this is equally ready for others, who come to God the same way that they did; that is, by faith and Repentance. 2. Many of those concerning whom we have the Assurance mentioned, were not only sinners, but great sinners, as was said, which must be also insisted on, to obviate another objection. For some may say, that although they were sinners, yet they were not such sinners as we are. And although they obtained forgiveness, yet this is no Argument that we shall do so also, who are guilty of other sins than they were, and those attended with other Aggravations than theirs were. To which I say, that I delight not in aggra∣vating, no nor yet in Repeating the sins and faults of the Saints of God of old. Not only the Grace of God, but the sins of men have by some been turned into lasciviousness; or been made a cloak for their lusts. But yet for the ends and purposes for which they are recorded by the Holy Ghost, we may make mention of them. That they may warn us of our duty, that we take heed lest we also fall, that they may yield us a relief under our surprizals, are they written. So then where
the mention of them tends to the advancement of Soveraign Grace and Mercy, which is the case in hand, we may insist on them. I think then that without mention of particulars, I may safely say, that there is no sin, no degree of sin, no aggravating circumstance of sin, no kind of continuance in sin, (the one only sin except∣ed) but that there are those in Heaven who have been guilty of them. It may be yet, some will say that they have considered the sins and falls of Lot, David, Peter, Paul, and the Thief himself on the Cross, and yet they find not their own condition Exemplified, so as to conclude, that they shall have the same success with them. A. 1. I am not shewing that this or that man shall be pardon∣ed, but only demonstrating that there is forgiveness with God, and that for all sorts of sins and sinners which these Instances do assuredly confirm. And moreover they manifest, that if other men are not pardoned; it is meerly because they make not that Application for forgiveness which they did. 2. Yet by the way to take off this Objection also, consider what the Apostle says in particular concerning the several sorts of sinners that obtained mercy, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the King∣dom of God; and such were some of you. But you are washed, but you are sanctified, but you are justified. Hell can scarce in no more words yield us a sadder Catalogue. Yet some of all these sorts were justified and pardoned. 3. Suppose this Enumeration of sins doth not reach the con∣dition of the soul, because of some especial Aggravation of its sin, not expressed. Let such a one add that of our Saviours, Matth. 12. 31. I say unto you, all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. They are not, they shall not be all actually remitted, and par∣doned unto all men; but they are all pardonable, unto those that seek to obtain pardon for them according unto the Gospel. There is with God forgiveness for them all. Now certainly there is no sin, but only that excepted, but it comes within the compass of all manner of sins and blasphemy, and so consequently some that have been guilty of it are now in Heaven.
We take it for a good token and evidence of a vertuous healing water, when without fraud or pretence, we see the crutches of cured Criples, and impotent persons hung about it, as a memo∣rial of its efficacy. And it is a great demonstration of the skill and ability of a Physitian, when many come to a sick person and tell him, that we had the same distemper with you, it had the same symptoms, the same effects, and by his skill and care we are cured: Oh saith the sick man bring him unto me, I will venture my life in his hand. Now all the Saints of Heaven stand about a sin sick soul; for in this matter we are compassed with a cloud of witnesses, Heb. 12. 1. And what do they bear witness unto? What say they unto a poor guilty sinner? As thou art, so were we; so guilty, so perplexed, so obnoxious to wrath, so fearing destruction from God. And what way did you steer, what course did you take to obtain the blessed condition wherein now you are? Say they, We went all to God through Christ for forgiveness, and found plenty of Grace, Mercy and Pardon in him for us all. The rich man in the Parable thought it would be a great means of conversion, if one should rise from the dead and preach. But here we see that all the Saints departed, and now in glo∣ry do jointly preach this fundamental Truth, that there is for∣giveness with God. Poor souls are apt to think that all those whom they read or hear of to be gone to Heaven, went thither because they were so good and so holy. It is true many of them were eminently and exemplarily so in their generations. All of them were so according to their degrees and measures: for without holiness no man can see God. And it is our duty to labour to be like unto them in Holiness, if ever we intend to be so in Happiness and Glory. But yet not one of them, not any one that is now in Heaven, Jesus Christ alone excepted, did ever come thither any other way but by forgiveness of sin; and that will also bring us thi∣ther, though we come short of many of them in Holiness and Grace. And this Evidence of forgiveness I the rather urge, because I find the Apostle Paul doing of it eminently in his own person, 1 Tim. 1. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. I thank Christ Jesus our Lord who hath enabled me, for that he counted me faithful, putting me
into the Ministry; who was before a Blasphemer and a Persecutor and injurious. But I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in un∣belief. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief. Howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might shw forth all long-suffering for a pattern to them that should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting. A great sinner saith he, the chiefest of sinners I was, which he manifests by some notable instances of his sin. I was saith he a blasphemer, the highest sin against God; a Persecutor, the highest sin against the Saints; Injurious, the highest wickednes, towards man∣kind. But saith he, I obtained mercy, I am pardoned, and that with a blessed effect. First, That he should after all this be so accounted faithful as to be put into the Ministry. And then that the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ in him and towards him was exceeding abundant. And what was the Reason, what was the cause, that he was thus dealt withal? Why it was that he might be a pattern, an Evidence, an Argument, that there was Grace, Mercy, Forgiveness to be had for all sorts of sinners that would believe to life Everlasting. To conclude then this Evidence. Every one who is now in Heaven hath his pardon sealed in the blood of Christ. All these pardons are as it were hanged up in the Gospel; they are all enrolled in the Promises thereof, for the encouragement of them that stand in need of forgiveness to come and sue out theirs also. Fear not then the Guilt of sin, but the Love of it, and the power of it. If we love and like sin better than forgive∣ness, we shall assuredly go without it. If we had but ra∣ther be pardoned in Gods way, than perish, our condition is secure. Patience of God to∣wards the World, an evidence of forgive∣ness.V. The same is evident from the Patience of God towards the world, and the end of it. For the clearing hereof we may observe. 1. That upon the first entrance of sin and breach of that Co∣venant which God had made with mankind in Adam, he might immediately have executed the Threatned Curse, and have brought eternal death upon them that sinned. Justice
required that it should be so, and there was nothing in the whole creation to interpose so much as for a reprieve or a re∣spite of vengeance. And had God then sent sinning man with the Apostate Angels that induced him into sin, immediately into eternal destruction, he would have been glorified in his Righteousness and Severity, by and among the Angels that sin∣ned not; or he could have created a new race of innocent crea∣tures to have worshipped him and glorified him for his Righte∣ous Judgement; even as all the Elect at the last day, shall do for the destruction of ungodly men. 2. God hath not taken this course. He hath continued the race of mankind for a long season on the earth; he hath watch∣ed over them with his Providence, and exercised exceeding Patience, forbearance and longsuffering towards them. This the Apostle Paul at large discourseth on, Acts 14. 15, 16, 17. Chap. 17. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. as also Rom. 2. 4. And it is open and manifest in their event. The whole world is every day filled with tokens of the power and patience of God. Every Nation, every City, every Family is filled with them. 3. That there is a common Abuse of this patience of God visible in the world in all Generations. So it was of old; God saw it to be so, and complained of it, Gen. 6. 5, 6. All the evil, sin, wickedness, that hath been in the world, which no heart can conceive, no tongue can express, hath been all an abuse of this patience of God. This with the most is the con∣sequent of Gods patience and forbearance. Men count it a sea∣son to fulfill all the abominations that their evil hearts can suggest unto them, or Satan draw them into a combination with himself in. This the state of things in the world proclaims, and every ones experience confirms. 4. Let us therefore consider what is the true and proper end of this patience of God towards the world, enduring it in sin and wickedness, for so long a season, and suffering one Gene∣ration to be multiplyed after another. Shall we think that God hath no other design, in all this Patience towards mankind in all Generations, but meerly to suffer them all and every one without Exception, to sin against him, dishonour him, pro∣voke
him, that so he may at length everlastingly destroy them all? It is confessed that this is the Consequent, the event of it with the most, through their perverse wickedness, with their love of sin and pleasure. But is this the design of God? his only design? hath he no other purpose but meerly to forbear them a while in their folly, and then to avenge himself upon them? Is this his intendment not only towards those who are obstinate in their Darkness, Ignorance and Rebellion against him, whose damnation is just and sleepeth not; but also to∣wards those whom he stirs up by his Grace to seek after a Remedy and Deliverance from the state of sin and death? God forbid; yea, such an apprehension would be contrary to all those notions of the infinite Wisdom and Goodness of God which are ingrafted upon our hearts by nature, and which all his works manifest and declare. Whatever therefore it be, this cannot be the design of God, in his patience towards the world. It cannot be, but that he must long since have cut off the whole race of mankind, if he had no other thoughts and purposes to∣wards them. 5. If this Patience of God hath any other Intention towards any, any other effect upon some, upon any, that is to be reckoned the principal End of it, and for the sake whereof it is evidently extended unto some others consiquentially unto all. For those concerning whom God hath an especial design in his patience, be∣ing to be brought forth in the world after the ordinary way of mankind, and that in all Ages during the continuance of the world from the beginning unto the end thereof, the patience which is extended unto them must also of necessity reach unto all, in that variety wherein God is pleased to exercise it. The whole world therefore is continued under the patience of God, and the fruits of it, for the sake of some that are in it. 6. Let us therefore see what is the End of this Patience, and what it teacheth us. Now it can have no end possible but only that before rejected, unless there be forgiveness of sins with God. Unless God be ready and willing to forgive the sins of them that come to him according unto his appointment, his patience is meerly subservient unto a design of wrath, anger, severity and a Resolution to destroy. Now this is an abomination once
to suppose, and would reflect unspeakable dishonour upon the Holy God. Let a Man but deal thus, and it is a token of as evil an habit of mind, and perverse, as any can befall him. Let him bear with these that are in his power in their faults, for no other end, or with no other design, but that he may take advan∣tage to bring a greater punishment and revenge upon them, and what more vile affection, what more wretched corruption of heart and mind, can he manifest? and shall we think that this is the whole design of the Patience of God? God forbid. It may be objected that this Argument is not cogent, because of the instance that lyes against it in Gods dealing with the An∣gels, that sinned. It is evident that they fell into their trans∣gression and Apostacy, before mankind did so: For they lead and seduced our first Parents into sin. And yet God bears with them and exerciseth patience towards them to this very day, and will do so unto the consummation of all things, when they shall be cast into the fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And yet it is granted, that there is no forgiveness in God for them; so that it doth not necessarily follow, that there is so for man, because of his patience towards them. I answer, That this must be more fully spoken unto when we come to remove that great Objection against this whole Truth which was mentioned before, taken from Gods dealing with the sinning Angels, whom he spared not; at present two or three Observations will remove it out of our way. For, 1. That the case is not the same with the sinning Angels, and the race of mankind in all Generations. There are no other Angels in this condition, but only those individuals who first sinned in their own persons. They are not in the Providence and Patience of God, multiplyed and encreased in ensuing times and seasons; but they continue the same individual persons who first sinned and no more. So that immediate execution of the whole punishment due unto their sin, would not have pre∣vented any encrease of them. But now with man it is other∣wise. For God continues his patience towards them to the pro∣duction of millions of other persons who were not actually in the first sin. Had not God so continued his forbearance, their
Being and consequently their sin and misery had been pre∣vented; so that the case is not the same with sinning Angels and Men. 2. Indeed God exerciseth no patience toward the Angels that sinned; and that because he had no forgiveness for them. So Peter tells us; 2 Epistle 2. 6. God spared not the Angels that sinned but cast them down into Hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness. Immediately upon their sin they were cast out of the presence of God whose vision and enjoyment they were made for, and which they received some experience of. And they were cast into Hell, as the place of their ordinary retention, and of their present anguish under the sense of Gods curse and dis∣pleasure. And although they may some of them be permitted to compass the earth, and to walk to and fro therein to serve the ends of Gods holy wise Providence, and so to be out of their prison; yet they are still in their chains: for they were delive∣red unto chains of darkness to be kept unto the last Judgement. And in these things they lye actually under the execution of the curse of God: So that there is indeed no patience exercised towards them. If a notorious Malefactor, or Murtherer be committed unto a Dungeon, and kept bound with Iron chains to prevent his escape, untill the appointed day of his solemn Judgement and Execution, without the least intention to spare him; None will say, there is patience exercised towards him; Things being disposed only so, as that his punishment may be secure and severe. And such is the case, such is the condition of the Angels that sinned, who are not therefore to be esteem∣ed objects of Gods patience. 3. The reason why the full and final punishment of these An∣gels is reserved and respited unto the appointed season, is not for their own sakes, their good, benefit, or advantage at all; but meerly that the end of Gods patience towards mankind might be accomplished. When this is once brought about, they shall not be spared a day, an hour, a moment. So that Gods dispensation towards them, is nothing but a meer withholding the infliction of the utmost of their punishment, until he hath accomplished the blessed ends of his patience towards mankind. But you will say (Secondly) Is it not said, that God willing
to shew his wrath, and to make his power known, endures with much long-suffering, the Vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, Rom. 9. 22. So that it seems that the End of Gods endurance and longsuffering, to some at least, is only their fitting unto de∣struction. Answ. 1. It is one thing to endure with much long suffering, another thing to exercise and declare patience. The former only intimates Gods withholding for a season of that destruction which he might justly inflict, which we speak not of; the other denotes an acting in a way of Goodness and kindness for some especial end. 2. The next Verse declares the great end of Gods patience, and answers this Objection. That he might make known the riches of his glory in the vessels of mercy which he had prepared for glory, ver. 23. This is the great End of Gods patience, which whilst he is in the pursuit of towards the Vessels of mercy; he en∣dureth others with much long-suffering, and forbearance. This then is fully evident, that there could be no sufficient Reason assigned of the patience of God towards sinners, but that there is forgiveness prepared for them that come to him by Christ. And this the Scripture clearly testifies unto, 2 Pet. 3. 9. The Question is, what is the reason why God forbears the Execution of his Judgement upon wicked and ungodly men. Some would have it, that God is slack; that is regardless of the sins of men; and takes no notice of them. No, saith the Apostle, God hath another design in his patience, and long-suffering; what is this? It is to manifest, that he is not willing we should perish. That is it which we have proved. For our freedom from destruction is by Repentance, which necessarily infers the forgiveness of Sin. So Paul tells us, that in the Gospel is declared what is the End of Gods patience and forbearance; it is saith he, the remission of sins, Rom. 3. 25. Let us therefore also mind this Evidence in the Application of our selves to God for pardon. It is certain that God might have taken us from the womb, and have cast us into utter dark∣ness. And in the course of our lives we have been guilty of such provocations, as God might justly have taken the Advan∣tage
of, to glorifie his Justice and Severity in our ruine. But yet we have lived thus long in the patience and forbearance of God. And to what end hat he thus spared us, and let pass those Advantages for our destruction, that we have put into his hand? Is it not that he might by his patience, give us leave and space to get an interest in that forgiveness which he thus testi∣fies to be in himself? Let us then be encouraged by it, to use it unto the end and purpose for which it is exercised towards us. You that are yet in doubt of your condition, consider that the patience of God was extended unto you this day, this very day, that you might use it for the obtaining of the remission of your sins. Lose not this day, not one day more, as you love your souls. For wosul will be their condition, who shall perish for despising or abusing of the patience of God. Experience of the Saints give∣ing Testi∣mony to Forgive∣ness.VI. The faith and experience of the Saints in this world, give in testimony unto this truth; and we know that their Record in this matter is true. Let us then ask of them what they be∣lieve, what they have found, what they have Experience of, as to the forgiveness of sin. This God himself directs and leads us unto, by appealing unto our own experience, whence he shews us that we may take relief and supportment in our distresses, Isa. 40. 28. Hast thou not heard; hast not thou known? Hast not thou thy self, who now cryest out that thou art lost and undone, because God hath forsaken thee, sound and known by experience the contrary from his former dealings with thee? And if our own Experiences may confirm us against the work∣ings of our unbelief, so may those of others also. And this is that which Eliphas directs Job unto, Chap. 6. 1. Call now if there be any that will answer thee, and to which of the Saints wilt thou look. It is not a supplication to them for help, that is intended, but an enquiry after the Experience in the case in hand, wherein he wrongfully thought they could not justifie Job.  to which of the Saints, on the right hand or left, wilt thou have regard in this matter? Some would foolishly hence seek to confirm the Invocation of the Saints departed; when indeed if they were intended, it is rather forbidden and discountenanced
than directed unto. But the  here, are the  Psal. 16. 2. The Saints that are in the Earth whose experiences Job is directed to enquire into and after. David makes it a great encouragement unto waiting upon God, as a God hearing prayers, that others had done so and found success, Psal. 34. 6. This poor man cryed unto the Lord, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of his troubles. If he did so, and had that blessed Issue, why should not we do so also? The experiences of one, are often proposed for the confirmation and establishment of others: so the same David, Come saith he, and hear all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he hath done for my soul. He contents not himself to mind them of the Word, Promises, and Providence of God, which he doth most fre∣quently; but he will give them the encouragement and sup∣portment also of his own Experience. So Paul tells us, that he was comforted of God in all his tribulation, that he might be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith he himself was comforted of God, 2 Cor. 1. 4. That is, that he might be able to communicate unto them his own experience of Gods dealing with him, and the satisfaction and Assurance that he found therein. So also he proposeth the example of Gods dealing with him in the pardon of his sins, as a great motive unto others to believe, 1 Tim. 1. 13, 14, 15, 16. And this mutual communication of satisfying experiences in the things of God, or of our spiritual sense and evidence of the Power, Efficacy and Reality of Gospel Truths, being rightly managed, is of singular use to all sorts of Believers. So the same Great Apostle acquaints us in his own Example, Rom. 1. 11, 12. I long to see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual gift, to the end you may be established; that is, that I may be comforted to∣gether with you by the mutual faith both of you and me: He longed not only to be instructing of them in the pursuit of the work of the Ministry committed unto him, but to confer also with them about their mutual faith, and what Experiences of the peace of God in Believing, they had attained. We have in our case called in the Testimony of the Saints in Heaven, with whom these on earth do make up one fami∣ly, even that one family in Heaven and Earth which is called after
the name of the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Eph. 3. 14, 15. And they all agree in their Testimonie, as becomes the Family and Children of God. But these below, we may deal personal∣ly with; whereas we gather the Witness of the other, only from what is left upon record concerning them. And for the clearing of this Evidence, sundry things are to be observed, As, The Evi∣dence that is in Spiri∣tual Expe∣rience.1. Men living under the profession of Religion, and not experi∣encing the power, vertue, and efficacy of it in their hearts are, what∣ever they profess, very near to Atheism, or at least exposed to great temptations thereunto. If they profess they know God, but in works deny him, they are abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate, Tit. 1. 16. Let such men lay aside Tradition and Custome, let them give up themselves to a free and a rational consideration of things, and they will quickly find that all their profession is but a miserable self-deceiving; and that indeed they believe not one word of the Religion which they profess. For of what their Religion affirms to be in themselves, they find not any thing true or real. And what Reason have they then to believe that the things which it speaks of that are without them, are one jot better? If they have no Experience of what it affirms to be within them, what confidence can they have of the Reality of what it reveals to be without them? John tells us, that he who saith he loves God whom he hath not seen, and doth not love his Brother whom he hath seen, is a lyar. Men who do not things of an equal con∣cernment unto them wherein they may be tryed, are not to be believed in what they profess about greater things whereof no tryal can be had. So he that believes not, who experienceth not the power of that which the Religion he professeth affirms to be in him, if he sayes that he doth believe other things which he can have no Experience of, he is a lyar. For instance, he that professeth the Gospel, avows that the death of Christ doth crucifie sin, that faith purifieth the heart, that the Holy Ghost quickens and enables the soul unto duty; that God is good and gracious unto all that come unto him; that there is precious Communion to be obtained with him by Christ;
that there is great Joy in believing. These things are plainly, openly, frequently insisted on in the Gospel? Hence the Apostle presseth men unto Obedience on the account of them; and as it were leaves them at liberty from it, if they were not so, Phil. 2. 11. Now if men have lived long in the profession of these things, saying that they are so, but indeed find nothing of Truth, Reality, or Power in them, have no experience of the effects of them, in their own hearts or souls, what stable ground have they of believing any thing else in the Gospel whereof they cannot have experience? A man professeth that the death of Christ will mortifie sin, and subdue corruption; Why doth he believe it? because it is so affirmed in the Gospel: How then, doth he find it to be so? Hath it this effect upon his soul, in his own heart? not at all; he finds no such thing in him. How then can this man believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, because it is affirmed in the Gospel; seeing that he finds no real truth of that which it affirms to be in him∣self? So our Saviour argues, John 3. 12. If I have told you earthly things and ye believe not; how will you believe, if I tell you heavenly things? If you believe not the doctrine of Regenerati∣on, which you ought to have experience of, as a thing that is wrought in the hearts of men on the earth; how can you assent unto those heavenly mysteries of the Gospel, which at first are to be received by a pure Act of faith, without any pre∣sent sense or experience. Of all dangers therefore in profession, let professors take heed of this; namely, of a customary, traditional, or doctrinal owning such truths, as ought to have their effects and accom∣plishment in themselves, whilst they have no experience of the reality and efficacy of them. This is plainly to have a form of godliness, and to deny the power thereof. And of this sort of men do we see many turning Atheists, Scoffers, and open Apo∣states; they find in themselves that their profession was a lye; and that in truth they had none of those things which they talked of; And to what end should they continue longer in the avowing of that which is not? Besides finding these things which they have professed to be in them, not to be so; they think that what they have believed of the
things that are without them, are of no other nature, and so re∣ject them alltogether. You will say then, What shall a man do who cannot find or obtain an experience in himself of what is affirmed in the Word? he cannot find the death of Christ crucifying sin in him, and he cannot find the Holy Ghost sanctifying his nature, or ob∣tain Joy in believing. What shall he then do? Shall he not believe, or profess those things to be so, because he cannot obtaine a blessed Experience of them? I answer, Our Saviour hath perfectly given direction in this case, John 7. 17. If any man will do his will he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self. Continue in following after the things revealed in the Doctrine of the Gospel, and you shall have a satisfactory experience that they are true, and that they are of God; cease not to act faith on them and you shall find their effects; for then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord, Hoseah 6. 3. Experience will ensue upon per∣manency in faith and obedience. Yea, the first Act of sincere be∣lieving, will be accompanied with such a taste, will give the soul so much experience as to produce a firm adherence unto the things believed. And this is the way to prove, what is that good and acceptable and perfect Will of God, which is re∣vealed unto us, Rom. 12. 2. 2. Where there is an inward spiritual Experience of the power, reality and efficacy of any supernatural truth; It gives great sa∣tisfaction, stability and Assurance unto the soul. It puts the soul out of danger, or suspicion of being deceived; and gives it to have the Testimony of God in it self. So the Apostle tells us, He that believeth on the Son of God hath the witness in him∣self, 1 John 5. 9. He had discoursed of the manifold testimony that is given in Heaven by all the holy Persons of the Trinity, and on earth by Grace and Ordinances, unto the forgiveness of sin, and eternal life to be obtained by Jesus Christ. And this Record is true, firm, and stable, an abiding foundation for souls to rest upon, that will never deceive them. But yet all this while it is without us; It is that which we have no Experience of in our selves: Only we rest upon it, because of the Autho∣rity and faithfulness of them that give it. But now he that
actually believeth, he hath the Testimony in himself; he hath by experience a real evidence and assurance of the things testified unto, namely that God hath given us eternal life. And that this life is in the Son, v. 12. Let us then a little consider, wherein this evidence consisteth, and from whence this Assurance ariseth. To this end some few things must be considered: As, 1. That there is a great Answerableness, and Correspondency between the heart of a Believer, and the truth that he doth believe. As the Word is in the Gospel, so is Grace in the heart; yea, they are the same thing variously expressed, Rom. 6. 17. You have obeyed from the heart, , the form of Doctrine delivered unto you. As our Translation doth not, so I know not how in so few words to express that which is emphatically here insinuated by the Holy Ghost. The meaning is, that the Doctrine of the Gospel begets the form, figure, image, or likeness of it self in the hearts of them that believe: So they are cast into the mould of it. As is the one, so is the other. The principle of Grace in the heart, and that in the Word, are as children of the same Parent, compleatly resembling and representing one another. Grace is a living Word, and the Word is figured, limned Grace: As is Regene∣ration, so is a Regenerate heart: As is the Doctrine of faith, so is a Believer. And this gives great Evidence unto, and Assu∣rance of the things that are believed. As we have heard, so we have seen and found it; such a soul can produce the du∣plicate of the Word, and so adjust all things thereby. 2. That the first Original Expression of Divine Truth is not in the Word, no not as given out from the infinite Abysse of Divine Wis∣dom and Veracity, but it is first hid, laid up, and expressed in the Person of Christ. He is the , the first pattern of truth which from him is expressed in the Word, and from, and by the Word, impressed on the hearts of Believers; so that as it hath pleased God that all the treasures of Wisdom and Know∣ledge should be in him, dwell in him, have their principal re∣sidence in him, Col. 2. 3. So the whole Word is but a Reve∣lation of the Truth in Christ, or an expression of his Image and likeness to the Sons of men. Thus we are said to learn the Truth as it is in Jesus, Eph. 4. 21. It is in Jesus originally, and from
really, and from him it is communicated unto us by the Word. We are thereby taught, and do learn it; for there∣by as the Apostle proceeds, we are renued in the Spirit of our mind, and do put on the new man which after God is created in Righteousness, and true Holiness, ver. 23, 24. First, the Truth is in Jesus; then it is expressed in the Word; this Word learned, and believed, becomes Grace in the heart, every way answe∣ring unto the Lord Christ his Image from whom this trans∣forming Truth did thus proceed. Nay, this is carried by the Apostle yet higher, namely unto God the Father himself whose Image Christ is, and Believers his, through the Word, 2 Cor. 3. 18. We all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory by the Spirit of the Lord, whereunto add, Chap. 4. 6. God who com∣manded light to shine out of darkness, hath shined into our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of God in the face of Jesus Christ. The first pattern or example of all Truth and Holiness is God himself: hereof Christ is the Image. ver. 4. Christ is the Image of God, The brightness of his glory, and the express Image of his person, Heb. 1. 3. The Image of the invisible God, Col. 1. 15. Hence we are said to see the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ; because he being his Image, the Love, Grace, and Truth of the Father are represented and made conspicuous in him. For we are said to behold it in his face, because of the open and illustrious manifestation of the glory of God in him. And how do we behold this glory? in a Glass (as in a glass) that is, in the Gospel, which hath the Image and likeness of Christ, who is the Image of God reflected upon it, and communicated unto it. So have we traced Truth, and Grace, from the Per∣son of the Father, unto the Son as Mediator, and thence trans∣fused into the Word. In the Father it is Essentially; in Jesus Christ originally and exemplarily; and in the Word as in a trans∣cript or Copy. But doth it abide there? No, God by the Word of the Gospel shines into our hearts, Chap. 4 6. He irradiates our minds with a saving light into it, and apprehension of it. And what thence ensues? the soul of a believer is changed into the same Image by the effectual working of the Holy Ghost, Chap. 3. 18. that is, the likeness of Christ implanted on the Word, is
impressed on the soul it self, whereby it is renewed into the Image of God, whereunto it was at first created. This brings all into a perfect Harmony. There is not where Gospel Truth is effectually received, and experienced in the soul, only a conso∣nancy meerly between the soul and the Word, but between the soul and Christ by the Word, and the soul and God by Christ. And this gives assured establishment unto the soul in the things that it doth believe. Divine Truth so conveyed unto us, is firm, stable, and immoveable. And we can say of it in a spiritual sense, that which we have heard, that which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of life, we know to be true. Yea, a Believer is a Testimony to the certainty of truth in what he is, much beyond what he is in all that he saith. Words may be pretended; Real effects have their Testimony inseparably annexed unto them. 3. Hence it appears that there must needs be great Assurance of those Truths which are thus received, and believed. For here∣by are the senses exercised to discern good and evil. Heb. 15. 14. Where there is a spiritual sense of Truth, of the Good and Evil that is in Doctrines, from an inward experience of what is so good, and from thence an Aversation unto the contrary; and this obtained , by reason of an habit, or an habitual frame of heart, there is strength, there is stedfasiness, and Assurance. This is the teaching of the Unction, which will not, which cannot deceive. Hence many of old and of late, that could not dispute, could yet dye for the truth. He that came to another, and went about to prove by Sophistical reasonings that there was no such thing as motion; had only this return from him, who either was not able to answer his cavilling, or unwilling to put himself to trouble about it, he arose and walking up and down gave him a real confutation of his Sophystrie. It is so in this case; when a soul hath a real experience of the Grace of God, of the Pardon of sins, of the Vertue and Efficacy of the death of Christ, of Justification by his blood, and peace with God by believing; let men or De∣vils, or Angels from Heaven oppose these things, if it cannot answer their Sophisms, yet he can rise up and walk: he can with all holy confidence and Assurance oppose his own sa∣tisfying
experience unto all their arguings and suggestions. A man will not be disputed out of what he sees and feels. And a Believer will abide as firmly by his spiritual sense, as any man can by his natural. This is the meaning of that Prayer of the Apostle, Col. 2. 2. That your hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love, unto all riches of the full Assurance of understanding, to the acknow∣ledgement of the mysterie of God, and of the Father and of Christ. Understanding in the mysteries of the Gospel they had; but he prayes that by a farther experience of it, they might come to the Assurance of understanding. To be true, is the property of the Doctrine it self, to be certain or assured is the property of our minds. Now this experience doth so unite the mind and truth, that we say, such a Truth is most certain, whereas cer∣tainty is indeed the property of our minds or their knowledge, and not of the truth known. It is certain unto us, that is, we have an assured knowledge of it, by the Experience we have of it. This is the Assurance of Understanding here men∣tioned. And he further prayes, that we may come to the Riches of this Assurance; that is to an abundant plentiful As∣surance. And that , to the acknowledgement of the Mysterie of God, owning it from a sense and experience of its excellency and worth. And this is in the Nature of all Gospel Truths; they are fitted and suited to be experienced by a believing soul. There is nothing in them so sublime and high, nothing so mysterious, nothing so seemingly low and outwardly contemptible, but that a gracious soul hath experience of an Excellency, Reality, Power and Efficacy in it all. For instance; look on that which concerns the Order and Worship of the Gospel: This seems to many to be a meer external thing, whereof a soul can have no inward sense or relish. Notions there are many about it, and endless contentions, but what more? why let a gracious soul in simplicity and sincerity of Spirit, give up himself to walk with Christ according to his Appointment, and he shall quickly find such a taste and relish in the fellowship of the Gospel, in the Communion of Saints, and of Christ amongst them, as that he shall come up to such Riches of Assurance in the Understand∣ing
and Acknowledgement of the wayes of the Lord, as others by their disputing can never attain unto. What is so High, Glorious, and Mysterious as the Doctrine of the ever blessed Trinity? Some wise men have thought meet to keep it veiled from ordinary Christians: And some have delivered it in such terms, as that they can understand nothing by them. But take a Believer who hath tasted how gracious the Lord is, in the Eternal Love of the Father, the great Undertaking of the Son in the work of Mediation and Redemption, with the Almighty work of the Spirit creating Grace and comfort in the soul, and hath had an experience of the Love, Holiness and Power of God in them all, and he will with more firm con∣fidence adhere to this mysterious Truth, being lead into it and confirmed in it, by some few plain Testimonies of the Word than a thousand Disputers shall do, who only have the notion of it in their minds. Let a real Tryal come, and this will ap∣pear. Few will be found to sacrifice their lives on bare spe∣culations. Experience will give Assurance and Stability. We have thus cleared the credit of the Testimony, now to be improved. It is evident on these grounds, that there is a great certainty in those Truths, whereof Believers have expe∣rience. Where they communicate their power unto the heart, they give an unquestionable Assurance of their Truths. And when that is once realized in the soul, all disputes about it are put to silence. These things being so, let us enquire into the faith and experience of the Saints on the Earth, as to what they know of the Truth proposed unto confirmation; namely, that there is forgiveness with God. Let us go to some poor soul that now walks comfortably under the Light of Gods countenance, and say unto him, Did we not know you some while since to be full of sadness, and great anxiety of Spirit; yea, sorrowful almost to death and bitter in soul? Answ. Yes saith he, so it was indeed; my dayes were con∣sumed with mourning, and my life with sorrow; and I walk∣ed heavily in fear and bitterness of Spirit all the day long. Why what ayled you, what was the matter with you; seeing as to the outward things you were in Peace?
Answ. The Law of God had laid hold upon me, and slain me; I found my self thereby a woful sinner, yea, overwhelmed with the guilt of sin. Every moment I expected Tribulation and wrath from the hand of God; My sore ran in the night and ceased not, and my soul refused comfort. How is it then that you are thus delivered that you are no more sad? Where have you found ease and peace? have you been by any means delivered, or did your trouble wear off, and depart of its own accord? Answ. Alas no; had I not met with an effectual Remedy, I had sunk and everlastingly perished. What course did you take? Answ. I went unto him by Jesus Christ against whom I have sinned, and have found him better unto me, than I could ex∣pect, or ever should have believed, had not he overpowred my heart by his Spirit. Instead of wrath which I feared, and that justly because I had deserved it, he said unto me in Christ, fury is not in me. For a long time I could not believe it; I thought it impossible that there should be mercy and pardon for me, or such a one as I. But he still supported me, some∣times by one means, sometimes by another: untill taking my soul near to himself, he caused me to see the folly of my unbe∣lieving heart, and the vileness of the hard thoughts I had of him, and that indeed there is with him forgiveness and plente∣ous Redemption. This hath taken away all my sorrows, and given me quietness with Rest and Assurance. But are you sure now that this is so, may you not possibly be deceived? Answ. Sayes the soul; I have not the least suspicion of any such matter; and if at any time ought doth arise to that pur∣pose, it is quickly overcome. But how are you confirmed in this perswasion? Answ. That sense of it which I have in my heart, that sweetness and rest which I have experience of, that influence it hath upon my soul, that Obligation I find laid upon me by it unto all thankful Obedience; that Relief, Supportment and Consolation that it hath afforded me in tryals and troubles, in the mouth of the Grave, and Entrances of Eternity, all an∣swering
what is declared concerning these things in the Word, will not suffer me to be deceived. I could not indeed receive it, untill God was pleased to speak it unto me. But now let Satan do his utmost, I shall never cease to bear this Testimony, that there is mercy and forgiveness with him. How many thousands may we find of these in the world, who have had such a seal of this Truth in their hearts, as they cannot only securely lay down their lives in the confirma∣tion of it, if called thereunto, but also do chearfully and triumphantly venture their Eternal Concernments up∣on it. Yea, this is the rise of all that peace, serenity of mind, and strong consolation which in this world they are made partakers of. Now this is to me, on the principles before laid down, an evidence great and important. God hath not manifested this Truth unto the Saints, thus copied it out of his word, and exemplified it in their souls, to leave them under any possi∣bility of being deceived. Institution of Religious Worship an Evidence of Forgive∣ness. Religious Worship of sinners, an Evi∣dence of Forgiveness with God.6. Gods Institution of Religious Worship and Honor therein to be rendred unto him by sinners, is another Evidence, that there is for∣givenesswith him. I have instanced before in one particular of Worship to this purpose; namely, in that of Sacrifices. But therein we intended only their particular nature and signi∣fication, how they declared and manifested Reconciliation, Attonement, and Pardon. That now aimed at, is to shew, how all the Worship that God hath appointed unto us, and all the Honour which we give unto his holy Majesty thereby, is built upon the same foundation, namely, a supposition of forgiveness; and is appointed to teach it, and to ascertain us of it, which shall briefly be declared. To this end ob∣serve, 1. That the General End of all Divine and Religious Worship is to raise unto God a Revenue of glory out of the creation. Such is Gods infinite natural self-sufficiency, that he stands in need of
no such Glory and Honour. He was in himself no less infi∣nitely and eternally glorious, before the Creation of all or any thing whatever, than he will be, when he shall be encom∣passed about with the praises of all the works of his hands. And such is his absolute perfection, that no Honor given un∣to him, no Admiration of him, no Ascription of Glory and praise, can add any thing unto him. Hence saith the Psalmist, My goodness extends not unto thee, Psal. 16. 2. It doth not so reach thee, as to add unto thee, to profit thee, as it may do the Saints that are on the Earth. As he in Job, Chap. 22. 23. Can a man be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be pro∣fitable unto himself? Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou art righteous, or is it gain unto him that thou makest thy wayes perfect? There is no doubt, but that it is well pleasing unto God, that we should be righteous and upright. But we do him not a pleasure therein, as though he stood in need of it, or it were advantage or gain unto him. And again, Chap. 35. 7. If thou be Righteous what givest thou him, or what receiveth he at thine hand? And the Reason of all this the Apostle gives us, Rom. 11. 36. Of him, and through him, and to him are all things. Being the first Soveraign Cause, and last absolute End of all things, every way perfect and self-sufficient, nothing can be added unto him. Or as the same Apostle speaks; God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of Heaven and Earth, is not worshipped with mens hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he giveth unto all life and breath, and all things, Acts 17. 24, 25. As he himself pleads at large, Psal. 50. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. 2. Wherefore, All the Revenue of Glory that God will receive by his Worship, depends meerly on his own voluntary Choice and Ap∣pointment. All Worship, I say, depends now on the Soveraign Will and pleasure of God. It is true there is a natural Wor∣ship due from rational creatures, by the Law of their Creation. This was indispensably and absolutely necessary at first. The very Being of God, and order of things required that it should be so. Supposing that God had made such creatures as we are, it could not be, but that Moral Obedience was due unto him; namely, that he should be believed in, trusted and obeyed
as the First Cause, Last End, and Soveraign Lord of all. But the entrance of sin, laying the sinner absolutely under the Curse of God, utterly put an end to this Order of things. Man was now to have perished immediately, and an end to be put unto the Law of this Obedience. But here, in the Soveraign Will of God an Interposition was made between sin and the sentence; and man was respited from destruction. All Wor∣ship following hereon, even that which was before natural by the Law of creation, is now resolved into an Arbitrary Act of Gods will. And unto this end is all worship designed, namely to give glory unto God. For as God hath said, that he will be sanctified in all that draw nigh unto him, that is in his worship, and that therein he will be glorified, Lev. 10. 3. and that he that offereth him praise, that is performeth any part of his Worship and Ser∣vice, Glorifieth him, Psal. 50. 23. So the nature of the thing it self declareth that it can have no other end. By this he hath all his glory even from the inanimate Creation. 4. Consider, That God hath not prescribed any Worship of him∣self, unto the Angels that sinned. They are indeed under his Power, and he useth them as he pleaseth to serve the ends of his holy Providence. Bounds he prescribes unto them by his Power, and keeps them in dread of the full execution of his Wrath. But he requires not of them that they should be∣lieve in him. They believe indeed and tremble. They have a natural Apprehension of the Being, Power, Providence, Holi∣ness and Righteousness of God, which is inseparable from their Natures; and they have an expectation from thence of that punishment, and vengeance which is due unto them, which is inseparable from them as sinners. And this is their faith. But to believe in God, that is, to put their trust in him, to resign up themselves unto him, God re∣quires it not of them. The same is the case with them also, as to Love, and Fear, and Delight, all inward Affections which are the proper Worship of God. These they have not, nor doth God any longer require them in them. They eternally cast them off in their first sin. And where these are not, where they are not required, where they cannot be, there no outward
Worship can be prescribed or appointed. For External instituted Worship is nothing but the way that God assigns, and chooseth to express and exercise the inward Affections of our minds to∣wards him. He rules the fallen Angels per nutum Providentiae, not per verbum praecepti. Now as God dealt with the Angels, so also would he have dealt with mankind, had he left them all under the Curse without remedy or hope of relief. As he doth with them, he eternally satisfies himself in that Revenue of Glory which ariseth unto him in their punishment; so also he would have done with these, had there been no forgiveness with him for them. He would not have required them to fear, love or obey him, or have appointed unto them any way of Worship, whereby to express such affections towards him. For to what end should he have done it? What Righteousness would admit, that Service Duty and Obedience should be prescribed unto them, who could not, ought not to have any Expectation or hope of Acceptance or Reward? This is con∣trary to the very first notion which God requires in us of his Nature. For he that cometh unto God, must believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of all them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11. 6. which would not be so, should he appoint a volun∣tary Worship, and not propose a Reward to the Worship∣pers. Wherefore, 3. It is evident that God by the prescription of a Worship unto sinners, doth fully declare that there is forgiveness with him for them. For, 1. He manifests thereby that he is willing to receive a new Revenue of Glory from them. This, as we have proved is the end of Worship. This he would never have done, but with a design of Accepting and Rewarding to his creatures. For do we think that he will be beholding unto them? That he will take and admit of their voluntary reasonable service accord∣ing to his Will and Command, without giving them a Re∣ward, yea, and such on one as their Obedience holds no pro∣portion unto? no such thing would become his infinite sell sufficiency Goodness and Bounty. This the Wife of Manoah well pleads, Judg. 13. 23. If saith she, the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a meat offering, and a burnt-of∣sering,
at our hands. His Acceptance of Worship from us, is an infallible Demonstration, that he will not execute against us the severity of the first curse. And this is clearly evidenced in the first Record of solemn instituted Worship performed by sinners, Gen. 4 4. God had Respect unto Abel and his Offering. Some think that God gave a visible pledge of his acceptance of Abel and his Offering; it may be it was by fire from Hea∣ven. For how else should Cain so instantly know, that his Brother and his Offering were accepted, but that he and his were refused? However it were, it is evident that what Te∣stimony God gave of the Acceptance of his Offering, the same he gave concerning his Person; and that in the first place he had respect unto Abel and then to his Offering. And there∣fore the Apostle saith, that hereby he obtained witness that he was Righteous, Heb. 11. 4. that is, the Witness or Testimony of God himself. Now this was in the forgiveness of his sins; without which, he could neither be Righteous nor accepted, for he was a sinner. This God declared by Acceptance of his Worship. And thus we also, if we have any Testimony of Gods Acceptance of us in any part of his Worship, should employ it to the same end. Hath God enlarged our hearts in prayer? hath he given us an Answer unto any of our sup∣plications; hath he refreshed our hearts in the preaching and dispensation of the Word, or any other Ordinance? We are not to rest in the particular, about which our communion with him hath been. Our doing so is the cause why we lose our experiences. They lye scattered up and down, separated from their proper root, and so are easily lost. But this is that which we should first improve such particular experiences in the Worship of God unto; namely, that God hath pardoned our sins, and accepted our persons thereon; for without that, none of our Worship or Service would please him, or be ac∣cepted with him. 2. Hereby God lets us know, that he deals with us upon new Terms, so that notwithstanding sin, we may enjoy his love and fa∣vour. For this we have the engagement of his Truth and Ve∣racity, and he cannot deceive us; but yet by this command of his for his Worship, we should be deceived if there were
not forgiveness with him. For it gives us encouragement to expect, and Assurance of finding Acceptance with him, which without it cannot be obtained. This then God declares by his Institution of, and command for his Worship, namely, that there is nothing that shall indispensably hinder those who give¦up themselves unto the Obedience of Gods commands, from enjoying his love, and favour, and communion with him. 4. For matter of fact; it is known and confessed that God hath appointed a Worship for sinners to perform. All the Insti∣tutions of the Old and New Testament bear witness hereunto. God was the Author of them. And men know not what they do, when either they neglect them, or would be intermix∣ing their own Imaginations with them. What can the mind of man conceive or invent that may have any influence into this matter, to secure the souls of Believers of their Accep∣tance with God? Is there any need of their Testimony to the Truth, Faithfulness, and Goodness of God? These things he hath taken upon himself. This then is that which is to be fixed on our souls, upon our first Invitation unto Religious Worship; namely that God intends a new Revenue of Glory from us, and therefore declares that there is a way for the taking away of our sins, without which we can give no Glory to him by our Obedience, and this is done only by forgiveness. Especial Ordinan∣ces evi∣dencing forgiveness.5. There are some Ordinances of Worship appointed for this very end and purpose to confirm unto us the forgiveness of sin. Especi∣ally in that Worship which is instituted by the Lord Jesus under the New Testament. I shall instance in one or two. First, The Ordinance of Baptism. This was accompanied with the dawning of the Gospel, in the Ministry of John Bap∣tist. And he expresly declared in his Sermons upon it, that it was instituted of God to declare the Remission of sins, Mark 1. 4. It is true, the Lord Christ submitted unto that Ordinance, (and was baptized by John) who had no sin. But this be∣longed
unto the Obedience which God required of him, as for our sakes, he was made under the Law. He was to observe all Ordinances and Institutions of the Worship of God; not for any need he had in his own Person of the especial Ends and significations of some of them; yet as he was our Sponsor, sure∣ty, and Mediator standing in our stead in all that he so did, he was to yield obedience unto them, that so he might fulfill all Righteousness, Matth. 3. 13. So was he circumcised, so he was baptized, both which had respect unto sin, though absolutely free from all sin in his own Person; and that because he was free from no Obedience unto any Command of God. But as was said, Baptism it self as appointed to be an Ordi∣nance of Worship for sinners to observe, was a Declaration of that forgiveness that is with God. It was so in its first Institu∣tion. God calls a man in a marvellous and miraculous man∣ner; gives him a Ministry from Heaven; commands him to Go and Baptize all those who confessing their sins, and professing Repentance of them, should come to him, to have a Testimo∣ny of forgiveness. And as to the especial nature of this Ordi∣nance, he appoints it to be such, as to represent the certainty and truth of his Grace in pardon, unto their senses by a visible pledge. He lets them know that he would take away their sin, wherein their spiritual defilement doth consist, even as Wa∣ter takes away the outward filth of the body; and that here∣by they shall be saved, as surely as Noah and his Family were saved in the Ark swimming upon the waters, 1 Pet. 3. 21. Now how great a deceit must needs in this whole matter have been put upon poor sinners, if it were not infallibly certain, that they might obtain forgiveness with God. After the Entrance of this Ordinance in the Ministry of John, the Lord Christ takes it into his own hand, and commands the observation of it unto all his Disciples. I dispute not now, who are the proper immediate objects of it; whether they only who actually can make profession of their faith, or Be∣lievers with their infant seed. For my part, I believe that all whom Christ loves and pardons are to be made partakers of the pledge thereof. And the sole Reason which they of old insisted on, why the infants of Believing Parents should not be
baptized; was because they thought they had no sin, and there∣in we know their mistake. But I treat not now of these things; only this I say is certain, that in the prescription of this Ordinance unto his Church, the great Intention of the Lord Christ was to ascertain unto us the forgiveness of sins. And sinners are invited to a participation of this Ordinance for that End, that they may receive the pardon of their sins; that is an infallible pledge and Assurance of it, Acts 2. 38. And the very nature of it declareth this to be its End, as was before intimated. This is another engagement of the Truth and Faithfulness and Holiness of God, so that we cannot be de∣ceived in this matter. There is, saith God forgiveness with me; saith the soul, how Lord shall I know, how shall I come to be assured of it, for by reason of the perpetual Accusations of Conscience, and the Curse of the Law upon the guilt of my sin, I find it a very hard matter for me to believe: Like Gideon I would have a Token of it: why behold saith God, I will give thee a pledge and a token of it which cannot deceive thee. When the world of old had been overwhelmed with a deluge of waters by rea∣son of their sins, and those who remained, though they had just cause to fear that the same Judgement would again befall them or their posterity, because they saw there was like to be the same cause of it, the thoughts and imaginations of the hearts of men being evil still, and that continually; to secure them against these fears, I told them that I would destroy the earth no more with water; and I gave them a token of my faithfulness therein, by placing my bow in the cloud. And have I failed them? though the sin and wick∣edness of the world hath been since that day unspeakably great, yet mankind is not drowned again, nor ever shall be: I will not deceive their expectation from the token I have given them. Wherever then there is a word of promise confirmed with a token, never fear a disappointment. But so is this matter. I have declared that there is forgiveness with me, and to give you assurance thereof, I have ordained this pledge and sign, as a seal of my word, to take away all doubts and suspicion of your being deceived. As the world shall be drowned no more, so neither shall they who believe, come short of forgiveness. And this is the Use which we ought to make of this Or∣dinance.
It is Gods security of the pardon of our sins, which we may safely rest in. 2. The same is the End of that other Great Ordinance of the Church, the Supper of the Lord. The same thing is there∣in confirmed unto us by another Sign, Pledge, Token, or Seal. We have shewed before, what respect Gospel forgiveness hath unto the death or blood of Jesus Christ. That is the Means whereby for us it is procured, the Way whereby it comes forth from God, unto the Glory of his Righteousness and Grace, which afterwards must be more distinctly insisted on. This Ordinance therefore designed and appointed on purpose for the Representation and calling to Remembrance of the death of Christ, with the communication of the benefits thereof unto them that believe; doth principally intend our faith and com∣fort in the Truth under consideration. And therefore in the very Institution of it, besides the General End before menti∣oned, which had been sufficient for our security, there is more∣over added an especial mention of the forgiveness of sin; for so speaks our Saviour in the Institution of it for the use of the Church unto the end of the world, Matth. 26. 28. This is my blood of the New Testament which is shed for many for the Remis∣sion of sins. As if he had said, The end for which I have ap∣pointed the Observance of this Duty and Service unto you, is that I may testifie thereby unto you, that by my Blood, the Sacrifice of my self, and the Attonement made thereby, I have purchased for you the Remission of your sins, which you shall assuredly be made partakers of. And more I shall not add unto this consideration, because the death of Christ respected in this Ordinance, will again occurr unto us. 3. What is the end of all Church Order, Assemblies, and Wor∣ship? What is a Church? Is it not a company of sinners ga∣thered together according unto Gods appointment, to give glory and praise to him for pardoning Grace, for the for∣giveness of sins, and to yield him that obedience which he re∣quires from us, on the account of his having so dealt with us? This is the nature, this is the end of a Church. He that understandeth it not, he that useth it not unto that End, doth but abuse that great Institution. And such abuse the world is
full of. Some endeavour to make their own secular Advantages by the pretence of the Church. Some discharge the duty required in it, with some secret hopes that it shall be their Righteousness before God. Some answer only their Light and Convictions in an empty profession. This alone is the true end, the true Use of it. We assemble our selves to learn that there is forgiveness with God through Christ; to pray that we may be made partakers of it. To bless and praise God for our Inte∣rest in it, to engage our selves unto that Obedience which he requires upon the account of it. And were this constantly upon our minds, and in our designs, we might be more esta∣blished in the faith of it, than it may be the most of us are. Prayer for the Pardon of sin com∣manded.4. One particular instance more of this nature shall conclude this Evidence: God hath commanded us, the Lord Christ hath taught us to pray for the pardon of sin, which gives us unquesti∣onable security that it may be attained, that it is to be found in God; for the clearing whereof observe, 1. That the Lord Christ in the Revelation of the Will of God unto us, as unto the duty that he required at our hands, hath taught and instructed us to pray for the forgiveness of sin. It is one of the Petitions which he hath left on record for our use and imitation in that summary of all prayer which he hath given us, Matth. 6. 12. Forgive us our debts, our trespasses, our sins: Some contend that this is a form of prayer to be used in the prescript limited words of it. All grant that it is a Rule for prayer, comprizing the heads of all necessary things, that we are to pray for, and obliging us to make supplications for them. So then upon the Authority of God revealed unto us by Jesus Christ, we are bound in duty to pray for pardon of sins, or forgiveness. 2. On this supposition, it is the highest Blasphemy and re∣proach of God imaginable, to conceive that there is not for∣giveness with him for us. Indeed if we should go upon our own heads without his Warranty and Authority, to ask any thing at his hand, we might well expect to meet with dis∣appointment. For what should encourage us unto any such
boldness? But now when God himself shall command us to come, and ask any thing from him, so making it thereby our Duty, and that the neglect thereof should be our great sin and Rebellion against him; to suppose he hath not the thing in his Power to bestow on us, or that his Will is wholly averse from so doing, is to reproach him with want of Truth, Faithful∣ness and Holiness, and not to be God. For what sincerity can be in such proceedings? Is it consistent with any Divine Ex∣cellency? Could it have any other end, but to deceive poor creatures? either to delude them if they do pray according to his command, or to involve them in further guilt, if they do not? God forbid any such thoughts should enter into our hearts. But, 3. To put this whole matter out of question, God hath promised to hear our prayers, and in particular those which we make unto him for the forgiveness of sin. So our Saviour hath assured us, that what we ask in his name, it shall be done for us. And he hath, as we have shewed, taught us to ask this very thing of God as our Heavenly Father; that is in his name. For in and through him alone is he a Father unto us. I need not insist on particular Promises to this purpose, they are as you know multiplyed in the Scriptures. What hath been spoken may suffice to establish our present Argument, namely, that Gods prescription of Religious Worship unto sinners, doth undeniably prove that with him there is forgiveness; especially considering that the principal parts of the Worship so prescribed and appointed by him, are peculiarly designed to confirm us in the faith thereof. And this is the design of the words that we do insist upon; There is forgiveness with thee, that thou maist be feared. The fear of God, as we have shewed in the Old Testament, doth fre∣quently express not that gracious Affection of our minds, which is distinctly so called; but that whole Worship of God wherein that and all other Gracious Affections towards God are to be exercised. Now the Psalmist tells us, that the foun∣dation of this fear or Worship, and the only motive and en∣couragement for sinners to engage in it, and give up themselves unto it is this, that there is forgiveness with God. Without
this no sinner could fear, serve, or worship him. This therefore is undeniably proved by the Institution of this Worship, which was proposed unto confirmation. The end of all these things, as we shall afterwards at large declare, is to encourage poor sinners to believe, and to evi∣dence how inexcusable they will be left, who notwithstanding all this, do through the power of their lusts and unbelief, refuse to come to God in Christ that they may be pardoned. Yea, the laying open of the certainty and fulness of the evidence given unto this truth, makes it plain and conspicuous, whence it is that men perish in and for their sins. Is it for want of Mercy, Goodness, Grace or Patience in God? Is it through any defect in the Mediation of the Lord Christ? Is it for want of the mightiest encouragements and most infallible Assu∣rances that with God there is Forgiveness? Not at all, but meer∣ly on the account of their own obstinacy, stubbornness and perversness. They will not come unto this Light, yea they hate it, because their deeds are evil. They will not come to Christ, that they may have life. It is meerly darkness, blind∣ness, and love of sin, that brings men to destruction. And this is laid open, and all pretences and excuses are removed, and the shame of mens lusts made naked by the full confirma∣tion of this Truth, which God hath furnished us withal. Take heed you that hear or read these things; if they are not mixed with faith, they will add greatly to your misery. Every Argument will be your Torment. But these considerations must be insisted on afterwards, Moreover if you will take into your minds what hath been delivered in particular, concerning the nature and end of the Worship of God which you attend unto, you may be instru∣cted in the use and due observation of it. When you address your selves unto it, remember that this is that which God re∣quires of you who are sinners. That this he would not have done, but with thoughts and intention of mercy for sinners. Bless him with all your souls, that this is laid as the Founda∣tion of all that you have to do with him. You are not ut∣terly cast off, because you are sinners. Let this support and warm your hearts, when you go to hear, to pray, or any du∣ty
of Worship. Consider what is your principal work in the whole. You are going to deal with God about Forgiveness, in the Being, Causes, Consequents, and Effects of it. Hearken what he speaks, declares, or reveals about it; mix his Reve∣lation and Promises with faith. Enquire diligently into all the Obedience and Thankfulness, all those duties of Holiness, and Righteousness, which he justly expects from them who are made partakers of it; so shall you observe the Worship of God unto his Glory, and your own Advantage. The giving and establishing of the New Covenant another Evidence of Forgiveness with God. The Oath of God en∣gaged in the confirmation thereof. Forgive∣ness mani∣fested in the New Covenant.VIII. Another Evidence hereof may be taken from the making, establishing and ratifying of the New Covenant. That God would make a new Covenant with his people is often pro∣mised, often declared. See among other places, Jer. 31. 31, 32. and that he hath done so accordingly, the Apostle at large doth manifest, Heb. 8. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Now herein sundry things unto our present purpose may be considered. For, 1. It is supposed that God had before made another Cove∣nant with mankind. With reference hereunto is this said to be a new one. It is opposed unto another that was before it, and in comparison whereof that is called old, and this said to be new, as the Apostle speaks expresly in the place before men∣tioned. Now a Covenant between God and man is a thing Great and Marvellous; whether we consider the nature of it, or the Ends of it; In its own nature it is a Convention, Com∣pact and Agreement, for some certain ends and purposes be∣tween the Holy Creator and his poor creatures. How infinite, how unspeakable must needs the Grace and Condescention of God in this matter be? For what is poor miserable man, that God should set his heart upon him, that he should as it were give bounds to his Soveraignty over him, and enter into terms of Agreement with him? For whereas before, he was a meer object of his Absolute Dominion, made at his Will, and for his Plea∣sure,
and on the same reasons to be crushed at any time into nothing; Now he hath a bottom, and ground given him to stand upon, whereon to expect good things from God, upon the ac∣count of his Faithfulness and Righteousness. God, in a Covenant, gives those holy properties of his Nature unto his Creatures: as his hand or arm for him to lay hold upon, and by them to plead and argue with him. And without this a man could have no foundation for any entercourse or Communion with God, or of any expectation from him; nor any direction how to deal with him in any of his concernments. Great and signal then was the condescension in God, to take his poor Crea∣ture into Covenant with himself. And especially will this be manifest, if we consider the Ends of it, and why it is that God thus deals with man. Now these are no other than that man might serve him aright, be blessed by him, and be brought unto the everlasting enjoyment of him, all unto his Glory. These are the Ends of every Covenant that God takes us into with himself. And these are the whole of man. No more is required of us in a way of duty; no more can be required by us to make us blessed and happy, but what is contained in them. That we might live to God, be accepted with him, and come to the eternal fruition of him, is the whole of man; All that we were made for, or are capable of; and these are the Ends of every Covenant that God makes with men; being all com∣prized in that solemn word, that he will be their God, and they shall be his people. Secondly, This being the Nature, this the End of a Covenant, there must be some great and important cause, to change, alter, and abrogate a Covenant once made and established, to lay aside one Covenant, and to enter into another. And yet this the Apostle sayes expresly that God had done, Heb. 8. 13. and proves it, because himself calls that which he promised, a New Covenant, which undeniably confirms two things. First, That the other was become old; and Secondly, That be∣ing become so, it was changed, altered and removed. I know the Apostle speaks immediately of the old Administration of the Covenant under the Old Testament or Mosaical Instituti∣ons: but he doth so with reference unto that revival which
in it was given to the first Covenant made with Adam. For in the giving of the Law, and the Curse wherewith it was ac∣companied which were immixed with that Administration of the Covenant, there was a solemn revival and Representa∣tion of the first Covenant, and its Sanction, whereby it had life and power given it to keep the people in bondage all their dayes. And the end of the Abolition or taking way of the Legal Administration of the Covenant, was meerly to take out of Gods dealing with his people, all use and Remembrance of the first Covenant. As was said therefore, to take away, dis∣annul, and change a Covenant so made, ratified, and esta∣blished betwixt God and man, is a matter that must be resolv∣ed into some cogent, important, and indispensable cause. And this will the more evidently appear, if we consider, Nature, Use and End of the first Cove∣nant.First, In general; that the first Covenant was Good, Holy, Righteous and Equal. It was such as became God to make, and was every way the happiness of the Creature to accept of. We need no other Argument to prove it holy and good, than this, that God made it. It was the Effect of infinite Holiness, Wis∣dome, Righteousness, Goodness and Grace. And therefore in it self was it every way perfect; for so are all the works of God. Besides it was such, as man, when through his own sault he cannot obtain any good by it, and must perish everlast∣ingly by vertue of the Curse of it; yet cannot but subscribe unto its Righteousness and Holiness. The Law was the Rule of it, therein is the tenor of it contained. Now, saith the Apostle, whatever becomes of the sin, and the sinner, the Law is holy, and the commandment is holy and just, and good, Rom. 7. 12. Holy in it self, and its own Nature, as being the Or∣der and Constitution of the most holy God. Just and equal with reference unto us; such as we have no reason to com∣plain of, or repine against the Authority of it, and the terms of it are most righteous. And not only so, but it is good al∣so, that which notwithstanding the appearance of Rigor and severity which it is accompanied withal, had in it an ex∣ceeding mixture of Goodness and Grace, both in the Obe∣dience constituted in it, and the Reward annexed unto
it; as might be more fully manifested, were that our present work. Secondly, In particular it was Good, Holy and Righteous in all the Commands of it, in the Obedience which it required. And two things there were that rendred it exceeding Righte∣ous, in reference unto its Precepts or Commands. First, That they were all suited unto the Principles of the nature of man created by God, and in the regular acting whereof consisted his perfection. God in the first Covenant required nothing of man, prescribed nothing unto him, but what there was a Prin∣ciple for the doing and accomplishing of it ingrafted, and im∣planted on his nature; which rendred all those commands equal, holy and good. For what need any man complain of that which requires nothing of him, but what he is from his own frame and Principles inclined unto? Secondly, all the Commands of it were proportionate unto the strength and abi∣lity of them to whom they were given. God in that Covenant required nothing of any man, but what he had before enabled him to perform: nothing above his strength, or beyond his power: and thence was it also righteous. Secondly, It was exceeding Good Holy and Righteous upon the account of its Promises and rewards. Do this, saith the Covenant; this which thou art able to do, which the Principles of thy nature are fitted for, and enclined unto. Well, what shall be the issue there∣of? Why do this and live; Life is promised unto Obedience, and that such a Life, as both for the present and future con∣dition of the creature, was accompanied with every thing that was needful to make it blessed and happy. Yea, this Life having in it the eternal enjoyment of God, God himself as a Reward, was exceedingly above whatever the Obedience of man could require as due, or have any Reason, on any other account, but meerly of the Goodness of God to expect. Thirdly, There was provision in that Covenant for the Preser∣vation and manifestation of the Glory of God, whatever was the Event on the part of man. This was provided for in the Wisdom and Righteousness of God. Did man continue in his Obedience, and fulfill the terms of the Covenant; all things were laid in subserviency to the Eternal Glory of God in his
Reward. Herein would he for ever have manifested and ex∣alted the Glory of his Holiness, Power, Faithfulness, Righte∣ousness and Goodness. As an Almighty Creator, and Pre∣server, as a faithful God, and Righteous Rewarder would he have been glorified. On supposition, on the other side, that man by sin and Rebellion should trangress the terms and tenor of this Covenant, yet God had made provision that no de∣triment unto his Glory should ensue thereon. For by the constitution of a punishment proportionable in his Justice unto that sin and demerit, he had provided that the glory of his Holiness Righteousness and Veracity in his Threatnings should be exalted, and that to all Eternity. God would have lost no more glory and honour by the sin of man, than by the sin of Angels, which in his infinite Wisdom and Righteousness is become a great Theatre of his Eternal Glory. For he is no less Excellent in his Greatness and Severity, than in his Good∣ness and Power. Reason of Alteration of the first Covenant.Wherefore we may now return unto our former enquiry. All things being thus excellently and admirably disposed in infinite Wisdom and Holiness in this Covenant, the whole Du∣ty and Blessedness of man being fully provided for, and the Glory of God absolutely secured upon all Events, what was the Reason that God left not all things to stand or fall ac∣cording to the terms of it? Wherefore doth he reject and lay aside this Covenant and Promise to make another, and do so accordingly? Certain it is, that he might have continued it with a blessed security to his own Glory; and he makes all things for himself, even the wicked for the day of evil. God himself shews what was the only and sole Reason of this dispensation, Heb. 8. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. The summ of it is this. Notwithstanding the blessed Constitution of the first Covenant; yet there was no provision for the pardon of sin, no room or place for forgiveness in it; but on supposition that man sinned, he was in that Covenant left remediless. God had not in it revealed that there was any such thing as forgive∣ness with him; nor had any sinner the least hope or grounds of expectation from thence of any such thing in him. Dye
he must and perish, and that without remedy or recovery. Now, saith God, this must not be. Mercy, Goodness, Grace, re∣quire another state of things. This Covenant will not ma∣nifest them; their effects will not be communicated to poor sinners by it. Hence saith he it is faulty; that is defective, I will not lose the glory of them, nor shall sinners be unrelieved by them. And therefore although I may strictly tye up all mankind unto the terms of this; yet, I will make another Covenant with them, wherein they shall know and find, that there is forgiveness with me, that they may fear me. Now next to the Blood of Christ, whereby this Covenant was ratified and confirmed, this is the greatest Evidence that can possible be given, that there is forgiveness with God. To what end else doth God make this great alteration in the effects of his Will, in his way of dealing with mankind. As forgive∣ness of sin is expresly contained in the tenor and words of the Covenant, so set it aside, and it will be of no more use or ad∣vantage than the former. For as this Covenant is made directly with sinners, nor was there any one in the world, when God made it that was not a sinner, nor is it of use unto any but sin∣ners, so is forgiveness of sins the very life of it. Hence we may see two things. First, The greatness of for∣giveness, that we may learn to value it: and Secondly, The certainty of it, that we may learn to believe it. First, The greatness of it. God would not do so great a thing as that mentioned, but for a great, the greatest end. Had it not been a matter of the greatest importance unto the glory of God, and the good of the souls of men, God would not for the sake of it, have laid aside one Covenant, and made another. We may evidently see how the heart of God was set up∣on it, how his Nature and Will were engaged in it. All this was done that we might be pardoned. The old glo∣rious fabrick of Obedience and Rewards shall be taken down to the ground, that a new one may be erected for the honour and glory of forgiveness. God forbid that we should have slight thoughts of that which was so strangely and wonder∣fully brought forth, wherein God had as it were embarked his great Glory. Shall all this be done for our sakes, and
shall we undervalue it, or disesteem it? God forbid. God could, if I may so say, more easily have made a new world of Innocent Creatures, and have governed them by the Old Cove∣nant, than have established this new one for the salvation of poor sinners; but then where had been the glory of forgiveness? It could never have been known, that there was forgiveness with him. The Old Covenant could not have been preserved, and sinners pardoned. Wherefore God chose rather to leave the Covenant, than sinners unrelieved, than Grace unexalted, and Pardon unexercised. Prize it, as you prize your souls, and give glory unto God for it, as all those that believe will do unto Eternity. Secondly, For the security of it, that we may believe it. What greater can be given? God deceiveth no man, no more than he is deceived. And what could God that cannot lye, do more, to give us satisfaction herein than he hath done? Would you be made partakers of this forgiveness? Go unto God, spread before him this whole matter; plead with him that he himself hath so far laid aside the first Covenant, of his own Gracious Will as to make a new one; and that meerly because it had no forgiveness in it. This he hath made on purpose that it might be known, that there is forgiveness in him. And shall not we now be made partakers of it? Will he now deny that unto us, which he hath given such Assurance of, and raised such expectations concerning it? Nothing can here wrong us, nothing can ruine us but unbelief. Lay hold on this Cove∣nant, and we shall have pardon. This God expresseth, Isa. 27. 4, 5. Will we continue on the old bottom of the first Co∣venant? All that we can do thereon, is but to set thorns and bryars in the way of God, to secure our selves from his coming against us and upon us with his indignation and fury. Our sins are so, and our Righteousness is no better. And what will be the issue? both they and we shall be trodden down con∣sumed and burnt up. What way then, what remedy is left un∣to us? only this of laying hold on the arm and strength of God in that Covenant, wherein forgiveness of sin is provided. Therein alone he saith, fury is not in me; and the end will be that we shall have peace with him both here and for ever.
Forgive∣ness con∣firmed by the Oath of God.IX. The Oath of God engaged and interposed in this matter is another Evidence of the truth insisted on. Now because this is annexed unto the Covenant before mentioned, and is its establishment, I shall pass it over the more briefly. And in it we may consider; 1. The Nature of the Oath of God; The Apostle tells us that he sware by himself: And he gives this Reason of it, because he had no greater to swear by, Heb. 6. 13. An Oath for the confirmati∣on of any thing, is an Invocation of a Supream Power that can judge of the truth that is spoken, and vindicate the breach of the engagement. This God hath none other but himself, Because he could swear by no greater, he swear by himself. Now this God doth, (1.) By express Affirmation that he hath so sworn by himself, which was the form of the first solemn Oath of God, Gen. 22. 16. By my self have I sworn, saith the Lord. The meaning whereof is, I have taken it upon my self as I am God, or let me not be so, if I perform not this thing. And this is expressed by his soul, Jer. 51. 14. The Lord of Hosts hath sworn by his soul, that is, by himself, as we render the words. Secondly, God doth it by the especial Interposition of some such Property of his nature, as is suited to give credit and confirmation to the Word spoken; as of his Holiness, Psal. 89. 35. I have sworn by my Holiness: So also Amos 4. 2. Sometime by his life; As I live, saith the Lord.  I live saith God, it shall be so. And sometimes by his Name, Jer. 44. 26. God as it were engageth the Honour and Glory of the Properties of his Nature for the certain accomplishment of the things menti∣oned. And this is evident from the manner of the Expression, as in that place of Psal. 89. 35. Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lye unto David; so we; in the Original the words are eliptical: If I lye unto David, that is, Let me not be so, nor be esteemed to be so, if I lye unto David. Secondly, For the End of his Oath; God doth not give it to make his Word or Promise sure and stedfast, but to give Assu∣rance and Security unto us of their accomplishment. Every Word of God is sure and certain, truth it self, because it is his; and he might justly require of us, the belief of it without any
further Attestation. But yet knowing what great Objections Satan and our own unbelieving hearts will raise against his Promises, at least as to our own concernment in them, to con∣firm our minds, and to take away all pretences of unbelief, he interposeth his Oath in this matter. What can remain of distrust in such a case? If there be a matter in doubt between men, and an Oath be interposed in the confirmation of that which is cal∣led in question, it is an End, as the Apostle tells us, unto them of all strife, Heb. 6. 16. How much more ought it to be so on the part of God, when his Oath is engaged. And the Apostle declares this End of his Oath, it is to shew the immutability of his counsel, Heb. 6. 17. His counsel was declared before in the Promise; but now some doubt or strife may arise, whether on one occasion or other, God may not change his counsell; or whether he hath not changed it with such conditions as to render it useless unto us? In what case soever it be, to remove all doubts and suspicions of this nature, God adds his Oath, manifesting the unquestionable immutability of his counsel and Promises. What therefore is thus confirmed is ascertained unto the height of what any thing is capable of. And nor to believe it, is the height of Impiety. Thirdly, In this Interposition of God by an Oath, there is un∣speakable condescention of Grace, which is both an exceeding great motive unto faith, and a great Aggravation of Unbelief. For what are we, that the holy and blessed God should thus condescend unto us, as for our satisfaction and surety, to engage himself by an Oath! One said well of old; Foelices nos quorum causa Deus jurat; O infoelices, si nec juranti Deo credimus. It is an inestimable advantage that God should for our sakes engage himself by his Oath. So it will be our misery, if we believe him not when he swears unto us. What can we now object against what is thus confirmed? What pretence, colour, or excuse can we have for our unbelief? How just, how righteous, how holy must their destruction be, who upon this strange, won∣derful and unexpected Warranty, refuse to set their seal, that God is true. These things being premised, we may consider how vari∣ously God hath engaged his Oath, that there is forgiveness with
him. First, He sweareth that he hath no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but rather that he repent and live, Ezek. 33. 11. As I live, saith the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of a sinner: Now without forgiveness in him, every sinner must dye, and that without remedy. Confirming therefore with his Oath, that it is his will the sinner should return, repent and live, he doth in the first place swear by himself, that there is forgiveness with him for these sinners that shall so repent and turn unto him. Again, Whereas the great means he hath appointed for the forgiveness of sins, is by the Mediation of the Lord Christ, as we shall afterwards shew, he hath on several occasions con∣firmed his purpose in him, and the counsel of his Will by his Oath. By this Oath he promised him unto Abraham, and David of old, which proved the foundation of the Churches stability in all generations; and also of their Security and As∣surance of Acceptance with him; see Luke 1. 73, 74, 75. And in his taking upon him that Office whereby in an especial man∣ner the forgiveness of sins was to be procured, namely of his being a Priest to offer Sacrifice, to make an Attonement for sin∣ners, he confirmed it unto him, and him in it by his Oath, Heb. 7. 20. He was not made a Priest without an Oath. And to what end? Namely, that he might be a surety of a better Testament, v. 22. And what was that better Testament? Why, that which brought along with it the forgiveness of sin, Chap. 8. 12, 13. So that it was forgiveness which was so confirmed by the Oath of God. Further, the Apostle shews, that the great Original Pro∣mise made unto Abraham, being confirmed by the Oath of God, all his other Promises were in like manner confirmed. Whence he draws that blessed conclusion which we have, Heb. 6 17, 18. As to every one, saith he, that flyes for refuge to the hope that is set before him, that is, who seeks to escape the guilt of sin, the curse and the sentence of the Law, by an Application of himself un∣to God in Christ for pardon, he hath the Oath of God to secure him that he shall not fail thereof. And thus are all the con∣cernments of the forgiveness of sin testified unto by the Oath of God; which we have manifested to be the highest security in this matter, that God can give, or that we are capable of.
The Name of God confirming the Truth and Reality of For∣giveness with him. As also the same is done by the Properties of his Nature. Forgive∣ness con∣firmed by the Name of God.X. Another foundation of this Truth, and infallible Evidence of it may be taken from that especial Name and Title which God takes unto himself in this matter. For he owns the name of the God of Pardons; or the God of forgiveness. So is he called, Nehem. 9. 17.  we have rendred the words, Thou art a God ready to forgive; but they are as was said, And thou art the God of Pardons, Forgiveness, or Propitiati∣ons. That is his Name, which he owneth, which he accept∣eth of the Ascription of unto himself. The Name whereby he will be known. And to clear this Evidence we must take in some considerations of the Name of God, and the Use there∣of. As, 1. The Name of God is that whereby he reveals himself unto us, whereby he would have us know him, and own him. It is something expressive of his Nature or Properties which he hath appropriated unto himself. Whatever therefore any name of God expresseth him to be, that he is, that we may expect to find him; for he will not deceive us by giving himself a wrong, or a false Name. And on this account he requires us to trust in his name, because he will assuredly be found unto us, what his Name imports. Resting on his name, flying unto his name, calling upon his name, praising his name, things so often men∣tioned in the Scripture, confirm the same unto us. These things could not be our duty, if we might be deceived in so do∣ing. God is then, and will be to us what his Name de∣clareth. 2. On this Ground and Reason, God is said then first to be known by any name, when those to whom he reveals himself, do in an especial manner rest on that name by faith, and have that accomplished towards them which that name imports signi∣fies or declares. And therefore God did not under the Old Testament reveal himself to any by the name of the Father of Jesus Christ, or the Son incarnate, because the Grace of it unto
them was not to be accomplished, God having provided some bet∣ter thing for us, that they without us, should not be made perfect; they were not entrusted with the full Revelation of God, by all his blessed names. Neither doth God call us to trust in any name of his however declared, or revealed, unless he gives it us in an especial manner, by way of Covenant to rest up∣on. So he speaks, Exod. 6. 3. I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and to Jacob () in the name of God Almighty, but by my name Jehovah was I not known unto them. It is certain that both these names of God Elshaddai and Jehovah, were known among his people before. In the first mention we have of Abrahams addressing himself unto the Worship of God, he makes use of the name Jehovah, Gen. 12. 7. He built an Altar unto Jehovah; and so afterwards not only doth Moses make use of that Name in the Repetition of the Story, but it was also of frequent use amongst them. Whence then is it said, that God appeared unto them by the name of Elshaddai, but not by the name of Jehovah? The Reason is because that was the name which God gave himself in the solemn confirmation of the Covenant with Abraham, Gen. 17. 1.  I am Elshaddai, God Almighty, God Alsufficient. And when Isaac would pray for the blessing of the Covenant on Jacob, he makes use of that name, Gen. 28. 3. God Almighty bless thee. He invocates that name of God which was engaged in the Co∣nant made with his Father Abraham, and himself. That therefore we may withfull Assurance rest on the name of God, it is not only necessary that God reveal that name to be his, but also that he give it out unto us for that end and purpose, that we might know him thereby, and place our trust and con∣fidence in him according unto what that name of his imports. And this was the case where ever he revealed himself unto any in a peculiar manner, by an especial Name. So he did unto Ja∣cob, Gen. 28. 13. I am the God of Abraham and Isaac; assuring him, that as he dealt faithfully in his Covenant with his Fa∣thers Abraham and Isaac, so also he would deal with him. And Gen. 31. 13. I am the God of Bethel; he who appeared unto thee there, and blessed thee, and will continue so to do. But when the same Jacob comes to ask after another name of God,
he answers him not, as it were commanding him to live by faith, on what he was pleased to reveal. Now then God had not made himself known to Abraham, and Isaac, and Ja∣cob by his name Jehovah, because he had not peculiarly called himself unto them by that name; nor had engaged it in his Covenant with them, although it were otherwise known unto them. They lived and rested on the name of God Almighty, as suited to their supportment and consolation in their wandring helpless condition, before the Promise was to be accomplished. But now when God came to fulfill his Promises, and to bring the people by vertue of his Covenant into the Land of Canaan, he reveals himself unto them by, and renews his Co∣venant with them in the name of Jehovah. And hereby did God declare, that he came to give stability and Accomplish∣ment unto his Promises. To which end they were now to live upon this name of Jehovah in an expectation of the ful∣filling of the Promises; as their Fathers did on that of God Al∣mighty in an expectation of protection from him in their wan∣dring state and condition. Hence this name became the founda∣tion of the Judaical Church, and ground of the faith of them who did sincerely believe in God therein. And it is strangely fallen out in the Providence of God, that since the Jews have rejected the Covenant of their Fathers, and are cast out of the Covenant for their unbelief, they have utterly forgot that Name of God. No Jew in the world knows what it is, nor how to pronounce it, or make mention of it. I know themselves, and others pretend strange Mysteries in the Letters and Vowels of that name which make it ineffable. But the truth is, being cast out of that Covenant which was built and established on that name, in the just Judgement of God, through their own blindness and superstition, they are no more able to make mention of it, or to take it into their mouths. It is required then that the name of God be given unto us as en∣gaged in Covenant, to secure our expectation that he will be unto us according to his name. 3. All the whole Gracious Name of God, every Title that he hath given himself, every Ascription of Honour unto himself that he hath owned, is confirmed unto us, (unto as many as
believe,) in Jesus Christ. For as he hath declared unto us the whole name of God, John 17. 6. So not this, or that Promise of God, but all the Promises of God are in him, Yea and Amen. So that as of old, every particular Promise that God made unto the people, served especially for the particular occasion on which it was given, and each Name of God was to be rested on, as to that dispensation whereunto it was suited to give relief, and confidence; as the name of Elshaddai to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the name Jehovah to Moses and the people; so now by Jesus Christ and in him, every particular Promise be∣longs unto all believers in all their occasions; and every Name of God whatever, is theirs also, at all times, to rest upon and put their trust in. Thus the particular Promise made unto Jo∣shuah at his entrance into Canaan, to incourage and strengthen him in that great enterprize of conquering the Land, is by the Apostle applyed unto all Believers in all their occasions whatever. I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13. 5. So like wise doth every name of God belong now unto us, as if it had in particular manner been engaged in Covenant unto us. And that because the whole Covenant is ratified and confirmed unto us by Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 6. 18. Chap. 7. 1. This then absolutely secures unto us an interest in the Name of God insisted on, the God of forgiveness, as if it had been given unto every one of us to assure us thereof. 4. God takes this name, the God of forgiveness to be his in a peculiar manner, as that whereby he will be distinguished and known. He appropriates it to himself as expressing that, which the Power and Goodness of no other can extend un∣to. There are Lords many, and Gods many, saith the Apostle; , some that are called so; such as some account so to be. How is the true God distinguished from these Gods by Reputation? He is so by this name, He is the God of Pardons, Micah 7. 18. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardoneth iniqui∣ty? This is his Prerogative; herein none is equal to him, like him, or a sharer with him. Who is a God like unto thee, that may be called a God of Pardons. The Vanities of the Nati∣ons cannot give them this rain; they have no refreshing show∣ers of mercy and Pardon in their power. Neither Angels,
nor Saints, nor Images, nor Popes, can Pardon Sin. By this name doth he distinguish himself from them all. 5. To be known by this name is the Great Glory of God in this world. When Moses desired to see the Glory of God, the Lord tells him that he could not see his face, Exod. 33. 18, 20. The face of God or the glorious Majesty of his Being, his Es∣sential Glory, is not to be seen of any in this life; We cannot see him as he is. But the glorious manifestation of himself we may behold and contemplate. This we may see as the back parts of God; That shaddow of his excellencies which he casteth forth in his passing by us in his works and dispensations. This Moses shall see. And wherein did it consist? Why in the Re∣velation and Declaration of this name of God, Chap. 34. 6, 7. The Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, the Lord, the Lord God, Merciful and Gracious, long-suffering, and Abundant in Goodness and in Truth, keeping Mercy for thousands, Forgiving Ini∣quity, Transgressions, and Sin. To be known by this Name, to be honoured, feared, believed as that declares him, is the great glory of God. And shall this fail us? Can we be deceived trust∣ing in it, or expecting that we shall find him to be what his name declares? God forbid. Let us lay together these Considerations, and we shall find that they will give us another stable foundation of the Truth insisted on; and a great encouragement to poor sinful souls to draw nigh to God in Christ for Pardon. God hath no Name but what he gives unto himself. Nor is it lawful to know him, or call him otherwise; as he calls himself, so is he. What his Name imports, so is his Nature. Every name also of God is engaged in Jesus Christ in the Covenant, and is proposed unto us to place our Trust and Confidence in. Now this is his name and his memorial, even the God of Forgiveness. By this he distinguisheth himself from all others, and expresseth it as the principal Title of his Honour, or his peculiar Glory. Ac∣cording to this name therefore all that believe shall assuredly find, There is forgiveness with him.
, of Gods Nature, manifest∣ing For∣giveness.XI. The consideration of the Essential Properties of the Na¦ture of God, and what is required to the manifestation of them, will afford us further Assurance hereof. Let us to this end take in the ensuing Observations. God being absolutely perfect, and absolutely self-sufficient, was eternally glorious, and satisfied with, and in his own holy Ex∣cellencies and Perfections, before, and without the creation of all or any thing, by the putting forth or the exercise of his Al∣mighty Power. The making therefore of all things depends on a meer Soveraign Act of the Will and Pleasure of God. So the whole Creation makes its acknowledgement, Rev. 4. 11. Chap. 5. 12. Thou art worthy O Lord to receive Glory, Honour and Power, for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created. God could have omitted all this great work, without the least impeachment of his Glory. Not one Holy Property of his Nature would have been diminished, or abated in its Eternal Glory by that omission. This then depend∣ed on a pure Act of his Will and Choice. 2. On supposition that God would work ad extra, by his Power produce any thing without himself, it was absolutely necessary that himself should be the End of his so doing. For as before the production of all things, there was nothing that could be the end why any of them should be brought forth out of nothing, or towards which they should be disposed: So God being an infinite Agent in Wisdom and Understanding and Power, he could have no End in his Actings, but that also which is infinite. It is therefore natural and necessary unto God to do all things for himself. It is impossible he should have any other end; and he hath done so accordingly, Prov. 16. 4. The Lord hath made all things for himself. He aimed at himself in all that he did; there being no other infinite Good for him to make his Object, and his End, but himself alone. 3. This doing things, all things for himself, cannot intend an Addition or Acrewment thereby of any new real good unto himself. His absolute Eternal Perfection and Al-sufficiency render this impossible. God doth not become more Power∣ful, Great, Wise, Just, Holy, Good or Gracious by any of his
works, by any thing that he doth. He can add nothing to him∣self. It must therefore be the Manifestation and Declaration of the Holy Properties of his Nature that he doth intend and design in his works. And there are two things required hereunto. 1. That he make them known; that by wayes suited to his Infinite Wisdom, he both declare that such Properties do be∣long unto him; as also what is the nature of them accord∣ing as the creature is able to apprehend. What it is to give Glory to God.So he doth things to make his power known, to shew his pow∣er, and to declare his name through the earth, Rom. 9. 17, 22. So it was said, that by the works of creation, , that which may be known of God is made manifest, Rom. 1. 19, 20. And what is that? even the natural essential Properties of his Being; his Eternal Power and Godhead. To this Head are re∣ferred all those Promises of God that he would glorifie himself, and the prayers of his Saints that he would do so. And the Attestations given unto it in the Scripture that he hath done so. He hath made known his Wisdom, Holiness, Power, Good∣ness, Self-sufficiency, and the like perfections of his na∣ture. 2. That he attain an Ascription, an Attribution of Praise, and Glory to himself upon their account. His design is to be ad∣mired in all them that believe, 2 Thess. 1. 10. That is, that up∣on an Apprehension of his Excellencies, which he hath re∣vealed, and as he hath revealed them, they should admire adore, applaud, glorifie and praise him, worship, believe in and trust him in all things, and endeavour the enjoyment of him as an eternal reward. And this is also threefold. 1. Interpretative; so the inanimate and brute creatures ascribe unto God the glory of his Properties, even by what they they are, and do. By what they are in their Beings, and their observation of the Law and inclination of their nature, they give unto God the glory of that Wisdom and Power whereby they are made; and of that Soveraignty whereon they depend. Hence nothing more frequent in the praises of God of old, than the calling of the inanimate creatures, Heaven and Earth,
Winds, Storms, Thunder, and the Beasts of the field, to give Praise and Glory to God. That is, by what they are, they do so, in as much as from the impression of Gods glorious Excellen∣cies in their Effects upon them, they are made known and manifest. 2. Involuntary in some rational creatures. Sinning Men and Angels have no design, no will, no desire to give glory to God. They do their utmost endeavour to the contrary, to hate him reproach and blaspheme him. But they cannot yet cast off the yoke of God. In their Minds and Consciences they are forced and shall be for ever to acknowledge that God is infi∣nitely Holy, infinitely Wise, Powerful and Righteous. And he hath the glory of all these Properties from them, in their very desires that he were otherwise. When they would that God were not Just to punish them, Powerful to torment them, Wise to find them out, Holy to be displeased with their lusts and sins, they do at the same time, in the same thing, own ac∣knowledge and give unto God the glory of his Being, Justice, Wisdom, Power and Holiness. When therefore God hath made known his Properties, the Ascription of glory unto him on their account, is to rational creatures, natural and unavoidable. 3. It is voluntary in the reasonable service, Worship, Fear, Trust, Obedience, of Angels and Men. God having revealed unto them the Properties of his Nature, they acknowledge, adore them, and place their confidence in them, and thereby glorifie him as God. And this glorifying of God consisteth in three things. 1. In making the Excellencies of God revealed unto us, the Principle and Chief Object of all the moral actings of our souls, and of all the actings of our Affections. To fear the Lord and his Goodness, and to fear him for his Goodness; to trust in his Power and Faithfulness, to obey his Authority, to delight in his Will and Grace, to love him above all, because of his Excel∣lencies and Beauty, this is to glorifie him. 2. To pray for, and to rejoyce in all the wayes and means whereby he will, or hath promised further to manifest or de∣clare these Properties of his Nature and his Glory in them.
What is the reason why we pray for, long for the accomplish∣ment of the Promises of God towards his Saints, of his Threat∣nings towards his Enemies, of the fulfilling of the glorious Works of his Power and Grace that yet remain to be done, of the coming of the Kingdom of Christ, of the approach of glory? Is it not chiefly and principally; that the glorious Excellencies of Gods Nature may be made more manifest, be more known, more exalted; that God may appear more as he is, and as he hath declared himself to be? This is to give glory to God. So likewise our Joy, Rejoycing and Satisfaction in any of the ways and works of God, it is solely on this account, that in them, God in his Properties, that is, his Power, Wisdom, Holiness, and the like, is revealed, declared and made known. 3. In their joint actual Celebration of his praises; which as it is a Duty of the greatest importance, and which we are indeed of all others most frequently exhorted unto, and most earnestly called upon for: so in the nature of it, it consists in our be∣lieving rejoycing expression of what God is, and what he doth; that is, our admiring, adoring and blessing him because of his Holiness, Goodness, and the rest of his Properties, and his works of Grace and Power, suitable unto them. This it is to praise God, Rev. 5. 4. Observe that none of these Properties of God can be thus manifested and known, nor himself be glorified for them, but by his declaration of them, and by their effects. We know no more of God than he is pleased to reveal unto us. I mean not meer Revelation by his Word, but any wayes or means, whether by his Word, or by his Works, or by Impressions from the Law of Nature upon our hearts and minds. And what ever God thus declares of himself; He doth it by exercising, putting forth, and manifesting the effects of it. So we know his Power, Wisdom, Goodness and Grace; namely, by the effects of them, or the works of God that proceed from them, and are suited unto them. And what ever is in God that is not thus made known, we cannot apprehend nor glorifie God on the account of it. God therefore doing all things, as hath been shewed, for the glory of these his Properties, he doth so reveal them, and make them known.
5. Upon this design of God, it is necessary that he should re∣veal, and make known all the Attributes and Properties of his Nature, in works and effects peculiarly proceeding from them and answering unto them, that he might be glorified in them, and which as the Event manifests, he hath done accordingly. For what Reason can be imagined, why God will be glorified in one Essential Excellency of his Nature, and not in another? Espe∣cially must this be affirmed of those Properties of the Nature of God, which the Event manifesteth his principal glory to consist in, and arise from, and the knowledge whereof is of the great∣est use behoof and benefit unto the Children of men in refe∣rence unto his design towards them. Glory arising to God by Forgive∣ness.6. These things being so, let us consider how it stands in reference unto that which is under consideration. God in the Creation of all things, glorified or manifested his Greatness, Power, Wisdom and Goodness, with many other properties of the like kind. But his Soveraignty, Righteousness and Holiness, how are they declared hereby? either not at all, or not in so evident a manner as is necessary, that he might be fully glori∣fied in them, or for them. What then doth he do? leave them in darkness, vailed, undiscovered, satisfying himself in the glory of those Properties which his work of Creation had made known? Was there any Reason, why he should do so, designing to do all things for himself and for his own glory? Wherefore he gives his holy Law as a Rule of Obedience unto men and Angels. This plainly reveals his Soveraignty or Au∣thority over them, his Holiness and Righteousness in the Equity and Purity of things he required of them: so that in and by these Properties also he may be glorified. As he made all things for himself, that is, the manifestation of his Greatness, Power, Wisdom and Goodness, so he gave the Law for himself, that is, the manifestation of his Authority, Holiness and Righteousness. But is this all? Is there not Remunerative Justice in God, in a way of Bounty? Is there not Vindictive Justice in him, in a way of severity? There is so, and in the pursuit of the design men∣tioned, they also are to be manifested, or God will not be glorified in them. This therefore he did also in the Rewards
and Punishments that he annexed unto the Law of Obedience that he had prescribed. To manifest his Remunerative Justice he promised a Reward in a way of Bounty, which the Angels that sinned not were made partakers of; and in the penalty threatned, which sinning Angels and Men incurred, he revealed his Vindictive Justice in a way of severity. So are all these Properties of God made known by their Effects, and so is God glorified in them, or on their account. But after all this, are there no other Properties of his Nature, Divine Excellencies that cannot be separated from his Being, which by none of these means, are so much as once intimated to be in him? It is evident that there are; such are Mercy, Grace, Patience, Long-suffering, Compassion and the like: con∣cerning which observe, 1. That where there are no Objects of them, they cannot be declared, or manifested, or exercised. As Gods Power or Wisdom could not be manifest, if there were no Objects of them, no more can his Grace or Mercy. If never any stand in need of them, they can never be exercised, and consequently never be known. Therefore were they not revealed, neither by the Creation of all things, nor by the Law or its Sanction, nor by the Law written in our hearts. For all these suppose no objects of Grace and Mercy. For it is sinners only, and such as have made themselves miserable by sin, that they can be exercised about. 2. There are no Excellencies of Gods nature, that are more expressive of Divine Goodness, Loveliness and Beauty, than these are, of Mercy, Grace, Long-suffering and Patience: and there∣fore there is nothing that God so requireth our likeness unto him in, our conformity unto his Image as in these; namely, Mercy, Grace and readiness to forgive. And the contrary frame in any he doth of all things most abhor. They shall have judgement without mercy, who shewed no mercy. And therefore it is certain that God will be glorified in the manifestation of these Proper∣ties of his Nature. 3. These Properties can be no otherwise exercised, and con∣sequently no other wayes known, but only in and by the par∣don of sin; which puts it beyond all question, that there is
Forgiveness with God. God will not lose the glory of these his Excellencies; he will be revealed in them, he will be known by them, he will be glorified for them; which he could not be, if there were not forgiveness with him: So that here comes in not only the Truth, but the necessity of forgiveness also. Forgiveness manifested in the sending of the Son of God to dye for sin. And from the Obligation that is on us to for∣give one another. Forgive∣ness mani∣fested in the Death of Christ.XII. In the next place, we shall proceed unto that Evidence which is the Center wherein all the lines of those foregoing do meet and rest: The fountain of all those streams of Refresh∣ment that are in them, that which animates and gives life and efficacy unto them. This lyes in Gods sending of his Son. The consideration hereof will leave no pretence or excuse unto unbelief in this matter. To make this Evidence more clear and legible, as to what is intended in it, we must consider, 1. What was the Rise of this sending, we speak of. 2. Who it was that was sent. 3. How or in what manner he was sent. 4. Unto what end and purpose. First, the Rise and spring of it is to be considered. It came forth from the Eternal mutual consent and counsel of the Father and the Son, Zech. 6. 13. The Counsel of Peace shall be between them both. It is of Christ the Branch, of whom he speaks. He shall build the Temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the glory. And shall sit and rule upon his Throne; and shall be a Priest upon his Throne, and the Counsel of Peace shall be between them both. That is, between God the Father, who sends him, and himself; There lay the Counsel of Peace making between God and Man in due time accomplished by him who is our Peace, Eph. 2. 16. So he speaks, Prov. 8. 30, 31. Then I was by him as one brought up with him, and I was daily his delight; rejoycing alwayes be∣fore him. Rejoycing in the habitable parts of the Earth, and my delights were with the Sons of men. They are the words of the
Wisdom, that is, of the Son of God. When was this done? Then I was with him. Why before the Mountains were setled, whilst as yet he had not made the Earth nor the Fields; That is, before the creation of the world, or from eternity, v. 25, 26. But how then could he rejoyce in the habitable parts of the Earth? And how could his delight be with the Sons of men? seeing as yet they were not? I answer, It was the Counsel of Peace towards them before mentioned, in the pursuit whereof he was to be sent to converse amongst them on the earth. He rejoyced in the fore-thoughts of his being sent to them, and the work he had to do for them. Then, with his own consent and delight was he fore-ordained unto his work, even before the foundation of the world, 1 Pet. 1. 20. and received of the Father the Promise of eternal life, even before the world began, Tit. 1. 2. That is to be given unto sinners, by way of Forgiveness through his blood. So is this whole Counsel expressed, Psalm 40. 7, 8. Whence it is made use of by the Apostle, Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7. Then said I, lo I come, in the volume of thy Book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will O God. Thy Law is in the midst of my heart. There is the Will of the Father in this matter, and the Law of its per∣formance. And there is the Will of the Son, in answer there∣unto; and his delight in fulfilling that Law which was pre∣scribed unto him. Let us now consider, to what purpose was this Eternal Coun∣sel of Peace, This Agreement of the Father and Son from Eter∣nity about the State and Condition of Mankind? If God would have left them all to perish under the guilt of their sins, there had been no need at all of any such thoughts, design or Coun∣sel. God had given unto them a Law, Righteous and Holy, which if they transgressed, he had threatned them with eter∣nal destruction. Under the Rule disposal and power of this Law; he might have righteously left them to stand or fall ac∣cording to the verdict and sentence thereof. But now he assures us, he reveals unto us that he had other thoughts in this matter; that there were other Counsels between the Father and the Son concerning us. And these such as the Son was delighted in the prospect of his Accomplishment of them. What can these thoughts and counsels be, but about a way for their
deliverance, which could no otherwise be, but by the forgive∣ness of sins? For whatever else be done, yet if God mark iniqui∣ties there is none can stand. Hearken therefore poor sinner, and have hope. God is consulting about thy deliverance and free∣dom. And what cannot the Wisdom and Grace of the Father and Son effect and accomplish? And to this end was the Son sent into the world, which is the second thing proposed to Consideration. 2. Whom did God send about this business? The Scripture layes great weight and Emphasis on this consideration, faith must do so also: John 3. 16. God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son: So 1 John 4. 9. In this was manifested the love of God towards us, because that God sent his only be∣gotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. And again, v. 10. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us: and sent his Son to be the propitiations of our sins. And who is this that is thus sent and called the only begotten Son of God? Take a double description of him, one out of the Old Testament, and another from the new. The first from Isa. 9. 6. To us a Child is born, to us a Son is given, and the Go∣vernment shall be upon his shoulders, and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace: The other from Heb. 1. 2, 3. God hath spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all, by whom also he made the worlds, who being the brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person, upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sate down on the right hand of the Majesty on high. This is he who was sent; in Nature he was glorious; even over all God blessed for ever. In Answerableness unto the Father; the brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his person: possessed of all the same essential Properties with him. So that what we find in him, we may be assured of in the Father also; for he that hath seen him, hath seen the Father, who is in him. In Power, Om∣nipotent, for he made all things, and upholding all things with an unspeakable facility, by the Word of his power. In Office, exalted over all, sitting at the right hand of the Majesty on high. In Name, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father; so
that whatever he came about, he will assuredly accomplish and fulfill; for what should hinder or let this Mighty One from perfecting his design? Now this consideration raiseth our Evidence to that height, as to give us an unquestionable Assurance in this matter. Here is a near and a particular Object for faith to be exercised about, and to rest in. Wherefore did this glorious Son of God come and Tabernacle amongst poor sinners? We beheld the glory of the Eternal Word, the glory of the only begotten of the Father, and he was made flesh, , and pitched his Tabernacle amongst us, John 1. 14. To what end? It was no other but to work out, and accomplish the Eternal Counsel of Peace towards sinners before mentioned, to procure for them, and to declare unto them the forgiveness of sin. And what greater evidence, what great∣er Assurance can we have, that there is forgiveness with God for us? he himself hath given it as a Rule, that what is done by giving an only begotten, or an only beloved Son, gives assured Te∣stimony of reality and sincerity in the thing that is confirmed by it. So he sayes unto Abraham, Gen. 22. 12. Now I know that thou fearest God, seeing that thou hast not withheld thy Son, thy only Son from me. This way it may be known, or no way. And they are blessed Conclusions that faith may make from this consideration; now I know that there is forgiveness with God, seeing he hath not withheld his Son, his only Son, that he might accomplish it. To this purpose the Apostle teacheth us to reason, Rom. 8. 32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? What further can any soul desire? What ground remains for unbelief to stand upon in this matter? Is there any thing more to be done herein? It was to manifest that there is for∣giveness with him, and to make way for the exercise of it, that God sent his Son; that the Son of God came into the world, as will afterwards more fully appear. 3. To this sending of the Son of God to this purpose, there is evidence and security added from the Manner wherein he was sent. How was this? Not in Glory, not in Power, not in an open discovery of his Eternal Power and Godhead. Had
it been so, we might have thought, that he had come meerly to manifest and glorifie himself in the world. And this he might have done without thoughts of mercy or Pardon to∣wards us. But he came quite in another manner: He was seen in the likeness of sinful flesh, Rom. 8 3. In the form of a servant, Phil. 2. 10. Being made of a woman, made under the Law, Gal. 4. 4. What he endured, suffered, underwent in that state and condition, is in some measure known unto us all. All this could not be meerly, and firstly for himself. All that he expected at the close of it, was to be glorified with that glory which he had with the Father before the world was, John 17. 5. It must then be for our sakes; and for what? to save and deliver us from that condition of wrath at present, and future expe∣ctation of Vengeance, which we had cast our selves into by sin; that is, to procure for us the forgiveness of sin. Had not God designed Pardon for sin, he would never have sent his Son in this manner, to testifie it: And he did it, because it could no other way be brought about, as hath been declared. Do we doubt whether there be forgiveness with God or no? or whether we shall obtain it, if we address our selves unto him for to be made partakers of it? Consider the Condition of his Son in the world; review his Afflictions, Poverty, Temptati∣on, Sorrows, Sufferings; Then ask our souls, To what end was all this? And if we can find any other design in it, any other Reason, Cause, or Necessity of it, but only and meerly to testifie and declare, that there is forgiveness with God, and to purchase and procure the Communication of it unto us, let us abide in, and perish under our fears. But if this be so, we have sufficient warranty to assure our souls in the expecta∣tion of it. 4. Besides all this, there ensues upon what went before, that great and wonderfull Issue, in the death of the Son of God. This thing was great and marvellous, and we may a little enquire into what it was, that was designed therein. And hereof the Scripture gives us a full account. As, 1. That he dyed to make Attonement for Sin, or Reconciliation for Iniquity, Dan. 9. 24. He gave his life a ransom for the sins of many, Matth. 20. 28. 1 Tim. 2. 6. He was in it made sin,
that others might become the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 20. Rom. 8. 3. Therein he bare our sins in his body on the Tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. This was the state of this matter. Not∣withstanding all the Love, Grace and condescention before mentioned, yet our sins were of that nature, and so directly opposite unto the Justice and Holiness of God, that unless At∣tonement were made, and a Price of Redemption paid, there could be no Pardon, no forgiveness obtained. This therefore he undertook to do, and that by the Sacrifice of himself; an∣swering all that was prefigured by, and represented in the Sa∣crifices of old; as the Apostle largely declares, Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7, 8 9. And herein is the forgiveness that is in God, copied out and ex∣emplified so clearly and evidently, that he that cannot read it, will be cursed unto Eternity. Yea, and let him be accursed; for what can be more required to justifie God in his eternal destruction? He that will not believe his Grace as testified and exemplified in the Blood of his Son, let him perish without remedy. Yea but, 2. The Curse and Sentence of the Law lyes on record against sin∣ners. It puts in its Demands against our acquittance, and layes an obligation upon us unto punishment. And God will not reject, nor destroy his Law, unless it be answered there is no acceptance for sinners. This therefore in the next place his death was designed unto. As he satisfied and made At∣tonement by it unto Justice, (that was the fountain, spring and cause of the Law) so he fulfilled and answered the demands of the Law as it was an Effect of the Justice of God: So Rom. 8. 13. He suffered in the likeness of sinful flesh, that the Righte∣ousness of the Law might be fulfilled, and answered. He answe∣red the Curse of the Law when he was made a Curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. And so became as to the Obedience of the Law, the end of the Law for Righteousness unto them that do believe, Rom. 10. 3, 4. And as to the penalty that it threatned, he bore it, removed it, and took it out of the way. So hath he made way for forgiveness through the very heart of the Law; it hath not one word to speak against the pardon of them that do believe. But, 3. Sinners are under the power of Satan; he layes a claim
unto them, and by what means shall they be rescued from his interest and dominion? This also his death was designed to accomplish. For as he was manifest to destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. So by death he destroyed him that had the power of death, Heb. 2. 14. That is, to despoil him of his Power, to de∣stroy his Dominion, to take away his plea unto sinners that be∣lieve; as we have at large elsewhere declared. And by all these things, with many other concernments of his death that might be instanced in, we are abundantly se∣cured of the forgiveness that is with God: And of his willingness that we should be made partakers thereof. 5. Is this all? Did his Work cease in his death? Did he no more for the securing of the forgiveness of sins unto us, but only that he dyed for them? Yes, he lives also after death for the same end and purpose. This Son of God in that nature which he assumed to expiate sin by death, lives again after death to se∣cure unto us, and to compleat the forgiveness of sins. And this he doth two wayes. 1. Being raised from that death which he underwent, to make Attonement for sin by the Power and Good Will of God, he evidenceth and testifieth unto us, that he hath fully performed the work he undertook; and that in our behalf, and for us, he hath received a discharge. Had he not answered the guilt of sin by his death▪ he had never been raised from it. 2. He lives after death, a Mediatory Life to make intercession for us, that we may receive the forgiveness of sin, as also him∣self to give it out unto us: which things are frequently made use of, to encourage the souls of men to believe, and therefore shall not at present be further insisted on. Thus then stands this matter, that Mercy might have a way to exercise it self in forgiveness, with a consistency unto the Ho∣nour of the Righteousness and Law of God, was the Son of God so sent for the ends and purposes mentioned. Now herein consisteth the greatest Work that God did ever perform, or ever will. It was the most eminent product of Infinite Wisdom, Goodness, Grace and Power. And herein do all the Excellencies of God shine forth more gloriously than in all the
works of his hands. Let us then wisely ponder and consider this matter; let us bring our own souls with their Objecti∣ons unto this Evidence, and see what exception we have to lay against it. I know nothing will satisfie unbelief: the design of it is to make the soul find that to be Iso hereafter, which it would perswade it of here; namely; that there is no forgive∣ness in God. And Satan, who makes use of this Engine, knows full well, that there is none for them who believe there is none; or rather will not believe that there is any. For it will at the last day be unto men according unto their faith or un∣belief. He that believeth aright; and he that believeth not, that forgiveness is with God, as to their own particulars shall neither of them be deceived. But what is it that can be rea∣sonably excepted against this evidence, this foundation of our faith in this matter? God hath not sent his Son in vain, which yet he must have done, as we have shewed, had he not de∣signed to manifest and exercise forgiveness towards sinners. Wherefore to confirm our faith from hence, let us make a little search into these things, in some particular enquiries. 1. Seeing the Son of God dyed in that way and manner that he did according to the determinate Counsel and Will of God, wherefore did he do so, and what aimed he at therein? Answ. It is plain that he dyed for our sins, Rom. 4. 25. that is, to make reconciliation for the sins of his people, Heb. 2. 17, 18. This Moses and the Prophets, this the whole Scripture testifieth unto; and without a supposal of it, not one word of it can be aright believed. Nor can we yield any due Obedience unto God without it. 2. What then did God do unto him? What was in trans∣action between God as the Judge of all, and him that was the Mediator of the Church? Answ. God indeed laid on him the iniquities of us all, Isa. 53. 6. all the sins of all the Elect; yea, he made him a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. And making him a sin offering, or an offering for sin, he condemned sin in the flesh, Rom. 8▪ 3. 2 Cor. 5. 21. So that, all that which the Justice or Law of God had to re∣quire about the punishment due unto sin, was all laid and ex∣ecuted on him.
3. What then did Christ do in his death? What did he aim at and design? What was his intention in submitting unto, and undergoing the Will of God in these things? Answ. He bare our sins in his own body upon the Tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. He took our sins upon him, undertook to answer for them, to pay our debts, to make an end of the difference about them between God and sinners, Dan. 9. 24. His aim undoubtedly was by all that he underwent and suffered, so to make At∣tonement for sin, as that no more could on that account be ex∣pected. 4. Had God any more to require of sinners on the account of sin, that his Justice might be satisfied, his Holiness vindi∣cated, his Glory exalted, his Honour be repaired, than what he charged on Christ? Did he lay somewhat of the penalty due to sin on him, execute some part of the curse of the Law against him, and yet reserve some wrath for sinners themselves? Answ. No doubtless: He came to do the whole Will of God, Heb. 10. 7, 8. And God spared him not any thing that in his holy will he had appointed to be done unto sin, Rom. 8. 32. He would never have so dealt with his Son, to have made an half work of it; nor is the work of making satisfaction for sin such, as that any, the least part of it should ever be under∣taken by another. Nothing is more injurious, or blasphemous against God and Christ, than the foolish imagination among the Papists of works satisfactory for the punishment due to sin, or any part of it: As also is their Purgatory pains to ex∣piate any remaining guilt after this life. This work of making satisfaction for sin is such, as no creature in Heaven or Earth can put forth an hand unto. It was wholly committed to the Son of God, who alone was able to undertake it, and who hath per∣fectly accomplished it. So that God now sayes, fury is not in me, he that will lay hold on my strength that he may have peace, he shall have peace, Isa. 21. 4. 5. What then became of the Lord Christ in his undertaking? Did he go through with it? or did he faint under it? Did he only testifie his Love, and shew his good will for our deli∣verance? or did also effectually pursue it, and not faint, until he had made a way for the exercise of forgiveness?
Answ. It was not possible that he should be detained by the pains of death, Acts 2. 24. He knew before hand, that he should be carried through his work, that he should not be forsaken in it, nor saint under it, Isa. 50. 6, 7, 8. And God hath given this unquestionable evidence of his discharge of the debt of sin to the utmost, in that he was acquitted from the whole account, when he was raised from the dead. For he that is given up to prison upon the sentence of the Law for the debt of sin, shall not be freed, untill he have paid the utmost farthing. This there∣fore he manifested himself to have done, by his Resurrection from the dead. 6. What then is now become of him? Where is he, and what doth he? Hath he so done his work and laid it aside, or doth he still continue to carry it on until it be brought unto its perfection? Answ. It is true, he was dead, but he is alive, and lives for ever; and hath told us, that because he liveth we shall live also; And that, because this is the end of his mediatory life in Heaven: he lives for ever to make Intercession for us, Heb. 7. 26, 27. And to this end, that the forgiveness of sin which he hath procured for us, may be communicated unto us, that we might be made partakers of it, and live for ever. What ground is left of questioning the Truth in hand? What link of this Chain can unbelief break in, or upon? If men resolve, notwithstanding all this Evidence and Assurance that is tendred unto them thereof, that they will not yet be∣lieve that there is forgiveness with God, or will not be encou∣raged to attempt the securing of it unto themselves, or else despise it as a thing not worth the looking after; It is enough for them that declare it, that preach these things, that they are a sweet savour unto God in them that perish, as well as in them that are saved. And I bless God that I have had this Op∣portunity to bear Testimony to the Grace of God in Christ, which if it be not received, it is because the God of this world hath blinded the eyes of men, that the light of the Gospel of the Glory of God should not shine into their minds. But Christ will be glorified in them that believe on these principles and foundations.
Our Obli∣gation un∣to mutu∣al forgive∣ness, proves forgiveness in God.XIII. Another Evidence of the same Truth may be taken from hence, that God requires forgiveness in us; that we should forgive one another; and therefore doubtless, there is forgive∣ness with him for us. The sense of this Consideration unto our present purpose will be manifest in the ensuing Observa∣tions. First, It is certain, that God hath required this of us: The Te∣stimonies hereof are many, and known, so that they need not particularly to be repeated or insisted on. See Luke 17. 3, 4. Ephes. 4. 32. Matth. 18 24. unto the end. Only there are some things that put a singular Emphasis upon this Command, manifesting the great importance of this duty in us, which may be marked. As, 1. That our Saviour requires us to carry a sense of our In∣tegrity and Sincerity in the discharge of this duty, along with us, in our Addresses unto God in prayer. Hence he teacheth and enjoyns us to pray, or plead for the forgiveness of our debts to God, (that is, our sins or trespasses against him, which make us debtors to his Law and Justice,) even as we forgive them that so trespass or offend against us, as to stand in need of our forgiveness, Matth. 6. 12. Many are ready to devour such as are not satisfied, that the Words of that Rule of Prayer, which he hath prescribed unto us, are to be precisely read or repeated every day; I wish they would as heedfully mind that prescri∣ption which is given us herein, for that frame of heart and spirit which ought to be in all our supplications. It might possibly abate of their wrath in that and other things. But here is a Rule for all prayer, as all acknowledge, as also of the things that are requisite to make it acceptable. This in par∣ticular is required, that before the searcher of all hearts, and in our addresses unto him, in our greatest concernments, we profess our sincerity in the discharge of this duty, and do put our obtaining of what we desire upon that issue. This a great Crown that is put upon the head of this duty, that which makes it very eminent, and evidenceth the great concern of the Glory of God, and our own souls therein.
2. We may observe, that no other duty whatever is expresly placed in the same series, order, or rank with it; which makes it evident, that it is singled out to be professed as a token and pledge of our sincerity in all other parts of our Obedience un∣to God. It is by Christ himself made the instance, for the try∣al of our sincerity in our Universal Obedience, which gives no small honour unto it. The Apostle puts great weight on the Fifth Commandment, Honour thy Father and Mother, because it is the first Commandment with promise, Ephes. 6. 2. All the Com∣mandments indeed had a promise, Do this and live; life was promised to the observance of them all: But this is the first that had a peculiar promise annexed unto it, and accompa∣nying of it. And it was such a Promise, as had a peculiar foun∣dation through Gods Ordinance in the thing it self. It is, that the Parents should prolong the lives of their Children that were obedient.  Exod. 20. 11. They shall prolong thy dayes; that is, by praying for their prosperity, blessing them in the name of God, and directing them in those wayes of Obe∣dience, whereby they might live and possess the Land. And this Promise is now translated from the Covenant of Canaan, into the Covenant of Grace. The blessing of Parents going far towards the interesting their Children in the Promise thereof, and so prolonging their dayes unto eternity, though their dayes in this world should be of little continuance. So it is said of our Saviour, that he should see his seed, and prolong his dayes, Isa. 53. 10. Which hath carried over that Word, and that which is signified by it, unto eternal things. But this by the way. As the singular Promise made to that Command, renders it singular, so doth this especial instancing in this duty in our prayer, render it also. For though as all the Command∣ments had a Promise, so we are to carry a Testimony with us of our sincerity in Universal Obedience in our addresses unto God: yet the singling out of this instance renders it exceeding re∣markable; and shewes what a value God puts upon it, and how well he is pleased with it. 3. That God requires this forgiveness in us, upon the ac∣count of the forgiveness we receive from him; which is to put the greatest obligation upon us unto it, that we are capable of:
and to give the strongest and most powerful motive possible un∣to its performance: See Ephes. 4. 32. 4. That this duty is more directly and expresly required in the New Testament than in the Old. Required then it was, but not so openly, so plainly, so expresly as now. Hence we find a different frame of Spirit between them under that dispensati∣on, and those under that of the New Testament. There are found amongst them some such Reflections upon their enemies, their Oppressors, Persecutors, and the like, as although they were warranted by some actings of the Spirit of God in them, yet being suited unto the Dispensation they were under, do no way become us now, who by Jesus Christ receive grace for grace. So Zechariah when he dyed, cryed, the Lord look on, and require; but Stephen dying in the same cause and manner said, Lord lay not this sin to their charge. Elijah called for fire from Heaven: But our Saviour reproves the least inclination in his Disciples, to imitate him therein. And the reason of this dif∣ference is, because forgiveness in God is under the New Testa∣ment far more clearly, especially in the nature and cause of it, discovered in the Gospel, which hath brought life and immortality to light, than it was under the Law. For all our Obedience both in matter and manner, is to be suited unto the discoveries and Revelation of God unto us. 5. This Forgiveness of others, is made an express Condition of our obtaining Pardon and Forgiveness from God. Mat 6. 14, 15. And the nature hereof is expresly declared, Chap. 18. 24. Such Evangelical Conditions we have not many. I confess, they have no causal influence into the accomplishment of the Promise; but the non-performance of them, is a sufficient barr against our pretending to the Promise, a sufficient evidence that we have no pleadable interest in it. Our forgiving of others will not procure forgiveness for our selves: But our not forgiving of others proves, that we our selves are not forgiven. And all these things do shew what weight God himself layes on this duty. Secondly, Observe, that this Duty is such, as that there is no∣thing more comely, useful, or honourable unto, or praise worthy in any, than a due performance of it. To be morose, impla∣cable,
inexorable, revengeful, is one of the greatest degene∣racies of humane nature. And no men are commonly, even in this world, more branded with real infamy and disho∣nour amongst Wise and Good men, than those who are of such a frame, and do act accordingly. To remember Injuries, to re∣tain a sense of Wrongs, to watch for Opportunities of Revenge, to hate and be malitiously perverse, is to represent the Image of the Devil unto the world in its proper colours; He is the great Enemy and self avenger: On the other side, no Grace, no Vertue, no Duty, no Ornament of the mind, or Conversation of man, is in it self so lovely, so comely, so praise worthy, or so useful unto mankind, as are Meekness, Readiness to forgive and pardon. This is that principally which renders a man a good man, for whom one would even dare to dye: And I am sorry to add that this Grace or duty is recommended by its raritie. It is little found amongst the Children of men. The consi∣deration of the defect of men herein, as in those other funda∣mental duties of the Gospel, in self-denyal, readiness for the Cross, and forsaking the world, is an Evidence, if not how little sincerity there is in the World; Yet at least it is, of how little growing, and thriving there is amongst Profes∣sors. 3. That there is no Grace, Vertue, or Perfection in any man, but what is as an Emanation from the Divine Goodness and Bounty, so expressive of some Divine Excellencies or perfection; somewhat that is in God, in a way and manner Infinitely more Excellent. We were created in the Image of God. Whatever was good or comely in us, was a part of that Image: Especi∣ally the Ornaments of our Minds, the perfections of our souls. These things had in them a resemblance of, and a correspon∣dency unto some excellencies in God, whereunto by the way of Analogie they may be reduced. This being for the most part lost by sin, a shadow of it only remaining in the faculties of our souls; and that Dominion over the Creatures, which is permitted unto men in the patience of God. The recovery that we have by Grace, is nothing but an initial Renovation of the Image of God in us, Ephes. 4. 22. It is the implanting upon our natures those Graces, which may render us again like unto him. And
nothing is Grace or Vertue, but what so answers to somewhat in God. So then whatever is in us of this kind, is in God absolutely, perfectly, in a way and manner infinitely more ex∣cellent. Let us now therefore put these things together. God re∣quires of us, that there should be forgiveness in us for those that do offend us; forgiveness without limitation and bounds; The Grace hereof he bestoweth on his Saints; sets an high price upon it, and manifests many wayes, that he accounts it among the most excellent of our endowments; one of the most lovely and praise worthy qualifications of any person. What then shall we now say? Is there forgiveness with him or no? He that made the Eye, shall he not see? He that planted the Ear, shall he not hear? He that thus prescribes forgiveness to us, that bestows the Grace of it upon us, is there not forgiveness with him? It is all one as to say, though we are good, yet God is not; though we are Benign and Bountiful, yet he is not. He that finds this Grace wrought in him in any measure, and yet fears that he shall not find it in God for himself, doth therein, and so far prefer himself above God; which is the natural Effect of cursed unbelief. But the Truth is, were there not forgiveness with God, for∣giveness in man would be no vertue, with all those qualities that encline thereto; such are meekness, pity, patience, compassion and the like. Which what were it, but to set loose Humane Na∣ture to rage and madness. For as every Truth consists in its answerableness to the Prime and Eternal Verity; So vertue con∣sists not absolutely nor primarily in a conformity to a rule of Command, but in a Correspondency unto the first absolute per∣fect Being and its perfections.
Properties of Forgiveness. The Greatness and Freedom of it. Properties of Divine forgiveness.The Arguments and Demonstrations foregoing have, we hope, undeniably evinced the great Truth we have insisted on, which is the life and soul of all our Hope, Profession, Religion and Worship. The end of all this Discourse is, to lay a firm foun∣dation for faith to rest upon, in its addresses unto God for the forgiveness of sins; as also to give encouragements unto all sorts of persons so to do. This End remains now to be ex∣plained and pressed; which work yet before we directly close withall, two things are further to be premised. And the first is, to propose some of those Adjuncts of, and Considerations about this forgiveness, as may both encourage and necessitate us to seek out after it, and to mix the Testimonies given unto it, and the Promises of it with faith unto our Benefit and Advan∣tage. The other is to shew, how needfull all this endeavour is, upon the, account of that great Unbelief which is in the most in this matter. As to the first of these then we may consider, First, That this forgiveness that is with God, is such as becomes him, such as is suitable to his Greatness, Goodness, and all other Excellencies of his Nature, such as that therein he will be known to be God. What he sayes concerning some of the works of his Providence, be still and know that I am God; may be much more said concerning this great Effect of his Grace: Still your souls, and know that he is God. It is not like that narrow, difficult, halving and manacled forgiveness that is found amongst men, when any such thing is found amongst them. But it is full, free, boundless, bottomless, absolute, such as becomes his Nature and Excellencies. It is in a word, forgiveness that is with God, and by the exercise whereofhe will be known so to be. And hence, 1. God himself doth really separate and distinguish his for∣giveness, from any thing that our thoughts and imaginations can reach unto, and that because it is his, and like himself. It is an object for faith alone; which can rest in that, which it cannot comprehend. It is never safer, than when it is as it were overwhelmed with infiniteness. But set meer rational thoughts, or the imaginations of our minds at work about
such things, and they fall unconceivably short of them. They can neither conceive of them aright, nor use them unto their proper end and purpose. Were not forgiveness in God somewhat beyond what men could imagine, no flesh could be saved. This himself expresseth, Isa. 55. 7, 8, 9. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, and he will abundantly pardon. For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your wayes my wayes saith the Lord; for as the Heavens are higher than the earth, so are my wayes higher than your wayes, and my thoughts than your thoughts. They are, as is plain in the context, thoughts of forgiveness, and wayes of Pardon whereof he speaks. These our Apprehensi∣ons come short of; we know little or nothing of the infinite largeness of his heart in this matter. He that he speaks of, is  an impiously wicked man, and  a man of deceit, and perverse wickedness. He whose design and course is nothing but a lye, sin, and iniquity. Such an one as we would have little or no hopes of; that we would scarce think it worth our while to deal withal about a hopeless Conversion; or can scarce find in our hearts to pray for him, but are ready to give him up, as one profligate and desperate. But let him turn to the Lord and he shall obtain forgiveness. But how can this be? Is it possible there should be mercy for such an one? Yes! For the Lord  will multiply to pardon. He hath forgiveness with him to outdo all the multiplied sins of any that turn unto him, and seek for it. But this is very hard, very difficult for us to apprehend. This is not the way and manner of men: We deal not thus with profligate Of∣fenders against us. True, saith God; But your wayes are not my wayes. I do not act in this matter like unto you, nor as you are accustomed to do. How then shall we apprehend it; how shall we conceive of it? You can never do it by your Reason or Imaginations; For as the Heavens is above the Earth, so are my thoughts in this matter above your thoughts. This is an ex∣pression to set out the largest and most unconceivable distance that may be. The creation will afford no more significant expres∣sion or representation of it. The Heavens are inconceivably
distant from the Earth, and inconceivably glorious above it. So are the Thoughts of God; they are not only distant from ours, but have a Glory in them also that we cannot rise up unto. For the most part when we come to deal with God about forgiveness, we hang in every bryar of disputing quar∣elsom unbelief. This or that Circumstance or Aggravation, this or that unparalleld particular, bereaves us of our Confidence. Want of a due Consideration of him with whom we have to do, measuring him by that line of our own imaginations, bring∣ing him down unto our Thoughts and our Wayes, is the cause of all our disquietments. Because we find it hard to forgive our pence, we think he cannot forgive Talents. But he hath pro∣vided to obviate such thoughts in us, Hos. 11. 9. I will not execute the fierceness of my wrath, I will not return to destroy Ephra∣im, for I AM GOD AND NOT MAN. Our satisfacti∣on in this matter, is to be taken from his Nature; where he a man, or as the Sons of men, it were impossible that upon such and so many provocations, he should turn away from the fierceness of his Anger. But he is God. This gives an Infiniteness, and an inconceivable boundlesness to the forgiveness that is with him; and exalts it above all our thoughts and wayes. This is to be lamented; Presumption which turns God into an Idol, ascribes unto that Idol, a greater largeness in forgiveness, than faith is able to rise up unto, when it deals with him as a God of infinite Excellencies and Perfections. The reasons of it I confess are obvious. But this is certain, no presumption can falsly imagine that forgiveness to it self from the Idol of its heart, as faith may in the way of God, find in him, and obtain from him. For, Secondly, God engageth his infinite Excellencies to demonstrate the Greatness and Boundlesness of his forgiveness. He proposeth them unto our Considerations to convince us, that we shall find pardon with him suitable and answerable unto them See Isa. 40. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. Why sayest thou O Jacob, and speakest O Israel, my way is hid from the Lord, and my judgement is passed over from my God? Hast thou not known, hast thou not heard, that the Everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the Earth, fainteth not, neither is weary; there is no searching of his understanding; He
giveth power to the faint, and to them that have no might he en∣creaseth strength: even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fail; but they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary; and they shall walk and not be faint. The matter in question is whether Acceptance with God, which is only by forgiveness is to be obtained or no; This sinful Jacob either despairs of, or at least desponds about. But saith God, My thoughts are not as your thoughts in this matter. And what course doth he take to convince them of their mistake therein? What Argument doth he make use of to free them from their unbelief, and to rebuke their fears? Plainly, he calls them to the consideration of himself, both Who and What he is, with whom they had to do. That they might expect ac∣ceptance and forgiveness, such as did become him. Minding them of his power, his Immensity, his Infinite Wisdom, his Unchangableness, all the Excellencies and Properties of his na∣ture, he demands of them, whether they have not just ground to expect Forgiveness and Grace, above all their thoughts and apprehensions, because answering the infinite largeness of his heart from whence it doth proceed? And Moses manageth this plea for the forgiveness of that peo∣ple under an high provocation, and a most severe threatning of their destruction thereon, Numb. 14. 17, 18. He pleads for pardon in such a way and manner, as may answer the great and glorious Properties of the Nature of God, and which would manifest an infiniteness of Power and Al-sufficiency to be in him. This I say is an encouragement in general unto Believers. We have, as I hope, upon unquestionable grounds evinced that there is forgiveness with God, which is the hinge on which turneth the issue of our eternal condition. Now this is like himself, such as becomes him; that answers the infinite perfe∣ctions of his nature; that is exercised and given forth by him as God. We are apt to narrow and streighten it by our unbe∣lief, and to render it unbecoming of him. He less dishonours God (or as little) who being wholly under the power of the Law, believes that there is no forgiveness with him, none
to be obtained from him, or doth not believe it, that so it is, or is so to be obtained, for which he hath the voice and sen∣tence of the Law to countenance him; then those who being convinced of the principles and grounds of it before menti∣oned, and of the Truth of the Testimony given unto it, do yet by streigthning and narrowing of it, render it unworthy of him, whose Excellencies are all infinite, and whose wayes on that account are incomprehensible. If then we resolve to rreat with God about this matter, which is the business now in hand, let us do it, as it becomes his Greatness, that is, indeed, as the wants of our souls do require. Let us not entangle our own Spirits by limiting his Grace. The Father of the Child possessed with a Devil being in a great Agony when he came to our Saviour, cryes out, If thou canst do any thing, have compas∣sion on us, and help us, Mark 9. 22. He would fain be deliver∣ed, but the matter was so great, that he questioned whether the Lord Christ had either Compassion or Power enough for his relief. And what did he obtain hereby? nothing but the retarding of the Cure of his Child for a season. For our Sa∣viour holds him off untill he had instructed him in this matter; saith he, v. 23. If thou canst believe, all things are possible unto him that believeth. Mistake not, if thy Child be not cured, it is not for want of power or pity in me, but of faith in thee. My power is such as renders all things possible, so that they be be∣lieved. So it is with many, who would desirously be made partakers of forgiveness. If it be possible they would be par∣doned, but they do not see it possible. Why where is the de∣fect? God hath no pardon for them, or such as they are, and so it may be they come finally short of pardon. What, be∣cause God cannot pardon them, it is not possible with him? Not at all! but because they cannot, they will not believe, that the forgiveness that is with him is such, as that it would answer all the wants of their souls, because it answers the infinite large∣ness of his heart. And if this doth not wholly deprive them of Pardon, yet it greatly retards their Peace and Comfort. God doth not take it well to be limited by us in any thing, least of all in his Grace. This he calls a Tempting of him, a pro∣voking Temptation, Psal. 78. 41. They turned back and tempted
God, they limited the Holy One of Israel. This he could not hear with. If there be any pardon with God, it is such as be∣comes him to give. When he pardons, he will abundantly par∣don. Go with your half forgiveness limited, conditional Par∣dons with reserves and limitations unto the Sons of men; it may be, it may become them, it is like themselves. That of God is absolute and perfect, before which our sins are as a Cloud before the East Wind, and the rising Sun. Hence he is said to do this work, with his whole heart, and his whole soul; , freely, bountifully, largely to indulge and forgive unto us our sins. And to cast them into the bottom of the Sea, Mic. 7. 19. into a bottomless Ocean, an Emblem of infinite mercy. Remember this, poor souls, when you are to deal with God in this matter, all things are possible unto them that do believe. Secondly, This forgiveness is in or with God, not only so, as that we may apply our selves unto it, if we will, for which he will not be offended with us, but so also, as that he hath placed his great Glory in the Declaration and communication of it; nor can we honour him more than by coming to him to be made partakers of it, and so to receive it from him. For the most part, we are as it were ready rather to steal forgiveness from God, than to receive from him as one that gives it freely and largely. We take it up, and lay it down, as though we would be glad to have it, so God did not, as it were, see us take it; for we are afraid he is not willing we should have it indeed. We would steal this fire from Heaven, and have a share in Gods Treasures and Riches almost without his consent. At least we think that we have it from him aegre, with much difficulty, that it is rarely given and scarcely obtained. That he gives it out, , with a kind of unwilling willing∣ness; as we sometimes give Alms without Chearfulness. And that he loseth so much by us, as he giveth out in Pardon. We are apt to think that we are very willing to have forgiveness, but that God is unwilling to bestow it, and that because he seems to be a loser by it, and to forego the glory of inflicting punish∣ment for our sins, which of all things we suppose he is most loth to part withal. And this is the very nature of unbelief.
But indeed things are quite otherwise. He hath in this mat∣ter through the Lord Christ ordered all things in his dealings with sinners to the praise of the glory of his Grace, Eph. 1. 6. His design in the whole mysterie of the Gospel, is to make his Grace glorious, or to exalt pardoning mercy. The great fruit and product of his Grace is forgiveness. The forgiveness of sinners. This God will render himself Glorious in and by. All the Praise, Glory and Worship, that he designs from any in this world, is to redound unto him by the way of this Grace, as we have proved at large before. For this cause spared he the world, when sin first entred into it: for this cause did he provide a New Covenant, when the old was become un∣profitable. For this cause did he send his Son into the world. This hath he testified by all the Evidences insisted on. Would he have lost the praise of his Grace, nothing hereof would have been done or brought about. We can then no way so emi∣nently bring or ascribe glory unto God, as by our receiving for∣giveness from him, he being willing thereunto upon the ac∣count of its tendency unto his own Glory, in that way, which he hath peculiarly fixed on for its manifestation. Hence the Apostle exhorts us to come boldly to the Throne of Grace, Heb. 4. 16. That is, with the Confidence of faith, as he expounds boldness, Chap. 10. 19, 20. We come about a business where∣with he is well pleased; such as he delights in the doing of, as he expresseth himself, Zeph. 3. 17. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee, is mighty; he will save, he will rejoyce over thee with joy. He will rest in his love, he will joy over thee with singing. This is the way of Gods Pardoning; he doth it in a rejoycing triumphant manner, satisfying abundantly his own holy soul therein, and resting in his love. We have then abundant en∣couragement to draw nigh to the Throne of Grace, to be made partakers of what God is so willing to give out unto us. And to this end serves also the Oath of God before insisted on, namely, to root out all the secret reserves of unbelief, concerning Gods Unwillingness to give Mercy, Grace and Pardon un∣to sinners. See Heb. 6. 17, 18. where it is expressed. There∣fore the tendency of our former Arguments, is not meerly to prove that there is forgiveness with God, which we may believe
and not be mistaken; but which we ought to believe. It is our duty so to do. We think it our duty to pray, to hear the Word, to give alms, to love the Brethren, and to abstain from sin; and if we fail in any of these, we find the guilt of them reflected upon our Conscience unto our disquietment. But we scarce think it our duty to believe the forgiveness of our sins. It is well it may be, we think, with them that can do it, but we think it not their fault who do not. Such persons may be pityed, but as we suppose not justly blamed, no not by God himself. Whose Conscience almost is burdened with this as a sin, that he doth not as he ought, believe the forgiveness of his sins? And this is meerly because men judge it not their duty so to do. For a non-performance of a duty apprehended to be such, will reflect on the Conscience a sense of the guilt of sin. But now what can be required to make any thing a duty unto us, that is wanting in this matter? For, 1. There is forgiveness with God, and this manifested, re∣vealed, declared. This manifestation of it is that which makes it the Object of our faith. We believe things to be in God, and with him, not meerly and formally because they are so, but because he hath manifested and revealed them so to be, 1 John 1. 2. What he so declares, it is our duty to believe, or we frustrate the end of his Revelation. 2. We are expresly commanded to believe, and that upon the highest Promises, and under the greatest penalties. This Com∣mand is that which makes believing formally a duty. Faith is a Grace as it is freely wrought in us by the Holy Ghost, the root of all Obedience and duties, as it is radically fixed in the heart. But as it is commanded it is a duty; and these Commands, you know, are several wayes expressed, by Invitations, Exhor∣tations, Propositions, which all have in them the nature of Commands, which take up a great part of the Books of the New Testament. 3. It is a duty, as we have shewed, of the greatest concernment unto the Glory of God. 4. Of the greatest importance unto our souls, here and hereaf∣ter. And these things were necessary to be added, to bottom our ensuing Exhortations upon.
Evidences that most men do not believe Forgiveness. Forgive∣ness be∣lieved by Few.That which should now ensue, is the peculiar improvement of this Truth all along aimed at; namely, to give Exhortati∣ons, and encouragements unto believing. But I can take few steps in this work, wherein methinks I do hear some say∣ing, Surely all this is needless; Who is there that doth not be∣lieve all that you go about to prove? And so these pains are spent to little or no purpose. I shall therefore before I perswade any unto it, endeavour to shew that they do it not already. Many I say, the most of men who live under the dispensation of the Gospel, do wofully deceive their own souls in this matter. They do not believe what they profess themselves to believe, and what they think they believe. Men talk of fundamental Errors; this is to me the most fundamental error that any can fall into, and the most pernitious. It is made up of these two parts. (1.) They do not indeed believe forgiveness. (2.) They suppose they do believe it, which keeps them from seeking after their only remedy. Both these mistakes are in the foundation, and do ruine the souls of them that live and die in them. I shall then by a brief enquiry put this matter to a tryal. By some plain Rules and Principles may this important Question, whether we do indeed believe forgiveness or no, be answered and decided. But to the Resolution intended, I shall premise two Obser∣vations. 1. Men in this case, are very apt to deceive themselves. Self∣love, vain Hopes, liking of Lust, common false Principles, sloth, unwillingness unto self-examination, Reputation with the World, and it may be in the Church, all vigorously concurr unto mens self-deceivings in this matter. It is no easie thing for a soul to break through all these, and all self-reasonings that rise from them, to come unto a clear judgement of its own acting in dealing with God about forgiveness. Men also find a Common Presumption of this Truth, and its being an easie relief against gripings of Conscience, and disturbing thoughts about sin; which they daily meet withall Aiming there∣fore only at the removal of trouble, and finding their present
Imagination of it, sufficient thereunto, they never bring their perswasion to the tryal. 2. As men are apt to do thus, so they actually do so, they do deceive themselves, and know not that they do so. The last day will make this evident, if men will no sooner be convinced of their folly. When our Saviour told his Disciples, that one of them twelve should betray him; though it were but one of twelve that was in danger, yet every one of the twelve made a particular enquiry about himself. I will not say, that one in each twelve is here mistaken: But I am sure the Truth tells us, That many are called, and but few are chosen; they are but few, who do really believe forgiveness. Is it not then incumbent on every one to be enquiring in what number he is likely to be found at the last day? Whilst men put this enquiry off from themselves, and think or say, it may be the Concernment of others, it is not mine, they perish, and that without remedy. Remember what poor Jacob said, when he had lost one Child, and was afraid of the loss of another, Gen. 43. 14. If I be bereaved of my Children, I am bereaved. As if he should have said, if I lose my Children, I have no more to lose, they are my all. Nothing worse can befall me in this world. Comfort, Joy, yea, Life and all go with them. How much more may men say in this Case, If we are deceived here, we are deceived; all is lost, hope, and life, and soul, all must perish, and that for ever. There is no help or relief for them who deceive them∣selves in this matter. They have found out a way to go qui∣etly down into the pit. Now these things are premised, only that they may be incen∣tives unto self-examination in this matter; and so render the ensu∣ing Considerations usefull. Let us then address our selves unto them. 1. In General; This is a Gospel Truth; yea, the great funda∣mental, and most important Truth of the Gospel. It is the turning point of the two Covenants, as God himself declares, Heb. 7. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Now a very easie Considera∣tion of the wayes and walkings of men will satisfie us as to this Enquiry, whether they do indeed believe the Gospel, the Cove∣nant of Grace, and the fundamental Principles of it. Certainly
their Ignorance, Darkness, Blindness, their Corrupt Affections, and Worldly Conversations, their Earthly-mindedness and open disa∣vowing of the Spirit, Wayes and Yoke of Christ, speak no such lan∣guage. Shall we think that proud, heady, worldly, self-seckers, haters of the people of God, and his wayes, despisers of the Spirit of Grace, and his work, Sacrificers to their own lusts, and such like, do believe the Covenant of Grace, or Remission of sins? God forbid we should entertain any one thought of so great dishonour to the Gospel. Where ever that is receiv∣ed or believed, it produceth other effects, Tit. 2. 11, 12. Isa. 11 6, 7, 8, 9. It teacheth men to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts. It changeth their hearts, natures and wayes; It is not such a barren, impotent and fruitless thing, as such an Apprehension would represent it. 2. They that really believe forgiveness in God, do thereby obtain forgiveness. Believing gives an interest in it; it brings it home to the soul concerned. This is the inviolable Law of the Gospel. Believing and forgiveness are inseparably conjoyned. Among the Evidences that we may have of any one being in∣terested in forgiveness, I shall only name one, They prize and value it above all the world. Let us enquire what Esteem and valuation many of those have of forgiveness, who put it out of all question that they do believe it. Do they look upon it as their Treasure, their Jewel, their Pearl of price? Are they soli∣citous about it? Do they often look and examine whether it continues safe in their possession or no? Suppose a man have a pretious Jewel laid up in some place in his house; Suppose it be unto him as the poor Widdows two mites, all her substance or living; will he not carefully ponder on it? Will he not frequently satisfie himself that it is safe? We may know that such an house, such fields or lands do not belong unto a man when he passeth by them daily, and taketh little or no no∣tice of them. Now how do most men look upon forgiveness? What is their common deportment in reference unto it? Are their hearts continually filled with thoughts about it? Are they solicitous concerning their interest in it? Do they reckon, that whilst that is safe, all is safe with them? When it is, as it were, laid out of the way by sin and unbelief, do they give
themselves no rest, untill it be afresh discovered unto them? Is this the frame of the most of men? The Lord knows it is not. They talk of forgiveness, but esteem it not, prize it not, make no particular enquiries after it. They put it to an un∣grounded venture, whether ever they be partakers of it or no; for a relief against some pangs of Conscience it is called upon, or else scarce thought of at all. Let not any so minded flatter themselves that they have any acquaintance with the mysterie of Gospel forgiveness. 3 Let it be enquired of them who pretend unto this per∣swasion, how they came by it; that we may know whether it be of him who calleth us, or no; that we may try whether they have broken through the difficulties in the Entertaining of it, which we have manifested abundantly to lye in the way of it. When Peter confessed our Saviour to be the Christ the Son of the living God; He told him that flesh and blood did not reveal that unto him, but his Father who is in Heaven. Matth. 16. 17. It is so with them who indeed believe forgiveness in God: Flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto them. It hath not been furthered by any thing within them or without them, but all lyes in opposition unto it. This is the work of God that we believe, John 6. 29. A great work, the greatest work that God requireth of us. It is not only a great thing in it self (the Grace of believing is a great thing,) but it is great in respect of its Object, or what we have to believe, or forgiveness it self. The great honour of Abrahams faith lay in this, that deaths and difficulties lay in the way of it. Rom. 4. 18, 19, 20. But what is a dead body, and a dead womb, to an accusing Consci∣ence, a killing Law, and apprehensions of a God terrible as a consuming fire? all which, as was shewed, oppose themselves unto a soul called to believe forgiveness. What now have the most of men, who are confident in the profession of this faith, to say unto this thing? Let them speak clearly, and they must say, that indeed they never found the least difficulty in this matter; they never doubted of it; they never questioned it, nor do know any reason why they should do so. It is a thing which they have so taken for granted, as
that it never cost them an hours labour prayer or meditation about it. Have they had secret reasonings and contendings in their hearts about it? No; Have they considered how the Ob∣jections that lye against it may be removed? Not at all; But is it so indeed that this perswasion is thus bred in you, you know not how? Are the corrupted Natures of men, and the Gospel so suited, so complying? Is the New Covenant grown so connatural to flesh and blood? Is the greatest secret that ever was revealed from the bosom of the Father, become so familiar and easie to the wisdom of the flesh? Is that which was folly to the wise Greeks, and a stumbling block to the Wonder∣gazing Jews, become on a suddain Wisdom, and a plain path to the same principles that were in them? But the truth of this matter is, that such men have a general, useless, barren notion of Pardon, which Satan, Presumption, Tradition, Common Reports, and the Customary hearing of the Word have furnished them withal; But for that Gospel discovery of forgive∣ness whereof we have been speaking, they are utterly igno∣rant of it, and unacquainted with it. To convince such poor creatures of the folly of their presumption, I would but desire them to go to some real Believers, that are or may be known unto them; Let them be asked whether they came so easily by their Faith, and Apprehensions of forgiveness, or no? Alas, saith One, these twenty years have I been following after God, and yet I have not arrived unto an abiding Chearing perswasion of it. I know what it cost me, what tryals, difficulties, temptations I wrestled with, and went through withal before I obtained it, saith another. What I have attained unto, hath been of unspeakable mercy. And it is my daily prayer, that I may be preserved in it; by the exceeding greatness of the Power of God; for I continually wrestle with storms that are ready to drive me from my Anchor. A little of this discourse may be sufficient to convince poor, dark, car∣nal creatures of the folly and vanity of their confidence. 4. There are certain Means whereby the Revelation and dis∣covery of this Mysterie is made unto the souls of men. By these they do obtain it, or they obtain it not. The mysterie it self was a secret, hidden in the Counsel of God from Eternity;
nor was there any way whereby it might be revealed, but by the Son of God. And that is done in the Word of the Gospel. If then you say you know it; Let us enquire how you came so to do? And by what means it hath been declared unto you? Hath this been done by a Word of Truth? by the Promise of the Gospel? Was it by preaching of the Word unto you, or by reading of it, or meditating upon it? Or did you receive it from and by some seasonable word, of, or from the Scriptures spoken unto you? Or hath it insensibly gotten ground upon your hearts and minds, upon the strivings and conflicts of your souls about sin, from the truth wherein you had been instru∣cted in General? Or by what other wayes or means have you come to that acquaintance with it, whereof you boast? You can tell how you came by your wealth, your Gold, and Silver; you know how you became learned, or obtained the know∣ledge of the mysterie of your trade, who taught you in it, and how you came by it. There is not any thing wherein you are concerned, but you can answer these Enquiries in reference unto it. Think it then no great matter, if you are put to an∣swer this Question also; by what way or means came you to the knowledge of forgiveness which you boast of; Was it by any of those before mentioned, or some other? if you cannot answer distinctly to these things, only you say, you have heard it, and believed it ever since you can remember, so those said that went before you, so they say with whom you do converse; you never met with any one that called it into question, nor heard of any, unless it were one or two despairing wretches; it will be justly questioned, whether you have any portion in this mat∣ter or no. If uncertain rumours, reports, general notions, lye at the bottom of your perswasion, do not suppose that you have any Communion with Christ therein. 5. Of them who profess to believe forgiveness, how few are there who indeed know what it is. They believe they say, but as the Samaritans Worshipped, they know not what. With some, a bold presumption, and crying peace peace, goes for the belief of forgiveness. A General Apprehension of impunity from God, and that
though they are sinners, yet they shall not be punished, pas∣seth with others at the same rate. Some think they shall prevail with God by their prayers and desires to let them alone, and not cast them into Hell. One way or other to escape the Vengeance of Hell, not to be pu∣nished in another world, is that which men fix their minds upon. But is this that forgiveness which is revealed in the Gospel? that which we have been treating about? The Rise and Spring of our forgiveness is in the heart and Gracious Nature of God, de∣clared by his Name; Have you enquired seriously into this? Have you stood at the shore of that infinite Ocean of Goodness and Love? Have your souls found supportment and relief from that Consideration? And have your hearts leaped within you with the thoughts of it? Or if you have never been affected in an especial manner herewithal, have you bowed down your souls under the Considerations of that Soveraign Act of the Will of God, that is the next spring of forgiveness; that glori∣ous acting of free Grace, that when all might justly have perished, all having sinned and come short of his Glory, God would yet have mercy on some? Have you given up your selves to this Grace? Is this any thing of that you do believe? Sup∣pose you are strangers to this also: What communion with God have you had about it in the blood of Christ? We have shewed how forgiveness relates thereunto; how way is made thereby for the exercise of mercy, in a consistency with the Glory and Honour of the Justice of God, and of his Law; how Pardon is procured and purchased thereby; with the my∣sterious Reconciliation of Love and Law; and the new dispo∣sal of Conscience in its work and duty by it. What have you to say to these things? Have you seen pardon flowing from the heart of the Father through the blood of the Son? Have you looked upon it as the price of his life, and the purchase of his blood? Or have you general thoughts that Christ dyed for finners? and that on one account or other forgiveness relates unto him, but are strangers to the mysterie of this great work. Suppose this also; Let us go a little further and enquire
whether you know any thing that yet remains of the like im∣portance in this matter? Forgiveness as we have shewed, is ma∣nifested, tendred, exhibited in the Covenant of Grace and Pro∣mises of the Gospel. The Rule of the Efficacy of these is, that they he mixed with faith, Heb. 4. 2. It is well if you are grown up hereunto; but you that are strangers to the things before mentioned, are no less to this also. Upon the matter you know not then what forgiveness is, nor wherein it consists, nor whence it comes, nor how it is procured, nor by what means given out unto sinners. It is to no purpose for such persons to pretend that they believe that whereunto either notionally, or practically, or both, they are such utter strangers. 6. Another Enquiry into this matter regards the State and Condition wherein souls must be, before it be possible for them to believe forgiveness. If there be such an Estate and it can be evinced that very many of the Pretenders concerning whom we deal, were never brought into it, it is then evident that they neither do nor can believe forgiveness, however they do and may delude their own souls. It hath been shewed that the first discovery that was made of pardoning Grace was unto Adam, presently after the fall. What was then his State and Condition? How was he pre∣pared for the reception of this great mysterie in its first dis∣covery? that seems to be a considerable Rule of proceeding in the same matter. That which is first in any kind, is a Rule to all that follows. Now what was Adams condition when the Revelation of forgiveness was first made to him? it is known from the Story; convinced of sin, afraid of punish∣ment, he lay trembling at the foot of God. Then was for∣giveness revealed unto him; So the Psalmist states it, Psalm 130. v. 3. If thou Lord shouldst mark iniquity, O Lord who shall stand? Full of thoughts he is of the desert of sin, and of in∣evitable and eternal ruine, in case God should deal with him according to the Exigence of the Law. In that state is the great support of Forgiveness with God, suggested unto him by the Holy Ghost. We know what work our Saviour had with the Pharisees on this account. Are we, say they, blind also? No, saith he, you say, you see, therefore your sin remaineth,
John 9. 40, 41. It is to no purpose to talk of forgiveness to such persons as you are, you must of necessity abide in your sins. I came not to call such righteous persons as you are, but sinners to Repentance; who not only are so, as you are also, and that to the purpose, but are sensible of their being so, and of their undone condition thereby. The whole have no need of the Physitian, but the sick. Whilst you are seeming Righteous and whole, it is to no End to tell you of forgiveness, you cannot understand it, nor receive it. It is impossible then that any one should in a due manner believe forgiveness in God, unless in a due manner he be convinced of sin in himself. If the fallow ground be not broken up, it is to no purpose to sow the seed of the Gospel. There is neither Life, Power, nor sweetness in this Truth, unless a door be opened for its Entrance by Conviction of sin. Let us then on this ground also, continue our Enquiry up∣on the ordinary boasters of their skill in this mysterie. You believe there is forgiveness with God; Yes, but have you been convinced of sin? Yes; you know that you are sinners well enough. Answer then but once more as to the nature of this conviction of sin, which you say you have; Is it not made up of these two ingredients. (1.) A general notion that you are sinners as all men also are. (2.) Particular troublesome refle∣ctions upon your selves, when on any eruption of sin, Consci∣ence accuses, rebukes, condemns? You will say, yes, what would you require more. This is not the Conviction we are en∣quiring after; That is a work of the Spirit by the Word; this you speak of, a meer Natural work, which you can no more be without than you can cease to be men. This will give no Assistance unto the receiving of forgiveness. But it may be, you will say, you have proceeded farther than so; and these things have had an improvement in you. Let us then a little try whe∣ther your process have been according to the mind of God. And so whether this invincible barr in your way be removed or no. For although every convinced person do not believe forgiveness: yet no one who is not convinced doth so. Have you then been made sensible of your condition by Nature; what it is to be alienated from the life of God, and to be obnoxious to
his wrath? Have you been convinced of the Universal Enmity that is in your hearts to the mind of God; and what it is to be at Enmity against God? Hath the unspeakable multitude of the sins of your lives been set in order by the Law before you? And have you considered what it is for sinners, such sinners as you are, to have to deal with a Righteous and a holy God? Hath the Holy Ghost wrought a serious Recognition in your hearts of all these things, and caused them to abide with you and upon you? If you will answer truly, you must say, ma∣ny of you, that indeed you have not been so exercised. You have heard of these things many times, but to say that you have gone through with this work, and have had Experience of them, that you cannot do. Then I say you are strangers to forgiveness, because you are strangers unto sin: But and if you shall say that you have had thoughts to this purpose; and are perswaded that you have been throughly convinced of sin; I shall yet ask you one Question more; what Effects hath your Conviction produced in your hearts and lives? Have you been filled with perplexities and consternation of Spirit there∣upon? Have you had fears dreads or terrors to wrestle with∣all? It may be you will say, No; Nor will I insist upon that enquiry; but this I deal with you in. Hath it filled you with self-loathing and Abhorrency, with self-condemnation, and abasement? If it will do any thing this it will do. If you come short here, it is justly to be feared that all your other pretences are of no value; Now where there is no work of con∣viction, there is no faith of forgiveness, whatever is pretended. And how many vain boasters this sword will cut off is evident. 7. We have yet a greater evidence than all these. Men live in sin, and therefore they do not believe forgiveness of sin. Faith in general purifies the heart, Acts 15. 19. Our souls are purified in obeying the Truth, 1 Pet. 1. 22. and the life is made fruitful by it, James 2. 22. Faith worketh by works, and makes it self perfect by them. And the Doctrine concerning forgiveness hath a special influence into all Holiness, Tit. 2. 11, 12. The Grace of God which bringeth salvation, teacheth us to deny all un∣righteousness and worldly lusts, to live soberly, righteously, and god∣ly
in this present world. And that is the Grace whereof we speak. No man can then believe forgiveness of sin, without a detestation and relinquishment of it. The ground of this might be farther manifested, and the way of the Efficacy of faith of forgiveness unto a forsaking of sin, if need were. But all that own the Gospel must acknowledge this principle. The real belief of the Pardon of sin, is prevalent with men not to live longer in sin. But now what are the greatest number of those who pretend to receive this Truth? Are their hearts purified by it? Are their consciences purged? Are their lives changed? Do they deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts? Doth forgiveness teach them so to do? Have they found it effectual to these purposes? Whence is it then that there is such a bleating and bellowing to the contrary amongst them? Some of you are Drunkards, some of you Swearers, some of you unclean persons, some of you lyars, some of you world∣ly, some of you haters of all the wayes of Christ, and all his concernments upon the Earth; proud, covetous, boasters, self∣seekers, envious, wrathful, backbiters, malitious praters, slanderers, and the like. And shall we think that such as these believe forgiveness of sin? God forbid. Again, Some of you are dark, ignorant, blind, utterly unacquainted with the mysterie of the Gospel, nor do at all make it your business to enquire into it. Either you hear it not at all, or negligently, slothfully, customarily, to no purpose. Let not such persons deceive their own souls: to live in sin and yet to believe the forgiveness of sin, is utterly impossible. Christ will not be a Minister of sin, nor give his Gospel to be a Doctrine of licen∣tiousness for your sakes. Nor shall you be forgiven that you may be delivered to do more Abominations. God forbid. If any shall say, that they thank God, they are no such Pub∣licans as those mentioned; they are no drunkards, no swearers, no unclean persons, nor the like, so that they are not concerned in this consideration. Their lives and their duties give ano∣ther account of them: then yet consider further, That the Pharisees were all that you say of your selves; and yet the greatest despisers of forgiveness that ever were in the world,
and that because they hated the light, on this account, that their deeds were evil. And for your duties you mention, what I pray is the root and spring of them? are they influenced from this Faith of forgiveness you boast of or no? May it not be fear∣ed that it is utterly otherwise? you do not perform them because you love the Gospel, but because you fear the Law. If the truth were known, I doubt it would appear, that you get nothing by your believing of pardon, but an encourage∣ment unto sin. Your Goodness such as it is, springs from ano∣ther root. It may be also that you ward your selves by it against the strokes of Conscience, or the guilt of particular sins, this is as bad as the other. It is as good be encouraged unto sin, to commit it, as be encouraged under sin, so as to be kept from humiliation for it. None under Heaven are more remote from the belief of Grace and Pardon, than such persons are: All their Righteousness is from the Law, and their Sin in a great measure from the Gospel. 8. They that believe forgiveness in a due manner, believe it for the Ends and Purposes for which it is revealed of God. This will further improve and carry on the former considera∣tion. If God reveals any thing for one end and purpose, and men use it quite unto another; they do not receive the Word of God, nor believe the thing revealed, but steal the Word and delude their own souls. Let us then weigh to what Ends and purposes this forgive∣ness was first revealed by God; for which also its manifesta∣tion is still continued in the Gospel. We have shewed before who it was to whom this Revelation was first made, and what condition he was in when it was so made unto him. A lost, wretched Creature, without hope or help he was; how he should come to obtain Acceptance with God, he knew not. God reveals forgiveness unto him by Christ to be his all. The intention of God in it was, that a Sinners All should be of Grace, Rom. 11. 6. If any thing be added unto it for the same End and purpose, then Grace is no more Grace. Again, God intended it as a new foundation of Obedience, of Love and Thankfulness. That men should Love because Forgiven, and be Holy because Pardoned; as I have shewed before, that it
might be the Righteousness of a Sinner, and a spring of new obedience in him, all to the praise of Grace, were Gods Ends in its Revelation. Our Enquiry then is, whether men do receive this Revelation as unto these Ends, and use it for these purposes, and these only. I might evince the contrary, by passing through the General abuses of the Doctrine of Grace, which are mention∣ed in the Scripture, and common in the world; but it will not be needfull. Instead of Believing, the most of men seem to put a studyed despight on the Gospel. They either proclaim it to be an unholy and polluted way, by turning its Grace into Lasciviousness, or a weak and insufficient way, by striving to twist it in with their own Righteousness, both which are an Abomination unto the Lord. From these and such other Considerations of the like im∣portance as might be added, it is evident that our Word is not in vain; nor the Exhortation which is to be built upon it. It appears, that notwithstanding the great noyse and pre∣tences to this purpose that are in the World, they are but few who seriously receive this fundamental truth of the Go∣spel; Namely, that there is forgiveness with God. Poor Creatures sport themselves with their own deceivings, and perish by their own delusions. Exhortation unto the Belief of the Forgiveness that is with God. Reasons for it, and the Necessity of it. Exhortati∣ons unto Believing.We shall now proceed unto the direct uses of this great Truth. For having laid our foundation in the Word that will not fail, and having given as we hope, sufficient Evidence un∣to the truth of it, our last work is to make that improvement of it unto the Good of the Souls of men, which all along was aimed at. The persons concerned in this Truth are all Sinners whatever. No sort of sinners are unconcerned in it, none are excluded from it. And we may cast them all under Two heads. First, Such as never yet sincerely closed with the promise of Grace; Nor have ever yet received forgiveness from God,
in a way of believing. These we have already endeavoured to undeceive; and to discover those false presumptions whereby they are apt to ruine and destroy their own souls. These we would guide now into safe and pleasant paths, wherein they may find assured Rest and Peace. Secondly, Others there are, who have received it, but being again entangled by sin, or clouded by darkness and temptations, or weakned by unbelief, know not how to improve it to their Peace and Comfort. This is the condition of the soul re∣presented in this Psalm: And which we shall therefore ap∣ply our selves unto in an especial manner, in its proper place. Our Exhortation then is unto both; to the first, that they would receive it, that they may have life, to the latter, that they would improve it, that they may have peace. To the former that they would not overlook, disregard, or neglect so great salvati∣on as is tendred unto them; to the latter, that they would stir up the Grace of God that is in them, to mix with the Grace of God that is declared unto them. I shall begin with the first sort, those who are yet utter strangers from the Covenant of Grace; who never yet upon saving grounds believed this forgiveness; who never yet once tasted of Gospel Pardon. Poor sinners! this word is unto you. Be it, that you have heard or read the same word before, or others like unto it, to the same purpose: It may be often, it may be an hundred times. It is your concernment to hear it again. God would have it so; The Testimony of Jesus Christ is thus to be accomplished. This Counsel of God we must declare that we may be free from the blood of all men, Acts 20. 26, 27. And that not once or twice, but in preaching the Word, we must be instant in season, out of season, reproving, rebuking, exhorting, with all long-suffering and doctrine, 2 Tim. 4. 2. And for you, wo unto you, when God leaves thus speaking unto you; when he refuseth to Exhort you any more, wo unto you. This is Gods departure from any person or people, when he will deal with them no more about forgiveness; and faith he, Wo unto them when I depart from them, Hos. 9. 12. O that God therefore
would give unto such persons, seeing Eyes, and hearing Ears, that the word of Grace may never more be spoken unto them in vain. Now in our Exhortation to such persons, we shall pro∣ceed gradually, according as the matter will bear, and the na∣ture of it doth require. Consider therefore, 1. That notwithstanding all your sins, all the evil that your own hearts know you to be guilty of, and that hidden Mass or evil treasure of sin which is in you, which you are not able to look into; notwithstanding that charge that lyes upon you from your own Consciences, and that dreadful sentence and curse of the Law which you are obnoxious unto; notwith∣standing all the just grounds that you have to apprehend that God is your Enemy, and will be so unto eternity; yet there are Terms of Peace and Reconciliation, provided and proposed between him and your souls. This in the first place is spoken out by the Word we have insisted on. Whatever else it in∣forms us of, this it positively asserts; namely, that there is a way whereby sinners may come to be accepted with God: For there is forgiveness with him that he may be feared. And we hope that we have not confirmed it by so many Testimonies, by so many Evidences in vain. Now that you may see how great a priviledge this is, and how much your concernment lyes in it; Consider, 1. That this belongs unto you in an especial manner, it is your peculiar advantage. It is not so with the Angels that sinned. There were never any terms of Peace or Reconciliation proposed unto them, nor ever shall be unto Eternity. There is no way of escape pro∣vided for them. Having once sinned, as you have done a thousand times, God spared them not, but cast them down to Hell, and delivered them unto Chains of darkness, to be reserved unto Judgement, 2 Pet. 2. 4. It is not so with them that are dead in their sins, if but one moment past. Ah how would many souls who are departed it may be not an hour since out of this world, rejoyce for an in∣terest in this priviledge, the hearing of Terms of Peace once more between God and them. But their time is past, their house is left unto them desolate. As the tree falleth, so it
must lye: It is appointed unto all men once to dye, and after that is the Judgement, Heb 9. 27. After death there are no terms of Peace, nothing but Judgement. The Living, the living, he alone is capable of this Advantage. It is not so with them to whom the Gospel is not preached. God suffers them to walk in their own wayes, and calls them not thus to repentance. The Terms of Reconciliation which some fancy to be offered in the shining of the Sun, and falling of the rain, never brought souls to peace with God. Life and Immortality are brought to light only by the Gospel. This is your priviledge who yet live, and yet have the Word sound∣ing in your Ears. It is not thus with them who have sinned against the Holy Ghost, though yet alive, and living where the word of forgive∣ness is preached. God proposeth unto them no terms of Re∣conciliation. Blasphemy against him, saith Christ, shall not be for∣given, Matth. 12. 31. There is no forgiveness for such sinners. And we, if we knew them, ought not to pray for them, 1 John 5. 16. Their sin is unto death. And what numbers may be in this Condition God knows. This Word then is unto you; These terms of peace are pro∣posed unto you. This is that which in an especial manner you are to apply your selves unto. And wo unto you, if you should be found to have neglected it at the last day. Where∣fore consider, 2. By whom these terms are proposed unto you, and by whom they were procured for you. By whom are they proposed? Who shall undertake to umpire the business, the controversie between God and Sinners? No creature doubtless is either meet or worthy to interpose in this matter. I mean originally on his own account. For who hath known the mind of the Lord, or who hath been his counsellor? Wherefore it is God himself who proposeth these terms; and not only proposeth them, but invites, exhorts, and perswades you to accept of them. This the whole Scriptures testifie unto. It is fully expressed, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20. He hath provided them, he hath proposed them, and makes use only of men, of Ministers, to act in his Name. And excuse us if we are a little earnest with you in this mat∣ter.
Alas, our utmost that we can by zeal for his glory, or compassion unto your souls, raise our thoughts, minds, spirits, words unto, comes infinitly short of his own pressing earnest∣ness herein. See Isa. 55. 1, 2, 3, 4. Oh infinite condescention! O blessed Grace! Who is this that thus bespeaks you? He, against whom you have sinned, of whom you are justly afraid. He whose Laws you have broken, and whose name you have dishonoured; He who needs not you, nor your Love, nor your Friendship, nor your Salvation. It is He who proposeth unto you these terms of Reconciliation and Peace. Consider the Exhortation of the Apostle upon this consideration, Heb. 12. 25. See that you refuse not him that speaketh from Heaven. It is God that speaks unto you in this matter: And he speaks unto you from Heaven. And he doth therein forego all the Advantage that he hath against you for your destruction. Wo would be unto your souls, and that for ever, if you should refuse him. 3. By whom were these Terms procured for you? and by what means? Do not think that this matter was brought about by chance, or by an ordinary undertaking. Remember that the proposal made unto you this day cost no less than the price of the blood of the Son of God. It is the fruit of the travail of his soul. For this he prayed, he wept, he suffered, he dyed. And shall it now be neglected or despised by you? Will you yet account the blood of the Covenant to be a com∣mon thing? Will you exclude your selves from all benefit of the purchase of these terms, and only leave your souls to an∣swer for the Contempt of the price whereby they were pur∣chased? 4. Consider, that you are sinners, great sinners, cursed sinners; Some of you it may be, worse than innumerable of your fel∣low sinners were, who are now in Hell. God might long since have cast you off everlastingly, from all expectation of mercy, and have caused all your hopes to perish. Or he might have lest you alive, and yet have refused to deal with you any more. He could have caused your Son to go down at noon day, and have given you darkness instead of vision. He could respite your lives for a season, and yet swear
in his wrath, that you should never enter into his rest. It is now otherwise. How long it may be so, nor you, nor I know any thing at all. God only knows what will be your time, what your continuance. We are to speak whilst it is called to day. And this is that for the present which I have to offer unto you. God declares that there is forgiveness with him; that your con∣dition is not desperate nor helpless. There are yet terms of Peace proposed unto you. Methinks it cannot but seem strange, that poor sinners should not at the least stir up them∣selves to enquire after them. When a poor man had sold himself of old, and his Children to be servants, and parted with the land of his inheritance unto another because of his poverty; with what heart do you think did he hear the sound of the Trumpet, when it began to proclaim the year of Jubilee, where∣in he and all his were to go out at liberty, and to return unto his possession and Inheritance? And shall not poor ser∣vants of sin, slaves unto Satan, that have forfeited all their In∣heritance in this world, and that which is to come, attend unto any Proclamation of the year of Rest, of the acceptable year of the Lord? And this is done in the tender of terms of Peace with God in this matter. Do not put it off; this thing belongs unto you; The great concernment of your souls lyes in it. And it is a great matter; for consider, 5. That when the Angels came to bring the news of the Birth of our Lord Jesus, they say, we bring tydings of great joy to the whole people, Luke 2. 10. What are these joyful ty∣dings? What was the matter of this report? Why, this day is born a Saviour, Christ the Lord, v. 11. It is only this; a Savi∣our is born; a way of escape is provided, and further they do not proceed. Yet this they say is a matter of great joy, as it was indeed. It is so to every burdned convinced sinner, a mat∣ter of unspeakable joy and rejoycing. Oh blessed words! a Saviour is born. This gives life to a sinner, and opens a door of hope in the valley of Achor. The first rescue of a sin di∣stressed soul. Upon the matter, it was all that the Saints for many Ages had to live upon; and that not in the enjoyment, but only the expectation. They lived on that Word, the seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head; that is, a way
of deliverance is provided for sinners. This with all diligence they enquired into, 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11, 12. and improved it to their eternal advantage. As of old, Jacob when he saw the Waggons that his Son Joseph had sent to bring him unto him, it is said his Spirit revived: So did they upon their obscure discovery of a way of forgiveness. They looked upon the Promise of it as that which God had sent to bring them unto him; and they saw the day of the coming of Christ in it, and rejoyced. How much more have Sinners now Reason so to do, when the substance of the Promise is exhibited, and the news of his Come∣ing proclaimed unto them. This then is a great matter; namely, that terms of Peace and Reconciliation are proposed; in that it is made known, that there is forgiveness with God. Upon these Considerations then we pursue that Exhortation which we have in hand. If any of you were justly condemned to a cruel and shame∣full death, and lay trembling in the expectation of the exe∣cution of it, and a man designed for that purpose should come unto him, and tell him that there were terms propounded on which his life might be spared, only he came away like Ahi∣maaz before he heard the particulars; would it not be a reviving unto him? would he not cry out, Pray enquire what they are, for there is not any thing so difficult which I will not undergoe to free my self from this miserable condition? Would it not change the whole frame of the spirit of such a man, and as it were put new life into him? But now if instead hereof, he should be froward, stubborn and obstinate, take no notice of the Messenger, or say, Let the Judge keep his terms to himself, without inquiring what they are; that he would have nothing to do with them; would not such a person be deemed to perish deservedly? doth he not bring a double destruction upon himself; first of deserving death by his crimes, and then by refusing the honest and good way of delivery tendred unto him? I confess it often times falls out, that men may come to enquire after these terms of Peace, which when they are revealed, they like them not, but with the young man in the Gospel they go away sorrowfull. The cursed wickedness and misery of which condition, which
befalls many convinced persons, shall be spoken unto afterwards. At present I speak unto them who never yet attended in sin∣cerity unto these terms, nor seriously enquired after them. Think you what you please of your Condition, and of your selves; or choose whether you will think of it or no, pass your time in a full regardlesness, of your present and future Estate. Yet indeed thus it is with you, as to your eternal concerns; you lye under the sentence of a bitter, shamefull, and everlasting death; you have done so in the midst of all your jollity, ever since you came into this world: And you are in the hand of him, who can in the twinkling of an eye destroy both body and soul in Hell fire. In this state and condition, men are sent on purpose, to let you know that there are terms of Peace, there is yet a way of escape for you: And that you may not avoid the issue aimed at, they tell you, that God that cannot lye, hath commanded them to tell you so; if you question the truth of what they say, they are ready to produce their warrant under Gods own hand and seal; here then is no room for tergiversation or excuses. Certainly, if you have any care of your eternal estate, if you have any drop of tender blood running in your veins towards your own souls, if you have any rational considerations dwelling in your minds, if all be not defaced and obliterated through the power of lust, and love of sin, you cannot but take your selves to be un∣speakably concerned in this proposal; But now if instead hereof, you give up your selves unto the power of unbelief, the will of Sathan, the love of your lusts, and this present world, so as to take no notice of this errand or message from God, nor once seriously to enquire after the nature and im∣portance of the terms proposed, Can you escape? shall you be delivered? will your latter end be peace? The Lord knows it will be otherwise with you, and that unto Eternity. So the Apostle assures us: 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the God of this world hath blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest the light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine into them. If you receive not this word, if it be bid from you, it is from the power and efficacy of Sathan
upon your minds. And what will be the end? Perish you must, and shall, and that for ever. Remember the Parable of our Saviour, Luke 14. 31, 32. What King, going to make warre, against another King, sitteth not down first, and consulteth whether he be able with Ten Thou∣sand to meet him that cometh against him with Twenty Thousand; or else while the other is yet a great way off, he sendeth an Ambassage and desireth conditions of Peace. That which he teacheth in this Parable is, the necessity that lyes on us, of making peace with God, whom we have provoked, and justly made to be our Enemy; as also our utter impotency to resist and withstand him, when he shall come forth in a way of Judgement and Vengeance against us. But here lyes a difference in this matter, such as is allowed in all similitudes; Amongst men at variance, it is not his part who is the stronger, and secure of success, to send to the weaker, whom he hath in his Power, to accept of terms of Peace. Here it is otherwise, God who is infinitely powerfull, justly provoked, and able to destroy poor sinners in a moment; when now he is not very farre off, but at the very door, sends himself an Ambassage with Conditions of Peace. And shall he be refused by you? will you yet neglect his offers? How great then will be your destruction? Hear then once more poor sin-hardened sensless souls, ye stout∣hearted, that are far from Righteousness. Is it nothing unto you, that the great and holy God whom ye have provoked all your dayes, and whom you yet continue to provoke, who hath not the least need of you or your salvation, who can when he pleaseth eternally glorifie himself in your destructi∣on, should of his own accord send unto you, to let you know that he is willing to be at peace with you, on the terms he had prepared? The Enmity began on your part, the danger is on your part only; and he might justly expect that the message for peace should begin on your part also; But he begins with you; and shall he be rejected? The Prophet well expresseth this, Isa. 30. 15. Thus saith the Lord God, the holy One of Israel, in returning and rest shall ye be saved, in quietness and confidence shall be your strength, and you would not. The Love and Con∣descention that is in these words, on the one hand, on the
part of God, and the folly and ingratitude mentioned in them on the other hand is inexpressible. They are fearfull words; But you would not. Remember this against another day. As our Saviour sayes in the like manner to the Jewes; You will not come unto me, that ye may have life. Whatever is pretended, it is will and stubbornness that lye at the bottom of this refusal. Wherefore, that either You may obtain Advantage by it, or that the way of the Lord may be prepared for the Glori∣fying of himself upon you, I shall leave this word before all them that hear, or read it, as the Testimony which God re∣quires to be given unto his Grace. There are terms of peace with God provided for you and tendred unto you; It is yet called to day, harden not your hearts, like them of old, who could not enter into the Rest of God, by reason of unbelief, Heb. 3. 19. Some of you, it may be, are old in sins, and unac∣quainted with God; some of you, it may be, have been great sinners, scandalous sinners; and some of you, it may be, have reason to apprehend your selves neer the grave, and so also to hell; some of you it may be, have your Consciences dis∣quieted and galled; and it may be some of you are under some outward Troubles, and Perplexities, that cause you a little to look about you; and some of you it may be are in the madness of your natural strength and lusts; your breasts are full of milk, and your bones of marrow, and your hearts of sin, pride and contempt of the wayes of God; All is one; This word is unto you all; And I shall only mind you, That it is a fearfull thing to fall into the hands of the living God. You hear the voyce, or read the words of a poor worm, but the Message is the Message, and the Word is the Word of him who shaketh Heaven and Earth. Consider then well what you have to do; and what answer you will return unto him who will not be mocked. But you will say; Why, what great matter is there that you have in hand? why is it urged with so much earnestness? We have heard the same words an hundred times over. The last Lords day, such a one, or such a one preached to the same pur∣pose; And what need it be insisted on now again, with so much importunity?
But is it so indeed; that you have thus frequently been dealt withall, and do yet continue in an Estate of irreconciliation; my heart is pained for you, to think of your wofull and almost remediless condition. If he that being often reproved, and yet stiffeneth his neck, shall perish suddenly, and that without remedy, Prov. 29. 1. how much more will he do so, who being often invited unto Peace with God, yet hardeneth his heart, and re∣fuseth to treat with him? Methinks I hear his voyce con∣cerning you; Those mine enemies, they shall not taste of the Supper that I have prepared. Be it then that the word in hand is a common word unto you, you set no value upon it; then take your way and course in sin; stumble, fall, and perish; It is not so slight a matter to poor convinced sinners, that tremble at the Word of God. These will prize it, and improve it. We shall follow then that counsel, Prov. 31. 6. Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine to those that be of an heavy heart. We shall tender this New Wine of the Gospel to poor sad hearted, conscience distressed sinners; sinners that are ready to perish; to them it will be pleasant, they will drink of it, and forget their poverty, and remember their misery no more. It shall take away all their sorrow and sadness; when you shall be drunk with the fruit of your lusts, and spue, and lie down, and not rise again. But now if any of you shall begin to say in your hearts, that you would willingly treat with God; oh that the day were come wherein we might approach unto him! let him speak what he pleaseth, and propose what terms he pleaseth, we are ready to hear. Then consider, Secondly, That the Terms provided for you, and proposed unto you, are equal, holy, righteous, yea pleasant, and easie. This being another General Head of our work in hand, be∣fore I proceed to the further explication and confirmation of it, I shall educe one or two Observations from what hath been delivered on the first. As, 1. See here on what foundation we preach the Gospel. Ma∣ny disputes there are, whether Christ died for all individuals of Mankinde or no; if we say No, but only for the Elect who are some of all sorts; some then tell us, we cannot invite all
men promiscuously to believe. But why so; we invite not men, as all men; no man, as one of all men, but all men as Sinners: And we know that Christ died for Sinners. But is this the first thing, that we are in the dispensation of the Gospel to propose to the Soul of a sinner, under the Law; That Christ dyed for him in particular. Is that the beginning of our Message unto him? were not this a ready way to induce him to conclude, Let me then continue in sin that Grace may abound; No; but this is in order of Nature our first work; even that which we have had in hand. This is the beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. This is the voyce of one crying in the Wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord. There is a way of Reconciliation provided. God is in Christ reconciling the World to himself. There is a way of acceptance; there is Forgiveness with him to be obtained. At this Threshold of the Lords house, doth the greatest part of men to whom the Go∣spel is preached fall and perish, never looking in to see the Treasures that are in the house it self; never coming into any such state and condition, wherein they have any ground or bottom to enquire, whether Christ dyed for them in particular or no. They believe not this report, nor take any serious no∣tice of it. This was the Ministry of the Baptist, and they who received it not, rejected the counsel of God concerning their sal∣vation, Luke 7. 10. And so perished in their sins. This is the summe of the blessed invitation given by Wisdom, Prov. 9. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. And here men stumble, fall, and perish, Prov. 1. 29, 30. 2. You that have found grace and favour to accept of these terms, and thereby to obtain peace with God; Learn to live in an holy Admiration of his condescension and love therein. That he would provide such terms; That he would reveal them unto you; that he would enable you to receive them. Unspeakable Love and Grace lyes in it all. Many have not these terms revealed unto them; few find favour to accept of them; and of whom is it that you have obtained this peculiar mercy? Do you aright consider the nature of this matter? The Scripture proposeth it as an object of eternal admiration, So
God loved the World; herein is love, not that we loved God, but he loved us first. Live in this Admiration, and do your utmost in your several capacities to prevail with your Friends, Relations, Acquaintance, to hearken after this great treaty of peace with God, whose terms we shall nextly consider, as before in generall they were expressed. Terms of Peace with God, Equal and Holy.2. The terms provided for you, and proposed unto you, are equal, holy, righteous, yea pleasant and easie, Hes. 2. 18, 19. They are not such, as a cursed guilty sinner might justly expect, but such as are meet for an infinitely Good and Gracious God to propose; not suited to the Wisdom of man, but full of the wisdom of God, 2 Cor. 2. 6, 7. The poor convinced wretch, thinking of dealing with God, Micah 6. 6, 7. rolls in his mind what terms he is like to meet withall; and fixes on the most dreadfull, difficult, and impossible that can be imagined. If saith he any thing be done with this Great and most high God, it must be by Rivers, Thousands, and Ten Thousands, Children, first born; whatever is dreadfull and terrible to Nature, what∣ever is impossible for me to perform, that is it which he looks for. But the matter is quite otherwise. The terms are wholly of another nature; it is a way of meer mercy, a way of free forgiveness. The Apostle lays it down, Rom. 3. 23, 24, 25. it is a way of propitiation, of pardon, of forgiveness in the blood of Christ; the Terms are the Acceptance of the forgive∣ness that we have described. Who would not think now that the whole world would run in to be made partakers of these terms, willingly accepting of them. But it proves for the most part quite otherwise. Men like not this way of all others. It had been something, says Naaman, if the Prophet had come and done so and so; but this, Go, wash and be clean, I do not like it, I am but deluded. Men think within them∣selves, that had it been some great thing that was required of them that they might be saved, they would with all speed address themselves thereunto; but to come to God by Christ, to be freely forgiven without more adoe, they like it not. Some rigid austere penances, some compensatory obedience, some satisfactory mortification, or Purgatory, had been a more likely
way. This of meer pardon in and by the Cross, it is but folly, 1 Cor. 1. 18. 20. I had rather, saith the Jew, have it as it were by the works of the Law, Rom. 9. 32. and Chap. 10. 3. This way of Grace and Forgiveness, I like not. So say others also. So practise others every day; either this way is wholly re∣jected, or it is mended by some additions; which with God, is all one with the rejection of it. Here multitudes of Souls deceive themselves and perish. I know not whether be more difficult, to perswade an uncon∣vinced person to think of any terms, or a convinced Person to accept of these. Let men say what they will, and pretend what they please; yet practically they like not this way of Forgive∣ness. I shall therefore offer some subservient Considerations, tending to the furtherance of your Souls, in the Acceptance of the Terms proposed. 1. This is the way, these are Terms of Gods own choos∣ing; He found out this way, he established it himself. He did it when all was lost, and undone. He did it not upon our desire, request, or proposal, but meerly of his own Accord, and why should we contend with him about it? If God will have us saved in a way of meer mercy and forgiveness; If his Wisdom and Soveraignty be in it, shall we oppose him, and say we like it not? Yet this is the language of unbelief, Rom. 10. 3, 4. Many poor Creatures have disputed it with God, untill at length being over-powered as it were by the Spirit, have said, If it must be so, and God will save us by Mercy and Grace, let it be so, we yield our selves to his will; and yet throughout their disputes dreamed of nothing but that their own unworthiness only kept them from closing with the Promise of the Gospel. Of this nature was that way of Sathan whereby he deceived our first Parents of their Interest in the Covenant of works; the terms of it, saith he, as apprehended by you, are une∣qual. Yea, hath God said, ye shall eat of every Tree of the Garden, but of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, ye shall not eat, lest ye die; come, you shall not dye, for God doth know in the day you eat thereof your eyes shall be opened. There is no pro∣portion between the disobedience and the threatning. The Issue
cannot be such as is feared. And by these means he ruined them. Thus also he proceeds to deprive Souls of their Interest in the Covenant of Grace, whereunto they are invited. The Terms of it are unequall, how can any man believe them? There is no proportion between the Obedience and the Pro∣mise. To have pardon, forgiveness, life, and blessed Eternity on believing, who can rest in it? And here lyes a conspiracy between Sathan and unbelief, against the Wisdom, Goodness, Love, Grace and Soveraignty of God. The poyson of this deceit lyes in this; that neither the Righteousness, nor the Mercy of God is of that infiniteness, as indeed they are. The Apostle to remove this fond imagination, calls us to the plea∣sure of God, 1 Cor. 1. 27. It pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching, that is by the Gospel preached, which they esteem∣ed foolishness, to save Believers. He suffered men indeed to make tryall of other wayes; and when their insufficiency for the Ends men proposed to themselves was sufficiently manifested, it pleased him to reveal his way. And what are we, that we should contend about it with him? This Rejection of the way of personal Righteousness, and choosing the way of Grace and Forgiveness, God asserts, Jerem. 31. 31, 32, 33, 34. Behold, the dayes come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel and the house of Judah. Not according to the Covenant which I made with their Fathers: (in which Administration of the Covenant as far as it had respect unto Typical mercies, much depended on their personal obe∣dience) But this shall be the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, after these dayes, saith the Lord,—I will put my Laws, &c. and I will forgive their iniquities, and re∣member their sins no more. Let then this way stand, and the way of mans Wisdom and self Righteousness perish for ever. 2. This is the way that above all others atends directly and immediately to the Glory of God. God hath managed and or∣dered all things in this way of forgiveness, so as no flesh should glory in his presence, but that he that glorieth should glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1. 29. 31. Where then is Boasting? it is excluded; by what Law? by the Law of Works; nay, but by the Law of
Faith, Rom. 3. 27. It might be easily manifested, that God hath so laid the design of saving Sinners by Forgiveness according to the Law of Faith, that it is utterly impossible that any Soul should on any account whatever have the least Ground of Glorying, or boasting in its self, either absolutely, or in com∣parison with them that perish. If Abraham, saith the same Apostle, were justified by works, he had whereof to glory, but not before God, Chap. 4. 2. The Obedience of works would have been so infinitely disproportionate to the Reward, which was God himself, that there had been no glorying before God; but therein his Goodness and Grace must be acknowledged; yet in comparison with others who yielded not the Obedience required, he would have had wherein to glory; But now this also is cast off by the way of forgiveness, and no pretence is left for any to claim the least share in the Glory of it but God alone; and herein lyes the excellency of Faith, that it gives glory unto God, Rom. 4. 20. the denyal whereof under various pretences is the issue of proud unbelief. And this is that which God will bring all unto, or they shall perish; Namely, that shame be ours, and the whole Glory of our salvation be his alone. So he expresseth his design, Isa. 45. 22, 23, 24, 25. v. 22. he pro∣poseth himself as the only relief for Sinners; Look unto me, (saith he) and be saved, all ye ends of the Earth; But what if men take some other course, and look well to themselves, and so decline this way of meer Mercy and Grace, wh saith he, v. 23. I have sworn by my self, the Word is gone out of my mouth in Righteousness, and shall not return, that unto me, every Knee shall bow, and every Tongue shall swear. Look you unto that; but I have sworn that you shall either do so, or answer your disobedience at the day of Judgement; whereunto Paul applyes those words, Rom. 14. 11. what do the Saints hereupon? v. 24, 25. Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I Righteousness and strength. In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory. They bring their hearts to accept of all Righte∣ousness from him, and to give all Glory unto him. God at first placed Man in a blessed state and condition, in such a dependance on himself, as that he might have wrought out his Eternal happiness with a great Reputation of Glory
unto himself. Man being in this honour, saith the Psalmist, abode not. God now fixes on another way, as I said, wherein all the Glory shall be his own, as the Apostle at large sets it forth, Rom. 3. 23, 24, 25, 26. Now neither the way from which Adam fell, nor that wherein some of the Angels continued, which for the substance were the same, is to be compared with this of Forgiveness, as to the bringing Glory unto God. I hate curiosities and conjectures in the things of God: Yet upon the account of the interposition of the blood of Christ, I think I may boldly say, there comes more glory to God, by saving one sinner in this way of Forgiveness, than in giving the reward of blessedness to all the Angels in Heaven; So seems it to ap∣pear, from that solemn Representation, we have of the Ascription of Glory to God by the whole Creation, Revel. 5. 9. 10, 11, 12, 13. All centers in the bringing forth Forgiveness by the blood of the Lamb. I insist the more on this, because it lyes so directly against that cursed Principle of Unbelief, which reigns in the hearts of the most, and often disquiets the best. That a poor un∣godly sinner, going to God with the guilt of all his sins upon him, to receive Forgiveness at his hand, doth bring more Glory unto him, than the obedience of an Angel, men are not over-ready to think, nor can be prepared for it, but by it self. And the formal nature of that unbelief which worketh in Convinced Sinners, lyes in a refusal to give unto God the whole glory of Salvation. There are many hurtfull Contro∣versies in Religion that are managed in the World with great noyse and clamour; but this is the greatest and most pernici∣ous of them all, and it is for the most part silently transacted in the souls of men; although under various forms and pre∣tences. It hath also broken forth in writings and disputati∣ons, that is, Whether God or man shall have the Glory of Salva∣tion; or whether it shall wholly be ascribed unto God, or that man also on one account or other, may come in for a share. Now if this be the state and condition with any of you, that you will rather perish, than God should have his Glory, what shall we say, but Go ye cursed souls, perish for ever, without the least compassion from God, or any that love him, Angels or Men.
If you shall say, for your parts you are contented with this course, let God have the glory, so you may be forgiven and saved; There is yet just cause to suspect, lest this be a selfish contempt of God. It is a great thing to give Glory unto God by believing, in a due manner. Such slight returns seem not to have the least relation unto it. Take heed that instead of be∣lieving, you be not found mockers, and so your bands be made strong. But a poor Convinced Sinner may here finde encouragement, Thou wouldst willingly come to Acceptance with God, and so attain Salvation; Oh my soul longeth for it; wouldst thou willingly take that course for the obtaining those ends which will bring most Glory unto God? Surely it is meet and most equal that I should do so; What now if one should come and tell thee from the Lord of a way, whereby thou poor, sinfull, self condemned creature, mightst bring as much Glory unto God, as any Angel in Heaven is able to doe? Oh, if I might bring the least glory unto God, I should rejoyce in it. Behold then the way which himself hath fixed on for the exaltation of his Glory: Even, that thou shouldst come to him meerly upon the account of Grace in the blood of Christ, for pardon and for∣giveness, and the Lord strengthen thee to give up thy self thereunto. 3. Consider, That if this way of salvation be refused, there is no other way for you. We do not propose this way of forgive∣ness as the best and most pleasant, but as the only way. There is no other Name given but that of Christ; no other way but this of Forgiveness. Here lyes your choice; take this path, or perish for ever. It is a shame indeed unto our cursed na∣ture that there should be any need to use this Argument, that we will neither submit to Gods Soveraignty, nor delight in his Glory. But seeing it must be used, let it be so. I intend neither to flatter men, nor to frighten them; but to tell them the truth as it is. If you continue in your present state, and condition, if you rest on what you do, or what you hope to do, if you support your selves with general hopes of mercy, mixed with your own endeavours and obedience, if you come not up to a through Gospel-closure with this way of God, if you
make it not your All, giving Glory to God therein; perish you will, and must, and that to Eternity. There remains no more sacrifice for your sins, nor way of escape for your Souls. You have not then only the excellency of this way to invite you, but the absolute indispensable necessity of this way to en∣force you. And now let me adde, that I am glad this Word is spoken, is written unto you. You and I must one day be accountable for this discourse. That word that hath already been spoken, if neglected, will prove a sore Testimony against you. It will not fare with you, as with other men who have not heard the Joyfull sound. All these words that shall be found consonant to the Gospel, if they are not turned to Grace in your hearts here, will turn into Torment unto your Souls hereafter. Choose not any other way, it will be in vain for you; it will not profit you; and take heed lest you suppose you Embrace this way, when indeed you do not, about which I have given Caution before. 4. This way is free and open for and unto sinners. He that fled to the City of Refuge, might well have many perplexed thoughts, whether he should finde the Gates of it opened unto him or no, and whether the Avenger of blood might not overtake and slay him, whilest he was calling for en∣trance. Or if the Gates were alwayes open, yet some crimes excluded men thence. Numb. 35. 24. It is not so here. Acts 13. 38, 39. This is the voyce of God even the Father; come saith he to the Marriage, for all things are prepared, no fear of want of entertainment, Matth. 22. 4. whence the Preachers of the Gospel are said in his stead to beseech men to be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5. 18. And It is the voyce of the Son; whosoever, saith he, cometh to God by me, I will in no wise cast out, John 6. 37. Who ere he be that comes shall assuredly find entertainment; the same is his call and invitation in other places, as Matth. 11. 28. John 7. 37. and This is the voyce of the Spirit, and of the Church, and of all Believers, Revel. 22. 17. The Spirit and the Bride say, Come, and let him that heareth say Come; and let him that is athirst
come, and whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely; All center in this, that sinners may come freely to the Grace of the Gospel. And It is the known voyce of the Gospel it self, as Isa. 55. 1, 2, 3. Prov. 9. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. And it is the voyce of all the Saints in Heaven and Earth, who have been made partakers of Forgiveness, they all testifie, that they received it freely. Some indeed endeavour to abuse this concurrent Testimony of God and Man. What is spoken of the freedom of the Grace of God, they would wrest to the power of the Will of man: But the riches and freedom of Gods mercy do not in the least enter∣fere with the efficacy of his Grace. Though he proclaim pardon in the blood of Christ indefinitely, according to the fullness and excellency of it, yet he giveth out his quickening Grace to enable men to receive it, as he pleaseth, for he hath mercy on whom he will have mercy. But this lyes in the thing it self, the way is open and prepared, and it is not because men cannot enter, but because they will not, that they do not enter. As our Saviour Christ tells the Pharisees, Ye therefore hear not Gods Word, because ye are not of God. Joh. 8. 47. and Joh. 6. 44. So he doth, Ye will not come unto me that you may have life, Joh. 5. 40. In the neglect, and inadvertency of the most ex∣cusable, there is a positive Act of their Will put forth in the refusing of Christ and Grace by him. And this is done by men under the preaching of the Gospel every day. There is no∣thing that at the last day will tend more immediately to the advancement of the Glory of God, in the inexcusableness of them who obey not the Gospel, than this, that Terms of Peace in the blessed way of Forgiveness were freely tendred unto them. Some that hear or read this Word, may perhaps have lived long under the dispensation of the Word of Grace, and yet it may be have never once seriously pondered on this way of come∣ing to God by Forgiveness through the blood of Christ; but think, that going to Heaven is a thing of course, that men need not much trouble themselves about; do they know what they have done? hitherto all their dayes they have positively refused the salvation, that hath been freely tendred unto them in Jesus Christ. Not they, they'l say, they never had such a
thought, nor would for all this World. But be it known unto you, in as much as you have not effectually received him, you have refused him, and whether your day and season be past or no, the Lord only knows. 5. This Way is safe. No soul ever miscarried in it. There is none in Heaven but will say it is a safe way; There is none in Hell can say otherwise. It is safe to all that venture on it, so as to enter into it. In the old way we were to preserve our selves and the way. This preserves it self and us; This will be made evident by the ensuing considerations. 1. This is the Way which in the Wisdom, Care, and Love of God in Christ, was provided in the room of another, removed and taken out of the way for this cause and reason, because it was not safe, nor could bring us unto God, Heb. 8. 7, 8. For if the First Covenant had been faultless, then should no place have been sought for the Second; but finding fault with them, he saith. And, 1. He tells us, that the first Covenant was not faultless, for if it had, there would have been no need of a Second. The Commandement indeed, which was the matter of that Cove∣nant, the same Apostle informs us to be holy, just, and good, Rom. 7. 12. But it was faulty as to all ends of a Covenant, considering our state and condition as sinners; it could not bring us unto God. So he acquaints us Rom. 8. 3. It was made weak through the flesh; that is, by the entrance of sin, and so became unusefull as to the saving of souls. Be it so then; through our sin and default this good and holy Law, this Co∣venant was made unprofitable unto us; But what was that unto God? was he bound to desert his own Institution and Appointment, because through our own default it ceased to be profitable unto us? Not at all; He might righteously have tyed us all unto the terms of that Covenant, to stand or fall by them unto Eternity. But he would not do so. But Secondly, In his Love and Grace, he finds fault with it, v. 8. not in its self, and absolutely, but only so farre as that he would provide another way, which should supply all its de∣fects and wants in reference to the end aimed at. What way that is, the Apostle declares in the following Verses to the end of that Chapter. The summe is, v. 12. I will be mercifull
to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their Iniquities will I remember no more. It is the way of pardon and forgiveness: This is substituted in the room of that insufficient way that was removed. Let us consider then, whether the infinitely Wise and Ho∣ly God, pursuing his purpose of bringing souls unto himself, laying aside one way of his own appointment as useless, and infirm, because of the coming in of sin, against which there was no relief found in it, and substituting another way in the room of it; would not provide such an one, as should be absolutely free from the faults and inconveniencies, which he charged upon that, which he did remove. That which alone rendred the former way faulty was sin; it could do any thing but save a sinner; this then was to be, and is principally pro∣vided against in this way of Forgiveness. And we see here, how clearly God hath severed, yea and in this matter opposed these two things, (1.) Namely, the way of personal Righteous∣ness, and the way of forgiveness. He finds fault with the first; what then doth he do? what course doth he take? doth he mend it, take from it what seems to be redundant, mitigate its severity, and supply it where it was wanting, by Forgive∣ness, and so set it up anew? This indeed is the way that ma∣ny proceed in in their notions, and the most in their practice. But this is not the way of God. He takes the one utterly away, and establishes the other in its place. And mens endeavours to mix them will be found of little use to them at the last. I can have no great expectation from that which God pronounced faulty. (2.) The unchangeable Principles and Foundations that this Way is built upon, render it secure and safe for sinners, for, 1. It is founded on the Purpose of God, Gal. 3. 8. The Scripture foreseeing that God would justifie the Heathen through Faith. God would do so, he had purposed and determined to proceed this way; and all the purposes of God are attended with immutability; and 2. His Promise also is engaged in it, and that given out in the way of a Covenant, as hath been already declared; and
3. This Promise is confirmed by an Oath; and it may be observed, that God doth not in any thing interpose with an Oath, but what relates to this way of coming to himself by Forgiveness. For the Oath of God wherever it is used, respect∣eth either Christ Typically, or personally, or the Covenant esta∣blished in him; for, 4. This Way is confirmed and ratified in his Blood; from whence the Apostle at large evinceth its absolute security and safety, Heb. 9. Whatever soul then on the invitation under consideration, shall give up himself to come to God, by the way proposed; he shall assuredly find absolute peace, and se∣curity in it. Neither our own weakness, or folly from within, nor the opposition of any of all our Enemies from without, shall be able to turn us out of this Way. See Isa. 35. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 3. In the other way, every individual person stands upon his own bottom, and must do so, to the last, and utmost of his con∣tinuance in this World. You are desirous to go unto God, to obtain his favour, and come to an enjoyment of him. What will you doe? What course will you fix upon, for the ob∣taining of these Ends? if you were so holy, so perfect, so righte∣ous, so free from sin as you could desire, you should have some boldness in going unto God; why if this be the way you fix upon, take this along with you: You stand upon your own personal Account all your dayes. And if you fail in the least you are gone for ever. For whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all, Jam. 2. 10. And what peace can you possibly obtain, were you as holy as ever you aimed or desired to be, whilest this is your Condi∣tion? But in this way of Forgiveness, we all stand upon the Account of one common Mediator in whom we are compleat. Col. 3. 10. And a want of a due improvement of this Truth, is a great principle of disconsolation to many Souls. Suppose a man look upon himself as loosed from the Covenant of Works, wherein exact and perfect Righteousness is rigidly required; and to be called unto Gospel Evangelical Obedience to be performed in the room thereof, in sincerity and integrity; yet if he be not cleared in this also, that he stands not in this
way purely on his own account, he will never be able to make his Comforts hold out to the end of his Journey. There will be found in the best of men so many particular failings, as will seem in difficult seasons to impeach their integrity; And so ma∣ny questionings will after arise, through the darkness of their minds, and Power of their Temptations, as will give but little rest unto their Souls. Here lyes the great security of this way; We abide in it on the account of the faithfulness and Ability of our Common Mediator Jesus Christ. And this is another Consideration, strengthening our invi∣tation to a closure with the way of coming unto God, under proposal. There is nothing wanting that is needfull to give infallible Security to any Soul, that shall venture himself into it and upon it. There are Terms of peace proposed, as you have heard. These terms are excellent, and holy, and chosen of God, tending to the interest of his Glory; free, safe, and secure unto sinners. What hath any soul in the World to object against them? or wherein do men repose their Trust and Confidence in the neglect of this so great Salvation? Is it in their Lusts, and sins, that they will yield them as much satisfaction and contentment as they shall need to desire? Alas, they will ruine them, and bring forth nothing but death. Is it in the World? it will deceive them; the figure of it passeth away. Is it in their Duties, and Righteousness? they will not relieve them; for did they follow the Law of Righteousness, they could not obtain the Righteousness of the Law. Is it in the continuance of their lives? Alas, it is but a shadow, a vapour that appeareth for a little while. Is it in a future Amendment and Repentance? Hell is full of souls perishing under such Resolutions. Only this way of pardon remains, and yet of all others is most despi∣sed. But yet I have one consideration more to adde before I further enforce the Exhortation. 6. Consider, that this is the only Way and means to enable you unto obedience, and to render what you do therein acceptable unto God. It may be that some of you are under the power of Convictions, and have made Engagements unto God, to live unto him, to keep your selves from fin, and to follow after holiness. It may be you have done so in Afflictions,
dangers, sicknesses, or upon the receipt of mercies; but yet you find that you cannot come unto stability or constancy in your course; you break with God and your own Souls, which fills you with new disquietments, or else hardens you, and makes you secure and negligent; so that you return unto your purposes no oftner, than your Convictions or Afflictions befall you anew. This condition is ruinous and pernitious, which nothing can deliver you from, but this closing with for∣giveness. For, 1. All that you do without this, however it may please your minds or ease your Consciences, is not at all accepted with God. Unless this foundation be laid, all that you do is lost. All your Prayers, all your Duties, all your amendments are an abomination unto the Lord. Untill peace is made with him, they are but the Acts of Enemies, which he despiseth and abhorreth. You run it may be earnestly, but you run out of the way; you strive, but not lawfully, and shall never receive the Crown. True Gospel-obedience is the fruit of the Faith of Forgiveness. Whatever you do without it, is but a building without a foundation, a Castle in the ayre. You may see the order of Gospel Obedience, Eph. 2. 7, 8, 9, 10. The founda∣tion must be laid in Grace; Riches of Grace by Christ, in the free pardon, and forgiveness of sin. From hence must the works of obedience proceed, if you would have them to be of Gods appointment, or finde acceptance with him. Without this God will say of all your Services, Worship, Obedience, as he did to the Israelites of old; Amos 5. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. I de∣spise all, reject it all; it is not to him, nor to his Glory. Now if you are under convictions of any sort, there is nothing you more value, nothing you more place your confidence in, than your Duties; your Repentance, your Amendment, what you do, and what in good time you will be. Is it nothing unto you to lose all your hopes, and all your Expectations which you have from hence? To have no other Reception with God, than if all this while you had been wallowing in your sins and lusts? Yet thus it is with you, if you have not begun with God on his own Terms, if you have not received the Atonement in the Blood of his Son; if you are not made parta∣kers
of Forgiveness, if your persons are not pardoned, all your Duties are accursed. 2. This alone will give you such Motives and Encourage∣ments unto Obedience, as will give you Life, Alacrity, and De∣light in it. You perform Duties, abstain from sins, but with heaviness, fear, and in bondage. Could you do as well with∣out them, as with them, would Conscience be quiet, and hope of Eternity hold out, you would omit them for ever. This makes all your Obedience burdensome, and you cry out in your thoughts with him in the Prophet, behold what a weari∣ness it is! the service of God is the only drudgery of your lives, which you dare not omit, and delight not to perform. From this wretched and cursed frame, there is nothing can deliver you, but this closing with forgiveness. This will give you such motives, such encouragements, as will greatly in∣fluence your hearts and souls. It will give you freedom, liberty, delight, and chearfulness in all duties of Gospel Obedience. You will finde a constraining power in the love of Christ there∣in; a freedom from bondage, when the Son truely hath made you free. Faith and love will work genuinely and na∣turally in your spirits; and that which was your greatest bur∣den, will become your chiefest joy: 2 Cor. 7. 1. Thoughts of the Love of God, of the Blood of Christ, or the Covenant of Grace, and sence of pardon in them, will enlarge your hearts, and sweeten all your duties. You will find a new life, a new pleasure, a new satisfaction, in all that you doe. Have you yet ever understood that of the Wiseman, Prov. 3. 17. The wayes of Wisdom are pleasantness, and her paths are peace? Have the wayes of Holyness, of Obedience, of Duties been so unto you? Whatever you pretend, they are not, they cannot be so, whilst you are strangers unto that which alone can render them so unto you. I speak unto them that are under the Law; Would you be free from that bondage, that galling yoke in dutyes of Obedience? Would you have all that you do towards God, a delight and pleasantness unto you? this, and this alone will effect it for you. 3. This will place all your Obedience upon a sure foot of ac∣count in your own Souls and Consciences; even the same that
is fixed on in the Gospell. For the present all that you do, is indeed but to compound with God for your sin; you hope by what you do for him, and to him, to buy off what you have done against him; that you may not fall into the hands of his Wrath and Vengeance. This makes all you doe to be irksom. As a man that labours all his dayes, to pay an old debt, and brings in nothing to lay up for himself, how tedious and wearisome is his work and labour to him. It is odds but that at one time or other, he will give over, and run away from his Creditor. So it is in this case, men who have secret reserves of recompensing God by their Obedience, every day find their debt growing upon them; and have every day less hopes of making a satisfactory payment. This makes them weary, and for the most part they faint under their discouragements, and at length they fly wholly from God. This way alone will state things otherwise in your Consciences; It will give you to see, that all your debts are paid by Christ, and freely for∣given unto you by God. So that what you doe is of Gratitude or thankfulness, hath an influence into Eternity, leads to the Glory of God, the honour of Christ in the Gospel, and your own comfortable account at the last day. This encourageth the soul to labour, to Trade, to endeavour; all things now looking forward, and unto his advantage. 4. Find you not in your selves an impotency, a disability unto the dutyes of Obedience, as to their performance unto God in an acceptable manner? It may be you are not so sensible hereof as you ought to be. For respecting only or principally the outward part and performance of dutyes, you have not Experience of your own Weakness. How to enliven and fill up Duties with Faith, Love, and Delight, you know not; and are therefore unacquainted with your own insufficiency in this matter; yet if you have any Light, any Convictions, (and to such I speak at present) you cannot but perceive and understand, that you are not able in your Obedience to an∣swer what you aim at; you have not strength or power for it. Now it is this faith of Forgiveness alone that will furnish you with the Ability, whereof you stand in need. Pardon comes not to the Soul alone; or rather Christ comes not to the
Soul with pardon only. It is that which he opens the door, and enters by; but he comes with a Spirit of life and Pow∣er. And as without him we can do nothing, so through his ena∣bling us we may do all things. Receiving of Gospel Forgive∣ness engageth all the grace of the Gospel unto our assistance. This is the summe of what hath been spoken, the: obedience that you perform under your convictions is burdensome and unpleasant unto you; it is altogether unacceptable to God. You lose all you do, and all that you hope to do hereafter, if the foundation be not layd in the receiving of pardon in the blood of Christ. It is high time to cast down all that vain and Imaginary fabrick which you have been erecting, and to go about the laying of a new Foundation, which you may safely and chearfully build upon; a building that will abide for ever. Certainty of the final Ruine of them who believe not.Again, It is such a way, so excellent, so pretious, so neer the heart of God, so relating to the blood of Christ, that the neglect of it will assuredly be sorely revenged of the Lord. Let not men think that they shall despise the Wisdom, and Love of the Father, the blood of the Son, and the Promises of the Gospel, at an easie rate. Let us in a very few words take a view of what the Holy Ghost speaks to this purpose. There are Three wayes whereby the Vengeance due to the neglect of closing with for∣giveness or Gospel Grace is expressed. 1. That is done Positively, He that believeth not shall be DAMNED, Mark. 16. 16. That's a hard word; many men cannot endure to hear of it. They would not have it named by their good wills, and are ready to fly in the face of him from whose mouth it proceeds. But let not men deceive them∣selves, this is the softest word, that Mercy, and Love it self, that Christ, that the Gospel speaks to despisers of forgive∣ness. It is Christ who is this legal terrifying Preacher; it is he that cryes out, if you believe not, you shall be Damned; and will come himself in flaming fire to take vengeance of them that obey not the Gospel, 2 Thess. 2. 8. This is the end of the dis∣obedient; if God, if Christ, if the Gospel may be be∣lieved.
2. Comparatively in reference unto the Vengeance due to the breach of the Law, 2 Cor. 2. 16. We are in the preaching of forgiveness by Christ, unto them that perish, a savour of death unto death, a deep death, a sore Condemnation, so Heb. 10. 29. Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye he shall be thought worthy: Sorer than ever was threatned by the Law, or inflicted for the breach of it; not as to the Kind of pu∣nishment, but as to the degrees of it; Hence ariseth the ad∣dition of many stripes. 3. By the way of Admiration at the unexpressibleness, and unavoidableness of the punishment due unto such sinners. Heb. 2. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation? Surely there is no way for men to escape, they shall unavoid∣ably perish who neglect so great salvation. So the Holy Ghost sayes, 1 Pet. 4. 11. What shall be the end of them that obey not the Gospel? What understanding can reach to an apprehension of their miserable and wofull condition? None can, saith the Holy Ghost; nor can it be spoken to their capacity; ah what shall their end be? There remains nothing, but a certain fearfull looking for of Judgement, and fiery indignation that shall consume the Adversaries, Heb. 10. 27. A certain fearfull ex∣pectation of astonishable things that cannot be comprehended. Exhortati∣on to Be∣lieving en∣forced.And these are the Enforcements of the Exhortation in hand, which I shall insist upon. On these foundations, on the con∣sideration of these Principles, let us now a little conferre to∣gether, with the words of Truth and Sobriety. I speak to such poor souls, as having deceived themselves, or neglected ut∣terly their Eternal Condition, are not as yet really, and in Truth made partakers of this forgiveness. Your present state is sad, and deplorable. There is nothing but the wofull uncer∣tainty of a dying life between you and Eternal ruine. That perswasion you have of forgiveness, is Good for nothing but to harden you, and destroy you. It is not the Forgiveness that is with God. Nor have you taken it up on Gospel grounds or Evidences. You have stollen painted beads, and take your selves to be lawfull possessors of Pearls and Jewels. As you are then any way concerned in your own Eternal Condition,
which you are entring into, (and how soon you shall be in∣gaged in it you know not) prevail with your selves to attend a little unto the Exhortation that lyes before you; it is your own business that you are entreated to have regard unto. 1. Consider seriously what it is you bottom your hopes and expectation upon as to Eternity. Great men, and in other things wise, are here very apt to deceive themselves. They suppose they think and believe much otherwise, than indeed they think and believe, as their cry at the last day will manifest. Put your souls a little unto it. Do you at all seriously think of these things? Or are you so under the power of your Lusts, Igno∣rance, and Darkness, that you neglect and despise them? Or do you rise up and lye down, and perform some duties, or neglect them, with a great Coldness, Remisness, and Indif∣ferency of Spirit, like Gallio not much caring for these things? Or do you relieve your selves with hopes of future amendment, purposing, that if you live, you will be other persons than you are, when such and such things are brought about and ac∣complished? Or do you not hope well in Generall upon the account of what you have done, and will doe? If any of these express your condition, it is unspeakably miserable. You lye down, and rise up under the wrath of the Great God, who will prevail at last upon you, and there shall be none to de∣liver. If you shall say, Nay, This is not our state; we rely on Mercy and Forgiveness; then let me in the fear of the Great God entreat a few things, yet further of you. 1. That you would seriously consider, whether the for∣giveness you rest on, and hope in, be that Gospel Forgiveness which we have before described? or is it only a General Ap∣prehension of Impunity, though you are Sinners? That God is mercifull, and you hope in him, that you shall escape the Vengeance of Hell-fire. If it be thus with you, forgiveness it self will not relieve you. This is that of the presumptuous man, Deut. 29. 19. Gospel-pardon is a thing of another nature; It hath its spring in the Gracious heart of the Father, is made out by a Soveraign Act of his Will; rendred consistent with the Glory of his Justice and Holyness by the blood of Christ, by which it is purchased in a Covenant of Grace, as
hath been shewed; If you shall say, yea, this is the forgive∣ness we rely upon, it is that which you have described. Then I desire further that you would 1. Examine your own hearts, how you came to have an in∣terest in this Forgiveness, to close with it, and to have a right unto it. A man may deceive himself as effectually by supposing that True Riches are his, when they are not, as by supposing his false and counterfeit ware to be good and currant; how then come you to be interested in this. Gospel-forgiveness? If it hath befallen you you know not how, if a lifeless, barren, in∣operative perswasion of it hath crept upon your minds; be not mistaken, God will come and require his forgiveness at your hands, and it shall appear, that you have had no part, nor portion in it. If you shall say, Nay, but we were convinced of sin, and rendred exceeding unquiet in our Consciences, and on that account looked out after Forgiveness, which hath given us Rest. Then I desire, 2. That you would diligently consider, to what ends and purposes you have received, and do make use of this Gospel-for∣giveness. Hath it been to make up what was wanting, and to piece up a peace in your own Consciences? that whereas you could not answer your Convictions with your dutyes, you would seek for relief from Forgiveness. This, and innumerable other wayes there are, whereby men may lose their souls when they think all is well with them, even on the account of Pardon and Mercy. Whence is that caution of the Apostle, Looking diligently lest any one should seem to fail, or come short of the Grace of God, Heb. 12. 15. men miss it and come short of it, when they pretend themselves to be in the pursuit of it; yea to have overtaken and possessed it. Now if any of these should prove to be your Condition, I desire 3. That you would consider seriously, whether it be not high time for you to look out for a way of deliverance, and escape, that you may save your selves from this evil World, and fly from the wrath to come. The Judge stands at the door. Before he deal with you as a Judge, he knocks with a tender of mercy. Who knows, but that this may be the last time of his dealing thus with you. Be you old or young, you have but your season,
but your day; it may perhaps be night with you, when it is day with the rest of the World. Your Sun may go down at Noon; And God may swear that you shall not enter into his Rest. If you are then resolved to continue in your present conditi∣on, I have no more to say unto you. I am pure from your blood, in that I have declared unto you the counsel of God in this thing, and so I must leave you to a naked Tryal between the Great God and your Souls at the last day; poor Creatures, I even tremble to think, how he will tear you in pieces, when there shall be none to deliver. Me thinks I see your poor de∣stitute forlorn souls, forsaken of lusts, sins, world, friends, An∣gels, Men, Trembling before the Throne of God, full of horror, and fearfull expectation of the dreadfull sentence. Oh that I could mourn over you, whilest you are joyned to all the living; whilest there is yet hope, oh that in this your day, you knew the things of your peace. But now of you shall say, Nay, but we will seek the Lord whilest he may be found, we will draw nigh unto him before he cause darkness; then consider, I pray, 4. What Joshua told the children of Israel, when they put themselves upon such a Resolution, and cryed out, We will serve the Lord our God, chap. 24. v. 19. Ye cannot serve the Lord, for he is an holy God, a jealous God, he will not forgive your transgressions, nor your sins. Go to him upon your own Account, and in your own strength, with your own best endeavours and dutyes, you will finde him too great, and too holy for you to deal withall. You will obtain neither Acceptance of your persons, nor Pardon of your sins. But you will say, this is heavy tidings. If you sit still you perish, and if you rise to be doing, it will not be better; is there no hope left for our Souls? must we pine away under our sins and the wrath of God for ever? God forbid. There are yet other directions remaining to guide you out of these entanglements. Where∣fore, 5. Ponder seriously on what hath been spoken of this way of approaching unto God. Consider it in its own nature, as to all the ends and purposes for which it is proposed of God: Consider, whether you Approve of it or no; do you judge it a way suited
and fitted to bring glory unto God? doth it answer all the wants and distresses of your souls? Do you think it excellent, safe, and Glorious unto them who are entred unto it? or have you any thing to object against it? Return your Answer to him in whose Name, and by whose Appointment these words are spoken unto you. If you shall say, we are convinced that this way of forgiveness is the only way for the relief and deli∣verance of our Souls; Then, 6. Abhorr your selves for all your blindness and obstinacy where∣by you have hither to despised the love of God, the blood of Christ, and the Tenders of Pardon in the Gospel. Be abased and humbled to the dust, in a sense of your vileness, Polluti∣ons, and Abominations; which things are every day spoken unto, and need not here be repeated. And, 7. Labour to exercise your hearts greatly with thoughts of that abundant Grace that is manifested in this way of sinners come∣ing unto God; as also of the Excellency of the Gospel wherein it is unfolded. Consider the Eternal Love of the Father, which is the Fountain and Spring of this whole dispensation; the inexpressible Love of the Son, in establishing and confirming it, in removing all hindrances and obstructions by his own blood, bringing forth unto beauty and Glory this Redemption or Forgiveness of sin, as the price of it. And let the Glory of the Gospel which alone makes this discovery of Forgiveness in God, dwell in your hearts. Let your minds be exercised about these things. You will find effects from them, above all that hath as yet been brought forth in your souls. What for the most part have you hitherto been conversant about? when you have risen above the turmoyling of lusts and corruptions in your hearts, the entanglements of your Callings, business, and affairs, what have you been able to raise your hearts unto? perplexing fears about your Condition, General hopes without savour or relish, yielding you no refreshment, Legal Commands, Bondage-duties, distracted Consciences, broken Purposes and Pro∣mises which you have been tossed up and down withall, with∣out any certain rest. And what Effects have these thoughts produced? have they made you more holy, and more humble? have they given you delight in God, and strength unto new
obedience? Not at all. Where you were, there you still are without the least progress. But now bring your Souls unto these Springs; and try the Lord if from that day you be not blessed with spiritual stores. 8. If the Lord be pleased to carry on your Souls thus far, then stirr up your selves, to choose and close with the way of for∣giveness that hath been revealed. Choose it only, choose it in comparison with, and opposition unto all others. Say you will be for Christ, and not for another, and be so accordingly. Here venture, here repose, here rest your Souls. It is a way of peace, safety, Holyness, beauty, strength, power, liberty, and glory; you have the Nature, the Name, the Love, the Purpo∣ses the Promises, the Covenant, the Oath of God; the Love, Life, Death, or Blood, the Mediation, or Oblation and Inter∣cession of Jesus Christ; The Power and Efficacy of the Spirit, and Gospel Grace by him administred, to give you Assurance of the excellency, the oneness, the safety of the Way, whereunto you are engaging. If now the Lord shall be pleased to perswade your hearts, and souls, to enter upon the path marked out before you, and shall carry you on through the various exercises of it, unto this closure of Faith, God will have the Glory, the Gospel will be Exalted, and your own Souls shall reap the Eternal benefit of this Exhortation. But now if not withstanding all that hath been spoken, all the Invitations you have had, and Incouragements that have been held out unto you, you shall continue to despise this so great salvation, you will live and dye in the state and condition wherein you are; why then as the Prophet said to the Wife of Jeroboam, Come neer, for I am sent unto you with heavy Ty∣dings. I say then, 9. If you resolve to continue in the neglect of this Salvation, and shall do so accordingly, Then Cursed be you of the Lord, with all the Curses that are written in the Law, and all the Curses that are denounced against Despisers of the Gospel. Yea, be you Anathema Maranatha; Cursed in this World alwayes, untill the comeing of the Lord, and when the Lord comes, be ye cursed from his presence into Everlasting destruction.
Yea, Curse them all ye holy Angels of God, as the obstinate Enemies of your King and Head the Lord Jesus Christ. Curse them all ye Churches of Christ, as despisers of that Love and Mercy which is your portion, your Life, your Inheritance; Let all the Saints of God, all that love the Lord, curse them, and rejoyce to see the Lord comeing forth mightily, and pre∣vailing against them to their everlasting ruine. Why should any one have a thought of compassion towards them, who de∣spise the compassion of God? or of mercy towards them who trample on the blood of Christ? Whilest there is yet hope, we desire to have continual sorrow for you; and to travail in soul for your conversion to God; but if you be hardened in your way, shall we joyn with you against him? shall we preferre you above his Glory? shall we desire your salvation with the despoyling God of his honour? Nay, God for∣bid, We hope to rejoyce in seeing all that vengeance and indig∣nation, that is in the right hand of God, poured out unto Eternity upon your Souls: Prov. 1. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. Rules to be observed by them who would come to stability in Obe∣dience. The first Rule. Christ the only infallible Judge of our spiritual condition. How he judgeth, by his Word and Spirit. That which remaineth to be further carried on, upon the Principles laid down, is to perswade with Souls more or less intangled in the depths of sin, to close with this Forgiveness by Believing, unto their Peace and Consolation. And because such persons are full of pleas and objections against themselves, I shall chiefly in what I have to say, endeavour to obviate these Objections, so to encourage them unto believing, and bring them unto settlement. And herein whatever I have to offer, flowes naturally from the Doctrine at large laid down and asserted. Yet I shall not in all particulars apply my self there∣unto, but in Generall fix on those things that may tend to the Establishment and Consolation of both distressed and doubt∣ing Souls. And I shall do what I purpose these two wayes. First, I shall lay down such General Rules as are necessary
to be observed by all those who intend to come to Gospel peace and Comfort. And then, Secondly, shall consider some such Objections as seem to be most comprehensive of those special reasonings where with distressed persons do usually in∣tangle themselves. I shall begin with General Rules, which through the Grace of Christ, and Supplyes of his Spirit, may be of use unto Believers in the condition under consideration. RULE I. Christ the only Judge of our spi∣ritual con∣dition.Be not Judges of your own Condition, but let Christ judge. You are invited to take the comfort of this Gospel Truth, That there is Forgiveness with God. You say not for you; so said Jacob; My way is hid from the Lord, Isa. 40. 27. and Sion said so too, chap. 49. 14. The Lord hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath forgotten me. But did they make a right Judge∣ment of themselves? We find in those places that God was otherwise minded. This false Judgement made by Souls in their intanglements, of their own Condition, is oft-times a most unconquerable hinderance unto the bettering of it. They fill themselves with thoughts of their own about it, and on them they dwell, instead of looking out after a Remedy. Misgiving thoughts of their distempers, are commonly a great part of some mens sickness. Many diseases are apt to cloud the thoughts, and to cause misapprehensions concerning their own nature, and danger. And these delusions are a real part of the persons sickness. Nature is no less impaired and weakened by them, the Efficacy of Remedies no less obstructed, than by any other reall distemper. In such cases we perswade men to acquiesce in the Judgement of their skilfull Physitian, not al∣wayes to be wasting themselves in and by their own tainted imaginations, and so despond upon their own mistakes; but to rest in what is informed them by him, who is acquaint∣ed with the causes and tendency of their indisposition better than themselves. It is oft-times one part of the Souls depths, to have false apprehensions of its Condition. Sin is a madness; Eccles. 9. 3. so far as any one is under the power of it, he is under the power of madness. Madness doth not sooner, nor
more effectually discover it self in any way or thing, than in possessing them in whom it is, with strange conceits and appre∣hensions of themselves. So doth this madness of sin, according unto its degrees, and prevalency. Hence some cry Peace, peace, when suddain destruction is at hand, 1 Thess. 5. 3. It is that madness, under whose power they are, which gives them such groundless Imaginations of themselves and their own Con∣dition. And some say they are lost for ever, when God is with them. Do you then your duty, and let Christ judge of your state. Your Concernment is too great, to make it a reasonable de∣mand, to commit the Judgement of your condition to any other. When Eternal welfare or woe are at the stake, for a man to renounce his own thoughts, to give up himself im∣plicitly, to the Judgement of men fallible and lyars like him∣self, is stupidity; But there is no danger of being deceived by the sentence of Christ. The truth is, whether we will or no, he will Judge; and according as he determines so shall things be found at the last day, Joh. 5. 22. The Father judgeth no man, (that is, immediately and in his own Person) but hath com∣mitted all judgement unto the Son. All Judgment that respects Eternity, whether it be to be passed in this World or in that to come, is committed unto him. Accordingly in that place  judgeth both of Things and Persons. Things he determines upon, v. 24. He that heareth my Word, and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into con∣demnation, but is passed from death unto life. Let men say what they please, This sentence shall stand; Faith and eternal life are inseparably conjoyned. And so of Persons, v. 38. You have not, (saith he to the Pharisees, who were much otherwise minded) the Word of God abiding in you. Take not then the Office and Prerogative of Christ out of his hand, by making a Judgement upon your own Reasonings, and Conclusions, and Deductions of your state and Conditi∣on. You will find that he often-times both on the one hand, and on the other, determines quite contrary to what men judge of themselves; As also to what others judge of them. Some he judgeth to be in an evil condition, who are very confident that
it is well with them, and who please themselves in the thoughts of many to the same purpose. And he judgeth the state of some to be Good, who are diffident in themselves, and it may be despised by others. We may single out an Example or two in each kind. 1. Laodicea's Judgement of her self, and her spiritual state we have, Revel. 3. 17. I am rich, and increased with Goods, and have need of nothing. A fair state it seems, a blessed Con∣dition. She wants nothing that may contribute to her rest, peace and reputation; she is Orthodox, and Numerous, and Flourishing; makes a fair profession, and all is well within. So she belives, so she reports of her self; wherein there is a secret reflexion also upon others whom she despiseth. Let them shift as they list, I am thus as I say. But was it so with her in∣deed? was that her true Condition whereof she was so per∣swaded, as to profess it unto all? Let Jesus Christ be heard to speak in this cause, let him come and judge? I will do so, saith he, v. 14. Thus saith the Amen, the faithfull and true Wit∣ness. Coming to give sentence in a case of this importance, he gives himself this Title that we may know his Word is to be acquiesced in. Every man, saith he, is a Lyar; Their Testi∣mony is of no value, let them pronounce what they will of themselves, or of one another; I am the Amen, and I will see whose Word shall stand, mine or theirs. What then saith he of Laodicea? Thou art wretched, and miserable and poor, and blind, and naked. O wofull and sad disappointment! O dreadfull surprizall! Ah how many Laodicean Churches have we in the World? How many Professors are members of these Chruches? Not to mention the generality of men that live under the means of Grace, all which have Good hopes of their Eternal Condition whilest they are despised and abhorred by the only Judge. Among Professors themselves, it is dreadfull to think how many will be found light when they come to be weighed in this ballance. 2. Again, he Judgeth some to be in a good condition, be they themselves never so diffident; Revel. 2. 9. saith he to the Church of Smyrna; I know thy poverty; Smyrna was complain∣ing that she was a poor contemptible Congregation, not fit for
him to take any notice of. Well, saith he, fear not; I know thy poverty whereof thou complainest; but thou art Rich; That is my Judgement, Testimony, and Sentence concerning thee and thy condition. Such will be his Judgement at the last day, when both those, on the one hand, and the other, shall be suprized with his sentence, the one with Joy, at the riches of his Grace; The other with terror at the severity of his Justice, Math. 25 37, 38, 39. and 44, 45. This case is direct∣ly stated in both the places mentioned in the entrance of this discourse; as in that for instance, Isa. 49. 14. Zion said, the Lord hath forsaken me. That is Zions judgement of her self, and her state and condition; a sad report and conclusion. But doth Christ agree with Zion in this sentence? The next verse gives us his Resolution of this matter; Can, saith he, a Woman for∣get her sucking Childe, that she should not have compassion on the Son of her wombe; Yea they may forget, yet will not I forget thee. The state of things in Truth, is as much otherwise as can pos∣sibly be thought or imagined. To what purpose is it for men to be passing a Judgement upon themselves, when there is no manner of certainty in their determinations; and when their proceeding thereon will probably lead them to further entanglements, if not to eter∣nal ruine. The Judging of Souls as to their spiritual state and condition is the work of Jesus Christ; especially as to the End now under Enquiry. Men may, men do take many wayes to make a Judgement of themselves. Some do it on slight and trivial conjectures; some on bold and wicked presumptions; some on desperate Atheistical notions; as Deut. 29. 17. some with more sobriety and sence of Eternity, lay down principles, it may be good and true in themselves; from them they draw conclusi∣ons, arguing from one thing unto another; and in the end oft-times either deceive themselves, or sit down no less in the dark, than they were at the entrance of their self-debate and Examination. A mans judgement upon his own reasonings is seldom true, more seldom permanent. I speak not of self-exami∣nation, with a due discussion of Graces and Actions, but of the final sentence as to state and condition, wherein the soul is to acquiesce. This belongs unto Christ.
Now there are Two wayes whereby the Lord Jesus Christ gives forth his decretory sentence in this matter. 1. By his Word. He determines in the Word of the Gospel of the state and condition of all men indefinitely. Each Indi∣vidual coming to that Word, receives his own sentence and doom. He told the Jews that Moses accused them, John 5. 45. His Law accused and condemned the transgressors of it. And so doth the acquit every one that is discharged, by the Word of the Gospel. And our self-judging, is but our receiving by faith his Sentence in the Word. His process herein we have re∣corded, Joh 33. 22, 23. His soul (that is of the sinner) draw∣eth neer to the grave, and his life to the destroyers; This seems to be his state; it is so indeed; he is at the very brink of the grave and hell. What then; why if there be with him, or stand over him,  the Angel interpreting, or the Angel of the Covenant, who alone is  the one of a thousand; what shall he doe? He shall shew unto him his uprightness. He shall give in unto him a right determination of his interest in God, and of the state and frame of his heart towards God; whereupon God shall speak peace unto his Soul, and deliver him from his entanglements, v. 24. Jesus Christ hath in the Word of the Gospel stated the condition of every man. He tells us, that sinners, of what sort soever they are, that believe, are accepted with him; and shall receive for∣giveness from God; that none shall be refused or cast off that come unto God by him. The Soul of whom we are treating is now upon the work of coming unto God for forgiveness by Jesus Christ. Many and weighty Objections it hath in and against its self, why it should not come, why it shall not be accepted. Our Lord Jesus the Wisdom of God foresaw all these Objections; he foreknew what could be said in the case, and yet he hath determined the matter, as hath been declared. In General, mens arguings against themselves arise from Sin and the Law. Christ knowes what is in them both. He tryed them to the uttermost, as to their penalties; and yet he hath so de∣termined as we have shewed. Their particular Objections, are from particular considerations of sin; their Greatness, their Number, their Aggravations. Christ knows all these also;
And yet stands to his firmer determination. Upon the whole matter then, it is meet his Word should stand. I know when a Soul brings it self to be judged by the Word of the Gospel, it doth not alwayes in a like manner receive and rest in the sentence given. But when Christ is pleased to speak the word with power to men, they shall hear the voyce of the Son of God, and be concluded by it. Let the Soul then that is rising out of depths, and pressing towards a sence of forgiveness, lay it self down before the Word of Christ in the Gospel. Let him at∣tend to what he speaks; and if for a while it hath not power upon him to quiet his heart, let him wait a season, and light shall arise unto him out of darkness. Christ will give in his sentence into his Conscience with that power and efficacy, as he shall finde rest and peace in it. 2. Christ also judgeth by his Spirit; not only in making this sentence of the Gospel to be received effectually in the Soul, but in and by peculiar Actings of his upon the heart and soul of a Believer: 1. Cor. 2. 11. We have received the Spirit of God, that we may know the things that are freely given us of God. The Spirit of Christ acquaints the Soul, that this and that Grace is from him, that this or that duty was performed in his strength. He brings to mind, what at such and such times was wrought in men by himself, to give them supportment and relief in the times of depths and darkness. And when it hath been clearly discovered unto the Soul at any time by the Holy Ghost, that any thing wrought in it, or done by it hath been truely saving; The Comfort of it will abide in the midst of many shakings and Temptations. 2. He also by his Spirit bears witness with our Spirits, as to our state and condition. Of this I have spoken largely else∣where, and therefore shall now pass it by. This then is our first General Rule and Direction. Self∣determinations concerning mens spiritual state and condition, because their minds are usually influenced by their distempers, are seldom right and according to Rule. Mistakes in such de∣terminations are exceedingly prejudicial to a Soul seeking out after relief, and sence of Forgiveness; let Christ then be the Judge in this Case by his Word and Spirit, as hath been directed.
RULE II. Self-condemnation and abhorrency for sin consistent with Gospel Justification and Peace. The nature of Gospel-Assurance; what is consistent with it. What are the Effects of it. Self-con∣demnation consistent with Go∣spel Justi∣fication and Peace.Self-Condemnation and Abhorrency do very well consist with Gospel-Justification and Peace. Some men have no peace, be∣cause they have that, without which it is impossible they should have peace. Because they cannot but condemn themselves, they cannot entertain a sence, that God doth acquit them. But this is the mystery of the Gospel, which unbelief is a stranger unto; Nothing but faith can give a real subsistence unto these things, in the same Soul, at the same time. It is easie to learn the notion of it, but it is not easie to experience the power of it. For a man to have a sight of that within him, which would condemn him for which he is troubled, and at the same time to have a discovery of that without him, which will justifie him, and to rejoyce therein, is that which he is not lead unto, but by Faith in the mystery of the Gospel. We are now under a Law for Justification, which excludes all boasting, Rom. 3. 27. So that though we have joy enough in another, yet we may have, we alwayes have sufficient cause of humiliation in our selves. The Gospel will teach a man to feel sin, and believe Righteousness at the same time. Faith will carry Heaven in one hand, and Hell in the other; shewing the one deserved, the other purchased. A man may see enough of his own sin and folly to bring Gehennam è Coelo, a Hell of wrath out of Heaven; and yet see Christ bring Coelum ex inferno, a Heaven of blessed∣ness out of an Hell of punishment. And these must needs pro∣duce very divers, yea contrary effects and operations in the Soul. And he who knows not how to assign them their proper du∣ties, and seasons, must needs be perplexed. The work of self∣condemnation then, which men in these depths cannot but abound with, is in the disposition of the Covenant of Grace, no way inconsistent with, nor unsuited unto Justification, and the enjoyment of Peace in the sence of it. There may be a deep sence of sin on other considerations besides Hell. David
was never more humbled for sin, than when Nathan told him it was forgiven. And there may be a view of Hell as deserved, which yet the Soul may know it self freed from, as to the issue. To evidence our intendment in this discourse, I shall briefly consider what we intend by Gospel Assurance of Forgiveness, that the Soul may not be solicitous and perplexed, about the utter want of that, which perhaps it is already in some enjoyment of. Gospel As∣surance, wherein it consisteth.Some men seem to place Gospel Assurance in an high unassault∣ed Confidence of Acceptance with God. They think it is in none but such, as if a man should go to them, and ask them, are you certain you shall be saved, have boldness, and confidence, and ostentation to answer presently, yea they are certain they shall be saved. But as the blessed Truth of Assurance hath been reproached in the World under such a notion of it, so such ex∣pressions become not them who know what it is to have to do with the Holy God who is a consuming fire. Hence some con∣clude, that there are very few Believers who have any Assu∣rance, because they have not this confidence, or are more free to mention the oppasition they meet with, than the supportment they enjoy. And thus is it rendred a matter not greatly to be desired, because it is so rarely to be obtained; most of the Saints serving God, and going to Heaven well enough without it; But the matter is otherwise. The importance of it, not only as it is our life of comfort and joy, but also as it is the principal means of the flourishing of our Life of Holiness, hath been decla∣red before; and might be further manifested, were that our present business; Yea and in times of tryall, which are the proper seasons for the Effectual working and manifestation of Assurance, it will and doth appear, that many, yea that most of the Saints of God, are made partakers of this Grace and Priviledge. I shall then in the pursuit of the Rule laid down, do these two things. (1.) Shew what things they are which are not only consistent with Assurance, but are even necessary concomitants of it, which yet if not duely weighed and considered, may
seem so far to impeach a mans comfortable perswasion of his con∣dition before God, as to leave him beneath the Assurance sought after. And, 2. I shall speak somewhat of its nature: Especially as mani∣festing its self by its Effects. Sense of sin consistent with Assu∣rance.1. A deep sense of the evil of sin, of the guilt of mans own sin, is no way inconsistent with Gospel assurance of Acceptance with God through Christ, and of Forgiveness in him. By a sense of the guilt of sin; I understand two things. (1.) A clear conviction of sin by the Holy Ghost, saying unto the Soul, Thou art the man; and (2.) A sense of the displeasure of God, or the wrath due to sin, according to the sentence of the Law. Both these David expresseth in that complaint, Psal. 31. 10. My life is spent with grief, and my years with sighing, my strength faileth because of mine Iniquity, and my bones are consumed. His Iniquity was before him, and a sense of it pressed him sore. But yet notwithstanding all this, he had a comfortable perswasion that God was his God in Covenant, v. 14. I trusted in thee O Lord, I said, thou art my God. And the tenor of the Covenant, wherein alone God is the God of any person is, that he will be mercifull unto their sin and iniquity. To whom he is a God, he is so according to the Tenor of that Covenant; so that here these two are conjoyned. Saith he, Lord, I am pressed with the sense of the guilt of mine Iniquities, and thou act my God who forgivest them. And the ground hereof is, that God by the Gospel hath divided the work of the Law, and taken part of it out of its hand. Its whole work and duty is to condemn the sin and the sinner. The sinner is freed by the Gospel, but its right lyes against the sin still, that it con∣demns, and that justly. Now though the sinner himself be freed, yet finding his sin layd hold of and condemned, it fills him with a deep sense of its guilt, and of the displeasure of God against it; which yet hinders not, but that at the same time, he may have such an insight as faith gives into his per∣sonal interest in a Gospel acquitment. A man then may have a deep sense of sin all his dayes, walk under the sense of it continually, abhorr himself for his ingratitude, unbelief,
and rebellion against God, without any impeachment of his Assurance. Sorrow for sin consi∣stent with Assurance.2. Deep sorrow for sin is consistent with Assurance of forgiveness Yea it is a great means of preservation of it. Godly sorrow, mourning, humiliation, contriteness of Spirit, are no less Go∣spel Graces, and fruits of the Holy Ghost, than Faith it self; and so are consistent with the highest flourishings of faith what∣ever. It is the work of Heaven it self, and not of the Assurance of it, to wipe all tears from our eyes. Yea these Graces have the most eminent Promises annexed to them, as Isa. 57. 15. chap. 66. 2. with blessedness it self, Math. 5. 4. yea they are them∣selves the matter of many Gracious Gospel Promises, Zech. 12. 10. so that they are assuredly consistent with any other Grace or Priviledge that we may be made partakers of; or are pro∣mised unto us. Some finding the weight and burden of their sins, and being called to mourning and bumiliation on that ac∣count, are so taken up with it, as to lose the sense of Forgive∣ness, which rightly improved, would promote their sorrow, as their sorrow seems directly to sweeten their sense of forgive∣ness. Sorrow absolutely exclusive of the faith of forgiveness, is legall, and tendeth unto death. Assurance absolutely exclusive of Godly sorrow is presumption, and not a perswasion from him that calleth us. But Gospel Sorrow, and Gospel Assurance may well dwell in the same breast at the same time. Indeed as in all worldly Joyes there is a secret wound; So in all Godly sorrow and mourning considered in its self, there is a secret Joy and refreshment; Hence it doth not wither and dry up, but rather enlarge, open, and sweeten the heart. I am perswaded that generally they mourn most, who have most Assurance. And all True Gospel mourners, will be found to have the root of Assurance so grafted in them, that in its proper season (a time of trouble) it will undoubtedly flourish. Sense of the power of sin con∣sistent with Assurance.3. A deep sense of the indwelling power of sin, is consistent with Gospel Assurance. Sense of indwelling sin will cause manifold perplexities in the Soul. Trouble, disquietments, sorrow, and anguish of heart, expressing themselves in sighs, mourning,
groaning for deliverance alwayes attend it. To what purpose do you speak to a Soul highly sensible of the restless power of indwelling sin concerning Assurance. Alas, saith he, I am ready to perish every moment, my lusts are strong, active, restless, yea outragious; they give me no rest, no liberty, and but little success do I obtain. Assurance is for Conquerours; for them that live at rest and peace. I lie groveling on the ground all my dayes, and must needs be uncertain what will be the issue. But when such an one hath done all he can, he will not be able to make more wofull complaints of this matter than Paul hath done before him. Rom. 7. and yet he closeth the discourse of it with as high an expression of assurance as any person needs to seek after, v. last, and chap. 8. 1. It is not Assurance, but Enjoyment that excludes this sense and trouble. But if men will think they can have no Assurance, because they have that, without which it is impossible they should have any, it is hard to give them relief. A little Cruse of Salt of the Gospel cast into these bitter waters will make them sweet and wholsom. Sense of the guilt of sin may consist with faith of its pardon and forgiveness in the blood of Christ. Godly sorrow may dwell in the same heart at the same time, with Joy in the Holy Ghost; and groaning after deliverance from the power of sin, with a Gracious perswasion that sin shall not have domi∣nion over us, because we are not under the Law but Grace. Fears and Temptati∣ons con∣sistent with Assurance.4. Doubtings, Fears, Temptations, if not ordinarily prevailing are consistent with Gospel Assurance. Though the Devils power he limited in reference unto the Saints, yet his hands are not tyed. Though he cannot prevail against them, yet he can as∣sault them. And although there be not an evil heart of unbelief in Believers, yet there will still be unbelief in their hearts. Such an evidence, conviction, and perswasion of Acceptance with God as are exclusive of all contrary reasonings, that suffer the Soul to hear nothing of Objections, that free and quiet it from all assaults are neither mentioned in the Scripture, nor con∣sistent with that state wherein we walk before God, nor pos∣sible on the account of Sathans will and ability to tempt, or of our own remaining unbelief. Assurance encourageth us in our
Combate, it delivereth us not from it. We may have peace: with God, when we have none from the assaults of Sathan. Now unless a man do duly consider the tenor of the Cove∣nant wherein we walk with God, and the nature of that Go∣spel Obedience which he requires at our hands, with the state and Condition which is our Lot and portion whilest we live in this World, the dayly sense of these things, with the trouble that must be undergone on their account, may keep him in the dark unto himself, and hinder him from that establishment in believing which otherwise he might attain unto. On this account some as holy persons as any in this World, being wholly taken up with the consideration of these home bred perplexi∣ties, and not clearly acquainted with the way and tenor of assuring their Souls before God according to the Rule of the Covenant of Grace, have passed away their dayes in a bondage frame of spirit, and unacquaintance with that strong consolation which God is abundantly willing that all the Heirs of promise should receive. The Na∣ture and Effects of Gospel As∣surance.5. Evangelical Assurance is not a thing that consisteth in any point, and so incapable of variation. It may be higher or lower, greater or less, obscure or attended with more Evidence. It is not quite lost; when it is not quite at its highest. God some∣times marvellously raiseth the Souls of his Saints with some close and neer approaches unto them; gives them a sense of his Eternal Love; a taste of the embraces of his Son, and the inhabitation of the Spirit, without the least intervening di∣sturbance, then this is their Assurance. But this life is not a season to be alwayes taking wages in; our work is not yet done, we are not alwayes to abide in this Mount; we must down again into the battle, fight again, cry again, complain again; Shall the Soul be thought now to have lost its assurance? Not at all, it had before assurance with Joy, Triumph, and Exul∣tation; it hath it now, or may have, with wrestling, cryes, tears, and supplications. And a mans Assurance may be as Good, as true, when he lyes on the earth with a sense of sin, as when he is carryed up to the third Heaven with a sense of Love, and foretaste of Glory. In brief, this Assurance of Salvation is
such a Gracious Evangelical perswasion of Acceptance with God in Christ, and of an interest in the promises of preservation unto the End, wrought in Believers by the Holy Ghost, in and through the exercise of Faith, as for the most part produceth these effects following. Effects of Gospel As∣surance in Believers.1. It gives delight in obedience, and draws out Love in the duties that unto God we do perform. So much Assurance of a Comfortable Issue of their Obedience, of a blessed End of their labours and duties, of their purifying their hearts, and pressing after universal Renovation of mind and life, as may make them Chearfull in them, as may give Love and Delight in the pursuit of what they are engaged in, is needfull for the Saints, and they they do not often go without it; and where this is, there is Gospel Assurance. To run as men uncertain, to fight as those that beat the Air, to travel as not any way perswaded of a comfortable entertainment or refreshment at the Journeys End, is a state and condition that God doth not frequently leave his people unto. And when he doth, it is a season wherein he receives very little of Glory from them, and they very little increase of grace in themselves. Many things, as hath been shewed, do interpose, many doubts arise and intangling perplexi∣ties, but still there is a Comfortable perswasion kept alive, that there is a Rest provided, which makes them willing unto, and chearfull in their most difficult duties. This prevaileth in them, that their labour in the Lord, their watchings, praying, suffer∣ing, alms, mortification, fighting against temptation, crucify∣ing the flesh with the lusts thereof, shall not be in vain. This gives them such a delight in their most difficult duties, as men have in a hard Journey towards a desirable home, or a place of Rest. 2. It casts out fear, tormenting fear, such as fills the soul with perplexing uncertainties, hard thoughts of God, and dreadfull apprehensions of wrath to come: There are three things spoken concerning that fear which is inconsistent with the Assurance of forgiveness. First, With respect unto its principle, it is from a spirit of bondage, Rom. 18. 15. We have not again received the spirit of bondage unto fear: It is not such a fear as makes an
occasional incursion upon the mind or soul; such as ise xcited and occasioned by incident darkness and Temptation, such as the best, and persons of the highest assurance are liable and ob∣noxious unto; but it is such as hath a compleat abiding prin∣ciple in the soul, even a spirit of bondage, a prevailing frame constantly inclining it to fear, or dreadful apprehensions of God and its own condition. Secondly, That it tends to bondage, it brings the soul into bondage, Heb. 2. 14, 15. He dyed to deli∣ver them who by fear of death were in bondage all their daies. Fear of death as penal, as it lyes in the curse, which is that fear that proceeds from a spirit of bondage, brings the persons in whom it is into bondage; that is, it adds weariness, trouble, and anxiety of mind unto fear, and puts them upon all waies and means imaginable, unduly and disorderly to seek for a re∣medy or relief. Thirdly, It hath torment; fear hath torment, 1 Joh. 4. 18. It gives no rest, no quietness unto the mind; now this is so cast out by Gospel Assurance of forgiveness, that though it may assault the soul, it shall not possess it; though it make incursions upon it, it shall not dwell abide and prevail in it. 3. It gives the soul an hope and expectation of the Glory that shall be revealed, and secretly stirs it up, and enlivens it unto a supportment in sufferings, tryals and Temptations. This is the hope which makes not ashamed, Rom. 5. 5. and that, because it will never expose the soul unto disappointment. Where ever there is the root of Assurance, there will be this fruit of hope. The proper object of it, is things absent, invisible, eternal; the promised reward in all the notions, respects and concernments of it. This hope goes out unto, in distresses, temptations, fail∣ings; and under a sense of the guilt and power of sin. Hence ariseth a spring of secret relief in the soul, something that calms the heart, and quiets the spirit in the midst of many a storm. Now, as where ever Assurance is, there will be this hope; so, where ever this secret relieving hope is, it grows on no other root, but a living perswasion of a personal interest in the things hoped for. 4. As it will do many other things; so that I may give one comprehensive instance, it will carry them out in whom it
is, to dye for Christ. Death unto men who saw not one step beyond it, was esteemed of all things most terrible. The way and means of its approach add unto its terrour. But this is nothing in comparison of what it is unto them who look through it as a passage into ensuing Eternity. For a man then to chuse death rather than life, in the most terrible manner of its approach, expecting an Eternity to ensue, it argues a comfort∣able perswasion of a Good State and Condition after death. Now I am perswaded that there are hundreds, who upon Gospel saving accounts would embrace a stake for the Testimony of Jesus, who yet know not at all that they have the Assurance we speak of, and yet nothing else would enable them thereunto. But these things being besides the main of my Intendment, I shall pursue them no further, only the Rule is of use. Let the soul be sure to be well acquainted with the nature of that which it seeks after, and confesseth a sense of the want of. RULE III. Continuance in waiting necessary unto Peace and Consolation. The fourth Rule. Remove the Hinderances of Believing by a searching out of sin. Rules and Directions for that Duty. Waiting necessary to obtain Peace.Whatever your Condition be, and your Apprehension of it; yet continue waiting for a better issue, and give not over through wea∣riness or impatience. This Rule contains the summ of the Great Example given us in this Psalm. Forgiveness in God being dis∣covered, though no sense of a particular interest therein as yet obtained; that which the soul applies it self unto, is diligent, carefull, constant, persevering waiting; which is variously ex∣pressed in the 5, and 6, verses. The Holy Ghost tells us, that light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart, Psal. 97. 11. Light and Gladness are the things now enquired after. Deliverance from darkness, misapprehensions of God, hard and misgiving thoughts of his own condition, is that which a soul in its depths reacheth towards. Now, saith the Holy Ghost, These things are sown for the Righteous. Doth the Husbandman after he casts his seed into the Earth, immediately
the next day, the next week, expect that it will be harvest? doth he think to reap so soon as he hath sown? or doth he im∣mediately say, I have laboured in vain, here is no return, I will pull up the hedge of this field and lay it waste? or I see a little grass in the blade, but no corn, I will give it to the beasts to de∣vour it? No, his God, as the Prophet speaks, instructs him unto discretion and teacheth him; namely, what he must do, and how he must look for things in their season. And shall not we be instructed by him? behold the Husbandman, saith James, waiteth for the precious fruit of the Earth, and hath long pa∣tience for it, until he receive the early and the latter rain, Jam. 5. 7. And is Light sown for them that are in darkness, and shall they stifle the seed under the clods, or spoil the tender blade, that is springing up, or refuse to wait for the watering and dews of the Spirit, that may bring it forth to perfection? Waiting is the only way to Establishment and Assurance; we cannot speed by our haste; yea nothing puts the end so far away, as making too much haste and speed in our Journey. The ground hereof is, that a sense of a special interest in forgiveness and acceptance, is given into the soul by a meer act of Sove∣raignty. It is not, it will not be obtained by or upon any ra∣tional conclusions or deductions that we can make: All that we can do is but to apply our selves to the removal of hinderances. For the Peace and Rest sought for, come from meer preroga∣tive. When he giveth quietness, who can give trouble? and when he hideth his face, who can behold him? Job 34. 29. Now what is the way to receive that which comes from meer Soveraignty and prerogative? doth not the nature of the thing require humble waiting? If then either Impatience cast the soul into frowardness, or weariness make it slothfull, which are the two waies whereby waiting is ruined; Let not such an one expect any comfortable Islue of his contending for deliverance out of his depths. And let not any think to make out their difficulties any other way: their own Reasonings will not bring them to any establishing conclusions; for they may lay down proposi∣tions, and have no considerable objections to lye against either of them, and yet be far enough from that sweet consolation, joy and assurance which is the product of the conclusion, when
God is not pleased to give it in; yea a man may sometimes gather up consolation to himself upon such terms, but it will not abide. So did David, Psal. 30 6, 7. He thus argues with him∣self, He whose mountain is made strong, to whom God is a de∣fence, he shall never be moved nor be shaken; but I am thus settled of God, therefore I shall not be moved; and therein he re∣joyceth. It is an expression of exultation that he useth; but what is the Issue of it? In the midst of these pleasing thoughts of his, God hides his face, and he is troubled; he cannot any longer draw out the sweetness of the conclusion mentioned. It was in him before from the shines of Gods Countenance, and not from any arguings of his own. No disappointment then, no tediousness or weariness should make the soul leave waiting on God, if it intend to attain Con∣solation and Establishment. So dealeth the Church, Lam. 3. 21. This I recall to mind, therefore have I hope: What is it that she calls to mind, this, that it is of the Lords mercy that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not, vers. 22. I will yet hope, I will yet continue in my Expectation upon the account of ne∣ver failing-compassion; of endless mercies in him, whatever my present condition be. And thence she makes a blessed conclusion, vers. 26. It is good that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord. And this is our third Rule. It is good to hope and wait, whatever our present con∣dition be, and not to give over, if we would not be sure to fail: whereunto I speak no more, because the close of this Psalm in∣sists wholly on this duty, which must be further spoken unto. RULE IV. Search of Sin neces∣sary to con∣solation.Seeing in the course of our believing and obedience, that which is chiefly incumbent on us, for our coming up to esta∣blishment and consolation, is spiritual diligence in the removal of the hinderances thereof: Let the soul that would attain there∣unto, make through work in the search of sin, even to the sins of youth; that all scores on that account may clearly be wiped out. If there be much rubbish left in the foundation of the
building, no wonder if it alwaies shake and totter. Mens leaving of any sin unsearched to the bottom, will poison all their consolation. David knew this, when in dealing with God in his distresses, he prayes that he would not remember the sins and transgressions of his youth, Psal. 5. 7. Youth is oftentimes a time of great vanity and unmindfulness of God; many stains and spots are therein usually brought upon the consciences of men. Childhood and youth are vanity, Eccles. 11. 10. Not be∣cause they soon pass away, but because they are usually spent in vanity, as the following advice (of chap. 12. 1.) to remember God in those daies, doth manifest. The way of many is to wear such things out of mind, and not to walk in a sense of their folly and madness, never to make through work with God about them. I speak of the Saints themselves; for with others that live under the Means of Grace, whom God intends any way to make usefull and industrious in their Generation, this is the usual course; by convictions, restraining Grace, Afflictions, Love of Employment and Repute, God gives them another heart than they had for a season. Another heart, but not a new heart. Hence another course of life, another profession, other actions than formerly doe flow; with this change they do content themselves; they look on what is past perhaps with de∣light, or as things fit enough for those daies, but not for those they have attained unto; here they rest, and therefore never come to rest. But I speak of the Saints themselves, who make not such through, full, close work in this kind as they ought. An after∣reckoning may come in on this hand to their own disturbance, and an inconquerable hinderance of their peace and settlement be brought in, on this account. So was it with Job, chap. 13. 26, He makes me possess the sins of my youth. God filled his heart, his thoughts, his mind with these sins; made them abide with him, so that he possessed them; they were alwaies present with him. He made the sins of his youth the sufferings of his age. And it is a sad thing, as one speaks, when young sins and old bones meet together; as Zophar, chap. 20. 11. His bones are filled with the sins of his youth. The joyous frame of some mens Youth, makes way for sad work in their Age. Take heed young
ones, you are doing that which will abide with you to Age, if not to Eternity. This possessing of the sins of youth, Job calls, the writing of bitter things against him. As indeed it is impossible but that sin should be bitter one time or other. God calls it a root that beareth Gall and Wormwood, Deut. 29. 18. A root of bitterness springing up into defilement, Heb. 12. 15. This then is to be searched out to the bottom. Israel will not have success nor peace whilst there is an Achan in the Camp. Neither success in Temptation, nor consolation in believing is to be expected, whilst any Achan, any sin unreckoned for, lyes in the conscience. Now for them who would seriously accomplish a diligent search in this matter, which is of such importance unto them, let them take these two Directions. 1. Let them go over the consideration of those sins, and others of the like nature, which may be reduced unto the same General heads with them, which we laid down before, as the sins which generally cast men into depths and intanglements. And if they find they have contracted the guilt of any of them, let them not think strange that they are yet bewildred in their con∣dition, and do come short of a refreshing sense of peace with God, or an interest in forgiveness. Rather let them admire the riches of Patience, Grace and forbearance, that they are not cast utterly out of all hopes of a recovery. This will speed an end unto their trouble, according to the direction given. 2. Let them cast the course of their times under such heads and seasons, as may give them the more clear and distinct view and apprehension of the passages in them between God and their souls, which may have been provoking unto him. As, First, For the state of their inward man, let them con∣sider, First, The unregenerate part of their lives, that which was confessedly so, before they had any real work of God upon their hearts; and therein enquire after two things. 1. If there were then any great and signal eruptions of sins against God; for of such God requires that a deep sense be kept on our souls all our daies. How often do we find Paul calling over the sins of his life and waies before his conversion. I was,
saith he, injuricus, and a blasphemer. Such reflexions ought per∣sons to have on any great provoking occasions of sin, that may keep them humble, and necessitate them constantly to look for a fresh sense of pardon through the blood of Christ. If such sins lye neglected, and not considered according to their im∣portance, they will weaken the soul in its comforts whilst it lives in this world. 2. If there were any signal intimations made of the Good Will and Love of God to the soul, which it broke off from through the power of its corruption and temptation, they require a due humbling consideration all our daies; but this hath been before spoken unto. Secondly, In that part of our lives, which upon the call of God we have given up unto him. There are two sorts of sins that do effectually impeach our future peace and comfort, which ought therefore to be frequently renewed and issued in the blood of Christ. First, Such as by reason of any aggravating circumstances have been accompanied with some especial unkind∣ness towards God. Such are sins after warnings, communica∣tions of a sense of Love, after particular ingagements against them, relapses, omissions of great opportunities and advan∣tages for the furtherance of the Glory of God in the world. These kinds of sins have much unkindness attending them, and will be searched out if we cover them. 2. Sins attended with scandal towards fewer, or more, or any one single person who is or may be concerned in us: The aggravations of these kind of sins are commonly known. Thirdly, The various outward states and conditions which we have passed through, as of Prosperity and Afflictions, should in like manner fall under this search and consideration. It is but seldom that we fill up our duty, or answer the mind of God in any dispensation of providence. And if our neglect herein be not managed aright, they will undoubtedly hinder and interrupt our peace.
RULE V. The fifth Rule. Distinction between Unbelief and Jealousie. The sixth Rule. Distinction between Faith and Spiritual Sense. Unbelief and Jea∣lousie di∣stinguish∣ed.Learn to distinguish between Unbelief and Jealousie. There is a twofold Unbelief. (1.) That which is universal and privative, such as is in all unregenerate persons; they have no Faith at all, that is, they are dead men and have no principles of spiritual life. This I speak not of, it is easily distinguished from any Grace, being the utter enemy and privation as it were of them all. (2.) There is an Unbelief partial and negative, consisting in a staggering at, or Questioning of the promises. This is dis∣pleasing to God, a sin which is attended with unknown Ag∣gravations, though men usually indulge it in themselves. It is well expressed, Psal. 78. 19, 20. God had promised his pre∣sence to the people in the wilderness to feed, sustain, and pre∣serve them. How did they entertain these promises of God? Can he, say they, give bread? can he give flesh unto his people? vers. 20. What great sin, crime, or offence is in this enquiry? Why vers. 19. This is called speaking against God; they spake against God; they said, Can he furnish a Table in the wilderness? Unbelief in questioning of the promises is a speaking against God, a limiting of the holy One of Israel, as it is called, vers. 41. An assigning of bounds to his Goodness, Power, Kindness and Grace, according to what we find in our selves, which he ab∣hors. By this Unbelief we make God like our selves; that is our limiting of him, expecting no more from him, than either we can do, or see how it may be done. This you will say was a great sin in the Israelites, because they had no reason to doubt or Question the promises of God. It is well we think so now; But when they were so many thousand families, that had not one bit of bread, nor drop of water aforehand for themselves and their little ones, there is no doubt but they thought them∣selves to have as good reason to question the promises, as any one of you can think that you have. We are ready to suppose that we have all the reasons in the world; every one supposeth
he hath those that are more cogent than any other hath, to question the promises of Grace, Pardon, and forgiveness; and therefore the questioning of them is not their sin, but their duty. But pretend what we will, this is speaking against God, limiting of him, and that which is our keeping off from stedfastness and Comfort. But now there may be a Jealousie in a Gracious heart con∣cerning the love of Christ, which is acceptable unto him, at least which he is tender towards, that may be mistaken for this questioning of the promises by Unbelief, and so help to keep the soul in darkness and disconsolation, this the spouse expresseth in her self, Cant. 8. 6. Love is strong as death, jealousie is hard as the Grave, the Coals thereof are Coals of fire which hath a most vehement flame. Love is the foundation. The root; but yet it bears that fruit which is bitter although it be wholsome; that which fills the soul with great perplexities, and makes it cry out for a nearer and more secure admission into the presence of Christ. Set me, saith the Spouse, as a Seal upon thy heart, as a seal upon thine Arms, for Jealousie is cruel as the Grave. I cannot bear this distance from thee, these fears of my being disregarded by thee. Set me as a seal on thy heart. Now this spiritual jealousie is the solicitousness of the mind of a believer who hath a sincere love for Christ, about the heart, affection, and good will of Christ towards it, arising from a consciousness of its own unworthiness to be beloved by him, or accepted with him. All causeless jealousie ariseth from a secret sence and conviction of unworthiness in the person in whom it is, and a high esteem of him that is the object of it; or concerning whose love and affection any one is Jealous. So it is with this spiritual Jealousie; the root of it is Love, sin∣cere love, that cannot be quenched by waters, nor drowned by floods, v. 7. which nothing can utterly prevail against, or over∣come. This gives the soul high thoughts of the glorious Excel∣lencies of Christ, fills it with admiration of him; these are mixed with a due sense of its own baseness, vileness and unwor∣thiness to be owned by him, or accepted with him. Now if these thoughts on the one hand, and on the other be not di∣rected, guided, and managed aright by faith, which alone can
shew the soul, how the Glory of Christ consisteth principally in this, that he being so excellent and glorious, is pleased to love us with love unexpressible who are vile and sinful, Question∣ings about the love of Christ, and those attended with much anxiety and trouble of mind, will arise. Now this frame may sometimes be taken for a questioning of the promises of God, and that to be a defect in faith which is an excess of love; or at most such an irregular acting of it, as the Lord Christ will be very tender towards, and which is consistent with peace and a due sense of the forgiveness of sins. Mistake not then these one for another, lest much causeless unquietness ensue in the Judgement which you are to make of your selves. But you will say how shall we distinguish between these two, so as not causelesly to be disquieted and perplexed? I answer briefly, Different Effects of Unbelief and Jea∣lousie.1. Unbelief working in and by the questioning of the promises of God, is a weakning, disheartning, dispiriting thing It takes off the edge of the soul from spiritual duties and weakens it both as unto delight and strength. The more any one questions the promises of God, the less life, power, joy and delight in obedi∣ence he hath. For faith is the spring and root of all other Graces; and according as that thriveth or goeth backwards so do they all. Men think sometimes, that their uncertainty of the love of God and of acceptance with him by the for∣giveness of sin, doth put them upon the performance of many duties, and they can have no rest or peace in the omission of them. It may be it is so; Yea this is the state and Condition with many. But what are these duties? and how are they performed? And what is their acceptance with God? The duties themselves are legal, which denomination ariseth not from the Nature, Substance or Matter of them, for they may be the same that are required and injoyned in the Gospel, but from the principle from whence they proceed, and the End to which they are used. Now these in this case are both legal, their principle is legal fear, and their end is legal Righteousness; the whole attendance unto them a seeking of righteousness as it were by the works of the Law: and how are they performed?
Plainly, with a bondage frame of Spirit, without Love, Joy, Liberty, or Delight; To quiet conscience, to pacifie God, are the things in them aymed at; all in opposition to the Blood and Righteousness of Christ. And are they accepted with God? Let them be multiplyed never so much, he every where testifieth that they are abhorred by him. This then Unbelief mixed with convictions will do. It is the proper way of venting and ex∣ercising it self where the soul is brought under the power of conviction. But as unto Gospel Obedience in all the duties of it, to be carryed on in communion with God by Christ, and de∣light in him, all questioning of the promises weakens and dis∣courageth the soul, and makes them all wearisome and burden∣some unto it. But the Jealousie that is exercised about the Person and Love of Christ unto the soul, is quite of another nature, and pro∣duceth other effects. It cheers, enlivens, and enlargeth the soul, stirs up to activity, earnestness, and industry in its enquiries and desires after Christ. Jealousie, saith the Spouse, is hard as the grave, therefore set me as a Seal upon thy heart, as a Seal upon thy arm. It makes the soul restlesly pant after neerer more sensi∣ble and more assured Communion with Christ; It stirs up vigo∣rous and active Spirits in all duties. Every doubt and fear that it ingenerates concerning the Love of Christ, stirs up the soul unto more earnestness after him, delight in him, and sedulous watching against every thing that may keep it at a distance from him, or occasion him to hide, withdraw, or absent himself from it. 2. Unbelief that works by questioning of the promises, is uni∣versally selfish; it begins and ends in self. Self-love, in desires after freedom from guilt, danger and punishment, are the life and soul of it. May this end be attained, it hath no delight in God. Nor doth it care what way it be attained so it may be attained. May such persons have any perswasions that they shall be freed from death and hell, be it by the works of the Law, or by the observance of any inventions of their own, whether any Glory ariseth unto God from his Grace and faithfulness or no, they are not solicitous. The Jealousie we speak of hath the Person of Christ and his
Excellency for its constant object. These it fills the mind with in many and various thoughts, still representing him more and more amiable and more desirable unto the soul. So doth the Spouse upon the like occasion, as you may see at large, Cant. 5. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Being at some loss for his presence, for he had withdrawn himself, not finding her wont∣ed communion and entercourse with him, fearing that upon her provocation she might forfeit her Interest in his Love, she falls upon the Consideration of all his Excellencies, and thereby the more enflames her self unto desires after his company and enjoyment. And these divers things may be thus distinguished and discerned. RULE VI. Differences between faith and spiritual sense.Learn to distinguish between faith and spiritual sense. This Rule the Apostle gives us, 2 Cor. 5. 7. We walk by faith and not by sight. It is the sight of Glory that is especially here in∣tended. But faith and sense in any kind are clearly distin∣guished. That may be believed, which is not felt. Yea, It is the Will and Command of God, that faith should stand and do its work, where all sense fails, Esa. 50. 10. And it is with spiritual sense in this matter, as it is with natural. Thomas would not believe, unless he saw the object of his faith with his Eyes, or felt it with his hand: but, saith our Saviour, blessed are they who believe, and have not seen; who believe upon the testimony of God, without the help of their own sense or reason. And, if we will believe no more of God, of his Love, of Grace, of our acceptance with him, than we have a spiritual affecting sense of, we shall be many times at a loss. Sensible impressions from Gods Love, are great springs of Joy, but they are not absolutely necessary unto peace; nor unto an evidence that we do be∣lieve. We will deal thus with the vilest person living. We will believe him whilest we have the certainty of our sense to se∣cure us. And if we deal so with God what is there in our so doing, praise worthy? the Prophet tells us, what it is to be∣lieve, in respect of providence, Hab. 3. 17. When there is no∣thing
left outward and visible to support us, then to rest quietly on God, that is to believe. So Psal. 73. 26. And the Apostle in the Example of Abraham, shews us what it is to be∣lieve with respect unto a special promise, Rom. 4. 18. Against hope, he believed in hope. When he saw not any outward ordi∣nary means for the accomplishment of the promise, when in∣numerable objections arose against any such hope as might have respect unto such means, yet he resolved all his thoughts into the faithfulness of God in the promise, and therein raised a new hope in its accomplishment; so in hope believing against hope. To clear this matter you must observe what I intend by this spiritual sense, which you must learn to distinguish faith from; and to know that true faith interesting the soul in forgiveness may be without it, that so you may not conclude unto a real want of pardon, from the want of the refreshing sense of it. Grace in general may be referred unto two heads. (1.) Our Acceptation with God through Christ; the same upon the matter with the forgiveness of sin that we are treating of. And (2.) Grace of Sanctification from God in Christ: Of each of these there is a spiritual sense, or Experience to be obtained; in both distinguished from faith that gives us a real Interest in for∣giveness. Spiritual sense wherein it consists.Of the first, or the spiritual sense that we have of Acceptance with God, there are sundry parts or degrees; As first, hereunto belongs peace with God, Rom. 5. 1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God. This peace is the Rest and composure of the soul emerging out of troubles, upon the account of the Reconciliation and friendship made for it by the blood of Christ. And it hath, as all peace hath, two parts; First, a free∣dom from war, trouble, and distress; and Secondly, Rest, Sa∣tisfaction and Contentment in the condition attained. And this, at least the second part of it, belongs unto the spiritual sense that we enquire after. Again, there is in it Joy in the holy Ghost, called joy unspeakeable, and full of Glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8. as also glorying in the Lord, upon the account of his Grace, Esa. 45. 26. with ma∣ny the like Effects, preceding from a shedding abroad of the Love of God in our hearts, Rom. 5. 5.
Yea, you say these are the things you aim at; these are the things you would attain, and be filled withall. It is this Peace, this Joy, this glorying in the Lord that you would alwaies be in the possession of; I say you do well to desire them, to seek and labour after them: They are purchased by Christ for Believers; but you will do well to consider under what notion you do de∣sire them. If you look on these things as belonging to the Essence of Faith, without which you can have no real interest in forgiveness or acceptance with God, you greatly deceive your own souls, and put your selves out of the way of obtaining of them. These these things are not believing, nor adequate ef∣fects of it; so as immediately to be produced where ever faith is: But they are such consequents of it, as may, or may not ensue upon it, according to the Will of God. Faith is a seed that contains them virtually; and out of which they may be in due time educed by the working of the Word and Spirit. And the way for any soul to be made partaker of them, is to wait on the Soveraignty of God's Grace, who createth peace in the ex∣ercise of faith upon the promises. He then that would place believing in these things, and will not be perswaded that he doth believe, until he is possessed of them; he doth both lose the benefit, advantage and comfort of what he hath, and neg∣lecting the due acting of faith, puts himself out of the way of attaining what he aimeth at. These things therefore are not needfull to give you a real, saving interest in forgiveness, as it is tendered in the promise of the Gospel by the blood of Christ. And it may be it is not the Will of God, that ever you should be entrusted with them. It may be, it would not be for your good and advantage so to be. Some servants that are ill husbands, must have their wages kept for them to the years end, or it will do them no good. It may be some would be such spendthrifts of satisfying peace and joy, and be so diverted by them from attending unto some necessary duties, as of humiliation, mortification, and self-abasament, with∣out which their souls cannot live, that it would not be much to their advantage to be entrusted with them. It is from the same Care and Love, that Peace and Joy are detained from some Be∣lievers, and granted unto others.
You are therefore to receive forgiveness by a pure Act of be∣lieving, in the way and manner before at large described. And do not think that it is not in you, unless you have constantly a spiritual sense of it in your hearts. See in the mean time that your Faith bringeth forth Obedience, and God in due time will cause it to bring forth Peace. The like may be said concerning the other head of Grace; though it be not so direct unto our purpose, yet tending also to the relief of the soul in its depths. This is the Grace that we have from God in Christ for our sanctification: When the soul cannot find this in himself, when he hath not a spiritual sense and experience of its in being and power, when it cannot evi∣dently distinguish it from that which is not right or genuine, It is filled with fears and perplexities, and thinks it is yet in its sin. He is so indeed who hath no Grace in him; but not he alwaies who can find none in him: But these are different things. A man may have Grace, and yet not have it at some times much acting; he may have Grace for life, when he hath it not for fruitfulness and comfort, though it be his duty so to have it Rev. 3. 2. 2 Tim. 1. 6. And a man may have Grace acting in him, and yet not know, not be sensible that he hath acting Grace. We see persons frequently under great temptations of appre∣hension that they have no Grace at all, and yet at the same time to the clearest conviction of all who are able to discern spiri∣tual things, sweetly and genuinely to act Faith, Love, Submis∣sion unto God, and that in an high and eminent manner, Psa. 88. Heman complains that he was free among the dead; a man of no strength, vers. 4, 5. as one that had no spiritual life, no Grace. This afflicted his mind, and almost distracted him, vers. 15. and yet there can be no greater expressions of Faith and Love to God, than are mixed with his complaints. These things I say then, are not to be judged of by spiri∣tual sense, but we are to live by faith about them. And no soul ought to conclude, that because it hath not the one, it hath not the other; that because it hath not Joy and Peace, it hath no interest in pardon and forgiveness.
RULE VII. The seventh Rule. Mix not foundation and building work toge∣ther. The eighth spend no time in heartless complaints, &c. Mix not too much foundation and building work together. Our foundation in dealing with God is Christ alone, meer Grace and Pardon in him. Foundation and Spiri∣tual Build∣ing distin∣guished.Our Building is in and by Holiness and Obedience, as the fruits of that faith by which we have received the Attonemont. And great mistakes there are in this matter which bring great in∣tanglements on the souls of men. Some are all their daies lay∣ing of the foundation, and are never able to build upon it unto any comfort to themselves, or usefulness unto others. And the Reason is, because they will be mixing with the foundation; stones that are fit only for the following building. They will be bringing their Obedience, duties, mortification of sin, and the like, unto the foundation. These are precious stones to build with; but unmeet to be first laid to bear upon them the whole weight of the building. The foundation is to be laid, as was said, in meer Grace, Mercy, Pardon in the blood of Christ. This the soul is to accept of, and to rest in meerly as it is Grace, with∣out the consideration of any thing in its self, but that it is sinfull and obnoxious unto ruine: This it finds a difficulty in, and would gladly have something of its own to mix with it: It cannot tell how to fix these foundation stones without some cement of its own endeavours and duty. And because these things will not mix, they spend a fruitless labour about it all their daies. But if the foundation be of Grace, it is not at all of works; for otherwise grace is no more grace. If any thing of our own be mixed with Grace in this matter, it utterly de∣stroys the nature of Grace; which if it be not alone, it is not at all. But doth not this tend to licenciousness? doth not this render Obedience, Holiness, Duties, Mortification of sin, and good works, needless? God forbid; yea this is the only way to order them aright unto the glory of God. Have we nothing
to do but to lay the foundation? yes, all our daies we are to build upon it, when it is surely and firmly laid. And these are the means and waies of our Edification. This then is the soul to do who would come to peace and settlement. Let it let go all former endeavours if it have been engaged unto any of that kind. And let it alone receive, admit of, and adhere to meer Grace, mercy and pardon, with a full sense that in its self it hath nothing for which it should have an interest in them, but that all is of meer Grace through Jesus Christ. Other foundation can no man lay. Depart not hence until this work be well over. Surcease not an earnest endeavour with your own hearts to acquiesce in this Righteousness of God, and to bring your souls unto a com∣fortable perswasion that God for Christ his sake hath freely for∣given you all your sins. Stir not hence untill this be effected. If you have been engaged in another way, that is, to seek for an interest in the pardon of sin by some endeavours of your own, it is not unlikely but that you are filled with the fruit of your own doings; that is, that you go on with all kind of uncer∣tainties, and without any kind of constant peace. Return then again hither; bring this foundation work to a blessed issue in the blood of Christ, and when that is done, up and be doing. You know how fatal and ruinous it is for souls to abuse the Grace of God, and the Apprehension of the pardon of sins in the course of their obedience, to countenance themselves in sin, or the negligence of any duty; this is to turn the Grace of God in∣to wantonness, as we have else where at large declared. And it is no less pernicious to bring the duties of our obedience, any re∣serves for them, any hopes about them, into the matter of pardon and forgiveness, as we are to receive them from God. But these things, as they are distinct in themselves; so they must be distinctly managed in the soul; and the confounding of them, is that which disturbs the Peace, and weakens the Obe∣dience of many. In a confused manner they labour to keep up a life of Grace and Duty, which will be in their places conjoyned, but not mixed or compounded. First, To take up Mercy, Pardon and Forgiveness absolutely on the account of Christ, and then to yield all obedience in the strength of Christ, and for the Love of Christ, is the life of a Believer, Ephes. 2. 8, 9, 10.
RULE VIII. Com∣plaints fruitless and heart∣less to be avoided.Take heed of spending time in complaints, when vigorous act∣ings of Grace are your Duty. Fruitless and heartless complaints, bemoanings of themselves and their condition is the substance of the profession that some make. If they can object against themselves, and form Complaints out of their conditions, they suppose they have done their duty. I have known some who have spent a good part of their time in going up and down from one to another with their objections and complaints. These things are contrary to the life of Faith. It is good indeed in our spiritual distresses to apply our selves unto them who are furnished with the tongue of the learned, to know how to speak a word in sea∣son unto him that is weary. But for persons to fill their minds and imaginations with their own Objections and Complaints, not endeavouring to mix the words that are spoken for their relief and direction, with faith, but going on still in their own way, this is of no use or advantage. And yet some, I fear, may please themselves in such a course, as if it had somewhat of Eminency in Religion in it. Others, it may be, drive the same trade in their Thoughts, al∣though they make not outwardly such Complaints. They are conversant for the most part with heartless despondings. And in some they are multiplied by their natural Constitutions or Di∣stempers. Examples of this kind occur unto us every day. Now what is the Advantage of these things? what did Sion get when she cried, The Lord hath forsaken me, and my God hath forgotten me? or Jacob, when he said, My way is hid from the Lord, and my Judgement is passed over from my God? Doubtless they did but prejudice themselves. How doth David rouse up himself when he found his mind inclinable unto such a frame? For having said, Why dost thou cast me off O God? why go I mourning because of the oppression of mine enemy? He quickly rebukes and recollects himself, saying, Why art thou cast down O my Soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? hope in God, Psal. 4. 2, 5. We must say then unto such heartless Complainers, as God did to Joshuah, Get you up, why lye you thus upon your faces?
Do you think to mend your condition by wishing it better, or complaining it is so bad? are your complaints of want of an In∣terest in forgiveness, a sanctified means to obtain it? not at all! you will not deal so with your selves in things natural or civil. In such things you will take an industrious course for a remedy, or for relief. In things of the smallest importance in this world, and unto this life, you will not content your selves with wishing and complaining. As though industry in the use of na∣tural means for the attaining of natural Ends, were the Ordi∣nance of God, and diligence in the use of spiritual means for the obtaining of spiritual Ends were not. Do not consult your own hearts only. What is it that the Scripture calls for in your condition? Is it not Industry and Activity of spirit? And what doth the nature of the thing re∣quire: distress that is yet hoped to be conquered, evidently calls for Industry and diligence in the use of means for delive∣rance. If you are past hope, it avails not to complain. If you are not, why do you give up your selves to despondencies? Our Saviour tells us, that the Kingdom of Heaven suffereth vio∣lence, and the violent take it by force, Mat. 11. 12. It is not of the outward violence of its Enemies seeking to destroy it, that our Saviour speaks, but of that spiritual servency and ardency of mind, that is in those who intend to be partakers of it: For , is taken by force, Luke 16. 16. is no more but  is preached, the Kingdom of God is preached, and every man presseth into it; pressing into it, and taking it by force, are the same thing. There is then a violence, a restless activity and vigour of spirit to be used and exercised for an interest in this Kingdom. Apply this to your condi∣tion. Are you in depths and doubts, staggering and uncer∣tain, not knowing what is your condition, nor whether you have any interest in the forgiveness that is with God? Are you tossed up and down between hopes and fears, want peace, con∣solation and establishment? why lye you upon your faces? get up, watch, pray, fast, meditate, offer violence to your lusts and corruptions; fear not, startle not at their crying or importunities to be spared; press unto the Throne of Grace by Prayers, Supplications, Importunities, restless Requests: This
is the way to take the Kingdom of Heaven. These things are not Peace, they are not Assurance, but they are part of the means that God hath appointed for the attainment of them. What then is the peculiar Instruction that is proper for souls in this condition? that plainly of the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Give all diligence to make your Calling and Election sure. Alas! saith the soul, I am at no certainty, but rather am afflicted and tos∣sed, and not comforted; my heart will come to no stability; I have no Assurance, know not whether I am chosen or called; yea fear that my latter end will be darkness and sorrow. There is I confess forgiveness with God, but justly fear that I shall never be made partaker of it. What is the usual course that is taken in such complaints by them to whom they are made? Mostly they have a good opinion of them that come with these com∣plaints: They judge them to be godly and holy, though much in the dark; if they knew them not before, yet upon these complaints they begin to be well perswaded of them. Hereupon they are moved with pitty and compassion, and troubled to see them in their perplexities; and set themselves to tender relief unto them: They mind them of the gracious promises of the Gospel; it may be fix upon some one or more of them in parti∣cular, which they explain unto them: Thence they minde them of the abundant Grace and tender Love of the Father, of the mercifull care of our High Priest, his readiness and ability to save, his communications of such savours unto them as they perceive not. By such waies and means, by such Applica∣tions do they seek to relieve them in the state and condition wherein they are. But what is the issue? Doth not this Re∣lief prove for the most part like the morning cloud, and as the early dew; a little refreshment it may be it yields for a season, but it is quickly again dryed up, and the soul left in its heart∣less withering condition. You will say then, do you condemn this manner of proceed∣ing with the souls of men in their doubts, fears and distresses? or would you have them pine away under the sense of their condition, or abide in this uncertainty all their daies? I answer, no; I condemn not the way, I would not have any left com∣fortless in their depths. But yet I would give these two Cautions;
1. That Spiritual Wisdom and prudence is greatly required in this matter, in the Administration of consolation to distressed souls. If in any thing, the tongue of the spiritually learned is required herein; namely in speaking a word in season to them that are weary. A promiscuous drawing out of Gospel conso∣lations, without a previous right Judgement concerning the true state and condition of the souls applyed unto, is seldome useful, oft times pernicious. And let men take care, how they commit their souls and consciences unto such who have good words in readiness, for all comers. 2. If Counsel and Consolation of this kind be given; speci∣al and distinct from the Advice we are upon of Watchfulness, Diligence, Spiritual Violence in a way of duty; it is exceed∣ing dangerous, and will assuredly prove useless. For let us see what counsel the holy Ghost gives in this condition unto them who would make their Calling and Election sure, who would be freed from their present fears and uncertainties, who complain of their darkness and dangers; why saith he, giving all diligence add to your faith vertue; and so on, v. 5. for saith he, If you do these things, an entrance shall be Administred unto you abundantly into the Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, v. 11. You who are now in the Skyrts of it, who know not whether you belong unto it or no, you shall have an Entrance into the Kingdom of Christ, and all the Joy, comforts, conso∣lations and Glory of it, shall be richly administred unto you. This is the advice that the Holy Ghost gives in this case; And this is the blessed promise annexed unto the following of this advice. And this the former compassionate course of Admi∣nistring consolation, is not to be separated from. But you will it may be here say, we are so dead and dull, so chained under the power of corruptions, and temptations, that we are not able thus to put forth the fruit of a spiritual life in adding one Grace unto another. But do you use diligence, Study, En∣deavours, all diligence, diligence at all times, in all wayes by God appointed, all manner of diligence within and without, in private and publick to this end and purpose? do you study, meditate, pray, watch, fast, neglect no opportunity, keep your hearts, search, try, examine your selves, fly Temptations, and
occasions of cooling, deadning, and stifling Grace? Do these things abound in you? Alass you cannot do thus, you are so weak, so indisposed; but alas you will not, you will not part with your ease, you will not Crucifie your lusts, you will not ufe all dili∣gence; but must come to it, or be contented to spend all your dayes in darkness, and to lye down in sorrow. Thus do men frequently miscarry; Is it any news for per∣sons to bewail the folly of their nature and wayes in the Morn∣ing and Evening, and yet scarce stand upon their watch any part of the day, or in any occasion of the day? Is this giving all di∣ligence? Is this working out our Salvation with fear and trem∣bling? And may we not see Professors, even indulging to them∣selves in wayes of Vanity, folly, wrath, envy, sloth and the like, and yet complain at what a loss they are, how unquiet, how uncertain. God forbid it should be otherwise with you; or that we should endeavour to speak peace unto you in any such a frame. To hear of a person, that he walks slothfully, care∣lesly, or indulgeth his corruptions, and to find him complain∣ing that he is at loss whether he have any interest in Pardon or noe, to give or tender Comfort to such mourners without a due Admonition of their duty to use diligence in the use of means, for to help on their delivery out of the condition where∣in they are, is to tender poison unto them. To this then the soul must come that is in depths, if it intend to be delivered. Heartless complaints, with excuses to keep it from vigorous spiritual diligence must be laid aside; if not, ordi∣narily, Peace, Rest, and stability will not be obtained. A great Example hereof we have in the Spouse, Cant. 5. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. She is drousie and indisposed unto communion with Christ, whereunto she is invited, v. 2. this puts her upon making excuses from the unfitness of the time, and her pre∣sent indisposition and unpreparedness as to the duty where∣unto she was called, v. 3. Hereupon Christ withdraws his presence from her, and leaves her at a loss as to her former comforts, v. 6. what course doth she now take; doth she now lye down again in her former Slumber? doth she make use of her former excuses and pretences, why she could not engage into the duties she was called unto? no such thing! but now
with all Earnestness, Diligence, Sedulity and Importunity, She engageth in all manner of duties, whereby she may reco∣ver her former Comforts, as you may see in the Text. And this must be the course of others, who would obtain the same success. Spiritual peace and sloth will never dwell together in the same soul and Conscience. RULE IX. The ninth Rule. Take heed of undue expressions concerning God and his wayes in distress. Hasty Ex∣pressions concerning God to be avoided.Take heed in doubts, distresses, and perplexities of hard thoughts of God; hasty unweighed expressions concerning him or his wayes, with or of secret resolves, that it were as good give over waiting as continue in the state wherein you are, seeing your Condition is re∣mediless. On three occasions are such thoughts and resolves apt to befall the minds of men, which sometimes break forth into unwar∣rantable Expressions concerning God himself and his wayes. 1. In deep perplexities of mind, by reason of some pressing terrour from the Lord. 2. On the long wearisome continuance of some tempting distress, and hereof we have many examples, some whereof shall be mentioned. 3. In spiritual disappointments through the strength of Lust or Temptation. When a person hath it may be recovered himself through Grace, from a perplexing sense of the guilt of some sin, or it may be from a course shorter or longer, lesser or greater of back sliding and negligent walking with God, and therein goes on cheerfully for a season in the course of his Obe∣dience, if this person through the power of Temptation Subtilty of Lusts, neglect of watchfulness, by one means or other, is surprised in the sins, or wayes that he had relin∣quished, or is turned aside from the vigour of that course wherein he was engaged, he may be exposed not only to great despondencies, but also be overtaken with secret resolves to give over contending, seeing it is to no more purpose, nay to no purpose, and that God regards him not at all.
Take an Instance or two in each kind. The first we have in Job in the Extremity of his tryals and terrours from the Lord. See among other places, chap. 10. v. 3. Is it saith he, to God, Good for thee that shouldst oppress, that thou shouldst despise the work of thy hands? Ah poor worms, with whom have we to do? who shall say unto a King thou art wicked, and to Princes ye are ungodly; and will ye speak so to him, who respecteth not the persons of Princes, nor regardeth them more than the poorest in the Earth? And see what conclusions from such thoughts as these he doth inferr. Chap. 14. 15, 16, 17. Thou numbrest my steps, dost thou not watch over my sin? my transgression is sealed up in a bag, and thou sowest up my Iniquity. He chargeth God to be his Enemy, one that watched for all opportunities and advantages against him, that seemed to be glad at his halting, and take care that none of his sins should be missing when he intended to deal with him. Had this indeed been the Case with him, he had pe∣rished unto Eternity, as elsewhere he acknowledged. Of the other, we have an Instance in the Church, Lament. 3. 18. I said my strength aad my hope is perished from the Lord. Present Grace in spiritual strength, and future expectation of mercy are all gone. And what is got by this? secret hard thoughts of God himself are hereby ingenerated; as v. 8. When I cry and shout, he shutteth out my Prayers, v. 44. thou hast co∣vered thy self with a Cloud that our Prayers should not pass through. These things are grievous unto God to bear, and no way useful to the soul in its Condition. Yea they more and more unfit for every duty that may lye in a tendency to its relief & deliverance. So was it with Jonah Chap. 2. 4. I said I am cast out of thy sight; all is lost and gone with me, as good give over as Con∣tend, I do but labour in vain; perish I must as one cast out of the sight of God. The like complaints fell also from Heman in his distress, Psal. 88. The General who heard one of his Souldiers cry out upon a fresh onset of the Enemy, Now we are undone, Now we are ruined, call'd him Traytor and told him it was not so, whilest he could weild his Sword. It is not for every private Souldier on every danger, to make a Judgement of the battel. That is the
work of the General. Jesus Christ is the Captain of our Salva∣tion, he hath undertaken the leading and conduct of our souls through all our difficulties. Our Duty is to fight and contend; his Work is to take care of the Event; and to him it is to be committed. That then you make a due use of this Rule, keep alwaies in your minds these two Considerations. Judgement of mens states in the hand of Christ a∣lone.1. That it is not for you to take the Judgement of Christ out of his hand, and to be passing sentence upon your own souls. Judge∣ment as to the state and condition of men is committed un∣to Christ, and to him it is to be left. This we were directed unto into our first Rule, and it is of special use in the case un∣der consideration. Self-judging in reference unto sin, and the demerit of it, is our duty. The judging of our state and con∣dition in Relation unto the Remedy provided, is the Office and Work of Jesus Christ, with whom it is to be left. 2. Consider, that hard thoughts of what God will do with you, and harsh desponding sentences pronounced against your selves, will unsensibly alienate your hearts from God. It may be when mens perplexities are at the height, and the most sad Expressions are as it were wrested from them, they yet think they must Ju∣stifie God, and that they do so accordingly. But yet such thoughts as those mentioned, are very apt to infect the mind with other inclinations. For after a while they will prevail with the soul to look on God as an Enemy, as one that hath no delight in it; and what will be the consequent thereof is easily discernable. None will continue to love long, where they ex∣pect no returns. Suffer not then your minds to be tainted with such thoughts; and let not God be dishonoured by any such expressions as reflect on that infinite Grace and compassion which he is exercising towards you.
RULE X. The Tenth Rule. Duly improve the least Appearances of God in a way of Grace or Pardon. The least Appearan∣ces of Grace to be im∣proved.If you would come to stability, and a comforting perswasion of an Interest in forgiveness by the Blood of Christ, improve the least Appearances of him unto your souls, and the least Intimations of his Love in Pardon, that are made unto you in the way of God. The Spouse takes notice of her Husband, and rejoyceth in him, when he stands behind the wall, when he doth but look forth at the window, and shew himself at the lattice, when she could have no clear sight of him, Cant. 2. 9. She lays hold on the least Ap∣pearance of him to support her heart withall, and to stir up her Affections towards him. Men in dangers do not sit still to wait until something presents it self unto them that will give assured deliverance; but they close with that which first presents it self unto them, that is of the same kind and nature with what they look after. And thus God doth in many places express such supportments as give the soul little more than a possibility of at∣taining the End aimed at. As Zeph. 2. 3. It may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lords Anger. And Joel 2. 14. Who know∣eth but he will return and leave a blessing. It may be we shall be hid; it may be we shall have a blessing. And this was the best ground that Jonathan had for the great undertaking against the Enemies of God, 1 Sam. 14. 6. It may be God will go along with us. And to what end doth God at any time make these seem∣ingly dubious intimations of Grace and Mercy? is it that we should by the difficulty included in them, be discouraged and kept from him? not at all; he speaks nothing to deter sinners, especially distressed sinners, from trusting in him. But his End is that we should close with, and lay hold upon, and im∣prove the least Appearances of Grace, which this kind of expres∣sions do give unto us. When men are in a voyage at Sea, and meet with a Storm or a Tempest which abides upon them, and they fear will at last prevail against them; if they make so far a discovery of Land, as that they can say, it may be there is
Land; it may it is such a place where there is a safe harbour, none can positively say, it is not; there lyes no demonstration against it; in this condition especially if there be no other way of escape delivery or safety proposed to them, this is enough to make them to follow on that discovery, and with all dili∣gence to steer their course that way, until they have made a tryal of it unto the utmost. The soul of which we speak is afflicted and tossed, and not comforted. There is in the Inti∣mation of Grace and Pardon intended, a remote discovery made of some relief. This may be Christ, it may be forgiveness. This it is convinced of; it cannot deny but at such or such a time under such Ordinances, or in such Duties, it was perswaded that yet there might be Mercy and Pardon for it. This is enough to carry it to steer its course constantly that way; to press for∣ward unto that harbour which will give it rest. How little was it that David had to bring his soul unto a composure in his great distress, 2 Sam. 15. 25, 26. If, saith he, I shall find fa∣vour in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and shew me the Ark, and the place of his habitation; but if he thus say, I have no delight in thee, behold here am I, let him do unto me as seem∣eth good unto him. He hath nothing but Soveraign Grace to rest upon, and that he gives himself up unto. Faith is indeed the souls Venture for Eternity. Something it is to venture on, as to its eternal condition. It must either ad∣here unto its self, or its own vain hopes of a Righteousness of its own; or it must give over all expectation and lye down in darkness; or it must shut out all dreadfull Apprehensions of Eter∣nity, by the power and activity of its lusts and carnal Affections; or it must, whatever its discouragements be, cast it self upon Pardon in the blood of Jesus Christ. Now if all the former waies be detestable and pernicious, if the best of them be a direct opposition unto the Gospel, what hath the soul that enquires after these things to do, but to adhere unto the last, and to im∣prove every encouragement, even the least to that purpose. As a close unto these General Rules, I shall only add this last direction: Consider in particular where the stress and hin∣derance lyes, that keeps you off from Peace through an establish∣ed perswasion of an interest in Evangelical Pardon. Do not
alwaies fluctuate up and down in generals and uncertainties; but drive things unto a particular issue, that it may be tryed whe∣ther it be of sufficient efficacy to keep you in your present en∣tanglements and despondencies. Search out your wound, that it may be tryed whether it be curable or no. Now in this case we cannot expect that persons should sug∣gest their own particular concerns, that so they might be consi∣dered and be brought unto the Rule; but we must our selves reduce such distresses, as may, or do in this matter befall the minds of men, unto some General heads, and give a Judgement concerning them according to the Word of Truth. Indeed particular cases as varied by circumstances are endness; nor can they be spoken unto in this way of Instruction and Direction, but they must be left unto occasional considerations of them, as they are represented unto them who are entrusted to dispense the mysteries of God. Besides, many have laboured already in this matter, and their endeavours are in, and of general use. Although it must be said, as was before observed, that special cases are so varied by their Circumstances, that it is very rare that any Resolutions of them are every way adequate, and suited unto the Apprehensions of them that are exercised with them. I shall therefore call things unto some general heads whereunto most of the Objections that distressed sinners make against their own peace, may be reduced; and leave the Light of them to be applied in particular unto the relief of the souls of men, as God shall be pleased to make them effectual. Second General Head of the Application of the Truth insisted on. Grounds of Spiritual Disquietments considered. The first; Af∣flictions. Waies and means of the Aggravation of Afflictions. Rules about them. That which now lyeth before us, is the second part of the se∣cond General Use educed from the Truth insisted on. Our aim is to lead on souls towards peace with God, through a gracious perswasion of their Interest in that forgiveness which is with him. And it consists, as was declared, in a Consideration of some of those disquietments which befall the minds of men, and keep them off from Establishment in this matter.
Afflictions a cause of spiritual disquict∣ments.And first, such disquietments and objections against the peace of the soul, and its acceptance with God, will arise from Af∣flictions; they have done so of old, they do so in many at this day. Afflictions, I say, greatned unto the mind from their Na∣ture, or by their Concomitants do oft-times variously affect it, and sometimes prevail to darken it so far as to ingenerate thoughts, that they are all messengers of wrath, all tokens of displeasure, and so consequently evidences that we are not par doned or accepted with God. Now this is a time of great Afflictions unto many, and those some of them such as have innumerable aggravating circum∣stances accompanying of them. Some have come with a dread∣full surprizal in things not looked for; such as falls not out in the providence of God in many Generations. Such is the con∣dition of them who are reduced to the utmost extremity by the late consuming fire; some have had their whole families, all their posterity taken from them; in a few daies they have been sud∣denly bereaved, as in the Plague. Some in their own persons, or in their Relations, have had sore, long and grievous tryals from Oppressions and Persecutions; and these things have va∣rious effects on the minds of men. Some we find crying with that wicked King, This evil is of the Lord, why should we wait any longer for him? and give up themselves to seek relief from their own lusts. Some bear up under their troubles with a na∣tural stoutness of spirit; some have received a sanctified use and improvement of their trials, with joy in the Lord. But many we find to go heavily under their burdens, having their minds darkned with many misapprehensions of the Love of God, and of their own personal interest in his Grace. It is not therefore unseasonable to speak a little to this Head of trouble in our entrance. Outward troubles, I say, are oftentimes occasions, if not the causes of great inward distresses. You know how the Saints of old expressed their sense of them, and conflicts with them. The complaints of David are familiar to all who attend unto any communion with God in these things; so are those of Job, Heman, Jonah, Jeremiah, and others; neither do they complain only of their troubles, but of the sense which
they had of Gods displeasure in and under them, and of his hiding of his face from them whilest they were so exer∣cised. It is not otherwise at present, as is known unto such as con∣verse with many, who are either surprized with unexpected troubles, or worn out with tryals and disappointments of an expected end. They consider themselves both absolutely, and with respect unto others, and on both accounts are filled with dark thoughts and despondencies. Saith one, I am rolled from one trial unto another; the clouds with me return still after the rain. All the billows and water-spouts of God go over me. In my person, it may be, pressed with sickness, pains, troubles; in my Relations, with their sins, miscarriages, or death; in my outward state, in wants, losses, dis-reputation, I am even as a withered branch. Surely if God had any especial regard unto my soul, it would not be thus with me; or some timely end would have been put unto these dispensations. On the other hand, they take a view of some other Professors; they see that their Tables are spread day by day; that the Candle of the Lord shines continually on their tabernacle, and that in all things they have their hearts desire. Setting aside the common atten∣dencies of humane nature, and nothing befalls them grievous in the world. Thus it is with them. And surely had I an interest in his Grace, in Pardon, the God of Israel would not thus pur∣sue a Flea in the Mountains, nor set himself in battel array against a leaf driven to and fro with the wind; he would spare me a little, and let me alone for a moment; but as things are with me, I fear my way is hidden from the Lord, and my Judge∣ment is passed over from my God. These kind of thoughts do perplex the minds of men, and keep them off from par∣taking of that strong consolation which God is abundantly wil∣ing they should receive, by a comfortable perswasion of a bles∣sed Interest in that forgiveness that is with him. And this was the very case of David; or at least these out∣ward Troubles were a special part of those depths, out of which he cryed for relief, by a sense of Pardon, Grace and Redemption with God. I answer to these Complaints; First, That there are so
many excellent things spoken concerning Afflictions; their Ne∣cessity, their Usefulness, and the like; such blessed ends are as∣signed unto them, and in many have been compassed and ful∣filled by them, that a man unacquainted with the exercise wherewith they are attended, would think it impossible that any one should be shaken in mind, as to the Love and favour of God on their account. But as the Apostle tells us, that no Af∣flictions are joyous at present but grievous; So he who made in the close of his Trials that solemn profession, That it was good for him that he had been affected, yet we know, as hath been declared, how he was distressed under them. There are there∣fore sundry Accidental things which accompany great Af∣flictions that seem to exempt them from the common Rule, and the promise of Love and Grace: As, Means of the Aggra∣vation of Affliction.1. The Remembrance of past and buryed misearriages and sins, lyes in the bosom of many Afflictions: It was so with Job; Thou makest me, saith he, to possess the sins of my youth. See his plea to that purpose, chap. 13. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. In the midst of his troubles and distresses, God revived upon his spirit a sense of former sins, even the sins of his youth, and made him to possess them; he filled his soul and mind with thoughts of them, and anxiety about them. This made him fear lest God was his enemy, and would continue to deal with him in all fe∣verity. So was it with Josephs Brethren in their distresses, Gen. 42. 21. They said one to another, we are verily guilty con∣cerning our Brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he sought us, and we would not hear, therefore is this distress come upon us. And vers. 22. Behold his blood is required. Their di∣stress revives a deep perplexing sense of the guilt of sin many years past before, and that under all its aggravating circum∣stances which spoiled them of all their reliefs and comforts, filling them with Confusion and Trouble, though absolutely innocent as to what was come on them. And the like appeared in the Widdow of Zareptha, with whom Elijah sojourned during the famine. Upon the death of her Son, which it seems was some what extraordinary, she cryed out unto the Prophet, What have I to do with thee thou Man of God? Art thou come to
call my sins to remembrance and to slay my Son? 1 King. 17, 18. It seems some great sin she had formerly contracted the guilt of, and now upon her sore Affliction in the death of her only child, the Remembrance of it was recalled and revived upon her soul. Thus deep calleth unto deep at the noise of Gods wa∣ter spouts, and then all his waves and billows go over a person, Psal. 42. 7. The deep of Afflictions calleth up the deep of the guilt of sin, and both in conjunction become as billows and waves pas∣sing over the soul. We see only the outside of mens afflictions, they usually complain only of what doth appear. And an easie thing it is supposed to be, to apply relief and comfort unto those that are distressed. The Rule in this matter is so clear, so often repeated and inculcated, the promises annexed unto this con∣dition so many and precious, that every one hath in readiness what to apply unto them who are so exercised. But often∣times we know nothing of the Gall and Wormwood that is in mens Affliction; they keep that to themselves, and their souls feed upon them in secret, Lam. 3. 12. God hath stirred up the Remembrance of some great sin, or sins, and they look upon their Afflictions as that wherein he is come, or beginning to enter into Judgement with them. And is it any wonder if they be in darkness and filled with disconsolation. 2. There is in many Afflictions something that seems New, and peculiar, wherewith the soul is surprised, and cannot readily reduce its condition unto what is taught about Afflictions in General. This perplexeth and intangleth it. It is not Affli∣ction it is troubled withall, but some one thing or other in it that appears with an Especial dread unto the soul, so that he questioneth whether ever it were so with any other or no, and is thereby deprived of the supportment which from former Examples it might receive. And indeed when God intendeth that which shall be a deep Affliction, he will put an Edge upon it in matter, or manner, or circumstances, that shall make the soul feel its sharpness. He will not take up with our bounds and measures, and with which we think we could be content∣ed. But he will put the impress of his own greatness and terrour upon it, that he may be acknowledged and submitted unto. Such was the State with Naomi; When from a full and plenti∣ful
condition, she went into a strange Countrey with an Hus∣band and two Sons, where they all dyed, leaving her destitute and poor; Hence in her account of Gods dealing with her, she sayes, call me not Naomi (that is pleasant) but call me mara (that is bitter) for the Almighty hath dealt very bitterly with me. I went out Full and the Lord brought me again Empty; why then call ye me Naomi since the Lord hath testified against me; and the Almighty hath afflicted me, Ruth 1. 20, 21. So was it with Job, with the Widdow of Zareptha; and with her at Naim who was burying her only Child. And still in many Afflictions God is pleased to put in an entangling specialty, which perplexeth the soul and darkens it in all its Reasonings about the Love of God towards it, and its interest in Pardon and Grace. 3. In some; Affections are very strong and Importunate as fixed on lawful things; whereby their Nature is made sensible and tender, and apt to receive very deep impressions from urgent Afflictions; Now although this in its self be a good natural frame, and helps to preserve the soul from that stout hardness which God abhors, yet if it be not watched over, it is apt to perplex the soul with many intangling Tempta∣tions. The Apostle intimates a double evil that we are obnoxi∣ous unto under tryals and Afflictions, Heb. 12. 5. My Son, de∣spise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him. Men may either through a natural stoutness de∣spise and contemn their sufferings, and be obstinate under them, or faint and despond, and so come short of the end which God aimes at for them, to be attained in a way of duty. Now though the frame spoken of, be not obnoxious unto the first extream, yet it is greatly to the latter, which if not watched against, is no less pernitious than the former. Affections in such persons being greatly moved they cloud and darken the mind, and fill it with strange Apprehensions concerning God and themselves. Every thing is presented unto them through a Glass composed of Fear, Dread, Terrour, Sorrow, and all sorts of disconsolations. This makes them faint and despond, unto very sad apprehensions of themselves and their Condi∣tions.
4. Afflictions find some entangled with very strong corruptions, as Love of the World, or the pleasure of it, of Name or Reputati∣on, of great contrivances for posterity, and the like; or it may be in things carnal or sensual. Now when these unexpectedly meet together, great Afflictions and strong Corruptions, it is not con∣conceivable what a combustion they will make in the soul. As a strong medicine or potion meeting with a strong or tough distem∣per in the body; there is a violent contention in nature between them and about them, so that oftentimes the very life of the patient is endangered. So it is where a great tryal, a smart stroke of the hand of God, falls upon a person in the midst of his pursuit of the Effects of some corruptions; the soul is amazed even to distraction, and can scarce have any thought, but that God is come to cut the person off in the midst of his sin. Every unmortified corruption fills the very fear and expectation of Af∣fliction, with horrour. And there is good Reason that so it should do; for although God should be merciful unto mens Ini∣quities, yet if he should come to take Vengeance of their Inven∣tions, their condition would be dark and sorrowful. 5. Satan is never wanting in such Occasions to attempt the compassing of his Ends, upon persons that are exercised un∣der the hand of God. In the time of suffering it was, that he fell upon the Head of the Church, turning it into the very hour of the power of darkness. And he will not omit any appearing opportunities of Advantage against his Members. And this is that which he principally in such seasons attacks them with∣all; namely, that God regards them not, that they are fallen un∣der his Judgement and Severity, as those who have no share in Mercy, Pardon or Forgiveness. From these and the like Reasons, I say, it is, that whereas Afflictions in general are so testified unto, to be such pledges and tokens of Gods Love and Care to be designed unto blessed ends; as conformity unto Christ, and a participation of the Holiness of God; yet by reason of these Circumstances, they often prove means of casting the soul into depths, and of hindering it from a refreshing interest in the forgiveness that is with God. That this may prove no real or abiding ground of inward spiritual trouble unto the soul, the following Rules and Directions may be observed.
Rules to be observed concerning Afflictions.1. Not only Afflctions in general, but great and manifold Af∣flictions, and those attended with all sorts of aggravating circum∣stances, are alwaies consistent with the pardon of sin, after signal tokens and pledges of it, and of the Love of God therein, Job 7. 17, 18. What is man that thou shouldst magnifie him, and that thou shouldst set thine heart upon him, and that thou shouldst visit him every morning, and try him every moment! What were the con∣siderations that cast him into this admiration of the Care and Love of God, is expressed, v. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. There are no words of a more dismal import in the whole book than those here expressed; yet when he recollected himself from his over∣whelming distress, he acknowledgeth that all this proceeded from the Love and Care of God; yea his fixing his heart upon a man to magnifie him, to set him up, and do him good; For this end doth he chasten a man every morning, and try him every moment; and that with such afflictions as are for the pre∣sent so far from being ioyous, as that they give no Rest, but even weary the soul of life, as he expresseth their Effects on him∣self, v. 15, 16. And hence it is observed of this Job, that when none in the Earth was like to him in trouble, God gave him three Testimonies from Heaven, that there was none in the Earth like unto him in Grace. And although it may not be laid down as a General Rule, yet for the most part in the pro∣vidence of God, from the foundation of the world, those who have had most of Afflictions, have had most of Grace, and the most eminent Testimonies of Acceptance with God. Christ Jesus the Son of God, the Head of the Church, had all Afflictions gathered into an head in him; and yet the Father alwaies loved him, and was alwaies well pleased with him. When God solemnly renewed his Covenant with Abraham, and he had prepared the Sacrifice whereby it was to be rati∣fied and confirmed, God made a smoaking Furnace to pass be∣tween the pieces of the Sacrifice, Gen. 15. 17. It was to let him know that there was a furnace of Affliction attending the Cove∣nant of Grace and Peace. And so he tells Sion that he chose her in the furnace of Affliction, Isa. 48. 10. that is, in Aegyptian Affliction, burning, flaming afflictions, fiery tryals, as Peter
calls them, 1 Pet. 4. 12. There can then no Argument be drawn from Affliction, from any kind of it, from any aggravating cir∣cumstance wherewith it may be attended, that should any way discourage the soul in its comforting supporting perswasion of an interest in the Love of God and forgiveness thereby. 2. No length or continuance of Afflictions ought to be any im∣peachment of our spiritual consolation. Take for the confirmation hereof, the great Example of the Son of God. How long did his Afflictions continue? what end or issue was put to them? No longer did they abide than until he cryed with a loud voice and gave up the Ghost. To the moment of his death; from his Manger to his Cross, his Afflictions still increased, and he ended his daies in the midst of them. Now he was the Head of the Church, and the great Representative of it; unto a con∣formity with whom we are predestinated. And if God will have it so with us, even in this particular, so as that we shall have no rest, no peace from our trials, until we lye down in the Grave, that whatever condition we pass through, they shall be shut out of none, but only from Immortality and Glory, what have we herein to complain of? 3. Where the Remembrance and perplexing sense of past sins is revived by present afflictions; separate them in your minds, and deal distinctly about them. So long as you carry on the conside∣ration of them joyntly, you will be rolled from one to another, and never obtain rest unto your souls. They will mutually ag∣gravate each other. The sharpness of Affliction will add to the bitterness of the sense of sin; and the sense of sin will give an edge to Affliction, and cause it to pierce deeply into the soul, as we shewed in the former instances. Deal therefore distinctly about them, and in their proper order. So doth the Psalmist here. He had at present both upon him, and together they brought him into these depths concerning which he so cries out for deliverance from them; see Psal. 32. 3, 4, 5. And what course doth he take? he applies himself in the first place to his sin, and the guilt of it, and that distinctly and separately. And when he hath got a discharge of sin, which he waited so ear∣nestly for, his faith quickly arose above his outward trials, as ap∣pears in his blessed close of all; He shall redeem Israel out of all
his trouble; the whole Israel of God, and my self amongst them. This do then, single out the sin or sins that are revived in the sense of their guilt upon the conscience. Use all dili∣gence to come to an issue about them in the blood of Christ. This God by your Affliction calls you unto. This is the disease whereof your trouble is but the symptom. This therefore in the Cure you seek after, is first and principally to be attended unto; when that is once removed, the other as to any prejudice un∣to your souls will depart of its self. The root being once digged up, you shall not long feed on the bitter fruit that it hath brought forth; or if you do, the Wormwood shall be taken out of it, and it shall be very pleasant unto you, as well as whole∣some. How this is to be done by an Application unto God for forgiveness, hath been at large declared. But if men will deal with confused thoughts about their sins and their troubles, their wound will be incurable, and their sorrow endless. 4. Remember that a time of Affliction is a time of Temptation. Satan, as we have shewed, will not be wanting unto any appear∣ing Opportunity or Advantage of setting upon the soul. When Pharaoh heard that the people were intangled in the wilderness, he pursued them. And when Satan sees a soul intangled with it's distresses and troubles, he thinks it his time and hour to assault it. He seeks to winnow, and comes when the Corn is under the flail. Reckon therefore that when trouble cometh, the Prince of the world cometh also, that you may be provided for him. Now is the time to take the shield of faith, that we may be able to quench his fiery darts. If they be neglected, they will enflame the soul. Watch therefore and pray that you enter not into Temptation; that Satan do not represent God falsly unto you. He that durst represent Job falsly to the All-seeing God, will with much boldness represent God falsly unto us, who see and know so little. Be not then ignorant of his devices; but every way set your selves against his interposing between God and your souls, in a matter which he hath nothing to do withall. Let not this make-bate by any means inflame the difference. 5. Learn to distinguish the Effect of natural distempers from spiritual distresses. Some have sad, dark and tenacious thoughts
fixed on their minds from their natural distempers. These will not be cured by Reasonings, nor utterly quelled by faith. Our design must be to abate their Efficacy and Consequents, by con∣sidering their Occasions. And if men cannot do this in them∣selves, it is highly incumbent on those who make Application of relief unto them, to be carefull to discern what is from such principles, whereof they are not to expect a speedy Cure. And, 6. Take heed in times of peace and ease, that you lay not up, by your negligence or careless walking, sad provision for a day of darkness, a time of Afflictions. It is sin that imbitters troubles; the sins of peace are revived in the time of distress. Fear of future Affliction, of impendent troubles, should make us care∣full not to bring that into them which will make them bitter and sorrowfull. 7. Labour to grow better under all your Afflictions, lest your Af∣flictions grow worse; lest God mingle them with more dark∣ness, bitterness and terrour. As Joab said unto David, if he ceased not his scandalous Lamentation on the death of Absolom, all the people would leave him, and he then should find him∣self in a far worse condition than that which he bemoaned, or any thing that befell him from his youth. The same may be said unto persons under their Afflictions. If they are not managed and improved in a due manner, that which is worse may, nay, in all probability will befall them. Whereever God takes this way, and engageth in afflicting, he doth commonly pursue his work until he hath prevailed, and his design towards the af∣flicted party be accomplished. He will not cease to thresh and break the bread-corn until it be meet for his use. Lay down then the weapons of thy warfare against him; give up your selves to his Will; let go every thing about which he contends with you; follow after that which he calls you unto, and you will find light arising unto you in the midst of darkness. Hath he a cup of Affliction in one hand, lift up your eyes and you will see a cup of Consolation in another. And if all Stars with∣draw their light, whilst you are in the way of God, assure your selves that the Sun is ready to rise. 8. According to the Tenor of the Covenant of Grace, a man
may be sensible of the respect of Affliction unto sin; yea unto this or that sin in particular, and yet have a comfortable perswasion of the forgiveness of sin. Thus it was in general in Gods deal∣ing with his people, He forgave them, but he took vengeance on their inventions, Psal. 99. 8. Whatever they suffered under the vengeance that fell upon their Inventions, (and that is as hard a word as is applied any where unto Gods dealing with his people) yet at the same time he assured them of the pardon of their sin. So you know was the case of David. His greatest Trial and Affliction, and that which befell him on the account of a particular sin, and wherein God took vengeance on his in∣vention, was ushered in with a Word of Grace, that God had done away, or pardoned his sins, and that he should not dye. This is express'd in the Tenor of the Covenant with the seed of Christ, Psal. 89. 31, 32, 33, 34. Objections against Believing from things internal. The person knows not whether he be Regenerate or no. State of Rege∣neration asserted. Difference of Saving and Common Grace. This difference discernable. Men may know themselves to be Regenerate. The Objection answered. Another head of Objections and Despondencies ariseth from things internal, things that are required in the soul, that it may have an Interest in the forgiveness that is with God. Some whereof we shall speak unto; and these respect, first the state of the soul; and secondly, some actings in the soul. Objections against Be∣lieving, from the State of the Soul.First, As to the State, say some, unless a man be Regenerate, and born again, he is not, he cannot be made partaker of Mercy and Pardon. Now all things here are in the dark unto us. For first, we know not well what this Regeneration is, and it is va∣riously disputed amongst men. Some would place it only in the outward signs of our Initiation unto Christ, and some other∣wise express it. Again, it is uncertain, whether thou that are Regenerate do or may know that they are so; or whether this may be in any measure known unto others with whom they may treat about it. And if it may not be known we must be
uncertain in this also. And then it may be for their parts, they neither know the time when, nor the manner how any such work was wrought in them; and yet without this, seeing it is wrought by means, and springs from certain causes, they can have no establishment in a not-failing perswasion of their Ac∣ceptance with God, by the pardon of their sins in the blood of Christ. This is the Head and summ of most of the Objections which perplexed souls do manage against themselves as to their state and condition. Hence indeed they draw forth reasonings with great variety according as they are suggested by their par∣ticular occasions and temptations. And many proofs taken from their sins, miscarriages and fears, do they enforce their Ob∣jections withall. My purpose is to lay down some General Rules and Principles, which may be applied unto particular occa∣sions and emergencies. And this shall be done in answer to the several parts of the General Objection mentioned before. I say then, Two diffe∣rent estates whereunto all men belong.First, It is most certain that there are two Estates and Condi∣tions that divide all mankind; and every one that lives in the world, doth compleatly and absolutely belong unto one of them. These are the state of Nature, and the state of Grace, of Sin, and of Righteousness by Christ; every man in the world belongs unto one of these states or condition. This the Scripture so abounds in, that it seems to be the first principal thing that we are taught in it. It is as clear that there are two different states in this world, as that there are so in that to come. Yea, all our Faith and our Obedience depend on this Truth. And not only so, but the Covenant of God, the Mediation of Christ, and all the Promises and Threats of the Law and Gospel are built on this supposition. And this lays naked unto a spiritual eye that abounding Atheism that is in the world. Men are not only like Nicodemus, ignorant of these things, and wonder how they can be, but they scorn them, despise them, scoff at them. To make mention of being regenerate is exposed to re∣proach in the world. But whether men will or no, unto one of these conditions they must belong. 2. As these two estates differ morally in themselves, and Physi∣cally
in the causes constitutive of that difference; so there is a specifical difference between the things that place men in the one condition and in the other. Whatever there is of Good∣ness, Virtue, Duty, Grace in an Unregenerate person, there is in him that is Regenerate somewhat of another kind that is not in the other at all. For the difference of these states themselves it is plain in Scripture. The one is a state of Death, the other of Life; the one of Darkness, the other of Light; the one of En∣mity against God, the other of Reconciliation with him. And that the one state is constituted by that of Grace which is of a peculiar kind, and which is not in the other. I shall briefly declare. Saving Grace spe∣cifically distinct from com∣mon Grace.1. The Grace of Regeneration proceedeth from an especial spring and fountain, which emptieth much of its living waters into it, no one drop whereof falls on them that are not Rege∣nerate. This is Electing Love; it is given out in the pursuit of the Decree of Election; God hath chosen us that we should be holy, Ephes. 1. 4. Our Holiness, whose only spring is our Re∣generation, is an effect of our Election; That which God works in our souls, in the pursuit of his eternal purpose of Love and good will towards us. So again, saith the Apostle, 2 Thes. 2. 13. God hath from the beginning chosen you to salvation through the sanctification of the Spirit. God having designed us unto sal∣vation as the End, hath also appointed the sanctification of the Spirit to be the Means to bring us orderly unto the attainment of that End. But the best of common Grace or Gifts that may be in men Unregenerate, are but products of the Providence of God, ordering all things in general unto his own Glory, and the good of them that shall be heirs of salvation. They are not fruits of Electing Eternal Love, nor designed means for the insiallible attaining of Eternal Salvation. Secondly, The Graces of those that are Regenerate have a manifold Respect or Relation to the Lord Christ that the com∣mon Graces of others have not. I shall name one or two of these Respects: First, They have an especial moral Relation to the Mediatory Acts of Christ in his Oblation and Intercession. Especial Grace is an especial part of the purchase of Christ by
his death and blood-shedding. He made a double purchase of his Elect; of their persons to be his; of especial Grace to be theirs. He gave himself for his Church, that he might sanctifie and cleanse it with the washing of water by the Word, that he might present it unto himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish, Ephes. 5. 26, 27. The design of Christ in giving him∣self for his Church, was to procure for it that Especial Grace, whereby through the use of Means, it might be regenerate, sanctified and purified. So Titus 2. 14. He gave himself that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purifie unto himself a pecu∣liar people zealous of good works. Real purification in Grace and Holiness hath this Especial Relation unto the Death of Christ, that he designed therein to procure it for them for whom he dyed. And in the pursuit of his Purchase or Acquisition of it, his purpose was really to bestow it upon them, or effectually to work it in them. Moreover, it hath an Especial Relation unto his Intercession; and that in a distinguishing manner from any other Gifts or common Graces that other men may receive. Giving us the Rule and Pattern of his intercession, Joh. 17. He tells us, that he so prayes not for the world, but for his Elect; those which the Father had given him, because they were his, v. 9. And what is it that he prayes for them, in distinction from all other men whatever? Amongst others, this is one principal thing that he insists on, v. 17. Sanctifie them through thy Truth. Their Sanctification and Holiness is granted upon that Prayer and Intercession of Christ, which is peculiar unto them with an exclusion of all others, I pray for them, I pray not for the world. Now the common Grace of unregenerate persons, whereby they are distinguished from other men, whatever it be, it hath not this Especial Relation to the Oblation and Inter∣cession of Christ. Common Grace is not the procurement of Especial Intercession. Secondly, They have a Real Relation unto Christ as he is the living Quickning-Head of the Church; for he is so, even the living spiritual fountain of the spiritual life of it, and of all vital Acts whatever. Christ is our life, and our life is hid with him in God, Col. 3. 2, 3. That Eternal Life which consists in the
Knowledge of the Father and the Son, Joh. 17. 3. is in him as the cause, head, spring and fountain of it. In him it is in its fulness, and from thence it is derived unto all that believe, who receive from his fulness Grace for Grace, Joh. 1. 16. All ue saving sanctifying Grace, all spiritual life, and every thing that belongs thereunto is derived directly from Christ as the living Head of his Church, and fountain of all spiritual life unto them. This the Apostle expresseth, Ephes. 4. 15, 16. Speaking the truth in love, grow up into him in all things, which is the Head even Christ; from whom the whole body fitly joyned together, and compacted by that which every joynt supplieth, according to the effe∣ctual working in the measure of every part, maketh increase of the body unto the edifying of it self in love. To the same purpose he again expresseth the same matter, Col. 2. 19. All Grace in the whole body comes from the Head Christ Jesus; and there is no growth or furtherance of it, but by his Effectual working in eve∣ry part to bring it unto the measure designed unto it. Nothing then, no not the least of this Grace can be obtained but by vir∣tue of our Union unto Christ as our head, because it consists in a vital effectual influence from him, and his fulness. And this kind of Relation unto Christ, all Grace that is, or may be in unregenerate men, is incapable of. Thirdly, The Grace of Regeneration, and the fruits of it are administred in and by the Covenant. This is the promise of the Covenant, That God will write his Law in our hearts, and put his fear in our inward parts, that we shall not depart from him, Jer. 32. This is that Grace whereof we speak, whatever it be, or of what kind soever. It is bestowed on none but those who are taken into Covenant with God; for unto them alone it is promised, and by virtue thereof is it wrought in and upon their souls. Now all Unregenerate men are strangers from the Co∣venant, and are not made partakers of that Grace which is peculiarly and only promised thereby, and exhibited therein. Fourthly, the least spark of saving Regenerating Grace is wrought in the soul by the Holy Ghost, as given unto men to dwell in them, and to abide with them. He is the water given by Jesus Christ unto Believers, which is in them a well of water
springing up to everlasting life, John 4. 14. First they receive the water, the spring it self that is the Holy Spirit; and from thence living waters do arise up in them; they are wrought, effected, produced by the Spirit, which is given unto them. Now al∣though the common Gifts and Graces of men Unregenerate are effects of the power of the Holy Ghost wrought in them, and bestowed on them, as are all other works of Gods Providence; yet it doth not work in them, as received by them, to dwell in them, and abide with them as a Never-failing spring of spiritual life. For so our Saviour sayes expresly, that the World, or Unbelievers do not know the Spirit, nor can receive him, or have him abiding in them. All which, in a contradistinction unto all Unregenerate persons, are affirmed of all them that do be∣lieve. Fifthly, The least of saving Grace, such as is peculiar unto them that are Regenerate, is Spirit, Joh. 3. 6. That which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit. Whatever it is that is so born, it is Spirit, it hath a spiritual being, and it is not educible by any means out of the principles of Nature. So it is said to be a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Be it never so little or so great, however it may differ in degrees in one and in another, yet the nature of it is the same in all; It is a new Creature. As the least Worm of the Earth in the order of the old Creation, is no less a crea∣ture than the Sun; yea or the most glorious Angel in Heaven: So in the order of the new Creation, the least spark or dram of true grace that is from the sanctifying Spirit, is a new Creature, no less than the highest Faith or Love that ever were in the chiefest of the Apostles. Now that which is Spirit, and that which is not Spirit; that which hath a new spiritual being, and that which hath none, whatever appearance of agreement there may be among them, do yet differ specifically from one another. And thus it is with the saving Grace that is in a Regenerate, and those common Graces that are in others which are not so. So that as these are divers States, so they are eminently different and distinct the one from the other; and this answers the second thing laid down in the Objections, taken from the Uncertainty of these States, and of Regeneration it self, and the real diffe∣rence of it from the contrary State, which is exclusive of an in∣terest in forgiveness.
Difference between the State of Grace and Nature dis∣cernable.Thirdly, This is laid down in the Enquiry, whether this State may be known unto him, who is really partaker of it, or translated into it, or unto others that may be concerned therein; to which I say, the difference that is between these two States, and the constitutive causes of them, as it is real, so it is discernable; It may be known by themselves who are in those states, and others. It may be known who are born of God, and who are yet Children of the Devil; who are quickned by Christ, and who are yet dead in Trespasses and Sin: But here also Observe, 1. That, I do not say, This is alwayes known to the persons themselves concerned in this distribution. Many cry peace, peace when suddain destruction is at hand. These either think themselves regenerate when they are not, or else wilfully de∣spise the consideration of what is required in them, that they may have peace, and so delude their own souls unto their ruine. And many that are truly born of God, yet know it not. They may for a season walk in darkness and have no light; Nor 2. That this is alwayes known to others. It is not known unto Unregenerate men in respect of them that are so. For they know not really and substantially what it is to be so. Na∣tural men perceive not the things of God; that is, spiritually, in their own light and nature, 2 Cor. 2. And as they cannot aright discern the things which put men into that condition, (for they are foolishness unto them,) so they cannot Judge aright of their persons in whom they are. And if they do at any time Judge aright nationally concerning any things or Persons, Yet they do not Judge so upon right grounds, nor with any Evidence in or unto themselves of what they do Judge. Where∣fore Generally they Judge amiss of such persons; And because they make profession of somewhat which they find not in them∣selves, they Judge them Hypocrites, and false pretenders unto what is not. For those things which evince their Union with Christ, and which evidence their being born of God, they savour them not, nor can receive them. Nor is this alwayes known unto, or discerned by them that are Regenerate. They may sometime with Peter think a Symon Magus to be a true believer; or with Eli an Hannah to be a daughter of Belial. Many Hy∣pocrites
are so set forth with gifts, common Graces, Light and profession that they pass amongst all believers for such as are born of God. And many poor Saints may be so disguised un∣der Darkness, Temptation, Sin, as to be looked on as strangers from that family whereunto indeed they do belong. The Judgement of man may fail, but the Judgement of God is ac∣cording unto Righteousness; wherefore, 3. This is that we say; it may be known in the Sedulous use of means appointed for that end, to a man's self and others, which of the Conditions mentioned he doth belong unto; that is, whether he be regenerate or no, so far as his or their concernment lies therein. This I say may be known and that infallibly and as∣suredly with reference unto any duty wherein from hence we are concerned. The discharge of some duties in our selves and toward others, depends on this knowledge, and therefore we may attain it, so far as it is necessary for the discharge of such duties unto the Glory of God. Now because it is not directly in our way, yet having been mentioned I shall briefly in our passage touch upon the latter, or what duties do depend upon our Judging of others to be regenerate, and the way or Prin∣ciples whereby such a Judgement may be made. 1. There are many duties incumbent on us to be performed with and towards Professors; which without admitting a Judge∣ment to be made of their State and Condition cannot be per∣formed in faith. And in reference unto these duties alone it is that we are called to Judge the State of others. For we are not giving Countenance unto a rash uncharitable censuring of mens spiritual conditions, nor unto any Judging of any men, any other than what our own duty towards them, doth in∣dispensably require. Thus if we are to lay down our lives for the Brethren, it is very meet we should so far know them, so to be, as that we may hazard our lives in faith when we are called thereunto. We are also to Joyn with them in those Or∣dinances wherein we make a Solemn profession that we are members of the same body with them, that we have the same head, the same Spirit, faith and love: We must love them be∣cause they are begotten of God, Children of our heavenly Fa∣ther; and therefore must on some good ground believe them
so to be. In a word, the due performance of all principal mutual Gospel Duties, to the Glory of God and our own Edifi∣cation, depends on this supposition, that we may have such a sa∣tisfying perswasion concerning the spiritual condition of others as that from thence we may take our ayme, in what we do. 2. For the grounds hereof, I shall mention one only; which all others do lean upon. This is pressed, 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. As the body is one, and hath many members, and all the members of that one body being many, are one body, so is Christ. For by one Spirit we are all Baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit. They are all united unto, and hold of one head. For as are the members of the body natural un∣der one head, So is Christ mystical, that is, all believers under Christ their head. And this Union they have by the inhabita∣tion of the same quickning Spirit, which is in Christ their head, and by him they are brought all into the same spiritual state and frame; they are made to drink into one and the same Spirit; for this same Spirit produceth the same Effects in them all, the same in kind though differing in degrees, as the Apostle fully declares, Ephes. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6. And this Spirit is in them, and not in the world, John 16. And as this gives them a natu∣ralness in their duties one towards another; or in mutual caring for, rejoycing and sorrowing with one another, as mem∣bers one of another, 1 Cor. 12. 25, 26. So it reveals and disco∣vers them to each other, so far as is necessary for the perfor∣mance of the Duties mentioned, in such a manner as becomes members of the same body. There is on this account a spiri∣tually natural Answering of one to another, as face answer∣eth face in the Water. They can see and discern that in others whereof they have Experience in themselves; they can tast and relish that in others, which they feed upon in themselves, and wherein the lives of their souls do consist? the same spirit of life being in them, they have the same spiritual tast and Sa∣vour. And unless their pallats are distempered by Tempta∣tions or false opinions, or prejudices, they can in their Commu∣nion, tast of that Spirit in each other, which they are all made to drink into. This gives them the same likeness and
Image in the Inward man, the same heavenly light in their minds, the same affections; and being thus prepared and enabled to Judge and discern of the State of each other, in re∣ference unto their mutual duties, they have moreover the true Rule of the Word to Judge of all Spirits and Spiritual effects by. And this is the ground of all that love without dissimulati∣on and real Communion that is among the Saints of God in this World. But here two Cautions must be allowed, 1. That we would not Judge the State and Condition of any men in the world, no further than we are called thereunto in a way of Duty; and we are so called only with reference unto the Duties that we are to perform towards them. What have we to do to Judge them that are without, that is any one that we have not a call to consider in reference unto our own Duty. Herein that great Rule takes place; Judge not, that ye be not Judged. Let us leave all men, the worst of men, unless where evident duty requires other actings, to the Judgement seat of God. They are the Servants of another, and they stand or fall unto their own Master. There have been great miscarri∣ages amongst us in this matter, some have been ready to con∣demn all that go not along with them in every principle, yea opinion or practice. And every day slight occasions and pro∣vocations, are made the grounds and reasons of severe cen∣sures. But nothing is more contrary to the conduct of the meek and holy Spirit of Christ. This is our Rule; are we called to Act towards any as Saints, as living Members of the body of Christ, and that in such Duties as we cannot perform in faith, unless we are perswaded that so they are, then are we on the grounds, and by the wayes before mentioned, to satisfie our selves in one another. 2. Do we endeavour mutually to discern the condition of one another, in reference unto such Ends; Let us be sure to look unto, and pursue those ends when we have attained our Sa∣tisfaction. What these ends are hath been shewed. It is that we may love them without dissimulation, as members of the same mystical body with us; that we may naturally take care of them, and for them; that we may delight sincerely in them; that we may minister unto their wants, Temporal and Spiri∣tual;
that we may watch over them with pitty and compas∣sion. These and the like are the only ends for which we are at any time called to the consideration of the spiritual condi∣tion of one another, if these be neglected the other is useless. And here lyes a great aggravation of that neglect, in that such a way is made for the avoidance of it. Here lyes the life or death of all Church Society. All Church Society and Relation is built on this supposition, that the members of it are all Rege∣nerate; some lay this foundation in Baptism only, professing that all that are baptized are Regenerate. Others require a far∣ther Satisfaction in the real work it self. But all build on the same foundation; that all Church members are to be Regene∣rate. And to what end is this? Namely that they may all mu∣tually perform those duties one towards another, which are incumbent mutually on Regenerate persons. If these are omitted, there is an End of all profitable use of Church So∣ciety. Churches without this are but meer husks and shells of Churches, Carkasses without souls. For as there is no real Union unto Christ without faith, so there is no real Union among the members of any Church without Love, and that acting its self in all the Duties mentioned. Let not this Ordi∣nance be in vain. But we must return from this digression, to that which lies before us, which is concerning what a man may discern con∣cerning his own being Regenerate or born again. I say then, Believers may know themselves to be born of God.Secondly, Men may come to an assured Satisfactory perswasion that themselves are regenerate, and that such, as is so far insalli∣ble, as that it will not deceive them, when it is brought unto the tryal. For there are many Duties whose performance in faith unto the glory of God, and the Edification of our own souls, doth depend on this perswasion and Conviction. As, 1. A due sense of our Relation unto God, and an answerable comportment of our spirits and hearts towards him. He that is born again, is born of God. He is begotten of God by the immortal seed of the Word. Without a perswasion hereof how can a man on grounds of faith carry himself towards God as his Father? and how great a part of our Obedience towards
him and communion with him depends hereon, we all know. If men fluctuate all their dayes in this matter, if they come to no settlement in it, no comfortable perswasion of it, they scarce ever act any genuine childlike acts of Love or Delight towards God, which exceedingly impeacheth their whole Obedience. 2. Thankfulness for Grace received is one of the principal duties that is incumbent on Believers in this World. Now how can a man in faith bless God for that which he is utterly uncertain whether he have received it from him or no. I know some men run on in a Road in this matter. They will bless God in a formal way, for their Regeneration, Sanctification, Justification, and the like: But if you ask them whether them∣selves are regenerate or no, they will be ready to scoff at it, or at least to profess that they know no such thing. What is this but to mock God, and in a presumptuous manner to take his name in vain: But if we will praise God, as we ought for his Grace, as we are guided and directed in the Scripture, as the nature of the matter requires, with such a frame of heart as may influence our whole Obedience, surely it cannot but be our duty to know the Grace that we have received. 3. Again the main of our Spiritual watch, and diligence, con∣sisteth in the cherishing, improving, and increasing of the Grace that we have received; the strengthening of the new Creature that is wrought in us; Herein consists principally the Life of faith, and the exercise of that Spiritual Wisdom which faith furnisheth the soul withall. Now how can any man ap∣ply himself hereunto, whilest he is altogether uncertain whe∣ther he hath received any principle of Living, Saving Grace, or no? whereas therefore God requires our utmost Diligence, Watchfulness, and Care in this matter, It is certain that he re∣quires also of us, and grants unto us, that which is the foun∣dation of all these duties which lyes in an Acquaintance with that state and condition whereunto we do belong. In brief there is nothing, we have to do in reference unto Eternity, but one way or other, it hath a respect unto our light and con∣victions, as to our State and Condition in this World. And those who are negligent in the tryal and Examination thereof, do leave all things between God and their souls at absolute
uncertainties, and dubious hazards; which is not to lead the Life of Faith. We shall now upon these premises return unto that part of the Objection which is under consideration. Say some; We know not whether we are regenerate or no, and are therefore alto∣gether uncertain whether we have an interest in that forgiveness that is with God; nor dare we on that account admit of the conso∣lation that is tendred on the Truth insisted on. Supposing what hath been spoken in general, I shall lay down the grounds of resolving this perplexing doubt in the en∣suing Rules. RULE I. Rules whereby men may judge of their Con∣dition in respect of Inherent Grace.See that the perswasion and Assurance hereof which you look after and desire be regular, and not such as is suited meerly un∣to your own Imaginations. Our second and third General Rules about the nature of all spiritual Assurance, and what is consistent therewithall, are here to be taken into consideration. If you look to have such an Evidence, Light into, and absolute conviction of this matter, as shall admit of no doubts, fears, questionings, just occasions and causes of new trials, teachings, and self-examinations, you will be greatly deceived. Regene∣ration induceth a new principle into the soul, but it doth not utterly expel the old; some would have security, not Assu∣rance. The principle of sin and unbelief will still abide in us, and still work in us. Their abiding and their acting must needs put the soul upon a severe enquiry whether they are not preva∣lent in it beyond what the condition of Regeneration will ad∣mit. The constant conflicts we must have with sin, will not suf∣fer us to have alwaies so clear an Evidence of our condition as we would desire. Such a perswasion as is prevalent against strong objections to the contrary, keeping up the heart to a due performance of those duties in faith which belong unto the state of Regeneration, is the substance of what in this kind you are to look after.
RULE II. If you are doubtfull concerning your state and condition, do not expect an extraordinary determination of it by an Immediate Te∣stimony of the Spirit of God. I do grant that God doth sometimes by this means bring in peace and satisfaction unto the soul; he gives his own Spirit immediately to bear witness with ours, that we are the children of God, both upon the account of Regene∣ration and Adoption. He doth so, but as far as we can ob∣serve in a way of Soveraignty, when and to whom he pleaseth. Besides, that men may content and satisfie themselves with his ordinary Teachings, Consolations and Communications of his Grace, he hath left the nature of that peculiar Testimony of the Spirit very dark and difficult to be found out, few agreeing wherein it doth consist, or what is the nature of it: No one mans Experience is a Rule unto others. And an undue Appre∣hension of it, is a matter of great danger. Yet it is certain that humble souls in extraordinary cases may have recourse unto it with benefit and relief thereby. This then you may desire, you may pray for, but not with such a frame of spirit as to refuse that other satisfaction which in the waies of Truth and Peace you may find. This is the putting of the hand into the side of Christ, but blessed are they who believe, and yet have not seen. RULE III. If you have at any time formerly received any especial or Imme∣diate pledge or testimony of God given unto your souls as unto their Sincerity, and consequently their Regeneration, labour to recover it, and to revive a sense of it upon your Spirits now in your dark∣ness and trouble. I am perswaded there are but few Believers, but that God doth at one time or other, in one duty or other, entring into, or coming out of one Temptation or another, give some singular Testimony unto their own souls and consciences concerning their Sincerity, and his Acceptance of them. Some∣times he doth this in a duty wherein he hath enabled the soul to make so near an approach unto him, as that it hath been
warmed, enlivened, sweetned, satisfied with the presence, the gracious presence of God, and which God hath made unto him as a token of his uprightness. Sometimes, when a man is entring into any great Temptation, Trial, difficult or dangerous duty, that death it self is feared in it, God comes in by one means or other, by a secret intimation of his Love, which he gives him to take along with him for his furniture and provision in his way, and thereby testifies to him his Sincerity. And this serves like the food of Elijah for forty daies in a wilderness condition. Sometimes he is pleased to shine immediately into the soul in the midst of its darkness and sorrow wherewith it is surprized, as not looking for any such expression of kindness, and is there∣by relieved against its own pressing self-condemnation. And sometimes the Lord is pleased to give these tokens of Love un∣to the soul as its refreshment, when it is coming off from the storm of Temptations wherewith it hath been tossed. And ma∣ny other times and seasons there are wherein God is pleased to give unto Believers some Especial Testimony in their consciences unto their own Integrity. But now these are all wrought by a transient operation of the Spirit exciting and enabling the heart unto a spiritual sensible apprehension and receiving of Gods expressing kindness towards it. These things abide not in their sense, and in their power which they have upon our Af∣fections, but immediately pass away. They are therefore to be treasured up in the mind and judgement, to be improved and made use of by Faith, as occasion shall require; but we are apt to lose them. Most know no other use of them, but whilst they feel them; yea, through ignorance in our duty to improve them, they prove like a sudden light brought into a dark place, and again removed, which seems to increase, and really aggravates our sense of the darkness. The true Use of them is to lay them up, and ponder them in our hearts, that they may be Supportments and Testimonies unto us in a time of need. Have you then, who are now in the dark as to your state or condition, whether you are Regenerate or no, ever re∣ceived any such refreshing and chearing Testimony from God given unto your Integrity, and your Acceptance with him there∣upon; call it over again, and make use of it against those dis∣couragements
which arise from your present darkness in this matter, and which keeps you off from sharing in the consola∣tion tendred unto you in this Word of Grace. RULE IV. A due spiritual Consideration of the Causes and Effects of Rege∣neration, is the ordinary way and means whereby the souls of Be∣lievers come to be satisfied concerning that work of God in them and upon them. The principle or causes of this work, are the Spirit and the Word. He that is born again, is born of the Spi∣rit, Joh. 3. 6. and of the Word; Of his own Will begat he us by the word of his Truth, Jam. 1. 18. We are born again by the Word of God that abideth for ever, 1 Pet. 1. 23. Where ever then a man is regenerate, there hath been an effectual work of the Spirit, and of the Word upon his soul. This is to be inquired into, and after. Ordinarily it will discover it self. Such im∣pressions will be made in it upon the soul, such a change will be wrought and produced in it, as will not escape a spiritual diligent search and enquiry. And this is much of the duty of such as are in the dark, and uncertain concerning the accom∣plishment of this work in themselves. Let them call to mind what have been the actings of the Spirit by the Word upon their souls. What Light thereby hath been communicated un∣to their minds; what discoveries of the Lord Christ and way of Salvation have been made to them; what sense and detestation of sin have been wrought in them; what satisfaction hath been given unto the soul, to chuse, accept, and acquiesce in the Righteousness of Christ; what Resignation of the heart unto God according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace, it hath been wrought unto; Call to mind what Transactions there have been between God and your souls about these things; how far they have been carryed on; whether you have broken off the Treaty with God, and refused his Terms; or if not, where the stay is between you; and what is the Reason since God hath graciously begun to deal thus with you, that you are not yet come to a through close with him in the work and design of his Grace; the defect must of necessity lye on your parts. God
doth nothing in vain: Had he not been willing to receive you, he would not have dealt with you so far as he hath done. There is nothing then remains to firm your condition but a resolved Act of your own Wills in answering the mind and will of God. And by this search may the soul come to satisfaction in this matter; or at least find out and discover where the stick is whence their uncertainty doth arise, and what is wanting to compleat their desires. Again, this work may be discovered by its Effects. There is something that is produced by it in the soul, which may also be considered either with respect unto its Being and Existence, or unto its Actings and Operations; in the first regard it is Spirit, Joh. 3. 6. That which is born of the Spirit, which is pro∣duced by the effectual operation of the Spirit of God, it is Spi∣rit; A new Creature, 2 Cor. 15. 17. He that is in Christ Jesus, who is born again, is a new Creature, a new life, a spiritual life, Gal. 2. 20. Ephes. 2. 1. In brief, it is an habitual furnishment of all the faculties of the soul, with new spiritual vital prin∣ciples, enabling a person in all instances of Obedience, to lead a spiritual life unto God. This principle is by this work pro∣duced in the soul; and in respect of its Actings, it consists in all the gracious operations of the Mind, Will, Heart or Affecti∣ons in the duties of Obedience which God hath required of us. This is that which gives life unto our duties (without which the best of our works are but dead works) and renders them acceptable unto the Living God. It is not my business at large to pursue and declare these things; I only mention them, that persons who are kept back from a participation of the Consola∣tion tendred from the forgiveness that is with God, because they cannot comfortably conclude that they are born again, as knowing that it is unto such persons alone unto whom these Consolations do truly and really belong, may know how to make a right judgement of themselves. Let such persons then not fluctuate up and down in Generals and Uncertainties, with heartless complaints, which is the ruine of the peace of their souls; but let them really put things to the trial, by the exa∣mination of the Causes and Effects of the work they enquire after. It is by the use of such means whereby God will be
pleased to give them all the Assurance and Establishment con∣cerning their State and Condition which is needfull for them, and which may give them incouragement in their course of obedience. But supposing all that hath been spoken; what if a man by the utmost search and enquiry that he is able to make, cannot attain any satisfactory perswasion that indeed this great work of Gods Grace hath passed upon his soul; is this a suffi∣cient ground to keep him off from accepting of supportment and consolation from this Truth, that there is forgiveness with God, which is the design of the Objection laid down before? I say therefore further, that 1. Regeneration doth not in Order of time precede the souls interest in the forgiveness that is with God, or its being made par∣taker of the pardon of sin; I say no more but that it doth not precede it in order of time, not determining which hath pre∣cedency in order of nature. That, I confess, which the method of the Gospel leads unto, is that Absolution, Acquitment, or the pardon of sin, is the foundation of the communication of all saving Grace unto the soul, and so precedeth all Grace in the sinner whatever. But because this Absolution or pardon of sin is to be received by faith, whereby the soul is really made par∣taker of it, and all the benefits belonging thereunto; and that faith also is the radical grace which we receive in our Regene∣ration; for it is by faith that our hearts are purified, as an In∣strument in the hand of the great purifier, the Spirit of God; I place these two together, and shall not dispute as to their prio∣rity in nature; but in time the one doth not precede the other. 2. It is hence evident, that an Assurance of being Regene∣rate, is no way previously necessary unto the believing of an in∣terest in forgiveness; so that although a man have not the for∣mer, it is, or may be his duty to endeavour the latter. When convinced persons cryed out, What shall we do to be saved! the answer was, believe and you shall be so; Believe in Christ, and in the remission of sin by his blood, is the first thing that con∣vinced sinners are called unto. They are not directed first to se∣cure their souls that they are born again, and then afterwards to believe. But they are first to believe that the Remission of sin
is tendred unto them in the blood of Christ, and that by him they may be justified from all things from which they could not be justified by the Law. Nor upon this proposition is it the duty of men to question whether they have faith or no, but actually to believe. And faith in its operation will evidence it self. See Acts 13. 38, 39. Suppose then that you do not know that you are Regenerate, that you are born of God; that you have no prevailing, refreshing constant evidence or perswasion thereof; should this hinder you? should this discourage you from believing forgiveness, from closing with the promises, and thereby obtaining in your selves an interest in that forgiveness that is with God? Not at all; Nay, this ought exceedingly to excite and stir you up unto your duty herein. For, 1. Suppose that it is otherwise; that indeed you are yet in the state of sin, and are only brought under the power of Light and Conviction; this is the way for a translation into an estate of spiritual life and Grace: If you will forbear the acting of faith upon; and for forgiveness, until you are Regenerate, you may, and probably you will come short both of Forgiveness and Regeneration also. Here lay your foundation, and then your building will go on. This will open the door unto you, and give you an entrance into the Kingdom of God, Christ is the door; do not think to climb up over the wall; enter by him, or you will be kept out. 2. Suppose that you are born again, but yet know it not, as is the condition of many. This is a way whereby you may re∣ceive an evidence thereof. It is good embracing of all signs, tokens and pledges of our spiritual condition; and it is so to improve them. But the best course is to follow the genuine natural actings of faith, which will lead us into the most setled apprehensions concerning our Relation unto God, and accep∣tance with him. Believe first the forgiveness of sin as the effect of meer grace and mercy in Christ. Let the faith hereof be nourished and strengthened in your souls. This will insensibly influence your hearts into a comforting Gospel perswasion of your state and condition towards God, which will be accom∣panied with assured rest and peace. To winde up this discourse; remember, that that which
hath been spoken with reference unto the state of Regenerati∣on in General, may be applyed unto every particular objection or cause of fear or discouragement that may be reduced to that head. Such are all Objections that arise from particular sins, from Aggravations of sin by their greatness or circumstances, or relapses into them. The way that the consideration of these things prevail upon the mind unto fears, is by begetting an apprehension in men that they are not Regenerate; for if they were, they suppose they could not be so overtaken or en∣tangled. The Rules therefore laid down are suited to the streights of the souls of sinners in all such particular cases. Lastly, There was somewhat in particular added in the close of the Objection, which although it be not directly in our way, nor of any great importance in it self, yet having been mentioned it is not unmeet to remove it out of the way, that it may not leave intanglement upon the minds of any. Now this is, that some know not, nor can give an account of the Time of their conversion unto God, and therefore cannot be satis∣fied that the saving work of his grace hath passed upon them. This is usually and ordinarily spoken unto, And I shall there∣fore briefly give an account concerning it. 1. It hath been shewed that in this matter, there are many things whereon we may regularly found a Judgement concern∣ing our selves; and it is great folly to wave them all, and put the issue of the matter upon one circumstance. If a man have a tryal at law wherein he hath many evidences speaking for him, only one circumstance is dubious and in question; He will not cast the weight of his Cause on that disputed circumstance, but will plead those Evidences that are more clear, and testifie more fully in his behalf. I will not deny but that this matter of the time of conversion is oftimes an important circumstance; In the affirmative when it is known it is of great use tending to stability and consolation; but yet it is still but a circumstance, such as that the being of the thing it self doth not depend upon. He that is alive may know that he was born, though he know neither the place where, nor the time when he was so. And so may he that is spiritually alive, and hath ground of evidence that he is so, that he was born again, though he knew neither
when, nor where, nor how. And this Case is usual in persons of quiet natural Tempers, who have had the advantage of edu∣cation under means of light and Grace. God ofttimes in such persons begins and carries on the work of his Grace insensibly, so that they come to good growth and maturity before they know that they are alive. Such persons come at length to be satisfied in saying with the blind man in the Gospel, How our eyes were opened we know not, only one thing we know, whereas we were blind by nature, now we see. 2. Even in this matter also, we must, it may be, be content to live by faith, and to believe as well what God hath done in us, if it be the matter and subject of his promises, as what he hath done for us, the ground whereof also is the promise and nothing else. Objections from the present state and Condition of the Soul: Weakness and imperfection of Duty. Opposition from In∣dwelling Sin. Objections from weak∣ness in Duty, and the power of Sin.3. There is another Head of Objections against the souls receiving Consolation from an interest in forgiveness arising from the consideration of its present state and condition, as to actual Holiness, Duties and sins. Souls complain when in Dark∣ness, and under Temptations that they cannot find that Holi∣ness, nor those fruits of it in themselves, which they suppose an interest in pardoning mercy will produce. Their hearts they find are weak, and all their Duties worthless. If they were weighed in the ballance they would be all found too light. In the best of them there is such a mixture of Self, Hypocrisie, Unbelief, vain Glory, that they are even ashamed and con∣founded with the Remembrance of them. These things fill them with discouragements, so that they refuse to be comfort∣ed, or to entertain any refreshing perswasion from the Truth insisted on; but rather conclude that they are utter strangers from that forgiveness that is with God, and so continue help∣less in their depths. According unto the method proposed, and hitherto pursued I shall only lay down some such general Rules, as may support
a soul under the despondencies, that are apt in such a condition to befall it, that none of these things may weaken it in its en∣deavour to lay hold of forgiveness. And, First, This is the proper place to put in execution our se∣venth Rule, to take heed of heartless complaints, when vigorous actings of Grace are expected at our hands. If it be thus indeed, why lye you on your faces, why do you not rise, and put out your selves to the utmost, giving all diligence to add one Grace to another, untill you find your selves in a better frame. Sup∣posing then the putting of that Rule into practice, I add, that 1. Known Holiness, is apt to degenerate into self righteousness. What God gives us on the account of Sanctification, we are ready enough to reckon on the score of Justification. It is a hard thing to feel Grace, and to believe as if there were none. We have so much of the Pharisee in us by nature, that it is sometimes well that our Good is hid from us. We are ready to take our Corn and Wine and bestow them on other Lovers. Were there not in our hearts a spiritually sensible principle of corruption; and in our duties a discernable mixture of self, it would be impossible we should walk so humbly, as is required of them who hold communion with God in a Covenant of Grace and pardoning mercy. It is a good life, which is at∣tended with a faith of Rightcousness, and a sense of corrupti∣on. Whilest I know Christs. Righteousness, I shall the less care to know my own Holiness. To be holy is necessary, to know it sometimes a Temptation. 2. Even Duties of Gods Appointment when turned into self∣righteousness are Gods great abhorrency, Isa. 66. 2, 3. What hath a good Original may be vitiated by a bad End. 3. Oftentimes Holiness in the heart is more known by the Op∣position that is made there to it, than by its own prevalent work∣ing; The Spirits Operation is known by the flesh's oppositi∣on. We find a mans strength by the burdens he carryes, and not the pace that he goes. Oh, wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from the body of this death, is a better evi∣dence of Grace and Holiness, than God I thank thee I am not as other men; a heart pressed, grieved, burdened, not by the guilt of sin only, which reflects with trouble on an awakened
conscience, but by the close adhering power of Indwelling sin, tempting, seducing, soliciting, hindring, captivating, conceiv∣ing, restlesly disquieting may, from thence have as clear an evidence of holiness, as from a delightful fruit-bearing. What is it that is troubled and grieved in thee; What is it, that seems to be almost killed, and destroyed; that crys out, com∣plains, longs for deliverance? is it not, the new Creature? is it not the principle of spiritual life, whereof thou art partaker? I speak not of trouble and disquietments for sin committed, nor of fears and perturbations of mind, left sin should break forth to loss, shame, ruine, dishonour; nor of the contending of a convinced Conscience lest Damnation should ensue; but of the striving of the spirit against sin, out of a hatred and a loathing of it, upon all the mixt Considerations of Love, Grace, Mer∣cy, Fear, the beauty of Holiness, Excellency of communion with God, that are proposed in the Gospel. If thou seemest to thy self to be only passive in these things, to do nothing, but to endure the Assaults of sin; Yet if thou art sensible, and standest under the stroke of it, as under the stroke of an Ene∣my, there is the root of the matter. And as it is thus, as to the substance and Being of Holiness, so it is also as to the degrees of it. Degrees of Holiness are to be measured more by Opposi∣tion, than self operation. He may have more Grace, than another; who brings not forth so much fruit as the other; because he hath more opposition, more Temptation, Isa. 41. 17. And sense of the want of all, is a great sign of some∣what in the soul. 2. As to what was alledged to the nothingness, the selfish∣ness of Duty; I say, It is certain whilest we are in the flesh, our duties will taste of the vessel whence they proceed. Weakness, defilements, treachery, hypocrisie will attend them. To this purpose whatever some pretend to the contrary, is the Complaint of the Church, Isa. 64. 6. The Chaffe oftentimes is so mixed with the Wheat that Corn can scarce be discerned. And this know, that the more spiritual any man is, the more be sees of his unspiritualness in his spiritual Duties. An outside perfor∣mance will satisfie an outside Christian. Job abhorred himself
most, when he knew himself best. The clearer discoveries we have had of God, the viler will every thing of self appear. Nay further, duties and performances are oftentimes very ill measured by us; and those seem to be first, which indeed are last, and those to be last, which indeed are first. I do not doubt but a man when he hath had distractions to wrestle withall, no outward advantage to further him, no extraordinary provo∣cations of hope, fear or sorrow on a natural account in his duty, may rise from his knees with thoughts that he hath done no∣thing in his duty but provoked God; when there hath been more workings of Grace in contending with the deadness cast on the soul by the condition that it is in, than when by a con∣currence of moved natural affections, and outward provoca∣tions, a frame hath been raised, that hath to the party himself seemed to reach to Heaven; so that it may be this perplexity about duties, is nothing but what is common to the people of God, and which ought to be no obstruction to peace and settlement. 2. As to the pretence of Hypocrisie, you know what is usu∣ally answered; it is one thing to do a thing in hypocrisie, another not to do it without a mixture of hypocrisie. Hypocrisie in its long extent is every thing that for matter or manner comes short of sincerity. Now our sincerity is no more perfect than our other graces; so that in its measure it abides with us, and adheres to all we do: In like manner, it is one thing to do a thing for vain glory, and to be seen of men, another not to be able wholly to keep off the subtle insinuations of self and vain glory. He that doth a thing in hypocrisie, and for vain glory, is satisfied with some corrupt end obtained, though he be sensible that he sought such an end. He that doth a thing with a mix∣ture of hypocrisie, that is with some breaches upon the degrees of his sincerity, with some insensible advancements in perfor∣mance on outward considerations, is not satisfied with a self end attained, and is dissatisfied with the defect of his sincerity. In a word, wouldst thou yet be sincere, and dost endeavour so to be in private duties, and in publick performances; in pray∣ing, hearing, giving alms, zealous actings for Gods glory, and the Love of the Saints, though these duties are not, it may be,
sometimes, done without sensible hypocrisie, I mean as traced to its most subtle insinuations of self and vain glory, yet are they not done in hypocrisie, nor do not denominate the persons by whom they are performed hypocrites; Yet I say of this, as of all that is spoken before; it is of use to relieve us under a troubled condition, of none to support us or incourage us unto an abode in it. 3. Know that God despiseth not small things; he takes notice of the least breathings of our hearts after him, when we our selves can see nor perceive no such thing. He knows the mind of the spirit in those workings, which are never formed to that height, that we can reflect upon them with our observation. Every thing that is of him, is noted in his Book, though not in ours. He took notice that when Sarah was acting unbelief towards him, yet that she shewed respect and regard to her Hus∣band, calling him Lord, Gen. 18. 12. 1 Pet. 3. 6. And even whilst his people are sinning, he can find something in their hearts, words or waies that pleaseth him, much more in their duties. He is a skilfull refiner that can find much Gold in that Ore where we see nothing but Lead or Clay. He remembers the duties which we forget, and forgets the sins which we remem∣ber. He justifies our persons though ungodly, and will also our duties, though not perfectly godly. 4. To give a little further support in reference unto our wretched miserable duties, and to them that are in perplexities on that account, know that Jesus Christ takes out whatever is evil and unsavoury out of them, and makes them acceptable. When an unskilfull servant gathers many herbs, flowers and weeds in a Garden, you gather them out that are usefull, and cast the rest out of sight. Christ deals so with our performances. All the ingredients of self that are in them on any account, he takes away, and adds Incense to what remains, and presents it to God, Exod. 28. 36. This is the cause that the Saints at the last day when they meet their own duties and performances, they know them not, they are so changed from what they were when they went of their hand. Lord, when saw we thee naked or hungry, so that God accepts a little, and Christ makes our little a great deal.
5. Is this an Argument to keep thee from believing? The Rea∣son why thou art no more Holy, is because thou hast no more faith. If thou hast no holiness, it is because thou hast no saith; Holiness is the purifying of the heart by faith; or our Obe∣dience unto the Truth. And the reason why thou art no more in duty, is because thou art no more in believing; the reason why thy duties are weak and imperfect, is because thy faith is weak and imperfect. Hast thou no holiness, believe that thou maist have; hast thou but a little, or that which is impercep∣tible, be stedfast in believing that thou maist abound in Obe∣dience. Do not resolve not to eat thy meat until thou art strong, when thou hast no means of being strong, but by eating thy bread, which strengthens the heart of man. Object. 4. The powerfull tumulating of indwelling sin or cor∣ruption, is another cause of the same kind of trouble and de∣spondency. They that are Christs have crucified the flesh with the lusts thereof. But we find, say some, several corruptions working effectually in our hearts, carrying us captive to the Law of sin. They disquiet with their power, as well as with their guilt. Had we been made partakers of the Law of the Spirit of Life, we had ere this been more set free from the Law of sin and death. Had sin been pardoned fully, it would have been subdued more effectually. There are three Considerations which make the actings of indwelling sin to be so perplexing to the soul. 1. Because they are unexpected. The soul looks not for them upon the first great conquest made of sin, and universal en∣gagement of the heart unto God. When it first sayes, I have sworn, and amstedfastly purposed to keep thy righteous Judgements; commonly there is peace at least for a season from the disturbing vigorous actings of sin. There are many Reasons why so it should be. Old things are then passed away, all things are be∣come new; and the soul under the power of that universal change, is utterly turned away from those things that should foment, stir up, provoke or cherish any lust or temptation. Now when some of these Advantages are past, and sin begins to stir and act again, the soul is surprized, and thinks the work that he hath passed through was not true and effectual,
but temporary only. Yea he thinks perhaps that sin hath more strength than it had before, because he is more sensible than he was before. As one that hath a dead arm or limb whilst it is mortified, endures deep cuts and launcings, and feels them not: when spirits and sense are brought into the place again, he feels the least cut, and may think the instruments sharper than they were before, when all the difference is, that he hath got a quick∣ness of sense, which before he had not. It may be so with a per∣son in this case; he may think lust more powerfull than it was before, because he is more sensible than he was before. Yea sin in the heart, is like a Snake or Serpent; you may pull out the sting of it, and cut it into many pieces; though it can sting mor∣tally no more, nor move his whole body at once, yet it will move in all its parts, and make an appearance of a greater mo∣tion than formerly. So it is with lust, when it hath received its deaths wound, and is cut in pieces, yet it moves in so many parts as it were in the soul, that it amazes him that hath to do with it; and thus coming unexpectedly, fills the spirit often∣times with disconsolation. 2. It hath also in its actings an Universality. This also sur∣prizeth; there is an universality in the actings of sin, even in Believers. There is no evil that it will not move to; there is no good that it will not attempt to hinder; no duty that it will not defile. And the reason of this is, because we are sanctified but in part; not in any part wholly, though savingly and truly in every part. There is sin remaining in every faculty, in all the Affections, and so may be acting in and towards any sin that the nature of man is liable unto. Degrees of sin there are that all Regenerate persons are exempted from; but unto so∣licitations to all kinds of sin they are exposed, and this helps on the Temptation. 3. It is endless and restless; never quiet conquering nor con∣quered; it gives not over, but rebels being overcome, or as∣saults afresh having prevailed. Oft-times after a victory ob∣tained, and an opposition subdued, the soul is in expectation of Rest and Peace from its enemies. But this holds not. It works and rebels again and again, and will do so whilst we live in this world; so that no issue will be put to our conflict but by
death. This is at large handled elsewhere, in a Treatise lately published on this peculiar subject. These and the like Considerations attending the actings of indwelling sin, do oftentimes intangle the soul in making a Judgement of it self, and leave it in the dark as to its state and condition. A few things shall be offered unto this Objection also. 1. The sensible powerfull actings of indwelling sin, are not inconsistent with a state of Grace, Gal. 5. 17. There are in the same person contrary principles, the flesh and the spirit; these are contrary; And there are contrary actings from these prin∣ciples; The flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh; and these actings are described to be great vigorous in other places. Lust wars against our souls, Jam. 4. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 1 l. Now to war is not to make faint or gentle Opposition to be flighted and contemned; but it is to go out with great strength, to use craft, subtlety and force, so as to put the whole issue to a hazard. So these lusts war; such are their actings in and against the soul. And therefore saith the Apostle, You cannot do the things that you would; see Rom. 7. 14, 15, 16, 17. In this conflict indeed the understanding is left unconquered; it con∣demns and disapproves of the evil led unto; and the will is not subdued; it would not do the evil that is pressed upon it, and there is an hatred or aversation remaining in the Affections unto sin; but yet notwithstanding sin rebels, fights, tumultuates, and leads captive. This Objection then may receive this speedy Answer. Powerfull actings and workings, universal endless struglings of ind welling sin, seducing to all that is evil, putting it self forth to the disturbance and dissettlement of all that is good, is no sufficient ground to conclude a state of Alienation from God; see for this the other Treatise before mentioned at large. 2. Your state is not at all to be measured by the opposition that sin makes to you, but by the opposition you make to it; be that ne∣ver so great, if this be good, be that never so restless and power∣full, if this be sincere, you may be disquieted, you can have no reason to despond. I have mentioned these things only to give a specimen of the
Objections which men usually raise up against an actual closing with the Truth insisted on to their consolation. And we have also given in upon them some Rules of Truth for their relief, not intending in them absolute satisfaction as to the whole of the cases mentioned, but only to remove the dark∣ness raised by them so out of the way, as that it might not hin∣der any from mixing the Word with Faith that hath been dis∣pensed from this blessed testimony, that there is forgiveness with God that he may be feared, Verse 5, 6. V. 5, 6.PRoceed we now to the second part of this Psalm, which contains the deportment of a sin-perplexed soul; when by Faith it hath discovered where its Rest doth lye, and from whom its relief is to be expected; even from the forgiveness which is with God, whereof we have spoken. There are two things in general, as was before mentioned, that the soul in that condition applies it self unto; whereof the first respects its self, and the other the whole Israel of God. That which respects its self, is the description of that frame of heart and spirit that he was brought into, upon faiths disco∣very of forgiveness in God; with the duties that he applied himself unto, the grounds of it, and the manner of its perfor∣mance, v. 5, 6.V. 5, & 6. opened.I wait for the Lord, my soul doth wait, and in his Word do I hope. My soul waiteth for the Lord, more than they that watch for the morning: I say more than they that watch for the morning. Herein I say he describes both his frame of spirit, and the Duty he applied himself to, both as to matter and manner. I shall, as in the method hitherto observed, first consider the reading of the Words, then their sense and importance, with the suitableness of the things mentioned in them, to the condition of
the soul under Consideration; all which will yield us a foun∣dation of the Observations that are to be drawn from them. The Words rendred strictly or word for word lye thus,I have earnestly expected Jehovah; my Soul hath expected, and in his Word have I tarryed, or waited. My Soul to the Lord, more then, (or before) the watchmen in the morning; the watchmen in the morning; or unto the morning. I have waited or expected;  from  to expect, to hope, to wait. Verbum hoc est, magno animi desiderio, in aliquem intentum esse, & respicere ad eum, ex eo pendere. The word denotes to be intent on any one with great desire; to behold or regard him, and to depend upon him; and it also expresseth the earnest inclination and intention of the Will and Mind. Paul seems to have expressed this word to the full, Rom. 8. 19. by ; an intent or earnest expectation, ex∣pressing it self by putting forth the head, and looking round about with earnestness and diligence. And this is also signified expresly by this word; Psal. 69. 20.  and I looked for some to take pitty; huc illuc anxie circumspexi, siqui fortè me commiseraturus esset. I looked round about this way and that way diligently and solicitously, to see if any would pitty me or la∣ment with me. Thus, I have waited, is as much, as I have diligently with in∣tention of soul, mind, will, and affections looked unto God, in ear∣nest expectation of that from him, that I stand in need of, and which must come forth from the forgiveness that is with him. 2. I have, saith he, waited for, or expected Jehovah; he uses the same Name of God in his Expectation, that he first fixed on in his Application to him. And it is not this or that means, not this or that Assistance, but it is Jehovah himself that he expects and waits for. It is Jehovah himself that must satisfie the Soul: his favour and loving kindness; and what flows from them; If he come not himself, if he gives not himself, nothing else will relieve. 3. My soul doth wait or expect; it is no outward duty that
I am at, no lip-labour, no bodily work, no formal cold careless performance of a duty; no, my soul doth wait: it is soul work, heart work I am at; I wait, I wait with my whole soul. 4. In his word do I hope: or wait. There is not anything of difficulty in these words; the word used  is from  sunt qui quod affiue sit verbo  velint anxietatem & nisum in∣cludere, ut significet anxie, seu enixe expectare, sustinere, & spe∣rare; It signifies to hope, expect, endure, and sustain, with care, solicitousness, and indeavours. Hence the 70 have ren∣dred the word by  and the Vul. Lat. Sustinui. I have sustained and waited with patience. And this on the Word; or he sustained his soul with the Word of promise that it should not utterly faint. Seeing he had made a discovery of Grace and forgiveness, though yet at a great distance; he had a sight of Land, though he was yet in a storm at Sea; and therefore incourageth himself, or his soul, that it do not despond. But yet all this that we have spoken reaches not the intens∣ness of the soul of the Psalmist in this his Expectation of Jeho∣vah. The earnest engagement of his soul in this duty riseth up above what he can express. Therefore he proceeds, ver. 6. My Soul, saith he, for the Lord, (that is, expects him, looks for him, waits for his coming to me in Love and with forgiveness) more than the watchers for the morning, the watch∣ers for the morning. These latter words are variously rendred, and variously ex∣pounded. The LXX. and vulgar Latin render them; from the Morning watch, untill night. Others, from those that keep the Morning watch unto those that keep the Evening watch. More than the watchers in the morning, more than the Watchers in the Morning. The Words also are variously expounded. Austin would have it to signifie, the placing of our hopes on the Morning of Christs Resurrection, and continuing in them untill the night of our own death. Hierome who renders the Words, from the morning watch to the morning watch, expounds them of continuing our hopes and expectations from the morning that we are called into the
Lords Vineyard, to the morning when we shall receive our reward; as much to the sense of the place as the former: and so Chry∣sostome interprets it of our whole life. It cannot be denyed but that they were lead into these mistakes by the Translation of the 70. and that of the Vulgar Latine, who both of them have divided these Words, quite contrary to their proper dependance; and read them thus, My soul expected the Lord. From the Morning watch to the Night watch, Let Israel trust in the Lord; so making the words to belong to the following Exhortation unto others, which are plainly a part of the expression of his own duty. The words then are a Comparison, and an Allusion unto Watchmen, and may be taken in one of these two senses. 1. In things Civil; As those who keep the Watch of the Night, do look, and long for, and expect the morning, when being dismissed from their Guard they may take that Sleep that they need and desire, which expresses a very earnest expecta∣tion, inquiry and desire, Or, 2. In things Sacred; With the Chaldee Paraphrast, which renders the words, more than they that look for the morning watch, which they carefully observe, that they may offer the Morn∣ing Sacrifice. In this sense, as faith he, the Warders and Watchers in the Temple, do look diligently after the Appear∣ance of the Morning that they may with Joy offer the Morning Sacrifice in the appointed season; So, and with more diligence doth my Soul wait for Jehovah. You see the reading of the words; and how far the sense of them opens it self unto us by that consideration. Let us then nextly see briefly the several parts of them, as they stand in Relation one to another. We have then, 1. The Expression of the Duty wherein he was exercised, and that is earnest waiting for Jehovah. 2. The bottome and foundation of that his waiting and ex∣pectation; that is the Word of God; the word of promise, he diligently boped in the Word. 3. The Frame of his Spirit in, and the manner of his per∣formance of this Duty; Expressed.
1. In the words themselves that he uses, according as we opened them before. 2. In the Emphatical reduplication, yea triplication of his expression of it; I wait for God, my soul waiteth for God, my soul for the Lord. 3. In the Comparison instituted between his discharge of his duty, and others performances of a corporal watch, with the greatest care and diligence; more than they that watch for the morning; So that we have, 1. The duty he performed; earnest Waiting and Expecta∣tion. 2. The Object of his waiting; Jehovah himself. 3. His Supportment in that duty, the Word of promise. 4. The Manner of his performance of it. 1. With Earnestness and diligence. 2. With Perseverance. Let us then now Consider the Words, as they contain the frame and working of a sin entangled soul. Having been raised out of his depths by the discovery of for∣giveness in God, as was before declared, yet not being immedi∣ately made partaker of that forgiveness, as to a comforting sense of it, he gathers up his soul from wandring from God, and supports it from sinking under his present condition. It is, saith he, Jehovah alone with whom is forgiveness that can relieve and do me good; his favour, his loving kindness, his com∣munication of mercy and Grace from thence, is that which I stand in need of; on him therefore do I with all heedfulness attend; on him do I wait, my soul is filled with expectation from him; surely he will come to me, he will come and refresh me; though he seem as yet to be afar of, and to leave me in these depths, yet I have his word of promise to support and stay my soul, on which I will lean untill I obtain the enjoyment of him, and his kindness which is better than life.
And this is the frame of a sin entangled Soul, who hath re∣ally by faith discovered forgiveness in God, but is not yet made partaker of a comforting refreshing sense of it. And we may represent it in the ensuing Observa∣tions. Obs. 1. The first proper fruit of faiths discovery of forgiveness in God unto a sin distressed soul, is waiting in patience and Ex∣pectation. Obs. 2. The proper Object of a sin distressed souls waiting and expecting, is God himself as reconciled in Christ; I have waited for Jehovah. Obs. 3. The Word of promise is the souls great supportment in waiting for God; in thy Word do I hope. Obs. 4. Sin distressed Souls wait for God with earnest inten∣tion of mind, diligence, and expectation; from the redoubling of the Expression. Obs. 5. Continuance in waiting untill God appears to the soul, is necessary and prevailing; Necessary as that without which we cannot attain assistance; and prevailing as that wherein we shall never fail. Obs. 6. Establishment in waiting where there is no present sense of forgiveness, yet gives the soul much secret Rest and Com∣fort; This Observation ariseth from the influence that these Verses have unto those that follow. The Psalmist having at∣tained thus far, can now look about him, and begin to deal with others, and exhort them to an Expectation of Grace and mercy. And thus though the soul be not absolutely in the haven of Consolation where it would be, yet it hath cast out an Anchor that gives it Establishment, and Security. Though it be yet tossed, yet it is secured from Shipwrack, and is rather sick than in danger: A waiting Condition is a condition of Safety. Hence it is that he now turns himself to others and upon the Experience of the discovery that he had made of forgive∣ness in God, and the Establishment and consolation he found in waiting on him, he calls upon, and incourageth others to the same duty, v. 7, 8. The Propositions laid down, I shall briefly pass through; still with respect unto the State and Condition of the Soul, re∣presented in the Psalm. Many things that might justly be in∣sisted on in the improvement of these Truths, have been anti∣cipated in our former General Rules. To them we must there∣fore sometimes have recourse; because they must not be again
repeated. On this account I say, we shall pass through them with all briefness possible; yet so as not wholly to omit any directions that are here tendred unto us, as to the guidance of the soul, whose condition and the working of whose faith is here de∣scribed. This therefore in the first place is proposed. The first proper fruit of faiths discovery of forgiveness in God unto a sin-distressed soul, is waiting in patience and expectation. Waiting the first fruit of Faith in a way of Duty.This the Psalmist openly and directly applies himself unto, and expresseth to have been as his duty, so his practice. And he doth it so emphatically, as was manifested in the opening of the words, that I know not that any duty is any where in the Scri∣pture so recommended and lively represented unto us. You must therefore for the right understanding of it, call to mind what hath been spoken concerning the state of the soul inquired into; its depths, intanglements, and sense of sin, with its Application unto God about those things; As also remem∣ber what hath been delivered about the nature of forgiveness, with the Revelation that is made of it unto the faith of Be∣lievers, And that this may be done, where the soul hath no refreshing sense of its own interest therein. It knows not that its own sins are forgiven, although it believes that there is for∣giveness with God. Now the principal duty that is incumbent on such a soul, is that laid down in the proposition, namely, patient waiting and expectation. Two things must be done in reference hereunto: First, The nature of the duty it self is to be declared: And secondly, The necessity and usefulness of its practice is to be evinced and de∣monstrated. For the Nature of it, something hath been intimated giving light into it, in the opening of the words here used by the Psalmist to express it by. But we may observe that these duties as required of us, do not consist in any particular acting of the soul, but in the whole spiritual frame and deportment of it in reference unto the End aimed at in and by them. And this waiting, as here and elsewhere commended unto us, and which is comprehensive of the especial duties of the soul in the case insisted on, and described, comprehends these three things.
(1.) Quietness, in Opposition to haste, and tumultuating of spirit. (2.) Diligence in Opposition to spiritual sloth, despondency and neglect of means. (3.) Expectation in Opposition to despair, distrust, and other proper immediate actings of unbelief. Waiting on God wherein it consists.1. Quietness. Hence this waiting it self is sometimes expres∣sed by silence. To wait, is to be silent, Lam. 3. 6. It is good both to hope,  and to be silent for the salvation of the Lord; that is, to wait quietly, as we have rendred the word. And the same word we render sometimes to rest. as Psal. 37. 7. Rest on the Lord,  be silent unto him; where it is joyned with hoping or waiting, as that which belongs unto the nature of it; and so in sundry other places. And this God in an especial manner calleth souls unto in straights and distresses. In quietness and confidence, saith he, shall be your strength, Isa. 30. 15. And the effect of the Righteousness of God by Christ, is said to be Quietness and Assurance for ever, Isa. 32. 17. First Quietness, and then Assurance. Now this silence and quietness which accompanieth waiting, yea which is an essential part of it, is opposed first to Haste; and Haste is the souls undue lifting up its self, proceeding from a weariness of its condition, to press after an end of its troubles, not according to the conduct of the Spirit of God. Thus when God calleth his people to waiting, he expresseth the contrary acting unto this duty, by the lifting up of the soul, Hab. 2. 3, 4. Though the vision tarry, wait for it; behold his soul which is lifted up is not upright in him, but the Just shall live by faith. God hath given unto the soul a vision of Peace, through the discovery of that forgiveness which is with him; but he will have us wait for an actual participa∣tion of it unto rest and comfort. He that will not do so, but lifts up his soul, that is, in making haste beyond the Rule and Me∣thod of the Spirit of God in this matter, his heart is not upright in him, nor will he know what it is to live by faith. This ruines and disappoints many a soul in its attempts for forgiveness. The Prophet speaking of this matter, tells us, that He that be∣lieveth shall not, nor will not make haste, Isa. 28. 16. Which words the Apostle twice making use of, Rom. 9. 33, chap. 10, 11. in both places renders them, Whosoever believeth on him shall not
be ashamed, or confounded. And that because this Haste turns men off from believing, and so disappoints their hopes, and leaves them unto shame and confusion. Men with a sense of the guilt of sin, having some discovery made to them of the Rest Ease and Peace which they may obtain to their souls by for∣giveness, are ready to catch greedily at it, and to make false, unsound, undue applications of it unto themselves. They cannot bear the yoak that the Lord hath put upon them, but grow impatient under it, and cry with Rachel, Give me chil∣dren or I dye. Any way they would obtain it. Now as the first duty of such a soul is to apply its self unto waiting; so the first entrance into waiting consists in this Silence and Quietness of heart and spirit. This is the souls endeavour to keep its self humble, satisfied with the soveraign pleasure of God in its con∣dition, and refusing all waies and means of Rest and Peace, but what it is guided and directed unto by the Word and Spirit. 2. As it is opposed unto Haste, so it is unto tumultuating thoughts, and vexatious disquietments; the soul is silent, Psal. 39. 9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou didst it. He redoubles the expression, whereby he sets out his endeavour to quiet and still his soul in the Will of God. In the condition discoursed of, the soul is apt to have many tumultuating thoughts, or a multitude of perplexing thoughts of no use or advantage unto it. How they are to be watched against and rejected, was before declared in our General Rules. This Quietness in waiting will prevent them. And this is the first thing in the duty pre∣scribed. Secondly, Diligence, in Opposition unto spiritual sloth, is in∣cluded in it also. Diligence is the activity of the mind in the regular use of means, for the pursuit of any end proposed. The End aimed at by the soul, is a comforting refreshing interest in that forgiveness that is with God. For the attaining hereof, there are sundry means instituted and blessed of God. A neg∣lect of them through regardlesness or sloth, will certainly dis∣appoint the soul from attaining that end. It is confessedly so in things natural. He that soweth not, must not think to reap; he that cloatheth not himself will not be warm; nor he enjoy health, who neglects the means of it. Men understand this as
to their outward concerns. And although they have a due re∣spect unto the blessing of God, yet they expect not to be rich without industry in their waies. It is so also in things spiritual. God hath appointed one thing to be the means of obtaining another; in the use of them doth he bless us, and from the use of them doth his Glory arise, because they are his own ap∣pointments. And this diligence wholly respecteth practice, or the regular use of means. A man is said to be diligent in business, to have a diligent hand; though it be an Affection of the mind, yet it simply respects Practice and Operation. This diligence in his waiting David expresseth, Psal. 40. 1. . We render it, I have waited patiently, that is, waiting I have waited, that is diligently, earnestly in the use of means. So he describes this duty by an elegant similitude, Psal. 123. 2. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their Masters; and as the eyes of a Maiden to the hand of her Mistress; so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until he have mercy on us. Servants that wait on their Masters, and look to their hands, it is to expect an inti∣mation of their minds, as to what they would have them do, that they may address themselves unto it. So, saith he, do we wait for mercy; not in a slothfull neglect of duties, but in a con∣stant readiness to observe the Will of God in all his commands. An instance hereof we have in the Spouse, when she was in the condition here described, Cant. 3. 1, 2. She wanted the pre∣sence of her Beloved, which amounts to the same state which we have under consideration. For where the presence of Christ is not, there can be no sense of forgiveness. At first she seeks him upon her bed; by night upon my bed, I sought him whom my soul loveth, I sought him, but I found him not. She seems herein to have gone no further than desires; for she was in her bed, where she could do no more; and the issue is, she found him not; but doth she so satisfie her self, and lye still, waiting until he should come there unto her? no, she sayes, she will rise now and go about the City, in the streets, and in the broad waies, I will seek him whom my soul loveth. She resolves to put her self into the use of all means, whereby one may be sought that is wanting. In the City, Streets, and Fields, she would enquire after him. And the blessed success she had herein is reported,
vers. 4. She found him, she held him, she would not let him go. This then belongs unto the waiting of the soul. Diligence in the use of means, whereby God is pleased ordinarily to com∣municate a sense of pardon and forgiveness is a principal part of it. What these means are, is known. Prayer, Meditation, Reading, Hearing of the Word, Dispensation of the Sacraments, they are all appointed to this purpose; they are all means of communicating Love and Grace to the soul. Be not then heartless or slothfull; up and be doing; attend with diligence to the Word of Grace; be fervent in prayer, assiduous in the use of all Ordinances of the Church, in one or other of thern, at one time or other thou wilt meet with him whom thy soul loveth; and God through him will speak peace unto thee. Thirdly, There is Expectation in it, which lyes in a direct opposition to all the actings of unbelief in this matter, and is the very life and soul of the duty under consideration. So the Psal∣mist declares it, Psal. 62. 5. My soul, wait thou only upon God; for my expectation is only from him. The soul will not, cannot in a due manner wait on God, unless it hath Expectations from him; unless, as James speaks, he looks to receive somewhat from him, chap. 1. 7. The soul in this condition regards forgiveness, not only as by its self it is desired, but principally as it is by God promised. Thence they expect it. This is expressed in the fourth Proposition before laid down, namely, that sin-distressed souls wait for God with earnestness, intention of mind, and expecta∣tion. As this ariseth from the redoubling of the Expression; so principally from the nature of the Comparison that he makes of himself in his waiting with them that watch for the morning. Those that watch for the morning do not only desire it, and prepare for it, but they expect it, and know assuredly that it will come. Though darkness may for a time be troublesome, and continue longer than they would desire, yet they know that the morning hath its appointed time of return, beyond which it will not tarry; and therefore they look out for its Appearance on all occasions: so it is with the soul in this mat∣ter. So, sayes David, Psal. 5. 3. I will direct my prayer unto thee  and look up. So we; the words before are defective  in the morning, or rather every morning, I
will order unto thee. We restrain this unto prayer. I will di∣rect my peayer unto thee. But this was expressed directly in the words foregoing; In the morning thou shalt hear my voice, that is, the voice of my prayer and supplications, as it is often sup∣plied. And although the Psalmist doth sometime repeat the same thing in different Expressions, yet here he seemeth not so to do, but rather proceeds to declare the general frame of his spirit in walking with God. I will, saith he, order all things towards God, so as that I may wait upon him in the waies of his appoinment;  and will look up. It seems in our Translation to express his posture in his prayer. But the Word is of another importance. It is diligently to look out after that which is coming towards us, a looking out after the Ac∣complishment of our Expectation. This is a part of our waiting for God; yea, as was said, the life of it, that which is principally intended in it. The Prophet calls it his standing upon his watch tower, and watching to see what God would speak unto him, Hab. 2. 3. namely, in answer unto that prayer which he put up in his trouble. He is now waiting in Ex∣pectation of an answer from God. And this is that which poor, weak, trembling sinners are so encouraged unto, Isa. 53. 3, 4. Strengthen the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees; say unto them that are of a fearfull heart, be strong, fear not, behold your God will come. Weakness and discouragements are the effects of Unbelief. These he would have removed with an Expectation of the coming of God unto the soul according to the Promise. And this I say belongs unto the waiting of the soul in the condition described. Such a one doth expect and hope that God will in his season manifest himself and his Love unto him, and give him an experimental sense of a blessed interest in forgiveness. And the accomplishment of this purpose and pro∣mise of God, it looks out after continually. It will not despond and be heartless, but stir up and strengthen it self unto a full ex∣pectation to have the desires of his soul satisfied in due time: as we find David doing in places almost innumerable. This is the duty that in the first place is recommended unto the soul, who is perswaded that there is forgiveness with God, but sees not its own interest therein. Wait on, or for the Lord.
And it hath two properties when it is performed in a due man∣ner; namely, patience and perseverance. By the one men are kept to the length of Gods time; by the other they are pre∣served in a due length of their own duty. And this is that which was laid down in the first Proposition drawn from the words; namely, that continuance in watch∣ing, until God appears unto the soul is necessary, as that with∣out which we cannot attain what we look after, and prevailing, as that wherein we shall never fail. God is not to be limited, nor his times prescribed unto him. We know our way, and the end of our Journey; but our sta∣tions of especial rest, we must wait for at his mouth, as the people did in the wilderness. When David comes to deal with God in his great distress, he sayes unto him, O Lord, thou art my God, my times are in thine hand, Psal. 31. 14, 15. His times of trouble, and of peace, of darkness and of light, he acknow∣ledged to be in the hand, and at the disposal of God; so that it was his duty to wait his time and season for his share and portion in them. During this state the soul meets with many Oppositions, difficulties and perplexities, especially if its darkness be of long continuance, as with some it abides many years, with some all the daies of their lives. Their hope being hereby deferred, makes their hearts sick, and their spirit oftentimes to faint; and this fainting is a defect in waiting, for want of perseverance and continuance which frustrates the End of it. So David, Psal. 27. 13. I had fainted unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord. Had I not received supportment by faith, I had fainted. And wherein doth that consist? what was the faint∣ing which he had been overtaken withall without the support∣ment mentioned? it was a relinquishment of waiting on God, as he manifests by the Exhortation which he gives to himself and others, v. 14. Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thy heart; wait I say on the Lord. Wait with courage and resolution that thou faint not. And the Apostle puts the blessed Event of Faith and Obedience upon the avoid∣ance of this evil, Gal. 6. 9. We shall reap if we faint not. Hence we have both encouragements given against it, and promises
that in the way of God we shall not be overtaken with it. Consider the Lord Christ, saith the Apostle, the Captain of your salvation, lest you be wearied and faint in your minds, Heb. 12. 3. Nothing else can cause you to come short of the mark aimed at. And they, saith the Prophet, who wait on the Lord, that is in the use of the means by him appointed, shall not faint, Isa. 40. 11. This continuance then in waiting is to accompany this duty upon the account of both the things mentioned in the Propo∣sition; that it is indispensibly necessary on our own account, and it is assuredly prevailing in the end; it will not fail. 1. It is necessary. They that watch for the morning, to whose frame and actings, the waiting of the soul for God is compared, give not over until the Light doth appear, or if they do, if they are wearied and faint, and so cease watching, all their former pains will be lost, and they will lye down in disappoint∣ments. So will it be with the soul that deserts its watch, and faints in its waiting. If upon the eruption of new lusts or cor∣ruptions; if upon the return of old temptations, or the Assaults of new ones; if upon a revived perplexing sense of guilt, or on the tediousness of working and labouring so much and so long in the dark, the soul begins to say in it self, I have looked for light, and behold darkness; for peace, and yet trouble com∣eth; the Summer is past, the Harvest is ended, and I am not relieved; such and such blessed means have been enjoyed, and yet I have not attained rest, and so gives over its waiting in the way and course before prescribed, it will at length utterly fail and come short of the Grace aimed at. Thou hast laboured, and hast not fainted, brings in the reward, Rev. 2. 3. 2. Perseverance in waiting is assuredly prevalent; and this renders it a necessary part of the duty it self. If we continue to wait for the vision of peace, it will come, it will not tarry but answer our expectation of it. Never soul miscarried that abode in this duty unto the end. The Joyes of Heaven may sometimes prevent consolations in this life; God sometimes gives in the full Harvest without sending of the first fruits afore∣hand; But Spiritual or Eternal peace and Rest is the infallible End of permanent waiting for God.
This is the Duty that the Psalmist declares himself to be in∣gaged in, upon the incouraging discovery which was made un∣to him of forgiveness in God. There is forgiveness with thee that thou maist be feared, I wait for the Lord, my soul doth wait, and in his word do I hope: And this is that which in the like condi∣tion is required of us. This is the great direction which was given us in the Example and practice of the Psalmist, as to our Duty and deportment in the condition described. This was the Way whereby he rose out of his depths and escaped out of his entanglements? Is this then the state of any of us; let such take directions from hence. 1. Encourage your souls unto waiting on God. Do new fears arise, do old disconsolations continue, say unto your souls, yet wait on God; why are you cast down O our souls, and why are you disquieted within us, hope in God; for we shall yet praise him, who is the health of our countenance, and our God, as the Psalmist doth in the like case, Psal. 43. 5. so he speaks else∣where, wait on God; and be of good courage, shake of sloth, rouse up your selves from under despondencies, let not fears prevail. This is the only way for success, and it will assuredly be prevalent; Oppose this Resolution to every discouragement, and it will give new life to faith and hope; say, my flesh fail∣eth, and my heart faileth, but God is the rock of my heart, and my portion for ever, as Psal. 73. 26. Though thy perplexed thoughts have even wearied and worn out the outward man, as in many they do, so that flesh faileth; and though thou hast no refreshing evidence from within, from thy self, or thy own Experience, so that thy heart faileth; yet resolve to look unto God; there is strength in him, and satisfaction in him, for the whole man; he is a Rock, and a portion; this will strengthen things which otherwise will be ready to dye. This will keep life in thy course, and stir thee up to plead it with God in an acceptable season when he will be found. Job carryed up his con∣dition unto a supposition that God might slay him; that is add one stroke, one rebuke unto another untill he was consumed; and so take him out of the world in darkness and in sorrow. Yet he resolved to trust, to hope, to wait on him, as knowing that he should not utterly miscarry so doing; this frame the
Church expresseth so admirably that nothing can be added thereunto, Lament. 3. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. Thou hast removed my soul far off from peace, I forgat prosperity, and my hope is perished from the Lord; remembring mine Af∣fliction and my misery; my Wormwood and my Gall; My soul hath them still in remembrance, and is humbled in me. This I recall to my mind therefore have I hope. It is of the Lords mercy that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not. They are new every Morning, great is thy faithfulness. The Lord is my portion, saith my soul, therefore will I hope in him. The Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to the soul that seeketh him. It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of God. We have here both the Condition, and the Duty insisted on, with the method of the souls actings in re∣ference unto the one and the other fully expressed. The Con∣dition is sad and bitter, the soul is in depths far from peace and rest, v. 14. in this state it is ready utterly to faint and to give all for lost and gone, both strength for the present, and hopes for the future, v. 18. This makes its condition full of sorrow and bitterness, and its own thoughts become unto it like Wormwood and Gall, v. 19, 20. But doth he lye down under the burden of all this trouble? doth he despond, and give over? no saith he, I call to mind, that there is forgiveness with God; Grace, Mercy, Goodness, for the relief of distressed souls; such as are in my condition, v. 21, 22, 23. Thence the conclu∣sion is, that as all help is to be looked for, all relief expected from him alone; so it is good that a man should quietly wait, and hope for the salvation of God. This he stirs up himself unto, as the best, as the most blessed course for his deliverance. 2. Remember, that diligent use of the means for the end aimed at, is a necessary concomitant of, and ingredient unto waiting on God. Take in the consideration of this direction also. Do not think to be freed from your entanglements, by restless, heart∣less desiring that it were otherwise with you: Means are to be used that relief may be obtained. What those means are, is known unto all. Mortification of sin, prayer, meditation, due attendance upon all Gospel Ordinances; conferring in General about spiritual things, advising in particular about our
own state and condition, with such who having received the tongue of the learned are able to speak a word in season, to them that are weary, are required to this purpose. And in all these are diligence and perseverance to be exercised; or in vain shall men desire a delivery from their entanglements. God the proper Object of the souls waiting in its distresses and depths. God him∣self the Object of our Wait∣ing.We have seen what the duty is intended in the propo∣sition; we are nextly to consider the Reason also of it, why this is the great, first, and principal duty of souls; who in their depths have it discovered unto them that there is forgiveness with God; And the reason hereof is; that which is expres∣sed in our second Observation before mentioned, namely. That the proper object of a sin distressed souls waiting and ex∣pectation, is God himself as revealed in Christ. I have saith the Psalmist waited for Jehovah; It is not this or that mercy, or Grace, this or that help or relief; but it is Jehovah himself that I wait for. Here then we must do two things, first, shew in what sense, God himself is the object of the waiting of the soul. (2.) How it appears from hence that waiting is so necessary a Duty. 1. It is the Lord himself, Jehovah himself, that the soul waiteth for. It is not Grace, mercy, or relief absolutely con∣sidered, but the God of all Grace and help, that is the full adaequate object of the souls waiting and Expectation; only herein he is not considered absolutely in his own Nature; but as there is forgiveness with him, What is required hereunto, hath been at large before declared. It is as he is revealed in and by Je∣sus Christ; as in him he hath found a Ransome, and accepted the Attonement for sinners in his blood; as he is a God in Cove∣nant; so he is himself the Object of our waiting. And that, First, Because all troubles, depths, entanglements, arise from, (1.) The Absence of God from the soul; and (2.) From his displeasure. The Absence of God from the soul, by his departure, with∣drawing, or hiding himself from it, is that which principally
casts the soul into its depths. Woe unto them, saith the Lord, when I depart from them, Hos. 9. 12. And this woe, this sorrow doth not attend only an universal, a total departure of God from any; but that also which is gradual, or partial, in some things, in some seasons. When God withdraws his enlight∣ning, his refreshing, his comforting presence, as to any wayes or means whereby he hath formerly communicated himself unto the souls of any; then woe unto them, sorrows will befall them, and they will fall into depths and entanglements. Now this condition calls for waiting. If God be withdrawn, if he hides himself, what hath the soul to do but to wait for his return. So saith the Prophet, Isa. 8. 17. I will wait upon the Lord that hideth his face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him. If God hide himself, this is the natural and proper duty of the soul to wait and to look for him. Other course of relief it cannot apply it self unto. What that waiting is, and where∣in it doth consist hath been declared. Patient seeking of God in the wayes of his Appointment is comprized in it; this the Prophet expresseth in that word, I will look for him; indeed the same in the Original with that in the Psalm, ; and I will earnestly look out after him with expectation of his re∣turn unto me. Secondly, A sense of Gods displeasure is another cause of these depths and troubles, and of the continuance of the soul in them, notwithstanding it hath made a blessed discovery by faith that there is with him forgiveness; this hath been so fully manifested through the whole preceding discourse, that it need not again be insisted on. All hath respect unto sin, and the reason of the trouble that ariseth from sin, is because of the displeasure of God against it. What then is the natural posture and frame of the soul towards God as displeased? shall he contend with him? shall he harden himself against him? shall he despise his wrath and anger, and contemn his threatnings? or shall he hide himself from him, and so avoid the effects of his wrath? who knows not how ruinous and pernitious to the soul such courses would be? and how many are ruined by them every day? patient waiting is the souls only reserve on this account also. And
Waiting on God whence so necessary.Secondly, This duty in the occasion mentioned is necessary upon the account of the Greatness and soveraignty of him with whom we have to do. My soul waiteth for Jehovah. Indeed waiting is a duty that depends on the distance that is between the persons concerned in it, namely, he that waiteth, and he that is waited on; so the Psalmist informs us, Psal. 123. 2. It is an action like that of Servants and Handmaids towards their Masters or Rulers. And the greater this distance is, the more cogent are the reasons of this duty on all occasions. And be∣cause we are practically averse from the due performance of this duty, or at least quickly grow weary of it, notwithstanding our full conviction of its necessity, I shall a little insist on some such considerations of God and our selves, as may not only evince the necessity of this duty, but also satisfie us of its reasonable∣ness; that by the first we may be engaged into it, and by the latter preserved in it. Two things we may to this purpose consider in God, in Je∣hovah whom we are to wait for. First, His Being, and the absolute and essential properties of his nature. Secondly, Those Attributes of his nature which respect his dealing with us; both which are suited to beget in us affections, and a frame of spirit compliant with the duty proposed. Considerations of God rendring our Waiting on him Reasonable and Necessary. His glorious Being. Considera∣tions of Gods Be∣ing and At∣tributes rendring Waiting necessary.1. Let us consider the infinite glorious Being of Jehovah, with his absolute incommunicable essential Excellencies; and then try whether it doth not become us in every condition to wait for him, and especially in that under consideration. This course God himself took with Job to recover him from his discontents and complaints, to reduce him to quietness and waiting, He sets before him his own Glorious Greatness, as manifested in the works of his power, that thereby being convinced of his own ignorance, weakness and infinite distance in all things from him, he might humble his soul into the most submissive dependance on him, and waiting for him. And this he doth accordingly,
chap. 42. 6. I abhor, saith he, my self, and repent in dust and ashes. His soul now comes to be willing to be at Gods disposal, and therein he found present rest, and a speedy healing of his con∣dition. It is the high and losty one that inhabiteth Eternity, whose name is holy, Isa. 57. 15. with whom we have now to do: He that sitteth upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabi∣tants of it are as Grashoppers before him; yea, the Nations are as the drop of the bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the bal∣lance; he takes up the Isles as a very little thing; all Nations be∣fore him are as nothing, they are counted unto him less than no∣thing and vanity, Isa. 40. 15, 17, 22. To what end doth the Lord set forth and declare his glorious Greatness and Power? It is that all might be brought to trust in him, and to wait for him, as at large is declared in the close of the chapter. For shall Grashoppers, a drop of the bucket, dust of the ballance, things less than nothing, repine against, or wax weary of the Will of the immense, glorious and lofty One? He that taketh up all Isles as a very little thing, may surely, if he please, destroy, cast and forsake one Isle, one City in an Isle, one Person in a City; and we are before him but single persons. Serious thoughts of this Infinite All-Glorious Being, will either quiet our souls, or overwhelm them. All our weariness of his dispensations to∣wards us, arises from secret imaginations, that he is such a one as our selves; one that is to do nothing but what seems good in our eyes. But if we cannot comprehend his Being, we cannot make Rules to judge of his waies and proceedings. And how small a portion is it that we know of God? The nearest approaches of our reasons and imaginations, leave us still at an infinite di∣stance from him. And indeed what we speak of his Greatness, we know not well what it signifies, we only declare our respect unto that which we believe, admire and adore, but are not able to comprehend. All our thoughts come as short of his Ex∣cellent Greatness, as our natures do of his; that is infinitely. Behold the Universe, the glorious Fabrick of Heaven and Earth; how little is it that we know of its beauty, order and disposal; yet was it all the product of the Word of his mouth; and with the same facility can he when he pleaseth reduce it to its primi∣tive nothing. And what are we poor worms of the Earth, an
inconsiderable unknown part of the lower series and order of the works of his hands; few in number, fading in condition, unregarded unto the residue of our fellow-creatures, that we should subduct our selves from under any kind of his dealings with us, or be weary of waiting for his pleasure. This he pres∣seth on us, Psal. 46. 10. Be still and know that I am God. Let there be no more repinings, no more disputings, continue waiting in silence and patience; consider who I am; Be still, and know that I am God. Further, to help us in this Consideration, let us a little also fix our minds towards some of the Glorious, Essential, Incommu∣nicable properties of his Nature, distinctly; As, 1. His Eternity. This Moses proposeth to bring the souls of Believers to submission, trust and waiting, Psal. 90. 1. From Everlasting to Everlasting thou art God. One that hath his Being and subsistence not in a duration of time, but in Eternity it self: So doth Habakkuk also, chap. 1. 12. My Lord, my God, my Holy One, art thou not from Everlasting: And hence he draws his conclusion against making hast in any condition, and for tarrying and waiting for God. The like Consideration is managed by David also, Psal. 102. 27. How unconceivable is this glorious divine Property unto the thoughts and minds of men? How weak are the waies and terms whereby they go about to express it? One sayes it is a nunc stans; another that it is a perpetual Duration. He that sayes most, only signifies what he knows of what it is not. We are of Yesterday, change every moment, and are leaving our station to morrow. God is still the same, was so before the world was, from Eternity. And now I cannot think what I have said, but only have inti∣mated what I adore. The whole Duration of the world from the beginning unto the end, takes up no space in this Eterni∣ty of God. Fow how long soever it hath continued, or may yet continue, it will all amount but to so many thousand years, so long a time; and time hath no place in Eternity. And for us who have in this matter to do with God, what is our con∣tinuance unto that of the world? a moment as it were in com∣parison of the whole. When mens lives were of old prolonged beyond the date & continuance of Empires or Kingdoms now, yet
this was the winding up of all; such a one lived so many years, and then he dyed, Gen. 5. And what are we poor worms, whose lives are measured by inches in comparison of their span? what are we before the Eternal God? God alwaies immutably subsist∣ing in his own Infinite Being? A real Consideration hereof will subdue the soul into a condition of dependence on him, and of waiting for him. 2. The Immensity of his Essence, and his Omnipresence is of the same consideration. Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, saith the Lord, Jer. 23. 24. The Heavens, even the Heavens of Heavens, the supreme and most comprehensive created Being cannot con∣tain him, saith Solomon. In his infinitely Glorious Being he is present with, and indistant from all places, things, times, all the works of his hands, and is no less gloriously subsisting where they are not. God is where Heaven and Earth are not, no less than where they are; and where they are not is him∣self; where there is no place, no space, real or imaginary, God is; for place and imagination have nothing to do with Immen∣sity; and he is present every where in the Creation, where I am writing, where you are reading; he is present with you, in∣distant from you. The thoughts of mens hearts for the most part are, that God as to his Essence is in Heaven only; and it is well if some think he is there, seeing they live and act as if there were neither God nor Devil but themselves. But on these apprehensions such thoughts are ready secretly to arise, and effectually to prevail, as are expressed, Joh 22. 13, 14. How doth God know? Can he judge through the dark; thick clouds are as a covering unto him that he seeth not; and he walketh in the circuit of the Heavens. Apprehensions of Gods distance from men, harden them in their waies. But it is utterly other∣wise; God is every where, and a man may on all occasions say with Jacob, God is in this place, and I knew it not. Let the soul then who is thus called to wait on God, exercise it self with thoughts about this Immensity of his Nature and Being. Com∣prehend it, fully understand it, we can never: But the con∣sideration of it will give that awe of his Greatness upon our hearts, as that we shall learn to tremble before him, and to be willing to wait for him in all things.
3. Thoughts of the Holiness of God, or infinite self-purity of this Eternal Immense Being, are singularly usefull to the same purpose. This is that which Eliphaz affirms that he received by vision, to reply to the complaint and impatience of Job, chap. 14. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 17, 18, 19. After he hath declared his vision, with the manner of it, this he affirms to be the Reve∣lation that by voice was made unto him: Shall mortal man be more just than God? shall a man be more pure than his Maker? Behold be puts no trust in his Servants, and his Angels he chargeth with folly. How much less on them that dwell in houses of Clay; whose foundation is in the dust, who are crushed before the moth? If the Saints and Angels in Heaven do not answer this infinite Holiness of God in their most perfect condition, is it meet for Worms of the Earth to suppose that any thing which proceeds from him is not absolutely Holy and perfect, and so best for them? This is the fiery property of the nature of God, whence he is called a Consuming fire, and Everlasting burnings: And the Law whereon he had impressed some representation of it, is called a fiery Law, as that which will consume and burn up whatever is perverse and evil. Hence the Prophet who had a representation of the Glory of God in a vision, and heard the Se∣raphims proclaiming his Holiness, cryed out, Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips, Isa. 6. 5. He thought it impossible that he should bear that near approach of the Holi∣ness of God. And with the remembrance hereof doth Joshuah still the people with the terrour of the Lord, chap. 14. 19. Let such souls then as are under troubles and perplexities on any account, endeavour to exercise their thoughts about this infi∣nite Purity and fiery Holiness of God. They will quickly find it their wisdom to become as weaned children before him, and content themselves with what he shall guide unto them, which is to wait for him. This fiery Holiness streams from his Throne, Dan. 7. 10. and would quickly consume the whole Creation, as now under the curse, and sin, were it not for the interposing of Jesus Christ. 4. His Glorious Majesty as the Ruler of all the world. Majesty relates unto Government, and it calls us to such an awe of him as doth render our waiting for him comely and necessary.
Gods Throne is said to be in Heaven, and there principally do the glorious beams of his terrible Majesty shine forth. But he hath also made some Representation of it on the Earth, that we might learn to fear before him. Such was the appearance that he gave of his glory in the giving of the Law, whereby he will judge the world, and condemn the transgressors of it, who ob∣tain not an acquitment in the blood of Jesus Christ. See the de∣scription of it in Exod. 19. 16, 18. So terrible was the sight here∣of, that Moses himself said, I exceedingly fear and quake, Heb. 12. 21. And what effect it had upon all the people is declared, Exod. 20. 18, 19. They were not able to bear it, although they had good assurance that it was for their benefit and advantage, that he so drew nigh and manifested his Glory unto them. Are we not satisfied with our condition? cannot we wait under his present dispensations? let us think how we may approach un∣to his presence, or stand before his Glorious Majesty. Will not the dread of his Excellency fall upon us? will not his terrour make us afraid? shall we not think his way best, and his time best, and that our duty is to be silent before him? And the like manifestation hath he made of his Glory, as the great Judge of all upon the Throne unto sundry of the Prophets, as unto Isaiah, chap. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4. to Ezekiel. chap. 1. to Daniel, chap. 7. 9, 10. to John, Rev. 1. Read the places attentively, and learn to tremble before him. These are not things that are forraign unto us. This God is our God. The same Throne of his Great∣ness and Majesty is still established in the Heaven. Let us then in all our Hastes and heats that our spirits in any condition are prone unto, present our selves before this Throne of God, and then consider what will be best for us to say or do; what frame of heart and spirit will become us, and he safest for us. All this Glory doth encompass us every moment, although we perceive it not. And it will be but a few daies before all the vails and shades that are about us, shall be taken away and depart. And then shall all this glory appear unto us, unto endless bliss, or everlasting woe. Let us therefore know that nothing in our dealings with him doth better become us than silently for to wait for him, and what he will speak unto us in our depths and streights.
5. It is good to consider the instances that God hath given of this his Infinite Greatness, Power, Majesty and Glory. Such was his mighty work of creating all things out of nothing. We dwell on little Mole-hills in the Earth, and yet we know the least part of the excellency of that spot of ground which is given us for our habitation here below. But what is it unto the whole habitable world, and the ful∣ness thereof? And what an amazing thing is its Greatness, with the wide and large Sea, with all sorts of creatures therein. The least of these hath a beauty, a glory, an ex∣cellency, that the utmost of our enquiries end in admiration of. And all this is but the Earth, the lower depressed part of the world. What shall we say concerning the Heavens over us, and all these creatures of Light that have their habitations in them? who can conceive the beauty, order, use and course of them? The consideration hereof caused the Psalmist to cry out, Lord our Lord, how excellent and glorious art thou! Psal. 8. 1. And what is the rise, spring, and cause of these things? Are they not all the effect of the Word of the Power of this glorious God? And doth he not in them, and by them speak us into a Reverence of his Greatness? the like also may be said concerning his mighty and strange works of Providence in the Rule of the World. Is not this he who brought the Flood of old upon the world of ungodly men? Is it not he who consumed Sodom and Gomorrah with fire from Heaven, setting them forth as Examples unto them that should afterwards live ungodly, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire? Is it not he who destroyed Aegypt with his Plagues, and drowned Pharaoh with his Host in the red Sea? Is it not he, one of whose servants flew an hundred and four∣score and five thousand in Senacheribs Army in one night? that opened the Earth to swallow up Dathan and Abiram? and sent out fire from the Altar to devour Nadab and Abibu? and have not all ages been filled with such instances of his Greatness and Power? The end why I have insisted on these things, is to shew the Reasonableness of the Duty which we are pressing unto; namely to wait on God quietly and patiently in every condition of
distress. For what else becomes us when we have to do with this great, and Holy one? And a due consideration of these things will exceedingly influence our minds thereunto. Secondly, This waiting for God respecteth the whole of the Condition expressed in the Psalm, and this containeth not only spiritual depths about sin, which we have at large insisted on, but also providential depths, depths of trouble or affliction; that we may be exercised withall in the holy wise providence of God. In reference also unto these, Waiting in patience and silence is our duty. And there are two considerations that will assist us in this duty with respect unto such depths, that is of Trouble or Affliction. And the first of these is the consi∣deration of those properties of God, which he exerciseth in an especial manner in all his dealings with us, and which in all our troubles we are principally to regard. The second is the Consideration of our selves, what we are, and what we have deserved. Let us begin with the former; and there are four things in Gods dispensations towards us, and dealing with us, that in this matter we should consider, all suited to work in us the end aimed at. The first is his Soveraignty: this he declares, this we are to acknowledge, and submit unto, in all the great and dreadful dispensations of his Providence in all his dealings with our souls. May he not do what he will with his own? who shall say unto him, what dost thou? or if they do so, what shall give them countenance, in their so doing? He made all this world of nothing, and could have made another, more, or all things quite otherwise than they are, It would not subsist one moment without his Omnipotent supportment. Nothing would be continued in its place, course, use, without his effe∣ctual influence and countenance. If any thing can be, live, or act a moment without him, we may take free leave, to dispute its disposal with him, and to haste unto the accomplishment of our desires? but from the Angels in Heaven, to the worms of the earth, and the grass of the field, all depend on him and his power continually. Why was this part of the Creation, an Angel, that a Worm, this a Man, that a Brute Beast; is it from their own Choice, designing or contrivance, or brought about by
their own wisdom; or is it meerly from the Soveraign plea∣sure and will of God? And what a madness is it, to repine against what he doth, seeing all things are, as he makes them, and disposeth them; nor can be otherwise; Even the repiner himself hath his Being and subsistence upon his meer pleasure. This Soveraignty of God, Elibu pleads in his dealings with Job, Chap. 33. 8, 9, 10, 11. He ap∣prehended that Job had reasoned against Gods sev re dispensa∣tions towards him, and that he did not humble himself under his mighty hand wherewith he was exercised, nor wait for him in a due manner; and therefore what doth he propose unto him to bring him unto this duty; what doth he reply unto his reasonings and Complaints; behold saith he v. 12. in this thou art not Just, I will answer thee, God is greater than man, v. 13. why dost thou strive against him, for he giveth not account of any of his matters. Be it that in other things thou art Just and Innocent, that thou art free from the things wherewith thy friends have charged thee; yet in this matter thou art not Just; it is neither just nor equal, that any man should complain of, or repine against any of Gods dispensations; yea, but I suppose that these dealings of God are very griev us, very dreadful, such as he hath, it may be, scarce exercised towards any from the foundation of the world; to be utterly destroyed and consumed in a day, in all Relations, and Enjoyments, and that at a time and season, when no such thing was looked for, or provided against; to have a sense of sin revived on the Conscience after pardon obtained, as it is with me; all is one, saith he, if thou complainest, thou art not Just; And what reason doth he give thereof? why God is greater than man; in∣finitely so, in power, and Soveraign glory; he is so absolutely therein, that he giveth no account of any of his matters; and what folly; what injustice is it to complain of his proceedings. Consider his absolute dominion over the works of his hands, over thy self, and all that thou hast; his infinite distance, from thee, and Greatness above thee, and then see whether it be just or no to repine against what he doth. And he pursues the same Consideration Chap. 34. 18, 19. If when Kings and Princes rule in Righteousness it is a contempt of their Authority to
say unto them they are wicked and ungodly, then wilt thou speak against him, contend with him, that accepteth not the persons of Princes, nor regardeth the rich more than the poor; for they are all the works of his hands; and v. 29. when he giv∣eth quietness who can make trouble, and when he hideth his face; who can behold him? whether it be done against a Nation, or against a man only. All is one, what ever God doth, and to∣wards whomsoever, be they many or few, an whole Nation or City, or one single person, be they high or low, rich or poor, good or bad, all are the works of his hands, and he may deal with them, as seems Good unto him. And this man alone, as God afterwards declares, made use of the right and proper mediums to take of Job from Complaining, and to compose his spirit to rest and peace, and to bring him to wait patiently for God. For whereas his other friends injuriously charged him with Hypocrisie, and that he had in an especial manner above other men deserved those Judgements of God which he was exercised withall; he who was conscious unto his own Inte∣grity, was only provoked and exasperated by their arguings, and stirred up to plead his own Innocency and uprightness. But this man allowing him the plea of his Integrity, calls him to the consideration of the Greatness and Soveraignty of God against which there is no rising up. And this God himself af∣terwards calls him unto. Deep and serious thoughts of Gods Soveraignty, and ab∣solute Dominion or Authority over all the works of his hands, are an effectual means to work the soul unto this duty. Yea, this is that which we are to bring our souls to. Let us consi∣der with whom we have to do; are not we and all our con∣cernments in his hands, as the Clay in the hand of the Potter? and may he not do what he will with his own? Shall we call him unto an account? Is not what he doth, good and holy be∣cause he doth it? do any repining thoughts against the works of God arise in our hearts? are any Complaints ready to break out of our mouths? let us lay our hands on our hearts, and our mouths in the dust, with thoughts of his Greatness and absolute Soveraignty and it will work our whole souls into a better frame.
And this extends it self unto the manners, Times, and sea∣sons of all things whatever. As in earthly things; If God will bring a dreadful Judgement of fire upon a people, a Na∣tion; ah, why must it be London; If on London, why so terri∣ble, raging, and unconquerable? Why the City, not the Suburbs? Why my house, not my neighbours? Why had such one help and I none? all these things are wholly to be referred to Gods Soveraign pleasure. There alone can the soul of Man find rest and peace. It is so in spiritual dispensa∣tions also. Thus Aaron upon the suddain death of his two eldest Sons, being minded by Moses of Gods Soverainty and Holiness, im∣mediatly held his peace, or quietly humbled himself under his mighty hand, Levit. 10. 3, 4. And David when things were brought into extream confusion by the Rebellion of Absolom fol∣lowed by the Ungodly multitude of the whole Nation, relin∣quisheth all other Arguments and Pleas, and lets goe com∣plaints in a resignation of himself and all his Concernments unto the absolute pleasure of God, 2 Sam. 15. 25, 26. And this in all our extremities must we bring our souls unto, be∣fore we can attain any rest or peace, or the least comfortable perswasion that we may not yet fall under greater severities in the just Indignation of God against us. 2. The Wisdom of God is also to be Considered and sub∣mitted unto. Job 9. 4. He is wise in heart who hath hardened himself against him and prospered. This the Prophet joyns with his Greatness and Soveraignty, Isa. 40. 12, 13, 14. There is no searching of his understanding, v. 28. And the Apostle winds up all his Considerations of the works of God in an holy Admiration of his Knowledge and Wisdom, whence his Judge∣ment becomes unsearchable, and his wayes past finding out, Rom. 11. 33, 34. He seeth and knoweth all things, in all their Causes, Effects, consequences and circumstances, in their utmost reach and tendency in their correspondencies one unto another, and suit∣ableness unto his own Glory, and so alone judgeth aright of all things. The wisest of men as David speaks walk in a shade. We see little, we know little, and that but of a very few things, and in an imperfect manner; and that of their present
appearances, abstracted from their Issues, Successes, Ends, and Relations unto other things. And if we would be further wise in the works of God, we shall be found to be like the wild Asses Colt. What is good for us or the Church of God; what is evil to it or us, we know not at all; but all things are open and naked unto God. The day will come indeed wherein we shall have such a prospect of the works of God, see one thing so set against another, as to find Goodness, Beauty, and Order in them all; that they were all done in number, weight and measure; that nothing could have been otherwise without an abridge∣ment of his glory and disadvantage of them that believe in him. But for the present all our wisdom consists in referring all unto him. He who doth these things is infinitely wise, he knows what he doth, and why, and what will be the end of all. We are apt, it may be, to think, that at such seasons all things will go to wrack with our selves, with the Church, or with the whole world; how can this breach be repaired, this loss made up, this ruine recovered? peace is gone, trade is gone, our sub∣stance is gone, the Church is gone, all is gone, confusion and utter desolation lye at the door. But if a man who is unskilled and unexperienced should be at Sea, it may be every time the vessel wherein he is, seems to decline on either side, he would be apt to conceive, they should be all cast away; but yet if he be not childishly timerous when the Master shall tell him that there is no danger, bid him trust to his skill and it shall be well with him, it will yield quietness and satisfaction. We are indeed in a storm, the whole earth seems to reel and stagger like à drunken man; but yet our souls may rest in the infinite skill and wisdom of the great Pilot of the whole Creation, who stears all things according to the Counsel of his Will. His works are manifold; in Wisdom hath he made all these things, Psal. 104. 24. And in the same wisdom doth he dispose of them. All these things come forth from the Lord of Hosts, who is wonderfully in counsel, and excellent in working, Isa. 28. 29. What is good, meet, usefull for us, for ours, for the Churches, for the City, for the Land of our Nativity he knows, and of Creatures not one. This infi∣nite Wisdom of God also are we therefore to resign and submit our selves unto. His hand in all his works is guided by Infi∣nite
Wisdom. In thoughts thereof, in humbling our selves thereunto, shall we find rest and peace, and this in all our pres∣sures will work us to a waiting for him. 3. The Righteousness of God is also to be considered in this matter. That name in the Scripture is used to denote ma∣ny Excellencies of God, all which are reducible unto the in∣finite Rectitude of his Nature. I intend that at present which is called Justitia Regiminis, his Righteousness in Rule or Go∣vernment. This is remembred by Abraham, Gen. 18. 25. Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? And by the Apostle; Is God unjust who taketh vengeance? God forbid. This our souls are to own in all the works of God. They are all righteous; all his who will do no iniquity, whose Throne is established in Judgement. However they may be dreadfull, grievous, and seem severe, yet they are all righteous: It is true, he will some∣times rise up and do strange acts, strange works, Isa. 28. 21. Such as he will not do often nor ordinarily; such as shall fill the world with dread and amazement: He will answer his people in terrible things? But yet all shall be in Righteousness. And to complain of that which is righteous, to repine against it, is the highest unrighteousness that may be. Faith then fixing the soul on the Righteousness of God, is an effectual means to humble it under his mighty hand: And to help us herein we may con∣sider, Considera∣tions of Gods Righ∣teousness in his Judge∣ments.1. That God judgeth not as man judgeth. We judge by the seeing of the Eye, and hearing of the Ear, according to outward appearances and evidences. But God searcheth the heart. We judge upon what is between man and man, God principally upon what is between himself and man. And what do we know or understand of these things? or what there is in the heart of man; what purposes, what contrivances, what designs, what corrupt affections, what sins, what transactions have been between God and them; what warnings he hath given them, what reproofs, what ingagements they have made, what convi∣ctions they have had, what use they were putting their lives, their substance, their families unto? Alas; we know nothing of these things, and so are able to make no judgement of the
proceedings of God upon them; but this we know, that he is Righteous in all his waies, and holy in all his works; yea the most terrible of them: And when the secrets of all hearts shall be revealed, ah how glorious will be his drowning of the old world, firing of Sodom, swallowing up of Dathan and Abiram in the earth, the utter rejection of the Jews, with all other acts of his Providence seeming to be accompanied with severity? And so will our own Tryals inward or outward appear to be. 2. God is Judge of all the world, of all ages, times, places, persons, and disposeth of all so as they may tend unto the good of the whole, and his own Glory in the universe. Our thoughts are bounded, much more our Observations and Abilities to mea∣sure things, within a very small compass. Every thing stands alone unto us, whereby we see little of its beauty or order; nor do know how it ought justly to be disposed of. That par∣ticular may seem deformed unto us, which when it is under his eye, who sees all at once, past, present and to come, with all those joynts and bands of Wisdom and Order, whereby things are re∣lated unto one another, is beautifull and glorious; for as no∣thing is of its self, nor by its self, nor to its self, so nothing stands alone; but there is a line of mutual respect that runs through the Creation, and every particular of it, and that in all its changes and alterations from the beginning to the end, which gives it its Loveliness, Life and Order. He that can at once see but one part of a goodly statua or Colossus, might think it a very de∣formed piece; when he that views it altogether, is assured of its due proportion symmetry and loveliness. Now all things, ages and persons, all thus at once are objected unto the sight of God, and he disposeth them with respect unto the whole, that every one may fill up its own place, and sustain its part and share in the common tendency of all to the same end. And hence it is that in publick Judgements and Calamities God oftentimes suffers the Godly to be involved with the wicked, and that not on the account of their own persons, but as they are parts of that body which he will destroy. This Job expres∣seth somewhat harshly, but there is truth in his Assertion, chap. 9. 22, 23. This is one thing, therefore I said it, he destroyeth the
righteous with the wicked. If the scourge slay suddenly he will laugh at the tryal of the Innocent. God in publick desolations oftentimes takes good and bad together; a sudden scourge in∣volves them all; and this God doth for sundry Reasons: As, 1. That he may manifest his own Holiness; which is such that he can without the least Injustice or Oppression, even upon the account of their own provocations, take away the houses, possessions, estates, liberties, and lives of the best of his own Saints. For how should a man, any man, the best of men, be just with God if he would contend with him? No man can answer to him one of a thousand, Job 9. 31. This they will also own and acknowledge; upon the account of Righteousness, none can open his mouth about his Judgements, without the highest impiety and wickedness. 2. He doth so, that his own people may learn to know his ter∣rour, and to rejoyce alwaies before him with trembling. There∣fore Job affirms that in the time of his prosperity he was not se∣cure, but still trembled in himself with thoughts of the Judge∣ments of God. Doubtless much wretched carnal security would be ready to invade and possess the hearts of Believers, if God should alwaies and constantly pass them by in the dispensations of his publick Judgements. 3. That it may be a stone of offence, and a stumbling block unto wicked men, who are to be hardened in their sins, and prepared for ruine. When they see that all things fall alike unto all, and that those who have made the strictest profession of the name and fear of God, fare no better than themselves, they are en∣couraged to despise the warnings of God, and the strokes of his hand; and so to rush on unto the destruction whereunto they are prepared. 4. God doth it to proclaim unto all the world, that what he doth here is no final Judgement, and ultimate determination concerning things and persons. For who can see the wise man dying as the fool, the Righteous and Holy perishing in their outward concernments, as the ungodly and wicked, but must conclude, that the Righteous God the Judge of all, hath ap∣pointed another day, wherein all things must be called over again, and every one then receive his final Reward, according
as his works shall appear to have been. And thus are we to humble our selves unto the Righteousness wherewith the hand of God is alwaies accompanied. 5. His Goodness and Grace is also to be considered in all the works of his mighty hands. As there is no unrighteousness in him, so also all that is good and gracious. And whatever there is in any trouble of allay from the utmost wrath, is of meer good∣ness and grace. Thy houses are burned, but perhaps thy goods are saved; is there no grace, no goodness therein? or per∣haps thy substance also is consumed, but yet thy person is alive; and should a living man complain? but say what thou wilt, this stroke is not Hell which thou hast deserved long ago; yea it may be a means of preventing thy going thither; so that it is accompanied with infinite goodness, patience and mercy also. And if the considerations hereof will not quiet thy heart, take heed lest a worse thing befall thee. And these things amongst others are we to consider in God to lead our hearts into an acquiescing in his Will, a submission under his mighty hand, and a patient waiting for the issue. Considera∣tions of our own Con∣dition tending to Humble us.2. Consider our mean and abject condition, and that infinite distance wherein we stand from him with whom we have to do. When Abraham, the Father of the faithfull, and friend of God, came to treat with him about his Judgements, he doth it with this acknowledgement of his condition, that he was meer dust and ashes, Gen. 18. 27. A poor abject Creature that God at his pleasure had formed out of the dust of the earth, and which in a few daies was to be reduced again into the ashes of it. We can forget nothing more perniciously than what we are. Man is a worm, saith Bildad, and the Son of man is but a worm, Job 25. 6. And therefore sayes Job himself, I have said to corruption, thou art my father, and to the worm, thou art my mother and my sister, chap. 17. 14. His Affinity, his Relation unto them is the nearest imaginable, and he is no otherwise to be accounted of; and there is nothing that God abhors more than an Elation of mind in the forgetfulness of our mean frail condition. Thou sayest, said he to the proud Prince of Tyrus, that thou art a God, but saith he, wilt thou say thou art a God in the hands of him that
slayes thee, Ezek. 28. 9. That severe conviction did God provide for his pride. Thou shalt be a man, and no God in the hand of him that slayes thee. And when Herod prided himself in the acclamations of the vain multitude, (the voice of God and not of a man.) The Angel of the Lord filled that God imme∣diately with worms which slew him and devoured him, Acts 12. 23. There is indeed nothing more effectual to abase the pride of the thoughts of men, than a due remembrance that they are so. Hence the Psalmist prayes, Psal. 9. 20. Put them in fear O Lord, that the Nations may know themselves to be but men, so and no more.  poor, miserable, frail, mortal man, as the word signifies; what is man? what is his life? what is his strength? said one, the dream of a shadow; a meer nothing; or as David much better, Every man living in his best condition is altogether vanity, Psal. 39. 5. and James, our life, which is our best, our all, is but a vapour that appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth away, chap. 4. 14. But enough hath been spoken by many on this subject. And we that have seen so many thousands each week in one City carryed away to the grave, have been taught the truth of our frailty, even as with Thorns and Briers. But I know not how it comes to pass, there is not any thing we are more apt to forget, than what we our selves are. And this puts men on innumerable miscar∣riages towards God and one another. Thou therefore that art exercised under the hand of God in any severe dispensation, and art ready on all occasions to fill thy mouth with complaints, sit down a little and take a right measure of thy self, and see whether this frame and posture becomes thee. It is the great God against whom thou repinest, and thou art a man, and that is a name of a worm, a poor, frail, dying worm; and it may be whilst thou art speaking, thou art no more. And wilt thou think it meet for such a one as thou art, to magnifie thy self against the great possessor of Heaven and Earth? Poor clay, poor dust and ashes, poor dying worm, know thy state and condition, and fall down quietly under the mighty hand of God. Though thou wranglest with men about thy concern∣ments, let God alone. The posheards may contend with the pot∣sheards of the earth; but wo unto him that striveth with his Maker.
2. Consider that in this frail condition, we have all greatly sinned against God. So did Job. chap. 7. 20. I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? If this considera∣tion will not satisfie thy mind, yet it will assuredly stop the mouths of all the Sons of men. Though all the Curses of the Law should be executed upon us, yet every mouth must be stopped, because all the world is become guilty before God, Rom. 3. 19. And why should a living man complain, saith the Prophet, Lament. 3. 39. Why, it may be, it is because that his trouble is great and inexpressible, and such as seldom or never befell any before him; but what then, saith he, shall a man complain against the punishment of his sins? If this living man be a sinful man, as there is none that liveth and sinneth not, whatever his state and condition be, he hath no ground of murmuring or complaint. For a sinful man to complain, especially whilest he is yet a living man, is most unreasonable. For, 1. Whatever hath befallen us, It is just on the account that we are sinners before God; and to repine against the judgements of God that are rendred evidently righteous upon the account of sin, is to anticipate the Condition of the damned in hell, a great part of whose misery it is, that they alwayes repine against that sentence and punishment which they know to be most righteous and holy. If this were now a place, if that were now my design to treat of the sins of all professors, how easie were it to stop the mouths of all men about their trou∣bles. But that is not my present business, I speak unto parti∣cular persons, and that not with an especial design to convince them of their sins, but to humble their souls. Another season may be taken to press that Consideration, directly and pro∣sessedly also. At present, let us only, when our souls are ready to be entangled with the thoughts of any severe dispensation of God, and our own particular pressures, troubles, miseries occa∣sioned thereby, turn into our selves and take a view every one of his own personal provocations. And when we have done so, see what we have to say to God, what we have to Complain of: let the man hold his tongue and let the sinner speak. Is not God holy, righteous, wise in what he hath done? and if he be, why do we not subscribe unto his wayes, and submit quietly unto his Will?
2. But this is not all, We are not only such sinners, as to ren∣der these dispensations of God evidently holy, these Judgements of his righteous, but also to manifest, that they are accompanied with unspeakable patience, mercy and Grace. To instance in one particular. Is it the burning of our houses, the spoiling of our Goods, the ruine of our estates alone that our sins have de∣served? if God had made the temporary fire on earth, to have been unto us a way of entrance into the Eternal fire of hell, we had not had whereof righteously to complain. May we not then see a mixture of unspeakable patience, grace and mercy in every dispensation? and shall we then repine against it? Is it not better advice, go and sin no more, lest a worse thing befall thee; for a sinner out of hell not to rest in the will of God, not to humble himself under his mighty hand, is to make himself guilty of the especial sin of hell. Other sins deserve it, but repining against God is principally, yea only committed in it. The Church comes to a blessed quieting resolution in this case, Micah. 7. 9. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him; bear it quietly, patiently, and submit under his hand therein. 3. Consider that of our selves we are not able to make a right judgement of what is good for us; what evil unto us, or what tends most directly unto our chiefest end, Psalm 39. 6. surely man walketh in ajvain shew;  in an Image full of false representations of things; in the midst of vain appearances that he knows not what to choose, or do aright, and therefore spends the most of his time and strength about things that are of no use or purpose unto him; Surely they are disquieted in vain. And hereof he gives one especial Instance, he heapeth up riches, and knoweth not who shall gather; which is but one Ex∣ample of the manifold frustrations that men meet withall in the whole course of their lives, as not knowing what is good for them. We all profess to aym at one chief and principal end, namely the enjoyment of God in Christ, as our eternal re∣ward; and in order thereunto to be carryed on in the use of the means of faith and obedience, tending to that end. Now if this be so, the suitableness, or unsuitableness of all other things being good or evil unto us, is to be measured by their
tendency unto this end. And what know we hereof? As unto the things of this life, do we know, whether it will be best for us to be rich or poor, to have houses or to be harbourless, to abound or to want, to leave wealth and inheritances unto our Children, or to leave them naked unto the providence of God? do we know what state, what condition will most further our Obedience, best obviate our temptations, or call most on us to mortifie our Corruptions? and if we know nothing at all of these things, as indeed we do not, were it not best for us to leave them quietly unto Gods disposal? I doubt not but it will appear at the last day, that a world of evil in the hearts of men was stifled by the destruction of their outward concern∣ments, more by their inward troubles. That many were de∣livered from tèmptations by it, who otherwise would have been overtaken to their ruine and scandal of the Gospel; that many a secret Imposthume hath been lanced and cured by a stroke, for God doth not send Judgements on his own, for Judgements sake, for punishment sake; but alwayes to accomplish some blessed design of Grace towards them. And there is no one soul in particular which shall rightly search it self and Consi∣der its state and Condition, but will be able to see wisdom, grace and care towards it self in all dispensations of God. And if I would here enter upon the benefits that through the sanctifying hand of God, do redound unto believers by Af∣flictions, Calamities, troubles, distresses, temptations and the like Effects of Gods visitations, it would be of use unto the souls of men in this Case. But this subject hath been so often, and so well spoken unto, that I shall not insist upon it. I desire only that we would seriously consider how utterly Ignorant we are of what is good for us, or usefull unto us in these out∣ward things, and so leave them quietly unto Gods disposal. 4. We may Consider that all these things about which we are troubled, fall directly within the compass of that good word of Gods grace, that he will make all things work together for the good of them that love him, Rom. 8. 28. All things that we en∣joy, all things that we are deprived of, all that we do, all that we suffer; our losses, troubles, miseries, distresses in which the Apostle instanceth in the following verses, they shall all work
together for good; together with one another, and all with, and in subordination unto the power, grace, and wisdom of God. It may be, we see not how, or by what means it may be Effected: but he is infinitely wise and powerful, who hath undertaken it, and we know little or nothing of his ways. There is nothing that we have, or enjoy, or desire, but it hath turned unto some unto their hurt. Riches have been kept for men unto their hurt. Wisdom and high places have been the ruine of many. Liberty and plenty are to most a snare. Pro∣sperity slayes the foolish. And we are not of our selves, in any measure able to secure our selves from the hurt and poison that is in any of these things, but that they may be our ruine also, as they have already been, and every day are unto multitudes of the Children of men. It is enough to fill the soul of any man with horrour and amazement, to consider the wayes and ends of most of them that are entrusted with this worlds goods. Is it not evident that all their lives they seem industriously to take care that they may perish eternally? Luxury, riot, oppression, Intemperance (and of late especially) blasphemy and Atheism, they usually give up themselves unto. And this is the fruit of their abundance and security. What now if God should deprive us of all these things? Can any one certainly say, that he is worsted thereby? might they not have turned unto his everlasting perdition, as well as they do so of thousands as good by nature, and who have had advantages to be as wise as we? and shall we complain of Gods dispensations about them? And what shall we say, when he himself hath undertaken to make all things that he guides unto us to work together for our good? Anxieties of mind, and perplexities of heart about our losses is not that which we are called unto in our troubles; but this is that which is our duty; let us Consider whether we Love God or no, whether we are called according to his pur∣pose, if so, all things are well in his hand who can order them for our good and advantage. I hope many a poor foul will from hence under all their trouble be able to say with him that was banished from his Countrey, and found better en∣tertainment elsewhere; My Friends, I had perished, if I had not perished; had I not been undone by Fire, it may be I had
been ruined in Eternal Fire, God hath made all to work for my good. The end of all these discourses is to evince the reasonableness of the duty of waiting on God, which we are pressing from the Psalmist. Ignorance of God and our selves, is the great principle and cause of all our disquietments. And this ariseth mostly, not from want of light and instruction, but for want of Consideration and Application. The notions insisted on con∣cerning God are obvious and known unto all; so are these con∣cerning our selves; but by whom almost are they employed and improved as they ought? the frame of our spirits is as though we stood upon equal terms with God, and did think with Jonah, that we might do well to be angry with what he doth; did we rightly consider him, did we stand in awe of him as we ought, It had certainly been otherwise with us. Influence of the Promises into the souls waiting in time of trouble. The nature of them. Having therefore laid down these Considerations from the second Observation taken from the Words; namely, That Jeho∣vah himself is the proper object of the souls waiting in the condition described; I shall only add one direction, how we may be enabled to perform and discharge this duty aright, which we have manifested to have been so necessary, so reasonable, so pre∣valent for the obtaining of relief, and this ariseth from ano∣ther of the Propositions laid down for the opening of these verses not as yet spoken unto. Namely that Support∣ment in trouble from the Word of Promise.The Word of promise is the souls great supportment in waiting for God. So saith the Psalmist; In his word do I hope, that is, the Word of promise. As the Word in general is the adequate rule of all our Obedience unto God, and Communion with him; so there are especial parts of it that are suited unto these especial actings of our souls towards him. Thus the Word of Promise, or the Promise in the Word, is that which our faith especially regards, in our hope, trust and waiting on God; and it is suited to answer unto the immediate actings of our souls therein. From this Word of Promise therefore, that is from these
promises doth the soul in its distresses take incouragement to continue waiting on God, and that on these two accounts. 1. Because they are declarative of God, his Mind and his Will: And secondly, because they are communicative of grace and strength to the soul; of which latter we shall not here treat. 1. The End and Use of the Promise is to declare, reveal and make known God unto Believers, and that in an especial man∣ner in him, and concerning him, which may give them en∣couragement to wait for him. 1. The promises are a declaration of the Nature of God, espe∣cially of his Goodness, Grace and Love. God hath put an impression of all the glorious Excellencies of his nature on his Word, especially as he is in Christ, on the Word of the Gospel. There as in a Glass do we behold his Glory in the face of Jesus Christ. As his Commands express unto us his Holiness, his Threatnings, his Righteousness and Severity; so do his Pro∣mises, his Goodness, Grace, Love and Bounty. And in these things do we learn all that we truly and solidly know of God; that is, we know him in and by his Word. The soul there∣fore that in this condition is waiting on, or for God, considers the Representation which he makes of himself, and of his own nature in and by the promises, and receives supportment and encouragement in its duty. For if God teach us by the pro∣mises what he is, and what he will be unto us, we have firm ground to expect from him all fruits of Benignity, Kindness and Love. Let the soul frame in it self that Idea of God, which is exhibited in the Promises, and it will powerfully prevail with it to continue in an Expectation of his gracious returns; they all expressing Goodness, Love, Patience, Forbearance, Long∣suffering, Pardoning Mercy, Grace, Bounty, with a full satis∣factory reward. This is the beauty of the Lord mentioned with admiration by the Prophet; How great is his goodness! how great is his beauty! Zeph. 9. 17. Which is the great at∣tractive of the soul to adhere constantly unto him. Whatever difficulties arise, whatever temptations interpose, or weari∣someness grows upon us in our streights, troubles, trials and desertions, let us not entertain such thoughts of God as our
own perplexed imaginations may be apt to suggest unto us. This would quickly cast us into a thousand impatiencies, mis∣givings and miscarriages; but the remembrance of, and me∣ditation on God in his promises as revealed by them, as expres∣sed in them, is suited quite unto other ends and purposes. There appears, yea gloriously shines forth, that Love, that Wisdom, that Goodness, Tenderness and Grace, as cannot but encou∣rage a believing soul to abide in waiting for him. 2. The Word of Promise doth not only express Gods nature as that wherein he proposeth himself unto the contemplation of faith, but it also declares his Will and Purpose of acting towards the soul suitable unto his own Goodness and Grace. For Promises are the declarations of Gods purpose and will to act towards Believers in Christ Jesus, according to the infinite Goodness of his own nature, and this is done in great variety according to the various conditions and wants of them that do believe. They all proceed from the same spring of Infinite Grace, but are branched into innumerable particular streams according as our necessities do require. To these do waiting souls repair for stay and encouragement. Their perplexities principally arise from their misapprehensions of what God is in himself, and of what he will be unto them; and whither should they repair to be undeceived, but unto that faithfull Representation that he hath made of himself and his Will in the Word of his Grace. For no man hath seen God at any time, the only begotten Son who is in the bosome of the Father, he hath revealed him, John 1. 17. Now the Gospel is nothing but the Word of Promise explained in all the Springs, Causes and Effects of it; thither must we repair to be instructed in this matter. The imaginations and reason∣ings of mens hearts will but deceive them in these things. The informations or instructions of other men may do so; nor have they any truth in them further than they may be resolved into the Word of Promise. Here alone they may find rest and refresh∣ment. The soul of whom we speak, is under troubles, per∣plexities and distresses as to its outward condition; pressed with many streights it may be on every hand; and as to its spiritual estate under various apprehensions of the mind and will of God towards it, as hath before at large been explained; in this con∣dition
it is brought in some measure unto an holy submission unto God, and a patient waiting for the issue of its trials. In this estate it hath many temptations to, and much working of unbelief. The whole of its opposition amounts to this, that it is neglected of God, that its way is hid, and his judgement is passed over from him, that it shall not be at present delivered, nor hereafter saved. What course can any one advise such a one unto for his relief, and to preserve his soul from fainting or deserting the duty of waiting on God wherein he is engaged, but only this, to search and enquire what Revelation God hath made of himself and his Will concerning him in his Word: And this the promise declares. Here he shall find hope, patience, faith, expectation to be all encreased, comforted, encouraged. Herein lyes the duty and safety of any in this condition. Men may bear the first impression of any trouble with the strength, courage and resolution of their natural spirits; under some con∣tinuance of them they may support themselves with former ex∣periences, and other usual springs and means of consolation: But if their wounds prove difficult to be cured, if they despise ordinary remedies, if their diseases are of long continuance, this is that which they must be take themselves unto. They must search into the Word of promise, and learn to measure things not according to the present state and apprehensions of their mind, but according unto what God hath declared concern∣ing them. And there are sundry Excellencies in the promises when hoped in, or trusted in, that tend unto the establishment of the soul in this great duty of waiting. As, 1. That Grace in them, that is, the Good Will of God in Christ, for help, relief, satisfaction, pardon and salvation, is suited unto all particular conditions and wants of the soul. As Light ariseth from the Sun, and is diffused in the beams thereof to the especial use of all creatures, enabled by a visive faculty to make use of it; so cometh Grace forth from the Eternal Good Will of God in Christ, and is diffused by the promises, with a blessed contem∣poration unto the conditions and wants of all Believers. There can nothing fall out between God and any soul, but there is grace suited unto it in one promise or another, as clearly and
evidently, as if it were given unto him particularly and imme∣diately. And this they find by experience who at any time are enabled to mix effectually a promise with faith. 2. The Word of promise hath a wonderfull mysterious especial impression of God upon it. He doth by it secretly and ineffably communicate himself unto Believers. When God appeared in a dream unto Jacob, he awaked and said, God is in this place and I knew it not. He knew God was every where, but an in∣timation of his especial presence surprized him. So is a soul surprized when God opens himself and his Grace in a promise unto him. It cryes out, God is here and I knew it not. Such a near approach of God in his Grace it finds, as is accompanied with a refreshing surprizal. 3. There is an especial Engagement of the Veracity and Truth of God in every promise. Grace and Truth are the two ingre∣dients of an Evangelical promise; the matter and form where∣of they do consist. I cannot now stay to shew where in this espe∣cial engagement of Truth in the promise doth consist. Besides, it is a thing known and confessed. But it hath an especial influ∣ence to support the soul when hoped in, in its duty of waiting. For that hope can never make ashamed or leave the soul unto disappointments, which stayes its self on Divine Veracity un∣der a special engagement. And this is that duty which the Psalmist engageth himself in, and unto the performance of, as the only way to obtain a com∣fortable interest in that forgiveness which is with God, and all the gracious effects thereof. And in the handling hereof, as we have declared its nature and necessity; so we have the Psalmists directions for its practice unto persons in the like condition with him, for the attaining of the end by him aimed at; so that it needs no further Application. That which remains of the Psalm is the Address which he makes unto others, with the en∣couragement which he gives them to steer the same course with himself; and this he doth in the two last verses, which to com∣pleat the Exposition of the whole Psalm, I shall briefly explain and pass through, as having already dispatched what I princi∣pally aimed at.
Psal. 130. v. 7, 8.Verse 7. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous Re∣demption. 8. And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities. Exposition of vers. 7, & 8.I shall proceed in the opening of these words, according un∣to the method already insisted on. First, the meaning of the principal words shall be declared; then the sense and impor∣tance of the whole. Thirdly, the Relation that they have unto the condition of the soul expressed in the Psalm must be mani∣fested; from all which Observations will arise for our Instru∣ction and Directions in the like cases, wherein we are or may be concerned. Let Israel hope in the Lord;  Hope Israel in Jehovah. Trust, or expect; the same word with that, vers. 5. In his word do I hope; properly, to expect, to look for, which includes hope, and adds some further degree of the souls acting towards God; it is an earnest looking after the thing hoped for; expecta ad Dominum; hope in him, and look up to him; For with the Lord, quia or quoniam, because, seeing that with the Lord;  mercy; the verb substantive, as usual, is omitted, which we supply, there is Mercy, Grace, Bounty, Goodness, Good-will. This word is often joyned with another, discovering its importance, and that is  Truth.  Goodness, or Mercy and Truth. These are, as it were, constituent parts of Gods Promises. It is of Goodness, Grace, Bounty, to promise any undue mercy. And it is of Truth or Faithfulness to make good what is so promised. The LXX. commonly render this word by , that is, pardoning mercy, as it is every where used in the New Te∣stament. And with him is plenteous Redemption;  with him; as before speaking unto God, v. 4.  with thee there is; the meaning of which expression hath been opened at large. Re∣demption  from  to redeem; the same with , Redemption: This word is often used
for a proper Redemption, such as is made by the intervention of a price, and not a meer Assertion unto liberty by power, which is sometimes also called Redemption. Thus it is said of the money that the first born of the children of Israel, which were above the number of the Levites were redeemed with; that Moses took  the Redemption, that is, the Redemption money, the price of their Redemption, Numb. 3. 49. And Psal. 49. 8. The Redemption of mens souls is precious; it cost a great price. The Redemption then that is with God, relates unto a Price; Goodness or mercy with respect unto a price, becomes Redemption, that is actively, the cause or means of it. What that price is, see Matth. 20. 20. 1 Pet. 1. 18. Plenteous Redemption,  multa, copi sa, much, abun∣dant, plenteous. It is used both for Quantity and Quality; much in quantity, or plenteous, abundant, and in Quality, that is, precious, excellent. And it is applied in a good and bad sense; so it is said of our sins, Ezek. 9. 6. our sins  are in∣creased or multiplied, or are great; many in number, and hai∣nous in their nature or quality. And in the other sense, it is ap∣plied unto the mercy of God, whereby they are removed; it is great or plenteous, it is excellent or precious. V. 8. And he, that is, the Lord Jehovah; he with whom is plenteous Redemption  shall redeem; or make them par∣takers of that Redemption that is with him. He shall redeem Israel, that is, those who hope and trust in him. From all his iniquities ; his iniquities, that is, of the Elect Israel, and every individual amongst them. But the word signifies trouble as well as sin, especially that trouble or punishment that is for sin. So Cain expresseth himself upon the denunciation of his sentence;  my sin, that is, the punishment thou hast denounced against my sin, is too great or heavy for me to bear, Gen. 4. 13. There is a near af∣finity between sin and trouble; noxam poena sequitur, punish∣ment is inseparable from iniquity.  then the word here used signifies either sin with reference unto trouble due to it, or trouble with respect unto sin whence it proceeds. And both may here be well intended. God shall redeem Israel from all his sins and troubles that have ensued thereon. And this is the sig∣nification
of the words, which indeed are plain and ob∣vious. And these words close up the Psalm. He who began with depths, his own depths of sin and trouble; out of which, and about which he cryed out unto God, is so incouraged by that prospect of grace and forgiveness with God, which by faith he had obtained, as to preach unto others, and to support them in expectation of deliverance from all their sin and trouble also. And such for the most part are all the exercises and trials of the children of God. Their Entrance may be a strom, but their close is a calm. Their beginning is oftentimes trouble, but their latter end is peace; peace to themselves, and advantage to the Church of God. For men in all ages coming out of great trials of their own, have been the most instrumental for the good of others. For God doth not greatly exercise any of his, but with some especial end for his own glory. Secondly, The sense and intendment of the Psalmist in these words is to be considered, and that resolves it self into three general parts. 1. An Exhortation or Admonition. Israel hope in the Lord, or expect Jehovah. 2. A ground of Incouragement unto the performance of the Duty exhorted unto; Because with the Lord there is much, plen∣teous, abundant, precious Redemption. 3. A gracious Promise of a blessed issue which shall be given unto the performance of this duty. He shall redeem Israel from all his sins, and out of all his troubles. In the Exhortation there occurs, 1. The persons exhorted; that is, Israel; not Israel according to the flesh; for they are not all Israel which are of Israel, Rom. 9. 6. But it is the Israel mentioned, Psal. 73. 1. The whole Israel of God to whom he is good, such as are of a clean heart; that is, all those who are interested in the Covenant, and do inherit the promise of their forefathers who was first called by that name? All Believers; and the Psalmist treats them all in general in this matter. 1. Because there is none of them but have their trials and intanglements about sin, more or less. As there is none that
liveth and sinneth not; so there is none sinneth, and is not in∣tangled and troubled. Perhaps then they are not all of them in the same condition with him, in the depths that he was plung∣ed into. Yet more or less, all and every one of them is so far concerned in sin, as to need his direction. All the Saints of God either have been, or are, or may be in these depths. It is a good saying of Austin on this place, Valde sunt in profundo qui non cla∣mant de profundo. None so in the deep, as they who do not cry and call out of the deep. They are in a deep of security, who are ne∣ver sensible of a deep of sin. 2. There is none of them, whatever their present condition he, but they may fall into the like depths with those of the Psalmist. There is nothing absolutely in the Covenant, nor in any Promise, to secure them from it. And what befalleth any one Believer, may befall them all. If any one Believer may fall totally away, all may do so, and not leave one in the world, and so an end be put to the Kingdom of Christ, which is no small evidence that they cannot so fall. But they may fall into depths of sin; that some of them have done so, we have testimonies and instances beyond exception. It is good then that all of them should be prepared for that duty which they may all stand in need of, and a right discharge of it. Besides the duty mentioned, is not absolutely restrained to the condition before described: But it is proper and accommodate unto other seasons also. Therefore are all the Israel of God exhorted unto it. 2. The duty it self, is hoping in Jehovah, with such an hope or trust, as hath an expectation of relief joyned with it. And there are two things included in this duty, 1. The Renuntiation of any hopes in expectation of delive∣rance either from sin or trouble, any other way; hope in Jeho∣vah; this is frequently expressed, where the performance of this duty is mentioned; see Hos. 14. 3. Jer. 3. 22, 23. And we have de∣clared the nature of it in the exposition of the 1, and 2. verses. 2. Expectation from him; and this also hath been insisted on in the Observations from the verses immediately preceding, wherein also the whole nature of this duty was explained, and directions were given for the due performance of it. Secondly, The incouragement tendred unto this duty, is the
next thing in the words; for with the Lord is plenteous Re∣demption; wherein we may observe, 1. What it is that he professeth as the great incouragement unto the duty mentioned, and that is Redemption; the Redem∣ption that is with God; upon the matter the same with the for∣giveness before mentioned; Mercy, Pardon, Benignity, Bounty. He doth not bid them hope in the Lord, because they were the seed of Abraham, the peculiar people of God made partakers of priviledges above all the people in the world; much less be∣cause of their worthiness, or that good that was in themselves, but meerly upon the account of mercy in God; of his Grace, Goodness and Bounty. The Mercy of God, and the Redemption that is with him, is the only ground unto sinners for hope and confidence in him. 2. There are two great Concernments of this Grace, the one expressed, the other implied in the words. The first is, that it is much, plenteous, abundant. That which principally discourageth distressed souls from a comfortable waiting on God, is, their fears lest they should not obtain mercy from him, and that because their sins are so great, and so many; or attended with such circumstan∣ces and aggravations, as that it is impossible they should find ac∣ceptance with God. This ground of despondency and unbelief, the Psalmist obviates, by representing the fulness, the plenty, the boundless plenty of the mercy that is with God. It is such as will suit the condition of the greatest sinners in their greatest depths; the stores of its treasures are inexhaustible. And the force of the exhortation doth not lie so much in this, that there is Redem∣ption with God, as that this Redemption is plenteous or abundant. Secondly, Here is an intimation in the Word it self of that Re∣lation which the Goodness and Grace of God proposed hath to the blood of Christ; whence it is called Redemption. This, as was shewed in the opening of the words, hath respect unto a price, the price whereby we are bought, that is the blood of Christ. This is that whereby way is made for the exercise of mercy to∣wards sinners; Redemption, which properly denotes actual deli∣verance, is said to be with God, or in him, as the effect in the cause. The causes of it are his own Grace, and the blood of Christ. There are these prepared for the redeeming of Believers from
sin and trouble, unto his own glory. And herein lyeth the in∣couragement that the Psalmist proposeth unto the performance of the duty exhorted unto; namely, to wait on God. It is taken from God himself, as all incouragements unto sinners to draw nigh unto him, and to wait for him, must be. Nothing but himself can give us confidence to go unto him. And it is suited unto the state and condition of the soul under consideration. Redemption and Mercy are suited to give relief from sin and misery. Thirdly, The last verse contains a promise of the issue of the performance of this duty; He shall redeem his people from all their iniquities. Two things are observable in the words. 1. The Certainty of the Issue or event of the duty mentioned,  and he shall; or, he will redeem; he will assuredly do so. Now, although this in the Psalmist is given out by Revelation, and is a new promise of God, yet as it relates to the condition of the soul here expressed, and the discovery made by saith of forgive∣ness and Redemption with God, the Certainty intended in this Assertion is built upon the principles before laid down. Whence therefore doth it appear, whence may we infallibly conclude, that God will redeem his Israel from all their iniquities? I answer, 1. The Conclusion is drawn from the Nature of God. There is forgiveness and Redemption with him and he will act towards his people suitably to his own nature. There is Redemption with him, and therefore he will redeem; forgiveness with him, and therefore he will forgive. As the Conclusion is certain and in∣fallible; that wicked men, ungodly men, shall be destroyed, be∣cause God is Righteous and holy; his Righteousness and Ho∣liness indispensibly requiring their destruction; so is the Re∣demption and Salvation of all that believe, certain on this ac∣count; namely, because there is forgiveness with him; he is good and gracious, and ready to forgive; his Goodness and Grace requires their Salvation. 2. The Conclusion is certain upon the account of Gods Faith∣fulness in his Promises. He hath promised; that those who wait on him shall not be ashamed; that their expectation shall not be disappointed; whence the Conclusion is certain, that in his time and way they shall be redeemed.
2. There is the Extent of this deliverance or Redemption; shall redeem Israel from all their Iniquities. It was shewed in the opening of the verse, that this word denotes either sin procu∣ring trouble, or trouble procured by sin; and there is a respect unto both, sin and its punishment. From both, from all of both kind, God will redeem his Israel. Not this or that evil; this or that sin, but from all evil, all sin. He will take all sins from their souls, and wipe all tears from their Eyes. Now God is said to do this on many accounts. 1. On the account of the Great Cause of all actual delive∣rance and Redemption, the blood of Christ. He hath laid an assured foundation of the whole work; the price of Redemption is paid, and they shall in due time enjoy the Effects and fruits of it. 2. Of the Actual Communication of the Effects of that Redemption unto them. This is sure to all the Elect of God, to his whole Israel. They shall all be made partakers of them. And this is the end of all the promises of God, and of the grace and mercy promised in them, namely that they should be means to exhibit and give out to Believers that Redemption which is purchased and prepared for them; and this is done two wayes, 1. Partially, initially and gradually in this life. Here God gives in unto them the pardon of their sins; being justified free∣ly by his grace; and in his Sanctification of them through his spirit, gives them delivery from the power and dominion of sin. Many troubles also he delivers them from, and from all as far as they are Poenal, or have any mixture of the Curse in them. 2. Compleatly; Namely, when he shall have freed them from sin and trouble, and from all the effects and consequents of them, by bringing them unto the enjoyment of himself in Glory. 3. The Words being thus opened, we may briefly in the next place consider what they express, concerning the State, Condition, or Actings of the soul, which are represented in this Psalm. Having himself attained unto the State before described, and being engaged resolvedly into the performance of that
duty which would assuredly bring him into an haven of full rest and peace; the Psalmist applyes himself unto the residue of the Israel of God to give them incouragement unto this duty with himself, from the Experience that he had of a blessed success therein. As if he had said unto them; Ye are now in Affictions, and under troubles, and that upon the account of your sins and provocations. A condition I Confess sad and deplorable; but yet there is hope in Israel concerning these things. For consi∣der how it hath been with me, and how the Lord hath dealt with me. I was in depths inexpressible, and saw for a while no way or means of delivery. But God hath been pleased graciously to reveal himself unto me, as God pardoning Iniquity, transgression, and sin; and in the Consolation, and supportment which I have received thereby; I am waiting for a full participation of the fruits of his Love. Let me therefore prevail with you who are in the like con∣dition to steer the same course with me. Only let your expectations be fixed in mercy and Soveraign Grace, without any regard unto any priviledge or worth in your selves. Rest in the plenteous re∣demption, those stores of Grace which are with Jehovah, and ac∣cording to his faithfulness in his promises, he will deliver you out of all perplexing troubles. Having thus opened the Words, I shall now only name the doctrinal Observations that are tendred from them, and so put a close to these Discourses. As, Obs. 1. The Lord Jehovah is the only hope for sin-distressed souls; Hope in the Lord: This hath been sufficiently discovered and confirmed on sundry passages in the Psalm. Obs. 2. The Ground of all hope and Expectation of relief in sinners, is meer Grace, Mercy, and Redemption. Hope in the Lord, for with him there is Redemption. All other grounds of hope are false and deceiving. Obs. 3. Inexhaustible stores of Mercy, and Redemption are needful for the incouragement of sinners to rest and wait on God. With him is plentiful Redemption. Such is your misery, so pressing are your fears and disconsolations, that nothing less than boundless Grace, can relieve or support you; there are therefore such Treasures and stores in God as are suited hereunto. With him is Plenteous Redemption.
Obs. 4. The Ground of all the dispensation of Mercy, Goodness, Grace, and forgiveness which is in God to Sinners, is laid in the blood of Christ. Hence it is here called Redemption. Unto this also we have spoken at large before. Obs. 5. All that wait on God on the account of Mercy and Grace shall have an undoubted Issue of peace. He shall redeem Israel; let him saith God lay hold of my Arm, that he may have peace, and he shall have peace, Isa. 27. 3. Obs. 6. Mercy given to them that wait on God shall in the close and issue, be every way full and satisfying. He shall redeem his people from all their Iniquities. And these Propositions do arise from the words, as absolutely considered, and in themselves. If we mind their Relation unto the peculiar Condition of the soul represented in this Psalm, they will yet afford us the ensuing Observations. Obs. 1. They who out of depths, have by faith and waiting ob∣tained mercy, or are supported in waiting for a sense of believed mercy and forgiveness, are fitted, and only they are fitted to Preach and declare Grace, and mercy unto others. This was the Case with the Psalmist. Upon his emerging out of his own depths and streights, he declares the mercy and redemption whereby he was delivered, unto the whole Israel of God. Obs. 2. A saving participation of Grace and forgiveness leaves a deep Impression of its fulness and excellency on the soul of a sin∣ner; So was it here with the Psalmist. Having himself obtained Forgiveness, he knows no bounds or measure as it were in the extolling of it. There is with God Mercy, Redemption, Plente∣ous Redemption, redeeming from all Iniquity; I have found it so, and so will every one do that shall believe it. Now these Observations might all of them, especially the two last, receive an useful improvement. But whereas what I principally intended from this Psalm, hath been at large insisted on, upon the first verses of it, I shall not here further draw forth any Meditations upon them, but content my self with the Exposition that hath been given of the design of the Psalmist, and sense of his words in these last verses. FINIS.
