P4290 12427108 61911
Mr. PYM HIS Speech in Parliament the XXV of Ianuary MDCXLI. Against the Bishops Charge, hastening their Triall. Printed in the yeare 1641.
Mr. PYM his Speech In PARLIAMENT IANVARY 25. 1641. Against the 12 Bishops charge M. SPEAKER, WHereas there hath been pre∣sented to the House a most faithfull and exact report of the Conference we had the other day concerning the 12 Bishops which is apeached of high Teason and with the opinion of the Committees that were appointed, and em∣ployed in that service for the maintaining of the chardge against them. And they conceived it sir that the Bishop of Lincolne and the rest should be brought to their tryall this day, I must second the moti∣on, and with the favour of the House, I shall be bold to offer my reason why I conceive it more necessary that we should proceed against them in their triall.
M. Speaker, Long introductions are not sutable to weighty businesses, we are fallen up∣on the great M E, the Lord Bishop of York and the rest of them, look upon them as they are in their highnesse, and you shall see that they are the stye of all pestilent filth, and hath infected the State and the government of the Church and Common wealth, look up∣on them in their dependances, and they are the onely mar and the onely men that hath raised and advanced all those, that together with themselves have been the authors, and cau∣sers of all these ruins, miseries and calamities which we do now grone under. Who is it, but in onely these men that have brought in all these seditious into the Church, and have caused other godly, mini∣sters both to preach and teach men in their heresies to side with them in their bloudy designes. Who is it M. Speaker, but they onely that have advanced all Popish Ministers to their preferment, and the chiefest of all that hath raised all these tumults of Papists and other sectaries to revolt against his Ma∣iestie. These are men that should have fed Christs flock, but they are the wolfs that have devoured them, the sheep should have fed up∣on the mountains, but the mountains have ea∣ten up the sheep, it was the happinesse of our
Church when the zeal of Gods house did eat up the Bishops, glorious and brave Martyrs went to the stake, in defence of the Protestant Religion, but the zeal of these Bishops have been to eat up and persecute the Church. Who is it M. Speaker, but these Bb. that hath sit at the helme to guide and steare them to all their managing of their Proiects, that hath been set on foot in this Kingdome these Two yeeres last past, and rather then they would stand out, they have most unworthily trucked and chaffered in the meanest of them, as for instance, that of Tobacco, wherein thousands of poore people have been stripped and turned out of their trades, for which they have served as Apprentice; Wee all know that they were then men that comprehended and contracted with them for their Licences: Certainly Mr. SPEAKER, they might have spent their times better, and more for their grace in the Pulpit, then thus raking and plotting of mischiefe. Mr. SPEAKER, Wee all know what they have been charged withall heere in this house, they be crimes of a dangerous Conse∣quence, and of a transcendent nature, no lesse than the subverting of the government of this Kingdome, and the alteration of the Prote∣stant Religion, and this not upon bare infor∣mation onely, but much of it comes before us
already, upon cleere and manifest proofes, and there is scarce any businesses, grievances, or complaints come before us in this place, wherein we doe uot finde them intermingled, and as it were twisted into it, like a busie and angery Waspe, his sting in the tayle of every thing. Wee have this day heard the Report of the Conferrence which Wee had the last weeke, and in it the accusation which is laid against them, and wee doe all know, that they are guilty of the same. Mr. Speaker, they have beere, and are still the common enemie to all goodnesse and good men, and it is not safe that such vipers should have been neere his Maiesties person, to distill their poyson into his sacred Eares, nor were it safe for the Common Wealth, that they should sit in so eminent a place of government, being thus wickedly bent, these men are the corrupt fountaine, that hath infected all the streames, and untill the foun∣taine be purged, we cannot expect to have any cleere Channells, I shall be bould therefore, to offer my opinion, and if I erre, it is the er∣rrour of my Iudgement, and nor my want of zeale and affection to the publike good. I conceive it most necessary and fit that wee should now take up a Resolution to doe somewhat, and to strike whilest the Iron is
hot: to goe to the Lords in the Name of the Commons of this House, to desire their Lordships, that these men might proceed in their triall. FINIS.
