R1690A 99831156 35619
A True and Perfect RELATION Of the Great VICTORY Obtained over the DVTCH With an Account of the Ships that was taken and sunk in the said Engagement. ALSO The Names of their Men of War, their Commanders and Number of their Guns, that were appointed for a Convoy to their SMYRNA Fleet. LONDON, Printed for G. I. 1672.
A True and Perfect Relation of the Great Victory obtained over the Dutch, with an Acconnt of the Ships taken and sunk in the said Engage∣ment; also the Names of their Men of War, their Commanders and number of their Guns that were appointed as a Convoy to their Smyrna Fleet. SIR, I Have received yours from London bearing no date, which I impute to the too hasty expectation of News from our Port, concering the late En∣gagement betwixt the Dutch Smyrna Fleet, and our Squadron of Men of War, which on the thir∣teenth of this Instant was Crucing off the Isle of Wight; to satisfie your curiosity take it as followeth; Upon Wednesday March the Thirteenth Sir Robert Holmes with a Squadron of five Ships, crucing about the Isle of Wight met with the Dutch Smyrna Fleet con∣sisting
of above fifty Saile, convoyed by six War▪ the names of the Ships in Sir Robert Holmes Squadron were first the Saint Michael commande Sir Robert Holmes as Admiral; the second the Resoi¦on, commanded by the the third, the Cambridge commanded by Sir Fretchevtie Holles as Reer-Admiral: the fourth, the Glocester com∣manded by Captain John Holmes Brother to Sir Robert Holmes; the Fairfax commanded by Captain egge. Then about two a clock in the afternoon meeting with the aforesaid Smyrna Fleet, shot to make them strike and lower their Top-sailes, which they refused to do, with which reful, our Ships shot Ball through and through ▪ upon which they lowered their Top-sails, but yet refused to strike, upon which the Fight began, the Dutch throwing over-board a great many of their heaviest Goods to lighten them, twenty of their Merchant-men carrying from twenty to forty Guns apiece they made serviceable by sending men aboard them in the night, so that there was as good as twenty eight Men of War, notwithstanding this our five Ships maintained a fight with them till night, and run through and through them, at which time there came to our assistance three Ships more, viz. the York commanded by Captain Elliot, the Dia∣mond commanded by Captain Towlis, the Success com∣manded by Captain Watson, on Thursday Morning early the Fight began again and continued all that day, about noon Captain John Holmes borded their Rear-Admirall, its name was S. Patrick formerly an English Ship, but our Seamen being too eager of the
prise neglected to stop the leak she being much shatte∣red and torn, in a short time she sunk down; about the Evening we took five of their richest Merchant∣men and had undoubtedly taken the rest had not the night parted us, and a very fresh gale of wind rising in the night, gave then an oportunity of getting away: The whole Fight was managed with a great deal of Courage and gallantry on our part, conside∣ring the number of our Ships and the great number of the Dutch full man'd, for they had at least fifteen hundred Spanish Soldiers abord that was going to the service of the Neitherland, it may be accounted as remarkable a Victory as ere was obtained in the British Seas. The loss of the Dutch was very considerable, not only as to the loss of Men, but of Goods thrown over board, there was at least fifty Bayles of Silk taken up by our Vessels, who went off from this Port the next Day, besides what Goods sunk to the bottom. The five Ships taken are loaden chiefly with several sorts of rich Silks, and other Turkish Commodities: in their Reer-Admiral was sunk abundance of Spa∣nish Silver, that was sent from Spain to pay of their Souldiers in the Netherlands. They had killed in their Reer-Admiral before she sunk (by acknowledgement of some of the Ships Company) above one hundred and fifty persons, and very many wounded: And it is thought that they could not lose less than a thousand men in this Engagemen. Since this His Majesty hath been pleased to set forth His Declaration shewing the Reasons that doth induce him to wage War with that
Ingrateful and Insolent people the Dutch, who not above eighty years since was the Poor Distressed States, and were ready to lie down at our Feet for reliefe; these we succoured, which now, like a viperous Brood, would fly in the faces of those that gave them a Be∣ing: But their Ingratitude we do not doubt will be sufficiently scourged, and they be brought again to acknowledge their Keepers and Preservers of their Lives and Liberties, when His Majesties Royal Fleet united shall meet them, which will consist of above Eighty Saile, commanded by his Royal Highness in person; and may well claime the Title of the Invin∣cible NAVY, for never such a Fleet for goodness of Ships, brave Commanders, and Valiant Seamen e∣ver plowed the Seas; in the mean time we may leave them to provide for the safety of themselves and Country which never was in greater danger, they be∣ing besieged on all sides with Enemies, viz. with the French, the Prince Elector of Coloigne, the Bishop of Munster, and the King of Danemarks Forces. So great a Crime is in Ingratitude, that Heaven will not let it go long unpunished. What further Newes comes to my hand you shall be sure to have an Account, From your Friend, John Robinson.
From the Hague, March 29. S. N. Worthy Imployer, IN obedience to your last commands I have sent you what News this place affords; to satisfie your cu∣riosity you may read this following abstract. Divers of our Smyrna Fleet are arrived in Zealand and in the Maes, together with the Men of War, un∣der whose Convoy they were, though extreamly torn and very much disabled; five of our Merchant men were taken by the English, two of which were the richest in the Fleet, laden with Silks and other rich Commodities, and were called the Landtman of Am∣sterdam, and the Vrede of Rotterdam, besides our Rear-Admirall (being formerly an English Ship) was sunk also one of our Men of War, mounted with 44 Guns and 50 men called the Little Holland: Captain de Haes Admiral of this Fleet was killed in this En∣gagement, with many of our Men, and many more wounded, who have been since brought a shore at Rotterdam and other places. The men of War which served for Convoys to the said Fleet were the Vlushing, Captain Adrian de Haes, carrying fifty Guns, and two hundred and fifty Men. The Dort, Captain Thomas de Bois, carrying forty six Guns and one hundred and seventy Men. The Eutrecht▪ Captain Cornelius Everson, carrying forty eight Guns and two hundred and twenty Men. The Hollandia, Captain Thomas Nes, carrying forty four Guns and one hun∣dred and fifty Men. The Delf, Captain Pourt, carry∣ing
thirty eight Guns and one hundred and forty five Men. The Lion, Captain Lenny, carryin thirty four Guns and one hundred and forty Men. The Centaur, Captain Thomas Alderson, carrying forty one Guns and one hundred and twenty Men. The Friezland, Captain Jacob Anderson, carrying thirty Guns and one hundred and ten Men. The Mannick, a considerable Merchant man, moun∣ted with thirty Guns, was so torn and disabled, that with much difficulty they have brought her into Port; Captain du Bois▪ Vice-Admiral of this Fleet, hath lost his right Arm, and many of his men. FINIS.
