R1694 12645332 65114
IRELANDS TRAGICAL TYRANNIE: SENT OVER IN TWO LETTERS, BY A SPEEH∣lesse Damzell, which landed at Miniard upon the 18. day Jan. 1642. wherein is plainly and truly shown, what Cruel∣ty hath possest the Irish Rebels hearts, and how barba∣rously they have dealt with her: first how they defloured her body, and after tore the haire from her head, And lastly, how they cut out her tongue; and one of her hands for resi∣sting them. ALSO, HOW THE WOLVES DESTROYED Mr. THO∣MAS ADAMS, his Wife and Children, to the number of fourteen persons in one night, being constrained to forsake their habitation. With a true Relation of other remarkable Passages, performed by the blood-thirsty Rebels. These Letters were sent from the Damzels Father out of Ireland, to her Vnkle Robinson, who liveth neere unto Miniard in Summerset-shire. LONDON, Printed for TL, 1642.
A COPY OF THE First Letter which was sent by the speechlesse Damzell to her Uncle, from her Father. DEare and loving Brother with weeping eyes, and bleeding heart, I am inforced to write unto you the Cause of my unparallel'd heavi∣nesse: I have before this time sent you three several Letters; to the which you sent me back answer that you could not beleeve that which was written to be true. But alas brother, the world is now grown to such a passe, that men will not believe any thing to be true, unlesse it be done upon their own persons, or in their own houses. Therefore for your further satisfaction, I have sent you my only daugh∣ter, with two letters, that you may with a lamenting heart behold her sorrow: there may you see the body of her, whom the villains abused: there may you see in what manner her hair was torn from her head, because she would not yeeld to their lust: there may you discern how her hair was cut off, be∣cause she sought to resist their tyrannicall cruelty: there may you also perceive, how her tongue was cut out of her mouth, because she would not blas∣pheme against her Maker. This woful spectacle have I sent unto you, that when you have seen her perple∣xity that she is in, you may bewaile her calamities:
and these Letters haue I sent by her, because her tongue is cut out, that she cannot expresse her mind. So hoping that you will with patience peruse lines, and the other Letter. I remain your faithfull brother, till death gives end to my life, Iohn Robinson▪ From London Derry▪ Jan. 18. 1642▪ THE Copie of the second Let∣ter which was sent to the speech∣lesse Damzell. VPon the eighth day of this present month of Jan. a great part of the Irish Rebels, being se∣ven score in number, came to the House of Mr. Tho∣mas Adams an English man who had long time li∣ved in feare of their comming, and having in readi∣nesse provided a way out of his back-doore: where∣by that himself and the rest of his Houshold might escape the enemies fury. On the backside of the house there was a running River, over which they had placed a Draw-bridge, that they might at any time weigh up and down, ac∣cording as their need required. On the fore-part of the house they had framed a goodly prospect, that they might the better descern the enemies approach; in the house was Ammuniti∣on, powder and shot, muskets, and other weapons sufficient to furnish 30. men. About the house were four goodly Ricks of
wheat, with two great barns full of other grain, be∣sides in the stables there were 12. stout horses some that belonged to the Plow, and some for other uses, and four yoak of Oxen at the staul with abundance of victuall, and all manner of good houshold stuffe, all which was consumed in a moment of time by the Rebellious Irish, as you shall hear in the following discourse. Now for the better safeguard of the house, and family, Mr. Adams, alwayes kept one on purpose to watch through the Prospect, but the Rebels being grounded in villany, had by some meanes learned where the house stood, and how it was furnished, and therefore went about the number of twenty first, and came within sight of the house, which when the watch-man had taken view of, hee mde his Master acquainted with the same, who presently gave Com∣mand that every man in the house should prepare for battell; for why, said he, J see there are but twenty in sight of the Rebels, and we are thirty in number: let it never be said, that we will flee from them, and forsake all that ever we have for fear of them that cannot hurt us. You know that one stroke from the hand of a true man, gains more victory then the force of theeves. Therefore let us approve our selves to bee bold hearted Englishmen, ad fight for our Countries ho∣nour against these Papisticall enemies of truth. At which manly resolution, every one of his men-ser∣vants betook himself to his musket, and liking so well of their masterr forwardnesse, evey man see∣med so couragious, as if they had no fear of death at all: by tha time the treacherous Rebels were come within gun shot of the house, they marched 4 abrest, and five in rank, and made an assault upon the house.
Whereupon the Master of the house and his men, having their muskets charged in readinesse, gave fire upon them out at the windows, and slew sixe of the twenty at the first valley of shot; the other six∣score of the Rebels which lay in ambush, hearing the Guns make such a ratling noise, knew that their fel∣lowes were in hot service, made all speed that might be towards the house, who were presently descry'd by the watch-man, which cryed out with a loud voice, O Master now seek to save your self, or else we are all dead men. When the Master and his men perceived themselvs in such a grievous streight, they kept fast the fore doors, and fled out at the backe door, and some over the draw-bridg, together with the Mistris and her Children, and the Maid-servants all in generall, hoping thereby to save their lives. But see how they ran out of one danger into another, the men because they were constrained to help the wo∣men kind, cast away all their armes, that the enemy might not overtake them in running, and so for suc∣cour they ran into a wood to hide themselves from their following foes, and having gathered together a deale of Ferne, they made them lodging under the trees: in which miserable night the Mistris was de∣livered of a man-child in that desert place. But here comes the griefe of all, it chanced so that in the dead time of the night, a Wolfe that had bin chased the day before, comming neere unto the place where these distressed people lay, and having scented them came to them, and ceised upon one of the maids, and bit her by the arm, and by the left breast, before shee could make any means to shift for her self. At last, crying out for help, one of the men which had a sword, drew it to save the maids life, The subtle wolf, finding himself like to be over-matcht, ran straightways to asleep hill, and sat thereon, and ther∣withall
made such a howling noise, that hee called such a number of wolves together, that all the power they had was not able to resist them, some that had swods fought for themselves, and some that could climbe got upon trees, the rest were torn in pieces by the ravening wolvs, to the number of 14. amongst the rest, the tender mother and her new-born infant served to suffice the hungry maws of the devouring monstrous wolves. The next day went forth of the town of London-Derry 500. rmed men, thinking to have met with the Rebels, but they were too swift of foot for them: but as they passed through the wood, they beheld what was done by the wolves. There might they see the bloud of Christians which was spilt by means of wolves and Cany bals. Their hearts, livers, and entrails torn in pieces with other wofull objects. Thus gentle brother have I sent you the cause of my delay in my mournfull Letters, hoping that the next time that I write to you, to send you better newes, otherwise would I might never live to write more. Your distressed Brother John Robinson. FINIS.
