S256 R26995 9602523 43796
Sad News from the Countrey, OR A TRUE and FULL RELATION OF THE LATE Wonderful Floods In divers Parts of ENGLAND. With the great Destruction of several Persons, the Carrying away of Houses, Mills, Cattel, &c. Besides the vast Damage done to the Growing Corn, by Wash∣ing it up by the Roots out of the Ground, which occasions the High Prizes thereof. Together with an Account of the late Extraordinary Tides i the River of Thames: And the Breaking out of the New River near Islington. Which may serve as a Preparative to the Approaching General Fast, that all may be Affected with, and Humble their Souls under the Hands of Providence; as well to Divert this Threatning Visitation of Unseasonable VVeather, as to Im∣plore a Blessing on the Nation. London, Printed in the Year, 1674.
Englands Wonder, OR The late strange Floods, &c IN vain do the Busie Philosopher, or more pretended Astro∣loger, think by Groping into the Secrets of Nature, Infal∣libly to Assign either the prime Causes or exact Times of excessive Heats, Infectious Airs, prodigious Floods, and such like wonderful Alterations happening in the Macrocosm, or State of the Great World; since Truth it self in its Sacred Ora∣cles assures us: That the Almighty God (that Natura Naturans and Eus Eutiun, as some of the wisest Heathens have called Him) can at his Omnipotent pleasure, restrain the sweet Influ∣ences of the Pleiads, and looe the Bands of Orion. 'Tis He, and He alone, that for our Sins, by His Over-ruling Providence, sometimes makes the Heavens as Brass, parching the Ground with Scorching Droughts, and at other times opens the Bottles of Heaven, to wash away the hopeful Fruits of the Teeming Earth with Deluges of Water. And certainly that Man (if any such deserve that Name) must be exceeding Stupid, or very Care∣less that does not once perceive and lay to Heart the late most Unseasonable weather, wherewith our Climate hath been Visi∣ted; wherein such continual Rains, and extraordinary Floods have happened, as few Mens Memories can Parrallel, as by the
Joynt Testimonses ensuing, faithfully Extracted from Letters from several Parts, may abundantly Apper. I. A Letter from Tiverton in Deonshire, Dated the 14th. of January Instant. SIR, AFter an Account of the Receipt of your last, and Acquaint∣ing you that I have fully performed your Desires there∣in, as by the enclosed Note you may perceive. I have little more to Trouble you with, except it be the sad News of the Ill weather we have suffered under; of Late, such extraordinary Rains having successively happened, that for near Three weeks time we have had continual Floods, and those so High and Vio∣lent, that they have caused no little Damage. In particular, our Rivers has Overflown so far as to Sweep away several small Dwelling Houses, Hay-reeks, Bams, and Out-Houses in the Neighbouring Villages; But at and about Hetherley, we hear the Inundation has been more furious, Destroying several Cat∣tel suddenly in Low-Lands, and some Persons that endeavoured to preserve them. There is scarce any Passage or Going Abroad to Markets, without danger of ones Life the Waters are so High: The Corn which was generally very Forward and Hope∣ful, is by these Violent Showres and Floods, washt out of the Ground, and like in a great measure to be Destroyed; so that Wheat is at present at Eight Shillings the Bushels with us, and like to Rise higher daily: The Lord in Mercy put a stop to this unseasonable Weather, to whose protection I Commit you, and Rest, Yours, T. H. II. Extracted from a Letter from Gainesbrough, in Lincolnshire. SIR, I Could not Write to you sooner, for the Water has been so excessive High round us, that no Carriers could pass, and the Bearer who now Ventures, will Run a great Hazard with
his Horses; and be forced to go far about in many places. The River Humber has overflow'd all the Country adjacent, up to∣wards Sherborn, and almost as far as Laeds, and swept away several Bridges and Mills over small Rivers that fall into it. The eldest man living hereabouts, never knew so wet a time, and of so long continuance: Corn Rises very extreamly by reason hereof, being much damnified here, and (as we are informed) in most other places, nor do our Sheep escape, but dye now in great numbers of the Rot, by reason of this wet Weather; poor England has smarted severely with a dread∣ful Pestilence; a lamentable Fire, and no small Calamities of War. Oh! may the merciful hand of Providence, pre∣serve us now from Famine, &c. Your Loving Friend, T. R. III. Taken out of a Letter from Town Maling in Kent. Dated the 19th. of the 11th. Moneth called, January. John C. I Had some thoughts of seeing thee in London before this time, but plainly the weather has been so bad for many days, That I did not think it convenient to undertake a Jour∣ney. We have had almost continual Rains for some time, and higher Floods than any I can remember to have seen: All a∣long almost from Tunbridge to Maiastone, the River has over∣flow'd its Banks, and that further than ordinary, Tis thought that Corn on the Ground will receive much prejudice here∣by; so that Wheat is already raised by people in its price pretty much in several Markets near us: Some Friends lately come from Chichester, into these parts say, That the Waters are thereabouts very much broken out likewise, and have done hurt in several parts of Sussex, bearing away Bridges and Cattel sometimes; And we hear the like from other places, So that tis feared the thing may be pretty General, and cause a
Scarcity of Bread and other Provisions for the Sustenance of man: Certainly the Lord hath a Controversie with sin, and since Pride and Fulness of Bread, have been Sins so rise amongst the People, they cannot but acknowledge it Just, if now they are afflicted with Poverty, and Leanness of Teeth, &c. S. K. IV. Out of a Letter from Downham, in Norfolk. Cozen, IN my last, I gave you some Account of great Rans that had happened of late here, but now we have far greater Floods then before; The Tydes coming in, meeting with vast Land-floods, have swel'd all our Rivers so high, that they scorn the an∣cient Confinement of their Banks, and run with an Enfranchiz'd Current over our Grounds, with as much violence and impe∣tuosity, As a Vulgar Rabbe, getting to a Head in a Sediti∣ous Tumult, when they bear down all Laws before them, and mad, for they know not what will be kept within Bounds of Reason or Moderation. Sure I am this unwelcome Inroad of waters, makes us very apprehensive of a thin Harvest; We wait with a longing Impatience to hear some Results from that Illustrious Great Councel, now Convened, when they please to make any thing publick, pray fail not to make your Coun∣trey Friends happy with an Importment. May the All pow∣erful God, put a period to this unseasonable Weather; banish all Clouds from our Horizon: Bless that Honourable Assem∣bly in their Counsels and proceedings, for the Honour of his Majesty, and wellfare of the Nation, and keep in his Love and Protection, your self and Family, together with Your most affectionate Kins∣man, G. H.
By a Letter from a Gentlemans Baily in Worcestershire, to his Master in London. Honoured Sir, ACcording to your Commands in your last, by Mr. T. G. Wherein you order me to give an Account, How your Concerns stand, and whether the late wet Season hath done you any Damage; I must with Sorrow acquaint, That you are like to receive very considerable Prejudice by i, both in Relation to your Cattel and Corn; for of the 350. Sheep you left, when you went up to London, notwithstand∣ing all the car could possibly be taken, or means used, I cannot assure you that there are 50. remaining Sound. But, Sir! this sad affliction hath not lighted only upon you; all your Neighbours, and the Country round, have shared in the like mishap; and tis feared it is a National Calamity. The Waters are exceeding High, and so have continued several Weeks, for as soon as one Flood begins to Ebb, or Abate, the Clouds pour down more Rain; and Reinforce the De∣luge with fresh Inundations. The Corn was generally come up very well; but 'tis wished now it were not so forward, for 'tis much feared, it will be quite Spoiled with those in∣ordinate Rains. I was in obedience to your Command, to wait on Sir J. K. who ordered me to acquaint you, &c. Your most Faithful, &c. To these several Country Instances we may add the Experien∣ces of the City and Places adjacent, the Towns having sweld of late with such extraordinary Tide as have not been known these 30 years, flowing into peoples houses a story high or more, and thereby doing much damage at Greenwich, Wapping, Southwark, Westminster and most Towns Westward as far as Brainford and beyond; As also how the New River (that most excellent Monument of the Renowned Middletons publique Spirited Generosity and grand refreshment of this City with it's Silver streams) grew over charged with Water and break∣ing
over its Banks came down full tarrens as if it sought re∣venge of the ungrateful Town, yet was at last so gentle that its fury served only to wash Hog-Lane-Alley, and some other place thereabouts, where the Inhabitants were surprized to see their Rooms all overflow'd, and Chairs and Cracles Floating about House like Boats; but these Accidents being obvious and well known, we own't and for Conclusion say. That as the unseasonableness of the weather seem; to threaten us with Scarcity and damage so undoubtedly the Ocean of our sins has brought upon us these Deluges of Water, which will be best dryed up and stopt for the future by Floods of Repentant Tears, for according to the excellent Du. Bartas. When from the Clouds Excessive Water spins Heaven surely weeps for our unwept for sins. FINIS.
