S2725 16412522 105381
THE Triumphs of London, Performed on Thursday, Octob. 29. 1691. for the Enter∣tainment of the Right Honourable Sir THOMAS STAMP Kt; Lord Mayor of the City of LONDON. Containing a true description of the several Pageants, with the Speeches spoken on each Pageant. All set forth at the proper Costs and Charges of the WORSHIPFUL COMPANY of DRAPERS. By E. Settle LONDON, Printed by Alex. Milbourn, for Abel Roper at the Mitre near Temple-Bar, 1691.
TO THE RIGHT HONOƲRABLE Sir THOMAS STAMP Knight; LORD MAYOR of the City of LONDON. MY LORD, HOnour ever looks Lovelyest, and shines Brightest, when 'tis the Re∣compence and Meed of Virtue; so great is the Difference between a Present and a Reward? Your Lordship ascends the Praetorial Chair under the last Qualification. Your Merits have planted You so fair a Mark for that Dignity You have received, that it is payd, not given You. And the Una∣nimous acknowledgements of all good Men are so sensible of a Desert so conspi∣cuous, that their concurring best Wishes make you one United Congratulation. And that Your Lordship has so deserved, your Constant Zeal for the Honour of Your Country, is not the Business of Yesterday. Your Lordship set out an early Devote in so worthy a Cause. For Instance, seve∣ral Years together in those memorable Days, when Intrigue & Designe sat high at the Helm, Your unshaken Honour and Hone∣sty were thought so dangerous to the then
State-Hammerers at the Anvil, that no less then Court-Power was pleased to rise up & wage against You, witness the several po∣tent, Oppositions made against you and your long Exclusion from your Right∣ful Entrance into Trust. But thanks to Pro∣vidence, under the present more benign, & more auspicious Administration, a Reign where Integrity qualifies for Magistracy, & the Courtier & the Patriot are not names incompatible, your Lordships Glory of being the Fear of that Age, intitles you to the Darling of this. And our proud Metro∣polis receives her saluted PRAEIOR so pleased at your Inauguration, and with such promising confidence of so upright and unbiast a Ministry of Equity & Justice from your Lordship that she never entrusted her Scales and her Sword in a Worthier Hand. In which high post of Honour, I joyn but in the Universal Quire, when all Prosperity and Hoppiness to your Lordship are most heartily wisht by, My Lord, Your most humble and obedient Servant, E. SETTLE.
TO THE WORSHIPFUL COMPANY OF DRAPERS. Gentlemen, UNDER this fair Occasion of expressing my Gra∣titude, perhaps I take a fairer of gratifying my Pride, when I publish Your Generous Goodness in Accepting of my poor Talent for the Service of this Honourable City. My best Acknowledgments to Your In∣troducing Favour lye no little Duty upon me; and though I dare not Arrogate any Merit to so much Honour, yet at least I have this Advantage that I succeed not over-formidable Predecessours; Those Brothers of the Quill whose Pegasus has not soard so high, that there's much danger of my Flag∣ging behind 'em. But when I Address to You my Kind and Worthy Patrons, I dare not pretend in so narrow a Paper to recount the Antiqui∣ty and Splendor of the Worshipful Company of DRAPERS. It is enough to say that the Honour of your Corporation extends as far as Trade can reach, or Canvas Wings can carry it; and from this little Island visits only those Nations of the World
that there is Sea to Travel to. And for Your First Original, Drapery is unquestionably so Ancient as to have the Honour of being the immediate Successor of the Fig-Leaves. And though we are not certain that our great First-Father began it within his Fair Eden, yet we are assured that Eves Spin∣stry and Adams Spade set to work together. And as for any Poetical Harangue to the Drapers Encomium, let it suffice that whilst there are Verdant Plains and Bleating Flocks, those innocent Panegyrists will do you more Justice, and speak much better than any weak flourish from the Pen of Your most Obliged Humble Servant E. Settle.
The Movements of the Morning. Between Seven and Eight in the Morning the whole Company design'd for the Duty of the Day, meet at Drapers-Hall. 1. THE Master, Wardens, and Assistants, in Gowns faced with Foins, and their Hoods. 2. The Livery in their Gowns Faced with Budg, and their Hoods. 3. Forty Foins Batchelors in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods. 4. Forty Budg-Batchelors in Gowns & Scarlet Hoods. 5. Forty Gentlemen Ushers in Velvet Coats, each of them a Chain of Gold about his Shoulder, and a White-Staff in his Hand. 6. Several Drums and Fifes with Scarfs, and the Co∣lours of the Company in their Hats, Blew and Yellow. 7. The Serjeant Trumpet, and Twenty Four Trum∣pets more, whereof Sixteen are their Majesties, the Ser∣jeant-Trumpet wearing Two Scarfs, a Blew & a Yellow. 8. The Drum-Major to the King, wearing a Shoulder-Scarf of the Companies Colours, with others of Their Majesties Drums and Fifes. 9. The Two City-Marshals, each of them Mounted on Horse-back, with Rich Furniture, Hoosings, and Crupper all Embroider'd: Six Servitors likewise Moun∣ted to Attend, with Scarfs, and Colours of the Companies. 10. The Foot-Marshal with a Scarf, and Six Atten∣dants in Colours.
11. The Master of Defence with the same Scarf and Colours, Eight Persons of the same Science to Attend him. 12. Twenty Pensioners with Coats and Caps, employ'd in carrying of Standards and Banners. 13. Eighty Pensioners in Blew-Gowns, Yellow Sleeves and Blew Caps, each of them carrying a Javeling in one Hand, and a Target in the other, wherein is Painted the Coat-Armour of their Founders, and Benefactors of the Company. Thus order'd, and accommodated, they are commited to the management of the Foot Marshal, who distributes them in Seven Divisions, rank'd all two by two, begin∣ning with the inferior part of the Standard Bearers. In the head of them are placed two Drums, one Fife, and one Gentleman, bearing the Companies Arms. In the Rear of them, two Gentlemen bearing Banners, containing the Arms of the deceased Benefactors. After them march the aged Pensioners in Gowns, and in the Centre of them fall two Drums. In the Rear of them three Drums, one Fife, and two Gentlemen in Plush-Coats, bearing two Banners, one of Their Majesties, the other of the Companies. After them Six Gentlemen Ushers, follow'd by the Budg-Bat∣chelors. The next, two Gentlemen bearing two other Banners. After them Six Gentlemen Ushers, succeeded by the Foyns Batchelors. In the Rear fall in two Drums, and a Fife. Then two Gentlemen, one bearing my Lord MAYORS, the o∣ther the City Banners. Then Twelve Gentlemen Ushers, and after them the Court of Assistance, which makes the last Division. The Right Honourable the LORD MAYOR, with the principal Aldermen and Sheriffs, Mounts his Horse, with
the Aldermen two by two, the Sheriffs in the Rear. In this Equipage of two and two, the whole Body move toward Guild-Hall, where the Lord Mayor Elect joynes with the Old Lord Mayor and his Retinue; whence all of them in this Order march through King∣street down to Three Crane-Wharf, there entring into their several Barges which are gloriously adorned with Flags and Pendants, His Lordship & this Gallant Company all Landing at Westminster, is conducted to the Exchequer-Bar; there having performed several Ceremonial and Customary Duties, and taken the Oaths to their Maje∣sties, he returns again by Water to Black-Fryers Stairs, with Drums beating, Trumpets sounding, Musick play∣ing, &c. There his Lordship, and the several Companys land∣ing from their Respective Barges, the rest of the Atten∣dants that went not to Westminster, waiting for his Re∣ception, the whole Body moves in Order before him to Cheap-side, where his Lordship is saluted with the First Pageant. The First Pageant A Chariot, &c. ON a large Stage are placed two large Lyons finely Gilded and Pollished, being the Suppor∣ters to the Drapers Company. On their backs are seated two Negroes in their Native Habit, bearing in their Hands two large Banners, the one of the Citys, the other the Drapers Arms; their Bridles, Trap∣pings,
and other Ornaments all of the Companys Co∣lour. In the Reer of the Lyons, and adjoyning to them, is E∣rected a Golden Chariot set with all the richest Embelish∣ments that can be performed by Art. Supremely elevated and gradually ascending, under a Canopy of Silver tyed up, in a Majestick glory sits a Young and Beautiful Virgin, representing Arachne the Mistress and Patroness of Arts, Industry, Spinstry, &c. A Peruque of Curld Bright Flaxen Hair flowing from her Shoulders, a Crown of Stars Around her head, beset with precious Stones, enrobed in a Bass or Tunick of Purple and Carnation, bearing in her Right hand the Kings Banner, and in her Left a Cornucopia to signify that In∣crease is owing to Industry and Art. On her right hand (on a Descent beneath) sits Dili∣gence, on her Left hand Industry. Diligence Array'd in a Robe of Lemon Colour'd Silk, with a mantle of Green Sarsnet, in short curl'd hair with a Wreathe of Lawrel, a pair of Silver Sheers in one hand and a Banner of the Citys in the other. Industry, in a Robe of Crimson Silk Fringed with Sil∣ver, a Mantle Party-Colour'd, Brown Hair, a Garland of Flowers, bearing in one hand a Shield Vert, a Bee-Hive, and a Swarm, in the other the Lord Mayors Arms. In the Front of this Chariot are placed three other Fi∣gures, richly adorn'd in their Proper Habits, Success, Ʋnion and Tranquility, Success beating the Kettle Drum, and Ʋnion and Tranquility sounding of Trumpets.
Arachne Addressing to my Lord. HOld, hold my sooty sun burnt Charioteers, Behold the awfull Lord of Pow'r appears: Bid my Triumphant Driving Chariot stay, Till to bright HONOUR I my Homage pay. That Pow'rful Hand must stop my rolling Wheels, Whilst to such WORTH even my proud Lyon Kneels. My Lyons! Yes; at that commanding Word, They know their Duty and must own their Lord. If such their Homage, Sir, what must be mine, I who but only from Your Favour shine? Though proud Arachne does her self profess, Of Arts the Mistress, and the Patroness. Fair Industry and Arts your Hand-Maids stand; Th' improving Age and the Enriching Land, All spin their Thred from Your Encouraging hand. My Wheel then and my Loom are all Your own, And' tis Your Smiles that mount me to my Throne. Then from that Throne, my Lord, I bend thus low; And to Acknowledge the vast Debt I owe, My Founders Fame in my own Loom enroll'd, For that Rich Web I'll spin a Thread of Gold.
The Second Pageant THE Pyramide of Honour. ON a Large Stage is Artfully and Eminently E∣rected a Lofty Pyramide, whereon is placed (and Richly Gilded) all manner of Trophies, as Standarts, Ensigns, Shields, Helmets, Trumpets, and other Military Habiliments, &c. On the Pinnacle of the Pyramide Three Imperial Crowns. Beneath this Stately Pyramide, on each side the Basis, are seated four Persons, representing Albion, Germania, Hispania and Batavia, intimating the present CONFEDERACY, Array'd in this following Manner. Albion in a Suit of Silver Armour with a Crimson Scarf, on his Head a Large Peruke tyed back in a bag, his brow encircled with a Gold Lawrel, in his right hand a Gold∣en Truncheon, in his left a Banner of England, his Bus∣kins Crimson, inlayed with Gold. Holland in an Orange Colour'd Robe, a Silver Head-Piece, a Red Plume of Feathers, and a Silver Mantle. Germany in a Purple Robe of Wachet Colour Silk, a Silver Head-Piece and Scarf. Spain in a Purple Robe, a Gold Mantle, and Gold Head-Piece. At the 4 Corners of this Stage are placed these four Rivers in Proper Habits, with their Urnes, Rushes Flags and Reeds, &c. viz. The Boyne, Shannon, Rhine and Danube, signifying the present Seats or Scenes of War, and the whole Pageant the Royal Confederacy of Eu∣rope, &c.
ALBION's Speech. WHilst Nassaus Trump shall t' endless Ages blow, Far as the Boyne, or Shannons Waters flow: Third Edward and Fifth Henry's deathless name, All centring in One Consummating Fame; Bear up, fair Albion, thy exalted Pride, Rise high my Monumental Pyramide. But whilst my Elevated thoughts I raise, All tuned to the Great WILLIAMS hallow'd Praise; Whilst my Transported Veneration mounts To that vast Theme, and the Summ'd Mass recounts: 'Tis just, my Lord, I pay Your Equal due; You share his Cause, and must his Honour too. Does the Arm'd Caesar drive Your Foes before You; Yes, You, kind Patriot, Plume his Wings for Glory: Divide between you then your shared Renown, William that Wears, you that support a Crown.
The Third Pageant, the Theatre of Victory. ON a spacious Stage is Eleborately contrived & Erected a stately Amphitheatre of the Richest Egyptian Marble, curiously wrought and adorned; design'd and built after the Corinthian order, with Columnes and Pilasters in a Quadrangular Form, wherein are seated in four Arches, bearing each the Pro∣spect of an Amphitheatre, Neptune and Thetis, Mars and Bellona sumptuously Drest after the manner of those Hea∣then Gods and Goddesses. Neptune in a Robe of Sea-Green, fringed with Gold, a Silver Mantle, on his head a Coronet of Shells and Coral, his hair and beard Green, in his Right hand a Silver Tri∣dent, in the other a Banner of my Lords, &c. Thetis in an Aurora Colour'd Mantua; and Watchet Colour'd Bases, a Coronet of shells and Coral, a Gold∣en Mantle, bearing the Citys Bannar. Mars in a Roman Body of Gold, A Silver head-piece, a Plume of Red Feathers and Bases, a Silver Scarf, bearing the Kings Banner. Bellona in a Carnation Robe fringed with Gold, a sil∣ver head-piece, a Plume of Red and Blew Feathers, a sil∣ver Scarf. On the Cupulo a stately Figure of Fame gilt: among the Ornaments of the several Columes, are intersprinkled these proper Mottos. Ʋictrix Fortuna. Triumphans Causa. Over Neptune Imperium, Oceano, sed Famam terminet Astris. Over Mars. Ʋltricibus Armis
The Speech of Neptune. NEptune and Mars (the Spear and Trident joyn'd) The two great equal Terrours of Mankind, From all our desolating Vengeance, hurl'd Around the Solid and the Floating World, We come to fill the Triumph of this Day, And both our Tributary Duties Pay. T' Augusta's great Commanding PRAETOR, you Dead Caesars Image, Caesars Vassals bow, And 'tis but Just that all those aiding Pow'rs That wait his Triumph, should attend on yours. Whilst the great NASSAU treads the Worlds fair Stage, Fills Fames loud Trump, the Heroe of the Age; Though his Illustrious Hand leads to the field, The Arming World that fights beneath his Shield; Battles and Arms his Soveraign Right, 'tis true, But Wealth and Riches, those, my Lord, your due, The Sinews of proud War belong to you: And whilst He Marches EUROPES Leading Lord, 'Tis He but Weilds, 'tis you that Edge the Sword.
The Fourth Pageant The VVilderness: OR, The Arcadian Plain, IN the Front of which is placed the Crest of the Wor∣shipful Company of Drapers, being a Ram Artfully carved and properly Painted, as big as the Life, planted for Magnificene on a green Mount, or Hill. On whose back is mounted a Beautiful Boy with Flaxen Hair, crown'd with a Garland of Roses, in a Robe of white Sarsnet, and a Carnation Mantle fringed with Gold, with white Shepherds shoes and stockings, playing on delightful Musick, bearing the Banner of the Arms of the Corporation of Drapers. In the Reer is placed a stately Bower composed after the Tuscan order, well carved and richly gilded and pain∣ted, and adorned with all manner of flowers. Under this Bower on a Green bank sit Sylvanus and Fauna, the Rural Deitys of the Groves and Flocks &c. to whom the Shepherds and Shepherdesses pay Devotion, &c. Sylvanus in a Robe of straw colour, Embroiderd with Gold, a sky colour'd mantle Fringed with Silver, a Gar∣land of Flowerson his head, white hair and beard, Car∣nation silk hose, gold Buskins, a Shepherds Crook, a Lin∣nen Scrip, and Leather bottle, bearing the Citys Banner. Fauna Attyred in a Purple Robe, Embroiderd with Silver, a Scarlet Mantle Fringed with Gold, light Flaxen
hair, on her head a straw hat adorned with Flowers, a Sheepcrook, a silver Scrip and Leather Bottle, bearing the Banner of the Lord Mayors Arms. In the square of this Plain, planted round with Trees and Bushes, adorned with Satyrs & other Rural Figures, are Shepherds, Shepherdesses and Wood-Nimphs, all Gayly Attired, with Bags, Bottles, Sheephooks and Streamers Flying, &c. with other Persons concern'd in the Wool∣len Trade at Work, as an Old Woman Spinning of Yarn, some Carding and Picking of Wool, and all at Inter∣vals, Frolicking, Pipeing, Dancing and Singing, repre∣senting the Pastoral and Rural Innocent Mirth, as a Compliment to the New Lord Mayor, and a Testimony of their Service to the Drapers Company. At the Approach of the Lord Mayor this CAROL is Sung. COme Shepherds and Nimphs a jolly fair Train, Let's Frolick and Dance it around the Plain, Round the Plain, Round the Plain, Let's Frolick and Dance it around the Plain. We'll drink my Lord's Health, then Laugh & lye down, And all to the Glory of London Town, London Town, London Town, And all to the Glory of London Town.
The Ceremony ending with this Speech of Sylvanus. VVHat tho' the whole Alarum'd Globe all round, Their softer Ayrs in Wars loud Thunder drown'd, The Frighted Swain throws his tuned Reed away: No sullen Cloud shades Britains halcyon day. Here Peace does with her Tuneful Measures raign, And to your Triumph brings this Rural Train. 'Tis true, my Lord, when we approach before ye, We neither boast of Pomp, nor State, nor Glory. Yet our Course Bowls as hearty Mirth can hold, As Theirs that drink your Lordships Health in Gold. Here the Pageantry concluding, the Painters, George Holmes and Richard Hayes, bid you good Night; the Lord Mayor and the whole Train moving off to Dinner, which finishes the Solemnity of the Day. FINIS.
