s5882a 99833317 37793
Strange Dreadful, and Amazing News from York. Giving a Sad and Terrible Account OF GOD's fearful Judgment ON ONE WINAM TENDIN, Near Rippon in the County of YORK. Who, upon his Father's Death, perswading his aged tender Mother to deliver up her Estate and Goods to him, upon a slight Pretence of Quarrel, soon after turn∣ed her out of Doors a Begging, threatning those that should Relieve her, so that coming almost starved to his House, when he was making a great Feast, he caused the Victuals to be set away, and drove her out of his Gate: With the Words she thereupon cuttered. And how his Food was turned into fierce poisonous Serpents, that Stung him to Death. And many other Circum∣stances attending so dreadful Relaation. A Dreadful RELATION Of a Prodigious Motion of the Earth, Near Charleville, in the County of Limerick, in Ire∣land, on the 7th Day of June, 1697. carrying with it abundance of Acres of Land, and a Bog of three Miies in lenth, laying Pasture land on that which was Meadow, sinking Hills and raising Valleyes; and by what Means it began and ceased its Motion. London, Printed by J. Wilkins, near Fleet-street, 1607.
Strange, Dreadful, and Amazing News from York-shaire, &c. NEar Rippen, in York-shire, there lived a Rich Man and his Wife, who, from the Fruits of their Love, had an only Son, whom they brought up with great Care and Ten∣derness to to considerable Learning; but the Mouther, too indulgent to him, in humour∣ing him upon all accasions, made him some∣what proud, headstrong, and obstinate, which much grieved his Father, who now was grown aged, insomuch that with vexing, and a short Feaver that thereupon ensued, he died, and left, by Will, great Riches to his Wife, charging her not to part with it to her Son, whil'st she lived, but only supply him as his Necessities requiquired: But the good old Man was no soones laid in his Grave, but upon the importunity of her dear Son, she forgot, or at least regarded not he had desired of her. He earnestly insinuated to her, that if he were possessed of what his Father left, he might advance his Fortunes in a Rich Mar∣riage, and that she should nevertheless be
well maintained; which the tender-hearted credulous Mother believing, upon his pitch∣ing on a rich young Widow, was willing to part with what he desired. To be brief, She made over all she had to him, and thereupon the Marriage was concluded. For a while the Mother lived with them, but not being content with Slights put up∣on her, and her Course Usage, making Complaints to him, and, not finding any Redress, she did the like to some Neigh∣bours, who sharply told him of it, and re∣proved him for his Unnaturalness to so good and tender a Mother: To which he made some Surly Answers, and the same Evening, being an excessive rainy Night, coming home from some of his Pot-Com∣panions, he reproached his Mother, for going about to disparage him, in telling Stories of him to his Neighbours; and, without giving her leave to Reply, or make any Excuse, violently, and not without some Blows, thrust the aged and feeble Creature out of Doors, swearing he would be the Death of her, if ever she came there any more. The poor aged Woman, amazed at this hard Usage from her graceless and unnatu∣ral Son, fell on her Knees, and begged of
him, in consideration of the tender Love she had always born him, and the great things she had done, that he would take compassion on her and be reconciled again to her: But he utterly refused, swearing, That if she would not depart, he would shoot her. She seeing him thus resolute, and fearing the worst, went weeping away to an old Hovel, that stood in a neighbouring Field, and there took up her miserable Lodging with the Cattle that were retired thither to shelter from the Fury of the stormy Night, and spent most of the Time, till the Morn∣ing came, in Sighs, Sobs, and Tears; then she went to some Neighbours, desiring them to get her Son to receive her into the House a∣gain: But he utterly refused it, vowing, with bitter Imprecations, to Arrest them, if they harboured the Old Bitch, as he vilanously termed her: So she thereupon was forced to Beg about the Country, and by the Charity of well-disposed People in that manner support∣ed herself more than a Year. In the mean while her ungracious Son kept Revelling and Feasting, not in the least re∣garding her or sending her any relief; so that her Patience being quite tired out with pi∣ning Want, and other Afflictions, one Day hearing there was to be a great Feast, and
many of the Neighbours at her Son's House, she resolved to go, as hoping, by their means, she might be either Reconciled, or gain pre∣sent Relief, and about the time just as Dinner was on the Table. But the ungracious Wretch, hearing her Voice without, caused the Dishes to be co∣vered and carried away into a Closet, swear∣ing, Though the Old Jade was come, to disturb his Jollity, she should get nothing by it; and, go∣ing to her, soon rallied her out of the House: Who departing pitiously, wringing her Hands, and shedding abundance of Tears, said, as she went out at the Gate, O Son, as you have dealt by me, may God, the righteous Judge of all the Earth, reward you. At this he scoffed, and then, returning to his Guess, said, Now we are shut of the Old Beldam, that came to di∣sturb our Mirth, let us make good Chear. Or∣dering the Servants immediately to bring in the Victuals; who, uncovering three or four of the Dishes wherein Chickens, Capons, &c. had been laid, to their Horror and Amaze∣ment, found ugly venomous Serpents, so that they durst not meddle with the rest. Their Master, wondering at their stay, sent a Maid-servant, to bid them make haste; she going, and seeing so strange and ama∣zing
a change, ran back to her Master in great affrightment, almost breathless, with abrupt stammerings, told him what had hap∣pened: But he, taking her to be bewiched, or distracted, laughing, rose up and swore, That if the Devil was in the Dishes, yet he would bring them to the Table. So, coming to lay Hands on and uncover the other Dishes, the Serpents, with dreadful Hissings; leaped furiously in his Face, and folded themselves so fast about his Neck, with their Mouths to his, that in vain crying out, and labour∣ing to disintangle himself, overcome with the Venom of their Stings, he fell down and died miserably swollen, so that his Car∣case, in a little time bursting, sent forth such a stench, that with much difficulty they were forced to bury him in the dead of the Night; and then the Serpents left the House, and were no more seen there. This amazing Accident caused a great Noise in the Country, bringing Fear and Trembling on many, who looked on it a Just, though Fearful Judgment; upon which the Wise run distracted, but care being taken of her, was brought again to her Senses, and allowed her Husband's Mother a Maintain∣ance; but she enjoyed it but a little while, for, through Grief and the Pining Want wherein she had suffered, coming, after long abstinence, to feed plentifully, she died.
Motion of the Earth, Near Charleville, in the County of Limerick, in Irland, &c. ON the 7th Day of June, 1697. near Char∣leville, in the County of Limerick in Ire∣land, a great Rumbling, or faint Noise, was heard in the Earth, much like unto the Sound of Thunder near spent, or Groans of Men; for a little space the Air was somewhat troubled with little whisking Winds, seeming to meet contrary ways: And, soon after that, to the greater Terror and Affrightment of a great number of Spectators a more wonderful thing happened; for in a Bog, about three Miles long, stretching North and South, the Earth began to move, viz. 16 Acres of Meadow and Pastureland that lay in the side of the Bog, and separated by an extraordinary large Ditch, and 80 Acres of other Land on the further side adjoyning to it; and a Rising, or little the middle of the Bog hereupon sunk fiat. This Motion began about Seven of the Clock in the Evening, fluctuating in its motion like Waves, the Pasture land rising very high, so that it over-run the Ground beneath it, and moved upon its surface, rowling on withgreat pushing violence, till it had covered the Mead∣ow of about 9 Acres, and is held to remain upon it 16 Foot deep. In the Motion of this Earth it drew after
it the Body of the Bog, part of it lying on the place where the Pasture-land that moved out of its place had before stood; and so for ma∣ny Hours travelling on it, continued so to do, till, as it were, weary with journeying, it stood still, leaving great Breaches behind it, and Spewings of Water that cast up noisom Vapours: And so it continues at present, to the great wonderment of those that pass by, or come many Miles o be Eye-witnesses oft so strange a thing; wherein appears the wonerd∣ful Power of Almighty God, who can do what∣oever pleases him in Heaven and Earth, a∣gainst whom no Power nor Strength is able to stand, this mighty Mass of Earth, being, in comparison, as an Attom before that Breath, at whose blast the Foundations of the whole Earth are shaken. This is testified by Mr. Nicholless Harris who was an eye-witness to it: And the Or∣iginal Letter that came from Ireland, may be seen at the Singe of the Sive, in the Minories a Seed-shop, for farther satisfaction. FINIS. Licensed according to Order.
