S597 12692052 65856
Imprimatur, Hic Libellus cui Titulus, A Discourse concerning the Church, &c. Iuly 28. 1688.Io. Battely.
A DISCOURSE Concerning the CHURCH In these following PARTICULARS. I. Concerning the Visibility of the true Church. II. Concerning the Church of Rome. III. Concerning Protestant Churches. IV. An Answer to this Question; Where was your Church before Luther? BY The Right Reverend Father in GOD ROBERT SANDERSON Late Lord Bishop of LINCOLN. LONDON, Printed by T. B. for R. Taylor, MDCLXXXVIII.
THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER. THat the following Discourses are Genuine and Authentick; and were really writ by that excellent Pre∣late whose name they bear; can never be doubted by the Learned and Iudicious Reader. For the Composures of that incomparable Pen are so Close and Logical, and his Stile so Mas∣culine
and Convincing, as not easily to be imi∣tated by any other Hand. However to justifie my Integrity herein (since posthumous Writings lye under Suspici∣on) I shall give this further Satisfaction; That about Twenty Years since, I received these Papers from the Hands of that well-known good Man Mr. Io. Pullen of MAGDALEN-HALL, his Lordship's Domestic Chaplain. Who, upon my Desire, did communicate not on∣ly these, but several other Remains of the same venerable Name. Amongst which, there is a Fragment of an Answer to Dr. Baylie's Challeng. Whe∣ther or no it was ever finished, I have no cer∣tain Conjecture. But if it were, and could be found, the Publishing of it at this Iun∣cture would be Seasonable and Useful.
For though that Pamphlet is a Piece of as transparent Sophistry, as was ever called Demonstration; and though the Weakness and Inconsequence of it hath been sufficiently displayed; yet such is the Pleasure of some Men, that it hath been Printed and Re∣printed with as much Assurance, as if not the least notice had been ever taken of it. The same Remark is obvious concerning these following Tracts. 'Tis surprising to observe (after these things have been so clearly and fully stated) that we should ever and anon be thus pelted with that impertinent Question, Where was your Church before Luther? Our Venerable Au∣thor doth tell them where it was. And he doth it with such an Evidence and Strength of Rea∣son, as is peculiar to Himself. For whereas
the Writings of other Men may indeed con∣vince; Those of Bishop Sanderson do per∣fectly Silence.
A DISCOURSE Concerning the VISIBILITY OF THE True Church. THE word [CHURCH] hath, among others, these four spe∣cial Significations. Being taken for, First, The whole Company of Gods Elect, actually made Members of Christ by vertue of an inward effectual Calling to Faith and Godliness. This we com∣monly call the Invisible Church, or the Church of Gods Elect. Secondly, The whole Company of all those throughout the World, who by
their Doctrine and Worship do out∣wardly make Profession of the Name of Christ. This we call the Universal Visi∣ble Church; Or, the Catholick Christian Church. Thirdly, Some particular, distinct, whe∣ther National, Provincial or other greater or smaller Part of the Universal. As we say; the Church of Rome, the Church of Corinth, the Church of Eng∣land. This we call a Particular Visible Church. Fourthly, By a Synecdoche the Bishops, Pastors, and Governours of particu∣lar Churches, lawfully authorized to represent the whole Church, whereof they are Governours, as to some special Intents. This we call a Church Repre∣sentative. The word [TRUTH] applyed to any Subject, is taken either Absolute, or Respective. Absolutely a thing is true, when it hath veritatem Entis & Essentiae; with all those Essential things, that are re∣quisite
to the bare Being and Existence of it. Respectively, when over and above these Essentials, it hath also such Accidental conditions and Qualities, as should make it perfect and commendably good. A Thing may be true in the first sense, and yet not true in the second but false. As a Man may be a true Man (animal rationale) and yet a false Knave. A Woman a true Wife (nupta viro) and yet a false Quean. A Speech a true Proposition (having Subjectum Praedica∣tum & Copulam) and yet a false Lye. A True Church, according to the first sense and absolutely, is every Church that in her Doctrine and Worship professeth the Faith of Christ, whether soundly or corruptly. But in the second sense and respectively, that only is a true Church whose Doctrine and Worship is pure, at least in a good measure, from Errors and Superstitions. So as other Churches which either maintain Hereti∣cal Doctrines, or prescribe Idolatrous Wor∣ship, may be justly called, at least wise
in comparison with this, and in this second sense, false Churches and not true. A total and utter Defection from the whole Faith of Christ, in Doctrine and in Worship, destroys the very Being of a Church, and maketh it no Church at all. But a defection from the purity of Faith, doth not take away the Being of a Church. It remains still a true Church Absolutely, but only maketh it an Impure and Corrupt Church; and so far forth a false Church Respective∣ly. Corruptions in Doctrine and Wor∣ship as they are greater or lesser, so they make a Church more or less false comparatively: and as they are im∣posed upon Men with greater or lesser exaction, they do more or less justi∣fy; whether a Separation from, or an opposition against, such a false Church, and in some cases enforce it. When betwixt two Churches, differ∣ing in Doctrine or Worship, Question
is made; Whether of them is the true Church? it must be understood not in the first sense and absolutely (for so both are true, and (ergo) equally true Churches, for vero nihil verius) but re∣spectively and comparatively and in the second sense, viz. Whether of them maintains the Doctrine, together with the Worship, taught by Christ and his Apostles, in the greater measure of Pu∣rity, and freer from Error and Super∣stition? [VISIBILITY] as to our pur∣pose, imports such a state of a thing, as wherein 'tis evident and discernable more or less by sensible Marks; so as a Man may infallibly know it thereby, and say; Here it is. Which Visibility hath several Degrees; and applyed to the Church may be several ways con∣sider'd. First, A Thing is visible in the high∣est Degree, where it doth it self ferire oculos, as it were; and is so eminently and gloriously conspicuous, that a Man
(unless he wilfully shuts his Eyes) cannot chuse but see it. As the Sun in the Fir∣mament is visible, when it shines forth in its greatest Lustre at Noon-Day. Secondly, In an inferior Degree; when 'tis discernable even outwardly, but not at the first sight, or in any glo∣rious Splendor; but with due and serious and intent Observation. As some Stars in an over-cast Evening to them that with a stedfast Eye look for them. Thirdly, And in a yet lower Degree; when its not discernable outwardly, or at all, to any but those only who more nearly partake of it. As the light of a Candle in a close private Room, is visible to those only that be in the Room. In every of which Degrees Visibility applyed to the Church and the Mem∣bers thereof, may be consider'd in a Four∣fold Respect. First, Of the Men themselves.
Secondly, Of their general Profession of Christianity. Thirdly, Of their particular different Tenents from other Men or Churches. Fourthly, Of the truth of their particular Tenents.
Theses. First, the Church in the first and most proper Signification, viz. the Church of Gods Elect, is wholly and altogether Invisible. But of this the present Question is not. Secondly, The Universal Christian Church upon Earth hath never failed from the whole Faith, nor ever shall fail to the Worlds end, in such sort but that still in some Part or other of it, it hath been, is, and shall be visible more or less, and that externally in the first or second Degree of Visibility; both in the first and second Respects. Thirdly, Whence it follows; that un∣derstanding Truth in the First sense, there never hath wanted, doth or shall want upon Earth, a true and distinct Par∣ticular Church, in some Place or o∣ther
externally visible, more or less in the Degrees and Respects above specified. Fourthly, Every Particular visible Church may fail, not only from the Pu∣rity of Faith, but also from the whole Faith it self; and so may cease to be a true Christian Church, even so much as in the First Sense; and may become no Church. Fifthly, The Universal Christian Church (consisting of all Particular visible Churches together and at once) may by the prevailing of Heresy and Idolatry, be brought to such a general Defecti∣on in the outward Face of it, though not from the whole Faith, yet from the Purity of Faith both in Doctrine and Worship, that for a long time to∣gether there may not be found upon Earth (taking Church in the second Sense) any true Particular Church visibly di∣stinct from the rest, by their outward Freedom from the common Corrupti∣ons; so much as in the second much less
in the first Degree of Visibility; either in the third or fourth Respects. And this is that Part of the Church especially under Antichrist. Sixthly, That even in the Times of the greatest and most general Defecti∣on, there have been always particular Men (and those eminent either for Number, Place, Learning or Godliness) who though living in the midst of Cor∣rupt Churches, and in the Communi∣on and visible Profession thereof, have yet according to the measure of their Grace and Knowledg, and the exigence of Times and Occasions, either First, Openly resisted the Errors, Super∣stitions and Corruptions of their Times; Or secondly, Noted the Corruptions as they grew and complained of them, and desired Reformation; Or thirdly, In private dissented from them in the Ex∣plication of the most dangerous Do∣ctrines, and kept themselves free from the foulest Corruptions, though carried with the Stream of the common. A∣postacy
to embrace the rest. Whereof we are to presume they repented ei∣ther, Explicitely, if God gave them to see their Errors; or at least wise Im∣plicitely, in the Mass of their ignorant and unknown Sins. Seventhly, Although such particular Men were not always so locally and generally seperated from the rest, as to make a visible distinct particular Church by themselves in the first De∣gree of Visibility; yet in these Men did the Succession of the true Church (taking it comparatively and in the second Sense) especially consist, and the Visibility of it continue in the Time of universal Defection. In which Men the true Church continues visible al∣ways, and perpetually, without inter∣ruption; and that ever in the fourth Respect, viz. in regard of the acknow∣ledg'd Truth of their Doctrine; in the third Degree of Visibility viz. in an in∣ward Estate and to themselves; and sometimes also (though perhaps not al∣ways)
visible externally, and to their very Enemies more or less, in the second Degree of Visibility, and in the Three first Respects.
Concerning the CHURCH of ROME. THE Church of Rome or Roman Church is taken in a Threefold Latitude. First, Respectively to the Place; for that Church which is in the City, or Territory, or Diocess of Rome. As we say the Church of Geneva, or the Church of Venice. And so St. Paul wrote an Epistle to the Church of Rome, as he did to the Churches of Corinth, Ephesus and other particular Cities. Secondly, Respectively to the State of the Empire, for the whole Latine or Western Churches, as they are distin∣guished from the Greek and Eastern
Churches, and from the African and Southern Churches. Because by reason of the Empire, these Churches had a nearer Communion among themselves then with other Churches; and ac∣knowledg the Bishop of Rome as primae sedis Episcopum; or the Patriarch of the West; as other Bishops were of the Greek, Asian, and African Churches. Thirdly, Respectively to the Faith; for all particular Churches aggregatim, that acknowledg Subjection to the pre∣sent See of Rome; and entirely Com∣municate with that Church in the pre∣sent Doctrine and Worship of it; and namely, and especially, as to our pur∣pose, as 'tis comprised in the Council of Trent. In which last Sense taking the Church of Rome, it may be consider'd ei∣ther; First, Materialiter, as 'tis a Church professing the Faith of Christ; as we also do in the common Points of A∣greement.
Secondly, Formaliter and in regard of that we call Popery viz. the Point of Difference, whether concerning the Doctrine or Worship; wherein we charge her to have added to the sub∣stance of Faith her own Inventions. Thirdly, Conjunction pro toto aggregato, taking both together. As in any un∣found Body; we may consider the Body by it self; the Disease by it self; and the Body and the Disease both to∣gether, as they make a Diseased Body.
Theses. FIrst, the Church of Rome (which of the Three ways soever taken) is not the Universal Christian Church, but only a Part thereof, or a Particular Church, or Churches. Secondly, The Church of Rome ever since the first Plantation of it hath continued a true Church, taking Truth in the first Sense; and considering the Church of Rome Materially as it is a Church. But so hath the Church of England also, and many other Churches. Thirdly, The Church of Rome hath no special Promise or Privilege, above other Particular Churches, of Immuni∣ty from falling; either from the Puri∣ty of Faith, or the whole Faith it self.
Fourthly, The Church of Rome which way soever taken, hath long since fail∣ed from the Purity of Faith, both in the Doctrine and Worship of it. And so consider'd formally, in regard of those Points which are properly of Popery, is become a False and Corrupt Church; and is indeed an Antichristian Synagogue, and not a true Christian Church; Taking Truth in the second Sense. Fifthly, The Doctrinal Errors of the Church of Rome, do not directly and immediately overthrow the Foun∣dation of Faith, as the Heresy of the Arrian Churches did, but mediately and by necessary Consequence they do. As in the Points of Merits, Mass, Transub∣stantiation, &c. Sixthly, The bare Teaching, even ex Cathedrâ, of the Doctrinal Errors of the Church of Rome (in as much as they do not overthrow the Founda∣tion, but ex consequenti and indirectly) is not enough of it self alone to enforce
or justify an outward Separation from her; But the imposing these Errors upon the Consciences of Men, to be believed as of necessity, is Damnable. And doth not only justify a Separation already made, but also bindeth sub Mor∣tali all true Christians to such a Separa∣tion. Seventhly, The Worship required and performed in the Church of Rome, is in most Things Superstitious; and in some lately Idolatrous: and such as wherein a good Christian cannot law∣fully Communicate with her. So as if there were nothing else, yet her Idolatry were enough to justify and enforce such a Separation.
Concerning Protestant CHURCHES. BY the Protestant Churches we un∣derstand those visible Particular Churches, which having by an ex∣ternal Separation freed themselves from the Tyranny and Idolatry of Popery, have more or less reformed the Doctrine and Worship from Popish Corruptions, and restored them more or less to the An∣cient and Primitive Purity. Now such Churches may be con∣sider'd either Materially or Formally. First, Materially. When we consider those Churches, to whom it happens thus to be Reformed, barely and precisely as
Local and Particular visible Churches; without respect had to their present Re∣formed, or former Corrupt Estate, or to the Substance of their Faith. As when we say, The Church of England, The Church of Denmark. The Church of Saxony, &c. Secondly, Formally. The Protestant Churches may again be consider'd two ways, in respect of a Two-fold Form. First, An outward and accidental Form. Secondly, An inward and, as it were, essential Form. The inward Form ever giveth Esse, but the outward often giveth Nomen. The outward Form is barely the State of Reformation, which supposeth another former Estate of Deformity or Corrup∣tion; out of which respect, they have the Name and Title of Protestant and Reformed Churches. But the inward Form is the Substance of their Faith thus reformed, in their Doctrine and Wor∣ship, from the Corruptions wherewith Popery had infected it.
Which Substance of Faith in the Pro∣testant Churches, may be consider'd differently in the Positive Points of their Faith and in the Negative. The Positive Points, or Affirmative Articles of our Chri∣stian Faith, are they which make us true Christian Churches. For in our Posi∣tive we teach the ancient Faith of Christ, and his Apostles, and the Primitive Church. And in our Negative, we re∣ject the Innovations and Corruptions of latter Times.
To the QUESTION then, Where Our CHVRCH was before Luther? I Answer; FIrst, Taking our Protestant Churches Materially, as namely the Church of England, it was where it is, viz. in England. Where by the great Mercy of God, it hath continued a visible Christi∣an Church from the first Plantation of it, by Apostles, or Apostolical Men, without Interruption (though not al∣ways without Error and Corruption) unto this Day. And herein it need not yield to the very Church of Rome it self; or to any other Church under Heaven.
Secondly, Taking the Protestant Church Formally, in respect of the Sub∣stance of Faith, the Professors of it have been in some Degree or other visible, as well before Luther as since. But yet differently in the Affirmatives and in the Negatives of our Faith. Thirdly, Taking the Protestant Church Formally, in respect of the outward Form, viz. as under the State of Re∣formation; we will freely confess; There was no such Reformed or Pro∣testant Church before Luther as now there is. For a Church could not be said to be Reformed till it was Deformed. No more than a Man can be said to be stript of a Motly Coat, before he had it on. Fourthly, The Protestant Church for Substance of Faith in the Affirmative Doctrine, hath continued visibly from Christ and his Apostles without Interrup∣tion, as well before as since Luther; according to the Tenor of our Second
and Third Theses. In which our Ad∣versaries and we agree; witness the Articles of our Church. Fifthly, The Substance of Faith, as concerning the Worship, Maintain'd and Practis'd in the Protestant Church of England, hath continued Visible in like manner in all Ages; as well before as since Luther. Witness our Service-Book; Wherein our Adversaries them∣selves are not able to except against any thing contained. Only they com∣plain of some Defects. But that belongs not to the Affirmatives, but to the Negatives of our Faith. Sixthly, The Negative Tenets of our Protestant Church, wherein she Renounceth the Errors and Idolatries of the Romish (for so much as they are Negatives) are not capable of a visible Profession, in such Sort as Affirmatives are. Yet thus far our Church was visible in respect of these Negatives be∣fore
Luther, viz. In the Primitive Times, for the first Six Hundred Years especial∣ly, and some other Ages after also, all Orthodoxal Particular Churches were visible Professors of our Faith. In as much as in their Writings, where we were Affirmative, they were Affirma∣tive also. Where we are Negative, they are either Negative or Doubtful, or Divided, or Silent. Which very Si∣lence is enough to make them ours as to this Intent. For who can ex∣pect they should purposely confute those Errors, which were (many of them) not so much as thought on in their Times.
Seventhly, In succeeding Times, when Errors and Superstitions began to grow to some Head (through the Factions of Princes, the Pride of the Clergy, and the common Ignorance of the Times.) As namely, about the Year Nine Hundred, and thenceforth till the Times of Luther, our Protestant Church was not visibly distinct from the corrupt Romish (according to the Tenor of our Fifth Thesis) but ming∣led with it. Yet it had thus far forth visible Professors; That there were in every Age before Luther, some whose Names and Opinions, have been by God's good Providence preserved in Hi∣stories and Records (notwithstanding the indirect Endeavors of the Adver∣saries to root out the Memory of them) who complained of the Cor∣ruptions, and contradicted the Do∣ctrines and Abuses of Popery, some in one Point, and some in another; some in most of all those Points where∣in
we now dissent; and that in such Degrees and Respects of Visibility, as we have declared in our Sixth and Seventh Theses. FINIS.
