S6357 R222482 99833649 38127
SAINTS LIKE CHRIST: OR, Somewhat of truth deli∣vered to the Congregation at Headly in Hampshire. By Jo. Symmonds, M. A. 1 COR. 15.48. As is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly. LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the Black Spread-Eagle at the West end of Pauls. M.DC.L.
o the Nobly Descended, gratious Christian and vertuous Virgin, rs SƲSANNA MILDMAY. May it please you, I Have made bold in venturing into the world to make use of your Worships name, that so I may passe ith the lesse molestation in these oublesome times. It is an age of ouble, and that not alone in the
world, and amongst men of the world, but such that professe to Christ, and I hope are in Christ. These latter own themselves, and what is theirs as men and fleshly, too much; and what is Christs and spirituall not enough; The con∣tention in the church of Corinth partly arose from mens overmuch affecting singularity, one was of Paul, another of Appollo, another of Cephas, another of Christ. It may be some boasted of their circum∣cision, some of their Baptisme, some of both Baptisme and cir∣cumcision, some it may be gloried that they had medled neither with Baptisme nor circumcision; if not so, yet it is more then conjectu∣rall that some boasted that they were hearers of such a one, and of such a ones Congregation: and from this outside-worke highly extolling their choice and way, slighting and abasing others,
caus'd strife. The Apostle blames for this contention, and shews that the way of Christ is to take from men, as men, all glorying. It is unbeseeming the eye to hate the foot, because the foot sees not, 'tis enough that it is of the body: so should not Christians that have more excellent gifts, villifie them that have not attained to their perfection, or trouble to see others differing in judgement in some low things from them; for in the body of Christ unity may stand with diversity: there may be di∣versity in respect of forms and yet unity in spirit; for men may en∣joy God in different formes, God may dwell in them that regard a day, and in them that regard it not; God may communicate him∣self to them, and so make them a∣like within glorious; by enjoy∣ing his glorious presence. Formes are to be reverenc'd (knowing of
some there is use) as they wherein Christians may walke and be use∣full one to another; yet meer be∣ing in forms makes not Saints, nor doth uniformity in formes breed true unity. True unity of members is from those members union with the head. And as souls are in unity with the head; so will they grow into a unity one with a∣nother. 'Tis the new and spiritu∣all birth whereby souls are one with Christ, and like Christ that makes them at on with Christi∣ans, and true Christians look upon all that professe to Christ not as in formes, but as possessing Christ; and as they find Christ living in them do they esteeme them, and account them precious, knowing that a precious Christ makes pre∣cious Christians, and that they will keep their excellency let the times and places be never so bad they are cast into. Right Worship∣full,
you are young, and yet some bad dayes you have seen, people of all Ages, Sexes, qualities very bad, some ill savour in every place by reason of corruption have you to your annoyance met withall; And God knowes what more you may, whilest here in the body. You know what hath kept you right in these crosse-walkings, and also what hath preserv'd you and enabled you to keep your sweet∣nes, hath not a Christ guided you? hath not a Christ communicated himselfe to you? I have high thoughts of your Noble self, and I am perswaded never a whit a∣bove you, but that you are as high as I take you to be, and that is in Christ; whom you have found all in all unto you, and on whom you rely to carry you through what remaines of sufferings as your part and portion, that at last you may sit down with Christ
in his Throne even as he is set down with his Father, in his Fa∣thers Throne: and as you are such as he is in this world, so you may be like him in the world to come, participating with your sweet Sa∣viour, and blessed redeemer in his glory to your perfect happines. You have an inside like Christ now, a soul glorious; you shall have an outside like him also, body glo∣rious, body and soul glorious, all glorious. Towards the enjoy∣ing of which so farre as my day∣ly prayers may help, you shall be sure of them, praying to God on your behalfe. And upon this ac∣count I tender my selfe. Your Worships devoted Servant, to serve you, in what I may, JO. SYMMONDS.
1 John 4.17. As he is, so are we in this world. THat which makes Christs appearance delightfull & giving soul-content to Christians is love, & that which makes the appear∣ance of Christians de∣lightful and pleasant to Christ is love.. Simele gaudet si∣mili. Joh. 13.1 1 Joh. 4.19 Like is very much won and pleas'd with its like, a loving Christ with lo∣ving Christians, and loving Christians with a loving Christ: A merciful Christ with merciful Christians, and merciful Christians with a merciful Christ: A holy Christ with holy Christians, and holy Christians with a holy Christ.Cant. 1.2 Christs love to Saints is better then wine,Cant. 4.10 so is the Saints love to Christ much better then wine, The savour of the good ointments of Christ causeth the Virgins to love him,Cant. 1.3 and the smell of the ointments and garments of those Virgins, being holy Saints, and Christs
Spouse,Hos. 14.5, 6, 7 is like the smell of Lebanon, where pleasant and odoriferous trees, herbs and spices grew in abundance; No spices (not the best nor sweetest of all Created things) yielded so pleasant a savour to Christ as the graces,Cant. 4.10 and actings of those graces, of his Sister and Spouse did. Christians, you see your blessed state, you are like Christ,Gal. 2.20 Rom. 1.5 and lov'd of him, it may be you are neither like men of the world, nor lov'd of them, you may be never the worse for this,Jo. 15.19 nay, it may be the more happier, for differing so much from them, and being hated or slighted of them. Our conformity to the world Christ never commends, but on the contrary (in Scripture) often discommends and bids us beware of it;Eph. 5.11 Rom. 12.2 Mat. 20.25, 26 2 Cor. 6.14 'Tis conformity to himself that Christ invites unto and expects, and as Christ would have it so, Saints desire it may be so; They care not who disapproves of them and theirs,1 Cor. 4.3 Humanum diem vo∣cat huma∣manum ju∣dicium. so Christ approves, who blames them, so Christ commends them, who slights them, so Christ ho∣nours them; They (it may be) cannot say when they see rich-men, that they are like them, rich as they are rich;
or if they see men advanced to worldly honours, that they enjoy such honours and dignities, or if they see people beau∣tifull or gorgeously apparel'd, they cannot (it may be) say they have so faire a face or rich cloaths, &c. Saints think they are rich enough, honoura∣ble enough, that they are very faire and gallant, if like Jesus Christ. In respect of many worldly injoyments that the sons of men possessed, 'tis probable the sons of Zion could not say they were like them, yet this was their comfort, that they had the witnesse of the spirit,Rom. 8.16 that they could say they were like God, they were holy souls, like the holy God; union with God brought forth likenes to God;1 John 4.15, 16 Deus cha∣ritas est, quid preti∣osius? Et qui manet in charita∣te, in Deo manet, quid secu∣rius? Et Deus in eo, quid jucundius? Haec gloria christianorum magna est. a blessed God dwelling in them makes them blessed souls; Ex∣ceeding blessed and ever happy are they, that from in-dwellings of Father Son and Spirit in them, can say God is holy, Christ is holy, the Spirit holy, and we as Saints delight to be holy, and so to be like Father, Son and Spirit: The Apostle speaks largely in his own and Saints commendation in uttering a few words, saying, As he is, so are we in this
world: He had spoken much of God, and of the Son of God,1 Joh 4.16 and of Gods dwelling in Saints, and of Saints being born of God,1 Joh. 4.7 and knowing God, and having laboured with his Divine and Heavenly Rhetorick, he endeavoured to give God the honour due unto him, and he would not let slip an opportuni∣ty of magnifying the grace of God in Saints,1 Joh. 3.1 1 Joh. 5.12 and how much they were dig∣nified by enjoying God, and as to extol their greatnesse and goodnesse in the world, so to chear up themselves, that had received such kindness of God, and that they might with boldnesse stand up pleading their own dignity and blessedness,1 Pet. 4.14 against all the reproach∣es, disgraces and scorns of the world, he holds out God, and then himself and Saints: As he is, so are we in this world. We shall look upon the Text as it hath relation mainly to God, as making out himself to us in Jesus Christ,Loquitur hic de con∣formitate, in puritate & inno∣centia vi∣tae. Hem. 1 Pet. 1.15 2 Cor. 5.21. Luk. 6.36. and to Saints through grace enjoying God within, and by that enjoyment striving to be like God in holinesse, righteous∣nesse, mercy, love, patience, longsuffer∣ing, goodnesse, gentlenesse, &c. And although 'tis impossible for Christians
to be such as God for purity and perfe∣ction,Haec con∣formitas nostri cum Deo in imitatione & conau, & omni puritate & perfe∣ctione po∣sita est. Rom. 8.29 yet through the Spirits help may they imitate God, and for the manner of living holily, strive to be conforma∣ble to the Lord, So that as God is a God of love, Christians are Christians of love: that love that is in a Christian to God, it is but a son, it is but a fruit of the love that is in God to a Christian, 'tis but the springing forth of somewhat of God himself planted within in the soul,Eccles. 1.7 'tis but a stream run∣ning back to that Sea from whence it came, returning God his due; like for like; love for love; a Saint knows love deserves love; Gods love is love;1 Jo. 4.19 In this way of love he acts freely,1 Pet. 5.2 and so is like God, it is as ordinary for a Christian to love, as to live; for what maintains his being as a Saint, produ∣ceth love to the ornament of his being. As it rejoyceth in having the life of a Saint,Gal. 2.20 Act. 4.20 Psal. 40.8 so it is pleased in doing the work of a Saint, laying out it self in what is pleasing to the Lord;Joh. 7.18 God cannot but act what is good, and what tends to his own glory; take a Saint as having God living in it,1 Joh. 3.18, 19. and from that living of God in it acting, it doth what is good,
and also tends to the glory of God;1 Cor. 15.58 It knows 'tis not lost labour to be doing for God, and that it is not in vaine. There is infinite good in God, and there is some good in a Saint; Infinitnesse in God enables God for infinite worke, God is able to do like himself, beyond what a soul can think or conceive; A soul that enjoyes somewhat that this all-good-God gives out in his love through Christ,1 Cor. 15.10 is in his actings accord∣ing to what he receives, and as that re∣ceiving springs and sprouts out;Omnia gratiae di∣vinae tri∣buit. A spark of fire will do what a spark can do, and a drop of water what a drop may: indeed it cannot do so much as the Sea, or E∣lement of fire can do; 'Tis a Christians joy that of Christs heavenly fulnesse it receives some grace,Joh. 3.34 Christ hath what he hath without measure, a Christian in measure; a Christian is glad that it finds Christ saying,1 Cor. 15.48 As is the heavenly such are they that are heavenly, and that by the spirits work 'tis fashioned to be like Christ now 'tis in the world, and so chang'd into the same Image from glory to glory.2 Cor. 3.18 And though it live in a wicked world amongst wicked men, yet it is not like them, but it is like him
that is heavenly, it is not conformable to those it lives withall without in the body, but to him that lives within, in his soul; Dearly beloved, what are you? what can you now say for your selves? can you say you are like Christ? have you a life like Christ? have you a conversation like Christ? are you cloath'd like Christ?Col. 3.12 have you put on (as the Elect of God (holy and belo∣ved) bowels of mercies, kindnesse, hum∣blenesse of mind, meeknesse, long suffer∣ing, forbearing one another, and for∣giving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any,Christus non tan∣tum nobis est donum, verum eti∣am exem∣plum. Miraculo∣sae actiones Christi, mentem nostram de veritate doctrinae ipsius con∣firmabunt. Peculiares actiones, quae sunt ipsius officii propriae, hae ut expiatoriae peccati nostri fuerunt: ita salutis fiduciam in nobis alent & confirmabunt. even as Christ for∣gave you, so also do yee: The actions of Christ should be instructions of christians, yet consider rightly of Christs actions, some were miraculous, as fasting forty daies, raising the dead, &c. these are not to be immitated, be∣cause they cannot, yet these may help to strengthen our faith, and confirme us concerning the truth of the Doctrine of Christ. Some are peculiar actions be∣longing to his office, as to redeem, or
make intercession, &c. these also are proper to Christ onely.Morales actiones, quibus le∣gi morali satiisfecit, hae nostram vitam & mores ad dilectio∣nem Det & proxi∣mi excita∣bunt. Some are mo∣rall, these last are onely imitable; you may take all thus, some actions there are of Christ which he did as God, some as Mediator, some as man. The last are binding to us to follow: every action of Christs is for our instruction some way or other, and carefull ought we to be to make use of it as we should, that so none of Christs doings do not passe by us un-observ'd and taken notice of, but that we rightly ponder them,Omnis Christi actio, nostra est instru∣ctio, sed di∣versimo∣de, &c. that what is to be admired and wondred at, we may admire and wonder, what in∣vites to praise, let them have it, and what is to be imitated, let them be set before us, and strive to imitate, and though we cannot act to perfection, yet let us act with affection, and though we cannot do as we should, yet let us de∣sire to do it, and though the bodies pace be slow, yet may your souls be nimble; Paul though he could not take hold on, yet did he reach out to those things that were before; And be sure to send love to Christ, and let that tell him that all of soul and body is following after. And that whatsoever your doings
are, yet your desires are right, for they are to please him, and glad would you be to be comprehended in that saying of the Apostle; As he is, so are we in this world: Blame none for desiring this, to be like Christ; He that is like Christ, is very excellent, and the more this likenesse is perfected, the nearer is the soul to glory. 'Tis an excellent disco∣very of a vertuous soul, to see it conti∣nue good, let the times, places, and people be never so bad: and so doubt∣lesse it manifests a heavenly excellency within, when a soul that lives in this wicked & ungodly world, appears in life and conversation heavenly, & shines out in a dark world though not with so clear a light, as Christ, yet is his light & shining out like Christ; A handsome imitation from some, is as pleasing as great action from others; Lord! thou art not strict to mark what is done a∣misse, look not on our actings which are imperfect, but Lord consider what our desires are, how we desire to con∣form to thee, and help Lord with thy spirit; As thou art a loving God, let us be loving christians, as thou art a glo∣rious Husband, let us be a glorious
Spouse, as thou art a soul-pittying-Sa∣viour, let us be soul-obedient Saints; As thou art a fountaine, a Sea, let us be streams, at least drops, and though we are not of such worth as thou O Christ,Quantum unusquis{que} est inocu∣lis Dei, tantum est, &c. yet let us be true coine, and as pounds and pence may have one stamp, and the least though not of so great a value as the best, yet of some value; Mark us sweet Jesus for thine, though the mark be never so small, that so what the Pharisees messengers answered thee concerning the Image and superscripti∣on upon the Tribute-money, saying, it is Caesars, so Lord let the Image and stamp upon our souls be Christs. That so our life, our love, our actions may be such as Christs, Christ and us may have one way, one will, one affection, one mind, our bent and purposes the same with Jesus Christ: Now the work goes on, now is the mirth, now thri∣ving, when all agree in one, when all the Souldiers do like the Captaine, all the servants like the master, all the fol∣lowers like the leader, all the members as the head directs, and that there are no divisions; commands answere with obedience, examples sutable to the pat∣tern,
learners like the teacher, Saints like the Saviour, As he is, so are we, &c. Obs: True Saints are such that are very like Jesus Christ. There is some speciall singular thing in Saints that is not in men of the world, there is a singular vertue in a Jewell that is not in another stone, which makes it esteemed, there is a pe∣culiar choice excelling in Saints that makes them so extold, there is some∣what in them that others have not seen, nor known,1 Cor. 2.10 which is manifest to them by the spirit, they are begotten of God, and so come to be like Christ as children of one father are like one ano∣ther: A holy Christ the Son of God, and holy Saints children of God,Heb. 2.11 all of one; for which cause Christ is not a∣shamed to call Saints brethren, and from this brotherhood it is that Christ and christians are good friends, that there is so much union, peace and affi∣nity, that they can speak together, con∣fer together, dwell together, feed to∣gether, lodge together, and live toge∣ther, the God of Christ, the God of Saints, the Father of Christ, the Father
of Saints, 'tis the words of Christ, the soul-delighting words of the Elder bro∣ther to the Younger, sent by Mary as a message of comfort to the Disciples,Ad per∣turbatos Discipulos accurre. Io. 20.17 Go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God. Here's a cordial, the Disciples were troubled at their Masters being crucified, and 'tis likely were ve∣ry much grieved, Christ forgets them not, but sends them news of his Resur∣rection and of his Ascending into glo∣ry, and that they should ascend likewise, for his Father would not entertain him alone, but them also; The inheritance of glory belongs to Saints as well as Christ, all Gods children shall partake in this kingdom,Rom. 8.17 The spirit it self beareth witnesse with our spirit, that we are the chil∣dren of God,Donorum patris cae∣lestis sunt participes. And if children then heirs, heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ. Christ had bled freely for them, and his message is sweet to them, wil∣ling his should know what glory is provided for them,1 Joh. 3.2 Phil. 3.21 Rev. 3, 21 and therefore tels them they should be like him, their vile bodies made like his glorious body, and sit with him in his Throne, those that are like him in grace, shall be like him in glory, they
that are partakers with him in bearing the crosse, shall be partakers with him in wearing the crown. Christ is fashi∣oning his daily for himself, and when he hath brought his work to that per∣fection here, that they come unto the measure of the stature of the fulnesse of Christ and to perfect man,Eph. 4.13 he will re∣move them to glory; for the church is heavens nursery, and as Christ sees fit he draws out those precious plants that are like himself, and sets them with himself; Small pieces of gold are look'd to and kept safe; if like Christ you are well enough souls, 'tis no matter who you are unlike; if fashioned like Christ, it matters not how different you are from all others, you are as you should be if like Christ. The choice work of Christ is about souls,  and here (as his skill is required so) hee shews it, in bringing forth so beautifull a piece and rare that was formerly deformed and vile, in making a brat of Satans a Saint, that which was like hell, to be like heaven; that which was most ugly, to be like him∣self that is the holy of holies. Saints are very like Christ, because
whatsoever is found in a Saint as a Saint, it is really one with Christ, some thing flowing out from Christ; In Saints there is plenitudo vasis the fullnes of a vessell; but in Christ is plenitudo fontis, a fountain-fullnesse. The School∣men say that Christ is as the fire, Christians as things lighted at that fire;Ʋt ignis, & ignita. the fullness of the fire is such that light a thousand torches at it, it is not dimi∣nished. Fire is not diminished by what is lighted at it, but by the abatement or diminution of the fuel, now Grace in Christ cannot be diminished, 'tis not subject to any decay; 'tis as he himself is, the same to day and for ever. Christ could not be perfect if subject to change; I conceive without offence I may say, that as a thing lighted at a fire is like the fire that lighted it, so Saints receiv∣ing grace from Christ are like Christ from whom they receive that grace;Joh. 1.16 as chil∣dren are like their Parents, so Saints like this everlasting Father,Isa. 9.6 who is their father. Christ lives with them, in them, and in this he delights, and all is of like∣nesse. Like is pleased with like, so is Christ, Saints are like him, and he re∣joyceth
to be with them. Affections meeting with a right object drawe all after; If the affections be won the whole man is obtain'd so tis with Christ; where his love is pitched all his excellences will fasten. If Christ meet with one in whom his soul takes pleasure, that soul cannot doe amisse. How kind are men where pleased, and what pleaseth but somewhat is sutable? Somewhat in David that lik'd Jonathan,1 Sam. 18.1 caus'd him to close with that soul-friendship, and to continue to the hazarding of his own life, Davids friend. Men love to live where they like, and with whom, so doth Christ, & that is in Saints; they are the persons he likes, and in them are the places he desires to make his places of residence. Let a man find a place that hee likes, its of force enough to bring him to live there. You need no other argument to draw him thi∣ther; the mind is of force sufficient to make him effect what he effects, let the place be in the way to heaven or hel; The mind hath a great hand in the sal∣vation or damnation of men;Rom. 8.6 God make our mindes spiritual that so we may love what is spiritual. A gracious
Christ loves gracious soules; here is nothing more like him, nor nothing more delightfull to him; his heart is ravished with them, exceedingly taken with them, so that nothing satisfies him but being in them, and by being in them, appears the unity; and by the unity the amity, and by the amity is manifested likenesse. Paul agreed with Saints he being made like them; won∣der not then at Christs friendlines with Saints; 'tis but the society of the Bride-groom with the bride, of the head with the members of a man with himself. As Christs love hath its perfect work on beleeving soules, so he that is the per∣fect worker hath his dwelling there: happy hoste that hath such a guest, bles∣sed spouse that hath such a Husband bles∣ed soul that hath such a friend, happy body that hath such a head. The Lord fashion us like Christ, and we doubt not of enioying him. The thing begotten is like that which begat, now Saints as Saints are begotten of Christ, and having Christ for their father they are children like him,1 Pet. 1.23 Jam. 1.18 Simile ge∣nerat sibi si time for time, as the first Adam begat a son in his own likenesse, so
the second:Rom 5.19 Nature makes us like the first Adam, grace like the second, theres a Certaine likenes betwixt the birth of nature, and the birth of grace. Much of the birth of Saints as Children of Christ, may be held out (as in an em∣blem) by the naturall birth God shew∣ed much mercy to let thee bee a man such an excellent Creature, That God that hath set thee so high,Psal. 8.6 that made thee to have dominion over the sheep & oxen, the beasts of the field, the foul of the aire and the fish of the Sea, might have made thee the lowest, the contem∣ptiblest of all these, this is not all the mercy yet, heares more, in that thou hast thy lot in heaven amongst Saints in the good land, where the gospell shines and wherein God in mercy dwels. It is a poor businesse for all this to brag of these things, unlesse thou art born a∣again of the spirit, for it is the new birth that makes thee inheritour of the glo∣rious things of Christ. Once born is not enough, Judas had that but not the se∣cond, the execellent name of Christians of right is by the second birth. Thou maiest by thy first birth be a play-fel∣low with Saints, as children meanly
descended may be with the children of Nobles, yet not Noble nor share in the inheritance or titles of honour: The five foolish Virgins were companions a while with the wise,Math. 25. but at length separated, so may carnall men, men once borne with Saints, men twice borne; but God wil find them out when he separates the precious from the vile, when he makes up his jewels: and ga∣thers the wheat into his barne, then it will little advantage a soul that it hath had a good name when 'tis found with a bad soul,Quid tibi prodest vo∣cari quod non es. that it hath eat and drunke with the Saints, when it shall enjoy no inheritance with them, but be shut out into outer darknesse.Mat. 22.13, Quid tibi prodest ista memoria, si ubi es, torquris, et ubi non es, lauda∣ris? Cor. 15.21.22. It may be thou maiest leave somewhat behinde thee, that Carnall men may commend thee for, what comfort is this if you should be in the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone, in a word, the first birth let it be never so perfect sets us but in a miserable world, higher it cannot ad∣vance. Neither King nor Noble happy by natures birth; tis the second birth gives perfection. By this souls are very holy, what Conceptions are in soules by Christ,
they are very like Christ himself, holy;Spiritus Jesus, spi∣ritus bo∣nus, spiri∣tus sanctus, spiritus rectus, spi∣ritus dul∣cis. &c. spirituall, heavenly. The seed of man may corrupt: but not the seed of God, where he casts his grace there will be growth and fruit sutable; wheat brings forth wheat; and barly brings forth barly; every seed a body like it self; so doth Christ. There are no more holy, heavenly, spirituall children then they that have the Father of Heaven theirs, An everlasting father begets everlasting children a holy father holy children, Saints. 2. By this they are blessed, they that are begotten of blessed Christ, are blesse soules, a happy man may have children, and yet they may not be hap∣py, a good man may have bad children, but tis not so with Christ, all Christs children are Good, all his offspring according to the spirit happy. If he be∣get Paul, he shall have occasion enough to magnifie his birth: laying aside the first birth, he bosts not of that: it is the second rejoyeth his heart: al blessed pri∣viledges came by the second, the first com∣pared with the second are but as dung and drosse. 3. By this they are preci∣ous, a precious Christ begetting causeth precious soules begotten. The Kings
daughter is glorious,Ps. 45.13 all glorious, every limbe glorious, within and without glorious,Eph. 5.27 as of Christ without spot or wrinckle,Col. 1.22 Quatenus considera∣tur in Christo, non solum sine macu∣la est, sed infinito decoro ex∣ornata, &c. or any thing like it, holy, unblamable, and unreproveable: the heart pure, upright, sanctified through∣out, the hands cleane, the life faultlesse, without defilement, walking in all gods waies blameless. These expressions as they have relati∣on to Christians, are to be understood of the righteousnes of Christians, as they are considered under the Covenant of grace and of the Gospel, not of legal perfection but of an Evangelical inno∣cencie and uprightnesse, not as they are in themselves, but as in Christ the pre∣cious. Christ is full of Love, peace, goodnes; so are Saints his children, children en∣dewed with love, peace, goodness. Wa∣ter taken out of a fountain, rellisheth like that in the fountain, fruit is sut∣able to the tree? 'Tis so with Saints, they are streames of a good fountain, they are fruit of a precious tree. Fruit of life, growing on the tree of life, li∣ving streames begun, and nourished by a living fountain. A loving Christ brings
forth loving children, Christ the Prince of peace, sons and daughters of peace; Christ that is all good conceives to his goodness. 6. They that are born of Christ affect what is good, what is heavenly. The birth of Creatures is maintain'd with such food as he that begat it is, A mans birth with mans food, drought will starve it. Earthly things nourisheth not a heavenly birth, the world is a step∣mother that will starve it, they are the brests of Christs Consolations (that as it desires) must nourish it; 'Tis bread of life, and water of life, and food of life that it must have; Wisdoms food & feasts, feed and banquet wisdomes chil∣dren. Every Morsel, Saints eat that nou∣risheth them, must have somewhat of Christ, he is living food for living souls. I am (saith Christ) that bread of life: He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my bloud,Iohn 6. dwelleth in me, and I in him; He that eat∣eth and drinketh him shall live for e∣ver. Souls, consider what food you feed on; Creatures nature appears much in the nourishing: they desire, and eat; A beast is pleased, if it may have beasts food; A man if mans food, so hear.
The first Adams children are contented with the worlds food, give them world∣ly things they are pleased, if the world will give them plenty from her Cup∣board, they look not after any other; But the second Adams children are not thus pleased, they must have somewhat from heaven, they will blesse God for loaves, but they will not be quiet with them, if they have not somewhat else, they have souls also to care for, these must be satisfied, or all is not well with them; Hungry souls are restless, Christ shall not be unsought unto till they are fild. I need not bid you examine your selves, what diet pleaseth you, you are pleased as you are; If worldly, with worldly things; if heavenly, with hea∣venly things. I could tell what preach∣ing would please you all, but I forbear; I am sure, no preaching pleaseth Saints but the preaching of Christ, God in mercy give all you that have been born but once, one birth more, a second birth; then will you long for the food that nourisheth you to everlasting life. True Saints are very like Christ, for Christ is known by them, the virtues, graces, sweetness, wholesomness, &c.
that is in Saints, and which they hold out in their conversation, sets out in some sort Christ. A gracious man hath much of Christ; whatsoever truly names him gracious, is Christ. Books bear their names from what is in them; And houses and lands (usually) from those that possesse them. We may guesse what the fountain is by tasting of the stream, what the book is by the title. If such and so much of the delicateness of Christ be in earthen vessels, what is in glory it self? if poor man be of so much worth that hath but one smal drop of this Ocean in him, what is the Sea it self worth? A man may conceive a Rocke of Pearle to be of a great value, when a smal dust is so much worth. True Saints though they have but little of Christ, yet may it lead you to this, that if Christ in a creature be so emi∣nent, and his graces make them lovely, doubtless, he as in himself is exceeding eminent and lovely. Saints at most are but as it were the picture, or image, now if the Image be admired, much more the person that is represented. An Im∣age may be like the substance, so a Saint like Christ. Christ is known other
waies, yet in some measure this way, by Saints. Christians, you desire now to know who are truly godly, 'tis an age of de∣ceit, all is not gold that glisters, there are false wares, false men, and there are false christians, there are some that have a name,2 Ep. Ioh. 6. Multi sunt in mundo impostores. Matth. 24.24.25.26. they live but are dead, there are many deceivers in the world, the world is full of soul-cheats, hardly any place free. The time is fully come, Christ prophesied of, there shall arise false Christs, and false Prophets, and shall shew great signs and wonders: in so much that (if it were possible) they shall deceive the very Elect. Behold, I have told you before. Wherefore if they shall say unto you, Behold, he is in the de∣sert, go not forth: Behold, he is in the secret-chambers, believe it not; Such Impostours are deceitfull,Matth. 24.5. and shall deceive many, beware you. They shall use the name of Christ, as their colour or pretence, and such are likely (unlesse there be great heed taken) to deceive; Sea-men are spoiled by Pyrats, that hang out their own colours,Prov. 7.14. that harlot was winning that pretended honesty; Souls, know Gods Merchants are vending as good
Merchandize now as ever the world had held out, and the devils as bad, he will keep market where God doth, he hath his cheats to vend, where God hath his truths. It is too hard a labour for me to find all the deceits that are a∣broad, what lies in the heart of one man is not known;Ierem. 17.9. the bottom can∣not be search'd, every heart hath its de∣ceits, and they are many, the world is full, the devil hath many large shops and many wares. I shall give you the Evangelists counsel: Look to your selves,2 Ep. Ioh. 8. were you going to a fair, and one should say to you, look to your purses, there are many cut-purses and cheats, how cautious would you be; Take heed of your souls Christians, 'tis for them Sa∣tan goes about, he hath what he aimes at if he gets them, and he never hath his aime till he hath them; But it is men, not things, that I have in hand, you say you cannot tell who to trust, and I say so too. Christ can discover all, the Lord hasten this work, he can find out the man without the wedding Garment though the Guests perceive him not,Matth, 22.11. he can shew you which are the foolish Vir∣gins, which the wise, though they lie to∣gether
for a whiles undiscerned. 'Tis usual with men to think God such as themselves;Psal. 5.21. no wonder then that they take them for Saints that are like them∣selves. Too too many go hand in hand to destruction. Your Carnal worldly men they take none to be godly but themselves, and such as they are that are good Husbands, and correspond with the world, doing (as they say) no man wrong, paying every man his own, no Saints to them but these: so people that are got into such a form of worship, they look upon none in Zion, but they that do as they do, all others are in Ba∣bylon. Many will not pray nor performe any duty of Religion with those that are not of their opinion; Oh strange! If this be not to have the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of per∣sons, what is? Could the Apostle esteem highly of those that were gracious, and shal not we, whether they were by nati∣on, Jews or Gentiles, whether circumcised, or not circumcised: if holy Souls pray, you may discern where Christ dwels, (they are true soules) love such, Christ is holy, they that have him are holy, Christ is truth, they have truth tha
have him, Christ is mercifull, so are they that are Christs; Trust not to my words, you may be deceiv'd, and so may I; yet I shall give you some hint of Saints that are so like Christ. 1. There are some that are very useful souls, these are like Christ; you know how useful Christ is. 1. The prayers of Christ are usefull, so are the prayers of Saints: Christ was much in prayer for the Churches good,Psal. 127.6. so are Saints. Jerusalem is preferred a∣bove their chiefe joy, Nehemiah, Daniell, Ezekiell, David, were praying soules, they were alwaies mindfull of the church, and so were others that were gratious. Saints are very like Christ in this, he prayed for his very enemies, so do they; he prayed for the Lords strength to strengthen his church, so do they;Ioh. 17.15. he prayed his church might be kept from the evil of the world, Saints have this among their petitions. 2. The company of Christ is useful. How usefull was Christ when in the flesh to many distressed souls? what place came he unto that he did not do some good in? how blessed are they that have his presence now, to cheere them, heale
them, helpe them according to their severall needs; are not Saints thus to their power? do they not exercise the gift given them for others good? 'Tis a blessed condition, (I assure you a Saint that knows best how to judge thinks it so) to live in such places where it may have the company of those that are truly godly. 3. Christ is so useful that he holds out all he hath to Saints, what he possesseth in grace or glory 'tis presented to souls, all is ready to do them good. Heres liberality, 'tis so with those that are Christs, they think nothing too dear to be spent for their brethrens good, a free Christ,Act. 3.32, 34. and free Saints, ready to sell and part withall, to help the necessities of fellow-members. The hand will not keepe money in it when the foot or o∣ther parts need it; the foot will not fit still when the body requires 'its help. There is a naturall helping amongst members, so amongst Saints. There are few like Christ in this, indeed few that are like him all; They are more like the devill then Christ, they put out all they have to do mischiefe, body, Estate, all goes if they thinke they may dis∣pleasure
Saints; let them buy hell, they may have time enough to complain of their bargain; They that are so unlike Christ and Saints here, shall have su∣table company, but it shall be neither Christ nor any of his holy ones. The Lord grant you grace that in this you may imitate Christ and be like him, in using what you have so for him & his, that you may give up an account of your stewardship with joy and not with griefe. 2. Some are very pittiful souls, they are pittifull from a Principle of grace, these are like Christ. If they see a poor creature in an ignorant sottish state, how do they bemoan him, take all op∣portunities possible to bring him to the knowledge of the truth?Miseri∣cordia est vicina mi∣seriae. Sen. l. 2. de Clem. A merciful man strives to be Neighbour to him that is in need, and who more then the igno∣rant? Paul was very pittiful affected this way, so are they that are like Christ, compassionate to their bodily needs; they strive to be merciful as their hea∣venly father is merciful. They are ex∣cellent for shewing pitty that are Christs. 2. They commiserate the wilful, and
strive to bring them to obedience, they have learned Christs language, crying out, why wil you die O obstinate souls? why will you crosse Christ and at length bring an eternall curse upon your selves?Psal. 35.14. they have such Yearning bowells after them, that it many times drawes teares from them. They may be ill dealt withal, and have many a mock and jeere and suffering for their good will, yet this beates them not off, it makes them not desist, but hold out, with Christ seeking their Good that cannot endure them;Isa. 65.23. You may see how Christ was, served yet what he did; I stretched out my hands all the day, to a rebellious people: a people that pro∣voketh me to anger continually to my very face: 'Tis so with many Saints, do not many preach the word to such that are deadly adversaries to them, that a∣buseth them to the very face, nay, in the very time they are perswading them,2 Cor. 12.15. Act. 7.57. Summa mundi in∣gratitudo. & the more a Saints spirit in pitty is for their good, the more are their spirits in rage against Saints to their hurt. 3. They have yearnings of soule after such that deviate from truth that goe astray in the wildernes of sin, striving to reclaime them, and to bring them
into the way of the Lord, to walke to∣wards holynes,Act. 17.23 Paul was employ'd in such a busines as this at Athens amonst a people that were wandering after an unknowne God, that went they knew not whither,Luk. 15.4. that worshipped they knew not what. As a man lookes after a wan∣dering beast to bring it home, so doth Christ a wandering soul; and this is part of the employment of such that can say, As he is, so are we in this world.Ezech. 34.6, 7, 8, 9. Christ is highly displeased with such that should looke after scattered soules, and are negligent, they walke contrary to him; but such please him that are painfull in preserving those are his, that undertake any employment for the re∣covery of soules from error to truth, from out of the Devils common to Christs sold. They are deare friends to Christ, that to their utmost are helpful to the purchased possession of Christ: you that are good servants to Christ, you shall find him a good Master to you: be like him in action, and he will make you like himselfe in the reward, he that works in his vineyard shall have faire wages. Blessed are you that now serve not your selves but the Lord Jesus Christ; this busines will make Christ
honour you; your striving to reclaime such that wander from the commande∣ments of the Lord:Dan. 12.3. They that be wise shall shine as the brightnesse of the fir∣mament: and they that turne many to righteousnesse, as the starres for ever and ever. God will honour them that strive to save others.Jam. 5.20. How like Christ are they that strive to convert a sinner from the error of his way, and to save a soul from death? Is not such work Christs worke? do not they follow him that works thus? When Christ works in us for making us like him, we will worke abroad to bring soules unto him. 3. They loath sinne, they that are like Christ, they detest and abominate what Christ detests. Sin is a devil (and who can abid him unlesse wretches that are like him.) Sin will eat up a soul; can any unlesse a mad-man love that which will utterly undoe him? Sinne brings plagues upon a mans selfe and all he hath, entertain not a guest that hath such ill attendants, thou canst not em∣brace sin but thou must wound Christ: wilt thou shew so much hard-heartednes as to wound him that hath suffered so much already,Isa. 52.14. yea such sufferings, as ne∣ver any suffered besides him, besides you cannot
sinne against Christ but you must hurt your selves, yea your best part,Pro. 8.36. your souls, but to cast such weeds aside and to speak of men and practises fiting the place and time, and that is Saints & their behaviour in this particular towards sin, they abhorre sin upon the same rea∣sons and grounds that Jesus Christ ab∣horres it, 'tis indeed Christ in them that makes them dislike it if their dislike be such as it should be, there are soules that may have some dislike of sin, yet they may not with a Saints spirit loath it. 1. Some there are that stand aloofe from sin when it allures, because should they yeeld, it may cause some disgrace to them, it may make some cast them off that now they have favour withall, and whose favour it may be is more benefi∣cial for present then their sin can be, they are sollicited unto. These deserve no thankes from God, for love to God makes them not dislike sin, 'tis the up∣holding of some reputation and credit amongst men that for present restrains them. They say not, I have receiv'd mer∣cy from Christ, how can I sin against him that hath been so good to me? but I have a reason of mine own, saith the
carnal soule, and therefore I may doe this or that, not but that he loves the sin, but it stands not with his end for present to meddle with it. 2. Some are kept off from sin as the dog from the bone with the cudgel, the feare of the Law deters them, faine they would be doing but then they feare suffering, they thinke it might be beneficiall to steale, but they like not hanging, the money might help them but the halter would hurt them; Christ is not beholding to these nor to any such, for love to him prevailes not with them;Mat. 14.5. these are kept from evil as Herod at first from killing John for feare of the people,Luk. 22.2. & as the Chief Priests & Scribes from killing Jesus, or the Captain and Officers from offering violence to the Apostles.Act. 5.26. That many are not more vile wee may thanke their feare of the Law, not their love nor likenesse to Christ. 3. Some are kept from some sins for fear of hell; Hell is not seen, and there∣fore not much feard, men think strang∣ly of hell, take heed you never know it, this place of Torments is not much considered of now, or if it be, men think
they are far enough from it and may es∣cape. If love to Christ keepe not from sin, fear of hell will not; 'tis the mercies of Christ that Paul presents as a bait to allure to holinesse, and drawe men off from the world,Rom. 12.1 — Signifi∣cans cogi∣tionem miserecor∣diae Dei debere no∣bis esse sti∣mulum ad vitam Deo pla∣centem transigen∣dam. mercies are very invi∣tive, especially the mercies of Christ that are such sweet & precious mercies, mercies that had never any like them, the world had never such another in it for mercy as Christ. Mercies drawe Saints to abhorre evill, and as God shall call you to be Saints, you will do likewise. Sin is offence to Christ and goodnesse is pleasing to him. Saints (are acquaint∣ed with him and) know it and strive it should be so to them, Christ and inside Christians, have but one object of their love & but one of their hatred, viz: good and all good, and that they effect toge∣ther; evill and all evill and that they re∣ject a like, you may conceive of such to be Saints that go so right with Christ. 4. Saints indeed, (soules like Christ they are such that aime at the glory of God) in all their undertakings, it was Christs meat and drinke to do the will of his father, so 'tis theirs that are Christs, if men will be pleas'd seeing
them in Gods businesse they rejoyce but if they will not, they neverthelesse continue doing; There was a Gallant courage in Christ to glorify his Father, so is there in Saints, they will honour God if they die in the action,Act. 5.19. they if oppos'd durst bidt heir opposers judge whether it be better to obey God or man, he acts right that bids his ene∣my be judge of his doings: if any spy faults, enemies will. Saints are for pleasing God, thats their aime, they are company for such whose journey is heaven-ward; Christ is gone before, they follow after. He goes fastest to hea∣ven that goes on most speedily in Gods worke, that, as it tends to Gods glory, so to the actors glory. A soul will soone be glorified it selfe, that glorifies God; they that are for God, shall be with God; heavenly work is recompens'd with good wayes; Christ did his work, is entred into his joy, doe yours and enter also, like doers shall have like pay. 5. Christ is for fellowship and com∣munion with his people,Mat. 18.20. (where two or three are gathered together in his name, there he is, in the midst of them)
so Saints the friends of Christ desire fellowship with those that are Christs: christians, this Lesson hath not been well learn'd of late, outward appear∣ances like our selves, (tis feard) have drawne us many times more then Christ in Spirit dwelling in souls. That part of Arethmeticke division hath beene in use too much, at least Nu∣meration too little, we should be more like Christ were we more for society, I meane with Saints. Davids Spirit was gratious and was much affected with such company, if like Christ sociable, but 'tis with Saints. 6. Christ delights to see men holy, embracing truth, in this Saints are like Christ. Saint John rejoyced great∣ly that he found the children of the E∣lect Lady walking in truth,Epist. Ioh. 2.4 so this ex∣ercise was pleasing to Paul.Col. 1.3, 4. We give thanks to God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, praying alwayes for you, since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, & of the love which ye have to all the Saints. As he rejoyced to see this amongst the Colossians, for it plea∣sed him to see others followers of the Lord,1 Thes. 1.6 and embracing that truth which
the churches of God embraced,1 Thes. 1.14. to the exceeding growth of faith, and the a∣bounding of charity each towards o∣thers;2 Thes. 1.3. They that were holy amongst the Jews, rejoyced at the Gentiles con∣version. And at this day there is no greater joy to Saints then to hear of o∣thers turning to the truth, and living holily. That which makes carnal men displeas'd, which is newnesse of life, pleaseth those that have received of the same life. Ezech. 337. Jesus Christ hates sin in every one, yet no mans person, he pitties their persons, Why will you die O house of Israel? He loath'd Jerusalems sin, yet he wept o∣ver the city as pittying the people, sor∣rowing through foreseeing of the mise∣ry that was coming towards them', and did afterwards befal them; They that are like Christ are thus qualified, they hate sin in all men, yet hate not the persons of any, no, not of their deadly enemies, but with Stephen they can desire eternal life, for those, that will not let them enjoy a temporal life, a crown for their enemies, that hale them to the crosse; There's much of the image of Christ in those that to the
utmost do good to the men, whose sins they hate; And though they seek the death of their sin, yet desire life, the life of Christ for their souls. Christ shewed man most mercy, when he shewed sinne none; he kill'd sin, and quickn'd man; A man may be merciful to his neigh∣bour, yet strive to be a slaughter-man to his sin: They must needs be like Christ, that from a gratious pitty are helpful to others, and omit no meanes to do them any kindnesse, furthering the sal∣vation of their souls, and good of their bodies, helping them in any thing, or way but what is sinful; 'Tis the calling of Saints to do good, yea to all, you have none of a more free spirit then they, they go up and down on this im∣ployment, 'tis the errand that Christ sends them on; Like Master, like Ser∣vants, all good, and their actions like themselves: The master cannot erre, the servants may, but they shall be set right again; These are no cheats that do good to all, as much as possible they may, harm none, no not enemies; render to none evill for evil, but con∣trariwise blessing. 8. Saints are very much like Christ
in that they are couragious souls, cou∣ragious in what is good, not bad, some men have too much courage in an evil way, but to what is good they have no heart. 'Tis not so with the children of God, they die rather then yield to any basenesse, shall such a one as I flie? a gallant speech of a noble soul,Neh. 6.11. of one that believed God had given command∣ment to save him,;Psa. 71.3. Salvum me facias ab inimi∣cis meis. Daniel would not omit his duty, though he knew the Li∣ons den was to be his punishment. God should have his honour whatsoever he suffered; The three children feared not the wrath of the King, nor the fiery Furnace; God should not be disho∣noured by them, they would die rather. Tyrants may kill Saints but not con∣quer them. Christ was slaine but not overcome, so it may be with those are Christs; That's good mettal will en∣dure the fire; a good Ship that holds sound and firm in all storms; good cloth that shrinks not in wetting; wel∣grounded colours that fade not; brave souls that nothing can daunt, discou∣rage, or turn from the truth; one of these is better then a thousand, that have great words, but when hardship
comes to be undergone prove low and weake; he's a friend that owns a man in need, and in a strait; he's a Saint that from inward grace is made so cou∣ragious that nothing shall separate him as from the love of Christ,2 Tim. 1.7 so from the worke of Christ. The Mettall of a soul∣dier is tried in the Battel, the spirit of a Christian in times of opposition. 9. Christ is all for drawing souls to himself;Joh. 12.32 if he be lifted up from the earth he will draw men to him, he is not a scatterer, but a gatherer, I mean of souls. His businesse is to seeke and to save, to find and preserve, he woes, and willing he is to marry soules, that they might be his for ever, christians in this are spirited like Christ, they en∣deavour to drive a trade for Christs gain, they are for their masters profit, they love Christ, & find exceeding benefit by him, and they think others should love him also. Pretious Christ is pretious to them, and faine would they have him so to others. They have an enlarg'd heart, and an open mouth crying to souls, oh! love the Lord all ye people, turne in hither souls, come, buy wine, and milke without noney, and with∣out
price, we have found Excellent en∣tertainment from Christ, come; he will shew you kindnesse; good soules will not conceale the bountifull mercy of the Lord,2 Chro. 7.9. if they neglect to publish his goodness, they wil say as the Lepers, we do not well to hold our peace; in∣deed they cannot but make mention of the name of the Lord. Christians are not tongue-tied in setting out Christs worth, they may be in speaking of themselves; sound and Gratious. Souls are sparing in speaking things tending to their own praise, but when occasion is offered to set out any thing for the honour of their Saviour, they want no words at least no will, to inlarge themselves on such a theame. You people that would not be deceiv'd in owning those that are right, that are afraid of a Devil ap∣pearing as an Angel of light, that faine would have a christian indeed your ac∣quaintance, such souls are very likely to fit you, that are industrious in enlarging Christs dominions, and are joyful when soules come in apace to Christ, for true Saints would have all men savd and come to the knowledge of the truth. Christians, whatsoever I have said of
this use. I must yet wish you to be∣ware. Pickpockets will be amongst ho∣nest men, cheaters amongst just dealers, and if the sons of men present them∣selves before God Satan is ready to be amongst them.  Secondly There may be an use of information given out; the Doctrine will affor'd it, and indeed the times consider'd, it may be seasonable and it manifesteth the ground and rise of persecution against Saints; where∣soever there are godly soules be sure there is some stir;Is. 50.15. there is some fire a Kindling. He that departs from ini∣quity makes himself a pray, hee's the but at which all the shooting is, all the hooting is at him. We hear of Pauls persecuting, but not of being persecu∣ted all the time he walked according to the course of the world: but Christ be∣ing reveal'd in him, wrath is revealed against him, hee being for Christ; enemies of Christ set against him in every place:Act. 20 23. The more like Christ any is, and the more they own him and follow him, the more is the trouble that riseth against them: the sea-waves give the greatest dash against what op¦poseth
them. The wind roareth most amongst those trees that tis stifly oppos∣ed, all wicked people rage against such that any may hinder them in their wickednesse. I dare challenge people in any city Country or village, that if they will speak truth, that they that are most Godly amongst them, are sub∣ject to most slanders,2. Tim. 2. reproaches, and wrongs. I know wicked men have pre∣tences for what they do against Saints: So had the Jews against Christ.Jo. 18.30 They tell Pilate, if he were not a malefactour, they would not have delivered him up unto him; Christ might have said to them as Themistocles to the Athenians, are ye wea∣ry of receiving so many benefits by one man? Paul had many grevious faults laid to his charge, as turning the world upside downe,Act. 27.6. setting all out of order, his ene∣mies spake as if all had been well, had it not been for him and such as he were: This Paul was a pestilent fellow, a mo∣ver of sedition all the world over,Act. 14.5. high crimes to be accus'd of, and why was this? because Godly, that was the main thing that troubled Satans slaves. Ste∣pnen is accus'd for blasphemy & what was his blasphemy?Act. 6.14. part is he should speak a∣gainst
the holy place and the law, and That Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy this place and change the customes which Moses deliver∣ed us. False witnesses, and men suborn∣ed laid this in against him; Knowing that it would mightily incense the people to hear of losing their custo∣mes. These carnall customes are so dear to carnall men that they are all in a rage if they heare any thing of losing them. Let Gospel go and Gospell own∣ers perish, they care not, if they may keep their customes. It was a custome to have this and that: I count it not worth the naming what many contend about and persecute the Saints for. I could experimentally speak in this par∣ticular but I forbear; Doubtlesse the spirit of men is in every age spit out a∣gainst truth, & they that now persecute Saints would persecute Christ as really as ever the Jews did, were his appear∣ance now in flesh as then. Suppose Christ would not observe Christmas as the Popish generation cals it, suppose he would not read over a Dead corps, suppose he would not give the Lords. Supper to any but holy and godly souls shutting out the covetous, ignorant,
swearer, drunkard, reviler, unclean person &c. What would the world say of him? I speake low to your capacity, I might speake higher to men in higher place, & fully clear it, why good men are so persecuted; But hear Christ himself, I have given them thy word,Joh. 17.14. the world hath hated them, because they are not of the world, as I am not of the world. See the cleaving to the word what it meets withal, it was not having the word in their houses or hand made them hated, but in heart and life, and walking contrary to the course of the world, for in body they were in the world, but in conversation they were averse to the world: in a word they through grace received did endeavour to glorifie the God of all grace, this was fault enough, for all that wil live godly must suffer tribulation. Christ was persecuted so shal they be that are Christs,Cum ipso in angust∣ia. Mat. 18.8. O bone Jesu, qic ure, hic percu∣te; ut par∣cas in fu∣turo- thornes and briers are in the way to heaven, and they will scratch. Be not dismaid, Christ is gone thorow and he will help you, you were better goe to heaven in a torn skin then to hell in a whole; Every skar that a Christian wears for Christs sake, is hea∣vens badge, be not ashamed of them, if
you be found in Christs livery, you will be received into blisse.Erigat sese fidelis anima & parata sibi consideret bona. Thinke of this you souls of honour, if you suffer with Christ you shall reign in glory with him; ponder of the glory when you are under the crosse, it may quicken your almost tir'd spirits; I wish you may hold out in the suffering, and then I question not your glory; That you faint not nor be weary, the Lord grant that your hearts frame may be chang'd from what it is by nature, and turn'd into a Christs frame what it should be by grace, your corrupt mind, into a pure mind; passion, turn'd into patience, pride, into meeknesse, loftinesse, into lowlinesse, weaknesse, into strength, fearfulnesse, into courage; that so you may undauntedly undergo sufferings. Souls, I wish you well, howsoever you deal with me, I pray for you, and hope I shall; that God would count you worthy to suffer for his sake, which you shall certainly undergo in some mea∣sure if Godly. The Devils birders are abroad, 'tis the best birds they aime at,Quis nori Daemonis astus? his nets are laid, he cares not for catch∣ing dogs, 'tis heart, 'tis a precious dish in hell; yet be of good cheer souls, if
you are truly good, Satan shall have none of you, you are reserv'd for the masters use, he hath need of you and will have you. Christians, the world is full of Blackmores, I mean black souls, if any white soul, viz. a gracious Saint appear, he's wonder'd at. Let the wick∣ed wonder and hate,Deus mo∣derator certantium & corona vincenti∣um. Christ observes and loves all that are his, and will pre∣serve every haire, be of good comfort keep this pretious soul-promise in your hearts. Suffering Saints, Christ brought it forth for you;Mat. 5.11, 12. blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsly for my sake; (saith Christ) rejoyce and bee exceeding glad; for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the Prophets, which were before you. So christians that suf∣fer, you are not the first, there are some sufferers before, follow on there is a crown in readines for you, and I would it were on your heads. I hope it will be, and then will you appeare more cleerly like Christ, for a crowned Christ and crowned Saints are very like each other. I shall souls, put you to it now, in
desiring you to consider who you are like,Christia∣ni nomen frustra ille sorti∣tur, qui Christum minime imitatur. many go for Christs people that are never a whit like him, neither fa∣shioned like him within nor without; neither in speech, nor shape like him; nor yet in word nor conversation. In∣deed they are more like Satan, and were it not for the name of christians, you would not know them scarcely from Devils, I am sure not from heathen. Their language speaks them not of the land of Canaan nor of Christs flock, but rather Goates and aliens from, if not enemies to Christ. Earthly they are and not heavenly, he that is of the earth is earthly and speaketh of the earth.Joh. 3.13. As ducklings have alwaies their bils in the mud, swine their noses in the mire, every thing tends to what likes him, so carnal men. Travaile upon the way and you shall find how familiar people of like dispositions are, gratious men for gracious company and dis∣course, worldly and carnal men abhor such company and communication, but if thry meet with such as are carnal, then they are pleas'd. Homogeneal things easily close, water will run with water in the same channel, dogs will
play with dogs, & wolves with wolves, try men by their company; you may find a sheep amongst wolves, 'tis rare, unlesse they prey, to devour; Souls I will not judge you, you have a judge within you, bring the question you would have decided before him, if you will hear he will speak to the businesse, the sentence shall be impartial, it is conscience properly to say the truth be it for a man or against him; Ask con∣science, how like Christ? ask conscience, whether such as you be are Saints? ask conscience, whether heavens glory have such as you? ask conscience whether you are skil'd in Scripture, and whether you walk according to the word? whe∣ther you be company for Christ? do not misunderstand conscience, nei∣ther hearken to something else that is not conscience. Well dear friends, I must hasten; I will put but one Inter∣rogatory to you, and end this Use; here are many people in this parish, some love the truth, others hate it, some are religious, some profane, some zealous, some but moral; who of these do you most affect? whose houses do you most frequent? whose sosciety is your delight? I know you can tell, I will
conclude nothing: I know what I might, what I could say, but I forbear. Lovers see somewhat in the object that delights the affection, something that pleaseth them, I can guesse what the man is if I am sure what he loves,Qualis a∣mor tuus, talis ipse es. Amans & res amata fiunt u∣num. Si divina diligis ef∣ficieris di∣vinus. for the affection pitcheth upon somewhat sutable; he hath a heavenly heart that loves heavenly things, he may be said to be gratious that loves grace, and he a christian that loves Christ as Christ deserves, even with his whole heart; what company you now like you will have enough of hereafter, let it be good or bad. Pray God make you like Christ, then will you love him, and he will take you to himself; If that be not hap∣pinesse judge you. Reproves the most of the world and  blames them for their self-deceiving, that think they are very holy yet no way like unto Jesus Christ. Blame I might open profane wretches; God knowes the world is full of such that live in al riot and excesse and hasten to hell, so of Civil men that goe sleepily and without making any noise to de∣struction: and also of men and women contenting themselves with a forme of
Godliness, how sad is the condition of such? how blame-worthy are they that regard not their souls? They take up so much of Religion as will get them some countenance from Gods people, but for God himselfe they care not.Psal. 75.4. I may say to such as the Psalmist to his fooles, deale not foolishly. For what will it advantage such to carry some esteeme for a short time among men, and to their shame, nay confusion (its feard) be discover'd at last? It is no comfort to a man in the end, that he was religious in shew only. And as their end will be comfortless that have onely the shell of goodneess, so theirs that are open profane, and also that are carelesly secure. You'l blame a child for loosing a penny given to it, the very loosing is blam'd (the manner not con∣sider'd) what may be said to such that loose their souls? as they may be blam'd so pittied, but neither recovers them, they being once gone; out of hell is no redemption. Soules consider this; have you not a place for dust, & another for Gold? I may say, so hath God. He hath a hel for filthy sinners, & a heaven for pure Saints. God is upon his worke of se∣paration
dayly, you will all find what I say true, he is ready to try you. Take heed in the day of sifting you be not chaff, if you be, you will be burn'd in unquenchable fire. Like must to like, Christ and the Devil will have what belongs to them. Souls I desire your change speedily; for by nature you are all like Satan, you must be new cast, have another forme, if like Christ. I cannot mend any of you by reproving (mending is Christs work) yet I shall as enabled pray, that they that are not chang'd into the Image of Christ may be, and where 'tis begun it may be per∣fected. Quest. You it may be have a mind to aske me, why so few are like Christ, seeing 'tis such an excellent state, and also honourable &c? Ans. I may say because they have not receiv'd of the heavenly gift, & are not by heavens hand polished. Besides, 'tis not the fashion of the world. To be holy is exceedingly out of fashion in these times; to be holy is to be singular, the last is to be wondred at, if not disdain'd; it sets all men a wondering to behold the assemblies of Saints.Psal. 38.5. Some-times be∣sides
wondring they are enrag'd against them;Reges ter∣rae inito inter se consilio congregati sunt contra hanc Dei civitatem, ejus{que} ci∣ves pari∣ter ad nos expugnan∣dos conve∣nerunt. I shal spare any further discourse upon such that differ so much from Christ, I am sure if they never be made like Christ, they will wish they had, if they be chang'd into the like Image I need not bid them, their own graces will quicken them to praise the Lord. The first Doctrine is left to your medi∣tation, I desire you may be as like Christ as the Doctrine is like truth; the next thing to present to your soules is this.  They that know Jesus Christ may know Saints. I know many questions might be propounded about this Doctrin but I omit them, what may be said of two men that are much a like, he that knows one may know the other, so he that knowes Christ may know Saints. I know no one surer way to try men by then this, looke well upon Christ, consider his graces, and all his endow∣ments,mor Dei est illud sigillum, quo Deus electos & credentes obsignat. taste his sweetnes, smell his sa∣vour & where you find that is like, what you find in Christ, conclude they are Saints. Men know their goods by the mark, their leases by the seale, servants by their livery, so may Saints be known by Christ. Study Christ well and thou
wilt say such are Saints, let their appear∣ances bee what they will, let them be by name Jew or Gentile, circumcis'd or not circumcis'd, if Saints their graces will discover what they be. Christians judge not according to the flesh and formes, but according to the Spirit, a gracious soul is lovely to a gracious spi∣rit, let it be of never so different judge∣ment in some low things that are sub∣ject to vanish. They are children of one Father,  descended of one Royal stock. Know the Eldest child well, you may know the Younges, consider of Christs comlines, & the Saints  may the better ap∣pear, know the righteousness of Christ, and you may know holy Saints, the voice of Christ, and the voice of Saints. God gifts and cloths his children much alike, what the eldest hath the youn∣gest hath the same, indeed the eldest is larges; and the difference is onely in the measure not in the manner; Al grace is in Christ, and some in Saints. There's grace in al, head and members have life, every part of the body its ornament, so whole Christ, and this in holines. Their employment is a like.  Do you
know the busines of Christ? can you say this is the work of Christ, and herein he is excercis'd? Consider who acts like him, and then judge. Compare things together, the holy and heavenly work of Christ, let that be the pattern, esteem and commend those souls whose work∣ings are most like the pattern. Children are commended that write most like the Copy, and so is the Limner whose draught is most like the body, whose picture agrees best with the life. Suffer a word of exhortation.Eph. 5.1. Be ye therefore followers of God, as deare childien, and walk in love, as Christ also hath loved us, and hath given himself for us, an offering, and a sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling savour. Christ yeel'ds a sweet savour in his love, and in his obedience:2 Cor. 2.15. so do Saints, they are unto God a sweet savour. Study Christ soundly, and when you have done, see how men agree with Christ, and accord∣ingly let them have the repute of Saints. Be not partial in your judging, but judge righteous judgement. Ʋuse.You may now hint whence it is that Saints are no better known. I conceive it is because Christ is not known. Ig∣norance
of Christ effecteth an ignorance of Saints.1 Cor. 2.8 Christ was kild by such that knew him not, and so are Saints. How many precious Jewels have been taken for drosse, and so cast out? how many gracious souls esteem'd not worthy to live? and why? because like Christ,Act. 22.22 both Christ and they taken for evil doers, for disturbers of the places where they come, yea sometime for blasphemers: you seldom see any reverence godly souls that yield not reverence to the God of souls;Joh. 16.2, 3. that respect Saints that honour not Christ. Men that are farthest from Christ, are the lap-children of wicked men, if any have their respect they are such that are like themselves, ungodly. Good men, you complain of your slight∣ings, wrongs, and divers sufferings in the world; and complain you may: your sorrows are ungodly mens musick; they never rejoyce more then when the Saints tears run down fastest. This hath and will be the worlds pastime, even good-mens sufferings. Christ sufferings pleas'd the Jews heartily: so doth the sufferings of Christs people, Jewish na∣tures to this day. Men do they know not what, in wronging the deare jew∣els
of God, and pluck on themselves a most heavy wrath from the God of Saints. The works of wicked men now are such as the wicked generations that went before,1 Thes. 2.15. for they killed the Lord Jesus, and the prophets, and persecuted Saints, and all was because they were blinded of Satan, and the glorious Spirit of holines shone not into their souls to give them the knowledge of Je∣sus Christ. How were it possible that men should be enemies to Christ or to Saints the friends of Christ, did they know what he hath suffered and un∣dergone for souls?Amor è caelo ad terram eum traxit, ad colum∣nam liga∣vit, cruci∣affixit, se∣pulchro clausit, ad inferos at∣raxit. how out of love and pitty he came down from heaven, un∣derwent many a gracious suffering, and all to do poor wretched man good? but here is a sad sight, al is slighted of many. Is it not strange to hear a groaning Christ, and sinners mocking? a Christ wounded to the heart, and souls mad at heart against him? to see the everlast∣ing Father dying, and yet the children of that Father abus'd, and that by such for whom the Father is suffering? It was an ungratful act of Joash to slay the child of Johoiada that had holp him to the Kingdome, but as the sufferer prayed,
God acted & punished the wicked doer. God is just, wait his time, and then see what he wil do to Christ and christian wrongers. You have need of patience you Christ-like souls, you are sufferers, you will be so in this world, you are not known neither is your Saviour, and indeed because your glory is hid, is it that your sufferings are open; but be of good chear, God will help you, he knows Christ, and he knows you, he holp Christ, and will help you. I shall say onely this to such that say they know not who are Saints, what these Saints mean they know not, &c. I fear you know not Christ, if it be so 'tis sad with you, and your state is miserable, and were I able this day to weep, I should willingly weep for such that know not the Lord Jesus Christ. Let not a form of worship bear o∣vermuch  sway with you, and so think all Saints that are under such a form, and for all others to thinke that they are heathen, to suppose that they are without Christ because without such a form, a form affected by you; These forms of worship, I mean Idolizing them, hath made a miserable stir a∣mungst
professors. The devil hath ta∣ken great advantage to nourish strife and discord amongst brethren by them, and he hath blasted charity abundant∣ly, nay so much that some will not joyn in prayer with any unlesse of their form, nor hear the word unlesse from one of their judgment. Is this a knowing of Christ, & then Saints; or is it a know∣ing appearances, & Saints by them? The Lord reconcile Jew and Gentile. The foot may be lov'd though it be not an eye because 'tis of the body, so may a soul though of a different outward ap∣pearance because it belongs to Jesus Christ. In the body there are several members, yet are all useful in their places, wherin the Lord hath been plea∣sed to place them: so it is in the several attainments and Administrations the Saints are under. All may be useful, and he that is in the lowest Attainment (es∣pecially that may be of some so judg'd) may there enjoy God, and be useful to the body, and though it see not with the eye, yet may it be a foot to help carry on the body. I could wish that we could more look after Christ, and where we find him esteem them Saints, whether
they be circumcised or uncircumcised, whether bond or free. I know not why any should consider them that are in a low appearance & as 'tis judg'd in mean attainment. Who knows but Christ may be with them? if so, thats enough; if Christ ascend they shall ascend with him. Noahs Arke rose as the waters did: so shall Saints as Christ pleaseth to bear them up, and at length all forms shall die, and Christ to his appear all in all. For the resurrection and appearance of the Lord is the death of man, and the death of forms, and the death of flesh: for all these things are but shadows, and when Christ cleerly appears they shall be abolished. The Lord make out his appearance clearly, that so we may know him, and by knowing him know those that are his, and from a right knowing, love, and love increasing, our mutual joy may abound in the Lord. Would you soules be taken for Saints? do you desire the people of God should have such an esteem of you indeed? You must be like Christ, or they durst not own you under that name, you must be anointed with that anonting he is a∣nointed
withal,Ro. 8.9. you must have the same spirit within and you must be fashioned without like Christ,Omnis vita nostra con∣formis illi reddatur, qui exa∣more nostri totum sae nobis con∣formavit. your conversation must be holy and as be∣cometh the Gospel. Two cannot walk together except they agree saith God; now what agreement can be between Christ and Beliall? between the wolfe and the lamb? what agreement was there between Saints and Paul all that time he persecuted? could Saints take him for a Saint then; No, he must be made a new creature, he must be changed, Christ must be revealed in him. Some of you are angry because you are debar'd from something that is the priviledge of Saints. Pray know this, Gods sheepe are known by his mark, shew your mark, let appear that your spot is the spot of God, and such as he puts on his flock. Every man may not sit in Parliament, is such that are chosen, and sent, so not every one may fit in the assembly of the righteous, but such that are called, and chosen, and faithful. Obj. You will object it may be and say, what do I think you are not holy? do I not take you for Christians? do I think th you have not a care to serve God
and live holily? do not wee (you'l say keep our church as much as any? do not we pray and hear? We were former∣ly taken for good people, and there was no exception, what must we, now be suspected? must our faith be now call'd in question? scuh things Carnall people object. Ans. Soules from this plea I cannot say you are Saints. I know many a Nominall Christian goes to hell, many go to Church (as they stile the house of publike worship) & are never the more reformed,Eccl. 8.10 they continue wicked and are unregenerated it may be for al this.Ro. 2.28. I may use Pauls words; He is not a Jew which is one outwordly, neither is that Circumcisition, which is outward in the flesh;Qui tan∣tum profes∣sione ex∣terna & nuncupati∣one est Judaeus, non coram Dei judi∣cio consetur Judaeus sed is solus, &c. Non qui est in operto Christianus is Christianus est nec qui est in aperto tantum baptismus, is baptismus est &c. Now know this that the meaning is I conceive, He is not a true Jew or true Israelite, viz. gracious, that can onely plead his naturall birth or the cutting off the foreskin of his flesh, neither is he a true Christian, that is so by name onely, and borne in a Christian country, and that hath re∣ceived the outward badge being sprink∣led with water. Paul discovered how little such outward things profited,
when he renounced all fleshly Con∣fidence;Phil. 3.4 Though he could plead as great fleshly priviledges as any, yet he counted all as nothing worth in compa∣rison of Christ. When he had received Christ,Eph. 5.13 he saw cleerly by that light, that manifests all things, that all natu∣ral endowments and enjoyments with∣out Christ were of no benefit to the soul. Now as Paul, though comparing them with Christ counted them dung and drosse, yet he did not detract any thing from the endowments and enjoy∣ments themselves.Haec nihil detrahunt dignitati sacramen∣torum, &c. No more would I from the name Christian, or from pub∣like meetings or, from baptism, but wil∣ing I am to give all their due; so that Christ be not rob'd but acknowledged all and in all. I must tell you souls, they are fooles and unwise that pride themselves in any thing that is not ve∣ry Christ. Baptisme is nothing, if a soul hath not Christ; a Sermon is nothing, preaching nothing, if Christ be not preached; the name Christian no∣thing, if Christ be not in the soul. The sum of the sum of all is Christ. 'Tis a common fault (God weed it out of mens hearts) for men to vatut in some
outward thing, and glad many are if they can denominate themselves of this or that opinion or judgement, or of this or that man as a hearer, follower or of his Congregation, or got into some attainement that bears high a∣mongst professours. I shall onely say this, beware you do not deceive your selves, Christ is all, and all you must have Christ, or you will perish eter∣nally. I might have added severall Rea∣sons why Saints are so wary who they take into their fellowship, as that they will not take in such that bear a name onely, and in life and conversa∣tion are sensuall carnall, heathenish, devilish, nor such as barely beleeve on∣ly a Christ without: that can speake of the letter of scripture and the history of Christ but, have not a Christ manifest¦ed within, but I shal not stay here much; for Saints them already; and for others, they (as Swine pearles) will tread them under their foot; they will scorn them as that they savour of over much strictnesse and novelty; it may they will say of Independencie and A∣nabaptisme. But a word of them. 1. It is uncomfortable to Saints to
take them into fellowship that have not a Christ within. Is it not uncom∣fortable living for a living man to be yok'd to a dead body, and to have dead men for his Company What are men without Christ but dead men,Eph. 2. 1. Joh. 1.22. souls without life stincking, rotten loath∣some souls that have no comlinesse? 2. It is dangerous to Saints to joyn in any intimate fellowship with such, by reason they are infectious persons; a body infected with the plague is not more apt to infect mens bodies, then sinfull vile souls are such that nourish fellowship with them.ps. 18.29. Men are very apt to fashion themselves like those with whom they converse and live, to imi∣tate their words and actions, and to be confederate in their doings, and so allured or enticed from what is right and agreeable to the perfect rule of the word. 3. It is scandalous, for if such be ta∣ken into fellowship and church society that are vile or that have but a form of Godlinesse, and so adorn not the pro∣fession of the Gospell, how doth it give ungodly men occasion to speak evil, and to open their mouths against the way
of the Saints, and to stand out so much the more stifly by way of oppossition against truth, because of some bad ones got into outward society that have not the inward enjoyment of truth. Saints had need beware (upon this considera∣tion) who they take into church-fel∣lowship, that so it be not such that by falling off from holinesse give offence, but such that are held in by the power of truth to the credit of truth, and truths professors with whom they are in communion. Souls you that know Christ look a∣bout you; consider of men rightly; take a serious consideration of them;Sanctam vitam cum ip so amant. Discite a me quia mitis sum & humilis corde. Si∣vis esse a∣doptivus Dei filius, vide quo∣modo con∣versetur filius ille unigenitus. & take them for Saints that are like Christ, such that are like holy as Christ is holy, pure as Christ is pure, precious as Christ is precious, sweet & lovely, comely beauti∣ful as Christ, gentle & lowly as Christ they that are Christs are like Christ. The ado∣pted sonnes of God like the only begot∣ten sonne of God, the younger brothers like the Elder, Saints like their Savi∣our, Christ is humble, gentle, loving, merciful, full of bowels of kindnes and goodnes, they that are Saints indeed are like him, he it is they strive to imi∣tate,
he they look vnto as their rule,Sancta Christi vi∣ta, est per∣fecta vitae nostrae re∣gula. he is the patterne they have always be∣fore them. I guide you not to this or that forme, attainment, opinion, judg∣ment, or the like, to find Saints; but I point out to you Christ, and if you see any like him esteem them: if you find any that have the same spirit as Christ,vbi spiri∣tus vnus, ibi eadem voluntas; ubi volun∣tas eadem; ibi etiam actiones eaedem. that have the same will, the same acti∣ons look on them & love them, and for Christs sake esteem them; because they are like Christ the very image of Christ. The main resolution of their souls, and actings of the body is to know God, and promote his glory, to ascribe praises to him, to do good to Saints, to put forward whatsoever is agreeable to his wil with all their might.Si propter Christum proprio ho∣nori, pro∣prio amo∣ri, propriae voluntati. in hac vita renunci∣as, Chri∣stus in fu∣tura, sui honoris, sui amoris compotem te faciet. 'Tis not mens frownes, tis not allurements, 'tis not losses, 'tis not Crosses can deter them from the work of God: they know if they deny themselves seeking here not their own honour nor self advancings, but following the advice of Christ, ob∣serving his will, doing his work, lay∣ing out themselves wholly for him, he will reward them, by giving out unto them of his honour, of his love, and the like in the world to come. I shall
leave you now to the search and finding out of Saints, by the wisdome of Christ owning and esteeming such for Saints that are like Jesus Christ, they that know Christ may know Saints. And so much shall suffice to be spoken of that second Doctrine. We shall as God shall enable us by his spirit give out somewhat more from the Text that may be of further use & comfort to souls, which is this. Saints brought to heaven shall not have a∣nother being,  onely a perfecting of what is begun on earth. They have a glory already in them, upon them,Joh. 17.22.23. even the glory that was given to Christ, in heaven they shall have more abundant glory. They have Somewhat for breeding, as heirs under age, not come to their full inheritance, yet growing to a ripenesse of years and so to a possession of the inheritance, even a knowledge of the excellencies of God and Christ fully and clearly, yea and of their own excellency by vertue of uni∣on and communion with Father and sonne; For then shall that glory be manifest and apparant above, which is not so manifest and apparent below. Christians have some light now, though
but small, they have part of what they shall enjoy in perfection; they now see though but darkly, then face to face, clearly; They enjoy visions of God though in a cloudy and darke manner. God and glory are reveal'd but in part to Saints whilst here on earth, and all they see and know is but dark and im∣perfect, to what they shall see and know: God communicates and makes out of his fulnesse to those are his here on earth, but the communication and making out of all fulnesse it self is only above in glory in the highest heavens, when they shal be brought to dwel with Christ to behold his glory, and inhe∣rit that marvellous Light, the bright∣nesse of which yet we are not able to behold. Christians have had, and still have, as much of God here, as such vessels could hold: here Saints are nar∣row-hearted, and dim-sighted, and cannot entertaine so much, nor see so clearly as they shall when they arrive at heaven, where their hearts shall be enlarg'd, and their sight made fit, as to receive much, so to behold much of the excellencies of Glory.
Souls,  consider what I am now about to speak to you: have you a being now like the Saints in glory, yea like Christ in glory, is the life of glory begun here? is there any sparks of that heavenly fire kindled in you? any drops of that foun∣tain? hath the light shin'd into you that shines in heaven? have you that joying you now hear on earth? that joyes Saints in blisse above? hath a sight of God made you large to see more of him? can you say with the Psalmist,Psal. 63.1, 2. My soul thirsteth, and my flesh longeth for thee, to see thy glory, so as I have seen it in the sanctuary? hath glimpse of beauty taken you? any thing of Christ delight∣ed you? 1. Pray try what is in your inward man? do you find any light of love shining in? are you warm'd with any of this heavenly heate?1 Joh. 4.12. I cannot presse this too much: doth God dwell in you? you are not like him if there be not in∣dwellings of God himself. I do not so much regard what you are without and in appearance. I would have you some∣what within. There is great glory in heaven, there must be some glory in your souls here; yea and it must be
such glory as is in heaven, glory shines in Saints more clearly above, here it shines though but dimly, and they that shine here a little as sparks shall shine exceeding brightly as the Sun in the kingdome of their Father,Mat. 13.43. here (if we are as we should be and such that shall increase in goodnes, & have an addition to our joy) we have some inward taste and feeling of the blessed comforts of God. Beloved that which I speake to you of, concerns your souls, take heed they be not empty, take heed they be not void of all goodnes, destitute of the love and sweet communion of God through Jesus Christ. You know how it sped with the five foolish Virgins that had no oyle in their lamps: let what befel them make you beware. 'Tis a wisemans part to refrain from that way which others have perished in; un∣clean birds may have gaudy outsides, the plain feather'd fowl may be wholsomest, beware that no man deceive you,Psal. 51.6. Psa. 51.10. Innova in interiori∣bus meis spiritum rectum. and also be cautious that you wrong not your selves, know this that God de∣sireth truth in the inward parts; and a pure inside; a clear heart was one thing David petition'd for, this you
should ask, and this you must possesse if ever it be well with you. That soul is as it should be when 'tis the seat, throne, and dwelling of God. 2. Are your souls rais'd ftom the dead? is there a power put forth in you, and that an exceeding great power, whereby you are delivered from sin, Sa∣tan and selfe, and unable to walke as Spiritually alive according to the wil of God. Souls in glory are free souls, rais'd souls, souls set on high, souls exceed∣ingly spiritualiz'd, wholly spiritual, a∣ctive, souls in glorifying and praising God, 'tis their oontinual employment, they cease not, they are alwayes busied in what tends to Gods praise. Is there any likenes to this in you? are you fetcht out of darknesse? set at liberty? made able for the work of God? Free∣men are first Apprentices, Apprentices are in the way to freedom, what are Saints in heaven but freemen? such that have serv'd out their time on earth: con∣sider christians are you bound to God? doth he teach you? doe you now serve him? are you wholly his? do you not serve Satan, world, nor selfe, but God? it will be but a few yeares but you
shall be advanced higher, advanc'd into sublime and transcendent glory, to sit with Saints, and there with your fellow-brethren to sing Hallelujahs for evermore. 3. Is there a prizing of the things of glory? They that are like Christ, esteem, love, prize, the things of Christ, and what Christ doth esteeme, love, prize; they esteeme creature things in their places as they ought; yet all these are but dung and drosse in comparison of the excellencies of grace and glory. Soul-necessities are not satisfied with creature-things: they free not from cor∣ruption, they reveale not the love of God, nor ease the soul of its trouble; if troubl'd for want of the loving kind∣nes of the Lord. Saints in glory are de∣livered from all misery and enjoy ful∣nes of consolation, they that are go∣ing glory-ward shall be eas'd, shall have their ful of joy: they eye the pleasures and blisse of heaven, they have thoughts upon them, they are much taken up with them in their meditations. Saints in heaven are pleas'd with the visible glory they injoy. Saints on earth are pleas'd, in that through faith they be∣lieve
there is a reward laid up for them, that they shall possesse an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled,1 Pet. 1.4. and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for them. Souls you know what you prize, what is delightful to you, you can tell whether earthly, or heavenly, carnal or spiritual things: surely if drawing towards heaven, they are hea∣venly things delight you; they that are in glory rejoyce in their glorious en∣joyments, they that are in grace going to glory, rejoyce through faith in be∣lieving what is laid up for them, and what they shall enjoy: they exspect the accomplishing of promises; and their accomplishing, tends to gracious souls advancing, and crowning in glory with an everlasting diadem. Consider of this I pray, take much care in trying whe∣ther you be in the right way to perfect peace: you would not willingly be cou∣soned in any earthly things, beware you be not cheated in this that concernes your soules, and so lose your soules: if you should, I need not say you are undone, you will to your sorrow finde it; but I hope you will be careful in this. I can but advise, 'tis God must make
you wise; I can but instruct, 'tis the Lord must make you to receive instruction. Try all things, try earthly things, you will see them vanity, try Spiritual things, God grant you knowledge to diserne, and wisdome to prize and hold fast what is good. Is to speake comfort to souls. What Revelations, have you now; you shall have more; what discoveries of love now you shall have more large manifestati∣ons heareafter; God speaks good to souls now, and gives in somewhat of love, but 'tis here a little and there a little, now and then a drop to keep their hearts open; but in heaven God comunicates all at once: here he gives out what he gives in degrees, & accord∣ing to Saints capacity to receive; but in heaven the whole shall be posses'd, that God hath in store for them that love him; they shall have perfect holi∣nes, compleat happines, and pure spi∣rituality.Animorum summa pu∣ritas, stupenda corporum charita, &c. There natures shall be spotless, and there actions blamelesse, an orient splendour and matchlesse brightness of resplendent light shall cover the whole man as a garment. Oh what an infi∣nite, unconceiveable, and unparallel'd
gladnes throughout the soul, spirit, & whloe man wil this occasion? Saints here desire much, and have somewhat of heavens excellency but their desires are not fully satisfied,Quicquid desiderare poterunt e∣lecti, illic invenient: quia coram a facie ad faciem in∣tuentur eum qui est omnia. and in heaven they shal have their ful, insomuch that desires shal cease, not longing after more, for God shal communicate him∣selfe fully and at once to Saints there. Saints have now some beauty, some comlines, they are in part sanctified, but in heaven they shal be fully sanctifi∣ed, all glorious, this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality, and then con∣ceptions of evil shall not be in souls, there shal be no unsoundnes of judg∣ment, nor taints of error, no impuri∣tie nor imbecillity of affections in glo∣ry. Saints love to Christ, shal not be cold, weak and feeble, but it shall be hot, strong, perfect, they shal be with∣out any imperfection. Nothing in them, or what is done by them shal be blame∣worthy,Similes erimus ipsi Deo benedicto in secu∣lum. they shal be like the blessed God for ever. Is not this a word of comfort now? wil it not be much more a precious soul-rejoycing to enjoy this purity, this samctity, this holinesse, of
being made a excellent beautiful like An∣gels,Angelis & sibi ipsi nos similes reddit. yea like God himself? There shal be nothing amisse in the soul; it shal be all glorious: no blindnesse, lamenesse, deafnesse, nor crookednesse, nor in∣firmity shal be on the body: the bodies of Saints in glory that be handsome, faire, comely, beautiful; yea like unto the glorious body of Christ:Phil. 3.21. yea, and which is more, they shal in the whole body be like unto his glorious body. Eadem corpora, quae hic cum Chri∣sto cruci∣fixa sunt, una cum Christo in caelesti be∣atitudine glorifican∣tur.These very bodies of Saints that suf∣fer now with and for Christ, shal with Christ in heavenly blisse be glorified with him; yea they shal have such glory as he hath. This Souls I shal leave to you to admire. I cannot sufficiently and to the ful in words discover it to you; 'Tis a wonder to thinke that they that are gracious and so like Christ here, should be in heaven as handsome bodi∣ed as Christ is,—Glo∣ria nulla lingua sa∣tis expli∣cari potest. and have as comely a person and feature as he himself has, whom the Father loves dearly, that their bodies shal be in all places like to Christs body. Beloved, may not this in∣courage us in trouble, to venture life and limb for God, rather then that God should lose his glory; seeing that he
can make up all again, and supply all wants, and wil make every one perfect at last: and also not to be troubled as concerning Death, with any discom∣fortable thoughts of worms eating and destroying the flesh, with rottennesse seising upon the body, and the like; knowing that Christ at last wil restore all perfect. 2. Saints, you have now some wis∣dome and knowledge, you shal have more abundant, you shal have more wisdome,Isa Dei sa∣pientia se∣ipsam eis ostendet, &c. you shal have clearer know∣ledge in the things of God and Christ, and of heaven; surely knowledge is an exellent thing, especially Divine and Heavenly knowledge, knowledge in the mystery of salvation. What is it that some would not give for knowledge now in Arts and Tongues, and in Scri∣pture-truths, yea to know God rightly? In heaven Saints you shall have an ex∣quisite and perfect knowledge of God; ye shal see him not only mentally and contemplatively, but also with the bo∣dies eyes corporally; so Job,Job 19.25, 26. I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth. And though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet
in my flesh shall I see God: Whome I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another; This Christians I conceive may make your longings to be eager after heaven, and exceedingly rejoyce to thinke you shal see God, to see God as he is in himself, and as he Is in you; And all this in a spiritual manner, for all knowledge in heaven shal be spiri∣tual. I might enlarge my self more on this, but I forbear according to what of God is given in to you, such is your knowledge already, and as God shal be reveal'd, knowledge shal encrease, and at last you shal in glory know as you are known. 3. Saints shal in heaven have a ful fruition of Christ, a ful sight of their sweet Saviour,Chridum videre, su∣perabit omnia∣gaudia. Superabit omnia cor∣dis nostoi desideria. such a sight that shal give in unspeakable joy, such enjoyment that shal bring more joy then heart can wish; no tongue can express, no heart can conceive what consolation they have that shal enjoy Christ and dwel with him for ever. To see Christ to dwel and be with Christ, brings to soules wounderful happines. This makes souls cry out how long Lord Jesus is it ere thou wilt bring us to glory, where
we may have beauty presented to our sight, sweetnes to our taste amongst men,Pulchri∣tudo erit visui, mel gustui, ci∣thara audi∣tui, balsa∣num olfa∣ctui, flos actui. musick to our eare, what is odoriferous to our smelling, and delightful to be touch'd and handled, the soul also fil'd with light, and comfort, every faculty having what is pleasant to it given out freely and fully; O blessed condition! O sweet life! O happy being! to be brought into the Court of the glorious God, to the society of Saints,Jesu Chri∣ste, sponse animaemeae suavissi∣me. into the bosome of sweet and blessed Jesus, the loving, and ever-glorious husband to blessed souls! Love is abundantly shown on earth by Christ to those that are Christs, in their affaires to direct them, in their troubles to help them, in their dan∣gers to deliver them; in bestowing di∣vers and excellent benefits both of grace and nature, and of creature-things: like∣wise in disappointing the dangerous de∣vices of enemies, in frustrating the subtile and crafty plottings of Satan, in beating downe the power of corruption and the like: here is much of mercy and goodnes in all this, but the crown and perfection of all, is the bringing, seating, crowning of souls in glory. How beautiful are souls in that day! how
glorious! how lifted up! how exalted! how honour'd when they shal not a∣lone see Christ, but they shal live with him! Not alone, behold him in a Throne at the right-hand of the maiesty on high, but they shal be seated in Thrones with him! Rejoyce O souls in the me∣ditation of this, let the consideration hereof be sweet and pleasant to you, for you shal be ever with Christ the Lord;Ibi sum∣ma & cer∣ta securi∣tas, secura tranquilli∣tas, tran∣quilla ju∣cunditas, jucunda felicitas, felix ae∣ternitas, aeterna beatitas. Gaudium erit sine tristitia, quod con∣tinet aeter∣nam laeti∣tiam, salus erit sine dolore, vita sine labore lux sine tenebris, amor nunquam tepescet; gaudium nunquam decrescet; ge∣mitus non audietur, ne{que} dolor sentietur, triste nihil videbitur, lia semper habebitur, &c. with Christ the glorious; there shal you be safe, there shal you have delight, there shal you have happines and that eternal happines and everlast∣ing blessednes, all good, all the excel∣lent enjoyments of heaven shal be end∣lesse, light endlesse, joy endlesse, plea∣sure endlesse, friendship endlesse: and as endlesse, so pure without mixture; there shal in Christs Armes, in Christs pre∣sents be joy without sorrow, health without grief, life without labour, light without darknesse, continual fresh and flourishing love, abounding joy, mourn∣ing shal not be there, neither shal there
be any grief, sorrow or sadnes or any such thing. I desire to speak more clearely of these things but I cannot utter them as they deserve, you that have had any refreshing from Christ here, can best judge and discerne what it is to possesse him wholly, and live with him altogether. 4. Christians, in glory you shal have much happines arise to you from the sweet communion and blessed fel∣lowship you shal have with Saints, you know some Saints now and you take some delight in their company, you are glad when you can meet with them to converse and talke with them, and to joyne in ordinances, your joy in these things shal be much more abundant, for you shal know all the blessed Saints in glory: they that were taken up thi∣ther before you, and they that shal come thither after you, shal be known of you, and you known of them. All Saints shal be known of every particu∣lar Saint, and every particular Saint shal be known of all, in coelo nullus erit a∣lienus, there shal be no stranger in hea∣ven, a Saint there shal have as much ac∣quaintance as all the Saints in glory
may afford, & as many friends as there are Saints. You that now desire com∣munion with holy souls, shal have your fill of familarity; you that joy to see and meet with Saints now, shal have your joy increas'd. Christians on earth complain of the strangnes of other Christians, but in heaven there shal be no cause of such complaints: as we shal be joyned one to another, and all to the Lord,Nemo ibi laediiur, irascitur nemo, in∣videt ne∣mo, cupi∣ditas nulla exardescit &c. so shal we love one another in the Lord. In glory none shal hurt other, none shal envy other, none shal desire others good: for every one shal have e∣nough, even his fil of good; and shal rejoyce to see one another happy: consi∣der I pray what love to Saints now; what delight in their company; what refreshment to see the faces of Saints; and enjoy the fellowship of sanctified soules, if it be right, if truely spiritual, and what it should be. It wil heareafter satisfie you to the ful when you shal have the perfect knowledge of al Saints. Let this comfort you against worldly mens slightings, yea and good mens shi∣ness; as for worldlings slightings care not, they are such that shal be shut out from the presence of God and fellow∣ship
of Saints. And for any Saints shi∣ness be not grieved, it wil not long con∣tinue: in heaven there is no such thing there all Saints shal be kind each to o∣ther, shal know each other perfectly, and love each other sincerely and truly. Happy are they that have some begin∣ings of sanctified love and communion with the holy and beloved ones of Jesus Christ now; it shal encrease and be more abundant, as they growe up in Jesus. Rejoyce in this Christians, you shal see, know, have fellowship, dwel with for e∣ver, all blessed Saints, such as, Abraham,Mat. 8.11 Jsaac, Jacob, Noah, David, Daniel, Paul, Sarah, Rebeccah, the Virgin Mary &c. you shal know their persons, names, natures, Excellencies, delight in them, and they in you. I shal speak no more of this Use. Thirdly,Si in hac vita non gustes ae∣ternae feli∣citatis ini∣tium, nunquam plenum percipies comple∣mentum. let me give out somewhat by way of reproofe to such men, that thinke they shal goe to heaven, and hope they shal dwel in glory hereafter, yet despise nothing more then what is heavenly, and what tends to help them thither; let such be assured that they that have not some taste and rellish of heavenly things now, and delight in
them wil never have their ful sotiety in glory. Doe you thinke to goe to hea∣ven that now hate holines, and speak evil of the wayes of the Lord? That ab∣horre Saints, as bad as the sight of Toads, what wil you doe in heaven? you cannot abide praises & hallelujahs and the glorious exercises of Saints, you cannot endure the fellowship of holy men and women, you abhor them now, yet they are not so pure as they shal be; and then doubtless you wil loath them more. Do not some of you abhorre being in places and amongst people where Godlines is in exercise? do you not delight to be where you may drink and swel, sing and roare, card and dice, hunt and hawk, mock and jeere, scoffe and deride goodnes and good-men? nay if it were in your pow∣er, would you not kil & slay the Saints? do you not defie their waies, courses, and behaviour, yea and that because ho∣ly, pure, sincere, upright and such as are becoming the Gospel of the blessed God? Consider, I pray, your selves whether you are not such that God himself re∣proves,Ps. 50.17. for hating instruction and cast∣ing his holy and heavenly councel be∣hind
your backs, and for letting your mouth be open to speak evil, yea and that against the righteous? Do you thinke that God wil set such with him∣self in glory hereafter, that now cast a∣side his councel, that wil not be instru∣cted by him? honour such with his Saints that now despise them? place such in the kingdome of glory that now ab∣hor the heirs of glory? No, no, he hath a place for such naughty wretches to put them by themselves,Psal. 9.17 Aeternis addicti suppliciis. they shal be turned into hel; there the being of wicked men shal be; Thinke of this you Saint-haters, you Sermon-despisers, you wicked mockers and scoffers at goodnesse, you that are the wretches prophesied of, that should be brought forth and come into the world in the latter daies, that should appear unholy, and that should be haters of such as are good;2 Tim. 3.1, 2, 3. What is it that some of you would do to the conscionable imbra∣cers of holiness, were they in your pow∣er? would you not imprison them, famish them, slay them, shew much cruelty to them? and would you not pluck down the pure preaching of Jesus Christ, and obstruct the perfect and up∣right
walking of Saints? are not your hearts now against such men, and such doings? and do you not wish your hands at liberty to act some enterprises against what is holy & good? against that which you cal Sects and Factions, and against such as you say bring all out of order, that turn the world upside down? I know not your thoughts within, you are privy to what dwels in your own breast. Paul was once as violent against goodnesse and goodmen as any of you, and doubtlesse had he been then asked, what Saul dost thou think wil become of thy soul? dost thou think thou shalt go to heaven? that thou shalt dwell with the ever-living God? with holy Angels and blessed Saints? he would have said he hoped he should go to heaven as soon any man living; but had the Lord let him go on in his way, & not shewed him mercy, what had he come of his soul? Let this be disgested in your souls: and know that glory and eternal happiness is provided for such that are washed, for such that are sanctified, for such that are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, & by the spirit of our God: and such must you be, if ever brought to heaven. You
are by nature vile, filthy and naked;Nuda erat sponsa, nec poterat ad regale cae∣lestis regni palatium ita nuda introduci; Ipse induit eam vesti∣mentis sa∣lutis & justitiae. Juimi∣cum erat sponsae ge∣nus caele∣sti patri sed ipse il∣lud per a∣cerbissi∣mam pas∣sionem pa∣tri recon∣ciliavit. Cant. 5.21 Erit ibi praesentia omns ma∣li & erit a tia omboni. you must be clothed as Saints, with the robes of righteousnesse and garments of salvation if brought into the Palace of glory, the dweling of the great God where he sits on his Throne and all his blessed Saints about him. I have this comfort yet of such that are enemies to God and what is good, That it is in the power of the Lord for to change them, he can instruct them to repen∣tance, and call them to holinesse, and reconcile them to himself: but should not the Lord thus work upon you that are revilers, slanderers, persecutors, and the like, you shall not inherit the King∣dome of God, but you would be cast a∣way into utter darknesse into unspeak∣able torments, to be tormented with the Devil and his Angels, into such a place of suffering, where you should have no mercy, no good, no comfort, no ease, no friend, no pitty: Miserable, miserable, beyond expression, misera∣ble shall they be in torments for ever, that now torment the holy ones of the Lord, and the blessed members of Christ by their evill speakings and evill doings: such shall be punished with e∣verlasting
destruction,2 Thes. 1.9 and be deprived of all mercy and comfort; I speak not these things to trouble you, but in pit∣ty to admonish you, and my prayer shall be tha the Lion may lie down with the Lambe, that from Comings in of truth into your soules, you may be overcome of truth, and so submit to it, that you may sweetly accord and friendly agree with the children of truth, and all that in truth professe truth; That you may speak and act the same things, and that there may be no divisions amongst you: as you hope to dwell with the Prince of peace, and with the Saints of peace, now live peace∣ably; follow after peace, and what may make for quietnesse in the waies of God. Seeing you are apt to say, you have hopes to be saved; do like them that shal be saved: harme not, but help such that are beloved of him that must save you if ever saved; Consider of what hath been said & the Lord give you aright un∣derstanding of al things, that may make you holy, gentle, courteous, peaceable, in life; and also honourable, blessed, happy and glorious for ever. The life of Saints upon earth is a
rare life, an excellent, holy, and hea∣venly being, a being that tends to the glory, honour and praise of God, to the exalting of his great mercy and good∣nes, and declaring his name and power: 'tis a life wherein men that are holy, la∣bour to improve themselves with all that is theirs in a way of duty to be serviceable to the God of holines; As they have beginnings of the life of glory in the kingdome of grace, so according to what is begun and the gift given do they act, here in grace sutable to what is done in glory. They are not perfect here, they have their failings, yet by the comings in of God they strive to be like God, and according to the gifts of the Spirit, are they spiritual exercis'd; they are spiritual in their prayers; spi∣ritual in their preaching; spiritual in their hearing, spiritual in their con∣versation; striving to walke after the Spirit, endeavouring to give up their all, to Christ that is all and in all. All their wisedome, all their might, all their strength, all their endowments, all their places, all of soule, all of body, all of liberty, riches, honour, in a word, all. Christ hath done so much for them
that they thinke, they can never do e∣nough for him, they think, they can never praise him enough, nor extol him as they ought, nor give the honour that is due to him. They are alwaies complaining of deadnes, and darknes, and weaknes, and inability to behold, to admire, to commend, to advance the sweetnes, goodnes, mercy and comforts that Christ gives out to them: they are longing for more abilities to serve the Lord Jesus. Faine would they do, as they in glory do, and they wait daily, earn∣eastly exspecting to be brought to glory that they may enjoy that in fulnes which here they have in part, and that fulnes being injoy'd, employ it to the honour and praise of the giver. Soules, they are not common men that live the life of Saints, neither is their life a com∣mon life. Saints are jewels, jewels are excellent things: there is that in a jew∣el that is not in ordinary and common stones: jewels have an excellency in them, so have Saints; and this excel∣ency is useful, to Christ, and what Christ adviseth. The Excellency in Saints is given into them from Christ, and as is comes from Christ, it is altogether for
returning to Christ. Christ in giving out his Excellency to Saints, doth open his heaet to Saints and doth also open Saints hearts. The one is opened for goodnes to goe forth, the other for goodnes to come in; and goodnes be∣ing receiv'd in, wil not lie stil: it wil set such that have it upon employments sutable to the wil of Christ, as by recei∣ving what is Christs: 'tis in some measure changd into the likenes of Christ: by re∣ceiving Christs love, the hearts of such receivers are chang'd into the nature of Christs heart, and so become heavenly, heavenly within, and being heavenly within, it wil be heavenly without: The fruit like the seed, Saints like Christ. Excellent things are spoken of Saints in glory, so of Saints on earth. The be∣haviour of Saints in glory is very com∣mendable. They enjoy perfection, and from that perfection act; The amia∣blenesse and admirablenes of Gods pre∣sence, drawes out all the abilities of Saints when in heaven to act answera∣ble unto the Lawes nearenes, and dear∣nesse of such a relation as is betweene God and them. So here on earth such that enjoy God though they cannot do
for God so immediately and fully, yet it is their desire to close with God, and to give out themselves to God; and to carry themselves in-offensively in the world, and as much as in them lies to do good to all; Excellent things are spoken of the City of God, of the holy Jerusalem, of the Lambes wife, of shee that is a dressing, a making ready for to be joyn'd to Christ. Shee is beautiful now, but she shal appear more beautiful, shee is faire and pleasant, and now the delight of Christ, his love, his dove, his undefiled; shee shal be the same in hea∣ven, onely this more perfect. Christs spouse, his Sister, his dove, is but one, shee that is his on earth, shal be his in glory, shee that is his faire one here, shal be his glorious one above, that now is his bosome friend, shal be his Throne-companion.Throni sui compos. The desires (I know) of all you that are Godly, that are some of Christs holy ones, (speake experi∣ence) is, that your sweet Saviour would now raise all your desires to him, fasten all your thoughts upon him, draw all the powers of your souls up on high to him, free you from every weight that holdeth you down, knit you to him
with a knot of love, that so your joy in the injoyment of him might be abun∣dant, your fellowship with Saints sweet, your dayly walking heavenly, giving occasions to all that are Godly to mag∣nifie God on your behalf; Look to it Souls, you are in some measure glori∣ous now, if you are such that shal ap∣pear with Christ in glory hereafter: That glory is sparkl'd in now, which shal shine in clearly and apparently: you have now some beams, shortly the ful light of the clear and glorious Sun him∣self. For the ever-blessed and glorious God wil let in such a light, such a clear light, such a great light, and withal give such a great strength of light unto Saints, that they shal be wholly light, and in them shal be no darkness at all. Beloved, I now commend you to God, that can make you children of Light, and enable you as children of Light to walk in Light, to the praise of his great name, and to the refreshing of the bow∣els of Gods people, to the rejoycing of all that delight in goodnesse. Christs Saints are all rare pieces, God grant all these pieces may be set in order, fitly u∣nited together, then wil glory appear,
exceeding glory, transcendent glory, glory in the Church, glory on earth like that glory that is amongst the Saints that are Triumphant in heaven. I shal say no more of that Doctrine: I shal yet give out somewhat from the Text that may be further useful to your souls, and it is this. There are some precious souls in the world, in this sinful world, in this wicked, vile, ignorant and naughty world,Joh. 17.24 1 Joh. 5.19. Joh. 12.31. & 14.20.16.11. 2 Cor. 4.4. Isa. 5.14. Mat 7.13. Jer. 3.14. Rom. 11.5 Luke 12.32. Rev. 3.4. Col. 2.22. 1 Joh. 5.5. Joh. 1.13. in this world wherein Satan bears such sway, who is the Prince of the world, a cheif one in it so farre as it is a sinful world and inhabited with sinful men. The Devil hath many, nay the greatest part; yet God hath some, a remnant, here and there one, a little flock, a few that are undefiled and that are lovely before him, that have kept their garments cleane, that are un∣blameable, & unreprovable before him, they have overcome the world, being borne, not of bloud, nor of the wil of the flesh, nor of the wil of man, but of God. Every age (though it hath brought forth never so many weeds, though it hath abounded in trash yet) hath brough forth some precious flowers,
some jewels have been found amongst the rubbish. In the first degenerate age, there was an Abel, after that a Seth and to him was borne Enos; at which time men began to cal upon the name of the Lord.Gen. 4.26 After that Enoch that walked with God, one that was the Phenix of that age,Gen. 5.24 one that was translated out of his own being, into a being in God, one that lost nothing, by losing what was his own by noture and according to the flesh. Af∣ter this God left not himself without testimony; Though the wickednesse of man was great in the earth and the whole earth was corrupt before God,Gen. 6.9. yet then appeared Noah a just man and per∣fect in his generations,Gen. 6.9. and one that walked with God, on that gave up him∣selfe to God, to be at his direction and at his service to do what was agreeable to the wil of the Lord. And as the world was replenished, and grew on, though there were many wicked men and much wickednesse in the world, yet some God had that were good, though very ob∣sure and hardly to be perceiv'd in those darke times. At length appear'd Abra∣ham, after him Jsaac and Jacob with o∣ther worthies, and when Elijah com∣plains
of the worlds emptines in re∣spect of good men, and that he alone was left, yet God tels him he had se∣ven thousand in Israel that had not bowed the knee to Baall. I confesse 'its a very few considering how many thou∣sands were in Israel, yet you see there were some though hid and conceal'd in those cloudy daies of Idolatry and su∣perstition.1 King. 19.18. God may let men follow their owne pernicious waies, and there may be a great forsaking of goodnes, yet some shal cleave to truth, though it may be but a few,Isa. 6.13. a tenth. There may be many weeds in a garden, yet some good herb may be found; abundance of trees in a feild, yet some corne; a world of earth, yet some vains of precious oare; a great deale of clay, of durt and stones, yet some pearles and precious jewels are now and then found. God hath ex∣cellent material, here and there, he wil bring them together, and of them make a famous structure; build his Church,Isa. 54.12, 13. whose foundations shal be laid with saphires, whose windowes shal be made of agates, and gates of carbuncles & al her borders of pleasant stones. This points out the excellency of Saints, and
also what a comly thing it is to see them joyn'd together in a right order, by the wisdome of God. God hath a ho∣ly City to build, which is admirably describ'd Revelations, 21. My brethren I need not tel you how Satan the world flesh, and many enemies, have labour'd to root out in all ages those that clear∣ly and readily appear'd for God, yet God hath preserv'd some to shine as lights, and to hold out his name, and enemies could never so prevaile as to raze out all the Saints nor to take away truth wholly; but stil the Lord continu∣ed some precious ones, some holy and excellent soules to shine out as lights in a darke place; a seed was left, though covered with clods, that the Lord hath nourished, and which through his bless∣ings hath sprung up, and brought forth fruit, so that some peecious souls have stil appear'd. We have seen bad times, and bad times are, and 'tis likly wil be, yet all you that have any knowledge in rhe things of Christ, cannot but say some holy souls there were, in those bad times; some there are in these evil daies; and some precious ones shal be as long as the Sun and Moon endureth
as long as there are any people in the world there shal be some good: you that live now meet with some precious souls up and downe, here and there: you or they that shal live hereafter wil finde that God hath a sprinkling some, a few: I shal speak to what is present, to what is in hand, there are some precious souls in the world. There are some in the world that are like Christ, they have such a life, such gra∣ces, such excellency, there life is Christ within, 'its Christ living in them, their wisedome is Christ, their righteousnes Christ, their justification, sanctification is Christ; Christ to such is all. Belie∣vers are translated into Christ, they are one with Christ, they are nothing in themselves, selfe is past away, they have a new selfe, Christ is their selfe, they have an intire being in Christ, yea God himselfe is within such, and from union with God is there likenes to God, and their preciousnes is from enjoying God. God makes that precious that is preci∣ous; precious souls are Gods work∣manship. Look upon Saints after the flesh, and in outward appearances, you cannot it may be say they are so preci∣ous,
but consider them as in Christ and Christ in them. Look upon Christ a∣lone in them; and boubtles Christ wil in them be precious;Magna quidem in Ecclesia Dei excel∣lentia: sect ea non sunt omnibus obvia. many see not this excellency in Saints because 'tis hidden. Christ in them is hidden from many; but where Christ appeares, the souls of such according to what of Christ is seen, appear precious. There are some that are lov'd as  Christ, lov'd with the same love, the same pure, free, intire love that Christ hath, given out from the Father, they have given out to them, running into them, shining upon them, these are pre∣cious. Love is that which doth beautifie soules, souls are faire as lov'd, excellent as lov'd, glorious as lov'd. There is ex∣ceeding bravery and beauty in a soule that hath much of love; what made Christ so priz'd so highly esteem'd, the chiefest of Ten thousand; but the a∣bundance of heavenly love that was in him: the more there is of heavenly love the more excellent. 'Tis not Noblenes of birth, beauty of face, greatnes of parts, much learning that makes men precious, but 'tis being borne of God, endued with grace, partaking of spiritu∣all
things and what is heavenly that makes one precious.Tantus quisque est quantus est apud Deum. As one saith of the worth of a man, he is so much worth, as he is worth in Gods account; so I may say he is so far precious as par∣taking in love, as enjoying that which the world doth not. A precious stone is a stone that hath a vertue & excellen∣cy which the common ordinary stones have not: so tis with precious, rare, ex∣cellent soules, they have somewhat the men of the world have not, & that is love,Rev. 2.17 the same love that is given out to Christ. The worth of this love none knowes but they that enjoy it. There are some in whom the Lord dwels, some in this word that are his temple, palace, throne: these are excel∣lent ones. Gods dwelling place, the dwelling of his glory is a precious place: they are precious soules, soules bravely adorned, soules excellently trim'd that are the court of the great God. Princes houses are richly furnish∣ed: so are the soules of Saints, Gods houses. There are some that put out all their might, strength, power, abilities, ad∣vantages for Christs cause, for what con∣cernes him, and what is his. These are
precious souls, Paul was a predious soul & it appear'd in his appearing so much for Christ, that he was not deter'd by la∣bours, stripes, imprisonments;2 Cor. 11 tedious Journes, perils of waters, perils of rob∣bers, perils by his own countrymen, perils by strangers, perils in the city, perils in the wildernesse, perils in the sea, perils amongst false brethren, wearinesse, painfulnesse, much watchings, hunger, thirst, fasting, cold, nakednessed;Rom. 8. Omnia praesentia futura, terrena, caelestia, inferna & super∣caelestia, omnia mi∣hil parva, & pro nihi∣lo erant &c. buc, Act. 15. all could not stop, this champion of truth; Let death life, Angels, principalities, powers, height, depth, any thing op∣pose: he for Christ, in the strength of Christ durst stand against all. So also the curch of Jerusalem, giving answer to the people and church of Antioch con∣cerning what had been proposed unto them, tels them in their letters that they had sent it by men that had ha∣zarded their lives for the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. Such as these are pre∣cious men, souls worthy the name of Christians: because valiant for Christ. I have read of one Romanus that was nobly born, yet so resolute and stout was he for Christ, that sufferings could not fright him, nor dismay him, when
his persecutors whipt him with a whip made of cords that had leads fastned at the ends; so that with whipping his flesh was torne, yea and so much torne that his very bowells were seen, yet he cryed out to his tormentors; that he desired not to be spar'd, neither did he wish his tormentors to give over,Christum diligit, se∣ipsum oit. he was wiling to suffer to the utmost in the cause and for the truth of Christ. It is reported of one Sames a noble man, who had and maintained a thou∣sand servants of his own yet was depri∣ved of al his estate by the King of Persia, and was compelled to serve one of the most abject and base of his own ser∣vants to whom the King of Persia gave the said noblemans wife, that by this meanes he might cause him to deny the faith. But he not at all moved kept his faith,See Bur∣roughs in Moses self. de∣niall, where you have many ex∣amples. stuck close to Christ, willingly did he undergo all this wrong and indig∣nity for Christ. Many such precious soules have been in the world, many there are, and if persecution should arise even to death, it would be seen that there are Gallant-spirited men now that would suffer any torments rather then forsake the Lord Jesus.
They would not harken to what flesh and bloud should say,Verus Christi-dis∣cipulus propriae vo∣luntati re∣nunciat, et divi∣nam vo∣luntatem sequi desi∣derat &c. but to what the spirit should say, and they would strive against what is evill in themselves, and search what the wil of the Lord is and obey that. 'Tis the part of a good steward that is intrusted with much of his ma∣sters substance, to laie out al for his master when his master requires it: the best of us all are but Stewards and what we have of life, parts, beautie, riches, honour, libertie, any thing, 'tis lent us of God; if God cal for it, we ought to give it all up for his service and ho∣nour. You that have truth of grace wil be ready so to do, saying, Lord all I have I received from thee, it came of thee: Io here I am ready to returne all to thee. My deare friends, consider what you do now for Christ, what heart you have to what is good now, what delight in Christs services now: you are likeliest to hold out in suffering; that are diligent in the businesse of the Lord, and in the work of your God now. Some men thinke they can suf∣fer for Christ, yet now they have no heart to the present service of Christ, which God cals unto, they are negligent
and loose in present duties; Suerely such soules who faile thus in present service and duty, are not like to hold out in suffering times whatsoever they may say; He that in summer and fair weather is a slothfull, carelesse, idle servant; is not likely to be a diligent laborious paines-taker in the cold, pinching, wet, stormy time of winter. They that are bred up in labour are best able to endure it.1 Tim. 4.7 Non ocio indulgen∣dum, sed totis viri∣bus eonni∣tendum. Christians, excercise your selves unto Godlinesse; do what God now sets before you; do it faithfuly, do it with your might; you wil the better endure harder businesse if your God cal you to it. They are men en∣dued with a precious blessing, that use their al to the glory of God, that let not a hough be idle or unserviceable. There are some that are clensed and made free from all unrighteousnes and uncleannes,Ps. 32.1.2 that have no wickednes im∣puted unto them: these are blessed soules; these are precious souls; Christ paid a ful price for their deliverance from sin, making peace through the bloud of the crosse: they are by Christ brought home to Christ, their life is hid with Christ in God, they are rais'd
up with Christ, and made to sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, even already. Indeed in themselves there is a body of lust, corruption and sin; and there is a law revealing sin, accu∣sing and condemning; so as it beleevers live onely by sense, reason and experi∣ence of themselves, and as they live to men, they live both under the power and feeling of sin and the Law; but if they live by faith in Christ, beleeving in the life, righteousnesse, obedience, satisfaction and glory of Christ, they live out of the power of all condemna∣tion, and unrighteousnesse. This is a precious life, and they are pretious souls that live this life of faith, that have all their assurance, confidence, comforts, flowing into them through a channel of faith, believing themselves happy for what another, even Christ, hath done for them, and not what they have done or can do for themselves. In brief they are precious, for take them as in Christ, as justified, they are as pure in the sight of God as the righteousness of Christ can make them, because God sees his onely in Christ, not in themselves, he loves them not in the glory and ex∣cellencie
of Christ; these appear glori∣ous to God and in his sight, because they have put on Christ that is glorious. There are as many precious souls now, as there are souls cloath'd with the righteousnesse of Christ: they that were precious formerly, and could say, As he is, so are we in this world; they were such by having Christ, by being perfect in his perfection, they were chosen in Christ, lov'd in Christ; they that are in Christ are precious now, and may say, As he is, so are we in this world. All believers are very like one another, and also like Christ. There are some that are the Sister, Spouse, Wife of Christ, that have ra∣vished his heart, that he rejoyceth over, as the Bridegroom over his Bride; these doubtlesse are precious. A precious Christ, wil have a precious Consort: He is an excellent one, and wil have his Wife, his Love, his other-self, to be pre∣cious also: Christ glorious, his Spouse glorious; Christ beautiful, his Love beautiful; they are alike; Bridegroom and Bride alike; their trimming is of one piece and fashion, the righteousnesse of God.
It may be a word of comfort and con∣solation  to such that live in places where they can find no good people, none that they can take comfort in, none that are lovers of truth, none that de∣light in the things of Christ. 'Tis sad to Saints spirits to live in such places, 'tis irkesome to a man as a man to live in a place where he can have no society, no company, fellowship with none: so with Saints to live where they can have none to confer with, none to discourse with∣al, none to joyn with them in prayer and fasting, and holy communion: To such let me speak, it may be you can find none for society, none that are gra∣cious; yet be assured God hath some. When the Prophet cried out he was alone, and that he could see none but Idolaters, none but what went on in wickednesse; yet God saw some that were free, some that were haters and loathers of Baal, that had never bowed the knee to him. The Lord hath here & there some, that are precious souls: Be not disheartned christians, be not dis∣mai'd, there are I acknowledge many briars and thornes, yet there are some Lillies; many weeds, yet some (though but a few) precious flowers; you may
find none in great houses, there may be some in cottages, none in silken gar∣ments, there may be some in rags, none on the high places of the earth, yet there may be some in the vallies; 'Tis indeed a thing to be bewail'd, that there should be such multitudes of men and women, in the world, and so few of them good, so few gracious. 'Tis sad to see a throng in the way to hel, men pressing for∣wards to destruction and to everlasting perdition, and to see but now and then one going towards glory, towards e∣verlasting salvation. Wickednesse hath many that owne it, and wicked waies are ful of footsteps; but for goodnesse 'tis not look'd upon, nor the waies of goodnesse travel'd in: holinesse is be∣come like a poor man,Cognatus pauperi nullus. Diviti cognatus est quili∣bet. none cares for being of his kindred or acquaintance; but wickednesse like the great men of the world have many followers. This is a trouble to Saints to behold, yet as there may be by a Traveller some English∣men found in a remote country, though but a very few in comparison of the Natives: so some heavenly souls, some new-born christians here in the world; though but a few in respect of what are
are earthly and born onely after the flesh. As a man may rejoyce much in finding one piece of gold, or some one pretious stone: so if you find but some one that is Godly, yet be comforted in hopes that there are more, though you for present know them not. And rest assured that there are precioos Saints in this age in the world, as wel as in for∣mer ages, and that you shal meet them all in glory. It may give you some hint who they  are, that are such precious souls, such rare Creatures, such jewels; souls like Christ; holy as Christ is holy, pure as Christ is pure, that are excellent here upon earth, that are Kings and raigne in life by one, even Jesus Christ, 1. They are such that enjoy a Christ within, that have Christ himself dwel∣ing in them, many dwel where Christ dwelleth, and so content themselves, never considering whether Christ dwel in them, we have nothing nor are worth nothing if Christ be not in us; all that a man hath perish and faile, and come to nothing if he hath not Christ. 'Tis Christ that is the souls all, he is the onely good, and the onely lasting good
and such soules may be said to have some thing that have him, yea al things; but they that enjoy him not, have no∣thing, they have no oyle in their lamps: and being so, wil be shut out and not enter with the bridegroome into joy. But now all are ready to say they have Christ in them: have you so? examine your souls; are they delighted with Christ? is Christ that which delights you? doth Christ give peace? doth Christ drawe your hearts heaven-wards? lovers whose hearts are delighted with one they love, how are they drawn towards such places where they may enjoy their love. Love is a loadstone drawing souls to Christ. We cannot forbeare, we can∣not abstaine from longing to be in more ful enjoyments of Christ if so be that Christ be in us. Christ is the great, the infinit good that is given out to men: they rejoyce infinitly that have this infinit good, their portion; they that have Christ have him that is good be∣yond compare, and this is he that makes souls precious. There are as many precious souls in this congregation as there be soules enjoying Christ. And there are so many enjoyers of Christ, as
there are lovers of Christ, that love him as their owne souls, as their owne lives nay much better then either. There are many that talke of loving Christ but their love to Christ is but such as the hosts to his guest, he is bid welcome more for his money sake, then for any desire of communion, and fellowship. If they may gain by Christ, they wil waite on him, if not they wil be strange to him; you that talke of loving Christ, what doe you know of Christ?Ex aspectu nascitur amor. love riseth from knowledge, what have you seene of him? have you seene his beau∣ty, seen his glory, seen his comlines? He is altogeather lovely; have you seen this lovelines? have you tasted of his love? love is mighty in 'its operation love, the love of Christ coming in,Socrates putat ani∣mam im∣mersam corpori, velut ex∣pergisci a∣moris sti∣mulis, &c. stirs the soul wonderfully, it rouseth it up, it sets it a worke for Christ. Love produceth action, it sets men up∣on difficulties, and makes them go through hardships: doth Christs love do so with you, try, you may know if you deal faithfully in this thing; you know who dwels in your house, much more in your hearts, you know why you do this and that; what is it of all
you do, that you do for Christ, and that from the life of Christ: Paul was pre∣cious in his actings and precious in him∣self, and all was by Christ that liv'd in him; as many of you, as have receiv'd Christ, are happy; Consider wel of it, whatsoever you are outwardly in appea∣rance in forme, in possessions, in friends, &c. I speak not of, 'tis nothing; you are precious if you have Christ within, precious children, precious souls, pre∣cious Saints, all of you precious, all of you jewels that have Christ. 2. They that are precious are such whose iniquities are hid and whose sins are done away, such in whom the Lord sees no guile, such that are holy, such that are nourished and carried in the bosome of the mercy and goodnesse of God. Obj. But is not every soul a sinner? do not all complain of their corrup∣tions, weaknesses, failings errors, &c? Ans. A Christian man is both righ∣teous and a sinner, holy and profane, an enemy of God, and yet a child of God; for a christian man by the force of his natural coruption may doe such things as the word of God forbids, and
as he himself as spiritual abhorres. Paul himselfe did many things which were repugnant to the law of God; there∣fore he had cause to say, he was not al∣ready perfect.Phil. 3.12. Scriptures are not alto∣gether silent as concerning Abraham, Jacob, Rebeccah, Sara, Moses, Job, David, He∣zekiah. All good and godly souls take them as Saints, and walking after the Spirit, yet take them as in the body; and sometimes they did not alone doe good things unperfectly, and leave some good things undone, but also do some evil actions,See Rom. 7, &c. which were directly repug∣nant to the rule of Gods law, and to their own renewed minde; thus may they be stil sinners unholy in respect of their failings, weaknesses, imperfect sanctification, or sanctification in part, but take them as justified, believers and in Christ they are righteous, holy, just: the sin which they slip into is not laid to their charge, but is done away for Christs sake in whom they believe, whose righteousnesse is their righteous∣nesse, and their sin, Christs sin;Ʋt Chri∣stus fuit peccator, ita nos just sumus. His by imputation, who is most just and inno∣cent of himself, yet was the curse and punishment imposed upon Christ, to
whome sin was imputed, that all be∣lievers may be reputed before God, by vertue of Christs righteousnesse, holy and perfect as righteousnesse it selfe. Thus you see how souls may be said to be sinners; take them as in themselves and in the flesh, so sinners; take them as reconcil'd to God, as having Christs righteousnesse imputed to them, and beheld of God in that, so without sin, without guile, no sinners, but holy pure, undefiled, beloved of God, blessed Saints, 3. They are precious souls, precious in this filthy, ungodly, sinful, wicked world, that from grace coming in act in wayes of grace and holines without, that let the inhabitants of the world be wicked, follow their Prince the Devil, yet they wil walke in holines, follow∣ing the Lord Jesus Christ the Prince of peace, and King of righteousnesse. God in all ages hath some to witnesse to his glorious truths, so in this age; some that are taught of the Spirit, led of the Spirit, that minde the things of the Spirit, that have the Spirit of God dwelling in them, and by the power of that Spirit in dwelling doe mortifie the
deeds of the body, and are raised up, and quickned by the Spirit of God within, to walke in righteousness & true holines, to serve God and own his cause, though the world with them that dwel therein oppose; they are excellent souls that ap∣pear for God in bad times, in the worst of times, yea when 'tis not alone a hazarding their names to disgrace and shame, but their bodies to be torne in pieces, to be burnt to ashes. You that, are acquainted with scripture and hi∣story may see every age, every yeare bring forth some such gallant spirits, that were ready to lay down their lives to undergoe any cruel, vile, shameful death for the name of Christ, and the testimony of Jesus. 4. They are precious, for they that are faithful and chosen, that are such as Christ is, continue good, let all the world be bad. A precious soule is an excellent Theophilus, and wil appeare so, let others be never so bad, let them be enemies to God, fighters against God. Times are bad now, and like for a while to be worse, yet there are pretious Chri∣stans: so some there wil be as long as the world continues that shal shine out
as lights in the world,Phil. 2.15 that wil be without rebuke in the midst of a crook∣ed and perverss nation, that wil run right on towards glory, let whose wil run crosse, that wil keep their gar∣ments white, though others be soyl'd. I commend such to you souls, for pre∣cious Christians, for precious Saints, that abstaine from all appearance of e∣vil, that in heart and soul and life, clear to and follow after what is good. Love those precious souls that Christ esteemes precious, nay that Christ hath made precious, that are be∣fore God precious, that are the dearely belov'd of his soul, that are honourable ones, that are borne of the wil of God, that are attended on by Angels, that are for a short time plac'd in the world and shal ere long be received into glory; let your delight be plac'd on those ex∣cellent ones, let your eyes be on them that Gods eyes are on, your heart to∣wards those that Gods heart is towards: good children are apt to respect those they see their parents love; if you be true children, rightly descended of the Royal line of heaven, you wil eye the outgoings of your fathers love, and as
Bees settle where the Queen settles, so wil you where God; upon what family or soul the Lord hangs his love, you wil hang yours; where God delights to be, you wil delight to be all so. Consider I pray who you love, what sort of peo∣ple it is you most affect, whether it be carnal, worldly, unregenerate men, or holy heavenly, regenerate Saints. Do you now desire to know Gods jew∣els,  to be able to discern of these preci∣ous ones, to say such are Gods children, such are the friends of Christ, like Christ? you must have the life, spirit, wisdome, knowledge of Christ, you must be taught of God, to know who are Gods, like God. Paul persecuted the precious Saints of Christ, and was a deadly foe and enemy to them, til such time as he was endued with wisdome from on high, til God shone upon him, yea into him; and then knowing Saints he associated himself with them, and was no longer hurtful but helpful. Many a soul is a sore and grievous ene∣my to the people of God; I am per∣swaded much of their enmity ariseth from this, because they know not Saints, they are ignorant what glori∣ous
ones they are, in what a high esteem they are with God, how God wil pu∣nish them that wrong them. Ignorance of Saints makes them slighted, reviled, defam'd, accounted as the filth of the world, and the off scouring of all things. Tis want of knowing the worth of a Jewel that makes it not prized; so of a Saint, that is a member of Christ, a child of God. The God of wisdome give you wisdome to know such that are holy, that are Princes of the bloud-Royal of heaven, and to give them such respect that is due, and reverence as be∣longs to them. This none can do but such as have the spirit, this you wil do if the Lord give out the spirit of truth to guide you in all truth: if heavenly light shine into you, that light shining in, wil discover and manifest to you the children of light, and whosoever you can find walking heaven-ward, you wil be glad of their company. Ignorance had a hand in killing Christ, and it hath some hand in all the wrong is done to Saints; the Lord free you all from it, least ye should through igno∣rance harme the darlings of God, and bring swift damnation on your selves.
God hath grievous threatnings in Scri∣pture against Saint-wrongers, and there are recorded some heavy punishments that have been inflicted on them that harme the righteous; God keep you from the sin, and so from the suffering. I might ad how beneficial 'tis for you to know who are Saints, and how much for your souls advantage to be acquain∣ted with them, but I omit it. Happy are you that are of the number of these jewels of God, of these preci∣out  ones. I do not know what your condition is in respect of outward things, and creature-enjoyments; but I can safely say you are a happy people, if precious, if such as Christ, you shal all be laid up in glory shortly. God wil not lose one of his jewels for a world: Heaven and earth shal perish, but no Saint, never a precious soul, not a jewel that belongs to the crown Royal of glory. These rare souls, these souls to whom Angels do service, that are carried in the armes, in the bosome, in the heart of God, that are singular souls, chosen out from among thousands by royal favour, sch in whom the eye of God can see nothing amisse, no defect,
no excesse, no presence of sinne, no ab∣sence of grace. Oh precious souls! These shal be preserv'd, Christ hath been at much cost about such souls, at more cost then about any thing, at more cost then about all the world besides: he made the world and lost never a drop of bloud, it caus'd him never a groane, but to make souls (such as they ought to be) holy; it cost him many a sad suffering, he spent his heart bloud in the work; he took a great deal of paines to perfect them, happy you that are the work∣manship of Christ, his workmanship as a Redeemer; that have your souls fa∣shioned by him to be like himself, but are made new creatures, holy souls, blessed Saints. 6. Christians, you that heare me, consider part of your duty as Christians, as men of God, as Saints; you should labour for a Spirit of discerning, to be able to judge between men and men, to know the holy and profane asunder, to know a Saint and a Devil, a graci∣ous soule and a carnal wretch, a jewel from a common stone, a true Diamond from a counterfeit. God laid this as a necessary thing to be acted by Jeremiah,Jer. 15.19.
to know, yea to separate the precious and the vile asunder; the not doing, this was charg'd as a sin upon the Priests in Ezekiel.Ezek. 22.26. Her Priests have vio∣lated my law, and have profaned mine holy things; they have put no differ∣ence between the holy and profane, neither have they shewed difference be∣tween the unclean and the clean; this may be laid at the doores of the mini∣sters of the Gospel also, that put no dif∣ference between, sheep and goats, lambs and wolves, Saints and sinners: are they parishioners, let them be drunkards, swearers, gamesters, whoremasters, all are admitted to the Sacrament, never considering whether the word warrants it and whether within the list of Christ: 'tis enough their houses stand, within such a bundary of ground. Looke to it you that must give account to God, take heed what you doe, how you cast Pearls before swine, give the childrens bread to dogs, admit them to your Masters table that are not of his family; it concerns you much all of you that are Godly to know men rightly, that so you may not associate your selves with the enemies of God, but with the Saints of God, not
joyne your selves with the assembly of mockers, but with such that praise God; not go in company with such that are Traitors to the heavenly King, but with his obedient subjects; not frequent the society of enemies of truth, but with the friends of truth; skil is required in all worke, especially in Gospel work. 'Tis needful for men to know the mistery of their trade, to know what ware is good, what bad; so is it needful to be such experienc'd Christians as to know what is for the good of our souls, what for their hurt, to know their friends and foes asunder. We strive to know good money and bad asunder, a true jewel from a counterfeit, gold from drosse; why then should we not strive to know precious souls from sin∣ful wretches, lillies from thornes, hearbs from weeds; Christians 'tis your duty to looke to what may tend to the welfare of your souls; let it appeare in this that you are careful by having no fellowship with the workers of ini∣quity, but as much as may be with the precious sons of Zion, with such that are precious Saints. I might speake more of this Use, shewing how you ought to labour for a spirit able to dis∣cern
between tares and wheat, between the children of Christ and the children of Satan, between them that feare God, and them that feare him not; and all this, In respect of God, In respect of Good men, In respect of Wicked men, In respect of Your selves. God guide you into all knowledge by that spirit that searcheth all things, and is able to reveale all things. I have now but one Doctrine more to present to you, and I have finished what I shal at this time speak from the Text in hand, it is this, Let the places and times be never so bad,  yet they that are Christs are like Christ; wheresoever truly gracious, Saints shal come, what times soever they may meet withal, whatsoever shal befal them, yet they loose not their vertue, they are Saints still. take a jewel, weare it upon your finger or in your bosome, 'tis a jewel, lay it up in a box it remaines a jewel, let it lie in the dust 'tis a jewel, nay if it should be cast ou o the dunghil it would be a
jewel there, thogh covered with ne∣is ver so much filth; So may I say of a wherein Christian, a blessed Saint, one that the Image of Christ: A little tablet Christ is drawn, if it be set on high, 'tis a Saint there, if imprison'd a Saint, if cast out as the ofscouring of al things, 'tis as vertuous then as at any time,Non abii∣cit ami∣num. 'tis the same for vertue, for worth, for excel∣lency when tis abas'd, as when it was ex∣alted, it looseth nothing by evill times, by sufferings or disgraces, or any thing befalls it.Non ce∣dendum malis. Acts 14. Glod wil be gold in the fire, in drosse, amongst counters. Paul is Paul, when at Lystra they would have ho∣noured him as one of their Gods; he is the same when in prison, the same in his bands and fetters as when free and at libertie, the same before the Magistrates as with mean men; in every place gra∣cious and striving to magnifie the Lord. Daniel is as holy, as excellent in the court as in the Lions den, and in the Lions den, as in the court. Mordecay is not altered within, though his habit be changed without; he had the same grace within when he walked a foot and was cloth'd in sackcloth as when he rode upon the Kings hor cloth'd
with Royall apparell, and the Crown Royall on his head, and had his enemy that wicked Haman his herauld. The three children were the same in the furnace as when they were over the affaires of Babylon: Moses in the court, and Jethros sheapheard; when he was reverenc'd as Pharaobs Grandchild, and when he was Jethros sonne in law, was faithful, though inwardly chang'd, yet not outwardly; he was the same Saint in the field and in the court. The time would faile me to bring out what might be shewne unto you from the word of truth in the Scriptures, and also from many unquestionable Histo∣ries, concerning souls that have mani∣fested their sincerity in all conditions, both in exaltation and in abasement, in honour and dishonour, in good report and bad report, when they have flour∣ished in the world, and when they have been at the place of execution, fire and faggot hath not dismaied them, the fire hath consumed the drosse, the flesh; not the pure part, the soul: Christ was Christ in them, both in life and death. There are some trees are greene all the year, in summer and winter, in heat and
cold in frost and snow,Non ti∣ment ful∣gura & tempesta∣tes, in & cendia aquarum astiates, tristes pla∣netarum configura∣tiones, & luminari∣um coeles∣tium ob∣scurati∣ones, quia super na¦turam e∣vecti, Christo in recum∣bunt, in Christo vi∣vunt. Non ab∣strahitur blanditiis seculi, quia audit in suavio rem vocem. Christi. so some souls al∣waies like Christ. Let the times be what they wil, let the face of the world alter yet they change not, let the world be turned upside down yet they stand upon their legs, they are right let all the world be wrong, they like Noahs arke float upon the waters let all be under water; Let there be troubles below in the world, here on earth, they care not: Let there be terrible apparations above and starry messingers portending sad events, they are not afraid of such evil tidings, they have a resting place in Christ, Christ is to them for safty, for preservation, every way a defence and a comforter; they change not, they alter not. Let the ship turne which way it wil the needle of the compasse wil stand North, let the world turne about never so much they stand directly to∣wards Christ, and look heaven-ward: when other trees are without leaves and fruit they have both; when others; coole, they continue hot; when others sparkes goe out, their light shines. When the hypocrisie of others to their shame is manifested, and they perish: The sincerity of the Saints appears, and
they flourish. Christs people have a marke by which they are known, let them be never so much disguis'd, and mis-nam'd by the world, Christ was God when the world abus'd him, though the world knew it not; Saints are like Christ, though under great sufferings, As he is, so are they in this world. Christ is unchangable, so are Saints,  Christ is the same to day and for ever, so are Saints, so far as Saints, enjoying Christ. Their light, life, holinesse, &c. in respect of Christ the root continues, other mens light shal go out, but the light of Saints shal never go out, it shal shine more and more unto the per∣fect day. The light in them is everlast∣ing, 'tis Christ in them, they shal ever live, because Christ their life shal live for ever in them. Nothing is able to deprive them of Christ, and therefore not of life; Christ is in christians. Sin, law, wicked men, Devils, all the prin∣cipalities, powers of darknesse, spiritual wickednesses that are in high places can∣not pluck him out, nor destroy the ha∣bitation of Christ. Now Christ makes his dwelling like himself, every soul is holy like Christ, in whom Christ dwels.
Let it be wheresoever Christ pleaseth, it wil be holy, holy in prosperity, holy in adversity, holy in a Palace, holy in a Prison, holy every where, take it ac∣cording to the spirit, and as it hath Christ within. Because they that are Christs have another self in them, their old self is done away, they have a new self, a spi∣ritual self, that is God himself in Jesus Christ: there is a discovery and remo∣ving of the rottennesse of old self, and another self is tendred, yea reveal'd, given in to souls, which is God him∣self, and he is the Saints righteousnesse, they are possess'd of God, and have God dwelling in them. Now I pray is not God the same in all places? and wil not God who is the life and righteousnesse of Saints make them appear the same, let them live in times and places that are never so subject to change? This is that which is worthy admiration, that God should become the life and righte∣ousnesse of such creatures as men are; and men by this means should be such excellent creatures, that their excellen∣cy cannot be done away. Because times of suffering, times of
tribulations,Rev. 7.14 times of persecutions are to them but as purging times, clensing times, washing times. The body may be purg'd, yet continue a body stil, the man may have an il humour remov'd, yet re∣maine a man. A house may be clens'd yet be a house, clothes may be wash'd, the filth taken away, and the clothes be clothes; gold may be cast into the fire, the drosse consum'd; yet the gold be ne∣ver the worse, so Saints may be Saints,Aurum probat ig∣nis: fidem, tentatio. and like Christ, though they suffer ma∣ny tribulations. Christ in troubles ap∣prares to them, and from that appear∣ance that they have of him, they appear his. Saints glory is hidden, it this follows not that therefore they have no glory. We must not say, there is no Sunne be∣cause the clouds hide it from our sight. They that have Christ have glory, and they doe and shal appeare glorious. Clouds, viz. afflictions, persecutions, and tribulations shal fly away, and then shal their glory more clearly appear. Now there is much of Christ appears in Saints in a low condition in the world, as long suffering, patience, strength to undergo trials and the like. Times may a little change somewhat of the outside
of a Saint, but it cannot take away the substance of a Saint. Let what hath been said be ground for reproof to such that are apt to blame times and places for making them bad, &c. O say they we had not been so bad, we had not run into this evil, nor into that, had we not liv'd in such a wicked place, had we not been acquainted with such vile company, it was such and such that were the occasi∣ons of our running into that bad course of life, of our taking such headlong waies, and leaping into such a gulfe of mischief. We will not much question such complaints, whether just or unjust. I confesse 'tis dangerous living in bad places, and in being familiar with naughty people, much mischief may they occasion to souls, yet it makes not people blamelesse to lay the fault upon the times or places they have to do in, this frees not from Gods displeasure. Adam laid the blame on his Wife, shee on the Serpent, yet this freed neither from suffering. A Thief that hath stolen may plead his poverty, and say he was in need, yet may he be punished and suffer what by law is to be inflicted up∣on
one guilty of such a crime: So an unclean person may say, had he not been guilty of folly had he not been entic'd and sollicited. We might speak in infi∣nitum in this case, and after this man∣ner, and yet wil not the offendor be found innocent. It were more just for faulty persons to lay the blame on their own corruptions, and evil hearts; for times and places would not make them bad, were not they bad. Joseph had a faire bait cast before him, yet not taken. Much grace may preserve men from evil in the worst times and places. Cast gold into mud, yet wil it keep its colour and worth; so a jewel in a coal-heap, yet wil it retain its vertue. A Saint wil be a Saint let him be amongst Devils. Gods people ought to keep a daily watch over themselves, especially when in bad company, and as much as possibly they may refraine from their sosciety, because many a good soul hath been spotted amongst such. I need not bid wise men beware of houses infected with the plague, nor good men of sin∣ful places, they know as the one is dan∣gerous to the body, so the other to the soul. Remember, it acquits not sinners to
say that Adam sinn'd, and had not he fallen they had not been thus tainted, nor so prone to evil; grace is offerd by, Christ, and they that wil be sav'd, must by faith lay hold on his righteousnesse; if not, they wil be inexcusable at the last day, and perish Eternally. 1. 'Tis not enough for men to say that they are flesh, and that the flesh lusteth, & draweth to evil, and over ma∣sters them. Now wil that which the De∣vil prompteth into men (help them when they must give up their accompt to God) that 'tis with them as with Paul, it is no more we that do it, but sin that dwelleth in us, or as it fel out of David or Lot, &c? first to Answer that of Paul, consider who he was, and of what sinnes he spake. Paul was a holy and a Godly man, a chosen vessel of God, can you say you are so? can you say Christ is reveald in you? that you encounter all temptations to the ut∣most of your spiritual abilities? besides 'tis shameful to bring such a speech from Scripture to patronize a course of wick∣ednes, which is us'd by the Apostle con∣cerning some secret and privie infirmi∣ties. Do not deceive your selves; God is
not mocked. Take heed of using Scri∣pture as a stumbling-block, and let not that which was left for the good of Saints hasten your damnation. 2. As to the sins of David and Lot, I shal not speake much now, you may by them see how apt the best are to fal, and so to take heed: do not any of you cast your selves into the Sea, because Jonah was not drown'd. By them may com∣fort be spoken to Saints, if God should let them be so farre fool'd by Satan as to fal into such faults. Much more might be said as concerning them, but I forbeare; the Lord in mercy hold up our goings that our footsteps slip not. 2. 'Tis not safe turning our iniqui∣ties to the times, and to the places where we live, and the wickednesse of men with whom we converse, this wil not make a passage to glory. The worse the times and places are, the more care∣ful ought we to be; the more cheats are abroad, the more should we look to our purses. If the aire be generally infected, had we not need to be so much the more thisful of using preservatives? But of care already.
3. There are some that accuse their cal∣lings for what they do amiss: they cannot reade and pray because of their callings, and their callings make them breake the Sabbath. Pray lay not the blame up∣on what deserves it not, your callings, if honest, were never ordain'd for your soules hurt, but for their good: such that complaine of their callings, yet can find time from their callings to eat and drink and sleep, visit friends, and follow recreations and the like, that concernes their bodies. 4. Some accuse their poverty, saying, we have not time to serve God; all we can do is to provide for our families, know this to be Godly helps towards thy family provision: So they cannot shew themselves charitable they have not wherewithal. Can you not remem∣ber the widdows two mites, & how ac∣cepted? Besides these, some lay the faultes upon their occasions, upon the objects they meet withal, upon Satan, upon fortune, any where rather then on themselves to be humbled; Let this reprove you; sin no more, least God consume you; for were you good, no∣thing should draw you to wickednes;
you would say to all temptations, how should I do this or that and sin against my God? Would you know Christs people? they  are such that in bad times are good, that owne truth when they must suffer for it, that are willing to die clasping truth in their Armes, or rather they clasp'd in truths Armes; that let multitudes meet them going to hel, they wil thorow the throng to heaven; let wind and tide be against them, they wil forwards; that are dismaid with no frownes, nor daunted with no sufferings. That are no milksops of fearefulnes,Oportet aut ma∣nentem vincere, aut interi∣re. Lacedae. monii hoc animo prae∣lium ini∣bant, ut aut victo∣res redi∣rent do∣mum aut victi oc∣cumbo∣rent, but Cham∣pions of courage, that wil not desert Christs cause, but manfully fight the good fight of faith, yea die in the battel rather then yield; for so it becomes true Christians, to conquer or die, to go through in what they have a warrant from Christ to undertake, or else for Christs sake and cause to lay down their lives. 'Tis reported of the Lacedemonians, that when they went to wage war, and joyn'd battel with any, they did it with this resolution, that they would go home conquerours, or die conquer'd. All true, and gallant-spirited Christians
are of such a spirit in whatsoever they undertake for Christ, being cal'd to it by Christ,Pons a ter∣go abrupt∣us est. they know there is no flying away without everlasting shame. To desert Christs cause, is an endangering of the soul to be deserted of Christ. Besides to fly from Christ is to go from him that hath al safety, from him that is strength, from him that the Psalmist speaks high∣ly of,Psal. 144. yet not as he deserves; the words are these, My goodnes, and my fortress, my high tower, and my deliverer, my shield, and he in whom I trust. Here are expressions holding out Christ, ac∣cording to what the soul could, and as we are capable of hearing, and under∣standing. 'Tis to shew that God is all in all to Saints, he gives in comfort, he guards and protects from dangers: this is enough to make any man valiant, to have divine power encouraging him, divine power comforting, divine power guarding, divine power at all times and upon occasions to help; how can such souls be conquer'd? 'Tis impossible; for he that is so divinely accommodated is ready to venture all he hath in the cause of Christ. A Christian endued with divine power, is ready and able
also to live and die with an Almighty Saviour; Christ to him is enough, Christ alone is all, he lookes stil on Christ, and observes him, what Christ sayes, he sayes; what Christ does, he does; let all the world take what course they please, do what they wil, neglect Christ, go contrary to Christ, persecute Christ, yet stil the Saint that hath God for his strength, God for his shield, God for his instructer, shrinks not, is not disheartned: but holds on his way for truth, in despite of al that oppose truth, and though never so much slighted of truths foes, it cares not, 'tis satisfaction and encouragment enough to him that truth defendeth, favours him. Christ hath all his affection, and he hath from Christ all power to do what Christ cals him to, & through Christ that strength∣ens him he can do all things. By the power and strengh of Christ, he is carri∣ed up on high, above sense, above rea∣son, above the world: he is raised a∣bove feares, above frownes, his soul like Jehosaphats is lifted up in the wayes of God.2 Chro. 17.6. Christ puts in a holy magnani∣mity, insomuch that in Christs cause it feares neither fire nor sword, cross
nor loss, breaking of bones, tearing of members, men or Devils, so it may be one with Christ. In a word a soul that is truly Christs, borne of him, liv∣ing to him is one, whom neither poverty nor death, nor bonds, nor any outward Evils can terrifie. Oh! souls you that this day heare me, what wil you do in bad daies? what in persecuting daies? in the daies that fiery trials come? wil you then owne truth? wil love to Christ make you cleave to Christ? suffer for Christ? die for Christ? if it doth, then may it be said, that you are Christs, and that you are no changelings; but true bred spirits, children of God in bad places and times like Christ. The Lord grant that though friends faile, riches faile, times alter, peace should be remov'd, yet your faith may not faile; but that you may be baptiz'd with the baptisme wherewith Christ was bap∣tiz'd, though a bloudy baptisme, and so being like Christ in life and death, you may be like him in glory. Were I in a more publique place, I might speak a word to the Parliament, the great counsel of the Kingdom; ex∣horting them & praying them to have a
care of such that are godly, of such that are like Christ, to deal wel with them, to preserve them, & make provision for them; for they shal be sure of the help of them, whilst they stick to Christ, the Saints wil stick to them. We have seen a miserable defection by abundance of men, I will not say all, but doubt∣lesse most have fallen off, because they were not like Christ, and did not cleave to Christ. I shal forbear speaking in this place what I might, were the audi∣tory sutable; Good men are too much slighted many times, and bad men over much favoured,Equidem Jehova contempum effudit in Principes. God hath in a great measure cast them out with shame, that were not friends to his precious Saints, but rather to the adversaries. I trust God wil give the Parliament a heart to cast their eies upon, (and have respect of) such that are the called, the faith∣ful and chosen of Christ. Whosoever deserts ths Parliament, the Saints will never, unlesse they forsake Christ, which God forbid. If the Parliament should be in straits, Saints wil go in with them, if they should be oppos'd, Saints wil help them, with body, soul, estate; their purse, prayers, strength shall help; If
they should meet with bad times the Saints would stand with them in the storme. I fear, if the Parliament should have the need of any hereafter, they wil finde few closing faithfully with them, but what are the faithfully of Christ. Methinks I hear a secret mutter∣ing amongst many, that are ready to say, if troubles come, the Parliament wil have but few to take their parts, few that wil joyn with them; to such whis∣perings I shal give a loud answer: if the Parliament follow Christ and take his part (as I trust they wil) they shal be sure of the Saints, all Christs friends, and have they these, I beleeve they need not care who is against them, or what opposition they meet withal, no though all the people of the earth be gathered together against them.Zach 12.3 Let the Parliament set up Christ and favour those are Christs, and then if all the Na∣tions of the world were gathered toge∣ther against them, they need not fear; for Christ would help them and take part with them; and if he be of their side they need not fear what man can do unto them: for Christ wil make their enemies fall before them. God
wil make our Parliament-worthies such to all their enemies,Isti incre∣dibili ar∣dore atque successu gentes omes de bell a∣unt, & subjicient vel potius stirpitus cacindeut, Zach. 12.6. as is spoken of the Governor of Judah, they shal be like a hearth of fire among the wood, and like a torch of fire in a sheaf. And they shall devour al the people round about, on the right hand and on the left. All that oppose them shall be but as a little wood laid on fire, or straw put upon fire coales, which would soon be consu∣med. God grant the Saints may be fa∣voured & they that are truly godly be respected and car'd, for by the Parlia∣ment; & then I doubt not of their flour∣ishing, and having friends to side with them, for they shal have all the faithful, and they are (through Gods blessing many. If this come to any of those worthies sights I pray God it may be a means to advise them, to have a care of Christs people, and then let them be sure those people of Christ wil have a care of them; And though they must venture all, nay die; they wil stand with them. God grant our Parliament-wor∣thies may consid, er that though they have not the most with them, yet they have the best, though the Saints be least for numebr, yet they are the strongest for
might, and such that can though but a few, subdue many, five shall chase an hundred,Lev. 26.8 and an hundred shall put ten thousand to flight. Great hath been the experience that this Kingdome hath had of the Saints victories; of those that went against their enemies,1 Sam 17.45. as David a∣gainst Goliah in the name of the Lord of hoasts. Keep close together Saints, keep with the Parliament,Deus fa∣vet justis & piis con∣siliis. and then I doubt not but all wil be wel, for God wil blesse the proceedings of good-men in a good cause; and what better cause can be taken in hand, then what is now in hand in England, the bringing Christ to his Throne? Let me conclude all with a word of consolation to such that fear bad times, and that have spirits troubled with the various tossings in the world, and defe∣ctions of men from truth, and other molestations that are all ready in the world, and that they fear wil come on to the further grief and suffering of Saints. Indeed there are troubles, the dayes are evil; times bad, and 'tis likely may be worse; yet be sure of this, they that are Christs people wil continue his people, they that are gra∣cious
there will be some good still, in sad times, in the worst times, some that in assured hope and confidence of Gods mercy in all necessities and tri∣bulations, cleave to the truth; know∣ing that Gods power is Allmighty, his promises, most true; his mercies, infi∣nite; and that 'tis for their souls ever∣lasting happinesse to follow Christ, let what sufferings soever come, yea though they loose their lives. There are a rem∣nant that are enlightened, and from that enlightening they know what is best to be embraced, they know that whatsoe∣ver of troubles come now, yet to al that are in Christ, that are like Christ, that love his appearing, there will berest, there will be peace; there wil be blessed∣nesse; there wil be glory. Those that are engrafted really into Christ, wil by ver∣tue receiv'd from Christ flourish. Bad times make not them bad, they will be good in any times, in any company, in any place. If exalted, good; if abased; good; if rich, good; if poor good; if in di∣stresse, good; if in prosperity, good. Christ was a precious Christ in every condition, and they precious Saints in every condition. I know not what
the times may be, but I know what they that are Christs will be, they wil be like Christ. As some trees continue green in every season of the year, in winter and summer, in heat and cold: so some men good in all times, they are no changelings, they are stedfast, un∣moveable, alwaies abounding in the work of the Lord.Immobi∣les sunt super soli∣do funda∣mento Christo Dominum, in ipsum sincera fide & perfecta recumber∣tes. Let others totter, they stand; others shake, they are un∣moveable; others fal; they rise, others be idle, they Labour; others be against God, they are for him. Consider of this I pray, and let it cheer up your spi∣rits. I know you are apt to say times are so bad you know not whom to trust al ready, men are so deceitful & wicked and if they should be worse you know not what to do, nor what wil become of you. Christ comfort you and en∣courage you, and let what wil happen in the world, and let whose wil desert you; if he never leave you nor forsake you, you wil do well enough, you wil be brought at the last to glory. You may receive comfort in hopes of meet∣ing with some friendly souls, some Saints in the most naughty times; but suppose you be left alone, and there be
none to be found, yet in this be glad, in this rejoyce, in this be comforted, that you shall find Christ, and he will be to you insteed of friends, and help∣ers, and companions, he wil be all to you. The Lord grant that none of you be disheartned, nor fal backe, nor asham'd of the Gospel of the Lord, but that you may beare witnesse to the testimony of Jesus; and of this be confident your la∣bour wil not be in vaine, nor any suf∣fering unrewarded that is undergone for Christ and his truth. Christian friends, whatsoever may make for your comfort I pray God give it you, let it be peace within, good company without, the benefit of ordinances, any mercy, that so you may be Christs, and con∣tinue like Christ, let places, times, men, the world with what is therein be ne∣ver so bad. FINIS.
