t2462 12303771 59196
A true & exact Relation of the several passages at the Siege of MANCHESTER, Between the Lo: STRANGE his Forces, and the Towne. VVherein is evidently seene the won∣derfull mercy of God in their deliverance. Written by one that was an eie-witnesse, and an Actor in most of that service. Also a Protestation of Master Hotham, and divers other Knights and Gentlemen, against the 14. Articles of Pacification, and Neutrality. LONDON, Printed for Edward Blackmore, at the Angel in Pauls Churchyard. Octob. 12. 1642.
An exact relation of the severall passages at the siege of MANCHESTER. SAterday the 25. of September, 1642. the Lord Strange having the fortnight past drawn to War∣rington great Forces of Horse and Foot, was fea∣red to have intended somthing against our town, yet could not any certainty (by any sure ground of appearance) be gathered, yet upon that night about ten of the clock, a letter came from Warrington aforesaid, intimating that the Lo: Strange was comming with great pow∣er to disarme us, this was seconded, and that foure great pieces upon cariages were on the way, & his purpose was to assault the Towne very early in the morning. This wrought in us great feare and a generall astonishment, there being in our towne some few gentlemen, Master Hellaude, Master Edgerton, Master Dun∣kefienld, Master Booth, Master Hids, Master Rosworme a Ger∣man, whom God hath sent into our Towne a little before, who the night before had finished the mud-walls and chains, that were done by his directions at the severall passages of our town: Also Captain Bradshaw. These being present in Town, coosulted about an houre with the chiefe of the Towne, and then it was concluded that the drum should beat up, the bells ring crosse to
give the Countrey notice, and every man within to stand to his Arms, & before the morning lights, notice was given that they were very nigh the towne, at which being by scouts discovered, every passage was as well manned as that present time would admit, which by reason of some Country Forces that were come unto us, our Neighbours and towne all joyneing, kept them of a suddaine Asault, which caused them to take up some houses and passages very neare the town at three principall passages, South, North, and West, to hinder us of the least both of men and pro∣vision, the Lord Strange his Forces (as is certainly Re∣ported) was about two thousand Foot, some say, four, five, or six thousand, are betwixt five and six hundred horse, six great peeces of ordnance they being setled, sent word to Require the Armes of our towne, and to billet an hundred men, which being denyed them, two Gentlemen from our towne were sent to know the Reason of my Lords comming in that manner against the Kings Subjects, one of them was kept two or three bowers, but at length got Releast. Sunday. THis day (being the Lords day) passed away with great fears and troubles as the like was never seene in Manchester, yet it pleased God to send us some ayd from severall Adjacent parts, so that before the next day at noone, there was about one thou∣sand men in compleat Armes within our town, most of them musketiers.
Munday. MUnday they strengthened all the passages as well as the Fort could do; Captain Bradshaw the Dense gate end, Captain Ratcliffe the market streete lane, Cap: Booth the Mill gate, Captaine Rosworme the Bridge against Sawford way, Li∣stermain, Barwick, the Hunts banck: and a company of resolute Souldiers the Sned hill without any commander, towards the Afternoone it was observed that divers Horsemen of the Lord Stranges went out to asault the towne Eastward, or to have stopped the way, which being taken notice of, Captaine Brad∣shaw with about 30. Musketiers issued forth, Shot Sharply at them and made them retire backe with hast towards their places of Randevouze. Notwithstanding there were then laid betwixt our men and that place 40. or 50. Musketiers that playd very vehemently upon them, and having the advantage also of a Ditch-bancke, our men feareing that they should be compast in with them, Retreated without any losse or hurt to the Dense-gate ende; the place that was first assaulted. And presently after that, divers of our enemies stoale downe to the ende of a great Barne that was full of Corne and Haye, and set it on Fire with some other buildings that was betwixt them and the new made Mudd-wall, the same being about an Hundted and Fifty yards distant, they gathered togeather (the Barne begining to burne) and thought to take the advantage of the smoake to cover them, and by a suddaine shot to have driven our men from their Fort, which assaying to doe, were answered so well by our shot, that they were beaten backe, and a cheife Commander of their Horse slaine, with divers others of their Souldiers. This fight continued for the space of three quarters of an houre in a vehement maner, our enemy having another com∣pany of foote to have seconded the first, and behind them a great force of Horse to have come on, but their welcome (by the grace of God) was so hott that they durst not aproach nearer but re∣tired
backe, in this fight was not one of our men touched, save that an unskilfull man (whose Musket was ready to be discharg∣ed) let it fly at unwares and strooke one of his fellows through the necke that he died, this man that was thus slaine, was Ser∣vant to Master Ashton of Middelton. Now when the flame of the fiered barne appeared (which might have discouraged all our hearts, had not the Lord suppor∣ted us) came down from Sawford to the foot of the bridg, great store of horse and foot of the Lord Stranges with a sudden shout, and Assayd to enter, but were so Answered with our ready shot, that they durst not ventur on it again, At which fight tis sayd some Commanders were cut off, and many Common Souldyers, for some lay dead in the street (that they durst not come near all the next day for feare of our shot): the night begining to aproach great care was used for our safety and with great feare the night passed on, About twelve of the Clock that night came (at the bottom of the parsonage) tis thought an hundred or an hundred and fifty men down by the water side, Intending to have fired the towne by some stacke of faggets that lay close behinde the houses, but four men standing Sentinell at that back passage, with the help of 8. men more that came in unto them, drove and for∣ced them back, how the Lord preserved these twelve men tis wonderful, for as the enemy shot fiercely at them before, so their own friends behind them, (not knowing who they were) shot as fiercely at them, yet God bee praysed none of them were touched, the night passed on with great fear. Tewsday. THe next morning were planted some Ordnance, which first played upon the Deans gate end, the first shot struck off 2. ridge tiles of a barn, and the bullet fel down among our Soldiers, the fight whereof did some what terrifie them, but their Cap: en∣couraged thē so as by little and little they were drawn past fear: they shot severall times again but did no hurt at all, then they planted two ereat peeces at Sawford, to batter downe about
that passage that came forth over the bridge, and shot twice, then my Lord Strange sent a Trumpeter to require passage through our Towne with his Forces, out that was refused, then played foure great pieces with great violence, the bullets shooting through and through divers houses so that the bullets came tum∣bling amongst us like balls but did no harme to any, only one boy (that was a wicked Childe, having overrun his parents) was with Cannon shot mortally wounded, by gazing in the face of the enemy, at a work made by the mudwall, who within a few houres died, then presently followed out a troop of their horse to stop part of the passage East-ward, but some of our musquetiers issuing forth at the market-steed-lane, drove them back, in which fight one of our bill men only was shot into his shoulder, the shooting continued with such vehemencie, then it is scarce cre∣dible to beleeve so little hurt should be done, our town lying so open and naked on all sides, in the Afternoone seven of our men went over the bridge to cease upon a house that commanded the bridg, but were presently discovered, this night passed away with great feare and trouble. Wednesday. ON Wednesday morning our seven men were surprised in the said house, and taken, and divers of our enemies were placed in their roomes; then they fell to shooting againe, which wee likewise answered, and Fortifications were soone made, that no great hurt was done to us. In the afternoone a man was shot into the leg as he was crossing downe to goe to his guard, and another of our Bel-men was by peeping forth of his Rank shot through the head with a bullet and dyed. This night continued with such shooting betwixt us and Salford, as the like hath not been heard. One of our men, his musket breaking (in the Church-yard) struck off his hand. The same evening they made an assault on the Sned-hill, but were beaten back. The Troo∣pers went out into the Country this day to rob and spoile a∣bout two miles from our towne, where two or three Musque∣tiers
and five or sixe Bill-men chased them and routed them, and tooke foure Horse, and slew one, and five men that evening, be∣sides many other prisoners were taken and brought into our towne, with some Armes. About seven of the clock in the evening, notice was given that they had a designe to fire our Towne, but store of raine fell that evening, which proved much to our advantage; for the waters were raised, and they could not so readily passe over the rivers; yea some one cry∣ed within the compasse of the Watch, Fire, Fire, which gave the Alarum, and ran quickly through the towne, which put us in great feare, but proved nothing. Warning was given to all men that they should watch their own houses both within and without. About eleven of the Clock at night, the enemy made an Assault at the east-side of the towne, and came upon the Brick croft with a great shout and a suddain discharge, where there lay 8 of our men in the brick kill, who had Fortified them∣selves there, and Answered the other with as sudden a shott as they could, They continewed shooting the space of an hower, and then the Cavaliers began to Retreate. In this fight one of the poore men in the brick kill shot of two of his little fingers of one hand, and his hand also brused by the bursting of his peece. This night was very greevous to our men, they being almost quite spent with watching, and toyling, and running to and fro, that beyond the ordinary course of Nature they held out: that Night it please God to send us about twelve of the Clock about 80 musketiers and pikes, eleven wherof were slain as they came to the towne, by seven of the enemies who lay secretly in the way as they should passe and shot them suddenly, which was a great greef to their fellowes, these when they came in Ioyned themselves to Captain Bradshaw they being his neigbours, which strengthned him very much, hee having indured a sharp, long, and bitter time of it. A great strength lying against that passage to enter there that night, before it was morning, were brought two great peeces and placed at the head of Salford, to come down to the foote of the bridge to make open way by driving down our works and our men from them.
But on the Wednesday morning, it being espied, care was ta∣ken how to prevent that danger. Shooting continued still very vehemently till towards the altncone; then his Lordship sent for a Treatie, requiring a thousand Armes; we were then in a great straight, having powder and shot, but no match, neither had any way to get any; time was required till seven the next morning; whereupon the Lord Strange engaged his honour, that nothing should be done in that time; in which time his Souldiers went about the worke they came for, that was to pil∣lage and play the theeves in the Countrey all thereabouts: in this little time of cessation, there was some man in our Towne that had seene the making of Match, and had thereby gained some little insight in the making thereof, he fell to worke, and gave direction about the making thereof, and performed it well, and got supply of Match; and our Souldiers being a little refreshed by rest and sleepe, did mightily incourage one another to stand to it, and would admit of no Parley; the Gentlemen being in∣clinable to condescend, but the Souldiers expressing a great un∣willingnesse, by a generall shout of Captaine Bradshaws Compa∣ny, declared that they would part with their Armes and lives together. Now his Lordships Souldiers began to start aside, for they would not come neare but gave backe; for by reason of cold, and wet, hunger and thirst, and labour, want of sleepe, and a bitter welcome that we gave them, their hearts were discoura∣ged mightily, in so much, that unarmed men of ours tooke cou∣rage and brought in both prisoners and Armes of theirs, so as scarcely can be beleeved. Now the time of Treatie was almost spent, and it was espied (by some of my Lords men) that some man of ours at the back side of a house, stood where was a ditch and small bancke cast up, to play upon Salford, they tooke excep∣tions against that which was done partly before that time, as also for taking downe a wooll pack, and laying it as it was the night before, a Souldier turning it downe to rest himselfe upon it; as also that a Countryman newly come into the Towne, and know∣ing nothing of the Treatie, shot off his Musket; all which as they said, was against the Law of Armes, which being excused, his Lordship answered, that he was informed, that during the time of the Treatie, his Souldiers had not made one shot, not taking
notice of the two men they kild us comming to the Towne, nor of the pillaging and plundering the Countrey, nor any of those Acts of injustice and violence, and therefore it was resolved, that wee would treate no more with him, neither would give him any Armes. Thursday. Then began they freshly to their worke againe on the thurs∣day morning about ten of the clocke, and immediately was dis∣charged two great Pieces of Ordnance against the new bancke that was raysed along the water-side to command the Streete that leads up to the Chappell, they being discharged strooke through and through a house of one that much favoured my Lord, but mist the worke. From whence we playde so hotly, that the Canno-neere having againe chargde his Cannon, durst not stay to discharge it, but so they stood all that night, and all the next day, and part of the next night, and they durst not come neare unto them, yea they were got away the second night, by what device I cannot tell. His Lordship sent for a Parley againe, but the Souldiers would admit of none. We passe here through great difficulties, Master Butterworth, a prime man, is gone out for ayde towards London we heare, Master Hol∣land the chiefe, upon good reason, thought fit to condescend, had drawne Master Booth and Master Edgerton with him: the Souldiers also that were ill affected, began to murmure and com∣plaine, making this an excuse, that the Countrey was spoyled, and they to save the Towne hazzarded their owne estaies, so that we were even at a stand, which being taken notice of, the well affected Souldiers incouraged by Master Hyde (the mea∣nest of the Lievtenants) Captaine Bradshaw, and Captaine Rof∣worme, spoke openly, that if all the Gentlemen deserted the cause, yet would they cleave unto it, and depend and rest up∣on the promise and engagement of the Parliament, for the ma∣king good any losse or dammage that should befall them. Great and terrible words are given out against the Rogues of Manchester (as they please to terme us) calling us bloudy minded Roundheads: Lyes published by them, that Mr. John∣son
one of our fellowes, was taken, hanged, and quartered, that Master Bowker our Constable was slaine, that our Towne was given up, and that the Queene had sent great battering Pieces; These and the like Reports went very farre into the Countrey, which hindered us of helpe, discouraged us within, so that had not the Almightie God (whom they scoffed a∣gainst in their reproachfull way) saying to this effect, we shall see where their Almightie Gods helpe is: I say, had not our Lord God been our present helpe, certainly in that very ex∣tremitie wee had perished. For encouragement rested onely in the breasts of a company of poore despised Christians, who with our Towne, our poore Manchester, ingaged themselves against the great mightie ones of our Countie; For, for ought I can learne, there was not one Gentleman of Eminency, Knight or Lord, throughout our Shire, nor any eminent man of note, but other in person or best assistance he was against us. Great boasts were made abroad, and our Towne condemned for proud and bloudy people, because wee would not give up; and gene∣rall notice was given (by my Lords friends) to all those whom they call well affected people, with all innocent women and children, as they did tender their lives, to forgoe and leave the Towne; yea, and before this time, many of the chiefe of our Towne, had left and forsaken us; and our owne neighbour Towne Salford was up against us, keeping us in play with their continuall shot, so as the theeves had more libertie to rob, yea, hope of helpe now fayling, and no ayde appearing, hope of provision beginning to slacke, the villaines having spoylde all about them, what they could not eate and carry away, either for horse or man, most shamefully they cast abroad and spoyld it. It is confidently spoken, they have done ten thousand pound of hurt. Also report came, that Master Leigh of Adlington, with foure hundred men, were at Stopport, ready to assist the Earle of Darbie. Master Ardene of Huden went our Eastward to cleare a passage, and had one of his men shot and dyed; more priso∣ners were this day brought into our Towne; The Cannon still play through and upon divers houses, and hurt none: this night passed on with great and generall feare, not knowing how wee should subsist.
Fryday. Fryday morning the great Pieces were drawne out of Salford, the well affected peoples houses there plundred, robbed, and spoyled, what they could not carry away, they mangled and puld in pieces; the former feares removed by Souldiers that were sencible Christians, they did vayle themselves with va∣lour, and gave out words, that if the head Gentlemen did still persist in destroying them, they would commit them, and there∣upon Listed themselves to every place and Captaine apart. The Earle of Darbie sent againe for a Parley, requiring to have the Trained and Freehold Bands with him made out two hun∣dred, part whereof were with him alreadie, and that he requi∣red them to defend the Kings person, the Lawes and Liberties of the Subjects. But answer was made, that they were bound by the Lawes of the Kingdome to keepe their Armes to defend themselves against Atheists and Papists, which they were sure was Law, and that he should not have one inch of match but against their wills. This day it was knowne that Captaine Stan∣dish was slaine by peeping out of a doore in Salford, which was a great griefe to the Earle of Darbie. The same time was three or foure drowned neare our Towne, one of them (as it is repor∣ted) had three Rings on his fingers, of an hundred and twentie pound value; three of our enemies men were buryed at Drosbery, some foure miles from our Towne. The Poste came in this night and brought some good news, which did incourage us a little, who were till then almost out of courage; and also reported that Mr. Leigh his men would not follow him out of Cheshire into Lancashire: here, was two very remarkable things that hapned. One Bloomely of Ardwick was cocking his Match to have shot and killed an honest man that came to assist the Town, the said Bloomely (wresting the Scriptures) that obedience (as if every obedience were lawfull) was better than sacrifice, the said Bloomely was this night killed by them that he so much defend∣ed, going with his wife to milking, was by the Cavaliers shot into the belly; And though upon his knees he begged that they
would save his life, yet could not obtain it. Also a man of a bit∣ter spirit, one Bradshaw, fleeing out of our Town to our enemies, for speaking some unadvised words, was slain and so requited. Another man, a Constable of Blackley, would not admit of a Watch, till his house was plundred, and the worth of thirtie pound taken from him, and then he was pleased to alter his opi∣nion. And concerning the Barn that was burnt with Haye and Corn by our Town side, it was worth an hundred and fiftie pound at least, and he that owed it was noted to be a man that did (as much as in him lay) comply with the Earle of Darby: and was so requited by his Cavaliers. Severall other remarkable passages might be collected, as this afternoone the plunderers coming to an honest mans house intending to slay him, got in, and cockt his pistoll or peternell, ready to discharge at the mans breast, but his fellow hitting him on the elbowe as if he had had something to have said to him, turned therewith the mussell of his Pistol upon one of his own Company and killed him, where∣by the poore man had time to make an escape with his life. Now the last and greatest project was by fire-bals, which as tis cre∣dibly spoken, twenty pound was spent in the making of them, which were accordingly shot and cast at our Town, but, God be praised, could take no effect, the Lord had respect to his own cause, and to his poore peoples prayers and teares; for otherwise certainly they had spoyled us, for no meanes for our overthrow, was left unattempted. Saterday. This night past, with the like shooting as before, the next day being Saterday, a parley was moved for exchange of prisoners, which was assented unto, we had about fourescore of theirs ta∣ken: and that they might not want a compleat number, they had taken divers poore men that were about their severall busi∣nesses in the fields. And had used our men which they had taken very inhumane∣ly, and had threatned to take their lives, yet God preserved them. Then his Lordship raised his siege, and went back with his baggage; for the Lord had caused them to return with losse
and disgrace. Those that were slain by us, and those that  away from him were very many, and is not yet known. Sunday. The Lords day following, our men were upon their march, and many of them issued out and took much Armes that they had left behind them in divers places. The report of their coming on was very terrible to my Lords Companies as tis said. Munday. Munday being come, our men being wearied out, went home: those of the Villages neare hand, promised us to be ready againe at a very short warning. The next morning a sudden report was that our Town was again assaulted, which was very terrible to us we being naked; notice was given, and divers came presently to our help, but it proved no such matter. It is now said that the Earle of Darby, with Earle Ryvers, are at Armeschurch, and at Wiggen, and Warrington, and in Cheshire, and are there raising Forces to come against us againe, our good God stand for us, we have no other hope nor help but from him; the cause con∣cerns the whole County, and if the Lord give us over, none can then expect to stand, all hanging (for the most-part) the o∣ther way. We expect aid of horse daily from London, with some great Peeces, which if the Lord send them us, we shall be ena∣bled more powerfully to resist. In the meane time with prayers and teares we intreat the help of Gods people by their prayers for this poore Town of Manchester. Beleeve my Reports, for I am confident that I spare to speake out, because I would be within the bounds of modestie and truth. My words are as the words of one risen from the grave, and sure you will heare him, they are my own ob∣servations, and what I know in great part to be true, being an eye witnesse: our troubles are so great, and fears so many, that we can scarcely tell what we do. Passe by the manner of my writing, for I cannot have time to peruse what I have writ: and
though this and more be fresh in my memory, yet the time, and circumstance being different, I may omit something in the or∣der. I desire that this our deliverance may be had in perpetuall remembrance, that the generations to come may heare and know what the Lord God hath done for poore sinfull Man∣chester. We daily looke for assistance from London, but our onely trust and safe dependancie is in God: The Lord shield his poore people from the rage of the oppressors and give us faith still to depend and pray to God with faithfull hearts, that our King may comply his heart to and with the faithfull of the Land. I shall ore-run my self, if any word or thing be wrong written, omitted, or left forth, let me intreat you to gather the sence of it by what is written before or after: if I have commit∣ted any fault in writing, for I have not time to read it over. I pray you pray for us all, and the Lord be with you all, and keep us all stedfast to the day of his appearance. And so I rest your lo∣ving Friend. Manchester, the 8. Octob. 1642. Although there is nothing more desireable to us whether we look upon our own particulars, or the present distractions and dangers of our Countrey, then that all our conclusions may con∣duce to a quiet and peaceable settlement for the effecting where∣of we are not at all insensible how necessary it is for us to hold concurrance with those Gentlemen with whom in all our con∣sultations hitherto we have communicated to the same end: yet inasmuch as those Articles hereunto annexed being as we con∣ceive, totally against the priviledges of Parliament, and the Protestation we have already taken, and no way at all tending to the peace, but rather to the exposing of us to more insuing dangers, being that it is a fundamentall liberty of Parliament, to send for Delinquents in such a way as they shall see needfull; and we conceive that the eight Article doth directly and plainly op∣pose it; being that now the Delinquents are so strong that they cannot be sent for in an ordinary way of proceeding: we there∣fore hold our selves necessarily obliged as well in discharge of our selves, as duty to our Countrey, utterly to disavow the said
Articles. To which end we have published this our Declaration, to which we have subscribed our names this. 8. of Octob. 1642. John Hotham. Matthew Boynton. Henry Fowles. Thomas Remington. Francis Boynton. John Anlaby. Arthur Beckwith. Phell. Saltmerse. Jeffery Gaile. William Darby. John Boucher. Tho. Notcliff. Francis Lassels. John Lister. John Dent. Henry Wickermer. And foure more. FINIS.
