T2943B 99832311 36783
A true Relation of the Dreadful Ghost Appearing To one John Dyer in VVinchester Yard, near St. Mary Ovres in Southwarke; taken to be the Spirit of his late Wife Jane Dyer, who departed this Life some time since, with an Account of the Affrightful Shapes, and its pursuing him from place to place. a man lies in a four-poster bed depiction of a supernatural figure Likewise is added another Account of the Penitent Murtherer, Robert Congden, who was Executed in Brook-street, near Ratclif-Cross, and afterwards hung up in Chams between Mile-End and Bow. London, Printed by T. Moore, 1691:
A True RELATION OF THE Dreadful GHGST Appearing To one John Dyer in Winchester-Yard, near St. Mary-Ovres in Southwark; taken to be the Spirit of his late VVife, Jane Dyer, who died some time since; with an Account of the dreadful Shapes, and its pur∣suing him from place to place. JOhn Dyer was formerly a Lad brought up at Christ's Hospital, and arrived to be an indiffe∣rent good Schollar, and since being a Sawyer by his Employment, Married to a young Woman, by whom he had several Children, and lately kept a Victualling-House at the Sign of the Blew-Coat in Deadman's place in Southwark, and some time since his Wife died, leaving him Three small Children; it seems, she was somewhat discontented on her Death-bed, and it is thought, because her Husband
had lent Money without her consent, which she feared would be lost. She had not been long buri∣ed before the House was troubled in the Night time, with strange and unusual Noises, which increased to that degree, that it proved a terrour to the whole Neighbourhood, and so frightful to the said John Dyer, that it made him leave that House, and go to another, thinking thereby to be rid of this troublesome Guess, but all in vain, for he was still pursued by those Disturbances, that he could not rest in his Bed, and has received such a Damage on his left Arm, that it is altogether made useless. One Night the Spirit came to him, and called him by his Name, bidding him not be afraid, for it would do him no harm, and approached to him so near, that he felt a perfect cold hand all over his Face, and the Spirit at the same time bid him go to Barna∣by-street, and fetch Fifteen Pounds, and pay it to Mr. Mealing the Brewer; and it continues frequent∣ly in fome disturbing manner or other, sometimes it makes a knocking, as if it were at the Door, at other times a sort of Noife, as though somebody walked up and down the Room, and has been so troublesome, that the poor Man is almost at Deaths door for want of Rest; he has been forced to make another removal into Winchester-yard, near St. Ma∣ry Overies, in hopes of finding a place of Rest some where, but still all in van; for since his lying there, he has been still terrified with strange Noises; there was a Minister, and Four or Five very creditable Neighbours sate up with him
him at this last House in Winchester-yard, who do affirm, That they heard some∣thing tap up and down, as if somebody should walk to and fro the Chamber, but say, they saw not any thing, but observed the Man to be in an extream sort of sweat∣ing, and looking very frightfull; on Thursday Night last, the Fifth of March, some other Neighbours sate up with him, (who indeed, some or other does every Night since this Affliction) and I heard him say he saw the aforesaid Shadow, or Spirit pass by his Bed, and he said, they that sate up with him that Night saw a great deal more, but I could not get out of him in what manner: he is really to be pitied, for he can take no rest hardly, either Night or Day, he is fain to sit up in a Chair every Night, for he dares not go to Bed: All the Neighbourhood affirms the reallity of this dreadful Relation, and he is visited by hudreds of People every day. A Prayer in Calamity. O Lord, in whose Power is the Breath of all Mankind; Thou Great
and Wise Disposer of all things, look down from thy Throne of Holiness, upon thy poor and unworthy Servant. O Mer∣ciful Father of all Spirits, give thy An∣gels charge over me, to support me in my greatest Necessities; That in Life and Death I may rely on Thee alone, and whilst I am on this side the Grave, my im∣perfect Prayers may find acceptance with Thee: Be near me in the hour of Death, and let the Enemy get no advantage o∣ver me, but support me, if it be Thy Blessed Will, and save me for thy Mer∣cies sake, not for any desert in me, but through the Merits and Mediation of our Lord Jesus Christ and Saviour. Amen. A Prayer at Night, in the time of Danger. O Lord God, what shall I do? whi∣ther shall I flie? Where can I be safe, but with thee? take me, receive me, keep and defend me now and for ever: O Lord give me quiet, rest, and sleep, and protect me, and grant all in this House Comfort in thee, this Night and ever∣more. Amen. FINIS.
Robert Codgden's Confession. My Master and Mistress both being from home, and none left but an ancient Gedtlewoman, (their Mother) a Servant-Maid, with a Child about two or three years of Age, at which time I brought my Companions thither. I sent the Maid forth for a Penny-worth of Tobacco, that I might accomplish my wicked Design; she was no sooner gone, but I immediately taking a Bar of Iron in my hand, went behind the ancient Gentlewoman, and knock'd her down, so that she immediately died; a little Child of my Masters sitting by, he feeing what I had done, said, Robin, Don't make me bloudy, as you have my Grand-mother. Yet notwithstanding the pretty Speeches of this Innocent Lamb, my Heart was so hardened, that I took not the least Pity or Compassion, but killed it as it was speaking to me this done: I placed my self behind the Door, wait∣ing the return of the Maid, whom I served as I had the other before; then Robbing the House, and going to offer the Plate to a Goldsmiths near Al∣gate, I was stopt, and had before a Magistrate, who committed me to Newgate; at Sessions coming to my Tryal, I was found Guilty, and accordingly re∣ceived the just Sentance of Death; for I do acknow∣ledge to the World, that it was these Hands of mine (and no other) that did commit the bloudy Mur∣thers upon those Innocent Persons, for which I ear∣nestly desire to Repent.
On Friday, February the 27th. A Gibbet was e∣rected at the Door of Captain Githings in Brook-street, Robert Congden was brought in a Cart (round by Ratcliff-Cross, and so up Brookstreet) to the place of Execution, and being tied up, he began to lament his most dreadful (and at present) remediless Downfall, after a most earnest manner, that ever he should be guil∣ty of so horrid a Crime, as the Murther of three such innocent Souls, who, he said, endured more at their Deaths, than he should now at his Execution: And after this he prayed to this effect. His Prayer. O Lord, and my dear Redeemer, Jesus Christ, I desire to repent of my Sins, do thou wash them all away with one drop of thy Bloud, and be near to me in the hour of great Extremity. My dear Saviour, I beg of my Repentance, because I am willing to repent: And let all the World take Example by my Suffering. Lord Jesus, I am com∣ing to thee just now in half an hours time. O let me come to thee with a clear Conscience, and let not the wicked One take hold of me, Lord. I have been a great Sinner, yet thou canst forgive them all; my Sufferings are nothing to what my dear Je∣sus under went for me. Lord take me into thy Cu∣stody; I forgive all the World, let me be forgiven by thee: Lord let me creep into thy Wounds, and wash me clean from my Sins. I Murdered the three Persons with my own Hands, and the Persons
whom I have accused are not Guilty: Let the Sin lie at my Door: Lord, they died and harder Death than I do now: And Lord, let me request one thing more from thee, that is in the behalf of my dear Parents, that God would bless them, for they gave me better Counsel: And Oh! that my Bre∣thren would take warning by me, and that God would give them more Grace, that they may not come to so fatal and End. So that he concluded with the Lord's Prayer, Our Father which art in Heaven, &c. After this his Foot slipping through the Cart, he sunk down, and was almost strangled, but the Rope being not well fastened to the Gibbet, gave way, so he came to his Senses again, and cryed out, O Lord Jesus, I was coming to thee, Why didst thou let me come into this wicked World again? I am more wil∣ling to Die, than Live any longer, &c. Then he Praying a considerable time by himself, the Cart was drawn away: and being Cut down, he was afterward conveyed to the Gibbet between Mile-End and Bow, and there hang'd up in Chains. FINIS.
