v103 12076048 53622
COSMOGRAPHY AND GEOGRAPHY In Two Parts: THE FIRST, Containing the General and Absolute Part of COS∣MOGRAPHY and GEOGRAPHY, BEING A TRANSLATION From that Eminent and much Esteemed GEOGRAPHER VARENIVS, Wherein are at large handled All such Arts as are necessary to be understood for the true know∣ledge thereof. To which is added the much wanted Schemes omitted by the Author. THE SECOND PART, Being a Geographical Description of all the WORLD, Taken from the Notes and Works of the Famous Monsieur SANSON, Late GEOGRAPHER to the French King: To which are added About an Hundred Cosmographical, Geographical and Hydro∣graphical TABLES of several Kingdoms and Isles in the World, with their Chief Cities, Seaports, Bays, &c. drawn from the MAPS of the said SANSON. Illustrated with MAPS. LONDON, Printed by S. Roycroft for Richard Blome, MDCLXXXII.
royal English blazon or coat of arms To the Right Noble CHRISTOPHER, DUKE OF ALBEMARLE, Earl of Torrington, Baron Monk of Po∣theridge, Beauchamp and Teys, Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, Lord Lieutenant of Devonshire and Essex, Captain of His MAJESTIES Life Guards and Guards of Horse, One of the Gentlemen of His Bed Chamber, and One of His Most Honurable Privy-Council. MY LORD, WHEN I consider You are the Duke of ALBEMARLE, the very Title is so Great, that it puts a damp on my Quill, and disables me from making any sufficient Apology for this presumptuous Dedication; But on the other hand, when I consider that You are Heir
to Your now Glorious Fathers Vertues, as well as to his Titles and Dignities; and that his Goodness and Humility are entailed on You his only Son, I cannot want a Motive to this Ambition. My Lord, This Volume is a Cos∣mographical and Geographical Description of the WORLD, in which Your Name is great and precious; and although in it self is excellent, yet being Countenanced by Your Pro∣tection will admit of no Equals. This being granted by Your Grace's Favour, I have no more to beg, but that Your Fathers Magna∣nimity, Valour, Grandure and Heroick Actions may be so deeply imprinted on You, that these Kingdoms may not only love and admire You, but that Your Name and Me∣mory may be precious to future Ages; which is the Prayer of, MY LORD, Your Graces most Obedient Servant, RICHARD BLOME.
THE Preface to the Reader. AMongst all those Arts or Sciences which Man ought to have a Knowledge of, the Description of the Earth and Heavens, which is termed COSMOGRAPHY and GEOGRAPHY (for the Ʋtility and Dignity thence arising) ought not to have the least estimate; the Soul being naturally inclined to the ex∣ploration of COSMOGRAPHY and GEOGRAPHY, as a ne∣cessary inherent in it; which seems evident; in that Men of undoubted Judgments, out of a singular desire to propagate this Study, and spa∣ring no Cost or Labour, have travelled over the greatest part of the Universe. Ʋnto this we add, That seeing the Earth was created by God to be the habitation of Man, if by brevity of Life, and Humane imbecility, we cannot so well Travel with the Body, yet at least-wise we would visit, behold, and contemplate it in our Minds; for its beauty, admirable elegancy, and the Honour of the Creator. There are many other Forceable Arguments, by which it appears all Men are generally inclined to the knowledge thereof: As the Commodities of every Nation are peculiar to it self, so that (according to Divine Providence) one Nation cannot well subsist with∣out the help of another, to which end they are transported by way of Exchange and Traffick unto other Countries. But, to shew the use of it in all Arts and Sciences; there being none but receive some light and assistance from COSMOGRAPHY and GEOGRAPHY. To this the immortal Stagyrite, and Divine Plato flieth as a refuge, when a numberless multitude, and variety of Natures secrets in Lands dis∣joyned, and the profound Ocean sometimes nonpluseth or staggers their Capacities. The Moral PHILOSOPHER is a Non-essence, being unskilled herein; for how can he search into, or inform himself of the Genius, Natures, Inclinations, or Studies of Men, and what is most proper for every distinct Nation or People (being his ad∣equate subject) without this Chart to stear by? The PHYSITIAN is necessita∣ted to have a great insight in this Noble Study, both for observing the Drugs and Medicaments, transported from Foreign Parts, &c. judging their Natures and Ef∣fects from the several Climates, &c. but especially for the variety of Bodies, or Con∣stitutions, which are habituated according to the Climate and Soil of the Country. Take this away from the MARTIALIST, his Stratagems fail, and his whole Knowledge is in a feeble condition. The MERCHANT and NAVIGATOR
are compelled unto an insight herein, for the knowing the Scituation and Climate of Countries, their Circumferences; the Latitude and Longitude of Places, the Currents of Rivers; what Commodities each Region aboundeth in, and what they are deficient of, and the Manners, Customs, and Dispositions of the Inhabitants. Without COSMOGRAPHY and GEOGRAPHY all History is a thing of little use, the affinity of them both being such, that they seem to center both in one. And, to come more home to the matter; the History of the Scythians, Indians, Aethiopians, and Americans, are only expressed unto us by Geogra∣phers. Farther, Historiographers make use of Geographical Descriptions for the better and more full illustration of their History: And lastly, in reference unto POLICY, or Management of State, no Wars, Societies or Leagues, can be well made with a Foreign State or Kingdom, except there be first a perfect know∣ledge of the Nature, Disposition, Manners, Customs, Strength, &c. of the Na∣tion or Pple with which such a Combination or League, &c. is to be made and established. Henry, King of Castile, though much weakned by Sickness, yet neg∣lected not to send frequent Embassadors into Asia, that he might have a continual information of the Manners and Strength of those Provinces: And the same was done by Moses, before his setting foot into Palestine. Now Nature, which ex∣hibiteth and discovereth her elegancy and force in the production of variety of things, hath not only diversly distinguished the Faces and Physiognomy, but also the Souls and Minds of Men; The Modes, Genius's, Customs and Natures of Nations being vastly different; unto this very end she hath variously disposed the causes themselves. GEOGRAPHERS have divided the World into Climates, and every Climate is distinctly subject to the Dominion of some Planet, as the chief cause of this Diversity; where observe, that the first Climate, which extendeth through the Meroë (an Isle, made so by the River Nilus) is subject to Saturn. Those under the second Climate, is attributed to Jupiter, and passeth through Siene, a City in Aegypt. Those inhabiting under the third, is subject to Mars, and extendeth through Alexandria. Those under the fourth, is appropriated to the Sun, and stretcheth through Rhodes, and the middle of Greece. Those under the fifth, which passeth through Rome, and divideth Italy from Savoy, is attributed to Venus. Those under the sixth, where Mercury is predominate, passeth through France. And those under the seventh, which is subject to the Moon, passeth through Germany, the Low Countries and England; which said Planets have their Operations or Influences on the Inhabitants dwelling under each of the said Climes. So that although the glorious and eternal Lumi∣naries of Heaven have an efficacious operation, yet notwithstanding the Dispo∣sition of the Earth, hath a far greater prevalency; seeing that through the various scituation of Hills and Vallies, we experimentally find more great and different effects of the Celestial Rays, which are also contemporated by the Rivers and Lakes. This can be denied by no man, that Nature is admirable in her Works; sometimes as it were on set purpose deluding the curiosity of Humane wisdom, by receding from the ordinary Laws of Causes. Who can render a sufficient reason of that which is testified by Mariners concerning the Region of Maliapur, in which is seated Ca∣licut? an exceeding high Mountains, topping the Clouds, dividing this Province
throughout, and ending in a Promontory, which is now called Comorium, which although it hath the same Altitude of the Pole, yet when the Winter rageth, and the Waters swell on the one side, on the other side the Fields and Towns are schorched with excessive heat, and the Sea calm. Wherefore this diversity which is discovered in the Climates, the scituation of Provinces; Contemporation of the Air and Elements, do variously discriminate the Constitutions of Men, and those Constitutions, their Natures; for the manners of the Mind follow the tempera∣ment and disposition of the Body. The Septentrional or Northern People being remote from the Sun, and by consequence inhabiting in cold Countries; are San∣guine, Robust, full of Valour and Animosity; hence they have alwaies been Victorious and predominant over the Meridional or Southern Nations; as the ASSYRIANS over the CHALDEANS; the MEDES over the ASSYRIANS; the PARTHIANS over the GRECIANS, the TƲRKS over the ARABIANS; the GOTHS over the GERMANS; the ROMANS over the AFRICANS; and the ENGLISH over the FRENCH. They love Freedom and Liberty, as those also do which are Mountaineers, as the Helvetians, Grissons, and Cantabrians. The Nations proximate to the Sun, have their Blood wholly exsiccated by immo∣derate Heat; hence the Inhabitants of those Places are melancholy, and pro∣found in the penetrating of the secrets of Nature: For all the Northern Nati∣ons receive the Mysteries of the Sciences from the AEGYPTIANS and ARABI∣ANS. The Provinces which are immediately between both Torrid Zones enjoy a a Benign Heaven; so that they Florish in Religion Justice and Prudence. The Mutations of Governments, the Transmigration and Emission of Colonies, Converse, Matrimony, War and Peace; also the Motions of the Celestial Spheres, which drive from the Poles, and the Zodiack of the Primum Mobile, the Heavenly Images on these Inferiour Bodies, do change and alter the Habits, Manners, and also Nature it self. If we have recourse unto History, we shall find the GERMANS noted of old for lofty Minds, and the ITALIANS on the contrary too abject and low, which difference now cannot be discerned. Nations have Swayed and been Predominate by turns, and as long as the Monarchy hath had duration amongst them, Vertue hath flourished, Arts and Arms have gone hand in hand, which afterwards with the Ruine of the Empire hath been smother'd in its Ashes, and received Vivification in another place; yet notwithstanding these Obstacles every Nation hath certain Propensions and fixed Affections appropriate to every one, which will adhere to Forrainers, if that they long remain amongst them. The Intelligent Reader, who desireth a Knowledge in these and other Parti∣culars, with a throughout Prospect of the Ʋtility of COSMOGRAPHY and GEOGRAPHY, may consult the Work it self. RICHARD BLOME.
The Contents of the SECTIONS and CHAPTERS. GENERAL GEOGRA∣PHY, which may be divi∣ded into III. Parts; 1. The Ab∣solute Part divided into Five Secti∣ons, The first Section of things to be fore∣known, Chap. 1. Of the Precognita's, Pag. 1 Ch. 2. Things necessary to Geometry and Trigonometry, p. 6 The Second Secti∣on explaineth the Affections of the whole Earth, Chap. 3. Of the Figure of the Earth, p. 11 Chap. 4. Of the Dimension and Magnitude of the same, 15 Chap. 5. Of the Motion of the same, p. 23 Chap. 6. Of its Place in the System of the World, p. 27 Chap. 7. Of its Substance and Constitution, p. 30 The Third Secti∣on, in which the Constitution and Parts of the Earth are explained, Chap. 8. Of the division of the Earth by Waters, p. 35 Chap. 9. Of Mountains in general, p. 40 Chap. 10. Of the difference of Mountains, p. 46 Chap. 11. Of Woods, Deserts, and Mines, p. 54 The Fourth Secti∣on of Hydrogra∣phy, in which the Waters and their Properties are explained, Chap. 12. Of the division of the Ocean throughout the Earth, p. 57 Chap. 13. Of the Ocean and its Parts, p. 65 Chap. 14. Of the Motions of the Sea, especially of the flux and reflux, p. 83 Chap. 15. Of Lakes, Pools, and Marishes, p. 102 Chap. 16. Of Rivers, p. 108 Chap. 17. Of Mineral Waters, Baths, Spaws, &c. p. 130 Chap. 18. Of the mutation of Dry places into Watery, and the contrary, p. 142 The fifth Section of the Atmos∣phere and Wind, Chap. 19. Of the Atmosphere and Air, p. 154 Chap. 20. Of the Winds in general, p. 179 Chap. 21. Of the differences of Winds, and of them in particular, p. 187 2. The Respective Part xplaining the Celestial Af∣fections, Chap. 22. Of the Celestial Affections in general, p. 23 Ch. 23. Of the Latitude of a Place, and the Elevation of the Pole, p. 207 Chap. 24. Of the division of the Earth into Zones, p. 213 Chap. 25. Of the Longitude of the Days, and division of the Earth into Climates, p. 220 Chap. 26. Of the Light, Heat, Cold, Rains, with other Properties of the Zones according to the Season of the Year, p. 231 Chap. 27. Of Shadows, and the division of the Inhabitants in respect of the Shadow, p. 259 Chap. 28. Of the Comparation of the Celestial Affections in divers places, where is treated concerning the Antoeci, Perioeci, and Antipodes, p. 269 Chap. 29. Of the diversity of Time in divers Places, p. 275 Chap. 30. Of the divers Rising of the Sun and Moon, and of the other Appearances, p. 280 3. The Compara∣tive Part conside∣ring the Affecti∣ons which do a∣rise from the com∣paring of one place to another, Chap. 31. Of the Longitude of Places, p. 291 Chap. 32. Of the Scituation of Places one to another, p. 309 Chap. 33. Of the mutual distances of Places, p. 335 Chap. 34. Of the visible Horizon, p. 342 Chap. 35. Of the Art of Navigation in general, and of the Building of Ships, p. 344 Chap. 36. Of the Lading or Ballacing of Ships, p. 345 Chap. 37. Of the Directory of the Nautick Art, in the first part the knowedge of the Distance, p. 347 Chap. 38. Th ond part, the knowledge of the Quarters, p. 348 Chap. 39. The third part, of Histiodromia, or the Course of a Ship, p. 353 Chap. 40. The fourth part of the place of a Ship in a Voyage, p. 361
Lib. 1. c. 2. A Half English foot. A Half Dutch and also an old Roman half foot A Half foot of Paris in French. And also a half Greek foot. A Half foot of Antwerp in Handers. A Half Aegyptian foot from Alexandria. A Half Babylonian foot mentioned by Historians. A Half foot of Venice. A Half foot of Toledo in Spaine. A Half foot of Vienna in Austria. The Proportion of diverse Miles according to theire compaired Length Lib. 1. c. 2. An Indian Mile A Russian Mile A Mile of Cambaja An English Mile A French Mile, And allmost an old Arabian League A Holland Mile. A Spanish League A German Mile A Swedish Mile
THE ABSOLUTE OR COMPLEAT PART OF General Geography. BOOK I. SECT. I. CHAP. I. Concerning the Precognita's, or things known before the handling of the Art it self; as the Definition, Division, Object, Properties, Prin∣ciples, Order, Method, Original, Excellency, and other affections of GEOGRAPHY; to be spoken of by way of Preface. A Preface to an Art, very neces∣sary.THE Custom or fashion hath for a long time prevailed, that they who compleatly treat of, and handle any Art or Science, do in the first place declare some things touching the Conditions, Method, Con∣stitution, and other properties of their Doctrine. Neither do I think that this is done by them with∣out reason; so that it be performed without any Sophistical encroachment; seeing that by such like fore-had Instruction, the Readers Understanding may before-hand conceive a certain Idea or Plat∣form of the whole Art or Science to be afterwards handled, or at least may understand the Argument or Contents thereof; and withal may gather thereby, how he ought to order himself in the studying the same. I therefore shall in this Chapter deliver some few passages concern∣ing the same.
The Definition of Geography. GEOGRAPHY is called a mixt Mathematical Science, which teacheth the affections or qualities of the Earth, and the parts thereof depending of quan∣tity; that is to say, the figure, place, magnitude, and other like properties. Geography by some (but too strictly) is taken for the only description and plcing the Countrys of the Earth; And on the contrary, by others it is ex∣tended (but too largely) to the political description of every Country. But these Men are easily excused, seeing they do it to retain and stir up the Rea∣ders affections; who otherwise by a bare account, and naked description of those Countrys, would be made drowsie and heedless. The Division of Geography. We will divide Geography into General and Special, or Universal and Parti∣cular. General or Ʋniversal Geography is that, which doth generally consider the Earth, and declare its properties without any respect of particular Coun∣trys. Special or Particular Geography is that, which teacheth the constitu∣tion and placing of all single Countrys, or every Country by it self. And this particular Geography is twofold,Particular Ge∣ography two∣fold, Chorogra∣phical and To∣pographical. General Geo∣graphy, and its parts. to wit Chorography and Topography. Choro∣graphy proposeth the description of any Country, having at least a mean mag∣nitude. Topography describeth any little tract of Land, or place. In this Book we will present you with a General Geography; which we have distributed into Three parts, to wit, the Absolute part, the Respective part, and the Comparative part. In the Absolute part we will consider the very Body of the Earth, with its parts, and proper affections and qualities; as figure, mag∣nitude, motion, Lands, Seas, Rivers, &c. In the Respective part we will contemplate those properties and accidents which from Celestial causes happen to the Earth: And lastly, the Comparative part shall contain an explication of those properties, which arise from the comparing of divers places of the Earth. The Object of Geography. The Object of Geography, or Subject about which it is employed, is the Earth; but principally its Superficies and parts. The Properties of Geography. Those things which deserve to be considered in every Country, seem to be of a triple kind, to wit Celestial, Terrestrial, and Human; and therefore may be declared in the particular Geography for every Country, with the profit of Learners and Readers. The Celestial properties of Geography.I call those Celestial properties which depend on the apparent motion of the Sun, Stars, and other Planets: and seem to be Eight. 1. The elevation of the Pole, the distance of the place from the Equator, and from the Pole. 2. The obliquity or wriness of the daily motion of the Stars above the Hori∣zon of that place. 3. The Quantity of the longest and shortest day. 4. The Climate and Zone. 5. Heat and Cold, and the Seasons of the year: also Rain, Snow, Winds, and other Meteors: for although these things may be referred to Terrestrial properties, yet because they have a great affinity with the four Seasons of the Year, and motions of the Sun; therefore we have marshalled them in the order and rank of Celestials. 6. The rising of the Stars, their ap∣pearance and continuance above the Horizon. 7. The Stars passing through the Vertical point of the place. 8. The quantity or swiftness of the Motion, wherewith, according to Copernicus his Hypothesis, each one is very hour wheeled about. According to Astrologers a Ninth property may be added; because they do appoint one of the Twelve Signs of the Zodiack, and the peculiar Planet of that Sign, to rule and govern every Country. But this
Doctrine hath ever seemed to me frivolous, neither can I perceive any ground for it: nevertheless at the end of our Special or Particular Geography, we will reckon up this their distribution. These may suffice for the Celestial affections or properties. I call those Ter∣restrial properties, which are considered in the place of every Country it self; of which I shall note Ten. 1. The bounds and circumference of the Country.2. Its Figure.3. Its Magnitude.4. Its Mountains.5. Its Waters, as Ri∣vers, Springs, Bays of the Sea.6. The Woods and Deserts.7. The Fruit∣fulness and Barrenness, as also the kinds of Fruits.8. The Minerals, or things dig'd out of the Earth.9. The living Creatures.10. The Longitude of the Place, which ought to be added to the first Terrestrial property, to wit the Circumference. The Humane properties of Geography.I make the third kind of Properties, which are to be considered in every Country, to be Humane, which do depend of the Men, or Natives and Inhabi∣tants of the Countries: of which Humane properties about Ten also may be made. 1. The stature of the Natives, as to their shape, colour, length of life, Original, Meat, Drink, &c.2. Their Trafficks and Arts in which the Inha∣bitants are employed.3. Their vertues, Vices, Learning, Wit, &c.4. Their Customs in Marriages, Christnings, Burials, &c.5. Their Speech and Lan∣guage.6. Their State-Government.7. Their Religion and Church-Govern∣ment.8. Their Cities, and most renowned Places.9. Their memorable Hi∣stories. And10. Their famous Men, Artifices, and Inventions of the Natives of all Countries. These are the three sorts of Properties to be declared in Special Geography; although those Terrestrial properties, which make up the third rank, are not so rightly referr'd to Geography: But we must yield somewhat to Custom and the Profit of Learners. We will besides these, joyn many Chapters to Parti∣cular Geography, concerning the practice of Geography. But in General Geography, which we will unfold in this Book; first the ab∣solute properties of the Earth, and its constitution, are considered. Lastly, in the Comparative part those things shall be proposed, which are offered unto us in the comparing one place with another. The Principles of Geography. The Principles which Geography useth for the confirming the truth of her Propositions, are threefold: 1. Geometrical, Arithmetical, and Trigonometrical Propositions. 2. Astronomical Precepts and Theorems; although it may seem like a miracle for the knowledge of the Earth in which we dwell, to use the Ce∣lestial Bodies, which are so many thousand miles remote from us. 3. Experience; for indeed the greatest part of Geography, especially that which is Particular, is upheld by the only Experience and Observation of men who have described every Country. The Order of Geography. Concerning the Order which I esteem sitting to observe in this Art of Geo∣graphy, it hath been already spoken in the Division and Explication of the properties thereof; yet here meets us a certain difficulty concerning the Order to be observed in the explication of these Properties: Forsooth, whether to all Countries their own Properties are to be attributed, or whether the Countries themselves are to be ascribed to the Properties generally explicated? Aristotle in the first Book of the History of Living Creatures, as also in his first Book of the Parts of Living Creatures, moveth the like doubt, and disputes it at large; whether according to the single orts of Living Creatures, their Properties are singly to be reckoned up; or else, whether these Properties are generally to be declared, and the Living Creatures in which the may be found are then to be subjoyned? The like difficulty occurs also in other parts of Philosophy. We in General Geography have generally unfolded some Properties, which in Spe∣cial Geography we will apply to the application of single Countries.
The Method of Geography. As touching the method and manner of proving the truth of Geographical Tenents, very many are proved in general Geography by Demonstrations pro∣perly so called, especially Celestial Properties: but in special Geography (the Celestial Properties only excepted, which may be demonstrated) are in a man∣ner declared without demonstration, because experience and observation doth confirm them, neither can they be proved by any other means. Also very many Propositions are proved, or rather demonstrated by the Ter∣restrial Artificial Globe, and also by Geographical Maps; and some of these Propositions which are thus explained upon the Globe, &c. may be confirmed by lawful demonstrations. Again, some Propositions can in no wise be so proved, but are therefore received; because we suppose, that all places in the Globe and Maps are so disposed, even as they lie on the Earth. Yet in these things we will rather follow the Descriptions made by Authors of Geography. The Globe and Maps serve for the clearing and more easie comprehension thereof. The Original of Geography. The Original of Geography is not New, nor brought into the World at one birth, neither came she to us from one Man: but her Principles and Foundati∣ons were laid long ago, yea many Ages since; although ancient Geographers were employed only in describing Countries which is the part of Chorography, and Topography. The Romans were accustomed, when any Country by them was subdued, to shew in their Triumph the Chorography thereof lively pen∣cilled, and drawn on a Table, and flourished with Pictures to the Beholders. There were besides at Rome in Lucullus his Porch, many Tables of Geography exposed to the view of all men. The Senate of Rome about an hundred years before Christs Birth, sent Surveyors and Geographers into divers parts of the World, that they might measure out the Earth; but they came far short thereof. Neco King of the Egyptians, many Ages before the Birth of Christ, commanded that the whole outer-side of Africa should be discovered by the Phoenicians in three years space. King Darius commanded, that the Mouths of the River Indus, and the Ethiopian Eastern-Sea should be searched out. Alexander the Great in his Voyage to Asia, took with him Diognetus and Be∣ton (as Pliny noteth) two Surveyors and Describers of his Journies; out of whose Annotations and Journals Geographers of succeeding Ages took many things. Ancient Geo∣graphy very imperfect.But the Geography of the Ancients was very lame and imperfect; for first they knew not America in the least. 2. The Northern-Lands. 3. The South∣land and Magellan were utterly unknown to them. 4. They knew not whe∣ther the Earth might be sailed about, or the Main Ocean with a continual trace did encompass it; but yet I deny not, but that some of the Ancients were of that opinion; yet I utterly deny they knew it certainly. 5. They knew not whether the Torrid Zone were habitable. 6. They were ignorant of the true dimensions of the Earth, although they wrote many things in this business. The Excellency of Geography. First, the study of Geography is commended to us by the great worthiness thereof, because it most of all becometh Man, being an Inhabitant of the Earth, and endued with Reason above all Living Creatures. Secondly, It is also a pleasant thing, and indeed an honest recreation to contemplate the King∣doms and Properties of the Earth. Thirdly, The commodity and necessity of it is notable, insomuch as neither Divines, Physitians, Lawyers, Historians, nor other Professors can want the knowledge thereof. But the Excellency of Geo∣graphy hath been sufficiently handled.
I place hereunder a Table, which openeth the order in Special Geography, to the observing the Explication of single Countries. Special Geogra∣phy consi∣dereth in every Re∣gion, Ten Ter∣restrial, 1. Limits and circumscription. 2. Longitude of place, and scituation. 3. Figure. 4. Magnitude. 5. Mountains, The Appellation, Scituation, and Alti∣tude. Their properties, and things contained in them. 6. Mines. 7. Woods and Deserts. 8. Waters, The Sea, Lakes, Marshes, Rivers. Their Springs, Inlets, Tracts, and Latitude. The quantity of Water, the celerity, the quantity, the Cataracts. 9. Fertility, Sterility, and Fruits. 10. The Animals. Eight Ce∣lestial, 1. The distance of place from the Aequator and Pole. 2. The obliquity of Motion above the Horizon. 3. The Quantity of Dayes. 4. The Clime and Zone. 5. The Heat, the Seasons of the Year, the Winds, Rain, and other Meteors. 6. The rising and stay of the Stars above the Horizon. 7. The Stars passing through the Vertex of the place. 8. The celerity or quantity of their Motion according to the Hypothesis of Copernicus. Ten Hu∣man Things, 1. The Stature, Life, Meat and Drink, and the Original of the Inhabitants. 2. The Income, Arts, Merchandize or Traffick. 3. Vertues and Vices, the Genius and Erudition. 4. Customs about Marriages, Children, and Funerals. 5. Speech and Language. 6. Politick Government. 7. Religion, and Ecclesiastical Affairs. 8. Cities. 9. Memorable Histories. 10. Famous Men and Women, Artificers, and Inven∣tions.
CHAP. II. Certain things taken out of Geometry and Trigonometry, which it behoveth the Students of Geography to know. Geometry and Arithmetick necessary to be understood in Geography.PLato wisely called Geometry and Arithmetick two Wings with which mens minds might soar up into Heaven, that is, might search out the Motions and Properties of the Sun and Stars. Those Sciences are no less necessary in Geography, as that man may truly understand, who desires to learn it without any hindrance. In the mean while, Geography is content with fewer circum∣stances then Astronomy. And because many men are taken up with the study of Geography, who have no knowledge in those Arts, I shall set down such things as are most necessary for the study hereof: not allowing of that naugh∣ty custom which is too much used by many Masters in these days, in teaching Youth Philosophy before they have tasted of Geometry▪ and Arithmetick. I shall suppose the Reader to have the knowledge of Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication, Division, and of the Rule of Three, or Golden Rule; there∣fore I shall not treat thereof: and if there be any ignorant in them, they may be instructed therein by the lively voice of a Master; my purpose being to give Geometrical Matters. See Scheme. Three sorts of Magnitudes in Geometry.First then, Geometry acknowledgeth three sorts of Magnitudes, by which it measureth forth all things, to wit, Lines, Superficies, that is, Outsides or Surfaces, and Solid Bodies: neither is there any fourth thing given in Na∣ture. Sorts of Lines.Secondly, A Line is one strait, another crooked, and the crooked Line is uniform, or circular, or different and unlike in fashion; as Oval Lines, Lines winding about like perwinckles or steeple stairs, or Heliacan Lines. A Circle.Thirdly, A Circle is called a space, or plain Superficies and Figure, included in a crooked Line; in which space is some point, from which all strait Lines drawn to that ending crooked Line, are equal. And that crooked Line bound∣ing in that space, is called the Circular Line, or Peripherie of the Circle. The middle point is called the center of the Circle. Diameter of a Circle.Fourthly, The Diameter of the Circle is the strait Line drawn from either side through the center of the circumference. An Arch. A Quadrant. The Comple∣ment.Fifthly, An Arch is called a part of the circumference of a circle. A Qua∣drant is called the fourth part of the whole circumference. The complement of any Arch is called the Arch by which it differeth from, or faileth of a Quadrant. The Excess of an Arch is by which it exceeds a Quadrant. The Probleme. How to draw a Perpendicu∣lar Line. See Scheme.Sixthly, A strait Line being given, and a point in it, or out of it, to draw from that point a perpendicular Line. Let the Line given be A B, the Point C; let any open space of the Compasses be taken, and one foot thereof put in C, and with the other foot let the Line be cut in D and F; then in the Center D, let the Arch be described over the part d f: also in the Center f, let another Arch be described in g and h, and let g h be drawn, and this shall be a Perpen∣dicular Line. How to divide a Circle into four parts. See Scheme.Seventhly, To cut or divide a circle and circumference into four parts. Let there be drawn one Diameter, and from the center let there be raised a perpen∣dicular line over it: And this also shall be a Diameter, and the circumference together with the circle, shall be cut into four equal parts or quadrants. To divide a Circle into De∣grees.Eighthly, To divide the circumference of a circle into degrees. But a de∣gree is the three hundred and sixtieth part of a circumference: for indeed Ma∣thematicians do cut a circumference into three hundred and sixty parts; and
they divide a degree into sixty first minutes:See Scheme. and then again they divide the prime, of first minute, into sixty seconds. Therefore to dispatch this Probleme above proposed, there being first ta∣ken a quadrant of the circle, let then, by the open space of a pair of Compasses, the half diameter of the circle be taken; and by this space of the Compasses, let the Arch be taken away from the circumference.To divide a Circumfe∣rence into De∣grees. This Arch shall be sixty degrees, and there shall remain in the quadrant thirty degrees, which being divided into two parts, you shall have fifteen degrees, which again being me∣chanically divided into three parts, you shall have five degrees; and these a∣gain are to be divided into five parts, which shall be the degrees themselves. But these things by the help of Mathematical Instruments, are more readily and perfectly performed. To find the A∣rea of a Qua∣drangle.Ninthly, To find out the Area or contained space of a Quadrangle strait-an∣gled, two sides of a Quadrangle being given. Let one side be multiplied into the other, the product shall shew the space contained. But it is to be known, that Lines are measured by Lines,See Scheme. Superficies or Spaces are measured by Mea∣sures, which may be Superficies, and they indeed square. Lastly, Bodies of Solid things are met by Measures, which may be Bodies and Solid Cubicks. Thus we measure the sides of an House with Feet-lines, but we meet the floor or pavement of an House with Square feet; and we describe the capacity or soli∣dity of a House by Cubick feet. The Diameter of a Circle be∣ing given, to find out the circumference of the Circle, in the same Measure.Tenthly, The half Diameter, or Diameter of a Circle being given, to find out in the same Measure the circumference of the Circle: and contrariwise, The circumference of the Circle being given, to find the Diameter thereof, and that indeed the nearest way that can be. The solution of the Probleme de∣pends of the proportion of the diameter to the circumference, which according to the most famous demonstration of Archimedes, is in a manner as 7 to 22; or more accurately, as 10000000000 to 31415926535; so 12 to the same cir∣cumference. See Scheme.Contrariwise, if a circumference be given, but a diameter may be demand∣ed; let it be wrought as 22 to 7, or as 31415926535 to 10000000000: so a circumference given according to the diameter demanded. The Circum∣ference of a Diameter be∣ing given in feet or miles, to find out the space of the Circle in feet or square miles.Eleventhly, The circumference of a Circle being given in feet, or miles and a Diameter: or also a circumference alone, or a Diameter alone being given, to find out the space of the Circle, in feet or square miles. According to the first Proposition, let the given circumference into the fourth part of the dia∣meter; or let half the circumference be multiplied into half the diameter; and the product shall be the space demanded. According to the second Propositi∣on, it is better to find out first the half diameter, or half circumference, by the foregoing Probleme, although it may be dispatched without it. Twelfthly, The half Diameter, or Diameter of any Globe being given, to find the Superficies thereof in square measure,The Globe called a round solid body. and its solidity in Cubick mea∣sure. The Globe is called a round or solid Body, in whose middle there is some point, out of which all the strait Lines drawn to the Superficies are e∣qual. And this point in the middle is called the center of the Globe. The Line through the center, is called the diameter: and it is called the axis, if the Globe be turned, or rolled about that diameter. Moreover, if the Globe be cut any way, howsoever the Section is the circle. And if it be cut through the center, or we imagine it to be drawn through the Plain, the Section shall be the circle, whose diameter is the same, as the diameter of the Globe it self. And such circles are called the greater circles of the Sphere or Globe: the rest are called the lesser circles of the Sphere. Therefore for the resolution of the Probleme; first let the circumference of the circle be found out by the given diameter. Then let the diameter be mul∣tiplied into this circumference, and then the superficies of the Globe shall be the product in square Measure. See Scheme.Furthermore, let this superficies be multiplied by the sixth part of the Diamer, and the product shall be the solidity of the Globe in Cubick Mea∣sure.
A Triangle.Thirteenthly, A Triangle is called rectangled, one side of which standeth perpendicularly upon the other side; or with it maketh a strait Angle of ninety degrees. These two sides are called Catheti; the third side is called Hypo∣tenusa. The measure of the Angles n the Arch.The Measure of the Angles is the Arch, which is described, a center being taken in the top of that Angle; to wit, of how many degrees that Arch inter∣cepted between the shanks of the Angle is, of so many degrees that An∣gle is said to be. So a strait Angle is said to be ninety degrees, because the Arch so described is always the Quadrant, or fourth part of the circumference of the circle. The Sine of an Arch.The Sine of any Arch is called a strait Line, which is drawn perpendicular from the extream of the Arch into the diameter, drawn through the other ex∣tream of the Arch. A Tangent of the Arch.A Tangent of that Arch is said to be a strait Line touching the Arch in one end, and a strait ended Line, which is drawn from the center through the o∣ther end of the Arch. But this Line thus drawn is said to be the secant of that Arch. But the Sine of an Angle is said to be the Sine of that Arch which measureth that Angle: so the Tangent of the Angle, and its Secant. Furthermore it is to be known, that by the labour and study of Mathemati∣cians, Tables were made,Tables called the Mathema∣tical Canon or Rule. in which the half diameter of 100000 (or of more Cyphers) being taken, the Sines, and Tangents, and Secants of all the Ar∣ches of the circumference are found out. For example sake; 2 degrees, 10 degrees, 20 degrees, 32 minutes, &c. And these Tables are called the Ma∣thematical Canon or Rule; and have infinite Commodities in all the Mathema∣tical and Natural Sciences. And therefore I am willing to teach the Studious of Geography these few things: But the principal use thereof is in the measu∣ring as well of Spherical as plain Angles. But because the measuring of Sphe∣rick Angles hath some difficulty, which seemeth necessary only for them who desire to enter themselves more profoundly into Art: therefore we will speak only of Triangles strait angled, whose dimension any one may easily appre∣hend. Two Theorems, whose use is frequent in Geography. Rules to be ob∣served.Fourteenthly, Three Angles of what Triangle soever, being taken together, are equal to two strait Angles, or are 180 degrees: and therefore two Acute in a Triangle strait angled, makes 90 degrees. Furthermore, if a strait Line touch a circular Line, and from the point of their contact or meeting, a strait Line be drawn to the center of the Circle, this makes a strait Angle with the Line Tangent. Fifteenthly, But these are the Problems whose use is frequent. First, the Hypotenusa, and together the Cathetus of a Triangle strait angled, being gi∣ven, to find out the Angle contained, or another Acute. For the finding out of which, let it be wrought according to the Golden Rule, as the given Hypo∣tenusa is to be the given Cathetus, so the whole Sine 100000 (which number is the half Diameter taken in the Tables of Sines) is to the Sine of the other Angle. This Sine sought out in the Canon, will shew the Arch or quantity of the Angle, which joyneth to the Hypotenusa. But the contained Angle is the complement of the found out Angle, to 90 degrees. Therefore, if the found out number be subtracted from 90 degrees, the demanded Angle is left remain∣ing. Secondly, A Cathetus, and an acute adjacent Angle being given, to find out the Hypotenusa. Let this be wrought according to the Golden Rule: as the Sine of the complement of the given Angle is to 100000 (or to 1000000 in the greater Canon) so is the given Cathetus to the demanded Hypotenusa. Third∣ly, Two Cathetuses being given, to find the Angle adjacent to either of them. Work thus; as one Cathetus is to another, so is the whole Sine 100000 to the Tangent of the Angle which is adjacent to the first assumed Cathetus. Fourth∣ly, A Hypotenusa, and one acute Angle being given, to find either Cathetus. Let the Work proceed thus; as the whole Sine 100000 is to the Sine of an An∣gle, which is opposite to the Cathetus demanded, so the given Hypotenusa is to that Cathetus.
Measures useful in Geography.Because the use of Measures is very frequent in Geography, and that also divers People use sundry Measures, therefore I shall give the Reader some Ad∣vertisements therein. The Foot the most famous Measure, first found out by Snellius.The famous Measure is the length of a Foot; but this is very different. The Rhindlandish Foot of Snellius is the now usual Mathematicians Foot, which is equal to the Old Roman Foot. And because Snellius was most diligent, and curioest in measuring the Earth, therefore that Rhindlandish foot is deserved∣ly taken for the rule of all Measures. A Rod, or Perch.The Decempeda, or Land measuring Rod, containeth ten foot Rhinlandish. It is also called a Peroh, or Pole; but Geodesians or Surveyors make a Rhind∣landish Perch to be twelve Rhindlandish foot, or else sixteen foot Germish, or or sixteen foot and an half English. The aforesaid Snellius makes a Hollandish Mile to consist of 1500 Rhindlandish Perches (every Perch being twelve foot long) or to consist of 18000 Rhindlandish Feet. Measures which arise from the divi∣sion of a Foot.And these two Measures, to wit, the Perch and Mile, arise from the mul∣tiplication and aggregation of Feet: But the Measures that arise from the di∣vision of a Foot, are a digit or finger, a palm or hands breadth, and a grain. A digit is the twelfth part of a foot; a palm contains four digits, and a grain is the fourth part of a digit: but these are seldom used. It is better to divide a foot into ten digits, and then a digit into ten grains. And these Measures are sufficient for the use of Geography: But there are other Measures hereunto to be added (which I have noted in the Scheams) to wit, those of the Ancients, as Egyptians, Greeks, Romans, Persians, &c. also thosr of later times, as of the Turks, Polanders, Germans, Moscovians, Italians, Spaniards, French, English, &c. The Grecian Stadium or Furlong is judged to be 600 Greek feet, which makes 625 Roman or Rhindlandinsh feet. A German Mile, of which Geographers allow fifteen to one degree, contains 14000 /19 feet. It is esteemed to be 4000 paces; that is, 32 stadia's or furlongs. Its proportion to the Rhindlandish Mile is as 15 to 19. The Italian or Roman Mile is a thousand paces, or eight stadiums. A Geometrical pace contains five foot. A Fathom is six foot; which is reported by some to have been the Grecian Pace. A Cubit is a foot and a half. Parasange, that is, the Persian Mile, is esteemed to have contained 30 stadi∣ums; but it contained 3000 Persian Paces. Schaenus the Egyptian Measure containeth, according to Herodotus, sixty stadiums, and according to Pliny, forty; but peradventure the size thereof was divers, according to the different places wherein it was used: Also, either Herodotus's stadium differed from Plinys, or else their Books are faulty. The French League holds proportion to the Rhindlandlish Mile, as 25 to 19, or else as 60 to 19. The Spanish League holds proportion to the Rhindlandish Mile, as 17 ½ to 19. But because in divers places both of France and Spain, a different great∣ness of a League is observed; therefore these things are not altogether certain. The English Mile holds proportion to the Rhindlandish Mile, as 55 to 19, or else as 16 to 19. But the English have three sorts of Miles, to wit, the greater, of which 27 ½ are equal to a degree: the mean, of which 50 makes a degree; and the least of which 60 or 55 miles makes a degree. The Danish or Swedish Miles, holds proportion to the Rhindlandish mile as 10 to 19: But in some places the Danes and Swedes use the Geman mile. The Russian Mile holds proportion with the Rhindlandish mile, as 80 to 19.
The Turkish Mile or League is thought to be equal with the Italian Mile, insomuch that 60 of them make a degree. The Arabian League formerly was the twentieth part of a degree, so that twenty five Arabian Leagues did equalize one degree, or ninetee Hollandish Miles: But yet the Arabians did also use another Measure, fifty five of which said to be a degree. An hundred Indian Miles are judged to be equal to a degree: although the Indians commonly describe their distances by the Journeys of Days and Hours. The Inhabitants of the Kingdom of Cambain and Guzratta use a certain Measure, which they call Cosa, thirty of which makes a degree. Those of the Country Sinae or China observe three Journey-Measures, which they call Li, Pu, and Ʋchan. Li is the space from whence the voice of a man crying aloud may be heard in a Plain, and in a calm Air, which is thought to be three hundred Geometrical Paces. Pu containes Li ten times; so that twenty Pu's makes a degree, and ten Pu's make an Ʋchan, which they determine one days Journey, which is 30000 Paces. The Square Rhinlandish Mile consists of square feet. The Cubick Rhindlandish Mile consists of Cubick feet. But the account of a square Rhinlandish Mile ariseth from multiplying the same mile into it self, and the Cubick mile is compleat, if the Square mile be multiplied by a simple mile. The same is to be understood as touching square and Cubick feet.
OF Absolute Geography. SECT. II. Containing the General and Absolute properties of the Whole Earth, in Five Chapters. CHAP. III. Concerning the Figure of the Earth. Things to be observed con∣cerning the figure of the Earth.FIGƲRE is first the principal of all Properties of the Earth; not only in nobleness, but also excelling the rest in the profit and necessity thereof, forasmuch as without it nothing can be fully and solidly demonstrated or known in Geography; and all things therein following do in a man∣ner depend and proceed from her alone. In the first place therefore it is manifest that our discourse is to be begun at her. But there have been divers opinions concerning the figure of the Earth, for indeed the Vulgar sort, (that is, men endued with no knowledge in Geography,) do think that the Earth extendeth it self in a vast and broad Plain, whose boundary is a Circular line, but that the Hills and Valleys meet and stop it. Lactantius and other Fathers were of this Opinion,Lactantius his Opinion of the Earth. who earnestly defended and maintained the Earth to be extended downwards with infinite Roots, and in that manner to have its foundation; this they thought, being moved there∣to by certain places of Holy Scripture,See Lactantius in his 3d Book chap. 24. And Augustine in his 16 Book de Civit. Dei, chap. 9. The Opinions of Francis. Pa∣tric, Anaximan∣der, Leucippus and Others, concerning the Earth. either misinterpreted or wrong under∣stood. This Opinion is attributed to the Ancient Philosopher Heraclitus: although some men write that he attributed to the Earth the shape of a Boat, or made hollow in the bottom. Furthermore, of these of latter days; Fran∣cis Patric, no base Philosopher, did stiffly maintain that the Earth is extended on a plain foot. Peucer writeth, that Anaximander judged the form of the Earth to be like a Rowling-pin; but that is not likely, seeing that he both es∣sayed the dimension or measuring the Earth, and was skilful enough in Astro∣nomy, according to the manner of that Age; forasmuch as he at Lacedemon sat up, and made Heliotropes, or Sun-dials, in which the top of the finger or
stile of the Dial with its shadow, did mark out and shew the day of the Equi∣noxes and Solstices.See Aristotle in his 2d Book de Coelo, ch. 13. Leucippus is recorded to have thought the Earth to be shaped in the form of a Drum: and there are other men which dare ascribe I know not what fond Opinions to the Ancient Philosophers. But the true O∣pinion maintained by almost all Philosophers that were Mathematicians was, that the Earth is round like a Globe or Sphere. But the Arguments, which Au∣thors for the confirmation thereof do use, they propose so obscurely and con∣fusedly, that they cannot compel or convince an obstinate and pertinacious Defender of the contrary Opinion. We therefore, as much as may be, will most clearly set forth those very Opinions, and examine them, that the Readers may have a distinct knowledge thereof. Reasons to prove the Earth round.First, I reject the slighter Reasons or Arguments, which are probable, or ra∣ther Sophistical. First, the Spherick figure is most capacious; therefore the Earth ought to have such a kind of figure. Secondly, all the parts of the Earth tend to the same Center; therefore all those parts make a round figure. Thirdly, when as in the Creation the Water as yet was confusedly mixed with the Earth, without doubt the Earth was moist and soft; but the figure or shape of Liquid things is round or spherical: therefore such also the figure of the Earth remained after the separation of the moist from the dry. These and the like Arguments being slighted, let us view and consider the stronger and most solid. There is but one Argument of one and the first kind, which is taken à priori; but the other two kinds are taken à posteriori: to wit, some Arguments are taken from the Celestial appearances; some again from them which we either observe in the Earth or in Heaven. As for the first Argument, concluding à priori, it is taken from the nature of Water; and this demonstration is wont to be taken either from Aristotle, or Archimedes. Ari∣stotle in his second Book de Coelo, chap. 5. hath proposed his Demonstration in these very words:The superficies of the Water round. It shall manifestly appear that the superficies or surface of the Water is round; if we shall take the Supposition, That Water of its own nature makes its confluence always to a hollow place, and that that place is more concavous which is nearer the Center. Therefore from the Center A let the strait lines A B and A G be drawn, and from B unto G let the line B G be drawn,See Scheme. unto which from A let a perpendicular line A D be drawn into E. It is manifest therefore that the line A D is less than the lines A B and A G (by the 18th of the first Book of Euclid's Elements Geometrical;) therefore this place D is more concavous; wherefore the Water shall flow from B and G until the lines A B, A D, A G may be equal: But A E is equal to A B, A G; therefore it must needs be, that the very water should be in these lines which are drawn in the Center (this part of the Demonstration is clearly known: but A E, &c. makes nothing for the Demonstration.) But that line, which toucheth them which are drawn from the Center, is the circumference; therefere the superficies of the Water, which truly is B E G, is round. Things to be noted.This is Aristotles Demonstration, in which, besides the confused and evil com∣posure thereof, these things I observe. First, that it supposeth some Center of the whole Ʋniverse: Secondly, that it taketh the place more or less bending down in regard of that Center. For he which shall deny the shape or figure of the Earth to be spherical, would call these things into question. Yet the first may be sufficiently, concerning the Center of the Universe, proved or corrected: For we must say, that either the Stars are wheeled round about by a Diurnal motion, or that the Earth is turned round about its own Center (for this the ap∣parent motion of the Stars forceth and causeth.) If the Stars, then that point about which they are turned, shall be the Center of the Ʋniverse; if the Earth, then the middle point of the Earth, or that about which it is turned, shall be ta∣ken in the Demonstration for the Central point of Aristotle. But the chiefest difficulty lies in the second Supposition, to wit, that the lesser or greater decli∣vity or bending downward, ought to be considered in respect of that Center: For he which would defend the superficies of the Water to be plain and of another figure, he would deny this Supposition, and would say, that the de∣clivity must be considered according to our senses, to wit, in respect of our
Horizontal plain, according to which the Earth with infinite spaces is ex∣tended into profundity; or else he would define the declivity in another man∣ner. And thus this demonstration concludeth nothing at all, unless it be granted; that the declivity of the places of the Earth must be taken in respect of that Center, about which the daily apparent motion of the Celestial Bodies is performed: which thing, although it may be true, and all other definitions of declivity, according to which the Water may be moved, may also be con∣futed; yet notwithstanding it can scarce be admitted for a principle, seeing that it in a manner supposes the figure of the Earth to be Spherical. Archimedes his demonstrati∣ons by some preferred be∣fore those of Aristotles.Others therefore prefer Archimedes his Demonstration before this of Ari∣stotle, which is found in his first Book, concerning those things that are car∣ried in the Water. This indeed is more Artificial than that of Aristotle, yet it is opprest with the same difficulties, forasmuch as it supposeth the Spherical figure of the Earth, and its Center, in respect of which it taketh the de∣pression of the Water. We will bring hither some Arguments framed from those that are taken from Celestial appearances. First, let us conceive the Meridian line of our place, or of any point of B in the Earth,See Scheme. or a Section of the Earth made in plane, which through the Poles of the World M N, passeth through A B C D: this line is usually called the Latitude of the Earth, and the line which is drawn perpendicular to this is named the Lon∣gitude of the Earth, or another plain Parallel to the Celestial Equator, making in the Earth the line E B F C. I say, as well the line A B C D, as the line E B F C in the Earth to be circular. But it is a Geometrical Thorem, If any Superficies according to one dimension be cut through any point, and the section be made in the periphery or circumference of the Circle; then according to the other dimension through the same point the section be made in plain, which is perpendicular to the former plain, and the section again be made in the periphery of the Circle, that superficies is spherical. Therefore, because we have taken the point B in the superficies of the Earth, according to our own pleasure, and have shewed the Section A B C D, and E B F C to be the peripheries of the Circles;The Earth a Spherical body. therefore by the aforesaid Theorem, we conclude, that the superficies of the Earth is spherical, and that the Earth is a spherical Body. The Section of the Earth, according to the dimension of the latitude from one Pole to another, is circular.Furthermore, that the Section of the Earth, according to the dimension of the Latitude from one Pole to another A B C D is circular, is proved by many Celestial appearances: First, if this line A B C D, any place whatsoever being taken in B, some man go forward towards either Pole M, or towards the Star near it, he observeth by his progresses made equally, that he approacheth equally to the Pole. But this could not be done, unless the line of his Journey B A C D were circular, and it is commodiously shewed by the Artificial Ter∣restrial Globe. Secondly, because A B C D is the Meridian line, into which when the Sun cometh it is midday to us, and to all People dwelling in this line A B C; experience witnesseth, that the Sun in the line A B C doth perpen∣dicularly hang over any place, to wit in the Torrid zone, for example P; and if we take equal spaces equal to B Q, Q P, we shall perceive that the distance of the Sun from the vertex or top of Q, is equal to the excess of the distance of the Sun from the vertex of B, above the distance from the vertical point of Q: which could by no means be accomplished, unless the line B P Q were cir∣cular. Thirdly, the same is the reason of all the Stars, which when they come into the Meridian A B C, their distances from the vertexes P Q B have the same reason, as the distances PQ, P B, Q P. So when our Mariners sail towards the South, the Stars, which before were not conspicuous, become higher and more manifest to the eye, according to the proportion of their sayling. Fourth∣ly, so if many Stars be taken, and the places of the Earth, through whose Zenith they pass, in one Meridian, you shall perceive that the distances of these places have the same proportion among themselves, as the distances of the points of the Meridian in which those Stars keep their Noon, or full Soth point. Now, forasmuch as belongeth to the Longitude of the Earth; for ex∣ample E B F C, that is also circular, and that the Earth hath a spherical tumor
or swelling according to this dimension,Of the rising and setting of the Stars. is proved by that, because the Sun and Stars do sooner by a great deal rise to those People which live from us towards the East, than to us; and do also sooner set to them, than to us: But to them that dwell from us Westwards, contrariwise they rise and set later than to us; and indeed according to that proportion of time, which the distances of the Meridians of those places have from our Meridian. So if two places be ta∣ken from ours, to wit, the distance of one Meridian towards the East 225 miles; the distance of the other 450: then we shall find, that in this place the Sun riseth two hours sooner than with us; but in the other place it riseth but one hour sooner than in ours. The Argument becomes more clear, if this Theorem be proposed of the Suns coming to the Meridians of divers places.Of the rising▪ of the Sun. For indeed look what is the account of the distance of places from ours, and the same will be observed the account of times which come in between the arrivings to those Meridians and ours, or between the Arches of the Equator intercepted be∣tween their Meridians and ours: which is made evident by the Eclipses; for these things are shewed by the Artificial Globe, if we ascribe a Spherick form to the Earth: but other shapes thereto applied are very absurd. So now the Spherical form hath as well been demonstrated, as touching the latitude, as the longitude of the Earth. Other Reasons to prove the Earth Spheri∣cal.Yea, but the Spherical form thereof may also be proved by the only Lati∣tude of the Earth, for indeed all divisions of the Earth which are made ac∣cording to the latitude thereof in divers places, are the Peripheries of the places; but they pass through the same point of Heaven, to wit, the Pole of Conversion near adjacent to the Polar Star. From these two Reasons we may solidly infer and prove, that the figure of the Earth is spherical. For it is a Geometrical Theorem, which therefore ought to be demonstrated by Geome∣tricians thus; if any solid body be cut in many planes, it matters not how passing through some one point, and all the sections or divisions be performed in the superficies of the periphery of the Circle, that body is spherical. Other reasons.Here cometh another Reason, taken from the shadow which the Earth on her averse part to the Sun disperseth to the Moon, whereby she suffereth an Eclipse: forasmuch as this shadow is conical, or like a spire of a Steeple, as is declared by the obscuration of the Moon. But if we deal rigidly, the Arguments taken from the spherical roundness of the Earth, from the viewing and consideration of the Earth, are these follow∣ing: First,Again. from the sayling round the Earth; because our men of Europe hoisting Sail eight times from Europe with a direct Journey to the West and South, even unto the streights of Magellan; afterwards to the West and North; they re∣turned again from the East into Europe, and all those appearances hapned to them which arise from the property of the Globe; which surely had not been done, if the Earth had not been round. And certainly, upon the supposition of that figure of the Earth all those Circumnavigations were grounded, which therefore had not taken such happy success, if the form had been other∣wise. Secondly,Furthermore. when either by Sea or Land we take our departure from high Towers and Mountains, then the lower parts thereof are absconded from us, and by degrees more and more, till at last the very tops thereof are quite taken from our sight. In the same manner, when as for a long distance we come to a Tower or Mountain, first the top presenteth it self to our view, then the in∣feriour parts, till at last through our nearer distance the foot thereof is seen. And this increase of Apparition and Occultation is altogether made according to such a proportion, as the spherical tumor or swelling of the Earth is able to make; neither can it be explicated by any other figure. The Diagram will make the Proposition more clear. Thirdly, because that the measuring the height of Mountains, or great Hills, which is grounded upon the hypothesis of the globous form of the Earth, is found by experience to agree with a real truth of the thing it self.
Further Rea∣sons to prove the rotundity of the Earth.Furthermore, that we may draw together the whole number of these Arguments taken à posteriori into one sum, (although they might be handled Geometrically, but that business would be of great labour and difficulty; for it must be demonstrated, that this or that different property being put, that the line is circular:) therefore a round spherical figure is to be assigned to the Earth. Because all the appearances as well Celestial, (as the divers ele∣vation of the Pole, the divers altitude of the Sun of that day in divers Countries, the reason of the Shadows, the difference and increase of the Longest days towards the Pole, times of the rising and setting of the Stars, &c.) as Terrestrial, (as the direction of Navigations, the appearing and hiding of Towers and Mountains, the distances of Places, the Ports, Coasts, Winds, &c.) are most commodiously declared by that round or spherical form or figure: neither can another figure be devised which can perform that, as it is manifest by the consideration of divers figures and forms of Bodies. And our artificial Terrestrial Globe so justly represents all these things, as they are really found to be in the Earth: which certainly could not be done, if the Earth had any form or figure than that of our artificial Globe. And what other form soever you shall chuse, there will follow innumerable absurdities.: For it is manifest, that it is not plain by the appearances hither alledged; and that it neither can be hollow is clear from this, that the Sun and Stars ought first then to appear to the western People, than to the Eastern, if it were of such a figure; as we see the Sun rising first to illuminate the Valleys, before it can give light to the averse parts of Mountains. CHAP. IV. Concerning the Dimension and Magnitude of the Earth. The Opinions of divers Wri∣ters concern∣ing the Dimen∣sion and Mag∣nitude of the Earth.THe Dimension or measuring of the Earth comprehends three principal Heads: First, the Longitude or length of the Diameter, or half Dia∣meter, that is, of a line from the Superficies to the Center, as also of a peri∣phery of the Earth, or the Circumference. Secondly, the magnitude of the Superficies of the whole Earth. Thirdly, the solidness or corporeal Dimen∣sion of the Earth. But these things are so contrived together, that one of them being known, the other two come to our knowledge by Geometrical Instruments, because the Earth is a certain Sphere; as it is shewed in the second Chapter. This property is the most noble and hard to know, and hath exercised the most excellent Wits for many Ages: insomuch that some Men have written whole Books concerning this matter. And therefore I have thought, that it would not prove ungrateful to the Students of Geo∣metry, if I should fully relate here the History of this Dimension. Dio∣genes Laertius praiseth Anaximander the Milesian, the Scholar of Thales,Anaximander the Milesian, the Scholar of Thales. that besides other Astronomical Inventions, he first of all others described the circuit or perimeter of both Land and Sea: But Anaximander lived about the year 550 before the Birth of Christ. The Mathematicians of suc∣ceeding Ages seem to have followed his Dimension, even until Eratosthenes,Aristotle. because Authors make mention of none other; and therefore I judge that to be the Magnitude assigned by Anaximander, which Aristotle hath noted in the end of his second Book de Coelo, saying; The Mathematicians also, which endeavour to measure out the Magnitude of the World, report that the Earth is bounded in and girt with four hundred Stadiums. By this perimeter, it is no difficult matter to assign the half diameter of the Earth according to Anaximander. But because we can find nothing noted con∣cerning Anaximanders Invention, besides that one place of Diogenes
Laertius;Eratosthenes. his and Eratosthenes his diligence is obscured, who next after Anaxi∣mander undertook this business with great applause of all men: he lived about two hundred years before Christ; and as he was most conversant in the rest of the Mathematicks and Dimensions, so he is esteemed most accurately to have perfected Geodaesia, or Surveying; and this glory is principally ascribed to him. But he discovered and delivered,The circuit of the Earth. that the perimeter or circuit of the Earth is two hundred fifty thousand Stadiums or Furlongs; but others two hundred fifty two thousand, which Pliny reports to make up three hundred fifteen thousand Roman miles, every one of which are thought to be a thousand Paces. Eratosthenes had written three Books of Geography,Eratosthenes. which by reason of the injury of time are now not to be found.Strabo. Strabo, the famous Geographer, relateth the Contents and Arguments of each Book:Cleomedes. and Cleomedes hath noted up his manner which Eratosthenes used for the discovery of the Cir∣cuit of the Earth; in which, what can be wanted, we will hereafter declare. For indeed Eratosthenes his measuring forth the Earth, was by many Mathe∣maticians, especially Hipparchus (a hundred years after Eratosthenes) judg∣ed to swerve from the truth; although there is nothing written touching Eratosthenes his Dimension or measuring forth the Earth, but that he added twenty five thousand stadiums to the perimeter.Possidonius. But Posidonius being not only a most knowing Astronomer and Practioner, but also in every part of Philosophy most expert, did next after Eratosthenes enter upon this Doctrine, a little before the birth of Christ, to wit, in the time of Cicero and Pompey. This man by his Dimensions found the circumference of the Earth to be two hundred forty thousand stadiums,Cleomedes. as Cleomedes hath noted; but 180000 stadiums,Strabo. as Strabo hath delivered: whereby ariseth a great doubt con∣cerning the cause of this difference between Cleomedes and Strabo his al∣lowance; seeing this of Strabo is the truer, although uttered in a few words: But Cleomedes his assignation of the same is far from truth, although he read and expounded Posidonius his Geodesie to many. Concerning his size or man∣ner, we will speak hereafter. But the Dimension of Eratosthenes was used as yet of many, even to Ptolo∣my's time, (the year 144 after Christ) who used a Perimeter of 180000 stadiums, and affirmed it to be more agreeable to truth, insomuch that this very Invention was by Theon ascribed to him.Theon. It is gathered that Marinus a famous Geographer,Marinus. and by whose Writings Ptolomy was much aided, did attempt something in this business, as appeared by his Geographical Writings of the same Ptolomy. After these times, when as the study and prosecution of the Sciences by little and little vanished away in Greece, nothing was done in this business, neither did the Romans undertake any thing herein. But the Arabians and Sarazons having obtained the Empire, or glory of other Arts from the Grecians to themselves, so likewise they left not this part of the Mathematicks untouched. Forasmuch (as Snellius relates out of Abelfedea an Arabian Geographer, who flourished about the year of Christ 1300, and whose Writings were printed at Rome) about the 800 year of the Christian Account,Maimon Ring of Arabia studious in Geography, in whose days it flourished. Maimon King of the Arabians, or the Calife of Babylon, being studious in the Mathematicks, forasmuch as he commanded the great construction of Ptolomy to be turned out of Greek into the Arabian Lan∣guage, which is called by the Arabians the Almagest of Ptolomy. This Maimon, I say, having assembled together certain skilful Mathematicians, commanded them that they should search after the Perimeter of the Earth. To perform which task, they chose the Fields of Mesopotamia, and they under the same Meridian proceeding from the North to South, until the Elevation of the Pole had decreased one degree, found after an even level, that the space or Journey was fifty six or fifty six and a half; from whence it is found that the Perimeter according to them, is twenty thousand and sixty, or twenty thousand three hundred and forty Miles.
From that time even to our Age no man hath assayed this; but many Ara∣bians have used this dimension of their own Mathematicians:The dimensi∣on of the Earth by the Latins. But the La∣tines, when they began to handle Astronomy, used that of 18000 Stadiums (which Ptolomy had used) which makes 324000 Italian miles, or 5400 Ger∣man miles; for 15 German, or 60 Italian miles, are allotted to one degree, when as there ought to have been assigned thereto 15 and /8;, because about 38 Stadiums are given to one German mile; and so the Perimeter should be 5625 German miles. But about thirty years ago, Snellius a famous Mathematician,Its dimension according to Snellius. Professor of Leyden, observed that usual Perimeter of the Earth, or the mag∣nitude of one degree defined in 15 miles, to depend on no cetain demonstra∣tion, but to be uncertain; therefore with very great industry he set upon this dimension, and happily finished it, demonstrating the magnitude of one degree in the Earth to be 28500 Perches or Poles (every one of which con∣tain 12 Rhindlandish feet, or 19 Dutch miles) and the whole Perimeter to be 8640 miles. But he defines a mile with 1500 Poles, or 18000 Rhindlandish feet. We will now speak concerning the manner of measuring the Earth. But indeed this Invention depends on the Figure of the Earth, which in the foregoing Chapter we have proved to be Spherical: For indeed we conceive the Earth to be cut by a Plain passing through the Center. This Section or Division maketh the greatest Circle of the Earth: For a Sphere being cut in any manner, the Section is made a Circle; but if it be cut through the Center, it shall be the greatest Circle, and therefore the Periphery of this Circle in the Superficies of the Earth, shall be the Circumference, Circuit, and Perimeter of the Earth. And this work of measuring beginneth from the magnitude of this Periphery;The Circum∣ference of the Sphere divi∣ded into 360 degrees. because therefore this Periphery or Circumfe∣rence, as others are, is divided in the mind into three hundred and sixty degrees, (as hath been said in the second Chap.) but indeed we cannot perform the magnitude of the whole Periphery, and therefore the Problem is thither reduced, that we may find out the magnitude of one degree, or other part in the known measure. For example; the magnitude of half a degree, the necessity of which also meets in other Problems. And we take the Periphery of the Earth for the most part to be that of the Meridian Circle, because this is more easily, and with less occasion of errour, determined by our own place, and by the North or Polar Star, or other means, which we will declare in the Three, and twentieth Chapter. The first mean or way which the Arabians, and other Mathematicians have used. Let the Horizon therefore of our Terrestrial Meridian (which lieth just un∣der the Celestial a bed, and is concentrical thereto) be H h, R ss; let the Periphery A B C D, R the Center of the Earth; our place B the Vertex,See Scheme. or supreamest point over our heads; the Pole of the Earth A lying under the Ce∣lestial; the Elevation of the Pole above the Horizon shall be A H a h: Let us now take another place in the same Meridian A B C D or G, lying under the same a b c d, the Vertex g, the Horizon f F R t T. Let here now the Eleva∣tion of the Pole be exactly observed in the place B, viz. a h or a H; also of the place G, to wit f a, or F A; and let F A be taken away from H A, and the re∣mainder is H F, to which the Arch B G intercepted between the places, is e∣qual. After that the interval or space between B G must be measured accu∣rately in a certain measure. For example; how many Perches or Poles it may contain, or how many miles? For these shall be correspondent to the Arch B G. And by the Golden Rule, as B G is to A B G c d the 360 degrees; so the space or interval found out, or the Perches or Miles are to the Perches or Miles of the whole Perimeter A B G C D, or as the Arch B G is to one degree, so the Perches or Miles found are to the Perches or Miles which are due to one degree. Note, if your pleasure be not to measure the interval B G thus, but to fol∣low the vulgar determination, then according to that way the quantity must be determined. As for example; that to 1 degree 15 such miles answer, as be∣tween B G may be 10, &c.
Elevation of the Pole at London.Example; B London, where the Elevation of the Pole A H, a h, is 51 de∣grees 32 minutes. Let G be Hartford lying under the same Meridian with London, the Elevation of whose Pole a f, a f, is 51 degrees 54 minutes; therefore f h, or B G is 29 minutes. But the distance between London and Hartford is 20 English miles, or 13875 Rhinlandish Perches of 12 foot: there∣fore as 29 minutes are to 60 minutes, so 9 ¼ to 19 Holland miles: therefore 19 Holland miles make one degree in the circumference of the Earth. Or the interval B G is accounted to be 7 ¼ German miles, a German mile being rec∣koned to be 1900 Rhinlandish Perches: therefore let it be wrought thus; as 29 parts are to 60,The Elevation of the Pole at Prague. so is 7 ¼ to 15 such German miles. So at Prague the Ele∣vation of the Pole is 50 degrees and 6 minutes: at Lincium it is 48 degrees, and 16 minutes: the difference of B G shall be one degree and 50 minutes; and it is thought to be distant 26 German miles; therefore the Perimeter was 5105 miles, and the whole Circuit of the Earth is 5400 miles. The second manner of Eratosthenes. Eratosthenes's manner used a∣bout the di∣mension and magnitude of the Earth. See Scheme.Let there again be two places of the Earth in the same Meridian; let B be the City Alexandria in Egypt, let G be Syene, another City of Egypt, under the Tropick of Cancer; let now the same places in one and the same day, in the full southing of the Sun, when he comes into the Meridian line a b c d, the distance from the Verticles b g be observed by a Quadrant. Let at Alex∣andria in the day of the Solstice, 21 of June g f, or G F be observed, 1/50 of the Periphery, or 7 degrees 12 minutes: but in Syene let there be no distance, the Sun hangeth perpendicularly over their heads; therefore B G shall be the Arch intercepted between those two places. And because the distance put is 5000 Stadiums, therefore according to the Golden Rule, it shall be, as 7 degrees, 12 parts to one degree, (or as 1/50 to 1/360, or as 5 to 36) so 5000 to 694 4/9 Stadi∣ums, which are requisite for one degree; or as 1/50 is to 50, or as 1 to 50, so 5000 to 250000 Stadiums of the whole Periphery A B C D according to this mea∣sure. Yet seeing there are divers ways to take the Meridian Altitude of the Sun, and the distance from the Vertical point g b, Eratosthenes wrought it by a hollow Spherical Scioterick or Sundial, which they called Scaphe, where the Style B x sheweth the Vertex o x z, but the Radius or beam of the Sun ter∣minaitng the shadow of the Style or Pin, marks out B z how much the distance of the Sun o b from the Vertex 7 degrees 12 firsts at Alexandria. But in the City Syene, the Style G x makes no shadow that day; because o the Sun hang∣eth perpendicularly over it, and therefore there is no distance of the Sun then, because therefore the Angle B x z is equal to the Angle b x o, whose measure is B o, or B z: there B o is equal to B z 7 degrees 12 first minutes, or 1/50 of the Periphery. The other things are performed as it hath been said. The third manner of Posidonius. Posidonius's manner used about the mag∣nitude, &c. of the Earth.Let two places B G be under the same Meridian. Posidonius took B Rhodes, and G the City Alexandria in Egypt: let the Altitude of some Star in these two places, when it cometh into the Meridian, above the Horizon, and that in the same day, or in divers days, which matters not at all. Posi∣donius took the shining Star Canobus, which is of the first magnitude in Ar∣gonavi;See Scheme. but this Star did not rise above the Horizon of Rhodes h H S, but did only touch the Horizon in S; yet it was elevated above the Horizon of Alexandria F R t in the Arch t S 1/48 part of the whole Periphery, or 7 de∣grees 30 minutes. Therefore the distance of the Arch T s, that is B G, shall be 7 degrees 30 minutes unto 1 degree, or as 1/48 part unto 1/360; that is, as 1 to 48, so 5000 to 240000 Stadiums of the whole Perimeter of the Earth, ac∣cording to these Hypotheses of Posidonius.
The fourth manner or way of Snellius. Snellius's way about the di∣mension and magnitude of the Earth.Because in the former ways we have taken two places B G lying under the same Meridian, and yet the places fit for this business may lye under divers Meridians, therefore we thought it requisite that an example, and that of Snellius, should be also concerning this case here proposed. Let therefore A B C D be the Meridian of Alcmaria; B Alcmaria it self, the Elevation of the Pole h a 52 degrees 40 ½ minutes; the distance from the Pole B A 37 degrees, 19 minutes, 30 seconds. See Scheme.Let the other place be P Bergenapsome, the Meridian A P V V the distance from the Pole, that is the Complement of the Elevation (51 degrees, 29 mi∣nutes,) A P is 38 degrees, 31 minutes: therefore P G a Perpendicular Line being drawn to A B G, the difference of the distances from the Pole is B G, 71 minutes, 30 seconds, or 1 degree, 11 minutes, 30 seconds. Moreover, Snellius by a laborious Geodesie or Earth-meeting, found the di∣stance of Alcmaria from Bergen B P, to be 34710 Rhindlandish Perches, and the Angle of Position P B G, to be 11 degrees, 26 minutes, 2 seconds. There∣fore in the Triangle strait angled P B G, the Hypotenuse B P, and the Angle B P G is given; therefore by the Problem of the second Chapter, B G is found 34018 (for which Snellius takes 33930; for he detracts 88 Perches from the Stations of the Elevations of the Pole.) But the Arch B G 71 ½ scruples is the difference of the Elevation of the Pole, therefore as 71 ½ mi∣nutes is to 1 degree or 60 minutes, so is 33930 (or 34018) to 28473 Perches for one degree, or according to the round number 28500, or 19 Holland miles. They which understand Spherical Trigonometry, from the given A B, A P, the Angle A B P, may find the Arch B P to be 1 degree, 14 minutes; which when they are equal with 34710 Perches, 1 degree shall be equal to the Per∣ches, or of 18 miles, and ⅘. But the cause that this number differeth from that of Snellius, is first, that Snellius did not take the very points of the Tow∣ers B P, by which he obtained the Angle G B P, for the knowing the Eleva∣tions of the Pole; but he took the places a little distant from them:See Snellius in page 197. Notwith∣standing no man can doubt but the same may be found to be the Altitude of the Pole. The other cause is, that he taketh the Lines B G, B P, P G as strait, which nevertheless are not strait, although this discord may seem to make little or no difference of any moment. But let Snellius his quantity of a de∣gree of 28500 Perches be taken (mine of 28300 Perches) his makes 19 147/150 miles, (mine 18 ⅘ miles) the Perimeter or Circuit according to Snellius, shall be 10260000 Perches, 123120000 feet, or 8640 Holland miles. The fifth manner, being the first Terrestrial way of measuring the Earth. The first Ter∣restrial way for the finding out the magni∣tude, &c. of the Earth.The three following manners or ways are Terrestrial, performing the work without the Heaven or Meridian Line. Let B P be the Altitude of the Tow∣er; this is to be sought out in a Land-measuring way: then let P s be the di∣stance of the most remote term from whence the Tower may be seen. And al∣though P s be not a strait Line, yet because it is the least part of the Peri∣phery of the whole Earth, therefore it is taken for a strait line; and the Triangle strait angled B P s, in which by the given B P, P s, the Angle B s P is found, to whom B R s is equal, whose measure is the Arch S P. There∣fore as this Arch is to one degree, so P s the found distance,See Scheme. is to the quantity of one degree. As for Example; let B P the Altitude be 480 Paces, and let the distance P s of the point s, which endeth the Sight, be 40000 Paces, or 10 German miles: therefore let it be wrought according to the Problem of the second Chapter. As P s 40000 paces are to B P 480 paces, so the whole Sine 10000000 is to 11904, the Tangent of the Angle B S P, or S R P, or of the Arch S P, to wit, 41 minutes; therefore as 41 minutes are to 60 mi∣nutes, so 40000 paces are to 59000 paces, that is about 15 miles for 1 degree.
Or the Diameter P R may be found without the Table of Sines, or with∣out the finding the Perimeter: For as B P is to P S, so P S is to P R; as 480 is to 40000, so 40000 is to 3333333 paces for the half Diameter R P. The sixth manner of measuring the Earth, being the second Terrestrial, with∣out the knowledge of the distance. The second terrestrial way for the measu∣ring the Earth.But truly the same half Diameter R P shall also be concluded in this man∣ner: Let B P be the high Tower, to wit, the Plummet being let down from the hole, the height thereof may be found to be 100 paces. Or if the height of the Mountain P B be known by another Geodesie, or surveying 4000 paces, afterwards the Instrument being applied in the top of B, let the Angle of the last Sight be found P B S, 88 degrees, 37 minutes: Therefore B R S shall be one degree, 23 minutes. Out of the Canon of Sines, let the Sine of 88 degrees, 37 minutes, be taken, and let this be subtracted from the whole Sine 10000000. And let it be dispatch'd thus: as the remainder is to the Sine of 88 degrees, 37 minutes, so B P of 1000 paces is to the half Diameter S R in paces. The seventh manner, being the third Terrestrial. The third ter∣restrial way for the measuring the magnitude of the Earth.This way or manner shall seem more accurate then the former ways, and shall appear more applicable to the practice, taking two mountains or heights, of whom, not the height but the distance may be known, which may be found Geodetically, or by the Art of Surveying. Let B P be one Altitude of the Mountain, Tower, &c. S T the other height; let T P be the distance of five German miles;See Scheme. let the Angle B T R 89 degrees, 55 minutes, be found by the Instrument, and in the other Mountain T B R 89 degrees, 55 minutes. The Angle P R S shall be 920 minutes (because the three Angles T, B, R, are e∣quated to two strait Angles, 180 degrees) wherefore according to the Golden Rule, Work, as 20 degrees are to 60 degrees; so 5 miles to 15 miles for 1 degree. These are the principal manners and ways of measuring the Earth: For by the found out measure of 1 degree, the whole Perimeter, Diameter, Superfi∣cies and Solidity is found out. Because according to Snellius, the Perimeter is 8640 Holland miles, or 10260000 Rhindlandish Perches, or 123120000 feet: therefore by the Pro∣blem of the second Chapter, the Perimeter of the Earth is found to be 1088 ¼ miles, or 1633190 Perches, or 19598300 feet. The Superficies of the Earth 18811353 ⅗ square Holland miles. And the whole Solidity is 4095681512 Cubick miles. The calculati∣on of German miles usual.But because the calculation by German miles is more usual, 15 of which makes 1 degree, therefore these may be used, but upon this condition, that such miles may be understood, of which 15 may make 19 Holland miles, or that 1 mile may contain 1900 Rhindlandish Perches. Therefore the Periphery of the Earth shall be 5400 such miles, the half Diameter 860, the Superficies 9278181 square miles, the Solidity shall be 265693384 Cubick miles. The Italian miles most commodious.Yet the Italian miles are the most commodious, 60 of which are allowed to 1 degree; for so 1 mile fittingly answereth one minute of a degree. But such an Italian mile ought to be understood, which may contain 475 Rhind∣landish Perches; so the Circuit of the Earth shall be 21600 such miles, the half Diameter 3440 miles.Reasons shew∣ing errors in the differing of the dimen∣sions of the Earth accord∣ing to the Ara∣bians, and o∣thers, Mathe∣maticians. These things being thus expounded, we must al∣ledge and bring hither the causes why the fore-rehearsed dimensions or measu∣rings of Authors may so differ, and what is wanting in every one of them. In the first manner of dimensions these things occur; First, That an Errour may be committed in taking the elevation of the Pole. Secondly, that a doubt may be made concerning places under the same Meridian. Thirdly, that the distance may not be declared distinctly: And because the Arabians used this
manner, therefore the things that are desired in their dimension, are these: First, the exact quantity or grEatness of their mile, (which according to Al∣fraganus is 4000 Cubits) as unknown to us. Secondly, the Arabians have not shewed to us the places, whose Elevations they took, and therefore we cannot make further search concerning their diligence. Thirdly, neither did they demonstrate their manner by which they measured. In Eratosthenes's dimension these things deserve correction. First, that to the Arch found B z of 7 degrees, 12 minutes, he did not add 15 minutes, for the Arch intercepted between the Radius Solis X Z, which was to be taken. Secondly, that he did not prove Syene and Alexandria to lye under the same Meridian. Thirdly, that the term of the Shadows cannot be exactly noted; and besides, that the places about Syene, even to 150 Stadiums, have this property, that the Style is without a shadow. Fourly, that he took the di∣stance between Syene and Alexandria, according to the opinion of the Vulgar sort, which neglecteth, and hath no care of exactness; neither can the magni∣tude of the stadiums be certainly manifest unto us. In Posidonius his manner these blemishes are judged to be; First, that he thought Canobus was not lifted up above the Horizon of Rhodes, whenas not∣withstanding it may be elevated 2 degrees above it. Surely he could not know, that it exactly touched it. Secondly, that he determined the distance between Rhodes and Alexandria by conjectures and common journeys. Thirdly, that his stadiasm, or measure of a stadium, is not sufficiently determinate. Fourth∣ly, because it may be doubtful whether Alexandria and Rhodes lye under the same Meridian, &c. In the Terrestrial manner of measuring the Earth, there is this defect: First, that in the exact measuring of Hills, a fault may easily be committed. Secondly, the furthermost point of the Sight cannot be known accurately, both because of the refractions, as also for the weakness of the eyes. It may suffice to have spoken thus much concerning the greatest Circuit of the Earth, its half Diameter, Superficies, and Solidity. We might, if it were a similar Body, by the solidity of the Earth, judge of its weight: but because parts of a different weight, whose proportion is hidden from us, are in it; therefore its weight cannot, but by a conceived supposition, be determin∣ed. The half Dia∣meter of the Earth is the measure of all Celestial di∣mensions. The distance of the Sun and Moon from the Earth.It is worthy observation, that the half Diameter of the Earth is the mea∣sure of all Celestial dimensions, as well in assigning the distances of the Planets from the Earth, and from themselves, as in numbring and computing their magnitude. So we say that the Sun is distant from the Earth ubout 1200 half Diameters, the Moon 40, &c. But seeing in Geography we do not only consider the great Circles of the Earth, as the Equator, &c. but also the Parallels of the Equator. Therefore we must likewise determine how many miles or perches answer one degree in every Parallel. We have taken the accounting of the Perches out of Snel∣lius, but I my self have reckoned up the miles; to wit, 1900 Perches for a German mile; 1500 for a Belgick or Holland mile: 475 for an Italian mile.
A TABLE of the Quantity of one Degree in every Parallel. The Degrees in which the Parallels are distant from the Equator, or the Elevation of the Poles of the Parallels. Equa∣tor of the Perch of one de∣gree Holland miles. German Italian The Lati∣tude. Of a Perch of one de∣gree. Holland miles. German Italian     mil. per. miles. min. miles. min.     mil. per. miles. min. miles. min.   28500 19 0 15. 0 60. 0                 1 28496 18. 1496 14. 59 59. 56 46 19798 13. 298 10. 25 41. 40 2 28483 18. 1483 14. 59 59. 55 47 19437 13. 0 0. 14 41. 0 3 8461 18. 1461 14. 58 59. 52 48 19070 12. 1070 10. 2 40. 8 4 28431 18. 1431 14. 57 59. 50 49 18698 12. 698 9. 50 39. 20 5 28392 18. 1392 14. 56 59. 46 50 18319 12. 319 9. 38 38. 32 6 28344 18. 1344 14. 55 59. 40 51 17936 11. 1436 9. 26 37. 44 7 28288 18. 1288 14. 53 59. 37 52 17546 11. 1046 9. 14 37. 0 8 28223 18. 1223 14. 51 59. 24 53 17152 11. 652 9. 2 36. 8 9 28149 18. 1149 14. 48 59. 12 54 16752 11. 252 8. 49 35. 26 10 28067 18. 1067 14. 46 59. 4 55 16347 10. 1347 8. 36 34. 24 11 27976 18. 976 14. 43 58. 52 56 15932 10. 937 8. 23 33. 32 12 27877 18. 877 14. 40 58. 40 57 15522 10. 522 8. 10 32. 40 13 27769 18. 769 14. 37 58. 28 58 15103 10. 103 7. 57 31. 40 14 27653 18. 653 14. 33 58. 12 59 14671 9. 1179 7. 44 31. 0 15 27529 18. 529 14. 29 50.   60 14250 9. 750 7. 30 30. 0 16 27653 18. 453 14. 25 57. 40 61 13817 9. 317 7. 16 29. 4 17 27255 18. 255 14. 21 57. 20 62 13380 8. 1380 7. 2 28. 8 18 27105 18. 105 14. 16 57. 4 63 12939 8. 939 6. 48 27. 12 19 26947 18. 0 14. 11 56. 44 64 12494 8. 994 6. 34 26. 16 20 26781 18. 0 14. 6 56. 24 65 12045 8. 45 6. 20 25. 20 21 26607 17. 1107 14. 0 56. 0 66 11592 7. 1092 6. 6 24. 24. 22 26423 17. 925 13. 54 55. 36 67 11136 7. 636 5. 52 23. 28 23 26234 17. 734 3. 48 55. 12 68 10676 7. 176 5. 38 22. 32 24 26036 17. 536 3. 42 54. 48 69 10213 6. 1213 5. 23 21. 32 25 25830 17. 330 3. 36 54. 24 70 9748 6. 748 5. 8 20 32 26 25616 17. 116 13. 29 54. 0 71 9279 6. 279 4. 53 19. 32 27 25394 16. 1394 13. 22 53. 28 72 8807 5. 1307 4. 38 18. 32 28 25164 16. 1164 13. 15 53. 0 73 8333 5. 933 4. 23 17. 32 29 24927 16. 927 13. 7 52. 28 74 7846 5. 346 4. 8 16. 32 30 4681 16. 681 13. 59 51. 56 75 7376 4. 1376 3. 53 15. 32 31 24429 10. 429 12. 51 51. 24 76 6895 4. 895 3. 38 14 32 32 24169 16. 169 12. 43 50. 52 77 6411 4. 411 3. 23 13. 32 33 23902 15. 1402 12. 35 50. 20 78 5925 3. 1425 3. 8 12. 32 34 23628 15. 1128 12. 26 49. 44 79 5438 3. 938 2. 52 11. 28 35 23346 15. 846 12. 17 49. 8 80 4949 3. 449 2. 36 10. 24 36 23057 15. 557 12. 8 48. 32 81 4458 2. 1458 2. 20 9. 20 37 22761 15. 261 11. 59 47. 56 82 3966 2. 966 2. 5 8. 20 38 22458 15. 0 11. 49 47. 16 83 3473 2. 473 1. 50 7. 20 39 22149 14. 1149 11. 39 46. 36 84 2979 1. 1479 1. 34 6. 12 40 21832 14. 832 11. 29 46. 0 85 2484 1. 984 1. 18 5. 12 41 21509 14. 509 11. 19 45. 16 86 1988 1. 488 1. 3 4. 12 42 21180 14. 180 11. 9 44. 36 82 1492 0. 1492 0. 47 3. 12 43 20843 13. 1343 10. 58 43. 52 88 995 0. 995 0. 31 2. 4 44 20501 13. 1001 10. 47 43. 8 89 497 0. 497 0. 16 1. 4 45 20152 13. 652 10. 36 42. 24 90 0 0. 0 0. 0 0. 0
CHAP. V. The Pythagori∣cal motion of the Earth is the cause of many Celestial appearances.THE Pythagorical motion, or turning the Earth about, as with a wheel (not that quaking and shaking) is the cause of very many Celestial ap∣pearances according to the Copernicans opinion, seeing that without it every place would have a perpetual constancie of these. But indeed there is no property or quality of the Earth, concerning which there can be greater dis∣putations, fith that not very long ago it hath suffered the Censure of the Church of Rome. Yet because to many men it seemeth likely to be true, that such a motion of the Earth may be given, therefore I will endeavour briefly to unfold the same. The Motion of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and their appearances.It is not unknown to any of the very Vulgar sort, that the Sun, Moon, and all the Stars of Heaven appear every day, that is, in the space of 24 hours to be moved from East to West, and commonly to return to the same places of Heaven. It must therefore needs be that either they are really moved, or that we are moved, and that our motion or moving be imputed to the Stars: For if two things change their dstance, one of them at least was moved; which principle is most manifest. The opinion of the Ptolomaians and Pythagore∣ans concerning the motion of the Stars, &c.That the Earth standeth still, and that the Stars with the Heavens are mo∣ved, was, and is yet, the common opinion of Astronomers, which are called Ptolomaians, or of such as follow the Doctrine of Ptolomy; yet the Pytha∣goreans long ago maintained that the Stars held their place constantly without budging from thence, and that the Earth was rouled and wheeled about its Center; one of whom was the famous Aristarchus of Samos, who for his de∣fending this Opinion, was by his Adversary accused of prophaning and viola∣ting Religion, before the most famous and severe Bench of the Areopagites, but he was nevertheless quitted by the sentence of those most sincere Judges. Yet this Opinion found but few Abettors, insomuch that many Ages it was as it were buried in oblivion: so that there was no mention in Schools made there∣of, until such time that eminent Astronomer Copernicus, some two or three A∣ges past made it famous, and so prevailed therein,The opinion of Copernicus therein. that very many excellent Astronomers imbraced this Opinion, and confirmed it with sundry Arguments and Reasons; among whom not long since flourished Kepler the Emperour's profest Mathematician, and Galilaeus of Galilee the Italian Mathematician to the grand Duke of Tuscany or Florence, and Lanthergius Belga. And be∣cause there is a twofold motion of the heavenly Bodies perceived by us; the first whereof is, whereby all the Stars, as well fixed, s Planets, seem with equal time, to wit, in 24 hours to be carried round abot the Earth, and to rise, and keep their southing and setting: The second motion is, that which is called proper, whereby the Planets are observed with a different or diverse motion, as also are the fixed Stars to be carried from West to East. The Pto∣lomaians airm that both these motions are in the Stars themselves, or their Orbs: But the Copernicans ascribe that first motion not to the carrying about of the Earth only from one place to another, but to the wheeling and turning about of it remaining in her own place, about her own Axil, from West to East, (such as is seen to be implanted in all the Stars:) yet they acquit the fixed Stars, as also the Sun from the aforesaid second motion, and attribute the apparent motion of these to the carrying of the Earth about the Sun, and to the inclination of the Axil, notwithstanding they leave the said second motion to the rest of the Planets. Forsooth they deny the Sun to be a Planet, but place the Earth in his stead: and they prefer the Sun into the Ptolomaian place of the Earth, to wit, the Center of the whole World, forasmuch as that is the cause which maketh the Earth, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury to turn round about.
These are the Reasons of this Opinion. Of the great number of the Stars which seem to per∣form their cir∣cuit in 24 hours.1. Because so great is the number of the Stars which seem to perform their Circuit in 24 hours about the Earth, and this appearance may be declared by the motion of the Earth, only remaining in her place; therefore it is more a∣greeable to reason to determine this motion, rather then that; insomuch as when we sit in a Ship, and sayling nearer to a Station or Harbour of many Ships, which in the mean while seem as it were to approach or sayl to us, yet we do not ascribe a motion or sayling to them. And seeing nature doth in no case work by many things, that which she can perform with a few; it is likely in this business also that that is so observed and kept by her. Of the swift motion of the Stars, &c.2. Because the swiftness of that motion of the Stars would be incredi∣ble, and such as would surpass all our imagination: for seeing that they are distant from the Earth almost an infinite space, and that most vast cir∣cuit ought to be run in one minute of an hour; at least, that they should be carried through 100000 miles. Contrariwise, if this motion should be ascribed to the Earth, she remains still in her place, neither need we to fear the least swiftness, because she is turned about her own Axil as a Wheel. The vastness of the Celestial Bodies compa∣red with the body of the Earth.3. There accrues a greater force to this Argument, if we compare the huge vastness of the Celestial Bodies with the Body of the Earth: for see∣ing that the Sun at least is 200 times bigger then the Earth; but the fixed Stars are in a manner 1000 times bigger; to what man can it not be made more probable, that the Earth is turned about its own Axil by a natural motion, than that so huge Celestial Bodies should be moved from place to place? Of the solidity of the Celestial Orbs accord∣ing to Tycho Brahe.4. Because all the most famous Astronomers being compelled with Tycho Brahe by the appearances of the Stars, &c. do now deny that the Celestial Orbs are solid and hard, which appearances the ancients used for proving the more easie supposition of the motion of the Stars; therefore the carrying or wheeling of them about the Earth, seemeth more incredible. Yea, they deny the Orbs to be solid, because if these were so, a mutual penetration of the Orbs must needs be granted, seeing that some Planets are found frequently in the Sphere of some other. No reason for the motion of the Stars about the Earth.5. No reason can be given why the Stars can be moved about the Earth, when as contrariwise there may some reason be given, why the Earth and the rest of the Planets may be moved about the Sun. Of the Pole and Axil.6. Neither is the Pole nor Axil real, about which the Stars are determined to be moved: contrariwise in the Earth there is both Pole and Axil. The sayling, of Ships from West to East, more easie, than from East to West.7. Because the sayling of Ships from West to East is more easie, than from East to West: For out of Europe into the Indies they sayl in about four months; when as in their return home it is about six months. And this is be∣cause in their Voyage thither they are carried or moved into the same point with the Earth; but in their return they are moved or carried into the contrary. From the mo∣ving of the Earth, the Ce∣lestial appear∣ances, &c. may be declared.8. Because all the Celestial appearances, the rising and setting of the Stars, the increase or lengthning of the days, &c. may be evidently declared, if we maintain the Earth to be moved: But most especially the commodiousness and necessity of this Hypothesis is seen in those admirable properties of the Pla∣nets, to explicate which the Ptolomaicks are compelled to invent many Cir∣cles, Epicycles, and Eccentricks without any reason: But the Copernicans do so derive them from the second motion of the Earth about the Sun with easie labour, insomuch that thereby they can make the cause of them manifest, and so easie, that the very unlearned may understand them; to wit, first, why the Planets may seem sometimes to be retrograde or go backwards, and in∣deed Saturn oftner and longer than Jupiter, Jupiter than Mars, &c. sometimes to be carried with a swifter motion, and sometimes to be stationary. 2ly, Why Venus and Mercury can never the whole night long be seen. 3ly, Why Venus can never depart any greater distance from the Sun than 0 degrees, but Mercury no
greater then thirty degrees, and therefore those two Planets can never be seen to be opposite to the Sun. Fourthly, why Venus in the evening of the same day after the Sun and in the morning before the Sun, may be seen. I forbear to bring hither any more appearances; but they are the principal, from which I think an Argument of greatest moment may be fetcht for this Motion of the Earth; when as by this Motion of the Earth they may be so commodiously declared, that it should rather be admired, if the Earth could not be moved by such evident appearances. These are the easier Arguments by which the Copernicans would evince the motion of the Earth, which although they be not demonstrative; yet they make this hypothesis more probable, than that which determines the Heaven to be moved: for one of them must needs be admitted. The Reasons of ome against the moving of the Earth, as the Ptolomai∣ans.But these Reasons which some men (to wit, the Ptolomaians) alledge to the contrary, are easily dissolved; which are these: First, that the Earth is un∣fitting for motions by reason of its ponderosity. Secondly, that the parts of the Earth are naturally moved with a strait motion to the Center; therefore a circular motion is contrary to the nature thereof. Thirdly, if the Earth should be moved, a stone cast down from a Tower could not fall to the foot thereof. Fourthly, a bullet shot out of a piece of Ordnance towards the East, at some mark, it could not come home to it or hit it, if the mark with the whole Earth were moved towards the East, or at least the hitting the mark should be more swift, than if the bullet were shot towards the East. Fifthly, neither the Towers nor buildings could stand stedfast, but would fall by reason of that motion of the Earth; neither could men be without giidi∣ness, by reason of the whirling about of the Earth. Sixthly, because we see that the Stars change their place, but not the Earth. Seventhly, because the Earth is in the Center of the World, but the Center is not moved. Eight∣ly, because the holy Scriptures do confirm the stability or stedfastness of the Earth. The aforesaid Reasons of the Ptolomaians answered by the Copernicans.Yet indeed the Copernicans to these Arguments use to answer after this man∣ner. To the first they Answer, denying the whole Earth to be heavy; for ponderosity is a tendency of the parts to their whole homogeneous (of the same kind) and such a heaviness is also discovered in the parts of the Sun and Moon, and yet notwithstanding neither the Sun nor Moon is said to be heavy. To the second they Answer, That that right motion of the parts of the Earth, not of the whole Earth, and the circular motion thereof, doth not hinder the strait carrying of those parts, which is evidenced by the parts of the Sun and Moon. To the third Argument they reply in a threefold manner: First, that such heavy things are not primarily carried to the Center of the Earth, and therefore are born by a very short line to the superficies thereof; as Iron tendeth not to the Center of the Loadstone, but to the Loadstone. Secondly, the whole Air cleaveth to the Earth, and is moved together with her; therefore all such heavy things being thrown together downwards, get this circular motion, and are moved as it were in a Vessel. And Thirdly,The Opinion of Gassendus therein. Gassendus by frequent experience hath de∣monstrated, that if any thing be cast from a moved body, that which is so cast is also moved with that motion of the moved body; as for example, a stone thrown down from the top of the Mast of a Ship moved most swiftly, is ne∣vertheless not left by the Ship, but falls down to the foot of the Mast; and from the foot of the Mast a bullet being shot perpendicularly out of a hand-Gun, falleth again perpendicularly: therefore the alledged Objection is nothing worth. To the fourth Reason, they answer in the same manner as unto the third. To the fifth they say, That some such thing hath no place, because the mo∣tion is equal, neither doth it dash against another body: and the buildings as it were heavy bodies and homogeneous, or of like to the Earth, are moved as
in a Ship; for we find in a Ship moved very swiftly, or slowly, the bodies set upright therein are not overthrown; yea Cups and pots full of Wine, or other liquor, shed nothing thereof at all. To the sixth we say, That the change of the Stars place is not perceived, but we find the change of their situation in respect of our selves; but this mu∣tation of position may be observed and be, whether we be moved with the Earth, or the Stars be moved, we being stedfast, or also both we and the Stars. In the seventh Objection, both the major and minor proposition is false, or at least doubtful. To the eighth they reply, First, that the holy Scripiure in physical or natu∣ral things doth speak according to appearances and the capacity of the Vul∣gar; for example, when the Moon with the Sun is called a great light, because it was created to give light to the Night,Of the Moon. whenas indeed the Moon is not great in respect of the Stars and Earth, neither hath she any light of her own proper nature, nor doth she give light in all Nights to the Earth. So the Scripture saith,Of the Sun. that the Sun goeth to the extreamest part of the Earth, and that he returneth to that end again, when as notwithstanding there is no such end or furthermost part. So in the book of Job, a plane and square figure is attributed to the Earth, under whom Pillars are set, upon which it leaneth; which indeed must not at all be so understood, as the very Vulgar well know. There might more places be alledged hither; but these are sufficient: For the holy Scriptures were not given to us, thereby to play the Philosophers, but to practice Piety. Secondly, certain places of Scripture are wont to be al∣ledged, which speak not concerning the immobility thereof, but concerning its constancy and durance, as that place which we have brought hither out of Job. Thus have we briefly declared of what sort the motion may be, which the Copernicans ascribe to the Earth, of which a more exquisite explication is usually given in Astronomy. But that being supposed, all those things are to be applied to the Earth, which are wont to be considered in a Globe turned round about,Of the Axil, Poles, Periphery, Parallels, &c. of the Globe. to wit, the Axil about which it is turned is one of the Diame∣ters: the Poles are the extremities or two points, which are not moved: the greater circle or periphery, according to which the circumrotation or wheeling about is made, and its parallels. Now let us see concerning the swiftness of that motion. The first motion by which the Earth is turned round about his Axil, cannot be seen and considered in the whole Earth at once,Of the motion of the Earth; its difference, swiftness, &c. but in divers places it is also different, to wit, how much the nearer the place is to the Equator, with so much the greater swiftness and space it is moved; but the greatest motion is in the places that lie in the Equator. For indeed, because every place of the Earth in twenty four hours, is rouled about by the space of a whole periphery, to wit, by 360 degrees; therefore the space of one hour is found. If 360 be divided by 24, the quotient is fifteen, which are so many degrees. These are the degrees, by which the place lying in the Equator, or without it, is turned about in one hour; but they make, if the place lye in the Equator, two hundred twenty five German miles, whence she will be turned in four minutes of an hour through one degree, that is fifteen Miles. But the places lying without the Equator towards either of the Poles, are in the space of the same hour wheeled about by so many degrees, but such as are much less; forsooth the reason is the same between the swiftness of the motion and the distance of two places, as is between the signs of the Arches by which those places are distant from the Pole: for example, the distance of Amsterdam from the Equator,The distance of Amsterdam from the Equa∣tor, or the Ele∣vation of the Pole. or the elevation of the Pole, is 52 degrees, 23 minutes. So the distance from the Pole is 37 degrees, 37 minutes, whose sign is 61037. Let us take one place to be in the Equator, whose distance from the Pole is 90 degrees, his sign is 100000. But the place under the Equa∣tor in four minutes is carried through 15 miles, and in an hour is carried through 225 miles. Wherefore by the Rule of Three, as 100000 are to 61037,
so fifteen to nine miles, or as 225 to 135 miles; therefore Amsterdam every hour by this motion is carried through 135 miles. But the discovery of this is much easier by the Table, which we have set in the end of the foregoing Chapter: For the division of 360 degrees being made by twenty four hours, we find that any place every hour is moved through fifteen degrees of his own Circle, and therefore that it is moved through one degree in four minutes. If we therefore enter that Table with the Elevation of the Pole, or distance from the Equator of that place pro∣posed, we shall find the miles set down at the degrees of the given Elevation, which are due to the motion of the place proposed in the space of four mi∣nutes; for example, At Stockholme the elevation of the Pole is about 60 de∣grees,The Elevation of the Pole at Stockholme. and in the Table at the degree 60, I find seven miles to answer with one degree; therefore I say, that Stockholme is moved about in four minutes by so many miles. The second motion of the whole Earth, which is mo∣ved with an equal swiftness, and by equal peripheries.So great is the first motion considered in the places of the Earth; but the second motion is of the whole Earth from place to place, and all the parts or places thereof are moved with an equal swiftness, and by equal peripheries. The quantity hereof dependeth of the distance of the Earth from the Sun, and is performed in a whole years space, and thereby the Earth every day mo∣veth through about one degree. Concerning the third motion of the Earth, because it hath a more hard con∣sideration, I leave it to be treated of by Astronomers, because in Astronomy there is a necessity of supposing it. Indeed Origanus hath raised a Controversie concerning the second motion also, thinking the first motion to be convenient for the Earth, but that the second should be left for the Sun and fixed Stars; but the Phaenomena's or appearances in the motions of the Planets, which we have alledged before, do sufficiently enough maintain the Motion of the Earth. CHAP. VI. Concerning the situation or place of the Earth, in respect of the Planets and Stars. THe consideration of the Earths situation in this whole systeme of the World in respect of other Planets, hath a contemplation suitable to that which we have alledged concerning the Motion of the Earth in the fore∣going Chapter: For the common Opinion of Philosophers and Astronomers, according to Ptolomy, hath decreed,The Earth, ac∣cording to the Opinion of the Philosophers and Astrono∣mers of Pto∣lomy, takes up the Center of the Universe. The Sun ac∣cording to the Copernicans, the Center of the Universe. that the Earth takes up the Center of this whole Universe, so that she is conversant in the middle of all the Stars and Planets. But they of Copernicus his Sect, with the ancient Pythagore∣ans, place the Sun in the Center of all the Stars; but they set the Earth as it were a Planet between Mars and Venus, and they think that she is carried there about the Sun with a yearly course or space, which is understood better by the Diagram or description thereof. Yet notwithstanding therein do these two differing Opinions agree, that both confess, that the Center of that first motion, whereby the Stars seem to us in the space of twenty four hours to be carried about, is in the Earth. For both Astronomy and Geography do want this Supposition, insomuch that whether you follow the Ptolomaican or Py∣thagorean Opinion,See Scheme. the firmness and certainty of General Astronomy and Geography loseth nothing: For the difference of Opinions consisteth in this, that the Ptolomaians will have this motion to be in the Stars themselves; but the Pythogoreans is to be the Earth, the Stars in the mean while resting, and never moving; neither of which is it necessary either for common Astro∣nomy or Geography to determine.
The placing the Sun, Earth, and other Pla∣nets, according to the Ptolo∣maians and Co∣pernicans.According to the Ptolomaians this is the placing of the Planets to the Earth and fixed Stars; The Earth, Moon, Mercury, Venus, Sun, Jupiter, Saturn, and the fixed Stars. According to the Copernicans, such is the situation or placing; The Sun is placed in the middle of the consistence or systeme of the World, as the heart, or fire; next to him the Orb of Mercury, Venus, the Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, and the fixed Stars. If you demand, how much the Earth, and we being on the Earth, are di∣stant from the Planets, you must know that the distance is not always the same, but is changed every day, and therefore Astronomers do reckon up three degrees of distances, viz. the least, the mean, and the greatest. The mean distance of the Earth from the rest of the Planets, is according to ma∣ny Astronomers this following: The mean di∣stance of the Earth from the other Planets.The Earth is distant from the Moon with its sixty half Diameters. From Mercury, 110. From Venus, seven hundred. From the Sun, 1150. From Mars, about five thousand. From Jupiter, about 11000: And from Saturn, 18000. But yet indeed the distance of Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, and the fixed Stars, is altogether uncertain, by reason of the defect of the parallaxy or mutual changing. In the Copernicans Hypothesis, the distance is varied not only from the motion of the Planets, but also from the motion of the Earth it self. The Reasons of either Opinion, to wit, of the Ptolomean and Copernican, concerning the place of the Earth, are almost the same with them, which in the precedent Chapter we have alledged: for this disputation hath great affi∣nity with the same. For if you ascribe and allow the second motion to the Sun, which is called the proper motion; not the Sun, but the Earth shall be in the midst; but if you allow that second Motion to the Earth; not the Earth, but the Sun shall be in the middle. These Arguments following may be said for the Copernicans Opinion. The Sun not only the foun∣tain of Light, but also the vital Spirit of the whole Universe.1. The Sun is not only the Fountain of Light, which as a most clear shining torch illuminates the Earth, Moon, Venus, and without doubt the rest of the Planets; but he is the fire-hearth of heat and vital spirit, by which this whole Universe seemeth to be cherished and sustained. Therefore it is pro∣bable that he holdeth the middle place, and that these are moved round about him. 2. It is more likely that the Earth should be moved about the Sun, that together with the rest of the Planets, she may receive light and heat from him. The Sun a vast body, &c.3. The Sun being placed in the midst, some cause is rendred why the rest of the Planets and the Earth may be carried round about him, to wit, be∣cause the Sun is a most vast body, and endowed with great vertues and forces, therefore he rowleth and stirreth up the rest of the Planets to their motion. And this Reason especially taketh place, if we admit Keplers Hypothesis con∣cerning the motion of the Planets. Spots in the Sun.4. The Observations of Galilaeus and Scheiner, concerning the spots in the Sun, prove, that the Sun is moved about his Axil. In the same manner therefore the rest of the Planets have their cause of going about, neither seems it consistent with reason, that any other should be attributed to him. 5. If we allow the Earth a place between Mars and Venus, and allow the Center to the Sun; the motion of every Planet fittingly answers and agrees to the distance from the Center, which in the Ptolomaick Supposition is manifest not to be effected, by the consideration of the motions of the Sun, Venus, and Mercury. 6. Those Celestial appearances, which we have used in the former Chapter, for the proving the second Motion of the Earth, are also valid and efficacious for this place, which I have said must be assigned to the Earth, to wit, the Retrograde course and station of the Planets, and the admirable apparent
motions of Venus and Mercury, &c. For indeed that second motion of the Earth, doth before hand suppose this place, and placing of the Earth, or hath it joyned to it self very nearly: But this Argument in my Opinion is the chiefest. Yet for the first motion of the Earth nothing can be fetcht by way of Argument, for gathering thence the situation of the Earth. For the Earth might be in the Center of the World, if she were without, or wanted the second motion, as Origanus also determines. 7. So also the variation of the distance of the Planets from the Earth, is well declared.The Aristoteli∣ans and Plato∣nists Argu∣ments about the Earth. Yet notwithstanding the Aristotelians and Platonists oppugn the Pythagoreans Opinion with many Arguments, and endeavour to chal∣lenge the Center of the Earth for a place, by these Arguments. First, heavy things are carried to the Center of the World; but the Earth is the heaviest body, therefore it takes up that Center. Secondly, heavy things would go from the Earth towards the Center of the Universe, unless this Center were in the Earth. Thirdly, the Center is the ignoblest place, and the Earth also is the vilest part of this Universe: therefore it shall have the Center thereof. Fourthly, if the Earth were without the Center of the World, and motion of the Stars, then the Stars and Constellations would be seen in some seasons of the year, and some days, bigger than in others. Fifthly, neither would the middle part of Heaven always be conspicuous, as Taurus rising, the Scorpion should set, &c. Sixthly, neither would there be Equinoxes. Seventhly, nei∣ther the Moon rising eclipsed, would the Sun set, &c. Eightly, neither would the number of Miles in the Earth equally answer every degree in Hea∣ven. The aforesaid Reasons of the Aristotelians, refuted by the Copernicans.The Copernicans do easily weaken these Reasons of the Aristotelians. For the first and second is refell'd, because the motion of heavy things is not to the Center of the Ʋniverse, but to the homogeneal body, as is proved by the parts of the Moon, the Sun, and Loadstone. The third Reason taketh a false major and minor proposition: For the Center is also a noble place, and the Earth is not ignoble or base. The other Reasons are easily disproved by Diagrams or Descriptions, this at least being fore-supposed, that the distance of the Earth from the Sun or Center, how great soever it be; yet if it be compared with the distance of the fixed Stars from the Sun, it would be so little, as that it would have no pro∣portion to it. The distance of the Moon, Ve∣nus, and Mer∣cury from the Earth, not so great, as of Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn.Moreover, the Explication of the Theorem belongeth to this place, that the distance of the fixed Stars and superiour Planets, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, is so great from the Earth, that the half Diameter of the Earth hath no pro∣portion to it; but the distance of the Moon, Venus, and Mercury, is not so great: touching the Sun there is as yet a doubt; surely, if there be any pro∣portion of the half Diameter of the Earth, to the distance of the Earth from the Sun, that will be very small. But the Theorem is proved thus; First, the fixed Stars and higher Planets appear to us to rise at the same moment, at which they would appear to rise by a right contrived supputation and calculation, if we were set in the Center of the Earth: Therefore the distance of our place from the Center of the Earth, that is, the half Diameter bears no proportion to the distance of the fixed Stars. Secondly, if we take the Meridian or Altitude of a fixed Star, or one of the superiour Planets, with an Astronomical Instrument, we find the same, as if we had observed it in the Center of the Earth: Therefore the semidiameter of the Earth vanisheth away in respect of that distance. Third∣ly, if there were any proportion, then the distance of two Stars would be found to be lesser about the Horizon, than about the Meridian, because in this position they are nearer to the Earth almost by one semidiameter of the Earth. The same Argument is valid as touching the Sun also; for his Dia∣meter is not found greater in the Meridian, than when he is yet on the Horizon.
But the Diameter of the Moon is observed to be a little greater in the Meridian, than when as yet she is on the Horizon: Therefore in the Meri∣dian it is somewhat nigher to us, to wit, almost one Semidiameter of the Earth. CHAP. VII. Concerning the substance and constitution of the Earth. WE have in the foregoing Chapters considered the qualities or pro∣perties of the Earth, no regard being taken of its substance or be∣ing. But now these being declared; it is fitting we consider this also, that we may know what kind of body the Earth is, and how its parts cohere together; the which although it may rather rather seem natural, yet because it is requisite for the perfect knowledge of the Earth, we will here handle briefly, leaving the accurate consideration thereof to the Natural Philosopher. Proposition I. To declare of what simple and similar Bodies the Earth may consist, or be compounded of. Of the four Elements of the Earth.There are divers opinions of Philosophers concerning this matter. The Peripateticks number four Elements of the Earth, and the whole sublunary World, being now sufficiently known to the very Vulgar, Fire, Air, Water, and Earth. Many of the Ancients, as Democritus and Leucippus, determined that the whole World consisted of very little solid pieces, which differ only in their various figures, shapes and magnitude: and them many of the later Philosophers do follow; and of late Cartesius endeavoured by such an hypo∣thesis to declare all natural appearances. The three Principles of the Earth by Chymists.Chymists make three Principles, Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury, to whom some do rightly add Caput mortuum or the Dead head, when as they three are fruitful. But to me, doubtful terms and words being laid aside, and the things themselves well considered, there seem to be five simple Bodies the first Principles of all things,By Others, Five simple bodies, the first principles of all things. to wit, Water, Oyl or Sulphur, Salt, Earth, and a certain Spirit which the Chymists call Mercury. For indeed all Bodies and the parts of the Earth are resolved into those five Elementary substances. Notwithstanding I deny not that those differ not so much in essence, as in the singular variety of their shapes and magnitudes. Therefore the whole Earth consisteth of these simple Bodies, which are divers ways commixed, from whence ariseth so great variety of Bodies, which do appear different from one another, and similar or Bodies of like parts. But the more exquisite declaration of these points belong to Natural Philosophy, which I shall have occasion to treat of more at large in the first Volume of my Book of the Arts and Sciences, now ready for the Press.
Proposition II. The Earth is divided into dry and moist parts, or into Earth and Water, to which some joyn the Atmosphere. This is the vulgar division of Geographers, and then the Water is taken in a large signification for all that is liquid or moist, and fluid and running, as the Land is taken for the whole dry and consistent part of the Earth,Of the Land, and its various bodies of Na∣ture. and thereby doth embrace and comprehend such various bodies of Nature, to wit, First, Sand, Loam, Clay and Mineral Earths, Chalk, Cinnaber, Ochre, Terra sigilata or Saracens Earth, Earth of Samos, Bole-Armoniack, with divers other kinds of Earth. Secondly, Stones of various sorts, the chief among which are Diamonds, Emeralds, Rubies, Saphirs, &c. Thirdly, Met∣tals, among which are Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead, Mercury or Quicksilver, Iron, Steel, &c. Fourthly, Brimstone, Salts, Niter, Alom, Bitumen, Vitriol, Antimony, &c. Fifthly, Herbs, Plants, &c. Of the Water and its parts.To the Water are referred, first the Seas; secondly, Rivers and sweet Waters; thirdly, Lakes and Fens, or Marshes; fourthly, Mineral Waters, as hot Baths, sowr Waters, &c. Of the Atmo∣sphere, which encompasses the Earth.The Atmosphere is that thin and subtile Body, which girts and encompasses the Earth towards Heaven, and contains the Air, Clouds, showers of Rain, &c. Therefore into these three Parts the Earth is fitly divided. Proposition III. To expound how the Earth and Waters cleave or hold together, and make the Land. The Earth not bounded with one Superfi∣cies, but hath hollow Cavi∣ties.1. The Land, that is, the dry part of the Earth, is not bounded with one and that even superficies or surface; but she hath many hollow Caves, many parts lifted up aloft. In her Cavities, caves or hollows, which are here and there found round about the whole Earth, the Sea or Ocean is contained; and therefore part of the Earthly superficies is covered with Waters. Those hollows or cavities are not made of an even hollowness, but have here and there Rocks and elevated parts, and elsewhere they have Gulphs and swal∣lows sunk very deep. So the part of the Earth appearing out above the Wa∣ters, hath certain (as it were) Navels in its middle, and some parts are more or less raised up, or sunk down, than others. So it cometh to pass, that the Water environing the whole Earth is hindred, that it overwhelms not the whole Earth, but the higher parts, and such as appear above the Waters are Islands, of which some are great and some small. Mouths, holes Pipes, & other conveyances in the body of the Earth.2. Besides that continual Channel in the Earth in the outward superficies, within also in the solid body of the Earth there are innumerable Mouths, holes, swallows, windings, conveyances, deeps, pipes, and huge vast Re∣ceivers, in some of which there is the Sea, which by that secret conveyance are joyned to the Channel of the common Sea; in some again there is Sweet Waters, Rivers, Streams: In some spirits, or else a sulphury and smoking substance. Seneca saith rightly, He gives too much way to his eye-sight, who believeth not, that there are in the hidden and secret bosom of the Earth Bays of a vast Sea. Neither do I perceive what may hinder, that there may not be some Sea-shore, and the Sea received by hid∣den passages. There is therefore no cause of doubting of there being many hollows in the very solid Earth: For verily we conjecture at it by these means. First, by the Rivers, which are found in many places where Earth is digged, even to a notable depth, which is frequent in Mines. Secondly, in some places the profundity of the Sea is beyond all sounding or measure. Thirdly, there are some Caves in the Earth. In the Western part of Hi∣spaniola is a Mountain of a great height, being hollow within with many
Caves, in which Rivers of Waters are thrown down headlong with so great sound and rushing noise of streams, that the very fall of those Waters may be heard five miles distance. Fourthly, some Gulphs or Whirlpools are found in the Sea. Fifthly, Earthquakes do also prove the being of Cavities under the Earth. Sixthly, some Rivers bury themselves under the Earth, as Niger, Tigris, &c. Seventhly, Salt-springs, which without doubt (for the greatest part) spring and flow from the Sea, are found in many places. Eightly, so in many places the grounds at the entrance of men walking, tremble and shake, as about the Abby of St. Omer in Flanders in the Province of Brabant, (die Peel.) Proposition IV. The Superficies or surface of the Lands is continual; but that of the Waters is not so. Indeed the Superficies of the Earth or Land appearing out above the Wa∣ters is continued, or always the same to the superficies of the Channels of the Sea; and this of the Sea again is continued to the other parts of the Land ap∣pearing above.One continual superficies of the Ocean, Bays, and Ri∣vers. So there is one continual superficies of the Ocean, the Baies, and Rivers, but not of all Waters; because there are some Lakes, which are not joyned with the Ocean in the superficies, as the Lake Parime, and the Caspian Sea. Proposition V. It is certain how, or in what manner the parts of the Earth, which are re∣moved from the surface, that is, from our habitation towards the Cen∣ter. Some men think, that the Water is in the bottom about the Center of the Earth:The body of the Earth with∣in (according to Gilbert, an English man) is a hard Load∣stone. but it is most likely true, that the Earth occupies that place. Gilbert an English man is of opinion, that the body of the Earth within, is nothing else but a most hard Loadstone; but that those parts to which men have ad∣mittance by digging, and in which Herbs grow and we also live, are as it were the shell or crust of the Earth, wherein continual generations and corruptions are made. See Fig. But Cartesius is of a different opinion. See Scheme.Cartesius his Opinion is not much different from this, who thinketh, that there are three Regions or Parts of divers substance in the body of the Earth. The most inward Region of the Earth he deemeth to be about the Center thereof; the second he judgeth to be thick and dusky, of very small parts; the third he thinketh (wherein Men are employed) to be made up of little parcels, not well cleaving together. But indeed touching this thing, there can scarcely any certainty be affirmed. It is manifest by the hot-Baths, that in very many places under the Earth, fire and fumes are lifted up from Sulphur. Proposition VI. The consistency or standing, and fast cleaving together of the Earth, is from Salt. In all kinds of Earths may be found a cer∣tain kind of Salt.The Artificial resolving of the Parts of the Earth sheweth, that in all Earths may be found a certain kind of Salt, and so much the more: as the harder the body is, (a few Oily ones being excepted;) as in Mettals, Stones, &c. and that the concretion or hard growing together of all things is
by reason of salt, is manifest by stones, which we may by Art make very hard with salt: bur if you separate the salt from the earth, she will no longer cleave or stick together, but will be a powder; neither can it be reduced to hardness without the admixtion of salt thereto. Proposition VII. The kinds of Earths are divers ways mixed together in the Earth. Of Metals found in Mines.Thus in Mines are found small pieces of Gold, Silver, Lead, &c. not heap∣ed together, and joyned apart from others, but both mixed among themselves, and also with unprofitable earth, according to the least parts, that Artificers not at the first sight, but by divers signs do find out what may be contained in any Metalline earth. In the same manner in the Fields, sand is mixed with clay or loam, lime, salt, &c.Of the diffe∣rent sorts of Earths, as did appear by the Well digged at Amsterdam. When as on a certain time at Amsterdam for ma∣king a Well, the earth was digged out, even to the depth of 232 foot; these sorts of earth were shewed to the beholders, viz. of Garden-earth 7 foot, of Black-earth fitting for fire, which is called Peat, 9 foot, of Soft-clay 9 foot, of Sand 8 foot, of Earth 4 foot, of Clay 10 foot, of Earth 4 foot, of Sand upon which the Houses of Amsterdam are wont to be rammed and paved 10 foot, of Clay 2 foot, of White-loam 4 foot, of Dry-earth 5 foot, of muddy 1 foot, of Sand 14 foot, of Sandy-clay 3 foot, of Sand mixt with Clay 5 foot, of Sand mixt with Sea-fish shells 4 foot, then a bottom of Clay to the depth of 102 foot, and lastly of loam 31 foot, where the digging ceased, and they came to Water. The Figure of which see among the Schemes. Proposition VIII. The Cavities of the Earth, and as well the outward disposition thereof, and the position of its parts, are not perpetually the same, but are at divers times divers. The water of the Seamaketh divers changes and ruins in the earth, where like∣wise lye hid Spirits and Sulphureous Substances.Indeed not only the Water of the Sea maketh divers changes and ruins in the parts of the earth; whilst certain holes are stopt up, some are made more broad: but also Spirits and Sulphury Substances lying hid here and there in the earth, when they begin to encrease, and to be resolved into Vapours, do impetuously shake and thrust forwards the parts of the earth, as it is manifest by Earthquakes. And it is likely that such like motions are made in the inte∣riour parts and bowels of the earth, the greatest part of which we feel not, neither perceive. But we will speak of the mutual changing of the water and earth in the Su∣perficies of the earth, in the eighteenth Chapter.
The Earth is divided into Land and Waters. The Super∣ficies of the Earth ex∣tant out of the Water by the In∣terflux of the Sea, is distinguish∣ed into these four parts, 1. Into great Continents or great I∣slands, of which four are reckon∣ed by us, 1. The Old World; whose parts are Asia, Africa, and Europe. The bounds of this Con∣tinent are On the North, the Frozen and Tar∣tarian Ocean. On the East, the Pacifick and Indian Ocean. On the South, the Southern Ocean. On the West the Atlantick Ocean. 2. The New World, or America, whose parts are Meridiona∣lis, Septentrio∣nalis, The bounds of it are On the North, Davis Streights. On the East, the Atlantick Ocean. On the South, the Pacifick Ocean. On the West, the Streights of Ma∣gellan. 3. The Polary North-land, or Greenland, is every where encompassed by the Sea and Streights. 4. The South-land, and Land of Magellan, yet undiscovered. 2. Into Pe∣ninsulas, or Chersonesus, which are parts of those Con∣tinents, Round, whose La∣titude and Longi∣tude are equal a∣bout, Africa it self. Peloponesus, the Chersonesus of Grecia. Chersonesus Taurica, or Tartaria Precopensis. Cambaja. Long, among which are The Chersonesus of Malacca, adjoyning to India. Cimbrica or Jutland, adhering to Holsatia. Borea adjoyning to Tartaria. The North and South parts of America. California. Jucatan. The Chersonesus of Thracia. Nova Francia. Ionia, Cindensis, Mindensis. Of Affinity to Peninsu∣las, Italy, Greece, Acaia, Spain, Norway, Sweden, Lapland, Asia mi∣nor, Arabia, Beach a Region of Magellan, and New Guiney, Indostan, Cochinchina, New-England, Monomotapa, Camboia. 3. Islands, which may be consider∣ed in four sorts, viz. Great, as England Japan Island Canada Sumatra. Madagascar, Borneo. Nova Zembla. California. Indifferent, as Sicilia Ireland Hispaniola Cuba Java Major Celebes Creet Luconia, Sardinia, Friesland, Terra Nova, Mindanoa, Ceilan. Small, as Gilolo, Amboina, Timor. Corsica, Majorca, Cyprus, Negropont. Sealand, Jamaica. The very small ones, in which we consider 1. The more famous, Solitaria, Rhodes, Malta, Lemnos, Helena, St. Thomas. 2. A knot or heap of Isles together, as The Canary Isles. The Flandrian or Caribbe Isles. The Hesperides. Those of the Gulph of Mexico. Of Maldives. Of Japan. About Madagascar. The Moluccoes and Isles of Bauda. The Philippine Isles. The Isles of Theeves. The Isles in the Aegean Sea. The Isles about England. The Isles of Solomon. 4. The Isth∣muses, Between Egypt and Arabia, or Africa and Asia. That of Corinth between Peloponesus and Achaia. The Isthmus of Panama or America the longest of all. Between Jutland and Holsatia. Between Malacca and India.
OF Absolute Geography. SECT. III. Wherein the constitution of the Land, or the dry part of the Earth, in four Chapters is declared. CHAP. VIII. Concerning the natural division of the parts of the Earth, made from the Ocean, flowing round about it. THE things which in this Chapter we shall deliver concern∣ing the division of the Earth, and in the fifteenth Chapter, we shall teach touching the division of the Sea, will great∣ly facilitate the young Student in the understanding the di∣stinction of the surface and parts of the Earth; and to fix them the faster in the memory: they are carefully and fully to be read, and to be compared with the Terrestrial Artificial Globe and Maps. Proposition I. A certain portion of Earth is covered with Water, and a certain part stands out above the Surface of the Water;Of parts of the Earth co∣vered, and of parts not co∣vered with water. but yet there are some parts which at some time are covered with Waters, and some parts are free from them and conspi∣cuous, as many Islands by Norway, Scotland, and other Countries: Add to these the beds or shelves of Sand and Seashores. But seeing these parts are so small, we take no account of them at present; neither will we move that Que∣stion here, Whether the Land takes up the greater part of the Superficies of the Earth, or whether the Water? We will treat of this briefly in the eigh∣teenth Chapter. Now we will confider the part standing up, or extant above the Waters, and we will call it Lands or Islands.
Proposition II. The Earth standing out a∣bove the wa∣ters, not one but many Lands: of which may be five sorts.The Land or Earth standing out above the Waters is not one, and continu∣al, but many Lands divided and disjoyned from one another by the Water flowing it between them. We will make five differences of them, to wit, 1. The greatest Lands or Islands; 2. The great ones; 3. The mean ones; 4. The little ones; and 5. The least ones. We will treat of the cause and ori∣ginal of these Lands extant or above the Waters, or of the Islands, in the eighteenth Chapter; for there will be a more commodious place to treat of this Matter or Subject. But all Lands extant above the Waters were to be called Islands, seeing that an Island is no other thing then a Land begirt with Waters;All Lands ex∣tant above the waters may be called Islands. yet the common use of speaking hath taken away from the greatest Lands this name, because that they are so great, and of such a huge tract and continuance, that the Cir∣cuit of the Water is thereby the less to be perceived. Insomuch that they are usually called the firm Land, and also great Continents. And indeed by reason of their vast bulk and greatness, unto which the magnitude of other Islands be∣ing compared, is small, they deserve this peculiar name; therefore we will also call them firm Lands and great Continents. Proposition III. The firm Lands four.The greatest Lands, Continents, or Islands (not contending with any a∣bout their name) are four. First, the Old World; Secondly, the New World or America; Thirdly, the Polar Land Artick, or Artick World; and Fourthly, the South-Land or Ma∣gellanick Land. The old world most famous, with its bounds, &c.The Old World, the most famous of those four, and only known of the An∣cients, which we inhabit, is commonly divided by the Sea into two parts, but joyned together by an Isthmus, or narrow neck of Land; one whereof is A∣frica, and the other Asia and Europe. It is invironed by the Ocean in this manner: from the East by the Chinean Ocean and the Pacifick Sea: from the South by the Indian Ocean and Aethiopick Sea: from the West by the Atlan∣tick Sea: and from the North by the Frozen or North Sea, the White Sea and Tartarian Ocean. The division of this Continent of which we have spoken, is made by the Mediterranean Sea and the Arabick Bay or Red-sea.Africa divided from Asia and Europe. For the distance of the Bays, that is the Latitude or breadth of the intercedent Tract, is not greater then about 30 miles, if which were away, Africa would make a peculiar firm Land, and would increase the number. The distance of the Old World towards the East, is but a very little space from the New World or America,The distance of the old world from the new. about the Streight of Anian, if only this be existent in the Universe of Nature. And the distance of Europe from Ameri∣ca is also very little between Norway and Newfoundland. Also the Old World is but a very small distance from the Pole Artick-land about the Streight of Waigats, from the South Polar or Magellan about New Guiney. The New World or America is thus begirt by the Ocean; On the East by the Atlantick Sea:The new world, with its bounds, &c. On the South by the Magellanick Streight; On the West by the Pacifick Sea; and on the North by a Sea unknown or uncertain, except Davis Streight. This World also wants but little, but that it may be cut into two Islands, to wit, at Panama and Nombre de Dios, where the confluence of the Pacifick and Atlantick Ocean is by a small Tract of earth intercepted. It is distant from the Old World a very little space, as before noted. The Polar Ar∣tick and South Land, with its bounds, &c.The Polar Artick, and the South or Austral Land, are begirt round with the Sea; the first with the North Sea, whose parts are the Streights of Davis, Waigats, and Anian. This South-land with the Pacifick-Sea, Indian Ocean, and Magellanick Streight.
The Polar Artick Land hath a very little distance at the Streight of Wai∣gats from the Old World: from America at the Streight of Davis. But it is re∣moved from the South-land by a huge space. The Polar Austral, or rather the South-land, is very nigh to the Old World at the running out Tract of New Guiney; as also to America at the Streight of Magellan. But concerning the South-land, only we have assuredly discovered, that it is round about environed with the Sea, and is separated from the rest. Concern∣ing the rest of the Lands, to wit, the Old World, America, and the Pole Ar∣tick World, the matter and discovery is not yet certain, whether they be round about begirt by the Sea, and separated from one another: but yet it is very likely they are so, by reason of divers Bays and Entrances of starts running within the Earth. The South-land only as yet is fully sailed about; this could not be hitherto performed in the rest. For the Old World as yet hath not been sailed round beyond Waigats Streight, although the whole Western, Southern, Eastern shore hath been viewed, and that but a little part of the North shore remaineth to be discovered. America hath been sailed round, only part of her Sep∣tentrional shore being excepted, by reason of the uncertainty of the Streights or narrow Seas. Thus have we declared the placing of the greatest Islands or Continents. Proposition IV. Ten great I∣land.We reckon up ten great Islands on the Surface of the Land, which are these following: 1. Britain, comprehending England and Scotland; it is esteemed the great∣est of all Islands which are commonly so called, those being excluded which in The foregoing Proposition we have related at large. 2. Japan, which in Maps and Globes hath a lesser magnitude than it ought to have: for they which have been there affirm, that it is as great, if not greater than Britain. 3. Luconia, one of the Philippine Isles, which also from its Metropolitan Town is called Manilha. 4. Madagascar or St. Laurence, seated on the Eastern shore of Africa. 5. Sumatra, one of the Indian Isles. 6. Borneo, not far from Sumatra. 7. Island, not far from Norway. 8. Newfoundland, nigh unto Canada. 9. Between Davis Streight and Hudsons Streight in the Northern Ocean, lyeth a great Island about the Polar Land, which according to Visher's Ʋni∣versal Tables, is in form round. 10. Nova Zembla, nigh unto Russia. To these is California to be also numbred, if that be an Island, which it is esteemed to be, and not a part of America. Proposition V. We number up ten mean Islands on the Surface of the Earth, viz. 1. Java, one of the Indian Isles. 2. Cuba, nigh unto Hispaniola. 3. Hispaniola. 4. Ireland, nigh unto England. 5. Crete or Candia, not far from Greece. 6. Sicily, nigh unto Italy. 7. Ceylan, one of the Indian Isles. 8. Mindanao, one of the Philippine Isles. 9. Sardinia, seated in the Mediterranean Sea. 10. Celebes in the Indian Ocean. To these may be numbred Friezland, an Isle not far from Island.
Proposition VI. Ten little Isles.We will also number ten little Islands on the Surface of the Earth, to wit; 1. Gilolo, one of the Indian Isles. 2. Amboina, not far from Gilolo. 3. Timor, one of the Indian Isles. 4. Jamaica in the Bay of Mexico. 5. Sealand in Denmark. 6. Corsica, seated in the Mediterranean Sea. 7. Eubaea, now Negropont, seated in the Mediterranean Sea. 8. Majorca, nigh unto Spain. 9. Cyprus. 10. Isabella in the Pacifick Ocean. There are more Islands which may be reduced to this rank, but we shall refer them to the last order of them, as more commodious. Proposition VII.The least Isles. Of the least Islands there is almost an innumerable multitude on the Surface of the Earth; among which these following deserve a peculiar consideration: First, the famous Solitary Islands; Secondly, those which are found in great numbers in some Tract of the Ocean, and for their Neighbourhood are com∣prehended under one name. We shall term them in general, a body or fry of Islands, because we are left destitute of a more fitting name. The Tract of Sea wherein these Isles lye, is called the Archipelago. The notable Solitary Islands are in the Mediter∣ranean Sea, Rhodes, Malta, Ivisa, Minorca, Chios, Cephalonia, &c. In the Atlantick Ocean between Africa and Brazile, lieth the Island of St. Helen, where also the Island of the Ascension, the Isle of St. Thomas, is placed in the very Equator. The Island Madera over against the Gaditane Streight. Zocotora, seated before the mouth of the Arabian Bay. Gothland in the Baltick Sea. Among the notable Solitary Isles, those are also worthy of remembrance which swim on the waters, of which see Chapter eighteenth. Proposition VIII. There are fifteen fries or files of the least Islands numbred on the Surface of the Earth;The lesser Isles. to wit, 1. The Canary Islands in the Atlantick Sea. 2. The Isles of Azores in the Northern Sea. 3. The Islands of Hesperides, or the Green Islands, over against Cape Verd. 4. The Islands of Maldives in Indian Ocean. 5. The Lucar Islands between Florida and Cuba, nigh unto America. 6. The Princes Islands between Hispaniola and America, to which I refer and reduce all the least Islands seated in the Bay of Mexico. 7. The Camercan Isles lying before Hispaniola. 8. The Mascarenian Islands between Madagascar and Africa. 9. The Molucco Islands, seated in the Indian Ocean. 10. The Philippine Islands in the Pacifick Ocean. 11. The Aegean Islands. 12. The Japonian Isles. 13. The Islands of Solomon in the Pacifick Sea. 14. The Isles of Theeves in the Archipelago of St. Lazarus. 15. The Isles of Banda nigh unto Java.
16. The Islands scituate near England and Scotland; as the Hebrides, Or∣cades, Sourlings, Sporades, &c. 17. The Islands between the Magellanick Streight and the Streight Le Maire. Other Isles may be rec∣koned.Here I do not reckon to these those Islands which lye close on the shore of some Continents in great numbers, as on the Coast of China, Norway, Brazile, Davises Streight, &c. Unto this rank also the Islands in great Rivers are to be referred and marshalled, as such as are found in the River Nile, in the River of St. Lau∣rence of Canada, in the River Wolga, and in some other Rivers; as also those which are in certain Lakes, as in the Lake Zembre, a Lake in Africa; in South America, where the Islands of Lead are scituate in a Lake, &c. But all (or most of) these Isles, especially these aforegoing, together with several others, I have largely treated of in the Geographical Description of the four Parts of the World in their fit places, to which I refer the Reader. Proposition IX. The Parts of all Lands or Islands are not of the same shape or figure, but are unlike. The more famous differences of these are a Peninsula and an Isthmus. A Peninsula.A Peninsula or Chersonese, that is, such a Tract of Land that is almost en∣compassed by the Sea, except at one only narrow place, where with a strait neck of Land, (called an Isthmus) it is knit to the Main Land. An Isthmus.An Isthmus is that narrow or strait neck of Land that couples and joyns the Peninsula to the Continent or Main-land, and that by which we pass out of one broad Land into another. The Peninsula's, Chersonesusses, or Chersoneses, that is, running out Lands, are these following, to wit; 1. Italy, 2. Spain, 3. Part of England,Of Lands which are (or may be termd) Peninsula's. 4. All Greece and Macedonia, 5. Norway and Swedeland, with Lapland, 6. Asia minor, 7. India, 8. Camboia. 9. New Guiney of the South-land, 10. Beach, a Country of the same Land, 11. Part of Virginia and New-England, 12. The Tongue of Africa, &c. Proposition X. Other Lands termed Penin∣sula's. The Chersoneses of the Anci∣ents.We will number up further fourteen Peninsula's or Chersoneses; and these we will divide into longish ones, and somewhat round ones. The longish ones are, first, the Golden Chersonese of the Ancients, now cal∣led the Malaccan Chersonese, and joyns to the Indies. 2. The Cymbrick Chersonese, now called Jutland, adjoyning to Holsa∣tia. 3. California, on the Western side of North America, near the Sea Verme∣jo: But late Observations report it to be an Island. 4. New France, on the Eastern side of North America. 5. The Jucatan Chersonese in the Bay of Mexico. 6. The Thracian Chersonese on the Hellespont. 7. The Cassandrian Chersonese by the Bay of Thessalonica in the Grecian Sea. There are also certain Peninsula's less celebrious, of the lesser Asia, to wit, Ionia or the Smyrnensian Peninsule; 2. The Cnidensian, or the Countrey of Doris; and 3. The Mindensian Peninsula's. Concerning Corea, it is doubtful whether it be a compleat Island or a Penin∣sula. Some Maps joyn it to Tartary, some again begirt it round with the Sea: yet notwithstanding the latest Observations make it a Peninsule. The somewhat round Peninsula's are, 1. Africa her self, a huge part of the Old World, is such an one: it is envi∣roned with the Mediterranean Sea, the Atlantick Ocean, the Aethiopick, In∣dian and Red-sea: It sticketh fast to Asia by a narrow Tract of Land at Egypt.
2. Three parts of America, to wit, Mexican and Peru stick fast together at Panama by a narrow passage of the Earth. 3. Peloponnesus, now called the Morea, being part of Greece. 4. Taurick Chersonese, or Peninsula in the Euxine Sea, and the mouth of the Fen Maeotis, now called the Precopensian Tartary. 5. Cambaia in India. Proposition XI. Of the chief Peninsula's.We reckon as many Isthmusses as Peninsula's; the more famous are five in number. 1. The Isthmus between Egypt and Asia, whereby Africa joyneth to Asia. 2. The Corinthian Isthmus between Peloponnesus and Greece. 3. The Panamensian Isthmus between Mexico, America, and Peruvia. 4. The Isthmus between the Chersonesus Aurea, or Golden Chersonesus, and the Indies. 5. The Isthmus of the Taurick Chersonese. CHAP. IX. Of Mountains and Hills in General. Of Mountains and Hills.TOuching Mountains, very many things worthy to be known in Geogra∣phy will here occur and meet us, partly because they seem to hinder the roundness of the Earth, and partly because divers things amongst renowned Authors are here delivered concerning them. Proposition I. But a Mountain or Hill is said to be a part of the Earth rising aloft, which if it be lesser, is called a Hillock or Clift. Of Promonto∣ries and Rocks.Also a Promontory is said to be a Hill, or Mountain running out at length in∣to the Sea. Rocks are called parts jutting or appearing forth in the Sea, or al∣so arising up out of huge stony Bulks or Bodies. But it must be generally known, that the parts of the Earth which appear plain, are not all of the same height, but some are sunk lower, especially at or near the Sea shores, insomuch as the height encreaseth from Maritine places, or such as abutt upon the Sea, even to the Inland Regions. This also is proved by the Fountains and flowing Streams of Rivers: For seeing that that part of the Earth, to which the wa∣ter floweth, is lower than that from which it floweth, and that the Fountain-heads and Springs of Rivers are seldom in the Inland places, and such as are far remote from the Sea: It is clearly manifest thereby, that the Inland places are more elevated than those adjoyning to the Sea Coasts.Inland places higher than those near the Sea-coasts. So Bohemia is high∣er then Holsatia; which is perceived by the streaming course of the River Elbe, which floweth from Bohemia to Holsatia. In like manner we take ap∣parent Signs and Arguments of the greater height of Inland places, from the Rivers Danubius, Visurgis, Rhene, Mosa, &c. The Swishers and Rhetians Countries are judged by some men to be the highest of all Europe, because the Rivers Rhene, Roan, and the greater Danou do flow and stream down from thence. Moreover, look how great the declivity or bearing downwards of the Rivers are, so great is the height of the Inland places above the Maritine places.
Proposition II. To finde out the height of a Mountain by Geodesie or Land-measuring, com∣monly called Surveying. This is performed in the same manner which we use in the searching out the height of Towers, if so be the top of the Mountain or Hill is remarkable by some peculiar sign. For the finding out the height of a Mountain by Geodesie.Let A B be the Mountains height, A the foot, B the conspicuous head there∣of. We will take the line F C by a mean distance from it, so that neither of the Angles A F C, A C F may be made very acute, but may in a manner be e∣qual. Then let the Angles A F C, A C F be observed by a collimation, or levelling with winking be made to B, and these being subtracted to 180 de∣grees, the remaining degrees shall shew forth the Angle C A F. After that the distance of the stations of F C is exquisitely to be measured;See Scheme. and let it be wrought, As the sign of the Angle F A C to the sign of the Angle C F A (or F C A, if you would take F A) so F C to A C, the distance of the Mountain from C. Then the Instrument being hanged up, or placed upright in C, and levelling with the Eye to B, let the Angle B C A be taken. And because the Triangle C A B▪ is strait angled, to wit, the Angle B A C is strait, therefore also the Angle A B C of 90 degrees shall be given. Let it therefore be wrought by the Triangle BAC: As the whole sign 10000000 to the Tangent of the Angle B C A, so the distance A C to the perpendicular height of the Mountain A B. The height of the Mountain Olympus mea∣sured by Xena∣goras.For Example, Let us put it, that Xenagoras the Son of Eumelus used this manner or way of Measuring in finding out and knowing the height of the Mountain Olympus, and to have found the Angle A F C to be 88 degrees, 29 minutes: but the Angle A C F 57 degrees, 30 minutes. Therefore C A F shall be 34 degrees, 13 minutes; and by measure he found F C to be 400 Grecian foot, or two third parts of one stadium. Therefore it shall be; As the sign of the Angle C A F 34 degrees 13 minutes, to the sign of the Angle A C F 57 degrees 13 minutes: So C F 400; the foot of the Mountain to the distance F A: to wit, as 50226 to 84339, so is 400 to 600; therefore F A is 600 foot. Fur∣thermore, let the Angle B F A be found 84 degrees 23 minutes. It shall be in the Triangle F A B, as 100000 to the Tangent of the Angle B F A 1016000: so 600 to 6096 foot for A B, the height of the Mountain Olympus: but 600 foot make a stadium. Therefore 6096 being divided by 600, there are found 10 stadiums, and 96 Greek feet for the height of the Mountain Olympus, just so much as Xenagoras found it to be. But these stadiums make ¼ of a German mile with 2/32, or about 1/16. The Mountain Olympus said to be very high by Aristotle.Aristotle, with many other Writers, affirms, that the height of the Mountain Olympus is so great, that the top thereof feels no motion of the Air, or showers of Rain, and also that it is elevated above the second Region of the Air: and the Ancients gathered that, by the Ashes left thereon, being never moved thence by any Wind; and by the draughts and forms of Letters, being no whit consumed, but found there after divers years, fresh, and as they were there drawn at the first. It is to be noted, that in divers places the height of the Mountain is also diverse; therefore the consequence availeth not. The Clouds do likewise cover this Mountain, therefore it is as high; for indeed in the Northern parts and Coasts of the World, the Clouds are a great deal lower. There is also another manner of Measuring in plane, the Mountains by two stadiums in the same strait line with the Mountain; but it is prone to errour, by reason of the small difference of the Angles. Another way to find the height of a Mountain. See Scheme.Yet by one height known; as for example, by a Tower, whose height is known, and the distance from the Mountain, we shall more accurately gain the height of the Mountain, viz. if we suppose F to be the Tower 300 foot high, and on the top thereof, or in some commodious place, the Angle B F P
be observed to be 83 degrees 30 minutes. P B shall be found to be 5896 foot, to whom B A the height of the Tower must be added. Proposition III. The height of the seen Mountain being given or known, to find out Geodeti∣cally, or by Land-measuring, how great distance we are from it, if we have either a Geometrical Instrument or Radius, or Altimetrical Scale with us, that is to say, a Height-measuring Scale. Another way to find the height of a Mountain.Let A B be again the height of the Mountain, being now known by the descriptions of the other 10 stadiums, and 96 Greek feet, or 6096 feet. Let F be our place▪ and let us desire to know the distance F A. Let the Angle B F A be taken by a Geometrical Instrument or Quadrant; let it be for example 48 degrees 23 minutes: Therefore the Triangle strait Angled B A F, when three are known, it shall be, As the whole sign to the Tangent of the Angle A B F,See Scheme. 5 degrees 37 minutes: So B A the known height shall be to the de∣manded A F. As 100000 are to 9234, so 6096 to 600 foot, or one stadium: Therefore at so great a distance, which is F A, we are from the Mountain. If we use a Land-measuring Quadrant, or Square, or Radius, we shall not then need the Canon of signs, which is manifest by the declaration and explication of the Instru∣ments; but yet the calculation or computation becomes thereby not so accu∣rate, by reason of the want of true proportion. Note, In these two Problems I have added Geodetically, because the man∣ner of measuring is otherwise, when we use a Semidiameter, or Periphery of the Earth, as we shall now propose: For in the former we have taken the di∣stance F A as a strait line, because there is but a small difference between that and a crooked line. Proposition IV. A distance being given, from whose term or extreamest boundary the top of the Mountain is first seen, to find thereby the height of the Mountain by Geography. A distance of a Mountain being given, to find the height. See Scheme.Let us take the most high Mountain of Teneriff, called El Pico, or the Pike, and let A B C D F be the periphery of the Earth, and indeed the Meridian of that Mountain: Let the Center be R, the Mountain it self A B; let from B a strait Tangent-line be drawn to the periphery B F. F then shall be the furthermost or first point, from which the top of the Mountain B shall be seen: let F R be drawn. But some Mariners do testifie, that when they are four degrees distant from it in the Meridian, they can descry the top of that Mountain. Therefore the Arch A F shall be four degrees: Let us therefore suppose that this Relation of our Seamen is true, and that the first visive ray B F come directly from the top of the Mountain B; and let us search out, how great the height of the Mountain may be, if the matter were so. The Angle B F R is strait, and be∣cause F A is four degrees, therefore also the Angle B R F is four degrees, and R F the half diameter of the Earth is known; and in the Triangle B R F are the three given, and it shall be, As the whole sign to the secant of the Angle B R F four degrees, so R F to R B. As 10000000 are to 10024419, so 3440 Italian miles R F, or 860 Ger∣man miles,The height of the Mountain El Pico in Teneriff.) to 3448 Italian miles for R B: take away thence 3440 for R A, and there remains 8 Italian miles, or 64 stadiums, or two German miles for the height of the Mountain A B; which is almost incredible, and altogether against the Ancients and Old Geographers. Therefore it is to be known, that there are two things taken in the Problem which are false; first, that that Radius or Ray, which coming from B first strikes the Eye, is direct, when as
yet by reason of the thickness of the Air it is refracted or turned. Indeed from B the top of the Hill, there cannot be a strait line drawn to F (if F A be four degrees,) but that first it must incur or run upon the Earth; and therefore the top B cannot be seen directly in the place of F, but by a refracted Radius, to wit, B T F, which is broken, and indeed the first of the broken rays, which may reach to F. If therefore we suppose, that this refraction brings it to pass, that this Mountain may be sooner seen by one degree, than it would be seen, if it were without this Refraction, to wit, with a direct ray B F to be seen from three degrees A F, the height A B shall be found out according to the declared form of five Italian miles, or 40 stadiums. But because it is also likely (which is the second) that our Seamen speak more at large, and not with so accurate a dimension; if we therefore subtract yet half a degree, so as we may resolve that it is seen 2 ½ degrees thence, or 38 German miles for F A: This I say be∣ing put, and our Calculation being ordered as at first, the height of the Moun∣tain A B shall be found to be about one mile. If the Mountain may be seen from the distance of two degrees (the refra∣ction being set apart) it shall be 2 ½ Italian miles high. But if it can be seen at one degrees distance, or 15 German miles, it shall be in height half an Italian mile, or about 5 stadiums high. To this end we add the Table following: If the height of the Mountains be ⅛ mile Germ. 1/7 mile ⅙ ⅕ ¼ ⅓ ½ 1 Then it shall be seen from the di∣stance of miles 14 18 20 25 26 27 ½ 28 29 ¼ But all these things are to be understood without Refraction, which for the most part increaseth the seen height of the Mountain, and the distance of the sight, as you may perceive by the description; for the refracted Radius T F produced, gives the height N A. Proposition V. The top of any Mountain being first seen, whose height is known, to find by Geography how great space we are from it. See Scheme. The top of a Mountain whose height is known, to find at the first sight its distance.This is the consequent of the former Proposition, and the solution thereof may be fetch'd from the Table before described: but the Calculation will shew a more accurate solution. Let therefore the known height of the Mountain be A B, and let it be seen in F, it may please us to know the distance A F, B F toucheth the Periphery. In the Triangle strait angled B F R, the Angle F is is strait, and the two sides R F, the half diameter of the Earth, and R B the same half diameter with A B are known, which we may put to be half a German mile. And because R F and R A is 860, R B shall be 860 ½: And it may be wrought, As R B is to R F, so the whole sign to the sign of the Angle R B F. In Rhindlandish feet As 860 ½ to 860, so 10000000 to As 19609700 to 19598300, so 10000000 to 9994186, the sign 88 degrees, 2 minuees, 40 for R B F. Therefore B R F, that is, the Arch A F shall be one degree, 55 minutes, 20 seconds. Therefore from this distance the Mountain shall be seen with refraction of Rays, if it is half a mile high; to which for the Argument of Refraction we may add eight miles, insomuch that it may be seen at the ordi∣nary distance of 37 miles: But the refraction also varies according to the di∣verse Altitude of the Sun, neither is it absent before the rising, or after the setting of the Sun. But we will treat more at large concerning this business in the Chapter touching the Air, and the Third part of this Book, where we shall discourse of the visible Horizon.
Proposition VI. The length of the shadow being given, which any mountain casteth, and the height of the Sun being given to that time, to find out the Altitude of the Mountain. To find out the Altitude of a Mountain by its shadow, knowing the height of the Sun. Of the Moun∣tain Athos, its height, &c.We will propose this Problem rather for its Antiquity and pleasantness, than that we think that the Altitude may accurately by the shadow be ob∣tained. Plutarch and Pliny have written, that the Mountain Athos will cover or hide the sides of the Lemnian Heifer, because the Mountain Athos scituated on the shore of Macedonia, is so highly elevated, that its casts its shadow into the Island Lemnos, the Sun being in Cancer, and indeed into the Market of the City Myr∣rhina, where the boundary or end of the shadow was signified by a Brazen Hei∣fer there erected, which the Inhabitants placed there for the strangness and wonder of the matter: And Pliny writeth, that the interval or distance between the Mountain Athos and the Isle Lemnos, is judged to be 87000 paces, or 87 Ita∣lian miles. But Writers have not noted the Alitude of the Sun, according to the shadow thereof: but yet it is likely, that this shadow cast from the Sun being at the point of setting, or when it began to be hidden from the City Myrrhina by the Mountain Athos; (for Athos standeth Westward from the Isle Lemnos;) or when in it, it was hid from the Vertical point of Myrrhina, which is drawn through the Mountain Athos. But although we may put, that the Sun was then as it were in the Horizon of Myrrhina F O, and so that the Radius O F passed through the top of the Mountain B,See the Scheme to the fifth Proposition. and cast the shadow A F, and O F shall be the Tangent of the Periphery; and because F R is given, and the Angle F R B (or by taking the Triangle B A F, and F A as a strait line) B A shall be found to be eight stadiums, the height of the Mountain. But because notwithstanding in this position of the Sun, the term or boundary of the shadow cannot be noted, because it is infinite; and besides that, the buildings of the City Myrrhina might hinder both the shadow and the near Rays of the Sun near to the shadow: Therefore it is to be determined, that the Sun at the least was elevated two degrees above the Horizon of Myrrhina. For example, In S, that the Angle S F O be two degrees, and the Radius of the Sun passing through the top of the Mountain T, and ending the shadow in F. Therefore in the Oblique angled Triangle R T F, the given Angle shall be T F R 92 degrees, and F R T is given one degree 16 minutes: And therefore F T R is 86 degrees 45 minutes; and the half diameter F R is known, 860 German miles. Therefore T R shall be found according to the proportion, As the sign of the Angle F T R 86 degrees 54 minutes, to the sign of the Angle T F R 92 degrees: so F R to R T, 860. Therefore R T shall be 861 German miles, and A T the height of the Moun∣tain Athos, somewhat above one German mile. If we take the Altitude of the Sun one degree, the height of the Mountain Athos will be found to be 20 stadiums. Yet notwithstanding I esteem the over great distance of Lemnos from the Mountain Athos, assigned by Pliny, to be the cause of the over-great Magnitude arising from the Calculation: For Sophians Tuble of Greece, and Blavius his Table of Modern Greece, do only exhibit and allow 55 Italian miles, the di∣stance for F A. Therefore the Angle F R T shall scarcely be one degree, to wit, 55 minutes; and the Altitude of the Sun, one degree 30 minutes: and there∣fore F R T, 87 degrees 35 minutes; and if it be done in the Triangle F R T, As the sign of the Angle F R T 87 degrees 35 minutes, to the sign of the Angle T R R 91 degrees 30 minutes: so F R 860 to R T. Or in the Triangle T F A strait angled to A, the Angle T F A shall be one degree 30 minutes; and F A is assumed as the strait or right of 55 miles The Altitude A T shall be found according to this Proportion: As the whole sign to the Tangent of the Angle T F A, one degree 30 minutes: So F A 55 miles, to A T the height of the Moun∣tain▪
Here also is the Problem to be answered, viz. How the height of any Moun∣tain may be found, if it be fully searched out? how much sooner the Sun is seen to rise in the top of that Mountain, than at the foot thereof? And con∣trariwise, if the Altitude be given, how, and in what manner this difference of time is to be found out? touching which matter Aristotle and Pliny have deli∣vered incredible stories, and such as the true Calculation and account do teach to be evidently otherwise. But seeing this cannot be explicated without the solution of another Problem, which we have referred to the second part of this Book: therefore we will defer these two Problems to the Thirtieth Chap∣ter. Proposition VII. The Altitude of Mountains hath no sensible proportion to the half diameter of the Earth, or else so little, that it hinders the roundness of the Earth no more, than a pointed note upon the surface of the Artificial Globe. The height of the Mountains no hindrance to the round∣ness of the Earth.For we have shewn that the Mountain of the Island Teneriff, called El Pico de Tayde, to have no greater Altitude than one mile, or at most 1½ mile. And certainly, Experience can scarcely find out a Mountain higher than that. See∣ing therefore the half diameter of the Earth is 860 miles, it shall be the model and account of the greatest height of the Mountains to the half diameter of the Earth, which is 1 to 860, to wit, of which parts the half diameter of the Earth or any Globe is 360, one of such the greatest height of the Mountains shall have. And whereas there are very few Mountains of so great height, but that very many of them scarcely ascend to the fourth part of a mile, it is manifest, that they heave or lift up the roundness of the Earth no more, than certain ruggednesses in Globes made by the hands of Artificers, do dispropor∣tion the roundness of those Globes. For indeed there is no body in the whole nature of things, that can have an exact Geometrical roundness. Proposition VIII. Why showers of Rain, Mists, and Snows, are frequent on the tops of Mountains, when as in the neighbouring Valleys the Air is serene and calm without any such Meteors? Showers of Rain, Snow, Mists, &c. on he tops of Mountains, when not in the Valleys.They which have travelled on the high Lands or Mountainous places of Asia, Peruvia, and other Countries, aver, that it oft falls out, that they which are conversant on the top of Mountains, do there feel and find showers of Rain, Snow, and thick and foggy Mists; but descending thence to the Valleys lying thereunder, they feel no such thing, but find a clear and calm Air. We some∣times observe the same in the Mountains of our own Country. Some say, that the cause of this Phaenomenon or appearance is, that the Mountains attract thither the Air and Clouds; but they do not declare, by what faculty or power they may do it, and therefore they say nothing to the purpose. It seems to me, that it is done in this manner: The vapours and ex∣halations, when as in the middle Region of the Air, (in which very many tops of Mountains are) they are condensated into small drops, begin to decline downward. And because the top of Mountains are nearer to those vapours and exhalations condensated in the middle Region of the Air, than the Val∣leys lying under them; therefore those small drops, which are above those Mountain tops, coming first to the ground, leave a place in the Region of the Air, which presently the next small drops do enjoy; because they are forced and thrust forth by others; either by reason of Natures abhorring and shunning of vacuity or emptiness, or because this is the nature of Water, that it flows and runs to that place where its flux or flowing first began, or where the place is more low and sunk.
Proposition IX. Whether the Superficies of a Mountain be more capacious, than the plane underneath it, upon whom it standeth? Of the Super∣ficies of Moun∣tains.Geometry proves it to be greater; but yet it is another Question, Whether therefore it can sustain the more Men, or bear the greater plenty of Provi∣sion? I prove the Affirmative: for although all things placed in a Mouatain ought to be perpendicular to the under sunk or placed Plane, yet greater store of Earth and a greater surface is there. CHAP. X. Of the differences and tract of Mountains; and in special, concerning Burning Mountains. Proposition I. Some Mountains are bounded about with a little space; Others extend themselves out, and march forth at a long reach and trace. Of Mountains or Hills.AND these Mountains or Hills of the later sort are called tops, yokes, or chains of Mountains or Hills. There are found such like Chains of Mountains or Hills almost in all Countreys in the World, so that they may be judged to be thereby continual, but that small spaces interpose and thrust in themselves; but they march out at length into divers Coasts: some from the North into the South, some from the East into the West, and other∣some to Coasts collateral to the Cardinal points. The most famous Chains or Cliffs of Hills are these following. Of the Hills or Mountains call'd the Alpes.1. The Alpes; which separating Italy from the neighbouring Countries, extend themselves out by a vast tract of Earth, and do as it were send forth their Arms into other Provinces and Countries, to wit, through France to Spain, where they are called the Pyrenean Hills or Mountains; and to Rhetia, where they are called the Rhetick Hills; and to Hungaria, where they are named the Hungarian Mountains, and doubtful ones; then above Dalmatia, the Dalmation Hills; and they are stretched out through Macedonia to Thrace and Pontus. But because there cometh in a little space between the Julian and Dalmatian Hills; therefore some men determine, and make the end of the Alpes to be in the Julian Mountains. It sendeth out one Arm with con∣tinual chains and yokes of Hills, and with a winding course, like a crescent, passing through all Italy, and dividing it into two parts, it runneth along even to the Sicilian Sea: Neither doth it march forward in one form every where, but in many parts it putteth forth collateral, or side-Companions and fellow Branches, as it also sendeth forth some Mountains styled with several Names, as the Mountain Massicus, the Hill Gaurus, Monte di Capua, or the Mountain of Capua; and the burning Vesuvius, &c.
The Hills of Peru.2. The Hills of Peru or Peruviana, the longest of all others; for they pass through the whole South America, even from the Equator to the Magellanick streigths, and do separate the Kingdom of Peru from other Provinces, inso∣much that the whole tract of this Chain of Hills is about 800 German miles. And the heads or cliffs of the Hills are so high, that they are reported to weary Birds in their flight over them: and there is but one only passage over these Hills (which as yet is discovered,) and that very cumbersom. Many of those are covered with perpetual Snows, as well in Summer as Winter; and many of them are also wrapt up and involved with the Clouds, and some likewise are elevated beyond the middle Region of the Air. Truly it hath hapned, the Spaniards sometimes passing out of Nicaragua into Peru, that many of them,These Moun∣tains exceed∣ing Cold. together with their Horses, on the tops of those interposed Mountains, have suddenly died, and if they had become stiff with cold Frost, they remained there immovable like standing Images. The cause of which seemeth-to have been the want of Air, such as our breath or Lungs require. There are also found in these Mountains Sulphury and smoking Hills. The Hills be∣tween Peru and Brasil.3. There are very many other Mountains between Peru and Brasil, which also stretch themselves out through the Country of China to the Magellanick streights, where the high tops of the Hills are perpetually hidden with Snows, although they lie under the Latitude of 52 degrees. The Hills of Canada, and New England.4. Add to these Chains of Hills, those of Canada and New England, and very many others in North America, covered with continual Snow, although they are less famous. The Mountain Taurus,5. The top of Taurus, a Mountain in Asia. This was amongst ancient Writers accounted the most noble and greatest Mountain of the World. It riseth up in Asia Minor, from the Pamphilian Sea nigh to the Chelidonian Islands, and thence marcheth along through divers Countries and great King∣doms under divers Names, from the West into the East, unto India, and divi∣deth all Asia into two parts, one whereof which looketh to the North is called Asia within Taurus, and the other which faceth the West is named Asia with∣out Taurus. It is fenced in on either side with many Companions, amongst which the famous and most notable ones are the greater and the lesser Anti-Taurus, which cut and divide the greater and lesser Armenia into two parts, where Taurus it self passeth between Armenia and Mesopotamia; it sendeth forth many Arms towards the North and South. The Mountain Imaus.6. The Mountain Imaus marcheth forth in form of a Cross two ways, as well towards the East and VVest, as towards the North and South. The Nor∣thern part is now called Alkai. It is stretched out forward towards the South, even to the very ends of the Indies, and the fountain heads of the River Gan∣ges in length about four hundred German Miles. It divideth the Asian Scythia into two parts, of which that which looketh on the west is called Scythia within the Mountain Imaus; but that which beholdeth the East, is named Scythia without the Mountain Imaus. The Mountain Caucasus.7. The top of the Mountain Caucasus is stretched out from the North to the South towards Pontus Euxinus, from the Caspian Sea (to whom it is a neigh∣bour) at the breadth of fifty miles, and to those that sail in the Caspian Sea, it is an infallible mark to govern and steer their course by: It reacheth to Mount Ararat in Armenia, where Noah's Ark rested, which the Turks and Persians believe to be there kept to this day. But the Mountains of Ararat are neigh∣bours to Taurus; because all these Mountains are contiguous. VVe will speak of the height of Caucasus in the Thirtieth Chapter. The Hill of China.8. The Hill of China, which embraceth and comprehends the Damasian Mountains, so called by the Ancients towards the VVest, and Ottoroora to∣wards the North. This Clift or Chain of Hills consisteth of many Mountains, not indeed continually yoked together, but here and there affording a passage between them. And the Mountains of Camboja seem to be a part of that gang of Hills. The Mountains of Arabia.9. The Hills of Arabia, which march forward in a triple rank, of whom the Holy Mount Sinai is a part.
The Mount Atlas.10. The most famous Hill, and which is celebrated with innumerable fig∣ments of the Greek Poets, is Mount Atlas in Africa. It riseth at the shore of the Western Ocean of Africa, and extends it self through all Africa, even to the borders of Egypt. It hath the Fountains and Springs of almost all the Rivers of Africa; in many places it is full of Snow and Cold, although it lieth in the Torrid Zone. The Mountains of the Moon.11. The Clift of Africa nigh to Monomotapa, which is called the Moun∣tains of the Moon. It compasseth in almost all Monomotapa; and the arms or branches thereof are many, as the Hill Zeth, and the Snowy Mountains. There are found very many, and in a manner innumerable other yoaks or chains of Mountains in Africa, severed and disjoyned by a small space, in∣somuch that they are almost all contiguous, and seem to be parts of one Chain of Hills. The Riphean Mountains of Europe.12. The Riphean Mountains of Europe, which are also called the Obian Hills; they march on forward from the White Sea or Muscovian Bay, to the very mouth of the River Ob, and the Muscovites call them Weliki Kamey∣poyas, that is, the great Stony Girdle; because they think that the whole World is girted in with them. There is here another yoak of Hills, which the Russians call Joegoria. It beginneth at the Southern boundary of Tarta∣ria, and extends it self unto the North Sea, and very many Rivers rise and spring out of this, viz. the Rivers Wissagda, Neem, Wissera, and Petsora the greatest of all. Besides a triple yoak of Hills runneth down betwen Siberia and Russia, from the North towards the South. One of them the Russians call Coosvinscoy Camen, whose breadth or passage is two days Journey. To this some Valleys coming in betwixt them, is a second bordering called Cirgins Koy Camen, also of two days Journey; the third is Podvins Coy Camen, the highest of these three Mountains, which in many parts throughout the whole year is covered with Snow and Clouds, and therefore it affordeth a very diffi∣cult passage, which is of four days. The City Vergateria Siberiae is nigh un∣to it. The Mountains of Norway and Lapland.13. The Mountains of Norway and Lapland, which begin from the Sou∣thern Promontory of Norway, and seperate Sweden in part from Norway, then in many orders proceed even to the farthest part of Lapland, and are distinguished by divers names, as Fillefiel, Dofrefiel, and the like. The Mountain Hercinium in Germany.14. In Germany, the famous Mountain Hercinium encompassing all Bohe∣mia, and by various windings extending it self into divers Regions, and that also by various names. In the Dutchy of Brunswick it retaineth its Ancient appellation, the Mountain Bructerus is part of it. Proposition II. In most Islands, and in the procurrent parts of the Continent, the Mountains are so scituated, that they pass through the middle of the Land, and divide them into two parts. The division of Lands by Mountains.So in Scotland the Mountain Grampius, (called by the Inhabitants Grans∣baine) which extendeth through this Island from the East to the West, and divides it in two equal parts, both which differ not only in the nature of the Soyl, but also in the Inhabitants. So in the Islands of Sumatra, Borneo, Lu∣conia, Celebes, Hispaniola, Cuba, Mountains are found, which arise from the Sea-shore by degrees towards the midst of the Islands unto a very great height. The Mountain Gatis.So the Mountains Gatis pass through the middle procurrent part of Asia, which is called India: For they arise from the extremities of Caucasus, and proceed to the Promontory of Corus, vulgarly called Cabo de Comerino, from the North to the South, and so divide this procurrent into two parts, whereof that part which is on this side Gatis towards the West, is termed the Region of Malabar, and the other beyond the Mountain Gatis towards the East the Region of Choromandel. This very same ridge of Mountains passeth through
the other part of India which is now called Bengala, through the Kingdoms of Pegu, Siam, and the whole Chersonesus of Malacca. The Mountains in Camboja, Ca∣lifornia, Corea.So also the Mountains of the procurrent of Earth termed Camboia: The like Mountains are in the Peninsula or Isle of California, in the procurrent Africa from the Lake Zair to the Promontory of Good-hope: In the Peninsula Corea, the Apennine in Italy. How these Mountains came, whether created with the Earth it self, or whe∣ther they afterwards sprung from natural Causes, is uncertain. Proposition III. Of Mountains famous for their exceeding Altitude. The Mountain of El Pico the highest in the world.1. El Pico in Teneriff, esteemed the highest in the whole World, whose top is conspicuous at Sea 60 miles; there is no ascending up it, but in July and August, by reason that it is covered all the other part of the Year with Snow, although that Snow is never seen in the Island it self, or the adjacent Canary Isles. The Vertex is manifestly discovered to be advanced above the Clouds, seeing that these encompass the middle of the Mountain, and the Vertex is be∣held to be above this Cloud; but because it suffereth Snow, thence it is certain that it is not protended beyond the middle Region of the Air. Three days are required to ascend to the top of this Mountain: for it is not a spiral top, but plain, and the Air being serene, and without Clouds, one may distinctly dis∣cern from it all the other circumjacent Canary Isles, of which some are 50 miles remote from it. In those two Months many Sulphureous stones are brought from the Mountain, and carried in great abundance into Spain. 2. In one of the Azores near to the Isle Fayal,The Mountain Pico de St. George. there is found a Mountain called Pico de St. George, whence the Isle is called Pico. It is reported to have an equal Altitude with the Mountain of Teneriff. The Mountain Cordillera3. The Mountain called Cordillera in the Southern America, separating Peru from the other Provinces, is said to be of that exceeding height, that it giveth place to no Mountain of the Earth for Altitude. It extendeth from the Streights of Magellan to Panama. Mount Aetna.4. Aetna, a Mountain in Sicilia, from the top of which fire is discerned to be ejected in the Isle of Malta, whence it is supposed to have at the least an in∣tire mile in Altitude: but in the preceeding Chapter we have given a reason of this apparent Altitude. 5. Hecla, a Mountain of Island.Hecla. Pico de Adam.6. Pico de Adam in the Isle of Geilam. 7. The Mountain Bructerus in Germany and Abnoba. 8. The Mountain Figenojamma in Japan,Figenojamma. is supposed to exceed the Clouds in Altitude. 9. The Mountain Caucasus much celebrated by the Ancients for its great height.Caucasus. The Mountain Pelion.10. The Mountain Pelion in Macedonia. Pliny saith that Dicaearchus the Mathematician, by the command and expence of some Kings, measured the Altitude of this Mountain, and found it to be 1250 paces, that is, 10 Stadia, or ⅓ of a German mile. Geminus saith that the Mountain Cyllene was found by Dicaearchus to be of the same Altitude. The Mountain Athos.11. The Mountain Athos (as Mela in Lib. 2. Chap. 2. relateth) is so elated, that it is believed to rise higher than that showers should fall thence. This O∣pinion received credit, because that the Ashes are not washed away from the Altars that are on the top of it, but remain in the heap as they were left in. It runneth along with a great broad Ridge into the Sea, where it adhe∣reth to the Continent. Xerxes making his Expedition against the Graecians, dugg it through, and made it Navigable. 12. Olympus, a Mountain of Asia minor,Olympus. of which we have spoken in the former Chapter.
13. Casius,Casius. a Mountain in Asia, which Pliny writeth to be four miles in height. 14. Mount Haemus,Haemus. which Martianus Capella describeth to be 6 miles in Altitude. 15. Atlas,Atlas. a Mountain in Africa, of which we have spoken in the pre∣ceeding Proposition. The Poets feigned this Mountain to be so high, that it upheld Heaven, but experience hath found the contrary. Proposition IV. The many differences of Mountains. In the former Propositions we have shewed three differences, viz. The differen∣ces of Moun∣tains.1. Some are extended in a long Tract, and some are terminated in a small Circuit. 2. Some divide the Regions in two parts; others pass through any Tract of the Regions. 3. Some are of an exceeding height, some of a mean, and some but low. To these differences these may be added: 4. Some are Sandy, some Rocky, Clay or Chaulky. 5. Some include or contain the Springs of Rivers, whereas others are with∣out them. 6. Some are adorned with Woods, and other some destitute of Trees. 7. Some are burning and smoaking, whereas others are without fires. 8. Some are rich in Metals, and others without them. 9. And some Mountains are covered with Snow all the Year, whereas others have no Snow at all. Proposition V. To enumerate the burning Mountains, and those that cast out flames. Of Vulcan's or burning Mountains.Such Mountains at this day are called Vulcans, which Appellation the Por∣tugal Marines first introduced, and now are commonly so called; and such are 1. The most famous is Aetna,Mount Aetna. a Mountain in Sicilia, at this day called Ge∣bel, from whose top the ejected flames and smoak are discovered at a long di∣stance in the Mediterranean Sea, even to Malta, which is 40 German miles. Howbeit that the ejaculation of the flames be continual, yet notwithstanding sometimes it rageth with a greater force. In the Year 1537. from the first of May to the twelfth,A great strange Earthquake. all Sicilia was shaken with an Earthquake, then a great and horrible noise was heard, as if Canons had been fired: there followed the de∣struction of many Edifices throughout the whole Isle, when that this storm had continued for eleven days, the Earth was rent in twain, or opened it self with a vast Gulph, whence a great flame and fire brake forth, by which, within the space of four days, all was consumed and burnt which was not distant above five miles from Aetna. A little after the Funnel, which is on the top of the Mountain, for three days cast forth an abundance of Ashes and Coals, which were not only dispersed throughout all the Isle, but also beyond the Seas into Italy. And the Ships in the Sea about 200 Leagues distant, steering towards Venice, were much damnified. Farellus hath at large described the fires of this Mountain, and doth also say that the foot of it is 100 Italian miles in Circuit. And in Anno 1669. the flames broak forth in a violent manner, to the great damage of the Inhabitants of those parts. Mount Hecla.2. Hecla, a Mountain of Island, doth sometimes rage as much as Aetna, and cast forth great stones: And continual fires in it wanting a free evacuation, oftentimes send forth noises like unto lamentations; thence many simple peo∣ple supposed that there was the place of Hell, where the Souls of the damned were tormented.
Vesuvius, or Monte de Soma3. Vesuvius, at this day Mont de Soma, not far from the City of Naples; is planted with most fertile Vines, which, without the time of the Conflagrati∣on, maketh the best Falernum, but it is obnoxious to frequent burnings. Di∣on Cassius relateth, that in the Time of Vespasian its Conflagration, and the force of its Flames were so vehement, that the Ashes cast forth from its bottom with the Sulphureous smoak, were not only carried by the wind to Rome, but also beyond the Mediterranean Sea into Africa, even to Egypt: moreover, the Birds being suffocated in the Air, fell to the Earth; the Fishes perished in the adjacent, infected warm and frequent water. Concerning this Confla∣gration, and the sad mutation of the Mountain, there is an excellent Epigram in Martial, who lived at that time, and saw the Mountain in its Verdure, and afterwards buried in its Ashes. But then the Conflagration ceasing, and the Showers watering the Sulphureous Embers and Ashes, in the Superficies of the Mountain here and there was great fertility of Wine. But again within these few years this Mountain burned a fresh, and sent forth an abundance of Smoak. The adjacent Land was burnt, and became dangerous to Travellers, by reason of the various Pits which the flame caused. A Mountain in Java worthy of note.4. A Mountain in the Island of Java, not far from the City Panacura: This in the Year 1586. when it had never burned before, first was rent with a violent eruption of flaming Sulphur, so that about 10000 persons were said to have perished in the neighbouring places; and it ejected exceeding great Stones into the City; and for the space of three days it vomited forth so much black Smoak mixt with Ashes and Embers, that it obscured the face of the Sun, and almost cloathed day with nights dark Mantle. The Mountain Gonnapi.5. Gonnapi, a Mountain in one of the Isles of Banda. This in the Year 1586. in the Month of April, when that it had burnt for 17 years, was rent with a great noise, and cast forth such an abundance of great Stones of Sul∣phur and ardent matter on the Sea and Land, that it astonished all persons: The abundance of Ashes and Embers also rendred the Cannons of the Hollan∣ders in their Castle unserviceable, such a vast heap overwhelmed them. Vast Stones were found in the Sea, with a multitude of small ones, so that the Barks had scarce a free passage. The water on the shoar so boyled, as if that fire had been placed under it: An abundance of Fishes were killed and seen floating on the water. Balaluanum.6. Balaluanum, a Mountain in the Isle of Sumatra, casteth forth Smoak and Flames as Aetna. Many places in the Molucco Isles cast forth fire.7. In the Molucco Isles the Land in many places belcheth forth fire with an huge noise; but it is chiefly noted for the Funnel of Turnate. The Mountain is advanced to the Clouds, and very steep, the lower parts of which are co∣vered with thick Woods, the upper naked by reason of the fire. On the top is the Funnel of a vast wideness, which is in the form of an Ampheater with many Circles, the greater including the lesser; thence in the Equinoctials, e∣specially those in the Spring and Autumn, certain Winds blowing, chiefly the Northern, with an horrible noise, Flames mixed with black Smoak and Embers, break forth, and fill all places to a great distance with Ashes. There are an∣nual seasons of seeing it; neither can one ascend but by Ropes or Chains in cer∣tain places.See Maffaeus. Here in some places of this Mountain the Inhabitants gather good Sulphur. 8. One of the Islands of Maurice (60 Leagues distant from Moluccoes) of∣tentimes the whole Isle is shaken with an Earthquake, and vomiteth Fire and Ashes: and there is so great an abundance of Fire, that whole Mountains and Rocks do burn. Oftentimes fiery Stones break forth of a vast bigness. When the Wind is more vehement, so vast an abundance of Ashes is poured forth, that people labouring in the Fields are forced to return home, being covered with Ashes: those Ashes also kill their living Creatures. From the top of the Mountain this black and dismal Fire breaketh forth with a dreadful noise, like unto Thunder or great Guns: And from thence cometh abundance of Pu∣mice Stones and other Stones burnt in the fire.
A Mountain in Japan worthy of note.9. In Japan (as Maffaeus relateth) there is a Mountain which continually vomiteth Flames, on the top of which the Evil Spirit sheweth himself to cer∣tain Persons, after that they have macerated themselves for a Vow sake. 10. Many Vulcanelloes are found in the Isles of Japan, distant 70 miles from Ferando. Also in a certain small Isle which lieth between Tanaxuma, and the Isles called the Sisters, a burning Mountain is discovered, at other times smoaking. Certain Vul∣canes in the Isle Tendai.11. In Tendai, one of the Philippine Isles, where the Promontory of the Holy Spirit is, certain Vulcans are found: One also in the Isle Marindique, a∣nother of the Philippine Isles. 12. In Nicaragna, a Province in America, a lofty Mountain casteth forth flames in such great abundance, that they may be seen 10 miles distant. Vulcan Moun∣tains in Cordil∣lera.13. In the Ridge of Peru called Cordillera, here and there are certain Rocks and Vulcan Mountains, partly smoaking and partly burning, and they are said to cast out fire: Especially in the Province of Carrapa, there is a Mountain from whose top, when the Heaven is serene, much smoak is discovered to be elevated. Others in Pe∣ru.14. Near to Arequipa a City of Peru, 90 miles distant from Lima, a cer∣tain Sulphureous Mountain continually ejaculateth fire, which is found danger∣ous to the City. 15. In Peru, near the Valley Mulahallow, about 50 Leagues from Quito, there is a Vulcan, which once rending, cast forth great Stones, and terrified also the remote places with the huge noise. Other Vulcans.16. In one of the Islands which they call Papoys, which Le Maire discove∣red (except peradventure it may adhere to the South Continent) on the Ori∣ental Coast of New Guiney is a Vulcan, which at that time burned. 17. Certain Mountains lying on the Oriental Shore of the River Jeniscea, in the Country of the Tingesi beyond Ob, towards the East, by a journey of some weeks, there are Vulcans as the Muscovites do report. 18. Certain Mountains at the River Pesida beyond the Region of the Tin∣gaesi. A Vulcan in Liburnia.19. In Liburnia, near the City Apollonia, is a rocky Mountain, from the top of which continually issueth smoak and flame. In the Land adjoyning there are hot Fountains; there are also certain Mountains which have now cea∣sed to burn. So the Isle Queimoda, on the Coast of Brasil, not far from the mouth of the Silver River, in time past did burn: so the Mountains in Congo or Angola, which they term Vesbrande Bergen. In the Isles of the Azores, especially Tercera and St. Michael, formerly the Earth burned in many places, but now the smoak in some places is sometimes expelled; hence also they have often Earthquakes. The Isles of St. Helena and of the Ascension, have also its Earth like unto these, viz. a Dust, Embers, and Ashes, so that in times past it is probably the Mountains of these Isles burned, which is also manifest from the Sulphureous Earth and Coals, which they call Smitskolen. Now the cause of these Vulcans or burning Mountains, is a Sulphureous bituminous Substance, which is contained in such like Mountains. Proposition VI. The Tanges of the Mountains, some admit of no passage or opening, some of many, other some of one or another only. Of the Tanges of the Moun∣tains.They are called Portae and also Thermopylae. Of which the more noted are, 1. The Thermopylae in Phocis, from which this name was communicated to the rest. 2. The Caspian Portae, which, as through a narrow pas∣sage, are admitted into the Caspian Mountains. 3. The Port of the Mountain Cordillera in Peru. 4. The Port of the Mountain which is extended between Abyssiue and Arabia Troglodytica, through which they carry Provision and Grain from that Region unto this. 5. In Caucasus the Sarmatick and Albani∣an Ports.
Proposition VII. That Mountain is termed a Promontory which runneth forth in a certain Tract to the Sea, or on the Shore is elevated above the adjacent pla∣ces. Of Promonto∣ries or Capes.In Mapps they are called Capes or Heads; among which the more noted are, Cape of Good-hope.1. The Cape of Good-hope in Africa, which must be passed by those that sail into India. Cape Victoria.2. Cape Victoria in the end of the Streights of Magellan. Cape Verd.3. Cape Verd in the Angle or Point of Africa, where the Shore windeth from West to East. Cape Vincent.4. Cape Vincent in Spain. Promontory or Cape of At∣las.5. The Promontory of Atlas, so anciently called, not a Cape, because that Mariners some Ages past supposed that it could not be passable; or that if any one had sailed beyond it, yet he could not return back safe: therefore this was the bound of their Navigation on the Coast of Africa. Other Promontories may be seen in the Mapps. Proposition VIII. Ʋnto Mountains are opposed Caves and deep Abysses, which are found in few places of the Earth. Of Caves or deep Abysses.In times past that Mephitick Cave in Island, called the Cave of St. Patrick; and that Cave in Italy, called Grotta del Cane, was famous. In the Moun∣tain of Fessano Beni Guazeval, is a Cave that vomiteth forth fire. In the Island Baruch, adjoynig to Wales in England, near the Sea is a Rock, in which there is a Cave, unto which if you apply your ear, a noise like stroaks of Hammers upon Iron, as in a Smith's shop, may be heard. Not far from the City Bessa in Aquitain, is a Cave, vulgarly called Du Souley, in which, in the Summer season, a noise is heard like unto Thunder. In many places betwixt the midst of the Mountains, there are found Valleys so profound, that they strike the Beholders with horrour, and cause a giddiness.
CHAP. XI. Of Mines, Woods, and Desarts. MInes, Woods, and Desarts do ennoble certain Parts or Tracts of the Earth;Of Mines, Woods, and Desarts. concerning which, although little can be proposed, yet for an exact knowledge of the Terrestrial Superficies, it will not be unnecessary to consider those Places, and to design the Tracts and Limits of them; which we shall briefly perform in this Chapter. Proposition I. A Mine is a place in the Earth from which Metals, Minerals, or other sorts of Earth are dugg. But because what is dugg up out of the Earth is various, therefore all these Mines receive various denominations,Of Mines. as Mines of Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron, Marble, Mines of precious Stones, and the like. The most famous of the Gold and Silver Mines are those of Peru and Ca∣stella Aurea,Peru and Ca∣stella Aurea, and Potosi, rich in Mines. the richest in the world: for throughout all the Provinces of Peru are found Mines abounding with Gold and Silver (yet not excluding the other Metals); so that the Natives of Peru, and the Spaniards in times past did boast that the Ground or Soyl of this Kingdom was Gold and Silver. Girava, a Spanish Writer testifieth, at the City Quito are Mines which yield more Gold than Earth; therefore when that the Spaniards first arrived in this golden Kingdom (which for that reason they have fortified with strong Ca∣stles and Forts) in many Cities, especially the Regal City, called Cusco, they beheld many Houses spread within and without with Plates of Gold. The most rich Mine of Silver is in the Mountain Potosi, in which 20000 men are employ∣ed to digg the Earth, descending by at least 400 steps, and by these Mines the King of Spain receiveth a vast Revenue annually, to the envy of all other Em∣perours and Potentates. 2. The most excellent Silver Mines are in the Isles of Japan, hence termed by the Spaniards the Silver Islands. There are also Mines of Gold found there, but now less rich than formerly. 3. Arabia had more abundance of Mines of Gold, than at this day. 4. In the mountainous parts of Persia, as also in China there are certain Mines of Silver. 5. In Guiney are many Mountains producing Gold, but yet remote from the shore.This Gold is called Seed Gold. The Gold is not dugg up that cometh from thence, but is gathered by other ways. Every one of their Kings are said to have their proper Mines, and sell the Gold, for which the Europeans give in exchange other Commodi∣ties. 6. In Monomotapa there are found rich Mines of Gold and Silver, as also in Angola. 7. Of all the Provinces of Europe, Germany is the most rich in abundance of Mines, whereof some afford some little Gold, divers Silver, and very ma∣ny Copper, Iron, Lead, Vitriol, Antinomy, and the like. Rich Mines in England.8. In many parts of England are rich Mines of Lead and Tin, which are sound very profitable to the Kingdom, not only by that which is used here at home, but also by the great quantities which are transported to other Countries. Likewise Mines of Iron, Coals, some of Silver, &c. 9. Sweden hath the most rich Copper Mine of any hitherto known, in a vast Mountain which they call Den Copperberg: such a great quantity of Copper is dugg, that it is said to make up the third part of the King's Revenue. There are also Mines of Silver and Iron, but they hardly discharge the expences in digging it.
Mines of Jewels.10. Mines of Jewels are found in the Island of Ceiland, where there is also a Silver Mine, and a great Marble Mine. 11. In the Region of Chili are rich Mines of Jewels, as also of Silver and Gold, but the warlike Natives having more esteem to Iron Weapons than to Gold and Silver, have vanquished the Spaniards and demolished the Mines. 12. In the Isle of Madagascar, Iron and Gold doth much abound; there is a moderate quantity of Silver, little Gold, no Lead; whence it cometh to pass that the Natives more value leaden dishes and spoons; than those of silver. 13. In the Isle of Sumatra, they write, that there are large Mines of Gold, Silver, Brass, and Iron, insomuch that their King in the Year 1620. had by him 1000 l. weight of Gold. 14. In the Philippine Isles, Java, Hispaniola, Cuba, and the rest, Histories record that Mines of Gold, Silver, Copper, and Iron are found. In the Moun∣tains of Siam also they relate that Gold, Silver, and Tin are found. Salt Mines.15. Mines of Salt are found in Poland at Pochiam, four miles from Cra∣covia, where they cut of huge lumps of lucid and white Salt from the Earth. In Transilvania; in the County of Triol; in Spain; in Asia minor; in Kili∣sim a Mountain of Persia; in places near the Caspian Sea, not far from the Ri∣ver Volga, where is the Island Kostowata. Hence the Russians digg their Salt, and boyle it up to a more pure Substance, and transport it throughout all Rus∣sia. There is a salt Mountain in Cuba. All the Mountains of the Isles of Ormus in the entrance of the Persian Gulph, consist of a Christalline salt; yea, the whole Isle is almost nothing else but salt, out of which they make the Walls of their Houses. In Africa there is no other salt but what is dugg out of the salt parts of Caves, as Marble is, of a white, red, and ashy colour. In Pe∣ru, 80 miles from Lima, in a certain Valley great plenty of Salt is found, whence every one may take what they please, because it continually encreaseth, neither doth it seem possible ever to be exhausted. In the Kingdom of Musuli∣patan, near the City Baganaga, great abundance of salt is dugg up, whence all the Indians fetch it. Of salt Fountains we shall speak in another Chapter. Proposition II. A Wood is a multitude of Trees stretched forth in a long and continued Tract of Earth, and propagated without any Culture, or dressing and planting. Of Woods.Most Woods have only Trees of one sort, and are denominated from them;and seeing that there is great variety of Trees; there are also various differences of Woods, as a Wood consisting of Palm-trees, is termed Palmetum; of Oak, Quercetum, and the like. Although these terms are frequently used for Groves or less Woods. But they are divers in several Regions, especially in those more remote. In Africa at Cape Verd, are Woods of Citrian and Orange∣trees, such as are also found in other places. In France are whole Woods of Chesnut-trees. In the Isle of Ceiland are Trees whose bark doth afford Cinamon. In Banda are Nuces Muscatae. In Brasil are Woods of Trees called Brasil of great use for Diers. In Madagascar are Tamerind Trees, as also in other pla∣ces. Cedars on Mount Lebanus, of which whole Woods are also found in Ja∣pan, so that they use them for Masts for Ships. In Spain, France, and Italy are Olive and Mirtle Trees. In Germany the Woods consist of Beech, Oak, Alder, Pine, Juniper, Maple, Firr, Ash, and Elm. The most noted Woods or Forests are, that of Hercinia, which in times past almost overspread all Ger∣many; part of it is the Bohemian Wood, and Bacen or Semana in the Duke∣dom of Brunswick, Gabrata, Martiana, and others. In England the Woods consist of Oak, Elm, Ash, Beech, and Maple Trees. In Scotland the famous Wood called Caledonia, and others in other places, especially in Norway, where there is an abundance of vast Trees above all other Countries in Europe, called Firr Trees, whence all the Masts of Ships almost throughout Europe are made. Lithuania hath almost nought else but Trees, whence the King of Poland hath a great Revenue.
Proposition III. Desarts are vast Tracts of Land not inhabited by man. They are twofold; those properly so termed, and those improperly: The former are those whose soil or earth is steril:Of Desarts. The latter, which indeed is fer∣til, but not inhabited by man, as in many places in Muscovia about the Caspi∣an Sea, from the shore of Volga, are many fertil and fat Fields which lie un∣cultivated, and chiefly by reason of the sloath of the Inhabitants; as also by reason of the Wars of Tamerlane, by which those Countries were depopulated: but these are less properly termed Desarts. Of those properly so termed, these are most noted, which may be divided into four kinds, vi. Sandy, Ericose, Stony, and Marish or Boggy Desarts: Those that are Ericose have for the most part here and there in many places Woods and Forests, are the more useful, and easier to be cultivated. 1. All the Desarts of Africa are almost Sandy, neither is any part of the Earth more pestered with Desarts; the greatest are found in Lybia; they also encompass all Egypt. 2. The Desarts of Arabia are partly Sandy and partly Stony; but the most famous is that Sandy Desart in Arabia, termed vulgarly the Sandy Sea. 3. The Desarts of Tartaria about the Mountain Imaus: Also the Desart Belgian about the Moguls, where hitherto it hath been (though falsly) be∣lieved, that the rich Kingdom of Cathaie is seated. 4. The Desarts of Camboia. 5. The Desarts of Nova Zembla, which are rocky. 6. The Desarts of Norway, Lapland, Sweden, and Finmarch. 7. All the Desarts of Germany are Ericose, they term them Een Heide, whence they call the Desart in the Dutchy of Luneburgh. 8. The Desarts of America, and the like.
OF Absolute Geography. SECT. IV. Containing the Hydrography or the description of the Water, explained in Six Chapters. CHAP. XII. Of the division of the Ocean throughout the Earth. The division of the Ocean.BY reason that we have treated in the precedent Chapters of the division of the parts of the Earth, order requireth that we contemplate the division and scituation of the Waters, which compose the other part of the Earth, and also take a survey of their Properties which do ap∣pertain unto Geography. In Chapter VII. Proposition II. we distributed the Waters into four sorts; which are, 1. The Ocean; 2. Rivers and Fountains of Fresh-waters; 3. Lakes and Marishes; and 4. Mineral Waters. In this Chapter we shall treat of the division of the Ocean. Proposition I. The Ocean in a continued tract encompasseth the whole Earth, and the Ter∣restrial parts, neither is the Superficies of the same any where altogether interrupted by the Lands interposed; but the more large continuity and free congress is only impeded. The truth of the Proposition can only be proved by Experience, especially from the Circumnavigation of the Earth, which hath now for a long while been so often attempted, and hapily performed first by the Spaniards, under the conduct of Magellan, who first found out the Streights: then by the English
twice, viz. under Drake and Cavendish; and lastly, five times by the Hollan∣ders. The opinion of the Anci∣ents concern∣ing the Old World.The Ancients nothing doubting of this continuity, by reason that they ac∣counted the Old World only for the extant Earth, and thought it on every side to be encompassed by the Ocean; yea some supposed it to float. But when that America was detected (which is extended from North to South in a very long tract, and impedeth the continuity of the Ocean;) and moreover the Polary Land North and South, then not undeservedly was it doubted concern∣ing it: For many supposed, and that not without probability, that America and the South Continent were conjoyned, as many Geographers now think, that the Northern America is contiguous to Greenland; which two, if both true, the Ocean could not encompass the whole Earth. But in truth Magellan removed the doubt, when in the Year 1520 he found out the Streights be∣tween America and the South Continent; by which it was manifest that the Pacifick Ocean was joyned with the Atlantick. What therefore the Ancients imagined from a false Opinion that they knew, that we know from infallible Experience. The like hapned with Africa, for then also the Ancients without any hesitation placed the Ocean without or beyond it, and thought Africa to be extended beyond the Equator in a far less space than in truth it is; but when the Portugals had sailed the Coast of Africa, and had found vast Lands in a long tract beyond the Equator; and then also it was questioned whether Africa could be sailed about, that they might sail into India; that is, whether it were encompassed with the Ocean? This doubt was removed by Vasques Gamma, under whose conduct in Anno 1497. Africa was first sailed about, the Promontory of Good Hope being found to be the ultimate bound of the same towards the South; which appellation it received from the King of Portugal in Anno 1494, when that Diaz, which first related concerning (although he passed it not, Victuals failing him, and the Tempests forcing his Return) the storm and raging Ocean of this Promontory, and spake much more to the King. Proposition II. The difference in the parts of the Ocean, which ariseth from the Earth, is threefold; or the Water of the Ocean may be divided into three kinds, which are, 1. The particular Ocean or Seas; 2. The Bays of the Sea or Ocean; and 3. The Streights. The Water in the Ocean may be divided in∣to three kinds.The word Ocean is taken in a twofold acceptation: Sometimes for the whole Ocean or Water, which encompasseth the Earth; sometimes, and that fre∣quently, for any part of the large Ocean, which adhereth to another part by a large tract, and that from on both sides: So we say the Atlantick Ocean, the German, the Ethiopick, the Indian, and the Chinesan Oceans. In this latter signification by use of Speech we sometimes use the word, although we sometimes call a part of the entire Ocean the Sea; but by reason of the homo∣nymie of the word Mare, or Sea, which shall be explained by and by, the word Ocean is usually used in that sense. A Bay.A Sinus or Bay of the Sea is said to be a part of the Sea or Water which runneth between two Lands from the Sea, or some other Bay until it stop at some Land. It is also commonly termed a Sea. A Streight.A Fretum or Streight is a part of the Ocean, or part of a Bay of the Ocean or Sea, running between two Lands in a narrow tract, and conjoyning of two Seas, or conjoyned with the Sea from both extremities, by which they Sail from one Sea into another.
Proposition III. We reckon four principal Oceans,Four principal Oceans. or great parts of the whole Ocean or Seas, in respect of the scituation of the four Continents or Quarters of the Earth. Atlantick Ocean.1. The Atlantick Ocean is that part of the Ocean which is scituated between the Occidental Coast of the Old World, and the Oriental of the New. It is vulgarly termed Mare del Nort, or the North Sea; but improperly, seeing that it extendeth it self beyond the Equator towards the South. It is more aptly divided into two parts, one from the Equator towards the North, the other stretcheth towards the South. It hath therefore on the Eastern quarter, the Occidental Coast of the Old World, and on the Western, the Oriental Coast of America. Towards the North it conjoyneth with the Hyperboreal, or Northern Ocean; and towards the South with the Southern Ocean. Pacifick Oce∣an. Hyperboreal Ocean. Southern O∣cean.2. The Pacifick Ocean lieth between the Occidental Coast of America and Asia, in a long tract, even to the Isles of India and to China. 3. The Hyperboreal Ocean about the North Polary Land. 4. The Southern Ocean about the South Continent, part of which Ocean is the Indian Ocean. Other Geographers make the four parts of the Ocean by another difference or division; one of which they make the Atlantick, but extend it not beyond the Equator; for here they begin the second, which they call the Ethiopick: For the third they reckon the Pacifick with us; the fourth they make to be the Indian Ocean. But we in our division have regard unto the four great Continents of the Earth, or to the greatest Isles: We may make three parts, viz. the Atlantick, the Pacifick, and the Indian Ocean; but then we extend the Atlantick further. The matter is of no great moment, so that either may be chosen: for this division rather dependeth on our Invention, than on Na∣ture. Proposition IV. The parts of the Ocean receive denominations from the names of the Lands they pass by. So we say the Cantabrian, the British, German, Indian, Chinesan Ocean, and the like. Proposition V. The Bays of the Ocean are twofold, long, and broad;The Bays in the Ocean. they are also twofold in another respect, to wit, primarily, and secondarily; they begin from the Ocean, these from another Bay; or they are a part of the primary Bay. The long primary are these: Mediterranean Sea.1. The Mediterranean Sea, it breaketh in from the Ocean between Spain and Barbary, and for a long space runneth between Europe and Africa, even to Syria, Asia Minor, and Thrace. It is called the Internal Sea. It maketh many secundary Bays, viz. the Adriatick (Gulph of Venice,) the Bay of Thes∣salonia, the Aegean Sea, and the like. Euxine Sea.As for the Euxine Sea we may doubt, whether it may be said to be a part of this primary Sinus, of which see Chapter Fifteen. The Mediterranean Sea is distinguished by divers Names, taken from vari∣ous Regions that it watereth; for towards the North it hath Spain, France, Italy, Sicilie, Illyricum, Greece, Creet, Thrace, and Asia minor; towards the South Morocco, Fess, Tunis, Algier, Tripoli and Egypt. Thence are the Names of the Iberian, Gallick, Ligustick, Sicilian, Baledrian, and Cretian Sea. It is extended from the West to the East.
Baltick Sea.2. The Baltick Sea, or Sinus Codanus, breaketh in from the Ocean between the Lands betwixt Zeland and Jutland; first it floweth by a long way from the North to the South, and then reflecting by a long space it runneth forth to the North; between the Provinces of Germany, Megapolis, Pomerania, Cassubia, Borussia, Livonia, &c. from one side, viz. the Oriental quarter. On the Occidental quarter it hath Sweden and Lapland. It maketh three secondary Bays, whereof two are long, viz. the Botnick and Finnick; the third is broad, viz. the Livonick. It receiveth Rivers of great Magni∣tude. The Red Sea.5. The Red Sea, Arabian Gulph, or Sea of Mecca, floweth from the In∣dian Ocean between the Promontory of Arabia to the City Aden, and be∣tween the Promontory of Africa, and runneth between Africa towards the West, and Arabia towards the East: it stoppeth at the Isthmus of Africa at the City Suez, where is the station or harbour of the Turkish Navy; it re∣ceiveth very few Rivers, and those of small Magnitude: but none from Africa, as some observe. It extendeth from the South quarter of the East, to the collateral quarter of the North quarter towards the West. The Persian Gulph.4. The Persian Gulph runneth between Arabia and Persia from the Indian Ocean, about the Isle of Ormus. It hath Persia on the East, and Arabia on the West: it stoppeth at Chaldaea. It extendeth from East and by South to the West and by North quarter; and receiveth very few Rivers except Euphra∣tes and Tigris, long before conjoyned. The Bay of California.5. The Sinus or Bay of California, Mer Vermejo, runneth between Cali∣fornia and the Occidental Coast of Mexico from the South towards the North: it is terminated at the unknown Province of America Tatonteac: It receiveth few Rivers. The Modern Mariners affirm California to be an Isle; and if so, this tract of Water cannot be a Sinus, Gulph, or Bay, but a Streight. The Bay of Nanquin.6. The Bay of Nanquin, runneth between Corea and the Coast of China and Tartary unto the Northern parts of Tartary, where Tenduc the Kingdom of Cathay is placed; yet falsly as those suppose, who will have Corea to be an Isle. It receiveth few Rivers: it extendeth from West to North. These are the long Gulphs, unto which lesser may be added; as the Gulph of Cambaia, and others. The four last rehearsed do not afford secondary Gulphs, viz. Arabia, Persia, California, and Nanquin, but only the Mediterranean and Baltick. Proposition VI. Broad Gulphs are in number Seven, viz. Gulph of Mexico.1. The Gulph of Mexico floweth from the Atlantick Ocean, between the North and South parts of America, which it separateth from the Oriental quarter to the Occidental. It stoppeth at a long Isthmus between those Lands; which impedeth the conjunction of the Pacifick and Atlantick Ocean on this quarter. It receiveth many Rivers, and for multitude of Isles may compare with the Aegean Sea. Gulph of Ganges.2. The Gulph of Ganges, (Gulph of Bengala) floweth between India and the Chersonesus of Malacca, from the Indian Ocean: it stoppeth at the King∣doms of India, Bengala, Pegu, and others. It receiveth noted Rivers, besides the Ganges. 3. The Gulph between Malacca and Camboja, not far from the Gulph of Bengala, and likewise floweth from the South towards the North: it stoppeth at the Kingdom of Siam. The Gulph Lantchidoli∣num.4. The Russian Gulph, or White Sea, floweth from the North Ocean, be∣tween Lapland and the utmost Coasts of Russia, towards the South: it is ter∣minated partly at Finland, and partly at the Kingdom of Moscovia: it ma∣keth a certain small long Gulph, which is extended to Lapland; where is that noted and well frequented Mart Archangelo. It receiveth eminent Ri∣vers.
The Gulph Lantchidoli∣num.5, 6. The Gulph Lantchidolinum floweth from the Indian Ocean, between the Provinces of the South Country Beach and New Guiney: it stretcheth from the North to the South, and terminateth at the unknown parts of the South Continent. Another Gulph is near unto it towards the West, between Beach and the o∣ther procurrent Land of the South, where is the Land called Anthonij à Die∣men, which is the Name of a Dutch Master of a Ship by whom it was disco∣vered. Hudson's Sea.7. Hudson's Sea is a Gulph between New France and Canada, and other parts of the Northern America; it is terminated at Estotiland. Proposition VII. Fretum, or Streights are threefold. For either they conjoyn the Ocean with the Ocean; or the Ocean with a Gulph;Of Streights. or a Gulph with a Gulph. We will enumerate fifteen, whereof three are of most note. Streights of Magellan.1. The Streights of Magellan of a very long Tract; it conjoyneth the At∣lantick Ocean with the Pacifick, and affordeth a passage from one into the o∣ther. The Longitude of it from East to West is 110 miles: the Latitude is various, sometimes two miles, sometimes one, and sometimes a quarter of a mile. Magellan was the first that found it, and sailed it in Anno 1500: its Latitude from the Equator is 52 degrees 30 minutes. On the North it hath Chica, a Province in South America: On the South the Isles of Magellan and Terra del Fuego. Fretum le Maire2. Near unto this is Fretum le Maire, between the South Continent and the Isles of Magellan; through that the way is far shorter through the O∣cean of Atlas into the Pacifick Sea. It is distant from the Equator 54 degrees 30 minutes. Streights of Manilhas.3. The Streight of Manilhas extended between Luconia, Mindanoa, and other Philippine Isles; it is reported to be 100 Leagues. It is dangerous to Ships by reason of the abundance of Sands. It is extended from the East to the West. It conjoyneth the Pacifick Ocean with the Indian on that part, al∣beit there be more free conjunctions in the Vicine. 4. There be many Streights among the Indian Isles, as also between the Isles and Vicine Continents. As first between Ceilan and India. 2. Between Sumatra and Malacca. 3. Between Sumatra and Banda. Waigats Streights.5. Waigats Streights, through which there is a passage from the North or Russian Sea into the Tartarian Ocean, but as yet is stopped with Ice, at least from the Europeans. It lieth between Samojeda and Nova Zembla. Glacick Streights.6. The Glacick Streights between Nova Zembla and Spitzberga, or by a∣nother name termed Terra Polaris. Davies Streights.7. Davies Streights between Groenland and the Northern American, but the Exit of it is not yet discovered, and therefore it is doubted whether it be a Streight or a Gulph. Forbischers Streights.8. Forbischers Streights afford a way to the Atlantick Ocean, if not by the Pacifick Ocean, yet at least by Hudson's Passage. Streights of Anian.9. The Streights of Anian between North America and Tartaria, through which there is a passage from the Tartarian Ocean into the Pacifick; but as yet uncertain. But yet that there is some Streight between the North part of America and Tartaria; and also another between America and Groenland, skilful Mariners do hence collect, because that in that part of the Pacifick Sea, which lieth between Tartaria and the Occidental Coast of the Northern Ame∣rica, 70 miles from Japan to America, the names of the Sea, and motion of the same is from the North, and West and by North, although divers winds, or those from another quarter do blow; but for 100 miles before that Shore of New Spain, those floods and motions cease altogether, for they are carried to some open Streight beyond New Spain, scituated towards the North. Add
moreover, that in those 70 miles, many Whales and Fishes which the Spani∣ards call Albacores, Bonetos, and Arum are found, which kind of Fishes, for the most part, move about Streights; so that it is probable that they come from the Streights of Anian into this part of the Pacifick Ocean, seeing that they are not found in any part of the Ocean. But very many of the Moderns alto∣gether deny this Streight, and place the wide Ocean between Tartaria, Corea, and America. Straits of Gaditanum.10. The Streights of Gaditanum, Herculeum, or of Gibraltar, through which the Atlantick Ocean floweth into the Mediterranean Streight: The least Latitude is about one mile; the Longitude greater. It lieth between Spain and Africa. Writers affirm that in times past there was no such Streight, but that it proceeded from the Oceans breaking through into the Land. The Sound.11. The Streights of Denmark, or the Sound, lie between Zeland and Scandia; through it the Atlantick Ocean floweth into the Baltick Sea. The Latitude is about ½ a mile where it is narrowest. Unto this Streight we must add another between Zeland and Funen; and a third between Funen and Jut∣land, called the Belt. Arabian Gulph12. The Mouth of the Arabian Gulph; it is near the Emporium Aden, through which there is a passage from the Indian Ocean into the Red-sea. Persian Gulph.13. The Streights of the Persian Gulph, yet improperly so termed, by reason that the entrance is no more narrow than the Gulph it self. The Hellespont.14. The Hellespont, a Streight sufficiently famous amongst the Greeks, through which there is a passage from the Euxine Sea into the Propontis. Near unto this is another Streight termed the Thracian Bosphorus, by which they sayl from the Propontis into the Aegean Sea. 15. The Streights between Sicily and Italy. Thus have we explained the differences of the Parts of the Ocean existing from the scituation of the Land, as in the eight Chapter we have shewed the differences of the Lands proceeding from the Oceans flowing between. For the more facile retaining of the same, it will be advantageous to have a pro∣spect or periplus of the Maritinate Coast of the Lands and Tract of the Oce∣an. For the more easie remembring of the scituation of the Parts of the Earth, it will be necessary to know the Shores of the Continents of the Maritine Coasts, and their conjunction; also the conjunction and scituation of the Parts of the Sea. The Periplus of the Mari∣tine Coasts of the old world.The Periplus of the Maritine Coast of the Old World is that which com∣prehendeth Europe, Asia, and Africa. The bound of the same towards the North is Waigats Streights; hence therefore it is best to begin. The Province of Samojeda adjoyneth to Waigats Streights, and in proceeding forwards to∣wards the West of Muscovia, where also the Land by a Gulph made receiveth the white Sea from the North: Then Lapland and the Coast of Nor∣way towards the West, lying from the North to the South. Here a bending being made towards the East, the Coast of Scania and Gotland, where ano∣ther bending being made, whose other Coast is Jutland, receiveth the Sea, which is called the Baltick Sea, flowing to Swedeland, Finland, Livonia, Borussia, Cassubia, Pomerania, Megapolis, Holsatia, and Jutland. Then fol∣loweth the other Coast of Jutland and Holsatia, Friesland, Holland, Zeland (where the Sea is termed the German Sea) France and Spain. Here again is a divarication, and a Gulph being made, the Internal Sea is received in and floweth by Spain, France, Italy, Illyricum, Graecia, Thracia, Asia Minor, Egypt and Barbary, where at Morocco, the Shore again is opposite to the Spanish Coast; and afterwards followeth the Occidental shore of Africa at Cape Verd, where the Coast bendeth to the East, viz. here is Guiney, Angola, Congo, towards the South at the Cape of Good-hope, where again the Shore bendeth towards the North, Mozambique, Soffala, and a Gulph is made for the Red-sea: then followeth the Coast of Arabia; here the Coasts of the Persian Gulph; and towards the East, the Coast of Persia, Cambaja, Indostan, India, Malacca, Bengala, Camboja, China, Tartary at Corea, or the Streight of
Anian, whence by or through the Northern Coast of Tartary and Samojedia, you return to Waigats Streights. The Circumscription or Periplus of America is thus: The Periplus of America.We begin from the Shore of Davies Streights, whence in a Gulph being made, the Sea named from Hudson is received. Here by a reflexion are the Coasts of Estotiland, New-England, New-France, Virginia, Florida, Mexi∣co, the American Isthmus, Castelle del Oro, Guiana, Caribana, Brazilia: Here the Coasts of the Streights of Magellan looking towards the South, but extended from the East to the West: hence from the South to the North run∣neth the Shore of Chili, Peru, the American Isthmus, Mexico, where at Ca∣lifornia, the Sea of Vermejo is received in a Gulph; hence the Coast of Cali∣fornia New-England, Quivira, Anian, where are the Coasts of the Streights of Anian, which now they deny, and follow unknown Shores, which are ex∣tended to the Streights of Davies. The Circumscription of the North Polary Land is thus: From Davies Streights the Coasts of Groenland do begin, which run a little towards the South, and then return to the North, and are termed the Coasts of Spitz∣bergh. Then the Shore runneth from the Region of Nova Zembla, and is opposite to the Tartarian Ocean; where the other Coasts, even to Davies Streights, are unknown.The Periplus of the Land of Magellan. The Periplus of the Land of Magellan is thus: The Coast beginneth from the Streights of Magellan or Le Maire, and making divers wndings to the Region Beach, where the Lantchilonium Sea is received in a Streight: hence the Coasts of New-Guiney run forward to the North, and then return to the South, then they go strait on to the Streights of Magellan. Thus the Peri∣plus of the Land is finished. Now let us take a prospect of the Circumscription of the Ocean: We will make entrance between Davies Streights and Nova Zembla; and here is the Hyperborean Sea, the Frozen Sea, the Caledonian or Sea of Groenland: then it runneth between the Coast of Europe and America, and is called the Bri∣tish Sea, the Danish Sea (where it maketh a Gulph) the German, French, Spanish, (where it maketh the Mediterranean and Sea of Mexico) the At∣lantick in part, here, viz. where it runneth between the Coasts of Brasil and Africa, by and by it is called Aethiopia; and the Streights of Magellan on one side enter in, from the other Eastern quarter is the Indian and South-sea, where it is extended between Africa and the Land of Magellan, then be∣tween Asia and the same Land of Magellan, and cometh into the Pacifick Sea, which is extended to the Streights of Waigats and Anian; and to the South Streight of Magellan (by the middle of which it is joyned to the Atlantick) it directly tendeth to the Oriental Coast of America, Chili, Peru, Mexico, Cali∣fornia, New-England. To these I should subjoyn two Tables, whereof one containeth the divisi∣on of the Parts of the Earth; the other the division of the Parts of the Oce∣an, but having made use of the former in the eighth Chapter, I omit it here, and only make use of the latter, viz. the Parts of the Ocean.
The Earth is divided into Land and Waters. The Water is divided into Ri∣vers, Lakes, Marshes, and the conti∣nued Ocean or Sea is di∣stinguish'd through the Lands by these dif∣ferences. 1. The OCEAN, whose chief parts are four, 1. The Atlantick, Mer del Nort, following with the Ethiopick Sea, between Europe and Africa on the one part, and America on the other, obtaineth divers Names, according to the parts; as the Ethiopick British, French, Ocean. 2. The Pacifick Ocean, Mer del Zur, between the extream parts of Asia, the Indian Isles, and the Occidental Coast of Ame∣rica. 3. The North Ocean, about the North Conti∣nent, the Tartarian, Hyperborean, Frozen Ocean. 4. The South Ocean, about the Land of Magellan, part of which is the Indian Sea. 2. BAYS, or GULPHS. Long; whereof there are six, to wit, 1. The Mediterranean, running between A∣frica and the Regi∣ons of Europe, whose parts are The Iberian, Sicilian, Cretan Sea, &c. The seconda∣ry Gulphs, which are many, The Adriatick, Gulph of Venice, Euxine Sea, The Bay of Corinth, &c. 2. The Baltick Ocean' whence are these secondary Gulphs, as that of Livonia, Botnia, Finmarke. 3. The Gulph of Arabia, between Africa and Arabia. 4. The Persian Gulph, between Arabia and Persia. 5. The Gulph of California, between California and New Gra∣nada. 6. The Gulph of Corea, between Corea and the utmost bounds of Tartaria and China. Broad or Wide, as 1. The Gulph of Mexico, between the North and South Ame∣rica. 2. The Gulph of Bengala, between the Coasts of Indostan and Malacca. 3. The Gulph between Malacca and Camboja. 4. The White Sea from the North Ocean, between Lapland and the utmost Coasts of Moscovia. 5. The Lantchidol Sea, between the Beach and New Guiny of the Land of Magellan. 6. Hudsons Sea, between New France and Canada, arising from the Northern Ocean. These want Streights. 3. Streights, as the Streights of 1. Magellan, by which you come from the Atlantick or Ethiopick into the Pacifick; and this is the longest Streight of all others. 2. Le Maire, near to that of Magellan, and of the same use. 3. Waigats, by which you sail from the North Ocean into the Tartarian. 4. Anian, by which you sail from the Tartarian into the Pacifick Ocean; which is now denied. 5. Davis and Forbischers, by which you sail from the Atlantick into the Tartarian or Pacifick. 6. Nova Zembla, by which a way might be granted from the Hyperborean and Frozen-Sea into the Tartarian, but that the Ice doth hinder. 7. Gibraltar, by which a passage is from the Atlantick into the Mediter∣ranean. 8. Denmarke, (or the Sound) by which you pass out of the Atlantick into the Baltick Sea. 9. The Mouth of the Arabian Sea, by which you arrive in the Arabian Gulph. 10. The Mouth of the Persian Sea, by which you come into the Persian Gulph. 11. The Hellespont and Bosphorus, by which you come from the Aegean Sea into the Sea of Pontus. As concerning the Caspian Sea, whether that it be peculiar, or whether that it belongeth to the broad Gulphs of the Ocean, of which it is a subterranean passage, is yet doubted.
CHAP. XIII. Of some Properties of the Ocean, and its Parts. Proposition I. The Superficies of the Ocean, and all Liquid Bodies, is Rotund, Spherical, or else is part of a Spherical Superficies, whose Center is the same with that of the whole Earth or Land. The verity of this Theorem is manifest from those Arguments, by which we proved in the third Chapter, that the Superficies of the Earth is Spherical, which is true concerning the Water as the Earth, as I have there proved. But because those probations only conclude à posteriori, I here therefore determine to make demonstration à priori, by which Archimedes proved concerning all Liquid Bodies that the superficies was spherical, this supposed as a thing cer∣tain, consisting in the Earth, or in part of the Earth. For Archimedes sup∣poseth in his demonstration three things;The demon∣stration of Archimedes. 1. In the middle of it the Earth hath some kind of Center, and therefore is of a spherical figure. 2. That this is the nature of all liquid bodies, that the parts of them lying equally, or in an equal distance from the Center of the Earth, and continuous amongst them∣selves, the lesser pressed is expelled by the more pressed, which he sheweth from experience. 3. That every part of a liquid body is pressed by the liquid body above it, to the Perpendicular in respect of the Center of the Earth, if so be that this liquid body be descending or pressed by some other body. Besides these three Suppositions, Archimedes useth a certain Geometrical Proposition, which is not found demonstrated in the Elements, and therefore he demonstra∣teth the same, which is this: If any superficies be cut from whatsoever places passing through one point, and every section be the periphery of the Circle, having that point its Center, this superficies is spherical; whose Center shall be the point named. Now this is very easie to shew: For let the superficies of any body be cut through the point D in the plain I F K E P,See Scheme. and let the line of the section I F K E P be the periphery of the Circle, having it for its Center, and in every section made by D, let the periphery of the Circle, having the Center D, be found. We must shew that this superficies is spherical, and D is its Center, D its point, that is, all the points of this line are equally distant from the point D; for we may conceive as many right lines as we will draw from the point D to the other points of the proposed superficies. Therefore these must be demonstrated to be equal mutually one to the other, let any one of those drawn from D to the superficies be taken, and through that and through the right line D F let a plain be drawn, this plain therefore cutting the superficies will make the periphery according to the Hypothesis: wherefore that being drawn, shall be equal to the right line D F, and so we shall shew concerning all drawn from the point D, that they are equal to D F it self, by reason that they are all mutually equal one to another: from whence we infer, that this superficies is spherical, having for a Center the point D: for a spheri∣cal superficies is a crooked superficies, within which is a certain point, from whence all the right lines being drawn are equal at the superficies. This premised, the spherical superficies of every liquid body is demonstra∣ted in this manner: Let any consisting matter be E F G H, let D be the Center of the Earth, and let us conceive this liquor to be cut in a plain passage through D; let the section made on the superficies of the liquor be the line E F G H: but we must first shew that this line E F G H is crooked, viz. the periphery or arch of the periphery of the Circle whose Center is D: But if it may be brought to pass, that there may be no such periphery, the right lines drawn from D to that will be unequal: let the unequal drawn lines be D E, D G, to wit, D G will be greater than D E, and let D G be the greatest of all which are drawn
from D, and let D E be the least: let the other right line D F be drawn twice cutting the Angle G D E at EFGH, so that this line D F shall be greater than D E, but less than D G: then let the periphery or arch of the Circle I F K H be described in the Center D, the internal D E in this same plain, the periphery of which will cut the right line D E protracted beyond the point E, viz. in the point I, but the right line D G on this side G, viz. in the point K. Moreover, in the Center D, the interval D L, which is lesser than D E, let the periphery or arch L M N be described beneath or within the liquor in the plain I F K H; therefore the parts of the liquor contained within D L N, or about the periphery L M N by an equal distance are placed, and are con∣tinuous from the Center D; but those parts which are about M N are more pres∣sed than those that are about L M, because they are pressed by a greater weight, viz. a greater quantity of water being above them, than those at L M. Therefore the parts near L M being less pressed, are expelled from the parts near M N, and these shall possess their place, neither shall the liquor consist; but let the liquor be supposed to consist and be quiet, there shall be then a li∣quor consisting; and not consisting which will be absurd: wherefore the right lines drawn from D to the line E F G H are not unequal, but equal, and there∣fore the line E F G H is the Arch of the Periphery of the Circle, whose Center is D. The same is the demonstration concerning all places cutting the Super∣ficies of the Liquors, and passing through D, viz. it will shew the Section of the Arch of the Periphery of the Circle of the Center D. Now by reason that the Superficies of Liquors is such, that if it be cut by Planes in any sort pas∣sing by D, the Section may always be the Periphery of the Circle: Therefore it followeth from the aforesaid demonstrated Proposition, that the Superficies of Liquors is Spherical, having the Center the point D, which is the Center of the Earth; therefore the Superficies of the Ocean is Spherical, having the same Center, which is the Center of the Earth; which will also be manifest from the confirmation of the following Proposition. Proposition II. The Ocean is not of a greater height than the Shores of the Earth are, and therefore the Earth and Water are almost of the same Altitude, high Mountains excepted. The truth of this Proposition is demonstrated from the former Proposition: For if the Superficies of the Ocean be Spherical,The Earth and Water are almost of the same Altitude. and of the same Center with the Superficies of the Earth, and the Sea be no higher about the Shores than the Earth, therefore neither shall the middle of the Ocean be higher than the Earth, but its Superficies with the Superficies of the other shall make one and the same Spherical Superficies: But without the former Proposition we shall shew this Theorem à posteriori after this manner, as the preceeding Propositi∣on may be shewed from this, if that they confide not in the former demonstra∣tion by reason of the assumed Hypothesis. 1. Experience testifieth that Water being free, and not hindred, doth flow from more high places to places more low: If therefore the place about the Shore was not so high as in the middle of the Ocean, part of the Sea would flow from the middle of the Ocean to the Shore, and would neither consist or be calm, which yet is not found in the tranquillity of the Air. 2. If that the Ocean far remote from the Shores, were more high than the Sea at the Shore, that Altitude would be discovered a far longer interval, than a Spherical Superficies doth admit of; yea, it would be seen from the same distance from which the parts of the Ocean intercepted between that Altitude and the Shore are seen. And experience testifieth, that it cannot be beheld from a greater distance, but that by degrees the more remote part is detected after the more near, when we come to Mediterranean places to the Shore: And
by how much any part is more vicine to the shore, by so much it is first, or by a larger interval beheld from the shore: Therefore the part of the Ocean remo∣ved from the shore is not higher than that part that is nigh unto it. Wherefore the Ocean is of the same Altitude every where, both in the middle, and at the shore, and not higher than the Earth. 3. Mariners in the midst of the Ocean and deep Sea, although they apply their Mathematical Instruments, yet find it no higher there than in the parts near the shore: which certainly could not be, if that the Sea had any Altitude elevated as a Tower or Mountain. For as by Instruments we find the Altitude of Towers or Mountains above the subjected parts of the Earth, so also if that there were any Altitude of the middle Ocean above the vicine parts, it could not be obstructed, and avoid the subtilty of Instruments. 4. Also here and there in the middle of the Ocean are found Islands, and that in great number in some parts, which are near to the Continents or great Islands. Therefore the middle of the Ocean is not higher than the Earth, be∣cause it is not higher than the Shores of those Islands. 5. No cause can be shew'd, why Water in the middle of the Ocean should be higher, and not flow into the Chanels of Rivers, if that their Waters be more depresed: For by experience we find that Water any where scituated moveth to the vicine parts, and these are less high, which have been the cause of so ma∣ny inundations. From these I think we sufficiently collect, that the Waters of the Ocean are not higher than the shoars of the Land. Seeing therefore the Altitude of very few shoars is elevated little more than the vicine Mediterranean Land, and in most lesser, seeing that the Altitude of the Lands from the shoars to the Mediterranean places increaseth and riseth into Hills; thence we conclude, that the superficies of the Ocean is not higher than the superficies of the Land. Now that the Altitude of the Land from the shoars to the Mediterranean places augmenteth, or that the Mediterranean places are higher than the shoars, is proved from the flux of Rivers, most of which arise in Mediterra∣nean places, and flow to the Ocean. So then at least the Mediterranean parts are somewhat more elevated than the shoars, because the flux is from these unto them; for Water floweth from the more high parts to places more infe∣riour. Now that some are somewhat depressed lower than the Water, we shall not go about to deny; but they are either defended by the height of their shoars, or by banks or other interposed earth. Now these Banks are raised for the most part, not because of the great Altitude of the Ocean, being tran∣quillous and in its natural state; but by reason of its impetuous motion, caused by the Winds, or from some other cause. Corollary.Corollary. Therefore they are deceived who will have the Waters of the Ocean to be higher than the Earth, and flie to a miraculous providence, by which the inundation of the Ocean on the Land and drowning of the World is hindred and restrained: For we have shewed, that the superficies of the Water and Earth are one and almost the same, to wit, spherical; and that many parts of the Earth, at least the shoars, have a greater Altitude than the middle of the Ocean, and that this is the cause that the Ocean cannot overflow the Lands. Which greater Altitude, if it be elevated in some shoars, the Banks being broken, or the Water being augmented or forced to them in great abundance, cause inundations. Neither is it altogether impos∣sible or contrary to nature, that the whole Earth should be covered with Water, as we shall shew in the end of the Chapter.
Proposition III. Why the Sea being beheld from the shoar, seemeth to arise in a greater Alti∣tude and tumor, by how much it is more remote. The middle of the Ocean by some said to be many miles higher than the Shoars.It is a fallacy of the sight, or of the estimating faculty, which hath brought many into this errour: so that they have endeavoured to defend, that the middle of the Ocean is many miles higher than the Shoars. But it is a won∣der that none of them have taken notice of daily Experiments in the ordinary course of our life, in which this fallacy is sufficiently manifest: For if that we look on any Pavement or floor stretched at length, or any row of Pillars, the more remote parts of the Pavement will appear more high than the vicine parts, so that from thence, from our place to the most remote, the Floor will seem by degrees more and more to elevate, which yet notwithstanding it is every where of the same Altitude. After the same mode it is with the Waters of the Ocean; for if on the Shoar you use a Geodetical Instrument, commodi∣ous to measure places withal, you shall find no elevation of the remote part of the Ocean above the Shoar, but rather a little depression; so that the Wa∣ters sink beneath the Horizon of the Shoars. Those that are versed in the Opticks declare the cause of the fallacy: Let A be the Eye,See Scheme. and let it survey the pavement or superficies of the Water ex∣tended at length unto the long space a e. Let the Angle a A e be divided into equal parts or four Angles, which are e A d, d A c, c A b, b A a from the right drawn A b, A c, A d, to wit, the more remote shall be far more great, as ap∣peareth from the Diagram, viz. e d is greater than d e, and d e greater than b c, and b c than a h. Although these parts are very unequal, yet they will appear equal, because they appear under the equal Angles a A b, b A c, c A d, d A c, and the Estimative faculty will judge them to be removed an equal di∣stance from the Eye A (in which there is a great deception) and therefore will judge the lines A b, A c, A d, A c, to be A f, A g, A h, A k, as they are equal a b, f g, g h, h k; whence the parts b c, cd, d e seem elevated, as if they were f g, g h, h k. Or more briefly, because the Eye is more elevated to behold Ob∣jects remote, than it is depressed at things near; therefore remote things are judged to be elevated, and those nigh, depressed: or because we compare the elevation of our Eye to parts vicine, therefore we judge them depressed; but we cannot so compare the elevation of our Eye to parts remote, wherefore they seem more elevated than in truth they are. So therefore we see from this, that the Ocean, to one that beholdeth it from the Shoar, seemeth higher, by how much it is the more remote; from thence, I say, it is no probation that it is more elevated. Some render another Reason, viz. that therefore a greater Altitude is to be attributed to the middle of the Ocean than to the Earth, by reason that they suppose that otherwise it cannot come to pass, that water should flow from the Ocean to Fountains of Rivers; which Fountains are in Mediterranean planes, seeing that no water floweth, but from an higher place unto one more low depressed. But I shall shew it to be performed by another way in the Chapter where I treat of the Original of Rivers or Fountains. And so also any one may inferr, that the Mountain of Teneriff is not so high (as also other Mountains) as to be beheld in the Ocean for so long an interval at four degrees, except that the foot of the Mountain or the Ocean be higher than the Sea at the Shoar of Teneriff. But what Answer is to be returned to this is manifest from the Eleventh Chapter,See Chap. II. whee we have treated of the Original or heights of Mountains.
Proposition IV. To exhibit the cause and Original of Gulphs, Bays, and Streights of the Ocean. The cause of Gulphs, Bays, and Streights in the Ocean.These Bays in proper manner of Speech are the Sinus of the Land, not of the Ocean, but rather Arms, branches, and procurrent parts of the Ocean: But more properly we may term those to be sinus or Bays of the Ocean, where the Ocean receiveth into it self Peninsula's of the Earth; as where it recei∣veth Jutland, the Chersonesus of Malacca, California, and the like. But the usual mode of Speech hath so obtained, that contrary to the nature of things, the word is so taken in the first signification, and a Sinus or Bay of the Ocean is the same with a branch or procurrent part of the Ocean. The cause of Bays.The cause of these Sinus or Bays is, by reason that the extant parts of the Earth are in some places mutually rent from one another and divaricated; so that the part of the Earth interposed between the divaricated parts, is more depressed than the superficies of the Ocean; therefore the water always tend∣ing to the more depressed part, floweth into the divaricated parts, and runneth forward so far until it meeteth the elevation of the Earth: for here it can go no farther, and therefore it receiveth its end or bound. The same is the cause of the Streights of the Ocean or Sea. The cause of the separation or divarication of the parts of the Earth (which is required to the existence of Bays and Streights) is the violent motion of the Sea, when it is forced by Winds or some other cause: which seeing that it is done almost every day, so that it beateth the Lands with its waves, thence it cometh to pass that in progress of time, in some parts of the Shoars the Land is so shaken, that it falleth on the rushing in of the Ocean, and maketh way for it: and if the Land adjoyning to the shoar be depressed, Bays do more easily arise, viz, when the Land of the shoar is broken through, the water will overflow the adjacent Lands, and so make a Bay, if that the land be so depressed, or consist of so much matter, which may easily be removed by the violent waves. And so it is manifest, that Bays and Streights may be made and exist anew; but thence we may not conclude, that all Bays and Streights that are at this day were so generated: for it may be that some existed with the Earth it self or Ocean, and therefore coeval with the very Ocean. For there is no record of the making of any new Bay of the Sea or Streight, although the Ancient Grecians fabulously reported such concerning the generation of the Gaditan or Herculean Streights; viz. they said, that the Mountain Calpe on the Spanish Coast, and the Mountain Abyla on the African Coast were one Mountain, but separated by Hercules; whence they called these Mountains Hercules Pillars, and the Streights, Hercules Streights. The Streights between Sicily and Italy.But as concerning the Streights between Sicily and Italy, which the Anci∣ents believed to be caused by an incursion of the Sea, we ought less to doubt, that such small Streights should be generated; for we deny not, but such like may be generated at this day. Also Bays may be made of Streights, and Streights may become Bays: For Example, If that either of the Mouths of Magellans Streights, or of the Streights of Manilhas should be obstructed, those Streights would become long Bays: on the contrary, if that the Isth∣mus between Asia and Africa should be taken away, then the whole Red Sea would become a Streight, through which a Ship might sail from the Indian Ocean into the Mediterranean Sea. Proposition V. Whether the Ocean every where be of the same Altitude. That all the parts of the Ocean are of the same Altitude, being in its na∣tural constitution, and all impediments removed, is manifest from the
first Proposition, by which we shewed, that the superficies of the Ocean is spherical, and that its Center is the Center of the Earth: hence it plainly followeth, that it must be of the same Altitude in all its parts. But here is a doubt, whether there be not some causes that may render some parts of the Ocean more high than other? This is most worthy of consideration, and is also of great moment, when we consult concerning the digging through of Isthmusses, and conjoyning parts of the Sea. Many will have, that the Ocean and Earth is higher about the North, and lower about the Equator. So Aristotle, lib. 2. De Coelo, Cap. 2. they alledge this Reason, That the Ocean seemeth to flow from the North Regions, as from a Fountain. But we cannot conclude any thing certain from this: for whether the Northern Lands (especially the North Channels) be more high or lower than the Channels of the Lands near the Equator is yet doubted: neither is it sufficiently proved from the motion, because this is not general, or is not found in all the Northern Regions. And if this motion of the Ocean from the North should be granted, yet thence it would not follow, that the Ocean was there higher, for to avoid this excess of Altitude, the Ocean floweth from those places towards the Equator. Now the original of the Opinion concerning the greater Altitude of the North Land, more than of others, seemeth to spring hence, because that the face being turned to the North, we discover the Pole elevated above the Hori∣zon and our place; and therefore the Pole of the Earth, and the vicine tracts of the Land, in their supposition, is higher than other Regions. Some determine the Indian Ocean between Africa and India to be higher than the Atlantick Ocean, which they endeavour to prove from the Bay, viz. the Arabian and Mediterranean: where also the doubt is to be considered, Whether the Altitude of the Bay be the same with that of the Ocean, or les∣ser especially in the extream parts of the Bay, and chiefly in those Bays which are joyned by a narrower Streight of the Ocean. The Indian and Atlantick Ocean higher than the Me∣diterranean.But it is not improbable but that the Atlantick and Indian Ocean are higher than the Mediterranean Bay, especially in the extreams parts of this at Asia Minor and Aegypt. For the Atlantick Ocean floweth through the Streights of Gades into the Mediterranean Bay, and it is probable that the Altitude of the Ocean is some what greater than that of the Streight, be∣cause a free Influx is impeded in these. Here indeed will be a small difference, but then proceeding forwards in so long and large a tract between Europe and Africa, the depression of this Bay will seem to be made greater than that of the Ocean, especially when it meeteth many Rocks, Islands, and procurrent Lands, which repel the current Water, and therefore either dimi∣nish or beat back the Influx. Yea, if that be true, which is reported by cre∣dible Authors concerning Sesostris King of Egypt, Darius, and other Egyp∣tian Kings, we ought no longer to doubt of this inequality of Altitude: For those Kings attempted to draw a Trench or Channel from the Red-sea into the Nile, so that by this passage a Navigation might be performed from the Indian and Red-sea through Egypt, and hence through the mouths of the Nile into the Mediterranean Sea, which would have offered great profit and conveniency to many Regions of the Mediterranean Bay: But they were forced to leave their enterprise, when it was discovered by those that were skilful, that the Red-sea was much higher than the interiour Egypt. Now if the Red-sea be higher than the Land of Egypt, it will also be higher than the Water of the Nile, and by consequence than the mouths of the Nile, and then the Mediterranean Sea it self, for that the water of the Nile is not of a lesser Altitude than the Mediterranean, is hence manifest that it floweth into it; wherefore the Red-sea, and therefore also the Indian Sea is higher than the Mediterrean, at least at the extream parts of it about Egypt, Syria, Thrace, and in the Aegean Sea.
The Isthmus, which con∣joyneth Asia and Africa, en∣deavoured to be cut by the Egyprian Sul∣tans.Moreover, other Egyptian Kings in times past, and of late the Egyptian Sultans and Turkish Emperors have consulted how to digg through the Isth∣mus, which conjoyning Africa and Asia, disjoyneth the Mediterranean and Red-seas: but the reason why they proceeded not, is reported to have been the Altitude of the Indian and Red-sea, above the Mediterranean, and the Coasts adjacent to it, and therefore they feared least that the water flowing from the Red-sea should overflow and drown the Regions of those Coasts, e∣specially Egypt, concerning whose low scituation all Writers do consent. If therefore the Isthmus between the Red-sea, and the Mediterranean should be cut or dugg through, then by an open passage the Indian Ocean would immit much water into the Mediterranean Bay; but whether it could let in so great a quantity that there should be any danger of an inundation of the Regions adjacent to the Mediterranean sea, I doubt: For peradven∣ture it may be thus; if that the Indian Ocean should let in somewhat over∣much, then the Atlantick Ocean would let in less through the Streights of Gades, from whose Altitude somewhat would be detracted, if that the moti∣on were made from the Indian Sea into the Mediterranean. But although I deny not but that this may be,Reasons why the Egyptian Sultans and Turks did not digg a passage through the Isthmus. yet I suppose that the Egypti∣an Sultans, and the Turks were moved by other reasons, and Political Causes for the omitting the digging through of this Isthmus. As 1. The vast expence, it being forty German miles, and the Earth rocky, also banks must have been made by the advice of skilful Artists, which they wanted. 2. They supposed that the Inhabitants of the Christian part of the World, as the English, French, Dutch, Italians, &c. would have reaped more bene∣fit by that means than they themselves: For then through that Streight they might have sailed into Persia and India, whereas now they fetch a vast circuit compassing all Africa, and have laden themselves with their rich Commodities, which they are now contented to have at Aleppo,See Massius in his third Book of his Indian History. being thither brought on Ca∣mels through the Turks Territories, and in many places receive customs for the same, which is no small benefit unto them. 3. That the Sultans and Turks knew that the Christians excelled in the a∣bundance of warlike Ships, which they were deficient in, and therefore fear∣ed least they should be invaded by a strong Navy, which might land a power∣ful Army, and so over-run their Country. These were necessary to be explained concerning the Altitude of the Medi∣terranean Sea compared with the Red-sea, the Atlantick and Indian Ocean, by reason that some thence take occasion to maintain, that the Altitude of the parts of the Ocean is divers. But we may confirm them also by another example, if that we may com∣pare small matters with great. The German Ocean, which is part of the Atlantick, flowing between Friesland and Holland into a Bay, which al∣though it be small in respect of the more noted Bays of the Sea, yet it is al∣so called a Sea, and watereth the Empory Amsterdam. Not far from thence is the Lake Harlame, which is also termed the Sea of Harlame, whose Al∣titude is no less than the Altitude of that Belgick Bay, which we have spoken of, and sendeth a branch into the City of Leyden, where it divaricateth into many Trenches. Now seeing that neither this Lake, nor that of the Belgick Sea, do cause the inundation of the adjacent Lands; it is thence manifest that they are not higher than the Lands of Holland: But the Inhabitants of Ley∣den have experimentally found the German Ocean to be higher than these Lands, when they undertook to make a Trench or Channel from this City to the Coasts of the German Ocean near the Town of the Catti, (it is the space of two miles) that they might sail through this Channel, the Sea being conveyed into the German Ocean, and hence into various parts of the Earth; but when that they had perfected a great part of the Channel,The Water of the German Ocean higher than the Land. they were compelled to desist, by reason that at length they found by observation that the water of the German Ocean was higher than the Land of Leyden, and the Shores of this Ocean; therefore the German Ocean is higher than the Belgick Bay.
But we must esteem otherwise of those Bays which flow between the Lands, not by an oblong, but by a broad tract, as the Bays or Gulphs of Mexico, Bengala, and others; that these are of the same Altitude with the Ocean, from which they are separated by no strait passages, is not to be doub∣ted of. Although I am not ignorant, that the Spaniards formerly did que∣stion this latter, (viz. whether the Pacifick Ocean were higher than the Bay of Mexico) when they consulted of digging through the American Isthmus, or that of Panama, that they might have a free and convenient passage from the Bay of Mexico to Peru, China, and the Indian Isles, viz. the Spaniards feared least the English, Dutch, and other Nations should use this Streight, and stop the mouth of it, and so invade Peru. Wherefore to conclude, it seemeth that we must determine that all the parts and broad Bays of the Ocean are all of the same Altitude (as the first Propo∣sition proveth;See Proposit. I.) but that the long Gulphs or Bays, especially those let in through an angust Channel or Streight are somewhat more low, chiefly in the extream parts. Concerning which yet I could wish that more diligent Obser∣vations were made, viz. these are the doubts, 1. Whether the Indian, Atlan∣tick and Pacifick Ocean be of the same Altitude; or whether the Indian or Pacifick be higher than the Atlantick? 2. Whether the Northern Ocean, properly so called, viz. that which is near to the Pole, or in the frigid Zone, be higher than the Atlantick Ocean. 3. Whether the Red Sea be higher than the Mediterranean? 4. Whether the Pacifick be higher than the Gulph of Mexico? 5. Whether the Baltick Ocean be equally as high as the At∣lantick? The same should be observed concerning Hudsons Bay, Streights of Magellan, and such other. Concerning the Euxine Sea, we shall treat in the fifteenth Chapter. The continual flux and reflux of the Sea, and other fluxes, altogether cause the divers Altitudes of the parts of the Ocean, and in the same part in a di∣verse time and hours of the day. But these are external causes, and we at present only consider the natural constitution of the Water: moreover they do not so vary the Altitude in the Ocean it self, as it appeareth at the shoars. Corollary. Therefore we cannot assent to Papyrius, Fabianus and Cleo∣medes, which made the greatest Altitude of the Ocean to be fifteen stadia's, (half a German mile) except we must take their Opinion concerning the pro∣fundity, and so Altitude is ill placed there for profundity. Proposition VI. The depth of the Sea or Ocean, in most parts may be sounded by the Load or Plummet; there being very few places whose bottom hath not been yet found out. The depth of the Sea in most places may be sounded.The profundity of the Ocean is various, according to the more or less de∣pression of the Channels it is found 1/80 of a mile, 1/20, ¼, ½; in very few places a∣bout a German mile, where they have not line enough to sound the depth, albeit here it be probable that it is not terminated at any vast distance. But yet we deny not, but that in the profound Channels there be as it were some hollownesses. The profundity of the Sea is far lesser in the Sinus or Bays, than in the Ocean, which Channel is less profound or hollowed by reason of the vicinity of the Land; as for the same reason the Ocean is less deep at the shoar, than in places more remote from the Land, which hapneth only by reason of the hol∣low figure of its Channels. Of the Mari∣ners Plumet.Mariners sound the profundity with a Plumet of Lead in form of a Pyra∣mid of about 12 pound weight, if that the line be of three or four pound, such as is sufficient unto 200 perches, although others require a plumb of more weight. Yet there may be a deceit in this Observation, if so be that the line being snatched by the Vortices of the waters, or waters themselves do not de∣scend perpendicularly, but obliquely.
But where the profundity of the Ocean is so great, that neither Cables or Chains are sufficient is uncertain, although some have invented something for finding out of this: For they determine, that you must observe how much time passeth in the space whilst a Plumet of noted weight descendeth to the profundity of the Sea: Then you must apply a Cork or Alder-pith to the Plumet, or a blown-up Bladder, so that this may presently be separated from the lead, when that the lead hath hit the bottom of the Sea, and so an ap∣plication being made, the lead must be let down again to the bottom, and the time must be noted until the Cork return to the superficies of the Sea. From this Observation, if it be compared with the observations made in another place, they suppose that the profundity of the Ocean may be found by the use of some Canons: But the uncertainty of the Rules, and the fallacy of the Observations, and the so great brevity of time is such, that I think the knowledge of the depth can never be obtained by this method. Yet this is sufficiently manifest, that the depth of the Ocean is no where infinite, but every where hath a bottom: For seeing that the Earth it self is not infinite, but round, and in a figure returning into it self, it is manifest that the profun∣dity of the Ocean is not infinite; neither doth it extend from one part of the superficies through the Center to the opposite superficies, so that it may sepa∣rate the parts of the Earth mutually from one another, because the Earth is heavier than the Water, and therefore the parts of the Earth, if that they were separated by the interceding Earth, yet presently would be conjoyned again. But from the profundity observed hitherto in most places it is manifest, that it is almost equal to the Altitude of the Mountains and Mediterranean places above the shoar, viz. as much as these are elevated, and are extant above the Horizon of the shoar, so much are the Channels of the Sea depressed beneath it; or as much as the Earth riseth from the shoars towards the Mediterranean places, so much by degrees more and more is it depressed, even unto the places of the middle of the Ocean, where for the most part is the greatest depth. The profundity is changed sometimes in this, sometimes in that part, for divers reasons; 1. By reason of the flux and reflux. 2. With the increase and decrease of the Moon: 3. From the Winds: 4. From the ruin or subsi∣dency of the Channels or Shoars; also if that the bottom of the Channel be made higher in progress of time by the fall of the Sand or Mud. Proposition VII. The Ocean hath no Fountains, but is contained within the Cavities of the Earth; yet it doth not remain always the same. The Ocean hath no Foun∣tains.Experience testifieth, that waters of Rivers proceed from Fountains or Springs; and because that this hath been for so many Centuries of years, it thence necessarily followeth, that that water which continually floweth from the Springs to the Sea, returneth through subterranean passages, or some other ways to the same Fountain. After the same manner there were Philo∣sophers in Old time said, that the Sea sprang from certain Fountains. Nei∣ther could the magnitude and perpetuity of the Ocean withdraw them from this Opinion; for they said, that it returned unto the same Fountains by some hollowness of the Earth, or by some other mode, that so they might render a cause of the perpetual flux. This Opinion may be answered after this man∣ner: If that the Ocean have Fountains, they must either be in the extant part of the Earth, or in that part which is covered by the Ocean, that is, in the very Channel or bosom of the Ocean; but they are not in the extant part of the Earth, for Men have no where found them. Neither may you object, That peradventure they are in the unknown Lands of the North or South: for this would be a part of high confidence to require that to be granted, which carrieth no weight of reason with it, especially seeing, that at not a few of the Northern lands the Sea is found frozen up with Ice, and in most of
those Regions, hitherto discovered, no Springs are found: Therefore the Fountains of the Ocean are not in the extant part of the Earth. It remain∣eth that we prove, that they  neither in the part of the Earth covered with waters, that is, in the bosome of the Sea. If that they were in this, there would be no more distance from the Center of the Earth, than the wa∣ters of the Ocean it self, and therefore there would be no flux from them, but the water would rest in them, whose nature it is not to be moved from places depressed to places more high: For the Fountains of all Rivers are more elevated than the waters that they send forth. But some may object, That this is a violent motion, because that the Chan∣nel of the Ocean, and the Land is perforated within with many hollownesses and pits, call them what you please, which proceed for a long Tract under the Earth, until they are let into some other place of the Channel of the O∣cean: So that there are two Orifices of these Channels, which may have a sufficient great Latitude and Extension within the Earth, going forth into the Channel of the Ocean; therefore it may be, that the water from the Ocean may flow into one of these two Orifices, and some forth of the other, as from a Fountain, which may be illustrated by an easie Diagram: And by that rea∣son that nothing hindreth but that there may be many of these subterraneous passages, and no absurdity thence followeth; therefore it may seem probable to some that there are many of these Fountains in the very Channel of the Sea. But this imagination is vain, and not agreable to the properties of wa∣ter; for water having fallen into either of these Channels would not go forth by the other Orifice, but would rest filled in it, (except moved by some vio∣lent cause): For although water should be pressed and stirred, by water for∣cing in on the Orifice, yet it could not exonerate it self by the other Orifice;, because that water incumbeth on this Orifice also, no less than the incumbing water at the former Orifice, which may thus be proved by ex∣perience.See Scheme. Let there be in any Vessel water ABCD, AB is the superficies of the water lying equally and spherically, but let in a stick RPEF into the middle of the vessel, which may perforate it by an oblique passage, so that the part of the vessel A shall be higher than the whole of the part of the vessel B, therefore the water, as well on the part A as on the part B, should, for exam∣ple, flow through g h into this passage, and fill it up, and should not be effused through either of the Orifices, not through g, because this is higher; nor through h, because though it be more depressed than g; yet the water flow∣ing from the part B, and perpendicularly tending to the bottom of the vessel, would prohibit the influx. From these it is manifest, that the Ocean hath no Fountain, but is perpetu∣ally contained within its own Channel. But somewhat may be objected against this,Objections. which is worthy of considera∣tion: First, That at some part or other of the Ocean there is always a violent external moving cause, as Winds, Fluxes, Refluxes, mutations of the Earth, and the like. Therefore these cause, that sometimes in some one part of the Ocean, and sometimes in another, there is a greater Altitude, and abundan∣cy of water, than in the other parts; and therefore that higher water fal∣ling into the subterraneous passages, is again poured forth into another part of the Channel of the Ocean, where there is a lesser Altitude of water by reason of that external cause, and where the incumbent water then less resisteth the eruption or efflux, because it is moved another way by an ex∣ternal cause: for although this may be, yet it cannot be proved by experi∣ence, neither can the contrary, that is this, be demonstrated to be so; therefore at least the truth is uncertain, and we must doubt concerning this Problem. Now that there are such subterraneous pits or passages in the Channel of the Ocean cannot be denied, and those places of the Ocean seem to shew them, to wit, where there is an immense profundity, seeing there is no such in the vicine parts. To this I answer, although we should admit of those subterraneous passages, yet therefore it doth not follow that
we should grant, that they proceed to another part of the Channel of the Ocean, or go forth into it: and if that this should be granted, yet seeing that there are no such passages in all places, and that these external causes some∣times are predominate in one part of the Ocean, and sometimes in another there is no consequence from the objection, that the Fountains of the Ocean are in any certain place, but that it floweth sometimes from one part of the Channel, and sometimes from another; so that that flux continueth no longer than the external cause continueth. 2. Some one may thus seem to argue: The flux of the Ocean is perpetually discerned from the Northern Land or quarter toward the South, between Eu∣rope and the Northern America; also between Asia and the Northern Ame∣rica. Yet notwithstanding, no part of the Ocean or vicine place is to be found whereby it may come unto those Northern Regions. Seeing that therefore this flux is perpetual, neither doth the water come by a manifest way unto those Regions, whence the flux is made, therefore it seemeth necessary to conclude, that the waters come through subterraneous passages unto those Northern Re∣gions, and so there to be effused from the holes of the Channel, as from a spring, and that the water moveth hence towards the South. There falleth in ano∣ther cause taken from the former: For the water of the Ocean in the Torrid Zone is more heavy than that in the Northern places, by reason of the great abundance of Salt, as we have proved in the Eighth and Twelfth Proposition. Therefore the water or Ocean in the Torrid Zone doth more press through the Orifices of the Subterranean passages, than in the Northern places; and therefore in these places the water less resisting, suffereth the water to flow from the Orifices of the Channels. Unto this I answer, That that flux of the Ocean is not only from the North, as the Objection seemeth to inferr, and as some, especially the Ancients conceived of it, (who would have the water to flow in four Channels from the very Pole, as also some Geographical Maps do exhibit it) neither is it continual, but is observed by reason of the frequency of Northern Winds: moreover the great and perpetual abundance of Snow and Rain in those places augmenteth the water, and causeth it to flow towards the South. Add likewise, that in other parts another motion of the Ocean is found, concerning which see the following Chapter. 3. It seemeth not absurd, but rather most true, that all the Fountains of Rivers taken together, disburthening themselves into the Ocean, are the very Fountains of the Ocean: For seeing that in perpetual progress of time, so great an abundance of water floweth from them into the Ocean, questionless the water cometh from the Ocean to the very Springs and Channels of the Rivers, partly through the Subterranean passages, and partly by Rains. 4. It may seem to prove, that the Fountains of the Ocean may be in the very Channel, because that in the bottom of the Ocean, in some parts sweet or fresh water is found, which could not be but by some Fountains flowing in the bottom. Linschaten relateth, that in Ormus fresh water is drawn by divers in the Ocean, at the depth of four or five Orgya: and the like Fountains are found in other parts of the Ocean and Bays. Unto this I answer, That few such Springs have yet been found, which suffice not the vast Ocean. Neither do we dispute concerning these Fountains, as we have said before. Hence it is manifest, that in some sort it is true; and we may well say, that the Ocean hath Springs, but not in that sense that we are wont to speak con∣cerning the Springs of Rivers, and in which we would have our Proposition to be taken. Hence also it is manifest what we ought to think concerning that Question, viz. Whether the Sea is always one and the same, and perpetually so remaineth, or whether it be another thing, whose parts are perpetually con∣sumed and generated again?
Proposition VIII. The saltness of the Waters proceedeth from the particles of Salt, which are mixed with it; but whence they may exist or are so augmented, is the doubt. Of the Saltness of the Sea-water.Experlence proveth the first member of the Proposition, by which it is com∣monly known that Salt is made of Sea-water, by decoction of the water, or by the heat of the Sun, or the fervour of the Fire: In Germany and other places the water is separated by the help of the Fire: In France, the greater heat of the Sun performeth the same, the Ocean being let into certain Trenches made, in which in the space of some Months the water being exhaled by the force of the Sun,Of Salt, and of what made. concreted and hard Salt is found. On the shoars of many Regions, as of England and other parts, plenty of Bay-Salt is found, the Sea-water continually overflowing those shoars, leaveth daily some particles or humors, from which the water exhaleth, and concrete Salt is left, whose blackness is taken away by boyling; although it be washed away and dissolved from many Coasts by the violence of the Ocean, which is the cause that it is not found on all Coasts. Seeing therefore that this Experiment is common, Aristotle had small reason to alledge a false Experiment concerning a waxen Vessel let down into the Sea. Hence it is manifest, that the proximate cause of the Saltness of the Sea-water, or the true subject of this saltness is the Saline particles, which are contained in that water. Therefore the Aristotelians with their Master spake improperly and obscuredly without cause, when they defend and say, That the saltness of the Sea proceedeth from the adustion of the Sea, caused by the Sun, or from the adust particles. But of this more anon. The chief difficulty and controversie is concerning the other member of the Proposition; Whence these Salt particles of the Ocean exist. Aristotle supposeth, that dry exhalations or fumes (all which he saith are of an adust and Saline nature) elevated from the Earth, are mixed with humid vapours, and when that these have met together in Rain, they fall with these into the Sea, and that thence proceedeth the saltness and Salt particles in the Sea;See Aristotle lib. 2. chap. 7. and on this account he seemeth to defend this Opinion, because that from thence he may render a reason, why the Sea is always salt. But other Peripateticks will have it, and so do endeavour to draw Aristotle to their part, that this saltness is in the Sea it self, by reason that it is perpe∣tually scorched by the heat of the Sun: a sign of which is, that the water is found by so much the less salt, by how much it is more deep or remote from the superficies; for in the superficies we discover it to be most salt. Both these Opinions are obstructed with great difficulties and absurdities, so that it seemeth wonderful that the minds of Philosophers and Learned men could acquiesce in them. First, the opinion of Aristotle is thus obstructed, that Salt-rain should be found in the Ocean, which never yet was found to be void of all tast of salt. Secondly, the Sea should be less salt, when it raineth not for a long time; the contrary of which yet is found. The other Opinion hath these difficulties; 1. It is false, that the waters of the Ocean are found the less salt, by how much they are nigh to the bottom; for there are few places, viz. in those bottoms where Springs of fresh water do flow. 2. Experience testifieth, that fresh water, although long exposed to the Sun or heat of the Fire, yet doth not become salt. This Objection Sca∣liger endeavoureth to avoid by an over-nice subtilty; for he saith, that this hapneth in these Observations by reason of the exiguity of the water, which doth not grow thick, but resolveth: For although you take a great quantity of water, and that you provoke with a light and gentle fire, that the resolution may be impeded, yet the water acquireth no salt tast. 3. Lakes and Marshes, though heated by the Sun, yet wax not salt. This Objection also Scaliger en∣deavoureth to avoid, saying, that this hapneth by the succession of fresh water.
And the same is found in those standing Pools and Lakes, which only proceed from Rain or Snow dissolved, where there is no place for that refuge of suc∣cession for those Lakes are rather dried, when that it raineth not for a long space, than turned into Salt, or rendred salt. Therefore rejecting those false Opinions concerning the cause and original of Salt in the Ocean, let us lay hold of one of the most probable Opinions, with little or no difficulty in it, viz. 1. That these particles are Coeternal with the very Ocean, and therefore we should no more dispute concerning their original, than concerning the ori∣ginal of the Ocean it self, the Earth, yea and of the original and generation of the World. 2. If that this Opinion be less complacent, we may make choice of another, viz. that these salt particles are here and there pulled from the Earth, and so dissolved into water. Now it is certain, that there are many saline Mountains or Rocks in the bosom of the Sea.Isle of Ormus a salt Rock. The whole Isle of Ormus is nothing else but a white and hard Salt, of which they make the Walls of their Houses, and therefore no Fountain of fresh water is found in that Isle. And none can be ignorant, how that many mines of Salt are found on the Land; and we have related concerning some in the Eleventh Chapter; but we need not particu∣lars. Let us consider the whole Earth,The greatest part of the Earth hath much Salt in it. the greatest part of which is nothing else but a Salt; for it hath its consistency from Salt; for the Chymical Philo∣sophers do rightly prove, that the consistency and compaction of every thing proceedeth from Salt; and Experience is answerable to the Assertion: for if that you take an hard piece of Earth, and burn it to ashes, much Salt will be found in it. Nothing can be alledged against this Opinion that is of any value, and is not easily refuted: for some say, that it is impossible that those salt parts of the Earth should perpetually suffice, and should not at some time or other be consumed by the water of the Ocean, which continually taketh away some part of them? Unto this I answer, That the Salt of the Ocean is not con∣sumed in so great abundance, that it should stand in need of much instauration; and if that any be consumed, yet notwithstanding that is laid up in another place, seeing that it is not removed out of the Earth. Proposition IX. Whether that Water be the fresher in the Ocean, by how much it is nigher the bottom? and why in some parts of the Ocean, fresh Water is found in the bottom? Of the fresh∣ness of Water in the Sea.Unto the first I Answer, That experience doth not testifie concerning that sweetness, but in some places, of which the other Question speaketh; that in these places, in the bottom of the Sea are Fountains of fresh water, I have sufficiently said; for it cannot naturally be, that the more Salt-water should exist above water less Salt, seeing that that is more heavy. Those places of the Sea, where fresh water is found to spring at the bot∣tom, may be collected by those that are studious, from the Writers of Geo∣graphy. Proposition X. The Water of the Ocean becometh less salt by how much it is nearer the Poles; and on the contrary, the more salt, by how much it is more near the Aequator or Torrid Zone. Although this may be understood of most parts of the Ocean, yet the Pro∣position admitteth of some exceptions. The cause of this inequality in saltness is sixfold.
The Causes of the inequality of the saltness of the Sea in different pla∣ces.1. That the heat of the Sun in the Torrid Zone lifteth up more vapours from the Ocean into the Clouds, than in the Northern places, which are the vapours of fresh-water; because that the particles of Salt, by reason of their gravity, are not so easily lifted up. Seeing therefore that from the Wa∣ter of the Ocean of the Torrid Zone, or where the place is more near the Torrid Zone, so much the vapours are separated by the heat of the Sun; thence it cometh to pass, that the water that is lest is found more salt there, than in the Northern places, where there is not so much fresh-water separated by reason of the weak heat of the Sun. The 2d Cause.2. The second Cause is the heat or cold of the water; for the same numerical water, or salt meat, as also pickled meat, sauce, and the like, afford a more sensible saltness to the tast when they are eaten hot, than when cold; for the heat or particles of the fire do move and render the particles of the salt con∣tained in such meat, more acute; and separates them from the admixtures, whence they bite and prick the Tongue more sharply. Now because the wa∣ter of the Ocean is the more hot by how much it is nigher the Aequator, or the parallels of the Sun at every day; and contrariwise the more cold, by how much it is more near the Pole; thence it followeth that waters, though they should contain the same quantity of salt, yet they must seem and appear so much the salter to the tast, by how much they are nearer to the Torrid Zone; and by how much they are more near the Pole, by so much they have less sensible Salt. The 3d Cause.3. The third Cause is the more or less quantity of Salt in the diverse parts of the Channel of the Ocean: for as we find in the parts of the Earth, that there are not pits of Salt in them all, neither where they are found is there the like quantity of Salt, must be held concerning the part of the Earth that the Sea washeth or covereth, that is, the Channel or the Shoars: where there is therefore most quantity of Salt or Mineral in the bottom or shoar of the Ocean, there the water is more salt, because that it is impregnated with a greater quantity of Salt. So the Isle of Ormus consisteth all of Salt; there∣fore the adjacent Ocean hath very Salt waters. But whether there be greater plenty of Salt in the Channel and shoars of the Ocean in the Torrid Zone, or more saline Mines than in the North, is very doubtful, by reason of the want of observation; yet it seemeth probable unto some, that there is greater quantity of Salt in those places, by reason of the greater heat of the Sun, by which the parts of the water are separated from the Terrestrial and Salt; but this is a deceitful sign. The 4th Cause.4. The fourth Cause of the unequal saltness is the frequency or scarcity of Rains, unto which we may add Snow: and in the Northern places Snow and Rain is frequent; in the places of the Torrid Zone they are less frequent in some parts of the year, and in othersome they are almost continual. And therefore in these places, in the pluvial Months, the water of the Ocean is not so salt on the shoar, and hath less Salt in it than in the dry Months. Yea in many Regions of the Coast of Malabar the Ocean is fresh in the pluvial Months, by reason of the abundance of water that floweth from the top of the Mountain Gatis, and falleth into the Sea: for this very reason, in divers Sea∣sons of the year the same Ocean is of a various saltness; yet because in the Northern places, the Rains and Snows are continual throughout the whole year, therefore this Sea is less salt than in the Torrid Zone. The 5th Cause.5. The fifth Cause is the dissimilary solution, or unequal faculty of the Water to dissolve this Salt and unite it to its self; for hot water sooner uniteth Salt unto it self than cold Water: although therefore in the Northern places of the Ocean, the shoars and Channels of the same contain more, or the like quantity of Salt, that those places of the Torrid Zone do; yet because the water is there more cold, it is not so able to dissolve and unite the Salt to it self so subtily, us the water in the Torrid Zone, which is more hot.
The 6th Cause.6. The sixth cause is the exoneration of many and great Rivers into the Sea; but this cause only taketh place in the parts of the Ocean that are vicine to the shoars; but is not discovered in the remote parts: So Mariners affirm, that the Ocean on the Coast of Brasilia, where the Silver-River disbur∣theneth it self, loseth it saltness, and affordeth fresh waters fifteen miles di∣stant from the shoar. The same is observed of the African Ocean on the Coasts of Congi, where the River Zaire exonerateth it self, and of many more Rivers. Unto these add runing Fountains in some parts of the bottom of the Ocean. These are the Causes which seem to concur to the variety and diversity of saltness in divers parts of the Ocean, from which the saltness of every one of the Seas may be explained. From whence also it is easy to give an account, why the water of the Ger∣man and Northern Ocean is less apt to separate Salt from it self by coction, than the water of the Spanish Ocean, the Canary Isles; and that of Cape Verd, (whence the Dutch fetch Salt in great abundance, and transport it into the Northern Regions) viz. this Ocean is more near the Torrid Zone, and receiveth water from the Ocean of the Torrid Zone; the other is more remote from the Frigid Zone: yet I cannot deny the constitution of the Channels themselves to be more or less saline. The Sea-water at Guinee, in the Ethio∣pick Ocean, affordeth Salt at one coction as white as snow, such as neither the Spanish Ocean, nor any other in Europe, do produce at one coction or boyl∣ing. Proposition XI. Why Rain-water in the middle of the Ocean is found sweet; but the water which we separate from the Marine or Salt-water, either by decoction or distillation, is yet notwithstanding found salt, when yet the Rain-water proceedeth from the Vapours exhaled from the Sea. Fresh-water abstracted from Salt-water.The Learned Chymists, or true Naturalists, have hitherto laboured in vain, that they might find out an Art by which they might distill and abstract fresh water from the water of the Ocean, which would be of great advantage; but as yet their Labours have proved fruitless: for although, as well in the deco∣ction as distillation, Salt may be left in the bottom of the Vessel, yet the water separated by decoction as well as distillation, is yet found salt, and not fit for men to drink, which seemeth wonderful unto those that are ignorant of the cause. Yet Chymistry, that is, true Philosophy, hath taught the reason; for by the benefit of this we know that there is a twofold salt in Bodies, or two kinds of salt, which although they agree in tast, yet they much differ in other qualities: one of these Artists term fixed, the other volatile salt. The fixed salt, by reason of its gravity, is not elevated in distillation, but remaineth in the bottom of the Vessel; but the volatile salt is full of spirit, and indeed is nothing else but a most subtile spirit that is elevated by a very light fire, and therefore in the distillation ascendeth with the fresh water, and is more firmly united by reason of the subtilty of the Attoms: neither is this volatile salt found only with fixed salt in Sea-water, but almost in all bodies, as Chymistry proveth by experience; but in some in a greater, and in othersome in a lesser quantity: in a greater quantity in sharp tasted Herbs, in a lesser in oily Herbs. Therefore difficulty consisteth in the separation of this salt spirit or volatile salt from the water. But why the pluvial water in the midst of the Sea is no less fresh than on the Land, seeing that yet it is generated by abstraction of the exhalations of the Ocean caused by the fervour of the Sun, or from some subterraneous fire, which evaporation doth little differ from distillation. The cause seemeth to be Fourfold; 1. A slow operation, by which the tenuous part is only elevated from the Ocean, which although, it containeth a saline volatile spirit, yet it hath it in less quantity, than if that this
exhalation were caused by a more forcible heat. 2. The long way that this vapour passeth through, before that it arriveth unto that Region of the Air, where it is condensated into rain, in passage it is possible that the saline spi∣rit is by degrees separated from the watery particles. 3. The admixture of other watery particles existing in the air. 4. A Refrigeration, Coition, and condensation of the vapour: for these exhalations exhaled from the Ocean by degrees are more and more refrigerated, and being conjoyned with other ob∣vious and admixed vapours, they condense into a more thick vapour or cloud: in this Refrigeration and condensation or coition of the saline spirit with the fiery particles they fly into the more exalted part of the Air. Now why the same is not performed in distillation (where the vapours ex∣alted are also condensed) the cause is, 1. That by reason of the small pas∣sage, the saline spirit is as yet over straitly conjoyned to the watery parti∣cles. 2. That the vapour restrained in the vessel, admitteth not a free pas∣sage to the evolant spirit. Proposition XII. Sea-water is more ponderous than fresh water, and the water of one Sea is more heavy than another. Sea water more heavy than fresh wa∣ter.The cause is manifest from what hath been said, by reason that the Sea wa∣ter containeth a fixed salt, which is a far more weighty body than fresh wa∣ter. And we have shewed that in divers parts of the Sea, there is a divers quantity of salt. Yet doth it not follow, that water is more heavy by how much it is the more salt, which doth not augment the gravity, but lesseneth it, and yet rendreth the water very salt. Proposition XIII. Salt water doth not so easily freez as fresh, or a greater dègree of cold is required to the congelation of Sea water than of fresh. Salt water doth not so soon freez as fresh.Experience sufficiently sheweth this against the Aristotelians, who defend that water is so much the lesser obnoxious to congelation, by how much it is the more pure, and therefore should more easily congeal, as receding more from the elementary water, which is false. Now the cause is, that in the salt it self their is a certain spirit, which resisteth congelation, and being sepera∣ted from the salt, admitteth of no congelation from the hardest frost, as those that are skilful in Chymistry know. For the spirit of salt is a medicament suffi∣ciently known, and of frequent use. Proposition XIV. Why the Ocean is not bigger, seeing that it receiveth so many Rivers. The cause is, 1. That the water returneth to the Sea, through subterra∣neous passages unto the fountains of the Rivers, as shall be explicated in the following Chapter. 2. Because that many vapours are elevated from the Oce∣an, whereof many being resolved into rain fall into the Ocean, and part on the land. Proposition XV. Certain parts of the Ocean differ in colour. The water in the Ocean in all places not of one and the same colour.Experience testifieth, that in the Northern places the Sea seemeth of a more black colour; in the Torrid Zone, of a duskish colour; in other places of a blew. About certain shoars of new Guinee the Ocean is found of a white co∣lour,
in some other place of a yellow. In Streights the water appeareth to incline to white, at the Shoars of Congi not far from Bay a D'Alvaro Gon∣zales a Rivulet or an Arm is disburthened into the Sea of somewhat a Redish colour, taken from a mine of red earth, through which it floweth. But the Arabian Gulph called therefore the Red Sea, by reason of the property of the colour, some will have the denomination taken from King Erythreus, others from the splendour which the Raies of the Sun repercussed doth effect. But the more probable opinion, and that which is confirmed from experience, is, that the redness doth arise from the sand of a red colour, which is found in the bottom of this Sea, and on the Shoars, and is frequently admixed with the water.The water in the Red Sea only red by reason of the red s in it. The cause of this admixture which seemeth contrary to the ponder∣ousness of sand is the vehemency of the flux and reflux of the water; or its swiftness and agitation in this Sea; by which it cometh to pass that the sand or gravel is agitated and moved up and down, and so hindred by the continual motion of the Sea, that it cannot rest. Mariners affirm that the water of this Sea sometimes appeareth as red as blood, but if taken up in a vessel, the sand will sink down, and then the water appeareth otherwise. It often happens that storms from the Red Sea rushing into Arabia, or Africa, carry with them so great an abundance of sand, and cast it on the earth, that it covereth whole troops of men and beasts, whence proceedeth the true Mummie. Whether from the same or another cause the Sea between California and America be termed red (Vermejo) I have not as yet found it observed by Writers. Proposition XVI. Certain peculiar things are found in certain parts of the Ocean. Of things in the Ocean peculiar to cer∣tain places.The Sea termed Di Sargasso by the Portugals, which beginneth not far from Cape Verd in Africa, about the Isles of Salt, and extendeth it self from the 20th. degree of Northern Latitude, unto the 34th. of South Latitude. The colour of this Sea seemeth to be green, which is not the colour of the Sea it self, but of a certain small leaved herb in the bottom of it, called by the Portugals, Sargasso. The leaves of this weed mutually complicated one into another, swim on the face of this Ocean in so continued a tract, that the wa∣ter can hardly be seen, so that the Seamen afar off discovering this Ocean, take it for an Island, and green Land, neither can they pass through this knot of weeds except that they be helped by a moderate wind at least: the herb bear∣eth a small berry, whence it ariseth is not yet known. Seeing that this Sea is not so near any land, that it should have its original from them, neither is it probable that it should come from the bottom of the Sea, by reason that the profundity of this Sea is such, that in many places it exceedeth the length of any line or cord. In the Ocean not far from the Promontory of Good Hope, are many floating red-like shrubs of a great thickness discovered, unto which the herb Sargasso is implicated. Seamen take it for a certain, that if they see them thereabouts, that they are near to the Promontory of Good Hope, or else have just past it. Corral found on the Shoar of Madagascar.On the Shoar of the Isle of Madagascar the Ocean casteth up red and white Coral, which augment like shrubs under the water, and although that they be soft in some places, yet between Madagascar and Africa there are reported to be Rocks of hard Coral. In the Baltick Ocean, nigh to the Shoar of Borussia, the Shoar casteth forth most excellent succinum, which the Inhabitants are taught, when certain winds do blow, to draw up with certain Iron hooks. Amber only in the Ocean in the Torrid Zone.The Ocean casteth up Amber only in the Torrid Zone, viz. at the Shoar of Brazile (where a peece of 500 l. weight was taken up by a Dutch Soldier, and presented unto Count Nassaw) at the Isle of Madagascar, at Cape Verd, at the Isle of Maurice; at the Isle of Sumatra, and other Indian Isles. Garci∣as
relateth that a piece of 200 l.weight was found; yea that some Islands consist wholly of Amber, but he doth not name them. In the Aethiopick Ocean at Guinea, Congo, and Angola, this is peculiarly observed, that at the sides of the Keil of the Ship, whilst that they remain there, green Cockles like unto grass do stick, which hindreth the sailing of the Ships, and eateth the wood. On the Coast of Languedock in France, Birds unshaped first of all, then by degrees they receive form, and fixing of their bill in the wood; when they begin to move, by degrees they are pulled off, and swim on the water like Geese. The excrement of the Ocean, termed the Scum of the Sea, is found floating in many places; but in some in greater quantity than in others. Serpents on the Coast of Malabar.On the Coast of Malabar, and at Cambaja, Serpents are discovered on the superficies of the water: this is a sign to Sea-men, that they are near to those Regions. About four miles from New Spain many Roots, Bulrushes and Leaves like unto Fig-leaves float on the water, which they eat, and are in tast like unto Coleworts. In the description of the first Navigation of the Dutch unto the Streights of Magellan, we read that on the 12th of January in Anno 1599. the water of the Ocean not far from the Silver-River, or Rio de laplata, in Brasil, appeared of a red and bloody colour; but being drawn up in a bucket, or the like, when that they had more throughly viewed it, they found that an in∣numerable multitude of Worms of a red colour were contained in that water, and being taken up in the hand they leaped like unto Fleas: And these Sea∣men call Sea-fleas; and they are supposed to come from an innumerable com∣pany of small Crabs, which being found on the South Continent, fill the Sea. Here is no place to treat of the Animals, of which there are various kinds in divers places of the Sea. Proposition XVII Why the Sea in the Night season seemeth to glitter, especially if that the Waves be raised the more vehemently by the Winds. The Sea in the Night seemeth to glitter or shine.This question requireth the knowledge of that difficulty concerning the causes of Colours. Divers are the resolutions of Philosophers concerning them; but as for the explication of the proposed phenomenon or Question, that Opinion seemeth the most commodious, which sheweth how Colours do exist, or rather appear from a certain and various motion; but we leave the accurate explication of the same to Naturalists. Proposition XVIII. The Ocean, or rather all Water casteth out Terrestrial Bodies on the shoar, especially in the Full Moon. Terrestrial bo∣dies are cast out of the O∣cean on the Shore.It is not difficult to render an account of this property, which Experience sufficiently testifieth: For Water is never without some motion, which if it be swift, and towards one quarter, it carrieth Terrestrial bodies with it, until it meeteth with the shoar; where, by reason of the ceasing vigour of the mo∣tion of the water, those Terrestrial bodies are laid down; but in the Ocean the Waves are carried hither and thither. By these the Terrestrial bodies are carried after the same mode; and because that all Waves tend to some coast of Land, therefore all Terrestrial bodies are carried towards the shoar.
In the Full Moons is the greatest motion of the Ocean: therefore vain is their Opinion, who believed the Ocean to be an Animal, and to have sense, by which it purgeth it self from all dregs, Terrestrial bodies; but here the cause is sufficiently manifest. CHAP. XIV. Of the Motions of the Sea in general, and in particular of the Flux and Reflux. Proposition I. Water hath no natural Motion, except one, by which it moveth from a more higher place unto these that are more low; but if the vicine place or body be equal, or of a greater Altitude than the superficies of the Water, then the Water naturally resteth, that is, it is not moved, except that it be compelled by a violent cause. Water hath no natural mo∣tion, except one.THe truth of this Proposition is manifest from Vulgar experience; for if that a vessel containing water be moved, the water so long fluctuateth in it until no part be higher than the other, that is, until they compose a Sphe∣rical figure or superficies, as we have said in the Thirteenth Chapter. For al∣though this Motion hath a violent cause, viz. the motion of the Air about the Earth; yet because that there is a great question concerning this cause, and it is so manifest in the water, that it seemeth not to come unto it from an exter∣nal cause, so for to distinguish this motion of the water from other motions, we term it Natural. Now this motion is unto that quarter, unto which the place more depressed is scituated. Proposition II. When part of the Ocean is moved, the whole Ocean is moved, or all the other parts of it are also moved; but by so much the more that every one is nearer the part moved. For because that if part of the Ocean be moved, it doth necessarily change place, and therefore this place is more low than the place of the vicine water, this nearer water shall be moved into this place, and the vicine water of that into the place of that, and so forward in the other parts: But there is lesser motion in the places of the more remote parts. Proposition III. To observe the quarter into which the Sea that is moved, tendeth. The quarter into which the Sea that is moved, tend∣eth.Chuse a time, if you can, when no violent Wind bloweth, and cast into the Water a body almost of the same gravity with the water; let the place be ob∣served where it was cast in, to wit, let the Boat remain there immovable: then when that this body is carried by the Sea a moderate space from the place where it was cast in; then let another Boat be placed of that, and let the quarter be observed into which the scituation of this second Boat verg∣eth from the former: For this also shall be the quarter, in which we say that the Sea at that time is moved.
Proposition IV. The Motion of the Sea is either direct, or a Vortex, or a Concussion. I call that direct which tendeth unto some quarter; a Vortex, when the wa∣ter moveth into a round, and is in some part rejected: a concussion, when it trembleth. But laying aside the two latter unto the end of the Chapter, we shall treat of the direct motion, and therefore we shall call this by a general term, the Motion of the Sea. Proposition V. Of the Motions which we find in the Sea, some are general, some proper and singular, other some contingent. General, pro∣per and singu∣lar motions of the Sea.I call that General which is found almost in all the parts of the Ocean, and that at all times. I call those proper and special motions by which only some parts of the Ocean are moved, and they are twofold, perpetual and anniver∣sary: the former are those which persist without mutation or cessation; the other, which are found at certain months or days of the year in some certain Sea. I call those motions of the Sea contingent, which without any certain order sometimes do cease, and other some begin; such are infinite. Proposition VI. Wind is the cause of the contingent motion of the Sea, forcing the Sea to a quarter opposit to the Wind; neither is the Sea ever free from such motions. Wind is the cause of the motion of the Sea.For seeing that the Air toucheth the Sea, and the Wind is nothing else but a strong commotion of the Air, and a pressure towards the Earth; therefore the Air being forced to the Sea, endeavoureth to drive it from its place, and by reason of the Sea is fluid, and not able to resist the forcing Air; therefore it is moved from its place towards the place of the opposite quarter, and forceth another water, and this another, and so on. Now seeing that there is always some wind in the Air, sometimes in this place, and sometimes in that, and sometimes diverse in divers places at one and the same time, thence it followeth, that there are certain contingent moti∣ons always in the Sea, which are more discernable in the parts nearer the Wind, and therefore the rather, by reason that the Sea doth most easily receive an impression, because it is fluid. Proposition VII. The general motion of the Sea is twofold; one continually from the East to the West, the other composed of two contrary Motions, which is termed the Flux and Reflux of the Sea, in which the Sea at certain hours floweth to the shoar, and in certain others floweth back again. We shall first treat of the first. The motion of the Sea twofold.That the Sea moveth from the East to the West continually, is chiefly pro∣ved from the motion of that Sea, which lieth in the Torrid Zone between the Tropicks: For because the motion is more strong, hence it is less hindred by other motions. This Motion of the Sea is manifestly found by those that sail from India to Madagascar and Africa, also in the Pacifick Ocean, between New Spain, China, and the Moluccoes; also in the Ocean, between Africa and Brasil.
So through the Streights of Magellan the Sea is carried from the East to the West with a vehement motion. So through the Streights Manillan, through Channels between the Isles Maldives, the motion of the Sea carrieth Ships from the East. The Sea glideth impetuously between Cuba and Jucatan into the Gulph of Mexico; and floweth out into Cuba and Florida. At the Gulph of Paria there is a violent influx, so that that Gulph is termed Os Draconis, the Dragons Mouth. Famous also is the flux at the Land of Canada. From the Tartarian Ocean the Sea moveth through the Streights of Nova Zembla, and Waigats Streights, which is proved both from the very motion it self, and also from the abundance of Ice, which the Tartarian Ocean casteth up at the Streights of Zembla. And at the Northern shoar of America in the Pa∣cifick Ocean, the motion is towards the Streight Anian; also from Japan the Sea is moved towards China. So in the Streight Manillan, the motion is from East to West; so also in the Streight Java. And when the Atlantick Ocean is moved towards the Coast of America, the contrary is found in the Pacifick Oce∣an. For this is moved from the shoars, which is the most conspicuous at Cabo dez Correntes, between Panama and Lima. Proposition VIII. The winds oftentimes change the general motion of the Sea, especially those fixed winds, which we shall shew to be termed Motions, in the XXI. Chap. The motion of the Sea oft∣times changed by the winds.For because that most of these do blow from the South and North, or from the Collateral quarters of these, thence it cometh to pass that the Sea by reason of its general motion tendeth towards the West, it moveth towards the Collate∣ral quarters of the West, viz. North-west, or South-west: yea the general wind, when that it seldom bloweth from the East, but most commonly from the Collateral quarters of the East, changeth this general motion of the Sea. Much more do the North winds in the Northern Sea, where the general mo∣tion is little discernable in the parts of the Ocean. Proposition IX. The cause of this general motion of the Sea from the East to the West is uncer∣tain. The Opinion of Aristotle and Copernicus concerning the general motion of the Sea from East to West.The Aristotelians suppose (although it were unknown unto Aristotle and his followers; and indeed to all the European Philosophers, before the Navi∣gation of the Portugals through the Ocean of the Torrid Zone) that it is cau∣sed by the prime motion of the Heaven, which is not only common to all the Stars, but also to the Air in part, and to the Ocean, by which all are carried from the East to the West. But some that follow Copernicus, as Kepler, al∣though they also acknowledge the Moon also the cause of this motion, yet they determine that the motion of the Earth doth not a little contribute unto this motion, viz. they suppose that the water, seeing that it is not continuous, but only contiguous unto the Earth, cannot follow the circumrotation of the Earth, and resist it towards the West, whilst the Earth withdraweth it self to∣wards the East, and therefore that the Sea moveth not from one part of the Earth unto another, but that the Earth leaveth part of the waters one after another. Othersome, who are not pleased neither with the solution of Aristotle nor Copernicus, having recourse unto the Moon, will have her to be Empress of the waters; and that she leadeth about with her, and draweth the Ocean from the East to the West. If it is demanded how? they reply, there is an occult faculty influence, sympathy, vicinity to the Earth and such like: indeed it is very probable that the Moon is the causer of this motion, by reason that in the new and full Moons this motion is more violent than in the quarters, where the motion for the most part is very little.
The most acute Cartesius hath explained a Mathematical mode by which the Moon causeth both this motion of the water and Air; for he supposeth ac∣cording to his general Hypothesis, that an infinite number of Atoms do move round about the Earth, by which the space even unto the Moon is filled with∣out any Vacuum, which space he calleth the vortex of the Earth, viz. Let the Earth be FEGH. The water 2143, the Air 6587. the vortex of the Earth B A D C, the Moon B. Therefore saith he, if that there were no Moon in the vortex B A D C, the particles of its vortex would be turned round about the Center T: but because that the Moon is in it, therefore the space through which the Celestial matter floweth between B and T, is rendred more Angust, and thence it followeth that the Celestial matter floweth there more quick (between B, and T) and therefore more presseth the superficies of the Air in 6, and also the superficies of the water in 2. than if the Moon were not in the Diameter of the vortex B D: and seeing that both the bodies of the Air and water are fluid and easily plyant to this pression, it must not be so high above the part of the Earth F, as if the Moon were without the Diameter B D. and on the contrary must be more high towards E. But whilst that the Earth is carried from E through F towards G, or from the West to the East, the tumour of the water 412, and also of the Air 856; which now incumbs over the part of the Earth E, by degrees do move unto other parts more Occi∣dental, so that after six hours they incumb over the part of the Earth H; and after twelve hours over the part of the Earth G. Whence it cometh to pass that the water and the Air are carried from the Oriental parts of the Earth, unto the Occidental parts of the same by a con∣tinual flux; thus Cartesius. The stress of the Demonstration is in this, because the Earth E F G H with the water 1234 is moved round, and also the Cele∣stial matter of the vortex between B A D C and 6587. The Moon being in B, maketh the space B 6 with a certain pressure passing through the Air and water, whilst that it passeth through B, is expressed towards J H G, and whilst that  passeth through B, is expressed towards H G F, and so forwards. Nei∣ther doth the part of the Celestial matter at the Moon having allapsed in B D mount upwards, because it is repelled, and that all are full of bodies. And al∣though it press the Air and water 62 F, not only towards the West, E 15, but also towards the East, 73 G. yet because the parts scituated from 62 F, to∣wards 73 G, do more and more recede from these Streights, but the parts to∣wards E 15, do more and more draw near, therefore by these chiefly is that force received. But in this explication of this ingenious person, these things are required or wanted. 1. From that it should follow that the Sea should cease to swell when that the Moon approacheth unto it, and that it should swell in the parts, which are a quadrant, or six hours absent from the Moon: viz. The tumour is in E 15, but in F 26 where the Moon is vertical, the Altitude is least. But this is repugnant to experience, for in F 26 the Sea swelleth, but in E 15 the tumour is very little. How this absurdity may be avoided, we shall shew in the following Proposition. 2. It is not sufficiently shewed (Cartesius hath omitted this) why, whilst the Celestial matter in the narrow space B 6, presseth the Air C, and the water 2; it is not equally moved towards G 37 from both the water and the Air, and the Celestial matter is carried with the Earth towards G 37, and therefore the water and the Air is rather carried towards the East than the West. And it is a doubt whether it can be avoided by the only subduction of the parts from 6 D B, towards G 37. 3. The Moon drawing near to any Sea, a more vehement wind is found in that part towards the West, from the East, than another time; but this hapneth not. 4. It is more manifest that the Sun maketh that motion of the Air from East to West, or that a general wind doth it; for we find that in the morning be∣fore the rising of the Sun, and also with the rising of the Sun, in many places; for then it is distant a quadrant from the vertex of the place. These things de∣serve consideration in the Cartesian Explication, to say nothing of the Hypo∣thesis it self.
But whether this motion can be referred to a general East-wind, is doubted: For seeing that that Wind is always under the Torrid Zone, it would seem to cause that motion of the Sea to be perpetual. For it is evident, that with the augmentation of the Wind, the motion of the Sea is augmented; but that it is a sufficient sign, that the motion it self doth depend on the Wind. For the connexion hindreth, which this motion hath with the Moon, viz. that the Moon approaching to the Sea, it causeth that 2 to swell, because in the Full and New Moon that motion of the Sea is more vehement from the East to the West, which the Demonstration of Cartesius excellently explaineth, viz. be∣cause the Moon in the New and Full is more near unto the Earth, and so the port B 6 is rendred more angust for the transition of the Celestial matter, and therefore the pressure is the greater. And although when the Moon is at Full, that intumescency may be referred unto the greater light of the Moon, yet the Moon being in the New, this cause ceaseth; and therefore it is evident, that the Moon is not the cause of this motion, but rather that pressure of Cartesius, as we shall observe in the following Propositions. Proposition X. The second general Motion of the Sea is the flux and reflux of the Sea, in which the Sea in the space of twelve hours and about half an hour, flaweth unto most Coasts, and floweth back again: It floweth when that the Moon approacheth unto the supream or lowest Meridian; and re∣floweth, when the Moon recedeth from the Meridian towards the West, and towards the East. The flux and reflux of the Sea is the se∣cond general motion.Where we must first discover, whether the Ocean by this motion be moved unto one certain quarter, viz. from the East to the West, or from West to East? For the shoars of Gulphs and Channels of Rivers, in which this flux and reflux is more manifestly found, than in the vast Ocean, are extended nigh unto, or according unto divers quarters, some towards the East from the West, as the Mediterranean; some from the South towards the North, as the Arabian Gulph. And in every one of these Gulphs and Shoars, the water floweth towards the quarter of extension. Therefore in divers Gulphs and Shoars, this motion of the Sea or Ocean tendeth into divers quarters: therefore our first Inquiry must be, Whether this motion of the Ocean observeth any certain quarter; and whether it be moved elsewhere un∣to other quarters: or whether it observe two quarters, viz. the Oc∣cidental quarter in the flux, and the Oriental in the reflux? Or whether one and the same quarter, both in the ebbing and flowing? viz. the Occi∣dental. Unto this may be answered, That the last is true, viz. that the whole Ocean in the flux is moved from the East to the West; but in the reflux it is moved indeed by a general motion again from the East to the West: but yet in the flux more quantity of water floweth unto a certain part; but in the reflux, (or to speak more properly, the deflux) it is not moved into a contrary quarter, but unto the same Occidental quarter; but yet a lesser quantity of water doth flow in. So then we must determine, that the flux and reflux of the Sea is not a distinct motion from the general motion of the same, which we have ex∣plained in the former Proposition, by which the Ocean continually moveth from East to West, but that it is a certain mode or affection of this general motion; and therefore if that this motion be considered in the whole, or in the middle of the free Ocean, it is not so properly termed a flux or reflux of the Sea, but rather a flux or deflux, yea those terms are not apt enough; but it is better to call it an Intumescency and Detumescency, so that by these peculiar appellations, the quality of the flux or motion may be distinguished from the motion or flux it self. For the Sea always floweth from the East to the West, and only appeareth to re-flow, by reason that when in one place there is a greater quantity of water, and that it floweth with vehemen∣cy to a certain place, afterwards in another time this impetus ceaseth.
But it is therefore termed a reflux, because that the Sea seemeth in Bays and Shores to draw near and depart. According to the extension of bays and shores, which hapneth not by reason of the quality of the Motion it self; but by rea∣son of the scituation of Coasts and Channels, viz. that the Water doth return back to a contrary quarter, but that the Sea falleth down; this proceedeth not from the scituation of the Coasts, but from the condition of the place it self. Neither ought or can the motion of the Sea be regarded from the appulse to the shore; for whatsoever the motion of the Sea be, or unto what quarter soever it be made, the flux is always towards the shore, which is by reason of the fluid nature of the water. Now seeing that both the flux or reflux, or in the intumescency and detu∣mescency, the Sea is moved towards the same quarter, viz. from the East to the West, and doth not re-flow again, is collected from hence. First, that in the Ocean removed from the shores, under the Torrid Zone, no other motion is found than that by which it is carried from the East to the West. Secondly, In the Streights which directly extend from East to West, and in which the parts of the Ocean are joyned; as the Streights of Magellan, Manillan, Java, and others amongst the Indian Isles: In these Streights, I say, the Sea indeed swelleth and falleth in twelve hours; but yet the Sea in the detumes∣cency doth flow back from out the Streights from the West to the East; there∣fore another orifice of the Streight into the West, which is a manifest sign that this intumescency and detumescency is not a peculiar motion, but a modi∣fication of the general motion, neither doth the Sea flow back into the East. Therefore Scaliger and all others are deceived, which here introduce a dou∣ble motion replicated into it self. But yet this must be understood, that when we say, that this motion is made from the East to the West, the Cardinal quarters are not only understood, but also those quarters that are collateral, viz. the Sea is moved also by this flux, from the Collateral quarters of the East unto the Collateral quarters of the West, yea unto the North and South; but not by so forcible and valid motion. Proposition XI. To declare the cause of the intumescency and detumescency of the Sea, or the flux and reflux, vulgarly so termed. The cause of the flux and reflux of the Sea.There is almost no phaenomenon of Nature, that hath more exercised the wits of Learned men and Philosophers, and that hath deluded more endea∣vours. Some have made the Sea and Earth to be an Animal, which by its inspiration and expiration, hath caused the flux and reflux. Others make the cause to be a great Vortex near to Norway, which for six hours sucketh up the water, and for so many spueth them out again. Scaliger and Others suppo∣sed the Coasts, especially those of America, to be the cause thereof, by reason that they repel the appulse of the Sea, which proceedeth from the general mo∣tion: But many, when that they discover the connexion of this intumescency and detumescency with the motion of the Moon, determined, that it only de∣pended on that. But how this should be, is a more than ordinary task to dis∣cover; seeing that they reply nothing else, but that the Moon doth attract upwards humors by an occult quality and sympathy. But these are only words, which signifie nothing else, but that the effect is caused by the Moon after some mode that we are ignorant of: but this is the mode demanded. Cartesius deduceth it from his general Hypothesis after this manner; Let the Diagram of the Ninth Proposition be taken,See Scheme. in which let A B C D be that Vortex which hath the Earth for its Center, which with it and with the Moon is carried in a greater Vortex about the Sun. M the Center of the Vortex, E F G H the Earth, 1234 the superficies of the Sea; from which, for the greater perspicuity, we do suppose the Earth to be encompassed on every side; and 5678 the superficies of the Air encompassing of the Sea. Now if that
there were no Moon in this Vortex, the point T, which is the Center of the Earth, ought to be in the point M, which is the Center of the Vortex; but the Moon being towards B, this Center of the Earth T ought to be between M and D, by reason that the Celestial matter of this Vortex, is somewhat more quicker moved than the Moon or the Earth, which it carrieth with it. Except that the point T were a little more distant from B than from D, the presence of the Moon would hinder, that that should not so freely flow between B and T: so seeing that the place of the Earth in this Vortex is not determinated, ex∣c from the equality of the strength of the Celestial matter flowing about it; therefore it is evident that it ought somewhat to approach towards D. And after the same mode, when the Moon shall be in C, the Center of the Earth ought to be between M and A, and so always the Earth departeth a little from the Moon. Moreover, because by this means, from this that the Moon is to∣wards B, not only the space through which the Celestial matter floweth be∣tween B and T, but also that space through which it floweth between T and D is rendred more angust; thence it followeth that this Celestial matter there floweth more swiftly, and therefore doth more press both the superficies of the Air in 6 and 8, and also the superficies of the Water in 2 and 4, than if that the Moon were not in the Diameter of the Vortex B D: Now seeing that both the bodies of the Air and Water are fluid, and easily obnoxious to this pression, they ought not to be so high above the parts of the Earth F and H, as if the Moon were without this Diameter B D; and so also on the contrary they ought to be higher towards G and E, so that the superficies of the Water 1 and 3, and of the Air 5 and 7, do there protuberate. Now because that part of the Earth which is now in F, on the opposite quarter of the point B, where the Sea is very little high, after six hours it will be in G, on the opposite Re∣gion of the point C, where it is most high, and after other six hours in H, on the Region of the point D, and so consequently, or rather because that the Moon in the mean space doth somewhat proceed forwards from B towards C, as running in a Months space through the Circle A B C D, part of the Earth that is now in F, on the opposite Region of the body of the Moon after six hours and twelve minutes, either more or less, shall be beyond the point G in that Diameter of the Vortex A B C D, which intersecteth that Diameter of the same Vortex in which the Moon shall then be at right Angles, and then shall the water be there most high: and after six hours with twelve minutes it shall be beyond the point H. in the place where the water shall be very low, &c. whence it is clearly discovered, that the water of the Sea in every twelve hours and twenty four minutes, shall flow and re-flow in one and the same place. This is the Demonstration of Cartesius, in which that is especially ingeni∣ous, that it aptly sheweth not only how the flux or intumescency is made at the place, when that the Moon is moved at its Vertex or Meridian; but also when that the Moon beneath the Horizon is moved to the Meridian of Mid∣night. We have said in the end of the Ninth Proposition, what any one may seem to require in this Demonstration, especially that which seemeth to be admired at, that Cartesius should not so much as think that according unto this Demon∣stration, That the least Altitude of water and all kind of Detumescency, ought to be when that the Moon cometh to the Meridian; as the Moon being in B, the least Altitude of water is in 2 and 4, and on the contrary the water in∣creaseth with the departure of the Moon or Earth, so that when F shall be in G. that is, six hours from the Moon, it shall have the greatest Altitude; which in truth is contrary to all Experience; for with the access of the Moon to the Meridian, the water increaseth, and with the departure of the same, decreaseth. But the words of Cartesius, as well as the Diagramma, assert the contrary. But I suppose this absurdity may be removed from the Demon∣stration, and that by this mode (so that it may be approved of by Cartesius;) for let us place the Vortex of the Earth A B C D to be without the Moon, and the water 1 2 3 4 to be equally distant from the Center T without any Tumor,
but yet to be moved round with the Earth and Celestial matter, between A B C D and 5 6 7 8. Now let the body of the Moon draw near unto this Vortex; for Example, into B, and therefore the space T B becometh more narrow; and the Celestial matter, whilst that it endeavoureth to pass through it, presseth the Water in 2 towards E. Therefore whilst that the Water is expelled from 2 towards E, it is demand∣ed where the greatest tumor of Water will be, whether in the place E, which is a quarter distant from the place F, (unto which the Moon is vertical;) or whether in a place nigh unto F towards E? If that you assert the first, viz. that the tumor ought to be in E, Experience doth then gainsay; but that the second is truly so, Experience confirmeth, and Reason doth induce to believe, viz. whilst that the Moon consisteth above the place E, the Water is expelled from 2 towards I: but the greatest tumor will be in the place near to 2, not in I. For this is manifest by Experience, because the Occidental places do later discover the intumescency; but reason and the motion of the Water do altogether require the same Laws: for if the Water be poured forth into 2, that it may flow towards E, the greatest quantity will be in the place E, a little less in the place near to that, and yet far less in the place nigh to that, and least of all in E. So also, when that water is driven from 2 towards E, its greatest quantity and accumulation shall be in the place near to 2; and so much the lesser, by how much the place is more remote from 2; but because the Earth is moved round that E may come unto F, then at length shall the greatest tumor be in E, and the water shall be forced towards H. Therefore the Diagram of Cartesius, with the Demonstration it self, ought to be changed, that the tumor may be in the place near unto the very 2, that is, to that unto which the Moon is vertical. What else may be here said, we shall handle in our treatise of the consideration of the Cartesian Philosophy. Proposition XII. In Full and New Moons the general motion of the Sea from the East to the West is more violent; also the intumescency of the Sea is found great in most parts: but in the quarters the motion is found the least of all, and so also in the intumescency. In Full and New Moons, the motion of the Sea from East to West, most violent.Experience sufficiently proveth this Proposition: for Mariners testifie, that the Sea doth foam and swell in New and Full Moons, and in the quarters is calm. Now it is easily demonstrated according to the Hypothesis of the pre∣ceding Propositions: for the Moon, when it is either Full or New, is more near the Earth than at any other time; and in the quarters more remote, as Astronomers do demonstrate. Now when the Moon is more near the Earth, that is, when that the space B T is less; the Celestial matter being hindred, more vehemently presseth the water from 2 to 1 (because it is more near) but on the contrary in the quarters. Yet the motion is observed to be more violent in the Full Moons than in the New, at least in some places, which except you will ascribe to the light of the Moon, I see no other cause, neither can we otherwise shew, why in the Full Moon both Trees and Animals have greater humors, than in the New, seeing that the Sea is equally augmented in the New Moon. Yet that is marvellous, that one Twistius a Dutch-man relateth in his description of India concerning the Kingdom of Gazaratt, where for many years he dwelt; that Cockles, Crabs, and other shelly Fishes, are less fleshy and juicy in the Full Moon than in the New, which is contrary to the nature of all Regions. Neither is it less admirable, that on the shoars, near to the mouth of the River Indus in the same Kingdom, that the Sea is augmented and swelleth in the New Moons; and not far from thence, in the Sea of Calicut, the increase is in the Full Moon.
Proposition XIII. In the time of the Vernal and Autumnal Equinox, or in the Spring and Autumn, the intumescency of the Sea is greater than in the other seasons of the year, but least in the Solstices. In Spring and Autumn the intumescency of the Sea is greatest.Cartesius indeed pretendeth to shew a demonstration of this propriety from his Hypothesis, but I cannot apprehend it from his words, neither do I see how it can follow from his Hypothesis. It is probable that the Sun and general winds do very much contribute to this intumescency of the water, and seeing that the Sun in the Aequinoctials doth incumb on the middle of the Sea of the Torrid Zone, therefore either he, or the winds cause that the Sea then swel∣leth more than at another time. But as concerning the Solstices we must say, in a contrary mode, or that the same is the cause of the greater intumescency of the Sea, in the time of the Aequinoctials either of the Spring or Autumn, which is the cause of more frequent rains, winds and inundadions in those seasons. Proposition XIV. In some parts of the Ocean, Gulphs, and Shoars, great is the encrease and de∣crease of the water in the influx, and deflux: in other some it is very small, in some not discernable, and so there is no flux and reflux, or intu∣mescency and detumescency. The increase and decrease of the water in several parts of the Ocean.Those places receive great Augmentation and decrease, 1. That are under the Torrid Zone, between the Tropicks, for then the Moon pressing for the most part is there carried round. 2. In places that are directly extended from East to West, or nigh the Collateral quarters. 3. In those Gulphs that are long and less broad, the Augmentation is the more sensible. 4. In those places in which few Islands or procurrents adjoyn to the Earth. The greatest flux and de∣flux in the Streight of Cambaja.The greatest flux and deflux hitherto observed, is that which is in the Streight of Cambaja in one of the inlets of the River Indus, and it hath struck many with admiration, for the water recedeth to an high distance, and that ve∣ry speedily. Whence not without reason the River Indus, or the Gulph of Cambaja is thought to be that unto which when that Alexander the Great came, and endeavoured to pass his Army over, as it is there related; the wa∣ter presently went back and left his Ships a ground; hence he went no farther, but judged that the Gods had here fixed the bounds of his Expedition, with a prohibition of proceeding any farther. The cause is the small or narrow, and deep depression of the Channel; but yet 'tis probable there was some other cause. Fluv and re∣flux at Dam∣man.At the City Damman in India not far from Surat, the Altitude of the water by flux and reflux is varied at two and a half Orygas, and the Sea departeth from the shoar the space of half a mile. In the Gulph of Cambaja the flux augmenteth the Altitude five Orgyas, others say seven, which unusual augmentation hath been the cause of the loss of many Ships by unexperienced Mariners; for the water falling, they have been split on the Rocks. No constant time of the flux and re∣flux in the Streights of Magellan. The flux and reflux in the Red-sea.In the Gulphs and shoars of the Streights of Magellan, no constant time of the flux and reflux is observed, for sometimes the water floweth and refloweth in three hours, othersome in twelve hours; which inconstancy is to be ascribed to the violent irruption of the Ocean into that Streight, and from the various agitations of the wind. About Malacca, also at the Streight of Sunda, a notable flux and deflux is ob∣served. In the Arabian Gulph, or Red Sea, some of the Ancients have written that there is so great a reflux (as Scaliger writeth) that Moses and the Israelites passed over without any Miracle. But it is false, because the reflux is not there so great as to leave the Channel dry.
On the Coasts of China the flux and reflux is very sensible, as also at the Isles of Japan. At Panama on the Coast of America lying at the Pacifick Ocean the Sea is very much exalted,The Sea at the flux much ex∣alted at Pana∣ma. and by and by depressed again; in the full Moons the flux is so much augmented, that water entreth into the Houses of the City. Yea in almost all the shoars of the South Sea, the Altitude of the water is won∣derfully augmented and diminished, so that in the reflux, the decrease is sen∣sible for two miles. In the Gulph of Bengala at the shoar of Sam the flux augmenteth the Altitude ten foot. The flux not perceivable in the Mediter∣ranean Sea.But in the Mediterranean Sea, which floweth in through the Streights of Gibralter, from the West to the East the flux is not perceivable, because the scituation is contrary to the quarter into which the Sea is moved, and there∣fore the water of it is little augmented by the flux, so that it is not discernable, unless in the Gulph of Venice, which by reason of its long extension and small Latitude, sheweth the flux and reflux, when in the other part of the Mediter∣ranean Sea by reason of its notable Latitude, that little augmentation and de∣crease is not discovered. Whence this flux and reflux was unknown to the Grecians, as also to the Romans in the time of Scipio Africanus. And the Grecians as well as the Romans, accounted it as miraculous what sometimes they discovered in other places, as is manifest from the Expedition of Alexan∣der the Great, and of Scipio in the expugnation of Carthage; but in the time of Cicero it was known to the Romans. Yet some observed it a little at Massi∣lia; also at certain Coasts of Barbary, it is noted enough. The flux and reflux in the Baltick Sea not yet found out.In the Baltick Ocean, as also in the whole Northern Sea beyond England, towards Norway, and Greenland, the flux and reflux of the Sea is not yet found out, as neither in the North Coast of the Pacifick Ocean. But the cause is not yet sufficiently known, unless you will say that those Seas are remote from the course of the Moon, and also that they are extended from the West to the East and North; moreover that many Isles, and procurrencies of land do hinder. These three must be conjoined to impede the flux of the Sea in these places. Proposition XV. The flux and reflux of the Sea is a violent motion, viz. an impulse, but the reflux is a natural motion of the water. For the flux is caused by the pression of the Moon, or matter between the Moon and the Earth, or also because that the Sea doth not remain in that sci∣tuation which is received in the flux, this is a sign that it was a violent motion. But in the reflux the Sea is moved from a more high place to a more de∣pressed place, which is the natural motion of water. Lemma. The place of the Moon being given in the Ecliptick, and the Latitude and hour of the day, from an Ephemerides, or by Supputation or Astronomi∣cal observation, to find on the Terrestrial Globe the place, unto which the Moon at the hour given is vertical, also to exhibit all those places of the Earth unto which the Moon will be vertical that day, viz. one af∣ter another. See Propositi∣on 13. in Chap. 19.The use of this Problem is great, yea very necessary in the Doctrine concern∣ing the flux and reflux of the Sea. The mode of performing of the same you shall find in the Nineteenth Chapter, and the Thirteenth Proposition. For there it is more conveniently explained: yet the Explication of that Proposition may be anticipated, and demonstrated to the studious in this Chapter.
Proposition XVI. In those places of the Sea, to which the Moon is vertical, the flux and de∣flux is greatest, except that there be other impediments, which we have reckoned up in the XIV Proposition. And by how much the parts of the Sea are more remote from the place, by so much the flux and deflux is les∣ser, other things being equal. For because in that place the pressure is greater, and the tumour of the wa∣ter greater, which is more vicine to the Moon pressing, and the Celestial mat∣ter; thence followeth that, that the Proposition intimateth the objections con∣cerning some other places, in the comparison of which the contrary is found, are to be excused by the admixtion of other causes. Proposition XVII. The quantity of the flux and reflux is unconstant in every place, and divers on several daies, and by so much the greater, or lesser, by how much the Moon is more remote, or near unto that place. The Moon e∣very day changeth her place in the Ecliptick.For the Moon every day changeth her place in the Ecliptick, and so on other daies is vertical to other places, and by consequence is more remote from any place, or more near. Which being observed, we conclude from the preceeding Proposition, that there is a divers quantity of the flux and reflux in one and the same place, on divers daies, whether that the diversity be sensible or insensible. Proposition XVIII. The greatest intumescency of water in any place, and term of the flux, ought to be when that the Moon doth occupy the Meridian of the place. But in many places it is found to be in another scituation of the Moon. For then is the Moon most nigh to any place of the Earth, when that it is in the Meridian of that place, because that the Hypotenusa of a right angled Tri∣angle, is lower than the Cathetus. Whence it is inferred by the XVI Propositi∣on, that when the Moon is in the Meridian,See Propositi∣on 16. there ought to be the greatest in∣tumescency, and Altitude of water, and immediately a decrease to succeed. But when the Moon is in the lowest of the Meridian, then the narrowest of the vortex of the Earth opposite to it in the upper Meridian; and therefore doth effect the same, as if that the body of the Moon were present. But here ariseth a great difficulty. For there are many places and Coasts of the Earth, in which we find that the term of the flux is not when that the Moon cometh to the Meridian, (as the Philosophers held before this age) but soon∣er or later, viz. when that the Moon cometh to a certain quarter, not Cardi∣nal, and this quarter is not constantly observed, but in new and full Moons; for the most part the greatest intumescency is, and the begining of a detumes∣cency, before the Moon cometh to this quarter or vertical Circle. So at Lon∣don the water is at the highest when the Moon cometh to the quarter which is between the South and West, or North and East; that is to the South West, or North East quarter. At the Coast of China, in the Port of the City Maccau,The greatest flux at the Coast of Chi∣na, observed by a Portugal. a certain Portugal Mariner observed the time of the greatest intumescency by this mode. The Elevation of the Pole is 22 degrees, 20 minutes; in the Year 1584 on the 19 of September, the Moon was at full, then the intumescen∣cy or Altitude of the highest water was observed in the morning at ½ or ¼ of an hour past 8. therefore then the Moon was removed from the Meridian 3 ¼ hours. Whence the quarter or vertical Circle in which the Moon at that mo∣ment of time was, is found according to the Problem of the 30 Chapter. Anno 1585, on the 16 of February, in the full Moon, the greatest hight of wa∣ter was observed at half an hour past a eleven a Clock at Noon.
Certain obser∣vations taken by a Dutch Ma∣riner of the flux of the Sea in many pla∣ces.A certain Dutch Mariner on the daies of the new and full Moon, noted the hours of divers places, for the term, or intumescency of the flux, from which I have extracted these. At the twelfth hour (on the daies of the new and full Moon) on the Coast of Flanders, at Enchusen in Holland, at Horn, at Embden in East Freezland, at the mouth of the Elve, at Eider, at the Isles of Jutland, and at Dover, at England. At 45 minutes past 12 at Flushing in Zealand, half an hour after one a Clock, at the Occidental Coast of the Isle of Wight, at Calis, at the mouth of the River of Thames, at the shoar of Zeland, in the mouths of Scald, in Mosa, and at Gored. A quarter after two, before the mouth of Scald, and the mouth of Mosa. At three a Clock at Amsterdam, Roterdam, Dort, in Holland, at Newcastle in England, at Arment in Flanders, in the mouth of the River of Burdeaux in the South Coast of Britain, Gallocia, Gascoyn, Biscay, Por∣tugal, and Spain, and on the Western Coast of Ireland, even to Hitland. A quarter after four in the evening at Roan in France, between Mosa and Rochel, in the River of Burdeaux, in the Bays of the Spanish, Portugal, and Galleci∣an Coast; in the South Coast of Britany in France, Gascoyn, and on the Western Coast of Ireland. Half an hour past four from the Texel, at the South Coast of Ireland. A quarter past five in all the Ports of the Southern Coast of Ireland, at Plymouth in England, and other Southern places of it, even to the Coast of Wales. At six in the evening and morning before Hamburgh in the Elbe, be∣fore Bremen, the Texel, Antwerpe, in the Channel between England and Bra∣bant, without Sorlis. A quarter before seven in the evening, between Fa∣wick and Vaelmuya, in the Channel even to Bristol; before St. Nicholas and Podessembe, even to Waymouth, and Hartepole. At half an hour past seven in the Haven at the Texel, at Kilduyna, in the middle of the Channel, nigh Ply∣mouth, and in the Sea, even to the Promontory of the Lizard. A quarter past eight in the evening, nigh the Isle of Wight, in the Channel, even to Be∣vesier, without the Fly on the Coast of Holland. At nine before the mouth of the River Ems in Freezland, before the Fly, before the Coast of Freezland, at the Eastern Coast of the Isle of Wight. At half an hour past ten before the mouth of the River Thames, on the Coasts of Normandy and Picardy. And at a quarter past eleven a Clock in the River Thames, and other places of En∣gland. A difficult task to expli∣cate the cause of this diffe∣rence.Now it is a most difficult task to explicate the cause of this so notable a diffe∣rence, and that in all places, although it be incumbent on the Philosopher, or Geographer. Yet it is probable that the various windings of the shoars, the scituation of the Coasts in respect of the Sea, the obstacles of Islands, the mutu∣al meetings of the water, the distance of the places from the Lunary way, va∣rious waies, especially those that are constant and general, the declining of the shoars, and other things, do very much conduce to this propriety of the flux. For example: at the Port of London, in the Coast of England, the water en∣creaseth until the Moon cometh unto the quarter of the South-West, viz. when it declineth from the Ecliptick towards the South; for then water begineth to flow back again, but not when the Moon cometh to the Meridian. There∣fore we say, that whilst the Moon moveth to the Meridian of London, towards Brazile, (or from Brazile towards London) the Sea doth not recede from London, but is yet augmented, by reason that the Coasts of America, unto which the Ocean is moved by the Moon, do repel that water towards England, and this hapneth therefore, because it affordeth not a passage for the water. But why, when the Moon is declining from the Ecliptick towards the North, is the greatest Altitude of the water, and the begining of the decrease observed, before the Moon cometh to the Meridian, viz. in the North-East? I answer, that this cometh to pass, because that the Moon is then far more near to England, than when it declineth from the Ecliptick towards the South: and therefore then it more swiftly filleth; but the cause, why then the flux is no longer protracted, even until the Moon cometh to the Meridian, may be, by reason that the Moon forceth the Sea more near the Sea of Mexico,
and Hudsons Streights, where there is found a great intumescency and detumes∣cency. On the Coast of China, we therefore say, that the intumescency doth anti∣cipate the appulse of the Moon at the Meridian; by reason that a continnual East wind driveth that Sea towards the West. But these allegations I leave to be farther examined, by the searchers of na∣ture. But for the finding out of the true cause, it is altogether necessary that we acquire accurate observations how the flux and reflux of the Sea is made in divers places, viz. in what vertical the Moon is in that flux; how the quarter is varied in a divers place of the Moon, as in the full and new; especially in those places where the Moon becometh vertical, also in those which directly respect the East, West, and North. Also that must be diligently observed, how the flux is here made in those hours of the day, whilst that the Moon being in the North part of her Circle, hath not the Sea placed vertically under her, but Lands in a long tract, viz. from Cambaja and China, even to the Occidental Coasts of Africa. For because then that it doth not directly press the water, it being depended over the Mediterranean places; I thence suppose that some variety must happen to this motion. Also what then it doth, whilst the Moon ruling in the South Hemisphere, passeth over the Mediterranean parts of Bra∣zile, or Southern America. Without these observations we shall hardly arrive at the true cause, neither shall we neglect this argument. Proposition XIX. The Sea floweth to most Coasts in six hours and twelve minutes, and reflow∣eth also in so many hours. The Sea in few places floweth in more hour; and refloweth in less.In very few places it floweth in more hours, and refloweth in less: and on the contrary, in very few places it floweth in fewer hours, and refloweth in more: yet so that the time of the flux and deflux (viz. between the two greatest intumescencies) together make twelve hours, with 24 ⅛ minutes, and two such times make 24 hours with about 50 minutes, (48 ¾) and therefore on every day the greatest intumescency falleth out later almost by an hour, be∣cause that the Moon almost an intire hour, returneth more slowly to the same Meridian every day. We have sufficiently explained the first part of the Proposition in the Demon∣stration of the Eleventh Proposition, although in this demonstration we have ta∣ken the Altitude of the Sea, the Moon possessing the Meridian: but in this Pro∣position, by reason that in the proceeding we have shewed that in many places that Altitude doth happen, the Moon being constituted without the Meri∣dian; we do not reckon in them the hours from the time in which the Moon possesseth the Meridian, but for that time in which the Moon occupieth that vertical place, in the which when that the Moon is, it is manifest that the greatest intumescency is. Yet in these places the period of the increment ot decrement doth not exactly observe these twelve hours witih twenty four minutes, or twenty four hours with fifty minutes; because that the Moon by reason of its various and mutable distance from the vertex, either in more or fewer hours returneth to the same vertical, which difference notwithstanding is not great. Although therefore in all places the flux and reflux be compleated almost in twelve hours and twenty four minutes, (when that there are no tempests) also in most this time is equally divided between the flux and reflux, so that in six hours it floweth, and in so many refloweth; yet in some places the time of the flux is unequal to the time of the deflux, viz. more or less.The flux and reflux of the Ocean at the River Garumna in France. The Ocean enter∣eth Garumna a River in France in seven hours, and resloweth in five. So at the Port of Maccoa, on the Coast of China, the flux is in nine hours, and reflow∣eth in three, yea in less, if that the Eastern winds blow. On the contrary at the Coast of Zenega (a River of Aethiopia) the Sea flow∣eth in four hours, and refloweth in eight.
The causes of these differences are difficult. Some refer them to the swift and valid efflux of the Rivers, or also to a simple efflux; for therefore the Shoar of Garumna discovereth the flux in seven hours, because that its strong motion re∣tardeth the flux, but yet assisteth the deflux; therefore the Sea refloweth in five hours. Others have added those hours to the flux, by reason that the Sea reflowing from the more Northern place, hindreth least the Sea should hinder the egress from Garumna, but rather be more forced on it. But I suppose therefore to be, by reason that Garumna poureth forth it self by a strong Moti∣on from its inlet or mouth into the Ocean for some distance; this efflux is pro∣hibited on some part from the Sea, and so the water of Garumna is at a stand also for some space, before that the Sea by reason of the Moon entreth its Chan∣nel. As for the encrease of Zenega, which only hath four hours, whether the cause ought to be ascribed to the extension of the Channel from the West to the East; or unto the swift deflux of Zenega, which may prohibit the influx for two hours: or whether to some other cause, I question, and require a more accurate obser∣vation. viz. Whether it decreaseth eight hours, or only six hours; and in the other two do neither encrease nor decrease, because the strong flux of the River hindereth the flux. That also must be considered, that depressed and low places may have the flux in more hours, and the deflux in fewer. Proposition XX. Whether the flux doth begin when the Moon toucheth the Horizon, or in the in∣crement be in the place, whose the Horizon is. So they commonly say: but yet we hold the contrary in those places, in which the water is at the highest, when that the Moon is in the Meridian. For when the Moon declineth from the Aequator towards the South, then she arri∣veth at the Meridian in less than six hours, and therefore the flux should begin when that the Moon is yet depressed beneath the Horizon. On the contrary, when that the Moon declineth from the Aequator towards the North, she re∣quireth more than six hours to come from the Horizon to the Meridian; and therefore when that the Moon is elevated above the Horizon unto the horary Circle of the sixth hour, then at length the flux begineth, and so it is observed in most places; but the contrary is at London, as we have said in the precedent Proposition.See Propositi∣on xix. And the reason seemeth to require, that although the Moon de∣cline from the Aequator towards the North, yet that the flux should begin in the place where the Moon cometh to the Horizon: for then the place is distant by a quarter from the place unto which the Moon is vertical. And therefore the pressure of the Sea cometh or extendeth hither: and here more accurate ob∣servations are required. Proposition XXI. The hour being given, in which the greatest or least Altitude of the water is on the day of the new or full Moon in the place where the ordinary flux and reflux is (viz. of six hours, with twelve degrees) to determine the hours of the days following after the new Moon, in which the greatest or least Altitude shall be. See the fore∣going Proposi¦tions.We have said in the foregoing Propositions, that the time of the greatest in∣crease and decrease (if we have respect to the middle motion of the Moon from the Sun) in one day after placeth 48 ¾ horary minutes, in half a day 24 ⅜ mi∣nutes. If therefore the greatest increase in any place happen on the day of the new or full Moon, on the twelfth hour of the day, these hours of encrease shall be on the following daies.
The age of he Moon. The hours of the day. Scruples. 1 12 48 2 1 37 3 2 27 4 3 17 5 4 5 6 4 55 7 5 59 8 6 49 9 7 23 10 8 12 11 8 56 12 9 51 13 10 40 14 11 29 14½ 12 Mid night.   15 12 Mid day.   Viz. In the end of the first day of the age of the Moon, the greatest intumes∣cency falleth out later by 48¼ Horary minutes. But in practice it is sufficient to add to the hour of the new Moon for the end of the first day 48 minutes, or ¼ of an hour. For the end Hours. of the second 1½ for the third 2½ for the fourth 3¼ for the fifth 4 for the sixth 5 for the seventh 5¼ for the eighth 6¾ for the ninth 7 for the tenth 8¼ for the eleventh 9 for the twelfth 9¼ for the thirteenth 10⅔ for the fourteenth 11½ for the fifteenth 12¼ This Supputation of time supposeth the middle or equal motion of the Moon from the Sun, which notwithstanding is unequal, so that the Moon in her Pe∣rigee departeth more swiftly from the Sun than in her Apogee, and therefore then the greatest encrease is longer protracted than six hours and twelve minutes. But when the Moon is in the Apogee the encrease is more quick. For certain true Lunary Months exceed 30 daies, others are less than 29 daies,True Lunary Months ex∣ceed 30. daies. when that the mean of 29 daies, twelve hours, 44 minutes is assumed. But in places where the greatest, or least Altitude is made by the appulse of the Moon to a certain vertical place, although it be done after the same manner, yet for all that the time is not so accurately discovered. For neither doth the same time, in which the Moon is joyned to the Sun, fall out on the hours of the day, or the same moments of the same hour in divers new Moons. How this is performed by the Terrestrial Globe,See Chap. 30. and 37. we shall shew in the XXX Chapter. And in the Thirty seventh Chapter, we shall treat more of the use of Navigation concerning a more accurat Method. We may also use this method for those places where the time of the flux is more or less, than in the time of the deflux; so that we are certain of the diffe∣rence. The consideration of the thing it self and practice will more easily teach this, than our discourse.
Proposition XXII. The winds do oftentimes protract, and often diminish the time of the flux or reflux in some places: Neither are winds of that place only a∣ble to do it, but winds blowing in an other place may also effect the same. The truth of the Proposition is so manifest, that it needeth no demonstra∣tion. Proposition XXIII. Great is the variety of peculiar or proper motions of the Sea, viz. in which a certain part of the Ocean is moved either perpetually, or in some certain months. Peculiar mo∣tions of the Sen.The first of those peculiar motions which are most considerable is that motion, by which part of the Atlantick or African Ocean about Guinee, is moved from Cape Verd, towards the bending of Africa, which is called Fernando Poo, that is, from the West to the East, which is contrary to the general mo∣tion from the East to the West; now this motion is vehement, so that it vio∣lently tosseth the Ships approaching to the shoars, unto this Gulph, beyond the imagination of the Mariners and supputation of their Voyage. Thence it co∣meth to pass, that Ships which have sailed in two daies from the Coasts of Mourrae to Rio de Benin, (which are one hundred miles) scarcely in six or se∣ven weeks can return from Rio de Benin to Mourrie; except they launch out in∣to the middle Sea, which is not easily to be performed, seeing that the Sea is moved with a strong motion to the North-East quarter from the Isle of St. Tho∣mas to the Gulph of Fernando Poo, carrying in with it the Ships; although they have a fair North East wind: and they can hardly get from that Coast, ex∣cept they be forced thence by those sudden winds; termed Travados, which sometimes for some months are less frequent, or not at all. For either they pe∣rished by Shipwrack, being carried or forced on the Rocks that lay hidden be∣yond all expectation, or else the Seamen perished by famine, being detained in this Gulph. But yet this Motion is not common to the whole Aethiopick Ocean; but on∣ly to that part which adjoyneth to the Coast of Guinee, even to that Gulph or Bay; for in the Sea it is not found to be above the distance of fourteen miles from the shoar, at the distance of one degree from the Aequator. Therefore Mariners sayling by those Coasts, are very cautious not to approach over near unto them, so that they may Steer their Course according to their minds and the scituation of the appointed place. Now it is difficult to find out the cause of this literal motion, especially see∣ing that the neighbouring Ocean is moved by a contrary way from the East to the West, yet two things may be said, 1. That the Ocean being repulsed from the Coasts of America, floweth back somewhat towards the East; and because that the Aethiopick Ocean is extend∣ed in a long tract to the Gulph of Fernando Poo, therefore it refloweth into this, which yet is only discovered at the shoars, not in the deep Ocean, because in this the contrary motion rendreth it insensible: but towards the shoar the Sea is moved more violently, and therefore is chiefly discovered in that Bay of Fernando Poo, because that the Sea by reason of the Rivers flowing in with a great violence, is repelled from the Shoars of the rest of Africa (as of Congo). 2. There may be a certain subterraneous Channel in this Gulph of Fernando Poo, into which the Sea may fall and attract the rest of the Ocean with it.
Proposition XXIV. The second peculiar perpetual motion. The second peculiar moti∣on of the Sea.About Sumatra the Sea floweth from the South towards the North, into the Gulph of Bengala, and that with a violent motion, so that it is probable that by the violence of the Sea this Gulph was made, and that the Cherfonesus of Malacca was separated from India. Whether the cause be that the Ocean which tendeth towards the West, be forced from so many Islands, and the Pro∣montory of the Land of Magellan; so that it should be carried violently flowing towards the North, or whether a subterraneous Channel be in that Gulph, is to be questioned. Yet I suppose it is not directly carried to the North, but to a Collateral quar∣ter, which declineth towards the West. Yea, this very same motion is found between Java and the Land of Magellan. Therefore the Dutch sayling to∣wards the Indies, direct their Course to that procurrent part of the Land of Ma∣gellan, or the South Continent, and then sail from the South towards the North, viz. to Java. Proposition XXV. The third spe∣cial perpetual motion of the Sea.The third special perpetual motion is observed between the Isle of Madagas∣car, and the Promontory of Good Hope; especially on the Coast of Africa, be∣tween Terra de Natal, and this Promontory of Good Hope. This motion is found from the quarter of the North-East, to the South-East (and from the North to the South, according to the extension of the Coasts) so vehement, that Ships with a stiff gale can hardly overcome it, and hold the contrary course to Madagascar. On the contrary, those who sail from Canali, into Madagas∣car, and Africa, towards the Promontory of Good Hope, without any help of the winds, are carried unto it by the motion of the Sea alone. I suppose the cause to be, the forcing of the Ocean by a general motion to the Coasts of Afri∣ca, where it findeth a passage. For this motion is not found in the middle of the Ocean, or that part removed from the shoars, between India and Africa, from a Collateral quarter. But the Ocean is moved from the East to the West. Proposition XXVI. The fourth special perpe∣tual motion.The fourth special perpetual Motion is in the Pacifick Ocean on the Coast of Peru, and the rest of America, where the Sea is moved from the South to the North: questionless the cause is a perpetual South wind; which is found to predominate on those Coasts, as we have shewed in our Chapter of Winds. In the Sea remote from the Coasts this motion is not discovered, neither this wind. Proposition XXVII. The fifth spe∣cial perpetual motion.The fifth special perpetual motion is observed in the Sea on the Coasts of A∣merica, from the Promontory of St. Augustin in Brazile, to the Isles Antilles in the Gulph of Mexico towards Florida, that is, from the South to the North. Peradventure the cause is that the Ocean being carried by a general motion to∣wards Brazile, is repelled, and by reason that a more free and broad passage is granted towards the North, thither is carried. The like motion is observed in the mouth of the Streight of Manilla near the Phillippin Isles. So in Japan a most strong motion proceedeth forwards from the Port of Xibuxia towards Arima.
Proposition XXVIII. The sixth spe∣cial perpetual motion of the Sea.The sixth special perpetual motion is in the Streight Le Maire, where the Mariners of the Prince of Nassau found the Sea to be carried from the West into the East. But one observation sufficeth not, especially seeing that Le Maire writeth the contrary. More special motions are found in the parts of the Ocean at or near the Coasts, but as yet they are not accurately enough observed, or described. Proposition XXIX. Ʋnto the special perpetual motions of the parts of the Ocean, also those do pertain, which great Rivers cause where they exonerate themselves into the Sea. So on the Coast of Africa, Loango, Congo, for ten or twelve miles from the shoar, is a strong motion of the Sea, from the Coasts towards the West, because many Rivers, (amongst which is the great River Zaire) cast themselves with a violence into the Sea,The River Zaire casts it self with a vi∣olent motion into the Sea. and so repel the Sea, which motion is helped by the general motion. Therefore some daies are required that Ships may touch those Goasts, although they may be distant only one or two miles from them. So at the Isle Lamon adjacent to the Coast of China, the Sea is moved from the shoar towards the East, contrary to the general Motion which is from the East towards China: this contrary Motion is caused by the impetuous flux of the great River Thoucoan in China, but in the Sea more remote from China, this motion is obstructed by the general Motion: neither is it discovered, be∣yond the Isle of Branco. Hitherto concerning the special perpetual motions: a little must be subjoyn∣ed concerning the special fixed, and anniversary motions. Proposition XXX. Great is the variety of the special ceasing, or periodical motions; and those periodical fixed, and anniversary motions do all almost arise from anni∣versary and stated winds. And stated or fixed winds of one place may make the motion of the Sea fixed in another place. The flux of the Sea in di∣vers places at certain times.So between the Isle Celebes, and Madera, when that the motion is West, viz. in December, January, and February, the Sea floweth to the South East, or a more near Collateral wind than the East. So at Java in the Streight Gallappa, when the motion is West, viz. in May, the Sea floweth towards the East, contrary to his general Motion. At the Isle of Ceilan, from the middle of March, to October, the Sea flow∣eth towards the South. on the rest of the Months towards the North, viz. be∣cause that in those Months the North winds are frequent, in others the South winds. Between Cochin and Mallacca, the Sea floweth with a Westernly motion from April to August, contrary to the general motion towards the East: then the rest of the time towards the West the winds assisting the general motion: the Sea floweth here with so great a noise, that those who know not the same, suppose Rocks to be there, against which the waters beat so for some months: after the 15 of February, the Sea is moved from the Maldivian Isles, towards the East, and India, contrary to the general motion. At the Coast of China and Camboja, in October, November, and December, the Sea is moved towards the North-West; but in January, towards the South-West, with a very swift course to the Sands de Champa, so that they seem to ex∣ceed the celerity of a stone that is slinged.
At Pulo Cato even unto Varella (on the coast of Camboja) when motions or winds do not blow, the swift motion of the Sea is towards the South; but the motions or winds move towards another quarter. On the Coast of the Gulph of Bengala, from Patana to the Promontory of Malacca, in November and December, a swift course of the Sea is observed towards the South. In a motion or wind from China to Malacca, in June, July and August, there is a vehement motion of the Sea from Pulo Cato to Pulo Cambir on the Coast of Camboja. Many more Examples, but less accurately consigned, are to be read in the Journals of the Mariners. At the Coast of Aguada de san Bras, not far from the Promontory of Good Hope, this is peculiarly observed, that the Sea is always moved from the East to the West towards the land so much the more vehemently, by how much the Occidental wind opposite unto it is more violent. Questionless some adjacent Coast higher than it, is the cause of it. Proposition XXXI. The circular motions of the Sea are three∣fold.The cirçular motions of the Sea, termed Whirlpools and Vortices, are threefold: For some only move the water in a round; othersome suck in the water, and in certain hours let it forth again; and others suck it in, but cast it not forth. Although without doubt there be a fourth sort in the Channel of the Sea, which casteth out and sucketh not in the waters. Yet I do not remem∣ber, that I have read in any Author such a Vortex to be found in the Sea; but many are found on the land. The Chalcidican Euripus or Vortex is famous in Greece, especially by reason of the Fable concerning the death of Aristotle; it receiveth water at certain hours, and casteth them out in others. The Vortex at Norway is the most noted and greatest of all, for it is related to be 13 miles in circuit; in the middle of it is a Rock called Mouske. This Vorago in six hours sucketh in all that approacheth near it; as Water, Whales, laden Ships, and in so many hours vomiteth them all out again with a great violence, noise, and circumgyration of water. The cause is unknown. Between Normandy and England is a Vorago or Whirlpool, unto which Ships are carried with a great swiftness, and being near the Whirlpool are re∣pelled back again. Proposition XXXII. The motion of the Sea, which we call a Concussion or Trembling, cometh from a spiration or wind, which moveth the Earth or Water it self, and causeth it to rise. Of the con∣cssion of the Sea, and its cause.On the Coast of Biscay is a place which the, Inhabitants call Capbreton; there sometimes the Sea swelleth without any winds, so that it seemeth to overflow the shore it self, and on a sudden falleth low. The like intumescency is found in a Lake of Scotland, called Loumond, moved by a subterranean wind. The Portugals in Anno 1523, in the Sea of Cambaja discovered a trembling of the water; for in a great calm (as Maffeus writeth) all winds being still, the Sea on a sudden swelled from the bottom; thence the Ships began to roul, and to fall foul of one another, to their great astonishment: Now in this great confusion and disturbance, some cast the lead, some pumped, others more wise bethought themselves of escaping, and got barrels on which they might swim; but on an instant it was found to be an Earthquake, which thus also di∣sturbed the Ships on the Sea as well as the Land.
Proposition XXXIII. Why the Pacifick Ocean is more calm, and without great floods or waves; and why it is easily moved, or rough with a wind. The cause without doubt is, because its motions towards the West are not hin∣dred by the intercourse of shoars, as the Atlantick Ocean is. CHAP. XV. Of Lakes, Pools, or standing Waters, and Marishes. Proposition I. Definitions. Of Lakes.A Lake is a quantity of Water in any cavity of a Mediterranean place, of a notable amplitude and tract, on all sides encompassed with the Land, and at the least having a moderate profundity: But more properly, that is termed a Lake which receiveth in, and letteth forth Rivers. A Pool is a small Lake,Pools. which doth never receive or send forth Ri∣vers. A Marish is water in a Mediterranean place,Marishes. here and there having the lands extant and about it, or mixed with the Earth. Proposition II. Lakes are four∣fold.Lakes are Fourfold: 1. Some neither send forth or receive Rivers, and such Lakes, if small, are termed Pools; but if large, they are called Lakes. 2. Some send forth Rivers, but receive none. 3. Others receive Rivers, and send forth none: And 4. some both receive and send forth Rivers; and some of those send forth greater than they receive, some equal, and some lesser. Also some send forth a River almost in the same line with that which they re∣ceived; others in another line, or to another quarter: also some receive more than they send forth; some more few, and some equal. Proposition III. To declare the generation and conservation of those Lakes, which neither send forth nor receive Rivers. Those Lakes are either great, moderate, or small. Some of the moderate and small perpetually remain so in the Summer, and when it hath not rained for a long space, are dried up; and both these are termed Pools. Now it is easy to declare the generation of those that are dried up, viz. the plenty of rain, and cavity and depression of the place in which such standing Pools are: For if that any place be scituated in the midst of elevated places, all the rain∣water runeth unto it, and so causeth a Pool. In India are many Pools.So in India there are many Pools or standing-waters made by the industry of the Inhabitants, whereof some are in compass a mile, and some two, en∣compassed with a Stone-wall, which are filled in the Pluvial months, that in the Summer months they may furnish those with water, who live far from Rivers or Fountains.
After the like mode small Lakes and Pools are made by the exundations of the Sea and Rivers. So the River Nilus and Niger exundating, when that they have reflowed, leave many Pools behind them, which either the Natives fortifie or make, that thence they may draw water on the other Months of the year. For the same reason, in Moscovia, Finland, Lapland, in the Spring, Summer and Au∣tumn, are many Lakes, partly by reason of the shores, and partly because of the dissolving of the Snows and Ice. But although some Lakes be dried up in the Summer, and after a long cessation of Rains; we may not thence firmly conclude, that they had all their waters from those Rains, for they may be dried up. As for other Lakes without Rivers that are not dried up, their generation may be also referred to the Rains, viz. if that they have a profound Channel, in which so great a quantity of water collected from Rains may be kept, as that the heat of the Sun is not of force enough to consume it all before that another Rain falleth: but it is more probable, that these Lakes have peculiar Rivulets in the bottom, from which they receive so much water, as is con∣sumed by the exhalation. And this cause alone taketh place in those Pools that are found on the tops of Mountains; as in the Mountain Bructerus in Cenisius, and others. Now it is probable, that some of these also were gene∣rated long since by a great inundation of Waters, and thence conserved by Ri∣vers: nay, without question some of these Lakes that are near the Sea, and also salt, had their being from some inundation of the Sea through some pas∣sage; as the Lake Harlem, and others in Holland. There are also many salt Lakes in Peru. Not many Lakes without Rivers, and those not large.Neither is there any great number of these Lakes without Rivers; some small ones are found in Moscovia and Finland, the Lake or Pool Lychnitis in Macedonia, the Lake Appollonia in Mysia; one in Carniola, called Zrinzee; a round one in China; another called Hilam in Cochinchina; one in Zan∣haga; one at the City of Mexico, twelve Leagues in length. All these are small, except that in China, in comparison of great ones. The Lake Parima the greatest Lake.There is only one great Lake of this kind in the whole Earth, and which exceedeth all others, to wit, that of Parima in America, which is about 300 miles in length from East to West, and about an hundred in breadth, where broadest; yet nevertheless it doth not receive, nor send forth any Rivers. How it had its original, is no mean doubt; whether long since caused by the inundation of the Ocean, or flowing from some subterranean Foun∣tains or Springs? Also, whether it be conserved by Rains, or from the same Springs? It seemeth to me probable that it hath Springs at the bottom, that supply as much as the heat of the Sun consumeth. Proposition IV. To declare the generation and conservation of those Lakes that neither re∣ceive, nor send forth any Rivers. Of the Gene∣ration and Conservation of Lakes, that neither re∣ceive nor send forth Rivers.There is an infinite namber of these Lakes, seeing that most Rivers flow from Lakes, as from Fountains or Springs; especially those that arise in Moscovia, Finland, and Lapland, viz. where there is any cavity in the place of a Spring, but not so large as to contain a quantity of runing water; then it becometh a Lake; thence proceeds a River, the water gliding to the ad∣jacent places. Neither may we doubt, but that these Lakes have their ge∣neration and conservation from Springs in the bottom, whether it be a true Spring, or an apparent Spring, viz. Water flowing from another place thi∣ther through a subterraneous passage; which last appeareth more pro∣bable in reference to certain Lakes which immediately send forth great Rivers. Of such small Lakes there is a great multitude, as I have said; as Volga, from whence is the first original of the River Volga; Odoium, from whence floweth Tanais; Adac, the original of one of the branches of
the River Tigris; Osera in Moscovia; the Spring of the River Sosnam, which is discharged into Volga; and many other small ones, we only reckon up the greatest of most note. 1. The famous Lake Chiamy, not far from India, in the latitude of 31 de∣grees, from which run four Rivers of note, magnitude, and inundation into the Kingdom of Sian, Pegu, and the like, viz. the Rivers Menam, Axa, Cosmum and Martavam; but some Maps have a very small River which run∣eth into this Lake. 2. The Lake Cincuyhay in China, which sendeth forth a great River towards the North, which joyned with another entreth China. 3. The Lake Titicaca in America meridionalis of 80 miles compass; it sendeth forth a great River, which terminateth in a small Lake, neither is it seen any farther: and about this Lake are many Cities and Towns. 4. In Nicaragua in America is a Lake so called, about four miles from the Pacifick Ocean, and 100 miles from the Atlantick, into which it runeth in a great Channel. 5. The Lake Iroquois in Canada, the original of the River of St. Law∣rence. 6. The Lake Annibi in Asia, under the latitude of 61 degrees. Proposition V. To declare the generation and conservation of those Lakes that receive Ri∣vers, and let out none. Of Lakes that receive Rivers, and letteth our none.Now it is manifest, that these Lakes are generated and conserved from those Rivers which they receive, and that flow into them: For when that Rivers having gone from their spring; and arrived in their passage at any noted and ample cavity, the water is collected in this, and maketh a Lake. Now if the Earth at the bottom prove porous, it sucketh in the water, and transmitteth it the to adjacent Earth, or that which I suppose to be more fre∣quent, if there be a Subterraneous passage, or that such an one be caused by the water; through this part of the flowing water is carried away, so that on that account the Lake doth not flow over. Of these kind of Lakes there is but a small number on the Earth. 1. In the preceding Proposition we have said, that the Lake Nicaragua sendeth forth a River, which endeth in a small Lake; this Lake therefore shall be one of this number. 2. The Lake Asphaltites in Palestine, termed also the Dead-Sea, receiveth the River Jordan, but sendeth forth none; it is seventy miles long and five broad. 3. A small one in Asia minor. 4. A small one in Macedonia, called Janna, which receiveth little Ri∣vers. 5. The Lake of Geneva. 6. A Lake in Persia. 7. The Lake Soran in Moscovia, which receiveth two small Rivu∣lets. 8. The River Ghir in Africa, rising in Mount Atlas endeth in a Lake, as Leo Africanus writeth, and so some Maps do represent it; but others bring the River into Nubia.
Proposition VI. To explain the generation of those Lakes, which both receive and send forth Rivers. Of Lakes which both receive and send forth Rivers.There is a threefold difference of them, as we have said in the second Pro∣position; for either they receive a greater quantity of water than they send forth, or an equal quantity, or a lesser. If that they send forth a greater quantity, it is manifest that that Lake hath occult springs. If less, it is a sign that there are secret Aqueducts in the bottom, or a spungious Earth: but if it be equal, we gather that there are neither occult Aqueduct nor hidden springs in the bottom. The cause of the generation therefore is partly the same, which we shewed in the fourth Proposition, viz. the cavity and depression of the place, and the quantity of water, unto which are adjoyned occult springs and much rain, and dissolved Snow and Ice help on the same. Those that are generated from the influx of one River, they are placed in the middle tract of the Rivers, and render the Rivers directly, and of these there are a great number. So the River Niger maketh four Lakes in its pas∣sage. The Nile maketh many Lakes in its passage, which the Maps do not shew. The River Duina pasteth through six or seven at least: and you shall see other Rivers in Moscovia and Finland, in the great Maps, to make six∣teen Lakes before that they come to their mouth. But it is best to consider those, which produce other Rivers than they have received. The most famous for magnitude are these: The Lake Zaire.1. Zaire; a Lake of the procurrent of Africa, lying between the thir∣teenth and sixth degrees of South latitude, and therefore in Longitude hath 105 miles; in the midst of it lieth an Island (besides other small ones) of that magnitude, that they can bring into the field at least twenty or thirty thousand fighting men. This Isle doth in a manner twice cut the Lake; so that one part is accounted for a peculiar Lake, it is called Zembre: from this Lake flow three mighty Rivers, Nile, Cuama and Zaire; but certain small Rivulets do flow into the same, which do not only seem sufficient to supply the greatest of the same; so that it is probable, that it hath certain springs at the bot∣tom, although the inundation to be ascribed to be the showers that fall in the pluvial months. The Lake Zaflan.2. Zaflan; a Lake not far from Zaire between the tenth and sixth degrees of South latitude, and therefore about sixty miles in Longitude: It sendeth forth a branch into the Nile, and receiveth small Rivers. The Lake Sachaf.3. The Lake Sachaf, not far from Zaire, towards the Promontory of Good hope, sendeth forth a Rivulet, which being augmented with other waters, at length maketh the River of the holy Ghost: It receiveth small Ri∣vers. The Lake Aquilunda.4. The Lake Aquilunda receiveth a branch from the Lake Zaire, and send∣eth forth many Rivers into Congo. The Lake Onega.5. Onega; a Lake in Finland, between the 60 and 63 degrees of Latitude, hath 44 miles in length and 30 in breadth, where it is at the broadest: It re∣ceiveth many small Rivers, which proceed from other Lakes, and sendeth forth the moderate River Sueri into the Lake Lodoga. The Lake Lodoga.6. The Lake Lodoga, 30 miles long and 15 broad; it receiveth the River Sueri from Onega, and many lesser from other places; a moderate one from Ilmen, a noted Lake in Moscovia. It sendeth forth a River into the Baltick Sea. The Lake Osera.7. The Lake Osera, receiveth the River Kousam, and others, and sendeth forth Sosnam, which runeth into the Volga. The Lake Enaraok.8. Enaraok; a Lake or Marish in Lapland, in length 40 miles, in breadth 15: It receiveth the River Avilan, and other lesser Rivers, and sendeth forth the River Paes into the Lappian Sea.
The Lake ula.9. Ʋla, a Lake in Moscovia 30 miles long, and 15 broad; it hath in the midst of it an Island, as in the Lake Zaire: It receiveth a River that passeth through 10 Lakes, and sendeth forth a famous River. There are many more in Moscovia, Finland, and Norway. Lakes in China.10. In China are four famous Lakes, which receive Rivers, and again di∣stribute them into divers parts. Lakes in Brasil.11. In Brasil, in the same manner as in China, are the Lakes Euparia, and Puerto de los Reyes, in which the Rivers Argenta and Omoranna do meet and pass through. Proposition VII. Many Lakes contain fresh Water, very few salt or Marine. Divers Lakes contain fresh-water, very few salt.Those that have their being from Rains or Rivers, as also those that have their own proper springs more remote from the Sea; but those that are caused by an inundation of the Sea through a certain passage, are salt, as also some which have springs of Salt-water in the bottom: So the Lake Har∣lem and others in Holland, are salt. There is a salt Lake found in the Isle of Madagascar, in Peru, in Cuba, which hath two Leagues in circuit, scituate not far from the Sea, and although it receive certain Rivers of fresh-water, and breedeth Fish and Tortoises, yet it is salt. So the Lake Asphaltites, al∣though it receive the fresh-water of Jordan, yet it is not sweet, but sendeth forth so stinking and violent a vapour, that the circumjacent land for the space of half a mile is barren. Proposition VIII. Whether the Caspian Sea be a Lake, Streight, or Gulph of the Ocean. The Caspian Sea, whether a Lake, Streight, or Gulph.Some will have it to be properly termed a Sea; but no Sea can properly be termed a Sea except it be a part of the Ocean, that is, except it doth adhere to the Ocean by some manifest tract; but they will have it joyned to the Ocean by some subterraneous passage. The Ancients indeed would have it to be joyned with the Indian Ocean, others with the Northern; but experience sufficiently sheweth both to be deceived. Concerning a subterraneous passage the matter is uncertain; yet it seemeth to be probable from thence, that it receiveth so many Rivers, and those noted for great quantities, which quan∣tity of water the Channel could not possible contain, except that it exonerated the same by subterraneous Caverns and passages into the Ocean. But others suppose that quantity of water otherwise to be consumed, viz. that it pe∣netrateth not into the Ocean, but into the vicine Mountains, of which there is a great number, and almost all send forth springs. Scaliger and others assert, that this Caspian Sea is carried by a subterraneous passage into the Euxine Sea; but he alledgeth no probation of it: yet that may be a sign, by reason that the Euxine Sea perpetually sendeth forth waters in great abun∣dance through the Bosphorus, which abundance of waters some think that it doth not receive from the Rivers, but by a subterranean passage from the Caspian Sea: But it seemeth not so to me to have any conjunction with the Sea, and therefore I suppose it to be a Lake, and so rather to be called, than a Sea. Now whence it was first generated is a greater difficulty: Some say, that great Mountains of Salts are found in its bottom, and that thence it hath its saltness; but the water they suppose to proceed from the multitude of Ri∣vers that exonerate themselves into this Lake or Sea. Yet although these waters make to the conservation of it; yet I think it more probable, that this Sea for some Ages since was conjoyned to the Ocean; neither do I question but that the Euxine Sea will at length become a Lake for the same reason, the Bosphorus being obstructed.
Proposition IX. To make a Lake in a place, if that it be possible. Of making Lakes.It may be done, if that there be a River in the land adjoyning, or that a Spring be found in the place, and that the place be somewhat more depressed and low than in the adjacent places; although small Lakes may be also made on the tops of Mountains: therefore the place must be hallowed, and the earth dug away unto so great a depth and amplitude as we require, and its sides must be fenced with banks upheld by wood, if need so require; then an Inlett being made from the Channel of the river, the water must be let in; or if that a Fountain in that place affordeth a sufficient quantity of water, there is no need of that inlett or aqueduct. Proposition X. To take away, or dry up a Lake. Of drying up of Lakes.That may be performed two ways; 1. If the bottom of that Lake be high∣er, or of almost an equal depression with the vicine place, an Aqueduct being made, the water will flow from the place or Lake, and at length will render the bottom dry, the heat of the Sun assisting, and Earth being cast in. 2. If that the bottom of the Lake be lower than the vicine place, it must first be fenced with a trench in its whole circuit, leaving only some Channels or open passages; then making use of Water-mills, the water must be expelled and drawn out, and then the bottom must be covered with earth and dung, and such seeds cast in, which suddenly will take root, as Mustard-seed, Coleworts, and the like. By this mode the Dutch very well know how to drain Lakes, and to make fruitful lands of them. Proposition XI. Marishes are of two sorts; some are ouzey, and consisting of a mixt sub∣stance as it were, viz. of Water and Earth, so that it will not suffer the footsteps of a man: others have small standing Pools, with small portions of dry land here and there. Marishes are of two sorts.Of the first sort are those that receive or send forth no Rivers; such Ma∣rishes are in Holland, Brabant (where is the Marish de Peel,) and many in Westphalia, to which some of the second sort are admixed. But many of the second kind are found at the originals or springs of Rivers, whence some are wont to call these Springs or Fountains, Marishes; as the Marishes of Tanais in Moscovia, of the Nile, &c. Such Marishes also seem to be in Savolax, a Province in Finland in a great tract of land; also the Marishes of Enarack; the Chelonides Marishes of Africa, the Marishes of Chaldea; through which the Euphrates doth pass. These Marishes are frequently found in Woods and Desarts that are Ericose, because that the rain which irrigateth those lanes, and collecteth in its cavities, is not attracted by the Sun, by reason that the Leaves of Trees do repel its Rays. Such kind of Marishes are found here and there in Germany and Moscovia. Moreover these Marishes of the second sort are four-fold; viz. some both receive and send forth Rivers; some only receive, some only send forth, and some neither receive nor send forth. The first sort are generated and conserved, partly by occult springs and water effused before that it be brought to a certain Channel, and also from a greater quantity of water than can possibly be brought through a Channel; many of which sort are in Moscovia and Finland: Ma∣rishes of the last kind probably are conserved, and spring from rain and small springs. Aristotle calleth the Palus Maeotis a Lake, and that more rightly.
Proposition XII. Marishes have a sulphurous, bituminous, and fat Earth. This is discovered both from the black colour, and from the Reeds which are generated from it,Of the earth of Marishes. and easily take fire, as is found in Holland and other places. The cause is, by reason that such substances are contained in the raise of the earth, where these Marishes do exist. Yet all Marishes are not such; but where the Earth is stony and hard, there are no Marishes: for where there is a soft earth, there for a certain is a fat and sulphurous substance. Proposition XIII. To drain Marishes and Fens. Of draining of Fens.Although some Fens have an high profundity, yet no more is required to drain them to such a depth; which we may do, if that we cause the water to flow away by some Channel or Aqueduct. 2. If that after some weeks they have been dried by the Sun, we cast in a great quantity of dry earth. 3. If that we make a fire upon them: and 4. If that we hinder water from flowing into them; as rain, and the like. CHAP. XVI. Of Rivers in General. Proposition I. We comprehend in this Proposition the definitions necessary for this do∣ctrine. Of Rivers, and their definiti∣on.1. A River is water flowing from a certain place of the Earth to another place in a long tract, and within its Channel. A Channel is that cavity in the Earth in which the water is contained, which is more depressed and lower than the shore of that water. 2. A Rivulet is a River that hath not the profundity and breadth, as to ad∣mit of small laden Vessels. 3. That is termed Amnis which admitteth of those Vessels; but if they will bear moderate Vessels, great ones laden, then it is called by the general term of Fluvius, and Flumen. 4. That water is termed a Torrent which floweth from the Mountainous places with a violence. 5. Where two Rivers meet, that place is called a Confluence. 6. A River or Rivulet which floweth from another, is termed a Branch or Arm; yet for the most part it is taken for such an arm which is lesser than the other part of the River. Yet those are also frequently termed Arms which proceed from a River divaricated into two Channels. 7. A Fountain or Spring, is water bubling and flowing forwards from a cer∣tain place of the Earth. 8. A Well is, when the water bubleth up, but floweth not forwards.
Proposition II. Torrents and Rivulets may sometimes proceed from a quantity of rain, and dissolved Snow. From whence Torrents and Rivulets do proceed.For in the Mountainous, or more elevated parts of the Earth, are found ma∣ny Cavities, small Lakes, and standing Pools: Now if that so great a quanti∣ty of water flow into these from the falls of Rain or Snow, that they cannot well contain them, they overflow and run down on the more depressed places; and because that on every year this happeneth, it maketh a Channel for it self: but sometimes Torrents do flow without any Channel. From this cause, viz. Rains and the dissolution of Snow, many Rivulets are made also Torrents, and moderate or indifferent Rivers in those places, which have ridges of Moun∣tains in a long tract, as the Procurrent of Africa, India, Peru, Sumatra, and the like. And these Rivulets flow neither in the Summer, nor in the night, but only in the day. Proposition III. Most Rivulets proceed from Fountains. But Rivers of a great magnitude, have their Original either from the congress of many Rivulets, and in∣different Rivers, or flow from Lakes and Marshes. For no Rivers of a∣ny considerable magnitude (as the Albis, the Rhine) do flow from one Fountain, but exist from many small Springs, or Lakes:Rivulets pro∣ceed from Fountains. But these pro∣ceeding from Lakes, are augmented by the accession of other Rivers. The River Volga, or Rha, receiveth two hundred and more partly Rivu∣lets, and partly indifferent Rivers, before that it dischargeth it self into the Caspian Sea; and the Danube, as many before she flow into the Pon∣tus. And although that Pliny and Cardan write, that no Rivers flow into the Nile, yet experience testifieth the contrary to them that have travelled in Abyssine. The Proposition is easily proved by an enumeration of Exam∣ples. Springs pro∣ceed common∣ly from Hills & Mountains.The Springs of some Rivulets and Rivers are in Mountains, and elevated places; and some on a Plane. As for the Springs of those Rivers that proceed from Lakes, we have said in the former Chapter, that those Springs are in the bottom, or Channel of the Lakes: and that such Lakes are as it were Conduits and effusions about the Spring, before that the water floweth in a Channel, or in a greater quantity. For some Springs are covered with Earth or water, others open. The Springs on a Plane are of those Rivers, from which Tanais and Albis exist in their first tract, unto which others do accede. It were easie to collect other Examples. Cardanus deny h these Fountains to be generated in these plane places, but to be derived from the vicine Mountains, by some subterraneous passage. But I suppose that such Springs first make a standing Pool, or Marsh. For Tanais seemeth not to flow from a Spring, but from a Marsh, or some less profound Lake. Many are the Mountainous Springs of Rivulets, as of those of the Rhine, Po, Danube, Borysthenes, &c. The Nile, Wolga, and the great River of St. Laurence in Canada flow from a Lake. Yet there is one mode, by which from one Fountain a great River may proceed, viz. if that the Fountain be on an Elevated place; but the Channel of the River must be a little higher than the Altitude of the
inlet. So the flowing water, first in a more swift Current, then in a more slow, is collected in the Channel, and in course of time may be a very great River, by reason that so much did not flow out in the first genera∣tion. Proposition IV. Rivers are very much augmented by frequent Rains, and dissolved Snow, and that in divers seasons and months of the year. Rivers are much encreas∣ed by rain and snow.So in the Region of Peru, and Chili, some Rivers are so small that they flow not in the night time, but only in the day; because that then the water floweth from Snow dissolved on the Mountain of the Andes, through the heat of the Sun. So the Rivers both in the Oriental and Occidental Coast of the procurrent of Africa, as in congo, Angola, and the like, are bigger in the day than in the night. So it is also in the shoars of Malabar, and Chormandel in India. Yea in those four Regions in Summer time the Rivers are almost dried up, and in the Winter, or wet season, are overflowing. So Wolga in the Months of May, and June, aboundeth with water, so that the Lands and Islands, are then covered with water, in the other Months the Sands will hard∣ly admit a passage over them for Ships that are laden. The reason is, because that then, the Snow is dissolved on the Mountains, whence those Rivulets pro∣ceed, which being more than one hundred, do exonerate themselves into the Volga. So the Nile, Ganges, Indus, &c. are augmented from rains, or Snow: so that they overflow the Lands. But these augments happen in a different season, because that they arise from divers causes, and divers places; for by reason that rains are more frequent in the Winter; therefore Rivers are more high at the season, except another cause intervene from the dissolution of Snow, which sometimes happeneth in some places and Mountains in the Spring, in others in the Summer, and in others in the intermedial time, by reason that the Snow is then dissolved on the Mountains that are adjacent to the Rivulets of these Rivers. Moreover some Rivers, especially the grea∣ter, proceed from remote places, where it is then Summer, when it is Winter in the place through which they flow; and those variations cause the swelling of Rivers in divers seasons. But most Rivers do so in the Spring, because that then Snow is dissolved in most places. The variety of these causes must be shewed in the particular description of every River. Concerning that peculiar Spring of Japan, which floweth every day only for two hours, we shall speak in the following Chapter. Proposition V. What may be the Original of that water which floweth from Springs? Or whence are Rivers generated? The cause of water flowing from Springs.We have before our eyes the great River Rhine, Albis, and others, the gene∣ration of which by reason of their abundance of waters, seemeth more admi∣rable than that of Rivulets: but we have shewed in the precedent and third Proposition, that the water of Rivers partly proceeds from , and the disso∣lution of Snow, partly from Lakes, and partly from the meeting of Rivulets and Rivers. Therefore the question is not so much concerning the Rise and Springs of Rivers, as the Original and perpetuity of Fountains and Springs. The Opinion of Philoso∣phers, and Ge∣ographers, are various.The Opinions of Philosophers and Geographers concerning it are va∣rious.
1. Some think that all the water of Springs of Rivers proceed from Rain, or dissolved Snow. And this they take for a sign of it, that Rain, and dissol∣ved Snow do much augment the Rivers, that oftentimes they extend beyond their Channel, and overflow Regions: also that Rivers do much decrease, and some lesser sort of them are altogether dried up, when no Rain; for a long while in the Summer season, hath fallen; because that their Channel is not very profound, and therefore have collected little water: but those that have a deep Channel are not dried up in the Summer, by reason that they have gathered so much water from the Rains that fell, and dissolved Snow, so that all cannot be turned into vapours, except by a daily and con∣tinual heat. 2. Because that there are very few Rivers in those places where there is little rain; as in the more inward part of Africa there are few Springs. But these allegations resolve not the question, because we are not to demand, or seek the Original of Rivers, but only the Original of the Water of Foun∣tains. Therefore those that speak thus, have not well considered the sence of the question, as we have taken notice before; although also the experience that they alledge, is not general, because that there are Rivers found in pla∣ces, where there is little rain and no snow; although it be true in the Region of Peru, and Aegypt, which they assert. Moreover rain moistneth not the Earth above ten foot deep: but Fountains spring from a far greater profun∣dity. The Opinion of Seneca.2. Others suppose, that we should not demand whence the water of Fountains doth arise, by reason that water is an Element as much as Earth, Air, and Fire, concerning the Original of which we do not dispute; thus Seneca discourseth. But other Authours cut in twain this Gordian knot with the Sword of Alexander. For it is not enquired after, how that water hath a Being, but how it cometh to the places of Fountains, and not to other places. Moreover, the Earth doth not so flow forward as Rivers do: But for the Air, it is false that we should not seek concerning it, as they deter∣mine. 3. Aristotelians follow the opinion of their Master,See Aristotle līo. 1. Chap. 11. who in the whole Ele∣venth Chapter of his first Book of Meteors, endeavoureth to prove, that the water of Fountains is generated from Air, contained in the bowels of the Earth. He alledgeth these reasons; 1. Waters are generated from Air a∣bove the Earth, viz. Rain: therefore seeing that Air is in the bowels of the Earth, and that there is the same cause of condensation, viz. Cold: there∣fore he saith it is absurd for any one to think that water is not produced from Air there. 2. Experience testifieth that more great drops that fall, are made of small ones, and therefore the Original of Rivers must be, as it were, certain Brooks of water that meet in one part of the Earth; for therefore those that make Aqueducts, are wont to bring the water down by trenches, and small Channels. 3. Because that many Springs, and those of the greatest Rivers are found in mountanous places, very few in Plains, or Valleys: which is an evidence, that the water of Fountains proceedeth from a condensed Air or Vapour; which Air and Vapour tend towards higher places, and mountainous places are as it were spunges incumbing over lower places. Those are the reasons of Aristotle. The Opinion of Cardanus.4. Cardanus with others, suppose, that the water of Fountains proceeds from Rivulets, which are generated of watery vapours, condensed both within, and without the Earth, but that these Fountains alone scarce make up Rivers, unless assisted by rain, or dissolved Snow. His Reasons are these, 1. If betimes in the morning one view the Mountains, they will appear moist. 2. Rivers overflow in the morning, and so much the more, by how much the part of it is more near the Fountain.
But the perpetual and constant impetus of the water bubling and leaping from the Springs, doth not seem to have its Original from so weak and in∣constant a cause. Neither doth this opinion of Cardanus much differ from that of Aristotle; but that Aristotle placeth Air with the generation, Cardanus vapours, with the generation, to be the cause of Springs, and indeed small is the difference between Air and vapours. 5. Some of the Antients supposed Rains to be coacervated within the Earth in Cavities, and thence to break forth as from a mighty belly, and that all Rivers sprang from one of them, or from some other of them; neither that there was any other water generated, but what were collected in the winter months into those receptacles, they supposed to evade into the multitude of these Rivers, and therefore that they flowed more in the win∣ter than in the Summer, and that some were continual, and some not. They added the same cause that we have laid down in the first opinion. But Ari∣stotle receiveth this opinion, because that more water in one year floweth out from the mouth of the River, than the bulks of that whole part of Earth, or Land. 6. Of Modern Philosophers many, as also of the Ancients, determined that the Earth again received whatsoever waters flowed out from the mouth of the Rivers into the Sea. For the water of the Sea by an hidden pas∣sage went under the Earth, and is beaten in its passage through divers windings of the Earth, and strained through Sand and Chalk, which remo∣veth its saltness, and so passeth into pure water. I also defend this opinion, and suppose it true, yet so as not to exclude the cause laid down in the first and third place: the reasons are these. 1. Because more than one thousand Rivers exonerate themselves into the Sea, and the greater of them in such an abundancy, that that water, which they send forth into the Sea throughout the whole year, exceedeth the whole Earth; as the River Volga into the Caspian Sea, and also other Rivers. Therefore it cannot otherwise be, but that water must be sent forth into many places of the Earth, even to the Fountains of Rivers. Now if that this were not so, we could not possibly imagine, how that the Sea should not be augmented unto an immensity, or why Fountains should not cease to send forth water. Neither may it be obje∣cted, that so many vapours are elevated from the Sea, that are equivalent to the water, that the Sea hath received from the Rivers. For first, only Rain maketh those vapours: then again it is most false that so great a quantity of vapours should be elevated from the Sea, as are generated from the water which floweth from the Rivers into the Sea. Fountains the nearer the Sea, are salter than those farther distant.2. This opinion is proved from that, to wit, that the Fountains near the Sea are salt and brackish; and by how much they are nigher to the Sea, by so much they are the more salt, as on the Coast of Africa, especially on the Coasts of Choromaudel in India, where no Vines do grow, and where that all Wells are salt. In the City of Suez at the Termination of the Red Sea, all Wells are salt, or brackish, and the water two miles distant is somewhat salt. So in many Islands in the Sea, no Wells of fresh water are found, (though not so salt as the Sea water it self) as in the Isle of St. Vincent and others. In Pe∣ru in the low Region, the Lakes are salt by reason of the vicinity of the Sea. Yea in the Oriental Maritimate places, the Nuts called Coco Nuts are found somewhat salt. Also in the Mediterranean places themselves, Fountains of salt water are found, as in Lorrain, Lunenburgh, and the like. 3. Because that it is manifest, that the Sea emitteth its water through sub∣terraneous passages, from the salt Fountains of Lunenburgh, where beneath the Earth those Aqueducts full of salt or Sea-water are found. 4. Because that digging to a great depth, as also in Mines, much water is found, of which neither the Rain, nor the Air can be made the efficient cause.
How water cometh from the Sea to the places of Fountains, so as to become sweet, we have now shewed, viz. the bottom of the Sea is not every where Rocky or Stony, but in many places Sandy, Muddy, Gravelly, Spungy, drinking the water of the Sea, and by a continuation of the Earth, brings it by degrees to a long distance from the Sea, where at length the Guttulae unite; especi∣ally in a narrow space, such as are Mountains, and make a Fountain in the given place, or Cavity: but if so be that Cavity be hidden from the Earth, then the water so collected either followeth another way, wheresoever it be made, and so a Fountain seemeth to break forth in another place, which yet is not in than place; but is a River derived from the former place by a subterraneous passage. Or if that the water of that Cavity findeth no way about it self, neither by vi∣olence can break through the Earth that covereth it, then that water is not augmented; but what water flowed unto it to have been its encrease, that is averted to another place. For that is the property of all humid bodies, that all their parts and particles are moved towards that place where the deflux is made. So if you fill a Vessel with water, that the swelling or tumour may be above the brim of the Vessel, then all the parts of the extant water have an equal inclination, and power of deflux in the vicine part of the brim. But yet by reason of the mutual coherence of the particles (whose cause is de∣clared in Natural Philosophy) if that the deflux be made in one part of the brim, all the other parts leave the vicine brim, and draw to that part of the brim, or they follow where the deflux is made. So if you immerge a long crust of Bread into water, you shall see the water born upwards, and and the part of the Bread that is not immerged, to be humid.The Sea go∣eth under the Earth through Caverns. Moreover the Sea goeth under the Earth through Caverns, from which, after the same mode the water may glide or creep forth, unless you had rather ascribe it to evaporations, which are carried upwards, and uniting the drops in a narrow place. But because there are many things, which may seem to render this opinion less probable, these ought also to be considered, that it may be evident, that they weaken not this assertion laid down. Things to be noted.1. The places of Fountains are more elevated than the Superficies of the Sea, by reason that most of them are in Mountanous places, therefore wa∣ter cannot flow from the Sea to those places, because the nature of water is to move to places more depressed, or less elevated, as it is manifest from Rivers, and the Artifices of Drainers. 2. Although the bottom of the Sea be gravelly, muddy, and sandy, so that the water may penetrate it self through its particles; yet the reason doth not appear evident enough, but that it may more moisten the adjoyning Earth, and that which is not so high, than to glide upwards to the places of Fountains, seeing especially that the Earth is Rocky and Stony, as in the Mountains of the Island of St. Helena. 3. There is no reason, why the water, so gliding from the Sea, should not break forth in a middle way between the Sea and the Fountain. 4. In the most profound Mines, none, or very little water is found, as Thurn∣heuserus witnesseth. 5. This water of the Fountains should be salt, because that it doth proceed from the Sea. These are the chief Arguments which may seem to weaken the opinion proposed. For I pass by those slight ones alledged by others,Other Argu∣ments Answer∣ed. viz. that they suppose that the Sea is not sufficient to supply so many Rivers; then again that Rivers then should never be diminished, if that were the true cause of Rivers that we have laid down. But unto these two, the answer is easy, because that the Sea again receiveth the water again from the Rivers, that it sent forth into the Fountains. Then as for the other we have shewed before, that the question is not, neither do we determine, that all the water of the Rivers is from the Sea; but only concerning the water of Springs, which is not the alone cause of Rivers, as we have said already: and we also assert, that the water of Fountains is augmented from rains, and Dew; because that these, moistening the Earth, glide, or are drawn towards the places of Foun∣tains,
Four Other Arguments of great concern∣ment. where the efflux of the water is made, which we have explained by o∣ther Examples. We come now to those four Arguments alledged, which may seem to carry some weight with them. The first is esteemed very valid, as being taken from multiplicit experi∣ence: therefore many solutions are brought, and alledged by Learned men. First, they the most easily discharge themselves, who defend the Ocean to be more high than the Earth, for so they deny the assertion, and they say that this Altitude of the Ocean is the cause of Springs, because that Springs are less high than the water in the middle of the Ocean.See Olearius his Voyage in∣to Persia. Moreover Olearius in the Description of his Voyage into Persia, relateth that he ascended the Moun∣tain that adjoyneth to the Caspian Sea, and with an Astrolabe (or rather a Gaeodetical Instrument) to observe the Elevation of this Mountain above the superficies of that Sea, but found none, but that the extream superficies of that Sea was seen in the Horizontal Line, yea somewhat elevated above it, so that the Tumour of this Sea was found a little more high than the vertex of the Mountain, on which he made his observation. But in truth this solution can∣not be admitted of,See Chap. 13. because we have shewed in the Thirteenth Chapter, that the water of the Ocean is not higher than the Mountains and shoars of the Earth: and the frequent observations of Mathematicians, made on Towers, or shoars testifie it. And as for the observation of Olearius, that seemeth to cause no small difficulty here, for that the Caspian Sea is no higher than the vicine Lands, much less than the Mountains, is collected from hence, viz. that many Rivers do exonerate themselves into the Sea, therefore we must say, that refraction obstructed the observation of Olearius, and caused the wa∣ter of the Sea to appear higher than in truth it was: and peradventure the waves of the Sea encreased the cause, and the Mountain that he ascended was none of the highest. Some discovering the weakness of this Argument, bring this; that the na∣tural place of water is above the Earth, and therefore that it must cover the whole Earth, because that it is higher than the Earth. Now by reason that it is impeded from its natural place by the Mountains above the Earth, arising towards the Mediterranean places, therefore that part of the Ocean which ought to be where the Mountains and Elevated parts of the Earth are, seeing that it is not in its natural place, doth press down the subjected water, which indeed is in its natural place, but yet is driven or pressed to the bottom, by the Superiour water, which is not in its natural place, where when it findeth no way, neither can give place, it retireth towards the sides, and passeth under the Roots of the Mountains, where being collected as in a Cistern, it is squeez∣ed out by the water of the Ocean, pressing towards the vertex of the Moun∣tain. No other than in a Vessel which hath on the side a Funnel touching the very bottom of the Vessel, from whence we infuse water or other liquor into Glasses; If, I say, we drop in a stone into such a Vessel full, or half full of liquor, the liquor flieth out through the Orifice of the Funnel. This is the subtilty of Scaliger; but in truth it is very thick. For water is not expelled so from the bottom of Mountainous places towards the vortex, because that experience testifieth the contrary in Trenches; and if that were so, all Spring waters should be salt: moreover it is false that he assumeth, that part of the water is not in its natural place, and therefore presseth down the subjected part. for this is taken up gratis, and contrary to experience; because that the water presseth not down the subjected part, except when it is higher than the vicine water, and therefore where the Superficies of the Ocean is Sphe∣rical, it resteth: but if that any motion were made from the pressure, this would drive the water of the Sea to the Coast, where the place is more broad, not through the small Caverns of the Earth. Now it is certain that water floweth in from the bottom of the Sea through the great Caverns, but they make not the Fountain fresh, because they take not away the saltness of the water.
I think not the solution of the Argument to be difficult, if that we consi∣der how water cometh to the Fountain, viz. not from any Channel from the bottom of the Sea, or foot of the Mountain (for so it would retain its saltness) but by or through a continual progression of the watery particles, or a creeping in the Terrestial matter, to the places adjacent to the Fountain, where at length it is gathered into drops by reason of the cavity, and continual successi∣on of the water, and so causeth a Spring.Veins of water in the bowels of the earth. For this we find in the Earth dug to a great depth, that here and there drops of water do consist, and are forced by those that are nigh, so that a little Rivulet is made, which are termed Veins of water. Many such Rivulets, if collected into one Cavity, make a Fountain; as those persons well known that are skilled in making of Foun∣tains, or Aquiducts, or Wells. For in Wells water is collected from many drops, which meet together in the bottom of the well, from the adjacent Earth. And those that make Aquiducts, bring the water by gutters and trenches into one place, so that the drops may fall from the higher places into the Ca∣vity. But if that you object that many Fountains bubble up in the midst of stones, by reason of which it is not probable that the watery particles should so creep forwards; to that I Answer, that this confirmeth our Opinion: For those stones do not go through from the top to the foot of the Mountain (at least in those Mountains, where the Fountains are found) but only occupy the Superficies of the Mountain, and a certain small profundity within the Earth of the Mountain is more soft, or less stony, or at least such as may receive and attract water. Therefore when by penetration it is come to the stony part, because that it can penetrate no farther, there it standeth, and is colle∣cted into drops, and maketh a springing Fountain between the stony parts; to wit, if that a passage be granted; and that the Mountains and Rocks of the Isle of St. Helena, and almost of all Islands, are not within so rocky and hard, is collected from hence, that almost all those Mountains have sometimes burn∣ed, or at the least smoaked, which is discovered from the Ashes on the Earth, and also the Brimstone, or Sulphur found in those places: add moreover what we observed before, that the spring of the water is not alwaies there where it seemeh to be, but floweth from some higher place through a subterraneous passage to the Fountain, and so causeth the water to leap up with some force, which I suppose to be done in many Fountains, and the more, if we con∣sider, that fire is moved also downwards, by reason of the continuation of the matter, when in truth, if that the same be free, it tendeth upwards. So if you put the end of a long piece of Iron in the fire, this will penetrate through the whole Iron, untill it come to the other extream, al∣though this other extremity doth not tend upwards but down∣wards. The second Argument an∣swered.So much for the first Argument; unto the second I answer, that a reason may be given, why the Sea water should not penetrate so much into the Earth towards the Center, as towards the Mountains, viz. because the Earth is there more full of Mettals, and hard, as experience testifieth: but where it is not so hard, there the water penetrateth; and therefore we deny not but that Rivers, or at least sweet or salt Lakes may be found beneath the bottom of the Sea, within the Earth, towards the Center, where any such Cavity is. But because that there are few such Cavities, and that every where the Earth is Metallous, and hard beneath the bottom of the Sea, therefore it cannot continually imbibe water, but when it is full it ceaseth to imbibe any more; neither doth it receive more. Therefore then the water glideth to∣wards higher places, unto the motion of which, it is probable that the mu∣tation of the height of the Sea availeth much; sometimes in this, and sometimes in that part, by reason of the floods, waves, or tempest. For the water being made higher, more presseth the water, and promoteth its ingress through the Earth to the Springs. And seeing that every day the Altitude of the Sea is augmented, and diminished in the parts of the Ocean, not only by storms, but also by the flux, and reflux; therefore such a pressure
happeneth every day: but I question whether this cause can effect much. The third Ar∣gument an∣swered. Unto the third Argument, I say that the reason is the disposition of the pla∣ces, and of the Earth it self; and as I said, that the humour is moved, and glideth towards that part, where the flux is made: neither do I think it need∣eth any farther explication. The fourth Argument Answered.The fourth Argument taken from the saltness, hath a more difficult soluti∣on: because that it seemeth not possible, that the saltness should be taken away only by transcolation; for the saltness of the water consisteth in a double Salt (which the Aristotelians never observed) the one of which, the Chy∣mists aptly call fixed, the other volatile Salt. And the fixed Salt may in∣deed be separated from the marine water, as well by continual transcolation, as by coction, and distillation of the water: but the volatile Salt because it is spirituous is immediately advanced with the water, neither can it be separated by frequent and often repeated distillation: Therefore it is hard to give a mode, by which this volatile salt spirit in its passage between the Sea and the Fountain, may be separated from the Sea water. Yet in the mean while these will suffice for the solution. 1. Although we have not discovered the mode, and artifice, by which this volatile salsitude may be separated from the Sea water, yet we must not deny, but that it may be separated: for by nature we find it separated; viz. for fresh showers fall into the Ocean, which yet were generated of the vapours taken up from the Sea. 2. Those particles of Salt water penetrating the Earth before they flow to their Fountain, are mixed here and there with other waters proceeding there from rain, or vapours, and so that small saltitude, that they yet had, is rendred alto∣gether insensible. 3. It is not true that the salsitude is altogether insensible in all Springs, because that some Fountains are salt, as we said before; other-some brackish a little, as those, two miles from the City Suez, and in pla∣ces less remote from the Sea. Therefore there is need of a long transcola∣tion, and gentle evaporation, to separate the water from the volatile Salt, and by this artifice we make Sea water less salt, and such also is the gene∣ration of rain water, which therefore is not salt, or at least less salt. For it is certain that sometimes saltish kinds of rain do fall into the Sea. Therefore the waters of Fountains proceed partly from the Sea or subter∣ranean waters, partly from Rivers, and Dew, that moisten the Earth. But the water of Rivers partly proceedeth from Springs, and partly from Rain and Snow. Proposition VI. Certain Rivers hide themselves in the midst of their passage under the Earth, and in another place rise up again as if they were new Rivers. Of Rivers which in the midst of their passage hide themselves un∣der the Earth, and rise again.The most celebrated of them are, 1. The River Niger, which meeting the Mountains of Nubia, is observed under them, and cometh sorth again from the other Occidental quarter. 2. Tigris having passed the Lake Arethusa, meeting the Mountain Tau∣rus, is hidden in a Cave, and floweth out on the other side. Then when it hath passed the Lake Thospites, it is again obscured in subterranean Caverns, and then after it hath thus run the space of about six German miles, it breaketh forth again.
3. About Arcadia in Peloponnesus many such Riverets are to be found, as Aristotle writeth in his first Book of Meteors, Chapter Ele∣venth. 4. Alpheus, a River of Achaia, is absorbed by the Earth. The Grecians write, that it keepeth its course under the Sea, and beneath the Earth, even unto Sicilia, where they will have it to emerge on the Coast of Syracuse, and to be that River that is called Arethusa in Sicilia. Now this they especially collected from this, viz. that Arethusa in Sicilia every fifth Summer cast up the dung of those Beasts at that time, when the Olympian Games were celebrated, and the dung and garbage of the slain Victims were cast into Alpheus. Therefore being carried with a direct Current, they were cast up in Sicilia. 5. The River Guadiana, between Portugal and Biscay, in times past called Anas, wholly obscureth it self at Medelina; and about 8 German miles fur∣ther discovereth it self again. 6. Dan (which flowing with the River Jor, maketh Jordan) breaketh forth some miles from its Fountain Phiala. Straw or rushes being cast into the same, are found and discovered in the Fountain or proruption of the River Dan. The Reasons why these Rivers hide themselves under the Earth, and again emerge, are, 1. The obstacle of a more elevated place, than the Chan∣nel of the River. 2. Either perchance some cavity existing in the Earth, or some inconstant matter, which easily giveth place to the gliding Ri∣ver. There are also other Rivers, which hide themselves under the Earth; but do not again emerge, as we shall shew in the following Propositions. Proposition VII. Most of the great and indifferent Rivers, as also a great part of the lesser, do exonerate themselves into the Sea, or a Lake; and the place where this exoneration is made, is termed the Mouth of the River. Some Rivers have one, some three, and some more such Mouths. Some of the Rivers of indifferent magnitude, as also the lesser sort, discharge themselves into greater Rivers: the others either stagnate, or are sucked up by the Earth. Most Rivers, both great and small, lose themselves in the Sea, or in Lakes.Concerning the greater Rivers, the thing is evident by the Example of the Rhine, the Danube, the Wolga, and such like: For the Danube is exo∣nerated into the Euxine Sea by seven Mouths; the Wolga hath at least seventy Outlets or Mouths; the Nile hath seven, and where it overfloweth, more. The cause why greater Rivers do exonerate themselves into the Sea, is their abundance of water and vehement course. Now why they have more outlets than one, there is a twofold reason for the same; 1. The abundance of water. 2. The generation of Sands and ridges in the mouths, which in pro∣gress of time was so augmented, that they become either part of the Land or Island, and so cause, that the River gliding is divided into two branches. And when many such ridges are generated, the River is divided into many branches, or one mouth into many; but then for the most part the mouths are carried forwards, and the Sea recedeth from the Land. Courses of wa∣ter often made by the Indu∣stry of Men.The Ancients testifie, that the Nile in times past let it self into the Sea by one mouth, which was termed Canobus. Unto these two former causes a third may be added, viz. Human Industry; for men oftentimes from some River derive courses of water, and prepare a passage or Channel for them into the Sea, partly to water their Fields, and partly for the convenience of Navigation; which Aqueduct in progress of time, by the violence of the water, becomes greater. Therefore the Ancients write, and that not with∣out
probability, that all the mouths of the Nile, except Canobus, were made by men. But of this we shall treat more fully in the following Proposition; where also shall be declared, how it cometh to pass, that one River floweth into the Channel of another. Wolchda in Moscovia (not Wolga,) ariseth from a Lake, and exonerateth it self into another Lake. Rivers, and Riverets, which neither exonerate themselves into the Sea, or into other Rivers, are either Arms or Branches of other Rivers, or else peculiar Rivers. Those which are branches of other Rivers very probably do stagnate, and go not under the Earth. Now the cause why they tend not towards the Sea is twofold; 1. Because the Channel is not so deep, and there∣fore they have not much water. 2. The more hard Earth hindereth the progress. 3. Many of them are made to water the Fields, and for the more easie use of water. 4. The Mouth is obstructed, the Sea departing, and the Land augmenting or promoting towards the Sea, or the banks or ridges gene∣rated in the Channel, are so augmented, that they admit of no water, but repel it; so that branch of the Rhine, which formerly discharged it self into the Belgick Ocean near the Village of the Catti, now stagnates in the mid∣way, between Leyden and that Village. But those peculiar Rivers, which neither exonerate themselves into the Sea, nor into other Rivers; but rising in the Earth, seem to be absorbed by the Earth; these Rivers are very small, also few; as also those that flow from the Mountainous places of Peru, India, and Africa, are swallowed up either within the Sandy soil, or are absconded in the Earth. So at Meten, a Village in Arabia, near the Gulph, is found a River with a glorious Chan∣nel. Under these Reeds, in the Summer season, the streams hide them∣selves with such a silent course, that there appeareth nothing of humidity on the top; but if that no way be admitted to these Riverets under the Earth, they make Marishes and small Lakes. Notwithstanding some run with so slow a stream; that almost so much is separated by exhalations, as they receive by the Stream, and so are stayed on the Earth, and neither make Lakes, nor are absorbed; as the Riverets Conitra, Salle, Marefsa, Jeleesa, and others in Moscovia. Proposition VIII. Whether the passage or Channel, through which the Rivers run, be made by the Industry of men, or by Nature? Of the Chan∣nels of Rivers.It is probable, that the Channels of those Rivers which were not gene∣rated with the Earth, were made by hands, on those very accounts: 1. Be∣cause that Experience testifieth, that when new Fountains do flow, the water so flowing out maketh not a certain Channel to it self, but doth dilate it self through the adjacent Land. And therefore, if that it must flow, there is need of the help of man to hollow a Channel. 2. It is manifest, that men have made many Channels: So the Chineses made a Channel, by which water runeth from the yellow River into another River. 3. Because Lakes and Marishes do confirm the same; such as are found about the Foun∣tains of many Rivers that are on a plain; such as are those Lakes or Marishes, from which the Nile, Tanais, Wolga, and others do flow. Which Lakes we doubt not, but to be generated and conserved from the effusion of water, made round about by the Fountain; and therefore men made a cer∣tain Channel to defend their Fields from such a water, into which Channel the water might fall and drain the Lands. The same must be understood of Ri∣vers, whose Springs are on the Mountains. Of affinity to this Proposition is this other, viz. Whether that Rivers, which exonerate themselves into others, or meet together, made that passage by their motion; or whether they were brought into them by men which made a Channel? The latter seemeth more probable, for the reasons before
alledged. The same must be observed concerning the branches of Rivers and Circumductions, by which Islands are made in the Tanais, Wolga, &c.Of Isles made in Rivers. So one Arm of the Euphrates formerly passing through the Ghaldean Marishes, was let out into the Sea; afterwards it left its course, many Aqueducts and Channels being made by the Natives to water their grounds; neither doth it arrive to the Sea, its mouth being obstructed, and its water is partly taken up in the Aqueducts that are made, and partly averted into the other Arm, which exonerateth it self into the Tigris. And so it seemeth to be the case of other Ri∣vers, which we now see do not go forwards into the Sea, but to stagnate. It is probable, that in times past they did exonerate themselves into the Sea. Proposition IX. Why no salt Rivers are found, seeing that Salt-springs are found in many places. The reason, why no Salt Rivers are found.The reason is, because that men have no need of Salt-water, and therefore make no Channel, by which the water of the salt Fountain may flow, by rea∣son that they can have Salt at an easier rate: But if that a fit Channel were prepared from those salt Springs, we should have salt Rivers; such as are in Lunenburgh and other places, under the Earth. Neither do we question, but that many Rivers of Salt-water do flow from their Fountains under the Earth. Proposition X. The Channels of Rivers, by how much they are the more near their Foun∣tains, by so much they are the more high; and by how much they are the more near the Mouths of Rivers, and the Sea, by so much (for the most part) they are the more depressed. Furthermore, of Channels of Rivers.But in some Channels some parts more removed from the Spring, are higher than that part more near to the Fountain; either by reason of the Hills and Valleys, as I may so say, in their Channels, or by reason of their Whirl∣pools: yet no part of the Channel is higher than the Fountain. The flowing of water.The cause or reason of the Proposition is manifest, because that water floweth not but from a place more high to a place more low, and so every part of the Channel (especially the mouth of the River) is lower than the Spring: for otherwise it would flow back again to the Fountain. Now that the elevation of the Channel doth decrease even to the mouth of the Ri∣ver, that at least is true concerning many parts of the Channel; for be∣cause here and there are found Whirlpools in a River, places more depressed; and on the contrary, ridges and little hills; thence it cometh to pass, that one part of the Channel, although more removed from the Springs; is higher than the other part of the Channel which is more nigh the Fountain; and yet notwithstanding the water floweth from this to that, because that quan∣tity of water floweth into the places depressed, that the superficies of it be∣cometh higher than the little hillocks or ridges, or the vicine patts, which being more elevated, lie towards the mouth. And there is scarce any River to be found, whose Channel hath not these inequalities; especially in the Nile and Wolga these ridges do abound. A Cataract, what.And where the water falleth from a higher place to a more depressed part of the Channel; if the depression be great, the place is termed the Cataract of the River, where the River runeth downwards with a great violence. Such Cataracts great Rivers have, especially the Nile.
For the Nile in two places of his Channel falleth down between the Moun∣tains with that noise and rapidness, that the Inhabitants are reported to be deafned by the same, Wolgda also, a small River in Moscovia (not Wolga) hath two Cataracts near Ladoga. So the Zaire, a River in Congo, six miles from the shoar, hath a Cataract, where it falleth from a Mountain: also the Rhine at Belefilda and Scaffusia, falleth with a great noise. But Drainers have observed, that if the bottom of the Channel be depressed one pass in 200 paces, it will hardly be navigable by reason of its celerity. Seeing therefore that all great Rivers are Naviga∣ble, we infer, That the depression of the Channel is no greater than one pass or mile in 200: but particular Cataracts and Whirlpools are excepted. Now this depression of one part of the Channel beneath the other part is termed Libramentum; and the depression of the mouths of the River beneath the place of the Fountain is termed, the Libramentum of the River. Proposition XI. Why Rivers have, or acquire a greater Latitude in one part of them, than in the other. Of the Lati∣tude of Ri∣vers.The causes are fourfold; 1. If that the bank or shoar be more low in this part, than in that. 2. If that the Earth of the shoar be less hard and cohe∣rent, as not being sufficient to resist the violent access of the River, which sometimes proceedeth from the winds, or plenty of water. 3. If that the Channel on that part be less profound, or hallowed, or have ridges: And 4. If that it flow from any Cataract into that part. Proposition XII. The Channels of Rivers become more or less depressed, sometimes in this, and sometimes in that part. They become less depressed, or elevated, and not so hollow; 1. If that Ridges be generated. 2. If that the River become more broad on that part. 3. If that the flux become less swift. The depression or cavity of the Channel is augmented, if that the flux of the River be more vehement and swift, especially from some Cataract, or be∣tween the narrownesses of the shoars; more especially, if that the whole bot∣tom consist of earth less coherent. Proposition XIII. Why some Rivers run with a more swift current, and others with a more slow. And why one and the same River is carried with a swift current in one place, and with a slow in another, which is observed of the Rhine in many places. Of the motion of Rivers.The causes are, 1. The Altitude of the Spring. 2. The depression in the parts of the Channel, or bottom (especially in the mouth,) for if that the bottom be depressed one mile in two hundred; Drainers have observed, that the water is so swiftly moved, that there is great danger in sailing: For where there are Cataracts, there the Rivers rush with a mighty violence; and therefore Torrents are carried so furiously, because that they flow from Moun∣tains. 3. The streightness of the Channel, and profundity joyned with an abundant quantity of water; as when Rivers pass between two Mountains or procurrent Lands.
Rivers famous for their swift course, are the Tigris, Indus, Danube, Yrtiis, Malmistra, that floweth with so great a noise, that it may be heard a great di∣stance off. Proposition XIV. The mouths of Rivers may be by so much the more easily obstructed, by how much they are the more broad, and by how much they are the deeper, or less depressed, and by how much there is less quantity of water, and the flux is less swift and vehement. For these causes make the River to be carried with a lesser violence, neither doth it thrust forth the Terrestrial matter, which is collected in its mouths, but rather suffereth it to sink. Proposition XV. Very few Rivers are carried in a direct course from the Spring to the Out∣let, many seek divers quarters in their flux, and some flow with ma∣ny windings. The course of Rivers from the Spring.The cause seemeth partly to be the industry of men, partly the motion of the water, partly the interposition of a ridge or bank in its direct course. Winding Rivers are, 1. Rio de Orellana in Brazilia, making innumera∣ble windings, so that its Passage or Channel is reckoned to be above 1500 miles, when in a direct line from the spring of it to the mouth are only 700 miles. 2. The River De Madres in Anatolia, which hath 600 windings. 3. The River Toera arising in Siberica, floweth with so many curvatures, or windings; and the Russians and Siberians, when they sail in it, carry the Boat or small Vessel and its lading by land from one winding to another, to a∣void greater expence. Proposition XVI. Whether the Lakes, through which some Rivers do seem to pass, (or to enter into, and to go out from) be caused by Rivers? or whether they have their peculiar Springs, and augment the water of Rivers? also whether that a River flowing from a Lake be the same with that which floweth in? Of the cause of Lakes.All Rivers have not such Lakes, but some only. Nubia, a River of Afri∣ca, hath five; the River Niger four; Rhodanus, the Lake Lemanus, &c. Concerning those Lakes we have spoken in the preceding Chapter, viz. that a River going forth must be compared with that which entereth in: if that which goeth forth be greater than that which entereth in, there will be pecu∣liar Springs in the bottom of the Lake, which causeth that River: but if that a lesser, or at least no greater, goeth forth, this Lake is made and con∣served by the River entering in, and the cause or original of its generation was the latitude and cavity, or depression of the Channel; and a Lake may be made from any River, as we have said in the preceding Chapter. Although the River going forth be situated almost in a direct line with the River entering in, yet those two Rivers shall be accounted one River, or the parts of one River, viz. when that which goeth forth is greater than that which entereth in: for if it be lesser, or no greater, I think we ought not to question, whether that which goeth forth be the same with that which co∣meth in.
Other Notes or Signs are in some, as the Rhodanus entereth the Lake Le∣manus, and again goeth forth▪ and yet causeth not that Lake; which is disco∣vered, besides other tokens, from the colour, which this River beareth con∣trary to the Lake; neither doth the Rhine cause any Lake, but is produced and conserved from waters bubling under the earth; yet I do not propose these as undoubted. Proposition XVII. Most Rivers are by so much the broader, by how much they are near to their mouth, or removed from their Spring, and great is their Latitude in their Mouths or Outlets. The Mouths of Rivers broader than at their Springs.The cause is, 1. Because other Rivers enter into that which exonerateth it self into the Sea, and so the quantity of water is augmented. 2. Because the Channel is less depressed in the parts nearer the mouth. 3. Because that the water is forced back by the wind blowing from the Sea from the mouth to the Fountain, which violence is only discovered in the parts near to the mouth, not in those remote and near the Fountain. 4. The Sea it self, when such a wind bloweth, entereth the mouth, and rendereth it more large and broad by ve∣hement agitation. And by so much the outlets are larger and broader in great Rivers, by how much they are the fewer. Great are the mouths or outlets of the River Ma∣ragnon in Brazilia; of St. Laurence in Canada; of the Zaire in Africa; of Rio de la Plate in Brazilia: for this River is carried into the Sea by an out∣let of 40 miles, as some have observed; or as others, of 20 miles only. And I suppose those that write of 40 miles, comprehend the other mouths of the River together. Those who have been in Congo, relate that the mouth of the Zaire is 28 miles: and these Rivers sending forth such a large quantity of water, overcome and obscure both the salt taste of the water, and the motion of the Sea towards the shoar, and that unto 10 or 12 miles in the Sea. Proposition XVIII. The water of Rivers carrieth with it many particles of various Metals, Minerals; Sands, of oyly or fat Bodies. Rivers in their course carry various things with them.Some Rivers carry gold, that is sands mixed with some grains of gold, and such are 1. some in Japan; 2. In the Islands of Lequeo not far from Japan; 3. A Riveret called Arroe in Africa, which springeth in Monomotapa from the foot of the Mountains of the Moon, in which Mountains there are golden Mines; and it floweth into Magnice, a River in Soffalae. 4. In Guiney, where the Negroes separate these grains from the sand, and sell it, or exchange it with the Europeans for Toyes or slight Commodities. 5. In the Riverets a∣bout Mexico, grains of gold are also gathered up, especially after showers of Rain. Which must be understood of all these Riverets: For except in the times of showers, scarcely any, or very little, is found. 6. In Peru. 7. In Sumatra. 8. In Cuba. 9. In Hispaniola and other adjacent Isles. 10. In Guiana a Province in America. 11. In the Rivers of Caribana great grains are found after showers. 12. Many Riverets and Springs are found in the Re∣gions about the Alpes in Germany, especially in the Province of Tirol, from the water of which gold and silver is extracted, although nothing of grains be conspicuous in them, because they carry very small Particles or Atomes. The Rhine also carrieth golden clay in many places, as also the Abbis. In times past the River Tagus was famous for rowling down Sand-gold; but at this day no such are found in it: neither do I remember that any River in Europe is celebrated for such riches. Also in Hassia at this time a small River is report∣ed to be found, in the sands of which were grains of gold; but I have read no Author worthy of credit concerning it.
No Silver Rivers or Riverets are taken notice of by Writers, yet I doubt not, but that there as many, or more Riverets, which carry grains of gold; but because they are not so easily discovered from the sand, and no great gain can be obtained, therefore it hath not yet been observed by any. The same is also the cause why we meet with no mention of those Riverets that carry grains of Iron, Copper, Tin, except of very few, of which questionless there are a great number, the admirable effects of which being discovered, men ad∣mire and are amazed, and vulgar Philosophers fly to an occult quality. Let us only cast an eye on that River in upper Germany,A strange Ri∣ver in Germany. which changeth Iron into Copper, as the Vulgar think; so that if you hang an Iron shoe in it, you will draw it out Copper. But the Iron is not changed into Copper, as is vulgarly supposed, but the grains and particles of Copper and Vitriol that are in this River, corrode the Iron by the assistance of the motion of the water, and the particles of the Iron being removed, those of the Copper succeed in their pla∣ces. This the Modern Physicians, that are skilful in Chymistry, have learned by another experiment. Much less are the Riverets that are impregnated with many particles of kinds of earth and salts observed: But we shall explain in the following Chapter the Mineral and Metallick Springs. From this admixture of various particles proceedeth the great diversity of waters in Rivers and Wells. The water of some, if that you use it to boyl Meat, maketh it black, (which is a sign that it is impregnated with Iron;) neither are Pease so easily softned, as when they are boyled in other water which is somewhat more fat. Of divers waters the same or like Beer can∣not be made. Now the Albis is of the number of these fat ones, as I may so say. The cause of this variety is to be sought from the variety of the Lands, through which the River runeth, which are either stony, gravelly, or metal∣lick. And experience testifieth, that Rivers, whose water is fat, do run through clayie Lands, so all the places that adjoyn to the Albis are fruit∣ful. Proposition XIX. The waters of most Rivers differ in colour, gravity, and other qua∣lities. The waters of most Rivers are of diffe∣rent qualitiesFor some waters are black, some inclining to black, some inclining to red, some to white. And this diversity of them is chiefly noted, when that two Rivers do meet; for we may discover for many miles those waters where now they exist in the same part of the Channel: From whence also 'tis manifest, that they differ in gravity, when that one rather sinketh to the bottom of the Channel, than the other; although this is made more manifest by the examination by weight. The water of the Ganges is accounted the most wholsome, and the most light; and the great Mogul, in whatsoever place he is, causeth this wa∣ter to be brought him, of which he only drinketh. Some will have the water of the Nile to be the most fruitful, and the most wholsome. Most heavy waters are impregnated with Iron or Mercury. In great Rivers we must have respect to the Riverets, of which they are compounded: For the Rhine receiveth many Mineral Riverets; so al∣so doth the Danube of Gold, Iron, and Vitriol: and hence have they their quality, although many Fountains have little of them.
Proposition XX. Some Rivers every year at a set time are so augmented, that they overflow their Channel, and inundate the adjacent Lands. Of the increase and overflow∣ing of Rivers.The most famous of those is the Nile, that so encreaseth, that it overspread∣eth all Egypt, except the Hills. In Congo, Angola, Monomotapa, Soffala, Mosambique, from those it is known that the Fountains of the Nile are the great Lake Zaire,River Nile. (or in the Lake Zaire) which is situate in the procurrent of Africa, in a middle place between the Eastern and Western shoar, under the tenth degree from the Equator towards the South, as we have said in the former Chapter. Near unto this Lake are many ridges of Mountains, which are called the Mountains of the Moon; so that the Lake lieth, as in a Valley, between Moun∣tains. Now because that these places lye from the Equator towards the South, therefore the reason of the Solary motion requireth that they should have Winter when that we have Summer: but by reason of their small distance from the Equator, they feel no cold; but instead of Snow they have almost conti∣nual Rains two hour before and after Noon in the Kingdom of Congo; the Clouds hardly permitting the sight of the Sun: with the same Clouds the tops of the Mountains appear as covered; and in these Mountainous places rains and showers are almost continually, which run down like Torrents, and all flow together into the Lake Zaire, and from thence into the Channel of the Nile, Zaire, Cuama, and others that arise from the same Lake, but yet do not a∣bound with so great a quantity (yet the Zaire doth overflow every year) as the Nile, because the Channel of them is more deep; and after a short Tract they exonerate themselves into the Sea: yet all of them encrease at the same time, and disgorge themselves of a great quantity of water into the Sea. River Niger.The second River among those that overflow the adjacent Lands at a certain time, is the Niger, of no less Tract than the Nile, though not so famous. It overfloweth at the same time that the Nile doth. The third River of the overflowing Rivers is the Zaire, a River in Congo, of which we have spoken.River Zaire. Add to this the lesser Rivers of Congo. The fourth is Rio de la Plate, a River in Brasil, which overfloweth the adjacent Fields at the same time with the Nile,Rio de la Plate. as Maffaeus writeth. Rivers▪ Ganges and Indus.The fifth of the overflowing Rivers is the Ganges. The sixth is the River Indus: these two Rivers in the Pluvial months of those Regions, pour themselves forth upon the Lands without their Channels, where then the Natives do gather the water into standing Pools, that in the other months of the year, when there is almost no Rain, they may thence fetch water; and this inundation causeth great fertility in the Fields. The seventh comprehendeth many, viz. four or five, which flow from the Lake Chiamy in a moderate Channel, and exonerate themselves into the Gulph of Bengala, passing through the Kingdoms of Peru, Sian, and others. That which passeth through the Country of Sian is called Menan. And at the time of the inundation, the Fields and Streets of the Cities are covered with wa∣ter, so that they are forced to make use of Boats to sail from one house to ano∣ther. And this inundation also causeth exceeding fertility. River Macou.The eighth is Macou, a River in Camboja, which overflows in the Summer months. River Parana.The ninth is the River Parana, which overfloweth after the same manner as the Nile doth. The tenth in Choromandel a part of India, the Rivers overflow by reason of the plenty of waters that flow from the top of the Mountain Gatis in the Pluvial months.
River Euphra∣tes.The Eleventh is the Euphrates, which at set-times of the year overfloweth Mesopotamia. The Twelfth of these overflowing Rivers is Sus, a River in Numidia,River Sus. which overfloweth in the Winter. I have not read of any other Rivers, that I can remember, that do overflow in an Anniversary time of the year, although some may do it in most years; to wit, the River Obius, and Flavius a River of China. There are many-Rivers that overflow without any order, or in a set-time, yea there is scarcely any River of noted magnitude which overfloweth not its Banks sometimes: So it is evident concerning the Albis, the Rhine, and the like. And but that the capacity of the Channel, and the height of the Banks obstructed, all great Rivers (in an Anniversary time) would inundate, because that most of them are much augmented in the Spring season. And it may so happen, that a River that did use to overflow, may begin to do it in an Anniversary time, viz. if that any part of it, by reason of ridges or sands, or any other way, become higher, and the Coasts or shoars become more high: but then men are accustomed to raise Banks. The only cause of these Inundations, is the abundancy of Water, which in some Examples alledged, may proceed peradventure from dissolved Snow; but in most, from frequent Rains. Yet that is a wonder, that the Indus and Ganges should overflow in other Months, than the adjacent Rivers, from the Lake Chiama; but the cause of this diversity, which is observed here in this Season, must partly be taken from the Anniversary rains in the adjacent places, partly from the Mountains and Rains about the places of the Fountains. But we, to avoid prolixity, shall supersede to discuss every Ex∣ample. The River Bibara in France, near to Paris, sometimes without any Rains, or at least with those that are usual, so swelleth, that it causeth desolation unto the Suburbs of St. Marcellus. Now the reason why almost all these Inundations make the Lands fruitful, is, because that water that inundateth is either Rain or Snow-water; which waters, both by reason of their Spirituous lévity, and also, because of their Sulphureous substance, which they have admixt in the Air. Above all other, Minerals are very prevalent to fructifie, and are also wholsom. Now that there is such a Spirit and Sulphur in Rain-water, is proved, 1. From the Worms that are generated in it. 2. From its easie putrefaction. 3. From the very Chymical distillation. Yet some Rivers by their Inundation, do not make the Earth fertile, but rather cause sterility; as Ligeris in France; when that Sequana maketh them fruitful by its fat water. Proposition XXI. To explain, how Springs or Fountains break forth. Of the break∣ing forth of Springs and Fountains.In the fourth Proposition we have shewed, whence the water ariseth that floweth from Fountains. Now here we demand, by what force that water collected in the Earth is thrust forth, seeing that it seemeth not possible to be done without a violent removing of the Earth: But the causes are various, which make way for a Spring in any place. 1. If that in any place there be a certain cavity; the water distilleth into that. without the help of any other cause, when that by creeping it cometh into it, and then in course of time, maketh greater passages for it self, until that cavity being filled, it floweth out and maketh a River. The same also hapneth without a cavity, if that the Spring be on the top of a Mountain. Also for this reason
frequent Springs are found in Woods and shady places: For the Rain-water moistneth the Earth; and because it is not extracted by the heat of the Sun, and an open and free Air, by degrees it allureth to it self the hidden water of a future Fountain. 2. A way is prepared, and the Earth removed by the Spirits, which are admixed with the waters, yet in the Earth; also the ra∣refaction of water in the Earth, by which it requireth the larger place: For the Waters, whilst that yet they are hidden within the Earth, carry many Spirits. Also Subterranean fires add not a little to this. 3. Oftentimes Fountains are brought to light by showers, for showers do render the Pores of the Earth more ample and large, when that they conjoyn with the water of the hid∣den Fountain; and so this followeth that, by reason of the mutual conjunction and coherency. 4. Sometimes Springs are opened by an Earthquake: so an Earthquake sent forth the River Ladon. 5. Sometimes they are discovered by the Industry of Men, by digging the Earth. 6. Many Fountains have been discovered by Animals, which are wont to dig up the Earth with their Snouts: so a Hog first discovered the first Salt Spring in Lunenburgh; for when he had rooted up the Earth and made a gutter, the water spouted out, which filling the gutter, the Hog (according to their custome) lay down in it; then when he arose, and that his back was dry, some discovered a very white co∣lour on him, which when they had more accurately contemplated, they found it to be white Salt: then they went to the Spring, and from thence forwards many more were sought and found out; from which the City obtaineth almost ll its riches and splendor: And in Memorial thereof the Hog was quartered and smoak-dried, and is kept at this very day in the Palace of Lunenburgh to be seen. Proposition XXII. A place being given in the Earth, to enquire, whether a Spring or Well may be made in it. See Vitruvius in the Eighth Book of his Architecture,See Vitruvius, Lib. 8. Cap. 1. Chap. 1. At this day we perform the same by digging up the Earth oftentimes to a great depth; and for the most part veins or heads of Springs or Wells, or the Wells and Springs themselves are found. Proposition XXIII. A place being given, to make a Spring or Well in it, if that it be possible to be made. We will alledge the words of Vitruvius, as being a man excellently skilled in these affairs,See Vitruvius, Cap. 7. seeing that we never used our selves to this kind of Exercise. In his Seventh Chapter thus he speaketh, Reason must not be contemned in digging of Wells, but the natural reasons of things are to be considered with sharpness of wit and great prudence, by reason that the Earth hath many and various things within it, for it is compounded, as other things, of four Principles, and the first is Terrene, and hath from the humidity of the water Fountains; also heats, whence proceed Sulphur, Alom, Bitumen, and gross Spirits of Air, which being thick, when by the fistulous intervenings of the Earth they come to the place where the Well is dug, and find men digging, by their natural vapour they stop up the Animal spirits of those that work, at their Nostrils: so that those that fly not quickly away, are there choaked: Now to avoid this, we must thus act; Let a Candle be lighted and let down, and if that it continueth burning, you may descend without danger; but if that the light be extinguished by the force of the Vapors; then let Aestuaries be dug on the right and left hand, near the Wll, so as by the Nostrils the Spirits will be dissipated. When those are so expli∣cated, and that you are come to the water, let the structure be so senced, that
the veins be not stopped: But if that the places should prove hard, or that the veins shall not be altogether at the bottom, then assistance must be taken from the coverings of Plaster-works. Now this must be ob∣served in Plaster-work, that the roughest and purest Sand be gotten, that the Cement be broken with a Flint, that the most vehement Chalk be mixed with the Mortar; so that five parts of Sand answer to two of Chalk or Lime: Let the Cement be added to the Mortar; of it, let the Walls in the de∣pressed trench, unto the measure of the future altitude be spaged, the Bars being made of Iron. The Walls being plaistered, let that which is Earthy in the midst, be evacuated to the lower measure or libration of the Walls; and the bottom being levelled, let the Pavement be plaistered with the same Mortar, unto the thickness that is appointed. Now these places, if they shall be made double, or treble, that they may be transmutated by the per∣colations of the water, will make the use of it far more wholsom; for the Mud, when that it hath found a place to sink in, the water becometh more clear, and will keep its tast without any scent; if not, you must of necessity add Salt, and extenuate it. Proposition XXIV. To prove, whether the Water of a Spring be wholsom. Of Spring-water, whe∣ther it be wholsom, or not.Concerning this, Vitruvius thus writeth; Their probations must be thus looked after: If that they flow and be open before that they begin to be drawn, look on them and observe of what membrature they are; what Inhabitants dwell about those Fountains, whether they be of strong Bodies, of good colours, not lame, blear or sore-eyed; if so, the Waters are very excellent. Also, if that a new Spring be dug, and the water be put into a Corinthian Vessel, or any other kind made of Brass; and if it causeth no stain, it is then most excellent water. Also, if that that water be heated, and afterwards setled and poured forth, and that no Sand or Mud be found in the bottom, that Water is also very good. Also, if that Roots put in that water be quickly boiled, they shew the water to be good and wholsom. Also that the water in the Fountain be clear and pellucid, if that no Moss or Reeds grow about it: Or if that the place be not defiled with any filth, but a pure shew. These signs shew it to be tenuous and very wholsom. Proposition XXV. A place being given, to make an apparent Fountain in it, if that it be possible. See Proposi∣tion V.That is termed an apparent Spring, as we have shewed in the th Proposition, where the water spouteth out, being sent from a more high place through a Subterraneous passage. Now such a Spring may be made, if that any Lake, River, or Fountain be in the adjacent Land, viz. a Pipe or Channel must be made under the Earth, from the given place to the adjacent Lake or River, through which the water may flow to the given place, as we shall shew in the following Proposition. Proposition XXVI. To bring a River, from a given Fountain or River, to the place given. If that the Fountain or River given be higher than the place given, the work will be easy: Now this is found out by Geodetical or Surveying Instruments; and the operation it self is termed or said to wash the places, for the leading of the water; and the difference between the Altitude of the Fountain and the place given, is termed the Libramentum of the River to be lead. Therefore a Channel
must be dug from the Fountain or River unto the place given, the Libra∣ment of which must be greater or lesser, as we will have the River to be swifter or slower: For the Problem is undeterminated for the most part in Aqueducts, that the celerity of the flux may be moderate. It is thus ob∣served, that in the Longitude of a Channel of two hundred foot, the de∣pression is no less than half a foot, (for otherwise the water will not flow, or else it will overflow: Vitruvius in one hundred foot requireth no less de∣pression than half a foot,) neither ought it to be greater than an whole foot, or at most a foot and a half (otherwise it will flow with an over violent and quick course.) But if that the Fountain be not higher in the given place, there will be need of Instruments; concerning which you must consult Me∣chanicks, as also concerning many other things, which are to be considered in this Affair. By this Problem also is made a conjunction of two Rivers, when that a Channel is drawn from one River into another, that a Navigation may be made from one into another; as from Duina into the next River; from Tanais into Wolga; from the River Flamus, in China, into Nanchina. Proposition XXVII. Some Rivers are noted and famous for long Tracts, some for Latitude, some for quickness of Course, some for the peculiar properties of the Waters that they carry; some for one or two of these causes. Rivers are no∣ted for several occasions.The truth of the Proposition needeth no probation. I will only reckon up here those Rivers which are the biggest of all, viz. those of a long tract, which also are famous for Latitude: such only are sixteen in the whole Earth, as yet known, viz. the Nile, Ob, Jeniscea, Orellana, Rio del Plata, Parana, Maragnon, Omarranna, Ganges, Danube, Canada or St. Laurence, Niger, Nubia, Wolga, Jansu, and Flavus. After those, these following are famous for the breadth of their Channel, but not for the length of their Course, and which are about twenty in num∣ber, viz. the Indus, Zaire, Cuama; the Rivers from the Lake Chiamay, Eu∣phrates, Tanais, Petzora, Pesida, Tabat, Yrtiis, Santa Esprit, Amana, Mag∣dalen, Julian, St. Jaques, Rhene, Albis, Mosa, Borysthenes, and Totou∣teack. We shall only here contemplate the courses of the ten greater Rivers, leav∣ing the more accurate explication of them, and the other Rivers, to Special Geography. The River Nile.1. Nilus, Niger, Ganges, run almost a strait course; the rest have many, and those vast Curvatures. The Spring of the Nile is placed in the Lake Zaire in the South latitude of 10 degrees; its mouth Canobus is in the North latitude of 31 degrees; it floweth from the South to the North: in some places it sendeth forth it self in a broad space, in other places it is very nar∣row: it hath two Cataracts; its tract or Longitude is about 630 German miles, or 2520 Italian miles, for which may be set down 3000 by reason of the windings; it overfloweth every year, as I have elsewhere treated of. The River Niger.2. Niger, a River in Africa, whose Fountain or Spring is in the 11th de∣gree of North latitude from the Lake. Some write, that it is derived from the Nile by a Subterranean passage: the sign of it is, that it overfloweth every year at the same time as the Nile doth. One of its Mouths is in the same degree of Latitude in which the Spring is; but it is more removed from the Aequator than 15 degrees of Latitude; it floweth from the East to the West. In some places it hideth it self under the Earth, and again emergeth. Its tract is about 600 German miles; but it will be lesser, if that you wholly neglect its great and noted bendings; and larger, if that all should be rec∣koned.
The River Ganges.3. Ganges in Asia; its most remote Fountain is placed in the North Latitude of 43 degrees in Tartaria, but some bring it back to 33 degrees; its Mouth is in the Latitude of 22 degrees: it floweth from North to South. Its course is about 300 German miles: it overfloweth every year. The River O.4. Ob also in Asia, very great, and every where broad; its Spring is placed in the 48 degree of North latitude in the Mountains of Tartaria, near the Stone-Tower. Its Mouth is in the 69 degree of Latitude; its tract is about 400 German miles, omitting its windings. It divaricateth it self into two Arms in Siberia, or rather sendeth forth a branch from its self, which having finished a crooked passage, returneth into its self and so formeth an Island, in which there is a City built by the Moscovites and Siberians, called Jor∣goet. The River Jeniscea.5. Jeniscea, another River in Asia, heretofore unknown to Geographers, but observed by the Moscovites. It is found to be greater than the Ob, from which it is distant ten weeks voyage towards Tartaria; at the Oriental shoar of which a ridge of Mountains are extended in a long tract: on the Occiden∣tal shoar inhabit a People called Tingaesi. Every year in the Spring it over∣floweth the space of 70 miles towards the Western lands, at which time the Tingaesi betake themselves with their Cattle and Housholdstuff into the Moun∣tains, on the Eastern shoar. Its Fountain and Outlets are unknown; its tract is supposed to be no lesser than that of the Ob. The River Pesida.6. Pesida, removed some days Journey towards the East from Jeniscea: its Oriental shoar is thought to touch on China, and the Kingdom of Cathay: its Fountain and Outlets are unknown. It is none of the number of the great Rivers; but I have briefly touched on it, because that no Geographers have hitherto made mention of it; as also of the River Jeniscea and Yrtiis. The River Orellana.7. Orellana, in America, (so called from Francis Orelli) is accounted a∣mongst the greatest Rivers of the Earth. Its Fountain is in the Kingdom of Peru, in the Province of Quito, in the South latitude of 72 degrees, (but this is not altogether certain; its Mouth is fifteen miles, in Latitude two degrees Southerly. Its tract is said to be 1500 Spanish miles, by reason of its great number of bendings, when that in truth it extendeth not 700. Others con∣found with it, or make the River Maragnon to be a branch of it. It is in some places four or five Leagues broad; but it receiveth not its water so much from a Spring, as from Rains falling on the Mountainous parts of Peru; so that in the dry mouths of those Mountains it carrieth little water. And in∣deed the Moderns do much detract from its magnitude. Rio de la Pla∣ta.8. Rio de la Plata, in Brasilia; its Fountain is in the Mountains of Peru: Its Mouth is in the South latitude of 37 degrees, and that is said to be about twenty miles; but when it overfloweth it hath many Outlets, which some account for one; at that time it carrieth not much water. The Natives call it Paramaguasu, that is, a water like the Sea, as some observe. The River Omaranna.9. Omaranna also, a River in Brasilia, flowing from the Mountains of Peru in a long tract. These three great Rivers in Brasilia, viz. Orellana, Rio de la Plata, and Omoranna, meet somewhere in some Lakes in the Mediter∣ranean places of Brasilia; and emorge again, being disjoyned. The River Canada.10. and lastly, Canada or St. Laurence, in America Septentrionalis: its Spring is in the Lake called des Iroquis. Its large Mouth is in the 50th degree of North latitude, and its tract is no lesser than 600 German miles. Proposition XXVIII. Whirlpools are found in the Channels of some Rivers. So in the River Sommona, between Amiens and Abbeville, in Picardy in France, is a secret Whirlpool, into which the waters rush with such violence, that their found may be heard for some miles.
Proposition XXIX. River-water is more light than Sea-water. Sea-water more heavy than River-water.The cause is easily known, to wit, Sea-water carrieth much Salt in it. Thence it hapneth, that many things sink to the bottom in Rivers, which float on the Sea; which frequently is seen in Ships heavy laden, that are raised up in the Sea higher than when in Rivers. Now various is the proportion be∣twixt these waters, because that the Sea-water is not every where of the same gravity, nor the water of divers Rivers; but yet the proportion is about 46 to 45, so that 46 ounces of River-water do equally ponderate 45 of Sea-water. CHAP. XVII. Of Mineral Waters, Baths, and Spaws. Because that there are many kinds of liquid Bodies, or Waters, the peculiar properties of which men do admire at; therefore Geographers are wont to treat of them: But all of them hitherto, except a bare recital of their Names, and a reckoning up of some wonderful Fountains, or Springs, have added nothing to solid knowledge. But we shall treat more clearly of them, and that with a declaration of their causes. Proposition I. No Water is pure and Elementary, but containeth or hath admixed par∣ticles, such as are found in Terrestrial Bodies: These particles are not only Earth, but also they are various; as Oyls, Spirits, and the like. That is termed Mineral-water, which containeth so many, or such par∣ticles of a different nature from the Water, so that from them it gain∣eth, or hath notable qualities, which we discover by sense, or the proper∣ties are notable by sense. No Water is pure, but hath admixed par∣ticles.THe truth of the Proposition is manifest by Experience, and is proved both from the differences of tasts, and from distillation: and all Natu∣ralists agree, that simple or pure water, as the other Elements separated from others, do not exist in nature. The cause is, the various and perpetual agitation of the particles; but in Waters, that I may say somewhat in par∣ticular concerning our matter in hand, by the cause of admixtion of Hetero∣geneous, they receive Spiritual particles. The Rain, and the Air it self, touching the water, consists of divers particles; therefore all waters, have ad∣mixed particles of another nature; but there is not the like quantity in all of them. Into the Rhine indeed, the Danube and Albis, and into all great Rivers, other Riverets do flow in, impregnated with innumerable particles, and in such quantity, that they are evident to the senses: but because besides these, many other Riverets do flow into them, not impregnated with so great a quantity of Heterogeneous particles as are discoverable to the eyes; and because that the greatest part of the water that they carry, consists of Rain and Air, therefore also in these greater Rivers, those Heterogeneous particles are not easily discovered,
but must be separated from them by Art, if that any one will have them dis∣covered to the sense. But we shall especially call them Mineral waters, which have some notable property beyond the common waters; that is, that contains such an admixture of Heterogeous particles, that thence possess a no∣table and sensible quality. Proposition II. Mineral Waters are of three kinds. Of Mineral waters.Some are Corporeal (we want an apter word,) others Spiritual, othes both Corporeal and Spiritual. I term those Corporeal Mineral waters, which contain solid and fixed particles of Minerals; so that these may be discovered and separated by the sight. These Corporeal Bodies are twofold; some carry those particles of Minerals of a very great magnitude, that without any trouble, or very little at the least, they may be beheld in the water, and to speak properly, they are not commixed waters. Such are those of which we have spoken in the former Chapter, because that the grains of Gold, Silver, and the like, are contained in their waters; therefore they are termed Gold and Silver-bearing Rivers: but these waters in property of Speech, are not to be termed Mineral▪ because that they have not these particles commixed with them, but free; neither do they recive any property or quality from them: Yet because that men also admire such Rivers, and the explication of them hath great affinity with the enodation of Mineral waters, properly so termed; therefore I comprehend them under the general ppellation of Mi∣neral waters. Bituminous Fountains, and the like, may be reduced under this Classis. Corporeal Mineral waters.But those are termed more properly Corporeal Mineral waters, which contain indeed solid particles of Minerals; but so little, small, and altogether commixed, that they are not presently discovered by the sight, but either by Art, or a long tract of time, subsiding and concreasing, and are reduced into a sensible quantity; as are sa Springs, sulphureous Fountains, and such like; and Chymical waters, in w Mettals are dissolved. Spirituous wa∣ters.Spirituous waters are , that contain only a volatile Spirit, such as is found in Minerals; but no fixed particles, and therefore none can be elicitated from them apparent to the sight. These are termed Corporeal and Spirituous waters together by me, which have both fixed or solid, and volatile or Spirituous particles of Minerals in them. We shall alledge Examples of the Species of them in the following Propositions. Proposition III. To explain, how Mineral Waters are generated. Of the gene∣ration of Mi∣neral waters.1. If that Waters be carried by a violent torrent or course through Sub∣terraneous passages, in which Metallick Earth and Minerals are less thick; it is manifest, that the water may take and carry away from these with it grains of those Mineral waters: this therefore is the generation of Corporeal Mineral waters, that carry grains. 2. If that the Minerals be imperfect, or less dense; as Vitriol, Sulphur, and the like: or also the Salts, which of their own nature are easily united to the waters, if that the Waters or Riverets be carried through these Earths (without Channel or Aqueduct, as we have explained in the generation of Fountains) the water cometh to the Fountain; this will have the Atoms of these Minerals ad∣mixed, and it will be a Corporeal Mineral water of a subtile conjunction, ac∣cording to the Atoms. Now whether that the water can unite the Atoms of Mettals after this manner to it self, is questioned, because that they are hard and solid, neither are they easily united to the water. I suppose it possible
to be done, but not by simple water, but by a salt vitriolated water, which is like unto the Aqua fortis of the Chymists: For as these waters of Aqua fortis dissolve Metals into Atomes, and intimately unite them to themselves, so that they sink not to the bottom, unless that they be separated by Art: So also if that such waters be carried through metallary earth, they are able to dis∣solve the metallick particles, and unite them to themselves. After this mode is the generation of mineral corporeal waters of the second Classis explained. 3. In the bowels of the earth, before that Metals are generated, vapours and fumes are condensed unto the extant Angles of the Rocks unto which they adhere; and first they meet together in a soft substance, and at length they are condensed: therefore if that the waters are carried or glide through the earth where such vapours are, and are raised, they are impregnated by them, and so spirituous mineral waters are made. But imperfect Minerals, after another mode, cause mineral waters of their own nature, viz. because that being heated by their own or subterraneous heat, they send forth spirits and va∣pours, as Salt, Sulphur, Vitriol, Coals, and such like: and such fumes and exhalations are continually made in places of such Minerals, through which if that the water glide, it is impregnated with the spirit. There are some that suppose these spirituous waters may be generated only by being carried through the metallick earths, or by a continual stay upon them, or in their Mines: but it is certain by experience, that the waters receive no quality from the Metals and Minerals, if that they should lye 100 years immersed in them: therefore laying aside this opinion, we affirm that those waters are generated, or spirit received, from, first, the seed of Metals, as I▪ may so say, or their Primordia; or secondly, we may say, that those waters are now im∣pregnated by other subtile Spirits of Vitriol or Salt, by the benefit of which a Spirit is extracted from the hard Metals: But I attribute the less to this cause or mode of generation, because here ariseth a question again concerning the generation of the spirituous water of Mineral, Vi∣triol, and Salt. 4. From these together, it is evident how mineral waters, that are both corporeal and spirituous, are generated. Proposition IV. There are innumerable kinds of mineral waters, according to the variety and diversity of the particles which they contain of divers Mine∣rals. In the precedent Proposition we have explained, how that mineral waters may receive those particles (from which their admirable qualities do arise) from Minerals or Fossils.Many kinds of Mineral waters. Now because that there are various sorts of Mi∣nerals, thence it cometh to pass that the mineral waters are various and dif∣ferent in their qualities; yea, they are almost infinite: For neither only are every one of these waters impregnated by one kind of mineral, but together many of many; wherefore mineral waters will either be simple or mixed, and the mixed will have something either from three or four, or from many Fossils or Minerals. Thence 1. are Metallick waters, viz. of Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead, Iron. 2. Salt waters, viz. of Common Salt, Niter, Alome, Vitriol. 3. Bituminous waters, Sulphureous, Antimonial, of Coals, and of Am∣ber. 4. The waters of the Earth and Stones, viz. Lime-waters, Chalk, Ochre, Marble, Alabaster. 5. Mercurial waters, and the like.
These denominations, or kinds of waters,See Pro∣sition II. are to be understood according to the triple mode, by which in the second Propasition we said, that Mineral waters were, 1. Some Corporeal, and even manifest to the sense; or Corporeal by a subtile and accurate commixion. 2. That others were Spirituous. 3. That others were Corporeal, and also Spirituous. These differences must be ap∣plied to every kind of Mineral-water, viz. (to demonstrate by one or ano∣ther Example) Gold-waters are, 1. Corporeal, which carry grains of Gold of that magnitude, that with little trouble they are discernable to the sense, neither have they any accurate coherencies admixed unto them. 2 Corporeal waters, which possess very small particles of Gold, and indeed very closely connexed to the water; such waters I suppose to Be. Although the nature of Gold be such, that the least grains in the water sink to the bottom, yet that such may be, is manifest from the Aqua Regia of the Chymists, in which Gold is dissolved into Atoms. But this Aqua Regia is not simple; therefore neither do those waters, that are found in nature to have Atoms of Gold admixed, want other particles of Minerals. 3. Spiritual Golden-waters, which conceive a spirit and vapour in the Earth, from whence Gold is wont to be generated. 4. Golden Corporeal-waters, and also Spiritual, which possess both Atoms of Gold, and a vapour generating Gold. A fourfold difference of Mineral wa∣ters.After the same manner the Readers must apply this fourfold difference unto every kind of Mineral waters, both simple and admixed, (whence innume∣rable kinds do exist; for either the bodies of the Minerals, or the Spirits, or the body of one with the spirit of another, are conjoyned in the water:) so Leaden-waters are fourfold, viz. 1. Manifestly Corporeal. 2. Corporeal, of a subtile mixture. 3. Infected with a Spirit of Lead: and 4. Impregnated both with the Spirit and Atoms of Lead. So those four divers participations of Minerals are to be applied to Vitriol, Sulphureous, and Mercurial waters, and the like; and more especially to these, to wit, to Salt, Vitriolate, and Sulphureous, because in these, Nature it self doth exhibit this fourfold variety. I doubt whether that Corporeal waters of a mixed subtilty do exist. Spiri∣tuous Metallick waters are very rare; but Sulphureous and Salt waters are frequent. But the Corporeal and Spirituous, because these sorts of Metals are both found in many places of the Earth, and also in a greater quantity, and easily suffer their particles to be gnawed off; they send out also frequent∣ly, a fume and vapour. We will explain by one Example this fourfold variety of participation, and that in Gold; 1. In the preceding Chapter and the six∣teenth Proposition, we have enumerated those Riverets which carry grains of Gold, and with this Treasury make glad the Natives; such are many in the Earldom of Tirol, and the places adjacent: and we have said that the Rhine it self, Albis, Danube, and most great Rivers in some places carry grains of Gold (as also of other Metals and Minerals;) by reason that they receive Golden, or Gold-bearing Riverets. The Rhine carrieth grains of Gold commixed with Clay and Sand in many places; but especially at these, 1. Near Curia in Rhetia; 2. At Meinfield; 3. At Eglinsan; 4. At. Secningham; 5. At the Town Augst, not far from Basil; 6. At Norinburgh; 7. At Wormes; 8. At Seltz; 9. At Mentz; 10. At Bacherack; 11. At Bononia, and the like. The Reader may see those Gold-bearing Riverets which the Rhine receiveth in Thurnhuserus, as also those that the Danube and Albis do receive. In the water of this, viz. the Albis, are found grains of Gold: 1. At Leutmeritz in Bohemia; 2. At Puru; 3. At Dresda in Misnia: 4. At Torga; 5. At Mag∣deburgh; 6. At the Tower of Lunenburgh, fifteen miles from Hamburgh. Concerning the Gold-bearing Riverets consult the forecited Book of Thurn∣huserus; where also you may see those that carry other Mettals and Mine∣rals. These Waters are therefore the Corporeal Golden-waters of the first mode, viz. those that carry grains of Gold; which less properly are termed Mineral or Golden, because the Golden-grains are not permixed with the water, but are carried down by the rapid Current of the water; and the waters them∣selves are simple or uncompounded. 2. Golden Corporeal-waters of a subtile
commixtion, to wit, the Atoms of whose waters are mixed with the Atoms of the Gold; as we have said of the Aqua Regia of the Chymists, which dissol∣veth the Gold, and uniteth it to it self by Atoms. And now, because there may be like waters, which whether they be carried through Golden-lands or Mines, may gnaw off and dissolve some Golden-Atoms of it with Earthly ones; such Golden-waters many Riverets seem to be, which Thurnhuserus writeth to participate of Gold, and reckoneth them up in the description of the Danube, Rhine, and other great Rivers. 3. The Golden Spirituous-waters are very few, and some of those are they peradventure, which Thurnhuserus enumerateth. Now such waters are less noted or sensible, because Golden-Earth and Mines are very rare, and that in a small quantity: Moreover where the Mines are, a quantity of other Minerals are also together with the Gold, whence the water receiveth many more Spirits. Yet some Riverets in the high Alpes of Bohemia, are said to participate of these Golden-Spirits; also in Silesia, and the Mountain that they call Fitchtelberg. The Pepper-Baths, in the Bishoprick of Curia, are be∣lieved to be impregnated with such a Spirit; but by reason of the admixture of other Minerals in greater quantity, the waters receive a less sensible qua∣lity from it. 4. Golden-waters, which carry both Atoms of Gold and Spirit, are some of the Riverets mentioned by Thurnhuserus. We will add the Example of Salt-waters: Example of Salt-waters.1. Salt Corporeal-waters, viz. which carry the more gross particles of Salt, and not accurately mixed; they are many, and sufficiently known to any person, as certain Springs of which Salt is made: Hitherto apper∣taineth the Sea-water, if that it be made more gross by the heat of the fire. 2. Salt Corporeal subtile-waters, which contain the Salt reduced into little particles; they are those, which when they are most Salt, yet withal they are very pellucid and subtile, as many salt Springs and tenuous Sea-water; although that there be great difference in this subtile commixtion: Hitherto appertaineth the Ʋrin of all Animals. 3. Salt Spirituous-waters, which contain not the particles of Salt, but the spirit of Salt: they are such, that if you should boyl many Vessels of them, yet notwithstanding you should receive no Salt. Not a few of these are in Germany, and elsewhere; but they are rarely found simple. 4. Salt Corporeal, and Spirituous-waters, which have particles of Salt and Spirit. Almost all the Corporeal have also some portion of Saline spirit, but most of them very little: So, near the City Saltzinga, not far from the Rhine, the Fountains are salt; the water of which, though more salt than other wa∣ters, yet it affordeth less Salt, because its sharp and salt sapor is sharpned by a spirit or volatile Salt, that flyeth away in the boyling. Hence it is manifest how this fourfold difference of participation is to be applied unto every sort of Mineral waters, viz. Vitriolate-waters, Alom-waters, Lead-waters, and the like. Proposition V. To reckon up the noted differences of Mineral Waters. The noted differences of Mineral Wa∣ters.In the foregoing Propositions we have explained the true kinds and diffe∣rences of Mineral waters, taken from the very essence of them, viz. from the particles of the Minerals which they carry, or by which they are impreg∣nated; but those differences, because they do not so strike the senses; and moreover, by reason of the various mixture of Minerals, communicate va∣rious properties to the water, wherefore they are less vulgarly known; for the denomination of all Bodies ariseth from manifest qualities on the Sense, as also doth the celebrity of waters amongst men. The explication and cause of
which apert qualities and properties must be sought from the inmost compo∣sition of things. Therefore the noted and famous differences or species of Liquors flowing from the Earth, and also known to the Vulgar sort of men, are these ten; to wit, 1. Sowr-waters: 2. Bitter: 3. Hot: 4. very Cold: 5. Oily and Fat: 6. Poysonous: 7. Coloured: 8. Ebullient: 9. Water that converts less hard into harder, or after any other mode, changing any Bodies cast in or stained with them: 10. Salt-waters: And in the 11th place we may add those, which are endowed with any other wonderful property. Unto these Classes, those that are studious in these things may reduce all Waters, which are found described in Authors. We shall only in brief shew their gene∣ration and differences, and alledge some Examples. Proposition VI. To explain the cause or generation, difference or kinds of Acid or Sowr Waters. Of Sowr Waters.Great is the celebrity of Acid waters or Springs; they commonly call them Spaws. 1. They arise from the admixture of a Spirit of Vitriol, Salt, and Alom; which Minerals, being partly simple, and partly more or less admixed with other Minerals, are found in the cavities of the Earth, especially in Iron. We prove this to be the true cause of Acidula's and Spaws: 1. By reason that almost every where, where such Acid waters break out, Mines of Vitriol, Salt, and Alom, are found. 2. Because the Spirits of Vitriol and Salt, are Acid, as also some Spirits of Sulphur; as is evident from Chymistry. 3. Be∣cause that from these kind of Acid waters, no Acid body, but Spirits, is separated, which are altogether like unto the Spirits of Vitriol and Salt. 2. Great is the quantity of Acid waters or Spaws in divers Regions, where Mines especially abound. The cause is, because that an Acid, Sowr Spirit is almost in all Bodies; (by reason that we have shewed, that it is Elementary, in the Seventh Chapter and first Proposition) it is found in all herbs and fruits. The difference of Spaws.3. The difference of Spaws is found to be notable: Some are found to be so sharp or sowr, that men make use of them instead of Vinegar. Such a Spring is found in Nicana, a Province of Sicilia: In Germany, the Fountain at Elleboga is of a wonderful Acidity. Other Acid Springs are termed Winy, because that by their sharpness they come near the grateful tast of Wine; a∣mongst which, that is famous which is in the Earldom of Catzenellebocen in Germany, at the Town Schwalbach. In the Province of Lyons in France, at the Town of St. Baldomare, is a Fountain termed Fontaine forte, that is, the strong Fountain: it supplieth the want of Wine, and if that one fourth part of it be mixed with Wine, it will want nothing of the tast of Wine; if it is poured on Flour it will presently ferment. They can boil no Meat in it, for by reason of its subtilty it flieth away: It is very wholsom, so that the Inhabi∣tants seldom use a Physician. In Aquitaine, not far from the City Bessa, is the like Winy sharp Spring; unto the waters of which, if that you only admix the sixth part of Wine, you will imagine, that you drink pure Wine without any admixture of water. Nigh to Rome is an Alomy sharp Fountain, which being mixed with Wine, ma∣keth a very grateful Drink. Great is the number of Acid Springs in the Ʋpper Germany, whereof some flow into the Danube, and others into the Rhine. Ve∣ry many are in the forementioned Earldom of Catzenelleboch, in the Province of Triers, in Tirolis, Rhaetia, Vindelicia: a noted ane is near Anderna, cal∣led Heilbrun. In the Province of Toledo in Spain, near the Village Valentiola, are Springs, which at the bottom are found Acid, and of a Winy tast, and in the upper part, sweet; which Baccius thinketh to happen, because that the Nitrous and Acid parts do subside and sink to the bottom. But I suppose, if that the Re∣lation be true, that it proceedeth from the subtilty of the Spirit, which being brought to the superficies, presently do expire.
Other Acid Fountains are astringent, and contracting the palate, which is a token of Iron particles, or of the admixture of Vitriol, as also of Alom. The Water of Acid Fountains, in Rainy and Cloudy weather, is found less Acid; which is a sign of an admixture of condensated Air. Also, if that the water be exposed to heat; or if it stand in an open Vessel for some hours; or if it be carried a long Voyage not well covered, in cold Vessels, it presently loseth its Acidity; which is a sign, that the Acidity of them dependeth on a subtile Spirit. Yet they also have Atoms, and the very Vitriol, Alom, Iron, Salt, Gravel, and the like. This is proved from the matter that is discovered to adhere to the Conduit-pipes. The Studious may collect Examples by reading of Authors: At least two hundred Acid Springs or Riverets run into the Rhine; but by reason of the subtilty of the Spirits, nothing of acidity is discovered in the Rhine. Do you demand, why there are no Acid Fountains in the Northern places? I suppose that cause to be the defect of Subterraneous heat, and an over great condensation of the Earth; as also for that cause it cometh to pass, that little or no Gold is found in those Regions. Proposition VIII. To explain the generation of hot Springs, termed Baths, and the places of the more famous of them. Of the gene∣ration of hot Springs or Baths.A Spring in Izland is judged the most fervid of them all, whose water little differeth from that, which hath arrived to the highest degree of heat and boyling on the fire. But Caronius writeth, that in Japan there is a Spring so hot, that no water can be brought to that degree of heat by the most vehe∣ment fire. It floweth not continually, but twice in a day for one hour with a great force of spirits, and maketh a great Pool; which another hath inform∣ed me to be called by the Natives, Singacko, that is, Hell. After those, the hot Fountains or Baths of Baden in Helvetia, are famous. Then the Baths of Appona in Italy. Of Vulgar Baths there is a great num∣ber in the Ʋpper Germany, as also in other places. In Scotland is the Lake and River Nessa, which is not hot, yet it is never congealed with Cold. The cause and generation of Baths, is first the admixture of Sulphureous particles, whilst the water is carried through Subterraneous passages; or rather, whilst that it glideth through the Sulphureous Mines to a collection about the Springs. 2. The vapours of Smoak and exhalations within the Earth, where Sulphur is pure or impure, as Peat, Coal, Amber, and the like; for these materials continually send forth a calid or warm fume, which heat the waters carried thither, or gliding through those places. Yet particles of Alom are admixed to many, nay the most Baths; as also of Iron and Niter, whence they have somewhat a sharp and astringent tast or sapor. Almost all the Baths, which we know, flow without ceasing, except the Pepper-Baths of Germany, which are famous in Rhetia, not far from Curia. And besides Sulphur, they contain something of Gold, and not a little Niter. The water of these Baths breaketh out every year about the third of May, and it ceaseth to flow about the fourteenth of September. The famous Baths in Germany are the Plumbariae in Lorrain; Emsebadae, above Constantina in Alsatia, near Gebersweil in the Marquisate of Bada; Wildbad, in the Dukedom of Wer∣tebergh; The Blasianae near Tubin. There are many also in Japan, and the Indian Isles. There are such hot ones in the Islands of the Azores, that an Egg may be boyled in them.
Proposition IX. To explain the generation of oyly and fat liquors flowing from the earth, and to enumerate the places of the earth in which they are found. Of oyly li∣quors.Some Fountains send forth a bituminous liquor, some a fat water, or water on which drops of oyl do flow. In Scotland, two miles from Edenborough, a Fountain floweth, on the whole Superficies of which drops of black oyl do swim: the Inhabitants use it to mollifie the skin, and to take away scabs. So the River Cilicia, tearmed Liparis, was famous amongst the Ancients, in which those that washed themselves, were anoynted by the water: whether it be so at this day, I much doubt. So likewise there was a Lake in Aethiopia, which anointed those that swam it. Also there was a Fountain in India, which on a clear day sent forth a great quantity of oyl. In Zant, and about Dyrra∣chium and Appallonia (as Vitruvius writeth) there were Fountains which vomited out abundance of pitch with water. There was a Lake in Babylon of great magnitude, called Limme Asphaltis, it had liquid Bitumen swim∣ing upon it, with which, the black Semiramis, encompassed Babylon with a Wall. At this day also at Monasterium in Bavaria, is the Fountain De∣gemsce, on the top of which oyl swimmeth, and is daily taken off. The Acid waters of Schwalback, if they be taken in a Vessel, and have been settled for some days, small drops of oyl swim on the top of them. There is a greater quantity in the Fountain tearmed Oelbrum, not far from Hagenaw, at the Village Lamperscholch. Also in the many Bathes are found bituminous par∣ticles, if so be that they stood quiet for some days; as in the Baths of the Kingdom of Naples, tearmed the Bath of Petrolei. Now the Fountains that send out not an oyl swimming on the water, but a meer fat or bituminous liquor, are also many. Near Gersbachium, in the Valley called Lebersthal, from an antiquated and exhausted Mine, oyl or bitu∣men floweth, with which the Country Swains besmear their Cart-wheels. Neither do the Inhabitants know its excellency. In the Isle of Sumatra is a Spring from which Naptha, like unto oyl, floweth; others say that it is a kind of Balsom: they report Fountains of Amber to be there likewise. In Peru, near the sea, is a bituminous Fountain, sending forth a Branch or Riveret in∣to the Sea. The Natives use it instead of pitch, neither do they use any o∣ther matter. In Persia, not far from Schimachia, at or near the high Moun∣tain Barmach, in a Valley, are about thirty Fountains of Bitumen or Naptha, but runing in deep Wells with a great force; the Depth is about two Ells, wooden steps being made for the conveniency of descent, it sendeth forth a Sulphureous and strong Spirit: it is of a twofold colour, in some red, in others white. The cause of these bituminous Fountains is a sulphureous and bituminous matter in the bowels of the earth, thrust forth by a heat and spirit. The cause of the differences is to be sought from the differences of the fat matters themselves; as Succinum, Amber, Oyl of Petrolei, Pitch, Naptha, and the like. Proposition X. To explain the generation of bitter water, and to reckon up the places of the earth in which they are found. Of the genera∣tion of bitter waters, and the places where they are foundMany Fountains and Wells in the Regions of India, on the Choromandel, have bitter water, although that they ebulliate in, and flow from Rocks. In Pontus, a Region of Asia minor, a little River tearmed Exampeus, at the Town Callipadus, is very bitter, it rendereth the River Hypanis, into which it floweth, also very bitter.
They arise from impure Sulphur, Bitumen, Nitre, Ink, Copper: as water left a long time in a Copper vessel acquireth a bitter taste. The Lake Asphaltites in Palestine, which is called Mare Mortuum, or the Dead Sea, hath a bitter water by reason of the impure Bitumen, whence it ought to be referred to the fat waters of the former Proposition. It sendeth forth a stinking scent and vapour: all things without life sink to the bottom; but it suffereth not any Animal to sink; neither doth it grow sweet, although that it continually swalloweth up the River Jordan. It is venomous by reason that it containeth Arsnick. Proposition XI. Yo explain the cause of very cold Springs, and to enumerate the places of the Earth where they are found. The cause of cold Springs.In the Province of Dauphin in France, not far from Vienna, is a Fountain of so great cold, that the mouths of those that drink it are swelled with it, nei∣ther can they endure their hands in it: it is not diminished for the water that is drawn out of it, nor augmented by the water poured into it. In Arabia or Aethiopia are most cold Springs, although that the heat of the Sun be most excessive there. In Stiria, not far from Gretz, are Fountains so cold at the bottom, that none can drink any water runing or drawn from thence. In a mile from Calma, a Spring sendeth forth water as it were boyling, with a great wind, when yet it is very cold; hence they call it The mad water. The cause of the coldness of these Fountains are, 1. The admixture of Nitre and Alom, also of Mercury, Iron, and the like. 2. The depth of the Spring, by reason of the defect of the Solary Beams, and of the sulphureous subterraneous heat. There are also some Springs which are sometimes cold and sometimes hot. In Gatalonia, the Lake and Fountain Salsula in the Winter is hot, and in the Summer very cold. This is common to it, with many others. I think the cause to be, that in the Summer the pores of the Earth are open, through which the hot Spirits break forth; in the Winter they are closed, whence within there are hot Furnaces that heat the waters: So some Fountains are more hot in the night than in the day. Proposition XII. To explain the generation of those waters which seem to change bodies into another kind; and to reckon up the places of the Earth where they are found. There are some waters which change wood into the hardest stone. In Ireland,Of the genera∣tion of waters which change bodies into a∣nother kind, &c. above the City Armagh, in a Pool not very large, a stake of wood if it be fixed for some months, the part that sticketh in the Mud will be iron, the part which is touched with the water is turned into stone, and the rest remaineth wood; so Giraldus and Maginus relate: but Brietius sayeth, I know not by what authority, that it is a meer fable. The waters of Loches in Blois, a Province in France, turn all things put into it into stone. At the City Senon in Burgundia, near a Lake, a Spring floweth which hardneth into stone. Vitruvius saith, that in Cappadocia, between Mazaca and Tuana, is a large Lake, which changeth a reed or wood put into it in one day into stone. In Bohemia, near the Baths of Charles, is a Fountain, in which wood lying long, is changed into stone. Other waters are thought to change Iron into Copper, which yet really they do not; but by reason that waters themselves carry particles and spirit of Copper and Vitriol, therefore they dissolve the particles of Iron, and by degrees take away from it, which whilst that they do, the Copper particles of the water are reposed in the place of the Iron ones taken away, or there adhere whilst that they glide with the runing water.
The reason of those that change wood into stone are these: 1. Some do not change the wood it self into stone, but earthy, stony, and saline particles contained in the water, do apply themselves to the wood, and so, as it were, cover the wood with a stony crust, and do not really change it. 2. Some do not change the wood into stone, but cause a stony hardness to the wood, which some mineral waters may possibly do. 3. If that some waters have truly changed wood into stone, I conceive it to be done after this manner; that chief difference is found by sight between the wood and the stone, that in the wood there are certain long Fibres or Veins, unto which the particles do cohere, and those are less thick: but in stone the particles are like unto Atoms, without any certain extension into long Fi∣bres. If that therefore any water dissolve, and as it were grind the particles cohering in the wood, according to a long line, so that now they do no more cohere after this mode, but yet are more condensed; there will be no more any great difference between the wood and stone, as may be observed by our Eyes; yet it is probable that these mineral waters communicate some substance to the wood it self. There are other waters whose faculty is reported to be able to change the colours in the hair of man or beast. Proposition XIII. To explain the cause of poisonous and death-causing waters, and to reckon up the places where they are. Of poisonous waters.Such is the Lake Asphaltites by reason of its Arsenical Bitumen. In times past, famous was the Fountain of Terracina, which was called Neptunicus, in the Region of the Volsci, of which those that drank were deprived of their lives; therefore it was filled up with stones by the Inhabitants. In Thessalia a Foun∣tain springeth of which no Cattle drink, nor no kind of Beast approacheth. Famous, or rather infamous, is the water, which in the Region of Arcadia, called Nonacris, the Ancients write to drop exceeding cold from stony Rocks, therefore called the Infernal and Stygian water, which no vessel, either of silver, brass, or iron, could be preserved in, without breaking. And by this water Historians report that Alexander the Great was killed by Jolla Son of Antipater, and that not without the infamy of Aristotle. At this day many mortiferous waters are found in the Places or Regions called the Alpes; but most of them are stopped with stones, which is the reason that so few death-causing Fountains are known. Now the generation of such water is, if the water glide or flow through Arsenical, Mercurial, or Antimonial Earths, and are impregnated with their fumes: For as the smoak or fume of Arsnick killeth living creatures, so waters impregnated with such a fume, do the same. Proposition XIV. To explain the generation of coloured waters, and their differences, and to enumerate the places of the Earth in which they are found. At Chinen in France, water floweth from a Cave of somewhat a yellowish colour.Of coloured waters. In the Kingdom of Congo a Riveret floweth of a red colour into the Sea. In some places waters flow of a black, of a green, and such like colours, but they are but few. The cause of the colour of these waters is, that they glide or run from lands, before they come to the Fountain.
Proposition XV. To explain the generation of Salt-waters, and to reckon up the places of the Earth in which they are found. Of the gene∣ration of Salt-waters.The generation is twofold: 1. From the Ocean they come through Subter∣raneous passages, and flow to the Superficies of the Earth. 2. They are ge∣nerated of a Salt contained in the Earth, such as is found in many places, through which whilst the water glideth, it conceiveth Saline particles and spirits, before that it arrive at the Spring. Great is the plenty, and that known to every one, of Salt Fountains. We have spoken in the preceding Chapter, and this matter is easily known, by reason of the abundance of Salt, al∣most every where lying hidden in the Earth, seeing that Salt it self is an Element. Proposition XVI. To explain the cause of Ebullient Fountains, and those that break out with a great spirit and wind; and to enumerate the places of the Earth wherein they are found. The cause is partly a Sulphureous spirit, and partly a Nitrous spirit com∣mixed with water in the Earth:Of ebullient Fountains. if that it be a Sulphureous spirit, the waters are hot; if Nitrous, cold: For neither are all the waters which ebulliate like to those that are hot, hot, but many of them are cold, as is evident from that near to Culma, called a mad water, of which we have spoken in the Twelfth Proposition. The River Tamayus in Galaecia, ariseth from a Lake; in its ri∣sing, for some months of the year, it sendeth forth a mighty noise. In Japan that wonderful hot Fountain, of which we have spoken in the Eighth Proposi∣tion, not above twice every day breaketh forth, for the most part for one hour; now when that the water beginneth to flow, it is carried with so great a force and vehemency of wind, that it moveth the vast stones incumbent on the Well, and leapeth to the height of three or four Ells with so great a noise, like unto the discharge of Cannon. In Westphalia a Fountain breaketh forth, tearm∣ed Bolderborn, from its noise. Most of the Spaws and Baths break forth with an abundance of wind, and ebulliate as if they boyled; a Sulphureous spirit causeth this in the Baths, and in the Spaws, the Spirits of Vitriol, Nitre, and the like. Proposition XVII. To enumerate the kinds of waters which have other certain wonderful pro∣perties, and to explain the causes of them. Unto this Classis all others ought to be reduced, which cannot conveniently be referred unto the former sorts.Other kinds of waters of won∣derful proper∣ties. So there is a Fountain in Portugal tearmed Cadina, devouring all that is cast into it: Also in times past there was another near to it, rejecting all things cast into it; but this latter is obstructed. In An∣dalusia, not far from the City Guadiana, Eusebius Nierenburgius relateth, that there is a Lake which sheweth the Seasons or Tempest; for when that this is approaching, it maketh an horrible noise, which is oftentimes heard for the space of 18 or 20 miles. In Calice in France is a Well, into which if that a stone is cast in, a noise will be heard like Thunder in the cavities of the Well. In the Alpes are Wells, whose water being drank off, contracteth swellings of a great bigness hanging from their necks. In the Kingdom of Granada, at the Town Antiquarius, is a Fountain of so great force, that it dissolveth stones.
Near unto Tours in France are Caves to be seen, tearmed commonly Les Caves Gouttieres, from the roof of which the water which falleth is formed into divers shapes, as Nuts, Almonds, and the like. The hot Fountain of Japan burneth all things, and devoureth cloth, iron, flesh, &c. The studious may collect divers other examples from other Authors, and reduce them to this Classis, if that they seem not possible to be reduced to any of the former. The Causes must be sought from the peculiar situation and property of each place. Proposition XVIII. To enumerate those Fountains which break forth at a set time, not continu∣ally; to explain the cause, and those which ebb and flow. Of Fountains which break forth at a set time, not con∣tinually.This Proposition belongeth not to this Chapter, but to the preceding; yet be∣cause it belongeth to the wonder of waters, and was neglected in the former Chapter, here it shall be explained. In a Fountain situated on the top of an high Hill, in the Province of Canaugh in Ireland, the water ebbeth and floweth every day with the flux and reflux of the Sea; yet the water is fresh. The same is observed in the Fountain Lou∣zara, which is in the mountainous places of Galaecia, called Cabreti, 20 miles from the Sea. Also in Aquitain, in the Village Marsacus, is a Fountain which i∣mitateth the swelling of the Sea, and swelleth with the increase of Garumnae in Burdeaux. Elsewhere there are said to be Fountains which augment and de∣crease contrary to the swelling of the Sea. In Wales, near the mouth of the River Severn, is a Pool called Linliguna, which swalloweth in the Marine floods, whilst that they arise, but it is by no means filled with the same; and the flood of the Sea ceasing, then it riseth with a great force, and vomiteth out the water, with which it covereth the Banks. In Biscay there are the four Springs Tamarici, whereof three every day are so dried twelve times, as if that no water were in them, as Pliny reporteth: But I question whether they be to be found at this day. In Savoy is a Fountain of noted magnitude, callen Wonderful, which sinketh low twice in an hour, and twice floweth; and before that it floweth, and doth break forth with a great noise, it floweth into the Lake Burgites. In the Mountains of Foix in Languedoc riseth the River Lers, which in the Months June, July, and August ebbeth and floweth 24 times in a day.See Bertius. In a Region of Westphalia, called Paderborn, is a Fountain which ebbeth and floweth twice every day, although it sendeth forth so much water, that not far from the Fountain the water driveth four Water-mills; and it breaketh forth with a mighty noise. In the Province of Wallis in Germany is a Fountain, called the Fountain of St. Mary; it ceaseth to flow in the Autumn at the day dedicated to St. Mary, and returneth in May. The Pool or Lake Maron in Palestine is so dry in the Summer, and bringeth forth Herbs and Shrubs so high, that Lions, Wolves, and other wild Beasts do abide there. In Spain, two miles from Valindolid, is a Fountain which ariseth in May, and falleth in November. All Baths flow without any cessation or change, except those that are in Rhaetia, and are called the Pepper Baths: for they flow only in the Summer; from the third of May to the fourteenth of September, then they cease.
CHAP. XVIII. Of the Mutation of the places of the Water and Land, or of the Mu∣tation of the watery superficies into the earthy, and the contrary. Proposition I. To know the Superficies of the Earth, which the water possesseth, how great it is, and that which the Earth occupieth. Of the Super∣ficies of the earth, which the water pos∣sesseth.WE cannot accurately know this, because we are ignorant whether the Sea or Land doth possess the Superficies of the North or South Polary∣land. Moreover, because the Superficies of the water, as also of the land, is terminated on the Globe by an irregular bending of the lines, therefore it would be a very difficult task to compute the quantity of the Superficies of the water and land; but as far as we are able to collect in gross from the inspection of the Terrestrial Globe, the Superficies of the water and land seem almost equal, so that the Superficies of the water is half to the Superficies of the land, and so also is the Superficies of the land. Proposition II. The Superficies of the Water, as also of the Land, is not at all times of the same magnitude, but sometimes greater, and sometimes lesser; and when the Superficies of the Water is augmented, the Superficies of the Land is diminished. For the Sea overfloweth sometimes here, sometimes there, or taketh away and carrieth with it: so therefore his Superficies is augmented more or less, as it hath overflowed a great or less tract of Land, as in times past it did in Thes∣saly. Yet this variety, as far as it is yet known, hath a very little proportion unto the whole Superficies of the water: it may be made great, as we shall shew in the eighteenth Proposition. Proposition III. To compute what quantity of Water the Earth containeth, and what quan∣tity of Land. Of the quanti∣ty of Land and Water which the Earth containeth.For the finding out the accurate and true quantity of water and land, first we ought to know both the whole Superficies of the water, as also its depth in divers parts of the Sea: also the subterraneous heaps of water ought to be examined. All which, seeing that we cannot find out by any method, there∣fore we cannot find out the accurate quantity of the water or land; but only from certain Hypotheses, viz. we laid down the Superficies of the water to be half the Superficies of the earth; the profundity to be quarter or half a mile: neither do we reckon the waters in subterraneous Channels. The quantity of water may be thus found out: Take a quarter, or half a mile from the Semidiameter of the earth, and the solidity of the Sphere may be found, whose Semidiameter is equal to the residue; let this solidity be taken from the solidity of the earth; the half of the residue is the quantity of the water: the same half substracted from the solidity of the whole earth, leaveth the quantity of the earth, unto which must be added a fourth or fifth part of the bulk of water, or of the former half. But these are uncertainties from suppo∣sed uncertainties, or at least nigh unto truth.
Proposition IV. The Water may leave the shoar and place of the Earth which it doth occupy, for divers causes, so that the Land may appear dry, where the Water or Sea was before, and so a new Land may seem to be generated. A Sevenfold Tract of Wa∣ters.There are a sevenfold Tract of waters, viz. 1. the Ocean, 2. Gulphs or Bays of the Ocean, 3. Streights, 4. Rivers, 5. Lakes, 6. Pools, and 7. Ma∣rishes. 1. Marishes may be exsiccated or drained either by subduction of the water, or by exsiccation of the earth, as none can doubt; for in many Regions the Soil is fruitful where there were Marishes some years since, as in Westphalia, Gelder∣land, Brabant, Holland, Muscovia. 2. The same is the account of Pools, seeing that they differ not much from Marishes. Proposition V. Rivers leave their Channel or Shoar, (that is, part of their Channel) and afford new Land. Rivers quit their Shoar, and afford new Land.1. If that they carry much Terrestrial matter, Sand, or Gravel with them, which sinketh to the bottom, in progress of they time so augment the Altitude of the Channel, that it is no more depressed than that place from whence the wa∣ter floweth from the vicine earth; but if that that matter sinketh into one place in part of the Channel, it will separate one part, which then at length will be dried up. 2. If that the River take another Channel, whether it be done by Art or Nature, and a violent cause, as by Wind, Inundation, or the like. 3. If the Springs of the Rivers be obstructed, or cease to send forth water, the earth being fallen in or condensated, or a great quantity of Sand being dri∣ven by the winds into the Fountains or adjacent places. Examples of Rivers whose Channels are exsiccated at this time, either in whole, or in part, are every where obvious in Writers, yet not of great Ri∣vers, but of small, or of the parts of any great Rivers: So a Channel of an Arm of the Rhine, which flowing by Leyden, flowed in times past into the German Ocean, now for some Ages deserted by the water, at this day is land, the Rhine stagnating between Leyden and the Vicus Cattorum. The Shoars are uncovered from the waters of Rivers, and that some Ri∣vers run in a more narrow Channel than they did formerly, is manifest from ma∣ny examples, and from thence that some at this day are not Navigable, which formerly were, may easily be collected; the Altitude of the water being di∣minished, and none at all to be left in their Channel, at some time or other, as in the River Scaldis: Therefore Governours of Commonwealths have a great care that the Mud and Sediments be drawn from out the Channels of Rivers, that they may remain navigable, as is seen in many places. But great Rivers cannot be dried up or changed into land, except in many ages, because that many lesser Rivers flowing from divers parts, make them, (of which though some may be dried up, or change their course, yet all do not suffer the same, except in a long space of time) and the Channel is deeper. But one heap or ridge of Sand may cause the River to run through another Chan∣nel, and the former to be dried up, yet it taketh not away the River, except the Fountains or Branches of it be obstructed: Therefore it is true, that nei∣ther the Nile, Tanais, Albis, or the Rhine, or other Rivers, always flowed, or shall perpetually flow, but that there was earth before, and shall be after∣wards where they now flow.
Proposition VI. Lakes are dried up and changed into Land. Lakes dried up and chang∣ed into Land.1. If that a Lake be constituted from Rivers that flow in, that mutation is made by the abduction, withdrawing, or cessation of the River, and also by evaporation. 2. If that a Lake receiveth waters by a subterraneous passage from the O∣cean or Sea, there will be a mutation of that Lake after that those subterrane∣ous passages are obstructed; and so Lakes are first changed into standing Pools and Marishes, then at length into dry Land. It is evident, saith Aristotle, that because a force of waters hath brought in Mud, or something of that sort, (he speaketh of Lakes made of Rivers) therefore standing Pools are made, and the earth is dry, and that their water being left and standing, in succession of time it is exsiccated, and altogether vanisheth. So the Lands that touch upon the Lake Maeotis, by the Soil brought down by the Rivers, are increas∣ed so much, that Ships now, far less then those about 60 years since, for traf∣fick sake, enter into it. There are many examples found of small Lakes chang∣ed into dry Land, especially in Holland. Proposition VII. Streights are exsiccated and changed into Isthmusses or Continents. That happeneth,Streights when that by reason of the continual sinking of the Ter∣restrial matter made in a long time, the channel of the Streight is become so high, that it denieth a passage to the Sea. So it is very probable that the Isthmus between Africa and Asia, was a Streight, by which the Mediterranean and Red-sea were conjoyned, as we shall shew in the following Proposition. In many Streights at this day, the Altitude of the Sea, and the Altitude of the Channel is found lesser than in former time; which is a certain token that those Streights shall have no water in them in the time to come, and shall be changed into a dry Isthmus. So the Streight through which the Atlantick Ocean maketh a Gulph, which the Hol∣landers called Snyder-zee, and the Texell, at this day receiveth no larger land∣ing Ships, and the depth of the Sea is every year found lesser, and the Land higher; therefore where the water is at the Texell, there, after some Ages, will be dry Land. Concerning the Ʋlier, the same in time to come will al∣so happen. Proposition VIII. The Bays or Gulphs which the Ocean maketh between the Mid-lands, in course of time do become dry places. Bays or Gulphs in time do be∣come dry Land.This is done by a double cause; 1. If that the Streight, by which the Bay is conjoyned to the Ocean, becometh an Isthmus, or else be stopped by Sand and Gravel, which is done in progress of time, as we have said in the preceding Proposition: For by this cause the Bay of the Ocean, and a part or member of it shall be cut off from the body, and shall become a Lake; and then a standing Pool and Marish, and by exsiccation become earth, and no water shall be seen there. 2. If that the very Channel of the Bay become higher by reason of the Ri∣vers flowing into it, and carrying Sand along with it, that it in time cannot re∣ceive the Sea; so by degrees the Sea will recede from the shoars of that Bay. Therefore the Mediterranean, the Baltick, the Red, Persian, and other Seas that are Bays of the Ocean, will cease in time to be Seas, and will be changed into Lands, which shall be fully proved in the following Proposition.
Proposition IX. The Ocean for saketh some Shoars or Coasts, so that it becometh Land, where the Ocean formerly was. Where the O∣cean formerly was, is now Land, by its forsaking the shoars.That happeneth for these causes; 1. If that the force of water be broken at the shoars by Rocks, here and there on the Coasts or Clifts in the Sea: for that force being broken, the Terrestrial parts of the water subside and sink, and augment the Altitude of the banks of Sand; whence it cometh to pass, that the impetus of the Ocean is more and more broken, and therefore more Terrestrial matter subsideth: so that the ridges being augmented, they ex∣clude the Ocean, or make the Channel more shallow. 2. It conduceth much to the Augmentation of the shoars, if that the shoars be sandy and stony, that the Ocean runing by, can separate or take away little with it: so that when it can take away nothing, it always leaveth some particles, that in progress of time the shoars become more high, and force or stop the Ocean from its accu∣stomed place. 3. If that another adjacent shoar hath less solid Earth, that is light and full of Caverns: for the Ocean carrieth the dissolved and broken parts of Earth to the vicine shoars. 4. If that great Rivers discharge them∣selves by the shoar into that Sea: for these Rivers carrying with them much Sand and Mud, or Gravel, when that they arrive to the mouth and shoar, where they endeavour to exonerate themselves into the Sea, they leave it, partly because the Channel is there more broad, and partly, because that the Sea resisteth the flux of them: and this is chiefly observed in Regions, which Rivers overflow every year. 5. If that frequent Winds blow from the Sea to the shoar, and the shoar be rocky and firm, not sandy. 6. If that the flux of the Sea be swift and vehement, and the reflux slow and gentle; for the gen∣tle reflux taketh not away the matter that the swift flux brought, but suffer∣eth it to sink. If that the shoar descendeth obliquely into the Sea for a long space, and bend not down directly and perpendicularly: for so the violence of the Sea decreaseth, and leaveth the matter behind. The Land of Aegypt. caused by the Nile.There are many places of the Earth, which it is evident were formerly taken up by the Ocean. Where Aegypt is, in time past was the Sea, as is proved by the testimony of the Ancients, and by Experience at this day: For the Nile flowing from the remote Regions of Aethiopia, and every year entring the Channel, where it swelleth, it expandeth it self through all Aegypt, where, when the force of the River ceaseth, the Mud sinketh, and also the Terrestrial matter, which the swift course of the River brought in; and so Aegypt becometh higher. And before that so much matter was brought in by the Nile, then the Sea covered the Land of Aegypt; but now the Sea is not admitted, by reason of the height. Of this, Aristotle and Others are Witnesses; his words are these, This place, and the whole Region of Aegypt, which was only made by the River, seemeth always to become more dry; and because that the Marishes by degrees drying up the adjacent places, began to be inhabited, the length of time obliterated the beginning of it; therefore all the mouths of the Nile, except that of Canopus, seem to be made by the In∣dustry of Man, and not by the River. Moreover, all Aegypt anciently con∣sisted of a City called Thebes, as is very manifest; which Homer also declareth, who flourished (as I have said) after this Mutation: For he maketh mention of that place, as if that Memphis as yet had no Being, or at least not so big. Seneca here explaineth it more clearly: All Aegypt, saith he, is made up of Mud; for (if that we may credit Homer) Pharos was so far from the Conti∣nent, as that a Ship with a full spread Sail could harldly measure or encompass it in an whole day; but it is now adjoyned to the Continent: for the Nile flowing muddy and troubled, and drawing much Mud with it, and so adding to it the former Lands, hath made Aegypt larger by an Annual increase. Hence the soil is muddy and fat, neither hath it any Intervals in it, but hath increased to a solidity.
The Rivers Ganges and Indus, by their Inundations, both cause al∣so Land.Ganges, and Indus in India, both famous Rivers, have caused the same by their Inundations that the Nile hath; also Rio de la Plata in Brazil. And it is probable, that China was generated, or at least augmented after the same mode, by reason that a violent River, which they call the Yellow River, flow∣ing from Tartary into China, often overflowing (although not in an Anniver∣sary time,) hath so much Sand and Gravel, that it maketh the third part of its water. These Examples demonstrate the cause laid down in the fourth place, viz. why Rivers should cause the Sea to forsake the Shoar: but the Sea it self is also oftentimes the cause of its departure in divers Regions, viz. whilst that it carrieth and layeth down the matter, by which the Channel and Shoar ac∣quire the greater Altitude, and admit not the approach of the Sea: so Holland, Zeland, and Gelderland were made; for that the Ocean in time past possessed these Countries, is known both from Ancient Histories or Monuments, as also from the quality of the Soil it self. The shells of Fishes, found on the Clifts or higher parts of Gelderland, not far from Noviomagus, do sufficiently testifie the same; as also shrubs and ouzey matter found in the profundity of the soil: Add, that the Sea is higher than the Land of these Regions, and hath overflowed it, and would cover it again, if that it were not obstructed by banks of Sands and Ramparts. Yet there are some that say, they suppose that Holland and Zeland were brought from the Rhine and the Mosa; which is not improbable. Proposition X. To shew the Generation of Sandy-banks in the Sea, and elsewhere. The generati∣on of Sandy banks.We term those banks of Sand, that are elevated above the Channel of the River▪ to that height, that they hinder the passage of Ships. Neither do they differ from Rocks, but that their parts do cohere and are condensated; but the Sand-banks do not consist of parts very coherent. But these words are often∣times confounded. The Sand-banks do either lie in the Channels of Rivers, (as many are in the Wolga, and the Albis,) or at the mouths of Rivers, (which is frequent, as in the Wolga, and the Albis) or on the Sea-shoar, or amidst Seas. The mode of the generation is the same, by which we have said in the foregoing Propositions, that the Channels of Rivers are dried, and the Sea forsaketh the shoar; for so oftentimes it cometh to pass, that the Ocean, before that it leaveth part of the Earth altogether, first generateth this ridge of Sand not far from the shoar, and so by degrees retreateth back, and these banks become parts of the Continent. After the same mode it hapneth in the Channels of Rivers, before that they are wholly dried and forsaken by the water. The most frequent cause is, when Ri∣vers are augmented by rain, or dissolved snow, and so run violently; for then where their motion is more vehement, and Channel more narrow, they eat off the mud and sand from the shoars or some banks; also the substance of the bottom is advanced and lifted up, and is carried by the impetuosity of the Ri∣ver, until it come to a more large and ample Channel, and be removed from the Fountain or cause of abundancy of water; for here the vehemency of the mo∣tion is remiss, and then the Terrestrial parts subside, and Sand-banks are ge∣nerated: of which, many are found in places where there are broad Rivers, but none almost in narrow. Neither is there any mischief, which taketh away more splendor from the most flourishing and rich Empories or places of trade, without any hope of re∣covery, or bringeth greater detriment to Ships. That we may pass over those Ancient Cities, now for many Ages buried in oblivion, we have Examples be∣fore our eyes of Stavoren in Friezland, Armuyen in Zeiland, of Dort in Holland, Antwerp in Brabant, and Stade in the Bishoprick of Bremen. Nothing took away the power of Traffick from these Cities, (which was the cause of all their splendor and riches) but the banks of Sand arising in their Rivers, or the Neighbouring Seas.
Neither is there almost any Empory that is Maritimate, that is free from the fear of these Sand-banks. Those that are in the Albis or the Elbe, have de∣stroyed many Hamburgian Ships, that have escaped the grand storms of the Ocean. The same is manifest in others, to him that considereth, especially in the Texel and Ʋlie of Amsterdam. They are discovered in a great number on the Sea-coasts of Flanders and Friezland, and the suff of the Sea going down, many of them are discovered to be part of the Continent; for the Channel interceding hath then little wa∣ter, and admitteth of no sailing. The famous, or rather infamous amongst Mariners, by reason of Shipwrack, are those that are found in a great num∣ber in one part or place of the Sea. They are these; 1. The Sand-banks of Brazil, Abrolhos de Brasilia, Het riff van Brasilian, also de Droogte van Brasil. They lie from the Coast of Brazil for the space of 70 miles, which the Mariners that sail to the Indies, ought to avoid with great diligence, whilst that to shun the calm of Guinea, they sail towards Brazil: yet they come as near to those Sands as they may, that they may have the greater Wind; but they must be cautious, that they be not carried between Brazil and the Sands. 2. The Sands of St. Ann, not far from Guinea, six degrees at the elevation of the North Pole. Ships being carried upon these, come not off without great danger and labour, and are detained for many daies, when that Seamen suppose that they have passed beyond them: For these Sands are not continual, but they are disjoyned by broad and deep Whirlpits or Gulphs; so that in a small distance, here is a depth of about eight fathom, by and by about two. 3. The Sands between the Isle of Madagascar and Arabia, cal∣led Baixos de India; they are sharp Rocks of Coral of divers Colours. 4. The Sands of China. 5. The Sands of Flanders. But more may be seen in Geographical Sea-charts. We have declared one mode of the generation, by which these Sands have an Original, by sinking of the Sandy matter, which the Sea carrieth with it. The second mode to be adjoyned to this is, by which such Sands can, or may have a Being; to wit, if that the Sea overflow the Earth, in which the hills and risings are sandy, (for then those hills are, or shall be called, Sand-hills:) they are discovered in a large tract; but the Land it self is more low. If therefore the Sea by an irruption, should inundate and cover those Lands, then those Hills would be Sand-banks: so we must judge of o∣thers. Therefore at the Mouths of Rivers, Sand-banks are most frequent, because the Channel is there broader, and therefore the impetus of the efflux of Rivers is there diminished; and therefore the matter sinketh, which the violent Flood brought with it: Also the waves of the Ocean repel the Waters flowing from the Mouths of the Rivers, whence all the force ceaseth. And it is worth our labour to distinguish, and consider these two modes of the generation of Sand-banks. Proposition XI. To conjecture, whether the Sand-hills, which lye in the Sea, not far from the Continent, shall be part of this future Continent. Of Sand-banks or Hills in the Sea, not far from the Land.We have said in the former Proposition, that these Sand-banks are gene∣rated two manner of ways; one truly by the subsidency or sinking of the Sand into the Sea, the other by denomination, viz. all Hill, the water encompas∣sing and overflowing the Earth. If that they are generated by the former mode, and are found to increase more and more, it is a sign that they will joyn to the Continent of the Earth; that is to say, that the Channel of the Sea will be dried between these Sand-banks and the adjacent Land; But if that the Sand-banks are generated after the second mode, then we may conjecture, that those Sand-banks will not so easily be conjoyned to the adjacent Earth; but that the Sea rather will farther overspread the Land.
Proposition XII. Islands are produced in the Sea and Rivers after the same mode that Sand-banks are; yea Islands may proceed from Sand-banks, yet they are also made after another mode. Of the genera∣tion of Islands.For if that in any part of the Sea, so great a quantity of Sand, Gravel, Mud, and Ouze, be aggregated in progress of time, that it becometh higher than the Sea, it will become an Island; which is the first Mode. Then by the second mode, If that the Sea breaking into the Land, overfloweth only the lower parts, but not the higher, and the Hills, those will be Islands. And by this latter Mode it is probable, that those Islands were generated, or had original, which arise to an huge Altitude; as St. Helena, Ascension, and the like; espe∣cially those which are rocky and stony. Sicilia separa∣ted from Italy by the Sea.Hitherto appertain Islands, which the Sea hath cut off from the promi∣nent Lands: So Writers testifie, and the Poets Verses are known, that Si∣cilia was separated from Italy by the violence of the Sea. By the first Mode, viz. the subsidency and congregation of many Terrestrial particles, the Islands of Zeland, Denmark, and Japan, had their original. The same seemeth to have been the original of the Molucco Isles: for if that you dig on the Plain to a small depth, you shall meet with an abundance of sand and shells. Other Isles se∣parated from the Continent by the Sea.The Inhabitants of Ceiland relate, that the Isle was separated from the procurrent of India, and it is very probable so. The Isle of Sumatra is sup∣posed formerly to have been united to Malacca. The Isles of the Maldives in times past was were said to adhere to India, and were a continuous Continent; yet at this day they are far in the Sea, and divided into an innumerable many Isles, (esteemed about 1100,) neither ought we to doubt of it, seeing that narrow Euripuses pass through every two of these Maldivian Isles, so that in some places they exceed not four or five Ells; but in progress of time many of them unite into one, the Euripus being di∣minished, and all of them at length will conjoyn in one oblong Island. Yea all the Oriental Isles, scituate between the Continent of Asia and the Land of Magellan in a great number, seem to arise from the violence of the Ocean, the Land being separated: For the Pacifick Ocean, in the Torrid Zone, is moved by a perpetual motion and force from the West to the East, that is, from America to those Oriental Isles: Moreover, a perpetual Wind greatly aug∣menteth the violence of the Ocean towards that Oriental quarter. There∣fore it is not improbable, seeing that all these Islands are in the Torrid Zone, but that Asia formerly did adhere to the South-land, or that of Magellan, in a continual tract of Land: then at length the violence of the Ocean eat off, and separated sometimes here and sometimes there, until that a way being made on every side, it was conjoyned to the Indian Ocean, and made so many Islands, as that we stand amazed at this day, in that quarter being di∣stant a very small space, Java, Celebes, Borneo, Madera, Amboina, &c. Concerning the Islands in the Gulph of Mexico, as also in the Streights of Malacca we conjecture altogether the same. The Isles of the Aegean Sea, whether they had a Being from the divulsion made by or from the Sea (the Sea flowing from the Euxine Sea, and the Me∣diterranean raising up of contrary floods,) or after the former mode, by a subsidency of the Terrestrial matter, which the Propontis had carried from the Euxine Sea, as yet I doubt: It is more probable, that a divulsion was made; and peradventure that famous Inundation of Deucalion, here also ex∣ercised its force. It is certain, that the Isle Euboea, at this day called Negro∣pont, did formerly adhere to Greece, as Authors of no mean Credit do relate; for so small an Euripus interfloweth, that it may be joyned by a Bridge.
We shall shew, that Islands may be made of Sand-banks by many Examples So the Islands in the River Nile, and in the River of St. Laurence, were former∣ly Sand-banks. Rivers make Islands after another manner, when that they send forth a branch, which they receive into themselves in another place, as may be seen in the Wolga, Tanais, and other places. That this was not done by Nature, but by the Industry of Man, we ought not to question. the River Ob doth the same. These two Rivers, Rengo and Coanza, made the Isle Loanda, scituated on the Coast of Africa, which exonerated themselves into the Sea in that place; by reason that they bring great store of Mud and Rubbish with them, they fal∣ling with an exceeding force from Mountainous places, so that they lest this, and as yet the same in their Inlets, and so in course of time made the Island Landa; first made a Sand-bank, now most fertile and likewise populous: And so we suppose that many Sand-banks formerly made the Islands, scituated at the Coasts; although that some were also caused by a divulsion made by the Sea, as Norway. And it is more probable, that this is the mode of generation of Islands in stony and rocky Isles: But in the Indian Sea, Islands may have an original both by divulsion and subsidence, or sinking of matter; because that whilst it forceth away, it also eateth between the middle of the Earth, which at length it putteth in another place; unto this many furious Winds, which are very fre∣quent in the Pluvial months from May to September, do much conduce: For by these the Sea is mightily troubled, so that the Sand and gravel is separated from its bottom, and from other Regions, which matter is forced on the Coasts of India. So the Mouths of the Port of Goa, by the violence of the Winter-winds (from May to September) are so obstructed with congested heaps of Sand, that they hardly afford a passage to smaller Vessels. So these heaps of Sand shut up the Port of Cocin, on those Months, so that neither small nor great Vessels can pass. For a continual Rain on the Mountain Gatis, and a frequent Ecnephias or impetuous wind from a Cloud breaking forth with an abundance of water from the Clouds, which are beheld to hang as it were on the top of Gatis, send forth such an abundance of water, and with that violence, that it carrieth much Sand with it to the shoar, where the Ocean resisteth; which Sand, when that the Winter endeth, is taken away by the Ocean, and the Ports are opened. There are some Lands so nigh the shoar, that the flux of the Sea doth make them Islands, and in the reflux they are in appearance part of the Continent; and if that the interposed Channel acquire a greater Altitude in progress of time, at length the flux of water is excluded, and the Islands become part of the Continent without reciprocal mutation. And also the Nile overflowing Aegypt every year, causeth the Cities and Hills of Aegypt then to seem Islands: So the River Wolga doth so increase in the Months of May and June, that it covereth the Sands and Islands, and many of the Isles that adjoyn unto India become Sands in the Pluvial Months, where that the Nile and the Ganges do overflow the Regions. Proposition XIII. There is yet another Mode, besides the two already related, by which Islands have a Being or Original; viz. for the coherent Earth suddenly to be carried from the bottom of the Sea to the superficies. Another Mode by which I∣slands have an Original.Others suppose this Mode, and that not undeservedly, to have proceeded from the fabulous Grecians and Poets: But Seneca a grave Author relateth, that the Island Thracia in his time sprang up in the Aegean Sea, whilst that the Mariners looked on. Although therefore that very few Examples of such productions of Islands are to be found, yet it ought not to be supposed impossi∣ble; for it may be, that a porous, spongy, sulphureous Earth doth exist (as there is a various difference and mixture of sight Earths,) which even now hath in∣creased to a notable altitude, yet so, as that it yet remaineth beneath the su∣perficies
of the water. Now, if that such a Sand or Earth adhere less firm at the bottom of the Sea, it may be separated by the violence of the Sea, because that it is little lighter than the water, or almost of the same levity, therefore it will ascend to the superficies of the water, and suddenly an Island will seem to spring up: or a Spirit or Wind included in the bowels of the Earth, without any violence of the Sea, and endeavouring to break forth, may send forth such an Island above the Water: for great is the force of Winds in∣cluded in the Earth, and requiring a larger space, as is evident from Earth∣quakes. By which it is manifest, that sometimes Mountains are sent forth of the Earth, and sometimes swallowed up: the same is manifest from Warlike Mines, where the Wind breaketh up great Towers and Walls and carrieth them into the Air. If that therefore such an Island of a sudden springing in the Sea adhere to the bottom of the Sea, we must necessarily say, that it was forced upwards by the violence of some subterraneous Wind: As some write, that Mountains some∣times are thrust forth of the Earth; but if that it no longer adhere to the bottom, as well the Wind, as the violence of the water, may separate it from the bottom; so that at length, by its own levity, it is carried upwards to the superficies. Proposition XIV. Whence another doubt doth arise, viz. whether that there be certain Islands that swim on the Sea, as Thales supposed the whole Earth to swim on the O∣cean? For the Opinion of Thales it is sufficiently refuted, seeing that the Chan∣nel of the Sea is found continuous to the Land: but reason perswades us, that there may be swiming Islands, if that the Land be light and sulphureous. Se∣neca addeth Experience; for he saith, that he saw the Isle Catylias swiming, which had Trees, and brought forth Grass and Herbs; that the water sustained it; and that it was not only driven hither and thither by the wind, but also by the Air; and that it continued not in one station either by Day or by Night. Moreover there was another Island in the Lake Vadimon: another in the Lake Station. So the Ancients relate, that Delos and all the Cyclades formerly swam in the Sea. Neither may you object, why do not those Islands swim at this day? For unto this the Answer is easie, That such a swiming cannot continue long; for seeing that those Islands almost touch at the bottom of the Sea, whilst that they are moved hither and thither, they are carried more or less elevated to the Sands or Channels, especially if that they come in the midst between two Sands, that motion is stopped, and other collected Earths are united with this Sand∣bank or Channel, and so of swiming Islands they become firm. In Fondura, a Country in America, at this day is a Lake in which are many Hills, which are moved to and fro with the wind. In the great Lake of Scotland, called Loumond, is an Isle that swimeth, and is moved about, although that it be apt for Pasturage, as Boetius writeth. Hitherto we have treated of the generation of the Lands, or of the Acid part of the Earth that is extant on the superficies: we shall now consider how the Ocean and Waters may change their places, and possess new. Proposition XV. Rivers possess certain tracts of Land, which they possessed not before, and that for divers reasons. Certain tracts of Land which Rivers possess, which they possessed not before.1. When that they first arise from their Fountains, and receive a Channel either from Nature or by Art, of which we have spoken in the fifteenth Chap∣ter. 2. If that a River, maketh another Channel for it self, or sendeth forth a branch from it self; which is most commonly done by men, viz. that they may bring part of the Rivers unto Cities, or into another River; Examples of which we have alledged in the forecited Chapter.
3. If that Rivers more and more possess the banks in progress of time, which hapneth, 1. If that the Channel become higher from the sinking down of the Earth or Sand. 2. If that it eateth off the sides of the Bank by its swift course. 3. If that it be augmented by another River, and by an abundance of Rain, or an Exhydria or impetuous wind, accompanied with a mighty fall of water. 4. If that they overflow the Earth, which if not going back again, but do more and more augment, they become Lakes; or if they return to their An∣cient Channel, the water being effused into the Fields, becometh a Marsh, if that there be great abundance of it. Corollary. It is probable therefore then, that there was a time in which those tracts of Land, which now the Rhine, Elbe, and the Nile possess; as also other Rivers, were dry, and possessed by the Earth. Proposition XVI. Lakes, Marishes, and standing-Pools, occupy parts of the Earth that before they possessed not. Lakes, Ma∣rishes, and Pools, possess parts of the Earth, which formerly they did not.1. When that they first spring up, and are augmented in progress of time; of which we have spoken in the fifteenth Chapter. 2. If that abundance of Rain fall. 3. If that Rivers bring store of water with force into the Lakes. 4. If that the Channel become more high. 5. If that the Lakes being agitated by often and more vehement floods, by degrees do more eat the banks and cover the land with water. So the Lake of Harlem within thirty or forty years, hath extended beyond its former Bank, about the space of the twentieth part of a mile. Corollary. Therefore it is probable, that there was a time when those tracts of land, which now the Lake Zaire, Lemanus, Parina, Harlem, Maeotis, or the Marishes of Westphalia, and all others formerly possessed, were dry Lands. Proposition XVII. The Ocean possesseth part of the Land, which formerly it did not possess. Land possessed by the Ocean, which former∣y it did not possess.This hapneth after various manners; 1. When that breaking through the middle of the land it maketh Streights and Gulphs; as the Mediterranean, the Arabian, that of Bengala, Camboja, and such like: So the Streight between Sicily and Italy; between Geilan and India, between Greece and Euboeja, be∣tween Manilla and Magellan, and also the Danish, &c. Neither is it improbable, but that the Atlantick Ocean was so generated, and that America was so divi∣ded from the Old World, or at least from Europe, which some do the more easily embrace, that they may thence only deduct the Original of the American Na∣tions from Adam. Indeed the Aegyptian Priests related unto Solon, about six hundred years before Christ, (as you may see in the Dialogue of Plato, termed Timons,) that there was formerly opposite to the Herculean Streight of Gi∣bralter, an Isle bigger than Asia and Europe together, called Atlantis, and that part of it afterwards by a great Earthquake, and a great deluge of one day and one night, was swallowed up in the Ocean. From which Narration we may col∣lect, that in former times amongst the Aegyptians there was a fame, especially amongst those that were Learned, of the separation of America from our World, made many Ages before. But it is far more likely, that the North part of America, in which is New France, New England, Canada, and the like, did in former Ages adhere to Ireland. The Ancients write, that the Streights of Gibralter were dug through by Hercules. 2. When with a violent Wind the Ocean is forced, and overfloweth the land by breaking through, or over the banks that are made by Nature and Art. There are many Examples of the Inundations of the Ocean; as formerly in Thessaly, and not long since in Friezland and Holsatia.
3. When by reason of the same causes, it penetrateth the firm Land, and ma∣keth Islands. By this Mode we have said in the former Propositions, that it is likely that that Sea had its original which interfloweth between those innume∣rable Oriental Isles, and that which floweth between the Maldivian Isles and India, and also between the Gulph of Bengala and Camboja. 4. When it by degrees eateth and consumeth the Coasts or Shoars, and so in progress of time covereth some parts of the shoar and of the adiacent land. So the Baltick Sea invaded the Coasts of Pomerania, and destroyed the fa∣mous Town or Empory of Vinetam: so taking away the Islands from the Coast of Norway, it let in it self between these Isles and the Continent. So the German Ocean hath possessed the shoar of Holland, near the Village of the Catti, in a great space of Land: so that the Ruins of the Brittish Tower, for∣merly a Fortress or Castle of the Romans, now lieth inconspicuous, being co∣vered with water far from the shoar in the Sea. The Ocean hath taken from the North part of the Island of Ceilan the space of 20 miles, so that at this day it is far lesser than it was. And there are many more Examples of the like kind. Corollary. From hence we may collect, that those places of the Earth, where now the Ocean is, in times past were Land; and again shall be land, to wit, if that we do suppose, that the earth hath continued so many thousand years, and shall yet continue. Concerning this Argument you may consult Aristotle in the first Book of his Meteors, and the twelfth Chapter; and Ste∣vinus in his Geography. If that you demand, how the Ocean shall occupy the place of Mountains, that then the Mountains shall not be covered by the Sea, but shall then become either Rocks or Islands, other earth being forced unto them; that is, confirmed by the example of many Islands, yea almost of all; because that Experience testifieth, that almost all Isles have Mountains in the midst, as Ceilan, Sumatra; Java: furthermore, some are nothing else but Mountains, as St. Helena, Ascension, the Hesperides, and the like. Seeing therefore that those places of the Ocean in which those Isles lye, in Ages to come shall be, or already have been land, then indeed the Mountains of these Isles shall be Mountains of the Continent. Proposition XVIII. Whether it is possible, that the whole superficies of the Earth should become dry, or Land? Or, that it should be all liquid or covered with water? That the most parts should be of an Earthy superficies at one time more than at another, or that more should be covered with water. Of the whole Superficies of the Earth, whether it may become all Land or all Water.1. That sometimes the land should possess a greater part of the superficies of the Earth, than at another. Also that which is a consequence to the former, that water at one time should possess the greater part of the superficies of the Earth, more than at another, hath been sufficiently shewed in the second Pro∣position of this Chapter. 2. Whether the Water or Ocean can cover the whole Earth, so that there shall be no Earth or Island above it, and so cause a Universal stood? Unto this I answer, That a mode may be conceived and explained, by which it may na∣turally be done; but yet by reason of the compaction of the Lands, and Al∣titude of the Mountains, it is scarcely probable that any such thing will be. The mode by which it may be done, is the same with that explained in the second Proposition: For if that the Ocean continually eateth the land from the shoar, and layeth it down in the profoundest parts of its Channel, and do this in a perpetual course of time, then it shall take away all the Lands of the super∣ficies, or extant parts, and it self shall cover all the Earth. And the Mountains shall either be made Rocks, or shall by degrees sink and fall, their Foundations being consumed by the vehement force of the water. But this may be done more easily, if that we will follow their opinion, who attribute a greater height to the Ocean than to the Land. But we have in the precedent discourse sufficiently confuted that opinion.
3. Whether that the Land can so occupy the whole superficies of the Earth, so that all the water and the whole Ocean may be contained in the Caverns of the Earth, or in the subterraneous passage, and covered by the Earth? Unto this I answer after the same manner, that it is not impossible, and that a Mode may be conceived by which it may be done; but yet scarcely ever shall be. Now there is only one Mode to be conceived, viz. that if now there are or may be so many cavities within the depth of the earth, within the which the Ocean may be contained: for neither hath it been demonstrated by any, as hitherto, that such cavities are not in the depth of the earth; and if they be not, but that they may be done, 1. by the violence of the earth, and 2. by subterraneous winds. Proposition XIX. Why, in the middle of the Ocean, no Islands are found, and no abundancy of Isles, but most at great Continents, or great Islands? No Isles found in the middle of the Ocean.Of the truth of this Proposition we ought not to doubt, for experience ma∣nifestly proveth it. In the midst of the vast Pacifick Ocean, between Africa and Brasilia, besides the Isle of Sancta Helena, and that of the Ascension, few are found: but about the shoars of the Continent, or in the Ocean, not far from the Coasts of the greatest Continents, all Islands are (those few only excepted which I have spoken of): this may especially be taken notice of in those nume∣rous ones that we tearm troops of Isles, which are all near the Continent. The troop of the Isles of the Aegean Sea adjoyneth to Europe and Asia; the Hespe∣rides to Africa; the Maldivian Isles to India; as also all the Indian Isles between Asia and the South Continent; only the Flandrian Isles, or Azores, seem to be situated in the midst of the Ocean, between the old World and Ame∣rica, although that they are more near to that than to this. The cause of this Phenomenon or situation of the Islands without doubt is, that they had a Being from the irruption of the Ocean into the Continents, by which violence the Lands of the Continents were separated: but because the Altitude of the Ocean was not so great, that it could cover all the Lands inter∣cepted, thence here and there between the Continents, and at the Continents, troops of Islands did arise: also it is likely that some of them were generated by another mode, viz. because the Ocean cannot carry the Lands separated, and cut off any long space with it, but suffereth them by degrees to subside not a long distance from the shoars, which subsidency or sinking continued for many Ages, at length caused Isles: therefore in the middle of the Ocean are few Islands. 1. Because that place is more remote from the shoar than that a∣ny of the eaten off parts should be carried thither. 2. Because that the com∣motion and force of the water is greater there, which moveth the earth of the Channel, or rather promoteth the depth, than suffereth Islands to be generated there. 3. Because there are no Continents there, therefore neither can troops or heaps of Islands be according to the first mode, by which we have shewed such heaps of Isles to be produced; yet in times past, when that the middle of the Ocean was not where 'tis now, it is not unlikely that such Isles were here, and by degrees were swallowed by the Ocean.
OF Absolute Geography. SECT. V. Containing an explication of the Atmosphere, and the Winds. In three Chapters. CHAP. XIX. Of the Atmosphere and Air. Proposition I. From the parts of the Earth, as well dry as moist, or from the Earth and Water, vapours and fumes do continually exhale into that space, which is about the Earth. THE Cause is twofold; first, the Celestial heat of the Stars, especially the Sun and Moon.Of vapours and fumes. The other is a Terrestrial heat, or subterranean or rather terrestrial fire, or which is admixed with the parts of the earth: For we see that al∣most all bodies, the least fire being moved towards them, send forth a fume. Seeing therefore that both the Celestial and Terrestrial heat is naught else but a certain fire, there∣fore it is also necessary that vapours and fumes should be advanced by it from the parts of the earth. So the truth of the Proposition is evidenced à priori; Experience also confirmeth the same. For those that travel in the night time, especially when the Moon shineth, and that towards the water, discover many vapours to wander and be advanced about the Super∣ficies of the earth. Also it is vulgarly known, that in the day the Sun doth raise many vapours: also when that a mist ariseth upwards, which is a certain token of rain to follow,
Proposition II. The Atmosphere is a space about the whole earth, in which the exhalations raised from the earth are always present, And it is uncertain whe∣ther that anything or body else be contained in it besides these exhala∣tions. It is also taken for the exhalations themselves about the whole earth. There is no small controversie amongst modern Philosophers,Of the At∣mosphere. concerning the body which consisteth about the earth. For many Mathematicians of sound know∣ledge determine, that there is nothing besides exhalations elevated from the earth, and therefore they take the Atmosphere and Air for one and the same, and immediately after the Atmosphere, place the Aetherial substance. But o∣ther Philosophers suppose, that besides these exhalations in the space about the earth, that there is a certain peculiar and simple body, which they call Air, although that they freely grant, that exhalations may be changed into Air, and contrariwise into clouds and thick vapours. The same Persons, after this Air even to the Lunary Orb, place another subtile thin body different from the Aether, which indeed they tearm Fire, but they confess that it is less properly done, and that it doth not agree with our fire; for it is a calid substance (not burning) dry and very subtile, not to cause the refractions of the rayes of the Sun and Stars, which yet they will have to be done in this Air. Those being well considered, these two opinions of the Philosophers seem rather to differ in words than in matter it self. For as for the Air, because that they grant it so gross, that a refraction of rayes may be made in it, and that it may be gene∣rated from exhalations by a light mutation, the Air seemeth nothing else but a subtile exhalation, although it was not exhaled from the earth. As for the Sublunary Fire, when that they confess that it is so improperly tearmed, but they affirm, that it is so tenuous that it causeth no refraction of rayes; this seemeth little to differ from the Aether. We affirm therefore, that the Atmostphere and Air are a body about the earth, on which the rayes falling are refracted, (laying aside the controversie whence this body hath its original) which definition agreeth with the former: For neither is it likely that any ex∣halations can be elevated from the earth so subtile, that they should cause no refraction or impediment to the luminous rayes proceeding from the Aether: yet if that such be granted, we cannot know their Altitude, and whether that they be excluded from the Atmosphere; which yet if that any one will sharply urge, supposing that the little fires or rayes cast from the Sun on the earth, again recoil to the Sun; he will not deny but that the latter definition is commodious: Therefore the Atmosphere and Air are naught else but a con∣texture of many small bodies which adhere to the earth, as a down or wool circumvesteth a Peach. Proposition III. Sometimes more, sometimes lesser exhalations are drawn from the earth, e∣specially in divers places. Of exhalationsThe cause is, 1. The various elevation of the Sun above the Horizon, or depression beneath it. 2. The diversity of the age of the Moon, and its ele∣vation above the Horizon. 3. The rising and setting of the other Stars, and their constitution above the Horizon. 4. The diversity in the parts of the earth them selves; for watery and humid places do more easily send forth va∣pours than earthy and dry.
Proposition IV. The exhalations which constitute the Atmosphere, are of a divers kind (especially in sundry Regions) viz. watery, saltish, earthy, sulphureous, spirituous. The sensible compounded exhalations, or parts of the At∣mosphere are divers, viz. mixed of simple particles. Of the exhala∣tions which constitute the Atmosphere.The cause is, because that in the parts of the earth such bodies are of a di∣vers sort, and are advanced by heat, some more easily, and other some with greater difficulty. Concerning the earthy particles some one may doubt, be∣cause that those are scarcely apt to be elevated. 1. By reason of the smalness of their dusts, which are light; seeing that gravity is an affection of compacted bodies. 2. By admixture of sulphureous particles which violently carry those earthy ones with them. Moreover, that there are sulphureous particles in the Air is proved from the fiery Meteors, Lightnings, Thunder, and the like: yea, a sulphureous o∣dor or scent after Thunder and Lightning manifestly asserteth the same. As for the watery parts we ought not to question; for saline and spirituous exhalations, by reason of their tenuousness, are easily exhaled from the earth. Little Animals generated in great number and abundance in the Air, confirm the same. The Aristotelians divide exhalations into two kinds, to wit, vapours and fumes. Vapours are generated of water, and easily return into the same again. Fumes proceed from dry bodies. So Sal Armoniac vanisheth into smoak, fire being placed under it. This also is the cause that in divers Regions a dif∣ferent Air is discovered. Also that it raineth in one place, and not in ano∣ther. Proposition V. The least particles of the Air, and those all insensible, repell or reflect the rayes as a Looking-glass, but some of the particles of the Air being sensible and compounded, do transmit many rayes, but reflect fewer; others, on the contrary, transmit fewer rayes, and reflect more. Therefore the parts of the Atmosphere are divided into those that are opac and pellucid:The parts of the Atmo∣sphere. these are those that transmit many rayes, the former are those that transmit fewer. Therefore because that the least particles (both water and earth) being Atoms, are solid little bodies without any pores, so that they transmit no rayes, but repell them; because that it is very probable that a perspicuity, or a trans∣mission of rayes doth require pores orderly placed in a body, and empty little spaces. But the parts of the Air or Atmosphere composed of little particles, if that they shall have ordinate and many pores, they will be perspicuous and trans∣mit many rayes: but if that those particles shall be composed or aggregated very confusedly, they will transmit rayes without any pores; thence it cometh to pass that the Sun discussing a thick cloudy opac Air, doth make it perspi∣cuous, to wit, more porous. Now that the least particles reflect rayes, is manifest from hence, that the rayes of the Sun in a most serene Air be admitted into an obscure Cham∣ber through a narrow hole, you will see manifestly from the particles flying in a great number in the Air, that the rayes are reflected to the eye as from a glass. Now seeing that those particles are yet sensible, the same must be concluded concerning the least particles, and those that fly the sense.
Now those, who will have humid attenuated vapours to be perspicuous, but not dry ones and smoaks, they are refuted by experience and reason. By reason, because that fumes and dry exhalations may be made equally subtile and porous, as those that are watery; but they suppose that perspi∣cuity doth not consist in the mode or reason of the pores, but in a peculiar quality: But it is manifest by experience, because that the Air is serene, it hath more dry than moist particles; for in that new kind of Wind-gun, which is not discharged by powder or fire, but by the help of wind and air, the Air is so con∣densated, that it scarcely comprehendeth the sixtieth part of the former space; yet neither do they create any kind of humidity in the Gun, which must alto∣gether happen, if that the particles of the serene Air were watery. Proposition VI. Exhalations do not ascend of themselves, and of their own nature upwards, but they are forced by a violent motion; or the Air is not light but hea∣vy in a proper mode of expression. Of exhalationsAll that is to be termed grave or heavy, is moved to the Cen∣ter of the Earth, except that it be hindred; but the Air doth that: for the Earth being digged up, the Air descendeth into the space made. That there∣fore it is carried upwards, is thus performed. 1. That heat rarifieth it to seek a greater space. 2. Because that it is forced by another vapour. So in cold places, as in Nova Zembla, and with us in the night season no Mist ascendeth, but the heat of the Sun approaching rarifieth it, and causeth one part to force out and thrust forwards the other: For if that those small particles of Air were free, neither mutually implicated one within another, then at length it would be light. Proposition VII. The upper parts of the Atmosphere are more subtile than the lower, yet it may so come to pass, that the middle parts may be more gross and conden∣sed than the lower parts about the Earth. Therefore the more light parts fly to the upper place, they are more subtile and light; hence the truth of the member of the former Proposition is mani∣fest: Now the cause of the latter member is, that the parts in the middle Air easily counite again, and so become thicker: for the hot or calid Particles be∣ing carried up with them, have forsaken them, and the Rays refracted from the Earth, in that middle Region, by reason of their distance, have no force. Thence it cometh to pass that after Rain, the middle Air is more serene, be∣cause the more thick parts are separated. Proposition VIII. The Atmosphere or Air being heated, possesseth more space than before; now by how much it is more destitute of heat, by so much the more it contract∣eth it self, and occupieth the lesser space. The Air being heated pos∣sesseth more space than before.This is excellently shewed by that Instrument which we call a Thermometer, or Weather-glass, because that we measure the temperature of the Air and heat by in, in hot and cold, in which we discover the Air to become more condensed, and to occupy lesser space in the Glass, by how much the Air acquireth less heat, as we shall shew in the following Proposition. Now the cause of the
Proportion is a priore, because the calid Particles, either of the Rayes of the Sun, or of another fire, are most subtile of all the Particles of the whole world, and in continual motion. Therefore those Atmospheres, whilst that they are admixed, separate and divide these Particles with a great force, and so cause more pores; and these little fires departing, the Particles of the Air left to themselves unite again, or are mutually complicated within themselves. Corollary. Therefore the Altitude of the Air or Atmosphere is not constant, but decreaseth and increaseth, viz. at Noon-day it ought to be greater, at Mid∣night least, about the time of the rising and setting of the Sun moderate, as in Proposition XIV. Proposition IX. To make a Thermometer, Thermoscope, or Weather-glass, by which we may discover the mutations of the Air in heat and cold. Take a Glass of an oblong and cylindrical neck with the spherical small head L H,How to make a Thermome∣meter or Wea∣ther-glass. let this be fixed to the Table or Board M N P Q, the head being erected. Let a Vessel with water be placed under the Orifice (which is best to be colour∣ed) so filled that part of the pipe or neck L F may be hidden in it: Now let the time of the moderate constitution of the Air, or at that time at whose tempe∣rature you will compare the temperature of the Air of the other days, and at that time let the water be poured into the Vessel, so it will happen that the Air becoming more frigid,Sec Scheme. the water will ascend upwards beyond F, because that the Air being condensated with cold, which before filled up the space F A, now possesseth less space. On the contrary, the Air being rendred more hot, the water will descend from F towards L, because that the Air F H being rari∣fied now requireth more space. Now you will find the degrees of accretion and diminution of the heat and cold, if that you divide the Line F A on the Table into certain parts of num∣bers. Or without putting a Vessel under, set the Glass L H even at the ex∣tremity L, have a Globe with a little hole from the side, and let this Globular Vessel be filled with Air; for so also the degrees of heat will be shewed by the ascent and descent of the water. Proposition X. The serene Air may be carried so by a most vehement fire that it may occupy a space 70 times greater than it did before: On the contrary, it may be so condensed in a Wind-gun, that it may only possess a 60 part of the former space, but the heat of the Sun bringeth not so great a rarification, or the cold so great a condensation to the Air, The same is proved from that, that if you take an Aeolopile and heat it with fire, so that it may then contain 13 ounces; but the same being cold, and return∣ing to its former natural estate, it will contain 13 ounces, a dram and a half: Therefore the space that the Air occupied whilst that it was hot, is greater than the space that the Air possessed when refrigerated, that the difference of the space is that part of the Aeolopile that receiveth half a dram of water, if that the whole receiveth 13 ounces with half a dram; and the part of this Aeolopile is almost the 70 part of the whole space in the Aeolopile, therefore the Air being hot, hath possessed a space 70 times greater than it doth when it returneth to its natural estate. Proposition XI. Why in the places in the Frigid Zone, at the time in which the Sun ariseth not altogether unto them, on some days the Air is clear and serene, and for the most part cloudy and foggy. Of the Air in places of the Frigid Zone.I answer, the cause of this gross and almost perpetual Mist or Fogg, is the small heat of the subterraneous Earth it self; or else it is derived from the Sun, and like∣wise the Moon (which in the time of the obscurity of the Sun remaineth many
days and nights continually above the Horizon) & the other Stars; which heat because it is weak, cannot dissipate this Mist. Now that some days or nights afford a serenity of the Air; this happeneth not because the thick vapours are attenuated, but because that they either sink down into the earth, or else are forced into other places by the winds. Proposition XII. Why oftentimes in the greatest cold of the Winter, the Air is yet subtile and serene, when that yet the cold condensateth and contracteth the Air? The Air sub∣tile and serene in the greatest cold of the Winter.Cold is twofold, Moderate or Extream. Moderate cold rendereth not the Air serene, but cloudy, by reason that vapours are elevated, but not discussed by that little heat which is mixed or adjoyned to that cold. But an extream cold maketh the Air serene for a twofold reason. 1. Because it rendereth the grosser vapours of the Air more gross, and so causeth them to fall, and make the Air more subtile. 2. Because that the pores of the earth are shut and bound up, and the vapours themselves cannot exhale and render the Air turbid. The Sea it self indeed is not bound up with Ice, yet the particles are so condensated with Ice, that it is not so apt for exhalations, al∣though it sendeth forth many; for the condition of it, and the earth, are dif∣ferent. Proposition XIII. Why the Air being beheld at the Horizontal Line, appeareth more thick and cloudy than that in which we are? The cause is twofold: 1. Because that the Air about the Horizon is indeed more cloudy. The other is a fallacy or deception of the sight, or judgment from our sight; for the eye apprehendeth the distances of columns placed in a long order and series, and therefore as the judgment supposeth the remote co∣lumns to be conjoyned, so also it apprehendeth not the distances of the particles of the Horizontal Air, but imagineth them conjoyned: but the eye beholdeth the distances of the elevated Air under greater Angles, and therefore better apprehendeth it. The same is the reason why the Air, which appeareth clou∣dy to us, removed from it, when we come to it, or are in it, seemeth less misty or cloudy. Proposition XIV. Whether that the Altitude of the Atmosphere or Air above the Earth, be the same in all places at one and the same time; and whether its figure be spherical. Of the Alti∣tude of the Atmosphere.That the Altitude is not the same, but divers in sundry places, seemeth to fol∣low from thence, that the Sun is only Vertical to one place at one time, and it sendeth forth oblique rayes; and therefore more weak unto other places, by how much the place is more remote from the Sun, and nearer to the Poles: therefore the pores of the rayes of the Sun are very different to the elevating of the va∣pours, and therefore they are raised to different Altitudes, to wit, in a place un∣to which the Sun is vertical, his Altitude is the greatest, in the opposite place the lesser, in the places about the Pole moderate, so that the Air receiveth an oval figure. But the contrary is more probable, viz. that the Altitude of the Atmo∣sphere is the same in all places; for although that the Vapours and Air be more elevated in some places than in others, yet because that the Air is fluid and tend∣eth by its gravity to the Center of the earth: therefore the more elevated part of the Air presseth down the Air placed under it, and this thrusteth down ano∣ther more depressed, until all the parts acquire the same Altitude.
And after the same mode the Spherical Figure of the Air shall be de∣monstrated, as in the thirteenth Chapter we have proved, with Archime∣des, concerning the water, by reason that the same Hypotheses are prevalent here, which we there assumed, to wit, that the part of the Air less pressed is expelled by that which is more pressed; for every part is pressed by the Air that is above it: wherefore the Figure of the Air is spherical, not oval as some will have it: but if the forementioned Hypotheses be not granted, the demon∣stration falleth. Des Cartes also maketh the Air oval in figure for a peculiar reason; see Chapter fourteen. Proposition XV. Condensation or Rarefaction of Air changeth not its Altitude. Condensation of Air chang∣eth not its Altitude.Because that the whole Atmosphere is not condensed, but only some parts: and at all times some parts are condensed, sometimes these, sometimes those; wherefore the condensation or rarefaction of one time, doth no more alterare the Air than the condensation or rarefaction of the first time. There only seemeth to be a difference, that at one time there may be a greater condensati∣on or rarefaction than at another: but this difference can little augment the Altitude. Proposition XVI. The Altitude of the Atmosphere or Air is not only the same in divers pla∣ces, but it remaineth the same, and that constantly at all times both Winter and Summer. The Altitude of the Atmo∣sphere is al∣ways the same in divers places.For although that heat in the Summer of our place may more elevate also our Air more than in Winter, yet because that the Winter is at the same in another place of the earth, the Air is less raised in it; wherefore part of our Air shall be moved towards the Air of those places, where the Air is less elevated, viz. to the more depressed place, as we have shewed in the fourteenth Proposition. And on the contrary, whilst that the Air of the place where we are, is depressed by reason of the cold of the Winter, part of this Air, where the Summer or the greater heat is, shall be moved towards our place, viz. until the whole Air be equally distant from the Center of the earth. The same is the reason concerning the Day and the Night, for whilst that the Air is depressed and contracted in the Night to us, in another place it is more rarefied, and so is moved towards the Air of our place, until it again make a spherical figure; and because that all are equal on every side, there∣fore the name Altitude shall remain in every time. But because that the Air is condensed more in one time and place than in another, that difference seeing that it is very small, can very little vary the Altitude, as we have shewed in the precedent Proposition. The same is the account of Rains or Mists, or Vapours that are in ours, or in another place: for to these it seemeth that the Altitude of the Air should be less or more. But I answer, that there is scarce any time, in which in some place of the earth it raineth not, and that the Mists fall not: and therefore when that it raineth in one place, the Air becometh not lesser than it was before, because that before it rained in another place: and so the rea∣son is equal, and the quantity of the Air is neither augmented nor diminish∣ed.
Proposition XVII. By how much the Air is more cold, by so much the more it is condensed; and therefore for the most part, more condensed in the Winter than in the Sum∣mer, (to wit, in some places of the Earth;) also in the Night than in the Day: Now watery thick exhalations in the Winter and the Night, cause and augment that condensation, especially in the Morning and E∣vening. The Colder the Air the more condensed.The truth of the Proposition is manifest from the preceding Propositions: neither doth it obstruct, for that part of the more not Air is moved to the more cold, as to a more depressed place; because that not that it self, but another adjoyning approachment, by reason of continual protrusion, and if that that happeneth, yet in a cold place that becometh also cold. Proposition XVIII. There are three Regions vulgarly made in the Air, whereof the middle is that in which the Snow, Rain, and Hail is generated: The first is that in which we are, extending it self even to the middle Region: the third is that which beginneth the uttermost bound of the middle Region, and ex∣tendeth it self to the utmost superficies of the Air (even to the Sublunary fire, as the Aristotelians affirm.) Three Regions in the Air.The middle Region is more cold than the first and third, which are reckoned more hot; but the third, by reason that it containeth more subtile, fiery, and sulphureous parts of exhalations, which fly to it about the place of the wa∣tery particles, or are thrust down as more light: (The Aristotelians say, that it is hot by reason of its vicinity to the fiery-Sphere.) But the first, because that the Rays of the Sun falling are ea there reflexed, and so duplicate the heat. It happeneth that some particles of subterraneous fire exhaling, are in this Region. But the middle Region i more cold, by reason that the reflected Rays are there vicine to those that fall in on the Earth: neither do they con∣tain any fiery sulphureous particles.) but watery ones; for the sulphureous and fiery ones, that have carried up the watery ones, fly higher. Proposition XIX. By how much that place of the Earth, unto which the Sun is vertical, re∣cedeth to the Pole; or by how much the place is more near the Poles, by so much the less distant the place of the Air is from the Earth, in which the Rain, Snow, Hail begin to be generated. The reason is, That the Rays of the Sun do fall more obliquely on the places about the Poles, than on the places about the Aequator; and therefore the Rays refracted are much withdrawn from those falling in, and so cause lesser heat; and for a lesser space than the Rays, under the places of the Sun, or un∣der the Torrid Zone: and so in a more nearer place, the watery vapours may unite to generate watery Meteors. Corollary. The Superficies terminating the first Region of the Air, is of an oval figure, or rather Elliptical or Sphere like, protuberating in the Torrid Zone.
Proposition XX. By how much the place of the Earth is nearer the Pole, by so much distance the Region of the Air is distant from that Earth that beginneth the third, or in which the more subtile and Sulphureous particles are. For there are the fewer and more subtle particles in part of the Atmosphere, by how much it is nearer the Pole, because that the heat of the Sun elicitateth fewer from the Earth. Therefore, because that there are fewer particles of the third Region under the Frigid Zone, than in the temperate, and in this fewer than in the Torrid; and yet the utmost bound of that third Region is equally distant from the Center of the Earth,See Propositi∣on 16. according to the sixteenth Proposition. Thence it followeth, that the beginning of the Region under the Torrid Zone, is far more distant from the Center of the Earth, than the beginning of that in the Torrid and Temperate Zone. Corollary. The Superficies terminating the second Region of the Air, or distinguishing it from the third, is Spherical, and protuberating in the Frigid Zone. All these must be shewed to Youth by Diagrams. Proposition XXI. The Rays of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, do not directly arrive at our eyes from the Aether through the Air; but where they enter the Air, they are withdrawn or deflected a little from a direct passage, which the skilful in the Opticks term to refract the Rays, and so those Rays refracted come to our eyes, and shew us the Star. Of the Rays of the Sun, Moon, and Stars.This part which treateth of the refraction of light, is the most subtle part of the Science of the Opticks; for Experience testifieth, that Rays pro∣ceeding from any visible body, if from one medium, they fall in upon another, that is, either more thick or subtle than the former, they are refra∣cted where they have entered at this other Medium, or deflect from a strait direct course to the sides. The Explication is easie from a Vulgar Experiment: Let any Vessel be taken, and let a ball of Gold or Copper, or Gold money, be affixed to the bottom; then depart back from the Vessel, by reason of the ob∣stacle of the sides of the Vessel, you can no longer see the Money at the bot∣tom. Then pour water into the Vessel; which being done, you shall see again in the former distance, the Money at the bottom. From hence it followeth, that seeing no Ray could directly come from the Money to the eye, by reason of the interposition of the sides of the Vessel, and yet afterwards the water being infused, the Rays arrived at the eye: It followeth, I say, from hence, that the Rays proceeding from the Money, where they enter into the Air, from the water, do deflect, or are refracted from the direct way, and being so re∣fracted, they arrive at the eye. It is called refraction, by reason that for this cause an Oar being partly in the water, doth appear refracted or broken. See Scheme.So let the Center of the Earth be T, L the eye in the superficies: let d r f p be the superficies of the Atmosphere or Air. Therefore no ray can directly arrive at the eye L, because it is beneath L f g: for other inferiour rays would fall in on the tumor of the Earth L o. Wherefore no Star can appear in a di∣rect ray until it come to the Horizontal line L f g: And the Stars appear be∣fore, viz. whilst that they are yet beneath L g; for Example, in S; and yet from S to the eye L, no ray can directly come, because that it should first fall on L o. Therefore of necessity, the ray which cometh from the Star S to the eye L, is not a direct, but a refracted ray, viz. L f, which refracted ray is propogated from the incident ray S f, to wit, S f falling from the Aether, on the more thick Medium, viz. the Atmosphere in f is refracted and becometh f L, when that it was direct in n, And so the Star appeareth before that it
could truly appear by a direct ray, that is, before that it arriveth at the Hori∣zontal line L f g. So a Star being in S, is not seen by the direct ray S L, but by the refract r L, whose incident ray is s r, and direct r m; and therefore the Star S appeareth higher, by reason of refraction, than it is; and in another place it appeareth high in the Arch x g, or in the Angle r l g, as if it were in x, when indeed it is in s. For this is the nature of refractions, that the rays falling from a more rari∣fied medium on a more thick, as from the Aether upon the Air, they become refracted, or decline towards the perpendicular, drawn through the point of incidency, or falling into the superficies of the incidency or medium. For Ex∣ample, the ray S f falleth in from the Aether on the Air: f is the point of the incidency, T f the perpendicular drawn through f to the superficies d r f p; therefore the ray S f n shall be refracted f T, that of f n may be made f L. So of r m is made r L; but the contrary is, when that the rays proceed from the water to the Air, for then they more recede from the perpendicular line drawn. Lastly, this also is the nature of refractions, that the rays falling in per∣pendicularly on the superficies of another medium, are not refracted, but only those that fall obliquely, and not perpendicularly; and by so much they are the more refracted, by how much they fall in the less perpendicularly, or by how much the more they depart from the perpendicular. So the rays S T, f T, H d T, are not refracted, because that they are perpendicular on the super∣ficies d r f p; but the rays S f, S r, are refracted, because that they fall ob∣liquely, and indeed S f more than S r. From whence it followeth, (which Experience also testifieth,) that by how much the Stars are more near the Horizon, by so much the more they re∣fract their rays; by how much the higher, by so much the less. And Astro∣nomers have observed, that the refraction is insensible where the Star hath at∣tained the altitude of 20 degrees; not that there is no refraction, but that it is very small. And for many Examples the skilful in the Opticks, and later Mathemati∣cians, have derived the Rule of refraction of all Rays falling in obliquely, viz. that in every medium there is one constant account between the sign of the Angle falling in, and the sign of the Angle refracted; to wit, the Angle n f T is termed the Angle of incidency, L f T the Angle refracted, n f L the Angle of refraction: and so in the refraction of the ray s r m. Therefore as the sign of the Angle T f n is to the sign of the Angle T f L, the same is the reason of the sign of the Angle T r m to the sign of the Angle T r L. Thence it followeth, that if from observation we have the quantity of refraction to the elevation of one Ray, we may thence know the quantity of the refraction of all others, howsoever elevated. Proposition XXII. The Atmosphere or Air, causeth the Sun, or the rest of the Stars, to be seen before that they arise in the Horizon; also to appear for some small space of time after that they have set; also that they appear higher than they are, and in another place of the Heavens, as long as that they are no higher than 20 degrees. The Air cau∣seth the Sun and Stars to be seen before they arise in the Horizon.We have sufficiently explained the Cause in the precedent Proposition; on∣ly we shall add some Experiences or Natural Phaenomenons. When that the Dutch wintered in Nova Zembla, the Sun appeared to them sooner by sixteen days than it was in the Horizon, that is, when that it was as yet depressed be∣neath the Horizon about four degrees, and that in a serene Air. And famous Astronomers have found it out with Tycho Brahe, that in our places the Morning-sky or Air being serene, we may behold the Sun elevated above the Horizon 34 minutes, when that as yet he is wholy under the Horizon, yet so
that his limbus or skirt doth enlighten the Horizon. And the Sun seemeth to arise, when that as yet he is depressed about 34 minutes beneath the Horizon, to wit, the Air of the place where we are, being serene. So the Spica Virginis, a bright Star, seemeth to rise to us, when that yet he is depressed 32 minutes beneath the Horizon, which is thence collected, be∣cause is seemeth to arise, when the Cauda Leonis is 34 degrees 30 minutes high, and in the same quarter in which this Star of the Lion then is. And the Cauda Leonis and the Spica Virginis, are distant thirty five degrees and two minutes. Proposition XXIII. By how much the Air or part of the Atmosphere, on which the ray of the Star falleth, is thicker, by so much it maketh the greater refraction, o∣ther qualifications being equal; viz. the same elevation of the Star, and the same altitude of the Air. So the Angle n f L (which is, and is called Refraction,) is by so much the greater; or the refracted Angle f L. approacheth so much the nigher to f T, by how much the Atmosphere is more gross: For so the Studious in the Opticks have found it true in all sorts of Mediums. Proposition XXIV. By how much the Air is thicker, by so much the more the Star is depressed beneath the Horizon, when that it first beginneth to appear. The thickness of the Air causeth the depressing of the Star.L f is the refracted ray, which first maketh the Star to appear: L f T is the refracted Angle; and let S f n be the incident ray, and n f T the Angle of in∣cidency, n f L shall be the refraction. Now let us suppose the Air f n L o to be thicker than where it maketh the refraction of the ray n f L. If therefore it be thicker, it shall make the Angle of refraction greater, viz. c f L, and the incident ray shall be K f c. There∣fore the Star being in K, the ray K f shall be refracted, that the refracted Angle f L may shew the Star: but the Air being less thick, the Star in S shall be first seen. Proposition XXV. By how much the Air is the lower, by so much the Star is the more depressed beneath the Horizon, when that at first it beginneth to appear, (that is, if there be the same serenity and thickness of the Air.) See Scheme.For the Air being supposed lower, the refracted Angle T f L shall be greater. For Example, If that T 4 be the altitude of the Air, the refracted Angle shall be (for the ray refracted coming first to L) T 4 L. Let 49 be drawn parallel with f n, because that so it is from the Hypothesis of the 21 Proposition, as the sign of one refracted Angle T f L is to the sign of the other refracted Angle T 4 L, (for they are supposed to differ so much in altitude, not in density;) so is the sign of the Angle of incidency n f T, to the sign of the Angle of inci∣dency 3 4 T, for the refracted 4 L, and the incident 3 4 6. Now the sign of the Angle T 4 L hath a greater respect to the sign T 4 9, than the sign T f L to the sign T f n, as is easily demonstrated by a Diagram described according to this draught. Wherefore the sign of the Angle T 4 L hath a greater re∣spect to the sign T 4 9, than the same sign T 4 L to the same sign T 4 3. And therefore the Angle T 4 3 is greater than the Angle T 4 9, and 3 4 L is greater than 9 4 L, that is, than the refraction n f T: The sign T 4 L is greater than the excess of the sign T f n above T f L. Wherefore the Angle 3 4 L is greater than the Angle n f L; and therefore 43 protracted, viz. 346 the ray incident,
for the refracted 4 L shall fall beneath S f, and the Star shall be in 6, that it may make the refracted ray 4 L; and therefore it is more, depressed, than when it is in S, where the altitude of the Air shall be L f. Proposition XXVI. The same may be the refraction of any Star to the same situation of it, al∣though the altitude of the Air be different, if that there be only a diffe∣rence in the thickness of the Air. The form of the Problem is more rightly propounded thus: The altitude of the Air, and the refraction being given, which the Star maketh at the given Altitude; and moreover another altitude of the Air being given, to find the den∣sity of this Air, or proportion of this refraction, such, that the same refraction may be at the given Altitude of the Star, which was in the first altitude of the Air. For Example, In the altitude of the Air T f,See Scheme. the ray of the Star S f maketh the Angle of refraction n f L. If now that there be another alti∣tude of the Air T 4, and yet of the Star S in the same scituation of the inci∣dent ray 54, (which by reason of its great distance is as it were parallel with S f) the refraction 34 L is equal to the refraction n f L. It is demanded, whether that this can be done; and if that it can, whether that this other Air ought to be thicker, and in what proportion of density or rarity? I answer, that it may be done, and that if the other latitude of the Air be greater than the former T f, the density of this other or second Air ought to be greater; but if that the other given altitude be lesser: for Example, T 4, the thickness of the other ought to be lesser, or rarity greater. Now how great this density or rarity ought to be, is thus known. First, let the Angle T 4 L be found out (from the given T 4, and T L) also T f L; then the sign of the Angle T 4 L, also the sign of the Angle T 43 (which is the Angle of the incidency of the ray 34 b:) therefore you have the proportion of the density of this Air, or rarity of the same to the rarity of the Aether, from whence the incident ray cometh. After the same manner let the signs of the Angle T f n and T f L be taken, so these signs will shew the proportion of the rarity of the former Air to the rarity of the Aether, and by the comparing of these accounts you will know, how much the latter Air of a lesser altitude ought to be more rare, or of a lesser thickness than the former. Yet in proper manner of speaking, the refraction is not the same, because we understand the same refraction, if that the rays falling in equally are elevated above the superficies of the Mediums. Proposition XXVII. If that the Air of one place be both thicker and lower than the Air of the other place, the Sun and the other Stars shall be more depressed beneath the Horizon of the former place, when that they begin first to appear, than in the second place. The Air caus∣eth the de∣pressure of the Sun and Stars beneath the Horizon.The Demonstration of this Proposition is manifest from the 25 and 26th prece∣ding Propositions. It followeth from thence, that if the Air be thicker and more low in the places of the Frigid Zone, than in the places of the temperate and Torrid Zone; that the Sun may be seen in those places, far sooner before his rising, and longer after his setting, than in the other places: for when that he is more depressed beneath the Horizon, and therefore ascendeth more obliquely, and in a longer time to the Horizon of those places; thence it fol∣loweth, that he is seen far sooner before his rising in the Frigid Zone, than in the Torrid. But it is a question, whether that the Air be lower in the Frigid Zone, and though the Sun appeareth sooner before his rising, whether that only a thickness of Air is sufficient; of which more afterwards.
Proposition XXVIII. Of the thick∣ness of the Air.If that the Air of one place be of a more thickness, and than the other, it may be an excess of thickness, so that they may not see the Stars before the rising in so great a depression beneath the Horizon, than in the other Air: also the excess of thickness may be such, that the Stars may begin to be beheld in the same depression. Lastly, the excess of thickness may be such, that the Stars may be beheld in aar distanter or longer depression beneath the Horizon, than in the other Air. Yea this thickness may bring with it a far greater depression than the lowness of the Air; and instead of refractions in Nova Zembla, a notable altitude of the Air with thickness is required. Proposition XXIX. It cannot be, that the refractions of any one Star in two Altitudes in one Air, should be equal to the refractions of the same Star in the same Altitudes in another Air, that is higher or lower, or thicker or more subtile. In the former Proposition we have demonstrated, that if in the altitude of the Air T f,See Scheme. the incident ray S f n maketh the refraction n f L, viz. T 4, the ray S 4 in another altitude (which is parallel with S f, by reason of its great di∣stance, and the rays are from one point) make the same refraction 34 L, which is equal to the refraction n c L, viz. if that the Air 40 L W be less thick than f o L d. Now therefore it is demanded, whether that this may be done in the two altitudes of the Star: For Example, It being supposed that in the scituation of the Star S, the Air f o L d, and the Air f o L W are so, that they cause an equal refraction: whether that in the altitude of another Star, for Example, in S, in the same Atmospheres f r d L o, 4 W L o can again be an equal refraction, or the same m c L. And I say, that it cannot be; for let the Periphery of this Air T 4 be described in the Center T, the interval of another Altitude, cutting L r in 3. Therefore 3 L shall be the ray refracted in this other Air, through which the Star S is seen: for the ray 3 L is the same with r L, by reason that the same apparent altitude x g, or Angle r L f, of the Star S is laid down. Moreover for this refracted Angle, let the incident ray be drawn through 3, 73 W, which shall be parallel with S r m, if that the refraction L 3 W were equal to the refraction L r m: for let T 3 be also drawn, the Angle T 3 W shall be the Angle of incidency, T r L the Angle refracted, W 3 L the refraction. Therefore as the sign 34 T is to the sign L 4 T, so is the sign W 3 T to the sign L 3 T. And as the sign n f T is to the sign L f Y, so is the sign m r T to the sign L r T. And now 34 L is equal to n f L; wherefore W 3 L is not equal to m r L, or W 3 is not parallel with m r. Now this consequence requireth a more difficult and operose Demonstration than can be propounded in this place, seeing that it rather belongeth to Geo∣metry; yet it shall be made manifest from the Analysis of the following Pro∣position.
Proposition XXX. The two refractions of any Star being observed in two Altitudes, to find thence both the altitude of the Air and the thickness of the Air in respect of the Aether, or the rule of Refraction in this Air. Of refractions of Stars.The refraction of a Star is of an equal difference between his observed Al∣titude and the true one, which is known by calculation, and therefore it is easie to know the refractions of the Stars: Now to come to the purpose, let the refraction n f L of a Star in S, and ejaculating his ray S f be given; then again in the altitude of the same S g, the same refraction m r L. Then in the Circle d r f p d, whose Center is T. T L is given (the Semi∣diameter of the Earth,) and T r, T f, L f, L r being drawn, let the Angles T L f, T L r be given (compounded of the Altitude of the Star and 90 mi∣nutes,) and the Angles n f L, m r L are given; and we know besides, that the same is the account of the sign of the Angle n f T to the sign L f T, which is the account of the sign m r T to the sign L r T. From these we must find the Semidiameter of the Circle T f or T r, and moreover the account or equality of the sign n f T to the sign L f T, or we must find out the Angle T f L. Indeed the Analysis doth teach that it may be found out, but by a most diffi∣cult Solution, so that the Synthesis or collection cannot be found out without many Propositions premised, like so many Indexes, which are altogether im∣proper to this place. Yet we will produce the Analysis, both that we may shew this Problem to be determinated, and also that the truth of the prece∣ding Proposition may also be confirmed. Let T L be f, The sign of the right Angle T L f S. b The sign T L r S. c The sign n f L S. d The sign of the Complement S. g. The sign m r L S. h The sign of the Complement K. The sign L f T S. a Let us seek the Angle L f T, be∣cause that after we have gained this, also T f and the rest will be known. Therefore it is in the Triangle f L T. As the sign L f T is to the sign T L f, so T L is to T f. As a to b, so is f to And because that the sign of both the Angles T f L, L f n is given, the sign also of the whole Angle n f T shall be given, viz. if that the signs of both An∣gles be multiplied alternately unto the sign of the Complement of the other; and the aggregate of the produced be divided by the ray b; therefore the sign of the Angle n f T, is . Then in the Triangle T L r are now known T r, T L, the sign T L r. There∣fore as T r is to T L, so is the sign T L r to the sign Y r L. As  is to f, so is c to  for the sign T r L. And let the sign m r L be also given, and you shall find according to the for∣mer Rule of the whole Sinus, m r T, viz. if that  or if  be equal to m, and  be n n, that the sign shall be  Therefore we shall have the signs of four Angles L f T, n f T, L r T, m r T: now we know these to be proportional; therefore as the sign T f L shall be to the sign T f n, so the sign T r L shall be to the sign T r m. As a to  so  to .
And therefore as b to c, so is ha + db − d v (bb − aa) to g f + ma − v (g g f f − nn aa.) And b g f + c d b − b m a + c h a + b u (g g f f − n n a a) equal to + d v (bb aa.) For  take , and for − b m a +c h a place q q a. And . Equal 2 v And the division being made by , and other signs being substituted, it shall be  equal to (.) And . —  equal to . So a division again being made by tt − ss, and other signs being substituted, it shall be  equal . For by this equation it is manifest, that the Problem is determined, and this very letter a, that is the sign of the Angle T f L, may be found as well by Geometry, as by the Arithmetical Analysis of Vieta: or also more easily, if that the equation may be reduced to a lesser power by the division: and from hence it is collected, that two refractions may suffice to find out the altitude of the Air, T f, and the very rule of Proportion; which I therefore take notice of,See Kepler in his Epitome of Astronomy, page 65. because that I see Kepler in the Epitome of his Astronomy, page 65. to re∣quire three refractions, although that he hath not attempted this way. Although therefore it hath been shewed, that the solution of this Problem may be had both by Geometry and Arithmetick; yet because that both are very laborious and difficult, especially to those that are studious in Geography; wherefore most understand not this, therefore for their sakes I shall demon∣strate another Method, by which the Problem may be more easily absolved, although it be less Mathematical, viz. by the Rule of Position: Therefore let T f be taken in a certain measure at T L. See Scheme.Therefore in the Triangle f L T from f T, T L, T L f, the Angle T f L shall be found: So in the Triangle T L r, from T r, T L, T L r, the Angle T r L shall be found. Then let the signs of the Angles T f L, T f n, T r L, T r m be taken also, let a fourth part proportional be taken at the signs T f L, T f n, T r L. If that therefore the sign T r m be equal to this fourth proportional part, then the assumed magnitude or altitude of the Air T f shall be true and legitimate; but if the sign T r m be greater than that fourth proportional, the lesser sign T f shall be taken; but if that the Minor be greater, then the Major must be taken, and this must be done so long until the sign T r m be found equal unto the fourth found out proportional part. Example. Let the Spica Virginis, or any other Star, or the Sun be placed to be beheld in the Horizon L f, when that it is yet depressed 40. 32 minutes, viz. in S. therefore the refraction n f L is 32. Then when that the same Star or the Sun hath the altitude g x 1 degree 22 min. or the true altitude g S 1 deg. then the refraction L m r is found 22 minutes.
The Semidiameter T L is 860 German miles, let us put it to be 1000, and the Altitude, o f let us suppose to be of such part S, (viz. 5/10000, or 1/3000 of the whole Semidiameter T L, that is  of about one mile.) Therefore the whole assumed sign in the Triangle T L f 10000000. As f T is to T L, so is the sign T f L, 2001-2000-10000000-9995992 signs, 88 deg. 22 min. 40 seconds. Therefore T f n is 88 deg. 54 min. 40 seconds, whose sign 9998200. Again in the Triangle T r L. As T r is to T L, so is the sign of the Angle T L r to the sign T r L. 2001-2000-9997155-999-2159. Signs 87 deg. 43 min. 40 seconds. Thorefore T r m is 88 deg. 5. min. 40. seconds, whose sign 9994500. Let the fourth proportional part now therefore be found at the sign T f L, T f n, T r L, viz. As  to , so is  to 9994366. With this fourth number, let the sign of the Angle T r m, which is 9994500, be compared. Therefore we find, that this sign is almost equal to that fourth part, and there∣fore the assumed altitude of the Air (/8; of one mile) doth not much differ from the true Altitude. But if that you desire to have it more accurately, you may take another Altitude and work after the same manner, until the sign T r m be more equal to this fourth proportional part; or else apply the rule of Falshood, or from the defect of two Positions, to collect the true Altitude as far as you may; for you cannot well find it altogether accurate, because that signs in little numbers do very much vary, although at least there be only the escape of half a minute: moreover the Canon of signs ought to be most accurate. We conclude therefore, that the altitude of the Air is the 2000th part of the Semidiameter of the Earth: this Semidiameter is 1633190 Perches; there∣fore the altitude of the Air is 816 Perches; wherefore one Perch containeth 12 Rhindlandish miles. but half a German mile is more truly taken, because that the refraction L f n, by Tycho, is greater than that we took, and 36 yea 38 may be taken, which being laid down, the altitude of the Air cannot be less than one mile. The altitude of the Air being known, an account must also be given of the density of the Air to the thickness or subtlety of the Aether, or a rule of the refraction in this Air, viz. which maketh such refractions at such scituations of the Star; viz. the account of the sign T f L, found before at the sign T f n, is the account or reason demanded. As 9995992 to 9998200. And the reason why these refractions are so small, is, because that we have taken the most serene Air, which differeth not so much from the Aether in rarity, as some imagine to themselves. Moreover, whether that the found out altitude of the Aire be the same eve∣ry where, and at every time, if from the two refractions observed at the two altitudes of the Star in another Air and in another time, the altitude of the Air be calculated after the same mode, as we have now done. And that those that are studious in nature may have whereon they may exer∣cise their calculation, and make a trial of the matter (whether that the Alti∣tude be the same every where, and at every time,) I will give them here Ex∣amples from the Observations of Tycho, who hath observed the refractions of the Sun and Moon at every degree of their Altitude. And because that the Ob∣servations of Lansbergius (because that he observed them in a different Air, if that he observed them at all) differ from those of Tycho's, I will also add them.
The TABLE of Refractions. The degrees of Al∣titude. The Refraction of the Sun, accord∣ing to Tycho. The Refraction of the Moon, ac∣cording to Ty∣cho. The Refraction of the Sun and Moon ac∣cording to Lans∣bergius. Degrees. Minute 1. Minute 1. Minute 1. 1. 0 34 33 34   1 26 25 26   2 20 20 21   3 17 17 18   4 15 15 15 45 5 14 14 14 0 6 13 14 12 30 7 12 13 11 15 8 11 12 10 5 9 10 11 9 5 10 10 11 8 15 11 9 10 7 35 12 9 10 7 5 13 8 9 6 40 14 8 8 6 19 15 7 8 6 0 16 7 7 5 42 17 6 7 5 24 18 6 6 5 7 19 5 6 4 50 20 4 5 4 33 21 4 4 4 16 22 3 3 4 0 23 3 3 3 44 24 3 3 3 28 25 2 2 3 12 26 2 2 2 56 27 2 2 2 40 28 2 2 2 24 29 2 2 2 9 30 1 1 1 54 31 1 1 1 39 32 1 1 1 24 33 1 1 1 9 34 1 1 0 55 35 1 1 0 41 36 1 1 0 27 37 0 1 0 13 38 0 1 0 0
The refracti∣ons of the Sun and Moon, ac∣cording to Lansbergius and Tycho.Lansbergius placeth both the same refractions of the Sun and Moon: but Tycho maketh them somewhat divers, viz. about the Horizon he maketh the refractions of the Sun greater than those of the Moon; then the fifth de∣gree of Altitude, he maketh them equal from this; then at length he maketh the refractions of the Moon a little bigger than those of the Sun. Indeed I confess my self ignorant of the cause of this, except it be to be ascribed to the weakness of the light of the Moon. Moreover; Tycho omitted the second Minutes, which yet should not be omitted, if that they come near to 60; be∣cause that there is use of them in the calculation of the altitude of the Air. Now you must know, that the refractions of all the Stars are the same, or else that the difference is insensible, viz. in one Air: But if that the Air be thick, the refractions will be greater. An Example of it is this (whereof a cause hath not yet been rendred sufficiently hitherto by any,) The Dutch Wintering in Nova Zembla, beheld the Sun after the night of some Months, when that as yet the Limbus or edge of the Sun was yet beneath the Horizon four degrees at least; therefore the refraction n f L is 4 deg. 30 min. Then at length, when that it was depressed beneath the Horizon 3 degrees 40 minutes, they saw him elevated above the Horizon 30 degrees (viz. his upper Limbus;) therefore the refraction m r L (we conceive m r S to fall be∣neath the Horizon, and r L g to be 30 min.) shall be 4 deg. 11 min. and L L T 90 deg. 30 min. From hence shall be found the altitude of the Air L f, and the reason of the density of that Air at Nova Zembla, which yet was serene at the time of the Observation. Now the Altitude is found much greater than the other refractions admit of, viz. of almost two miles; nei∣ther is it corrected by the position of a greater thickness of Air (as shall be shewed in the following Proposition) by reason that the Angle T f L cannot be greater than 85 deg. 30 min. (if that n f L is 4 deg. 30 min.) it becometh greater, if that d f be placed less than 2 miles. Therefore we do not undeservedly doubt of the truth of the observation of the Mariners, seeing that no like Exam∣ple hath been observed, yea the contrary hath been observed in the same place.See Chap. 26. Proposit. uit: Moreover, no reason can be rendred, that in those places (after so long an absence of the Sun) the Air should be higher, than at the time wherein after so long a stay the Sun departed; seeing that rather the contrary doth follow, viz. the Air becoming more thick and lower (by reason of contraction) if that any one will urge the altitude of the Air to be inconstant. Yet when I more accurately weigh all the matters, three things fall in with me, by which that apparancy and great refraction may be salved, (for seeing that the Master or Pilot was skilful in Astronomy, and also that they saw the Sun elevated above the Horizon, in which he was yet depressed; therefore we ought not to deny the Observation, neither ought we to be suspicious concerning an Errour in the numeration of the days by reason of that long night; for when that they returned to their own Countrey, they reckoned the same day of the year that their Country∣men reckoned, which they could not have done, if that before they had made a false reckoning of the days: For if that we will admit so great an altitude of the Air, such as the refractions of the temperate and torrid Zones do not admit of. we must say, that the Air is every where the same both in the torrid and temperate Zone, as it is in the frigid; but the supream Region of the Air, both in the torrid and temperate Zone, is so subtile, that it maketh no refraction, but only the middle Region: Whence it is no wonder, if that the refractions in the torrid and temperate Zone be lesser; for although the Air be lower that causeth them (for which cause the refraction ought to be greater) yet its far more rare than the other Air.) But yet an Objection may be made against this, viz. that the observation of the Mariners was made in a serene Air, as they themselves testifie. Unto this I answer, That yet it seemeth not so probable that the Air should be so subtile, as in the torrid and temperate Zone, when that the Sky is most serene. Secondly, it may be said, That that Air of the frigid Zone, when that the Sun after a long absence, returneth unto it, is first attenuated in the superior Region, and the middle is yet somewhat more thick; and therefore the Sun was seen through two refractions, as the Stars through the Air and a Glass.
Now a double refraction doth far more depress the Star beneath the Hori∣zon, than a simple, and so the altitude of the Air, the space of one mile or ¾. Neither may you here object, why the same doth not happen at that time, when that the Sun departeth from the Air, and maketh the beginning of the ong Night: For then it is probable, that there is less difference in the thickness of the Air, by reason of the long stay of the Sun; or shall we say, that a thick∣er exhalation consisteth in the Morning times in that Zone, after that long ab∣sence. Thirdly, If that you are not pleased to admit that double refraction, neither are you willing to grant, that the supream part of the Air, in the torrid and frigid Zone, maketh any refraction; I say, if that the two premised Re∣sponses or Explications please not, then you must confess, that the Air in that place of the torrid Zone at that time was much higher than in our temperate Zone, and likewise more thick (or only the altitude diminisheth the refra∣ction;) but if that there be a great thickness, refraction is much more aug∣mented by this, than it is diminished by the altitude decreasing. But I am most taken with the first of these three Causes, which maketh the altitude of the Air two miles, for we may not in the Horizontal refraction of 4 degrees 30 minutes, make a less in Nova Zembla: the other two are perplexed with many difficulties. Now why they beheld not the Sun for so many days, the same altitude remaining, after he ceased to rise the third day of November; I say, that the cause was the thickness of the Air. The same answer must also be given, why the same Dutch Mariners in the year 1596, on the 30th of May, beheld not the Sun at Midnight under the elevation of 69 deg. 24 minutes, when that yet it was not under the Horizon 1 degree: Why here it made no refraction the cause may be the same. But we have been too large concerning this matter, which prolixity the Reader must ascribe to the difficulty of the Do∣ctrine: For to accurate knowledge of this matter, most accurate Observations are required; neither yet may we, if that the Observations made at divers ele∣vations of the same Star on one place make not the same altitude, assert, that therefore the altitudes of it are diverse: for the cause may be the diversity of the rarity of the Air, viz. by how much it is nigher the Horizon, by so much it is less rare. If that this be so, the Observations will in no wise produce the same altitude, although it be the same; because that we suppose in the Calcu∣lation, that the same rarity of the Air is in both parts of the Air; and there∣fore the same rule of Refraction. Proposition XXXI. The depression of the Star beneath the Horizon being given, when that it first beginneth to appear (that is, the Horizontal refraction of the Star, being given) to find out the least altitude of that Air, as may be; the thickness of that Air for such are fraction, and the greatest excess of density (as may be) of that Air above the density of the Aether, that is the greatest Rule that can be of Refraction. Also more generally, the refraction of a Star being given unto the given apparent altitude of it above the Horizon, to find the greatest Altitude that may be. Of the depres∣sion of the Star beneath the Horizon.So let the given Horizontal refraction n f L, or the depression of the Star beneath the Horizon g f S, or g L S, when that it first beginneth to appear, such as it was in Nova Zembla. 4 deg. 30 min. It is manifest therefore from the Opticks, that if the radius S f touch the Air in f; that is, if that the Angle N f T be strait,See Scheme. then indeed that ray is not refracted; but if that no Star be beneath the Tangent i n, then no ray can immediately come near to f. Therefore it is required, that the Star should be about the Tangent, and the Angle n f T should be lesser than the right Angle, or than 90. Let it therefore be supposed, that 89 deg. 59 min. (or 90 degrees) although very great, yet not greater than 90. Moreover, let n f T the Angle given, or the Horizontal refraction 4 deg. 30 min. the Angle T f L 85 deg. 29 min. is left, the greatest which may be; whence, if that it cometh to pass, that as the sign T f L is to the sign f L T,
so is L T to T f: And the found out T f shall be the least altitude of the Air that may be; the fourth proportional T f shall be the least that may be, if so be that the middle bounds or terms, viz. the whole signs T L f, and T L, re∣main the same, if that the refraction T f be not given to the apparent Hori∣zontal ray, but to the altitude of the Star x L g. We shall act after the same mode in △, T L r T. Also the reason of the sign of the Angle n f L, 89 deg. 59 min, to the sign T f L, 85 deg. 29 min. shall be the greatest reason which may be, of the density of the Air to the density of the Aether. Proposition XXXII. The altitude of the Air, and one refraction of a Star in it, being given to a certain altitude of it, to find out from it the rule of refraction or pro∣portion of the signs of the Angles of Incidency, to the Angles refracted, or to the thickness of that Air, for the given refraction at the given Alti∣tude. Now the given altitude of the Air ought to be greater than that, which according to the precedent Proposition, is found to be the least:See Scheme. For if that it be not greater, it is a sign that the refraction is not observed, and that the Problem is impossible. Let therefore the T r given be greater: for Example, let x L g act the apparent altitude, let the known refraction be m r L; there∣fore in the Triangle T L r, is given T r, T L, and the Angle T L r. From these is found out T r f, the refracted Angle; unto which, if that you add mr L, you have the Angle of Incidency m r T, and the reason or account of the sign m r T to the sign L r T shall be found: This shall be the rule of Refra∣ction in this Air, or the reason of the thickness of it to the density of the Air. Proposition XXXIII. The altitude of the Air, and Refraction being given to the one altitude of a Star, to find out the Refraction in another altitude of a Star. See Scheme.For Example, Let the altitude of the Air T f or T r, and the refraction n f L at the apparent altitude o be given, viz. the Horizontal ray f L is that refracted. Then let the altitude of the apparent altitude of the Star r L g or x L g be given. Let the rule of Refraction, or the reason of the sign n f T, T f L, or the sign n f T, T f L be found by the precedent Proposition. Then on the Triangle T r L, from the notes T r, T L; and on the Angle r L T let the Angle T r L be found. And as the sign T f L is to the sign T f n: so is T r L to the other sign, which shall be that of the Angle m r T: from which, if that you take away T r f, the refraction m r L demanded is left. The Ancient Opticks used another far more intricate, but yet a more false method. Proposition XXXIV. The Altitude and Rule of Refractions of the Air being given, to find the refraction at the given apparent altitude of the Star, and thence the true Altitude. Of RefractionsThis is the same with the former; Because in the former, from the given re∣fraction at the given Altitude, that rule of Refraction was to be found. Exam∣ples for Exercise may be taken from the Table laid down before.
Of the Reflection of Light in the Air. Proposition XXXV. The Rays of the Sun and Moon having entred the Air, or Atmosphere, are not only refracted, but are also reflected or repercussed from the particles of the Air, as from a rough Looking-glass, by reason of the inordinate scituation of the particles. Of the Rays of the Sun.For except the Rays of the Sun were reflected from the particles to our eyes, no part of the Air would appear lucid unto us, except that above, which the Sun is; and so the Sun being in the Oriental part, neither the Meridian or Occidental Air would be lucid: Therefore some rays being refracted, pass through by the Atmosphere; some are refracted here and there with many reflections from one particle unto another, and so they make the Air luminous or light. Proposition XXXVI. The reflection of the rays of the Sun from the particles of the Air, is the chief cause of the Twilight; that is, of the light before the rising, and after the setting of the Sun. Chief cause of Twilight is the reflection of the Rays of the Sun from the particles of the Air.It is manifest from the precedent Proposition: for as the Sun being in the East, his rays being ejaculated to the West, do reflect to our eyes, and so make the Occidental part conspicuous: so the Sun being beneath the Horizon, his rays sent forth into our Air are reflected to our Eyes and to the Occident, and from the Occident to our Eyes. Proposition XXXVII. The beginning of the scituation of the Morning Twilight, that is, the Ori∣ental Air is illuminated, and is so beheld, the Sun being depressed about 18 degrees beneath the Horizon: and the end of the Evening Twilight (that is, no more illumination appeareth in the Occidental Air,) is, when the Sun is depressed 18 degrees beneath the Occidental Horizon. Of the Morn∣ing Twilight.This Proposition dependeth on Experience and Observation, for if in the Morning season (that is, after the first and second hour after Midnight,) we diligently observe, our Eyes being turned towards the East, when that any bright colour sheweth it self in the Oriental Air about the Horizon, and that we know at that time the hour, and minute of the hour, we may thence know the depression of the Sun beneath the Horizon. Now we understand a serene Air, of which seeing that there is or may be a great difference; thence it cometh to pass, that some do extend the Twilight to the twentieth degree of the depression of the Sun beneath the Horizon; others unto the sixteenth: for by how much the Air is more thick, by so much the less will the light of the Twilight be discovered, contrary unto what we said, may happen in refra∣ction.
Proposition XXXVIII. The Altitude of the Air, or matter, may be found from the quantity of the Twilight, which by reflection createth the light of the Twilight, as hi∣therto they have thought; neither doth the beginning of the Twilight a∣rise from a simple, but at least from a double reflection. See Scheme.Let T L h be the Earth, g f o m the bound of the Air; L the place of the Earth in which the Twilight appeareth, or the light in the Horizontal Air f, the incident Solary ray f g s. Therefore Mathematicians, that have hitherto written concerning Twilights, say, that the ray incident on f, which maketh the reflection f L to come from the very Sun S, and because that no ray can come from the Sun to f, so long as the Sun is beneath the Tangent f h s; for Example in S, then its ray may come to f first: or because that they will have reflection to be made from f, as from an hollow Looking-glass; therefore T f h ought to be equal to the Angle T f L: wherefore because that the Sun is found depressed 18 degrees beneath the Horizon, therefore the Angle n f s shall be found 18 degrees, and L f h 162, and T f h or T f L 81 degrees, and L T f 9 deg. whence T f is found about 874 German miles, and the altitude of the Air 11 miles, as Clavius and Nonius make it. Alhacen and Vitellio make it 13 miles. This so great an altitude of the Air must in no sort be granted, when that other Phaenomenons do repugn: Now that it is found so great according to that method, that happeneth from a false hypothesis that they assume, viz. the ray g h f, which maketh the reflected f L to come from the very Sun: for this is false, because that it cometh by reflection from another ray; for Example, g L. Now that to make the small light in f, it is not necessary that the ray f g should come from the vry Sun, but another reflected ray may do the same, is proved from thence, that in the Occidental Air we behold the light before the rising of the Sun; when yet it is certain, that no direct ray then cometh from the Sun S to the Occidental Air m, but from another point of the Air; for Example, from f and o, and so the reflected ray L m proceedeth from the incident ray f m, which very f m is reflected from the incident g f, and this g f from another g L, which perchance also cometh from another. Secondly, that also is worthy of note, That they have determined, that reflection is caused from the Air as from an hollow Looking-glass, the Center of whose ca∣vity is T, viz. the same with that of the Earth: for this also is false, for the rays are reflected from the particles of the Air, no regard being had to the Center of the Earth, but according to the superficies of those particles: this is manifest from the ray L m, which slideth from the Occidental Air m to T; for if that it came from M as from the hollow-glass of the Center T, its inci∣dent ought to come from the quarter x; but now it cometh from o, or between f and o: therefore the ray L m is so reflected from the particle m, as the figure of it required. And there are in the Air particles of a most different figure, and therefore it is no wonder, if that divers reflections are here and there cau∣sed into all quarters. Proposition XXXIX. It being supposed, that the light of the Twilight is not generated by a simple, but by a double reflection, to find thence the altitude of the Air, which may more agree with other Observations. See Scheme.In the former Proposition it is said, that that ray g h f, which maketh the first reflection f L in the beginning of the Twilight, cometh not from the Sun it self, but that it is also reflected in g; let therefore his incident be g l (which may touch the Earth in p, for so L g is the first ray that can come to g:) and this we place to come now immediately from the Sun it self, yet by reason of refra∣ctions it may a little deviate, viz. let Q L be the very ray it self of the Sun, l p g
the refract, g h x the reflex, f L the second reflex. The altitude of the Air T x is to be found out; because that therefore the ray g l x is the refract of the in∣cident Q L, let us suppose the refraction to be made 30 minutes, viz. the An∣gle Q l x: moreover, the Center of the Sun to be 17 degrees beneath the Horizon, when that the Twilight beginneth; therefore the Limbus of the Sun Q, which shall be distant beneath the Horizon 16 deg. 45 min. and 30 min. being taken away by reason of refraction; the Angle n K x 16 deg. 15 min. shall be the refracted depression of the Limbus of the Sun beneath the Hori∣zon: And moreover, because that K L, K p are equal, and also f L, g p, there∣fore Kg, Kf are also equal, and the Angle K f g is equal to the Angle K g f. Now both of them taken together are equal to the Angle n K g, 16 degrees 15 minutes; wherefore K f g is 8 degrees 7 minutes, and f T L is 4 degrees, and T f L 86 minutes, whence is found that T f, 86 ½ miles. And therefore the altitude of the Air is found 1 ½ mile, which is far lesser than the Mathemati∣cians formerly deduced from the Twilight, and it will yet be found far lesser, if that a threefold reflection be placed to make the beginning of the Twilight, which is not impossible; and this twofold or threefold reflection is more rightly admitted of for the cause of the duration of the Twilight, than that which Kepler alledgeth concerning the splendid matter in the vicinity of the Sun. See the other things concerning the time of the Twilight, and variation of Longitude, in the second part of this Book. Proposition XL. To find out the Altitude of the Clouds by a Geodetical dimension. By a Geodetical dimension to find out the Altitude of the Clouds.The Air being serene and quiet, let any point, or little Cloud more observa∣ble than the rest be taken, and measure the altitude of this, as the top of an high Tower, from two stations; so that at the same time one Observer may be in one station, and the other in another: so you shall find the altitude of this Cloud, which is never found to exceed a quarter of a mile. Proposition XLI. To suppute the quantity of the Air, its altitude being given. This is nothing else, but to suppute the space between the Earth and the outward superficies of the Air, which is easie, if so be that we know the al∣titude of the Air: For let the solidity of the Sphere be supputed, whose Semi∣diameter is composed of the Semidiameter of the Earth, and the Altitude of the Air; and from the found out solidity, let the solidity of the Earth be taken away, that which is left is the solidity or quantity of the Air. Proposition XLII. The Air in some places hath some things peculiar. Of Rains. In Aegypt it seldom or ne∣raineth.So in Aegypt it very seldom Raineth, or rather not at all: and if at any time a light Rain falleth, Catarrhs, distempers of the Lungs, Feavers, and other Diseases do follow. The inundation of Nilus, and almost a quotidian Erost in the Morning, do supply the stead of Rains. So in Peru, Rains are never seen.Also in Peru. In many places under the Aequator it raineth for an whole half year, and in the other half it is fair. See in the Second Part, Chapter the 26th. The Island Puton Timor, is for the most part covered with Clouds and Frost. The Air of Sumatra.In the Island of Sumatra the Air is very heavy and cloudy, by reason of many standing Pools. The like is in many other, places: so in Old Mexico; also in Malacea, and the like.
The Isle of St. Thomas, lying under the Aequator,St. Thomas. is reputed to have the most unwholsom Air of all Regions, although that it abound in all Fruits. In the Province of Chili the Air is so subtile;Chili. that a Sword sheathed in its Scabbard without any wiping, yet receiveth no rust. Isles of the Azores.In the Isles of the Azores the Air and Wind is so sharp, that it eateth plates of Iron; and the Walls, covered with the same, in a short space, and reduceth them to dust. Aristotle relateth, that on Mount Olympus there is no motion of Air, (yea no Air at all, if that that be true which followeth); and that Characters writ∣ten in the Dust, are found there after many years without any disturbance; and that those that ascend that Mountain cannot continue their lives, except that they carry moistned Sponges with them, by the help of which they breath. In America, when that the Spaniards passed through from Nicaragua into Peru, on the tops of the Mountains interposed, many suddenly died, or were frozen to death, with their Horses, like unto Statues, even unto the return of those that escaped. Some think, that a defect of Air was the cause; but that is not probable. Neither do I receive that for truth, which Aristotle writeth concerning Mount Olympus, because the contrary is found in higher Mountains, whose tops are covered with Snow. Whence we formerly conclude, that they are not above the Air, but that the Air floweth over them. Busbequius, an Eye-witness, declareth,See the Chap∣ter of Moun∣tains. The Authors relation of the Mountain Carpathus in Hangaria. that Mount Olympus in the Summer is also covered with Snow. About the Isles of the Indian Ocean the Air is fragrant with the scent of the Odours, especially at that time when that Aromaticks are mature. Mariners discover this scent when that as yet they are three or four miles distant from these Isles, viz. when that a Wind contrary to their course bloweth. The Air of the Sea is more heavy than that of the Land, and less accepta∣ble unto those that are not accustomed unto it: the difference is manifestly dis∣cerned when that Mariners approach near the shoar; for by the distance of an whole mile they will discover how nigh the Land they are, by the very Air. Mariners relate this especially concerning Soffala, which is scituated in the Oriental Coast of Africa. When that I had printed these, I hapned by chance on a certain Observa∣tion made by David Froelichius on the Mountain Carpathus in Hungaria, which because it made not a little to the confirming our Judgment concerning the altitude of the Air, and the constitution of its Regions, I therefore have thought fit to annex it here, although it ought to have been adjoyned to the 18th Proposition. Of the Mountains of Hungaria, Carpathus (saith he) is the chief, by which vulgar appellation all the tract of the Sarmatian Moun∣tains is denominated, which separate Hungary from Rutheni, the Polonians, Moravians, the Silesians, and that part of Austria which is on this side the Danube. Their more high and astonishing tops are in the Earldom Sepusia, at my Native Country, Caesariopolis. Now by reason that they are almost covered with perpetual Snows, they are termed by the Sclavonians, Tatry or Tarczal, as it were the shaved and bald Mountains. And these Mountains, by reason of their roughness and precipices, far exceeding the Italian and the Helvetian Alpes, and those of Tiroli, are almost unpassable, and are seldom travelled over, except by the Searchers of Nature. Now I my self (that I may relate this by the by) in the Month of June, Anno 1615, being desirous to try and discover the height of these Mountains (with two others of my Asso∣ciates) when being on the top of the Mountain with great pains, I thought that I had attained unto the uttermost height, of a sudden another sublimer Mountain offered it self, unto which I arrived through vast and tottering Stones, which if moved falleth down towards the Valley, and that with so great a noise to the astonishment of the Passenger. After I was ascended, another more high was discovered by me, and so some lesser tops, the latter of which always exceeded the former in altitude, through so many Valleys was I forced to pass, with the great hazard of my life, until I had arrived unto the uppermost top of all; and when that I surveyed the Valleys beneath beset
with huge Trees. From the declivities of the Mountains, I could observe no∣thing but an obscure Night, or a blewish colour, like unto profound Air; and it seemed to me, that if I should chance to fall from the Mountain, that I should not light on the Earth, but fall directly into the Firmament: For by the overmuch declivity, the visible Objects were extenuated and dulled. But whilst that I ascended a more high Mountain, I was pendent, as it were, a∣mongst most thick Mists. Having overcome these, after the space of some hours, when that I was not far from the highest top of all, reposing my self, from aloft I beheld and discovered, that in those places, where I supposed my self before to be lodged amongst Mists, that there moved compacted and white Clouds; above which for some miles, and beyond the bounds of Sepusa, I had a commodious prospect. Yet also I saw some Clouds higher, likewise some more low, and also some equally distant from the Earth. And hence I understood three things:Three things observed by him. 1. That then I had passed the beginning of the Middle Region of the Air. 2. That the distance of the Clouds from the Earth was not equal, but according to the mode of the Vapour, in some pla∣ces higher, and elsewhere more low. 3. That the distance of the Clouds near the Earth, was far lesser than what some Philosophers do determine, and that not 72 German miles, but only half a German mile. When that I came to the highest pitch of the Mountain, I found the Air so calm and subtle, that I discovered not the motion of an hair; when yet notwithstanding, I had found in the more depressed parts of the Mountain a vehement Wind: whence I ga∣thered, that the highest top of this Mountain Carpathus ariseth a German mile from its lower root or basis, and extendeth to the supream Region of the Air, unto which the Winds ascend not. On the top I fired a Pistol, which gave no greater a Report at first, than if I had broken a small Stick; after a short space of time, a great rumbling or murmuring increased, and filled the lower parts of the Mountain, Valleys and Woods, like unto the report of a Canon: (here I feared, least that the whole Mountain being shaken, should have fallen with me;) and this noise continued for about half a quarter of an hour, until that it had penetrated the most obtruse Caverns, at which the Air being multiplied on every hand rebounded. And indeed such concave Objects did not present themselves on the top of the Mountain; therefore the sound at first was repercussed almost insensible, until that by descending it became more near to the Caves and Valleys, it more forceably struck against them. Also in these high Mountains, for the most part, in the midst of Summer it Snoweth or Haileth, when that it Raineth in the adjacent Plain; as I also my self have found. The Snows of divers years may be known from their colour and hard Crust.
CHAP. XX. Of the Winds in general, and the Quarters of the World. A Certain affection of the Air is the Wind, and therefore the consideration of the fame doth appertain to the absolute contemplation of the Earth, especially seeing that its cognition is required in Hydrography, and most of all in the Art of Navigation, which is a part of Geography: which although I grant more to belong unto Natural Philosophy; yet because that it containeth many things belonging unto Geography, therefore I shall briefly treat of the same here. Proposition I. The Wind is a commotion of the Air, sensible by touch, or with some force. Of the Wind.So I think it may be defined with the consent of all Nations: neither shall I here contradict some Conceited persons. If that the commotion be higher, it is termed an Air or Breez; but if that the agitation be so small, that of it self it asserteth not the sense of Touching, then it is not termed a Wind: And the Air is never without such an agitation of particles, as a ray of the Sun let into a Chamber by a narrow passage, doth evidence; therefore we add the word Touch in the Definition, for that motion of the Atoms is only perceivable by the Eye. Proposition II. Most Winds tend from one quarter to the opposite quarter, and force Bodies with them. Winds force Bodies with them in their motion.This is perceivable both from the force of the Winds, or our Bodies; and also from the Vanes fixed on the top of the Masts of the Ships, which are ex∣tended by the Wind to the contrary quarter. Yet this is not done altogether directly and continually, but with some mo∣tion of the Vanes hither and thither. There are some that suppose, that we ought to have added in the Definition, A commotion made towards one quarter, or towards the same parts: But we thought these more fit to be omitted, see∣ing that also some circular Winds are found, and to speak properly, no Wind constantly observeth the same quarter. Proposition III. A Quarter is an imaginary point, which we conceive to be extended from any place of the Earth perpendicularly, towards one point of those which circularly stand about that place. Of Quarters.Such the true and common Notion seemeth to be; in the finding out of which I have not a little endeavoured: sometimes the Points standing about are termed Quarters. Indeed the Explication of the Quarters doth not belong unto this Section of Geography, but unto the third, concerning the Compleat Affections; but because that the sorts or kinds of Winds are denominated from them, or these from the Winds, therefore here we shall anticipate that Tracta∣tion. Now this is the use of the Quarters, that seeing various things and ap∣pearances do appear in a various scituation from ours, we may be able to explain the same.
Proposition IV. The Quarters are infinite in number, seeing that Plains may be drawn through every point of the Horizon; but only 32 have obtained peculiar appellations at this day, which are also common to the Winds, that blow from such Quarters. But 32 parti∣cular Winds.The Quarters are twofold (as also the Winds) Cardinal and Collateral; the Cardinal are those which pass through by the four circumstantial Points depending on the daily circumvolution of the Stars. Such are the North, South, East and West: by which names, both the Quarters and also the Winds are designed. For we say, the North and South quarter and wind, the West, South, East quarter and wind: and the Winds are called by one term Aquilo or Boreas, the North-wind; Auster or Notus the South-wind; Eurus, the East; Zephyrus, the West-wind. Those are collateral which stand between two Cardinal Winds, of which there are infinite. At this day are accounted only 28, viz. seven between two Cardinal Winds, as between the North and East, the East and South, the South and West, and the West and North. Of these intermedial ones, four are primary Quarters or Winds, viz. that are exactly in the middle between the Cardinal ones, and are distant from them 45 degrees, which are the North-east, the South-east, the South-west, and the North-west. Proposition V. These 32 Quarters are equally distant one from another, viz. every one from that which is next; whence it cometh to pass, that 11 degrees of the Horizon, and one quarter, do intercede between two quarters. The Car∣dinal Quarters are distant from one another 90 degrees. The 32 Quar∣ters are equal∣ly distant one from another.For seeing that the Horizon, as a Circle comprehending all the Points about any place, hath 360 degrees, as all other Circles; if that 360 degrees be divi∣ded between 32 Quarters, every one shall receive 11 degrees 15 minutes; but if that they be divided amongst four Cardinal Quarters, every one of those Cardinals shall receive 90 degrees. Therefore the quarter from the North towards the East is the first, which is distant from the North towards the East, 11 deg. 15 minutes: the second, which is 22 deg. 30 minutes: the third, which it 33 degrees 45 minutes: the fourth, which is 45 degrees; this is in the midst: and so in the other Quarters. The terms given to these 32, both Quarters and Winds, by the Germans, are most commodious; but are very difficultly imitated by other Tongues. Therefore you may see the order of the Quarters in the Table annexed with their degrees. We have also added the Latin and Italian appellations. Proposition VI. Now because as yet Intervals very great interceded between the two Quar∣ters, from which the Winds may blow, and in which other Bodies are often placed, the scituation of which unto our place we desire to know; therefore some cut twice every one of these 32 Quarters, and interplace one, so that they reckon 64 Quarters and Winds, which some Mariners observe in long Navigation. The 32 Quar∣ters, by some divided into 64 Quarters.But Mathematicians, seeing that these do not sufficiently suffice to an ac∣curate designation, they reckon so many quarters as there are degrees and minutes in the Horizon, and they denominate and design them by the number of the degrees and minutes by which they are distant from any Cardinal quar∣ter; or by how much the Arch of the Horizon is intercepted between the
Cardinal quarter, and any point of the Horizon: so the quarter of the first degree, from the South towards the East, and the like. But in the Sea-mans observation of the Winds, so subtle a division ought not to be required. Yet a Mode may be thought on, by which the 32 Winds may more commo∣diously be denominated, that it may be easie to the Tongue and Speech of all Nations, viz. if that they be named from the order in which they mutually follow from one Cardinal quarter to the other. For Example; the first from South to East, or the first South-East; the second North-East; the third, fourth, and so on. Proposition VII. The Ancients both Greeks and Latins reckoned less Winds, or that we may speak more truly, they imposed names on fewer Winds; neither do they consent in these, but call the same Winds by divers names, which they took not from the Order, but from somewhat else. Whence there ariseth no small difficulty concerning their distribution of the VVinds. The Greeke and Latins reckon fewer Winds than twelve.In time past amongst the Grecians only four Winds had names, viz. the Cardinal winds; Eurus blowing from the East, Zephyrus from the West, Bo∣reas from the North, and Notus from the South. Neither doth Homer make any other mention of the Winds. Then at length unto these they added four others, to wit, of those that blow from these quarters: 1. In the quarter in which the Sun doth arise, when the Winter Solstice is between the East and South, which quarter is called the Winter Solstice of the East: and the wind is termed Eurus; for they call the East-wind it self Subsolanus: but Gellius calleth it Vulturnus, and he will rather have the Eastern wind called Eurus. 2. In which the Sun setteth, which is called Africus and Lybs. 3. In which it riseth in the time of the Summer Solstice, between the East (Eurus) and the North, which quarter is called the Solstitial rising absolutely; and the wind is termed by them Aquilo. 4. In which he setteth in time of the Solstice, which quarter is termed the Summer or Solsticial setting of the Sun. This wind was termed by the Grecians, Corus. The annexed Diagram representeth the Order of the Winds,See Lib. 5. of Seneca's Natu∣ral Philosophy. according to the annumeration of Seneca, in the fifth Book of his Natural Questions. Proposition VIII. This designation of the Grecians is very inconvenient for Navigation, and o∣ther uses, which inconveniency they did not much discover, when for a long space they departed not from Greece in their Navigations. For in places of a diverse Latitude, or of a diverse distance from the Poles, diverse also is the distance of the VVinter and Solsticial rising from the quar∣ters, North, South, and so on. Yet the Grecians retained it, augmented with other appellations of the four intermedial Winds, so that there were 12 winds, every one of which they designed by their proper terms; although that some others reckon otherwise. The Latins besides these twelve, added the names of twelve more, which blow between two of the former twelve; the follow∣ing Diagram sheweth their appellations and order, in which the Greek winds are noted by Greater letters, and those which the Romans have interposed be∣tween every two, are noted by Lesser letters: yet Seneca noteth, that this in∣conveniency was long since observed by Varro, and that therefore he ordered these twelve VVinds thus, that every two should be distant by equal distances, not having any regard of the rising of the Solary quarter; but in that Seneca affirmeth, that there are no more VVinds than twelve, is false and ridiculous, for they are infinite.
Proposition IX. Hitherto we have explained the distribution of the Winds taken from the quarters; and have also shewed, that both the divisions of the Ancient Grecians and Romans, is less adapted to the use of Navigation and Geo∣graphy. Therefore we deservedly retain the more recent distributions, which consti∣tute 32 Winds blowing from quarters equally distant. Now those are called Opposite Winds, or contrary, which blow from quarters diametrically opposite: For we conceive the Winds, as coming from another place to our place; but we suppose a quarter to be extended from our place to another place. Proposition X. The Causes of the Winds are various; for seeing that the Wind is nothing else but a continued protraction of the Air, all those things which are able to effect such a protrusion, will be the causes of Winds. Now they are these: The Causes of the Winds are various.1. The chief and general cause is the Sun it self, which attenuateth and rarefieth the Air by his fiery beams, especially that on which he sendeth forth his perpendicular rays, or over which he standeth; for the Air being rarefied requireth far more space. Thence it cometh to pass, that the Air being forced by the Sun, doth protrude the vicine Air with a great force; and when that the Sun is moved round from the East into the West, the chief force of the Air caused by him is towards the West. And a sign of it may be, that in many places of the torrid Zone, and every where in the Sea, a continual Easterly wind doth blow, viz. the Sun thrusteth forwards the Air from the East to∣wards the West, and exceedeth not the torrid Zone. Indeed the rarefied Air is thrust forwards circularly towards all the quarters, North, East, South, West; but yet it is not admitted in all quarters: But the more vehement protrusion is towards the West, because that the Sun moveth towards that quarter; therefore the wind is almost, continually more sensible in the torrid Zone to∣wards this quarter. But in our Zone for many days in the Morning before the rising of the Sun, and after that, where for the most part other Winds do cease. Of other quarters, some are sometimes more disposed than others to receive this force: therefore where the protrusion becometh greater towards the North, the South Wind is said to blow; when that it is thrust towards the East, then the West Wind bloweth; when towards the South, the North, and so for o∣ther quarters. And it is to be noted, that when this protrusion is made to any quarter lying without those four Cardinal Quarters, then in divers Re∣gions a diverse Wind shall be seen: For although that that quarter be one in respect of the place unto which the Sun is vertical, yet in respect of other places it is diverse; and so the same cause maketh the same Wind to be termed by divers names in several Regions. Now this cause is either assisted or hin∣dred by other causes; if that it be assisted, it maketh the Wind vehement; if it he hindred, it maketh it less vehement from that quarter, and oftentimes ano∣ther Wind then bloweth, which is rather assisted by that general cause. 2. I make the second cause of the Winds, and that more frequently, Exhalations elevated copiously, and with a violence from the Sea and Land; but they scarce cause any Winds, except that when they begin to be rarefied. 3. The attenua∣tion and rarefaction of the Clouds and Mists, whether that it be caused by the Sun, or from other Stars; or whether from included or adjoyned fires, or sul∣phureous particles. 4. The dissolving of Snow and Ice, especially of that which lieth on Mountainous places, and are not wholly dissolved into water. 5. The various scituation and rising of the Moon and the other Stars. 6. The con∣densation and rarefaction of the Air and Vapours by any heat or cold. 7. The descent of the Clouds, by which the subjected Air is pressed.
The consideration of the Aeolopila conduceth much to the more easie under∣standing of these causes, into which the water included, fire being put to it by an arrow orifice, sendeth forth the winds with a great force, until that all the water be exhaled. Now these retain the place of a narrow orifice in the Air; 1. The more dense circumstantial Air. 2. If that the same vicine Air be forced by, or prohibited to give place by other Vapours or Mists. 3. If that the Air be more condensed towards one quarter, and so layeth open a way to Blasts. Proposition XI. Why the Winds blow so that they make a perpendicular line over the Hori∣zon; or why the going forth of the Winds is perpendicular to the Ho∣rizon. The Winds so blow, that they make a per∣pendicular ine over the Horizon.The cause is, by reason that the Air in a Spherical figure doth encompass the Earth, and the protrusion of the Air is made for the most part through the greatest circle of the Sphere, which passeth through the Center of the Earth: for although we may suppose the Air to be forced according to a transverse line, yet because that there is a lesser force from the sides, and greater resistance; thence it cometh to pass, that the winds incumb into the midst of the passage. But we shall more commodiously conceive this mode, if that we do but consider the first cause of the winds: for the Sun thrusts forwards the Air towards all the quarters of that place, unto which it is vertical; but that force is not received in all, as I have said. If that now we consider the great Circles drawn from that place, and amongst these, those in which the Air is thrust forwards, all those places of the Earth seated in this circle or semi∣circle, shall find the wind falling down perpendicularly, by reason that every great Circle of the Earth, passing through any place of it, is perpendicular to the Horizon of that place. The same is the reason, if that at any time the wind breaketh forth from a thick Fog, or dissolved Clouds; but those places that are scituated without these Circles, feel not the wind, although that the Air be moved above their Horizon; because that it is not perpendicular to that Horizon, but oblique. Yet it is not general, that the wind proceedeth in a perpendicular way to the Horizon, because that oftentimes in the Air transverse Blasts are found. So we see, that Smoak coming forth of a Chimney, is not carried by the wind towards one quarter, but part of it is carried unto other quarters. Proposition XII. Why the Winds blow by an interrupted force, so that sometimes they cease, and other some, as it were, with redoubled strength they return with the greater importunity: And why that they seem more continually to blow on the Sea, so that it is discovered less calm. The Winds  blow by an in∣terrupted force.I suppose the reason to be, that the cause that moveth or stirreth up the Winds, continueth not always, but that some space is required unto the colle∣ction of such a quantity, which by such a vehemency may break through the Air; and therefore, because that Exhalations are more continual in the Air, and the motion is less impeded, there the calm in the Ocean is less discovered, although that it be not wholly removed.
Proposition XIII. Why no Wind, bloweth perpendicularly from the Air unto the places of the Earth. Concerning this question,See Aristotle, lib. 2. chap. 9. of Meteors. Aristotle in his Second Book, Chap. 9. of Meteors, treateth very absurdly; so that the Peripateticks are not agreeing concerning his Opinion: neither shall I in this place relate their Sentiments. The cause seemeth easily to be explained, viz. that the Air being thrust downwards to∣wards the Center of the Earth, cannot break through this way, by reason that other vapours are expelled or born upwards; and therefore the overmuch resistance of the Air, which is directly scituated under the Air moved, causeth the protrusion to be made to the sides of the place in which the violence be∣ginneth. Which is therefore the more probable, seeing that the matter of the Wind is for the most part more light than that Air, and that is more rarified than that which is more near unto the Earth. Proposition XIV. Why Westerly-winds are less frequent than Easterly-winds. See Proposition 10.The cause of this is manifest from the Tenth Proposition, where we have made the Sun to be the first cause of Winds, who so rarifieth the Air proceed∣ing from the East to the West; and therefore the Air is more thrust towards the West. Therefore that this general cause may be impeded, of necessity very many Exhalations must consist in the Western quarters, which doth hap∣pen less frequently. Proposition XV. Why the Northern and Eastern-winds are more impetuous and stormy: and on the contrary, the Southern and Western more relaxed and weak. The Northern and Eastern Winds more stormy, than the Southern and VVestern.The cause is by reason that the Northern Air is more thick, by reason of Cold; and the Southern (in our Zone,) by reason of the greater dissi∣pation caused by the Sun and Heat is more rarified. Now by how much the Air is more rarified, by so much the lesser is it carried with an impetuous force. Yet you must know, that the South-winds are cold, dry and violent in the Temperate Zone or the Artick Zone, opposed to ours, no less than the Northern-winds are unto us; but the Eastern-wind is more rigid, or more intense for another cause, viz. because that it ariseth for the most part from the refraction of the Air, made by the Sun, which being con∣tinually carried from the East to the West, the Air also is thrust forwards with the greater violence from the East to the West: But it is probable that other causes may accede, that may either help or obstruct that violence. Proposition XVI. Why the Southernly and Westernly-winds are found more hot than the Easternly and Northernly, which have a wonderful power of causing Cold in respect of them. The Southern and VVestern Winds are found more hot, than the Easternly and VVesternly.So this Question is wont vulgarly to be propounded; yet we must know that in must not generally be understood of all places, but only concerning the places of our Zone: For in the other temperate Zone scituated towards the South from the Aequator, the contrary holdeth true; because that in these places the Northern-winds are hot or warm, and the Southern are found more cold. And so the nature of the thing, and the condition of the cause required:
For the reason why the South-wind is discovered more warm to us, and the North more cold, proceedeth hence, viz. that the South-winds come from a quarter and places more near unto the torrid Zone, or way of the Sun; but the Northern places more remote from that way of the Sun, that is, from more cold places. But the contrary is found in places scituated towards the Antartick Pole from the Aequator, because that the Northern-winds approach to them from the way of the Sun, the Southern from the places more near the Pole. But as concerning the Eastern and Western-winds I must answer otherwise, neither doth that diversity of the places of our Zone, and that of the opposite, here take place. Therefore first, it is said in the preceding Proposition, that the Western-winds are less frequent in all places; the cause of which is the same with that, by reason of which the Occidental winds are discovered more warm, viz. because that for the most part they blow in the Night, and after the setting of the Sun; where the Air that is thrust forwards towards our place, is more calid or less frigid, than the Air of our place, which is more remote from the West, than that which lieth between the Sun and our place. There is also another cause (which also is of force in the difference between the Northern and Southern-winds) viz. that the Western-winds blow with less violence, and not so intense, but with some relaxation. Now it is known, that any Air or Wind is discovered so much the more cold, by how much it bloweth with the greater or more intense force, although in truth it be no hotter or colder, which is evident by our expiration, which we can exhale either cold or hot. Proposition XVII. Why Mariners from the sight of a Cloud, especially such a one that is of a pale or duskish colour, predict a wind from that quarter: also to de∣clare the other signs of future winds. Mariners from the sight of a Cloud, pre∣dict a Wind from that quarter.A twofold Reason may be rendred; for either Clouds of that colour do shew, that by and by they shall be dissipated and dissolved into Blasts: or else the Clouds sinking by their own weight, and segregated from other Clouds, press down the Air beneath them, and so cause it to blow. Concerning the peculiar Clouds, termed by the Dutch the Bulls-eye, see the following Chapter. 1. The Sun appearing spotted in his rising, and lying obscured under a pale or black Cloud, foretelleth either showers or winds. 2. If that the Sun at his rising appeareth concave, so that it shineth from the middle and sendeth forth rays, it signifieth a moist and windy season. 3. If that the Sun be pale in his setting; but if it be red, the Air will be quiet and serene the next day. 4. If the Sun being pale setteth in black Clouds, it signifieth a North-wind. 5. If that the Moon be red like unto gold, it is deemed a certain sign of a Wind, according to the Verse, Pallida Luna pluit, rubicunda fiat, alba serenat. 6. A circle about the Moon. 7. If that the Northern-horn or corner of the Moon appear more extended, a North-wind is approaching: 8. If that the Southern, a South-wind is at hand. 9. The rising of the Moon, and the more noted Stars; as of the Bear, Orion, and especially the Goats, with the Sun. 10. If the small Stars in Cancer, termed Asellos, be covered with a Cloud, if the Northern of them be covered, the Wind will be South; if the Southern be covered, it will be North. 11. For the most part Winds begin to blow, when that the Wind ceaseth. 12. When a certain noise and murmur, like to an Ebullition, is heard in the Sea. 13. The Ancients also prognosticated from the Raven, the Dolphin, and other Animals. 14. From fiery Meteors, as from Lightning and Falling-Stars; but not from the Ignes fatui.
Proposition XVIII. Why in the Spring and Autumn the Winds are more frequent, and blow with greater force, than in the hot Summer or cold Winter. Greater and more frequent Winds in Spring and Autumn, than in Sum∣mer and cold VVinter.In the Spring it is supposed to be partly by reason of the dissolving of Snow, especially in Mountainous places; partly, because that the Pores of the Earth are then opened, and send forth many exhalations: partly, because that the Air and Vapours are then more thin, when that they were condensed in the Winter. Add, that for the most part in the Month before the beginning of the Spring, and in the very Spring, many Rays do fall, by reason that humid Constellations then have possessed those houses of the Zodiack, into which on the entrance of the Sun we account the beginning of the Spring; and also in Autumn the frequent Rays and Exhalations are to be accounted the cause of the Winds, as well as in the Spring, by reason that a moderate heat proceeding from the Sun, advanceth the Vapours and Exhalations; yet such as are more thick and less atte∣nuated. But in the heat of Summer there are no Winds, for the most part, for the same reason, by reason of which Rays are very seldom seen at that Season, viz. because that the Sun overmuch attenuateth the Exhalations, and doth not per∣mit them so to conjoyn or meet in such a quantity, as is required to the genera∣tion of the Winds. Which cause is not general or always true: and neither is it generally true, that in the heat of Summer there are no Winds; for here we are only to understand it concerning that which oftentimes happeneth: But in the sharp Winter the winds are more rare, and that by reason that both fewer Vapours are raised from the Earth; and those also that are elevated; are either condensed into Clouds, or are so dissipated by Frost, that they cause no wind. Proposition XIX. In what Altitude of the Air, or in what Region of the Air the Winds begin to blow. In what Regi∣on the Winds begin to blow.There are some that suppose the winds not to exceed the lower Region of the Air, because that they discover, that the tops of the high Mountains, as Olympus, feel no Blasts. But I question the Observation, seeing that the Smoak cast forth from the top of Mount Aetna, is discerned to be moved to and fro by the wind: therefore I suppose, that such a windy commotion may be cau∣sed also in the upper Region of the Air. Proposition XX. Ʋnto what space one and the same Wind may extend it self. How far one and the same Wind may ex∣tend it self.There is great diversity in this matter; for the winds blowing from the East to the West, under the torrid Zone, seem to encompass the whole Earth: and those also that blow either from the North or South, for many days and long spaces, are wont to accompany and follow Mariners. The same seemeth true concerning collateral Lines; but this diversity is, because that the same wind is different in divers places, as we have shewed in the Tenth Proposition, in the end of the explication of the first cause.
CHAP. XXI. Of the Winds in particular, and Tempests. IN the foregoing Chapter we have alledged the distribution and differences, or rather the denominations of the Winds, which they receive from the quarter from whence they blow, or seem to blow; which division also is acci∣dental, by reason that they are taken in respect of a certain place of the Earth unto which those Quarters are related. Now in this Chapter we shall alledge the divisions and Phaenomena which are in a certain time of the year, or else are proper to certain tracts of the Earth, although that we desire to have more, and those likewise more accurate Observations concerning these things. But we will produce what we have collected with much labour from the Diaries of the Seamen. Proposition I. One Wind is constant, and another inconstant. Of Winds con∣stant and in∣constant.That is a constant wind, which at the least for one or two hours bloweth from the same quarter. That is an inconstant wind, which sometimes bloweth, and other some is changed into other winds blowing from other quarters. The causes of the more or less duration of the same wind: also of the swift im∣mutation seemeth to be, 1. if that it be from a general cause, or from a cause less constant. So Winds proceeding from the motion of the Air, with the motion of the Sun in the torrid Zone, are constant: so those also that blow from the dissolv∣ing of the Snow, especially in the Mountains. 2. If that by chance there be no such vapours in other quarters, which are apt to generate Winds. 3. If that the circumambient Air about the Cloud, of which the Winds are generated, be more thick, and granteth no passage to the Exhalations: but if that the Air be not so thick, or more relaxed, and that few Vapours be here and there in di∣vers places and quarters; and lastly, if that the general causes do cease, then indeed the Winds are found variable, which are for the most part gentle. Proposition II. One Wind is general, and another particular. Of general and particular Winds.The general Wind is termed by Mriners a Passant wind, which at many places at once, in a long tract of Earth, bloweth on the Sea almost for a whole year. That is termed a particular on the contrary, which bloweth not at once in many places for a whole year. Now a general Wind is hindred, 1. In the parts of the Sea near the Earth; for here Vapours from other quarters do interpose or force in: and therefore a general Wind is considered, especially in the midst of the Sea, most remote from the Land. 2. Yet another wind may also blow in the midst of the Sea, viz. if that in another a Cloud, or other cause generating of a wind, be very great. From these two Causes it happeneth, that a general wind is less or more constant, or continual in divers placer. Now the general winds are only found in the Sea of the torrid Zone, or that which lieth between the Tropicks, about the whole Earth; yet in some places it extendeth it self without the Tropicks the space of 7 degrees, and they are called Eastern, that is, the East-wind or collateral to the East, as the South-East, North-East, viz. which blow from the East towards the West
for the whole year. But they do not consist with the like constancy in all the parts of that Sea; but in some they are more hindred, and in some less. They are more constant in the Pacifick Ocean (viz. in that part of it which lieth between the Tropicks,) so that Ships that loose from the Port of Aquapulco in New Spain, in America, towards the Philippin Isles; that is, such as steer their course from the East to the West, oftentimes for 60 degrees Sail continual∣ly, without any alteration or furling of the Sail, with a constant East, or North-East wind; neither unto this day hath any Ship in that most long Voyage (of 1650 miles) been cast away. Whence the Mariners say, that they may sleep securely in this Voyage; neither is there any need of guiding the Ship, seeing that the general Wind bringeth the Ship to the wished Port: for here other winds do impede the general Wind. The same constancy of this same Easterly wind, is found in the Sea from the Cape or Promontory of Good-hope in the bounds of Africa, or rather from that procurrent part of Africa which lieth in the Torrid Zone even to Brazil; in the midst of which Voyage lieth the Isle of St. Helena, unto which Mariners returning from India unto Europe, are wont to direct their Course. The Isle of St. Helena is distant from the Promontory of Good-hope 350 Miles, and is oftentimes accomplished in sixteen days, or also in twelve (as the general wind is either vehement or slack, for in this there is not a perpetual likeness) the Sea-men using the same security (when that they have first sailed to the Parallel of that Island, for the Promon∣tory of Good-hope lieth without the Tropicks) which we have said that they use, who Sail in the Pacifick Ocean, from Aquapulco to the Philippins: yea, when that they have passed the Promontory of Good-hope, they judge them∣selves to have escaped all danger and variation of the winds, and sleep securely, the wind constantly filling their Sails towards that Island and Brazil: But yet this only is their great care, that they may not Sail beyond the Island, see∣ing that it is a very small one; for if that they have passed it the eighth part of a mile, they cannot regain it, viz. an Easterly wind forcing them towards the West: therefore then they are forced with great loss of their Voyage to make to the Coasts of Brazil, or the other Isle called Ascension, to water at. If then you demand by what course they Sail, when that the Ships make a contrary Voyage in this Sea, viz. whilst that they steer from the Philippin Isles unto New Spain, or from Brazil and the Isle of St. Helena, unto the Promontory of Good-hope, whilst that they Sail from India; in these Voya∣ges the Reader must know, that Mariners use a threefold mode; for either they navigate the Sea scituated without the Tropicks (therefore they do not touch at the Isle of St. Helena, whilst that they Sail from Europe into India) or where necessarily they must pass by this, they do not directly steer their course from the West to the East, but obliquely from the North, the Colla∣teral quarter of it, to the South or the Collateral quarter of it: or lastly, they choose such a time of Navigation in which they know, that that general wind is impeded often by others. But this latter, because that it hap∣peneth rarely, therefore they rather make choice of the two former Modes, of which we sll speak more in the Chapter of Navigation. Therefore there are two Seas of the Torrid Zone, in which that general Oriental wind, with its Collaterals, reigneth throughout the whole year, viz. that which lieth between the procurrent of Africa and Brazil: the other is that which is extended between New Spain, or rather between A∣merica and the Oriental Islands, of which the Philippins are a part. The third part of this Sea under the Torrid Zone, viz. between the Procurrent of Africa and the Philippins, or Oriental Islands, is not indeed destitute of this general wind; but oftentimes it is hindred in this Sea, by reason of the fre∣quency of Islands, which hindrance yet in some places is more frequent than in other some. Between Mozambique and India, the general wind is of most force in January, February, March, April; in other Months other winds do blow, of which we shall speak in the following Proposition. This general wind is more hindred in the Sea of the Indian Isles. At the Isle of Banda, in the Month of May, the Oriental winds begin to be prevalent, being very
violent, and accompanied with rain: at Malacca in September, and in other places otherwise, as we shall shew in the following Proposition.See Propositi∣on 3. Yet this you must know, that this general wind doth not equally extend it self in these Seas towards the Tropicks in all parts, but that there is a great dif∣ference in this. For the Tropicks are distant from the Aequator on both sides 23 ½ deg. but the general wind may be discovered in one Meridian unto the Latitude of 20 degrees, in another Meridian unto 15, in another un∣to 12. So in the Indian Ocean, when in the Months of February, and January, the East wind, or South, or South-East bloweth, it is not discovered until you come to the 15 degree of Latitude. So unto those that Sail from Goa unto the Promontory of Good-hope: here a general wind meeteth them at the 12 deg. of South Latitude, and at the 28 degree of the same Latitude accompanieth them. So also Mariners have observed that no general wind bloweth between the 4. degree of Northern Latitude, even unto the 10, or 11 deg. between Africa and America; for when they have Sailed by that wind from St. Helena to∣wards the Aequator, even unto the 4 deg. of Northern Latitude; then are they destitute of that wind, even until they come unto the 10 degree of Latitude. And from that degree, even unto the 30, the North-East is again manifestly found continually to blow, although that the 30 degrees: be 7 degree from the Torrid Zone. Yet notwithstanding in the 6, 7, and 8. degree of Parallel La∣titude it also bloweth in some places, but in all places almost in the Parallels of the 10 deg. even unto the 30 deg. North. After the same manner beyond the Tropick of Capricorn, in the Sea between the Promontory of Good-hope and Brazile, the South-East wind bloweth even unto the 30 deg. of Latitude, that is 7 degrees beyond the Torrid Zone towards the South, and that through the whole year. And although as we have said, that this general wind is not discovered on all Coasts, much less in Mediterranean places, yet in some it is sufficiently ob∣servable. So on the Coasts of Brazile Easterly unto the Coasts of Loango, the South-East is a Quotidian wind, although that other winds do admin them∣selves. There is a threefold Cause of this continual general wind alledged by Modern Philosophers, (for both it, and the Torrid Zone were unknown to the Anti∣ents, who have not so much as mentioned it). Some Determine that the Sun is the cause of this wind, blowing from the East to the West; by reason that by its great faculty it rarifyeth the Air in the Torrid Zone, and so it thrusteth it forwards from the East to the West, seeing that the Sun it self goeth this way. Some and those of the Opinion of Pythagoras, that Determined the Heaven to stand still, and the Earth to moved round; some of them I say, supposed this general wind to Proceed from hence, viz. that whilst the Earth is moved round, and the Air with it; this less followeth the motion of the Earth, but is somewhat more slower to motion: and therefore whilst that we are carried with the Earth from the West to the East, the Air moved with less celerity to the same quarter, seemeth to meet us, and to be moved from the East to the West, when that yet we do rather meet it. See Des Cartes in his 222 Proposition of his Principels.Des Cartes alledgeth the third Cause, and that altogether new in the 222 Proposition in his Principles. Where he endeavoureth to shew that the Moon causeth this motion, as well as the motion of the Sea from the East to the West. But because that his Opinion cannot be understood, except that all his Philo∣sophical Hypotheses should be Explained; therefore we shall say nothing con∣cerning it here, especially seeing that we shall shew in another place, that that Cause is not true. I approve of the first Cause; the second seemeth therefore not to be received, because that many Copernicans approve not of it; and no reason can be given, why this wind should be found to blow only between the Tropicks, or to the 30 deg. of Latitude, and not in the whole temperate Zone.
Proposition III. Some Winds are Periodical and fixed, others wandering and Erra∣tick. Some winds fixed, others wandering.Those are termed fixed, and periodical, which blow on certain daies, and then cease for a certain number of daies, until that they begin to blow again. Some return in the space of half a year; othersome are Monthly, which re∣turn in the interval of one or two Months. Also the fixed winds are other∣wise subdivided, viz. some when that they begin to blow, continue for some Months, others for half a year, others for a Month, others for a few daies. Amongst these those are chiefly observed by Mariners, which blow for some Months in certain places of the Sea, (and they call these winds, as also the times wherein such winds blow, Motions, or Moussons). And such Moti∣ons are more especially notable in the Indian Ocean, from Africa to the Phi∣lippine Isles, although that they be not wanting in other places: there is a very great moment to be placed in the observation of these Motions; for Seamen ought to choose the time of them for the Voyage that they intend to that same quarter, (or that which is collateral unto which that wind bloweth;) neither to undertake a Voyage to the quarter of this Motion, but to expect the contrary Motion. For in the parts of the Indian Ocean, where that one wind ceaseth to blow for some Months, another succeedeth contrary to the former, and continueth with the same constancy, until that it hath compleated its time, and therefore they call these, Contrary Motions. They term those the time of the mutation of those Motions, which intercede between the end of one Mousson, and the begining of the contrary. For one Motion ceasing, ano∣ther doth not presently begin to blow, but some days fall between, some times more, sometimes fewer, also more in some places, and fewer in other some. And in these intermedial daies, in which no certain Motion bloweth, the wind is variable; the calm dangerous, and for the most part the Sea is tossed with uncertain waves, and sudden Tempests arise: some of these Motions return twice in a year, but not with the same vehemency, whence Mariners term the one the great Motion; the other the lesser. 1. In that part of the Atlantick Ocean, that lyeth in the Torrid Zone, as also that which is in the Temperate Zone, the North wind perpetually blow∣eth in the Months of October,Months most fit to taka a Voyage from Europe to In∣dia. November, and January. And therefore these Months are chiefly fit to undertake a Voyage in from Europe to India; that they may pass the Aequator by the help of those winds. For it is mani∣fest by experience, that some Ships that have set Sail from Europe in March, have arrived no sooner at Brazile, than those that have set Sail in October; viz. both of them have come thither in the Month of February, being helped by the North wind. Yet because that this wind is not so continual and cer∣tain, therefore Mariners are not wont to call it a Motion. Neither is it an ea∣sie matter to render a cause of this wind in these Months, unless you will refer it to copious thick vapours, or to a continnual pressure made from thick Clouds. But those that have wintered in Nova Zembla, testifie that there is a most frequent North wind all the time of the Winter, where this effect cannot be ascribed unto the Sun, rarifying the Air, seeing that he lyeth obscured under the Horizon. Yet I suppose that in general the Cause may proceed from the dissolving of Snows or gross Vapours, or Clouds, collected in the Winter in the Northern and Southern places, especially on the Mountains. Which I am in∣duced to believe by this Argument more especially, because that these Moti∣ons blow for the most part from the North and South quarters, or the Col∣lateral unto them. Therefore by reason that Snow and thick Clouds are dis∣solved in the Northern places by the Sun, especially in that half of the year in which he passeth through the North part of the Ecliptick; therefore those Motions shall then be Northernly. After the same manner in the
Southern or Antartick places for the other half of the year, the Sun dissolveth the Snow, and the thicker Clouds, therefore then the Motion shall be discove∣red Southerly. Now that these Motions blow more from the Sea in the Collateral quarters, to wit, In the South-East, and North-East, or in the quarters more near to the North, and South; its cause seemeth to be referred either to the divers scitua∣tion of the places, in which the Snow and the more thick Clouds are there collected, or rather unto a general wind, which is very forcible to attract those Motions unto another quarter. For seeing that a general wind of its own na∣ture tendeth directly from the East, to the West, and these Motions tend from one Pole unto the other, thence ariseth a mutual hindrance; and thence it may come to pass, that the wind may gain an intermedial quarter between the East and South, and East and North. The South-West, and North-West Mo∣tions are unconstant, rare, and weak; and therefore are scarce reckoned amongst Motions, when that the North and South by accident seem to decline some∣times to the West, but they are attracted to the East by a general wind. Now to render a reason concerning the great diversity of these Motions in divers pla∣ces, more accurate observations are required, and those not of one year but of many, with the notation of the Winter, Rainy, Snowy Seasons: and the Moun∣tains of these places from the quarters of which these state winds do blow; we should also know the Phasis and Motion of the Moon, and what variation this maketh. Several winds blow at certain times in set places.2. In July South winds blow at Cape Verd, (for then there is the Winter in the time of Rain) and this seemeth to produce from no other Cause than that, by which in our Zone North winds blow in the Winter. 3. At the Promontory of Good-hope, in September, the North-East wind bloweth. 4. At Patanen in India, in November, December, and January, continual Rains, and a North-East wind predominateth, but in other Months an East wind bloweth, and it is Summer. 5. About Sumatra, there is a mutation of the Motions in November and De∣cember. 6. In the Isle of Mayo, one of the Azores, in the end of August, a vehement wind bloweth from the South and bringeth Rain, which moistens the Earth, otherwise dry, and then first of all Grass springeth up, which feedeth many Goats at the end of December. 7. In Congo from the middle of March, to September, (at what time it is Winter there) the North and North-West wind blow, or other in∣termedial winds, which force and gather the Clouds on the tops of the Moun∣tains, and generate an obscure Air with Rain. But from September, to March, the South and South-East and other intermedial winds blow that are con∣trary to the former.See the follow∣ing Propositi∣on. We have taken these differences of the state and Anniver∣sary winds, from the Observation of Mariners, that term them Moussons, or Motions, if that they blow in a long tract of the Sea. And now we should Treat of their Causes, but that we are ignorant of the Mountains of the Regi∣ons, of the times of the Snows, and their meltings, and many other matters. Moreover those Observations of Seamen are not sufficiently accurate, so that they deserve a diligent inquisition concerning their Causes. The more noted Motions are these, More noted Motions.1. In the Indian Ocean, between Africa and India, and to the very Mo∣luccos, in an Oriental Motion towards the West, which begineth in January, and bloweth for six Months, even to the begining of June: In August, and Sep∣tember, a contrary Motion begineth, viz. Western winds. In June, July, and August, is a mutation of Motions, and great Tempests from the North. Now when that we speak of Oriental and Occidental winds, we do not only understand the East and West winds, but also the Collateral winds.
2. The Oriental motion varieth very much at the Shoars, so that Ships can only Sail from India on this side Gatis, or on the Coasts of Malabar, from January to the middle of May, to Persia, Arabia, Mecha, and Africa: for seeing that in the end of May, and all June, July, and August, the Tempests rage violently, and often a North wind, or furious North-East wind frequent∣ly intermixing it self: therefore in these Months no Ships pass from India on this side Gatis: but on the Coast of India beyond the Gatis, or Ganges, that is on the East quarter, or on the Coasts of Choromandel, such Tempests are not known. A Voyage is undertaken from Ceilan, Java, and other Isles, to the Moluccoes, in September, because that then the Oriental motion begineth, which hindereth the general wind. But when you depart to 15 degrees of South Latitude, beyond the Aequator, this Occidental motion is not discover∣ed in the Indian Ocean, but a general South East wind filleth the Sails. 3. From Cochin to Malacca, that is from the West, to the East, they begin their Voyage in March, because that then there the Western motion begineth, or rather the North West wind frequently bloweth. 4. In the Kingdom of Guzurat, half the year the North winds blow from March to September, and in the other half the South winds, and that without any other hindrance caused by other winds. 5. The Dutch set Sail from Java for the most part in January, or February, when that they return for Europe: then they Sail with an Easterly wind even to 18 degrees of South Latitude: and here the South or South-East wind begineth to blow, by which they Sail even to St. Helena. 6. Although in the Indian Ocean from January, even to June, the motion be Oriental, and then from August to January, the motion be Occidental; yet nevertheless in divers parts of it, when we must Sail from one place to another, divers seasons are discovered more or less convenient, by reason that the Collateral winds do more or less blow, or the motion is more or less vehe∣ment at those times, or other winds more often or more seldom intermix at that time: therefore those that are to Sail from Cochin to Malacca, observe another motion, another from Malacca to Maccou, the Emporium of China, another from Maccou to Japan. 7. At Banda the Western winds cease with the end of March, and at the end of April there are variable winds, and calms: with the Month of May, vi∣olent Easternly winds with Rain begin. 8. At Ceilan about the Promontory called Punto Gullo, on the 14th. of March, the first Occidental wind beginneth, viz. the West-South-West. then the South-West constant and continnual from the end of March, to the first of October: then the North-East begineth, which bloweth there even to March, but some daies at ten, or also more, these State-winds or motions happen soon∣er or later. 9. In the Voyage from Mozambique to Goa, in May, and June, the South-East winds are predominate even to the Aequator, but from the Aequator to Goa, the South-West and South winds reign in July, August, and the following Months. 10. In the 35 deg. of the Elevation of the Meridian which passeth through the Isle of Tristan de Conha, in May, on the New Moon the West wind reign∣eth. 11. At the 2 ⅕ of North Latitude, in the Sea seventy miles from Guinea, a South-East wiad predominateth from the 20th. of April, to the 5th. of May, but not on the Shoar, or in Guinea it self: after the 5th. of May, the same wind is also discovered at the 3 deg. and 3 ½ of Latitude. 12. At the Isle of Madagascar, from the 15th. of April, unto the last of May, the North, and North-West wind bloweth; but in February, and March, the winds blow from the East and South. 13. In April or May, in the tract of Land, and Sea, from Madagascar to the Promontory of Good-hope, the North wind, and the wind Collateral to the North blow continually to the East, so that it is esteemed a Miracle if that the Southo South-East wind blew for two daies.
14. After the 20 of April, in the Sea of Bengala, the South wind is violent before that day, the South-West, and North-West, and those being very impe∣tuous, do predominate. 15. There is a Motion for Navigation from Malacca to Maccou, in July, October, November, December, viz. the South winds, and South-West winds, and oftentimes the South-East winds, but in June, and July, at the begining the West winds rage, about Malacca, and in the Sea of China. 16. The Motion by which they Sail from Java to China, (from the West, to the East) begineth with the Month of May. 17. The Motion by which they Sail from China to Japan, from the West, to the East, is in force in June, and July: viz. the South-West wind; but the North and Collateral wind to the North, at the East oftentimes interpose, and that especially at the day time, but in the night season the South-East and the first Collateral wind at the East do interpose, and let. 18. A contrary Motion, viz. from Japan to Maccou, from the East, to the West, is in February, and March, viz. the East, and North-East winds, but these predominate not in the Sea, but on the Coasts of China, which those that Sail in that Voyage from Japan, observe, they term them the Winds over the Land. 19. The motion by which they Sail from the Phillippine Isles, or China, to Aquaepulco in America, viz. the Western winds are observed in June, July, and August, but they are very weak, except in the Full Moon; now they are the South-West winds: but they avoid the Torrid Zone, and choose the Coasts of America Septentrional is to shun the wind that is general from the East, which yet then is less vehement. This therefore must be known in general, that the Occidental Motions, or West winds, are more weak than the Oriental, because that these are helped by a general wind, but these are diminished by it. 20. In the Sea of China, a South, and South-West Motion reigneth in July, August, and October. But if that these winds be changed into an Oriental Mo∣tion, they never presently return to the South; but first to the North: hence when they have blowed some daies, they return to the East, and lastly to the South: sometimes the North-East, is immediately changed into the South-West, sometimes presently from the North to the South, and that here is suffi∣ciently frequent. So in the Sea anniversary winds are more constant, unto which I add those that are less constant, and those which on the Coasts, and also on Maritimate places are observed to be Anniversary. Proposition IV. The Etesian winds, so termed, that are Anniversary in Grece, proceed from Rain and Snow dissolved on the Mountains. Of Etesian winds and from what they proceed.The Grecians observed a twofold kind of Winds on every Year, which were Stated and termed Etesian winds. Viz. 1. Those in the Summer, or Canicu∣lar winds; which they called by the General term Etesiae, because that they were more strong and sensible. 2. The Winter winds, which they called the Chelidonii, or Ornithiae. The Canicular Etesian winds are Northern, in the placing of the begining of which to a certain, Writers do much differ. When that Aristotle had added that they blow after the Summer Solstice; he mentioneth nothing of the true time, which certainly is a very great negligence, which at length he augment∣eth, where making mention of the Ornithiae, he omitteth both the time, and the quarter of these winds: but those that have noted the time of the Etesian winds, they have observed that the forerunners of them begin to blow either on the 6 of July, or on the 15 of July, at the rising of the Canicular or Dog Star. Now those winds blow 40 daies, the whole space of the Dog dates, and therefore end with the Month of August; but others extend them to September
they only blow in the day, and cease in the night, therefore Mariners former∣ly called them, the sleepy and delicate winds. The cause of these winds questionless is the dissolving of the Snow caused by the heat of the Sun on the Northern Mountains, which at that time is very great, by reason that now for divers Months together, almost he hath conti∣nually shined on those Mountains without any setting; and with this cause it aptly agrees that the Etesian winds cease on the night, because that then the resolution of the Snow ceaseth, or at least is lesser than the generation of the wind requireth, because that the Sun then is over or near the Horizon, or else setteth wholly. The same Northern Canicular wind is not only in Greece, but also in Thrace, Macedonia, the Aegean Sea, and the Isles of the same, (all which Regions are sometimes comprehended under the general term of Greece,) yea in Aegypt al∣so; and it is probable that the wind which we have said in the former Propositi∣on, bloweth in Congo, (scituate beyond the Aequator,) that that wind that bloweth from the North, between March, and September, is the same with these Etesian winds of the Grecians, or at least proceed from the same cause: as also that North wind which we have said bloweth in the same Months in the Kingdom of Guzurat, from March, to September; these I say, we ought to Determine to proceed from the dissolved Snows of the Mountains of Asia, termed the Sarmatian Mountains, and the Girdle of the World, and therefore we reckon it amongst the Motions. The second Anniversary wind of the Grecians, is the Chelidonian, which they relate to begin after Winter, but have not noted the day of the beginning. Now these are South winds (contrary to the Canicular or Etesian winds) and very weak, without violence. Moreover inconstant, and not so continual, whence they render the Sea calm. Aristotle relateth that they blow by Course even unto the middle of Sum∣mer, until the Northern Canicular Etesian winds begin, but that they are not so much discerned. The Cause also of these winds, is the dissolving of the Snow on the Moun∣tains of Monomotapa, which Snow the Sun rarifyeth, because that in the time of Winter, and that of Greece, they have Summer, the Sun passing through the Southern parts of the Zodiack; and this wind is also found in Congo, Aegypt, and the Aegean Sea, and the like is in Guzurat, but for very many Months, when it beginneth to blow in Congo, and Guzurat, in September, it continueth even to March. The Anniversary wind of the Grecians, which they call Ornithia, or the Bridges wind, this they say bloweth after the Vernal Aequinox, the Sun ascend∣ing to the Vertex of the Europeans. Proposition V. Why the Etesian winds blow not in Italy, France, Germany, Persia, and other Regions? especially seeing that they are more near the Northern Moun∣tains, from whence we assert the Etesian winds of the Grecians, Congo, and Guzurat do arise and blow. The Etesian winds blow not in all Re∣gions, though near the Nor∣thren Moun∣tains.The Question is of no small moment, and I wish that we had more accurate Observations concerning this matter, viz. the notations of the winds, which at that time are observed in each Region, whether in every Year the same ne∣ver return? Yet if that any thing must be said to the Question, these seem convenient. 1. We cannot deny but that the North wind often bloweth in our Canicular, or Dog daies. 2. That it is discovered less continual and in each year, peradventure the Cause is the often blowing of other winds, which hinder the discovery of the same. 3. We may say that the Mountain from which this first resolution of the Snow begineth, is scituated directly from Greece, and therefore the first Canicular wind is carried hither, but the Vapours are carried hither from the Snow of the other Mountains, because that here they find a free passage made, but I shall reject these my extemporay thoughts, when that I shall see a better reason, and more accurate Observations.
Proposition VI. Some winds are proper and almost perpetual to some place or tract of Land, others are ceasing. Places which have a certain wind at a fix∣ed time.Those places of the Earth are very few which have a certain wind at a fixed time, viz. these: 1. The places of the Torrid Zone, especially of parts of the Pacifick and Aethiopick Sea scituate in the Zone, enjoy a perpetual wind, viz. an Orien∣tal wind or its Collateral, which they call a General wind, as we have shewed in the second Proposition, where we have treated largely of it. Yea this wind is not so much to be reckoned amongst the proper winds, but rather to be determi∣ned to be common to all places; for although by accident it happeneth that it be not discerned in all places, viz. because other winds blow more strong, yet it is proper to some: the Cause is alledged in the place cited. 2. On the Coasts of Peru, and part of Chili, and to the adjacent Sea, the South wind is almost perpetual, and his Collateral wind at the West. It be∣ginneth at the 46 deg. of Latitude, and bloweth to Panama the American Isthmus, and causeth that in few daies Ships arrive from Lima at Panama la∣den with Gold, Silver, &c. But it requireth many daies sail from Panama to Lima. But this wind bloweth not in the Sea remote from the Coasts of Pe∣ru. It is difficult to render the cause of this wind, by reason that the South Land from whence it seemeth to blow, is not yet known unto us. Yet I think it probable, that because that Mountains are found in it covered with perpe∣tual Snow; therefore the winds are generated from a continual resolution of them. But I will not infect the mind of the Reader with these my suspicions, or conjectures. For peradventure the Snows which are found all the year long in the high Mountains, at the Streights of Magellan, are the cause of these winds, but yet it may be Objected, that those Mountains lie from the South towards the West, declining from the South: wherefore we shall leave this to a more diligent inquisition, or a more full knowledge of the South Con∣tinent. 3. At the Coasts of the Land of Magellan, or Del Fugo, about the Streight Le Mair, continual or at least very frequent Westernly winds do blow, and that with that force, that they make the Trees to bend towards the East from their perpendicular rectitude; neither is there any part of the Earth in which those Occidental winds so often blow: but on the other part of the Streights Le Mair, at the Coast of the South Land the South wind bloweth. I can render no other cause of those Occidental winds, but that I suppose them to be raised from Snow and Clouds in the South Con∣tinent, which extendeth it self from the side of that Occidental Streight, from the South towards the North. But these are doubtful and more diligently to be inquired after. 4. On the Malabarian Coasts of India; for almost the whole year, the North and North-East winds blow: the cause proceedeth from the resolution of the Snows of the Mountains of the Asiatick Sarmatia, viz. Imaus, or Caucasus from the Clouds on the other Mountains of Asia, which are collected and press the subject Air. 5. In the Sea near to Guinea, the North West wind is frequent, and in the remote Sea the North East. 6. In the middle passage between Japan and Liampo. a Maritimate City of China, even unto these are found Occidental winds, which blow in Japan in November, and December. 7. At the Isle Guotou, not far from the Isle Dos Cavallos in the Sea of Chi∣na, is a frequent South wind, when that yet in the neighbouring Ocean a North wind is predominate.
Proposition VII. Ʋnto these Periodical or state Winds, appertain those also that are tearmed day Winds, which in some Regions, and at a certain time of the year blow for some hours every day. Of Day Winds so called.Now they are found to be twofold, and that only in some Maritimate places, for some blow from Mediterranean places to the Shore towards the Sea; and others on the contrary from the Sea to the Shoars. 1. On the Malabarian Coasts in the Summer season, viz. from September to April, the Terrestial winds, or Terrinhos do blow from the twelfth hour of the night to the twelfth hour of the day, now these winds are Eastern winds. But from the twelfth hour of the day to the twelfth hour of the night, the Sea wind, or Viraconus, to wit, the West wind bloweth: but this is very weak, so that by its assistance the Ships can hardly arrive at the Shoar. I suppose the cause of those Oriental winds from twelve at night to twelve in the day, part∣ly to be a general wind, and partly Clouds on the Mountain Gatis. But the cause of the Occidental Winds, that blow from twelve in the day to twelve at night, is the resolution of thick Clouds caused by the setting of the Sun, which Clouds before by the Oriental wind were forced towards the West. Out of those named Months, the North wind predominateth, also the East and North-East, neither by reason of the often Tempests are these Terrestrial and Marine winds discerned. 2. In Musulipatan a City on the Coasts of Charomandel, these Terrinhos begin to blow on the first day of June, and continue only fourteen daies, and then the Ships depart thence. But these are rather to be referred amongst the motions, because that as far as I can conjecture from the words of the Nautick Description, these Terrestrial winds on those daies are there continual, nei∣ther do the Marine winds succeed them. 3. On the Coasts of America, and new Spain, unto the Pacifick Ocean, Ter∣restial winds blow in the middle of the night; and Marine winds in the day. 4. In Congo, and the Provinces at Lopo Gonsalvo, Terrestrial winds blow from the evening all night; and Sea winds begin in the morning, and so lessen the heat of the day. 5. The Subsolan winds also, which are found to blow before the Sun, and with the Sun rising every day, in all places, especially in Brazile, where it hapneth every day in the morning. It is no difficulty to explain the cause of it: for either we say that it is a particle of the General wind, or that the Sun discusseth and rarifieth the more gross particles condensed by the night. 6. The Etesian and Chelidonian winds of the Grecians, appertain to the Diary or day winds. 7. On the Coasts of Camboja from Varrella to Pulo-Catte, from the 28 of July, to the fourth of August, Terrestrial and Sea winds successively blow of∣ten every day, because that the motions then cease there, and cause a calm. The West and North-West are the Terrestrial winds. But the Collateral are the East, to pass through the North, and presently are reflected at the South; then a calm succeedeth until the Terrestrial winds begin to blow again, which yet are discovered on the Sea not above two miles from the Shoar. 8. Those Terrestrial and Sea winds are found to blow in the night in Ameri∣ca at Havanna.
Proposition VIII. By how much you draw near the Aequator from the Artick Pole, by so much the Northern-winds are found to be less vigorous; and having passed the Aequator in part of the South Continent, Southern-winds are vigorous, which in these places are cold and dry, especially in Chilis and Peru. The cause of both are the same, by reason that they both proceed from the Polary places; yet South-winds are found in the North Continent, and Nor∣thern in the South. Proposition IX. From what hath been said it is manifest, that there are four differences of Winds. Four differen∣ces of Winds.1. Those that are common, which blow at all times, and in every place, ex∣cept that they be hindred by other winds; such is only one, viz, the General wind. 2. Proper winds, which blow at all times; but yet only in a certain place or tract of the Earth, not in all the Earth. 3. Those that blow in many places, but not continually, or at all times; as are Motions, Anniversary winds, and some Diary winds. 4. Those that blow not at all times, nor in many places. Proposition X. Some Winds are sudden, impetuous and violent, not continuing long. Of sudden and violent Winds, and not of long continu∣ance.Such are the Winds termed Prester, Typhon, Turbo, Exhydrias, Ecnephias. These Winds are Anniversary in some places; and some are more frequent in some places in the Sea. The Wind called Prester is a violent wind, breaking forth with Lightning; such are seldom observed, and it is seldom solitary without a wind termed Ecnephias. But Seneca saith, that a Prester is a Typhon, or Whirlwind, with an inflamed Air. An Ecnephias is a sudden Wind, and violent breaking through some Cloud or Vapour; such Ecnephiae are often in the Aethiopian Sea between Brazil and the Procurrent of Africa, especially at the Promontory of Good-hope, and from the other side of Africa to Terra de Natal, also at Guinee under the Ae∣quator. Mariners call them Travados, by a Portugal word: also in some Months of the year it is more frequent in some Seas. That Cloud, and sometimes many thick and dusky Clouds, are manifestly be∣held by the Mariners to collect and augment by degrees, and that in a most serene Sky, before that the Wind breaketh forth: and therefore when that they see it, they ought to furl their Sails, and defend themselves against a future Storm. But before that Sea-men had learned the nature of these Clouds, and their Prognosticks, many Ships having entred into this Sea were cast away, which the Portugals first experimented; for that Nation first of all the Euro∣peans sailed the Aethiopian Ocean: For India being discovered by Gamma, the King of Portugal sent thirteen Ships, a new Navy of great burthen, thither, under Admiral Caprali, in Anno 1500. This Navy first of all the Europeans arrived at Brazil to the great joy of the Portugals. Here, when that they had stayed sometime, viz. the Month of April, they set Sail thence on the Month of May towards the Promontory of Good-hope; but they had a most cruel Storm from an Ecnephias, the approach of which they saw, yet were not acquainted therewith. Which Maffaeus thus describeth: From Brazil
to the Promontory of Good-hope they reckon almost two thousand Leagues (that is, about a thousand German miles,) those are the Kingdoms especi∣ally of the raging Ocean and violent Winds. The Portugals having entred into that space more adventurously than fortunately on the Month of May, a flaming Comet appeared incontinently even to the tenth day. And now the Sky often changing, as also the Sea, black and sordid Clouds were conglobated to the North, and collected all the Wind into it self, as it were by reciprocation, the Sea was languid, and the Calm treacherous; the Sea-men unskilful both in the Places and Tempests, spread their Sails to receive all the gale of Wind; when from those Clouds, as I have said, the North-wind pouring it self sud∣denly with an universal violence, it Shipwracked four of their Ships that were not so well disposed to hand their Sails in a moment, the rest looking on, so that of so great a Company of men none escaped.See Maffeus. The sudden striking of the Yards or Sails rent by the wind, preserved the rest by accident. Then the North-wind blowing furiously, the Sea swelled, the Flouds sometimes advanced to the Skies, and sometimes sunk to the depths of Hell: the water in the day time appeared as black as Pitch, and in the night time of a fiery colour. This dismal Tempest continued the space of 20 days. The Promontory of Good-hope is especially infamous for such Ecnephiae or Travados. There is not far from the Shoar a very high Mountain not ending in an Apex, but having a plain on the top, like to a Table. From that top an Ec∣nephias breaketh forth with a great violence, and wonderful Prognostick. For the Sky being very clear, and the Sea calm, a Cloud is beheld to stand on the Table of the Mountain, which is so small at first, that it seemeth not to exceed the bulk of a grain of Barly, and at length it increaseth to the bigness of a Wal∣nut. The Dutch call it the Oxes-eye, because that this Cloud is said to be like unto it, then after a while the Cloud augmenteth, and extendeth it self over the whole plain of the Mountain. Then on a sudden an Ecnephias breaketh forth from the top of the Mountain with so great violence, that it over-setteth and send∣eth to the bottom Ships that are unprovided and not well strengthned; but Sea-men being now more cautious, when that they once discover that Bulls or Oxes-eye, presently depart from the Shoar as far as they can, and then furl their Sails, and use other Artifices to preserve their Ships; neither doth this Prognostick ever fail: therefore they fly this deadly Banquet. After the same mode an Ecnephias rageth at Terra de Nata: the Bulls-eye fore-runing it, by which many Ships have been cast away. And so it is also in that whole tract between that and and the Promontory of Good-hope. In Dauphin in France, not far from Vienna, is a high Mountain, on the top of which is a standing-Pool, from whence all Tempests seem to arise in these places: on the top of it is procreated a Cloudy exhalation, which foresheweth immediately Thunder or Storms to succeed. In the Sea between America and Africa, and near the Aequator, such Ecnephiae and Travados are frequent, especially in those Months in which no Winds blow constantly, or if they do, it is very seldom, viz. throughout the whole year, especially in April, May, and June (in other Months it is more rare,) and they are very observable on the Coasts of Guinea: The Portugals, as I have said, call them Travados, which word also the Dutch keep; but the Inhabitants of Guinea call them Agremonte. They often happen, viz. three or four times in a day, by and by they cease; for they continue for the most part above an hour and a half, but the first shock is very violent. They break out of black and dusty Clouds, the Sky being clear at hand. By their assistance Sea-men oftentimes pass the Aequator, because that other continual Winds are often wanting there, especially in those three Months; neither do they hinder Ships to sail, except at the first onset. But in the Sea that is near to that part of Africa, in which the Kingdom of Loango is scituated, there is a frequent Ecnephias in January, February, March and April: so on the Promontory of Africa, called by the Ancients Aromata, and now Guardafu, not far from the Mouth of the Red Sea, in May every year the North-wind rageth, and a most violent Ecnephias.
For you must know, that as some Anniversary winds are less violent: so also Tempests and Ecnephiae are Anniversary in some places. In such an Ec∣nephias, not far from that place, the Portugal Admiral Sodrens was lost Anno 1505; who being forewarned by the Africans would not follow good Advice. But in the Mouth of this Arabian Sea, as also in Arabia and Aethiopia, a peculiar and wonderful Ecnephias doth somewhat happen, viz. a thick and black Cloud, mixed with Nubicular flames like to a burning Furnace (dismal to behold) cloudeth the day in darkness, of an instant a Storm breaketh forth, the rage or which is by and by pacified; but it casteth forth red Sand in great abundance on the Land and Sea, so that the Arabians say, that it hath often happened, that such Storms of Sand have overwhelmed the Annual Company of Merchants and Travellers with their Camels, they term them Carawanen, Caravans, or Cassila, viz. every year once or twice Merchants being met together from divers parts of Asia in Syria, go from Aleppo into Arabia about six thousand persons, by reason that the wonted Robberies of the Arabians, and the difficulty of the way, cause them to fear to Travel alone: which also they do from India to China and Tartary: and thence they say, that the Mu∣mia of the Arabians and Aegyptians hath its original. Viz. those Bodies co∣vered with the drifts of Sand, are-dried up by the great heat of the Sun. Now this Ecnephias ariseth from the Northern quarter into which the Red-Sea is extended; and therefore it is probable, that seeing so great a quantity of this Sand is sound on the shoar of this Sea, that it is raised aloft by the Wind, and that thence that Red colour is seen in the Clouds, and thence also the Sand is ejected from the Clouds. That such an Ecnephias ariseth in Lybia, by reason of the great quantity of Sand, is not improbable, and was in some measure known to the Ancients; who therefore writ, That the access to the famous Temple of Jupiter Ammon in Lybia, was difficult, neither were they altogether ignorant of the genera∣tion of Mumia. Twistius a Dutch-man, that lived a long time in India, saith, that in the Kingdom of Guzurat Clouds of Sand, or an huge quantity of Dust (that are elevated by the heat of the Sun) do oftentimes overwhelm the Travellers. Now we must speak of the Causes of this Tempestuous wind, whence the Ecnephias proceedeth. It is evident, that it breaketh forth of a Cloud. Now there are two Modes by which such a Wind may seem to be ge∣nerated from a Cloud: 1. If that a Cloud tending downwards by its gravity striketh the Air with a great force, as we discover by Experience, if that stretched forth Sails fall, the Air is moved with an impetus. And thence it cometh to pass, that by how much the Cloud or Bulls-eye appeareth less, by so much the Storm is the greater that followeth, viz. because that the Cloud is more high, and therefore appeareth small; and descending down from a higher place, it more vehemently striketh the Air; the other is the motion of the generation, if that the Wind included in the Cloud breaketh forth suddenly, or by reason of some fire or Sulphureous matter, the way being rendred strait, and other outlets being restrained, the Vapours strike, as from a Vessel of a narrow mouth containing water, if that it be heaped, the wind breaketh forth; but the first cause seemeth more probable. Proposition XI. An Exhydrias is a Wind breaking from a Cloud with great abundance of water. A Wind called an Exhydrias.It is little different from an Ecnephias, but that the Cloud from whence it seemeth to break, is now condensed into water, and so long upheld by other circumstantial Clouds, and peradventure forced into one by the winds, until by its ponderosity it rusheth downwards, and strikes the Air, whence a great Wind proceedeth. But these Exhydrias are very rare: yet the Ecnephias hath for the most part Rains. Showers, or thick Clouds accompanying him; and therefore only differeth from the Exhydrias, according to the more or the
less. For a Nimbus is nothing else, but a Wind with a violent Rain, and there∣fore is more general than an Ecnephias: but an Exhydrias oftentimes falleth perpendicularly from the top. Proposition XII. A Typhon is a violent Wind, passing swiftly through all the quarters about a place, and for the most part rushing from the top. A VVind cal∣led a Typhon.The Saracens call it Olifant; the Indians, Orancan. It is often in the Ori∣ental Sea, especially in the Sea of Sian, China and Japan, (between Malacca and Japan.) This violently breaking almost from the Western quarter, and being whirled about the Horizon with a rapid course, perfects its circumference by continual increase in the space of twenty hours, raising those vast Seas with an horrid violence and swellings; the Billows beating one another, take away all hope of safety from the Mariners: and so both by reason of these Typhons, and also other Storms, sailing from India to Japan is very dangerous, so that it is accounted an happy Voyage, if that one Ship of three keepeth its course. At the Autumnal Season a most furious Typhon doth especially predominate, and that often with so great violence, that those that have not seen it, can hardly believe it; so that it is no wonder, that some mighty Ships have been weakned by those great Waves: you would think in this Storm, that Heaven and Earth would meet. Neither doth it only rage on the Sea, but also on the Shoars, and over∣whelmeth many Houses, and throweth up huge Trees by the roots, and forceth great Ships from the Sea on the Land for about a quarter of a mile. The Mariners term it a Wind that runneth round the Compass. In the Indian Ocean it seldom continueth above six hours, and maketh the Sea so level at the first, as if that it were plained; but on a sudden horrible Waves do fol∣low. So about the City Ardibil in Persia, in June and July every day, when that the Sun is at his Meridian height, a Whirlwind ariseth for an hour, by which a great dust is raised. Questionless the cause of a Typhon is, that a wind breaking forth with violence from some one quarter towards another, findeth an obstruction in this, and therefore is wreathed and turned into it self; as we see, that if water be sud∣denly moved, if that an obstacle be put in its way, it moveth in a round sud∣denly, and with a force. It may be, that a Typhon may arise from opposite winds blowing together violently, which render the superficies of the Sea so plain, and comprehend the Ships in the middle. If that it rush from above, it is cal∣led Caetegis: and then it maketh the Sea so plain, as if that it had been plained; but presently mighty Floods or Waves arise. Proposition XIII. Whether that some Winds break forth from the Earth, or Water. Of VVinds breaking forth from the Earth or VVater.We easily apprehend that this may easily be, seeing that Cavities are here, and also Winds, Sulphureous substances, and Moisture. Now nothing hinders, but that a gust sufficiently vehement may be there generated, viz. if that it be any thing hindred, as it is procreated, to go forth; or if that it be presently ge∣nerated in a great quantity, as much as the winds require. If that the Outlet be hindred, an Earthquake is generated, or a wind with a violent force maketh wey for it self, and thrusts forwards the Earth. So of∣tentimes a Smoak breaketh forth from the Earth in the Isles of Maarice: so also from some Caves. In Japan is a Fountain, breaking forth at certain hours of the day with great noise. Yet I do not remember, that I have read of any Wind breaking forth out of the Sea.
Proposition XIV. Whether that a certain Wind may arise from the flowing of the Sea, and of the Rivers? Of a VVind that floweth from the Sea and Rivers.Experienced testifieth, that in those places where the flux and reflux of the Sea is discovered, if at any time the Air be free from other winds, from the most part with the water flowing from the Sea, a wind also bloweth from the Sea. Therefore it seemeth probable, that the Air, by reason of the contiguity, is carried with the water to the same quarter: But this should be more diligent∣ly observed, Whether, when that the Air is still, the same wind is discover∣ed with the afflux of the Sea? I think yet, that another cause of this Wind may be given, viz. that the Air is forced from the place by the flowing water. Now the Air is much moved at a very little impression: so they will have the Air moved with the Rivers that run swiftly. Proposition XV. Why Ignes fatui, Castor and Pollux, and Helena, are amongst Tempests. The Portugals call them Corpo Santo; the Spaniards, St. Elmo. Now not only one, but many are oftentimes beheld in Ships at the Masts, wandring with an uncertain motion, as other Ignes fatui, although that sometimes they may seem to fix on the Sails and Masts: But sometimes leaping up and down they appear like a flame, or a Candle burning obscurely. If that four such vi∣cine Lights be seen, the Portugals term them Cora de Nostra Seneora, the Crown of our Blessed Lady, or Virgin Mary. And these they account of as a most certain sign of the Tempests to cease. The cause of those Fires is a Sul∣phureous part, full of Bitumen, forced downwards through that great motion of the Air, and forced or fired into one by agitation or congregation. So we see by agitation, that the Butter of Milk is separated: from this Phaenomenon is also collected, that for the most part those violent Tempests proceed from a Sulphureous spirit, rarefying and moving the Clouds. Proposition XVI. Why there is so frequent a Calm in the Sea near Guinee, and under the Aequa∣tor in the Atlantick Ocean, between America and Africa. Frequent' Calms in the Atlantick Ocean.This is one of the Phaenomenons about Winds of no small difficulty, That at Guinee, which is two degrees from the Aequator, and under the Aequator, is almost a perpetual Calm, especially in April, May, and June, where no mo∣tions are found there, when that no such thing is observed in other parts of the Ocean scituate under the Aequator. Indeed an Ecnephias is sometimes sufficiently frequent there; but this also is desired oftentimes by the Sea-men, because that by the force of frequent Ecnephiae they endeavour to sail beyond the Aequator: For it happeneth very often, that Ships sailing from Europe to India, are detained a whole Month at the Aequator before that they can pass it. Now especially they avoid the Coasts of Guinee, and the Calm there; and therefore with some hindrance to their Voyage, they sail towards Brazil: yea some Ships are detained here for three Months, before that they can depart from the Coasts into the Mid-Sea. I have not yet found out the cause of the Phaenomenon, unless perchance this be it, that Snows are found intercepted in no Mountains of Africa between Guinee and Barbary, which may generate the Winds.
Proposition XVII. In some Regions the Tempests are Anniversary. Of Tempests Anniversary in some Regi∣ons.We have given some Examples of these in our former Propositions, viz. 1. Concerning the mutation of Motions. 2. Concerning our Ecnephias. 3. Concerning a Typhon. 4. At the Promontory of Good-hope, in June and July. 5. In the Isle Del Majo, with the Southern-motion in the end of Au∣gust, in 35 degrees of the Meridian of Tristian de Cunha, in May, in the New Moon, the West-wind rageth, and Shipwracks: but in 33 degrees of the same Meridian, the North and North-east Winds predominate. 8. In June and Ju∣ly in the Sea of China, at Pulon Timor, the West-winds are violent and dange∣rous. 9. Between China and Japan, many Storms are from the New Moon of July to the twelfth day of the Moon. 10. There, if in June other winds blow besides the motion, sometimes from this, sometimes from that quarter, until that they are setled in the North-east quarter, of a certain a Storm followeth.
astrological charts illustrating the systems of René Descartes, Nicolaus Copernicus and Tycho Brahe
THE SECOND BOOK OF General Geography, CONCERNING The Affections of the places of the Earth depending on the apparent motion of the Stars. CHAP. XXII. Of things requisite to be foreknown in the knowledge of Geography. Itherto we have been employed in an absolute contemplation of the Earth; we now draw near the Second Part of this Doctrine, in which we shall consider those Properties or Affections which happen to the Earth from the apparent motion of the Sun and Stars: Neither would they be, except this Motion were evident. The Explication of which Affections will, with greater right, appertain unto Geography; if so be that same Motion be attributed unto the Earth it self, of which we have treated in the Sixth Chapter. Now for the right knowledge of these Affections, these following Hypotheses and Definitions are necessary to be understood.
Definitions. An Artificial Terrestrial Globe termed a factitious Glbe.First, the Artificial Terrestrial Globe is termed a factitious Globe, from whose Superficies the parts of the Earth, and their scituation, a  presented, as they have an existence in the Earth it self, according o the proportion of this Superficies to the Superficies of the Earth. A Map, a plain Figure, and of what Lines it consists.A Map or Geographical Card is a plain figure, in which the scituations of the Terrestrial Superficies are represented. And this again is either Univer∣sal or Particular: The first exhibiteth the whole Superficies of the Earth; the other, some one or other Region. Some Maps consist of strait Lines, and others of crooked: These of strait are such in which the Peripheries or Circumferences of the Terrestrial Circles are represented by right Lines; the other in which the same Peripheries are exhibited by crooked Lines. But as for the composure of a Terrestrial Globe, and Geographical Maps, we shall take an occasion to treat of in the end of our Book, by reason the same cannot be understood before the Doctrine, which we now handle, be well apprehended. Of the Poles and Axis of the Earth.Secondly, The Poles of the Earth are two points diametrically opposite in the Superficies of the same, which remain immoveable in the Diurnal circum∣rotation of the Earth, or which are subjected unto the Poles of the apparent Quotidian motion of the Stars. But the Axis of the Earth is said to be the Diameter conjoyning the Poles: Or thus, The Axis of the Earth is that Dia∣meter of the Earth, about which the Diurnal motion of the Stars, or Earth it self, is perfected. Now the Poles are said to be the Extream points of the Axis in the Superficies of the Terrestrial Globe; and that Pole which is sub∣jected to the Constellation termed the Bear, is called the Artick, Septentrional, or Northern Pole: the other is called the Antartick, or Southern Pole. These are by more facility explained by an Artificial Terrestrial Globe, than by words. If the former be wheeled round, those two immoveable points will appear, which are the Poles, and the Diameter imaginarily drawn from one Pole to the other through the Center of the Earth, shall be the Axis. The Aequator, or Aequino∣ctial Line.Thirdly, The Aequator is said to be the Periphery or Circumference of the greatest Circle in the Globe of the Earth, equally distant from both the Poles, or placed in the middle between the Poles, or whose Poles are the same with the Poles of the Earth. It is also termed the Aequinoctial Line, and that by Mariners. All the Stars in their Diurnal motion, make Peripheries equi∣distant or parallel to the Aequator; wherefore the Aequator is the Rule of Diurnal motion. Parallels.Fourthly, The Parallels of the Aequator are said to be lesser Peripheries, which are parallel to the Aequator. In an Artificial Globe the Aequator, by reason of its Magnitude, is more conspicuous than the others, and its name is ascribed, and it is divided into 360 degrees. The Parallels are also conspicu∣ous, which are likewise termed the Circles of the Latitude of Places, as we shall shew in the following Chapter. Of Maps.These may also be shewed in Geographical Maps that are Universal. In∣deed in Maps of Right Lines the Poles are not represented, but the Ex∣tremities of every Meridian are the Poles: but in Maps consisting of Crooked Lines, the Poles are those points in which the Crooked Lines do meet the Aequator, being transverse in both kind of Maps, passeth through the middle of them, and hath a greater Latitude than the other Lines, and withal it is a strait Line; although in the particular Maps of Asia and Europe it be made crooked. The Parallels of the Aequator in strait-lined Maps, are strait-ls; and in crooked-lined Maps, they are crooked. The Ecliptick.Fifthly, The Ecliptick is the greatest Circle of the Heavens, which the Sun describeth in his Annual motion. In truth it existeth not in the Earth; but by reason of its notable use it is marked in the Artificial Globe, as also in Geogra∣phical Maps.
The Tropicks.Sixthly, The Tropicks are two Parallels of the Aequator, which are distant from the Aequator by so great an interval, as the greatest recess of the Sun is from the Aequator towards the Poles, or as the greatest declination of the Sun, or obliquity of the Ecliptick. The Tropick of Cancer is that which is interposed between the Aequator and Pole Artick. The Tropick of Capricorn is that, which is between the Aequator and the Southern Pole. The Polary Circles.In the Globe, and in Maps, they are wont to be noted by a double Peri∣phery, and the same appellation is ascribed. The Polary Circles are two Parallels, so called; whereof one is distant from the Pole Artick, the other from the Antartick, so many degrees as the Sun is from the Aequator in his greatest recess; and the first is termed the Artick Circle, and the other the Antartick. The Circles hitherto explained do not depend on certain Places, such as the following do, which in divers places are various and different. The Meridian.Seventhly, The Meridian of any place in the Superficies of the Earth, is a Line, so termed, which passeth through that place, in which, when the Sun cometh, the Meridies is in that place. Now the Meridies is that moment of the day, which is equally distant from the rising and setting of the Sun. Theorem. The Meridian of every place passeth through both the Poles of the Earth. The Meridians are drawn through every ten degrees of the Aequator, which are the Meridians of all those places through which they pass. But instead of the Meridians of all other places, that doth supply the place, which is made of Brass, and in which the Globe doth hang. For Instance; If that any place in the Superficies of the Globe be brought unto the Brazen Meri∣dian, that shall be the Meridian of the place. In Maps of Strait lines the Meridians are Strait lines drawn from the top, or uppermost part, unto the bottom. In Maps of Crooked lines, they are those Crooked lines which joyn in the Pole. The Norizou.Fightly, The Horizon of any place in the Superficies of the Earth, is the greatest imaginary Circle in the Heavens, which terminateth the visible part of the Heaven in that place. It is also termed the Rational Horizon, that it may be distinguished from the Visible Horizon, which is improperly so called. It hath no place in the Artificial Globe, but a Wooden Circle, in which the Globe is sustained with its Brazen Meridian, and serveth instead of the Ho∣rizon of any place, as shall be shewed in the next Chapter; and therefore it is termed the Wooden Horizon, and simply, the Horizon. These are the Definitions, whose knowledge is necessary for the attaining the following Doctrine: besides which, it behoveth us to borrow from Astro∣nomy the mode of the Motion of the Sun and Stars. The Motion of the Sun, Moon and Stars.The first and common Motion is that, by which the Sun, Moon, and all the Stars seem to be carried round about the Earth, to arise to us, to make the Me∣ridian, and to set; and that in the space of twenty four hours. Every one of the Stars, and the Sun, every day by this their common Motion, seem to de∣seribe Parallel Circles unto the Aequator; because that this motion is per∣formed upon the Axis of the Earth, and the Poles of the same; and therefore the Aequator is the greatest Circle of this Motion, and the Rule and Square by which we measure the Motion of the other Parallels. In every hour they pass fifteen degrees through the Meridian, both of the Aequator and every other Parallel: for 360 degrees divided by 24, the hours, gives unto every
hour fifteen; and therefore one hour and fifteen degrees of the Aequator, make an equal proportion. The Horary Circle sheweth the hours; which Circle being affixed unto the Artificial Globe, is seen in the Brazen Meridian, where the Pin or Hand adhereth to the extremity of the Axis of the Earth, and it is turned about in the Horary Circle to shew the hours. The second motion of the Sun.Secondly, The proper and second Motion of the Sun, which is also Annual, is that in which the Sun, (or rather the Earth) is moved from West to East, or contrary to its first motion. The time or number of the days, in which the Sun returneth unto the same point from whence it departed, or in which it performeth its whole Period or Circle; is termed a Year. Now such a Year is 361 days, and one fourth part of a day, or thereabouts. The Way of this se∣cond Solary motion is termed the Ecliptick, as we have said before, which is divided into twelve parts, which are called Signs: For Astronomers have ob∣served these Constellations of the Heaven, through which this Way of the Sun doth lye; and from these Constellations denominated the twelve parts of the Ecliptick. And because that all Constellations represent the forms of Animals, therefore the Ancients termed that Way or Ecliptick,The Zodiack, Zone or Girdle in the Weaven. the Zodiack: Yet those which spake more distinctly, call the Zodiack, a Zone or Girdle in the Hea∣ven whose middle is the very Ecliptick it self, or Path of the Sun; but the extream parts from both sides of the Ecliptick, are distant from it eight de∣grees, by reason that the rest of the Planets have a certain peculiar motion from East to West. In which motion they do not describe the Ecliptick it self, but paths declining somewhat from the Ecliptick, which declination, by reason that it exceedeth not 8 degrees, therefore they do attribute 16 degrees of La∣titude unto the Zodiack, viz. Eight from both parts of the Ecliptick, so that the Zodiack is that space of the Heaven in which the Planets are always moving, neither do they ever move out of it: and the Ecliptick is the middle Line of the Zodiack, which the Sun passeth through by an Annual motion, in which it always keeps its fixed course. Moreover, the Signs or Constellations of the Heaven, through which the Ecliptick and the Zodiack passeth, are these: March 21.     The Signs of the Zodiack.♈ ♉ ♊ Aries, Taurus, Gemini, June 21.     ♋ ♌ ♍ Cancer, Leo, Virgo, September 21.     ♎ ♏ ♐ Libra, Scorpius, Sagitarius, December 21.     ♑ ♒ ♓ Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces. Moreover the Ecliptick obliquely cutteth the Aequator,Ecliptick. so that its greatest distance is twenty three degrees, and about thirty minutes. Where therefore the Ecliptick cutteth the Aequator, which he doth in two points, in one of these is placed the beginning of the Ecliptick, and also the beginning of the accounting of the Sigus. In those points the Sun then being in, causeth the equality of the days and nights in all places, as also the beginning of the Vernal
and Autumnal quarters. We begin to number from that point in which the Sun makes the beginning of the Spring to us; that is, we being scituate from the Aequator towards the Pole Artick; the first Sign, or first twelfth part of the Ecliptick; is termed Aries, the second Taurus, the third Gemini, and so forth as aforesaid; because about twenty Ages past, those Signs of the Hea∣ven were in these very parts of the Ecliptick. Every one of these twelve Signs are divided into thirty Degrees, for the whole Ecliptick hath three hundred and sixty Degrees, which being divi∣ded by 12 makes 30. Moreover, seeing that the Sun passeth over the whole Ecliptick (that is 360 Degrees) in 365 days, and one fourth part of a day, hence we collect, that in every day he passeth 59 Minutes, and 8 Seconds, which is something less than a Degree. The Motion of the Sun.Now as the Sun in a years time, or 12 Months, runneth over the whole E∣cliptick, or 12 Signs of the Zodiack, so also in every Month he passeth a∣bout one Sign, but his entrance into the Sign is not at the beginning of the Months, but on the 21th day of every Month; and this is according to the Gregorian Kalender, and on the 11th day of every Month according to the old Julian Account, viz. on the 21th of March, he entreth the Sign of A∣ries, or the very Section of the Ecliptick with the Aequator: then on the 21th of April he entreth Taurus, and so on. Now this his entrance doth not happen on the 21th of every Month, but in some Months before, and in some after. Therefore when we desire to know the precise place of the Sun, we must look for it in an Ephemerides, or in our Almanacks. The place of the Sun is found also in the wooden Horizon of the Artificial Globe for every day of the year, when one may search when the Globe is at hand: for it is a grand fault in a learned or knowing person to be ignorant of the Motion of the Sun, seeing that from thence all the seasons of the year, also the days and nights, with many other things do depend, of all which there is great use in the life of man. CHAP. XXIII. Of the Latitude of places, and the Elevation of the Pole. Proposition I. The Latitude of a place in the Superficies of the Earth is the distance of the same from the Aequator. Of the Lati∣tude of the Earth.Now a Perpendicular Line or Arch drawn from the place given to the Ae∣quator, measureth this distance, and by reason that the Meridian of every place is perpendicular to the Aequator, therefore the Latitude of the place is the Arch of the Meridian of that place intercepted between the place and the Aequator. The Longitude of the Earth.This is termed the Latitude of the Earth, whose extension is in the Super∣ficies from one Pole to the other: as the Longitude of the Earth is the extensi∣on of the same returning from the West by the East, unto the West; which is the same with the Aequinoctial Line.
Proposition II. The Elevation of the Pole of any place, or above the Horizon of any place, is called the Arch of the Celestial Meridian of that place interce∣pted between one or other Celestial Pole, and the Horizon of that place. Elevation of the Pole.It may also be said to be the Arch of the Terrestrial Meridian intercepted between one or other of the Poles of the Earth, and the Horizon. For by this Mode it may be more justly desired, if that the Earth cause the first moti∣on: but Astronomers for the most part apply the definition to the imaginary Celestial Pole. Proposition III. To find the Latitude of a place given in the Superficies of the Globe of the Earth, in degrees and minutes, (if that the Globe be great) the same Latitude in Geographical Maps. For the finding the Latitude of a place by a Globe, or by Maps.In a Globe, let the place given be brought to the Meridian, and let the de∣grees be numbred from the Aequator to the place; they shall be the sought for Latitude of the place. In Geographical Maps; if the Map consists of Right lines, let a Right line be drawn through the place given, parallel to the Aequator, except it be alrea∣dy drawn in the Map; or let a Rule only be applied to the place, so that it be parallel to the Aequator: and so the bounds of this Line in the Side-lines of the Map, will shew the Latitude of the place. But if the Map be of Crooked lines, so that no parallel can pass through by the place given; one foot of the Compass shall be placed in the Pole of the Map, and the other foot in the place given: and in this space the Parallel of the place to be described in the Side-line, again will shew the Latitude of the place; if that the Parallels be described from the Pole. Also the distance of the place from the Pole may be found out. Proposition IV. The Place being given in the Superficies of the Globe, so to constitute the Globe, that the Wooden Horizon may be the Horizon of that place. Let the Place given be brought to the Meridian, and let 90 degrees be num∣bred from it towards the adjoyning Pole in the Meridian. Let the term of the Numeration be placed in the Crena of the Horizon: so the Wooden Hori∣zon shall be the Horizon of the place proposed. Nevertheless in the Corollary of the following Proposition, we shall shew an easier method of performing the fame. Proposition V. The Latitude of the Place is equal to the Altitude, or Elevation of the Pole, above the Horizon of that place. This is shewed by the Globe, thus; Take a place as you please in the Super∣ficies of the Globe; then so place the Globe, that the Wooden Horizon may be the Horizon of the place. Now let the degrees of Latitude of the place, and the Elevation of the Pole be numbred, and they will be found e∣qual.
The Theoried shewed by a Mathematical Demonstra∣tion. See Scheme.The Theorem is thus shewed by a Mathematical Demonstration: Let C be the Center of the Earth, L and place in the Superficies, P the Poles, H P L Z shall be the Meridian, and H Z the Diameter of the Horizon; P H the Ele∣vation of the Pole; Q T the Diameter of the Aequator, or the Section of the Meridian and the Aequator: and P Q shall be the Quadrant of the Meridian, or of 90 degrees, because that P is the Pole of the Aequator. For the former reason L H shall be the Arch of 90 degrees, because L is the Pole of the Hori∣zon: Therefore L H is the Arch of an equal Arch P Q, and the common part L P being taken away, the remainder of the Arch P H L Q will be e∣qual. The Latitude of any place being known, you have also the Elevation of the Pole for the same place. Now the distance of a place from the Pole, and the distance from the Aequator joyned together, makes 90 degrees, wherefore one being known, the other is also. A Place being given in the Superficies of the Globe, to elevate the Pole so, that the elevation of the Place requireth the elevation of the Pole. This is the same with what was propounded in the preceding Proposition, viz. to cause, that the Wooden Horizon become the Horizon of the place given. First find out the Latitude of the Place, and let the Latitude be numbred from the Pole in the Meridian, descending downwards towards the Horizon. Let the Terminus of the Numeration be constituted in the Crena of the Horizon: so the Pole will be elevated, as the scituation of the Place given requireth. Proposition VI. A Place being given in the Superficies of the Globe, or the Latitude of any Place being given, to shew all the Places of the Earth, which may have the same Latitude or distance from the Aequator, or Elevation of the Pole: Or, to find all the places of the Earth, which may have the di∣stance given from the Aequator. Further Rules to be observed concerning the Latitude of places.In the Globe; Let the Place given be brought to the Brazen Meridian, or let the Latitude given be numbred from the Aequator in the Meridian to∣wards the Pole: then let a pointed Chalk be applied unto the term of the Numeration, and turn the Globe round: so the Chalk will describe the Peri∣phery, which shall contain all the places, whose Latitude is the same with the Place given. In Maps of strait Lines, let a strait Line be drawn through the Place given parallel to the Aequator; all the Places through which that Line passeth, shall have the same Latitude with the place given. In Maps of Crooked lines, let the Periphery be described passing the place given from the Pole of the Maps, as from a Center: so by the same means as before, the Places sought for shall be found. But if no certain Place, but a Latitude be given, let one fool of the Compass be placed in the Pole of the Map, and the other on the side Line to the degree of Latitude, and then the Parallel shall be described. Proposition VII. To find the Meridian, or the Plaga, and point of the North and South in the given place of the Earth, or in the given plane. There are divers ways by which the Line fought for may be found. Rules for the finding the Meridian.First, The most easie Mode is that, which maketh use of the Magnetical Needle: For seeing that the Magnetical Needle, or Needle of the Com∣pass, with one extream looketh to the South, and the other to the North, the extension of it will shew the Meridian Line. But because in very few places it hath respect to the Northern and Southern Point or Clime, and in very many declineth from them, as we shall shew elsewhere;See in Chapter the 38th. therefore the Meri∣dian line is not accurately found by that, but only an adjoyning line, which
although it may serve, when the matter is not much material for which we de∣sire it; yet in concernment of greater moment it may be the cause of a great errour. First draw the Line which the Magnetical Needle sheweth, then taking any point in this Line, let the Periphery of the Circle be described from it, as from a Center, in the which let the Degrees of the Declination of the Needle be numbred, beginning from the false drawn Meridian Line, and that towards the East, if the given Declination be towards the West; and contrariwise towards the West, if the given Declination be towards the East. Lastly, let a straight Line be drawn through the term of the Numeration of the Center of the Peri∣phery. This shall be the true Meridian Line. The Mariners Compass use∣ful.There is no need of this labour, if that you have the Mariners Compass at hand, in the which the Declination of the Magnetick Needle is corrected to the place proposed. Secondly, The Meridian Line is more accurately found out by the benefit of the Stars:The Meridian Line found by the Sta. First when the Sun shineth, a style or pin being erected, the shadow of it will shew the Meridian Line. But by reason that it is not safe to conside in Dyals, therefore this mode is not altogether accurate, and it sheweth a true Line, yet a little distance from the true. Thirdly, A Periphery being drawn in a plain given, let a style or pin be ere∣cted from the Center of the same, and let the term of the Shadow before the Meridies be noted: or first, the extremity of the Shadow being noted, let the Periphery or Circumserence be described by the extremity of the Shadow from the place of the style. Then you must expect so long after the Meridies, until the extremity of the Shadow touch the same Periphery. The Latitude being known, the Meridian Line by the help of the Globe may be sound out.Fourthly, If that the Elevation of the Pole or Latitude in the place of the Observation be known, we may be the benefit of the Globe find out the Me∣ridian Line by this means: First by observation, let the Altitude of the Sun above the Horizon be found out; then let a strait Line be drawn on a plain, in which the Sun then seemeth to be; and a point being taken as a Center, in this Line whatsoever it be, the Periphery is described: then let the Pole be eleva∣ted in the Globe according to the elevation of the place given; let the place of the Sun in the Ecliptick for the day given be noted; let the Quadrant be appli∣ed to the Vertex, and in that let the observed Altitude of the Sun be marked. Then let the Globe and the Quadrant be moved together until the point of the Quadrant and the noted place of the Sun do meet. The Globe thus remain∣ing, let the intercepted Degrees between the Meredian and the Quadrant of the Verrical point be numbred in the wooden Horizon: let so may Degrees be cut off in the Periphery before described, beginning from the Line of the Plaga of the Sun towards the East or West, as the time of the observation shall be, and let a right Line be drawn through the term or bound of the Resection and Center of the Circle. This shall be the true Meridian Line. The invention will be far more easie, and without the use of the Ver∣tical Quadrant, if the Plaga be observed, or a Line drawn in the plain, in which the Sun either rising or setting is beheld: For then a Circle be∣ing again described, let the place of the Sun be brought to the Horizon, and let the intercepted Degrees between the place of the Sun, and the North or South be numbred; let so many Degrees be cut off in the Periphery described from the Line drawn; and let a right Line be drawn through the term or bound of the Resection and Center. This shall be the true Meridian Line.
Proposition VIII. To place a Globe, so that the Cardines of the same may respect the Cardines of the Earth; that is, that the Brazen Meridian may be seated in the true Meridian of the place. Of the placing the Globe.Let the Meridian Line be found in that plain on which the Globe standeth, and let the Globe be so placed that the Brazen Meridian may exactly hang over the Meridian line: so the Globe shall be fixed according to the Plagas or Climates of the World. Or let the Mariners Compass be placed at the foot of the Globe, and let the Globe, with its foot, so long be moved in the plain, until the Brazen Meridian and the Meridian line of the Compass, be found to be in the same plain: so the Globe shall be again constituted according to the Plaga or Climates of the Earth; that is, so that the North part of the Globe, shall have respect to the North part of the Earth; the South to the South, East to the East, and West to West. A Problem may be propounded concerning Geographical Maps, (and the use is also in the Art of Navigation) viz. so to place them on a plain, that the Northern places of them may look towards the North of the Earth, the Southern to the South, and the like. The Solution is easie, if that a Meridian line may be found in that plain, or if you have an accurate Mariners Compass: for the Side line of the Map shall be placed on the Meridian line of the plain; and so the Map shall have its required scituation. Proposition IX. To find the Latitude of the place from the Heaven, or the Elevation of the Pole above the Horizon of any place, by the benefit of the Stars. To find the Latitude of a place above the Horizon, by the Stars.Although the Latitude of a place exist in the Superficies of the Earth, viz. its distance from the Aequator; yet it cannot be found without the Stars. The modes of finding the same are various. First, Let the Altitude of the Sun above the Horizon be observed, when he cometh to the Meridian line, and let its complement or distance from the Vertex of the Sun, be taken. For this, take away the declination of the Sun to the day of the Observation; that is, if that the Sun be fixed in the Southern part of the Zodiack; but let it be added, if that it be in the Southern, the re∣sidue shall be the Latitude of the place. But the declination of the Sun, that is, his distance from the Aequator, in the day of the Observation, is found from the place of the Sun, and that from a Table of the declination of the parts of the Ecliptick, or from the Globe; for let the place of the Sun be noted in the Globe at the day of the Observation, and brought to the Meridian, the degrees of the Meridian being intercepted between the Aequator and the place of the Sun, exhibit the declination of the Sun at the day given. Secondly, The Sun rising or setting, by the benefit of the Globe, the Lati∣tude shall thus be found: Let the Plaga, or part in which the Sun riseth or setteth, be observed, which Mariners are accustomed to do by their Compass; (but the true Meridian line is required to this.) Let the same Plaga or de∣gree be marked in the Wooden Horizon of the Globe: Let the place also of the Sun in the Ecliptick, for the day of the Observation, be noted; then let the Brazen Meridian in the Crena of the Horizon be turned thereunto, the Pole being more or less elevated, until the noted place of the Sun meet with the noted place of the Horizon: so the elevation of the Pole in the Globe, shall be the same which the place hath, where the Observation was made. The Solution will be more easie by Calculation; but by reason very few Stu∣dents of Geography understand the solution of Spherical Triangles, therefore I omit the same, which shall also be observed in the following Problem.
Note, That in the time of the Aequinoxes, when the Sun is in the begining of Aries or Libra, then this method hath no use, because that then the Sun, in one and the same Plaga or part, riseth and setteth to all places, viz. in the part of the true East or West, or in the Plaga of the Aequinoctial rising or setting. Thirdly, When the Sun shineth at Noon, let the style or pin A B be perpen∣dicularly erected on an Horizontal plain,See Scheme. and let the Longitude of the shadow A C, and the style A B be taken in some divided line. Therefore in the right Angled Triangle A B C shall be both the noted sides A B, A C, whence the Angle A B C shall be found to be the distance of the Sun from the Vertex: viz. if that it may be, that as A B hath its self to A C, so the whole sign hath it self to the Tangent of the Angle A B C; from thence the Latitude of the place shall be found, as we have shewed in the first Mode. But if the Obser∣vation be made on the day of the Aequinox, then the distance of the Sun from the Vertex being found, the same is the Latitude of the place. The elevation of the Pole at Rome and Car∣thage.So Pliny writeth in the 72 Chap. of his Second Book, that in the City of Rome, the ninth part of the Gnomon or pin is wanting unto the shadow; whence the elevation of the Pole is collected to be 41 degrees, 25 minutes. At Carthage the Gnomon hath the same proportion to the shadow, as 11 hath to 7; whence the elevation of the Pole is collected to be 32 degrees, 13 mi∣nutes. Fourthly, In the Night time, when the Stars can be seen, if we take the Altitude of any Star in the Meridian with an Instrument, or from a Table know the declination of the Stars; thence with little trouble we shall find the Latitude of the place. For if that Star be scituate between our Vertex, and the Semicircle of the Aequator elevated to us, we must then add: But if the declination of the Star be Northernly, and the Star seated be∣tween our Vertex and the Polary Star, we must then subtract from that decli∣nation the distance of the Star from our Vertex; the remaining number shall be the Latitude of the place. If that the Declination be Northern, and the Star be seated between the Pole Star, and the proximate part of the Horizon, the complement of the declination shall be added to the found out Latitude of the Star. The aggre∣gate number shall give the Latitude of the place, or the elevation of the Pole. If the Declination shall be Northern, and the Star is placed between our Vertex, and that part of the Horizon remote from the Polary Star; that de∣clination shall be added to the distance of the Star from the Vertex, or to the Complement of the Altitude. The aggregated number shall be the Latitude of the place. Finally, if that the Declination of the Star be Southern, this must be de∣ducted from the Complement of the Altitude observed; and the remaining number will shew the Latitude of the place. Neither in this casualty doth any variety occur, as in the Star of the Northern declination; which is to be un∣derstood of the places scituated between the Aequator and the North Pole: for it is otherwise with the places which lye between the Aequator and the South Pole. Fifthly, If the Plaga or part be observed, in which any Star riseth or setteth, the Latitude of that place may be found by the benefit of the Celestial Globe, according to what we have said in the third Mode. Sixthly, If that you have not a Table of the Declination of the Stars at hand, you may obtain the thing required, if that you observe some Stars not setting, viz. such a one, which in its whole circumrotation is remaining above the Horizon: for those Stars come twice to the Meridian, and therefore their Meridian altitude is twofold, one greater, and the other less. Both these must be observed, and the half difference must be added to the lesser Altitude, or taken from the greater: so we shall obtain the Latitude of the place.
Seventhly, If we enquire not after an accurate Latitude of a place, but would be contented with one, not much receding from the true; we must take the Altitude of the Polary Star, when that it hath far departed from the Me∣ridian: for that is equal to the Latitude of the place. Proposition X. The Places of the Earth scituated under the Aequator, have no Latitude or elevation of the Pole; but both the Poles lye in their Horizon.The places un∣der the Aequa∣tor have no Latitude. The places under the Pole have the Latitude of 90 degrees, viz. the Pole in the Vertex, and the Aequator in the Horizon. The places between the Poles and the Aequator, have a less Latitude than Ninety De∣grees. The truth of this Proposition is evident, therefore it needs no Explication. Proposition XI. If we are either on the Sea or Land, and know not the place where we are, let the Latitude be found to exhibit that Parallel in the Globe, that we may be certain that we are in one point of it. This is done after the same manner, that we have shewed in the sixth Pro∣position, viz. a Parallel must be described at the given or observed Latitude: and this is the Parallel demanded. The same is also easie in Maps. CHAP. XXIV. Of the division of the Earth into Zones; and the Celestial Ap∣pearances in the divers Zones. Proposition I. From the proper or Annual motion of the Sun, there ariseth a certain divi∣sion of the Superficies of the Earth into five parts or Zones. THe division of the Earth into 5 Zones. See Scheme.SEEing that the Sun doth not always continue in the Aequator, but declining from it, describeth by his Motion a path which cutteth the Aequator, so that his greatest declination is in 23½ degrees, as well towards the North from the Aequator, as towards the South, in which declination he describeth the Tropicks of Cancer and Capricorn: thence it is, that he is not perpetually vertical to the Places lying under the Aequator; neither doth he always keep one distance from other places, for sometimes he is more nigh, and sometimes more remote from a certain place; and variously changeth heat, cold, rain, and other conditions of the Seasons. These which we have now spoken of, may be shewed as well on the Globe, as in Maps. A Zone is termed a part of the Earth included within the Tropick and the Polary Circle.A Zone, what And because there are two Tropicks, and two Polary Circles; thence it cometh to pass, that there are five Zones, viz. 1. Torrid, 2. Temperate, and 2. Frigid.
Torrid zone.The Torrid Zone is that part of the Earth, which lieth between the Tropicks of Cancer and Capricorn. Temperate Zones.The Temperate Zones, which lye between one of the Tropicks, and the ad∣jacent Polary Circle: the Northernly Temperate Zone, is that which lieth between the Tropick of Cancer, and the Artick Circle: the Southernly tem∣perate Zone, is that which lieth between the Tropick of Capricorn, and the Antartick Circle. Frigid Zones.The Frigid or Cold Zones, are those parts of the Earth which lye about the Poles, even to the Polary Circles; and they are as well Northernly, as Sou∣thernly, cold Circles. Proposition II. The Places, ac∣cording to their Lati∣tudes, in what Zones they are in.Those places of the Earth, whose Latitude is less than 23 degrees and 30 minutes; they lie in the Torrid Zone. Those whose Latitude is 23 degrees and 30 minutes; they lie in the Tro∣picks, viz. in the extremity of the Torrid Zone. Those whose Latitude is greater than 23 degrees and 30 minutes, and less than 66 degrees and 30 minutes; they lie in the Temperate Zone. Those whose Latitude is 66 degrees and 30 minutes; they lie in the Polary Circles, viz. in the term of the Temperate Zone. Those whose Latitude is greater than 66 degrees and 30 minutes; they lie in the Frigid Zones. These are manifest from the definitions of the Tropical and Polary Circles, which we have treated of in the 23th Chapter. Proposition III. The Aequator of the Earth passeth through these Places. Places which the Aequator passeth through.Through the Island of St. Thomas in the great Bay of Africa, which is called the Aethiopian Ocean. Through Aethiopia. Through the Indian Ocean. Through the middle of Sumatra. Through the Chersonesus of Malacca, and other Islands in the Indian O∣cean. Through the Moluccas themselves, and the Pacifick Ocean. Through the entrance of the Province of Peruana. By the Lake Parima. Through the Atlantick Ocean, even to the Island of St. Thomas. The Aequator divideth the Torrid Zone into two equal parts, so that they may deservedly be termed two Torrid Zones, one Northern, and the o∣ther Southern. These Places lie in the Torrid Zone. Places which lie in the Torrid Zone.The greatest part of Africa, the Indian Ocean, Abyssine, part of Arabia, Cambaja, India. The Isles of the Indian Sea, Java, Ceilan, Peruvia, Mexico, great part of the Atlantick Ocean, the Island of St. Helena, Brazil, New Guinee. Places which the Tropick of Cancer passeth through.The Tropick of Cancer passeth through these places, viz. through the Confines of Lybia, and other places in the Inland Africa; through Syena in Aethiopia. Thence passing the Red Sea, beyond the Mountain Sinai; and Mecca, the Birth-place of Mahomet, it passeth through Arabia Felix: hence it entreth the Indian Ocean, and toucheth the borders of Persia, and passeth over Cambaja, India, and the Borders of China, until it come into the Pacifick Sea; which being passed over, it falleth in with California into
the Kingdom of Mexico; and again entring into the Atlantick Ocean, pas∣sing the Gulph of Mexico, it sweepeth the Coast of the Isle of Cuba, and thence returneth to the Occidental shoar of Africa. Places which the Tropick of Capricorn pas∣seth through.The Tropick of Capricorn passeth through very few places of the Earth; its greatest part lying in the Sea. The places through which it passeth, are, through the Tongue of Africa; through Monomotapa, Madagascar, the In∣dian Ocean, New Guinee, the Pacifick Ocean, Peru, Brazil, and through the Atlantick Ocean. Places scituate in the Nor∣thern and Sou∣thern tempe∣rate Zones.Many places in the Earth lie in the Northern temperate Zone, and those al∣most all known and inhabited; viz. all Europe, all Asia, (except part of India, Malacca, and the Isles of the Indian Ocean,) great part of America Septentrio∣nalis, and part of the Atlantick and Pacifick Ocean. In the Southern temperate Zone few places lie, and those not fully known, with a large portion of the Sea; viz. part of the Prominent, part of Africa, Monomotapa, a great part of Terra Magellanica, part of Brazil, Chili, the Streights of Magellan. and a great part of the Atlantick, Indian, and Pacifick Ocean. Places which the Artick and Antartick Po∣lary Circles pass through.The Artick Polary Circle passeth almost through the middle of Izland, through the Upper Norway, the North Sea, Lapland, the Bay of Russia, Samojeda, Tartaria, America Septentrionalis, and Groenland. The Antartick Polary Circle passeth through Terra Magellanica; of which we have little or no knowledge at this day. Places which lie in the cold Northern, and Southern Zones.In the Cold Northern Zone lieth part of Izland, the Utmost part of Nor∣way and Lapland, Finmarch, Samojeda, Nova Zembla, Groenland, Spits∣berga, and some part of America Septentrionalis, not yet discover∣ed. In the Cold Southern Zone, what it is, whether Land or Water, is un∣known. What we have spoken on hitherto, are shewed by the Globe and by the Maps; but they are proved by the Tables of the Latitude of Places, which are made by Observations. Proposition IV. In the Places which lye in the Tropicks, the Sun once in every year is only vertical in the Meridies or Noonstead; but in places lying un∣der the Torrid Zone, he is vertical twice a year, viz. two days, which are equally distant from the Longest day. But in Places without the Torrid Zone, and scituated without the Tropicks, the Sun never in any day of the year is vertical. The Sun, how oft, and in what places; Vertical.For when the Sun is in the first degree of Cancer, which is about the one and twentieth of June, then he describeth the Tropick of Cancer in the Heaven; and by how long a space this Tropick is distant from the Celestial Aequator, by so much the Terrestrial Tropick of Cancer is distant from the Terrestrial Aequator; and so the Terrestrial Tropick is subject to the Cele∣stial, and the Sun therefore becometh vertical to the Places seated in the Tro∣pick of Cancer. In the places of the Tropick of Capricorn, it happeneth after the same manner about the twentieth of December, the Sun then entring the Sign of Capricorn. These are manifest from the Globe, and from Maps. But for further Explanation, to shew the Sun to be vertical twice a year in a place:
Take a place lying in the Torrid Zone,Explanation. and let the place taken be brought to the Meridian, and a pointed Chalk being applied, let the Globe be turn∣ed round, that the Parallel of that place may be described, that will cut the Ecliptick in two points, which will be equally distant from the first degree of Cancer or Capricorn. And the Sun being in these points of the Ecliptick will be vertical in the place taken; for the Parallel which the Sun in those days describeth, will directly hang over the Parallel of the place described Wherefore the Sun will pass through the Vertex of that place, and therefore will be vertical to it in the Meridies of these two days; but not so in other days. Now that it is only vertical in the Meridies unto places, is perspicuous from his diurnal revolution. Now that in places scituate without the Torrid Zone, and the Tropicks, the Sun is never vertical, is manifest, by reason that no Parallel of the Sun is im∣minent over the Parallel of those places: for the Sun is never vertical in the Temperate and Cold Zones. Proposition V. To places seated in either of the Frigid Zones, the Sun every year some day or other setteth not, and so many days riseth not; and that so many days the more, by how much those days are nigh the Poles: so that in a whole place of the Pole, for six Months space it setteth not, and ariseth not to another. But in places in the Artick or Antartick Circle, the Sun setteth not, one only day in the year, and one day ariseth not; but other days it setteth and riseth. The rising and setting of the Sun in places seated in the Frigid Zones.Take any place you please of the Frigid Zone in the Globe, and let the Pole be so elevated as the Latitude of the place requireth, or that the Wooden Horizon may become the Horizon of the place, as in the preceding Chapter. Then let a pointed Chalk be applied to the Crena of the Horizon, which is more nigh the Pole elevated; and let the Globe be turned round, so that the Chalk may mark some Parallel of the Aequator. This Parallel shall cut the Ecliptick in two points, which shall be equally distant from the first degree of Cancer; and the Sun being in any of these points of the Ecliptick, and in all Intermedial points, shall not set; which hence is manifest, because the Parallels of the Sun, existing in these points, remain above the Horizon in the whole Circumrotation. On the contrary, If that the Chalk so pointed be applied unto the other Crena of the Horizon, and the Parallel be described, we shall find those points of the Ecliptick, or the Arch, about the beginning of Capricorn; in which, whilst the Sun is, he doth not arise to that place of the Frigid Zone, but remain∣eth beneath the Horizon. The contrary appeareth, if the place be taken in the cold Antartick Zone. What we have said of the places lying under the Artick or Antartick Circle, is shewed after the same manner, viz. the Pole must be elevated to 66 degrees, 30 minutes: so the Wooden Horizon shall be the Horizon of any place lying under the Artick Circle. And it will be manifest, that the Tropick of Cancer setteth not, and the Tropick of Capricorn ariseth not, but that they touch the Horizon; therefore the Sun in the first degree of Cancer setteth not, and in the first degree of Capricorn ariseth not, but on both days radiateth the Horizon: But in other degrees of the Ecliptick it will arise, and set, which may be dis∣cerned by the Oriental and Occidental points of the Ecliptick.
Proposition VI. In places seated without the Frigid Zone; that is, in the Temperate or Tor∣rid Zones, the Sun every day riseth and setteth. In places with∣out the Frigid Zones, the Sun riseth and set∣eth every day.Take any place in the Globe lying without the Frigid Zones, and Polary Circles, and let the Poles be elevated according to its Latitude, so that the Wooden Horizon doth become the Horizon of that place: If that now you turn the Globe, it will be apparent that all the points of the Ecliptick do rise and set; that is to say; sometimes they are depressed beneath, and sometimes elevated above the Horizon. The Sun then being in those points doth the same. Proposition VII. A place being given that is seated in the Torrid Zone, to find those two days in the which the Sun is vertical to that place. Let the place given be brought to the Brazen Meridian, and let the degree of Latitude be marked with Chalk: then move the Globe, until one point or other of the Ecliptick to pass through this noted point of the Meridian. Let these two points be noted, for they are those in which when the Sun is, he is vertical to the place given: let also the days of the Year be found, in which the Sun occupieth those points of the Ecliptick, which may be done either in the Wooden Horizon, or from a Table, or by the method of the 22th Chapter, those will be the sought for days; whereof one will be before the Solstice, the other after it, in which the Sun is vertical to that place, when he cometh to the Meridian. This Problem is also easily resolved in Universal Maps. For if a Parallel line be drawn through the place given to the Aequator, right, or circular from the Pole of the Map in Crooked lines; this being drawn will cut the Ecliptick in two points, from which the days of the year will be manifest. But if you require the resolution of the Problem on a Globe, or on Maps, you ought to know the Latitude of the place; with this enter the Table of the Declination, placed in the 22th Chapter; and except the days in which the Sun hath such a declination: they shall be the days required. Proposition VIII. A place being given, seated in the Frigid Zone, to shew those days in which the Sun doth not set to that place, and in what days he riseth not: Also the first and last of those days in which he setteth not to that place, or in which he riseth not to the same. Of the rising and setting of the Sun in the places seated in the Frigid Zone.In the Globe, let the place given be brought to the Meridian, and let the Pole be elevated for the Latitude of the place: then turning the Globe round, let the points of the Ecliptick, which set not, be marked in the Crena of the Horizon, and in the other Crena, those that do not arise. Therefore that de∣gree, which is between the first degree of Aries and the first of Cancer, will shew the first day, in which the Sun setteth not to that place: and the other degree, between the first of Cancer and the first of Libra, will shew the last day. And in these days the Sun radiateth the Horizon, yet he will remain above it: which yet must be understood of the Center of the Sun. But in the Intermedial days, he will perpetually remain above the Horizon. By the same method, those days will be found, in which the Sun will remain beneath the
Horizon, in the opposite part of the year, and the first and last day of them. This perform∣ed by the Globe.By a more easie method this may be done upon the Globe, yet with less ma∣nifest demonstration. As many degrees as the place given is distant from the Pole, let so many be numbred in the Meridian from the Aequator, and let the term be noted on both sides of the Aequator: then the Globe being turned round, observe what points of the Ecliptick pass through the noted points of the Meridian: For those that are near to the beginning of Cancer, and the Arch comprehended, will shew the days of the perpetual stay of the Sun a∣bove the Horizon of the place given. The other Arch within the points, a∣bout the beginning of Capricorn, will shew the days of the perpetual absence of the Sun beneath the Horizon of the place given. Also by Maps.In Maps, let the Complement of the Latitude of the place, or distance of the place from the Pole, be numbred in the Side-line of the Map from the Ae∣quator towards both the Poles, and the Parallel to the Aequator be described through the term of the Numeration, whether the Map consists of Strait, or Crooked lines, as we have shewed in the forecited Propositions. These Lines so drawn shall cut the Ecliptick each in two points: these Points will shew the first and last da of the perpetual stay of the Sun above the Horizon, and the Arch interceptg all the days of the perpetual stay. The other Line in the opposite points  the Ecliptick, will shew the perpetual delitescence of the Sun beneath the Horizon. Likewise by a Table of the Declination.By a Table of the Declination it is thus done; If the Latitude of the place be known, enter with the Complement of the Latitude the Table of the Decli∣nation; and seek that declination, such as is the Latitude of the place, which you shall find four times, and take those four days in which the Sun hath that declination. Two of them, whereof one is between the 21th of March, and the 21th of June; the other, the 21th of June, and the 21th of September, are the first and last of the perpetual stay of the Sun above the Horizon. The other two, of the perpetual stay beneath the Horizon of the place propounded; the Intermedial days will be of the perpetual stay of the Sun a∣bove, or under the Horizon. Proposition IX. The day of the year being given, to find those places of the Earth in the Globe, or the Map, in which the Sun that day is vertical in the Meridies, viz. one place after another. From the day given, the place of the Sun in the Ecliptick may be found, according to the method of the 22th Chapter. In the Globe; Let the place of the Sun be brought to the point of the Me∣ridian, which it hangeth over, let the Globe be turned round: so all the places, which pass through the marked points, are those which are sought for. In Maps; Let the place of the Sun in the Ecliptick be marked, and through it let a right Parallel of the Aequator be drawn, or otherwise a crooked; as the Table shall either consist of strait or crooked Lines. So all the places of this Parallel shall be those demanded; but it ought to be in the Hemisphere of the Maps. By the Table of the Declination delivered in the precedent Chapter, the Latitude of those places may be found.
Proposition X. The day of the year being given, to find those places of the Earth, in which the Sun, viz. his Center doth not set, so that this day may be the first of all those, in which the Sun doth not set in those places: And to find those places in which the Sun doth not arise, with the same condition. The day of the-year being given, to find those places of the Earth, in which the Sun doth not set, nor arise.The day must be one of those, which fall between the 21th of March, and the 21th of June; or the 21th of September, and the 21th of December. First of all, let the place of the Sun in the Ecliptick at the day given be found, then the rest will follow so. In the Globe; Let the place of the Sun in the Ecliptick be brought to the Meridian; and how many degrees are intercepted between that and the Ae∣quator in the Meridian, let so many be numbred from the Pole towards the Aequator: or how many degrees are between the place of the Sun and the Pole, let so many be numbred from the Aequator towards the Pole; let the Term of the Numeration be noted with a Chalk, or let a Parallel be drawn to it. All the places seated in this Parallel satisfie the first demand; but those places which are sought for in the second place, shall be in the Parallel equally distant from the other Pole. In Maps; Let the Declination of the Sun noted, be numbred from the Pole towards the Aequator, in the Lateral line, and let the Parallel of the Aequa∣tor be drawn through the Term. All the places lying in this Parallel of both the Planispheres are those demanded: The places of the second demand shall be found in the same degrees in the Parallel, distant from the other Pole. In the Tables of the Declination, let the Latitude be found for the place demanded. Proposition XI. To compute the Latitude and Magnitude of all the Zones, in Miles, or some other famous Measures. The computa∣tion of the La∣titude and Magnitude of the Zones in Miles, &c.The Latitude of the Torrid Zone is 47 degrees, viz. 23 ½ from both parts of the Aequator: the Latitude of both the Temperate, is 43 degrees. The Latitude of both the Temperate, is 43 degrees. The Latitude of both the Fri∣gid, 47 degrees. These Degrees, if changed into Miles, one degree being estimated at 15 German miles, the Latitude of the Torrid Zone will be 705 miles: one of the Temperate, 645; and one of the Frigid, 705. The place requireth, that we should now treat of the Seasons in the divers Zones and places; but because some of them do appertain unto the following Chapter, I have omitted them here.
CHAP. XXV. Of the Longitude of the Days in divers Places of the Earth: And of the division of the Earth into Climates, which proceed from them. Proposition I. In two Days of the year are the Aequinoxes, or the Night equal to the Day in all places of the Earth. The Days and Nights in all places are e∣qual in two days of the year.THe Days are those in which the Sun entreth the Aequator, whether he describes the same by Motion, or Diurnal circumvolution; which is, when that he entreth the first degree of Aries, and the first degree of Libra, viz. on the 21th of March, and the 21th of September, according to the Gregorian Kalendar. Now we shall shew, that on these days the Night is equal to the Day, consisting of twelve hours in all places of the Earth: Now this Day noteth the stay of the Sun above the Horizon; and the Night, the stay beneath the Horizon. Take any place in the Globe, and let the Pole be elevated for the Latitude of that place, so that the Wooden Horizon may become the Horizon of that place. Then let the first degree of Aries or Libra be placed in the Oriental Horizon, the Index at the twelfth hour of the Horary Circle: then turn the Globe, until the first degree of Aries come to the Occidental Horizon, you shall see that the Index in the Horary Circle hath passed twelve hours. The same method may be used to manifest the Night, consisting of twelve hours. In Places scituated in the Poles of the Earth, which are only two; the Sun neither riseth nor setteth in these two days of the year, but his Center shall be wheeled round in the Horizon (which is the same with the Aequator,) so that they shall have at one time both Day and Night. Seeing therefore that in other places, the term of the Days and Nights is a moment, there, on the con∣trary, the intire revolution or Natural day, is the term or medium of the per∣petual appearancy or disappearancy of the Sun. And in these two days of the Aequinoctials, (the 21th of March, and 21th of September) the half Sun shall be above the Horizon in those two places, and half beneath it. And on the 21th of March in the Pole Artick, it shall make the beginning of a long day of six Months; and on the 21th of September, shall be the beginning of a long night of six Months, as we shall shew anon: therefore it is no absurdity, that some places for twenty four hours should neither have night or day. Here I shall mention many things peculiar to the Poles above other places of the Earth, viz. Several things here noted pe∣culiar to the Poles, above other places of the Earth.1. The Sun in a whole year only once riseth, and once setteth; that is to say, it riseth in one Aequinox, and setteth in the other. 2. They have no Meridies, or Midnight, at a certain time; but at all hours they have a perpetual Meridies for six Months, or perpetual Night for six Months. 3. No Fixed Stars arise, nor set; but some remain perpetually above the Horizon, and some always beneath it. 4. The Stars keep the same Altitude above the Horizon, and distance from the Vertex, as the Sun also doth in his whole Diurnal circumvolution. 5. No Winds there can be called Northern, for they are all Southern in the Artick Polé and contrariwise in the Antartick Pole, all Northern, and none Southern, Western, or Eastern. 6. If the Stars and Sun do not move, but the Earth, according to Coperni∣cus his Hypothesis, then if the Eye were a point, that it could be seated in
the Pole, all the Stars, Sun, and Moon, would appear immovable in the same Plaga. All these are easily shewed by the Globe. Proposition II. In places scituated in the Aequator, the days and nights are always equal. In the places of the Poles, there is only one day, and one night in the whole year. Now the day is longer than the night in the North Pole; but in the South, the day is shorter than the night. The days and nights alwaies equal in pla∣ces seated in the Aequator.Take any place you please in the Globe, you must shew that in every day in the year, the night is equal to the day; that is, that the Sun for so long time remaineth beneath the Horizon, as he doth above it. Take the day of the year as you please, and let the place of the Sun be enquired after to it, which is noted in the Ecliptick: then let the place taken be placed in the Vertex, that the Poles may hang over the Horizon; for so the Wooden Horizon shall be the Horizon of the places of the Aequator. Let the place of the Sun be brought to the Meridian, and the Parallel described, which the Sun perfecteth that day. Then let the two Points of this Parallel in the Horizon be noted, and it will be manifest, that the Arch of this Parallel above the Horizon, will be equal to the Arch which is beneath the Hori∣zon. And because the Motion of the Sun Diurnal is equal, as that of all the Stars, therefore in an equal time, it will pass through the equal Ar∣ches of the Parallels. So that the first part of the Proposition concerning every day is shewed. Now for the shewing of the other part of the places of the Poles, either of the Poles must be placed in the Vertex of the Wood∣en Horizon, so shall this be the Horizon of the Pole. And the Globe being turned round, we shall see that one half of the E∣cliptick remaineth above the Horizon, and the other beneath it. There∣fore whilst the Sun is in this, he setteth not, whilst in that he riseth not. And he is more daies in the Northern Semicircle of the Ecliptick, than in the Southern by nine daies. Therefore his perpetual stay above the Hori∣zon shall be longer than beneath it of the Pole Arctick. But it is otherwise in the Antarctick Pole. Proposition III. In places lying beneath the Aequator, and the Pole, no days are equal to the nights, except the two days of the Aequinoctials, but all the rest are either greater or lesser than the nights. The days not equal to the nights in pla∣ces lying un∣der the Aequa∣tor.Let any place in the Globe be taken beneath the Aequator, and the Pole, and let the Pole be Elevated according to the Latitude of the place, and any day of the year being taken, (except the daies of the Aequinoxes). Let the place of the Sun for that day be found, and so be noted in the Ecliptick, and being brought to the Meridian, let the Parallel be described, which the Sun ma∣keth by his Diurnal Circumrotation. Let the two Points of this Parallel in the Horizon be noted, and it will be manifest, that the Arch of the Parallel above the Horizon is greater or lesser than the Arch of the Parallels lying hid be∣neath the Horizon, and so the day, or stay of the Sun above the Horizon, will be greater or lesser than beneath it. Or in the place of the Sun brought to the Oriental Horizon, let the Index be placed above the 12th hour of the Horary Circle, and let the Globe be turn∣ed round, until the place of the Sun doth come to the Occidental Horizon. The Index in the Circle will shew the number of the hours of the day. Then let the Index be brought back to 12, and the Globe turned round, until the place of the Sun passing beneath the Horizon, returns to the
East. The Index again will shew the number of the hours of the night, and the inequality will be manifest. Proposition. IV. A place being given in the Globe, or the Latitude of a place being given, and the day of the year also given, to find how many hours the Sun in that day remaineth above the Horizon of that place, and how many be∣neath it; that is, to find the Longitude of the day and night for that place at the day given. Let the place of the Sun in the Ecliptick at the day given be found. And let it be noted in the Ecliptick of the Globe. Let the Pole be Elevated ac∣cording to the Latitude of the place given.Latitude of places. Let the place of the Sun be brought to the Oriental Horizon, and the Index of the Circle to 12, let the Globe be turned round, until the place of the Sun come to the Occidental Horizon; the Index will shew the number of the hours of the day; the other at 24 will shew the hours of the night. Proposition. V. In all places seated between the Aequator, and the Pole Arctick, the long∣est day and shortest night, is when the Sun enters the first degree of Can∣cer; and the shortest day, and longest night is when the Sun entreth the first degree of Capricorn. But in the places seated between the Aequator and the Antarctick Pole it is just contrary. Of places seat∣ed between the Aequator and the Pole Arctick. The daies longest, and nights shortest, when the Sun entreth into Cancer; and daies shortest, and nights longest when into Capricora.To shew this on the Globe, take what place you please, and let the Pole be Elevated according to its Latitude. Then according to the preceeding Propo∣sition, find out the number of the hours, when the Sun is in the first Degree of Cancer, then any other point of the Ecliptick being taken for any day of the year, let the number of the hours again be found for that day. And it will be manifest, that the number of the hours of the day, when the Sun is in the first Degree of Cancer, is greater than the number of the hours of another day. And because this other day is taken at pleasure, and in every day the same Demonstration is in force, therefore the day, when the Sun is in the first Degree of Cancer, is the longest of all daies, and consequently the shortest night. After the same way we may shew, that the day is the shortest, when the Sun is in the first Degree of Capricorn, and the nights the longest. The same Method of Demonstration shall be observed for places scituated on the other side of the Aequator, towards the Antarctick Pole. Proposition VI. In the Northern places of the Earth, whilst the Sun moveth from the first degree of Capricorn, to the first of Cancer, the days continually encrease: and whilst he moveth from the first of Cancer, unto the first of Capri∣corn, they continually decrease. But it is contrary in the places South∣ernly, for they encrease from the first of Cancer, to the first of Capricorn; and decrease from the first of Capricorn, to the first of Cancer. Of the encrea∣sing and de∣creasing of the daies in the Northern pla∣ces of the Earth.Take any Northern place you please in the Globe, which lyeth between the Aequator, and the Pole Arctick, and let the Pole be Elevated for the La∣titude of that place. Then taking two, or more of the Points of the Eclip∣tick, which he between the first of Capricorn, and the first of Cancer, he quantity of the day may be found for these Points, or for the Sun
then in those points; And it will be manifest, that the day from the day of the first of Capricorn being more remote, will be greater than that day which was more near to the same day of the first of Capricorn. The same way we must use in the daies scituated between the first of Cancer, and the first of Capricorn. And in places seated Southernly, we shall shew the Proposition by such like Method. The Demonstration will be more per∣spicuous, if that it be done through the Parallel Arches, which are above, and under the Horizon. Proposition VII. If the place of the Earth be more remote from the Aequator, or more propin∣cate to the Pole, than another place,According to the scituation of the places of Earth to the Aequator and the Pole, the daies and nights are longer and shorter. the difference is greater between the daies and the nights, and the longest day is greater, and the shortest night is less. Contrariwise, if the place be more nigh the Aequator, the difference between the quantity of the daies and nights is lesser, and the longest day besser, and the shortest night greater; so that the places near the Aequator, or scituate in the Torrid Zone, have almost all the days equal to the nights, as the places of the Aequator it self, and the excess of the longest day above that of the Aequinoctial about one hour. Take in the Globe two places, one more remote from the Aequator, the other more nigh, and take what day of the year you please (except the Ae∣quinoxes) you may shew that in the place more remote, the day more diffe∣reth from the quantity of the night, than in a place more near the Aequa∣tor. Let the place of the Sun in the Ecliptick be found at the day taken, and noted in the Ecliptick of the Globe. Then let the Pole be Elevated for the Latitude of the Earth of the one place taken, and let the Longitude of the day and the night, (or the stay of the Sun above or beneath the Horizon) in that place at the assumed day be found by the sixth Proposition of this Chap. Then let the Pole be Elevated for the Latitude of the other place; and let the Longitude of the day and night, or stay of the Sun above or beneath the Horizon, be found at the same assumed day. Let this Longitude so found, be compared with the other, and the truth of this Proposition will be manifest. So that the place more remote hath all the daies of one half year longer, than the place more nigh. On the contrary, it will have all the daies of the other half year shorter. Corollary, What hath been shewed of all the daies of the year (except the Aequinoctials) the same is also of force in the quantity of the longest and shortest day. And in this it is most observed, and noted, because here is the greatest difference between the Longitude of the night and day, not so great in other daies of the year. Therefore of the two places, that which is more remote from the Aequator, or more near to the Pole, hath the longest day greater than the place more Vicine to the Aequator: and the shortest day lesser. Proposition VIII. All places of the Earth scituated in one of the same Parallel, have all the days of the year equal, and therefore the same quantity of the longest day. The Demonstration of this Proposition is easie by the Globe. Let any Pa∣rallel be taken in the Globe, and what places you please.The equality of the daies according to their scituati∣on in one of the same Paral∣lel. Let the Pole be Ele∣vated for the Latitude of this Parallel, and let any Parallel of the Sun be taken for any part of the year: Out of the Degree let the Tropick of Cancer be taken for the longest day; let one of the places taken be constituted under the Meridi∣an, that so it may possess the Vertex of the Horizon; or that the Wooden Ho∣rizon may be the Horizon of the place. Then let the Arch of the Tropick above
the Horizon be noted, or the two points of the same which are in the Horizon; for the Arch in these, denoteth the stay of the Sun above the Horizon of the place; then let the second place be brought to the Meridian or Vertex, that the Wooden Horizon may be the Horizon of it, and let the Arch of the Tro∣pick above the Horizon again be marked, which if it be compared with the former, we shall find that they are equal. The same may be shewed also by hours on the Horary Circle. Therefore the Sun remaineth an equal time above the Horizons of those pla∣ces, and therefore the daies shall be equal, as also the nights. Definitions. From these aforesaid Propositions, the Original of the division of the Earth into Climates, is easily to be understood. Observations concerning a Climate.For a Climate is said to be one part of the Earth of those parts into which the Superficies scituated between the Aequator and the Pole is so cut by drawn Parallels, that the longest day in the Parallel more remote from the Aequator, exceedeth the longest day of the Parallel more near the Equator in a cer∣tain part of an hour, or number of hours. Viz. Half an hour in places scitua∣ted even to the Artick Circle; in other places a whole hour, or some hours, and daies. The begining of a Climate is called a Parrallel, with which the Climate be∣gineth, and is more nigh the Aequator: The end of a Climate is called a Pa∣rallel terminating the Climate. The middle of a Climate is called a Parallel, drawn almost through the mid∣dle Superficies of a Climate, so that in that the longest day exceedeth the long∣est day of the begining of a Climate, by a quarter of an hour, or an half diffe∣rence, wherein the longest day of the end of a Climate, exceedeth the longest day of the begining of a Climate. A Parrallel space, is said to be that, which the middle Parrallel of a Climate comprehendeth, with the begining, or end of a Climate. Proposition IX. If more places of the Earth be taken from the Aequator, towards the Pole. whose distance from the Aequator equally augmenteth, from one degree, to 10, 20, 30, 40 degrees. The longest days in these places shall not be equally greater, or not equally augment; but they shall more augment in places more remote, and where the place is more near to the Pole. Touching the length of daies of Places ta∣ken from the Aequator to∣wards the Pole.To shew the Verity of this Proposition by the Globe, let places be taken re∣mote from the Aequator towards the Pole by an equal encrease of distance, viz. for conveniency, Parallels of 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60 degrees of Latitude. For these Parallels in the Globe, let the Pole be Elevated to the Latitude of 10 degrees, and the first degree of Cancer being brought to the Oriental Hori∣zon, and that being noted; let the point of the Tropick be also noted, which then is in the Occidental Horizon. For the Arch of the Tropick then being above the Horizon, sheweth the stay of the Sun above the Horizon of the place 10 degrees of Latitude. The hours of this his stay may also be known by the Index and Horary Circle. Then let the Pole be Elevated according to the Latitude of the second place 20 degrees, and the first degree of Cancer, being again brought to the Oriental Horizon, let the point of the Tropick be noted in the Occidental: for the Arch above the Horizon will again note the stay, which also may be known by the Index, and the Circle in the Hours.
The same may be used with places whose Latitude is 40, 50, 60, 70 degrees, and the like; which being done, let the Diurual hours of the Suns stay above the the Horizon, or the Arch of the Tropick be compared, and it will be mani∣fest, that the quantity of the longest day doth much more increase in places more remote, than in the places more adjacent to the Aequator, and therefore the encrease of the longest day doth more augment, than the encrease of the distance of the places from the Aequator. Note, what hath been said, and shewed concerning the longest day, that is true of all the daies of one half of the year, and is demonstrated after the same manner, if instead of the Tropick of Cancer, the Parallel of the place be taken. And therefore although Generals must be delivered generally, yet because the Doctrine of Climates especially requireth the Explication of the increase of the longest day, therefore we do not observe in this Doctrine that Law, . Proposition X. If so many places or Parallels are so taken between the Aequator and the Pole, that the longest day of one place, exceedeth the longest day of the Vicine place, (which is more nigh the Aequator) every where equal in excess, or that the longest day equally may encrease,Of Parallels between the Aequator and the Pole. these Parallels shall not equally be distant one from another, (viz every vicine Couple) but these which are more remote from the Aequator, shall have a less distance than those more near the Aequator. The truth of this Proposition is shewed from the precedent, for if these Pa∣rallels should be equally distant from one another, viz. every two Vicine, the quantity of the longest day in these Parallels would not Augment by an equal encrease, as we have here shewed. And it is now laid down that the places or Parallels so taken equally encrease, that the longest day may equally in∣crease in them; wherefore every two Vicine or near Parallels, shall not so equal∣ly be distant one from another, but many Parallels being taken from the Aequa∣tor towards the Pole, on this condition, that the longest day may equally en∣crease. These Parallels shall not be equally distant from one another, but the distance of the third from the second, shall be lesser than the second from the first, that of the fourth less from the third, that of the fifth lesser from the fourth, and so forwards. Corollary, and because that many of the Climates are so taken, that the long∣est day in the final Parallel of the Climate, exceedeth the longest day of the begining at the Climate by half an hour; it followeth from this Proposition, that the Climates more remote from the Aequator, are less broad, or more narrow, then these more near the Aequator; and therefore the Latitude, and Magnitude of the Climates, decreaseth towards the Pole. Hence it cometh to pass, seeing that the Climates at length would become very narrow towards the Pole, if that the same excess should be kept, viz. the excess of half an hour, so that Geographers define the bounds of the Northern Climates not by half an hour, but first by whole hours, and then by whole daies.
Proposition XI. The number of the hours of the longest day being given in any place or Pa∣rallel of the Earth, to find the Latitude of the place, or Elevation of the Pole of this Parallel, and to exhibit the Parallel it self in the Globe; or to exhibit those places where the longest day is so great. For the find∣ing the Lati∣tude of a place, &c. The longest day in all Northern places, is when the Sun is in the first De∣gree of Cancer.Let the place of the Sun of the longest day, be brought to the Meridian, Let the Index be brought to the 12th. hour of the Horary Cycle: let the Globe be turned, until the Index shew that hour of the Cycle, from which the given number of the longest day is denominated, and then let the point of the Tro∣pick in the Meridian be noted. Then let the first degree of Cancer be brought to the Oriental Horizon, and the Meridian in the Crena, be so moved to the Pole, Elevated or depressed, until the other noted point of the Tropick be in the Occidental Horizon; but so that the first degree of Cancer be yet in the East: which being done, number the Degrees of the Elevation of the Pole. For that is the sought for Elevation, or Latitude of the Parallel, which you shall find in the very Globe it self, if you number so many Degrees in the Me∣ridian from the Aequator towards the Pole, and a Chalk being apply∣ed, you may turn round the Globe to the term of the Numeration. For the described Parallel is that which is sought. The Probation of the Method is easie. Proposition XII. The number of some days being given, to find out the Latitude of the places, or Parallels, and to exhibit the place of the Frigid Zone on the Earth, when the Sun for so many days setteth not, and for so many more ariseth not. Further con∣cerning the Latitudes of places.Let the number of the daies be divided in half, and let so many Degrees be numbred in the Ecliptick from the first Degree of Cancer, as that divided or half number is, or as many Unites as this hath, (the Numeration may be made from both parts of this begining.) Let the term be be noted with Chalk, if the daies be more than thirty; the number of the Degrees must be taken les∣ser than an Unite. Then let this noted point be brought to the Meridian, and let the Degrees interrupted between that and the Pole be numbred. For these are the sought for Elevation of the Pole, or Latitude of the places, wherein so many daies as are given, the Sun setteth not, and in so many daies riseth not. You shall find the very places and Parallels in the Globe, if that you number the found out Latitude from the Aequator, towards the Pole in the Meridian, and design the Parallel by Chaulk applyed to the Term. For this is that sought for, and it containeth all the places sought for. For the Demonstration of this Solution, let the Pole be Elevated for the Latitude of the places found out, and it will be manifest, that the noted De∣grees of the Ecliptick about the first Degree of Cancer set not beneath the Ho∣rizon, but remain above it. The Sun therefore passing over these points of the Ecliptick, setteth not: now he passeth through these points in so many days, as are given, as is apparent by the connstruction. After the same manner we shall shew the truth of this Solution concernig the daies, in which the Sun doth not arise at all in the places Parallel found.
Corollary, It is easie therefore to find the Elevation of the Pole of those places, or Climates, which lie in the Frigid Zone, where the longest day en∣creaseth not by hours, but by a number of whole daies. Proposition XIII. To frame or compose a Table of the Climates. Of the making a Table of the Climates.This is called a Table of Climates, in which at the beginning, middle and end of every Climate, the Elevation of the Pole, or Làtitude of the Parallel, and the very quantity of the longest day is found noted, as also the interval of the Climates, or distance of the Parallels. The Construction is easie, for from the order of the Climates, the quantity for the longest day for the beginning, middle, or end of every Climate is found, by adding ¼ of an hour, to twelve hours by a continual Suc∣cession. Then from the quantity of the longest day of every Parallel, is found out the Elevation or Latitude of the Pole of every one of them, according to the XI. Proposition. Lastly, you have the interval, or Latitude of the Climates, if you take the Latitude of the beginning Parallel, from the Latitude of the ending Parallel. All these being noted in the Table, we shall have a Table of the Climates, which I have hereunto annexed.
A Table of the Climates and Parallels. Climates. Parallels. Longest days. Elevation of the Pole. The Inter∣val.     hours. min. deg. min.     The first. The begin∣ing, middle, end, & begin∣ing of the 2. 12 0 0 0         12 15 4 15 0 1     12 30 8 25 8 25     12 45 12 30     The second. The middle. the end. 13 0 16 25 8       13 15 20 15     The third. The middle, the end. 13 30 23 50 7 25     13 45 27 40     The fourth. The middle, the end. 14 0 30 20 6 30     14 15 33 40     The fifth. The middle, the end. 14 30 36 28 6 8     14 45 39 2     The sixth. The middle, the end. 15 0 41 22 4 52     15 15 43 32     The seventh. The middle, the end. 15 30 45 29 4 7     15 45 47 20     The eighth. The middle, the end. 16 0 49 1 3 31     16 15 50 33     The ninth. The middle, the end. 16 30 51 58 2 7     16 45 53 17     The tenth. The middle, the end. 17 0 54 27 2 49     17 15 55 34     The eleventh. The middle, the end. 17 30 56 37 2 10     17 45 57 32     The twelfth. The middle, the end. 18 0 58 29         18 15 59 14     The thir∣teenth. The middle, the end. 18 30 59 58         18 45 60 40     The four∣teenth. The middle, the end. 19 0 61 18         19 15 61 55     The fif∣teenth. The middle, the end. 19 30 62 25         19 45 62 54     The six∣teenth. The middle, the end. 20 0 63 22         20 15 64 40     The se∣venteenth The middle, the end. 20 30 64 6         20 45 64 30     The eigh∣teenth. The middle, the end. 21 0 65 49         21 15 65 6     The nine∣teenth. The middle, the end. 21 30 65 21         21 45 65 35     The twen∣tieth. The middle, the end. 22 0 65 47         22 15 66 57     The 21st. The middle, the end. 22 30 66 6         22 45 66 14     The 22d. The middle, the end. 23 0 66 20         23 15 66 25     The 23d. The middle, the end. 23 30 66 28         23 45 66 30     The 24th. The middle, the end. 24 0 66 31    
The Climates were wont to be extended no further, because that in the following places the Longest day doth not increase by hours, but by whole Days, or Diurnal revolutions; and it is lost labour to compute them. Not∣withstanding the following Canon will shew the Elevation of the Pole, or Latitude of the Places, where the Longest days increase by whole Months. Months, 1 2 3 4 5 6 The Latitude of the places deg. min. deg. min. deg. min. deg. min. deg. min. deg. min.   67 20 69 30 73 20 78 20 84 0 90 0 Proposition XIV. To explain the method of other Geographers in reckoning of the Climates, and making the Table of the Climates. The division of the Earth into Climates, by the Ancient Geographers.The Ancient Geographers, especially the Grecians, who supposed only a small portion of the Earth to be inhabited, because that as well the places Northernly, as those of the Torrid Zone, they denied, as impossible to be in∣habited; therefore they divided only that portion of the Earth, which they knew, into Climates, and so only numbred seven Climates from the Aequator towards the Pole Artick, and named them from some noted place, through which the Parallel of the Climates passed; viz. The first Climate they called, the Climate through Meroe, (which is an Island and City in Africa, encompassed by the Nile.) The second, through Syene, a City of Aegypt. The third, through Alexandria in Aegypt. The fourth, through the Island of Rhodes. The fifth, through the Hellespont. Others through Rome. The sixth, through Borysthenes, a famous River of the European Sar∣matia. The seventh, through the Riphaean Mountains of Sarmatia. The Ancients numbred not the other Climates from the other side of the Aequator towards the South, because all those places were unknown to them; and many thought, that the Sea possessed all the superficies of the Earth. Which, seeing it seemed somewhat improbable to the latter, these also num∣bred the Climates from the other side of the Aequator: and they named them, not from any noted places, (for they had no knowledge of any,) but by the same appellations with those of the Northern, only preposing the Preposition , as the Climate ; as if you should say, the Climate opposite to the Climate through Meroe or Syene, &c. Other Cli∣mates added by the Anci∣ents.But when through progress of time, they discovered many parts of the Earth lying towards the South Pole to be inhabited, many more Climates were numbred and constituted. Some named the eighth Clime from the Palus Maeotis; the ninth, from the Baltick Sea; the tenth, the eleventh, and the rest, from other places. Which denominations, although not ne∣cessary for the construction of a Table, yet they may be added unto our Table in those Areae, where we have placed the number of the Climates: for so the Climates will stick closer in our memory, as also the Places in every Climate; and we may be able to make a better comparison between the difference of Cold and Heat. But this is better to leave to the Industry of the Reader, and to those that are Studious, than to add it to it, that so we may afford them a greater occasion of contemplating the Terrestrial Globe; and by this means may more easily commit them to Memory.
Where the Ancients be∣gan the Cli∣mates.You must also take notice, that the Ancients did not begin the Numera∣tion of the Climates from the Aequator it self, as our Table doth, but from the Place or Parallel, where the Longest day consisteth of 12¾ hours; and therefore their first Climate is the second in our Table, their second our third, and so on: for they supposed those places, which we ascribe to the first Climate, could not possibly be inhabited by men, by reason of the ex∣cessive heat of the Sun,The first Cli∣mate of 9 de∣grees of Lati∣tude. that therefore they judged it not meet to reckon those places; but seeing that Experience hath demonstrated the contrary, we would observe their Mode of naming and constituting of those Cli∣mates. Ptolomy beginneth the first Climate from the Parallel, where the Longest day is 12¼ hours; or where the Latitude or distance from the Aequator, is four degrees 15 minutes. The matter is of no great concernment; yet it is better to begin from the Aequator, that all the places may lie in some Climate. Proposition XV. To shew the use of the Table of the Climates. 1. The Latitude of some place, or Elevation of the Pole, being given, to know the quantity of the Longest day in that place, and the Climate in which it lieth. Let the given Elevation of the Pole be sought in the Table, and on the opposite Region we shall find both the quantity of the Longest day, as also the Climate and the Parallel. If that the given Elevation cannot be found in the Table, then take that Elevation which is less near, or the like, which is found in the Table. From the Lon∣gitude of the Longest day of any place, to know the La∣tude of the place, and the Parallel and Climate.2. The Longitude of the Longest day of any place being given, which any person hath observed, or received by relation, to know from thence the Lati∣tude of that place, the Parallel, and the Climate in which that place lieth. Enter the Table with the Latitude given, and you shall see on the opposite Region both the Latitude and the Place demanded; as also the Climate and Parallel. 3. A Climate being given, to determine the Longitude of the Longest day, and the Elevation of the Pole. This is facil from the very sight of the Table.
CHAP. XXVI. Of the Light, Heat, Cold, Rains, in the diverse parts of the Earth or Zones, and other properties of the Zones. Proposition I. These Causes are efficacious to generate and procure Light, Heat, Cold, and Rain, with other Meteors in the places of the Earth, and the vicine Air. Of the causes of Heat.1. THe more, or less, or no obliquity of the Rays of the Sun coming to, or emitted on any place. For the Rays falling perpendicular on any place cause great heat, and the other Rays sliding obliquely, have for that very reason a less power of heating, by how much the obliquity of them is the greater; that is, by how much the more they decline from the perpendi∣cular Ray. 2. The diurnal stay of the Sun above the Horizon of the place. For the same heat maketh more hot, and changeth the Air in a longer time, than in a shorter. 3. The depression of the Sun beneath the Horizon, being more or less in the Night season. For this difference of depression causeth, that either more or less Light is perceived in the Air; also more or less Heat, Rain, thick Clouds. Hitherto belongeth the Twilight. 4. The more or less Elevation of the Moon above the Horizon, the more or less depression of the same beneath the Horizon; the more or less Diurnal stay of the same above the Horizon. The Causes are the same with those al∣ledged in the three foregoing Paragraphs. The Planets and fixed Stars, raise Va∣pours, &c. in the Air.5. The same may be said of fixed Stars, especially of those more noted ones, and of the five other Planets, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus and Mercury. For they generate some light and heat in the Air, although it be but little, and change the Air divers ways, and raise Vapours, if that we may credit Astro∣nomers. 6. The propriety or species of the Earth of every place. For where the Earth is more stony and rocky, there for the most part it is more Cold, than where it is sulphureous and fat; and here again it is more fertil Where there is much Sand, and no Rivers, there is greater Heat. Fumes and Mists proceed from Lakes.7. Lakes, or the Sea adjacent. From thence also Fumes and Mists are raised more moist and frequent in the Air; and the Rays are less powerfully reflected from the Sea, than from the Earth. 8. The scituation of Places. For the Sun acteth otherwise on Mountains and Mountainous places, than on Valleys and Plains. Moreover Mountains hinder the free access of the Rays of the Sun to the subject places; for to them the Vapours of the Air are in some sort attracted;See Chap. 20. whence the Moun∣tains change the seasons of the adjacent places, as Heat, Rain, and the like. For these would be otherwise in the Subject places, if that the Mountains were absent. The Winds cause diffe∣rence in the weather.9. The Winds especially, the general. So the Etesian winds temperate and allay the Canicular heat. A general Wind in the Torrid Zone, especially the Subsolan winds in Brasilia, render the Heat temperate; when in A∣frica, which is Occidental, the Heat is vehement, because these places feel not so general a Wind. The Northern winds are cold and dry; the Sou∣thern, warm and moist in our places.
10. Clouds, Rain and Fogs, take away and diminish light and heat. I sup∣pose that there are not many causes of this variety in light and heat, &c. which is observed in divers places of the Earth, or also in the same places; but yet in a different time or season. Proposition II. How are the Seasons of the year, Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter, to be defined? The four Sea∣sons of the Year.Although in Sciences we ought not to contend and dispute concerning Definitions; yet because certain Homonymes or Likenesses do here occur, without the Explication of which there will arise much confusion in the following Doctrine: therefore I will so propose this Question, that you may the more cautiously avoid this Homonyme, that they may not be deceived and intangled by the same. The Question comprehendeth two difficulties: first, Whether these Sea∣sons ought to be defined from the entrance of the Sun, and his stay in certain sings of the Ecliptick and Zodiack?According to Astronomers and Astrologers. For so Astronomers and Astrologers commonly do, saying, that that is the Spring, whilst the Sun moveth from the first degree of Aries to the first of Cancer: that is Summer, whilst the Sun moveth from the first of Cancer to the first of Libra: that is Autumn, whilst the Sun moveth from the first of Libra to the first of Capricorn: and that is Winter, whilst the Sun moveth from the first of Capricorn to the first degree of Aries. Now it is manifest, that these Definitions are not general and agreeable to all places, because they are only of force in the Northern places (scituated from the Aequator towards the Pole Artick,) and not in the Southern: so that for these Definitions, the same persons bring Definitions contrary to the former; saying, that in these places, the Spring beginneth from the first degree of Libra, proceeding unto the first of Capricorn: the Summer, from the first of Capricorn to the first of Aries: the Autumn, from the first of Aries to the first of Cancer: and the Winter, from the first of Can∣cer to the first of Libra. But from thence it would follow, that those Seasons cannot possibly be de∣fined; which is false; and Generals ought to be defined by Generals. Second∣ly, Definitions so made, cannot have place in the places of the Torrid Zone; for when the Sun passeth through the Vertex of those places, then every one will then confess, that there ought to be Summer, except some other cause obstructed, in respect of the Celestial cause: and so in places scituated in the Aequator, the Spring or Summer ought not to be in the entrance of the Sun into the first degree of Aries, or Libra; but rather the Sum∣mer, because then he passeth through the Vertex of those places, and causeth great heat; except some other cause hinders. Neither can the Summer be transferred unto the first degree of Cancer, or Capricorn. The same also holdeth, concerning places scituated between the Aequator and the Tropicks; because the Sun passeth through their Vertex, before that he draweth near to the first degree of Cancer, or Capricorn, and there∣fore first causeth the Summer there. For we must know, that although Definitions may be free, yet seeing that by the common notions of all Nations, they define the Summer by Heat, and the Winter by Cold, or at least, by a lesser degree of Heat; and so the Definitions ought to be made, that they may render as little as may be from these Notions, and in no sort be contrary to them. The same difficulty is, concerning the Spring and Autum of the places of the Torrid Zone; yea, they do not seem to have place here, especially in places which lye in the Aequator.
Of Heats and Cold.The second difficulty, for which this Question is proposed, is this, Whether the Seasons are to be defined from the very degree of heat and cold, viz. the Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter; or from the access or recess of the Sun? For the common notion of the Men of Europe, which they form con∣cerning those Seasons, or in which they do conceive them, comprehendeth both, although they have more respect to heat than cold: But Astronomers are more attentive to the access and recess, or entrance of the Sun into certain Signs of the Zodiack, as we have said before. Moreover it is observed in ma∣ny places of the Torrid Zone, that those Seasons answer not the access and re∣cess of the Sun; but that contrary to the Celestial motion of the Sun, they are tried by a Winter (raging, not with cold, but with storms and rains,) when they should have Summer, by reason of the vicinity of the Sun; and on the contrary, they have Summer when the Sun is remote, when they should have Winter, (of which more anon,) and so those People define not the Summer and Winter, by the access of the Sun, and his entrance into certain Signs; but they define the Summer by its serenity, and the Winter by its rain and some∣what cold Air. And so it is impossible to make definitions of the Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter, as to be general and agreeable to all these pla∣ces, according to the notions of the People. These difficulties thus considered, I thus think; First, seeing that in many places of the Torrid Zone, (as we have spoken in the second difficulty,) and also some certain places of the Temperate Zones, Heat and Cold happen con∣trary to the Celestial mode or motion of the Sun; yet notwithstanding those definitions cannot be made accurately by Heat and Cold: therefore these terms of the Seasons must be distinguished, as being Homonymical, so that we must make some Seasons to be Celestial, and others Terrestrial. I confess these terms to be less fit, but the want of better doth compel me to use them: so that it is termed the Terrestrial Summer of any place, in which, in that place a great heat is caused every year by the Sun; but the Celestial Summer is term∣ed that season of the year, wherein a great heat ought to be in that place, by reason of the vicinity of the Sun. So that is termed the Celestial Winter of a place, in which season Cold should be in that place, by reason of the great di∣stance of the Sun; but that season is termed the Terrestrial Winter of any place, in which there is very great Cold in that place every year. And al∣though in many places the Celestial and Terrestrial Winter happen in one sea∣son of the year; as also the Celestial and Terrestrial Summer; yet there are some places of the Torrid Zone, where they observe divers seasons of the year, as we shall shew in the following discourse. The same should be said of the Celestial and Terrestrial Spring, and likewise of the Autumn. Secondly, Seeing that there are few places, where the Terrestrial Summer and Winter differ from the Celestial in the season of the year; but in most pla∣ces fall in with the same time of the year: therefore the Celestial Summer may be absolutely termed the Summer; so also the Winter, the Spring, and the Autumn. But when we speak of the Terrestrial, we must add the word Terrestrial; but where we simply say, the Summer, the Winter, Spring and Autumn, we are to understand the Celestial seasons agreeing with the Terre∣strial. But how shall we make distinct and accurate definitions of the Summer (viz. the Celestial) the Winter, the Spring, and the Autumn, so that they may be general for all places, and also take place in the Torrid Zone? I know no other Mode, whereby such definitions may be made, but only this: The definiti∣ons of the sous Seasons of the year.1. The Celestial Summer of any place, is that season of the year, whose be∣ginning is that day in the Meridies of which, the Sun hath the least distance from the Vertex of the place, (and that in the first season, if the Sun become vertical to that place in two seasons.) The end that day, in whose Meridies the Sun receiveth a moderate distance from the first Vertex of that place, or whether it be lesser than that of all other days of the year.
2. That is termed the Winter of any place, the beginning of which is that day, in whose Meridies the Sun obtaineth the greatest distance from the Ver∣tex of that place. And the end that day, in whose Meridies the Sun acquireth a moderate distance from the Vertex of that place. 3. That season is termed the Spring of any place, which falleth between the end of the Winter, and the beginning of the Summer: or whose beginning is that day, in the Meridies, of which the Sun hath acquired a moderate di∣stance from the Vertex, when he hath come from a great distance. And the end is that day, where in whose Meridies the Sun hath acquired a very small distance from the first Vertex of the place. 4. The Autumn of any place is termed that season of the year, falling be∣tween the end of Summer and the beginning of Winter; or whose beginning is that day, in the Meridies of which the Sun receiveth a mean distance from the Vertex of the place coming from a lesser. And the end that day, in the Meridies of which the Sun hath obtained a very great distance from the Ver∣tex of the place. According to these Definitions, Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter, may be attributed to all places of the Earth. Neither is it easie to find out any o∣ther Mode of defining them, so that they may agree with all places. Now these Definitions being laid down, let us come to the matter it self. Proposition III. The Celestial Summer of the places of the Earth, which lye between the Tropick of Cancer and the Pole Artick, beginneth with the entrance of the Sun into the first degree of Cancer (viz. the 21 of June) and ends with the entrance of the Sun into the first degree of Libra (viz. the 21 of September,) and that together at once in all those places. So that Au∣tumn is in those places, the Sun going from the first of Libra unto the first of Capricorn: the Winter, whilst the Sun moveth from the first of Ca∣pricorn to the first of Aries: the Spring, whilst the Sun moveth from the first degree of Aries unto the first of Cancer. Further, con∣cerning the Seasons of the Year.The truth of this Proposition is easily shewed by the antecedent Definitions, and may be demonstrated on the Globe, and in Universal Maps: For the Sun coming to the first degree of Cancer, hath the least distance in the Meridies from the Vertexes of every one of the places of the Northern, Temperate, and Frigid Zone. After the same Mode, the Sun in the first degree of Libra hath a moderate distance from those Vertexes: In the first of Capricorn a greater: In the first of Aries a moderate, and he ascendeth to a more great, which is apparent, both from the declination of the Sun, and from the Globes and Maps. Therefore it is inferred, by the Definitions laid down before that the Summer, the Winter, and the Spring of those places, begin and end in those days we have spoken of. The Summer of those places of the Earth, which lye between the Tropick of Capricorn and the Antartick Pole; or those of the Southern Zone, tempe∣rate and frigid, beginneth with the entrance of the Sun into the first of Ca∣pricorn (viz. 21 of December,) and ends with the entrance of the Sun into the first of Aries, (viz. the 21 of March.) The Autumn of those places be∣ginneth with the entrance of the Sun into the first of Aries, and ends with the entrance of the Sun into the first of Cancer (viz. the 21 of June.) With this the Winter of those places beginneth, which endeth with the entrance of the Sun into the first of Libra (viz. 21 of September:) And with this their Spring beginneth, and endeth with the entrance of the Sun into the first of Capricorn (viz. 21 of December,) where the Summer beginneth a∣gain.
These are shewed after the same Mode, by the Definitions delivered, and by the Globe or Maps, by which we shewed the former, because in the first degree of Capricorn the Sun hath the least distance from the Vertexes of those places: In the first of Aries, a moderate, and descends to the less: In the first of Can∣cer, the greatest: In the first of Libra, a moderate, and ascendeth to a greater. But the Celestial Summer, Spring, Autumn, and Winter of the places of the Earth, which lie in the Torrid Zone, between the Tropick of Cancer and Ca∣pricorn, do not begin on one and the same day of the year, but on divers days in every place of diverse Parallels, or of a diverse Latitude of this Zone. Now the places of the Torrid Zone are threefold, viz. the places of the Aequa∣tor; the Northern places of the Torrid Zone; and the Southern places of the Torrid Zone. 1. The Places lying in the Aequator have this peculiar to them, that they enjoy two Summers, two Winters, two Spring seasons, and two Autumns, and that in every Year: so that in half a year they have, or ought to have those four Seasons, according to our Definitions, and the Celestial Law. They have again the same four Seasons, from the 21 of September to the 21 of March,Half a year, is from the 21 of March to the 21 of September.viz. one Summer, whilst the Sun moveth from the first degree of Aries to the second of Taurus, (from the 21 of March to the 22 of April.) Autumn, whilst the Sun moveth from the second degree of Taurus to the first of Cancer, (from the 22 of April to the 21 of June.The motion of he Sun in the 12 Signs of the Zodiack.) Winter, whilst the Sun moveth from the first degree of Cancer to the second of Leo, (from the 21 of June to the 19 of August.) The Spring, whilst the Sun moveth from the 28th degree of Leo to the first of Libra, (from the 19 of August to the 21 of September.) The other Summer, whilst the Sun moveth from the first degree of Libra to the second of Scorpio, (from the 21 of September to the 22 of October.) The other Autumn, whilst the Sun moveth from the second degree of Scor∣pio to the first of Capricorn, (from the 22 of October to the 21 of Decem∣ber.) The other Winter, whilst the Sun moveth from the first degree of Capri∣corn to the 28th of Aquarius, (from the 21 of December to the 19 of Fe∣bruary.) The other Spring is, whilst the Sun doth move from the 28th degree of Aquarius to the first of Aries, (from the 19th of February to the 21 of March.) All these are easily demonstrated from the Definitions laid down, because that the Sun in the first degree of Aries, and in the first of Libra, hath the less distance in the Meridies, from the Vertices of the places lying under the Aequator; for it hath none, because it is vertical unto them: therefore then do the Summers begin. Then in the second degree of Taurus and the se∣cond of Scorpio, (where the declination of the Sun is 11 degrees 45 minutes) it acquireth a mean distance, departing to a greater: then therefore the Au∣tumns do begin. Moreover, when he is in the first degree of Cancer and the first of Capricorn, he hath a greater distance from the places of the Ae∣quator: therefore then do the Winters begin. Finally, on the 28th degree of Leo, and the 28th of Aquarius, he receiveth a moderate distance from the places of the Aequator (10 degrees 45 minutes,) ascending towards the least: and therefore then doth the Spring seasons begin. These are understood more perspicuously from the Globe; therefore here these Seasons may be distin∣guished thus, according to the Celestial Laws, notwithstanding the Terrestrial Seasons are in many places of the Aequator otherwise observed, as we shall shew in the following Propositions. 2. All the Places of the Earth, lying under the Torrid Northern Zone, have the end of the Autumn and the beginning of the Winter together, both at one time, viz. the 21 of December; but they have not together the beginning and end of the Summer and Spring, as also the Autumn; but different places have them in several days.
Other Obser∣vations about the beginning of the Seasons.For the end of the Autumn, and the beginning of the Winter in those pla∣ces, is, when the Sun obtaineth the greatest distance that possibly he can from the Vertex of those places, as it is laid down in the Definitions. And it is true concerning all the places of the Torrid Northern Zone, that the Sun entring into the first degree of Capricorn acquireth the greatest distance in the Meridies from the Vertex of those places, because that in all the other days he is more near to those places. Therefore the Sun being entred into the first degree of Capricorn, the beginning of the Winter happeneth to all those places; and also the end of Autumn, which is the first part of this Proposi∣tion. The other part is also easily proved; for if these places be of a diverse Lati∣tude, then the Sun is not vertical in the Meridies to those places in the same days, but in diverse: for then is the beginning of the Summer of any place of this Torrid Zone, when the Sun by his ascent from the first of Capricorn cometh to that degree of the Northern Ecliptick, that he is vertical to that place. So that in divers days the beginning of Summer may be in those divers places; yet in all those places its beginning falleth between the 21 of March, and the 21 of June. The Summer shall also end in different days, and the Autumn begin, because the Sun in divers days cometh to his mean distance, (or to the points of the Eclip∣tick, which have a moderate distance from those places,) because these points are differently seated between the first of Libra and the first of Capricorn: not∣witstanding this beginning falleth out between the 21 of September and the 21 of December. After the same Mode, in divers days the Winter shall have an end, and the Spring begin, because the points of the Ecliptick again of a moderate distance, are divers from the Vertices of those places. Now the Sun touching them causeth the beginning of the Spring, which yet happens in all between the 21 of December and the 21 of March. 3. All the places of the Earth scituated in the Torrid Southern Zone, have also the end of the Autumn, and the beginning of the Winter, together at one time, viz. the 21 of June: but they have not the beginning and end of the Spring, as also the beginning of the Autumn, together; but divers, places have it in different days; yet so, that the beginning of the Summer of all those places, doth fall between the 21 of September, and the 21 of December: The beginning of Autumn, and the end of Summer, between the 21 of March and the 21 of June: the beginning of the Spring, and the end of Winter, be∣tween the 21 of June and the 21 of September. The parts of this Proposition are proved after the same manner as the for∣mer: For on the 21 of June the Sun is in the first degree of Cancer, and there∣fore hath the greatest distance that is possible from the places of the Austrial Torrid Zone. Then therefore all of them shall have the beginning of Win∣ter; but the beginning of Summer, the Spring, and Autumn, shall happen on divers days, because the Sun in sundry points of the Ecliptick becometh ver∣tical unto divers places, and acquireth also a moderate distance from those places, in many places. 4. Those Places of the Earth in the Torrid Zone have something peculiar, which lye between the Aequator, and the Eighth degree of Latitude, as well towards the North, as South: For the Sun by his proper Motion, or by his access or recess, make two Summers in them, two Springs; but yet but one Autumn, and one Winter, and that by a confused kind of order, viz. this, the Spring, the Summer, the Spring; the Summer again, then Autumn, and then Winter. The places in the Torrid Zone have some∣thing peculiar to them, which lye between the Aequator and the 8th degree of La∣titude.The cause of this Paradox is, because the Sun receding from the Vertices of those places, which lye between the Aequator and the 8th degree of the Boreal or Northern Latitude (where it maketh the beginning of the first Sum∣mer,) and going forwards towards the beginning of Cancer, it acquireth here a a moderate distance; when it returneth from the Vertices towards those Ver∣tices, it shall not make Autumn after that first Summer, but another Spring, seeing that it made the first before it began the first Summer; where it obtaineth a mean distance between the first of Capricorn, and the first of Aries.
For Example, let us take a place which is four degrees from the Aequator; because therefore also the Sun in the tenth degree of Aries declineth, and is distant from the Aequator four degrees; therefore he being in the tenth of A∣ries, shall cause the beginning of Summer in that place. Moreover, the grea∣test distance, which this place can have in the Meridies is 27 degrees, 30 minutes, (viz. in the first degree of Capricorn, where his declination from the Aequator is 30 minntes, 23 degrees, to which let the Northerm distance of the place from the Aequator 4 degrees be added) therefore seeing his meanest distance is 0 degrees, let 0 degrees be his middle distance 13 degrees, 45 minutes. Wherefore when the Sun shall be in the points of the Ecliptick, which are distant from the place taken, or the Parallel of the place, 13 degrees, 45 minutes. Then the Sun shall make either Spring or Autumn in that place; the Spring, if the Sun be moved from those points towards the Vertex of the place; but Autumn if the Sun tend from that point to a remote distance. Now the points of the E∣cliptick, which are distant from the place assumed 13 degrees, 45 minutes, are found to be four, to wit, the 25th degree of Libra, the 3d degree of Gemini, the 27th of Cancer, and the 5th of Pisces, which is proved from the declina∣tion of these points. Because that therefore the Sun coming to the fifth degree of Pisces from the first of Capricorn, acquireth here a middle distance from the Vertex of the place assumed, and tendeth towards the place he shall then make, (viz. he being in the fifth degree of Pisces) the beginning of the Spring in that place; which Spring shall continue until the Sun doth come to the tenth of Aries, where he shall become Vertical to the place, and that shall be in the beginning of the Summer, when the Sun by his motion hath de∣parted from the place, to the third of Gemini. Again, he shall have a mode∣rate distance from the Vertex of the place in the Meridies, viz. 13 degrees, 45 minutes, and then shall that Summer have an end, and the Spring begin; not the Autumn, because that the Sun doth not tend to the greatest distance from the Vertex, from the third of Gemini; but returneth to the least, viz. whilst he moveth through Cancer and Leo, he cometh to the twentieth of Virgo: For then again he becometh Vertical to the place assumed, and makes the be∣ginning of a new Summer, which continueth until the Sun cometh to the five and twentieth of Libra: For then again he obtaineth a middle distance, and tendeth to the point of the greatest distance (viz. the first of Capricorn) therefore then he shall make the beginning of Autumn: and in the first of Ca∣pricorn the beginning of Winter. So then we have shewed how such a place which lieth between the Aequator and the eighth degree of Northern Lati∣tude in the Torrid Zone may have two Summers, two Springs, one Autumn, and one Winter, which by the same Mode may be shewn concerning the places lying between eight degrees of Latitude from the other side of the Aequator. But in places scituate eight degrees beyond towards the Tropicks, this holdeth nor, because those points of the first degree of Cancer, or the first of Capricorn, have not a middle distance from them, but lesser than a middle: For the greatest distance of the Sun from the place of the ninth degree of Latitude (that is possible) is 32 degrees, 30 minutes;. Therefore the middle is 16 degrees, 45 minutes; and therefore if the place be in the ninth degree of Northern Latitude, the Sun being in the first of Cancer, shall have a less distance from it than the middle distance is; for that is only 14 degrees, 30 minutes, but this is 16 degrees: Therefore in that place the Summer, which beginneth with the first access of the Sun to the Vertex (in the four and twentieth of Aries, the fifteenth of April) is not finished before the Tropick of Caner, but shall be continued in the whole course of the Sun through Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, and Libra, in the four and twentieth degree of which, viz. about the fifteenth of October, it endeth.
But here seem to arise two new difficulties; 1. That these Months must not be ascribed to Summer, because the Sun doth not recede by a direct course from the Vertex, but first he acceedeth to another distance again and again, whilst he receedeth from the Vertex of the place to the Tropick of Cancer: but the Summer must be defined only by the time of his recess or departing back. But I answer to this, that the Summer ought to be defined by a departure, but not by a departure to every distance, but by a recess to a moderate or middle distance. Neither by this is a mixt access excluded from a recess, so that the recess be not greater than a middle distance. 2. For the places lying between the Aequator and the eighth degree of La∣titude, seeing that before the first degree of Cancer (or if the Latitude be Southernly, before the first of Capricorn) the Sun acquireth a moderate di∣stance from those places where we said the end of the first Summer is, it appear∣eth not that we should place the entrance of the Spring, because the Sun is not directly moved from that point again towards the place, but first it more de∣parts, viz. from the first of Cancer, and from thence it returneth to the place. But we must know that the departure is so small, that we ought little to regard the same, because it scarce maketh one or another degree, and that time of a greater recess cannot be ascribed to another season, except we will feign some new fifth and sixth Season. Also it may otherwise seem concerning these places to some one, viz. that an intermedial Spring should not be placed between two Summers, but one continued Summer; and that time of an intermedial Spring should be attributed to this Summer, making no account of it, that the Sun is removed to a middle distance from the place, seeing that he remaineth so near the place, and so little receedeth beyond his middle distance, that he can hardly diminish the heat of the Air, but by reason of his continuity rather augment at that time. I shall contest with none about this; but I think it more advantageous to insist on the explained Method; but here is overmuch concerning this Subject. Proposition IV. A place being given in the Torrid Zone, to find out the daies of the year, in which the Summer, Autumn, Spring, and the Winter, begin and end in that place. The finding out of the days of the year in which the Seasons begin and end in places of the Torrid Zone.1. If the place be scituated in the Aequator, we have shewed in the preceed∣ing Theorem of the Proposition, in what degrees these Seasons of the year begin and end, which are there double. 2. If the place be without the Aequator, and removed from it beyond the eighth degree of Latitude or Distance, let it be brought to the Meridian, and let the imminent point of the Meridian be noted with Chalk; then let the Globe be turned round until some point of the Ecliptick, seated between the first degree of Aries and the first of Cancer, come to the same point of the Meridian (if the place given be in the Northern Torrid Zone; but if in the Southern Torrid Zone, then the point ought to pass between the first degree of Libra and the first of Capricorn) this shall be the point, which when the Sun entereth, he makes the beginning of the Summer in the proposed place. Then let the intercepted degrees between the noted point of the Meridian, and the Tropick of Capricorn (of Cancer if the place given be South) be cut into two equal parts, and let the middle point in the Meridian be noted, and let the Globe be moved until the point of the Ecliptick, seated between the first de∣gree of Capricorn and the first of Aries (between the first degree of Cancer and the first of Libra, if the place be Southern) pass through the last noted point of the Meridian. Again, let it be moved until another point between the first degree of Capricorn and the first of Libra (the first of Cancer, and the first
of Aries, if the place be Southern) pass through the same point of the Me∣ridian: the first point will note the day for the entrance of the Spring, the ltter for the beginning of Autumn. But the beginning of Winter is in the first of Capricorn if the place given be Northern, but in the first of Cancer if Sou∣thernly. They may also be resolved by Maps, but most accurately from the Tables of Declination, viz. with the Latitude of the place enter the Table of the Solary Declination, in which seek that Latitude, to which you see the four days of the year apposed: from those take that which is between the 21 of March and the 21 of June, if the place given, or the Latitude of it given be Northern; but if it be Southern, take that day which happeneth between the 21 of September and the 21 of December, this day shall be the beginning of the Summer. Then take away half of the given Latitude of the plain from 11 de∣grees, 45 minutes, and seek the remaining Number in the Table of the Declination, you shall see again opposite four days of the year, in two of which the Sun shall obtain a middle distance from the place given; if therefore the place given be North, take two of those four days, where∣of one happeneth between the 21 of December and the 21 of March, (this shall be the entrance of the Spring) the other between the 21 of September and the 21 of December, this shall be the entrance of Autumn: But if the place given be South, from those four days you must take the day between the 21 of June and the 21 of September for the entrance of the Spring; and for the beginning of Autumn that which happeneth be∣tween the 21 of March and the 21 of June. The beginning of Winter shall be the 21 of June, if the place be South; but if North, the 21 of Decem∣ber. 3. If the place given be between the Aequator and the eighth degree of Latitude, it shall have two Summers and two Spring seasons, besides Autumn and Winter, except peradventure we will cast away that second Spring which is intermedial between the two Summers, as we said in the end of the preceeding Proposition, and attribute a continual Summer to that time; which if you do, we must act no otherwise with the given place than in the former Mode. If we will attribute two Summers and two Springs to it, as the definitions of Summer and Spring accurately ob∣served do require, we shall first act by the first Mode, as in the former Theorems, viz. we shall find the entrance of Summer and Winter, and except the four days of moderate distance found in the Table of those four, those two which we advised to take in the former Mode, for the entrance of the Spring and Autumn, here again we shall take on the same conditions; but of the other two days, that only which is proximate to the day of the Summer shall be taken. For this will shew the end of the Summer, and the beginning of the second Spring; but for the day of the second Summer, another day of the three remaining shall be taken in that Area, from which the beginning of the first Summer was taken, viz. that which is distant by an equal number of days from the 21 of June, and (the 21 of Capricorn if the place be South) the first day of the Summer: So the days shall be found in which the Summer, the Spring, Autumn, and the Winter do begin and end in the places of the Torrid Stone.
Proposition V. In the places in the temperate and frigid Zones, the four seasons of the year are almost equal, or consist of an equal number of days: But in the places of the Torrid Zone they are unequal: Neither are only the times of the divers seasons unequal, but also the time of the season in the di∣vers places of the Zones is unequal. The seasons of the year in the places in the Temperate and Frigid Zone are e∣qual.1. For the places of the temperate and frigid Zones, what I have said is easily demonstrated: For seeing that the Sun in every time of those four quar∣ters of the Year runs through three Signs, therefore the times of the Spring, Summer, Autumn, and the Winter shall be equal, or of equal days, except some days, viz. five in which the Summer, and four in which the Spring of the Northern places exceed the Autumn and the Winter: but in the Southern places it is otherwise; for Autumn and Winter exceed the Spring and Summer, which as we have shewed before, proceedeth from the excentricity of the Sun. 2. In places lying under the Aequator, there are two Summers (as also o∣ther Seasons) but hoth short, as also both the Springs, viz. each Summer and each Spring hath only 32 days, which is 64 days; but the Autumns and Win∣ters are longer, viz. 55 days, which is 110 days. 3. In the places of the Torrid Zone, by how much the less they are remote from the Aequator, by so much the more they have the longer Summer, the less Winter, and more or less moderate Autumn and Spring: for in places not re∣mote above 10 degrees from the Aequator the Summer continueth six Months. Now the greatness of the Summer, Autumn, Winter, and Spring, is known by the preceeding Proposition. What hath hitherto been said, is only to be understood concerning the Cele∣stial Seasons, that is, those which depend on a Celestial Cause, or from the ac∣cess or recess of the Sun: for from this alone cometh not light, heat, and cold, as we have said in some places before; therefore we shall consider the other cau∣ses in the following Propositions. Proposition VI. In places of the Tornid Zone, as the Sun by day is very near the Vertex, so on the contrary by night he is beneath the Horizon,Of the Motion of the Sun in places of the Torrid, Fri∣gid, and Tem∣perate Zones. and very much remo∣ved from the Vertex of those places, so that those places by night lye al∣most in the middle shadow of the Earth, neither can the Air possibly any wayes be warmed by the Suns rayes by frequent reflection. In places of the Frigid Zone, as the Sun by day is not very nigh the Ver∣tex, so by night he doth not profoundly remain beneath the Horizon; but for the greatest part of the night doth so turn round beneath the Hori∣zon, that many rayes from him by reflection do penetrate into the Air. In places of the Temperate Zone, as the Sun by day cometh to the Vertex of those places by a moderate Vicinity, so by night by an easie distance he is depressed beneath the Horizon, so that some rayes at least are in the Air. To shew this by the Globe, first let the Pole be elevated for some place sci∣tuated in the Torrid Zone, or rather let the Pole be placed in the Horizon it self, that the places of the Aequator may be in the Vertex of the Horizon, or that the wooden Horizon may become the Horizon of the places of the Aequa∣tor; then consider the depression of the Parallels, which the Sun describeth
by his circumrotation, beneath the Horizon, and the truth of the member of this Proposition will appear. Then let the Pole be elevated for the places of the Frigid Zone, or let the Poles be placed in the Vertex of the Horizon, and the Parallels of the Sun beneath the Horizon from the first degree of Libra to the first of Aries, being considered, it will again be manifest that they are very little depressed below the Horizon. And so we have shewed the second member or part of this Pro∣position. Lastly, let the Pole be elevated for the Latitude of any place scituated in the Temperate Zone, and the depression of the Parallels beneath the Horizon again being considered, the third part of this Proposition will be proved. Proposition VII. A place being given in the Globe, and the day of the year, to find the Lon∣gitude of the Crepusculum or Twilight in the place given at the day gi∣ven. That time is termed the Longitude of the Twilight, in which either before the rising of the Sun, or after his setting, some light is discovered in the Air. For the find∣ing the Longi∣tude of the Twilight by the Globe, of any place and day of the year.For the finding out of the quantity of this time, we must suppose that which is observed by Astronomers (as we have said in the nineteenth Chapter) that the morning twilight beginneth for the most part, if the Air be serene, the Sun drawing nigh to the eighteenth degree of depression beneath the Horizon, and the evening endeth when the Sun hath come to that degree of depression. Let therefore the Pole be elevated for the Latitude of the place given, and let the place of the Sun in the Ecliptick, being found from the day of the year, be sought in the Ecliptick of the Globe, and let his opposite point be noted; then let the Quadrant be applied to the Vertex, and the point noted be found to the Horizon; the Index to the twelfth hour of the Cycle; then let the Globe be turned round until the noted point be elevated 18 degrees above the Hori∣zon, which is known by the help of the Quadrant; for so shall the place of the Sun be depressed so many degrees beneath the Horizon; and the Index in the Cycle shall shew how many hours, or parts of an hour, the serenity of the Air being laid down, the twilight continueth that day in the place given. It is convenient by three examples to learn the use of this Problem, choosing a place for one of the Torrid Zone, another of the Temperate, and a third of the Frigid Zone. Proposition VIII. In places of the Torrid Zone the twilights are small, very long in those of the Frigid, and moderate in those of the Temperate Zone. Of the diffe∣rence of the Twilights in the several Zones.For in places of the Aequator, and those near, the Crepusculum, according to the Hypothesis laid down in the former Proposition, is of about one hour, which yet experience testifieth is only half an hour, or little more, because the more thick and gross Air is not so high there, as is required to make the twilight to the 18 degree of depression; both also because the Hypothesis of the 18 de∣gree is to be taken concerning very small light, with which the twilight begin∣neth, such as yet is not accounted by the Vulgar for a twilight. In the Frigid Zone the twilights continue for many days when the Sun re∣maineth beneath their Horizon. In the Temperate Zone it continueth 3, 4, 5 and 6 hours, and in some places all night; and in the days of the Summer, according as the places are more or less nigh the Frigid Zone. All these are proved by the Mode proposed in the precedent Proposition.
Proposition IX. A place being given in the Temperate or Frigid Zone, and another in the Torrid Zone, and moreover the day of the year being given, to find out the hour of the place of the Torrid Zone, in which hour the Sun may have the Altitude above the Horizon of that place (and so strike that place with his rayes equally elevated) as great as it hath in the place of the Temperate Zone in the Meridies it self. Let the Pole be elevated for the Latitude of the place of the Temperate or Frigid Zone, and let the place of the Sun found from the day given be brought to the Meridian, and the Altitude of it reckoned, for this is the Altitude of the rayes heating that place, and illustrating it in the Meridies. Then let the Pole be elevated for the Latitude of the place given in the Tor∣rid Zone; let the Quadrant be applied to the Vertex, and let the degree of Al∣titude before found out be noted in it; let the place of the Sun be brought to the Meridian, the Index to the twelfth hour of the Cycle, then let both the Globe and the Quadrant be moved till the place of the Sun agree with the noted de∣gree of the Quadrant: for so the Sun shall have the same Altitude above the Horizon of this place, as it is in the Meridies of the former. The Index will shew the hour demanded in the Cycle; therefore this hour, and the rayes of the Sun illustrating and beating of the place and Air of the Torrid Zone, are as e∣qually elevated over the Horizon of it, as the rayes in the Meridies of the for∣mer place; it thence followeth, that the same heat will be in the Torrid Zone at the hour found out, as in the place of the Temperate Zone in the Meridies, except other causes intercede,Some hinder∣ances.viz. first, that the Sun in the foregoing days hath introduced some one or other calid Constitution to the place, and the Air of the Torrid Zone; and not such, and so great in the places of the Temperate or Frigid Zone. Then secondly, that the Sun straitly ascending towards the Meridian above the Horizon of the places of the Torrid Zone, sendeth forth all his rayes to the place, as in one plain, and to one plaga, and therefore cau∣seth greater heat than in the Temperate or Frigid Zone, where the Sun mo∣veth obliquely from the Horizon to the Meridian, and sends forth his rayes from one and another plaga: therefore the rayes are not contracted into a place so narrow, nor do they continually heat. For example, let us seek in what hour of the day in places being under the very Aequator, on the day of the Aequinoctials, the Sun will have that Altitude as he hath at Amstelodame on the Meridies of the same day. Proposition X. How the causes of light, heat, and of the seasons, which we have reckoned up in the first Proposition of this Chapter, have themselves in the Torrid Zone, and how to shew them. Of the seasont, light, and heat in the Torrid Zone, and how they are shewed.First, every day of the year ascendeth directly above the Horizon of those places (especially of the Aequator) towards the Meridian and the Vertex of them; and therefore about the ninth hour of Forenoon, he heginneth to eja∣culate to those places rayes about 40 degrees declining from the perpendicular rayes, which rectitude of the rayes, or perpendicular of the rayes, augment∣eth towards the Meridies, and again decreasing, continueth to the fourth hour after the Meridies or Noonstead, where the Sun departing towards the Occi∣dental Horizon, beginneth to send forth his rayes more obliquely to those pla∣ces; therefore the greatest heat in those places ought to be from about the ninth hour before Noon, even to the third or fourth after Noon, if that this cause be only regarded: but yet because the Sun now departs from the Vertex of those places, and sometimes approacheth nearer, therefore
the Winter of every one of those places shall be, when the Sun goeth from the points of the Ecliptick much remote from those places; that is, from the first degree of Cancer or Capricorn, towards the points having a middle distance from the place assumed; the Spring when he goeth from a point of mo∣derate distance towards the very Vertex of the Pole, or to the point of the Ecliptick, which is Vertical to the place, or to the Parallel of the place: the Summer, where the Sun goeth from this other point of middle di∣stance to a point of greatest distance, that is the first degree of Capricorn or Cancer. 2. In the places of the Aequator it self, the Sun no day of the year re∣maineth above the Horizon more or less hours than twelve, and so many be∣neath the Horizon. In other places of the Torrid Zone one hour, or an hour and an half at the most (viz. in the extream places of this Zone about the Tro∣picks of Cancer and Capricorn) when the day is at the longest, the Sun remain∣eth above the Horizon twelve hours, and in the shortest day about eleven hours, and in the intermedial days that time of the stay of the Sum above and beneath the Horizon doth not much differ from twelve hours. And therefore this is the cause that the nights are not without cold, and the heat of the day continueth not long about the eveningtide. 3. In the night time the Sun is profoundly depressed beneath the Horizon, for that he illustrateth the Air with none of his rayes, nay not reflex. This is the cause that most dark nights are there, and the cold of the night is aug∣mented, the Air is condensed, and contracteth it self, and being cold, it de∣scends towards the earth by its own ponderosity. Moreover, in a very short time (about the space of half an hour) before the rising of the Sun, and after his setting, those places have the light and heat of the Twilight. 4 The Moon almost after the same manner as the Sun ascends directly from the Horizon towards the Meridian of those places, yet a little more oblique∣ly, because it departeth from the Ecliptick, and therefore towards the Torrid Zone about five degrees; and it remaineth after the same manner as the Sun a little above twelve hours above the Horizon; and is depressed beneath it almost so many hours, and that profoundly, as we have spoken of the Sun. There∣fore with her direct rayes, or those near to the perpendicular, she will augment the warmness of the night, especially when she is Vertical to any place, and diminish it by her recess: but by reason of her short stay above the Horizon, the effect of it is little discerned in any place, except when it is Vertical to it. 5. All the Stars arise, and set in places nigh the Aequator (but those Stars which are near the Pole in places more remote from the Aequator do not a∣rise, and those are but very few) and therefore they can cause little heat and light; and that also insensible in the Air. 6. In many places of the Torrid Zone, as in India and its Isles, in the Tongue of Africa, and in Mexico the earth is Sulphureous, which sendeth forth more calid vapours, whence it communicateth a certain heat to the Air, and a peculiar property. In some places it is sandy, as in the North part of Africa, lying in the Torrid Zone, in part of Lybia, and the Land of the Negroes, in many places of Arabia, in Peru, and in the places between Peru and Brazilia: whence in these places a very great heat is raised by the Sun; because the particles of the Sand do very long retain the heat re∣ceived from the Sun, and soon communicate the same to the vicine Air. In other places the Rivers are many, and in those Sandy ones few; there are many in Abyssine, in Guiney, Congo, India, and in Brazilia; hence hu∣mid vapours are raised, which do very much blunt the force of the Suns rayes, and render his heat more tolerable.
7. The most places of the Torrid Zone have the Sea adjacent; as India and its Isles, the Tongue of Africa, Guiney, Brazilia, Peru, Mexico; some pla∣ces of the Torrid Zone are Mediterranean, as the more inward Africa, the Regions between Peru and Brazilia; whence it cometh to pass, that in those places the heat and drought is greater: and in some, or most of them, the Air is more moist, and less fervent then can be caused by the Sun, except other causes happen. 8. Most of the Regions of the Torrid Zone, seeing that they are almost en∣compassed by the Sea, have in the middle places more or lesser ridges of ex∣ceeding high Mountains, as India and its Isles, the Tongue of Africa and Pe∣ru. These rows of Mountains do very much vary the light, heat, and rayes of those places: somewhere they hinder the Oriental rayes of the Sun, other∣where the Occidental. Moreover, the humid vapours condensed in the Air are moved to the Vertices of these Mountains, as we have shewed in the twentieth Chapter, whence rains and clouds proceed, by which the heat and light of the Sun is very much obstructed, and the Celestial cause of the Seasons is disturbed. There are few of the places of the Torrid Zone which want those ridges, as the inward Africa, Mexico, and the like. 9. The effects of the Winds in the Torrid Zone are various and notable; for a general wind blowing from the side Plagas of the East, or from the East continually towards the West, refrigerateth the Maritim places which regard the East, as Brazilia, the Oriental Coast of Africa; but not so to those towards the West; as Guiney, Congo, Angola, and the Coasts of Peru. Some winds are appropriated, as the South in Peru; which winds dispel vapours towards the Plaga in which they blow. Some are fixed winds, of which we have largely treated in the one and twentieth Chapter. Now these winds do very much disturb the Celestial cause of the Seasons, for they are al∣most as equally constant, and observe order, as the motions of the Heaven it self. They bring down the Air, compel the vapours towards the tops of the Mountains, and by other Modes alter the Seasons. Ten Anniversary rains are in many places of the Torrid Zone, and take away the Celestial cause, see∣ing that they are as equally constant as the motion of the Sun it self. For those err, who suppose that this our Sublunary Orb observeth all with inconstancy, and without order, and that the Celestial only have a constant motion. Seeing that the causes hitherto spoken of are so various, to be able to cause the heat, and the properties of the Seasons; and in one place some are from other causes; in another, others are of force, or concur in divers Seasons of the year, or mutually impede one another; hence we discover, why the cause and condition of the Seasons of the Torrid Zone is so various. Proposition XI. How the Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter (Terrestrial) do behave themselves, and in what Months of the year they commence in the divers places of the Torrid Zone. Of the begin∣ning of the Seasons in places in the Torrid ZoneWe have said before, and especially in the second Proposition, that the Sea∣sons in many places of the Torrid Zone are contrary to the motion of the Sun, viz. that it is Summer there when the Sun is most distant, and Winter when he is nearest, yea vertical to the Vertex. Therefore we have distinguished the Seasons into Celestial and Terrestrial. We have shewed heretofore, and that in the third and fourth Proposition, how any place being given in that Torrid Zone, the Months of the year are to be found, in which the place ought to have Summer, Spring, Autumn, and Winter, if we have regard to the access and recess of the Sun; that is, we have taught to design the times of the Celestial Seasons. But seeing that in many places of this Zone the fore∣mentioned Seasons do not happen in those Months, but in others, and that in divers places in a different time; therefore the times of the
Terrestrial seasons must be taken, not from the Heaven, or a certain method, but from the experience made in those places, and as much as possible, the cause of every one of them, why they repugn the Celestial cause, must be explicated; viz. from those 10 causes, which we have laid down in the first Proposition  this therefore ought first to be known, that the Winter in the Torrid Zone doth rage with cold and frost, but rather with raines, and is to be defined by a lesser heat then that in the time of the Summer. Farther in many places of the Torrid Zone, they reckon not four but two seasons of the year viz. Summer and Winter, and these are not distinguished by heat and cold, but chiefly by siccity and humidiy; for in the Winter they have often greater heat than in their Summer; with a shortness of respiration, because the rain and the Clouds press the Calid Air downwards. But the Spring and Autumn are not to be found by so manifest signs, or differences. We shall begin our Narration from that part of Africa, which lyeth un∣der the Torrid Zone, and proceeding towards the East, with Brazilia, we shall finish the whole Torrid Zone, seated in the West measured by us. The Regions of the Occidental shore of Africa from the Tropick of Can∣cer to Cape verd, (that is distant 14 degrees from the Aequator towards the North) are all abounding both with Corn, and variety of Fruit; there are also heards of Cattell, and flocks of Sheep in great abundance: The Inhabitants are of a great strength, the heat of the Air a little exceedeth Mediocrity, so that the Inhabitants go naked, except the Noble, and those that are rich, whose clothing is a Linnen Cloth. The cause of this fertility and temperate Air contrary to the custom of the Torrid Zone, is, First, many Rivers, of which the chief are Senega, and Gambea; before they discharge themselves into the neighbouring Sea, they water those Regions, and render the Air more humid and frigid. Secondly, the vicinity of the Sea, which affordeth humid vapours, and somewhat cold Winds. How the Sea∣sons of the year have themselves in this place, and what months of the year Summer and Winter happen, and are vigorous, I have not found noted by Writers, which is to be imputed to their negligence, and sloth. Yet in one Itinerary, I have read, that in one of the Islands which lye not far from the Pro∣montary of Cape verd (by name Salinae or the Hesperides) in one of them, I say, called St. Vincents (the Latitude is 16 degrees) the watery months, that is Winter, are August, September, November, December, January, e∣ven to February. This time almost agreeth with the Celestial cause, for in the months of May, June and July; because the Sun is very near, or else verti∣cal to that place; therefore it maketh the Celestial Summer, and here the Ter∣restrial agreeth with it, for then they have a greater heat, and dry Air with∣out Rain. In the months of February, March and April, is their Spring, be-because the Sun is moved from a moderate distance to a lesser, therefore they are then without rains, and have a moderate heat. The months of August, September and October, are to be ascribed to Autumn, by reason of the rains, although it ought to begin latter, because the Sun in August, hath not yet re∣turned from his least distance to his mean. Lastly, the months November, December and January, are Winter, because the Sun hath then the greatest distance from their Vertex, and then they find more and longer continuing rains, with some cold; but this is not to be observed every year, though most years: But how the seasons are in the Continent of Africa is not related, except that concerning the shore of Sierra Leon, it is contrary, as we shall now speak.
2. Now succed the Regions of the Coast of Africa which look towards the South, and extend themselves from the Promontory of Cape Verd, to the curvature or bending part of Africa, that is from the West to East. These Regions are termed by one name Guiny, although others attribute this term only to one part: Now they lie in the Torrid Northern Zone 3.4. and more degrees from the Aequator. In these Regions there is a con∣tinual heat of the Air without any intervening Cold, yet they attribute some months to the Summer, and some to the Winter. I think the same must be understood of the former Western Coast; for in the Regions of the Shore called Sierra Leon, which is removed above 9 degrees from the Aequator towards the North, as also in many Tracts of Guiny, they ascribe the months March, April, May, June and July to Winter, espe∣cially the three first, by reason that on these months there fall frequent and almost continual rains, hot or warm, great Thunders and Lightnings, and so great Storms rage without violent Winds, that none can easily con∣ceive them,See Chap. 21. who hath not had experience of them. How they rage I have already spoken, also in these months the Fields lie Barren, but when these Stormy months are expired, then they dig up the dry Earth (which hath sucked up the great Rains in the said wet months) and mix stamp∣ed and bruised Coals (instead of manuring) and so for the space of 10 days suffer the Earth to putrify, and then they sow their Seed. There is here so great an heat of the Air, joyned with humidity by reason of the pro∣pinquity of the Sea, that the Fish which are taken, stink, if kept undres∣sed half a day. Therefore in these places, the Winter shall be in A∣pril, May and June, when the Storms and Rains rage. The Spring in July, August, and September; the Summer in October, November, and December; and the Autumn in January, February, and March, where the Rains and Storms do begin. Now all these times of the Seasons in those places are contrary to the Celestial cause, or motion of the Sun, for in the months of May, June and July, great heat ought to be there, because then the Sun is then ver∣tical, or near the Vertex, which the heat or warmness of the Rain also testifyeth: contrariwise in the months of October, November, and Decem∣ber, it should be Winter, because that the Sun being about the beginning and Tropick of Capricorn, is most remote from the Vertex of those places. Here therefore the time of the Terrestrial season do much differ from the Celestial seasons. The cause therefore of these Rains, Storms, and Thun∣ders, at that time in those places, when the Sun is so near, is not easy to be explicated. But it seems to be, that the Sun in the day time forceth up many Vapours from the Sea, and Sulphureous exhalations from the Land of Guiny, which vapours being condensed by the cool of the Night, cause the Rains; especially when no continual wind bloweth in these places, which may discuss the Vapours. But for the most part here is a calm, some Storms excepted. And these months of Rain which they at∣tribute to Winter are not cold but hot, because no wind bloweth, and the Sun is Vertical; yea the heat is Suffocative, which is the cause, of shortness of respiration to the Inhabitants. And although the Fields be Barren of Grain in these Watery months, yet the Trees and Bushes are in their Verdure all the year, and bear Fruit. The Day is here equal to the Night almost throughout the whole year, the Sun in the East, rising at six in the Morning, and sets in the West at six in the Evening: but the Easterly or Westerly Sun is seldom conspi∣cuous there, because for the most part he ariseth involved with Clouds for half an hour, and half an hour before he setteth, he is again inveloped with Clouds.
That also deserveth consideration, why in the Months of July and August the same Rains and Storms rage not there, seeing that the Sun is then as equally nigh to those places as in the months of May and June. Moreover why in the Islands of the Hesperides, which are not so far re∣moved from Sierra, Leon, and Guiny, the VVinter falleth out in con∣trary months. 3. How the times of the seasons are in the Interiour, or Mediterrane∣an part of Africa, which is included in the Arch of the Tropick of Can∣cer, the Regions of the Occidental Shore, and Guiny, or the Land of the Negros, concerning which I have found nothing as yet noted, but that all those places are almost Steril, except those adjacent to the River Niger: for that River every year in the months of June, July and August, overfloweth, and communicateth much fertility to those Lands; and moreover formeth many Lakes. The other places confining on Lybia are infested with violent heat, being for the most part Sandy. The Watery Months do not seem to bear sway here after the same mode, as in Gui∣ny. 4. Now follow the Regions of the Coast of the Tongue of Africa, which is stretched from the North towards the South, and regardeth the West. The Regions are Manicongo, Angola, and the like, from the second degree of Nothern Latitude, even to the Tropick, South of Capricorn, be∣yond the Aequator. Now the Kingdom of Congo beginneth from the second degree of South Latitude. The Winter in these places is like the con∣stitution of the Vernal season in the Territory of Rome in Italy; the heat temperate, so that they alter their Garments in no time of the year. Nei∣ther are the tops of the adjacent Mountains infested with cold. Here almost with our Spring, the Watery Winter beginneth and continueth April, May, June, July, August and good part of September. At that time the Summer beginneth, which possesseth the other Months, even to the 10 of March; even in this Summer they have no rains, or at least very little, and seldom have a continual serenity. But in the Watery Months the Sun is scarce to be seen on any day, perpetual Clouds and rain so obstructing the Air, also frequent Travados or Storms. It doth not rain whole days, but for the most part hours before, and two hours after noon, great drops fall, which are soon received by the droughty Earth. Therefore although the Inha∣bitants divide the year only into two parts, it may be distributed into four; (our common people also do usually divide the year into Summer and Winter because the Spring is comprised in the Summer, and the Autumn in the Winter.) These times of the Terrestrial seasons in these places almost agree with the Celestial course, for from the 25 of March, April, May, June, July, August, to the 25 of September, the Sun departs from those places to the Tropick of Cancer, where he is most remote from them, the 21 of June, and the rest of the time he approacheth again to them: so that on the 30 of September he becometh ver∣tical to them, and goeth to a moderate distance towards the Tropick of Capri∣corn, and returneth from thence in the months of October, November, December, January, and February; so that in March he again becom∣eth vertical, therefore in those Months they have a Summer by reason of the vicinity of the Sun, whose effects are not here hindred by a Te∣restrial cause. And then again in the Months from the 10th of March, to the 10th of September, they have Winter, because then the Sun is more removed from them: but the times of the Spring, Autumn, Summer, and Winter which we have assigned, do not well agree with the Celestial course, and I doubt whether the Summer and VVinter may be distingu∣ished into the Spring and Autumn in those places. Therefore here a more easy cause may be rendred, why in those Months from the 10 of March, to the 10 of September they should have a quotidian Rain, and some kind of VVinter, viz. because the Sun departs from their vertex towards the place of the greatest distance: but this cause is not only sufficient, because it is
not able of its self to produce such an effect, but another must be added: The tops of the Mountains, which lie not far from these Maritime places towards the east, are discerned in those watery Months to be continually covered with Snow,The Wind is the North-west; Wind. and this is caused by reason of the fixed wind which in these Months there bloweth; therefore the Sun elevateth the Vapours very much from the Sea. And this fixed Wind forceth them towards the tops of the Mountains where they are condensed, and then turn to Rain; and from the Rain which falleth from the Mountains springeth the inundation of the Nile, and other Rivers of Africa. Moreover we must know that in these watery Months the Rivers of Congo overflow the adjacent Fields, which causeth great Fertility in them, and al∣so disgorgeth great quantities of water into the Sea. 5. In the Maritime Region Lowango, adjacent to Congo, there are also ob∣served to be Rainy Months, and other Months of Summer that are serene; but that which is to be admired is that they are not the same with those, in which we said the Rain doth wax vigorous in the Months of January, Februa∣ry, March, and April, when yet it is Summer and a serene Aire in January and February in Congo. Here therefore the Terrestrial Season is repugnant to the Celestial, because that in January and February the Sun is not most remote from those places, and therefore they should not have Rain, but rather Siccity. Without doubt the cause is either from another scituation of the Mountains, a∣nother fixed Wind, or the like. 6. The Island of St. Thomas,See the De∣scription of St. Thomas. and Anobon are very abundant in Sugar, Grain, Fruits, and Meats, and great plenty of Oranges, &c. 7. How the Seasons are in the other Regions of the Occidental Coasts of A∣frica from Lowango to the Tropick of Capricorn, I have not yet found to be observed by any one. 8. Therefore that shore being left, and the Promontory of Good-hope being sayled about, we return to the Tropick of Capricorn, where the Oriental Coast of the Promontory or Tongue of Africa is discovered, in which lyeth Zofala, Mozambique, Quiloa, even to the Aequator, which are illustrated by the Ori∣ental Sun. In these places the Winter is in the Months of September, Novem∣ber, December and January; in the rest Siccity and Summer, which time is contrary to that, in which in Congo we have said that they have the Rain in Winter, and yet these Regions lye from the Aequator, but the ridge of Moun∣tains which doubly divide this Prominent Tongue of Africa into the Eastern and Western Land, questionless are the cause of this diversity. The Land of these Regions are only of a moderate Fertility, in many places Sandy, Barren, and scorched with the chalure of the Sun; but the Rivers, the adjacent Sea, and general Easternly Wind much allay the heat. 9. The other Regions of the Oriental Coasts of Africa lying from the Ae∣quator towards the North, at the mouth of the Arabian Gulph, and hence to the Shore of the said Gulph, even to the Tropick of Cancer; these Regions I say what seasons they have, and in what times of the year, I have not yet found ob∣served by any, but that some write, that this tract is barren, sandy, oppressed with such a violent heat, and destitute of Rivers. 10. As to the seasons in the Mediteranean part of Africa, which is the Re∣gion of the Abyssines, which is cut almost in the middle by the Aequator, so that it hath some Provinces in the Southern Torrid Zone, and very many in the Northern Torrid Zone. 11. Now leaving Africa, we enter the Regions of Asia lying under the Tor∣rid Zone, where first we meet with the Regions of Arabia adjacent to the Red Sea, from Mecca to Aden (12 degrees from the Aequator towards the North) which regard the West;The Mer∣chants at Aden negoriate their affairs in the Night season by reason of heat in the day. on the East they have the Arabian Mountains. These Regions are exceedingly infested with heat in March and April, and more in the following Months, whilst the Sun approacheth to their Vertex and about it, it remaineth May, June, July, and August; the chalure is so great, that the Inhabi∣tants, especially the better sort, cause water to be poured on their Bodies all the day long, or else lie in Vessels of Water to refresh them. I suppose the cause
to be the defect of watery Vapours, because on the Oriental part the Region is Rocky, and hath but few Rivers; now the Oriental wind, which is general, although it be not there perceived, repelleth the Vapours rising from the Red, Sea: Likewise the abundance of Sand which retaineth the heat received in the night, and communicateth it to the Air. Therefore this time of the Summer and Winter agrees with the Celestial Course. 12. The same is the case of all Arabia, and its Eastern Coast. 13. In Camboja in India, lying under the Tropick of Cancer, as also in the Regions of Malabar, or the Eastern Coast of the Indies which regard the West, and extend themselves from the North towards the South to the eighth degree of North Latitude; I say these Regions the Winter or rainy Seasons possess the Months of June, July, August and September, but especially from the mid∣dle of June to the middle of September. Neither in all these places doth it rain in an equal time, but more continually in the province of Goana and Cocina; and less in Camboja where it only raineth three Months, in the other eight months it seldome raineth in Camboja, but in Goa in the Months of April and May it raineth, but less vehement, and beginning with Thunder and Storms; so that to Autumn here, may be ascribed half the Month of March, also April, and May to the 15th of June, then from the 15th of June, July and August to Winter, likewise from the 15th of September to December the Spring; the other Months from the 15th of December to the 15th of March to Summer,The Winter is not so called from the cold (as with us) but from the Rains which then fall. for in these Months is great drought, because that the Water of the former Rains is extracted by the Sun from the Earth. Yet the Inhabitants do not number four Seasons, but only two, Summer and Winter, or rather a dry, and a rainy Season. Besides these Raines, there are frequent Storms on the Coast, and also Thun∣ders in those rainy Months; so that the Sea is supposed to be then shut up, and many Rivers then overflow; the Sea is open again in the Month of September, and then Ships put forth to Sea from the Coast of Malabar into various parts of the world. Neither are there any violent rains in these places in the Fields, except some Storms, by reason that it ceaseth for many hours of the day, therefore it affordeth the Inhabitants a time of Planting, and Sowing, which they do in these watery Months. The Air also is of a moderate heat at that time be∣cause the Sun is obstructed with Clouds, so that the remote Inhabitants expati∣ate from the Shore to the Hills and Fields for recreation, where the inundation is not great, and incredible fertility is acquired to the Earth by this Rain. But if these Raines fall not on the year, (as in Anno 1630.) which seldom happens, then all hope of Sowing and consequently Harvest is taken away; thence com∣eth Scarcity of Corn, a hot Sultery Air, burning Feavours, Pestilences, and Deaths of Thousands of People. In the said year 1630,A great Fa∣mine in Cam∣boja in 1630. and the year following Mans Flesh was publickly sold in the Shambles in Camboja: Sometimes the Shores do so rage, that the Houses (which are but slightly built) fall by the inundation of the River. They Sow in May, and the beginning of June, and Reap in November and December: it is otherwise in Guiny. This Summer, and this Winter is contrary to the Celestial Course or Motion of the Sun, for in the Months of July and August the Sun is vertical to those places, or very near the Vertex, therefore they must have heat and drought; this is the great felicity of those places, for if these Rains fall not, and the Clouds obscured not the Sun, that great heat of the Sun would render the ground Sandy, and Steril, as Lybia, and Arabia, where these Rains are not, the Sun being near the Vertex. Contrary wise in the Months of December, Ja∣nuary and February, they should have Winter, or lesser heat, because that then the Sun is most remote from them; and then they have Summer: Yet in the night the Air is cold enough: moreover a continual Wind from the 12th hour of the day to the 12th hour of the night bloweth from the Sea, which is very acceptable.
14. In the Coast of the East Indies which is called Choromandel, the sea∣sons also differ from the Heavens; for in the Months of March, April, May and June, the Sun causeth vehement heat, and there is no rain. Now the Peo∣ple which for the most part are Saracens, divide the year into the hot, the wet, and the Cold seasons; the hot or Summer, as I have said, is in the months of March, April, May, and June, but the intollerable heat is from the middle of May, to the middle of June, the Wind blowing from the North, unto which if you turn your face, you shall discover so great a heat of the Air, as if you drew nigh an Oven; for the Sun then in that Plaga, is in the Meridies: also the Wood and Stones contract a great heat, yet the Waters in the Wells is so cold, that many drinking thereof for extream heat, dye. The greatest heat of the day is between Nine in the Forenoon, and Three in the Afternoon; in these intermedial hours they rest from travelling: the other hours before Nine in the Morning, and Three in the Afternoon, the Air is at least tolerably temperate, serene, and acceptable, the Heaven delightful, and tra∣velling pleasant. The VVet season taketh up four months, July, August, September, and Oc∣tober. The Cold season, November, December, January, and February: in Decem∣ber, and January the Cold is sensible enough, especially in the night. Here are many things which deserve our enquiry, for in the months of March, April, May and June, the Sun cometh to those places of the Coast of Choromandel, and becometh Vertical to them; therefore it is no wonder if they have great heat; but why have they not the same heat in July and Au∣gust, feeing he is equally as near them in those months, and by reason of the former heat it should be more hot? Moreover why do the seasons of the Coast of Choromandel differ from the seasons of the Coast of Malabar, seeing that they both lie in the same Climate, and have the Sun Vertical on the same days, and on the same remote? And that which is more to be wondered at, there interceedeth between these two Regions, in some places 70, in others only 20 miles interval; so that you may come into a place of a se∣rene and servid Air, where the Winter predominateth, and that in the space of one day. Masseus thus speaketh of these places, In these Regions saith he amongst other admirable things, that above others exceedeth the reach of all Philosophers, that in the same Plaga of the Heavens, in the equal access and recess of the Sun in the same months of the year, from the Sun rising beyond the Mountain of Gatis, (which by a direct excursion to the Promontory of Cori intersects the whole Region of Malabar) there is Summer and drought, and from the West on this side Gatis there are Rains and Winter; that in so near a propinquity of places, in respect of the course of the seasons, the same Peo∣ple almost seem Antipodes one to another. But not only in these, but also in o∣thers we have shewed this diversity to be found, and shall shew more anon. The cause is the scituation of the Mountains, which determinate the Land of Choromandel from Malabar, proceeding from the North towards the South. To this must be added divers Winds, for on the Coast of Choromandel a general Eastern Wind is more discovered, (except in the Summer months of May and June,) which driveth the vapours towards the tops of the Mountains, whence it raineth in the Land of Malabar. These Mountains tops are discovered to be continually covered with Clouds in the Pluvial months, also more vehement Showrs in those, where the rain is in Malabar: But when it raineth in the Region of Choromandel, then is there a serenity in the tops of the Mountains, as in the Land of Malabar (except the months July and August,) for in these it raineth in both Lands. 15. In the Regions of the Gangick Sea, opposite to the Coast of Chroroman∣del, and in the Northern Torrid Zone, as Sian, Peru, the Chersonesus of Ma∣lacca, the Pluvial months, in which the Rivers overslow, are September, October and November. But in the Land of Malacca it raineth every week of the year twice, or thrice, except the months of January; February and March, in which there is a continual drought. All these are contrary to the
Celestial course, and their causes must be sought from the Mountains, Winds, the propinquity of the Sea, and the like: But because as yet we have no ac∣curate observations concerning these Regions, we will not search them here. The chief cause of the Fertility of these Regions, is the overflowing of the Rivers. The vapours of the adjacent Sea, the Rivers, and the Winds do much allay the heat, whence the Inhabitants have great plenty of Fruits. In the Kingdom of Patana, and those bordering on it, the Summer beginneth in February, and continueth to the end of October; in which time, there is a continual heat, which is allayd with a continual Oriental Wind, the Air whol∣som. In November, December and January, there are continual Rains, which yet do not hinder a new increase every month at the least. The same must be understoood of Camboja. And this Winter agreeth with the Ce∣lestial course. 16. Leaving Asia, the Pacifick Sea being Sayled over, we enter that part of America which lieth under the Torrid Zone, which is twofold, South and North: the South again is twofold, Peru and Brazilia; although the parts of Peru be vicine, yet they have contrary Seasons in one and the same time; for the Region of Peru is divided into three parts, the Shoar. or Ma∣ritim part, the Mountainous and the Plain part which he in the same Climate. In the Mountainous places; they have a Plavial Winter from the month of October, to the end of March, when they should have Summer by the vicinity of the Sun. They have Summer from the entrance of April to October, in which months no Rains do fall; but in the Winter months there are continual Rains. Therefore the Terrestrial seasons differ here from the Celestial. In Maritim Peru there is almost no Winter in the whole year; but they account their Winter from the month of April to October, (which a∣greeth with the Celestial cause, because the Sun is then removed from them to the Tropick of Cancer, and thence returneth) by reason that in those months it Raineth not, but almost every day the Clouds appear so thick as if it would immediately Rain, but there falleth only a certain kind of Dew, and that especially in the months of June, July and August: Yet this mist is not unwholsom, but being condenfed into Dew, and falling, it irri∣gateth the Vallies. It doth not Rain at this time in the Mountainous places, but is a serene season. This Maritim Peru is distinguished into Vallies, and Sandy places: the Vallies are abundantly fertile; the Sandy places which are between every Valley are steril, also in the adjacent Islands it never raineth but a Dew only falleth. In the Isle of Gorgon, which is removed three degrees from the Aequator towards the South, it raineth for Eight months almost continually, with so great Thunder and Storms not to be parallel'd. In May, June, July, and August, it is Summer, and dry, contrary to the Celestial course. In some parts of this Torrid Zone it is very cold, for in the Province of Pastoa, in the Valley Airs∣sina both in Summer and Winter the season is very cold, so that the fruit encrea∣seth not. In the Region of Cusco, which lyeth almost in the middle betwen the Tropick of Capricorn, and the Aequator, hard Frosts and Snows are also found. From whence it is collected, that Peru is parched with no violent heat, but rather enjoyeth a temperate Air throughout the whole year; excepting its Sandy places and Hills, but the Vallies are most fertile and pleasant, abounding with Trees and Fruits. Their Water they receive in the Winter from the Dew which I have said falleth every day; but in the Summer from the Flouds which descend and rush from the Mountains, because in the Mountainous Region it is then Winter, and raineth. And from these Torrents the Inhabitants conduct the Water by certain convoyances into the Vallies; yet some Vallies are con∣tent only with the Dew, and yet produce abundance of Fruit. The cause of this diversity between the seasons of the Mountainous and the plain Peru, and why it never raineth in the level Peru, is difficult to declare; for these Mountainous parts are so near to the level Maritim Peru, that any one in the morning descending from these pluvial and raging showers, in the evening may arrive at the level Peruvia where there is no rain but a se∣rene
Air. The cause seemeth to be twofold. First, those tops of the Moun∣tains. And Secondly, a South-West Wind which is proper and perpetual to Peru. Therefore this Wind forceth the Vapours towards the Mountains, where they are as it were conderised, so that the Clouds may not destil their drops in the level Peru; but in the Mountainous places they are attracted af∣ter the mode which we have explained concerning Mountains. Therefore Peru hath this in common with Aegypt, and some other places, that the South Winds are not the cause of Rain and warmth, but rather a clea∣ring the Air; although it may seem to have place in all the places lying to∣wards the South from the Aequator. 17. The South part of America, viz. Brazilia. is very pleasant, and ex∣celleth with an wholsom disposition of the Air; so that it giveth place unto no Region of the Earth. Concerning its seasons, the Inhabited front of it recei∣veth the Subsolan Wind, which refresheth Men and Beasts, and freeth them from the intolerable heat of the Vertical Sun; which if it approach the Sea, is discovered in the morning; if it depats from thence, it is discerned more af∣ter the Spring of the morning,See Piso in his Book De medi∣cina Braziliensi concerning the seasons. neither doth it languish about the evening. It is wont do do so in many parts of India; but it is so intense by the assistance of the Sun, that it is vigorous beyond midnight, and the Nocturnal Conden∣sation of the Air cannot easily dul or overcome that dilation and natural mo∣tion of the Air. But the other part (which is seperated from Peru by high ridges of Moun∣tains, and vast spaces) although it be infested with an unwholsom West Wind, and a Mediterranean Gale, at midnight, yet it is every where encompassed with Mountains near the Sea, and is so driven from the Matutine Gale that it can hardly penetrate to the Shores. As in these most delectable and constant seasons of the year, there are no great mutations, so they happen in the day and night seasons more evidently; because the days and nights are not more equal in space, than different in heat and cold: for the Sun ascending higher, after it hath opened the pores of the Earth and Men; it hideth it self more profoundly, and that by an equal inter∣val, whence the greater condensation of the Air, effects the more extream rorifluous part of the night. Hence a penetrating cold, from the third hour of the night, even to the rising of the Sun, striketh the body, so that that this is wont to be very noxious to those that are new comers into the Land: which he that shunneth not, will hardly lead a good life in these, or other parts of the Indies. The Brazilians therefore very cautiously keep a continual fire in their habitations, and near their resting places: by the bene∣fit of which they may be able to indure cold, and drive away venemous Infects. Moreover the direct ascent and descent of the Sun, causeth the shortest Cre∣pusculas, and maketh the nights so even to the days, that an hours difference can hardly be found. The cold is more in the Summer nights than in the Winter, which is to be admired at; and it is more mildly discovered in the latter than in the former, the Air being tranquillous. The beginning of the Wet season is in the month of March, or April, and is finished in August; in which the Sun returning from Cancer, in part dissolveth the matter of the Rain into winds, whence im∣mediately proceed storms and tempests; which by and by the Spring Season calmly composeth. The Inhabitants of the Tropicks know no muta∣tion about the seasons of the year; the Sun twice coming towards, and depart∣ing back, as many supposed; but only going away from the Aequator to the Tropick of Cancer or Capricorn. There are only two times of the year, whereof one is dry and hot, called Summer; the other hot and moist like to Summer with us in Europe, which supplyeth the place of Winter. And this is found most true in all the Indies, between both Tropicks. For although the beginning and end of the Winter and Summer seasons, by reason of the particular incidences of the place, and also for the greater or lesser vicinity of the Aequator, do not happen in the same; yet for the most part the year is accomplished in about six months, in∣clining
to Humidity, and six to Siccity: and on that account, as in the places of many Citties of Asia and Africa of the same Latitude with us, there is thence a great remission of the heat; our here is little perceived, although the Sun passeth the Zenith of the Brazilians in the months of October and Fe∣bruary, and striketh the Earth with reflex raies, at most acute Angles. Which diversity of these Regions, promiseth the Inhabitants perpetual health, by rea∣son of the often calms, and the Air quelling all noxious heats. Hence it is easy to dollect, that the seasons of the year do not so much de∣pend immediately on the Sun and his motion, as on the species of the Winds, the diversity of aspects of the Stars, the quality and peculiar scituation of the Region Moreover in these Mediterranean Regions towards the West the nights are more cold, than in the Maritim, so much some times that the Frost seizeth on the very hairs of the Peoples. In the same months from the East about the Ocean is Summer and Siccity;No Islands are opposite to Brazilia. from the West beyond the ridges of the Mountains, and the Marshes of Brazilia, is the Winter, Fogs and Rain. Oftentimes the Heavens may be seen covered with vast Clouds, from the East towards the West; but those again very thin, except in the days of the Rain, the Sun both rising and setting may be beheld with fixed eyes; for there is a wonderful serenity on every side, especially towards the evening; which never afordeth any Vapours or Clouds to the succeeding Moon, but renders the night so clear, that the old and new Moon may be seen in one and the same day; and letters may be well read it the quarter Moon. The Aether in respect of the diversity of the Planets, other inseriour causes acceding, receiveth its distemperature; for the Heaven about evening is bright with Lightning without Thunder in the most dry and serene season. The drops of Rain are very great, and fall with great violence, which is wont to be preceeded by a suffocative warmness. The Dew here is more fruitful than that of Europe, being impregnated with much Winter, and therefore is more penetrating and thin, especially in Sum∣mer; which is manifest in all Mettals, and in Iron especially, which it easily eateth up without the assistance of any Clouds, The Meadows and open Fields do less wax green in the Summer, but more especially in the Pluvial months, (although the Earth then seemed some∣what more sad to the Inhabitants) and the places unfit for Tillage afford PastureSee Piso. All the Lands of Brazilia arise into moderate and pleasant Hills; there are no Mountains of any great hight in the Coasts: but yet some are discove∣red afar off in the Solitudes, among the barren hills, yet not every where, but with some intervals of Miles the Valleys are interposed, every one irrigated with some small Rivers, and for that reason are not only fertil in the pluvial months, but also in those of the Summer. The Hills in the Summer months are steril by reason of the heat of the Sun; so that they wither, and Grass doth not only die on them, but sometimes the Trees also. It very seldom raineth throughout the whole day and night; and for some continual days ve∣ry seldom without intermission: the Pluvial months do a little differ. In the year 1640. (as Marriners have observed) there were 7 Pluvial months, viz Februa∣ry, March; April, May, June, July and August. But most, and almost continually from April, May and June. In the year 1642. the most Pluvial months six, viz. March, April, May, June, July and August. But the account of the other years was not much different. Now these observations are to be taken only for one place, and not for all the places in Brazilia. Hence it is manifest that the Summer and Winter of Brazilia, answereth to the Celestial account, seeing that in the greatest distance of the Sun they have Rain; and in the least and moderate towards the South, they have heat: Yet there are not a few irregularities, the cause of which are to be sought from the scitu∣ation of the Winds and Earth. The six rainy months are May, June, Ju∣ly, August, Sep∣tember, and Oct∣ober.18. This is enough for the Southern America; in the Northern it is other∣wise. For in the Province of Nicaragua it raineth for six months; and the other six months it is Summer, and dry weather; so that passengers may tra∣vel in the night. This now is contrary to the Celestial course, for in the wet
months; for in May, June, and so on to November, the Sun is vertical, or near the Vertex unto these places: so that then they should have Summer and Siccity and not Rain. In November and December it is very distant, therefore they should there have Rain. Thus have we declared the Seasons of the chief places of the whole Torrid Zone, from which being compared one with another we collect. 1. That in some places, the cold is scarse sensible in some part of the year; and therefore the Winter is rather to be defined by the Rains, than by cold in those places. 2. In some places the cold is sufficiently sensible. 3. In the night time, especially in the last quarter, the Air is discovered to be very cold, by reason of the depression of the Sun beneath the Horizon. 4. That it is not the least cause of the tolerable heat, and that those Regions are inhabited, viz. that no days are there long, but almost equal to the night; for if the days were as long there, the Sun remaining above the Horizon, as in the places of the Temperate and Frigid Zones; then doubtless they would be uninhabited. 5. That the Winds do much diminish the heat of the Sun. 6. That places which ly in one and the same Climate, have the Summer and Winter in divers times, although they be very near to one another. 7. That those places which have Siccity and Humidity contrary to the access and recess of the Sun, are so scituated, that on the East they have Ridges of Mountains, and that they regard the West, Peru excepted. 8. That the Seasons observe no certain rule in the places of the Torrid Zone. 9. That although most of the Inhabitants divide the year into two Seasons, which is likewise observed by many Writers, to wit, a Pluvial and Dry Season, yet it may aptly be divided into four, so that they may not only have a Summer and a Winter, but also a Spring and an Autumn. For as in our parts the Spring approacheth near the nature of Summer, and the Autumn of Winter; so also the dry places of the Torrid Zone may be divided. 10. And lastly in some places there is a continual Har∣vest; in some only in two parts of the year, and in others only in one part of the year. Proposition XII. To shew how the four Seasons of the year are made, &c. in the places of the Temperate Zones. Of the seasons of the year in places lying in the Tempe∣rate Zones.1. In these places that cause, which we have placed in the first place amongst the causes of the Seasons in the first Proposition of this Chapter; is so potent in respect of the other causes, that that above almost maketh up, and moderateth them. To wit, in the Regions of the Northern Tem∣perate Zone it is Spring and Summer; the Sun going from Aries by Can∣cer to Libra; because then he is more near them. Then the Sun going from Libra through Capricorn to Aries, it is Autumn and Winter. But in the Southern Temperate Zone the matter is contrary; neither can those other causes altogether disable the force of this first, and induce a new course of the seasons, and be able to alter the times, as in the Torrid Zone. 2. Yet those Seasons of divers places vary, so that in one place there may be more Heat or Cold, or Rain than in another, although the places lie in the same Climate; but yet they cause not the Winter to be changed into Summer, or Summer into Winter. A Rocky, Marshish, and Maritim Land, findeth some∣what another degree of heat or cold, than Vallies, or a Chalk and Maritim Land. 3. The places in the Tropicks for the most part in the Summer have an ex∣cessive heat, others a Pluvial Season; so that they almost approach to the nature of the places of the Torrid Zone. So in the part of the Kingdom of Guzarat lying without the Tropick; at the same time the wet and dry months are observed: which in the part lying beyond the Aequator, the Summer is changed into a Pluvial Season: yet then there is greater heat, than the dry part of the year, where they have a moderate cold; and in truth, in the pla∣ces
of the Temperate Zones we judg the Summer and Winter not from the drought and rains, but from the heat and cold. Now in the Coasts of Persia and Ormus, there is so great heat without Rains in the Summer; by reason of the vicinity of the Sun, rhat both the Men and their Wives ly in Cisterns full of Water. The like heat is in Ara∣bia. The Regions of Africa on the Mediterra∣nean Sea are called the coast of Barba∣ry.Throughout all Barbary, the middle of October being past, Showers and Cold begin to increase; and in December and January the cold is perceived more intense, and that only in the morning: and withal so remiss, that the Fire is not desired. February taketh away the greatest part of the cold from the Winter; but yet it is so inconstant, that sometimes 5 or 6 times in one day the Air changeth. In the month of March, the North and West Winds blow violently and cause whole trees to be vested with blossoms. April giveth form almost to all Fruits; so that the entrance of May and the end of April is wont naturally to produce Cherries. In the middle of May they gather Figs, and in the middle of June in some places are ripe Grapes;Of the seasons of the year of Barbary. the Figs or Autumn are gathered in Au∣gust, and there is no greater plenty of Figs and Pears than in September, There is not so great intemperies of the year in those places; but that the three months of the Spring are always temperate. The entrance of the Spring (that is the Terrestrial, not the Celestial) is as they reckon on the 15th of February, and the end the 18th of May; in all which time the Air is most grateful to them. If from the 25th of April to the 5 of May they have no Rain, they esteem the same as ominous. They count their Summer even to the 16th of August, at which time they have a very hot and serene Air. Their Autumn, from the 17 of August to the 16 of November, and they have that for two months; to wit August and September, yet not great. That which is inclu∣ded between the 15 of August, and the 15 of September, was wont to be ter∣med by the Antients the Furnace of the whole year; and that because it pro∣duced Figs, Pears, and that kind of Fruit to maturity. From the 15 of Novem∣ber they reckoned their Winter, which they extend to the 14 of February. At the entrance of this they begin to till their Land, which is the plain; but the mountainous in the month of October. The Africans have a certain per∣swasion that the year hath 40 very hot days, and on the other side so many cold,The Opinion of the Arabi∣ans. days; which they say begin from the 12 of December. They begin the Ae∣quinoxes on the 16 of March, and on the 16 of September. Their Solstices on the 16 of June, and the 16 of December. The end of their Autumn, all their Winter, and a good part of their Spring is full of violent Winds, accom∣panied with Hail, Lightnings, and dreadful Thunders; neither is there want∣ing in many places of Barbary an abundance of Snow. In Mount Atlas 7 de∣grees distant from the Tropick of Cancer, they divide the year only into two parts; for from October even to April, they have a continual Winter; and from April again to October they have Summer. In this there is no day, in which the Mountains tops glitter with Snow. The seasons of Numidia.In Numidia, the parts of the year swiftly pass away, for in May they reap their Corn, in October they gather their Dates; but from the middle of Sep∣tember to January a violent Frost continueth; October abstaining from Rains, all hopes of Sowing is taken from the Husbandman: the same hapneth if that April produceth not Pluvial Water. Leo Astricanus remembreth many Mountains of Snow in Africa, not far from the Tropick of Cancer. Of China.The North part of China although no more remote from the Aequator than Italy, yet it hath a cold more sharp; for great Rivers and Lakes are congea∣led up with Frost, the cause of which is not yet sufficiently known, except we should refer it to the Snowy Mountains of Tartaria, not far remote, to the avoyding of which cold, they abound with the Skins of Foxes, and Scy∣thilian Rats. New EnglandNew England, although it lie in 42 degrees of North Latitude, and therefore no more removed from the Aequator than Italy, yet in the month of June, when Sir Francis Drake was there, the Air was so vehement cold, that he was compelled to sayl back to the South; for the Mountains were
then covered with Snow. The cause is the Frigid temperature of the Earth being Stony. The seasons of Aegypt.In Aegypt which is bounded with the Tropick of Cancer, the Spring and Temperate Season of the year is observed about January and February. The Summer beginneth with March and April; and continueth June, July and August. The Autumn possesseth September and October. The Winter hath November and December. About the beginning of April they Reap their Corn, and presently thresh it. After the 20 of May not an Ear of Corn is to be seen in the Fields; no Fruits on the trees. On the Ides of June, the in∣undation of the Nilus beginneth. The seasons in the streights of Magellan.In the Streights of Magellan, and the adjacent Regions; although they be no more distant from the Aequator than our parts are (under the 52 degree of South Latitude) yet they have no very hot Summer. So that the Hol∣landers in the month of January (when there should be an hot Summer) found a great glade of Ice in the Creek of one of their Seas. In the Mountains of the adjacent Coasts Snow is discovered all the Summer long; and it is obser∣ved, that in almost all the Regions of the South Temperate Zone; they have a Cold far more intense in Winter, and a violency of Rain, and a less heat in Summer, than the parts of our Northern Temperate Zone. Whether this be the cause, that the Sun makes a longer stay, and the slower progress in the Semicircle of the Northern Zodiac, than in the Southern; is to be questioned. In the Neighbouring Province of Peru, which they call La Valla Im∣perial, in the Province of Potosi; they find so great a Cold, that for four miles circumference there groweth nothing. The season of Chili.In the Kingdom of Chili, which extendeth it self from 30 degrees of South Latitude, to 50 degrees; the Spring beginneth in the months of August (sooner than the Celestial Account admitteth) and endeth in the middle of November: And from the middle of November Summer beginneth, even to the middle of February; from whence Autumn leadeth on to the middle of May, which the Winter succedeth, which is very violent, and dispoileth the Trees of their Blossoms, and scattereth a deep Snow; with a vehement Frost, which yet is discovered by the Sun, except (which is very seldom) that the Sun appeareth not, but the Snow, rarely falleth in the Vallies; for although it falls in great abundance, and is heaped up so high, that it ascends the tops of Mountains, and is heaped together in the vacuity of the Mountains as in so many wells, and indure almost the whole year; yet being there dissol∣ved, they flow into the Rivers and Torrents, which run through the Vallies with a great force even to the Sea; to the great enrichment of the Grounds. But although here it Snow not, except rarely in the Plains; yet it maketh so excessive a Frost that the like is scarcely felt in many parts of Europe; which happeneth partly from the Altitude of the Pole; partly from the pro∣pinquity of the Mountains; from which descend so subtile and penetrating Winds, that sometimes they are unsufferable; whence it cometh to pass that the Maritim parts are more temperate: He that is Studious may collect other differences of Region under the same Climate, or in the vicine Climates from Writers, for example; that in Eng∣land the Air is not so cold as in Holland, so that they pen not up their Heards in the Winter. Betwen Siberia and Tartaria, in a place seated not far from the Frigid Zone, in the end of our Temperate, are said to be plesant Fields, and rich Pastures, almost no cold, seeing that they scarce feel Winter; where by the command of the Duke of Moscovia the City Tooru is built, which is at this day so much encreased, that it is able to repell the Assaults of the Tar∣tars.
The Island of Japan.In Japan the Winter is Cold, Snowy, Ruiny, when yet other Regions of Europe and Asia, lying under the same Climate, have far lesser Winter; the cause is because that Japan consists of many Islands, disjoyned by a small Euri∣pus, and that it also lyeth in the middle of the Ocean. America very hot in the Summer.In Armenia and the adjoyning places, there is great heat in Summer, be∣cause it lieth amongst Mountains, here and there mixed with Fields; hence the more rich in some places in Summer remove to the tops of the Mountains; and remain there for some months; but the meaner sort in the day time de∣fend themselves in the Mountains from the near, and about eventide do de∣scend to the lower ground. Proposition XIII. To declare how in places in the Frigid Zone, the four Seasons of the year have themselves with the light. Of the places in the Frigid Zone.The cause of those Seasons, with the light proposed in the entrance of this Chapter, thus stands in the Frigid Zone. 1. The Center of the Sun for some days or months, (as the place is either nearer or remote from the Pole) doth not arise above the Horizon, and for so many days setteth not. 2. In those days when he is above the Horizon, he only illustrateth those places with his oblique raies, because he is not much elevated above the Hori∣zon; but moveth round it, because those places are over much removed from the way of the Sun. 3. The Sun is not deeply depressed beneath the Horizon; yea, in places near the Polary Circle, or Artick Pole; although the Center of the Sun doth not arise, yet part of his Skirt ariseth and is beheld for some days above the Horizon before the Center it self ariseth, by reason that the half Sun pos∣sesseth 15 minutes in the Heaven. For example, let us take those places whose distance is from the Aequator 67 degrees towards the Pole Artick; let the Pole be elevated according to this Latitude, and in the Meridian Crena of the Horizon, you shall see that the degrees of the Ecliptick do not arise from the 19th degree of Sagittarius, to the 11 of Capricorn; that is the Center of the Sun being in that Arch doth not arise for 24 days, viz. from the 10th of December to the 4th of January; and yet part of the Skirt of the Sun for that whole time shall be above the Horizon, to wit, on the 21 of December the Limbus glittereth the Horizon; but on the 10 of December as also on the first of January half the Sun shall be above the Horizon, and half beneath, because the Center is then in the Horizon. But the whole Sun shall be eleva∣ted above the Horizon, when the Center of the Sun shall hold the 14 degree of Capricorn; that is about the 4 day of January: also the whole shall after∣wards appear, when his Center shall possess the 16 degree of Sagittarius, that is about the 7 of December. But in places where the elevation of the Pole, is 70 or 75 degrees; there this difference between the Oriental Limbus, and the Oriental Center is very little, so that the Limbus or Skirt scarcely anticipateth the rise of the Center of the Sun one day, or half a day. From this smallest of depression; it followeth also that they enjoy the light of the Crepusculum many hours before the rising, and after the setting of the Sun, and although the Sun ariseth not, yet in all, or many of the hours of the day they have light in the Air. There is also another cause,See Chap. 19. which maketh the Sun first to be seen before that he is elevated above the Horizon. For thence it cometh to pass that not only the Sun is seen before he is elevated above the Horizon, and before the Raies can directly come from him to the Eye, but also that the light of the Twilight sooner illustrateth the Air, than it would do without this refraction. We shall anon alledge an example of the ap∣pearancy of the Sun proceeding from refraction.
4. The Full Moon, and near the Full, remaineth above the Horizon for many days, when the Sun is depressed beneath it, viz. for so many more days by how much that place is more near the Pole. Yet it is not so highly elevated above the Horizon, as to cause any warmness. But the Full Moon in those months, in which the Sun remaineth above the Ho∣rizon in an whole revolution, the Full Moon is never above the Hori∣zon. The Planets not always the same above Horizon.5. The Fixed Stars are almost the same always above the Horizon, but not the Planets. For Saturn remaineth 15 years above the Horizon of the place near the Pole, and 15 beneath the same: Jupiter 6 years beneath, and 6 above the same Horizon: Mars 1 year: Venus and Mercury about half a year. From this cause it is likely that there is great diversity of the motions of the Air and seasons in divers years. 6. The Land in most places of the Frigid Zone, is Stony, Rocky, and as hard as Flint; in few places Chalky, Sulphureous and Fat: In these places there is a moderate fertility, in the other a sterility. 7. Those Regions are incompassed with the Sea, but for the Mediterranian we as yet have no certain account. 8. Some of the Regions of the Frigid Zone have Mountains of a moderate hight, but most want them, running on a plain for a long space. 9. The cold Winds there frequently blow from the Polary Plaga, sel∣dom the East Wind, and least of all the West. In the cold Artick Plaga, the North Winds rage; in the Antartick the South. 10. Clouds and Rains frequently perplex these Regions. From these causes it is not difficult to collect what the condition of the seasons in these Regions are; for in the Winter time when the Sun riseth not for whole daies, it cannot otherwise be, but that for the most part thick Clouds, Frost, and Cold must render the Land uninhabitable. They are not altogether deprived of light for that time; for the Moon being above the Horizon for a long time giveth light, and the twilight is dai∣ly afforded from the Sun to the Vicine Horizon. But the Snow, the stick close about the Earth; which cannot be discussed by the heat of the Sun; and therefore hinder the aspect of remote things. There is no fer∣tility, but all barren and uncultivated; for that which some suppose, by how much any Region is nearer to the Pole, by so much less it feeleth the intenseness of the cold, and the Fields are found more fertil, seem∣eth not probable to me; when neither in Nova Zembla (which is distant 16 degrees from the Pole) nor in Spitzbirga (which is only 8 degrees di∣stant) such a constitution of the Earth is found: but a roughness and hard∣ness, and almost in the middle of Summer, Snows or at least Showers and very cold Winds. Neither is their opinion helped by one example, observed by Mariners in a certain Region 9 degrees distant from the Pole, which most men suppose to be Groenland. For in this green Grass is found, and an Air more warm than in Nova Zembla, as is most certain. The only Animals peculiar to these Northern Regions,Rhinoceros a kind of Veni∣son. is the Rhino∣ceros; and this in the space of a month becometh exceeding fat, by feed∣ing on this grass. Nevertheless, seeing that as yet not many Regions are hitherto found of this temperature in the Frigid Zone, it is not expedient for us from this single example to make a general conjecture, especially seeing that the cause of this peculiar constitution is manifest, for that Land is full of Marshes and Sedgey, and the grass by which the Rhinoceros or Dear are tendred so fat, is not a kind of Terrestrial Grass, but Sedge and Osiers; but other Herbs are not there found, or any Trees. From whence we may gather, that that Land containeth some fat and Sulphureous Substance; which being mixed which the water produ∣ceth such an Oyle, and fattening Sedge; but that the like Earth is to be found in other parts of the Frigid Zone, hath not as yet been observed, but rather the contrary.
Therefore in the Winter in these places is little light, but an incredible and great violence of Cold, Snow, Showers, and Polary Winds. And this Win∣ter beginneth in the Northern Frigid Zone, when the Sun first entreth Capri∣corn; although also the Autumn, the Sun going from the 1 degree of Libra to the 1 of Capricorn, be little different from this violent Winter. The Spring indeed is less infested with this violence of the Air; yet it is without Snows, Showers, and cold Polary Winds. Yet the increase of heat in the day, or rather the decrease of cold, is discovered at that time, viz. the Sun going from the 1 degree of Aries to the 1 of Cancer. And in this Vernal sea∣son, or in the latter days of it, the Sun continueth above the Horizon in intire revolutions; and therefore then there is discovered a moderate heat, which yet is not of that force as to melt and dissolve the Snow of all those places into Water, much less is it able to melt the Ice; whence Marriners report, that here is to be found Snow and Ice of a perpetual duration: Then the Summer shall be, from the going of the Sun from the 1 degree of Cancer to the 1 of Libra; in the first part of which, the Sun yet remaineth for whole daies above the Horizon, and augmenteth the heat by some accession; so that June, July, and August, are months of a tolerable Air. In some places among the Moun∣tains, the heat of the Sun is intense; but the Showers and Clouds do much hinder this benignity of the Sun, and especially the most sharp Northern Winds, unto which sometimes Snow is adjoyned; so that no fruits or Corn can here arrive to any maturity, except in some places near the Artick Circle. CHAP. XXVII. Of the Shadows, which the bodies erected in the Earth, and illu∣minated by the Sun do cast; and of the division of the Earth ari∣sing from thence. SEeing that the Shadows in divers places of the Earth, which the illuminated bodies of the Sun do cast, are carryed into divers places, and falling on the Sense, have much variety; hence it came to pass, that men who were ignorant of this cause, were struck with an admiration; and in respect of the Shadows of the Earth, divided the Inhabitants of the Earth, as it were into three sorts, (which division must be applyed to the places of the Earth, or to its Superficies:) So that they termed some Amphiscij, others Heteroscij, and the rest Periscij. The explication of which terms, seeing that they con∣tain but small learning; we shall say somewhat also concerning Shadows, which although they do not pertain to Geography; yet by reason of their near affinity, they may be proposed in this Chapter. Of Shadows.The Shadows receive their denominations from the parts or quarters of the World into which they are cast, as the Oriental Shadow, which tendeth in∣to the East, from the Sun placed in the West. Contrariwise, the Occiden∣tal Shadow, which goeth into the Western Plaga or quater. But here is chiefly to be considered the Meridian Shadow, which is scituated on the Plain of the Meridian; or which is cast from bodies perpendicularly e∣rected, or seated in the plain of the Meridian; the Sun then being in the Meridian, and this is two fold, viz. Northern and Southern. The Inhabitants of that part of the Earth, are termed Heteroscij, where the Meridian Shadows of bodies erected, are constantly carried all days of the year to either Pole.
The Periscij, are those Inhabitants of the Earth, where the Shadows of e∣rect bodies in one and the same day, are carried about into all the Plagas of the Horizon; or where the Meridian Shadows in one and the same day are cast to both the quarters of the Meridian. The Amphiscij are those Inhabitants of the Earth, where the Meridian shadows of the erected bodies in some days of the year, are cast to the North, and on othersom to the South. Proposition I. The Shadows of bodies erected above the Horizontal plain, fall upon the quarter opposite to it, in which the Sun existeth. Of Shadows in reference to Opticks and Dyalling.Those that are versed in the Opticks and Horology, are wont to say that a Shadow, an Opac and Luminous body, are in one Plain; but the Term or bound of the Shadow, the extremity of the Opac, and the Sun, are in one right line. For because the Opac, the Shadow, and line concealed from the extremi∣ty of the Opac, to the extremity of the Shadow, make a Triangle: now every Triangle is in one plain, therefore those three lines shall be in one plain: the Sun is in the extremity of the line conjoyning the extremity of the Opacity, and the Shadow. Moreover an erect body is right to the Horizontal plain; wherefore the plain drawn through it, (viz. that of the forementioned Triangle) is also streight to that Horizontal plain, and therefore seated in the Vertical plain; and because a body erected is seated as it were a Vertex between the Sun and Shadow, therefore the Sun and Shadow shall be in the opposite quarter. There are three parts of this Shadow, which the Stile erected, being il∣luminated from the Sun, doth cast, viz. a Dense Shadow, a Central, and a Shadow which is almost a Dense Shadow, which a ray coming from the upper∣most edge of the Sun doth terminate; a Central Shadow is that which is intercepted between the ray of the Superior edge, and the Centrel ray: the penumbra is that which is intercepted between the Central ray, and the ray of the lower. Proposition II. The Inhabitants of the places of the Earth whichly in the Tropick of Can∣cer and Capricorn are Heteroscij. The people in the Tropicks are Heteroscij.For when the Sun is in the first degree of Cancer; that very day the bodies erected in any point of the Tropick of Cancer, do absorbe the Shadow of the Sun possessing their Meridian, because that then the Sun perpendicularly from his Vertex hangeth over the Horizon; and therefore illuminateth all parts of it: neither doth any ray from the erect Opac hinder like this, which perpendicularly falleth on the plain of the Horizon; and therefore ly∣eth in the very Opac. But in other days of the year, because the Sun declineth from the Ver∣tex of the places of the Tropick towards the South; therefore the Sha∣dow is cast in the Meridies towards the North, never towards the South. On the contrary in the places of the Tropick of Capricorn, every day it is cast towards the South, (except on one day, in which there will be no Shadow;) never towards the North.
Proposition III. The Inhabitants of the Torrid Zone are Amphiscii. The Inhabi∣tants of the Torrid Zone, are called Am∣phiscii.Let any place of the Torrid Zone be taken in the Globe, and let it be brought to the Meridian, and let the Parallel of the Latitude, which shall cut the Ecliptick in two points, be described by Chalk applied. When there∣fore the Sun shall be in these points of the Ecliptick, he shall describe by his circumvolution a Parallel, which shall directly hang over the Parallel descri∣bed; and therefore on those two days, in which he obtaineth those points of the Ecliptick, in the assumed place, and in all scituated in the described Parallel, he shall be vertical in the Meridies, and illustrate all the places of the Horizon. And therefore no shadow shall be cast on these two days; and the Inhabitants shall be Amphiscii, without any shadow: but on the other days of the year they shall not be so, but the Meridian shadow shall either be cast to the North, or to the South; to the North, whilst the Sun moveth in that part of the Ecliptick, which lie in those two points before noted towards the South. On the contrary, to the South, whilst the Sun moveth in that part of the Ecliptick, which is scituated from those two points towards the North. Proposition IV. The Inhabitants of the Temperate Zone, are Heteroscii. The Inhabi∣tants of the Temperate Zone, are cal∣led Heteroscii.For because the Sun in all those days of the year, in the Meridies, is moved from the places of the North Temperate Zone towards that quarter, to wit, the South; and on the contrary, from the places of the South Temperate Zone, towards the North; it followeth from the first Proposition, that the Meridian shadow of the places of the North Temperate Zone, bend to the same quarter all the days of the year, (viz. the North:), on the contrary, to the South, in the places of the South Temperate Zone. Proposition V. The Inhabitants of the Frigid Zones, are Periscii. The Inhabi∣tants of the Frigid Zone, are called Pe∣riscii.For by reason, that on some days of the year the Sun setteth not in these places, but moveth round about the Horizon; it is also necessary that the shadow should be carried round into all quarters, and the Sun being in the su∣periour Semicircle of the Meridian, the shadow is cast towards the North; and when the Sun is in the inferiour Semicircle, the shadow is carried towards the Southern quarter. Proposition VI. A place of the Torrid Zone being given, to find the days of the year, in which the Inhabitants of that place shall be without any shadow; and in what days the shadows are carried to the North, and in what to the South. Let the days of the year, in which the Sun becometh vertical to the place given, be found; those shall be the days in which the Inhabitants of that place shall be without a shadow. For this, use the Mode in the third Proposition.
Proposition VII. The day of the year being given, to find the places of the Earth in the Globe, whose Inhabitants are Amphiscii that day. Let the places be found, in which the Sun becometh vertical on the day of the year given, (according to the 9th Proposition in the 24th Chapter,) these shall be the places sought. Proposition VIII. A place of the Frigid Zone being given, to find the days of the year, in which the Inhabitants of it are Periscii. Let the days of the year be found, in which the Sun setteth not in the given place, (according to the 10 Proposition of the 24th Chapter,) they are the days sought. Proposition IX. The day of the year being given, to find out the places of the Frigid Zone, the Inhabitants of which are Periscii that day, so that this day be the first day. Let those places of the Frigid Zone be found, in which the Sun in the day given doth not first begin to set; they shall be the places sought for. Proposition X. In places scituated in the Aequator, the Meridian shadow falleth half the year towards the North, the other half towards the South, and in the days of the Equinoxes, the Inhabitants are Amphiscii. For because the Sun in one half of the year recedeth from the Aequator to∣wards the South, the other half, towards the North; the shadows are carried to the quarter opposite to the quarter of the Sun, and thence it cometh to pass, that in one half year the Meridian shadows are carried to the North, and the other half to the South. Proposition XI. To place a Plain above the Horizontal Plain of our place, in which the ere∣cted Styles perpendicular may be the Amphiscii for some days of the year; on some days of the year the Meridian shadows may be carried to the North, on others, to the South; that is, in which the Meridian sha∣dows may be so cast, as in some given place of the Torrid Zone. Let the Latitude of the place given of the Torrid Zone be taken from the Latitude of our place, if the Latitudes be cognominal; but if they be of a diverse species, let both the Latitudes be added, and the remaining degrees kept; then in the Horizontal Plain the Meridian line being found, and also the line of the Aequator, which is perpendicular to the Meridian line, let some Plain be erected above the line of the Aequator, that it may incline above the Horizon so many degrees as were kept before. The Styles or Pins erected in this Plain shall cast such shadows, as if they were erected in the places of the Torrid Zone.
Proposition XII. In the places seated in the Aequator, the shadow of the Style perpendicu∣larly erected in the whole days of the Aequinoxes, remaineth in one right Line, whether before Noon t be continually cast into one quarter of the West, or after Noon, into a quarter of the East; now in the other days of the year the shadow is carried round into the Semicircle. Of Places seated with∣out the Aequa∣tor.In Places scituated without the Aequator in the Torrid Zone, whilst the Sun is moved in part of the Ecliptick, which lieth between the Vertex of any place, and the vicine Tropick, the shadow wandreth through the lesser part of the subject Superficies in a Semicircle. In the Places of the Temperate Zones, whilst the Sun is moved in a more remote Circle from those or the Zodiack, the shadows steal by the lesser Superficies in a Semicircle, and the greaten, whilst the Sun runneth through the nearer Semicircle of the Zodiack. In the days of the Aequinoxes, the shadow of an erected Style is carried round in a Semicircle in all the places of the Earth, except the Aequator and the Pole. These are all rendred perspicuous, partly from the sight of the Globe, and partly from the declination of the Diagrams. Proposition XIII. In the places of the Torrid Zone, whilst the Sun is in the Arch of the E∣cliptick, between the vicine Tropick and the Parallels of the place, in those days the shadow of the erected Style twice returneth back, and go∣eth over the Lines left behind, viz. once before Noon, and once after Noon. The Sun also in these days will seem to inflect his course. Of the shadow of the Sun in the places of the Torrid Zone.Take any place of the Torrid Zone in the Globe, and let the Pole be ele∣vated according to his Latitude, and let the Parallel of the place be descri∣bed, which shall cut the Ecliptick in two points; I say, that whilst the Sun moveth in the intercepted Arch of the Ecliptick, between this Parallel and the vicine Tropick, in those days the Sun will seem to be twice retrograde, and go over the lines left behind. Let any of the Points of that Arch be taken, and let the Parallel of the Sun be described, viz. which the Sun be∣ing in that point describeth by Diurnal circumvolution: For Example, take the first degree of Cancer or Capricorn, and another of their Tropicks, for so there will be no need of the description of a Parallel, until it come to the point in which the Quadrant toucheth the Parallel; the Sun being in this Seat, or in this quarter, will seem to bend his course towards the Vertex of the place, and the shadow shall begin to be retrograde from the line of the Aequa∣tor towards the Meridian line. After the same manner, if that you apply the Quadrant to the Occidental part of the Parallel, you shall see in that point in which the Quadrant toucheth the Parallel, that the Sun goeth to the quarters he hath left, and setteth in that quarter in which some hours before he was. Corollary. Therefore it is not against Nature, that the shadow should go back on Sun-Dials; but then it is miraculous, if that it be done suddenly in a noted space; also if it repeateth the lineary hours, viz. if that the Style be not perpendicular, but parallel to the Mundane Axeltree: yea, although it be perpendicular, yet do not the lines of the shadow it self shew the hours, but the lines of the shadows of the Axis of the World, part of which is concealed in the mind on the Dial, if that it be wanting.
Proposition XIV. A place being given in the Torrid Zone, and one day of those in which the Sun seemeth to bend his course, and the shadow of the Style seemeth to go back; to find the quarter in which the Sun then shall be, and the hour when it shall be. Let the Pole be elevated for the Latitude of the place given, and let the place of the Sun be found at the given day, and let it be noted in the Ecliptick, and let the Parallel be described with Chalk, which the Sun being in that point describeth. Let the Quadrant be applied to the Vertex, and so turned a∣bout until it touch the described Parallel: so the extremity of the Quadrant in the Horizon, shall shew the place sought for. Now that the hour may be found, let that point of the Parallel be noted in which the contact is made; let the Index be placed at the twelfth hour of the Cycle, and let the noted point of the Parallel be turned to the Meridian. The Index will shew how many hours before, and how many hours after Noon the regress beginneth. Proposition XV. The Longitude of the shadows decreaseth, the Altitude of the Sun in∣creasing; and on the contrary, the Altitude of the Sun decreasing, the shadow increaseth. They decrease from the East to the Meri∣dies; and from the Meridies to the setting, the Shadows again increase.For the Sun is more near the vertex of the Style, by how much the more he is elevated above the Horizon; therefore the ray of the Sun terminating the shadow, becometh also more nigh the style, and on that account the shadow becometh lesser. Moreover, the Sun hath the greatest Altitude in the Meridies; therefore the Longitude of the shadow then shall be lesser. But in the rising and setting of the Sun there is no Altitude; therefore the Longi∣tude of the shadow shall be infinite. Proposition XVI. The Longitude of the Style, and the shadow being given, to find the Alti∣tude of the Sun above the Horizon, and thence the hour of the day; if that moreover the Latitude of the place, and day of the year be known. The Longitude of the Style, the shadow, and the ray terminating the sha∣dow, makes a right Angled Triangle: therefore let the proportion be instituted according to the 15th Proposition of the second Chapter. As the Longitude of the shadow is to the Longitude of the style: so are the whole signs to the Tangent of the Angle, which sheweth the Altitude of the Sun. From this Altitude and Latitude of the place,See Proposit. 3. Chap. 29. and day of the year, shall the hour of the day be found out. Proposition XVII. The Semidiameter of the Sun and Earth being given, and the distance of the Sun from the Earth, to find out the Longitude of the shadow, which the whole Earth casteth towards Heaven. Of the Longi∣tude of the Shadow.The shadow of the Earth is Conical, as the Opticks demonstrate, and is easily shewed by a Diagram: therefore the distance of the vertex of this Cone, which causeth the Eclipse of the Moon, from the Earth, is sought; that is found by this Proposition: for as the distance of the Semidiameters of the
Sun and Earth are to the distance given, so is the Semidiameter of the Earth to the Longitude of the shadow of the Earth, or to the Axis of the shady Cone. Proposition XVIII. The distance of the Moon from the Earth, and the Longitude of the Shadow of the Earth being given, to find how great a part of the Moon is op∣scured; how great the Eclipse will be, if that the Moon remain in the Ecliptick. Of the Eclipse of the Moon.Let the Rule of Three be instituted according to this proportion; As the Longitude of the shadow is to the excess of this Longitude above the distance of the Moon: so the Semidiameter of the Earth is to that shady Cone of the Earth, in that part where the Moon entred it. Furthermore; As the distance of the Moon is to the found out Semidiane∣ter of the shadow: so are the whole signs of the Canon to the Tangent of the Angle of sight, which the half diameter of shadow subtendeth to our eye; which, if it be doubled, the Angle of sight is accounted for the whole diameter of the shadow. With this Angle, let the Angle of sight, or the apparent Semi∣diameter of the Moon, which is in opposition of the Sun, or in time of Eclipse, be compared. From this Comparation the quantity of the obcsurity will be made manifest, which if you desire to have in Digits, institute a Rule of Proportion after this manner: As the diameter of the Moon is to twelve Digits, so is the apparent diameter of the shadow; or Angle of sight, to the Ecliptick Digits. Proposition XIX. By how much the places of the Earth, every day are more remote from the Aequator, or from the Parallel of the Sun; by so much the more, both the Meridian shadow, as well as the shadows of the rest of the hours, are longer. For because the Sun is more remote from the Vertex of those places, there∣fore also the rays of the Sun terminating the shadow, are more remote from the Style; and therefore the shadow is so much the longer extended. Proposition XX. If that the Style be placed in any plain after such a Mode, that it becomes part of the Axis of the World, or that it be Parallel to that Axis, the shadow of that Style shall fall on a certain hour, on the very line of that Plain, in which this Line is cut by the great Horary Circle, whether of declination, or from the Meridian, in which the Sun is at that hour. A moment, or small space of an hour.For the shadow of the Axis of the World, or the style so placed, falleth on the plain of the Horary or Meridian Circle, in which the Sun is at that mo∣ment of time; for neither can it fall beyond the Plain, seeing that the Sun, the Opac body, and the Shadow are in one Plain, upon which the Style is placed. Wherefore seeing this Style is upon this Plain, as also on the Plain of the Meridian, which the Sun keepeth for a moment; thence it followeth, that this shadow may fall on the common Section of this Plain, or the Plain of the Meridian, or of the Horary Circle: For if any Line be in two or more Plains, it shall be in the common Section of those Plains.
Proposition XXI. To describe the Aequinoctial Night-Dial. Aequinoctial Night-Dial.A Plain of Wood, Paper, Brass, or other Mettal, must be erected above the Horizon, so many degrees as the Aequator is elevated above the Horizon; or so many degrees as are in the Complement of the Latitude of the place. Before it be erected, it is necessary to draw the Lines of the Scioterick; therefore let what point you please be taken in that Plain, and let the Peri∣phery of the Circle be described from it, as from a Center. Let a line Parallel to the Horizon be drawn through that Center; or let the Line be Parallel to the common Section of the Aequator and the Horizon, which shall be the Line of the shadow of the hour of six in the Evening, and six in the Morning. Let a Line perpendicular to this be drawn from the Center, which shall be the shadow of the twelfth hour: then let both the Quadrants be divided into three parts, and every one of those three, into two, so that the six Arches may be in every one of them, whereof every one shall be of fifteen degrees; and let them be drawn from the Center to the terms or bounds of the Arches of the right Line, these shall be the Lines of the shadows for the beginnings of the remaining hours, which fall between twelve and six, whose number and order must be set down at the extremities of the Lines drawn; the same Arches of fifteen degrees beneath the Horizontal line must be taken in the described Periphery for the hours before six in the Morning, and six in the Evening; and the Lines of the shadows must be drawn; the perpendicular Style must also be erected from the Center. Furthermore, In the Horizontal plain (if that the Plain of the Scioterick be not yet erected) the Meridian line must be found, and the Line of the Aequinoctial rising and setting; and so it must be placed on or above this Plain of the Scioterick, that the Horizontal line of the Scioterick may be paral∣lel to this Line of the rising and setting: so the shadow of the Style shall shew the beginning of the hours at every day of the year. But because the Sun only illustrateth this one Superficies of this Plain half a year, and the other another half year, therefore in both the Superficies a Scioterick must be made after the appointed Mode laid down before; that on one side of it, in the time of Summer and Spring; in the other, in the time of Autumn, the hours may be known by the benefit of the Sha∣dows. The Lines of the Circle, which shew the place of the Sun in the Ecliptick, or the entrance of the Sun into the twelve Signs of the Zodiack, and which do represent the Parallels, which the Sun describeth in the Heaven by his circum∣volution, may easily be drawn on this Aequinoctial Scioterick. For let a certain Magnitude of the Style be taken, and let it be accurately divided into Ten parts, and one of thsee Ten into ten other parts, that the whole Line may be conceived to be cut into an hundred particles: then from a Table of De∣clinations, let the Declinations of the Sun be excepted, the fifth, the tenth, the fifteenth, the twentieth, the twenty fifth, the thirtieth degrees of Aries; or the first, the fifteenth degrees of Taurus; the first, the fifteenth degrees of Tau∣rus; the first, the fifteenth degrees of Gemini; the first degree of Cancer: and let the Tangents be taken from the Mathematical Canon. Moreover, from the Center of the Horologe in the interval of the Tangent of Complement of the fifth degree of Aries, let the Periphery of the Circle be described; this will note the entrance of the Sun into the fifth degree of Aries, and the twenty fifth of Virgo, and the Parallel of the Sun for that day, viz. when the diurnal extremity of the shadow, by its circumvolution, shall fall on this described Periphery, it shall be a sign, that the Sun is in the fifth de∣gree of Aries, or the twenty fifth of Virgo. After the same Mode, let the Pe∣ripheries be described in the interval of the Complement of the tenth and the
twentieth degrees of Aries, the first and the fifteenth of Taurus, the first and the fifteenth of Gemini, and the first degree of Cancer; those will shew the Parallels of the Sun in those points, and also in the points of the 20th degree of Virgo, the 10th and the first of Virgo; the 15th of Leo and the first of Leo; and the 15th degree of Cancer. After the same Mode on the other side of the Scioterick, let the Peripheries be described for the Parallels of the Sun in the first degree of Libra, and the 25th of Pisces; in the 10th of Libra, and the 20th of Pisces; in the 15th of Libra, and the 15th of Pisces; in the first of Scorpio, and the first of Pisces; in the 15th of Scorpio, and the 15th of Aquarius; and in the first degree of Sagittarius, and the first of Aquarius. Unto every one of these Peripheries, the Characters of the Signs of the Zodiack must be ascribed. Proposition XXII. To describe an Horizontal Scioterick, or an Horizontal Plain. An Horizon∣tal Scioterick, or Horizontal Plain, descri∣bed.By the Globe. Let the Pole and Meridian be elevated for the Lati∣tude of the place, which Meridian is more conspicuous than the other lines in the Superficies, both for colour and magnitude; let it be brought under the Brazen Meridian; let the Index be placed at the hour of twelve; let the Globe be turned round, until the Index shew the hour One or Eleven, or until 15 degrees of the Aequator do pass the Brazen Meridian. In this scituation of the Globe, let the degrees intercepted between the Brazen Meridian and the Meridian of the Globe be numbred on the Wooden Horizon, and let this hour be noted for the hour of One after noon, and Eleven before noon. Then let the Globe be turned again, until the Index shew the hour 11 or 10, and let the degree intercepted between those two Meridians, the Brazen one and that assumed, be noted for the 10th or 11th hour. After the same manner, let it be done for the hours 9 and 3, for 8 and 4, for 7 and 5, for 6 and 6, (but we shall not want this hour) for 5 and 7, for 4 and 8, for 3 and 9. These degrees being thus noted for every ascribed hour, let the Meridian line be found on the Horizontal Plain; and for any point of this line, let the periphery of the Cir∣cle be described as from a Center, and let it be drawn perpendicularly from the Center to the same, on either side. This shall be the line of the shadow at the hour 6 before noon, and 6 after noon. The Meridian line is the line of the shadow of the hour 12. In the described periphery, let the Arches before noted be cut of, beginning from the Meridian line towards the line of the hour 6, before and after noon. First, the Arch noted for 11 and 1, then for the hour 10 and 2, for 9 and 3, for 8 and 4, &c. The Arches thus cut off, let the lines be drawn from the Center to those bounds; these shall be the lines of the sha∣dows in the beginning and end of the other hours. But the Style must be so elevated from the Center of the Horologe, above the Meridian line, that the Angle which it maketh with it may be equal to the Latitude of the place, or elevation of the Pole. But it is more commodious to make some Triangle, whose Angle at the Basis is equal to the Latitude of the place. If the declination be made on Paper, let the line be drawn from the Center, which from the periphery may take an Arch equal to the Latitude of the place; (the Numeration being from the Meridian line,) and let the Triangle be cut out to be placed above the Meridian line; so the shadow will shew the hours. The making of this Scioterick, is easie without a Globe.
Proposition XXIII. To describe a Scioterick on a vertical Plain, which may directly regard the East and West Aequinoctial. A Scioterick, what.The making of this is perfected after the same Mode, which we used in the Horizontal, if that the Pole be not elevated according to the Latitude of the place, but according to the Complement of it; and then the Style also be ele∣vated above the Meridian, according to this Complement: but this is better learned by Instruction, than long Precepts. Proposition XXIV. To make a Scioterick in our Horizontal, or other Plain, which shall shew the hours of other places, although remote from ours. This may be done on our Scioterick, which was made to shew the hours of our place. First consider, whether the place given lie East or West from ours; if Eastwards, the 12th hour must be reckoned there, before in our place; if Westwards, mare later. Then let our place be brought to the Meridian, the Index to the hour 12; and let the Globe be turned until the other place come to the Meridian; the Index will shew what hour is in this place, when it is 12 in ours. From hence it is easie to collect the hours of that place, which may agree with the 1, 2, 3, 4; also 11, 10, 9, 8, &c. of ours, which then must be ascribed to them. But this may be done more elegantly without the Globe, ac∣cording to the Mode that the Horizontals are composed. Proposition XXV. To elevate a Plain above the Horizon of our place, and in that Plain to make a Scioterick, in which the shadows of the Hours may seem to go backwards, as in the places of the Torrid Zone. Because the Elevation of the Plain is left to our choice, therefore we shall chuse such an one as is commodious to our purpose: For Example, we shall so place the Plain above our Horizon, or above the Aequinoctial line, East and West, that the Axis of the World, or Pole, may be elevated ten degrees above it. So the shadow shall begin to be retrograde, the Sun being entred into the 26th degree of Aries: and it shall so do, until the Sun comes to the 4th degree of Virgo. Therefore let the Plain be so constituted, and the Horologue so made, that it may be in the place of the Latitude of 52, the Plain shall be elevated 42 de∣grees; so the Pole shall be elevated above that 10 degrees.See Proposit. 22. In this Plain an Horizontal Scioterick may be made for the Elevation of the Pole 10 degrees. Where, when the lines of the shadows are brought from the Center of the Horologue, and extended far enough, let their parts about the Center be blotted out, and the Center also, and let a perpendicular Style be erected in any point of the Altitude of the Meridian line, such as shall exhibit a Gnomonical Trian∣gle; and the extremity of this Style, by its shadow falling on the lines of the shadows, shall shew the hours, and also the shadow shall seem to be retrograde on those days. Also by the assistance of the Terrestrial Globe, Meridional, Polary, and In∣clining Sciotericks of all sorts may be described. But because this matter ap∣pertaineth to another Discipline, viz. to Dialling, therefore I think it un∣necessary to treat of all these here.
CHAP XXVIII. Of the Comparison of the Celestial Affections in divers places of the Earth. See Scheme.FRom the consideration of the agreement and difference of the Celestial Appearances, in the divers places of the Earth, proceedeth the denomi∣nation of the Inhabitants, (which some have mistaken for the division,) by which some are said to be Antoeci, others Perioeci, and others Antipodes. Of the deno∣mination of the Inhabi∣tants of the Earth.Those are said to be Antoeci, or the Inhabitants of two places, which lye in the same Semicircle of the same Meridian, but from a divers quarter of the Aequator, to wit, one towards the North, and another towards the South; but yet so, that they are equally distant from the Aequator. Perioeci, are the Inhabitants of two places, which lye in the same Parallel, and in divers Semicircles of the same Meridian. Sometimes the word is taken for all the Inhabitants of any one Climate; but to avoid confusion, we shall abstain from that use of it. Antipodes, are the Inhabitants of two places, which diametrically are op∣posed one to the other. Note, That these three words are so taken for the most part, that they de∣note the Inhabitants of both places, which are compared as we defined them: but yet sometimes, when any certain place is adjoyned to them, they only de∣note the other place; as when we say, the Perioeci, or Antipodes of this or that place. Proposition I. Those who live in the same Semicircle of the same Meridian, they have also the same Meridies, or 12 hours; and also reckon together all the other hours. For the Meridies is defined by the existency or appulse of the Sun to the Meridian, because therefore those places of the Earth, which inhabit in the same Meridian of the Earth, have also the same Meridian of the Heaven; thence it is manifest, that the Sun in the same Meridian to those that inhabit it, maketh the Meridies and the 12th hour to them all at one time. More∣over an hour is defined to be that 24th part of that time, which intercedeth be∣tween two vicine Noons, or appulses of the Sun to the same Semicircle of the Meridian. Because therefore that it is the same time which intercedeth be∣tween the two Meridies of the places of the same Meridian; therefore also the 24th part of the same shall be equal, and the same in all; and on that ac∣count, they shall together number all their hours from the Meridies. Proposition II. They which dwell in the divers Hemispheres of the Earth, which the Ae∣quator maketh or distinguisheth; or those who live in the divers parts or quarters of the Aequator; they, I say, have contrary Seasons of the year at the same time, and the same Seasons in a different time of the year: so that in one Hemisphere it is Winter, when as in the other it is Summer; and when the Spring is in that, Autumn is in this. Of the diffe∣rent Seasons which the Ae∣quator maketh.For the Summer beginneth in every place according to the Celestial course, viz. the motion of the Sun, when he obtaineth a small distance from the Vertex of the place: the Winter, when a great distance. Now because the
Sun moveth from one Hemisphere to the other, thence it cometh to pass, that when it draweth near the places of one Hemisphere, it more and more de∣parteth from the places of the other; and so the Summer of one Hemisphere agreeth in time, with the Winter of another; and the Spring of one with the Autumn of another. In the places of the Torrid Zone, the vicissitude of the Seasons hath some∣thing peculiar,See Chap. 26. of which we have treated at large in the 26th Chapter. Proposition III. Those who live in the Northern Hemisphere of the Earth, to them, when they turn their faces towards the Aequator, the East is on the left hand, and the West on the right; the South before them, and the North behind them. Those who inhabit the Southern Hemisphere of the Earth, they turning their faces to the Aequator, the Stars rise on their right hand, and set on their left. Of those who live under the Aequator.Those who live under the very Aequator, if they turn their faces to∣wards the Northern Pole, they then have the East on their right hand, and the West on their left; but if they turn their faces towards the Southern Pole, it is contrariwise. Those who live in the Northern Hemisphere, to them, their faces being turned to the Aequator, the Sun going in the Northern Semicircle of the Zodiack, will seem to rise and set behind them; but perambulating the other Semicircle, he will seem before them. The contrary hapneth in the Northern Hemisphere: and the contrary will also be observed, if you turn your faces to∣wards the Poles. These are manifest from the consideration of his circumvolution, and may be illustrated on the Globe; but Mariners, and others, unskilful of the Cele∣stial motions are wont to wonder at it, when they sayl from our Hemisphere into the Southern Hemisphere. Proposition IV. The Celestial Affections of the Antoeci compared amongst themselves, are thus. 1. They have the same Meridies,See Propos. 1. the same Midnight, and reckon all their hours together, as is manifest from the first Proposition of this Chapter. 2. They have contrary Seasons of the year at the same time; for when it is Spring in one place, it is Autumn in another; when that hath Summer, this hath Winter,Proposition 2. as is manifest from the second Proposition of this Chapter. 3. The days of one place are equal to the nights of the other; and the days of this, to the nights of the former. 4. When the days of one place increase to the longest day, in the mean while the days of the other decrease, even to the shortest: for they have op∣posite equal days in their Kalendar. For Example; the day of one place at the twentieth of April, is equal to the twentieth of October in the other place. 5. On the days of the Aequinoctial, the Sun riseth and setteth together to them; but on other days sooner to the one than the other: also in those two days the Sun hath the same altitude above the Horizon of the Antoeci, at every moment of time; but on other days a different Altitude. 6. To those that turn their faces one towards another, or those who regard the Aequator, to one the Sun shall seem to rise on the right hand, and set on the left; and to the other, to rise and set contrary. After the same Mode, all the Stars shall rise to one on the right hand, and to the other on the left.
7. When the Sun riseth and setteth behind to the one, he riseth and setteth before to the other; contrariwise to this on the left hand, when to that on the right. 8. They have the divers Poles elevated by an equal Elevation. 9. The Stars appearing perpetually to one place, or not setting, never arise to the other place, but always remain depressed beneath the Horizon; contrariwise, those which never set to this place, never rise to that. These are all manifest from the Globe. Proposition V. Those which inhabit in the Aequator, have no Antoeci; but the Perioeci of those are the same with the Antipodes of these. The Poles of the Earth have no Perioeci, for they are mutually one to the other Antoeci, and Antipodes. The truth of this Proposition is evident from the Definitions of the Antoeci, Perioeci, and Antipodes, and therefore needs no probation. Proposition VI. A place being given in the Globe, to exhibit the place of the Antoeci, Perioeci, and Antipodes of the same. Let the place be brought to the Brazen Meridian, and as many degrees as are intercepted between this and the Aequator, let so many be numbred from one part of the Aequator: the term of the Numeration shall be the place of the Antoeci. Then let the Index be applied to the 12th hour of the Cycle, and let the point of the Meridian be noted, which hangeth over the place given, also that which hangeth over the place of the Antoeci; this being done, let the Globe be turned round, until the Index shall shew the other 12 hours: so the point of the Globe, which is subjected to the noted point of the Meridian of the place given, shall be the place of the Perioeci; and the point of the Globe, subjected to the other noted point of the Meridian, shall be the place of the Antipodes. Proposition VII. Those who live in the same Parallel of the Earth, have every day, and every night, equal: every one of the Stars also remaineth an equal time above their Horizons; the same Stars never set, the same Stars never rise: the Sun every day, and all the Stars also, rise and set to them in the same quarter; and in the same hour also the Stars are equally eleva∣vated above the Horizon, or depressed beneath it. They have the same Pole equally elevated; their faces being turned to the Aequator or the same Pole, the Stars rise to them from the same side, and set on the same side: they have the same seasons of the year, Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter together, and at the same time, excepting the singular properties of some places. These are manifest from the very consideration of the motions of the Stars, and scituation of the Places of the Earth. In the Globe, if that one certain Parallel be taken, and the Pole be elevated near its Latitude or distance from the Aequator, the Wooden Horizon of all places shall be the Horizon of that Parallel, viz. if that every place be brought to the Meridian; and then will be manifest what this Proposition containeth.
Proposition VIII. The Celestial Affections of the Perioeci, compared one with another, are thus: The Celestial Affections of the Perioeci compared to∣gether.1. They have all those things common, which we have related in the pre∣ceding Proposition, concerning the Inhabitants of one and the same Parallel. 2. They reckon contrary hours of the day in reality, but yet the same in name, viz. when in one place it is Noon, and the 12th Meridian hour, then in the other it is Midnight, and the 12th hour of Midnight: and the Inhabitants of this, number 1, 2, 3 from Midnight, whilst they number 1, 2, 3 from Midnoon. 3. On the days of the Aequinoxes the Sun setteth to one place, whilst it riseth to another, and therefore the time of the day of one place, is the night of another; but on other days of the year, viz. on the half year, in which the Sun runneth through the vicine Semicircle of those places of the Zodi∣ack, that is, in the Spring and Summer, it first riseth to one place before he setteth to another; and therefore in some hours, or some parts of an hour, they have both the day and the night conspicuous together, viz. whilst the Sun tendeth towards the setting to one place, he beginneth to ascend towards the Meridian to the other, having now emerged above the Horizon: But in the other half of the year, Autumn and Winter, in which the Sun runneth the more remote Semicircle of the Zodiack, he first setteth to one place before he riseth to another, (viz. the Perioeci;) and therefore they have no part of the day, but some part of the night common, and the Sun for some hours, or for some parts of the hours, depressed beneath the Horizon; so that to one place it is the end of the night, to the other, the beginning. 4. After the same Mode, those Stars which decline from the Aequator, to∣wards the Pole elevated to the Perioeci, may be seen for some hours, or for some parts of hours, at once, viz. before they are set to one place, they are risen to another; and on the contrary, before they are risen to that, they are not set to this; and in this, for so much the longer time, by how much the Star is more remote from the Aequator towards the Pole elevated. On the contrary, they never see those Stars together, which decline from the Aequator to∣wards the Pole, depressed to the Perioeci; but they first set to one place, before they arise to another; and therefore for some time, or for some hours, or parts of the hours of the day, they are conspicuous to neither of the Perioeci; and for so much the longer time, by how much the Star is more near the Pole; and those Stars, which remain continually to the Antoeci above the Horizon, are perpetually obscured to the Perioeci. 5. What place of the Earth, one of the Perioeci hath in the setting Aequi∣noctial, or to the West; the same the other of the Perioeci, being about to shew, directs the digit to the Oriental quarter, whereof one part is common to the Antoeci, the rest to the Perioeci. Proposition IX. The Celestial Affections of the Antipodes, compared one with another, are thus: The Celestial Affections of the Antipodes.1. In all the days of the year the Sun and the Stars rise to one place, whilst they set to another; for they have the same Horizon, although a different face. 2. The day of one, is the night of another. 3. They have opposite equal days of the year, as also nights; so that the longest day of the one place, is the shortest of the other. 4. They have contrary seasons of the year at the same time, and the same seasons in an opposite time; viz. some have Spring, whilst the other hath Au∣tumn; the one Summer, whilst the other hath Winter; and contrariwise.
5. They have the different Poles elevated by an equal Elevation, they are equally distant from the Aequator; but that from the diverse quarters of it: they are seated in the same Meridian, but that is in its different Semi∣circles. 6. They reckon indeed the contrary hours of the day, but the same in name, viz. it is Noon to one place, whilst it is Midnight to the other. 7. What Stars continually appear to one place, or do remain above the Ho∣rizon, they perpetually remain beneath the Horizon of the other place: Also what Stars remain a long space above the Horizon of one place, they remain but a short time above the Horizon of the other place. 8. The Sun and Stars seem to rise to the Inhabitants of one place, on the right hand; to the Inhabitants of the other, on the left; if that both shall turn their faces to the Aequator. Proposition X. The Perioeci of one place are the Antipodes of the Antoeci of that place, and the Antoeci of the Antipodes of that place. So the Antipodes of one place, are the Perioeci of the Antoeci of that place, and the Antoeci of the Perioeci: These are plain from the Definitions, neither do they need probation. Proposition XI. A place in the Globe being given, to find those places which have the same Hours and Meridies with the place given: also those places which reckon contrary hours and Midnight, when it is Midday in the place given. Sundry Que∣stions wrought and perform∣ed by the Glbe.Let the place given be brought to the Brazen Meridian: so all the places which are subject to the same Semicircle of the Meridian of this, or those places, which number at once all the same hours: then let the Index be placed at the 12th hour of the Cycle, and let the Globe be turned round until the Index shew the other 12th hour: so the places which are subject to the same Semicircle of the Brazen Meridian, are those reckon'd hours, contrary to the hours of the place given. Proposition XII. A place being given in the Globe, to fiad those places, in which all the days of the year are equal to the nights of the former place. Let the place given be brought to the Meridian, and let the Parallel of its Antoeci be found. All the places scituated in this Parallel satisfie the de∣mand. But if that a place be required, whose days are equal to the nights of the place given, and all the hours of the same; then the place of the Antoeci is only that sought for. But if all the hours be contrary, the place of the Antipodes only satisfieth the demand.
Proposition XIII. A place in the Globe, and the day of the year being given, to find the hours in which the Inhabitants of that place, and its Antoeci both together, may see the Sun, or in what hour the Sun is above the Horizon of both places; also the hour in which he is sooner seen in one place, than in another. Let the Longitude, or time of the stay of the Sun above the Horizon of the place given,See Propos. 4. Chap. 25. at the day given, (according to the fourth Proposition of the 25th Chapter) be found; the hours in which this time is deficient from 24 hours, are the hours of the day in the place of the Antoeci. For these two places have the Sun elevated together so many hours, as the day of the place given consisteth of hours, or the day of the Antoeci, viz. of that day which hath no more than 12 hours, as he is in the days of the Aequinoxes; but lesser than other days: Or, that I may speak more plainly, if the day of the place given is less than 12 hours, then the Antoeci shall see the Sun on the same hours; but yet in more, to wit, before and after that time. But if the day of the place given be more than 12 hours, the number of the hours of the night must be taken: for so many hours together the Antoeci shall see the Sun, and no more; and these hours are to be reckoned about the Meridies, because they have their Meridies together. Then half of the difference of the days, (or the difference between the day and night of the same place) will shew the hours in which the Sun ariseth sooner above the Horizon of one place, and also setteth later than to the other place of the Antoeci. Proposition XIV. A place being given in the Globe, and the day of the year, to find the hours in which the Inhabitants of that place together see the Sun with their Pe∣rioeci, and what hours they do not see it together. Let the place of the stay of the Sun above the Horizon of the place given, be found at the day given, and let the time of his stay beneath the Horizon, that is, the quantity of the day and the night, be found; half the difference between the quantity of the day and the night, will shew the hours, or part of the hours, in which the Sun first riseth to one place, before he setteth to ano∣ther; and setteth later also to that place, than he ariseth to this.
CHAP. XXIX. Of the Computation of time in the divers places of the Earth. Proposition I. The Hour of one place being given in the Globe, to find the hour of another place given. By the Globe, the hours of the places are found out.LEt the place, whose hour is given, be brought to the Brazen Meridian, the Index to that hour of the Horary Cycle, such as is given. Let the Globe be turned round until the other given place come under the Meridian, the Index in that scituation of the Globe will shew the hour demanded of this other place. Proposition II. The hour of our place being given, (or of some other place in the Globe) to exhibit on the Globe all those places in which at that hour the Meridies is; also those in which it is Midnight; also those in which is what hour we please. The Problem should be propounded concerning the Earth, if we would act Scientifically; for it is an affection of the Earth. Ʋnder∣stand the same concerning many other following Problems. Let the place given be brought to the Meridian, the Index to the given hour of the horary Cycle. Let the Globe be turned round until the Index shew the 12th hour of the Meridies; so the places which are discovered to be sub∣ject to the superiour Semicircle of the Meridian (from the elevated Pole to the Pole depressed,) are those which have the Meridies at the time given. But if the Globe be turned round, that the Index may shew the 12th inferiour hour, the places which are discovered to be subject to the same Semicircle of the Meridian, are those in which the Midnight then shall be. If we desire places in which is any hour, let the Globe be turned until the Index shew that hour, if the places subject to the Semicircle of the Meridian, be those that are sought. Proposition III. The Altitude of the Sun being given, the day of the year, and the Latitude of the place, to find the hour at the time of that altitude. Rules for the finding the hour of the day.Let the Pole be elevated for the given Latitude of the place: from the given day let the place of the Sun be found in the Ecliptick, and let that be noted in the Ecliptick of the Globe, and brought to the Meridian. Then let the Quadrant be applied to the Vertex, and let the degrees of the given Al∣titude be noted in it, and let the Index be placed at the 12th hour of the Ho∣rary Cycle. Then let the Globe and the Quadrant be moved until the noted place of the Sun agree with the noted point of the Quadrant. In that scituation the Sun will shew the hour demanded.
Proposition IV. A Quarter being given, in which the Sun is beheld sometime of the day given; and the Latitude of a place being given, to find the hour of the day. Mariners ob∣serve the quar∣ter of the Sun on the Compass.Let all be done as in the preceding Proposition: that the Quadrant may be applied to the Vertex, let his end or extremity be brought to that quarter of the Horizon which was observed, and let the Globe be turned round until that point of the Sun come to the Quadrant. In this scituation, the Index will shew the hour of the day. Proposition V. The Sun shining, by the benefit of the Globe to know the hour of the place given; or the Latitude thereof, which is given. Let the Pole be elevated for the given Latitude of the place, and let the Globe be placed at the four quarters of the World; then let a Needle be fixed perpendicularly at the place of the Sun in the Ecliptick; or, which is better, let the Spherical Gnomon be applied to the Ecliptick, so that the Apex of the Gnomon fix on the place of the Sun, and so let it be brought to the Meridian, and the Index to the 12th hour: let the Globe be turned, until the Needle make no shadow on the Globe. In this scituation the Index will shew the de∣manded hour. Proposition VI. An hour of our Numeration being given, to find what hour it is from the rising of the Sun, that is, the Babylonish, or Norimbergian hour. In time past the Babylonians, and now the Inhabitants of Norimberg, and some other People, reckon 24 hours from one rising of the Sun, to the rising of the Sun the next day. Let the Pole be elevated from the Latitude of the place given, and the place of the Sun being found from the day given, let it be brought to the Me∣ridian, the Index to the 12th hour of the horary Cycle: let the Globe be turned until the Index shew the hour given. Then the Globe remaining im∣movable, let the Index be reduced to 12, which being done, let the Globe be turned from the setting to the rising, until the place of the Sun appear in the Oriental Horizon: and in the horary Cycle, let the hours be reckoned from 12, toward the East or rising, even to the Index: for these are the Babylonish or Norimberg hours sought for. Proposition VII. On the contrary: The hour being given from the Babylonish rising, to find out the hour of our Numeration, which is from Midnight, or Midnoon. Let the Pole be elevated for the Latitude of the place given, let the place of the Sun be noted in the Ecliptick, and brought to the Oriental Horizon, the Index to the 12th hour; let the Globe be turned towards the West, until the In∣dex shew the hour given on the Cycle from the East. Which being done, let the Index be reduced to the 12th hour, and then let the Globe again be moved, un∣til the place of the Sun be brought back to the Semicircle of the Meridian which is next passed through, and let the hours be numbred from 12 to the In∣dex towards that quarter, unto which the motion of the Globe was made: so shall be found the hour of our numbring from the Meridies, or Midnight.
Proposition VIII. An hour of our reckoning being given, to find what hour it is from the preceding setting of the Sun, that is, the Italian hours. Of Italian hours.At this day, in many places of Italy, and in times past in Greece they num∣bred 24 hours from one setting of the Sun to the following, or next setting; to find out which, we must thus do from the hours of our Numeration. Let the Pole be elevated for the Latitude of the place given; let the place of the Sun in the Ecliptick be noted and brought to the Meridan; let the Index be placed at the 12th hour at Noon of the Cycle: let the Globe be turned until the Index shew the hour given. Then the Globe being immova∣ble, let the Index be brought to the 12th hour; and this being done, let the Globe be turned towards the East, until the place of the Sun be beheld in the Occidental Horizon. Then let the hours be numbred from 12 to the Index, near the quarter of his motion; for these shall be the Italian hours of Nume∣ration. Proposition IX. The hour from the setting of the Sun, or of Italick Numeration, being given, to find what hour it is of our Numeration from the Midnoon or Midnight. Let the Pole be elevated for the Latitude of the place given; let the place of the Sun in the Ecliptick be noted, and brought to the Meridian; let the Index be placed at the hour 12; let the Globe be turned to the setting, until the Index shew the given Italick hour. Then the Globe remaining immova∣ble, let the Index be brought to the 12th hour; this being done, let the place of the Sun be turned back to that Semicircle of the Meridian which it did nearest pass through, so the hours interrupted between 12 and the Index (numbring from 12 towards the rising) are the hours from the Meridies or Midnight, according to our numeration or reckoning. Proposition X. An hour of our Numeration being given on the day given, to find what hour of the day that hour is, according to the ancient Judaick account, and that of other Nations. The Jews di∣vision of the day and night.In Ancient times, the Jews and other Nations (Astronomy being not yet polished) divided every day, from the rising of the Sun to his setting, into 12 hours, and the night into as many, which hours are therefore termed Ju∣daical hours, Planetary hours (for another reason,) but more fitly unequal hours; for seeing that neither the days or nigh are equal amongst themselves, or of equal Longitude; but increase for half a year,See Chap. 25. and decrease the other half (except in the places of the Aequator,) thence it cometh to pass that those hours are sometimes greater, and sometimes lesser; for they increase with the Longitude of the days, and decrease with the decrease of the same. But in places near the Aequator this increase is not great, as we have shewed in the 25th Chapter: but all the days of the whole year are almost equal; and thence it cometh to pass, that the People more remote from the Aequator, as those of Europe, never used these hours, but only those People who are not far removed from, or that dwell under the Torrid Zone. Therefore the Problem may be thus more clearly propounded, viz. an equal hour being given in a given day, to find an unequal hour. An equal hour is termed the 12th part of any day or night, or of the time in which the Sun doth remain above, or beneath the Horizon. An unequal hour is termed the 24th part of that time, in which the Sun is moved from the Semicircle of
the Meridian, until it return again to the same Semicircle, which time is cal∣led an Astronomical day. Now for the Solution of this Problem, we must thus act: Let the Pole he elevated for the Latitude of the place given; let the place of the Sun in the Ecliptick be noted, and brought to the East, the Index to the 12th hour of the Cycle: let the Globe be turned, until the noted place of the Sun come to the West; the Index will shew the hours for the Longitude of this day, or the stay of the Sun above the Horizon, which must be observed. Then set it be found, what is the hour given from the East or rising (or from the West and setting, if that any hour be given after the setting of the Sun) ac∣cording to the 6 or 8th Propositions.See Proposi∣tion 6 and 8. And let the proportion be compared after this Mode, that as the noted hours of the Longitude of the whole day or night are unto 2 hours, so the hours found from the rising, (or setting, if that an hour of the night be given) are to the number of the Judaick hours. Proposition XI. The Judaick hour being given, in the day given to find what hour that is ac∣cording to our Numeration or account; or to reduce a given unequal hour to an equal hour. Of the Judaick hour.Let the Pole be elevated for the Latitude of the place given; the place of the Sun in the Ecliptick from the day given being found, let it be brought to the East, the Index to the 12th hour; and let the Globe be turned to the West, that the Longitude of that day may appear in unequal hours on the horary Cycle, which is noted. Then let the place of the Sun be brought to the Meri∣dian, the Index unto 12, and let the place of the Sun be turned round to the Oriental Honrizon, the Index will shew the hour of the rising. Then let it so be brought to pass, that 12 be added to the number of the Ju∣daick houry so also let the found out Latitude of the whole be added to the other number, which if that be added to the hour of the rising, we shall have the hour from the Midnight, according to our numeration: if that the number of these hours be more than 12, let 12 cast away, and the remainder will shew the hour from Noon. Those Judaick hours which are related in the Sermon of CHRIST, cannot accurately be reduced to the hours of our account, because the day of the year is not added: so that the third hour of that day, may be our 8th, 9th or 10th; so that the 11th hour of that Sermon, may be our 7th, 6th, or 5th, viz, as that day may be taken either according to the Summer or Winter Solstice, or the Aequinoctial. Proposition XII. Those who go from some one part of the Earth, or sayl towards the Sun rising, and the whole Globe of the Earth being encompassed by them, they return to the same place whence they set forth; they in the mean space, at once have often had the Sun rising, setting, the Meridies, and the Mid∣night, the very same with the Inhabitants of the place, from which they went from; and therefore when they return, they number one day of a year more than in that place. For Example, If in this place it be the first day of January, they reckon the second of January; if they account it to be Saturday, they reckon Sunday. And if they shall have sayled about the Earth, twice, thrice, or four times, they shall still number so many more days. Of the com∣passing of the Earth.Those who by a determined course sayl about the whole Earth towards the West, they in the mean while for one space have the setting or rising Sun, the Meridies and Midnight more rare; and therefore when they return, they number one day less than in that place, to wit, the 31 of December; if in
that place it be the first of January, and Saturday or the last day of the Week, when in this place it shall be Sunday, or the first day of a new Week: And if they have sayled round the Earth twice, thrice, or soin times, they shall also reckon so many days less. This was a matter of wonder and admiration some Ages ago to M and others; but the frequency of this Experiment hath lessehen the admina∣tion, and hath administred occasion to Mathemn to  the cause. Neither is it difficult to explain the same, so that the motion of the Sun, and the Meridian of the places of the Earth be well apprehended, and a certain day of the year be proposed  for it dependeti the Diurual cirvoluation of the Sun, not from his proper nation, as some have thought which we may begin from any Circle, but for our more easie understanding it is very conve∣nient to begin from the Meridies, that the day may be the time from one Me∣ridies to the following Meridies, or Noon; or whilst the Sun returneth from the Semicircle of one Meridiany, to the same Semicircle. Therefore, because that those who Sayl towards the East, or Rising, come to those places where the Sun first riseth and maketh his Meridian, than in the place from whence they departed; thence it cometh to pass, that the Sun be∣ing in the Meridian of the place to which they have arrived, they begin to reckon a new day. For Example: the second day of January, where in the place of their departure hitherto they have numbred the first day of January, (if that they set Sayl on the same,) and the difference shall be one or two hours. This anticipation daily increaseth until they come towards the East, so that it shall make the hours of half a day, when they come to the opposite Semicircle of the Meridian; for here they shall have the Meridies of a new day, when in the place of their setting forth it shall be the Midnight of the preceding day. And where they shall come to the Meridian 1 degrees more remote, being in that, they shall have the Meridies 13 hours sooner, than in the place of their set∣ting forth: and when again they shall come to a Meridian more remote 15 de∣grees, there they shall have the Minidies 4 hours sooner, than in the place of their setting forth. And so moreover, as they shall come to the Meridians or places more remote 15 degrees, they shall have the Meridies 15, 16, 17 hours sooner, and shall begin to account a new day sooner, than in their place of their setting forth: so that when at length they shall have returned to the place, they shall then number the Meridies of a new day sooner by 24 hours, where in the place also the Meridies is, which yet may answer in number to the Meridies which the Mariners had the former day. But it is contrary with those who Sayl towards the West, when they return to the place from whence they set forth; for by how much the more they re∣cede from this place, by so much the more they shall have the Sun later in the Meridies, because they are in a more remote Meridian, and therefore do later begin the account of their new day, than in the place whence they set forth: So that this Proposition taketh away an whole day in the return. Corollary 1.Corollaries. If that two at the same time set sorth from any place of the Earth, the one towards the East, the other towards the West, and they shall return both together to the same place, the whole Earth being Sayled about: he that took his Journey towards the East shall reckon two days more, than he which took it towards the West. And if they have Sayled the Earth about twice, they shall reckon a days more; if thrice, 6 days more, &c. but the days of these are longer; of those, shorter. Corollary 2. The same will happen, if that in any place of the Earth any two meet one the other; and from hence first, and then often afterwards, was this apparently discovered: for when Ferdinando Magellanes by a direct course into the West, had entred the Indies by the Streights, denominated from him, it was found out by the Mariners, which there met with other Europeans, brought towards the East by an ordinary Journey, that the Ka∣leudar, or the Numeration of the days, differed an whole day. The same hath been observed by all, which have Sayled round the Earth, when they have come into the Indies.
Corillary 10. This also is the cause, that in two near places the account of a different day  observed, viz. in the Philippine Isles, and in the City of Marow on the Chast of China,The day in Macoa, not the same as in the Philippine Isles. although they lie under the same Meridian, yet they reckon the days of the Kalendar sooner in Macoa, than in the Philippine Isles, and that by the anticipation of one day, so that it is Sunday in Moacoa when but Saturday in the Philippine Isles. The cause of this diversity is this, that the Rortu possessing the City of Macoa came thither from Europe towards the East by asseccourse out of India; but the Spaniard, which possess the Philippine Isles, came thither from Europe towards the West, by a set course from America. Therefore it is in ferred from the preceding Corollary, because here in Ma and the Philippines, they almost meet,  ome into the same Meridian, that they should ced by one day the days of the other. CHAP. XXX. Of the various Rising Setting, Altitude of the Sun, and other Ap∣pearances in the divers parts of the Earth. Proposition 1. To place or hang a Terrestrial Globe, so that when the Sun shineth, those parts, of the Globe may be illuminated, which the Sun enlighteneth in the Earth at any time, and that it also may appear, unto what People the Sun ri∣seth, and to whom it setteth; to whom it makes the Meridies, and to whom it is altogether absconded; to what place it is vertical: also to find the place of the Sun in the Ecliptick, and the day of the year; also the hour of the place. The motion of the Sun shew∣ed by the Globe.LET the place in which the Globe is placed be noted on the Globe, and brought to the Meridian, and let a mark be made with a Chalk on that point of the Meridian. Therefore if the Globe be to be hung by a Cord, the Cord must be tied to the point of the Meridian. But if that it must be placed firmly in any place, an Iron pi must be brought through the Center of the Globe, even to the opposite point; and this Iron pin must be closely fixed to the Horizontal plain, that it may remain immovable. The Globe must be disposed according to the four quarters of the World, viz, that the North, part of the Globe may regard the North part of the Earth or Heaven; which, the Meridian line being found, is easie to do by the Ma∣riners Compass, or the Magnetick Needle. The Globe being thus placed, at every moment of the day, when the Sun shineth, on the Globe may be seen the part of the Earth illuminated, and the part not illuminated. Those places which lie in the middle Semicircle of the part illuminated, are those which will have the Meridies at that moment of time. To those which are seated in the Oriental Semicircle, dividing the illuminated part from the part not illu∣minated, the Sun setteth; but to those which are in the Occidental Semicircle, separating the illuminated part from the part not illuminated the Sun riseth. To find out the place of the Sun in the Ecliptick, let the Needle or Spheri∣cal Gromon be moved hither and thither perpendicularly about the middle of the part illuminated, until it maketh no shadow, and let the point in the Globe be noted  for this being brought to the Meridian, here will shew the declina∣tion of the Ecliptick point, in which the Sun is at the time of the Observation; whence, according to the condition of the time, to wit, Spring, Summer, Au∣tumn, or Winter, the place of the Sun shall be known, and thence the day of the year. Also the place in the Globe, unto which the Needle being affixed gave no shadow, is that to which the Sun is vertical at that moment of time, and the Parallel passing through this place will exhibit all the places, in which the Sun will be vertical on that day.
Moreover, to find the hour of the place in which the Globe is so placed or hung, let that place be brought to the Meridian to which the Sun is vertical, the Index to the 12th hour of the horary Circle; and let the Globe be turned round until our place, or that in which the Globe is seated, do come to the Me∣ridian? the Index will shew the hour. But because the Globe cannot be turned round, when it is affixed by the Iron Style to the Horizontal plain, therefore it will be convenient that the Qua∣drant be tied to the Pole, or part of the Circle of the Periphery 113 /: for here the Arch being brought to the place of the Needle, will shew the declina∣tion of the Sun from the Aequator, whence the place of the Sun, and the day of the year shall be found. The same Arch will shew the degree in the Aequa∣tor, from whence if that the degrees be numbred to the Brazen Meridian, and these degrees be changed into hours, or parts of hours,Fifteen Degrees make an Hour. you shall have the hour of the place. If so be that the Sun be between the Occident and the Bra∣zen Meridian, that is, of our place; but if that it be between the East and our Meridian, the hour found out must be subtracted from 12, and the remain∣ing number will shew the hours from Midnight. If that such a Brazen Arch be adjoyned to the Pole of the Globe, as I have described, 113 ½ degrees, it may be bored through from the end even to 47 de∣grees; that is, from the departure of the Sun from the Aequator, and a turning Plate be inserted in it, which may bear the perpendicular Style: and so there will neither be need of a Needle, or of a Spherical Gnomon, and the operation will be less obnoxious to errour. Proposition II. The Terrestrial Globe being o placed, as in the former Proposition is declared, it will also shew, when the Moon shineth, to what People, at any moment of time in which it is above our Horizon, it is conspicuous; to whom it ari∣seth, to whom it setteth, and to whom it is vertical. These are all manifest from the preceding Proposition.See Proposit. 1. Proposition III. By how much the places of the Earth are remote from the Parallel of the Sun on any day, by so much the Sun is elevated to a lesser Altitude in the same hours above their Horizon. Let the places in the same Meridian be taken in the Globe, for these do rec∣kon all the same hours, and that at once: then let a Parallel be described for any assumed day, and it will be manifest, that any point of this Parallel is far∣ther distant from the more remote places, than from the places more near. The Sun therefore being above, the points of this Parallel will be farther distant from the Vertex of the remoter places, than from the Vertex of those that are nearer; and therefore he shall be less elevated over the Horizon of those places, than of these. Proposition IV. By how much the places of the Earth are more remote from the Aequator, or more near the Pole, by so much the more the parts of the Horizon are di∣stant, in which the Sun riseth on the day of the Solstice, and the day of the Winter; as also those in which he setteth. The same is true concerning the Moon and all the Planets. Take what places you please of a diverse distance from the Aequator, and let the Pole be elevated for the Latitude of every one of them, and let the points be noted in the Horizon, in which the Tropicks of Capricorn and Cancer cut it. A comparison being made, the truth of the Proposition will appear: this is also shewed the same way, by how much the places are more remote from the Ae∣quator, by so much the more the Sun, in his Aequinoctial rising, is distant in the East on every day of the year. The Astronomers term it, the rising Amplitude.
Proposition V. Stars placed between the Parallel of any place (lying without the Aequator) and the Pole, are less elevated above the Horizon of the places between this Parallel, and the other Pole of those scituated there, than above the Horizon of the places scituated between this Parallel and the nearer Pole. Of the eleva∣tion of Stars, &c.The Parallel of any Star may be designed on the Terrestrial Globe, or a point only noted for a Star, and any place more remote from the Pole being assumed, designeth the Parallel of the place. Then taking another place sci∣tuated towards the other Pole, the stay of the Star above the Horizon of both places may be found, and the truth of the Proposition will be manifest. Proposition VI. In places scituate in and near the Aequator, the Sun and Stars directly as∣cend above the Horizon, even to the Meridian, and so descend again: but in places scituated above the Aequator, they obliquely ascend and de∣scend; and so much the more obliquely, by how much the place is more remote from the Aequator. Of the ascen∣sion and de∣scension of the Sun and Stars.Let any Parallel of the Sun be described on the Globe, such as some alrea∣dy are delineated on the Globe, viz. the Aequator, the Tropicks, and some In∣termedial ones: then let the Poles be placed in the very Horizon, that it may be the Horizon of the places of the Aequator, and it will be evident that the points of the Parallels directly ascend from the Horizon to the Meridian. Then let the Pole be elevated for the Latitude of any other places, and it will appear that the Parallels are so much the more oblique to the Horizon, by how much the more the Pole is elevated; that is, by the Wooden Horizon becometh the Horizon of the places more remote from the Aequator, or nearer to the Pole. Proposition VII. By how much the place is more remote from the Aequator, by so much the more the Signs of the Zodiack, and the other Constellations, require the greater time to arise, and set; and they pass through the Meridians of all places at an equal time. Let two places be taken on the Globe, unequally distant from the Aequator, and let the Pole be elevated, and observed separately for each of them, how much time any Sign of the Zodiack requireth to ascend above the Horizon; viz. the entrance of the Sign being brought to the Oriental Horizon, let the Index be placed at the 12th hour, and the Globe be turned round until the whole Sign be rising: the Index will shew the hours elapsed in the space whilst the Sign arose; for by the comparison of the time, the truth of the Proposition will be manifest. Proposition VIII. The day of the year being given, to find, or shew on the Globe those places, in which the Sun ariseth in any given quarter. To find the rising of the Sun in any quarter, by the Globe.This Problem, and those that follow, should be propounded and resolved con∣cerning the Earth it self, if that we would act according to Art: for these affe∣ctions belong unto it; but they are propounded concerning the Globe, because here it representeth the Earth; although another method must be used in the Earth, or another construction, which although it can only be comprehended by the mind, is sufficient, that it may hinder in the practice by reason of the ob∣stacles.
This is the same with that Problem, The day and the quarter being given, in which the rising of the Sun was observed, to find the Latitude of that place, or its Parallel, in any point of which it is manifest that we are placed.See Chap. 23. Proposit. 11. The Solution of which we have delivered in the 23 Chapter. Proposition 11. Proposition IX. The day and the hour, or part of the hour being given, to shew the place on the Globe to which the Sun is then vertical. First let the place of the Sun, from the given day being found, be noted on the Ecliptick of the Globe, and that being brought to the Meridian, let a mark be made with a Chalk on the supereminent point; then let those places be found, in whose Meridian the Sun was at the given moment of time, and let them be brought to the Brazen Meridian. These being done, that place which is subject to the noted point of the Meridian is the place which is de∣manded, viz. that to which the Sun is vertical at the given moment of time. Proposition X.Further note.The day and the hour being given, to shew all the places on the Globe, from whose Vertex the Sun is distant the given degrees at that hour; but the given degrees must not exceed a hundred and eighty: Or the day and the hour being given, to shew on the Globe those places, above whose Ho∣rizon the Sun hath the given Altitude, or the given depression beneath it; but the Altitude given must not exceed 90 degrees, as likewise the depression. Let the place be found on the Globe, to which the Sun is vertical at the hour given, and let this be brought to the Meridian, and let the Quadrant be affixed to the imminent point of the Meridian. Let the degree of distance from the Vertex given be noted, and the Quadrant be turned round, the Globe remaining immovable; all the places of the Earth through which the noted degree of the Quadrant passeth, are those from whom the Sun hath the given distance, or above whose Horizon the Sun hath the given Altitude. Proposition XI. At the given hour of the day, to shew on the Globe all plains unto which the Sun riseth and setteth, and to which he is fixed at the Meridian; and all that are illuminated, and not illuminated. Further, con∣cerning the ri∣sing and set∣ting of the Sun, found out by the Globe at any day, or hour of the day.Let the place be found in the Globe, to which the Sun at the time given is vertical; and let the place be brought to the Meridian, and the Pole elevated for the Latitude of that place: or let that place be placed in the vertex of the Horizon. So all those places which are discovered under the Semicircle of the Meridian above the Horizon, shall have the Meridies; but those places which are beheld in the Oriental Semicircle of the Horizon, are those to which the Sun then setteth: but to those which lie in the Occidental Semicircle of the Horizon, the Sun riseth at the given time, and all the places which are above the Horizon are illuminated by the Sun: on the contrary, all the places scituated beneath the same, then want the presence of the Sun. Note, that the Problem must be understood of the rising and setting of the body of the Center of the Sun: for the body of the Sun illustrateth part of the Earth somewhat bigger than the Hemisphere, which, how big it is, shall be dis∣covered in the following Proposition. Therefore we may shew the places to which the Sun riseth or setteth, when we have Noon or Midnight: And con∣trariwise, those in which he setteth, when he ariseth to us, who then have Mid∣night, or Mid-day.
Proposition XII. The Semidiameter of the Sun and Earth being given, and the distance of the Sun from the Earth being known, to find out the part of the Earth which the Sun illuminateth. See Scheme.Let the Semidiameter of the Earth be A B, A C; A the Center; A B C D E the greatest circle of the Earth; S the Center of the Sun; S L, S O the Semidiameter of the Sun; L B, O C the rays touching the Globe of the Sun and Earth: for these di∣stinguish the part illuminated from the part not illuminated; therefore the Arch B D C representeth the part of the superficies of the Earth illuminated, and the Arch BLC the part not illuminated. Let the Tangents LB, O C be extended until they concur in R, and B N parallels to A S: therefore in the Triangle B N L, let N L be given; the excess S L above A B, and B N of equal distance to A S; the Angle B N L is direct, because that B L toucheth the Circle. Wherefore in the Triangle B L N, let the Angle N B L be found according to this Proposition; that as B N is to N L, so are the whole signs to the Tangent of the Angle N B L. Moreover the two Angles L N B, N B L are together equal to one streight or 90 degrees, and B N L is equal to the Angle A S L, or B A R. Therefore the Arch of the Angle N B L is equal to the Arch B M, by which P B is greater than 90 degrees, or than P M: so also the Arch P C. If we take the Semidiameter of the Sun, according unto Ptolomy, of 52 Se∣midiameters of the Earth; but the distance A S, 1168 Semidiameters: these, I say, being laid down, the Arch M B will be found 13 minutes, in which the Sun illustrateth the Earth more than half M P Q. Corollary. When therefore the Center of the Sun riseth to some places, then his limbus or edge riseth to the People which inhabit in the parallel of the Horizon, scituated 13 minutes beneath the Horizon; also after the same Mode to those to whom he setteth. And when his Center setteth, then his limbus yet remaineth conspicuous, until the Center setteth to the People, which are re∣mote 13 minutes from our Horizon. Proposition XIII. The height of a Mountain being given, to find how much sooner the Sun seemeth to rise in the Vertex of the same, than at the foot or root of the Mountain; and how much later it setteth. From the given Altitude,See Chap. 9. Proposit. 5. by the fifth Proposition in the ninth Chapter, let the interval or Arch from which the Vertex of the Mountain may be disco∣vered, or in the bound of which, a line so drawn from the Vertex of the Mountain, that it may be the Tangent of the Earth, refracteth the same: for this line sheweth the first ray, which may come from a direct passage from the Sun to the Vertex of the Mountain. Moreover, the point of the Earth in which this is touched by the line, is the place to which the Sun ariseth, when he beginneth to be seen on the Vertex of the Mountain, and the Arch in∣terrupted between that point and the foot of the Mountain, is equal to that in which the Sun is depressed, as yet, beneath the Horizon of the foot of the Mountain, when he is apparent in the Vertex. Therefore the Problem is reduced hither; The depression of the Sun beneath the Horizon being given, to find the time which is spent whilst the Sun moveth from the depression to the Horizon; whence al∣so it will be manifest, that this time is also diverse in the divers days of the year. Therefore let the place of the root of the Mountain be noted on the Globe, and let the Pole be clevated for the Latitude of the same; let the Quadrant be affixed to the Vertex. The place of the Sun being found in the Ecliptick from any day taken, let it be noted; also
the Point of the Ecliptick opposite to the place of the Sun. Then let this op∣posite Point be brought to the Occidental Horizon, and let the Index be pla∣ced at the hour 12. This being done, let the Degree of depression before found be noted in the Quadrant, and the opposite Point be turned above the Horizon, until it hath an Altitude equal to the Arch of the depression (which will be discovered from the application of the Quadrant) so the place of the Sun be∣neath the Oriental Horizon, will have that Depression. And the Index in the Horaty Circle will shew the time intercopted between that depression of him, and his emersion above the Horizon. But because in this case we do almost work only by Minutes, therefore it is better to calculate it, than to search after it on the Globe. Now you shall find it If that the Altitude of the Mountain be placed 3 stadias, or ¾ of a Ger∣man mile, because the Arch of the depression is about three Degrees,The Moun∣tains of Cauca∣sus, and Casius according to Aristotle, and Pliny, are llustrated with the Suns rayes to the third part of the night. and if the Latitude of the Foot of the Mountain be 38 Degrees, and the place of the Sun about the middle of Leo, the time in which the Sun is beheld, is sooner in the Vertex, than at the Foot of the Mountain by 13 Minutes. Hence it is ma∣nifest, that that is not so probable which Aristotle relateth of the highest parts of Caucasus, and Pliny of the top of Mount Casius, that they before the rising, and after the setting of the Sun, are illustrated with the Sun Beams, e∣ven to the third part of the night. Now how great an Altitude is required for this, shall be shewed in the following Proposition. Proposition. XIV. The time being given in which the Sun is sooner discerned on the Vertex of the Mountain, than at the foot of the same, to find the Altitude of the Mountain. Let the Pole be Elevated on the Globe, for the Latitude of the Root of the Mountain, and the Point being noted, which is opposed to the place of the Sun in the Ecliptick, let the Arch of the depression of the Sun beneath the Ho∣rizon, for the given time, be found. Then from this Arch, as from an interval, from whence the Vertex of the Mountain is discovered, the Altitude of the Mountain must be searched after by the Fourth Proposition of the Ninth Chap∣ter. Proposition. XV. The places of the Moon being given in the Zodiack, together with its Lati∣tude, to find out, or shew all those Places on the Globe, to which the Moon is Vertical in the Circumrotation of that day. Let the place of the Moon taken from the Ephemerides, be noted in the E∣cliptick, then let one end of the Quadrant be applyed to the Pole of the Eclip∣tick, the other to the Point noted in the Ecliptick, or to the place of the Moon, and let the Degrees of the Latitude of the Moon be accounted on the Quadrant, and let a mark be made at the term of the Numeration on the Globe; then this being brought to the Meridian, and a Chalk applyed, let a Parallel be descri∣bed, which the Moon that day doth describe by her Circumvolution; and all the places scituated in this Parallel, are those demanded. After the same Mode we act with the other Planers, if their Longitude and Latitude be given.
Proposition XVI. The place of the Moon being given in the Zodiack, and its Latitude, and the day of the year, to find the hour, in which she ariseth in any place gi∣ven, and in which she setteth; also in which she maketh midnight. Let the Pole be Elevated for the Latitude of the place of the Earth given; let the place of the Sun found from the day of the year, be noted on the Ecli∣ptick. Then let a point also be noted on the Globe for the place of the Moon, as we have shewed in the preceeding Proposition.See Propositi∣on 15. This being done, let the place of the Sun be brought to the Meridian, the Index to the 12th hour of the Circle, and let the Globe be turned round until the Moon arise, or be in the Meridian, or set. For the Index in the Circle will shew the hour of her rising or setting, or being in the Meridian, or setting. After the same manner we must act with the other Planets. Proposition XVII. To shew on the Globe all those places, in which the Moon ariseth at the gi∣ven hour, and in which she is in the Meridian, and to which she setteth, if that the Longitude and Latitude of the Moon be known. By the Globe are shewed all the places in which the Moon ariseth, and setteth at any hour.Let the place of the Sun, as also of the Moon, be noted on the Ecliptick, as aforesaid, and the place of the Sun being brought to the Meridian, and the Index to the 12th hour of the Circle, let the Globe be turned until the place of the Moon come to the Meridian, and let the hours be observed on the Circle, which are noted, or let a mark be made on the Circle: for they shew how much later the Moon cometh to the Meridian, than the Sun. Moreover the place of the Moon being constituted in the Meridian: let the eminent point be noted in this; or let the Parallel of the Moon be described. This done, let the place of the Sun be brought to the Meridian, and the Index to the 12th hour. Let the Globe be turned until the hour be found, in which the Moon toucheth the Meridian of the place: Let the point also of the Meridian be noted, which hangeth over the place of the Moon. Moreover let the place whose hour is gi∣ven, be brought to the Meridian, the Index to the hour given: let the Globe be turned until the Index shew the 12th hour of noon, or midnight; so the pla∣ces are those subject to the Semicircle of the Meridian, in which the Sun ma∣keth the Meridies at the hour given. Let the Index be reduced to 12, and let the Globe be turned again until the Index come to the hour noted before in the Circle. In this scituation of the Globe, the place which is subject to the noted point of the Meridian, is that to which the Sun is then Verti∣cal. Therefore let this place be constituted in the Globe in the Vertex of the Ho∣rizon, all the places are those subject to the Superiour Semicircle of the Meri∣dian, to which the Moon is then in the Meridian: but those places which are discerned in the Oriental Semicircle of the Horizon, are those to which the Moon then setteth. Lastly in those places, which are discerned in the Occi∣dental Semicircle of the Horizon, the Moon riseth at the given moment of time. After the same Mode we act with Saturn, Jupiter, and the rest of the Planets, if that their Longitude and Latitude be known,
Proposition XVIII. The day, or hour being given, in which the Ecliptick of the Moon shall be, or hath been, to exhibit on the Globe all those places which have seen it, and in that species, to whom the Moon shall in the Meridian, to whom it shall arise, and to whom it shall set Eclipsed. This Problem little differeth from the precedent, but yet it hath a more ea∣sy Solution. From the day given, let the place of the Sun be found, except it be alrea∣dy known, and let the Point opposite to it be noted on the Ecliptick of the Globe, for this is the place of the Moon. See Propositi∣on 6. Chapter 28.Let the place be found in the Globe to which the Sun is Vertical at the hour, and let the Antipodes of this place be found according to the VI. Proposition of the XXVIII. Chapter, for this shall be the place, unto which the Moon be∣ing Eclipsed, shall be Vertical. Let this place be constituted in the Vertex of the Horizon, the Pole being elevated or depressed for the Latitude of the place, so all the places of the Globe which are above the Horizon, may have seen that Eclipse: and those which lie under the Brazen Meridian, shall see it in the Meridian: those which lie under the Oriental Semicircle, shall see it in the West, or setting with the Eclipse; but those which lie in the Occidental Semicircle of the Horizon, shall see it in the East, or Noon to arise Eclipsed. But seeing that an Eclipse is not performed in one moment of an hour, but dureth for some hours, therefore it is wont to be divided into the Beginning, Middle, and End, and the Moments of the hours are wont to be noted, there∣fore the consideration must be more especially concerning the middle time of the Eclipse. Moreover, seeing that the Moon is less than the Earth, it will illustrate a lesser part than the Hemisphere is; also it will be seen by the In∣habitants of a lesser part, so that it will not be any more conspicuous to those which lie in the Oriental Semicircle of the Horizon: but to those in the Occi∣dental Semicircle it hath not yet appeared, but a certain Circle Parallel to the Horizon is to be seen, which terminateth the part illustrated. Now how much this part is distant from the Hemisphere, or how great a portion it is of the Superficies of the Earth, shall be the enquiry of the following Proposition. Proposition XIX. The Semidiameter of the Moon, and Earth being given,See Scheme. and the distance of them, to find out how long a portion of the Earth is illustrated by the Moon at the Full. See Propositi∣on 11.This Problem must be solved by the same Mode that we have used in the Eleventh Proposition. For let the Center of the Earth be S, the great Circle representeth the Superficies, O F L H. The Center of the Moon A, the great∣est Circle C P B Q. Let the Tangents L B, O C, be drawn. For these are the ultimate rayes that can come from the Moon to the Earth, and there∣fore the Arch O H L, will denote the part of the Superficies of the Earth. which is illustrated by the Moon, and whose Inhabitants may see the Moon toge∣ther, which by how much lesser it is than the Hemisphere, we shall know if we find the Angle H S L, or the Arch H L. Let B N be drawn from B, Parallel to A S, B A shall be equal to S N, and N L, the excess of the Semidiameter of the Earth S L, above the Semidiameter of the Moon A B, and B N is of an equal distance with A S: but the the Angle N L B is direct, or of 90 Degrees. Therefore in the Triangle Streight Angle N B L, we shall find the Angle N B L by this proportion. As N B is to N L, so are the whole Signs to the Signs of the Angle L B N, whose Arch is that in which H L differeth from the Arch 90, or from the Quadrant of the Periphery of the Earth, and so great an in∣terval is the Periphery of the Earth distant from the greater Circle, termina∣nating the part of the Earth illuminated by the Moon. Let us suppose the Semi∣diameter
of the Moon to contain four parts, of such like the Semidiamiter of the Earth contains 15, or 4/15 of the Semidiamiter of the Earth: now the greatest distance of the Moon from the Earth in her Full; is 64 Semidiamiters of the Earth. Therefore N L shall be 11/15, and the proportion shall be made thus: as 64 is to a 11/15, so is 10000000 to 114583, which is the Sign 39 Minutes. Therefore the Arch H L, is less than 90 Deg. 39 Minutes, and therefore 89 Deg. 21. Minutes. Therefore in the place to which the Moon is Vertical constituted in the Ver∣tex of the Horizon, the People to whom the Moon then riseth and setteth, shall not be those which are beheld in the very Horizon, but those in the Paral∣lel of the Horizon, distant from it 39 Minutes. Proposition XX. The Declination of any Star being given, to exhibit all the places on the Terrestrial Globe, unto which that Star is Vertical in his Diurnal Cir∣cumvolution. Of the Decli∣nation of Stars.Let the Degrees of the given Declination of the Aequator, be numbred on the Brazen Meridian, and in the term of the Numeration make a sign with a Chalk, or let a Parallel be noted on the Globe by a Chalk applyed, and the Globe turn∣ed round, all the places scituated in this Parallel, are those, which pass through the noted Point of the Meridian, the Vertex of which that Star in every Diur∣nal Circumvolution shal possess for some moment of time. Proposition XXI. The direct Ascension of any Star being given, and the hour of the given day be∣ing given, to shew all those places on the Terrestrial Globe, on whose Meri∣dian the Star is at the given hour. Concerning the Ascension of any Star.Let the Degrees given of the right Ascension of the Star be numbred in the Aequator, and let a mark be made with Chalk. Let also the place of the Sun found from the given day, be brought to the Meridian; and let the Degrees of the Aequator in the Meridian be noted. Let the Arch of the Aequator intercep∣ted between these two noted Points be observed, or which is the same, let it be changed into hours, or scruples of hours: for they shew the time which in∣tercedeth between the Appulse of the Sun, and that Star at any Meridian. This done, let the places be found in whose Meridian the Sun is at the given hour, or scruple of an hour, and the Index being placed at 12, let the Globe be turned until the Index shew the hour before noted, or until the noted Degrees of the Aequator have passed the Meridian. In this scituation of the Globe all those places which are discovered subject to the Meridian, are those sought for, to wit, those in whose Meridian the Star is at the given time. Proposition XXII. The right Declination, and Ascension of a Star being given, and any time of the day being given, to exhibit on the Globe first, that place to which the Star is then Vertical. Secondly, all those places above whose Horizons the Star then shall be, and those beneath whose Horizons the same shall then be: also those, in whose Meridian it shall be at the Meridies, and in whose Meridian it shall be at midnight: also in all those places, in which the Star shall then arise, and all those im which it shall then set. From the direct Ascension, let the places be found in whose Meridian the Star is at the time given, and those may remain subject to the Brazen Meridian. Then let the Degrees of the given Declination from the Aequator, towards the Pole be numbred, and the Point of the Globe which is subject to the term of the Numeration be noted. For this is the place, unto which the Star shall be
Vertical at the time: Let it be placed in the Vertex of the Horizon, the Pole being Elevated for Latitude, so those places which are subject to the Supe∣riour Semicircle of the Meridian shall have that Star at the given time in the Meridian of the Meridies. But those places which are beheld in the Inseriour Semicircle of the Meridian, shall have it in the Meridi∣an of Midnight: and those places which are beheld in the Oriental Semicircle of the Horizon, are those to which the Star setteth at once at that time: but to those which lie in the Occidental Semicircle of the Horizon, the Star then ariseth together, Proposition XXIII. To exhibit on the Terrestrial Globe all those places, in which the Sun, Moon, and all the Stars, for so long time are obscured beneath the Horizon, as they remain to us, or any other given place above the Horizon. Let our place, or any other given place be brought to the Meridian, and let the Parallel of the Antaeci be found; all the places scituated in this Parallel, are these sought for, as may be shewed on the Globe, if that the Pole be Elevated for the Latitude of the place given, and depressed for the Latitude of the Parallel found. Proposition XXIV To shew the Cause why the days sooner augment and decrease about the Ae∣quinoxes, and more slowly about the Solstices, where for many days there seemeth to be no encrease or decrease, and that except the Aequator, in all the places of the Earth, and so much the more, by how much they are more removed from the Aequator. Concerning the augment∣ing and de∣creasing of the days about the Aequinoxes and Solstices.For Example, Let us take 30 days before the Vernal Aequinox, (from the 20 of February, to the 21 of March) and 30 days after the Solstice of Winter, or the Solstice of Capricorn (from the 21 of December, to the 21 of January); here the Cause must be shown, why the excess of the 21 of March, (or stay of the Sun above the Horizon) above the Longitude of the 20 of February be much greater, than the excess of the 21 of January, is above the 21 of December. Let the place of the Sun for every one of those 4 days be noted on the Eclip∣tick of the Globe, to wit, the first Degree of Pisces, of Aries, Capricorn, and Aquarius, and let the Parallels of the Sun be described, whereof two are ex∣tant in the Globe, viz. the Aequator, and the Tropick of Capricorn. Therefore it will be apparent, that the Aequator, or Parallel of the Sun in the 1 of Aries is absent a far longer interval, from the Parallel of the Sun in the 1 of Pisces, than the Parallel of the Sun in the 1 of Aquarius, from the Parallel in the 1 of Ca∣pricorn. Thence it cometh to pass that not much a bigger portion of the Paral∣lel of the 1 of Aquarius is above the Horizon, than of the Parallel of the 1 of Capricorn, or of the Tropick of Capricorn it self. Now these parts shew the stay of the Sun above the Horizon in those daies, but the portion of the Aequa∣tor, or Parallel of the 1 of Aries, that is above the Horizon, is much bigger than the portion of the Parallel of the 1 of Pisces. Now because these Arches being above the Horizon, denote the stay of the Sun above the Horizon, for this is the Longitude of the day, hence we collect the increase or decrease of the Declination of the Sun from the Aequator (or of the Points of the Ecliptick) to be the Cause of this unequal increase of the days, but in the places of the Aequa∣tor it self, all days are equal, and therefore here is no increase or decrease: al∣though the Sun seem to stand about the days of the Solstice, that is a little changing the Meridian Altitude. Now it is manifest, that the greater inequality of this encrease and decrease of the days is to be found, where the places are more remote from the Aequa∣tor, if that the Pole be Elevated for the distance of the divers places from the Aequator; and the Arches of the Parallels Elevated above the Horizon, be consi∣dered in both scituations.
Proposition XXV. In the places of the Torrid Zone, or those scituated in the Aequator, or in the midst of the Torrid Zone, the Sun much sooner departeth from the Vertex, than in places near the Tropick of Cancer, or Capricorn. Of the depar∣ture of the Sun in places of the Torrid zone.Let any Degree in the Brazen Meridian of the Globe be noted, for Exam∣ple, the Fifth Degree from the Aequator, and another place in the Torrid Zone being taken, for Example, one whose Latitude is 18 Degrees. Let this be brought to the Meridian; make a sign with a Chalk in this, and let 5 De∣grees from this towards the Tropick be reckoned on the Brazen Meridian, and here again make a sign with a Chalk. We must shew that the Sun in fewer days is removed from the Vertex of the places of the Aequator, 5 Degrees in the Meridies, than from the Vertex of another place so many Degrees. Let the Globe be turned until some Point of the Ecliptick come under some noted Point of the Meridian near to the Aequator. And let the Degrees of the Ecliptick between the first of Aries and Libra, and between that Point and the Arches here to be noted. Then let the Globe be turned again, until some Point of the Ecliptick pass through the Note made in the Meridian for the place, and let this Point of the Ecliptick be noted: then let the Globe be turn∣ed again until another Point of the Ecliptick pass through by that Point, remo∣ved five Degrees which is noted, which must again be noted: and let the Arch between the two last Points of the Ecliptick be reckoned, which will be found to be much bigger, than that which was first noted; and thence the Sun shall stay in this Arch more days than in the former, and therefore he more slowly recedeth from the Vertex of the second place, than from the Vertex of the place taken in the Aequator.
THE THIRD BOOK OF General Geography, TO WIT, THE COMPARATIVE PART Of the Affections from Comparing of Places. CHAP. XXXI. Of the Longitude of a place. Definitions. 1. HE Circle of the Longitude of any place in the Earth,Definition. is a Circle passing through that place, and both the Poles of the Earth. It is also termed the Meridian Circle, be∣cause the Meridian of a place, and the Cir∣cle of the Longitude of a place, are one and the same Circle. But they are only ratio∣nally distinguished, because the Meridian hath respect to the Motion of the Stars; the Circle of the Longitude, to the extensi∣on of the Earth; having no respect to the Celestial Motions. But the use of the term Meridian, is more frequent and convenient, and therefore we shall also use the word. They are conspicuous in Globes, and Maps, passing through eve∣ry Ten Degrees of the Aequator.
2. The distance of a place from a certain Meridian is termed the Longitude of a place, or else it is the Arch of the Aequator, or Parallel intercepted be∣tween the Meridian of that place, and a certain other Meridian: This Meridi∣an from which the Meridians of other places are reckoned, from West towards the East, is called the first Meridian. The Longitude of the Earth it self is termed its extension from West to East, conceived according to the Line of the Aequator. The first Meridian in the Maps, and Globes, is notable above the rest for Magnitude, and Colour, and it is apparent to the eyes. 3. The distance of one place from another, is a very short Line intercepted between those two places in the Superficies of the Earth. 4. Any Point in the Globe and Maps, is truly said to represent and exhibit any place of the Earth, if that it hath that Scituation and distance to the other points of the Maps, such as the place of the Earth, which it ought to represent, hath to the other places of the Earth, which are represented by the other Points of the Earth. Proposition I. Nature hath put no beginning or end to the dimension of the Earth, or of the extension from the West, to the East, or according to the Aequator, but all and every one of the places may be taken for a beginning and the first Meridian may be placed in them. For the better understanding of this, the matter must be more fully searched into,No beginning or end of the Dimension of the Earth, &c. because that some, (I know not upon what account) suppose great my∣sterias to le herein, that every Superficies, as well plane as crooked (as a Line y one, and a Body by three) is measured and terminated by two Dimensions, or extensions, as is evident from Principles of Geometry, and common use: of which extension one is termed the Longitude of the extension or figure, and the other the Latitude: and the one is conceived perpendicular to the other. Neither do these extensions differ in their nature, but that which we take for Longitude, may also be taken for Latitude, and so on the contrary: but yet for the most part, if these two extensions be unequal, we take the longest for Longitude, and the shortest for Latitude. But in Ordinate Figures, as in the Aequilateral Triangle, a Quadrate, and the like, the two extensions are equal; neither is there any difference between Longitude and Latitude. For the Figure of the Superficies of the Earth is Spherical, and Latitude doth not truly differ from Longitude, which we so conceive in it for the more distinct cognition. Now those two extensions in the Spherical Superficies are commodiously so conceived (as in other crook∣ed Superficies,) if that first the Periphery of the Semicricle be taken in it, drawn from one point to the opposite point, and this Line be made one extensi∣on of the Superficies, then for the other extension you shall take another Peri∣phery, cutting the former Periphery in the middle at Right Angles (for so Longitude and Latitude are taken in all Figures) and this must be conceived to extend about the whole Superficies, until it return to it self, that so, a crooked Superficies may be supposed to be extended into a plane. Because therefore the first assumed Periphery, or extension, is only the Semicircle, that shall be the Latitude of the Globe; the latter, or other extension shall be the Longitude of the Globe, because it is longer than the former extension, as returning into it self, and being the Periphery of the whole Circle. Others render another cause of the Appellation; , that the lesser part of the Earth was known to the Ancients, from Pole to Pole; the greater from the East to the West. Concerning the Latitude and Longitude of the Earth, and of places.Moreover in the Superficies of the Globe, we may take any Semipeniphery for the extension of Latitude, and his perpendicular for the extension of Lon∣gitude, and therefore we may do the same also on the Superficies of the Earth: but because it is better for memory, if that the Peripheries be assum∣ed, whose bounds, or selfe those Peripheries before the other Peripheries,
which have somewhat peculiar in the Superficies, therefore in the Superficies of the Earth for the extension of Latitude, some one Periphery is deservedly ta∣ken, drawn amongst the Poles of the Earth, and because no other Periphery is perpendicular to this Periphery, which may pass together through its Medi∣um, except the Line of the Aequator, therefore the Aequator it self must be ta∣ken for the extension of the Longitude of the Earth. So I think it is clearly explained, for what reason the Latitude of the Earth between the Poles is measured for Longitude by the assumed Line of the Aequa∣tor. This Latitude and Longitude of the Earth must not be confounded with the Latitude and Longitude of places, or Points in the Earth, therefore they are expressed by the same terms, because the Latitude of places, or Points, is ta∣ken in the Periphery of the Latitude of the Earth it self, and is part of it: but the Longitude of places or Points is taken in the Periphery of the Longitude of the Earth, viz. in the Aequator it self, and its Parallels. Yet this is an improper acceptation of the terms, because Latitude and Lon∣gitude properly (as hath been said) only agreeth to the Figures and Superficies: but a Point hath neither Latitude, nor Longitude; and therefore this different acceptation of the words, Latitude and Longitude, ought to be observed, be∣cause they are so frequently met with in the reading of Geographers, viz. the use and acceptation otherwise when we say the Latitude and Longitude of France, Spain, and the like. Because then the words are taken in their proper signifi∣cation: for it is the Figure of France, or Spain, and so Longitude then signifieth the outmost or longest extension, but Latitude the shortest; which acceptation doth agree with that, wherein we said before that so much Latitude and so much Longitude must be assigned to the Superficies of the Earth. But the signification is otherwise, when we say, the Latitude or Longitude of this place, if by places we understand any Point, City, or Famous Place, because then, Latitude denoteth the distance of the place from the Aequator; and the Longitude its distance from a certain Meridian. And indeed in my Judgment, for the avoyding of confusion,The Authors Judgment a∣bout the words Lati∣tude, and Longitude. it were better to abstain from the use of these words, Longitude and Latitude, and to use these in their stead, the distance from the Aequator, and the distance from the Meridian: but seeing that for so many Ages this hath been received, there∣fore it will be a hard matter to abolish it, wherefore in the following Discourse I shall also use the said terms, Latitude and Longitude. Moreover the Latitude of a place, as the Latitude of the whole Earth, hath some noted Points of the Earth for the beginning of the Numeration, viz. the Poles and the Aequator: but the Longitude of the Earth, because it is extended about the whole Earth, hath no certain beginning, or end, but the beginning and end is every where, because the Periphery is like to an infinite Line, Where∣fore any Point of the Aequator may be taken for the beginning of the Longi∣tude of the Earth, and the Meridian passing through that Point, for the first Me∣ridian, from whence the Meridians of all the Points of the Earth are numbred, or the Longitude of them Calculated. Now why we require these two distances in every Point of the Earth, viz. one from the Aequator, and the other from a certain Meridian, shall be shewed in the Third Proposition. Proposition II. To place and determinate the first Meridian, and the beginning of the Nume∣ration for the Longitude of the places in the Globe of the Earth. We have said in the preceeding Proposition that every Point of the Aequator may be taken for the beginning of the extension of the Earth according to Lon∣gitude,See Propositi∣on 1. and that from its Meridian the Longitudes of places must be reckoned, but because we cannot take all at once, it is better to fix one beginning, or to choose some certain Point, (but that is left to the choice of persons). Therefore Geographers have taken a certain place in the Superficies of the Earth, through which the first Meridian shall be drawn, and should shew in the Aequator, where it cutteth it, this beginning of reckoning of the Longitude of places. But all have
not taken the same place for the first Meridian, but divers. Ptolomy hath taken that near to the Fortunate Islands, which he removeth but only one deg. from the first, and hence towards the Oriental quarter through Africa, and Asia, he reckoneth the rest of the Meridians,The Longitude of places where begun by Ptolomy. and Longitude of places. For seeing it was less free to place a beginning, the Ancients chose rather to have an account of the places of the Earth, which they knew were inhabited, which portion doth not return into it self, as the Superficies of the Earth, and therefore in that por∣tion or part a beginning of Longitude and end may be assigned in another Point. Because therefore in the time of Ptolomy the Fortunate Isles, where the ulti∣mate ones in the Occidental Quarter of all the Earth, or Lands then known: Therefore from that bound Ptolomy beginneth to reckon the Longitude of the Earth, and having gone forwards to the Oriental Regions, he maketh the end of his Numeration of the Meridians, in Sina, the ultimate Shoar of Asia. But in process of time many Regions of the Earth were found to be Inhabited towards the Occid. and America was discovered, then some Geographers promo∣ted the beginning of Numeration of Longitude towards the Occid. For some made the first Meridian at the Isle of St. Nicholas, adjacent to Cape Verd in Africa; but Hondius chose the Isle of St. James in his Maps. The Longitude of places where begun by Hon∣dius, Mercator, and others.Some chose the Meridian of one of the Islands of the Azores, which is called Del Corvo for the first Meridian, because that in this Isle, and the adjoyning Sea, the Magnetick Needle is found to have no Declination from the Meridian Line, and that it sheweth the Northern and Southern quarter. Mercator hath ob∣served the beginning also in his Maps. But seeing that there are other places in the Earth, where the Magnetick Needle doth the same, neither doth it do it in all the Meridian of this place, therefore other Geographers have not thought that Cause sufficient: and some have placed the first Meridian in the Brazilian Shore: the more Modern, espe∣cially the Hollanders having gone back to the Fortunate, or Canary Isles, have chose in one of them called Teneriffe,The Longitude by the Hollan∣ders begun at Teneriffe. a Mountain which is thought to be the highest in the whole World, called El pico de Teneriffe, and from the Meridian of this Mountain, they judge the Numeration of the Longitude of places ought to be begun, because they think fit that a Famous and durable place for all Ages may be best chosen for this purpose, concerning which in Ages to come, Poste∣rity should not easily doubt, and moreover that that assignation of Ptolomy, which hath been observed for so many Ages, should not be deserted on a trivial account.The Longi∣tude by the French begun at the Isle of Fer, in the Cana∣ries. The French at this day, from the Year 1634, observe that for the first Meridian which passeth through the Occidental part of the Isle of Fer, one of the Canary Isles. Which beginning Lewis the XIII King of France, com∣manded his Mariners and Geographers to observe. Astronomers also take divers places for the first Meridian. For those who fol∣low Tycho, are wont to place it at Ʋranoburge, scituate in an Island in the Da∣nish Sea, and at this place to compute their Celestial motions, and thence to o∣ther places. Others make other beginnings as they follow this or that Author of the Ephemerides.The Longi∣tude likewise begun in sun∣dry places by Astronomers. For the Writers of Ephemerides, as also the computers of the Planetary Tables, are wont to calculate the motions and appearances of the Planets, to the Meridians of their own Country, as Origanus to Frankford, Maginus to Venice, (because that Padua is an Academy of the Venetians). Ecstadius to Stetin, Lansbergius to Goesa in Zeland, Reinholdus to Regium a Mountain of Borusia. But to speak freely what I think, all this dissent of Authours proceedeth from no sufficient Cause, so that those who first removed the Ptolomaick-beginning out of its place are blame worthy. But it is all one, whatsoever beginning of this account is taken in the Earth, whether the place be noted, or the ultimate to the Occident, or Orient, so that the scituation and distance of the other places be accurately known at it. Yet this variety of the beginning of the Me∣ridians expresseth the reading of Geographical Writers with many confusions and difficulties. Yet because the knowledge of the De∣clination of the Loadstone, is of great utility, and that that Declination encreas∣eth
even to a certain Meridian, and then again decreaseth, I think it not altoge∣ther inconvenient for the observation of the Declination of the Load stone, and the more easy comparison of the increase or decrease of it, if that that be taken for the first Meridian, in which the Magnetick Needle maketh little or no Decli∣nation, so that such a Meridian might be given, viz. in all the places of which, or the most at least, the Magnetick Needle would do it. But seeing that the Hollanders at this time take the Mountain of Teneriffe, for the beginning of their Longitude, and that they Sail at this day into all parts of the World, therefore it is convenient to acknowledge the same be∣ginning with them for the better understanding of the Diaries that they are wont to publish. Now you must know that the Reading of Authours, where mention is made of the Longitude of a Place, or of a certain numbred Meridian, that then you ought to consider, what beginning of Longitude that Author determineth, or through what place he bringeth his first Meridian, (as you are to observe that the Maps which are used in the Second Part of this Book, being the Geo∣graphical Description of the parts and places of the Four Parts of the World, the Longitude I say of those places, are taken according to the French Account, beginning at the Isle of of Fer, being one of the Canary Isles, they being Com∣posed by Monsieur Sanson, Geographer to the King of France, and whose Me∣thod is not convenient to be allow'd), for to that the Longitude of other places must be brought and inquired of. Proposition III. The Latitude and Longitude of any place, or the distance of any place from the Aequator, or a certain Meridian being given, which is found in the Maps, or Globes, to exhibit the scituation and Point of that place on the Maps, or Globes. Or thus, If that we be in any place of the World (ei∣ther at Land or Sea) which is unknown unto us, or whose scituation we are ignorant of, to the other parts of the Earth, so that if we can find the Latitude and Longitude of this place, thence to find out the scituation of this place in the Earth, and its distance from other places. This is that Problem for which a Method is sought so anxiously, and with so great industry, by which the Longitude of a place at any time in which we are in it may be found, and therefore although we should first treat of the inven∣tion of this Longitude, yet I thought it fitter to premise the Problem it self, for which that Longitude is sought for, and that for this reason, seeing that we must treat largely of this Longitude, least you should be cloyed, not know∣ing to what end so great a labour is undertaken, and so many various ways tryed. The Longi∣tude and Lati∣tude of places, of great impor∣tance to Mari∣ners to know.For Mariners having Sailed far from the Shoar, and being in the Ocean, because they cannot accurately know the way of their Voyage made, by rea∣son of the divers hindrances, and note it in their Maps, are often ignorant in what place of the Earth they are, what scituation this place hath to those places whither they go, or what places are to be gone to, if that they will avoid danger, and therefore also they are ignorant unto what quarter they must direct their course. Unto the knowledge of which there is no more ready a Method, than for to certainly find the Longitude, and Latitude of the place, that is, its distance from the Aequator, and some certain Meridian of the Earth. And Mathematicians have taught them, with no great difficulty by divers ways to find out the Latitude of a place in the day by the Sun, and in the night by the Stars. Such Modes we have shewed before, (for those who think to know it only by the help of the Compass, sufficiently discovered their igno∣rance;) from which Latitude being found, they know in what Parallel of the Earth they are, which indeed is no small part of the demand. But seeing that the Points of the Parallel are infinite, they do not yet know from the know∣ledge of this Latitude in what Point of the Parallel they are: this they would at∣tain,
if that they knew in what Meridian they were, or how many degrees this Meridian is distant from some Meridian of other places. For this Meridian cutteth the Parallel before found, that Point is the place wherein they are. For so it is observed in all Mathematical Disciplines, that when it is demand∣ed concerning the place of any Point, that for the most part is no otherwise found than by the Section of two Lines. Therefore let the Latitude or Longitude of any place, or Point scituated in the Superficies of the Earth be known, the scituation of the place or Point will be found thus in the Globe. Let the deg. of Latitude from the Aequator be numbred in the Brazen Me∣ridian, and at the term of the Numeration, let the Parallel of the place, or Circle of Latitude, be described by a Chalk applyed. Thus it is certain from the found out Latitude, that we are in some Point of it, or that some Point of it is that which is sought for. And this Point moreover is known from the found out Longitude, for let the Meridian or place, from which that Longitude is reckoned be brought under the Brazen Meridian (if that the Meridian pass through the beginning of this Numeration, or if the first Meridian of the Globe be that be∣ginning, then it is not necessary to bring it to the Brazen Meridian) and let the deg. of the known Longitude, be numbred in the Aequator for that Point, which is in the Meridian, towards the West, or East, as the Longitude is given. Let the term of the Numeration be brought to the Brazen Meridian (except some Meridian pass through it) so this Meridian shall represent the Meridian in which the Point sought, or place unknown is necessarily scituated. And the Parallel is before found, in which the same demanded Point hath been shown to be sci∣tuated. Wherefore the sought place is that Point where the found out Meri∣dian, and the before found out Parallel mutually cut one another, viz. that Point of the Parallel which is discovered under the Brazen Meridian: The pra∣ctice is easy after this Mode. Let the degrees of the given Longitude be numbred in the Aequator, from that Point which is the beginning of the given Longitude: Let the term of the Numeration be brought to the Brazen Meridian, and let the Degrees of the La∣titude given be reckoned from the Aequator in the Meridian. The term of this Numeration is the place sought, or the term of the Point, in which the place unknown lyeth. Mariners make use of Maps or Charts con∣sisting of streight Lines.It is thus shewed on Maps, consisting of streight Lines, as all Mariners Maps are: the degrees of Latitude are reckoned in the Lines descending, or side Lines, and the Rule being applyed, the Parallel of the place is drawn, in which it is certain that the unknown place lyeth. Then in the transverse lines above and beneath, the Longitude is reckoned, and the Rule being applyed, the Meridian Line is drawn, where this cutteth the former, that is the Point of the place sought for. But more expeditiously thus: the Rule being applyed to the degrees of Longitude given in the tranverse lines, then one or other part is ta∣ken from the interval of the Compass in the Lateral line, which lyeth between the given degree of Latitude, and the upper or lower Point, and this interval or space of the Compass being fitted to the Rule, presently you have the place of the Point sought for in the Map. Therefore the scituation of this is beheld at once in all places; hence it is easy to gather unto what quarter the Ship must Sail, and direct her Course, if that they intend to arrive at this or that place. Of Maps of Crooked Lines.We act after the same Mode in Maps of Crooked lines, except only that we are forced to draw Crooked lines in streight lines. This is the principal use of the found out Latitude of the Mariners Art. The second and greatest use, is the making of Globes and Maps, because after the same Mode in which we have shewed by Longitude, and Latitude known, all the places are made in the Globes and Maps, as shall be shewed in the follow∣ing Proposition. For it would be impossible to make a Terrestrial Globe, except the Longitude of places had been found out and known. And thence it cometh to pass, that Globes, and Maps, may attribute many places to a false place, be∣cause their true Latitude was not known.
The third use of the known Latitude of places is also notable, viz. that by that we easily know the variety of times in divers places, and in what hour, or in what part of an hour every one of the Celestial Phoenomena's are beheld in di∣vers Regions, of which I shall speak in the next Proposition. The fourth use, is that from the difference of the Longitude of two places, and Latitude, the distance of places is found. Now we come to the Method of finding of it. Proposition IV. The Sun, Stars, and all the Points conceived in the Heaven (as the Points of the Aequator, and Parallels) are every hour removed, or recede 15 de∣grees from the Meridian of any place, in one scruple of an hour 1/60 they are removed 15 minutes, and so in 4 scruples of an hour they recede one de∣gree, viz. the distance being taken in the Parallel of any Star. The Sun, Stars, and all the Points con∣ceived in the Heavens, are every hour re∣moved 15 de∣grees from the Meridian of any place.An hour is the 24th part of time, in which the Sun being carried from the Meridian of any place, to the Occident through the lower Heaven, and the Oriental Horizon, returneth to the Meridian again, that is, he is circumvolved through an whole Periphery. Now a Periphery is accounted by 360, and if you divide 360 by 24, you shall find that 15 degrees do answer to one hour. There∣fore the Sun in one hour is removed 15 deg. from the Meridian of any place, all the Stars also are found at the same time to be wheeled round with the Sun, through an whole Periphery to the Meridian. Wherefore they also depart from the Meridian every hour 15 deg. and in 4 scruples of an hour one deg. This may be shewed or demonstrated on the Globe. For let any Point of the Aequator be noted, and that being brought to the Meridian, let the Index be placed at the 12th hour of the Circle. Then let the Globe be turned until the Index shew the first hour, and you shall find that the noted Point of the Aequator, hath departed 15 deg. from the Meridian, or as we commonly say, the Meridian hath passed 15 deg. of the Aequator: if you then again turn the Globe until the Index shew the 2d, 3d, or 4th hour, you shall find in every noted hour, that the Point hath departed from the Meridian 15 degrees. Af∣ter the same Mode we shall find the same in any Parallel, which the Sun and Stars do describe by a Diurnal Motion without the Aequator. Proposition V. The given hours being given at one and the same time, or at one and the same Celestial appearance, as also the Horary minutes of our place, and that of the other place; to find out how many degrees the Meridian of our place is distant from the Meridian of the other place, that is to find the Longi∣tude of our place from that place. The solution is easy from what hath been said already, by reason that it hath been shewed, that if one place anticipateth one hour of the account of the o∣ther place, the Meridian of that is more Oriental than the Meridian of this, by 15 degrees; if two hours by 30 degrees; if three hours by 45 degrees. Let therefore the difference of the given hours, be changed into the degrees, and Minutes of the Aequator, viz. reckoning for every hour 15 degrees; for ¾ of an hour, 3 degrees, 45 Minues; for one scruple of an hour 1 degree. The found out degrees and Minutes, will shew the distance of the Meridians, viz. if that the hours of our place be more than the hours of the other place, our Meridian shall be scituated towards the East from the other; if fewer, towards the West.
Proposition VI. Again hours and scruples of hours of divers places being given at one and the same time; or at the time of one and the same Celestial appearance, and one place, or one Meridian of one place being given in the Maps, or Globes, to exhibit also the Meridian or Longitude of another place on the Globe or Maps. Let the difference of hours, and scruples of hours be changed into the De∣grees and Minutes of the Aequator.Further con∣cerning the Longitude of places. Then consider, whether the hours of this place, whose Meridian is given on the Globe, and the Maps be fewer or more than that of the other place, whose Meridian is sought for. If fewer, this other Meridian shall be scituated from the given Meridian, towards the East; if more towards the West. Let it be brought to the Brazen Meridian (except some other Meridian pass through it) and let the Degrees and Minutes found from the difference of the hours be numbred from the Point of the Aequator, toge∣ther being in the Meridian, and that towards the West, or East, as we collect the scituation of the other place (it is more easily done by the Horary Index applyed to 12, and the Globe being turned round until the Index shew the dif∣ference of the hours). Let the term of the account be noted with Chalk, and brought under the Meridian: so this Brazen Meridian shall be the Meri∣dian sought, and the Point of the Aequator shall shew its Longitude. In Maps let the same Degrees and Minutes be numbred from the given Me∣ridian in tranverse lines above and below, and the Rule being applyed, let the Line be drawn (for in right lined Maps, as such as those of Mariners, is the chief of this Problem) this Line shall be the sought for Meridian. Proposition. VII. To find the Longitude of an unknown place, in which we are, or to find the distance of the Meridian in which we are, from some known Meridian, or whose scituation is or may be expressed on the Maps, or Globes. Of the finding out of the Longitude of an unknown place in which we are.This is that Problem whose solution Seamen so much expect from the Ma∣thematicians, which would render the Art of Navigation almost perfect, and subject to no Errour, which hath exercised for this two Ages the wits of so ma∣ny great persons, for the resolving of which, the English, French, Dutch, have every one appointed a donative of 50000 Florens to him who shall ex∣hibit a resolution: the Dutch and German Mariners are wont sometimes to expound the: Problem according to the Latine phrase: but sometimes they use another, as if you should say, to seek the Oriental and Occidental quarter, which phrase is very void of the matter; so that it is manifest what a power the Vulgar have taken in introducing new phrases, though very improper. For by this phrase it cometh to pass that persons unskilful in Geography, and Na∣vigation, are ignorant what the Mariners mean, when they speak of find∣ing out the East, and West: for most think, that they seek what the words import, viz. the Eastern and Western quarter, which yet is false and unwor∣thy the demand. For they know these quarters when they are in any place of the Sea, by the benefit of the same Magnetick Needle, which sheweth the North and South. Because in the Mariners Compass all the quarters are no∣ted, and without the Compass the Plaga of the North and South, being known, it is most easy to shew the quarter of the East, and West; for the face being turned towards the North, the East is on the right hand, the West on the left: on the contrary, the face being turned towards the South, the East is on the left hand, and the West on the right. But this is not the demand, but the Longitude of the place is that required; that is, how much in the Arch of the Aequator the Meridian of this place is removed towards the West, or East, from any certain Meridian. But why, may some say, do Mariners assume so
improper a phrase? The reason is, that the Vulgar do conceive almost all things confusedly, and only Superficially, and from a small similitude with other things impose Names and Phrases, as is manifest from the appellation of America, which they Vulgarly term the West Indies, because that after the discovery of India, (properly so called) that was also found. This might be instanced by many more Examples, and so it is with this phrase, to seek the East and West. But seeing that this Problem to find out the North and South, is resolved by the Magnetick Needle, and also the Problem of finding out the Longitude of a place is of very great Moment, and Mariners desire to have as easy a Method to know the same, as that of the Latitude of a place, and moreover that Longitude is reckoned from the West, to the East in the Aequator;Longitude reckoned from the West to the East in the Aequator. therefore by reason of this slight similitude, and account, they have taken up this phrase, to find the East and West, when here no quarter is sought for, but only the distance of the Me∣ridians. This is convenient to explain, by reason that many were brought in∣to an Error, and false Conception of the same, or at least were ignorant, what was signifyed by the phrase. It is easy as is shewed aforesaid, from the difference of hours, to shew, or find out the Longitude of one place from another. Therefore in Calendars, and Ephemerides, (by the signal Benefit, and liberality of Astronomy) we have set down for every day and hour, all the Phoenomena of any place, and the Motions of the Planets, as the beginning, the middle, the end of an Eclipse; also the Conjunction of the Moon with other Planets, her entrance into the E∣cliptick. Therefore being in the place of an unknown Longitude, if we en∣quire the hour in which we behold the same Phoenomena in this place, we shall thence find the difference of our hour, from the hour of that place unto which the Tables are Calculated; and hence moreover the distance of the Meridian from the Meridian in which we are, or whose hours the Table sheweth, and so we have the demanded Longitude of the place. Neither doth the difficulty consist in the finding of the hour, and Horary scruples, for they are easily known from the quarter on Altitude of the Sun or Stars, but the diffi∣culty is in the defect of such Celestial appearances, which may be so ob∣served. Now although there be also other Modes, by which without the knowledge of the hours, and consideration of the Planetary motions, the Longitude of a place may be inquired, yet they have no place here, by reason that they do not first shew the Longitude, but the place it self, and require other things which are equally unknown in those cases with the Longitude, which Modes we shall explain in the following discourse. But now we seek such Modes, in which that Longitude of the place may be found, where the scituation of the place is unknown. All which Modes presuppose a knowledge and comparison of the time in which any appearance of the Planetary motion is beheld in divers places. But those Motions are unfit for this business which are very slow, so that in many hours none, or little difference is found in the place of those Planets. For Example, Saturn maketh his Progress in the Ecliptick, in the space of one hour. Therefore although from the Ephemerides we may have the time, and the hour which is in that place when that Saturn is in the Ecliptick, yet because that he moveth very slowly, thence it cometh to pass, that if you observe, he seemeth to stay many hours in the same place, and therefore that Moment of the hour cannot be known in the place where we are, seeing that they stay in the very minute, and therefore they can∣not also compare the hour of our place, with the hour of the place of the Tables. The Motion of the Sun in the Ecliptick.So the Sun goeth forwards every hour in the Ecliptick about 2 ½ first minutes, (because in an whole day it goeth forwards about one degree) which Motion is over flow for this business, by reason that although observa∣tions may be very accurately made at the beginning and end of the hour, yet the same place of the Sun shall be found, and therefore the Error of two or three hours may easily happen. For you must know, that the Modes ought to be such that in the very search of the 15th part of an hour, an error
may be avoyded, that is, that that Celestial Phoenomenon, which is made use of for the finding of the same, may sensibly be varied within two scruples of an hour; for if at or between two scruples of an hour, it remaineth altogether the same both as to sense and diligent observation, we cannot be certain of that part of an hour, in which that happeneth truly in the Heaven, and if we err two scruples of an hour in the observation, then an errour of half a degree will slip into the Longitude; so that we will suppose that our Meridian in which we are, and note it in the Maps, and Globes, which is not the true one, but remo∣ved from the true one in the Aequator half a deg. Therefore they are such Phoenomenons of the Planets, which within two scruples of an hour, or else at one scruple, or if possible, at half a scruple may be varied. But of such there are none but these. 1. The beginning of the Eclipse of the Moon, the middle, and the end. 2. The Longitude, or place of the Moon in the Zodiack, 3. The distance of the Moon from the fixed Stars, or her appulse towards them. 4. The ingress of the Moon into the Ecliptick, or into the Points of her Cir∣cle, where this cutteth the Ecliptick; And 5. The Conjunction, Distance, and Eclipses of the Jovial Planets, viz. of those Four Planets which are found in this our Age, to make a Circuit about Jupiter. Whence the Coperni∣can Hypothesis hath obtained a great deal of Confirmation. The first Mode by the Eclipse of the Moon. Of the Eclipse of the Moon. First Mode.This Mode is very▪ accurate if that their could happen but Eclipses every night. At the time wherein we behold the beginning or end of the Lunary Eclipse by the help of the Telescope, then I say, let the Altitude, or Plaga of any fixed Star be observed, and also let the Elevation of the Pole be before found out, or let it together be sought for from some Star in the Meridian. From the Altitude of the Star, the hour with the scruples, is accurately enough found, as we shall shew from Astronomy, and more easily without the invention of Altitude, if the Star be in the Meridian. Let this hour so found out with the scruples, be compared with the hour and scruples in which the Ephemerides exhibit the beginning of the Eclipse, or the middle, (which hours respect the Me∣ridian, unto which the Ephimerides are Calculated) for so the hour of two places is found at the same time, or at the same Celestial appearance, viz. the hour of our place, and of the Meridian of the Ephemerides: and the Meridian of the Ephemerides is known. Therefore we shall find the Longitude of our place from the Meridian of the Ephemerides, if we change the difference of the hours of both places into the degrees and Minutes of the Aequator, as we have said in the V. Proposition. And because in Maps given, and in the Globe, the given Meridian of the Ephemerides is known, or may be shewed with little labour, therefore we must reckon the degrees found out from it in the trans∣verse lines of the Maps, towards the West, or East, as the hour of our place, or of the place unknown shall be more, or sewer than the hours of the Meridi∣an of the Ephemerides and the Meridian Line shall be brought through the term of the Numeration. That is the Meridian of the place in which we then are, or in which the observation of the Ecliptick was made. The second Mode by the place of the Moon in the Zodiack. Although the preceeding Mode, by the Eclipse of the Moon performing the business,The second Mode. be most accurate, yet because those Eclipses are very rare, neither are all conspicuous in all places, therefore this Mode doth not resolve the busi∣ness sufficiently, neither can it help the Mariners in the wide Ocean, but it is more convenient to the constituting and finding out the hours of the Terre∣strial places, where Mathematicians are, or may go, and the Longitudes of almost all places▪ which we know are found out by this Mode. For from the noted comparation of the time, in which the beginning, or middle of the E∣clise was discovered, it is easy to find out the Longitude of one place from another, as I think is sufficiently explained. But the use of Mariners requi∣reth
a Phoenomenon or appearance, viz. which may happen every night at the least (if not in the days) because it can happen in every night, so that they may be in an unknown place, as deceived by Tempests. But the more frequent Phoenomenon is the place of the Moon in the Zodiack, but a very troblesom ob∣servation is required by reason of twofold Parallaxes, so that you can hardly avoid a small error, if at least a great one of half, or an whole hour be shunned, whence a false Meridian is found removed from a true many miles; viz. a hundred and more. Yet you will be subject to the lesser error, if that you expect the moment of the hour in which the Moon is in the Meridian: for then the place is accurately enought found after this Mode. When you have observed that the Moon is come into the Meridian of the place where you are, then you must presently take the noted Altitude of some Star, and from this,It is presuppo∣sed that the Elevation of the Pole is be∣fore found. and the Elevation of the Pole, you may enquire the hour: but it is better to do it by some Star then in the Meridian, as we shall hereafter shew. Moreover from the known hour is found what Point of the Ecliptick, or Zodiack, is then in the Meridian, or that possesseth the middle of Heaven (as Astronomers speak) which also is easy as we shall shew anon. So at the hour of our place, or of the un∣known place, we shall have the known place of the Moon in the Zodiack. Then from the Tables of the Ephemerides let the hour be found, which is in the Me∣ridian of the Ephemerides, where the Sun is in the place of the Zodiack, which is taught in the Introduction of the Ephemerides, neither is it difficult. And so again we shall have the hours of two places at the same time, viz. of the place in which we are, whose Longitude is unknown, and of the place, unto whose Meridian the Ephemerides are Calculated, and whose scituation is in Maps and Globes. Wherefore from the difference of time the Longitude of our place sought for shall be found, as is sufficiently demonstrated in the pre∣ceeding Mode. The third Mode, by the distance of the Moon from some fixed Star. The third Mode of the Moon.By reason that we cannot observe the Moon in the Meridian many nights, viz. when she is not much removed from the Sun, after and before the New Moon, and therefore this appearance is not so frequent as the Mariners use re∣quireth, Therefore some do consider another Phoenomenon in the motion of the Moon, which is more frequent, and from thence the Mode in finding out the Longitude is delivered, viz. the drawing near, and departing of the Moon from the fixed Stars; for from thence the true place of the Moon may be ob∣served at the given moment of the observation. But the Calculation is so diffi∣cult by reason of the Parallaxes, and the solution of the Oblique Spherical Tri∣angles, and other hazards, that it can neither serve Mariners, nor will I bur∣then you with its Precepts, but rather omit it. For it requireth a Genius most expert in Calculation. The fourth Mode by the entrance of the Moon into the Ecliptick. The fourth Mode of the Moon.The path of the Moon cutteth the Ecliptick in two points, in which when it cometh by its own proper motion, she is then in the Ecliptick, but at other times it is moved out of it by a great departure of 5 degrees. Therefore you must ob∣serve exactly the time in the place of the unknown Longitude, in which the Moon toucheth the Ecliptick. Moreover from the Ephemerides, let the hour be taken at the Meridian of the Ephemerides, in which that entrance is made. Then from the comparison of our time, or of the place unknown, with the time of the Meridian of the Ephemerides, you have the difference of time, whence the Longitude of the place, which is ours may be found from the Meridian of the Ephemerides. But this Mode also by reason of the difficult practice is to be esteemed useless. For the entrance of the Moon into the Ecliptick is diffi∣cult to be observed, and the Calculation is very intricate, and subject to rror.
The fifth Mode by the Jovial Planets. The fifth Mode by the Jovial Planets.Many judge this Phoenomenon to be prefered before the Phoenomenons of the Moon in this affair, because that these Jovial attendants are not subject to Pa∣rallaxes; and moreover in every scituation of Jupiter above the Horizon, afford a commodious observation. There are four Planets, the invention of the Great Galilaeus, which move about Jupiter, as about the Center of their Lord, so small that they cannot be discerned by a free sight, but only by the help of a Telescope. Their Motion (viz. that proper to them, by which they move about Jupiter, for they have a Diurnal Motion common with all the Stars, (a Motion common in the Ecliptick with Jupiter, and the other Planets) is ve∣ry swift. For he that is next to Jupiter, absolveth his course in one day with 18 ½ hours; the second in 3 days, with 13 ¼ hours; the third in 7 days, and 2 hours; the fourth and last in 16 days with 18 hours. The progress of their Motion must be Calculated at every hour, and therefore it is not found in the common Ephe∣merides; but you have their Ephemerides in other Books. Therefore if we de∣sire by the help of their Motions to find the Longitude of a place, we must make use of a most perfect Astroscope, and in the night turning it to Jupiter (if he be above the Horizon of that place) to observe the Conjunction of these two Pla∣nets, or the Conjunction with Jupiter, or the like appearance, and at that mo∣ment of time to find also the hour of the place from the Meridian scituation or Altitude of any Star. Then the Ephemerides of these Companions of Jupiter must be consulted, and the hour, and scruples of hours thence taken, in which such a Conjunction is in the Meridian, unto which those Ephemerides are com∣puted. And so again we shall have the hour of the two places at the time of one and the same Phoenomenon. Whence from the difference of the hours, if it be turned into degrees, we shall find the Longitude of our place from the Me∣ridian of the Ephemerides which is known. The sixth Mode by an Automatical, or moving Dial, or Horologe. By reason that all the Modes in which by the Celestial Phoenomena we have shewed to find the Longitude of places are in this respect defective,The sixth Mode by a moving Dial. that they do not appear every night (for it is known concerning the Moon, as also with the attendants of Jupiter, that they rise and set with the Sun near to Jupiter) and moreover that they have a great difficulty of observing in the Ships, joyn∣ed or accompanied with the flowing of waves; for this reason many leaving the appearances of the Moon, and the attendance of Jupiter, fly to the Auto∣matical Horologe, and advise the Mechanical Artificers, so to endeavour to prepare a Machine, or Horologe as may be subject to no error, so that it may shew 24 hours at the same time, in which the Sun may be circumvolved, and may make one day, or 24 hours, and may neither Anticipate or postdate the time. A moving Dial very useful for the finding the Longitudes of places.If that such an Automaton could be made, it would be very apt and afford a most facile invention of Longitude to Navigators. For before that they set Sail from any place, the hour of that place must be observed accurately at some time (which is no difficult matter) and the Automaton was to be disposed at that hour, and so in every day it will shew the hours of this place, if that it be subject to no fault. When therefore that place being left, it came to another whose Longitude or distance of the Meridian, from the Meridian of the place of the departure, we desire to know, nothing remaineth to be done, but that we should observe in this place the hour from Heaven (which in the day time is done by the Sun, in the night by the Stars without much labour) of this place, and also looking on the Automaton what hour then is in the place, or Meridian whence we departed. So we shall have the hours of two places at the same moment of time. And therefore that difference of hours, if that it be changed into degrees and Minutes, as hath been
said already, it will shew the Longitude of this place, from the Meridian of our place whence we departed, and so the degrees in the Maps or Globes being numbred from this Meridian whence we departed, they will shew he Meridi∣an where we are. But notwithstanding Artists have hitherto shewed great industry in the ma∣king of an Automaton of such perfection, yet none hath been so happy to accomplish the same. For both the condition of the matter whence they are made lacks such a perfection, and the diversity of the Air taketh away the perpetual equality of the motion. For when the Air is cold, it moves more slowly than when the Air is warm, so that the Automaton which the Hollan∣ders placed in their Houses, when they lived a whole Winter in Nova Zem∣bla, ceased wholly from motion, although that they added more weight to it than was usual. Now for the correcting this defect in these Automatical Horologies, or Clocks,The Automa∣tical Horologe subject to Er∣ror. they advise us every day to place the Horologe at the hour of that place in which, or unto which they then are come, but although this be done, yet a great error may creep into the invention of Longi∣tude. For if on the second day of our going forth, the Longitude of this place, or Meridian may be found out from the hours of the Automaton, compared with the hours of the place unto which we are come, and the hours of the Auto∣maton do not altogether exactly agree with the hours of the place whence we set Sail, thence it will come to pass that a defective Longitude may be taken, and a false Meridian noted in the Maps for the place of the Ship that day In the following day, viz. on the third day, a false Longitude shall again be found, and that being numbred from the false Meridian of the preceding day, shall duplicate the error. On the fourth day again it shall be augment∣ed, and the defect shall be triplicated. On the fifth day it shall be four times worse, and so on. For Example, if that an Horologe in the space of 24 hours prove defective in the Celestial motion and revolution for the 15th part of an hour, (which perfection our Artificers do seldom exceed) the Longitude found from it shall be greater or lesser than an whole degree (for 1/13 of an hour, maketh a degree) and so a false Meridian of this day shall be noted in the Maps, which is distant from the true a degree, or 15 Miles. And on the third day, by reason that the Automaton erreth again the 15th part of an hour, here again will be the defect of one degree of Longitude, and see∣ing that the noted Meridian of the former day is also absent one degree from the Meridian, which is true, and from thence the Numeration is made for the Meridian of the third day, here now will be a Meridian removed two degrees, that is thirty Miles in the Aequator: on the fourth day three degrees, on the fifth day four degrees, that is sixty Miles, so that at length the numera∣ted Longitude, and the noted Meridian will be far from the Meridian in which the Ship then is. And this is the Cause why this Mode is not perfect, and is therefore neglected by Mariners. Lemma. Because that in all the preceeding Modes of finding out of a Longitude, the hour was to be sought for at the time of observation, therefore we shall explain the same Mode from the Principles of Astronomy, by which it is done (for con∣cerning the Elevation of the Pole, which also is required, we have spoken in the 23 Chapter). In the day time the Sun must be observed,See Chap. 3 in the night the most remarkable Stars. At both time it is best to expect the time in which the Sun or Stars are in the Meridian, and for the knowing the hours and Horary scruples of the other remaining part of time, a most exact Automaton must be used. For an Automaton will little err above the space of half a day if it be ex∣actly made, and so we shall have no need of the Elevation of the Pole in this case, which yet we ought to know by reason of the Parallel. Concerning the day therefore, the Sun being brought into the Meridian, we know the 12 hour to be in the place, and therefore the Automaton must be pla∣ced
at this very moment of time to shew the hours of the following time. But if the Phoenomenon must be observed before the Meridies, let the Automaton be dis∣posed at the very time of the observation, and then let the appulse of the Sun at the Meridian be observed, and then looking on the Automaton the hours may be known, which are elapsed from the time of the observation to the Meridies, or 12th hour, whence the hour of the observation shall be known. But if when the Sun is without the Meridian, you desire to know the hour from the Heaven, let the Altitude of the Sun be taken at the time of the Phoe∣nomenon, or appearance. Then on the Spherical Triangle, from three given sides, which are the Complement of the Elevation of the Pole (or the distance of the place from the Pole) the Complement of the Declination of the Sun to that day, and the Complement of the observed Altitude of the Sun; from these three sides, I say, of the Spherical Triangle, let any Angle be found out: in this that must be found which is comprehended from the Complements of the Declinati∣on and Elevation of the Pole, or that which is opposed to the Complement of the Altitude of the Sun, which how it may be done, let those that are stu∣dious search from the Doctrine of Trigonometry. How the hour may be found by the Globe from the Altitude of the Sun at any time,See Chap. 29. Proposition 3. we have shewed in the 29 Chap. and the 3d. Prop. which may satisfie most Students in Geography, when they do not so much as demand an exact part of an hour, but in Navi∣gation it must be Calculated, except some, who resolve it by a Catholick Pla∣nisphere, but I fear over much defect in Horary scruples. In the night time the Stars must be applyed, as hath been said, and because, for the most part, one or other of them may be had in the meridian; therefore there is no neces∣sity to exhibit another without the Meridian, but it is best to Elect one in the Meridian, or to expect it at the time, in which some Star nigh to the Meridi∣an cometh unto it. Then assume from the Astronomical Tables, the direct Ascension of that Star. and also the direct Ascension of the Sun of that Point of the Ecliptick, in which the Sun is on that day. And if the direct Ascension of the Sun shall be lesser, let it be substracted from the Ascension of the Star; if greater, let his Complement be taken at 360 degrees, and let this be added to the Ascension of the Star. Change the degrees thus taken into hours, and scruples of hours: these shall those demanded at the time of the observa∣tion. Proposition VIII. To shew other Modes of finding out of Longitude,Other ways for the finding out of Longi∣tude. which exhibit not prima∣rily and properly the Longitude, but the very place of the Point (whose Longitude or Meridian is only demanded): yet it is commodious to use for the Constituting or examining of the Longitude of Terrestrial pla∣ces. The first Mode. The distance and Latitude of two places being given, to find the Longitude of one place from the other; but in Maps which Mariners use, and in Globès to find the Point of an unknown place, if that another place be given, (for there is always one place known or given). The first Mode.If that by a Trigonometrick Calculation, you will find out the accurate Lon∣gitude, you must find the Angle on the Spherical Triangle, all whose sides are given, viz, the distance being turned into degrees, the Complements of Latitude, or distance of the places from the Pole: the computation must be made from the two sides of the comprehended Angle, which are the Comple∣ments of Latitudes, or which are the Arches intercepted between two places. The Method must be taken from Spherical Trigonometry. But in Mariners Maps, and the Globe, the unknown place of the Point is thus found from the given.
Mariners Maps.In Mariners Maps the given distance is taken by the interval of the Com∣pass from the opposite scale, and one foot being fixed on the given place, the other is turned round until it touch, or cut the Parallel of the other Latitude, which is that of the unknown place. The Point of the Contact, or Section is the place demanded or unknown. But other Maps are unfit for this pur∣pose, neither do the Mariners Charts exhibit an accurate distance of places. On the Globe, let the given distance be turned into degrees and Minutes, and let them be taken by the interval of the Compass on the Aequator. Then let the degree of Latitude of the unknown place be noted, let one Foot of the Compass be placed on the given place, and let the Globe be turned until one extremity of the Foot touch the Point of the Globe subject to the noted Me∣ridian sign: that shall be the place demanded. Or let the Parallel of the un∣known place be described with Chalk, and then one Foot of the Compass being fixed on the given place, let the other be turned round until it cut that Parallel, or touch it. This Point of the Section is the place sought for, whose Longitude is then reckoned in the Aequator. The second Mode. A Quarter being given, in which any place unknown (that is whose sci∣tuation is unknown) doth lye from the noted place, or place given, and the Latitude of both places being given, to find the Longitude of the unknown place from the place known, and to exhibit the place on the Globe, and Mariners Chart. The second Mode.By the given place, we understand here the Angle intercepted between the Meridian of either place, and the Line drawn from the one place to the o∣ther, which is more commodiously explained on the Globe, or by a Diagram. If therefore by Calculation you would find out the Longitude of one place from the other, the Spherical Triangle must be solved, in which there are two sides given, (to wit, the Complements of Latitude of both places) and the Angle adjacent to the given side of either. But the Angle comprehended from the two given sides is that demanded. For this will exhibit the sought for Longitude. But in a Globe and Mariners Charts it is not needful to find out Longitude, neither can it at the first be found out, but the place unknown is found from the given places. Not needful to find out Longitude in a Globe, and in Mariners Charts.In the Globe: Let the place be brought to the Meridian, let the Pole be Elevated for its Latitude, and let the Vertical Quadrant be applyed to it: let the Parallel be drawn with Chalk at the Latitude of the other place un∣known. Then let the extremity of the Quadrant be applyed to the given Plaga of the Horizon, viz. in which the other unknown place lyeth from the known. The Point of the Parallel where the Quadrant cutteth or toucheth it, is the place sought for, whose Longitude shall be reckoned in the Ae∣quator. In Mariners Charts: Let the Parallel be drawn to the Latitude of the unknown place, then from the given place let a Line be drawn for the gi∣ven quarter, the Point where this cutteth the Parallel is the place sought. But if the Loxodromick Plaga be given, we should do otherwise, of which in the 39 Chapter.
The third Mode. A Quarter being given, and the distance of one unknown place from the other, whose Latitude is given, to find out the Longitude of that place from this: but on the Globe and Maps if this place be given, to exhibit the scituation of that. The third Mode.If you desire to find it by Calculation, two Angles are given in the Spheri∣cal Triangle (the Complement of the Latitude of the place known, and the distance of the unknown place being turned into degrees) and the Angle com∣prehended from the Plaga given: from these three given, the opposite An∣gle to the distance must be sought for. For this will exhibit the Longitude of the other place from the known place. But on the Globe, and Mariners Charts, the place is thus found: let the Pole be Elevated for the Latitude of the place given: let the Quadrant be ap∣plyed to the Vertex, and let the other extremity be applyed to the given Pla∣ga of the Horizon. Then the distance given being turned into degrees, let it be reckoned on the Quadrant from the Vertex. The term of the Numeration shall be the place sought for on the Globe. But if that the Longitude be only sought for without the designation of the place, that is, if you are minded to resolve a Spherical Triangle by the Globe, it will be done after this Mode. We will give Examples in the 33 Chapter,See Chap. 33. which is also to be observed in the following Chapters. There also we will shew by one Example how such Problems may be resolved by the Planisphere. Concerning all these, also Tu∣tors may instruct their Scholars from the Method of the Logarithms, if that they be studious in these matters. But Mariners use Calculation, or the Plaine Sphere.A Globe not commodious in a Ship. For the use of a Globe is not so commodious in a Ship. In Mariners Charts, Let a Line be drawn from the given place for the gi∣ven quarter, and by the interval of the Compasses, let it be taken on the Scale, the distance of the places being opposited, and one Foot being fixed on the place given, let the other Foot be placed in the Line drawn for the Plaga or quarter. This Point shall be the place sought for, but yet not exact, as we shall shew in the following Chapter. The fourth Mode. The distance of a place unknown, being given from two places known, to ex∣hibit that and the known one in the Globe, and Maps; but to enquire its Longitude by Calculation. The fourth Mode.In the Globe: Let one distance by the interval of the Compasses (turned in∣to degrees) be taken on the Aequator, and one Foot being fixed in the place from those given, whose distance was not taken; let an Arch be drawn on the Superficies of the Globe, by the other Foot, which hath the Chalk at its end. After the same Mode, a distance being taken from any other place, let an Arch be described from this, as from a Center on the Superficies: the Point in which this Arch cutteth the former, is the place demanded. In Mariners Charts, we must act after the same manner, but yet the di∣stances given must not be changed into degrees, but must be taken on the op∣posite Scale. But if the place be somewhat more remote from the place given, an over great error may be committed, by reason that the Charts do not per∣form this accurately. The invention of Longitude by Calculation, because it hath much difficulty, as the Diagram requireth; therefore I shall leave it to be taught by some Tutor, and not describe it in words.
The fifth Mode. Two places in the Earth being given, and the Quarters in which some other unknown place is scituated at them, to find out this third place in the Earth, Maps, and Globe, and to enquire the Longitude of this place by Calculation. The fifth Mode.In the Globe, Let one of the given places be brought to the Meridian, and let the Pole be Elevated near its Latitude, let the Quadrant be applyed to the Vertex, and with the other end (in which to wit, at this noted place the third unknown place is put to lye) and at the Margent of the Quadrant by a pointed Chalk, let a small Periphery be drawn. Then let the other given place be brought to the Me∣ridian, and the Pole Elevated near to its Latitude, let the Quadrant be affixed to the Vertex, and the other extremity to the given Plaga of the Horizon, to wit, in which the third unknown place is placed to lie at this, same known place the Point, in which the Margent of the Quadrant cutteth the Periphery before drawn with Chalk, is the third place demanded. On Maps It is thus done; Let a Line be drawn from one given place for the given quarter of the three places; after the same Mode let the Line of the quar∣ter be drawn from the other given place. The Point in which these two Lines mutually cut one another is the place demanded. After the same Mode we should do on the Earth, if that we would Act scien∣tifically: neither in Sciences do we value hinderances, and impediments, so that we may comprehend the Mode in our mind. The Calculation in which our unknown Longitude of a place is found, from these given, we leave to the Instruction of a Tutor if that he hath apt and ca∣pable Scholars. But more than enough hath been said concerning the invention of Longi∣tude, the ample use of which we have explained in the 2d Proposition. Here should be added a Table of the Longitude and Latitude of the chief places of the Earth, which the Author hath Collected, and did here insert; but being but short, and having Maps of the several Kingdoms of the World in the other Part, or Volumn, to which the Latitudes and Longitudes are added, they are thought convenient to be omitted here, and referring the Reader to the particular Maps, by which you may easily find the Latitude and Longitude of any place desired. The fixed Stars as to their Declina∣tion and Ascen∣sion, of great use in Geogra∣phy, and Navi∣gation.Moreover seeing that there is great use of Declination and Ascension of the fixed Stars, both in Geography and Navigation, I shall here add a Catalogue of the Stars of the first Magnitude, with their Declination and direct Ascen∣sion at the Year 1650. For it is known from Astronomy, that in progress of time, a change is made in these by reason of the proper motion of the Stars above the Poles of the Ecliptick. But in the use it is convenient to have such a Table of all the Stars, because we have not alwaies a conveniency of using the same Stars. But we only lay down these for Exercise, and for the trying the propo∣sed Problems in these. This business belongeth to Astronomy, but the use is notable both in other Sciences, and also in Geography. Astronomy sheweth how a Declination, and direct Ascension may be found at every Year.
A TABLE of the DECLINATION And right Ascension of the Stars for the Year 1650. The Letter S, sheweth the Northern Declination, and the Letter A, the Southern. The Names of the Stars. Declination. Right Ascension. Of the first Maginitude. deg. min. deg. min. Oculus Tauri. 15 46 S 64 0 Regulus, or Cor Leonis. 13 39 S 147 27 Cauda Leonis. 16 32 S 172 59 Spica Virginis. 9 17 A 196 44 Cor Scorpii. 25 34 A 242 4 Lucida Aquarii. 31 24 A 339 28 Arcturus Bootis. 21 4 S 209 59 Lucida Lyrae. 38 30 S 206 17 Cauda Cygni. 44 3 S 307 23 Capella. 45 35 S 72 44 Pes Orionis Sinister. 8 38 A 74 29 Sirius, Canis Major. 16 13 A 97 26 Humerus Dexter Orionis. 7 18 A 84 7 Canis Minor. 6 6 S 110 17
CHAP. XXXII. Of the mutual scituation of places, and composition of the Terrestrial Globe and Maps. Proposition I. A place being given in the Earth, to find the scituation of other places at that place. Of finding of the scituation of places in the Earth, &c.NOw the scituation of one place to the other is termed that Plaga in which this lyeth at, or an Angle of position, that is an Angle, which the Meri∣dian of the given place maketh with a Line, or Periphery drawn from this place to the other. For Example, if we be in Amsterdam, and desire to know in what scituation other places lie unto it, as Rome, Leyden, the Hague, or the like. The first Mode. The first Mode.To those places that a prospect is granted from the place given, their scitua∣tion may exactly be observed to this place by Instruments. Let a Geometrical Instrument be placed in an high Tower, or the place of the given place, so that it may be Parallel to the Horizon, and the Meridian Line being found, let one Rule of the Instrument be applyed unto it; and the other having a Perspe∣ctive must be directed to the conspicuous place. The Arch of the Periphe∣ry intercepted between the two Rules is the Angle of the position of the place observed at this place; and from thence his quarter shall be known. So the scituation or position of all other vicine places shall be observed, then let us go to these places, and from them by the same Mode we shall again di∣scover the scituation of other places: and then we may so act over the whole Superficies of the Earth, except that other ways were known, by which we might come more easily to the demanded place. The second Mode. The second Mode.If that the proposed places may be had on the Globe, let the place given be brought to the Meridian, and let the Pole be Elevated for its Latitude; let the Quadrant be affixed to the Vertex, and let it be applyed to one, and the other places, whose scituation we desire to know at our place. The extremity of the Quadrant in the Horizon, will shew the Angle of position, and the quarter sought for. And therefore we shall say, that Rome, Constantinople, lie from Amsterdam towards this or that found out quarter. Which that we may con∣ceive in the World, we ought to know the Meridian Line, or quarter of the North and South, also the East and West Aequinoctial, for from these being well conceived of, the intermedial quarters may easily be conceived. Here must be collected what hath been said concerning quarters in the 20 Chapter.See Chap. 20. The third Mode. The third Mode.From Maps of Streight lines, if that the places propounded be to be found in them, it is easy to discover the scituation of those places to this by the eyes. For through the given place a right Meridian Line is conceived shewing the North, and South, and another Line transverse, or shewing the Parallel of the place, which discovereth the Eastern and Western quarter. From these the interme∣dial quarters in which every place is beheld, are easily discovered, or else they are more accurately known by Lines drawn on the Quadrant of the Periphery, if that there be need of a more accurate knowledge. But yet this Method is not compleat except in particular Maps. In Maps of Crooked lines, the quarters or scituations of places are not so a ac∣curately sought as the other place.
The fourth Mode. The fourth Mode.The Latitude and Longitude of two places beging given, the scituation of one to the other is exactly found by a Trigonometrical Compute, both that which is Vulgar, as that which is Logorithmetical, or by a Catholick Plani∣sphere, or also by the Globe. For let a Spherical Triangle be had, in which three things are given, viz. the Complements of the Latitudes of both places, and the Angle comprehended from these, which is known from the difference of Longitude. Now let the opposite Angle, or adjacent to either of the two sides be sought, for this will shew the Angle of position of one place to the other, and the very quarter. A Diagram, and the lively instructions of a Tutor, will make these more clear; and hence appeareth the use of the Table of Longitude and Latitude of places. The fifth Mode. From the given distance of a place from two places, or from the given distance and Latitude,The fifth Mode. his quarter or scituation to the other place is found out by the solution of the Spherical Triangles. The sixth Mode. The Latitude of two places being given, the distance of the quarter of one is found to the other by a threefold Method,The sixth Mode. as hath been said. Other things given may be propounded by which we may find out the quarter. Proposition. II. A place being given on the Earth or Globe, to exhibit all places which lie at the given place, in some one given quarter, or scitua∣tion. Of the know∣ing the places in the North-East quarter from Amster∣dam.For Example, we desire to know all the places which lie in the North-East quarter from Amsterdam. Let the Pole be Elevated for the Latitude of the given place, and let the place be brought to the Meridian; let the Quadrant be affixed to the Vertex, and le the other extremity be applyed to the given quarter of the Horizon. So we shall behold the half part of the places sought for, viz. those, which are adjacent in the Globe to the Margin of the Quadrant, the other half part is beneath the Horizon at the point opposite to the Vertex. But the construction is more easy for the Earth it self: to wit, Let the Pe∣riphery of the great Circle be brought to the place given, which with the Me∣ridian of that place may make the given Angle of the Position. All the places in the half Periphery are those sought for. Proposition III. A place being given in the Earth, or on the Globe, to exhibit all those places, at which the given place, hath some one given scituation or quarter. Of the know∣ing the places which lie North-West to Amsterdam.For Example, we desire to know all the places, unto every one of which Amsterdam lyeth in the North-West quarter. But the Problem may with more delight be thus propounded; Any place, in the Earth, or on the Globe, being given, as in Amsterdam, to shew all those
places, from which whilst we desire to go to the given place Amsterdam, we must direct our Course from every one of the places to one and the same given quarter. The preceeding Problem was locally plain, because the place of the demand∣ed points, was the Periphery of the Circle, which may be exhibited on a plain; and is always scituated in one plain. But the present Problem is so∣lid, or rather doth belong to the Superficies. For the place of the demanded points in the Superficies of the Globe is not any Periphery of the Circle (ex∣cept when the quarter given is Northernly or Southernly) but a certain pecu∣liar crooked solid line, that is, which may not be on a plain, but a Crooked, to wit, a Spherical Superficies: yet neither is it a Loxodromical line (of which we shall speak in a peculiar Chapter) but a Crooked line of its own kind termi∣nated on both sides. Now for the conceiving of this line, or the places themselves on the Superficies of the Globe, let the given place be brought to the Meridian. Then if the quarter given be Oriental, it is certain that the demanded places are seated in the part of the Globe towards the West removed from the Meridian of the given place (but it is otherwise if that the quarter given be Occidental) and if the quarter given be one of those, which incline from the East, or West, towards the North, the places demanded shall lie between the South, and the primary Vertical of the given place. But it is otherwise if the quarter given be one of those, which incline from the East, or West towards the South: if the given quarter be of the Eastern or Western Aequinoctial, the place of the de∣manded places shall be some one Crooked line, beginning from the given place, and terminated in the vicine Pole, seated from the Oriental part of the Meridi∣an, if the given quarter be of the West, but from the Occidental, if that the given quarter be of the East, and must be conceived at this line: so the places must be sought or exhibited from which Amsterdam lyeth towards the Western Aequinoctials. Because the quarter or Vertical Quadrant respecting the Eastern, or Western Aequinoctial, falleth in with the point of the Aequator, which is 90 deg. absent from the Meridian of every place. Therefore first let the point drawn from the given place, be conceived to be seated at the Aequi∣noctial quarter, or point of the Aequator in the Horizon, and therefore it is certain that all the places sought, ought so to be seated from the Oriental part of the Meridian of Amsterdam, so that their quarter, or primary Vertical Qua∣drant, respecting the West, must cut the Quadrant of the Aequator between the points in the Occident, and the Meridian. Therefore from every one of the points of this Quadrant, let the greatest Peripheries be conceived passing through Amsterdam, and the Meridians drawn from these points as from the Poles, in which the first conceived Peripheries every one cut their Meridians, are those demanded: they make such a Crooked line as I have said, which put∣teth it self into the Pole, neither is it infinite. Hence the difference is manifest between the Crooked line and the Loxodromick. For this doth not arise in journeys instituted towards the Eastern or Western Aequinoctial. All the kinds of this of which we now do speak, are such that are contained and run within the Pole, and the Quadrants of the 2 Merid. whose distance doth not exceed 90 deg. But where any quarter is given intermedial between the Cardines, for Ex∣ample, places are sought from which Amsterdam lyeth towards the South-West, or in the quarter removed 45 deg. from the Meridian of every place towards the West from the South. First therefore let another Meridian from the Oriental part of Amsterdam be imagined (for in this it is manifest, that the places sought ought to be) which with Amsterdam maketh an Angle of 45 deg. or between which and that of Amsterdam, the intercepted Arch of the Aequator is 45 deg. This shall be the term of the places sought for, neither beyond it can any place be found in any Meridian which doth satisfie. Let a perpendicu∣lar Periphery be supposed to be drawn from Amsterdam into this Meri∣dian. Moreover because the quarter given seemeth to incline towards the South from the West, thence it is certain, that the places demand∣ed should be scituated in the space of the Triangle whose sides are now first drawn Perpendicular. Secondly, part of this Meridian is
intercepted between the drawn Periphery and the vicine Pole. Thirdly, part of the Meridian of Amsterdam, is between Amsterdam, and the adjacent Pole. In this space the Crooked line, all whose Points answer the demand, is seated, which creepeth forwards from Amsterdam with a crooked passage even to the Pole: For the Description of it many Meridians are to be taken, from which the great Periphery drawn to Amsterdam, may make with the Meridian from whence it is drawn, and Angle of forty five degrees for our Ex∣ample. So many Points of this Crooked line to be described shall be found. We have treated fully of this Crooked line in our Book of Crooked lines, here we have only touched what is proper to Geography. Proposition IV. The Latitude of one place being given, and the distance from the other place, and the quarter in which this other place in seated from it, to find the quarter of this other place in which the former place is seated at this other place. It will be better understood by an Example. Viz. Let the quarter be given in which the City of Hamburgh is seated from Amsterdam: we seek the quar∣ter in which Amsterdam is seated from Hamburgh. The vulgar opinion is that the contrary quarter is to be taken, which is false. And in this all Mariners Charts, and all Right lined Maps do much err. The soluti∣on is easy by a Trigonometrical Calculation, or by the Globe, or by the Plain Sphere. Proposition V. To make a Terrestrial Globe. Of the making a Terrestrial Globe.So the vulgar speak very confusedly by this Problem: but the distinct understanding of it is thus to be propounded in a Mathematical Style. Any Piont being given in the Superficies of any Globe, which is put to repre∣sent any place scituated in the Superficies of the Earth (or in the given half Pe∣riphery to find out any lines and Points in the Superficies of the same Globe, which are so mutually seated to the given Point and to themselves, as the pla∣ces and Lines in the Superficies of the Earth, which ought to be represented by them, are scituated to the place first taken, and mutual to themselves. The first Mode. The first Mode of making Ter∣restrial Globes.The best, most easie and exactest method is that by which from the Longi∣tude and Latitude of places in the Superficies of the Globe it self, the places and Points fought for, or representing the parts of the Superficies of the Earth are consigned, which although Artificers do not use in making of Terrestrial Globes which are sold in a great number, (because that this may be done ano∣ther way, where from the abundance of their Sale, the cost and charge is suffi∣ciently payed, which is not of facility and lester expence for the making of one Globe, but most apt and prompt for the making of innumerable, of the same Magnitude, and less expence, of which I shall speak in the third place; yet the foundation of the constouction of it dependeth on this Description con∣ceived on the Globe: moreover where peculiar Terrestrial Globes are to be made in Brass of a notable Magnitude, and the places of the Earth are to be designed on its Superficies, as Brinces that favour the Mathematicks are wont to have them,A great Globe a prearing for Frederick Duke of Hol∣stein. as for example, Frederick Duke of Holstein hath ordered such a Globe to be made, whose Oavity is to be so great, that one may commodi∣ously set in it, and in the Superficies all the fixed Stars are to be painted in a
golden colour, or little Stars made, are let in with a small instrument, and the Sun moveable, and to be turned in the Zodiack, and with the addition of a small instrument shall be wheeled round in 24 hours, so that the Spectator set∣ting within its Cavity may see the Stars in one and another scituation, to arise, Ascend to the Meridies, to set, even as we see the Stars to do in the Heaven. But the external Superficies to come to our purpose, shall exhibit all the pla∣ces of the Earth, so that this Globe shall be both Celestial and Terrestrial. But when I say such places are to be engraven, or painted on the Superficies of great Globes, Artists cannot use their Mode by applying of Maps made of Paper, neither would that be so convenient in so great and famous a Work. But now they must be engraven in the Globe, and the places be illustrated with colours, as also the Peripheries, the Rivers, and such like as are found in the Earth. Now this is done thus, (using also at the same time a vulgar Globe, in which the Courses of the Rivers, Seas, and the Earth are beheld.) Let a great Periphery of the Globe be described through the given point, (or the assumed point at your choice, if that be not given) in the Superficies, which Periphery we shall constitute for the Meridian of this place; then let an Arch be taken in this from that point, equal to the Latitude which that point is put to represent: and let the term be noted, and let another Arch equal to the Complement of the Latitude, or distance of the place from the Pole, be ta∣ken from the same point, or from another point in the same Periphery, the term of this Arch shall be the point which must represent the Arctick and Antarctick Pole of the Earth, because it is so seated at the given point, as the Pole of the Earth which is put to be represented from the point. Therefore we call this point the Pole of the Globe, but the term of the Arch first noted shew∣eth the point in which the Aequator cutteth the Meridian of the given place. And therefore from the Pole of the Globe, let a great Periphery be drawn by the interval of the Compasses from that Pole to the Mentioned term, which shall be the Line of the Aequator, or the Aequator of the Globe. Then let a Pole be taken in the Meridian opposite to the former, and let an Iron Axis be put through from one to the other through the Cavity and Cen∣ter of the Globe, and let a Brazen Meridian be affixed in its extant parts, pre∣pared by a diligent Artist, having every one of its quarters divided into de∣grees. Now these points must be applyed to the Axis where o, o, is, or where the division of the quarters do end, so that the beginnings of the first degrees may exactly hang over the Line of the Aequator. Let the Aequator be accu∣rately divided into degrees. Moreover if you will take the Meridian of the given place, or of some other place for the first, it is all one, but it is better to take that for the first, which the Tables of Longitude and Latitude which are to be used in the designation of places, do acknowledge for the first, or from whence they number the Longitude and Lati∣tude of the other places. And therefore if the place first given, is not that which the Tables acknowledge, let the Longitude of the first given place be taken from the Table, and let so many degrees be numbred from that point in the Aequator, where the Meridian of the first place cutteth it. The term of the Numeration shall be the point for the first Meridian of the Tables. Now unto what quarter the Numeration must be made is known, viz. towards the West: but what part of the Globe is to be taken for the Occidental quar∣ter, and what for the Oriental quarter from the Meridian of the first place, you shall thus know? So place the Globe that the Semicircle of the Meridian containg the first point may be uppermost, the other beneath, and regard the Globe, now the Pole Arctick should be hearest, the Antarctick more remote; if that the place given near the Arctick Pole, but if near the Antarctick, then the Antarctick must be placed nearer us, so that Hemisphere which is in our right hand must be taken for the Occidental places, and the other for the Oriental.
But in the Section of the first Meridian noted in the Aequator, let those num∣bers be ascribed to the degrees of the Aequator beginning from that Section, viz. 10, 20, 30, and so on. And then so must it be done in representing for any other place, let the Longitude be taken from the Table of that place, and reckoned in the Aequator from the first Meridian. Let the term of the Nu∣meration be placed under the Meridian, and let the degrees of the Latitude of that place which there we have extracted from the Table, be numbred in this from the Aequator. The point of the Globe which is then subject to the point of the Meridian where the Numeration of the Latitude endeth, will repre∣sent that place of the Earth. And so we must do with all places, all Inlets, and Fountains of Waters. Their appellations must be engraven. So the Problem is satisfyed, for all the places shall so be seated in the Globe, as in the Earth it self. Yet in the practice we must not so act at the first, because it is better to as∣sume Pole, for the first point, or that which may represent the Pole: and in the making of the Globe, let the Axis be added, whose ends denote the Poles. And the first Meridian of the Tables must immediately be noted on the Globe, and then the other places, as I have said. But such great Globes are seldom made from Tables, but for the most part imitateother lesser Globes, from whence the Latitudes and Longitudes, and the tracts of Rivers, &c. are taken. The second Mode. The second Mode of the making of Globes.This Mode is more apt to design some place, viz. one or two in the Globe from others given, than to be used for the making of an intire Globe: for it useth the distances of places. Let the greatest Periphery, or the Arch of the greatest Periphery be drawn through the Globe, and in this from the given point, let the Arch be taken, as much as the distance of the other place is from the place first given, the term of the Arch shall be other place. Then if you will design any third place, take by the interval of the Compass the distance of that third place, from the other two even now designed, and from these as from Centers, let the Arches be described by these intervals of the Compass: The point, in which these Arches mutually cut one another, is the point of the third place. But as I have said that this Mode is not commodious for the intire designati∣on of the Globe; but when we will design any place in the Globe now made, which is not yet in it, and desire to do it from the only noted distance of that place from the two others which are found in the Globe, because it is easy, and we have not time by reason of Calculation, to search the Longitude and Lati∣tude of this third unknown place. For thus we shall easily find the scituation of this point, or place in the Globe, and also the Longitude and Latitude; then the Problem is this. The distance of a place being given from two places that are found on the Globe, to design the scituation of that place on the Globe, whose distance is gi∣ven, of which in the following Chapter. The third Mode, the Vulgar one of Artificers. The third Mode of ma∣king of Globes.The third Mode of exhibiting and representing the Superficies and places of the Earth in the given Globe, is that which Artificers use in the making of all Globes both Celestial and Terrestrial (except those great ones of which I have now spoken) which have nothing of compendiousness, or commendation from the facility, if that the places of the Earth be but only to be represented from one Superficies of the Globe, but it is to be done on the Superficies of the Globes of the same Magnitude; this practice hath great Prerogative before the other: for the Mode is thus; the Superficies of the Globe and the Earth is conceived to be divided into twelve parts (or more if the Globe be to be made of a larger form) through the Meridians drawn from Pole to Pole, so that in any two Meridians, the 12th part of a Superficies is included from Pole to Pole.
Then on a Plain let the like Figure be included in such a part of the 12, in two Arches, which then in the Globe make the half Periphery of the Meridians. And in many Meridians drawn through every degree of the Aequator, and di∣vided into portions, and segments of the Parallels affordeth a kind of lettice work: the portion of the Aequator is in the midst: all the Meridians end in the Poles, then c. e Meridian being taken for the first, which the Tables of Lonitude acknowledge; let the degrees be noted from it in the Aequator, the numbers being ascribed, so that the degrees of Longitude of every place may e accounted. Then in every one of these places representing the 12 parts of the Superficies of the Globe, let the places be noted for the places of the Earth, every one at his degrees of Longitude and Latitude, which are extra∣cted from the Table, and the name is ascribed to the Table, and the tracts of the Rivers and Bays drawn, as also of the Lands: these being thus described on Paper, or Wood, then make an incision, and engrave according to that ex∣emplar in Plates of Brass, which then is fit for the Printing Press. Which are afterwards applyed and joyned to the Superficies of the Globe, so that its ends may touch the Axis or Poles of the Globe; yet in many the Papers do not touch the Poles, but are so made only to touch the Artick, or Antarctick Cir∣cles: and peculiar Papers are taken for the Polary Spaces. For so they are more easily applyed, especially in great ones so in the Superficies of this Globe all the places of the Earth are exhibited, to which is then added a Brass Meri∣dian and Horizon with a Foot, Horary Circle, and an Index. The things worthy of note in this Mode.There are two things in this description which require a more full explicati∣on, all the rest I suppose to be plain, and intelligible. First, after what Mode these 12, or 24 parts are to be described, according to the Example of which the engraving in Brass must be made. Secondly, how plain Paper can be applyed to the Superficies of the Globe. The first is thus don ommodiously enough. For Example, let the 12 portion of the Hemisphere from the Pole to the Aequator, be applyed to the Globe. First, from the known Diameter of the Globe, let the quantity of the greatest Periphery be found out according to the proportion of Archimedes, or the other proportion of the Periphery to the Diameter. For Example, let the Diameter of the Globe be two Foot, and let the Longitude of the Foot in the noted Paper be divided into 10 digits, and the 10 digits, into 10 grains, that there may be 100 parts in a Foot. Let it be done so that as 7, is to 22, so 200 is to 628 4/7 parts, or 6 28/200 Foot for the Periphery; the fourth part of this, that is the Quadrant of the Periphery shall be of 157 1/7 hundred, or 1 57/10071 Feet, and the 12th part of 52 19/21 hundreds, or ½ a Foot, and 2 hundreds and 19/21 of an hundred. These being found, let a long Line of 52 19/21 hundreds be drawn on the Paper, (from the ascribed Scale); from the middle of this Line let a long perpendicular of 157 19/21 hundred be erected, which shall be the Quadrant (its extremity shall be the Pole) and may be divided into degrees (you have the Longitude of one degree if you divide 628 /7 by 360). Then let a Periphery be described from the Pole through the beginning of every degree, or of every tenth, (they shall be Parallels) in these Peripheries; from both parts of the drawn perpendicular, let that part be cut off by the Compass, as much as is the 1/24 of the Periphery. Now how great it is in the opposite Scale is known from the proportion of the Parallels, to the Aequator, which we have delivered in the end of the IV. Chapter.See Chap. 4. So the points being signed in every Periphery and Arch you please, a Line must be drawn through them, and part of the Pa∣per perminated by these Lines, must be cut off. For this being applyed to the Globe will possess 1/12 of the Hemisphere. Now the application is easily perform∣ed, viz. if that the portions be small, for in these the distance between streight and Crooked, is little discovered, especially of the Earth when the Pa∣per hath first been wetted; so it is readily applyed. But the places in that Pa∣per before they are applyed, are consigned to their fit degrees of Longitude, and Latitude.
Proposition VI. To compose Geographical Maps. We may thus propound the Problem in a Mathematical Style. Of the compo∣sing Geographi∣cal Maps.The scituation of an infinite Plain, or one to be produced at pleasure being gi∣ven, to represent in that the places of the Superficies of the Earth, according to the Rules of Perspective. Or thus more generally: A Point being given on any Plain, which is put to represent any place of the Superficies of the Earth, to find on the same Plain (infinite), divers other Points and Lines, which as commodiously may be, may represent to the life the pla∣ces and Lines of the Superficies of the Earth, or their scituation to the given place, or one to another. So I think the sence of the Proposition will be better understood. By reason that very few Students and favourers of Geography understand the Rules of Perspective, neither can they attain to any distinct knowledge of the Construction and nature of Geographical Maps, or judge of their commo∣dity or defects, except they know the Principles, according unto which they are made. Therefore here a few things necessary in this Doctrine must be explained from the Art of Perspective.The know∣ledge of Per∣spective neces∣sary in Geogra∣phy. Now that Art, as most know, is con∣versant in representing all Objects, or Bodies on some Table, or Plat-form, as the parts of a Picture are so conformed, and seated one to the other, and so appear to our fight (the eye being fixed to some certain place) as the parts of the body which it representeth. This indeed is the end of the Perspective. But the Mode by which they endeavour to obtain it, is this. The Mode for the obtaining the Art of Perspective.Then they will represent a point, a Superficies, or any Body of what shape soever in a Table, Board, or Paper, (whether they behold it, or conceive the Idea in their fancy). 1. They Imagine it is discerner by the eye as in or from one Point, and they do assign a certain scituation or place to the eye whence the sight may be made. 2. Then they conceive some one infinit plain (they term it a Glass, because it is better for conception, if that the plain be un∣derstood to be pellucid) to be interposed in some certain scituation between the eye and the Object. Then 3. They conceive rayes or Lines to be drawn through that plain to the Eye from every point of the Object. They say that the points of this plain by which the rayes are so conceived to penetrate to the Eye, are the representation of the points of the Object it self, or the Shadow of it, as they term it, and these points being conjoyned by Lines, they determine the Figure which thence ariseth, in the Table to be the representation of the very Object of the Body, or Superficies in such a scituation of the Eye, and this Figure of a Plain or Table remaining in its scituation, doth not otherwise ap∣pear to the Eye remaining in its scituation, then as if it beheld the very Object it self (which yet the Opticks shew not to be altogether true in all respects, and it is easy to understand from the various position of an interposed Plain.) But by reason no better Method of representing Bodies is yet found, therefore we must be content with this. For Example, let the Superficies of the Earth, and all its Peripheries and places be represented on a Table. And therefore in the first we conceive the Eye to be fixed or scituated as a point without the Earth in the Air. Then between the Eye and the Earth, a certain Table or Glass Plain to be extended, whose scituation although it may be taken at plea∣sure, yet in practice it is so assumed, to a better and more ordinate Figure of an equal form, that it is perpendicular to the Line, which is drawn from the Eye to the Center of the Earth. Then we conceive Lines to be drawn, or Rayes to be emitted through the Table or Glass to the Eye from all points or places of the Superficies of the Earth (as from all the points of the Aequator, of the Tropicks, Polary Circles, also of the Meridians; as likewise from all Cities, Sources of Waters, and the like.) Every one of these Rayes shall pierce the Table in certain points. These points therefore are the shadows, or represen∣tations of the places of the Superficies of the Earth, and if those points which
are made by the Rays emitted from some one Periphery (as from the Aequa∣tor, from one of the Tropicks, from a Polary Circle, or some other Meridian) be joyned by a drawn line, let it be either streight or Crooked, this shall be the representation or shadow of this Periphery, so we shall have all the Circles, and all the places of the Earth represented on a Table. The whole su∣perficies of the Earth being round, cannot be so well re∣presented on a Plain, as otherwise it is.But because the Earth is round, therefore the whole Superficies of the Earth with all its places, cannot commodiously be represented on one plain, because they should make two places one and the same point on the plain, and those that are scituated beyond the Hemisphere, would be represented with a false face: therefore half the Supersicies of the Earth must be represented on one Ta∣ble, and the other half on the other. And so the Eye may be taken within the Earth it self, viz. when we take up one Hemisphere to be represented, the Eye is conceived to be placed in the other Hemisphere, and the Table between that and the Hemisphere to be represented. The same must be understood, if that only part of the Superficies, as Europe, Asia, Spain, must be represented on the Table, for then we may assume the place of the Eye in the very Center of the Earth, if we please. From these I think the Reader may sufficiently understand the nature and Mode of this Perspective Art, by which the places of the Earth are re∣presented on a plain. The other two are more fully to be explained, from those which we have spoken of in this Method. Because from thence de∣pendeth the variety and diversity of Geographical Tables. We have said that a point must be taken for the representation for the place of the Eye without the Object to be represented, as without the He∣misphere of the Earth, or without the Superficies of Spain, or Europe. And therefore because there is an infinite space about any Object, and on that ac∣count there are infinite points, in which the Eye may be put contemplating the Superficies of the Earth, (or Europe, or Asia,) if that a particular Table must be made, and if the Rays be drawn to divers points from the same points of the Object, or Superficies, which may penetrate the same Table, the penetration of the Rays is made in a very different place and scituation, and there∣fore very unlike Figures arise thence in the Table; thence it cometh to pass that according to the various scituation of the Eye (which we attribute to it without the Earth, or without that part which it ought to represent) there ariseth a various representation of that Superficies on the Table. For as there existeth another sort of Frontispiece of the walls of an house, when the Eye may behold it from a scituation directly opposite; another from an oblique scituation; another from an upper place; another from a long place, and so changing according to the various scituation of the Eye (which Tutors may explain by Diagrams); so there ariseth a different position of the parts of the Earth to be represented on the Table, if that the Eye be so constituted, or conceived in the Air in such a scituation, that it may hang over the Aequator of the Earth; and otherwise, if that it be supposed to exist in the pretended Axis of the Earth, or in the Semi-Axis of the Hemisphere, and otherwise if it be con∣ceived to be eminent over any other place of the Earth. Thence it cometh to pass that both the Aequator, and the Parallels, as well as the Meridians, obtain various representations, because the Rays drawn from them, existing in the Earth to the Eye perforate the Tables in divers points, endued with a various scituation, which the Readers may easily understand,The Direction of a Tutor very profitable. if that they have the li∣ving information and direction of a Tutor. The other, which I esteem fit for the Readers consideration in this Method for his better understanding, is concerning the cause of the variety in the Magnitude of Tables, and representations: for we can shew the same Superficies of the Earth, as also of all the Bodies of the World, as Temples, Houses, and the like, on a great or small Table. The Cause is twofold, first, by how much the Eye is placed more remote from the Earth, or any Object, by so much the representation re∣ceiveth the lesser Magnitude, ziz. the scituation of the Table or Glass so re∣maining. 2. How much the Table, or Glass (in which the representation should be made by the perforation of the Rays) is nearer moved to the Eye, by
so much the representation or projecture receiveth, the lesser form; by how much the nearer to the Object, so much the greater. But if the Eye may be removed in any kind from the Object, (the Table re∣maining) so that it be removed in the same Line with the Center of the Earth, or so that it remain in one Perpendicular Line, to the Superficies of the Earth, therefore the Figure of the projecture is not changed, but only the Magnitude, the similitude remaineth. So also if that the Table be any ways moved to the Eye, or removed towards the Object, all the projectures do become of a divers Magnitude, yet they remain mutually alike, and represent all the places in a like scituation, so that the Table shall observe the Parallel scituated from the Eye in his access, and recess. But if the Table receiveth another position, and also if the Eye be not only removed, but also recedeth from that Perpendicular Line, then the like projectures shall not arise and the places shall not have the like sci∣tuation on the Earth, but besides a various Magnitude, there shall also be a no∣table dissimilitude in the scituation of the places, one to the other. But in the projectures of all Bodies, as also in the projecture of the Superficies of the Earth, it is so wont to happen, that we attribute such a scituation to the Table or Glass, that it may touch the Body or Superficies in that Point to which the Line drawn is Perpendicular to the Superficies of the Body, or which is drawn from the Eye to the Center of the Earth: now to obtain the lesser or greater projecture we remove the Point of the Eye more or less from the Earth. But then we conceive the Earth to be very small. This in general being explained concerning the projecture of the Earth, and the Original of Geographical Maps, we shall shew the Method of doing it: where first we shall shew whether these Tables should be made according to the Rules of Perspective, and whether all may be made according to them, for the end of these Tables or Maps is to the life, and exactly as may be to express the scitua∣tion of the places in the Superficies of the Earth. Therefore it is demanded and that not unadvisedly, whether this may be done by another Method, which ob∣serveth not the Rules of Perspective; for whether it be done according to the Rules of Perspective, or contrary to them, so that it exactly representeth the scituation of the places, the Table shall be accounted to be well done. To that I answer, that although certain Tables of some small Province may be made, and are also made by another Method, to wit, by Angles of position, or also by distances, as we shall shew in the last place, yet in a great part of the Superficies of the Earth it cannot be performed by a more commodious Method, than by the Rules of Perspective, although the true scituation of the places may not be represented in the Tables made according to these Rules. Things to be known about the making of these Maps.For we must know that in making of these Maps we must attend to a three∣fold end. 1. That all the places must have such a scituation and distance to the chief Circles of the Earth, as the Aequator, the Parallels, the Meridians, as they have in the Earth it self, so that from those Tables the Parallels of every place, the distance from the Aequator, from the Pole, the Zone, the Climate, &c. may be beheld, because that from thence many properties of the Regions and Celestial appearances do depend. 2. That the Magnitudes of every Regi∣on may have that proportion that they have in the Earth it self. 3. That eve∣ry place may have the same scituation to the other mutually which they have in the Earth it self. Of these three requisites all Maps or Tables ought exactly to perform the first, and for the most part exactly do, because they are made from the Table of La∣titude and Longitude of places; neither do the Rules of Perspective hinder the same. But for the second, they cannot accurately perform the same if that the Rules of Perspective be observed, because the crooked paths of the Superficies being more remote from the Eye, makes the representation lesser in the Glass than those parts subjected to the Eye: but yet that inequality is small and beco∣meth insensible, if that the Eye be conceived to be remote an infinite interval from the Earth. But the third requisite can be performed by no larger Tables, such are those of the whole Earth, also those of the 4 quar. of the Earth and the greater Provinces although they may accomplish it in the lesser Regions, and the vulgar
suppose that it may be had in the larger Maps. But we shall more fully explicate this in the description. Only this we shall here advise in general, that in all Maps which we have, or which are sold by Artificers, viz. those that are universal, that place must be taken for the point, which shall be directly subject to the Eye in the projecture; that place I say of the Earth which is seated in the middle of the Table, for here we must conceive the Eye to hang over. This hath place in many particular ones, yet not in all. Moreover you may make the following Rules to be more plain, if that you make use of several Maps,Maps necessa∣ry to be used. which will the more illustrate and explain our Rules by the Examples. The first easy Mode, the Eye being placed in the Axis. See Scheme. Of the Hemi∣sphere of the Earth which placeth the Eye in some Point of the Axis of the Earth.In the first place, I exhibit this Method of painting the Hemisphere of the Earth, which placeth the Eye in some Point of the Axis of the Earth. For Example, we would represent the Arctick Hemisphere of the Earth, to wit, that which lyeth between the Aequator and the Arctick Pole, and the places contained it, that is a, Geographical Map must be made of the Arctick Globe. Therefore we shall conceive the Eye to be placed without this Hemisphere, that it may hang over the middle Point of that Hemisphere, viz. the Pole Arctick, that the Eye may be with the Pole Arctick, and the Center of the Earth in one streight line, that is, that the Eye may be in the Axis of the Earth. And therefore it shall be either in the Axis from the part of the Aequator towards the Antar∣tick Pole, or in the Axis extended from the part of the Pole Arctick. But it matters not in what part it be put. For the Table or Glass in which the repre∣sentation ought to be, let the place of the Aequator be taken, or some Tangent of the Earth in the Pole Arctick, if that the Eye be conceived to be placed from this part. But to avoid confusion, and the better to express our selves, let us sup∣pose the Eye to be placed in the Antarctick Pole, the Plain of the Aequator to be the Table.We conceive the Earth to be of a small Magnitude. Moreover we conceive Rayes to be emitted from all the places and Peripheries of the Arctick Hemisphere, (whether it possess the Antarctick, or other Point of the Axis) which Rayes therefore shall penetrate the place of the Aequator. The Points in which the perforation is made, shall exhibit every place of that Hemisphere of the Earth, and the points made from the perforating Rays, the Peripheries of the Tropick, if they be joyned, do exhibit the Lines which represent those Peripheries. By this Method it cometh to pass that the Aequa∣tor becometh the term of this projecture: the Pole of the Earth may be repre∣sented from the Center of this Circle, or of the Aequator: the Meridians make right Lines, all passing through the Pole, even to the Aequator, the Parallels of the Aequator, or the Circles of Latitude, the Tropick of Cancer, the Arctick Pole, and the like. Also by this projecture may be made these Circles, or Peripheries, whose Center is the same with that of the Aequator, viz. the Point, which re∣presenteth the Pole Arctick. But the places of the Earth are represented every one in their Peripheries of Latitude, and the Meridian Line, viz. where the Meridian Line of the place cutteth the Parallel of the place, the Point of the Section is the representation of the place. But all the other Peripheries and Se∣miperipheries, which may be conceived in that Hemisphere, do not make in projecture streight lines, or Circular, but Eclipses: for Example, if we will re∣present the Horizon and vertical Circles of any place; all these in their proje∣cture shall make Ecliptick Arches. For the more easy imagination of projecture, by which Circles are represent∣ed in a Table, a radious Cone must be conceived, whose Vertex must be the Eye, let the Circle of the Earth to be represented be the basis, let the sides be the rays drawn from the Periphery to the Eye: moreover this Cone to be cut by the Ta∣ble, and according to the various position, a various Line and Section to be made, which is the projecture of the assumed Periphery on the Earth. So also the Ecliptick it self, whose half only is represented with the Arctick Hemisphere, maketh a portion of the Ecliptick. But yet to speak properly, the Ecliptick it self is not represented, because it cannot be conceived immutable on the Earth, but only in a certain scituation, or at a certain moment of the day, and his
intersection may be taken with the Aequator in any point of the Aequator, yet in all Maps by reason of its Commodity, the intersection of the first Meridian is assumed with the Aequator. So therefore we have distinctly explained the Original and Method of the first sort of Tables or Maps, which have the Eye in the Axis: now I shall shew how such a Table is to be described in practice.How Tables of the first sort are to be de∣scribed by practice. In any Plain or paper let the middle point P, be taken for the Pole, and from that as from a Center, let the great or small Periphery be drawn (as we desire to have our Maps great or small) which we shall have for the Aequator. These two may be taken at pleasure, but the other points and Peripheries shall be found from them. Let the Aequator be divided into 360 deg. and streight lines being drawn through the Center and the beginning of every deg: these shall be the Meridians, from which that which is drawn at the beginning of the first degree from these 360, shall be taken for the first, so the rest of the lines shall shew the rest of the Me∣ridians and Longitudes of the Earth from the first Meridian. Now the Paral∣lels of Latitude must be described. There are four Quadrants, or quarters of the Aequator, the first 0,90: the second 90,108: the third 180,270: and the fourth 270,0. Let those be noted for the more easy appellation with the letters A B, B C, CD, D A, and let one be taken from these, for Example, B C, from every one of whose degrees as also from the 20 deg. 30. min. and the 66 deg. 30 min, let occult streight lines be drawn to the point D, (the term of the Diameter B D) or let the Rule be only applyed to D, and brought round through every degree of the Quadrant B C: and let the 23 deg. 30 min. and the 66 deg. 30 min. in which these streight lines cut the Semidiamiter P C, be noted, and from P as from a Center, and the Peripheries be described through every point taken in P C. These Peripheries shall be the Parallels of the La∣titudes unto which in the first, and opposite Meridian, viz. A P, and C P, the numbers may be ascribed from the Aequator towards P, to wit, 1, 2, 3, 4, even to 90, so that the Latitude of every one may be conspicuous: but at the Paral∣lel 23 deg. 30 min. the Tropick of Cancer shall be ascribed; at the 66 degree 30 min. the Arctick Circle. In the Praxis neither all the Meridians, nor all the Parallels must be coloured, but only every tenth, the rest must be represen∣ted with occult or obscure lines. After all the Meridians and Parallels are described, it is easy to note from the Table of Longitude and Latitude of places, the places of the Earth, viz. of its Superficies; let the Longitude of any place be accounted from the first assum∣ed Meridian in the Aequator, so we fall into the Meridian of the place; then from the Latitude of the place we choofe a Parallel of the same Latitude, and the point where the Meridian cutteth the Parallel is the point, which represent∣eth the assumed place of the Earth, whose appellation is to be ascribed unto it, and so we shall act with the inscription or projecture of any place to be taken, until the Maps, or Tables be finished. Rules to be observed if the Semicircle of the Ecliptick be to be noted.If the Semicircle also of the Ecliptick be to be noted in it, that must be done before the designation of the places. We have said that the Ecliptick maketh the Ecliptick line in projecture, therefore its points through which that porti∣on of the Eclipsis must be drawn, ought to be found. That is taken for the first point, or for the intersection of the Ecliptick, and the Aequator, in which the first Meridian cutteth the Aequator, which therefore is noted in the sign of Aries. But the last point of this half Eclipsis, or the other intersection of the Aequator, and the Ecliptick, viz. the end of Virgo shall be in 180, the opposite point of the Aequator, the intermedial point is that in which the Meridian 90, cutteth the Tropick of Cancer. So we have gotten three points, through which the portion of the Eclipsis to be described passeth, (which is lesser than the half Eclipsis (which are the points of the 1 deg. of Aries, Cancer, and Libra: for finding the other points, as the 1 deg. of Taurus and 15; the 1 deg. and the 15 de∣grees of Gemini; the 1 deg. of Leo; the 1 deg. of Virgo, the Declinations of these points must be taken from the Table and the right Ascension which are here ascribed.
Declination. Right Ascension.   deg. min. deg. min.     The 15 of Aries and Virgo 5 56 13 48 166 for the 15 deg. of Virgo. The 1 of Taurus and Virgo 11 31 27 0 152 for the beginning of Virg. The 15 of Taurus and Leo 16 24 42 0 187 for the 15 deg. of Leo. The 1 of Gemini and Leo 20 13 57 0 122 for the beginning of Leo The 15 of Gemini & Cancer 22 41 73 0 106 for the 15 deg. of Cancer, Then where the Meridian 13 deg. or 4 deg. cutteth the Parallel 5 deg. or ra∣ther 6 deg. that point shall be the 15 deg. of Aries; also where the Meridian 27 cutteth the Parallel 11 ½, there shall be the 1 deg. of Taurus, so where the Meridian 42, the Parallel 16 deg. where the 15 deg. of Taurus, and where the Meridian 106 cutteth the Parallel 22 deg. 41 min. there shall be the 15 deg. of Cancer: where the Meridian 122 cutteth the Parallel 20, there shall be the beginning of Leo: and so the other Meridians 137, 152, 166, cut the Pa∣rallels 16, 11, 5, for the 15 deg. of Leo in the beginning of Virgo, and the 15 of Virgo. These points being joyned by a Crooked Line, we shall have the portion of the Eclipsis for the Semicircles of the Boreal Ecliptick, whose points and degrees are easily noted in every sign, if that you take Declinations for every one out of the Tables, and Right Ascensions, by that Mode, by which we have signed the degree, the 15 deg. of Taurus, the 1 deg. of Gemini and the like. This being done, the Composition of this Geographical Map is finished, which shall represent the half Superficies of the Earth, to wit, the part between the Aequator, and the Pole Arctick. That this Mode is most easy and pleasant will be manifest from the Descri∣ption, and the Praxis will shew it: now we shall speak of its use and inconveni∣ences: we have said before that three things are required in a Map, or that they are made for a threefold end: The first of these, the Map, made by this Method do accurately enough discover,Maps are made for a threefold end.viz. the Latitude and Longitude of every place, because they are made from a Table of Latitudes and Longitudes: also they shew the distance of places from the Course or way of the Sun, or Zones. The second requisite, to wit, the due proportion of the Magnitude of every Region; Maps of this sort do not altogether perform, for Regions, by how much they are more near the Aequator, by so much the more they receive the greater place in this projecture, than they ought to have by their own proportion, But this difference is small, by rea∣son of the great distance of the Eye,Few Regions Inhabited about the Pole, but many to∣wards the Aequator. and this defect is compensated by that Commodity, that the places may the better be noted, by reason few Regions are inhabited about the Pole, but many towards the Aequator. But the third end, viz. the scituation of one place to another, and the distance of places cannot be performed by these Tables, because the Lines, which note such pla∣ces in the Maps, have another scituation, and proportion, than in the Earth. But if you please to examine the scituation of one place, to the scituation of other places, and the rising and stay of the Sun above the Horizon of the same, the Horizon of that place may be drawn in an Ecliptical form in this Method: Let 90 degrees on both sides be reckoned in the Aequator from the Meridian of the given place, one of the terms of the Numeration shall one point of the Horizon to be drawn, viz. the Oriental point, in which the Aequator cutteth the Horizon. The other term again shall be the point of the Horizon for the
Aequinoctial setting. Moreover in the opposite Quadrant of the Meridiah of the place, let so many Parallels be accounted from the Pole towards the Aequator, as the Parallel of the place is distant from the Aequator. The term of the Numeration shall shew the third Point of the Horizon, viz, the Nor∣thern Cardo, (we shall shew how to find the Point of the South Car∣do, in that which we shall annex by and by; if a greater portion than that of the Hemisphere, be to be represented on the Map, for it is not to be found in the Hemisphere, only except the Horizon of the Pole, which is the very Aequator). So we shall have three or four chief Points, through which the Ho∣rizon ought to pass. To find out the other Points, there is no more commodious way than by the benefit of the Globe, viz. let the Pole be Elevated for the Latitude of the place assumed; then in every Parallel let one Point be chosen, through which the first Meridian passeth, and let that be brought to the Meri∣dian, which done, let the degree under the Meridian be noted, and so you must do in every Parallel. These being noted, let so many degrees be reckoned on both sides from every Parallel from the Meridian of the place given in the Map on the Aequator, viz. for 10th, 20th, 30th, and so on; and where the Meri∣dians cut the convenient Parallels, they shall be the points demanded, to wit, through which the Horizon is to be drawn, and the scituation of the other places may be examined in some measure at that. By this Method the whole Superficies of the Earth may almost be represent∣ed on one Table, if that either of the Poles, viz. the Antarctick be assumed for the Eye, if a Table or Glass plain be taken of any Parallel near the Pole, for instance, the plain of the Arctick Pole, and the Antarctick Circle on one plain, neither doth any thing else remain to be done, or added to the former construction, but that the Meridian Lines should be protracted, and the Paral∣lels drawn from the other part of the Aequator. Then let the whole Eclip∣tick be drawn, and if you please, let the Horizon be compleated. But seeing that the parts and degrees scituated beyond the Aequator, towards the An∣tarctick Pole, by this Mode would become far greater, than the parts about, and in the Aequator, which is contrary to the truth of the matter, therefore it is better to make the projecture on two Hemispheres, that one may shew the Ar∣ctick Orb, the other the Antarctick. Tables described according to this Method are very few: to general Maps of Right Lines, two other Maps very small, described in this Method, are wont to be added, whereof one exhibiteth the Regions about the Arctick Pole, the other those about the Antarctick, which the Reader may look upon for the better understanding of what hath been said. But these are better learned from practice than from precepts. The second Mode, the Eye being placed in the plain of the Aequator. The second Mode. See Scheme.The preceeding Mode of describing of Geographical Maps doth neither fitly shew the Magnitudes and scituation of places, neither is commodious to de∣scribe the Hemisphere intercepted between the two Poles; and to represent all the places lying in the same Meridian: moreover it seemeth to be repug∣nant to our conception, that the Pole of the Earth should fall into the Center, and therefore those described Tables afford a more difficult imagination. Therefore another Method hath been found, which is somewhat more hard than the former, but more aptly representeth the places of the Earth, and re∣moveth the Pole from the Aequator. For the conceiving of this Method, we must understand the Superficies of the Earth to be cut into two Hemispheres from the whole Periphery of the Meri∣dian, and in two Tables we exhibit those Hemispheres, one in one, the other in the gther. The Eye is placed in the Point of the Aequator, which is removed 90 degrees from the first Meridian: the Table or Glass in which this representati∣on ought to be made, is assumed; the place of the first Meridian and Hemisphere, (which lyeth beneath that Plain in respect of the Eye) is taken to represent it on the Plain. In this form of projecture the Semicircle of the Aequator be∣cometh
a right Line, and that Meridian which is distant from the first 90 de∣grees, unto which the eye is conceived eminent, will also become the Right Line: all the other Meridians, and all the Parallels of the Aequator, become the Arches of the Circles, because their Cones are cut from the Plain of the Ta∣bles by a subcontrary Section. The explication of which must be demanded from the Conical Doctrine, and may better be shewed than expressed. But the Ecliptick becometh a portion of the Eclipsis for the Cause alledged in the former Method. The descripti∣on Mathema∣tically ex∣plained.This Description is thus made: the point E, being taken for the Center in the Table, a great or small Periphery of the Circle is described, A B C D, (as we desire to have the Table great or small). This representeth the first Me∣ridian, and its opposite, viz. the Diameter B D, being drawn, there arise two Semiperipheries, whereof one B A D, is the first Meridian, the other B C D, is the opposite, or of Longitude 180. This Diameter B D, representeth the Meridian 90 degrees distant from the first, and his point D, is one Pole, viz. the Arctick, but the point D, is the Pole Antarctick: the Diameter A C, to B D, is the perpendicular Line of the Aequator. Let these Quadrants A B, B C, C D, D A, be divided every one into 90 degrees. Moreover we must do thus for the representation of the Meridians, and Parallels, or for the finding out the Arches of the Meridians, and Parallels. First, the Line of the Aequa∣tor, A C, must be divided into its degrees, to wit, 180, (because it only shew∣eth half the Aequator) or A E, E C into 90, after this Mode: from the point D, let the Semiperipheries, right Lines, A B C be drawn to every degree, or which is as well, let the Rule be applyed to the point D, and to every degree of the Semiperiphery A B C: these Lines shall cut the Line of the Aequator into 180 parts, which shall represent the degrees, which are the degrees of Longitude, and therefore the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, and the like, must be ascri∣bed, beginning from the first Meridian D A B. Through every one of these points, 1, 2, 3, and both the Poles B D, the Arches of the Circles must be de∣scribed, which shall represent the Meridians. But how the Periphery must be described through these three given points, for Example, B, D, or B 2 D, and the like, is taught by Geometry, viz. you must find the Centers for every Pe∣riphery to be described, which Centers are placed in the very Line of the Ae∣quator, as is the Center E, of the Meridian D A B. Those points are found according to Euclids Method, Proposition 1. Lib. 3. if the Lines B 1, B 2, B 3,See Euclide lib. 3. Proposition 1.&c. be doubly cut by the perpendicular lines (this is most easy by the appli∣cation of the Rule): where these perpendicular lines fall into the protracted Line E C of the Aequator, if there be need, there are the Centers for the de∣scribing of the Arches, B 1 D, B 2 D, &c. But the Centers of the Arches B 91 D, B 92 D, B 93 D, &c. fall into E A; if that need be to protract it. But the more easy invention in practice is, if that Right Lines be drawn from B, through every degree of the Quadrants B A, B C, even to the protended Line A C, which make these points, a, b, c, d, e, and the like. So that 1 A, shall be the Diameter of the Meridian through which the 1 ought to pass, and the 26 of that which passeth through the 2, and so the 3 c, 4 d, &c. if therefore 14, 26, 30, 4d, &c. be bissected, we have the Center of the Meridian to be described, But the operation will be less obnoxious to error, and more easy (especially in great Maps) by a Canon of Tangents, for so we shall have no need to draw Lines. For to divide E A, E C, E B, E D into degrees, we thus act: we di∣vide E B, in the opposite scale into 10000 parts. Then from the Canon we take Tangents ½ degree, 1 deg. 1 ½ deg. 2, 2 ½, 3, 3 ½, 4, and the like; and we put every one of these Tangents taken from the opposite scale in E A, E C, E B, E D, from E; so two near points shall contain one degree, the ascription must be made as before. Then at the Centers of every one of the Meridians to be found in E A, E C, the number must be taken from 90 degrees (or the very number from the Complement it self) let the Tangent of the residue be taken from the Canon, and be placed from E, in E C, or E A. The term shall be the Center of the Meridian to be described through the assumed degree. So we
must do with all the Meridians. Practice will shew this to be easy, The foun∣dation of this latter operation for the finding out the Centers, is a Trigonometri∣cal Theorem. The difference of the Tangents of two Arches together filling up the Quadrant, is double to the Tangent of the difference of the Arches. So therefore the Meridians are represented. To draw the Arches of the Parallels, the Meridians D B, must be divided af∣ter the same manner into 180 degrees, as the Quadrants of the Aequator E A, E C, if that occult lines be drawn from C, to every degree of the Peri∣phery D A B: but there is no need of this, when those parts may be transfer∣red from E A, into E B, the points or degrees from E, towards B, must be num∣bred from the Aequator to the Pole, 1, 2, 3, 4, and the like. So from E, to∣wards the other Pole D. Then through every one of these points, and degrees of the Quadrants of the like named number A B, C B, the Arches of the Circles must be described, viz. through the first degrees, then from the beginning of the third, and the like. And so from the other quarters of the Aequator towords D. So we ob∣tain the Parallels of all degrees, and the Polary Tropicks, with their Meridians first found out. A twofold Method for the designing the Ecliptick.To design the Ecliptick, there is a twofold Method, for we either put the scituation of the Ecliptick on, or above the Earth, that his intersection with the Aequator, or the beginning of Aries, may hang over the place E, and in this scituation the projecture of the Semicircles of the Ecliptick, from the 1 deg. of Cancer, to the 1 of Capricorn, on the Table is a Right Line: to wit, let the 23 deg. 30 min. be numbred from A, towards B, and let the Diameter be drawn through E, from the term of the Numeration. This shall represent the Semicircle of the Ecliptick in that scituation. Which line shall be divided af∣ter the same Mode into degrees, as the Semiquator A C. For the point in the Quadrant B C, where the Arctick Circle falleth in, viz. 66 ½ of a degree, is that from whence if that streight lines be drawn to every degree of the Semi∣periphery F A D G, they shall cut E F into 90 degrees, and after the same Mode E G: to which the numbers, and signs of Aries, Taurus, Gemini, and so on, must be ascribed. If the scrituation of the Ecliptick be put such that his intersection and that of the Aequator may hang over the place A in the first Meridian, then his pro∣jecture shall become a portion of the Eclipsis; whose two points are A, C; the third, that in which the Meridian 90 cutteth the Tropick of Cancer; the other points shall be found by the same Mode, which we have explained in the first Mode, viz. if that we have the Declinations and Right Ascensions of the 15 degree of Aries, the 1 of Taurus, the 15 of Taurus, and the like; where the Parallels of every one of the degrees of the Declinations cut the Meridians ta∣ken for every Right Ascension. Those points of the Sections are the 15 of Aries, the 1 of Taurus, and so on through those. Therefore if a Crooked line be drawn, we shall have the projecture of the Ecliptick, because it so remaineth continued in two Hemispheres. Moreover to the ascribing of every one of these places in their Tables, Lon∣gitudes, and Latitudes must be excepted from the Tables of every place, and where the Parallel of Latitude of any place cutteth the Meridian of the Longitude of the same place, that point representeth that place on the Table, whose appellation is to be ascribed, and so all the places are to be de∣signed. After the same Method the whole Superficies of the Earth may be repre∣sented on one Table, if that the plain of the first Meridian be not taken for the Glass, but one Parallel to it, and that very near to the Eye; for so whole Paral∣lels, and whole Meridians, or every continued Meridian may be described in their opposites. But thence there will arise a divers appearance from the true Superficies of the Earth, and therefore it is omitted by Artificers, who ra∣ther exhibit two Hemispheres on one Map. But it is useful that practitioners should exercise themselves in these. But then it will be more commodious to place the Eye in the first Meridian, so that B D may be the first; the line
of the Aequator shall not be A C, but another drawn from the point of the right line E D, which shall be divided into so many degrees, as are in the Arch taken away by the same Artifice. The second praise is, that it aptly exhibiteth the Hemisphere intercepted between the Poles. The third is, that it almost sheweth the Latitudes and Longitudes of every place, and distance from the Aequator, and Pole, as they lie in the Earth. The defects.The defects are, that first it hath unequal degrees of the Aequator, viz. in how much they are more near the first Meridian D A B, or the opposite B C D, by so much they are the greater, and therefore the equal Regions of the Earth in these Tables, are also made unequal, as in the preceding Mode (this defect may be in part corrected, if the Eye be removed far from the Earth): viz. the Regions about E are lesser, about A C greater than they ought by proportion to be: after the same manner the Regions about the Pole B, D are made bigger than they ought. Secondly, the scituation of one place to another cannot be commodiously examined, neither thence can we find the distances of places. The third, fourth, and fifth Mode of Right lined Maps. The 3d. 4th. 5th. Mode of Right lined Maps. See Scheme in Place.There are sold by Artificers, Ʋniversal Geographical Maps of Right lines; viz. in which both the Circles of Longitude (Meridians) and of La∣titude, (Parallels) are designed by Right lines, which is impossible according to the Rules of Perspective; neither can there be any scituation or position assigned to the Eye or Glass, that both the kinds of Circles, viz. Latitude, and Longitude, may become Right lines, but either of the Circles may be repre∣sented by Right lines. In the first Method, which we have explained of the Meridian or Longitude of Circles, Right lines are made according to Per∣spective, and the Circles of Latitude become Circles, not Right lines: but in the fifth Method following, the Circles of Latitude become Right lines, but the Meridian Circles, crooked Ellipses. In other Methods which are institu∣ted according to the Rules of Perspective,The Rules of Perspective ne∣cessary to be understood. both kinds become Crooked lines, except yet in one Method, according unto which the Meridians be∣come Right lines, but the Circles of Latitude become Hyperboles, to wit, if the Eye be placed in the Center of the Earth, and beholdeth the Hemisphere from either part of the first Meridian, but the Table, or Glass, through which the aspect is made, becometh the plain Parallel to the first Meridian. For so the Meridians shall become streight lines, and the Circles of Latitude shall be Hyperboles. The division of the line of the Aequator, and of the Me∣ridians according unto this Method into degrees is easy: and those who are delighted with the variety of these things may try this Mode with plea∣sure: but by reason of the description of Hyperboles, it is less fit for practice:The Instructi∣ons of a Tutor good. them use a Tutor. Therefore Maps of Right lines are not made according to therefore we shall say no more concerning it; those who will attempt it, let Perspective, but contrary to the same, as hath been said. They are found to be twofold, or of two sorts. Some account both the Rules of Latitude and Longitude equal, such as were made in times past: but others, as those which are now made, have the Rules of Longitude, or of the Aequator equal (which is contrary to Perspective) but not the degrees of Latitude, or of the Meri∣dians. For they augment the Magnitude of these towards the Poles more and more, so that to 80 degrees; the degree is twice double more than to the Aequator, and then the degrees more near the Pole, may receive almost an infinite Magnitude, which cannot be expressed in any Map, which encrease is contrary to Perspective, which only granteth a small augmen∣tation.
Right lined Maps.Right lined Maps of the first Mode are the most easy of all others. For Ab, being taken for the Longitude, the Map is divided into 180, (for one Hemisphere) equal parts, which shall be degrees; and the Meridians, viz. Right perpendicular lines are drawn through every degree, and in these parts equal to them are taken, which are taken in the line of the Aequator, and right lines Parallel to the Aequator, are drawn through every part (which de∣note the deg. of Latitude) these shall be the Circles of Latitude. Any places shall be signed, as in the former Mode, viz. where the Meridian of that place, and the Circle of Latitude meet. The second Mode of Right lined Maps.Now the second Mode of Maps of right lines, in the division of the Aequa∣tor into equall degrees, differeth not from the former, and therefore the assu∣med A B, is divided into 180 equal parts (for either Hemisphere) as in the former, and right perpendicular lines are drawn through every one of them which design the Meridians or Circles or Circles of Longitude. But they ob∣serve another Method to the designing the Circles of Latitude, or Parallels of the Aequator. For the Meridians are not divided into equal degrees, but in∣to unequal, as aforesaid, so that they encrease towards the Poles. The Cause is, because other Maps do not shew the true position of one place to the other, or rather a Nautical line, from one place to another, neither admit the finding out the distance, but they determine these two may be obtained by Maps of this kind. For because the Meridians are all drawn through the degrees of the lines of the Aequator equally distant one to another, thence it cometh to pass that the places or points scituated in every Meridian, are so much the more removed above the true distance from the first Meridian, by how much they come nearer the Pole from the Aequator: viz. the distance in Charts, from the first Meridian, so much exceedeth the lawful distance, as the Semi∣diameter, or whole sinus, exceedeth the Sine of the Complement of Latitude of any place, so one degree or more to the Circle of this Latitude. And therefore the degrees in these Circles ought to be exhibited lesser than in the Aequator, and by so much the more lesser, by how much those Circles are more near the Poles. But in Maps of right lines, because the Meridians are drawn equally distant, they do not become lesser, but equal in all Parallels. How much therefore the degrees in every Circle of Latitude, are augmented above their due Magnitude, so much the degrees of La∣titude, every one ought to increase in these Maps, above the Magni∣tude of one degree in the Aequator. That is done thus in this Method in designing the Magnitude in every degree: As the quantity of one de∣gree in every Parallel is to the quantity of one degree in the Ae∣quator, that is, as the sinus of the Complement of any Parallel beginning that degree, is to the whole Sine, so is the Magnitude of the part in the Aequator, which designeth one degree, to the Magnitude of the part which shall denote this degree in the Meridian, from whose beginning that Parallel is drawn. But if you will act more exactly, the sinus of the Complement of Latitude of any Parallel is not to be taken, but the sinus of the Complement of Latitude, which beginneth the degree, is to be added to the sinus of the Complement which terminateth that de∣gree and half of the aggregated Complement must be taken for the first term in the Rule of proportion. Example. If a term be to be designed in the first Meridian for the first degree of Latitude in the Aequator, let the Magnitude of one degree of the Aequa∣tor, be of ten particles taken in the opposite Scale, according to the first Proposition his Magnitude shall become equal to the deg. of the Aequator:See Prop. 1. be∣cause the Aequator is the Parallel which beginneth this deg. but according to the II. Proposition, I take the Sine of the Complement 0 degrees of Latitude, which Sinus is 100000 (for the Complement is 90) and I add to the Sine of the Com∣plement 1 deg. viz. to the Sine 89 deg. which is 99985, they become 99985,
the half 99992. Therefore as 99992, is to 100000, so is 10 (the Magni∣tude of a degree in the Aequator, or an equal degree) to 10 10/100000 for the first degree. But because the increase above 10 particles is so small, that it cannot be noted in a Map; therefore this degree becometh of 10 particles, viz. equal to a degree of the Aequator. But in progress made towards the Poles, the degrees more and more increase. For Example; let the Mag∣nitude of 66 degrees be designed, viz. which is between the term of 59 degrees, and the beginning of 61 degrees. According to the first Propositi∣on, the time of the Complement of the 59 degree is 51503. Therefore as 51503 is to 100000, so is 10 to 19 ⅖, particles must be taken for the Scale, of which a degree in the Aequator containeth 10. See Proposi∣tion 2.According to the second Proposition thus we must do. The Sine of the Complement of the 50 deg. is 51503. The Sine of the Complement of the 60 degree is 50000, the half of the Aggregate is 50751. Therefore as 50751 is to 100000, so is 10 to 19 3/. Which Magnitude is very little bigger than the former, neither is it worth the pains. Moreover when the Magnitude of the second solitary degree is found, it must be added to the Magnitude of the first degree: the Aggregate shall be the increasing Latitude, as much as is to be taken in the Meridian from the Aequator, for the term of the second de∣gree. Then the found out Magnitude of the third solitary degree, must be added to the increasing Latitude of two degrees before laid down. So we shall have the Magnitude to be taken from the Aequator in the Meridian for the term of the third degree. And so you must do with the other degrees. Moreover that the labour may be more easy for the Studious, I have here set down a Table for the taking of the terms of every degree in the Meridian; I take such particles as one degree of the Aequator is put to have 100.
The TABLE. The Table for the taking the terms of every degree in the Meridian.grad. grad. grad. term. term. term. 1 100 29 3032 57 6970 2 200 30 3147 58 7157 3 300 31 3263 59 7349 4 400 ½ 32 3347 60 7546 5 500 ⅔ 33 3499 61 7749 6 601 34 3619 62 7960 7 702 35 3740 63 8175 8 802 36 3863 64 8399 9 903 37 3988 65 8631 10 1005 38 4114 66 8872 11 1107 39 4241 67 9023 12 1209 40 4371 68 9384 13 1311 41 4502 69 9691 14 1414 42 4636 70 9943 15 1517 43 4772 71 10243 16 1621 44 4909 72 10558 17 1725 45 5053 73 10900 18 1830 46 5193 74 11243 19 1936 47 5338 75 11617 20 2042 48 5486 76 12017 21 2150 49 5637 77 12445 22 2256 50 5791 78 12908 23 2364 51 5981 79 13409 24 2473 52 6109 80 13960 25 2583 53 6274 81 14565 26 2694 54 6441 82 15243 27 2806 55 6611 83 16009 28 2918 56 6790     The degrees of Latitude being so designed in the first Meridian, let Paral∣lel lines be drawn through every one of them with the Aequator, which shall be the Circles of Latitude. And let the Inscription of every one of the places be in the point, where the Circle of Longitude and Latitude of the place do meet. But the Regions about the Poles less aptly, and overmuch contrary to their natural disposition are exhibited in Maps of this kind, therefore the parts between the Poles, and the Polary. Circles are wont to be adjoyned to the universal Map, in two peculiar little Maps made according to the first Mode. The use of these Maps.The use of these Maps is such. 1. The Latitude and Longitude of places is found, as in the preceeding. 2. The place A, being given from whence you Sail, and the place B, to which you Sail, the quarter is exhibited to which the Ship is to Steer her Course. For if a Parallel be drawn through A, and the Right line A B, the Angle which these two lines make shall
shew the quarter. Mariners use another Mode. 3. They would find the distance between two given places, it the interval of those two places be taken with a Compass, and transferred to the divided Meridian, so that the feet of the Compass may be equally absent from the Parallel, which is in the middle between these places. But these I think to be less exact. The sixth and seventh Mode. See Ptolomy in his latter Chap. of his first Book of Geography. See Scheme.Ptolomy in the latter part of his last Chapter of his first Book of Geography proposeth another Mode, and teacheth by that to represent the part of the Earth then known: In this Method the Aequator, and Circles of Latitude become the Arches of the Circles: the Meridians become Elliptical Arches. The Eye is placed to hang over the Meridian, which is the midst between the extremities of the Inhabited Earth: and in the middle place between the ex∣tream degrees of known Latitude. But by reason of the inconveniencies of describing the Ellipsis, and because it was devised by Ptolomy more to repre∣sent part of the Earth, viz. that which is inhabited, therefore it is not used by Artificers. To this that Mode is something like, which exhibiteth Circles of Latitude, by Right lines: but the Meridians by the semissis of the Ellipsis, such as the projecture is, if you conceive perpendicular lines to fall from every point of either Hemisphere on the place of the first Meridian. But the Eye must be supposed to be removed by an infinite space from the Earth, so that all the Rays from the places of the Earth being drawn to it, may be accounted for Parallels, and Perpendiculars to the plain of the first Meridian, as Dialists say, that all the Rays emitted from some point of the Sun to the Earth do so little bend, that they may be esteemed for Parallels, and do make the same appear∣ances in shadows. But it is not very difficult. If therefore you intend to represent in this form the Hemisphere of the Earth, take any point in the plain E, and from that as from a Center let the Periphery A B C D be described, let the Quadrants be A B, B C, C D, D A; let every one be divided into 90 degrees, beginning from A C, towards B and A, B A D, shall be the first Meridian, B C D the opposite, in the right line B D, the middle between these is the 90 from the first B A D. Let them be drawn to A C, which sheweth the Semiperiphery of the Aequator; Right lines Parallel through every degree of the Quadrants, or quarters, they shew the Parallels of the Aequator or the Circles of Latitude, and the Tropicks and Polary Circles shall also be found out. The parts into which E B, E D is divided, through these that are drawn, are the Meridian degrees B D, which are noted, 1, 2, 3, and so on. The same are taken in the Quadrant E A, of the Aequator, and the Quadrant E C, and the number 1, 2, 3, are ascribed, even to 180, beginning from the first point, or next to the Meridian B A D. So the parts A E C shew the degrees, into which the Semiperiphery of the Aequator, is divided, through which the Poles B D, the Semiellipsis must be drawn for the Meridians. Because through B D, is the greater Axis of Ellipsis which are to be drawn, but the Semissis E B, or E D: but the Axis of the lesser Semissis is various in divers, viz. pair of E A, intercepted between E, and the degree of Longitude, and therefore from those given it is easy by an apt Instrument, to describe these Ellipses, which Instrument is vulgar at this day, neither is it difficult to make it. Yet the points of every one of the Ellipsis may be easily found, through which they must be drawn with a free hand: but it is better to delineate them with an Instrument. The Circles of the Latitude, and the Meridians being so described, all the places in this Map are to be ascribed at these points, in which the Meridian and Circle of Latitude do meet, and so the Map shall be finished. The Ecliptick shall be represented by a streight line, or by the Ecliptick line, by that Method which we have explained in Maps of the second Mode, with little la∣bour.
These Maps very useful.Maps of this Method are able to perform, what the Tables of the preceeding Modes do, besides this they have this Commodity, that they apparently shew the decrease of the Circles of Latitude in Magnitude towards the Poles. If the division H G, and H K, cannot be made through the stroaks of the Lines, by reason of the great distance of the Eye D, it will be easy by calcula∣tion to find out the Parallels for every degree, viz. according to this propor∣tion: As the distance of the Eye taken from the Center of the Earth, with the Sinus of the Complement of the Arch of the Aequator to be represented, have themselves to the Sinus of the same Arch, so is the distance of the Eye from the Table, to part the Line H C, or H K, which shall only represent the Arch of the Aequator. For Example, let us put the Eye D, to be removed from the Center of the Earth E, 200 Semidiameters of it: but the Table or Glass H K, 100 Semi∣diameters. Therefore D E, shall be 200, and D H 100, of such as E B, or E A, E C is 1. We shall find first the Longitude of G H K, which ought to re∣present the Semiperiphery of the Aequator A B C, in this distance of the Eye or Glass. And it shall be thus: As D E, is to E A, so is D H, to H S, or H K. 200 100 1 to the Semidiamiter of the Earth ½. From whence it is manifest H K, or H G, ought to be of half the Longitude of the Semidiamiter of the Earth, which in truth is over vast, when we can ex∣hibit no such Line on any Plain. Therefore for the Earth it self, we conceive a little Earth, or Globe Terrestrial, lesser than usual, whose Semidiameter if that it be of 2 foot, H G, or H K, shall be of 1 foot, viz. if that the Eye be put 200 foot remote from the Center of that little Earth, but the Glass 100. But if you desire to know how much distance the Eye ought to be removed from the very Earth, that the Semidiameter of the Aequator E A, or E C, may make the projecture H C, of given Magnitude; for Example of 1 foot, (the Semidiamiter of the Aequator, that is the Semissis of the Axis of the Earth containeth 19598300) that may be found by this proportion (yet sup∣posing the distance of the Glass from the Eye, viz. H D, 10000.) As H G, to D H, so E A, to D E. A Holland mile.1 to 100000, so 19598300 to 1959830000000 foot, wherefore 18000 makes an Holland mile, a vast distance. But in practice we take not the Earth its self, but its type, or little Earth, from which it is not necessary to suppose the Eye removed by so great an interval, but the projecture therefore is not varied. The eighth Mode in which any given place in the Earth receiveth the Cen∣ter, or middle place of the Map. If you please to have a Map, in which the scituation of all places to our place, or to any given place, as also the distance of them from our place, may be be∣held and found out, a Method is discovered, by which the Superficies of the Earth is so represented, that any given place of it may possess the middle place, or Center of the Map: and the other places may lie about it as a Center. Such Maps those people affect,The Chineses and ancient Jews, suppo∣sed their Coun∣trey to be in the middle of the Earth. who are delighted with a vain opinion, that their Coun∣try is scituated in the middle of the whole Earth, as the Chineses, and likewise the Jews in times past. But to describe such a Map, let us take London to possess the Center of the Map: we take his Latitude, or the Elevation of the 'Pole, to be the 51 ½ de∣gree, the Eye is placed in the point opposite to the Vertex, or in the Nadir of the place: the Table, or Glass is the Plain of the Horizon, or another Parallel to it; if you please to represent a larger portion than the Hemisphere, which is more commodious in this Method, to wit, that the Plain at least may pass through the depressed Pole.
Therefore in the Plain, let the Center E, be taken for London, and the de∣scribed Periphery A B C D, which sheweth the Horizon, must be divided in∣to four quarters, and every one of these into 90 degrres: let the Diameter B D, be the Meridian line: B the North Pole: D the South Diameter. And the line of the rising and setting Aequinoctial, sheweth the primary vertical. A, the Occident, C, the Oriental Cardo, or sheweth the place which is distant 90 degrees in the primary vertical point. All the vertical points are repre∣sented in streight lines, drawn through the Center E, to every degree of the Ho∣rizon. But to shun confusion it is better to omit them, and to adjoyn a Circum∣ductile Rule to the Paxil affixed in E. Then let B D be divided into 180 degrees, as in the former Mode, by draw∣ing Right Lines from A, to every degree of the Semiperiphery B C D. That point in E B, which sheweth the 52 deg. of the Arch B C, shall be the proje∣cture of the Arctick Pole: Let the point in E D, be noted with the letter P, which representeth the 52 deg. of the Arch D C, (by accounting from C, to D) shall be the projecture of the intersection of the Aequator, and the Meridian of London. Let the letter Q, be noted, and from that towards the letter P, let the numbers of the degrees, 1, 2, 3, &c. be ascribed. Also from Q, towards D, and from B, towards P, viz. 52, 53, 54, 55, &c. Then the points being taken from P, of the equal degrees, viz. 99 and 99, also 88, and 88; let these be described about these parts as the Diameters of the Peripheries of the Circles, which shall represent the Parallels or Circles of Latitude, and the Tropicks, and Polary Circles with the Aequator. For the descri∣bing the Me∣ridians.To describe the Meridians, first, let a Periphery be described through the points A P C: that shall shew the Meridian, which is 90 degrees absent from London. His Center shall be M, in B D, (protracted into the point N, which sheweth the Antarctick Pole). Let P N, the Diameter, be drawn through M, Parallel to A C, which is F H; protracted from both parts in K, L. More∣over let the Circle P H N F, be divided into 360 deg. and Right lines from the point P, to every deg. (or only by application of the Rule) which shall cut the line K F H L. The Circles must be described through every point of the Section, and both the Poles P, N, as through three given points which shall represent all the Meridians: the Centers of the Arches to be described are seated in the same K L, viz. those which are found by the former Section, but to be taken with this condition that the most remote Center at L, be chosen for the nearest Meridian from B D N, towards A, and for the second, the se∣cond from this. The Circles of the Latitudes, and the Meridians being thus described, it is easy to inscribe the places of the Earth on a Map, and the scituation of them all to London, will be conspicuous. Moreover to affix the Rule to the place of London, the same parts should be brought in, into which E B, was divided, and the number of degrees must be ascribed; so the Rule being brought round un∣to every place, we shall presently know, both how great an interval they lie from Amsterdam, and in what quater they lie in respect of it. Now how by the benefit of the Globe such a Map should be made, we shall shew in the Fourth Mode of particular Maps. The first Mode of Geographical particular Maps. We have spoken of the making of general or universal Maps; now it is re∣quired that we should teach the composition of particular or special Maps.Of particular or special Maps, as of Asia; Africa, Europe, America. The parts therefore of the Earth, which we would represent on the Map, are either great or small. It great, as Asia, Africa, Europe, America; it will be necessary to institute a Declination according to the Modes explained for General Maps: but in divers parts sundey ways are more commodious. Afri∣ca, and America, because the Aequator passeth through them, are not commo∣diously. exhibited by the first Mode, but most aptly by the second, the Eye being placed in the Plain of the Aequator above the middle Meridian, between the extreams which shut up Africa, or America. Therefore in these Maps the
Aequator is a right line, but the Parallels and the Meridians are the Arches of the Circles. But to represent Asia, and Europe, the first and sixth Mode are more commodious, but for the Polary Lands, or Frigid Zones, we have said that the first Mode is most apt in the explication of the same. First, therefore a streight line must be drawn upon the Plain for the Meridi∣an of the place, unto which we would have the Eye hang over, and that must be divided into degrees, according to the Method explained in the preceeding Modes, and which shall be degrees of Latitude, the number of which must be ascribed. Then from the Table must be extracted the Latitude of both Paral∣lels, viz. that which terminateth the Region from both sides which represent∣eth the Poles. The degrees of the Latitude of these must be noted in the right line, or the Meridian of the Eye, and through those points streight perpendicu∣lar lines must be drawn, which inclose the Map towards the Northern and Southern quarter. Then Parallels and Meridians must be drawn at every de∣gree: and the places inscribed until the Map be perfected. The second Mode of describing particular Maps? The second Mode of par∣ticular Maps.Artificers are wont to use another Method in Regions not so large, but only moderate or small. First, a tranverse line is drawn in the extremity of the Table, for the Circle of Latitude; in which the ends of the Regions respecting the Aequator, are to be drawn; in that so many parts are taken equally, through how many deg. of Longitude that Region is extended from that part. Then from the middle of this line, a perpendicular is drawn, which hath so many parts as there are deg. of Longitude between the bounds of that Regi∣on towards the Aequator, and the Pole. But how great these parts should be, is known from the proportion of the deg. of the first Circle, which is greatest to the deg. of Parallel, which is represented from the lower transverse line. Through the term of this perpendicular, another perpendicular, or Parallel to the inferiour line, is drawn, in which so many deg. of Longitude must be taken as are in the lower line, and equal to them of the lower line; if these Lati∣tudes be not much distant from the Aequator, or mutual from themselves. But if the distance from the Aequator be great; or if the excess of the ultimate La∣titude of the Region be great above that which is more near the Aequator, the parts to be taken in the transverse line, shall not be equal to the parts of the in∣feriour line, but they ought to be lesser according to proportion, which the degrees of this more remote Parallel hath to the degrees of the inferiour line, which proportion is known from the Table we have placed in the Fourth Chapter.See Chap. IV. After the parts are thus taken for the deg. of Longitude in the superiour and inferiour line, the right lines are to be drawn through the beginning and end of the parts of the same number: which right lines shall represent the Meridi∣an lines. Then through every deg. of its perpendicular, which we have order∣ed to be erected from the middle point of the inferiour line, lines Parallel to that lower line must be drawn through the beginnings of every degree which shall shew the Parallels of Latitude. In the last place, places must be inscrib∣ed at the points, in which the Parallels of every place, and the Meridian of La∣titude do meet. So a Geographical Map for a given Region shall be com∣pleated. The third Mode of describing particular Maps. The third Mode of parti∣cular Maps, as Provinces, &c.In representing the Provinces of a small tract, we use another Method, which we have explained before, viz. that the Maps may more accurately ex∣hibit the scituation of one place to another, and the distance of places. The Me∣thod consisteth in this, that we may find the Angles of the position of one place to another by Mathematical Instruments, and then aptly transfer into the Chart. For Example sake, let there be Five places of any Region to be dispo∣sed in the Table according to its scituation and distance; we shall call those
Five places A, B, C, D, E. First, we shall chose from these that A, from which the rest or most of them may conveniently be beheld; and an Instrument being applyed, we shall observe the Angles of position at every place, viz. the Angles between the Meridian line of the place in which we observe, and between the quarters of the other places B, C, D, E. Moreover in the Chart in which we will represent those places, we may take the letter A, and cut the Periphery described from thence into degrees, (which is not necessary if we have a Semicircle divided, or some other Geometrical Instrument fit for that purpose;) we shall assume one Diameter for the Meridian line of the place A, viz. F A G: the other perpendicular to this H A K, will shew the Aequinoctial rising in the extremity H, the setting K. F is the Northern Car∣do, C, the Southern. Let the Angle of the position of the place B, to A, be observed of 30 deg. from the South, towards the East, we shall number in the Quadrant G H, so many degrees, and shall draw the line from A, through that degree. This shall represent the place B, from the place A. After the same Mode the quarters of the other place D E, must be noted on the Chart, if they be observed. Then another place is to be chosen from B, C, D, E, whose di∣stance from A, is known, or found out; for Example, the place B, and in that the Instruments, being applyed, the quarters observed of the three other pla∣ces C, D, E. This being done, we put in our Table the Scale of miles, or Leagues, which we take either greater or lesser, as we desire to have either a greater or lesser Map, and in the Line of the quarter of the place B, we take from A, the noted distance, and there we mark the place B, and through B we shall draw the Line Parallel to F G, which shall represent the Meridian of the place B, and in the Pe∣riphery described about B, as about A, we shall draw Lines from B, which will denote the quarters of the places C, D, E, and where these Lines cut them which are drawn from A, the points of the Intersection shall be the places of the C, D, E, and we must do after the same Mode if that there shall be many places. The fourth Mode which applyeth the Globe. The fourth Mode by the help of the Ter∣restrial Globe.We may by the help of the Terrestrial Globe, exhibit on a plain the sci∣tuation and distance of places remote from one to another, and of divers Kingdoms; yea the whole Superficies of the Earth: so that any place given may seem to occupy the middle, as we have shewed in the sixth Mode: so that this Mode may be reckoned to the Modes for General Maps: but it is better not to extend the Mode beyond the Hemisphere. For distance I determine to set down before your Eyes on a Chart, the scituation of all the places to Lon∣don, and their distance from this place. First in the Chart let the middle point be taken for London, let the letter A, be noted, from that let the Periphe∣ry F H G K, be described. Let F G, be the Meridian Line, or the Line of the North, and South: let H K, be the Line of the East, and West. F, may shew the North, G, the South, H, the East, and K, the West. Let every one of the Quadrants be divided into 90 degrees. Then in the Globe let London be brought to the Brazen Meridian, and let the Pole be Elevated according to the Latitude of London, let the Quadrant be affixed to the Vertex, and applyed to every place, whose scituation we would represent to London on the Chart. For Example, the beginning, middle, and end of France, so to the bounds of Italy, Spain, Hungary, Sweden, and the like; and let the Angles be noted which the Quadrant maketh with the Meridian in every application, that is the Angles of the Position of those places to London: moreover the degrees of the Quadrant between London and every place, that is the distance of every one of them. This done, lay aside the Globe, and on the Chart, let the Lines be drawn from A, for the quarters of every one of the places, viz. which may make such An∣gles with the Meridian Line, as are noted before, and that between the Cardinal noted points. (How we may supercede this labour of draw∣ing of Lines, we shall shew anon) In these Lines of the quarters the points must be found out for the places, by taking the distances from London,
which we may do by a double Method. For the places are either removed a little interval, which we will note, or by a large interval, but so it is best to make a small Map; or the places are removed a great interval, and so you must form a Map of a greater bulk. In the two Cases it is sufficient to make a Scale of degrees, by dividing some Line into equal parts, every one of which may represent a degree. From this Scale we take the distances of every place before noted, with the interval of the Compass, and bring them into the Line of the quarter of every place. The term shall be noted with the appellation of the place.A Scale of e∣qual parts for Degrees not sufficient for larger Maps, with remote Regions. And so we shall note all the places in the Table about London. But if you must make a Map of a larger form, and the remote Regions must be noted, it is not sufficient to take a Scale of equal parts for degrees, but the Line must be divided by another Mode, viz. according to the Rules of Per∣spective; because in this Mode we place the Eye beneath the Horizon of Lon∣don, in the place of the Antipodes, and take the Horizon for the Glass. If we are minded to represent an Hemisphere, or a part greater, lesser than the Hemis∣phere, then we take a Plain Parallel to the Horizon, which may be distant from it by so great an Arch, as is the part to be represented by the Hemisphere. There∣fore let the Periphery of the Circle be described in another Chart, M, the Cen∣ter, N O, one Diameter, P Q, another perpendicular. Let the Quadrant P Q, be divided into 90 degrees, and let so many degrees be taken beneath Q, as much as the part beyond the Hemisphere is to be represented, and through the term R, let it be drawn to Q M, Parallet at M O, to wit, R S. Moreover from O, let right Lines be drawn to every degree of the Quadrant N Q, or N Q R, (if a greater portion than the Hemisphere be to be exhibi∣ted) which divide the right Line M Q, or S R, into such parts, which in pro∣jecture shall shew the degrees. Then let a Line be taken, how much we will have to be the distance of the most remote place from London in the Table, that is how much we will have to be half the Table. That Line shall be divided as M Q, or S K, was divided: and the parts shall be noted with numbers, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, &c. for degrees. The distances taken from this Scale for every place from London, if they be brought into the Lines of the Quarters, shall exhibit the points for the places, and the Map shall be made which we desired. In the practice we may supersede from the pains of the Lines to be drawn from the Quarters, for it will be commodious to design a Scale of degrees in the Rule, whose beginning if it be applyed to London, and the Rule be brought round to the degrees of the Periphery for the Quarters of every place, the point may presently be noted for any place, accounting the distance on the Rule from the beginning of the Scale. The practice will shew this Method easy. The fifth Mode, concerning Sea Maps, or Charts. The fifth Mode treating of Sea Maps, or Charts.Sea Maps, or Charts, are of right lines, and have all their Meridians Paral∣lel, otherwise than the second Mode hath in the last member. They are two∣fold, as we have said, that Universals are twofold in the fourth and fifth Mode of universals, viz, of equal degrees of Latitude, or unequal degrees. The construction is the same with that of the universals, the difference is only that they represent part, and admit of divers Nautick or Sea Compasses. Of their use we shall speak in the Art of Navigation. Charts become of equal degrees, if that part of the Earth a little varying in Latitude, be to be represented: such are the Charts for the Navigation of the Mediterranean: they are made of unequal degrees, if that the Latitude be great.
CHAP. XXXIII. Of the distance of Places. Proposition I. Two Points, or Places being given on the Globe, to draw a line or Arch from one to the other, which may be part of the greatest Periphery of the Globe, or to describe on the Superficies a Periphery of the greatest Circle, which may pass through the two given Points. Concerning the distances of places.LEt us conceive two Right Lines drawn from one point to the other, and from both to the Center of the Globe, or Earth, which three Lines shall make a Triangle, and therefore they are on one Plain. This Plain protended may cut the Superficies of the Globe: the Section shall be the Periphery of the greater Circle, and the Arch intercepted between both places shall be that sought for. Or let the interval of the Quadrant of the greatest Periphery be taken with the Compasses, and one foot being fixed on one of the given places, let the Arch be described on the Superficies of the Globe: then the other Arch, the foot being fixed on the other given point, the Cannon Section of these two Arches, shall be the Pole of the Periphery to be described, or in which if one foot of the Compass be designed, and the Periphery described on the Superficies of the Globe, we shall have the Arch demanded intercepted between the two given places. Proposition II. The distance of two places on the Superficies of the Earth is very short, or the shortest way from one place to the other is only one (except the places of the Antipodes) viz. the Arch of the greatest Periphery, which is inter∣cepted between those two places. The shortest distance of two places, is a Right Line drawn from one Point to the other.The shortest distance of these two points, is a Right Line drawn from one point to the other, as is manifest from the definition of Archimedes, and it is easy to deduct from other definitions. Also the shortest distance of two places existing in the Superficies of the Earth is a Right line, which is conceived to be drawn frome one place to the other; but seeing that the Superficies of the Earth is a crooked Convex, thence it cometh to pass, that the Right Line which is truly the shortest distance of the two places, may fall between the Cavity of this Superficies. But we consider only those ways from one place to another, which are on the very Superficies of the Earth, and therefore Crooked Lines: wherefore we add in the Proposition the shortest distance on the Superficies of the Earth. Between these ways, or intercepted Lines, there is one which is shortest of all, viz. the Arch of the greatest Periphery, intercepted be∣tween any two points so drawn, as we have said in the preceeding Propositi∣on. That therefore this Arch, or Crooked intercepted Line is shorter than all the other Crooked Circular intercepted Lines (of which there are in∣finite) is manifest from this Geometrical Theorem: if the Arches of two unequal Peripheries be taken, whose subtended Line is equal, or the same, the Arch of the greater Periphery shall be lesser than the Arch of the les∣ser Periphery of the Earth, except that Arch which is supposed to be of the greatest Periphery. But that this Arch is also lesser than the other Crook∣ed not Circular solid Lines, (as the Helices) such as may be infinitely sup∣posed on the Superficies of the Earth intercepted between two places is shewed from others: for this Theorem doth not belong to Geography but to Geometry,
which also sheweth only that one Arch of the greatest Periphery may be drawn from one place to another, not many. Proposition III. The distances of places are not changed. Itinerary di∣stances of pla∣ces may be greater or les∣ser.The Itinerary distance of places may sometimes be greater, and sometimes lesser: but the true and shortest Geographical distance remaineth the same, ex∣cept you conceive the Superficies of the Earth to be rent or torn. But here we understand places to be the points of the Earth which are immovable, and therefore the Superficies intercepted between two places become higher, the distance of the places shall also be made greater; if more depressed, lesser. Proposition IV. No Maps of the Earth are distant a greater interval, than 2700 German miles, whereof 15 are said to be a degree. Therefore because the Superficies of the Earth is Spherical, the shortest Arch cannot fall between two points of it,Fifteen Ger∣man makes a degree. which is greater than 180 deg. that is, than the Semiperiphery of the greatest Circle. And 180 deg. makes 2700 German miles; wherefore no places are distant more than 2700 German miles. But the condition of an Itinerary distance is otherwise. Proposition V. The distance of the Antipodes is 2700 German miles, or 180 degrees. The distance of the Anti∣podes.The shortest distance amongst the Antipodes is not one, but infinite, and those all equal, although to speak properly, they cannot be called the shortest distances, but those than which none are shorter. The Circular distances amongst the Antipodes are all greater Peripheries, no lesser, of which between other places there are infinite, which are not oppo∣sed to the Diameter. A Periphery passing through two places, also passeth through the Antipodes of these places. The distance of any places of the two which belong to the Antipodes taken together, make 180 degrees. Therefore the distance of one place being known from the other, the distance also of that place shall be known from the place of the other of the Antipodes. These Five Propositions are of so manifest a truth, that any one weighing of them may easily discern, and understand them. Proposition. VI. Any place being given on the Superficies of the Globe, to exhibit all those place which may have one and the same distance from that given place: but the given distance must not be greater than 2700 German miles. Let the given place be brought to the Brazen Meridian; let the Pole be Ele∣vated according to to the Latitude of the place, let the Quadrant be affixed to the Vertical point. Moreover let the given distance be turned into degrees, which degrees must he numbred on the Quadrant from the Vertical point. Let the term of the Numeration be noted with Chalk: then let the Quadrant be brought round on the Superficies of the Globe: the noted point will shew all the places of the Earth, which have the given distance from the given place.
Or let the deg. of the changed distance be taken on the Aequator by the in∣terval of the Compass, and one Foot fixed on the given place, let the other be brought round. The places through which it passeth, are those de∣manded. But if the deg. arising from the changed distance are more than 90, that is than a Quadrant, let their Complement be taken at 180: and let the place of the Antipodes be brought to the Superiour Semicircle of the Brazen Meridi∣an, let the Pole be Elevated for its Latitude, and the Quadrant affixed to the Vertical point, and let the deg. of the Complement be accounted on it, and let the term of the Numeration be noted with Chalk. If then the Quadrant be turned about, all the places demanded, which have the given distance from the given place, shall have the noted point. But if you will do the business with the Compass, use the Method of the Chorographical Maps. Proposition VII. Of the Cause why the Itinerary distance is greater than the true, or short and Geographical. The reasons why the Itine∣rary distance is greater than the true, short, and Geographi∣cal.1. The unpassable Woods which lie between some places. 2. High Moun∣tains, and low Valleys. 3. Marishes and Water in general, if you mean Land Voyages. 4. In Sea Voyages the procurrent Lands and Islands hinder the direct Voyage. 5. Peculiar Fluxes of the Sea. And 6. The Winds. But some may demand whether it be not possible that there may be places whose Itinerary distance is lesser, than the most short Geographical? To this I answer, although to Sense the Figure of the Earth be Spherical, yet I have shewed in the first Book, that this Figure is not altogether Geometrical, but is rendred unequal by many places Elevated and depressed. Therefore if we con∣ceive a certain Superficies of the Earth, or the distance of the Superficies from the Center, for Example, the vulgar Semidiamiter of 860 miles, in respect of which places are to be taken Elevated, or depressed, this being supposed, I say, there may be two places so scituated, that the Itinerary distance may be lesser than the shorter Geographical, which is removed 860 miles from the Center, but the intermedial place must be more depressed. Proposition VIII. To find out the distance of two places given on the Globe, as also in Geogra∣phical Maps. The finding out the di∣stance of two places given on the Globe.Let one of the given places be brought to the Brazen Meridian, let the Quadrant be affixed to the Vertex, and let it be applyed to the other given place: then let the degrees intercepted between the Vertex and this place be numbred: let these degrees be turned into miles, or another measure in which we would know the distance of those places; this shall be that de∣manded. Or let the interval of two places be taken with the Compasses, and this being translated to the Aequator, let it be considered how many degrees it possesseth in this, for these are the distances of the places, which we must convert into miles, or some other measure. But if that the distance be greater, than can be taken by the Quadrant, or Compasses, (viz. more than 90 degrees) the distance of one place from the Antipodes of the other, shall be lesser than 90 degrees. Let this be enquired after and taken from 180 degrees, the remaining degrees shall be the distance required. In Universal Maps, as also in Particular of great parts, the distance of pla∣ces cannot be exactly found: but in Particular Chorographical Maps, a Scale of Leagues or miles is usually added, by the assistance of which the distance of places contained in those Maps is known. For so if you take the interval of
two places, and transfer this into the Scale, you shall presently know the di∣stance of those places. But if the Map be of any greater proportion, this Method is defective, for no Map can be made by any Method, which exhibiteth the true distance of pla∣ces: but such an one may be made, which may shew the distance of one place from all the rest, as we have said in our Method of making Maps. Proposition IX. The Latitude and Longitude of two places being given, to find their di∣stance. The Latitude and Longitude of two places being given, to find their distance.The solution of this Problem is easy by the Globe and Catholick Plani∣sphere; it is difficult by Calculation, and Trigonometrical Supputation. It is performed on the Globe after this Mode: let any Meridian be taken, and let the difference of the Longitude of places be numbred from it in the Ae∣quator; let the term of the Numeration be brought under the Brazen Meridi∣an, and let the Latitude of the other place be reckoned on this; let the point of the Globe, which is under the term of the Numeration be noted with Chalk: also in the first Meridian, let the point of Latitude be noted for the other place. Then let the interval be taken between the noted points with the Compasses, and let it be transferred either into the Aequator, or first Meridian: so we shall know the distance of places in degrees, and parts of degrees: which degrees must be turned into miles, or other measure which we would have; but if the interval be greater than can be conveniently taken with Compasses, we must do as in the VII Proposition.See Proposi∣tion 7. But because the Planisphere is more apt for use, especially by Seamen, and many love to solve Problems by it, and the use of this Problem is frequent, I shall also propound this Method by the Planis∣phere. There are two Cases of this Problem, for either the given Longitude of the places is one and the same, or the difference of 180, to wit, if they lie in the same Meridian, or the Longitude is diverse. If it be the same, there is no need of another Method, but that difference of Latitude may be turned into miles; viz. that every Latitude is the distance of places in degrees: but if the Latitudes be of divers species, to wit, one North, the other South, the degrees of Latitudes shall be added: if the difference be of 180 degrees, viz. if in divers Semicircles of the same Circle of Longitude, we must do after the same Mode, which is easy for any one to collect. But it is otherwise, if that the Longitude of the places be unequal, that is, if the places shall be scituated in divers Meridians, and without the Aequator. Cases which vary the solu∣tion of this Problem.But it will be useful for the distinct understanding of the Problem to reckon the Cases which vary the solution, and most of them have a most easy solution, as will be manifest by Examples, which the Studious ought to exa∣mine. 1. If the Longitude of the places be the same, and they be the same cogno∣minated Latitude, in this Case the difference of Latitude is the very distance in degrees, which may be changed into miles, or other measure. 2. If the Longitude of places be the same, but the Latitudes be of a divers name, one Northern, the other Southern; in this Case, the Latitudes shall be added in one sum, this shall shew the distance in degrees. 3. If the difference of Longitudes be of 180 degrees, and be of a like cogno∣minated Latitude, the Complements of the Latitudes shall be taken at 90 de∣grees, or the distance of the places from the Poles, and they shall be added: the same will shew the distance in degrees. 4. If the difference of Longitudes be of 180 degrees, and the Latitudes be of a diverse name, let the difference of Latitudes be taken, and substracted from 180 degrees, or the Semicircle. The remaining number shall exhibit the di∣stance in degrees.
5. It both places shall be in the Aequator, the difference of Longitude is the very distance. 6. If the Latitude of places shall be one and the same, and not greater than 20 degrees, and the difference of Longitude small, we must enter with that Latitude, the Table of Magnitude laid down in the IV. Chapter, and we must except the quantity of one degree. Then we shall take the difference of Lon∣gitude, and turn these deg. into the excepted Miles, or Measures. 7. But if the Longitude and Latitude be divers, or if the Latitude be the same, but yet greater than 20 degrees, and the difference of Longitude be some what greater, which is usual in many Examples; in this case we must not use the same compendiums, but the solution is more difficult, and in this case the Problem is chiefly propounded. We have shewed the solution by the Globe; the Method by the Planisphere is this: let the Rule of the Planisphere be brought to the Latitude of one place, or to the degree of the Elevation of the Pole: then let the difference of Longitudes be numbred in the Meridians, beginning from the other part, and wherein the point may be observed, where this Meridian terminating the Numeration, cutteth the Parallel of the other place of Latitude. Let the end of the Index be placed above this point. This done, let the Rule be applyed to the Line of the Aequator. The number of the Parallels intercepted between the Pole and the Index, is the sought for di∣stance in the degrees. The solution of the Problem.Thus the Problem is solved by the Planisphere. There is another Method found out by Maurolicus, which by the stroaks of the Lines on the Circle, teacheth by a pleasant operation to exhibit the distance, from which lineary description also is deduced a Mode, in which the Problem is solved by Calculati∣on. Let a certain Periphery of the Circle be described in the Center E: one Semidiamiter B E: let the Arch B A, be taken equal to the difference of the Longitudes of the places (if the difference taken be greater than 180 deg. the Complement of this difference is at 360 degrees) and let the Semidiameter A E be drawn. Then let the Arch A F, (towards B) be taken equal to the Latitude of the place A, and from B, the Arch B C, equal to the Latitude of the place B: let G I, be let down perpendicular from G, on B E, and F H, from F, on A E. Let I H, be drawn, and above this the points I, and H, must be erected perpendicular, I L, equal to I G, and H K equal to H F (on the same quarter if the Latitudes of the places shall be Cognominal; but if they be of a divers Name, then I L, shall be drawn from one quarter to the right Line I H, and H K, from the other). This done, the right Line L K, shall be stretched to the demanded distance, or the Arch of it shall be subtended, which shall shew the distance of degrees. Therefore by the interval of the Compass K L, let the Arch B X, be taken: this shall represent the distance in degrees. This Mode of Maurolicus is taken from the solution of Spherical Triangles, neither will this lineary Method exhibit an accurate distance, although the pra∣ctice be pleasant and easy: but only the Method by Numbers, or the Trigono∣metry of Spherical Triangles, exhibiteth an accurate distance. For let there be had a Spherical Triangle, in which two sides are given, viz. the distances of the places from the Poles (the Complements of Latitude) and the Angle contained whose measure is the difference of Longitude, the third side is demand∣ed. For the finding of which although there are many Methods, yet the most ge∣neral is this: First, if that the Latitudes of places be Cognominal, let it be brought to pass, that as the Quadrant of the whole Sinus is to the right Angle, contained under the Sinus of the distance of the places from the Pole, so is it to∣wards the Sinus of the difference of the Longitudes (if it be greater than 180 degrees, let his Complement be taken at 360 degrees) to a certain fourth num∣ber. Then let the difference of Latitudes be taken, and the Sinus of this Complement. Moreover let the fourth number found out before be compared with this Sinus: if it becometh equal, the distance of the places shall be 90 de∣grees. If it be lesser let it be substracted, and the residue shall be the Sinus of the Arch, whose Complement is the distance of the places. If the fourth be found greater than the said Sinus, let this be subtracted from that, and the re∣sidue
shall be the Sinus of the Arch, which being added to 90 degrees, will ex∣hibit the distance sought in degrees, which must be converted into an Itinera∣ry distance. 2. If the Latitudes be of a divers name, viz. one Northern, the other Southern, let the place of the Antipodes be taken for either place of it, and the distance of it may be found from the other place according to the said Method. For the Latitude of this shall be the same with that of that place, but of the same name with the other place: therefore in a Spherical Triangle there shall be two given sides, and the Angle is the Complement of the difference of the Longitude of the places at 180 degrees (or an excess above 180; if this difference shall be greater than 180) therefore the distance between one place, and the Antipodes of the other place being found, you have also the distance of those places. For this is the Complement of the former to 180 degrees, as hath been said in the former Proposition. In places near, and not much distant from the Aequator (viz. not beyond 18 degrees) we use a more easy, though not an Apodictical Method, which shall exhibit a distance not much diverse from the true, viz. we take the Quadrant of the difference of Longitude, and also of Latitude, we add the Quadrants, and from the Aggregate extract the Quadrate Root, this will shew the difference not much different from the true. Or thus, act in a more certain Method, which may also be applyed to places beyond the 20 degree of Latitude: from the Table of the Quantity of the Pa∣rallels, except the proportion of the greater Parrallel of Latitude to the Ae∣quator: and as the quantity of the Aequator is to the quantity of the Paral∣lel, so is the difference of Longitude to the other, or to the difference of Lon∣gitude taken in the Parallel of a greater Latitude. Let this quantity be assum∣ed for the difference of Latitude, and do as before. Tables of Lo∣garithms use∣ful for the so∣lution of this Problem.The solution of this Problem is easy, if we apply Tables of Logarithms, and resolve a Triangle, Oblique Angle, into two right Angles. So there will be need of no Multiplication, or Division. Proposition X. The Latitude of two places being given, and the Quarter in which one is scituated from the other, to find the distance. This Problem is the same with the Trigonometrical abstract: two sides be∣ing given in a Spherical Triangle, and an Angle, which is opposite to one gi∣ven side, to find a third side. For the two given sides are in this Geographical Problem, the distances of these two places from the Pole, and the Angles op∣posite to either side is the Angle of position, or the Angle of one quarter of the place to the other, or the Complement of this Angle at 180 degrees. The Solution of this Problem is thus performed by the Globe. Let the first Meridian be taken for the Meridian of the place, whose quarter is not given at the other: and in this Meridian let the point of Latitude be noted for this place. Then let the Pole be Elevated for the Latitude of the other place, and the Qua∣drant affixed to the Vertex, but let the other end be applyed to the quarter or degree of the Horizon, for the given quarter. Then let the Globe be turned round, until the point noted in the first Meridi∣an come to the Quadrant. So the Arch of the Quadrant intercepted between the Vertex and that point, is the demanded distance of the two places: you shall also have the difference of Longitude in the Aequator, viz. the Arch of the Aequator intercepted between the Brazen, and first Meridian.
Proposition XI. The Longitude of two places being given, the Latitude of one place, and the quarter in which this other place lyeth at this, to find out the distance. Here we have again a Spherical Triangle, whose sides are the distances of the places from the Pole, and the mutual distance of the places themselves, in which one side is given, viz, the distance of one place from the Pole, and two Angles are given, one, whose measure is the diffe∣rence of Longitude, the other is known from the given quarter of the other place. From these three given the side is demanded, which is opposite to the Angle of the difference of Longitude, the solution may easily be performed by the Globe, and by the Planisphere; and very exactly by a Logarithmical Cal∣culation, as also by the common computation. We will only shew the Me∣thod which the Globe affordeth, although it be more easy by the Planisphere, but that which is done by the Globe representeth the Triangle. The Method which the Globe afford∣eth herein.Let the first Meridian be taken for the Meridian of the place whose Latitude is not given: and let the degrees of the difference of the Longitude of the places be accounted in the Aequator. Let the term be noted with Chalk and brought to the Brazen Meridian: so this shall represent the Meridian of the other place: let the degrees of the given Latitude be reckoned on it, and the Globe remain∣ing fixed let the Pole be Elevated for that Latitude; Let the Quadrant be affixed to the Vertex, and the other end to the given quarter of the Horizon. In this scituation of the Globe the point in which the Quadrant cutteth the first Meridian, shall represent that other place, and the Arch of the Quadrant, which is intercepted between the Vertex, and the point is the distance demanded. Also by the same Method, the Latitude of this other place is had. Proposition XII. The distance of two places scituated in the same Meridian, or of the same Longitude, being given in the quarters in which that third place lyeth from those two, to find the distance of this third place from both of them. Here again we have a Spherical Triangle, whose three sides are the distance between those three places. And one place is given, viz. the distance of two places (which must be turned into degrees, except it be so given) and the two adjacent Angles are given, the two other sides are sought. Leaving the Methods which perform it by Calculation, and the Planisphere▪ although they be more accurate, we shall only deliver that which solveth it by the Globe, and placeth it more before the Eyes. Let the degrees of two places distant be taken on the Brazen Meridian where you please, and let the terms be noted: so that these may represent the places whose distance is given. Then let the Pole be Elevated for the Latitude of one of these terms, let the Quadrant be affixed to the Vertex, and applied to the given quarter, in which the other place is scituated at the place which is repre∣sented from that bound, and let the extension of the Quadrant be noted with Chalk on the Globe. Then let the Pole be Elevated for the Latitude of the other bound, and the Quadrant be affixed to that term, the other extremity to the other given quarter. The point in which the Quadrant shall cut the Arch marked with Chalk, shall represent the third place, whence it is easy to take the distance from these two terms.
CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Visible, or Sensible Horizon. A Sensible Horizon, is a Periphery on the Superficies of the Earth which boundeth the prospect of the Eye moved round about, or which termina∣teth part of the Superficies which the Eye moved about may see, or from whence the Rays may come to the Eye. His Semidiameter is termed the greatest Arch of the Earth intercepted between the Foot of the Spectator, and that Periphery, which therefore is perpendicular over it. Proposition I. The extension or Semidiameter of the sensible Horizon variously existeth both according to the divers Altitude of the Eye, as also from the diver∣sity of the taken Semidiameter of the Earth. A sensible Ho∣rizon what.Let the greatest Circle of the Earth be M P N Q. Let T be the Center, T P the Semidiameter, P O the Altitude of the Eye: let O be the Eye. Let the Tangents O N, O M be drawn from O: and let us conceive the Ray N O to be as it were carried about on the Superficies of the Earth: and so to describe the Periphery: this shall be the sensible Horizon: his Semidiameter P N, P M; for the Rays N O, M O are the last, which from O can come to the Eye from the Superficies of the Earth, which we here suppose to be perfectly round. And it is manifest, if we take the lesser, or greater Altitude than P O, that also the Arch P N shall be greater or lesser. After the same Mode if F P be made to be of more, or fewer miles, P N shall also be of more or fewer miles. The opinions of the Antients concerning this Horizon.These seem to be the Causes, that the Ancient Authours have followed divers opinions concerning this Horizon, or Extension of Sight. For Macro∣bius assigneth to it the Semidiameter P N of 180 stadia's, that is 22 ½ miles. Eratosthenes 350 stadia's, which makes 44 miles. Albertus Magnus 1000, which makes 125 miles. Proclus 2000 stadia's, that is 250 miles. Many assign 500 stadia's, that is 62 ½ mile. Yet I suppose the Causes of the diversity of these assignations, not only to be those of which I have spoken, but the divers assumed distance of the stadia, as shall be manifest from the follow∣ing Proposition. Proposition II. The stature of a Man being given from the Foot to the Eye, and the Semidi∣ameter of the Earth being given, to find out the Semidiameter of the sen∣sible Horizon. Let P O be the stature of a Man: O the Eye. T P is the Semidiameter. O N is the Rays touching the Superficies of the Earth, terminating the sensible Horizon, or the Aspect: therefore P N is the Semidiameter; the Longitude of this is demanded. Let P O be added, for Example, of Five Foot to T P the Se∣mediameter 19598300: so you shall have T O, and in the Triangle N T O be∣sides T O and T N, we know the Angle T N O to be right, or 90 degrees. Therefore N T O is found according to this proportion.
As T O is to T N, so is the whole sinus to the sinus of the Angle N O T, whose Complement at 90 degrees is the Angle N T O, or the Arch N P, which may be turned into miles. Corollary. We therefore may thence know that if this, or that quantity of the Semidiameter T N, or T P be taken, and another Altitude of the Eye O, how great a variation there thence is of the sensible Horizon. Proposition III. The Altitude of the Eye being given on a Tower, or Mountain to find the distance of the last point, unto which the Eye extendeth it self, or which the Eye can see. Let P O be the given Altitude of the Tower, in which the Eye being pla∣ced beholdeth all round. Therefore in the Triangle right Angle N T O, the given have themselves after the same Mode, as in the preceeding Problem. Therefore the Angle N T P and the Arch N P shall be found after the same Mode, which we have used in the solution of the former. Proposition. IV. The Semidiameter of the sensible Horizon being given, or the greatest di∣stance from which the Eye is supposed to see, to find out the Altitude of the Eye. Of the finding out the Alti∣tude of the Eye.This is the same with that Problem. The greatest distance being given from which the Vertex of the Mountain is seen, to find the Altitude of the Mountain. In the Triangle N T O, let the right Angle T N O be given, and the Angle N T O is known from the Semidiameter of the sensible Horizon P N: moreover let the Semidiameter of the Earth T N be given. Therefore T O shall be found according to the proportion. As the whole sinus is to the secant of the Angle N T O, so is T N to T O. From which if you substract T P, the remaining number will shew the sought for Altitude of the Eye. Proposition V. The Altitude of the Eye being given, and of some erected sean Magni∣tude, as a Tower, the Mast of a Ship, or an high Mountain; to find the distance of this from the Eye, that is the distance of the Ship. To find the distance of a Ship, &c. by the Eye.For Example, in the Diagram in the preceeding Propositions, let P O be the Altitude of the Eye in the Ship, Tower, or Mountain. Let F S be the Mast of another Ship; and let P be the point, and F S the Ship so seated, that in P the first top of the Mast S moy be seen. Therefore the point S shall be in the Line O N, which is the Tangent drawn from the Eye O: for whatsoever is seated beneath this O N X, that can send forth no direct Rays to the Eye O: but it must so draw near, that the Vertex or point may fall into the right Line O X. Therefore the distance F P is sought, viz. in which the first Ray from S may come to the Eye. In the Triangle N O T the Angle N T O is found from the given N T, T O and from the right Angle T N O. And again in the Triangle right Angle N T S, N T, T S is given, and the right Angle S N T: the Angle N T S, shall be found out: and so the whole Angle O T S shall be had, whose measure is the Arch P S, the distance demanded.
Proposition VI. On the contrary, if the Altitude of the Eye be given, and the distance, from which first the top of the approaching Mast of the Ship or Tower may be seen, to find out the Altitude of the Tower, or Mast of the Ship. In the Diagram of the former Proposition in the Triangle N O T, from the given N T, T O, the Arch N P is found, which being substracted from the Known Arch P F, (from the given distance turned into minutes) the Arch F N, or the Angle N T S is left. And in the Triangle N T S, the right Angle N T is given, and N is the right Angle; therefore the Hypotenusa T S shall be found, from which if T F be taken, F S is left the demanded Altitude of the Tower, or Mast of the Ship, or of any Mountain. Proposition VII. The refraction of Rays in the Air, augmenteth the apparent Semidiameter of the sensible Horizon. Of refraction of Rays in the Air.For there is a divers refraction of the Air in divers places; but the thick∣er by how much it is nearer the Earth. Therefore although a Ray cannot come by a direct way to the Eye O, from the point scituated beyond N, for Ex∣ample F, yet his Ray may be so broken in the Air, that the refract may be N O, or the Tangent of the Earth. CHAP. XXXV. Of the three parts of the Nautick Art; and in special, of the first part, viz. the making or building of Ships. Proposition I. That is termed the Nautical Art or Science, which teacheth how a Ship may most safely with the assistance of the winds, be sailed from one place to ano∣ther through the Sea. By the Winds Ships are car∣ried from one place to ano∣ther in the Seas.BEcause in this discipline the places of the Earth are compared amongst them∣selves, or mutually to themselves, and their respective scituation is exami∣ned, therefore deservedly it is referred to the respective part of Geography. Now I suppose that three parts may conveniently be constituted of this most Noble Art so much useful to human Society. 1. The Art of building of Ships, which also considereth the motion of the Ship in the water, or else presuppo∣seth it as known. 2. Concerning the lading of Ships. 3. The Direction, Gu∣bernation or Sailing of a Ship, which is termed the Art of the Master, or Pilot, and in general the Art of Navigation by way of Excellency: unto which also the definition of the Nautick Art is most of all agreeable. And this part with greater right doth appertain unto Geography than the two former, which are more truly referred to the Staticks, and Mechanicks: now the Art of Sailing doth wholly depend on Geography. Proposition II. In the Fabricks of Ships these things following must be observed. Things to be noted in the Fabricks of hips.1. That the matter or wood be taken, which may endure very long in the water, of which Vitruvius and other Authors are to be consulted. Hither
also belongeth how the Woods are to be prepared, and their density to be aug∣mented, the unuseful moisture to be consumed with Fire, Pitched, and defended from corruption. This Doctrine must be taken from Philosophy. 2. That such a Figure or Shape be given to a Ship that is most apt for a quick motion, and may be moved by a small power. 3. In this Fabrick, and in reference to the Figure, this must be observed, that a Ship may with ease be defended against storms and tempests; but of this I shall treat in the Second Part, where I shall speak of the lading of Ships. The Magni∣tude of Ships.4. The Magnitude of Ships must be considered, where there is a great com∣parison between the Ancient and Moderns. Some suppose that the Ship of Alexandria, made by Archimedes by the Command of Hiero King of Sicily, and presented to Ptolomy King of Aegypt, was of 12000 tuns. The Ship of Philopater is delivered by Calixenus to have been in length 280 Cubits, in breadth 38, and in highth 48 Cubits. The greatest Ships at this day are those of the Spaniards, or Portugals; they call them Caracasts. But of all Nations in Christendom, the English may best brag of their gallant Ships for the service of War. 5. There belongeth to the building of Ships, the knowledge of every part, as the Keil, the Rudder, Ribs, Head, Stern, Masts, Yards, Cables, and An∣chors, &c. of which not only the matter, figure, and coherency, but also the Weight and Magnitude are to be explained. 6. To the Fabrick of Ships belongeth the skill how to prevent a breach, leak, or other defects of Ships. Thus much in brief of the First Part of the Nautick Art of building of Ships. CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Lading of Ships, or the Second Part of the Nautick Art. Proposition I. The burden to lade Ships withall is expressed by Lasts, and Tuns. Of the Lading of Ships.THe Tun of a Ship is supposed to be 2000 pound weight, the Lasts twelve Tuns. Proposition II. The body or matter which is higher than water, is not mergent altogether in the water, but some part of it is above, but if it be of a greater weight than water, it will sink to the bottom: if of the same weight, it keepeth the given place in the water. Hitherto belongeth the various knowledge of the weights of bodies, as of Lead, Gold, Iron, Wheat, Sand, Oyl, Wine, the gravity of all which must be compared with water. Corollary From hence it is manifest, that the weight of the matter to lade the Ship with, taken with the burden of the Ship, ought to be lesser than the burden or gravity of the water, whose moles is equal to the solidity or capacity of the whole Ship. Proposition III. By how much the Figure of the Ship cometh to an Ordinate, that is to a Cu∣bick equality of Longitude, Latitude, and Thickness; by so much the more it can sustain the greater burden in the water. The demonstration must be sought from the Staticks.
Proposition IV. In the Lading of Ships respect must be had to two things, first, that there is not imposed so great a burden, that its weight taken may be equal with the weight of the Ship, or greater than the Moles of the water which is equal to the solidity of the Ship, but that it be lesser, though not much. But if the matter to lade the Ship be so light, the burden must be augmen∣ted with Ballast. Secondly, the depth of the water must be considered, through which the Ship is to sail. Ballasts requi∣red in a Ship.For although the gravity of the Water admitteth of this or that weight of the Ship or Lading, when this is lesser than the equal gravity of the Ship is to the moles of the Water; yet if the Water hath lesser profundity than the part of the Ship beneath the Superficies of the Water, the bottom will not grant a motion to the Ship, but detain it. This is the reason that Spanish Ships carry greater burden than Dutch,Spanish Ships carry greater burden than the Dutch. because they have the Sea deeper on the Shore, and in the Harbours, as also greater Ships come to Zeland, than to Holland. Proposition V. If a Ship be so burdened, that its weight, or gravity, be almost equal to the weight or gravity of the Sea water, equal to the capacity of the Ship, yet it sinketh not in the Sea, but when it shall be brought into any Rivers, it sinketh to the bottom. The reason is because the Water of Rivers is lighter than the Water of the Sea. Therefore if the weight of the laden Ship be almost equal to the gravity of the Marine Water, therefore it shall be greater than the gravity of River Water, and so the Ship shall be sunk in the River, or carried to the bottom. Many Ships for this reason have perished, which have been over laden by unskilful Mari∣ners, or not unburdened in the Mouths of the Rivers. Now how much this gravity should be, is known from the proportion of the Sea Water to River Water. Proposition VI. Any body swiming on the water hath that weight that the watery Moles hath, equal to the demergent part of this body. Corollary. The part of the Ship being given which is under Water, the weight of the whole burdened Ship may be found. For the gravity of the Wa∣ter is known, or is easy to be found. For Example, one Cubick foot of Water is 70 li. and therefore if the part of the Ship under Water be 2000 Cubick foot, therefore the gravity of the Watery Moles which is equal to the part of the Ship under Water, shall be 140000 li. So much also shall be the weight of the Ship laded. Proposition VII. A Ship is most commonly accounted commodiously to carry that quantity of burden whose gravity is equal to the gravity of half the Moles of water, which the Ship can contain. For Example, if the Ship can carry 500000 Tun of Water (whereof every one is accounted at 2000 li. weight) that is if it contain the Water of 1000000000 li. You may conveniently lade it with the burden of 250000 Tuns, 1000000000. In this sense you must understand it, when they say that Ships are so many Tuns, or carry so many Lasts. The Spanish Carracts carry 1200 Lasts: the greatest Holland Indian Ship 800 Lasts.
Proposition VIII. By how much the Weight of the Ship laded is greater, by so much the less it is tossed with storms, and tempests. A laded Ship is not so subject to be tossed in Tempests as when not laden.Ships of 2000 Tuns are not in danger of those Tempests, which are vexati∣ous to Ships of 300, or 500 Tuns. Much more might be said, but this may suf∣fice for Elements. CHAP. XXXVII. Of the third, and chief Part of the Nautick At, viz. the Art of Guiding, or Navigating of a Ship, and its subdivision of the Four Parts. Proposition I. That is termed the Art of Guiding or Navigating of a Ship, which teacheth unto what quarters a Ship is to be Guided in any scituation of it in the Sea, that it may come to the purposed place without danger. I Make Four Parts of it. Of the Guid∣ing, or Steer∣ing of Ships.1. Special Geography, that is the knowledge of a space intercepted between two places, and the properties of the same. 2. The knowledge of the quar∣ters in every place. 3. The cognition of the Line by which the Ship is to be brought from one place to the other; for there are between every two places infinite intercepted Lines; this part is termed Histriodromice. 4. The know∣ledge of the scituation of every place, unto which by Sailing we arrive, or how these places are scituated unto that place, unto which the Ship is to be directed. This is the chief part of the Art of Sailing. Proposition II. The cognition of the intermedial space comprehendeth these things. Things obser∣ved from Spe∣cial Geography and Nautical Maps.1. The scituations of the places, the procurrences of Angles, the bending of the Shores, the aspect of Promontories, Mountains, Bays, the depths of Wa∣ters, the sight of Islands, and Coasts of Lands. All which are known from Special Geography; and Nautical Maps, but most easily, and with greatest cer∣tainty from observation, and frequent Navigation through any tract of Land; which is the only Cause that some Mariners are more fit to guide a Ship to such place, and others to another. 2. The knowledge of the General and Special Winds, and those that are pe∣culiar unto any place, which is exceeding necessary in Navigations which are undertaken in the Torrid Zone, and adjacent places. For here a general Wind, and in many places Anniversary Winds (which we have shewed to be called Moussons, Motions, in our XX. Chapter) do rule, which either promote or hin∣der Navigation. For the Indian Sea is Sailed by these Anniversary Winds. Of these and also of storms and tempests we have spoken in the XX. Chapter.See Chap. 20. 3. The Condition of the Motion of the Seas in every tract, also the quarter of it, into which quarter the Sea and Waves are born: for they carry the Ship with them. The diversity of those Motions in many places we have shewed in the XVII. Chap.See Chap. 17.
First of all there is required a knowledge of the Ship, and reflux of the Sea, and the time or hour of the increase and decrease at every day; the supputati∣on of which is termed the reckoning of the Tides, for except a Master know this, the Ship is often much hazarded, when it is near Shores, or Sands, whereof most in the greatest increase of the Water, do not hinder the passage of the Ship, but most do in the decrease. So with a flux the Navigation is more facile to the Shore, and to the inlets of Rivers, and the contrary is discovered in the re∣flux. Of the supputation of this time we have spoken a little in the Propositi∣on of the XVII. Chapter. CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the knowledge of places, viz. the North, South, East, and West, and the intermedial quarters. Proposition I. In every place to know the Plagas, viz. the North, South, East, and West, and the intermedial quarters. The quarters very neccessary in Navigation.THe knowledge of this is the most necessary of all the Problems of the whole Art of Navigation, seeing that a Ship must be guided unto some quarter, which if unknown, there can be no direction, and the very defect of this knowledge alone hindred the Navigation of the Ancients: and in this is the chief difference between the Ancient and Modern Navigation. For the Ancients had not a Method by which at any time in the large Ocean they might know where was the North, where the South, and the other quarters. There∣fore they could not, nor durst they commit themselves to the vast Ocean; but only coasted the Shores, so that they might know the quarters from other signs. The Ancients had a double Method of finding out the quarters.The Ancients had a double Method, (which serveth also to the Modern Na∣vigation) of finding out the quarters (now this Problem is the same with that to find out the Meridian Line, and the North and South quarters; for these be∣ing known, it is easy to know the rest.) First by the Stars, viz. in the night, the Bear, or the Helice, and Polary Star so called, in the extremity of the tail of the Ʋrsa Minor (of great same amongst the Ancients) which shewed the North quarter, whence all the rest are found; for the face being turned to the North, the East is at the right hand, and the West on the left, the Line of which quar∣ters at Right Angles cutteth the Line of the North and South. And these Cardinal quarters being found, it is easy to find the intermedial quarters, unto which purpose, that there may be no need of a description, they had a Circle made with the quarters, whose Northern Line being placed above the Nor∣thern Line of any place, the other quarters at one sight are discovered. But in the day they sought out the quarter by the rising or setting of the Sun, as we have shewed in the XXVIII Chapter.See Chap. 28. 2. The other Method of the Antients for the knowing of quarters, was the knowledge of the scituation or extension of the Shoars, and one Promontory to the other. For seeing the quarter of this extension was known to them either from the Maps, or from Observation, and Experience, they might in Naviga∣tion by seeing them know the other quarters. (For one quarter being known; all the rest are known) therefore the Ancients did not far depart from the Coasts, viz. that they might know the quarter by the benefit of the known quarter of the extension of Shoars. For they could not always use the Method of the Stars, and the rising and setting of the Sun.
3. The third Method of the Ancients of the knowledge of the quarters was the observed course of the Ship. For going from any place, and guiding the Ship to the known quarter, they were able from the mutation of the course of the Ship to know the quarters. 4. Hence it is manifest, that the chief cause of the dangerous and imperfect Navigation of the Ancients, was the ignorance of a Method, by which every where in the middle of the vast Ocean they might know the quarters, and so that quarter unto which the Ship was to be steered. For, as I have said the Method by the Stars, and the rising and setting Sun, cannot be ap∣plied on all days, and on the hours of every day: for the mark from the scitu∣ation of the Shoars faileth in the mid Seas in the night, neither is it safe e∣nough in the day time. The third Method from the observed course of the Ship hath not place when the Ship is tossed by boysterous winds and tempests, from one quarter to ano∣ther. And in this casually lyeth the chief difficulty. This I thought fit to ad∣monish concerning the Modes of the Ancients for the finding out the Meridian Line and the North and South, by reason that the imperfection of these was the cause of the dangerous and small Navigation of the Ancients, seeing that they were never able to commit themselves to the vast Ocean, and therefore never knew those Regions between which the Ocean is interposed (of which the chief is all America, never yet fully known.) But at this day the Method of knowing the quarters in all places, and of finding out the Line of the North and South, is facile, by the benefit of the ad∣mirable propriety which the Loadstone and all Iron touched by it hath been found to have. Viz. that all Magneticks not hindred by others in any place direct their points almost to the same quarters. For there are two opposite points in the Loadstone, whereof one always and in all places turneth it self to the North, or the adjacent quarter, the other to the South, and so also the other points of the Magnes respect the other quarters viz. every point its particular quarter: but all of them are not considered, but only those two points, which as I have said do convert themselves to the North and South, which are term∣ed the Poles of the Magnes, one Northern, the other Southern. And the same vir∣tue (much to admiration) is communicated to the Needle, but by an inverted and contrary operation of nature. For the end of the Lamine or Needle which is touched at the North Pole of the Magnes, doth not convert it self to the North, but to the South, and that end which is rubbed at the South Pole of the Loadstone, turneth not to the South but to the North. These points of the Needle are also termed the Poles.The virtue of the Loadstone. Although therefore the Loadstone and the Iron touched by it have very many notable properties, yet all may be referred to two species or heads: one is, that virtue which doth extract the Iron: the other, by which in every place it directeth the two points of its Superficies to the North and South. The former faculty the Ancients were not ignorant of, but only this latter. Seeing therefore the Magnes hath this property, therefore by its help it is ea∣sy to find in any part of the Earth, or Sea, where the North or South is; whence all the other quarters are soon known. For if those points of the North and South be noted in any Loadstone, or the North and South Pole, and we have this Magnes in the Ship, where we are in the Sea, when we desire to know the quarters, the Loadstone being hung by a Cord that it may easily move it self, will so direct its Poles to the quarter of the North and South, that it will shew the quarters demanded. But the Magnetick Needle is more easy for use, whose end is touched at the South Pole of the Magnes. For if that this Needle be placed in the middle upon a sharp perpendicular pin, so that it can freely turn round, the Needle resting will shew by one of its ends the North quarter, and by the other the South. From what hath been said, it is easy to make a Nautical Instrument.
Proposition II. To make a Mariners Compass. Of the making the Mariners Compass.Let the described Circle on any Paper be divided into 32 Quarters, or degrees, and let one of these deg. being taken for the North Quarter, be ascribed with these appellations. Viz. with a peculiar Sign (the Flower de Luce) and the found out points for the other Quarters, viz. South, East, West, North-East, North-West (as we have propounded them in the Diagram in the XX Chapter.) Mariners term this Chart the Rose. Then let the Magnetick Needle be so affixed beneath the Chart, that the middle of the Needle may be beneath its Center, and the North Pole of the Needle may be subjected to the Line of the Paper unto which we ascribe the Northern Quarter. Moreover the Paper being so made, with the Needle ly∣ing under; let it be put upon the pointed pin, that it may have a free Circum∣rotation. So the Index of the North, viz. the Lilly, in any place will shew the North Quarter, and the Indexes of the other Quarters after the same Mode will shew the other Quarters of the World. And this is the Fabrick of that In∣strument which the Seamen term the Compass, by the help of which they com∣mit themselves to the vast Ocean, and seek the remotest parts of the World; steering the Ship unto that Quarter which the Loadstone directeth unto. The construction of this Compass is for the places in which the Magnetical Needle respecteth the Northern Quarter: for the other places see the VI. Propo∣sition.See Prop. 6. Proposition III. There are so many Quarters, as there are Points in the Periphery of every Horizon, that is, they are infinite: now Seamen number 16 in their small Navigations, 32 in those that are Moderate; and 64 in the great Voy∣ages through the vast Ocean. Concerning this Proposition we have spoken in the XX. Chapter, from whence an accurate explication of it may be drawn. The Portugals call these Quarters Rumbs. The Dutch, de Cours, also Een Streeck, although they at∣tribute these terms also to the Loxodromical part. But when they will deno∣minate the intermedial Quarters, they do that by the division of a space lying between two Quarters. Proposition IV. The Magnetical Needle (as the Poles of the Magnes it self) in very few places doth respect the very Quarter of the North and South, but in most places declineth a little from that towards the East or West, and that in an equal declination, and therefore altogether sheweth not the true Quar∣ters. That declination is called Chalyboclisis. No Declinati∣on at one of the Isles of Azores.Yet at one of the Isles of the Azores called El Corvo, there is no declinati∣on, but the Needle sheweth the exact Northern point. The same is observ∣ed in some places of the same Meridian, but not in all parts of it. In places scituated from this Island towards the East, (even to the Promontory of the pro∣current of Africa, called Cabo das Angulhas, not far from the Promontory of Good Hope) the Needle declineth from the North towards the East in an equal declination, even to the Islands of Tristan de Cunha, and the declina∣tion augmenteth a part more remote by 70 degrees, so that it is there a∣bout 13 degrees, then again it decreaseth to the places adjacent to the Promontory de Agulhas, where again there is no declination. From that place
towards the Indies the Declination of the Needle beginneth from the North to∣wards the West at Hamburgh, the Chalyboclisis of 90 degrees. At Amsterdam at this time about five: for in time past it was greater. Now observations testifie that this Declination doth not remain the same, but changeth in course of time. For at London in Anno 1580 it was observed 11 degrees 15 minutes, but in Anno 1622, it was 6 degrees, 13 minutes; and in Anno 1634, it was 4 degrees, 6 minutes. And the observations were per∣formed not only by the new but old Needles also. At Paris in Anno 1640 the Declination was observed 3 degrees, which in Anno 1610 was found 8 de∣grees. The same was also observed in other places. Proposition V. To find the Declination of the Magnetick Needle from the true quarter of the North in any place. The finding the Declinati∣ of the Magne∣tick Needle, &c.Let the Meridian Line be found from the Heaven, as we have shewed by di∣vers ways in the XX. Chapter, and the Declination of the Magnetical Needle will soonbe discovered. But the following Proposition will shew the more easy method for the use of Seamen. Proposition VI. To explain the terms of Navigation, which are used in designing of this Declination, and the correction of the Mariners Compass, and the Modes which Sailors use to find out this Declination in the Sea, The Modes which Sailors use to find out the Declinati∣on at Sea.In the composition of the Compass the defect of the Declination is amended or corrected. viz. the Declination of the Needle being known in the place, for which the Instrument is prepared, that Needle must not be affixed to the Line of the Chart, which hath the Flower de Luce, and should be the Index of the North, but under that Line, which is removed so many degrees from the Line of the North as the Declination of the Loadstone hath been found to have to wards the Line of the East, or West. For so the Lilly, and the Line of the North, will shew the true North, although the Needle may De∣cline. But for the use of Navigation, because in divers places there is a different Declination, the Needle ought to be fitted to the Chart, that that may be car∣ried round, the Needle remaining immovable, and the Line of that quarter may be brought above the Needle, which the observed Declination shall shew. For so the same Instrument shall serve for all places. Now for the finding out of the Declination of the Magnetick Needle from the true Line of the North, and South, thus many Mariners do Act. They observe the quarter of the Compass in which the Sun doth rise; and the quarter of the West, in which the Sun setteth, for although that then they are in another place, yet they are absent a small interval from the former in which the Declination is not varied. I these quarters of the Compass are equally distant from the quarter of the Compass is the North, then it is a sign that the Needle in that place hath no Declination, and so there is no need of Correction, but the Needle ought to remain under the Line of the North: but if the quarter of the Eastern Sun be further distant than the quarter of the Western Sun from the quarter of the North, then it is a sign that the Needle Declineth in that place from the true Line of the North, towards the West: but lastly, if the quar∣ter of the Eastern Sun be farther distant than the Western Sun from the Northern quarter of the Chart, it is a sign that the Needle declineth
towards the East. The quantity of the Declination is thus known: let the Arches intercepted between the Northern quarter of the Compass, and the East and West quarters of the Sun, be noted let the lesser Arch be deducted from the greater, the half of the residue is the Declination sought, and so many degrees the North Line of the Chart must be removed from the Magnetical Needle. This Method hath two inconveniencies. 1. The Sun seemeth to arise when he is as yet 34 minutes beneath the Horizon, from which difference of the ap∣parent and true rising, as also of the setting, an error redoundeth unto the quantity of the Declination, which although it be little in the places near the Aequator, yet in places somewhat remote from the Aequator, it may ascend unto two degrees. 2. The Sun oftentimes ariseth covered with Clouds, which are almost perpetual in the Torrid Zone. Mariners use also sometimes another Method which is less subject to errour, viz. they observe the quarter of the Compass, in which the Sun is discovered any time after his rising, and at that time they observe the Altitude of the Sun. Then after noon they expect, or wait, untill they find the Sun to come un∣to the same Altitude; which being found, they observe the quarter of the Com∣pass in which the Sun was then beheld: from these quarters or Arches interce∣pted between them and the quarter of the North, the Declination of the Needle is found, after the same Method that we have spoken of. Sometimes Mariners skilful in Trigonometry, or by the help of an universal Planisphere use a third, or fourth Method. Viz. when that immediately by one observation the Declination of the Needle must be enquired, to know the quarters. For either they observe the quarter of the Compass in which the Sun riseth or setteth; or they observe the quarter in which they found the Sun at any observed Altitude. Then by a Trigonometrical Calculation, or a Catho∣lick Planisphere, they find in what quarter the Sun truly sticketh at this time of the rising, or Altitude. The difference of this or that quarter observed on the Compass, is the very Declination of the Needle. Proposition VII. To shew those things, which withdraw the Magnetick Needle from its na∣tural scituation in any place, and therefore are the Causes that it sheweth not the quarters as it ought to do. Things which withdraw the Magnetical Needle from its natural scitua∣tion.The chief are these. 1. The blunt extremity, or less sharpness of the pin on which the Needle is fixed. 2. Some matter in the hole that receiveth the Needle. 3. If the Paper or Rose lyeth beyond its Horizontal scituation. 4. Some admission of Air. 5. The vicinity of Iron: these hindrances of the true shewing must be avoided.
CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Histiodrome or Line of the course of a Ship. The Line of the course of a Ship is the most difficult part of Geogra∣phy.THis is the most difficult part of all Geography, of which some Authors have written so obscurely, and very many so falsely, that the Readers could gain nothing from their writings but a confused imagination, and ne∣ver understand the matter it self. But we will endeavour as much as is possi∣ble to give a clear and distinct explication, and there is required in the Reader an attentive consideration. Proposition I. If that any two places be scituated in one Meridian, or if that another place be scituated from some place towards the quarter of the North, or South, that same place shall be scituated towards the same quarter of the North, or South, from all those places or points, which are interposed be∣tween those two places first assumed. One of the two places lying in the same Meridian, from another, and from all intermedial points, is scituated towards the same quarter of the North, or South. Of the scitua∣tion of two places in one Meridian.The truth of the Proposition is manifest if that it be rightly conceived. By pla∣ces intercepted between two points or places, are understood all points, which are the intercepted Arch of the great Circle drawn through the two points first assumed; or the points of that Arch which sheweth the shortest distance. Let that place at which the scituation of the other place is expend∣ed, be termed the first; and that other whose scituation is expended, be term∣ed the second. And for the more easy understanding, the first place is so to be conceived, that it may be in the same in the middle of the whole Earth, or in the middle of the circumjacent Regions, and by reason that it is scituated in the Brazen Meridian of the Globe, infinite Verticals are drawn through it by the circumjacent places to the Horizon, and so the scituation of all the rest of the places is expended at it, or the distance from the Meridian of it, or of its Angles which they make vertical with the Meridian. The Cause of the Proposition is, because that the Angle which the Meri∣dian of the first place maketh with the vertical of the first place drawn through that second place, denoteth the scituation of the second to the first, or to the quarter. Now if we conceive all the points interposed between the two places assumed of one Meridian (for these are they of which the one towards the other lyeth towards the quarter of the North, or South) it is manifest, that the Meridian of every one of them is the same with the vertical, which is drawn through every one from or through either place assumed, that is, that there is no Angle between the Meridians and verticals. Wherefore the place assumed is scituated at every interposed point towards the quarter of the North and South. Proposition II. If that any two places be assumed in the Aequator, unto one of which, or the first, the scituation of the other or second be to be examined, the second scituated from the first in the chief quarter shall be the East, or West, and the second shall be scituated in the same Cardinal quarter, to all the places interposed: or, one place of two lying in the same Aequator from another, and from all intermedial points, is scituated to the same quarter of the East or West. For the more easy understanding of this, let any place in the Aequator be taken, and so placed that the Wooden Horizon may become the Horizon of it,
that is, that the Poles of the Earth may be in the Horizon it self. Then let the second place in the Aequator be taken, whose scituation or quarter we consider at the first place. It is manifest that it is the chief quarter of the East, or West. For the Aequator is Vertical to it, which is drawn from the first place through the second perpendicular to the Horizon, and cutteth the Meri∣dian Line at right Angles. The same is also true concerning all the interjected points, which if that they be brought to the Brass Meridian, the Wooden Ho∣rizon shall be their Horizon, and the Aequator shall be the Prime Vertical of them, which cutteth the Meridian Line at right Angles, and passeth through the second place. Therefore this second place shall be scituated to all those in∣terjected points in one and the same Cardinal quarter of the East, or West. Proposition III. If that the second place with the first be not scituated in one and the same Meridian, and both of them be not in the Aequator; the second place shall not be scituated to the first, and to all interposed points in one and the same quarter, but in divers quarters at divers points. The know∣ledge of the Original of Lines which a Ship maketh, dependeth on this Propositi∣on.From this Proposition dependeth the knowledge of the Original of Lines which the Ship maketh, therefore the Reader must endeavour well to under∣stand it. Let any two places be taken in the Globe, which neither of them are in the Aequator, nor in one Meridian (for in these two kinds of scituation the quar∣ter of the second place is not varied at the intermedial places) for Example, Let Amsterdam be taken for the first place from whence the Voyage is to be begun, and Fernambuck in Brasilia for the second, or unto which the Voyage is appointed. Let Amsterdam therefore be brought to the Brass Meridian; and let the Pole be Elevated for the Latitude of the same, (for so the Wooden Horizon representeth the Horizon of the place), let the Quadrant be affixed to the Vertex, and let it be applyed to Fernambuck, it will shew the quarter in the Horizon in which Fernambuck lyeth from Amsterdam. And the Arch inter∣jected between these two places exhibiteth on the Globe the intermedial points. It must therefore be shewed, that the quarters in which Fernambuck lyeth from every one of these points, are not the same, but all divers, or that from eve∣ry one of those intermedial places Fernambuck doth not lie towards one and the same quarter. For the understanding of this we must repeat from the preceding Doctrine that the Angle, with the Meridian of this assumed place, maketh with the Vertical passing through the other place, sheweth the quarter of another place from some one place assumed; or the Arch of the Horizon intercepted between the Meridian and this Vertical, as the Angle sheweth the quarter of Fernambuck from Amsterdam, which the Quadrant with the Brass Meridian maketh (which is of Amsterdam it self). Therefore to prove the truth of this Proposition, let what points you please be taken between Amsterdam and Fernambuck in the Arch subject to the Quadrant, and let the Meridians passing through by them be conceived. It is best to take those points, through which on the Globe the Meridians pass, (or the Circles of Longitude) because therefore the Quadrant passeth through every one of these places, and Fernambuck it self, it will represent the Vertical of every place, in which Fernambuck lyeth from them. There∣fore the Angles which it maketh with the Meridians of each place, are the Angles of Position, and shew the quarters in which, or towards which Fernam∣buck lyeth from every intermedial place. Now these Angles are unequal, and of a different Magnitude, therefore the quarters also towards which Fernam∣buck lyeth from those places are divers. Now that these Angles are unequal is manifest from the very sight, or more evident if that by any interval of the Compass you draw an Arch from each point, and measure these Arches inter∣cepted between each Meridian and the Vertical: or if that we have ready
by it self a Crooked portion, which may be fitted to the Superficies of the Globe; or if that the places themselves be brought to the Brazen Meridian, and the Pole be Elevated for their Latitude; let the Quadrant be applyed to the Ver∣tex, and to Fernambuck, and in that scituation let the degrees of the Arch of the Horizon be reckoned. Streight lined and Sea Maps are defective.Corollary. Therefore the streight lined and Sea Maps are very defective, which do so represent the places, that if that any two places be taken, at one of which the scituation or quarter of the other be examined, this other doth seem to be in one and the same quarter from the intermedial places, which yet is false. The cause of the fault is, that they exhibit the Meridians Parallels, which yet do meet in the Poles: but Seamen regard not this fault, so that they do but re∣late the Course or quarter which they ought to have observed in Sailing from one place to another. Proposition. IV. If a Voyage be to be made, or that a Ship be to Sail from one place to ano∣ther (which two places are not in one Meridian, or both of them in the Aequator) by a most short cut, or by this means, that it may never re∣cede from the interposed Arch of the Vertical, in such a Voyage the quar∣ter is changed every moment, or the quarter becometh another and another, into which the Voyage is to be taken, or the Ship is to be Sailed. This Proposition is manifest from the foregoing.See Prop. 3. For let the Voyage be taken from Amsterdam to Fernambuck by the nearest way, that is, through the Arch of the Quadrant affixed at Amsterdam, and passing through by Fer∣nambuck. Because therefore every where in the whole Voyage, or in every point the Voyage is directed towards Fernambuck, and it is shewed in the pre∣cedent Proposition, that the quarters are divers, towards which from those middle points Fernambuck lyeth, therefore it is manifest, that the quarter be∣cometh another and another in every moment, and in each point, into which the Ship is to Sail, or to be Sailed, that it may respect Fernambuck. But if that the places be scituated in one Meridian, or if that both be in the Aequator, the Case is otherwise. For in them the same quarter of the Voy∣age of the North or South remaineth: in these the Cardinal quarter of the East or West. Proposition V. A Voyage cannot be so undertaken, or a Ship so directed, that it may tend in each moment to other, and other quarters, but for some time at the least whilst it is moved, it tendeth to one and the same quarter in appearance. Therefore whilst we are to Sail from one place to another, such a way, or line of a way is most convenient, whose every two near points are scitua∣ted in one and the same quarter in shew, although that this way be not the shortest. A Ship in a moment can∣not move from one quarter to another.A Ship cannot tend from one quarter to another in a moment of time, but whilst that it is moved, for some time at the least it tendeth to it. Moreover it can by no means be done, that the Seamen should know the quarters, unto which the Ship should be Sailed, if that another quarter were so often to be as∣sumed. Therefore it is evident, that that passage between two places is most com∣modious for Navigation, whose every two vicine points are scituated in one and the same quarter, so that the Ship may be continually directed unto one quarter, and to come by such a direction to the place appointed. This being supposed, let us enquire, what way is thence for the Motion of the Ship. Which way indeed, if that the places be scituated in one Meridian, shall be part of the
Meridian it self: if in the Aequator, that way shall be a portion of the Aequator it self; if in one Parallel, it shall be a part of this Parallel; if in any other Cir∣cle besides these, that way shall be another Line, not that Circle, as we shall shew in the following Propositions. Proposition VI. If that a Voyage be appointed, or that a Ship be directed to the North or South quarter, (that is, if that the place from whence, and the place unto which, be in one Meridian), the line of the Motion of the Ship it self shall be a part of the Meridian. It is proved from the first Proposition of this Chapter.See Prop. 1. of this Chap. For the place requir∣ed at all the intermedial places, that is at the points of the Arch of the Meridian is scituated in one and the same quarter of the North and South, as is ere said. And by the preceeding Proposition such a way is commodious for Navigation from place to place, whose every two vicine points are scituated in one and the same quarter. Wherefore seeing that the Arch of the Meridian is such a way, that shall be the way or line of the Motion of the Ship, viz. which the Ship by its Motion describeth, whilst that it is continually directed or steered to the North or South. Proposition VII. If that a Voyage be appointed from any place scituated in the Aequator to∣wards the East, or West quarter, the line of the Motion is a portion of the Aequator it self. We have shewed in the Second Proposition,See Chap. 2. that if two places be taken in the Aequator, the first, from whence, the second unto which the Voyage is ap∣pointed, that the second is scituated in one and the same East and West quar∣ter from all the interposed points, that is, from the points of the Arch of the Aequator it self. Because therefore the Ship is continually directed unto these quarters, the Arch of the Aequator interposed between these two places shall be the way of the Motion of the Ship. And because that we supposed in the V. Proposition, that such a way between two places is to be chosen, and is commodious for Navigation, viz. whose every two vicine points are scitua∣ted in one and the same quarter, such a portion of the Aequator shall be chosen for the way of the Ship. Proposition VIII. If that a Voyage be undertaken from any place scituated without the Aequa∣tor, towards the East or West quarter, so that the Ship continually may be directed to either of these quarters, the circumference of the Vertical Circle shall not be the line of the Motion of the Ship, but the Parallel of the Aequator, viz. of the Circle of the Latitude of the place, from which the Voyage is appointed. For because that a Ship, whilst it tendeth from one Meridian to another, is supposed to have respect to the same quarter, it will not remain in the Verti∣cal, but presently into another point of the vicine Meridian, viz. which is a point of the Parallel of the Aequator, or of the Circle of the Latitude of the place whence the departure was made. For every point of this Circle is such, that the Tangent lines of this Circle being brought unto them may respect the quarter of the East and West of each of these points. Furthermore the Keel of the Ship, because that it is continually supposed to be directed towards these quarters, always shall touch this Parallel in any point. Or by reason that any two points of this Parallel are such, that one is scituated from the other towards
one and the same quarter of the East, and West, and the Ship is supposed continually to be directed unto this quarter, neither is there any other Line on the Globe, whose points are so directed; therefore it followeth, that the way of the Motion of the Ship is this Parallel of the Latitude of the place. The way of a Ship is circu∣lar.Corollary. From the Three preceeding Propositions we collect, that if a Voyage be undertaken from any place, or that the Ship be continually dire∣cted towards any Cardinal point, that the way of the Ship is Circular. Proposition IX. If that a Voyage be appointed from one place to another scituated in the same Parallel, or Circle of Latitude, this way of the Ship shall be a portion of that Parallel, although this be not the shortest way. For that line is chosen for the Navigation of the Ship, by which we ar∣rive at the place appointed, by directing the Ship continually unto one and the same quarter. And any two of the points of the Parallel of the Circle are such. Whererefore the portion of the Parallel shall be the way of the Motion of the Ship. A threefold scituation of places.Corollary. There is therefore a threefold scituation of places, from one of which to the other, when a Voyage is undertaken, the way of the Navigation is the Periphery of the Circle. 1. If that both places be in one Meridian. 2. If that both be in the Aequator. And 3. If that both be in one Parallel or Cir∣cle of Latitude. In the two former kinds of scituation the way or line of Na∣vigation is the same with the distance or shortest way: but in the third scitu∣ation the line of the Navigation is divers from the shortest way. For this is the Arch of the greatest Circle interjected between two places. In any other scituation of places the way of the Navigation cannot be the Periphery of the Circle, as we shall shew in the following Proposition. Proposition X. If that a Voyage be undertaken from any place, towards any quarter not Cardinal, so that the Ship may be continually directed to that quarter, the Motion of the Ship is not Circular, but a crooked line, and incompas∣sing the Earth with infinit bendings and windings. Let us conceive a Ship to Sail from some place, when she hath arrived to the vicine Meridian point, it is directed towards the point of the following, or nearest Meridian, which is scituated in the same quarter unto the first point, in which this is first to the first place, and so moreover in the following Meridi∣ans. Now these points of all the Meridians do not make the Periphery of the Circle, but a solid crooked Helicoides. A distinct explication of this matter is more easily shewed on the Globe, than by many words. A definition of the word Loxo∣dromy.Loxodromy, is a way or line of Motion which the Ship maketh whilst it mo∣veth from one place continually towards one quarter not Cardinal. This is the Nominal definition: but the Essential definition of this line, that is the knowledge of the Nature and Properties of it, is most difficult, for neither is it an Helix as many think, neither doth it depend on any property of the Loadstone, who say that it hath its existency thence, because the Ship followeth the conduct of the Loadstone, neither is it composed of the minute particles of many Peripheries, as Nonnius saith (which is manifest from the very Parallel Circles, which are made from the same Motion of the Ship as of Loxodromy) neither is the Explication of Snellius plain, who saith that Loxodromy is an Helicoidical line in the Superficies of the Terrestrial Globe, which a right line touching about every where with the Meridians in total by contact it comprehendeth those points equal Angles to those drawn out, for
Snellius doth not explain now such a Tangent ought to be conceived, or how to be drawn: and to speak properly, Loxdromy hath not right lines Tangent, because it is a solid line when that Tangents are drawn to plain lines to a curva∣ture: for in solid lines infinite Tangents may be brought to any points. More∣over that definition may agree also to other draughts of lines when unto any point of such a Menidian, such a Tangent, and Crooked line may be conceived to be drawn from the vicine Meridian. Also our definition may be thus proposed: Loxodromy is a crooked line en∣compassing the Earth with many windings, every point of which lyeth from all its other points in appearance in one and the same quarter; or in which if that two points be taken, one point lyeth from another, and all the intermedial points in one quarter; or from any point of which if that circular Arches be drawn unto all the rest of the points, these Arches make equal Angles with the Meridian, which passeth through all these several points. This definition is essential. Proposition XI. If that a Voyage be undertaken from one place to another, which is not scitua∣ted with the former in the same Meridian, or Aequator, nor Parallel, and in the whole Voyage the Ship be directed unto that quarter, in which the place designed is scituated from the place of the departure, you shall ne∣ver by this Voyage come to the place designed, but continually the Ship shall be removed more and more from it. A notable pro∣perty in Na∣vigation.This notable property of Navigation seemed Miraculous to Mariners when that it was first observed, which happened in the time of Petrus Nonnius the Portuguez Mathematician, who wrote two Books of this Subject; after him many Mathematicians laboured in the explication of this matter, or Crooked line: and lastly, Mariners found it necessary for the Nautick use, and thence Tables were made. The cause thereeof.But the Cause of this Phoenomenon is, that the Ship being continually directed unto that quarter in which the second place from the first is scituated, it remain∣eth not in the Periphery intercepted between these places, but whilst that it cometh to one point, because here is a new Horizon, and another quarter the extension of the assumed Course, and this is continually done in the following points, thence existeth the Crooked Helicoidical line, in which whilst that the Ship is moved in some places, it is more and more removed from the determined place, and else where it approacheth more near. Proposition XII. 1. When a Voyage is to be undertaken from one place towards another scitu∣ated in the same Meridian, or towards the quarter of the North or South, the Ship is continually to be directed to this quarter of the North or South, or a Meridian is to be chosen for the way of the Ship, and it will arrive at the other place. Observations about Voyages.2. When a Voyage is to be undertaken from one place to another, and both are in the Aequator, the Ship shall be guided into that quarter, in which the other place lyeth from the first, that is to the quarter of the East or West, or the line of the Aequator is to be taken for the way of the Ship. 3. When a Voyage is to be undertaken from one place to another, and that they are both scituated in one Parallel of the Aequator, the Ship is not to be gui∣ded unto that quarter, in which this other place from the first lyeth, or which is extended from the first to the other, for the Ship would never arrive at the other place, but would go with infinite windings about the Earth towards the Poles: but the Course must be made into the quarter of the East or West, for whilst that the Ship tendeth unto that, it describeth by its Motion the Parallels of the Aequator, and so arriveth at the other place.
4. When a Voyage is to be made from one place to another which are nei∣ther in one Meridian, neither both in the Aequator, nor in one Parallel of the Aequator, the Ship must not be guided unto that quarter, in which the other place from the first lyeth, for it would never arrive to the other place, but the Motion of the Ship would describe the Loxodrome, which would not pass through another place: but the course must be directed unto that quarter, in∣to which whilst that the Ship moveth, it describeth the Loxodrome which passeth through another place into that quarter, whose Angle with the Me∣ridian is equal to the inclination of the Loxodrome, which passeth through those two places. All these follow from the preceeding Propositions. Proposition XIII. Infinite Loxodromes may proceed, or be conceived from any place of the Earth as there are infinite Verticals, but yet there are only 28 reckoned about every place, viz. 7 in the Quadrant between the Meridian of the place, and the Parallel of the place, so that they divide that right Angle into 8 equal parts, and the 2 vicine are distant an equal Angle. Yet the Parallel it self is termed an eighth Loxodrome. Of the number of Loxodromes.But they are called by the same Names by which the Winds, or quarters are named. On the Globe they are beheld to proceed and turn round about the Earth from the Center of the Compasses, or also from other points of the Meri∣dian. But in Nautick use the intermedial Loxodromes are denominated by a di∣stance from the adjacent Loxodromes, for Example, in a third part, a fourth part more North, more East. Proposition XIV. A Loxodrome intercepted between two places is almost, or according to the sense, equal to the Hypotenusa of a right lined plain Triangle, whose one Cathetus is of an equal distance of Latitude of those two places, the other Cathetus is of an equal difference of Longitude of the places taken in the Parallel, which is in the middle between the Parallel of those two places. What Trian∣gles are termed Loxodromes.Such Triangles are termed Loxodromical. But places very near are to be taken for an accurate Calculation, that a small portion may be interposed, viz. places whose difference of Latitude is only of one scruple. Proposition XV. The parts of the Loxodrome intercepted between Parallels distant by an e∣qual interval are equal. Therefore many small Loxodromical Triangles, are conceived in each Loxo∣drome, of which if that the Loxodrome of one be supputed, you have the quan∣tity of the Loxodrome from one place into another, whose Latitude is known. Proposition XVI. The Latitude and difference of Longitude of two places being given, to find out the Loxodrome, by which you may Sail from one place to another. Or two places being given on the Globe, or in a Map, to find out the quarter, unto which the Ship is to Sail, or to be brought from one place to the other. The chief Problem in the Art of Na∣vigation, to which all the rest are refer∣red.This is the chief, or rather the only Problem of the whole Art of Navi∣gation, unto which all the rest are referred. If that there be no difference of Latitude, the Loxodrome shall not be the way of the Ship, but the Paral∣lel
of those places which yet is commonly termed the eighth Loxodrome, be∣cause after the same Mode as the other Loxodromes, it is generated by the Mo∣tion of the Ship which is directed to the Eastern or Western chief quarter. If that therefore there be no difference of Latitude, they say that the eighth Lox∣odrome ought to be taken, and the Ship must be steered to the chief Oriental or Occidental quarter in the whose Navigation. For although it be not di∣rected to the appointed place, yet by this false direction the Ship shall be brought to the place. If that that there be no difference of Longitude, the way of the Ship shall not be Loxodromical, but a part of the Meridian in which both the places lie, and the quarter of the North or South, is taken for the direction of the Ship. But if the places given be of a different Latitude and Longitude, and that you are minded to work by the Globe, let the given Latitude be noted on the Brazen Meridian, and if the Parallel of one Latitude have in it the Center of any Compass, or from whence the Loxodromical lines were drawn, let this be brought on the Globe to the Meridian under the noted degree of Latitude: then let the Globe be turned round, until so many degrees of the Aequator pass through the Meridian, as there are degrees in the difference of Longi∣tude; and then let it be observed whether any point of the Loxodrome brought from the Center be under the noted point of the Meridian. That is the Lox∣odrome sought, and it sheweth unto what quarter the Ship is to be directed that it may arrive from the given place unto the place given: if that there be no point of the Loxodrome under the noted point of the Meridian, the Loxo∣drome intermedial between those two near to that point must be taken. But if that the Center of any Compass be to be found in neither Parallel of the Latitude from which the Loxodromes were drawn, let some Loxodrome be chosen, which may appear near to that demanded, and let it be brought to one point of the noted Latitude, or of the Meridian, and let the Globe be turned as before, until that the difference of Longitude pass through the Meridian. This being done, if that any point of the assumed Loxodrome be under either noted point of the Meridian, the taken Loxodrome shall be that which is de∣manded. If that such a point be not found, another Loxodrome must be taken, and you must do as before, until such an one be found; any point of which be∣ing found, let it be removed under the other noted point of the Meridian, or at least no long interval from it, and the Loxodrome shall be denominated from those nigh it, amongst which it is to be conceived as the midst. Of Sea Charts.In Sea Charts it is performed after this Mode, as the quarter of one place is found from another, which Method in Maps of equal degrees of Latitude, is faulty, but in Maps of unequal degrees of Latitude it accurately enough disco∣vereth the Loxodrome or quarter unto which the Ship is to be Sailed. Also Mariners have another Method easy enough, in which by the solution of a plain right angled Triangle the Loxodrome of Navigation is found: but to that Method they use a Table, which they call a Table of encreasing Latitude, of which we have spoken in the the XXXII.See Chap. 32.Chapter.
CHAP. XL. Of the chief Problem of the Art of Navigation, viz. of finding out a place in the Maps unto which, the Voyage being performed, we ar∣rive at a certain time, or of finding out the Longitude and Lati∣tude of this place. Proposition I. The quarter cannot be known, unto which the Ship is to be Sailed, that it may come unto the appointed place, except that the place be known in which the Ship was at that time. WE have said in the former Chapter that this is the chief Problem of the Mariners Art concerning the finding out of the quarter, unto which the Ship is to be directed, but that cannot be found, except that the place be known, whence the Ship is to be directed. Therefore the solution of the Pro∣blem for finding out the place is necessary. Proposition II. To find the place in the Maps at which the Ship arriveth or toucheth at any time. The finding the place in Maps, at which the Ship at a∣ny time arri∣veth.This is that work which the Dutch call Het besteck in de pas-kaert. They note with a Pin every day on the Map the place unto which they suppose the Ship to have touched, that by this means they may discover in what place they are, and unto what quarter the Ship is to be Sailed. They use a threefold Method in this affair, as they suppose this or that to be more rightly ob∣served. 1. The Rhumbe being observed in which the Ship was directed from the place of the first day, or from the place given on the Map, or the Rhumbe in which the Ship was moved, and the quantity in the interim of the Voyage made, being observed: these two things being known, the place of the Ship is found thus on the Map: Let the Rule or Compass be taken, and one Shank of it be appli∣ed to the place of the former day, or from whence the Ship departed, let the other Shank be applied to the vicine line which representeth the observed quarter or course: let the point of the Shank be noted with Chalk, which is im∣minent over the place of the departure. Then by the interval of the Compass let the miles of the performed Voyage be taken from the opposite Scale, and let one foot of the Compass be put upon the place of the departure,Pilots without a Rule, with two pair of Compasses per∣form the Problem. but let the Rule be moved on the line of the quarter until the other foot of the Compass touch the noted point of the Rule. The place of the Map that is subject to that point in that scituation of the Rule, is that demanded, viz. in which the Ship then is. But if that you determine to find out more accurately the point on the Map by Calculation, or the place of the Ship it self, the Problem shall be this: The Latitude and Longitude of one place being given, and the quarter being given in which they Sailed unto the other place, with the Voyage performed, to find out the Latitude and Longitude of the other place. For these being found, you may more accurately note the place of the Ship on the Map. 2. The quarter being observed, in one known place to another unknown, and the Latitude of this other, or Elevation of this Pole being observed, to find the scituation of this other place on the Map.
Let one shank of the Rule be applied to the quarter observed near the place, and let the other shank be placed on the place known (or whence the Voyage is begun) and make there on the shank a mark with a Chalk. Then let the shank applied to the quarter be moved, until the other noted point of the shank applied to the quarter fall in on the Parallel of the observed Latitude. For the point of the falling in, is the place sought, viz. the place of the Ship. But if that there be no Parallel of Latitude observed on the Map, let the degrees intercepted between this Latitude and the vicine Parallel be taken by the in∣terval of the Compass on the lateral line. And let the Rule in the line of the quarter, and one Foot of the Compass be moved together in this Parallel, until the other Foot of the Compass and the noted shank do meet, the point of the meeting sheweth the place of the Ship. Seamen use two pair of Com∣passes. If that you will determine more accurately by the Calculation of the place demanded on the Map or Earth it self, the Problem is this: The Latitude and Longitude of one place being given, and the quarter in which the Navi∣gation is appointed to another place, and the Latitude of this place given, to find his Longitude: for the Latitude and Longitude given is the place it self. 3. The quantity of the Voyage performed from one known place to another unknown being observed, and the Latitude of this other being observed, to find this other on the Maps. Let the quantity of the Voyage performed be taken by the interval of the Compass from the opposite Scale. Then if a Parallel through the degree of La∣titude be observed on the Map, let one Foot of the Compass be placed on the no∣ted place, the other Foot on this Parallel. This point shall be the place de∣manded. But if the Parallel pass not through the degree of Latitude, let one shank of the Rule be applied to the vicine Parallel; on the other shank let the degree of Latitude be noted, and let the Rule be moved until the other Foot of the Compass toucheth the noted point of the Rule. The place of the Map subject to the point in this scituation shall be the sought for place of the Ship. If that a more accurate invention is required by Calculation, the Problem shall be this: The Latitude and Longitude of one place being given, and the di∣stance of the other on the line of Navigation, and the Latitude of this, to find out the Latitude of this other. For this being known, when the Latitude is observed, you have the scituation of the place it self on the Maps, or Earth. The 4th or 5th Method also of finding out of this place is also given, viz. in which the Longitude of the other or sought for place is supposed to be ob∣served, but the Latitude is unknown. But because that very seldom the Lon∣gitude can be observed on the Sea; therefore this Method is omitted as unuse∣ful.See Snellius, Stevens, and Metius. He that desireth more concerning this Method let him Read Snellius, Stevens, Metius, and others, that have treated at large of it. Proposition III. To conjecture unto what quarter the Ship is moved, and in what Rhombe, al∣though the signs be fallacious. In the solution of the former Proposition for the finding out the place of a Ship, those things as noted were taken and observed. 1. The quarter unto which the Ship is moved, and the Rhombe, in which. 2. The way made. 3. The Latitude of the place unto which it hath arrived. Now therefore we must shew how these three may be observed on the Sea, that they may be used for the finding out of the place. For if that these be not rightly known, or observed, the true place shall neither be found or discovered. First there∣fore let us see concerning the quarter of the course of the Ship and the Rhombe.
The Pilots know the quar∣ter from the Compass or Loadstone.The Pilots know the quarter from the Compass, or Loadstone. For what quarter, or Rhombe of the Compass agreeth with the Line of the conceived Lon∣gitude of the Ship, the same is put into the quarter of the Ship to be moved, and to describe its Rhombe. For they seldom use the sign taken from the quarter of the apparent rising and setting of the Sun which they compute. These signs may be corrupted by divers Causes, so that they may deceive in shewing the Rhombe or quarter. 1. If that the Declination of the Magne∣tick Needle be uncertain in that place, and therefore the quarters of the Com∣pass do not shew the true quarters. 2. If that the Sea in that place hath a flux to a certain place, for it will carry the Ship from the true Rhombe, although the Ship be directed unto the same quarter, the fluxes, and refluxes are the fre∣quent cause of this error. And in many places of the Torrid Zone, a general Moti∣on is of force, and in many places a stated and fixed Motion from stated winds. 3. Winds, especially storms remove the Ship from the Rhombe of their Voyage, although they ply in the same quarter. 4. The fluxes of the Sea which are carried towards other quarters, and carry the Ship with it. 5. The Rudder or Helme cannot be moved by him that steereth unto any quarter as it ought to be, the waves of the Sea obstructing of it. All these hinder the Ship to be moved in the same Rhombe, whose quarters are shewed by the Compass. But how much it is drawn aside must be learned by conjecture from the vehe∣mency of the Flood, and of its quarter, and the like: but the Method is very imperfect. Proposition IV. To cast up the Voyage made upon the Rhombe, to measure it at the given time from the given place. The casting up the Voyage made upon the Rhombe, &c.Pilots conjecture the same. 1. When they observe or know by experience what course a Ship is wont to make with such a Wind. 2. If that they have Sailed in the same Meridian or vicine Line with any Wind, and have observed the Latitude of the place in the beginning of the Motion, and the Latitude of the place in the following time. For the difference of Latitude turned into miles sheweth the course made for so long a space of time, and such a Wind. Whence for the time given and such a Wind continuing, the course made is collected. 3. With more industry they measure the course performed by a Boat and string; one end of which is fastened to the Boat, and the other with the Globe is in the Ship, for the Ship remaining immovable, Sailing is permitted to the Boat un∣till it be removed 10 or 12 Orgyas of the string, and the time elapsed between is observed. And from this for any time of the performed course of the Ship is found out. The signs of the performed Sailing of the Ship are corrupted, and rendred un∣certain by divers ways; yea are uncertain of themselves, seeing they are mere conjectures. 1. Oftentimes the Ship maketh lesser or greater way than the conjecture affordeth, viz. because in many places of the Sea the flux is unto a certain quarter, or the Billows are rould unto a certain quarter. If therefore the Ship be directed into the same quarter, the way made will be greater than the conjecture maketh it; but if into a contrary, it will be lesser. 2. Because the Ship is carried by other Causes into other quarters, and so by windings arriveth at another place. 3. The winds are variously changed. 4. By how much a Ship hath the greater Altitude, by so much its Motion seemeth more slow, though it be not so. Proposition V. To observe the Latitude of a place unto which a Ship is arrived. The Seamen observe it by the Sun in the day time, and by the Stars in the night, as we have shewed in the XXIII. Chapter, they use Three Instruments,See Chap. 23. the Astrolabe, the Radius, and the Triangle.
Proposition VI. From whence it is manifest that the Methods used by Seamen to find the pla∣ces on the Maps unto which they have arrived, are fallacious, because that they can neither be certain of the Rhombe or quarter of the way, or of the quantity of the way made, or of the observed Latitude of the place▪ yet the observation of the Latitude of the place unto which they are arri∣ved, because that it is not less subject to error, especially the Air and Sea being tranquillous, may be exempted from this fallacy. But from that alone the place it self is not found on the Map or Earth, but a se∣cond is required, viz. either a distance from another place given, or a Rhombe by which they Sail from the given place to that, or lasty, the Longitude of that place from this. We have said that the observation of the way made, or di∣stance, is uncertain, as also that of the Rhombs. Therefore they return back to find out the Longitude of the place. For the Latitude and Longitude of the place being known, the place it self is found on the Maps, and determined on the Globe of the Earth. Whence it is evident that the Art of Navigation requireth the solution of this Problem to the making up of its perfection: viz. to find out the Longi∣tude of the place where we are at any time, and on any day. The prize is pro∣pounded, let him win who can.
map of the world A MAPP or GENERALL CARTE of the WORLD Designed in two Plaine Hemisphers, By Monsieur Sanson Geographr to the French King and Rendered into English and Illustrated with Figures by Richard Blome By the Kings Especiall Command. royal English blazon or coat of arms
To the High and Mighty Monarch Charles the Sec by the Grace of God, King of England Scotland France and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith &c. This Mapp in all Humility is Dedicated, by your Majesties obedient subiect and sarvant. Richard Blome.
A GEOGRAPHICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE WORLD, Taken from the WORKS Of the Famous Monsieur SANSON, Late Geographer to the present French King. To which are Added, About an hundred GEOGRAPHICAL and HYDROGRAPHICAL TABLES, of the Kingdoms, Countreys, and Isles in the World, with their Chief Cities and Sea-Ports; drawn from the MAPS of the said Monsieur Sanson, and according to the Method of the said Description. Illustrated with MAPS. The Second Part. By RICHARD BLOME. Printed in the Year, 1680.
Geographical TABLES. On, or a∣bove the Surface of the Ter∣restrial Globe, and Maps of the World, ought to be under∣stood and noted, Ten Points; of which Four are called Cardinal Points, as the North, or the Pole Artick. the South, or the Pole Antartick. the East. the West. Four are called Collateral Points, as the East of the Summer, the East of the Winter, the West of the Summer, the West of the Winter. And two, as Above and Under us; as the Zenith, the Nadir. Ten Circles, or Lines, of which Five are Parallels, the one to the o∣ther, as the Aequinoctial, or— the Aequator. the two Tropicks, as the Tropick of Cancer, the Tropick of Capricorn. The two Polar Circles, as the circle of the Pole Artick. the circle of the Pole Antartick. Five others are different the one from the others, as in the middle of the Zodiack; as— the Ecliptick. the Horizon, as the Horizon rational, the Horizon sensible, or visible. the Parallels, or— the degrees of Latitude. the Meridians, or— the degrees of Longitude. Two Colures, in which are 4 Points, which note our four Seasons of the year, to wit, above the colures of the Aequinoxes, as the Spring, the Autumn. the colures of the Solstices, as the Summer, the Winter. Three sorts of Zones, in which are five, to wit one Torrid, or the Parching. two Temperate, as the temperate Artick, or Northernly, the temperate Antartick, or Southernly. two Frozen; or Cold, as the frozen Artick, or Northernly, the frozen Antartick or Southernly. Three sorts of Shadows, which diversly re∣ceive the Inhabi∣tants of the five Zones; for they are in the Torrid Zone Amphisciens. in the Temperate Zones Northernly, Northern Heterosciens, Southernly, Southern Heterosciens. in the Frozen Zones Northernly, Northern Perisciens, Southernly, Southern Perisciens. Three sorts of Positions, as the Inhabitants about the same Parallel, opposite in Meridian, are Perioeciens. the Inhabitants about one Meridian, opposed in their Parallels, are Antoeciens. the Inhabitants opposed both in Meridians, and in Parallels, are Antipodes. The Climates; of which the Ancients first made seven which they call by the most famous Places, Seas, and Rivers, by which they passed; as dia (that is, through) Meroes, dia Sienes, dia Alexandrias, dia Rhodou, dia Pontou, dia Boristenon, then me, in adding dia Ripheon, dia Danias. the Moderns made 30, to wit between the Aequator and the Polar circle 24, by half hours, between the Polar circle, and the Pole — 6, by Months. The Parallels; which are following the Ancients 14, between the Aequator and Polar circle 48, by quarters of hours. following the Moderns 60 between the Polar circle and the Pole 12, by fourteen days. The Winds; whereof the 4 Firsts, and whereof the names are Monosylla∣bles, shall be called Cardinal Winds, as North, South, East, West. 4 Seconds, and whereof the names are of two syllables, and composed of two of the four Firsts, shall be called Collateral Winds, as North-east, North-west, South-east, South-west. 8 Thirds; and have their names of three syllables, com∣posed of one of the four Firsts, and of one of the four Seconds, as North North-east, North North-west, South South-east, South South-west, East North-east, East South-west, West North-west, West South-west. North, and a quarter by North-east, North, and a quarter by North-west, North-east, and a quarter by North, North-west, and a quarter by North. 16 Fourths; taking their names from four Firsts, or four Seconds, in saying of one fourth part by the other, and that without having regard to the eight Third winds, &c. as it were South, and a quarter by South-east, South, and a quarter by South-west, South-east, and a quarter by South, South-west, and a quarter by South. East, and a quarter by North-east, East, and a quarter by South-east, North-east, and a quarter by East, South-east, and a quarter by East. West, and a quarter by North-west, West, and a quarter by South west, North-west, and a quarter by West, South-west, and a quarter by West. The Measures; in which are to be consi∣dered, that the least part that can be described upon the Terrestrial Globe, is a Point. many Points, described and continued right the one to the other, make a Line. twelve Lines continued together, are esteemed to make — an Inch, or Thumbs breadth. twelve Inches, make — a Foot. two Foot and half make a common Pace, and two common Paces a Geometrical Pace. one hundred twenty five Geometrical Paces, make — a Stade, or certain measure of ground. eight Stades, or one thousand Geometrical Paces, is — one thousand Roman Paces, or the Italian Mile. one thousand fifty six Geometrical Paces make — an English Mile. one thousand two hundred sixty seven Paces make — a Scotish Mile. two thousand four hundred, or 2500 Geometrical Paces make a Spanish League. four thousand Geometrical Paces, make — a Dutch League, or Miles. five thousand Geometrical Paces, make — a Swedish League, or Miles. six thousand Geometrical Paces, make — an Hungarian League, or Miles. 24 or 25 French Leagues, or 60000 Geometrical Paces make a degree of Latitude on the Aequator. three hundred and sixty degrees of Longitude on the Aequator, make the great circle of the Terrestrial Globe. the great circle of the Terr. Globe, multiplyed by his Diameter, make the Superficies of the Terrestrial Globe.
Geographical and Hydrographical TABLES. The Ter∣restrial Globe hath all its Sur∣face in LAND; which discover∣eth it self in Two Con∣tinents; whereof Ours, or the most Ancient and▪ Superi∣our, contain∣eth three great parts; to wit, Europe; where are the Kingdoms or parts of Turkey in Asia, Arabia, Persia, India, China, Tartaria. Asia; where are the Kingdoms or Countreys of Italy, Turkey in Europe, France, Germany, Low Countreys, Poland, Scandinavia, Russia, or Moscovia. Africa; where are the Kingdoms or Countreys of Rarbary, Biledulgerid, Egypt, Sara, or Desart of Saara, the Land of the Negroes, Guinee, Nubia, the Emperour of the Abyssines. Zanguebar, Congo, Monomotapa, Caffreria. Spain, The other, or New and In∣feriour, is called AME∣RICA. America Septentrionalis; where are the Kingdoms of Canada, or New France, New Mexico, New Spain. America Meridionalis; where are the Kingdoms of Peru, Brazil, Paragua. Many Isles; of which the most famous are About our Continent, and part of Europe; as those in the Mediterranean Sea, the Western Ocean, called the British Isles. part of Asia; as those of Japon, the Philippins, the Moluccoes, Sonde, Ceylan, and the Maldives, &c. part of Africa; as those of Madagascar, or St. Lawrence, St. Thomas, Cape Verd, the Canaries, &c. Between the one and the other Continent; as the Azores. About the o∣ther Conti∣nent, and towards America Septentrionalis; as those of Terra Neuves, California, the Antilles. towards America Meridionalis; the Magellanick Isles. And in some Lands and Isles, the most part unknown, towards the one and the other Pole; among the which are Groenland, Izland, &c. Terra Australis, Nova Guiney, &c. WATER; which is found in SEA; and which may be called Ocean, about our Conti∣nent, Oriental, or Indian; where are the Seas of China, India, Arabia. Southern, or Aethiopian; where are the Seas of Barbaria, or of Zangucbar, Cafreria, Congo. Western, or Atlantick; where are the Seas of Guinee, Cape Verd, the Canaries, Spain, France, Great Britany. Northern, or Frozen; where are the Seas of Denmark, Moscovy, Tartaria. Sea, about the other Conti∣nents, North-Sea, or Seas of Canada, or New France, Mexico, or New Spain. Brazil, Magellanick-Sea, or Seas of Paraguay. Magellanick. Pacifick-Sea, or Seas of Peru, New Mexico. Gulphs, or Seas, between the Lands of our Continent, the Baltick Sea, the Mediterranean Sea, between the Lands of the other Conti∣nent, the Gulph of Mexico, the Gulph of Hudson. Lakes, or Seas, in the midst of our Continent, the Caspian Sea, in the midst of the other Continent, the Lake, or Sea of Parime. Streights; to wit, between the one and the other Contin. of Anian, between the other Contin. and the J. M. of Magellan. between Europe and Africa— of Gibraltar. RIVERS; of which the most famous, are In our Conti∣nent; as In Europe, the Tage, the Loire, the Rhine, the Elbe, the Danube, the Boristene, the Don, or Tanais, the Volga. In Asia, the Tigre, and the Euphrates, the Indus, the Ganges, the Quiam, or Jamsuquiam, the Oby. In Africa, the Nile, the Niger. In America, Septentrional; as—the River Canada, or St. Lawrence. Meridional; as the River Paria, or Orinoque, the River Amazones, the River of Plates.
The Wa∣ter in the surface of the Ter∣restrial Globe, is for the most part in Seas; and which may be called Ocean, and about our Conti∣nent, to wit, the Indian, or Eastern, where are the Sea of China, Indian Sea, Arabian Sea. Aethiopian, or Southern, wherein are the Sea of Barbary, or of Zanguebar, Sea of Caffreria, Sea of Congo. Western, or Atlantick; where are the Sea of Guinee, Sea of Cape Verd, Sea of the Canaries, or Gulph of Yeguas, Sea of Spain, Sea of France, Sea of Great Britain. Northern Frozen, or Scythick; where are the Sea of Denmark, or Mourmanskoi-More, Sea of Moscovy, or Petzorke-More, Sea of Tartrria, or Niaren-More. Sea, and about the other Con∣tinent, to wit, the North, or Sea of Canada, or New France, Sea of Mexico, or New Spain, Sea of Brazil, or North-Sea. Magellanick, or Sea of Paraguay, Magellanick Sea, Sea of Chili. South, or Pacifick; or Sea of Peru, or South-Sea, Sea of California, or New Mexico. Between the one and the other Continent, and towards the Ar∣tick Pole, are the Archipelague of St. Lazare, the Sea of Groenland, Gulphs; among which there, where the Ocean wash∣eth them, and About our Continent, are these Gulphs and Seas, as the Gulph of Nanquin, Gulph of Cochinchina, Gulph of Sian, or Cambogue, Gulph of Bengala, Gulph of Ormus, and Balsora, Gulph of the Red-Sea, or Sea of Mecca, Gulph of Aethiopia, or St. Thomas, Sea of Guascagne, White-Sea, or Bella-more. there, where the Mediterra∣nean Sea entreth, and within our Continent, are these Gulphs and Seas, as the Gulph of Lyon, Gulph of Venice, Archipelague, or White-Sea, Sea of Marmora, Black Sea, or Sea of Majeure, Levant Sea. there, where the Baltick Sea entreth, and within our Continent, are these Gulphs and Seas, as the Gulph of Bolnia, Gulph of Findland, Gulph of Rhiga, Gulph of Dantzick, Gulph of Lubeck. there, where the Sea washeth them, and About the other Continent, are the Gulph of Hudson, Gulph of St. Lawrence, Gulph of Mexico, Gulph of Hondutas, Gulph of Panama. Streights; among which there, where the Ocean and the See washeth, and About the other Continent, are these Streights, Seas, &c. as the Streight of Anian, Sea of Vermejo, Streight of Magellan, Channel of Bahama, Streight of Hudson, Streight of Davis. About our Continent, are the Streight of Nassau, or Vaygatz, Pas or Streight of Calais, Streight of Bebelmande, Streight of Mocandan, Streight of Manar, Streight of Malacca, Streight of Sonde. there, where the Baltick Sea is, and In our Continent, are the Streight of Sound, Streight of Belt. there, where the Mediterra∣nean Sea is, and In our Continent, are the Streight of Gibraltar, Fars, or Haven of Messia, Eurpe, or tourn passage of Negroponte, Streight of Gallipoli, or the Dardanelles, Str. of Constantinople, or Channel of the Black Sea, Streight of Cassa, or Vospero. Lakes; and which may be called Seas; as In our Continent, the Sea of Bachu, or Sala, Sea of Zabaque, or Tana. In the other Continent, the Lake or Sea of Parime. Lakes; as In Europe, the Lake of Earne, Lake of Werner, Lake of Ladoga, Lake of Geneve, Lake of Constance, Lake of Balaton, Lake of Majeur. In Asia, the Lake of Sodom, or the Dead-Sea, Lake of Astamar, or Vastan, Lake of Burgian, Lake of Kithay, Lake of Chiamay, Lake of Cincui-Hay. In Africa, the Lake of Zaire, and Zambere, Lake of Zafflan, Lake of Niger, Lake of Bouchaira. In America Septenrional, the great Lake of Canada, Lake of Mechoacan, Lake of Chapala, Lake of Mexico, Lake of Nicaragua. Meridional, the Lake of Maracaybo, Lake of Titicaca, Lake of Eupana, or de los Xarajes.
The most famous RIVERS In our Con∣tinent, and its Isles, are, to wit in EUROPE, and in the Kingdoms, Countreys or Regions of Spain; as the Douro, the Tagus, the Guadiana, the Guadalquivir, the Ebro, or Iberus. Italy; as the Tiber, the Arno, the Po. Turkey in Europe; as the Danube, or Donaw, the Drin, the Orfee, or Alfee, the Vardar, the Marize. France; as the Loire, the Garone, the Rhosne, the Seyne. Low-Countreys; as the Escault, the Meuse. Germany; as the Rhine, the Weser, the Elbe, the Oder. Poland; as the Weisser, or Vistule, the Niemen, the Duna, or Dzwina, the Niester, the Nieper, or Boristene. Sweden; as—the Torne. Moscovia; as the Wolga, the Dwine, the Don, or Tana. England; as the Thames, the Severn, the Trent. Scotland; as —the Tay. Ireland; as—the Shennon. ASIA, and in the Kingdoms, Countreys, or Religions of Turkey, in Asia, as the Euphrates, the Pactolus, the Tygris, the Acheron, the Jordaine, the Orontes, the Lali, the Chrysorhous. Georgia; as —the Araxes, and the Farza. Arabia; as —the Caybar, and the Astan. Persia; as the Tiritiri, the Gehun, the Bendimir, and the Tostar. India; as the Indus, the Tapta, the Ganges, the Gemeni, the Mecon, and the Pegu. China; as —the Quiam, or Jamsuquiam: Tartaria; as the Oby, the Gehan, the Tartar, the Palisanga, the Jeniscey, the Albiamu, the Chesel, and the Jaick. AFRICA, and in the Kingdoms, Countreys, or Regions of Morocco; as —the Tensift, and the Sus. Fez; as the Ommiraby, Suba, the Mullulus, and the Cherser. Barbary; as the Mulvia, the Maber, the Magrada, the Capes, the Rio Major, the Chol, the Suffegmarus, the Masurius, the Tefflisus, and the Mina. Aegypt; as—the Nile. Bilidulgerid; as the Suz, the Buzedota, the Darha, and the Albus: Zaara; as the —Ghir, and the Equestris. the Negroes; as the Niger, which is divided in the Senega, the Gambia, the Rio Grande, and the Cano. Higher Aethiopia; as the Quilmanci, Nubia, the Zaire, and the Marabus. Lower Aethiopia; as the Zambere, divided in the Curama, the Barame, the Spiritu Sancto, the Rio dos Infantos. In the other Continent, or in AMERICA Septentrionale and in the Kingdoms, Countreys, &c. of Canada, or New France; as those of Canada, or St. Lawrence, Toppahanock, Penobscot, Pautuxat; Nansamud, Chesapeac, or Pouharan, May, la Trinite, Apamatuck, Pamanuc, and Patawomeck, Florida; as those of Rio de Flores: Rio de Spirito Sancto, Rio de Neives, and Rio grande. Mexico; or New Spain; as those of Spiritu Sancto towards the East, Spiritu Sancto towards the West, Panuco, Guaxacoalco. Baranja, Zacatula, Desaguadero of Nicaragua. AMERICA Meridionale, and in the Kingdoms, Countreys, &c. of Terra Firma, Guiana, and Peru; as those of Darien, Viapoco, St. Martha, Cayanna, Corritine, Brebice, Orinoque, Apuruvaca. Essequebe, Madelaine, Desaguadero of Peru. Brazil; as those of Orethane, or the Amazons, Maragnon, or Miari, Taboucorou, Rio Janiero, Rio grande, or Potengi, Rio Real, Parayba. Paraguay; as those of —Paraguay, or de la Plata.
All the Kingdoms, Regions, Countries, Isles, &c. in the World, may be compre∣hended under these two Heads, viz. Known Anciently, and in our Con∣tinent; as EUROPE, with its King∣doms, Estates, Isles, &c. may be consider∣ed in three times three parts, and then The three most Sou∣thern parts, are the Kingdoms, Estates; and Isles of Spain and Portugal, with its Isles of Majorca, Mi∣norca, &c. Italy, with its Estates and Isles of Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica, Isles of Naples, &c. Turkey in Europe, with its Estates and Isles. The 3 Innermost parts; and within the Con∣tinent, are the King∣doms and Estates of France, Germany, and Belgium, with its several Estates; as the Swisses, the Grisont, &c. Poland, with its several Estates, towards the Danube; as Transylvania, Moldavia, &c. The three most Nor∣thern parts or King∣doms, and Isles of Great Britain, and Ireland. Scandinavia, or Denmark, Sweden, Norway. Moscovy, with its Dutchies and Kingdoms. ASIA, with its Kingdoms, Countreys, Isles, &c. as they are found In firm Land; as Turkey in Asia, with its Countreys, Isles, &c. Georgla, Arabia, Persia. India as it is divided into the China, Empire of the great Mogul; Peninsula of India, within the Ganges; Peninsula of India, without the Ganges; Tartaria, the Land of Jesso, the Land of Papous. In Isles; as In the Ocean; a the Isles of Japon, Isles of Larrons, Isles of Sonde, Philippine Isles, Isles of Ceylan, and the Maldives. In the Mediterranean Sea; as in the Levant Sea, in the Archipelago. About China, Persia, Arabia, &c. AFRICA, with its King∣doms, Isles, &c. as it is divided and found in Africa, or Lybia Exteriour, or out∣wards; as Barbary, Bilidulgerid, Aegypt. Interiour, or in∣wards; as Zaara, or Desart, the Countries of the Negroes; Guinee. Aethiopia, higher; as Nubia, Aethiopia, or the Empire of the Abyssines. lower; as Congo, Monomotapa, Caffres. And di∣vers Isles, which are found In the Mediterranean Sea; as the Isle of Malta, &c. In the Western Ocean; as the Canary Isles, the Isles of Cape Verd, the Isles of St. Thomas. In the Eastern Ocean; as the Isle of Madaga car, the Isle of Zocotora, &c. Lately, and in the other Conti∣nent; as AMERICA, with its King∣doms, Regi∣ons, Coun∣treys, Isles, &c. as they are divided, and found in America Septentri∣onale; as Canadian, or the Artick Lands; as Groen and, Eslotiand, Izland, &c. Canada, or New France, with its Estates; Isles, &c. Florida. Mexican, or Mexico, or New Spain, with its Audiences of Mexico, Guadalajara, Guatemala, and St. Domingo, The Caribbe Isles. America Meridio∣nale; as Peruvian, or Terra Firma with its Estates; Provinces, and Isles. Guiana. Peru, with its Audiences of Quito, Lima, Dela Plata. Chili, with its Jurisdictions. Brasilian, or Bzil, with its Capitane, Paraguay, or Rio de la Plata, with its Parts or Pro∣vinces, the Magellanick Land, &c. Unknown, or not fully discovered, and lieth either under the Artick, or Circles; as Antartick Circles; as Nova Guinea, Terra del Fuego, Maletur. Psitracorum Regio, and the like feigned Names and Place.
EUROPE, with its Kingdoms, Isles, &c. may be considered in three times three parts; and then The three most Sou∣thern parts, are SPAIN, with its Kingdoms or Principa∣lities, viz. Castile, Madrid, Leon, Leon, Navarr, Pampelona, Bisay, Bilboa, Asturie, Oviedo, Gallicia, St. Jago de Compo Portugal, Lisbon, Algarve, Pharo, Andaloufia, Sevill, Granada, Granada, Mucia, Murcia, Aagon, Caragosa, Valencia, Valencia, Catalonia, Barcelona, the Isles of Baleares, Majorca. ITALY, with Its several Estates and Principalities; the Chief of which are Piedmont, Turin, Millain, Millain, Genoua, Genoua, Parma, Parma, Mantua, and Modena, Mantua, Venice, Venice, Toscany, Florence, Estare of the Church, Rome, Naples, Naples, Isle of Sicily, Messina, Isle of Sardiny, Calari, Isle of Corsica, Bastia. TURKEY (in EUROPE,) with its several Estates; the Chief of which are those of Bosnie, Jaycza, Servie, Belgrad, Bulgarie, Sophia, Romania, Constantinople, Macedonia. Salonichi, Thessalie, Armicho, Epire, Perveza, Achaia, Selines, Pelopornesus, Petras, Dalmacie, Rhagusa, Sclavonia, Posega, Illyris, Zatha, Croatia, Sisseg. Together with several Isles, as they lie in the Aegean, or Grecian Seas, as Negroponte, Cree, the Isles of Cyclades, &c. Ionian Seas, as Zant, Zeffalonia, Corfu, &c. Ariatick Seas, as Zara, Lesina, Curzola, Lissa, &c. The three In∣nermost parts, and within the Continent, are FRANCE, with its twelve Governments, or General Estates; viz. Picardy, Amiens, Normandy, Roen, or Roven, Isle of France, Paris, Champgne, Troys, Brelagne, Nantes, Orlenois, &c. Orleans, Bourgogne, Dijon, Lyonnois, &c. Lyon, Guyenne and Gascogne, Bourdeaux, Languedoc, Toulouse, Provence, Marseille, Dauphin, Grenoble, The several Estates, which lie between France, the Catholick Low Countrey, Anvers, Lorrain, Metz, the French County, Besansons, Savoy, Cambery, Germany, the Low Countreys, or the United Provinces, Amsterdam, Rotterdam. the Swisses, Basle, the Grisons, Coire. GERMANY, with its several Estates and Principalities; the chief of which are On this side the Rhine, Strasbourg, Beyond the Rhine, Cologne, Westphalia, Munster, Franconia, Noremberg, Sovabe, Ansbourg, Bavaria, Munchen, Austria, Vienna, Bohemia, Prague, Higher Saxony, Dresden, Brandenbourg, Berlin, Pomerania, Stetin, Lower Saxony, Hamburgh. POLAND, with its several Estates; the chief of which are Polonia, Cracow, Prussie, Dantzick, Mazovie, Warzaw, Lithuania, Wilna, Volhynia, Kyovia, Podolia, Kamieniec, Russia Nigra, Loewenberg. And some Estates or Principalities, towards the Danube and Black-Sea, as Hungaria, Buda, Transylvania, Hermenstat, Valaquie, Targovisko, Moldavia, Soczowa, Little Tartaria, Nigropoli. The three most Nor∣thern parts, Kingdoms and Isles, are SCANDINAVIA; where are the King∣doms and Estates of Danemark, Danemark, Capenhagven Norway, Trondhem. Sweden, Gothland, Calmar, Sweden, Stockholm, Finland, Abo, Livonie, Riga. MOSCOVIA, with its several Kingdoms, Dutches and Provinces; the chief of which are Moscovy, Mosco, Wolomodire, Wolodomer, Dwine, St. Michael Archa Cazan (Kingdom) Cazan, Astracan (Kingdom) Astracan. The ISLES of GREAT BRITAIN; where are the Kingdoms of England, London, Scotland, Edinburgh, Ireland, Dublin.
map of Europe To the high and Mighty, Prince James Duke of Yorke & Albury Marquesse of Ormond Earle of Ross & of Arismanoch Ld High Admirall of England Kt of the most noble order of the Garter sole Brother & Privi Councellor to his most Sacrid Ma.ty K: Charlas the 2d this Mapp is humbly Dedicated by Rich: Blome. royal English blazon or coat of arms A MAPP of EUROPE Designed by Mounsieur Sanson. Geographer to the French King; and Rendred into English and Illustrated by Ric: Blome, By his Majets Espesiall Command London. Printed for Rich Blome it.
EUROPE. EƲROPE is one of the three parts of our Continent, of which Asia makes the most Eastern, Africa the most Southern, and Europe in regard of them is be∣tween North and West. Its Bounds.It is for the most part bounded by the Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea; that which we call the Septentrional, or Frozen Ocean, on the North; and the Occidental, or Atlantick Ocean, on the West: The Mediterranean Sea (which is but an Arm of the Ocean) lies on its South, and separates it from Africa; but from Asia, it is separated towards the East by divers Seas, which fall into the Mediterranean; by several Streights between these Seas, to wit, the Archipelago, the Sea of Marmara, the Black Sea, and the Sea of Zabaque. Between the Archipelago and the Marmara, is the Streight of Gallipoli, or the Dardanelles of old Hellespontus: between the Marmara and the Black Sea, is the Streight of Constantinople, or the Channel of the Black Sea; and between the Black Sea and the Sea of Zabaque, is the Streight of Caffa, or Vospero. Then the Rivers of Don, Wolga, and Oby, compleat the division of Europe from Asia, by drawing a line from the one to the other. Scituation.The scituation of Europe is between the 35 and 72 degrees of Latitude; and between the 10 and 100 of Longitude, though it fill not all this space; and it is almost all in the Temperate Zone, no part in the Torrid; but some under or near the Frozen Zone. But the Ocean, together with the divers Seas which encompass and divide the parts of Europe, have given so great an advantage to its People, that they are long since become the most expert in the World in Navigation, all Arts and Sciences, and in Arms and Military Discipline. Its Division.We will consider Europe in Nine (or three times three) principal parts: And of these, the first three shall be Spain, Italy, and the Estates of Turkey in Europe; and these possess the Southern part of Europe: the second three parts shall be France, Germany and Poland, and these take up the middle part of Europe; and the third shall be Scandinavia, where are the Estates of Den∣mark and Sweden, Russia Alba, or Muscovia, and the Isles of Great Britain and Ireland; and these are most Northward. As to the several small Isles, I shall com∣prehend them under one and the other of these 3 parts, and that according to their scituation or vicinity unto them. Besides these 9 parts, there will remain some Estates and Lands between France, Germany, and Italy; likewise between Germany, Poland, Turkey and Moscovia; and some in Turkey, which shall be described as occasion presents. The Langua∣ges or Speech∣es.But before we proceed to the Parts, let us consider that there are 3 principal Tongues, and as many principal Religions in Europe, viz. the Latin, which ex∣tends it self into Italy, France, and Spain, though in divers Idioms: the Teuto∣nick into Germany, the British Isles, and Scandinavia: the Sclavenian into Po∣land, Moscovy, in good part of Turkey, Bohemia, &c. though still in several Idioms and Dialects. The other Tongues are much less general, as the Greek, Albanian, Hungarian, and the Tartaresque in the Eastern parts; and lastly, the Basque, Welsh, Irish and Laplandish, in the most Western and Northern parts. Religions.The Religions are the Protestant, which hath spread it self where the Teuto∣nick Tongue is spoken; the Roman Catholick is almost every where with the Latin; Schism, alone and every where amongst the People speaking Sclavonian and Greek; the Mahumetan Religion is among the Natural Turks of Europe. But to proceed to its Parts.
SPAIN. SPAIN, with its fourteen Kingdoms or Princi∣palities, whereof Two are in the midst of the Country, to wit, LEON, Beyond the River Douro, or Do∣vere, Leon, Avilez, Astorga, Placentia. On this side the Douro, Salamanca, Cuidad Rodrigo. CASTILE, The Old, Burgos, Valadolid, Numantia, Segovia, Calahorra, Soria, Osma, Siguenca, Avila, Placentia, Coria. The New, Toledo, Madrid, Alcantara, Alcala de Henores, Cuenca, Guadalasara, Cuidad Real, Merida, Badajox. Three are to∣wards the North; as NAVARRE, which hath the Merindades of Pamplona, Viana, Estella, Tudela, Olite, Sanguesa. BISCAY, where are Biscay, Bilboa, St. Andero. Guipuscoa, St. Sebastiano, Andero, Victoria, Tolosetra. ASTURIE, or Oviedo, Oviedo, Santillano: Three are to∣wards the West, viz. GALLICIA, St. Jago de Compostella, Bajona, Coronn, Mondonedo, Lugo, Tuy. The Kingdom of PORTU∣GAL, Between the River Minho, and the Douro, Braga, Miranda, Porto, Bragansa. Between the Douro, and the Tajo, or Tagus, Lisbona, Santara, Sintra, Lamego, Guarda, Coimbra. Alen Tajo, or between the Tajo, and the Guadiana, Evora, Portalegre, Leirla, Beja. ALGARVE, Pharo, Tavila, Silves, Lagos. Three are to∣wards the South, to wit, ANDALOUSIA, and ESTREMADURA, Sevill, Cordova, Marchena, Medina Sidonia, Xeres de la Frontera, Cadiz. GRANADA, Granada, Malaga, Almeria. MURCIA, Alicant, Carthagena, Murcia. Three are to∣wards the East, viz. ARRAGON, Caragosa, or Saragoz, Lerida, Huesca, Mosons, Jacca, Borio, Calatajud, Daroca. CATALOGNE, or CATALONIA, Rousillon, Perpignan, Elna. Catalogue, Barcelona, Girona, Taragona, Tortosa, Lerida, and Solsona. VALENCE, or VALENCIA, Valencia, Morvedre, Segobre, or Segorbia, Xativa. Together with the Isles of Baleares, or MAJORCA, Majorca, Palomera. MINORCA, — Citadelli, and Mahon. YVISA, — Yvisa, and Magno.
All the E∣states of the CA∣THO∣LICK KING, may be comprised under The Estates of the Crown of CASTILE, which are In SPAIN, the King∣doms of Leon,— Leon, Castile, the Old, Burgos, Valadolid. the New, Toledo, Madrid. Biscay, — Bilboa. Asturie, Oviedo. Gallicia, St Jago de Compostella. Andalousia, Sivil. Granada, Granada. Murcia, Alicant. Navarte, — Pamplona. Towards FRANCE, The Catholick Low Countrey, Anvers, or Antwerp, Brussels, Arras. The French County, — Dol. In ITALY, The Estate of Milan, Milan, Pavia. On the River of Genes, — Finale. On the Coast of Toscany, — Orbetello. In AFRICA, On the Coast of Barbary, Oran, Marsalquibir, le Penon de Velez. The Canary Isles, — Canary. In ASIA, The Philippine Isles, — Maille. In AMERICA Septentrio∣nale, or Mexicane, The Isles Antilles, St. Domingo, in Hispaniola, Havana, in Cuba. Florida, — St. Augustino. Mexico, or New Spain, Mexico, los Angelos. Canada, or New France, Guadalajara, Compostella. Guatemala, St. Jago de Guatemala, Leon de Nicaragua. Meridiona∣le, or Pe∣ruviane, Terra Firma, Porto Bello, Panama. New Kingdom of Granada, Cartagena, St. Marta, St. Fee de Bogata. Peru, Popayan, St. Francisco de Quito, Lima, or Los Reyes, Cusco. Ios Charcas, la Plata, Potessi. Chili, St. Jago de Chili, Valdivia. Rio de la Plata, Assumption, Cordovade Tucuman. And towards Austriales, The Isles of Solomon, — Isabella. The Estates of the Crown of ARRAGON, which are In SPAIN, the King∣doms or Principalities of Arragon, Saragoz, or Caragoss Lerida, Huesca, Jorca. Catalogne, or Catalonia, Barcelona, Perpignan; Taragona, Lerida. Valencia, Valencia, Morvedre, The Isles of Majorca, Minorca, Yvisa, Majorca, Citadelli, Yvisa. In ITALY, the King∣doms, &c. of Naples, Naples, Cosence, or Cozenza, Lecce, Aquila. Isle of Sicily, Messina. Palermo, Siracusa. Isle of Sardiny, Cailari, Oristagni. And divers small Isles, Ischia, Capri, Lipari. The Estates of the Crown of PORTU∣GAL, which are In SPAIN, the King∣doms of Portugal, Lisbona, Braga, Evora, Coimbra. Algarve, — Pharo. In AFRICA, and thereabouts, On the Streight of Gibraltar, — Ceute. On the Coast of the Negroes, — Arguin. of Guinee, St. George de la Mine. of the Caffres, — Cuama, or Sophala. of Zanguebar, Mosambique, Melinde. And the Isles of Madera, — Funghal. the Azores, Angra. Cape Verd, St. Jago. St. Thomas, — Cuidad, or Pavosan, In ASIA, and therea∣bouts, On the Coast of Persia, — Ormus. India, Diu, Goa, Malacca. And part of the Isles of Ceylan, Colombo. of the Moluccoes, Nostro Senioro del Rosario. In AMERICA, Brazil, St. Salvador, Olinda, Parayba.
The Estates of the Crown of CASTILE, are About EUROPE; as In SPAIN; to wit, In the midst of the Coun∣trey, the Kingdom of Leon, Leon, Astorga. Kingdom of Castile, Burgos, Valadolid, Toledo, Madrid. Towards the North, the Signiory of Biscay, Bilboa, Kingdom of Asturie, Oviedo, Kingdom of Gallicia, St. Jago de Compostella, Towards the South, the Kingdom of Andalousia, Sivilla, Cordova, Cadiz. Kingdom of Granada, Granada, Malaga. Towards France, the— Kingdom of Murcia, Alicant. Kingdom of Navarre, Pamplona. FRANCE; to wit, The LOW COUN∣TREYS; where are the Dutchy of Brabant, Louvain, Brusselles. Dutchy of Limbourg, Limbourg. Dutchy of Luxembourg, Luxembourg, Thionville, Dutchy of Gueldres, Ruremonde, Gueldres. County of Flanders, Gand, or Gaunt, Lisle. County of Artois, Arras, St. Omer. County of Haynaut, Mons. County of Namur, Namur. Marquisate of the Empire, Anvers, or Antwerp: Seigniory of — Malines, The FRENCH County; where are the Balliages of Dole, Gray, Salins. In ITALY; to wit, The Estate of the Dutchy of MILAN; viz. Milanese, Milan. Pavese, Pavia. Cremonese, Cremona. Alpesre, Come. Alexandrin, Alexandria de la Paille. On the River of GENES, the Estates of Finale, and Pontremoli. On the Coast of TOS∣CANY, are the Estate of the Presidii, Orbetello, Porto Hercole. Protection of the Seignory of Piombino. In AFRICA; as Terra Firma, on the Coast of Barbary, Marquisate of Oran, and the Oran, Masulquivir, Penon de Valez. In the Western Ocean, The CANARY Isles, The Great Canary, Canary. In ASIA; as In the E. Ocean, The PHILIPPINE Isles, Luson, or Manilla, Manilla, Towards the Land of AUSTRALES, The Isle of SALOMON, or of New Guinee, Isabella. In AMERICA; as SEPTEN∣TRIONALE, or MEXICANE, where are the Audiences of St. DOMINGO, Isles of Antilles, S. Domingo in Hispaniola Havana, in Cuba, St. Jean de Puerto Rico. Florida, St. Augustino. MEXICO, or NEW SPAIN, Mexico, Mexico. Mechoacan, Valadolid. Panuco, St. Estevan del Puerto. Tlascala, los Angeles. Guaxaca, Antequerra. Jucatan, Merida. Tavasco, Neustra Seniore de la Vi∣ctoria. GUADALAJARA, or New GALLICIA, Guadalajara, Guadalajara. Xalifco, Compostella. Chiametlan, St. Sebastian. Culiacan, St. Michael. Cinaloa, St. John Ro. los Zacatecas, los Zacatecas. New Biscay, Indies. GUATEMALA, Guatemala, St. Jago de Guatemala. Soconufco, Guevetlan. Chiapa, Guidad Real. Verapax, Verapax. Honduras, Valadolid. Nicaragua, Leon de Nicaragua. Costarica, Cartago. MERIDIO∣NALE, or PERUVIA∣NE; where are the Au∣diences or Regions of PANAMA, Veragua, La Conception. Panama, Porto Bello, Panama. New Kingdom of GRA∣NADA, Cartagena, Cartagena. St. Martha, St. Martha. New Kingdom of Granada, St. Fe de Bogota. Rio de la Hacha, Nost. Sen. de los Reme∣dios. Venezuela, Venezuela, or Cori. New Castile; Cordova la Nueva. PERU, Popayan, Popayan, Cali. Quito, St. Francisco de Quito. los Quixos, Bacsa. Pacamores, St. John de las Salinas. Lima, Lima, or los Reyes, Cusco, los Charcas, la Plata, Potessi. la Sierra, St. Cruz de la Sierra. CHILI, Chili, St. Jago de Chili, la Imperiale, PARAGUAY, Rio de la Plata, Tucoman, l'Assumption, St. Jago del l'Estero, Cordova de Tuconan.
The Estates of the Crown of ARRA∣GON, are In SPAIN to wit, In the Firm Land; as The Kingdom of ARRAGON; where are Ten Cities, to wit, Caragosa, Lerida, Huesca, Jacca, Callatajud, Borio, Daroca, Teruel, Albazarin, And more than a hundred Walled Towns; the chief of which, are Anza de Sobrarbe, Benavarri de Ribagorsa, Monsons, Fraga, Camfrane, Viescas. The Principality of CATA∣LOGNE, or CATA∣LONIA, with the County of ROUSILLON; where are In Catalogne, eight Cities, Barcelona, Tartagona, Lerida, Girona, Tortosa, Solsona, Urgel, Vich, In Rousillon, two Cities, Perpignan, Elna. And about an hundred and fif∣ty Walled Towns; the chief of which in Catalogne, are Puycerda, Balaguer, Cardona, Cervera, Manresa, Castillo d'Empurias, Roses, And in Rousillon, —Collioure. The Kingdom of VALENCIA; where are Four Cities, Valencia, Segorbia, Xativa, Orihuelha. And about 60 Walled Towns; the chief of which are Elche, Biar, Denia, Gandia, Alzira, Morvedre, Villa Real, St. Mattheo. In the Sea, as The Kingdom, and the Isles of Majorca, — Majorca, Minorca, — Citadelli, Yuisa, — Yuisva. In ITA∣LY; to wit, In the Firm Land, as The Kingdom of NAPLES; where are Terra di Lavoro, Naples, or Napoli, Capona. Principato citra, Amalfi, Salerno. Principato ultra, Benevento, Conza. Calabria citra, — Conzenza. Calabria ultra, Reggio, Cotrone. Basilicata, — Cirenza: Terra di Otrante, Tarante, Lecce, Otrante, Brindici, or Bindes. Terra di Bari, Bari. Capitanate, Monte St Angelo, Manfredonia. Comtado di, — Molife. Abruzzo citra, or Abruzze citerieure, Lanciau, or Lancrano, Sulmone, Civita di Chietti. Abruzzo ultra, or Abruzze ulterieure, Civita di Penna, Aquila. In the Sea, as The Isle and Kingdom of SI∣CILY; where are in Val di Demona. Messina, Taormina, Catane, Patta, Troina, Cefaledi, Val di Noto, Siracuso, Noto, Motya, Termini. Val di Mazara, Palermo, Monreal, Trapani, Marzalla, Mazara, Xacca, Girgenti, The Isle and Kingdom of SARDAIGNE; where are in Capo Cagliari, Cagliary, or Calari, Oriftagni, Villa di Glesia. Capo Lugodori, Sassari, Algeri, Bosa. And divers Isles towards Naples, Ischia, Capri, towards Sicily, — Lipara, &c.
The Estates of the Crown of POR∣TU∣GAL, are In EUROPE, the PORTU∣GALS or Kingdom of PORTUGAL comprehend∣eth three Re∣gions, six Pro∣vinces, twenty Almoxarifatz; (that is, Courts of Audience, or for the Re∣ceipt of the Kings Reve∣nue) 18 Cities, more than 400 walled Towns, 200 Boroughs, 4000 Parishes. The Regions are Between the Rivers MIN∣HO and DOU∣RO; where are the Provinces of Between the Rivers MINHO and DOURO, which comprehend the Almoxarifatz of Porto, — Porto. Viana de Foz, Caminha, Viana de Foz de Lima, Barcelos. Ponte de Lima, — Ponte de Lima. Guimaranes, Braga, Guimaranes. TRA-LOS MONTES, which comprehendeth the Almoxarifatz of Miranda, Miranda, Bragansa. Torro de Mencorvo, Torre de Mencorvo, Chiaves. Villa Real,— Villa Real, Pinhel, Castel Rodrigo, Pinhel. Between the Rivers DOU∣RO and TA∣JO; where are the Provinces of ESTREMADURA, which containeth the Almoxarifatz of Lisbona, — Lisbona. Santarein, Santarein. Tomar, Tomar. Alenquez, Alenquez, Sintra. Leiria, — Leiria. Setubal, Setubal, Cezimbra, Almada, Palmela, Alcazer do Sal. BEIRA, which hold∣eth the Almoxarifatz of Coimbra, — Coimbra. Guarda, Guarda. Lamego, Lamego. Viseu, Viseu, Aveiro, — Aveiro. Castel Branco, Castel Branco, Salvatierra, Indanha. ALEN∣TAJO, or be∣tween the Ri∣vers TAJO and GUADI∣ANA; where are the Pro∣vinces of ALEN-TAJO; which holdeth the Almoxari∣fatz of Evora, — Evora. Beja, Beja, Serpa, St Jago de Ccem, Mertola, Ourique. Elvas, Elvas, Olivensa, Mouraon. Portalegre, Portalegre, Crato. Estremoz, — Estremoz, and Avis. ALGARVE; and the Almoxarifatz of Tavila, Pharo, Tavila. Lagos, — Silves, and Lagos. Divers E∣states, King∣doms, Isles, Cities, &c. in the other parts of the one and the other Con∣tinent; among the which are In AFRICA; and On the Coasts of The Kingdom of Fez, — Centa. The Kingdom of Morocco, Mazagan. The Countrey of Negroes, Arguin. Sierre Leone, Cachieu. Guinee, St. George de la Mina. The Kingdom of Angola, St Pol de Loanda, Cambambe. Caffreria, or Cafres, Cuama, or Sofala. Zanguebar, Mozambique, Malinde, Monbaza. The Isles of Madera, — Funghal. Azores, Angra. Cape Verd, St. Jago. St. Thomas, &c. Pavoasam. In ASIA; and On the Coast of Arabia, — Mascate. Persia, Ormus. Cambay, Diu, Daman, Bazaim. Decan, Chaul. Cuncan, Goa. Canara, Barcelor. Malabar, Cananor, Cranganor, Cohin, Coulan. Choromandel, Negapatan, Malapour, or St. Thomas: Pegu, Sirian. Malacca, Malacca. China, Macao. The Isles, or part of the Isles of Ceylan, Colombo. Manar, Manar. Moluccoes, Nostro Seniora del Rozaria. Japon, Meliapon. In AMERI∣CA; and In BRAZIL, the fourteen Capitanies, or Governments of Para, — Para. Maranhan, Maranhan. Ciara, Ciara, Rio Grande, Rio Grande, or Potengi. Parayba, Paraba. Tamaraca, Tamaraca. Fennambuco, Olinda. Seregippa, Seregippa. Bahia de Todos los Santos, St. Salvador. los Isleos, los Isleos. Porto Seguro, Porto Seguro. Spiritu Santo, Spiritu Santo. Rio Janiero, St. Sebastian, St. Vincent. Santos.
map of Spain blazon or coat of arms of the Hunloke baronetcy To ye Rt Worshipfull Henry Hunloke of Wingerworth in Derbyshireshire Bart This Mapp is humbly D.D. by R.B. A General Mapp of the Kingdom of SPAINE By Monsieur Sanson Geographer to the Eranch King
SPAIN. THE Kingdom of SPAIN is almost quite encompassed with the Ocean and Mediterranean Sea; and the Pyrenean Moun∣tains seperate it from France. These Mountains are that Isthmus or neck of Land, that uniteth Spain to the Continent, and serveth as a desence and bound for this Kingdom and France; and the Inhabitants that here reside, are a sort of rude and Barba∣rous people. Spain taken conjoyntly with Portugal (which though a particular King∣dom, hath been always taken as a Member thereof) extends it self from the 35th degree of Latitude unto almost the 44th; and from the 9th degree of Longitude to the 24th. It is seated in the most Southernly part of the North Temperate Zone,Scituation. the longest Summers-day making 15 hours. It is a Country not over fertil in Corn or Cattel, which doth occasion the People to order their Diet according∣ly, their chief food being Sallets and Fruits, the product of the Earth, so that with a small piece of flesh, they will make two or three Dishes; and above all their Oleums are esteemed as an excellent dish. But in recompence of the defect of Corn and Cattel, the Country produceth divers rich Commodities; as Wines, Oils, several Mettals, Rice, Cork, Soda Barrellia, Shumack, Soap,Its Commo∣dities.Anchoves, Hony, Wax, Woad, Coriander, Saffron, Anniseeds, Raisins, Almonds, Oranges, Lemmons, Liquorice, Wool, Lamb-skins, raw Silk, &c. Spain received its first People from Celtes, whence came the name of Celti∣eri; then the Phoenicians and Carthaginians possessed the most Southern parts nearest to Africa,The several Inhabitants. and endeavoured to make themselves Masters of all the Country. The Romans drove them out, and possest it wholly, and in the declension of their Empire, the Goths, Vandals, Sueves, Alains and Silinges fetled here, and parted it amongst them. The Goths in the end remained sole Masters, till such times as the Moors vanquished them, and forced them to re∣tire to the Mountains of Leon, the Asturias, and Gallicia. The People now inhabiting in Spain are of a swarthy complexion, black hair'd, and of a good proportion; they are very stately in all their Actions, of a Majestick gate, in their carriages are very grave and serious; to their King are very obedient, true and loving; in Adversity, patient; they are much addicted to Women; are great braggers, and exceeding proud, though scarce Masters of a single Ryal. In matters of Religion, they are Roman Catholicks, in which they are very devout, not admitting the publick exercise of any other Religion through∣out the Kingdom. Spain is divided into fourteen Kingdoms or Principalities, which are set down in the Geographical Table of the said Kingdom; and to these fourteen Principalities, we may add the Isles of Baleares, seated in the Mediterranean Sea, which comprehendeth Majorca, Minorca, and Yvisa: and all these King∣doms have formerly been reduced into three Estates, which they call, Castile, Arragon, and Portugal. But to proceed to its several parts.
Kingdom of Leon.LEON, called by some the Kingdom of Leon and Oviedo, hath for its chief places, 1. Leon, by some called Legio, as supposed that the eleventh Le∣gion quartered here, which was called Legio Germanica: 2. Avilez, seated on the Sea-shoar: 3. Salamanca, of note for having the most famous Academy or all Spain: 4. Astorga; and 5. Placentia. Kingdom of Castile.CASTILE, severed into the Old and the New, or first and last gained or conquered from the Moors. The Old Castile is seated Northwards of the New, and hath for its chief places, 1. Burgos, famous, as contending with To∣ledo for the primacy of all Spain: 2. Validolid, a neat and fair City and a University, honoured with the Birth-place of King Philip the Second, who erected a Colledge for the English Papistical Fugitives. 3. Numatia, fa∣mous for defending it self against the Romans for fourteen years, and at last left Scipio nothing else, but a pile of Ashes for his Triumph, and 4. Segovia, a place of note for Clothing, here made. The New Castile boasts of Madrid for its chief place, though but a Village, but is the greatest in all the World, and may compare with many Cities in Europe; and its Territory, although neither pleasant nor abundant, yet is made both, by the residence of the Kings of Spain. 2. Yoledo, seated on the Tagus, and almost in the heart of all Spain; a fair City, beautified with stately Edifices; its Walls are strong, whereon are placed about fifty Towrs of Stone: It is honoured with a University, famous for the study of the Civil and Canon Laws. 3. Alcantara, of note for its Order of Knights, so called. 4. Alcala de Henares, dignified with an University: And 5. Cuenca, seated at the Spring-head of the Xucar, nigh to which is the stately Palace of the Escurial or St. Lawrence, built by King Philip the Second; a place of such magnificence, that neither times past came near it, nor present, doth equal it. In this large and stately structure are Eleven several Quadrangles, every one incloistred, all ex∣pressing a Peruvian Treasure to have been spent in the building them, and is of such beauty and magnificence, that a voyage to Spain were not lost to see it. Kingdom of Navar.NAVAR, for Antiquity may claim the second place of all the fourteen Kingdom: It hath for its Eastern bounds the Pyrenean Mountains. Its chief places are, 1. Pamplona, a place more famous for her Fortification, than her Negotiation: 2. Viana, once the Title of the Prince of Navar, near which Caesar Borgio was slain by an Ambush; 3. Estella; 4. Tudela; 5. Olite; and 6. Sanguessa; all good Cities. This Country was one of the first, that with success opposed the Moors. Seigniory of Biscay.BISCAY, by reason of its Mountainous and Woody scituation, is the only Countrey of all Spain, that remained unconquered by the Moors; and for its many Iron-Mines, is called the Armory of Spain. The chief places are, 1. Bilboa, a Town of grat Trade, Riches, and much frequented by Merchants, seated two miles distant from the Ocean, and aboundeth in Wines, Cattle, and the best Blades, known by the name of Bilboa-Blades. 2. St. Sebastian, ano∣ther noted Town for Traffick: 3. Andero; all Sea-port Towns; 4. Victoria; and is. Tolosetta; Cities of some account. Kingdom of Asturie.ASTƲRIE, or Oviedo, hath for its chief place, Oviedo; which gave name to the Territory, which conjoyns with that of Leon. Kingdom of Gallicia.GALLICIA, a Mountainous Countrey, like Asturie; hath for its chief places, 1. St. Jago de Compostella, or St. Jago, in honour of St. James, who here lieth interr'd; it is honoured with the See of an Archbishoprick, and an Ʋniversity; and in one of the Churches are kept the Relicks of St. James, which are much reverenced: 2. Bajona, seated at the Mouth of the River Mi∣nius: 3. Coronna, not far from the Promontory of Nerius: 4. Mondonnedo; 5. Luge; and 6. Tuy, seated on the River Minho.
The Kingdom of PORTƲGAL. This Kingdom of Portugal, as united with that of Algarve, and divided from the Dominions of Castile, contains the Kingdoms of Portugal and Al∣garve. It enjoyeth a sweet and healthful Air; for most part is hilly, and not very grateful to the Husbandman; but that defect is recompenced by their abundance of Wine, Oil, Fruits, Hony, Fish, White Marble, Salt,Its Commodi∣ties.Al∣lom, &c. which are the product of the Country. This Kingdom is about 320 Miles in length, and about 120 in breadth,Extent. Number of Parishes. in which compass are said to be about 1460 Parishes, and many Nunneries and Religious Houses. Its Fruits are excellent, by reason of which here are abun∣dance of Confectioners: It is well watered with Rivers, having near 200 great and small, the chief of which is the Tagus. The People are esteemed more honest, plain,Its People. and of a simpler behaviour than the rest of Spain, and more devout in matters of Religion. The chief Places in thir Kingdom are 1. Lisbona, said to be built by Ʋlysses in his ten years Travels, seated on the Tagus convenient for Navigation, and of a great resort and trade; it is in compass about seven miles, in which may be numbred about twenty thousand well built Houses, and hath thirty and odd Parish Churches; and on its Walls are about sixty Turrets and Towers, which renders a pleasing shew to the Beholders; towards the Continent, it is seated on five small Hills, betwixt which is a Valley which runs down to the River Duero, whose entrance is defended by a Castle: and this City being the Metropolis of the Kingdom, is the residence of the Kings of Portugal, and the See of an Archbishop. 2. Braga, once the chief of the Kingdom, now dignified with the See of an Archbishop. 3. Miranda, seated on the Duero, an Episcopal See. 4. Santaren, seated on the Tagus. 5. Sintra, upon the main Atlantick, at the end of high Mountains; which for the pleasure of the Woods here adjacent, as also for the refreshings which come from the Sea, is the usual retirement of the Kings of Portugal in the heat of Summer. 6. Coimbra, seated on the River Mondego, of a pleasant scituation, being a∣mongst Vineyards and Woods of Olives, dignified with an Episcopal See, and a famous Ʋniversity. 7. Porto, seated at the mouth of the Duero, now called Portuport, a Town of good Trade, and affords an excellent strong Wine. 8. Bragansa; 9. Lamego; 10. Guarda; 11. Evora; 11. Portalegre; and 13. Leiria. South of Portugal is ALGARVE, which was united by the Marriage of Alphonso, the Third of Portugal, who had it in Dowry with his wife Beatrix, Daughter to Alphonso the Fourth of Castile, and Tenth of Leon. Its chief places are, 1. Pharo, a Port-Town towards the Streights of Gi∣braltar and Silvis, anciently the Seat of its Kings within Land. The ut∣most end  this Country, is called the Cape of St. Vincent, because the Bones of St. Vincent, which the Christians kept sacred, were by the Saracens (the then Masters of the Country) burnt and scattered about the Earth. This Kingdom of Portugal is much coveted by the King of Spain, who esteems it the chiefest Pearl of his Cabinet, and as the chiefest Flower in his Garland; and which to regain, he hath oft times waged War against them, but to no purpose. Kingdom of Andalousia.ANDALOƲSIA. the most rich and fruitful Country in all Spain, and well watered with Rivers: It hath on the East and South, Granada and the Sea, and adding the Country of Estremadura, it reacheth Northwards to the Castiles. The chief Places are, Sevilla, or Sevil, the most beautiful of all this Continent: It is in compass six Miles, and environed with stately Walls, and adorned with no less magnificent Buildings, as Palaces, Churches, and Monasteries. It is severed in two parts by the River Boetis, which are
joyned together by a stately Bridge. From this place the Spaniards set forth their West-India Fleet, and do hither return to unlade; and the Trade of this City is of that greatness that some have dared to say, that the Customs are worth to the King of Spain the yearly Revenue of about half a Million of Gold; and indeed this City, and Lisbon in Portugal, may be said to be the chief Cities for Trade in this Continent; this for the West-Indies, and Lisbon for the East. It is dignified with a flourishing Ʋniversity, and the See of an Archbishop, whose Revenue is said to be 100000 Crowns yearly, and is e∣steemed the next to him of Toledo. In this City are said to be kept 30000 Ge∣nets for the service of the King of Spain, which are ready upon all occasions. And here resteth the body of Christopher Columbus, famous for his Naviga∣tions and discoveries of the New World. 2. Cordova, once the Royal Seat of the Moorish Kings; from hence cometh that excellent Cordovant-Leather, Not far from this City was fought that famous Battle between Coesar and the Sons of Pompey, where Caesar gained the day, and made an end of the Civil Wars. 3. Marchena, famous for its Genets. 4. Medina Sidonia, whose Duke was General of the Invincible Armado, in Anno 1588. 5. Xeres de la Fontera, a Sea-port Town, from whence comes our Sherry Sack: and 6. Cadiz, seated in an Isle below Sevil, a Colony of the Carthagenians. Country of Estremadura.ESTREMADƲRA, Whis is part of Andalousia, hath for its Chief places, 1. Merida, built and made a Colony by Augustus; and 2. Guadalcanal, famous for its Mines of Silver. Kingdom of Granada.GRANADA, bounded on the South with the Mediterranean Sea: Its Chief places are Granada, a stately City, where is yet to be seen the Palace of the Moorish Kings, indented with Mosaical work, and guilt; its Build∣ings are of Freestone, fenced about with a strong Wall, on which are 130 Turrets. It is an Inland Town, yet famous for being the residence of the Parliament, and Court of Justice for all the Southern parts of Spain, as Valadolid is for the North. 2. Malaga, a famous Sea-port Town seated on the Mediterranean, abounding in Raisins, and a rich Wine called Malaga Sack. 3. Almeria, seated on the Sea-shoar. This Country was the last that the Moors were expelled out of, which may be attributed to its barrenness, and being so Mountainous. Kingdom of Murcia.MƲRCIA, bounded on the East with the Mediterranean Sea, a fertile Country, and well stored with Fruits: Its Chief places are, 1. Alicant, seat∣ed on the Mediterranean, where it enjoyeth a commodious road for Shipping, is a place well frequented, enjoyeth a good Trade, and affordeth for Merchan∣dize great quantities of excellent Wines, and several good Commodities. 2. Cartagena, seated also on the Mediterranean Sea, built by Asdrubal of Carthage, at present one of the most famous Havens in Spain: and 3. Murcia, which takes its name from the Country, a City of good account. Kingdom of Navarre.ARRAGON, divided in the midst by the River Iberus; the Chief places are, 1. Caragosa, or Saragoz, seated on the Iberus or Ebro, anciently called Caesar Augustus, by whom it was first founded: It is a famous Ʋniver∣sity, and once the Seat of the Moorish Kings. 1. Lerida, seated on the River Cinga, which hath its Spring-head in the Pyrenaean Hills; it is an Ʋniversity. 3. Huesca, also an Ʋniversity. 4. Mosons, which gives entertainment to the King of Spain every third year, at which time the People of Arragon, Va∣lentia, and Catalonia, make the King a Present of 600000 Crowns; and this is all the Taxes or Moneys they pay to the King for three years. 5. Jacca; 6. Borio; 7. Galajud; and 8. Daroca.
Kingdom of Catalonia.CATALONIA, near the Pyrenaean Mountains on the North; Its chief places are, 1. Barcelona, seated on the Mediterranean shoar, a place of good strength and Antiquity, being built out of the ruins of Rubicata, an old Co∣lony of the Africans, and now dignified with the Seat of the Vicegerent. 2. Girona, seated on the River Baetulus, the ancient Seat of the Arragon Princes. Kingdom of Valence.VALENCE, or VALENCIA, encompassed with Murcia, Castile, Arragon, and the Sea. Its chief places are, 1. Valencia, scituate near the mouth of the River Guadalangar, and about two miles from the Sea, where there is an open, but ill commodious road for Ships, called la Greno; yet, as being the chief City in the Country, enjoyeth a good Trade. Here is an Uni∣versity in which St. Dominic, the Institutor of the Dominican Order, studi∣ed: 2. Morvedre; 3. Segobre; and 4. Zativa. The BALEARE ISLES. The Islands of the Baleares, or Kingdom of Majorca, comprehend that of Majorca and Minorca, both seated in the Mediterranean Sea. Island of Majorca.MAJORCA, about sixty miles from Spain; It is about 300 miles in cir∣cuit, and hath for its chief places, Majorca, where there is a University; and Palomera, which gave birth to Raymundus Lullius. Isle of Minorca.MINORCA, distant from Majorca nine miles, and is about half the ex∣tent of Majorca. Its chief place is Citadelli, and its chief Port, Mahon, which is very large and commodious. These Isles are indifferent fertil in Corn, Wine, and Oil, which are three good Commodities. Nigh to these Isles are two other small ones; Isle of Yvisa.YVISA, or Ebuisa, of about 150 miles in circuit, whose chief place is so called, and its Port is Magno. The chief Commodity which it affordeth is Salt, of which here is made a great quantity. And about ten miles from this Isle is the other, called PORMENTERA,Isle of Por∣mentara. which is about fifty miles in circuit. The People are excellent Swimmers, as well the Women as the Men. The Air of the whole Country of Spain is generally good and healthful, and the Soil fertil enough, were it well cultivated; but the thinness of its In∣habitants since their setling in America, is the chief cause thereof. The whole Country is Catholick; It hath 11 Archbishops, 56 Bishops, 20 or 25000 Parishes, and abundance of very rich Abbeys and Mona∣steries. Chief Rivers in Spain.In Spain are five great Rivers, viz. the Douro; the Tagus, or Tago; the Guadiana; the Guadalquiver; and the Ebro, or Iborus. The Douro is e∣steemed for force, the Tagus for its renown, the Guadalquiver for its riches, the Ebro for its name, and the Guadiana, not having wherewith to answer the others (for shame) hides it self under ground. Chief Hills in Spain.The chief Hills in Spain, are Seir Morena, being a chain of Hills, declining from the midst of Spain towards the Streights of Gibraltar; and upon these Hills it was, that Cervantes, the Wit of Spain, made the Scene of the ma∣ny Warlike exploits, atchieved by the flower of Knight Errantry, Don Quixot de la Manche. 2. Inbalda, or Idubalda, which extends it self from the Py∣reniae towards Portugal: And 3. Seira Nevada, which from East to West crosses Granada, and are very high Hills.
ITALY ought to be considered in three or four princi∣pal Parts, which shall be those of LOMBAR∣DY, which may be divi∣ded into the Higher; where are the E∣states of PIEDMONT, which belongs to the Dutchy of SAVOY, and com∣prehends the Dutchy of Aost, Aoste. Signieury of Verceil, Verceili. Principality of Piedmont, Turine. County of Ast, Astr. Marquisate of Saluce, Saluzzo. County of Nice, Nizza, or Nice. MILLAIN, which comprehendeth the Dutchy of Millan, Millan. Lake of Como, Como. Lodesan, Lodi. Cremonese, Cremona. Pavese, Pavia. Tortonese, Tortona. Alexandrin, Alexandria. Laumelline, Valenca. Novarese, Novara. GENES, or GENOA, which is divided in The Eastern River, Getroa, Sarzana. The Western River, Savona, Arbengue, Vintimiglia. MONTFERRAT, To the Duke of Mantoua, Alba. To the Duke of Savoy, Trin. Lower; where are the E∣states of The REPUBLICK of VENICE, which possesseth the Pro∣vinces or Parts of Bergamase, Bergarne. Cremase, Crema. Bressan, Brescello. Veronois, Verona. Vicentin or Vicentinois, Vizenzo. Padouan, Padoua. Polsne de Rovigo, Rovigo. Coast of. Trevisane, Trevigi. Feltrn, Feltri, Bellnois, Belluno. Cadorin, Cadore. Friouli, Cuidad de Austria, Aquileja, Palma la Nova. Istri, Cabo d'Itria. Dogdo, or Dutchy of Venice, MANTOA, — Dukedom of Mantoua. Mantoua. PARMA, and PLACENZA, Dukedom of Parma, Parma. Dukedom of Placenza, Placenza. MODENA, and REGGE, Dukedom of Modena, Modena. Dukedom of Regge, Reglo, or Regge. TRENT, — Bishoprick and County of Trent. In the one and the other Lombardy, are divers small Estates, among the which is Mirandola. ITALY, particularly so called; where are The Estates of the CHURCH, Towards the Gulph of Venice; as Dukedom of Ferrarese, Ferrara. Bolognois, Bologna. Romandiola, Ravenna. Dutchy of Urbin, Urbin. Coast of Ancone, Ancona. Towards the Tyrrheni∣an Sea; as County of Citti di Castello. Perusin, Perugia. Ombria, or the Dutchy of Spoleto. Orvietin, Orvieto. Terre Sabine, Narvi. St. Peters Patrimony, Veij. Campagna di Roma, Rome, or Roma: Among the Estates of the Church, are Dutchy of Castro, Castro. Republick of St. Marino. The Estates of TOSCANY, To the Great DUKE of TOSCANY, Florence, Florence. Sanase, or Siennois, Sien. Pisan, Pisa, Livourne, or Ligorne. To divers Princes; as the Republick of Lucque. Principality of Alassa. Signieury of Piombine. Isle of Elbe, Cosmopoli. The Kingdom of NAPLES, sometime di∣vided in TERRA di LAVARO. CALABRIA. But at present in∣to twelve Provinces; whereof are Six to∣wards the Tyrrhene∣an Sea, to wit, Terra di Lavora, Naples, Cajeta. Principato citra, or Interi∣our, Amalfi, Salerno. Principato ultra, or Exteri∣our, Benevento, Conza. Calabria citra, Cosenza. Calabria ultra, Regium. Basilicate, Cirenza. Six to∣wards the Gulph of Venice, to wit, Terra di Otranto, Otranto, Brundufium. Gallipoli, Brindici. Tetra di Bari, Bari. Capitanate, or Pugi, Manfredonia, Mont St. Angelo. County of Molise. Abruzzo citra, or Interiour Lanciano, Sulmona, Civita di Chietti. Abruzzo ultra, or Exteri∣our, Civita di Penna, Aquila. PUGIA. ABRUZZO. And to which, for the fourth part, may be added, The Isles and Kingdoms of SICILE, or SICILY, Messina, Palermo, Siracusa, Montreale, and Catali. SARDAGNE, or SARDINIA, Cagliari, Bosa, and Sassari. CORCE, or CORSICA, Bastia, Mariana, and Calvi. Together with several small Isles, as those of Naples, Liguria, &c. some of which are taken notice of in the Descriptional part.
The Estates of the DUKE of SAVOY, are On this side the ALPES, to wit, The DUTCHY of SAVOY; where there are the Provin∣ces of Genevois, Annecy, la Roche, Alby, Thonnon, Vieux. Faussigni, Cluse, Bonneville, Bonne, Sallanche, Taninge, Chablais, Thonon, Evian, St. Gingot. Savoy, Chambery. les Eschelles, Montmelian, Ayguebelle, Conflans, Beaufort, Ugine, Miolans, Aix, and Rumilly, Tarentaise, Monftiers, St. Jaqu' Esme, le bourg St. Morice. Morienne, St. Jaan de Morienne; la Chaobre, Modane, Laebourg. And Beugey, in part, Yenne, St. Genis d'Hoste. The COUNTY of NICE; where are the Vicarats of Nice, or Nizza, Nice, or Nizza, Ville Franche. Poget, Poget. Barcellonnette, Barcellonnette, le Lauset. Sospelle, Sospelle, Saorgiz. And the Val St. Esteve, St. Esteve, St. Salvador. Counte of Boglio, or of Beuil. Beyond the ALPES; to wit, PIEDMONT; under the name of which is understood, the Dutchy of Aoste, Aoste, Castillion, Bard. Marquisate of Yvree, Yvree, Pont, St. Martin. Signiory of Verceil, Verceilli, Crescertin, Borzane, Biele, Andorne, Gartintra. Marquisate of Suze, Suze, Avillare. Principality of Piedmont, Turin, or Turino, Mondouj, Fossan, Chivas, Rivoli, Javen, Carignan, Pancalier, Vigon, Cavours, Ville franque, Raconis, Savillan, Coni, Tende, Ceve, Cortemille, Bene, Quierase, Quiers. Moncalier, Cocconas. Verue. Counte of Ast, Asti, Ville neuved' Ast. Saluce, or Saluzzo. Marquisate of Saluce. Carmagnole, Barges, Revel, Droners, Cental, Rocqu' Esparviere. Demont. Quarter of Piedmont, or at present belonging to Fracne, Pignerol, Perouse, Lucerne, Brigueras, The DUTCHY of MONFERAT, On the Coast of GENES, In part, where are Albe, Trin, and Aqui. The Marquisate of Oneglia, Marro. In PIEDMONT, restored from the Church, the Printipality of Masseran. The DUTCHY of SAVOY preteneth to Geneve, Chypre, &c.
LOMBAR∣DY, which may be di∣vided into the Higher, and comprehend∣eth the E∣states of PIEDMONT, as it belongs to the Duke of Savoy; where are the Dutchy of Aost, Aoste, Ivree. Seignieury of Verceili,— Verceili. Principality of Piedmont, Turin, Fossan, Mondevi, or Mondoui, Suze, Savillan, Coni, Quierase, Quiers. County of Ast, — Asti. Marquisate of Saluce, Saluce, or Saluzzo, Carmagnole. County of Nice, Nizza, or Nice, Barcelonnette. MILLAN, as it belongs to the Catholick King; where are the Dutchy of Millan, — Millain. Val de Ugogne, Domo d'Osula. Lake of Como, Como. Novarese, Novare. Vigevanase, Vigevan. Lodesan, Lodi. Pavese, Pavia. Laumelline, Valenca. Alexandrin, Alexandria de la Paille. Tortonese, Tortona. Cremonese, — Cremona. GENES, or GENOA, a Signieury and Republick; which is divided into Eastern River, Genoa, or Genes. Sarzana. Western River, Vintimiglia, Arbengue, Savona. The Dutchy of MONFERRAT; as it belongs To the Duke of Mantoua, Alba, Aqui. To the Duke of Savoy, Trin, Casan. In Piedmont appertaineth To the French, — Pignerol. To its peculiar Prince, — Masseran. In the Estate of Millain, apper∣taineth To the Swisses, Lugan, Locarne, Bellinzone. To the Grisons, Churcoire, Chiavenna, Sondrio, Bormio. In the Estate of Genes, or Genoa, appertaineth To his peculiar Prince, — Monaco, or Mourgues. To the Duke of Savoy, — Oneglia. To the Catholick King, Finale, Pontremoli. Between Piedmont, Monferrat, &c. To the Pope, or Church, — Montaldo, &c. Lower, and comprehend∣eth the E∣states of The Signleury and Republick of VENICE; where are Bergamese, — Bergame. Cremase, Crema. Bressan, Bressia. Veronois, or Veronese, Verona. Vicentin, or Vicentinois, Vicenza. Padouan, Padoua. Polesine de Rovigo, — Rovigo. Dogado, or Duchy, Venice, or Venetia, Chiogia, Caorla, Torcello, Muran. Coast of Trevisane, — Trevigi. Feltrin, Feltri. Bellunis Cuidad de Bellune. Cadorin, — Pie di Cadore. Friouli, Cuidad de Austria, Aquileja, Cuidad de Friouli, Concordia, Palma la Nova. Istria, Cabo d'Istria, Cita Nuova, Parenzo, and Pola. MANTOUA, to his Dukedom that of Mantoua, Mantoua, Viadana, Goito. MODENE, and REGGE, &c. to their Dukedoms, Dukedom of Modene, — Modene. Dukedom of Regge, Regio, or Regge. Principality of Carpi, Carpi. Signieury of Carfagnan, Castelnove de Carfagnan. PARMA and PLACENZA, to their Dukedoms Dukedom of Parma, Parma. Dukedom of Placenza, — Placenza, TRENTE, to his Bishoprick; where are Trent, Bolzan. In the Signieury of Venice, ap∣pertaineth To the Pope, or Church, — Ceneda. To the House of Austria, Gorice, Trieste, Pedena: In the Estate of Mantoua, are to their Lords The Dukedoms of Guastalle, Sabionete. The Counties of Bozolo, or St. Martin, Castillon della Stivere. Between the Estates of Mantoua and Modene, are The Dutchy of — Mirandola. The County of — Novelcare. In the Estate of Modene, and to the Duke of Modene, are The Signieuries of Correge, Sassuol. In the Estates of Parma, to their parti∣cular Princes, are The Estates of Palavicin, — Bourg St. Domino. The Estate of Land, — Bourg val di Taro.
The Signi∣eury or Re∣publick of VENICE; called the ESTATE of FIRM LAND, which is pos∣sessed in ITALY; to wit, Bergamose, Bergamo, Martinengo, Chuson. Cremase, — Crema. Bressan, Bressia, Salo, Azola, Orsi Nuovi. Veronoise, Verona, Peschiera, Legnago. Vicentin, or Vicentenoi, Vicenza, Lonigo. Padouan, Padoua, Este, Moutagnana, Castel Baldo, Monselice, Campo St. Petro, Citadella, Pieve di Sacco. Polesine de Rovigo, Rovigo, Adria. Dogado, Venice, or Venetia. Chioggit, Caorla, Torcello, Grado, Murano, Marano, Maestre. Coast of Trevisane, Trevigi, Serravalle. Feltrin,— Feltri. Bellunoise,— Cuidad de Bellune. Cadorin, — Pieve di Cadore. Friouli, Cuidad de Austria, Aquileja, alma la Nova, Cuidad de Friouli, Concordia, and Chiusa. ESTATE of or in the SEA; which is possessed On the Coas of Istria, Capo d'Istria, Citta Nuova, Parenzo, Pola, St. Juan de Duino. Dalmatia, or Esclavonia, Nona, Zara, Novigrad, Tina, Sebenico, St. Nicolo, Traw, Spalato, Salona, Almissa, Starigrad, Vesicchio, Cataro, Budua, Dolcigno. Epire, Torre de Butrinto, Perga. And the Isles In the Gulph of Venice, Chergo, — Cherso. Ossero, Ossero. Veggia, Veggia. Arba, Arba. Pago, Pago. Solta, Solta. Brazza, Neresi. Lesina, Lesina. Torta, Torta. Issa. Meo. Curzo, — Curzo. Of the Le∣vant, Corfu, Corfu, Cape St. Angusto. Zephalonia, — Zephalonia. Zante, Zante. Cerigo, Capsli. Crete, or Candia; now the Grand Seigniors; Candia, Retimo, Canea, Sittia, Suda, Spinalonga, Belvidere, Verapolo, Castel Theodoro, Grabuso, Turluru. Teno, — Teno. Micone, Micone. And between the Estates of the VENE∣TIANS, are To the Pope, or Church, on the Coast of Trevisane, — Ceneda. To the House of Austria, in Friouli and Istria, Gradisca, Trieste, Pedena. To the Signieury of Ragusa, on the Coast of Dalmatia, — Ragusa. To the Turk, on the Coast of Albania, &c. Castal Nuova, la Valona.
The Estates of the CHURCH, or POPE, compre∣hendeth Twelve Pro∣vinces in ITALY, of which Seven are between the TIR∣RHENE and the APEN∣NIN; to wit, the Campagne de Rome; where are Roma, or Rome, Ostia, Erascati, Tivoli, Palestrina, Veletri, Segni, Anagni, Ferentino, Alatri, Velori, Terracina. Patrimony of St. Peter, Veij, Citta Castellana, Sutri, Porto, Civita vechia, Coreto, Monte Flascone. Orvietin, Orviero, Aquapendente. Terre Sabine, Narni, Terni. Ombrie, or the Dutchy of Spoleto, Spoleto, Fuligue, Nocera, Norcia, Rieti, Amelia, Todi, Assisio. Perusin, Perugia, Fratti. County of— Citta di Castello. Five are between the APEN∣NIN and the GULPH of VENICE; to wit, the Region, or Quarter of Ancone, Ancona, Jesi, Osmo, Recanati, St. Maria Lauretane, Fermo, Ripa Trnsone, Ascoli, Macerat, Tolentino, St. Severno, Camerino, and Fabriano. Dutchy of Urbin, Urbin, Eugubbio, Cagli, Sinigagla, Fossombone, Fano, Pesaro, St. Leo, Durance. Romague, or Romandioa, Ravenna, Rimini, Sarsina, Cesena, Cervia, Bertinoro, Forli, aenza, Imoa. Ferrarese, Perrara, Comacho, Mesola, Bolognos, Bologna, Bolognese. Also, In the Kingdom of Naples, The Dutchy, and City of — Beneveno. In the Estate of Venice, The City of — Ceneda. Between Piedmont, Divers places, among which are Montaldo, St. Stepano, &c. Monserrat, and Genes, are Divers places, among which are Montaldo, St. Stepano, &c. In FRANCE, and Between Dauphin, Languedoc, and Provence, the County of Avignon, and of Ve∣naiscin▪ where are, Avignon, Carpentas, Cavaillon, Vaison. Venasque, Lisle, Vaureas, Pont de Sorgues, Chaun neuf du Pape, Malausae, Brantes. Rostored, freed, or quitted from the Jorisdiction, or Supemacy of the Church, or Pope, divers E∣statea  among. which are the Kingdoms of Naples, — Naples. Sicily, Messina. Sardaigne, Cagliari▪ Arragon, Syracuse. Jerusalem, Jerusalem. Hungary, Bude. England, London. Ireland, — Dublin, Dukedoms of Para, Csro, Braciano. County of— Ronciglione. Principalities, or Selgnories of Radicosani, Masseran. Republick of — St. Marino.
map of Italy A Mapp of ITALY Those cheife Estates & Isles are ye Dukedome of Toscania The Republique Venice the Estates of ye Church, The ki∣ of Naples The Illes of Sicile, Sarda∣ne Corsica &c. In which said parts re Included seuerall other Estates & provinces of less note. PIE TE blazon or coat of arms of the earls of Kingston upon Hull Ye Rt Honrbl Robert Pierreponte Earle of Kingston upon Hull viscount-Newark Lord Pierreponte Maunvey & He This Mapp is Humbly D.D by R.B.
ITALY. ITALY lies in the midst of the three most Southern parts of Europe; It is formed like a Boot, and washed on all sides by the Sea, viz. by the Adriatick, or Gulph of Venice, behind; by the Iyrrhenian before, and by the Ionian at the foot: only the top of the Boot is contiguous to France and Germany, from which it is parted by the Alpes. Extent of the Roman Em∣pire.The extent of the Roman Empire, before Constantine Ruled, and the divisi∣on thereof, was accounted to be about 3000 Miles in length, to wit, from the River Euphrates Eastward, to the Irish Ocean Westward; and in breadth, from Mount Atlas. Southward, to the Danube Northward, about 2000; which large extent was the cause of its ruine and declension. The Ancient Romans.The Ancient Romans were a gallant People, of a sound Judgment, and a ready Wit, well skilled in Arts and Sciences; very covetous of glory; of great Valour, as by their subduing the chief part of the World, who, contra∣ry to the custom of Invaders, to sack and ruine Countries, they taught the People Manners, Literature, &c. The Romans were the first that wore the Purple Robe, and the beginners of Triumphs: they had excellent and stately Theaters, and it was hold no disreputation to be an Actor. Its fertility and Commo∣dities.This Country is so exceedingly furnished with whatsoever may be found useful for Man, and the Soil so rich and fer tile in Grains, Fruits, Rice, &c. in some places having threo Harvests in one year, that it is esteemed the Garden of the World. The chief Commodities for Merchandize that this Country yieldeth, are Silks, both raw and wrought into several fabricks, as Sattins, Taffities, Plushes, Velvets, Cloth of Gold and Silver, Damasks, Grograms, Rashes, Fustians, Glasses, Alom, Armour, excellent Wines, Oils, Saffron, Anni seeds, Argal, Brinistone, several Metals, Olives, Almonds, Galls, Kids∣skins, Lute strings, Quicksilver, Aloes, Gold, Thread, Anchoves, several Drugs, &c. The People of Italy.The Italians are very ingenious, respective, and grave; exceeding malici∣ous, if affronted; much addicted to Women, which are here allowed the liberty to make use of their own. They are generally very jealous of their Wives, so that they are denied the liberty of the Streets, or the common view or society of men. The Women are generally handsom, witty, and of a seeming modest behaviour; it is observed of them, that they are Saints in the Church, Angels in the Streets, Magpies at the Door, Syrens in the Windows, and Goats in the Gardens. Their Language is very eloquent. Its chief parts.Italy may be considered in three principal Parts, viz. Lombardy; Italy, particularly so called; and Naples: to which, for a fourth may be added the neighbouring Isles, in which said parts are divers Estates and Dukedoms; all which are at large set down in the Geographical Tables: and of these parts in order.
LOMBARDY. Parts of Lombardy.Lombardy is divided into the Higher and Lower; in the Higher are the Estates of Piedmont, which belongs to the Duke of Savoy; of Millan, which belongs to the Catholick King; of the Commonwealth of Genes, or Genoa; and of Montferrat, which belongs to the Duke of Mantoua; yet the Duke of Savoy hath some part thereof. And in the Lower Lombardy are the Estates of Venice, of Mantoua, Parma, and Modena, which have their Dukes; and of Trent, which hath its Bishop. And in the one and the other Lombardy, are several small Estates, amongst which is that of Mirandola. The Estates of PIEDMONT, washed by the Mediterranean Sea, is exceeding fertil, though inferiour to other parts of Lombardy: It is divided betwixt the Dukes of Savoy and Mantoua, the River Tener separating their possessions. It is very populous, numbring about 160 walled Cities and Towns, of which the chief is Turin,Chief places. which is the Palace and Court of the Duke of Savoy; it is also dignified with the See of an Archbishop and an Ʋniversity, where the famous Erasmus proceeded Dr. of Divinity. 2. Aoste, or Avost, seated on the Northern limits of the Country. 3. Verceili, a Town of great strength, bordering on Millan, to which it did once belong. 4. Saluzzo, a Marquisate and Bishops See. 5. Nizza, or Nice, a Sea-port Town, and serveth for Turin: and 6. Asti. And since we have before omitted it, before we pass further let us repass the Alpes, and speak of the Territories of this Duke on this side, which is the Country of Savoy, from whence he bears his Title. Country of Savoy.SAVOY, adjoyning to Piedmont, is a Country very Mountainous and full of narrow passages, and consequently not very fertil. Its chief City is Cham∣bery, or Cambreria, the residence of the Duke, when he is in these parts, seated in a pleasant Valley, amongst Mountains, which are well stored with beautiful Houses, belonging to the Gentry of these parts; and next Turante, which com∣mands the passage into Italy. Its other places of account, are Thonon, Cluse, Beaufort, Ʋgine, Montiers, Yenne, Modane, &c. The Dutchy of MILLAN is rich in Natures gifts, being seated in the best part of Lombardy, affording great plenty of Grains, Wines, Oils, and Silks, and is said to have the best Rice in the World. It hath for its chief places, Chief places.1. Millan, which notwithstanding its often spoils, is said to be the greatest City of all Lombardy. It is seated in a wide Plain, wherein are no less pleasant than profitable Meadows and Rivers; it is strongly fortified with a Wall, and a spa∣cious and almost impregnable Castle, besides its Fortifications; it is beautified with many splendid Ornaments, the chief of which are its Ʋniversity; its Hospital, liberally endowed, seated in an Isle almost two miles in compass, and capable to give entertainment to about 4000 Sick persons. Its Schools, Nunne∣ries, and Churches, which amount in all to 238; most of which are stately structures, and beautified with curious Paintings, Images of the Saints, Se∣pulchres, and several Religious Antiquities. The whole City is about seven miles in circuit, is exceeding populous, very rich, and of a great Commerce, affording sundry good Commodities. 2. Pavia, seated on the River Tacinus honoured with a famous Ʋniversity, of note for the Battel, in which Francis the first of France was taken Prisoner by the Emperour Charles the Fifth, who for his ransom was forced to release all his Title and interest to the King∣dom of Naples, and this Dutchy of Millan. 3. Cremona, seated on the banks of the Poe, first built in the beginning of the Punick War. It is a place of good account, hath a considerable Trade, beautified with well built Houses, with the conveniency of curious Gardens, and hath large and well ordered
Streets. It is of most note for its high Tower and Cathedral Church, where are to be seen many Relicks of Saints, and curious Pictures. 4. Como, seated on a Lake so called, which is about fifty miles in circuit, on which the Citizens use to recreate themselves in Boats; It is a City of good Antiquity, and here it was that both the Plinys were born. 5. Alexandria, which from a poor Vil∣lage (through the often ruins of Millan,) is now become a fair, strong, and flourishing Town. 6. Lodi; 7. Tortona; 8. Valenca; and 9. Novara. State of Genoua.The State of GENES, or GENOƲA, once very large, but at present possesseth only Liguria in the Continent, and the Isle of Corsica, of which we shall speak in place more convenient. The People are much addicted to Traf∣fick and Ʋsury, and here the Women are allowed the liberty of the Streets, as also to accompany or discourse with Men, which is forbidden them in other parts. Its chief places are, 1. Genoua, seated on the Sea-shoar, at the foot of high Mountains between two Rivers, built by Janus, the first Inhabiter of Italy; it is (as also its whole State) governed in form of a Republick. The City for its stately Buildings, makes it to be termed by the Italians, Genoua la Su∣perba, having beautiful Palaces, with delightful Gardens; its Strada Nova being a spacious, long, and strait Street, on each side imbellished with stately Palaces, which for the most part are supported by vast Pillars of Mar∣ble, not to be parallel'd in the World; amongst which may be reckoned the Jesuits Colledge, than which nothing can be more polite. The Palace of the Prince d'Orta, with its famous Bird-cage, deserves a particular mention; nor is its new Mould to be forgotten, which hath made the Port twice as capacious, and much safer than before. The City is in circuit about eight miles, defended besides its Walls, by a strong and fair Castle; it is exceeding populous and rich, its Inhabitants being observed to be the greatest Ʋsurers and Money-mongers in the World, which is a great obstruction to its Trade. 2. Savona, of note for the interview between Ferdinand of Spain, and Lewis the 12th of France, Anno 1507. 3. Sarzana; 4. Arbengue; and 5. Vintimiglia. Estate of Montferat.The Estate or Country of MONTFERAT doth in part belong to the Duke of Mantoua, and the rest to the Duke of Savoy; a Mountainous Coun∣try, but of a fertil Soyl. It is encompassed with the Appenine Hills, Millain, and Piedmont: the River Tenarus parts the possessions of the Duke of Man∣toua from that of Savoy; its chief places are, 1. Alba, where Pertinax the Roman Emperour was born; 2. St. Vas, built by the first Duke of Mantoua; 3. Casal; and 4. Trin, fair Cities, with some others. In the Lower LOMBARDY we have placed the Estates of Venice, Mantoua, Modena, Parma, Placenza, and Trent; of which in order. Estates of Venice.The Estates of the Duke of VENICE may be divided into several Parts or Provinces, as they lye on firm Land and on the Sea, which are taken notice of in the Geographical Tables of Italy; the chief of which I shall here only name, as I have occasion to treat of the Cities; 1. Trevigi, seated in the Pro∣vince of Marche Trevisane, a City of some account, as commodious for an Inland Trade. 2. Bressia, seated in the Province of Bressan, esteemed the se∣cond City for largeness and beauty in all Lombardy; it is more famous in her Archbishop, who is Earl, Marquess, and Duke, than in any matter of trade. 3. Brescello, in the Province of Bressan, famous for the death of Otho, the Roman Emperour. 4. Este, in the Province of Padouan, from whence came the late Dukes of Ferrara: 5. Crema, in the Province of Cremase, seat∣ed on the River Serio, and in a very fertil Soyl; a beautiful and rich City, adorned with stately Edifices; and about two Furlongs from the City, towards the Castle, is a stately Temple, called Sancta Maria del la Cruce, a structure of great beauty, and richly adorned with Pictures, &c. a place much frequented for Devotion sake: this City may be termed a strong Fortress against the Mil∣lanois, upon which it borders. 6. Vicenzo, in the Province of Vicentin, seat∣ed at the bottom of a Hill which commands the City, being well watered with
Rivers, which uniting themselves not far distant from the City, form a Navi∣gable River, capable to receive Vessels of a considerable burthen, which passing by Padua falls into the Sea by Venice. It is about four miles in circuit, beau∣tified with stately Palaces, Temples, and Publick buildings; it is very populous, and inhabited by Nobility and Gentry, who contrary to the custom of the Italians, delight to Travel; here is a famous Theater, capable to receive five thousand People, whose Stage is so represented by Prospective, that it seems a stately City, being modelled by the famous Architect, Andreo Paladio: then its Piazza, a spacious and beautiful place. 7. Verona, in the Province of Ve∣ronois, a fair, large and beautiful City, seated on the Athesis, a place of great strength, as well by Nature as Art, and boasteth chiefly of its yet standing Amphitheater, capable to receive about 80000 Persons. 8. Padua, in the Province of Padouan, seated in the midst of a spacious Plain, about 20 miles distant from the Sea; It is a place of good strength, being inclosed with double Walls and deep Ditches, besides its Bulwarks and Fortifications; it was built by Antenor, Brother, to Priam King of Troy, whose Tomb is here yet to be seen; to this City do belong seven Gates, several Stone-Bridges, and five spacious Piazza's; it is every where beautified with many splendid E∣difices, as well private as publick; also its Churches are no less beautiful and rich, of which the Domo or Cathedral is chief; its Hall of Justice is a spacious and stately structure, near to which are the Schools for Learning: but this City is now most famous for its Ʋniversity of Physicians. 9. Bergamo, in Bergamasse, adjoyning to Cremase: 10. Feltri, in Feltrin, towards the Bisho∣prick of Trent; and 11. Rovigo, in the Polesine of Rovigo, far engaged to∣wards the Estates of the Church. And these Provinces may properly be com∣prehended under one part, to wit, Marche Trevisane. The chief Rivers in this Country are Addua, Athesis, Breuta, and Olius. Estates of Frioli.The second part in this Estate of Venice, is FRIOLANI, encompassed with Histria, the Alpes, Trevigiana, and the Adriatick Sea. Its chief pla∣ces are, 1. Aquilegia, seated on the Natisco, a place not very well inhabited: 2. Cuidad de Austria, built by Julius Caesar: 3. Palma la Nova, the best for∣tified place in all Italy; and 4. Tergestum, or Treist, seated nigh the Sea∣shoar. The chief Rivers are Natisco, Risanus, and Lizonsus. The third and last part of this Estate shall be ISTRIA, of an unhealthful Air. Its chief places are, 1. Cabo d'Istria; 2. Polo; 3. Cita Nuova; and 4. Parenzo: But to proceed to Venice, the principal City of this Republick. City of Venice.The City of VENICE is seated at the bottom of the Adriatick Sea, or Gulph of Venice, built on 72 Islands, being distant from the main Land five miles, and defended from the fury of the Sea by a Bank of sixty miles in length, through which, in seven places there are passages broken for small Vessels, save only at Malamocco, and the Castle of Leo, which are strongly fortified; it is about eight miles in circuit, having for the conveniency of the Inhabitants a∣bout 4000 Bridges, amongst which that of Rialto is the chief, built over the Grand Canal, which for length, breadth and height, may compare with any in the World; and for the passage of People to and fro, here are said to be employed about 10 or 12000 Gondelos; all its Buildings are fair and beauti∣ful; here are 200 particular places built of Marble, adorned with Columns, Statues, and Pictures of great value, erected by the Senators, which for their Grandure are fit to lodge and entertain any Prince in Christendom, most of which are seated on the Grand Canal. Also the Royal and proud Palace of the Duke deserves a particular description, which for its largness, beauty and riches, as well in its fabrick without, as in its Pictures and Statues within, exceeds all others: then the Tribunals or Courts of Justice, the Senate-house, or great Hall. Its Arsenal or Magazine of War being about two miles in cir∣cuit, encompassed with high Walls, and the Sea having but one place or Gate for entrance, and only one Channel for Ships to pass in and out at; and here is
kept always in readiness about two hundred Gallies, with all things fit for a Voyage or fight; also here are kept a thousand Coats of Plate, garnished with Gold and covered with Velvet: but above all, its Church of St. Mark, which for its exteriour and interiour beauty, and richness of its Ornaments, have deservedly made this City famous; and in this Church, according to report, lyeth the body of St. Mark, the Patron of this City, which was brought hi∣ther from Alexandria. In this City are seventeen rich Hospitals, 56 Tri∣bunals, 67 Parish Churches, 26 Monasteries of Nuns, 54 Convents of Fry∣ars, 18 Chappels, and six Free-Schools for the increase of Learning. Its Piazza, or broad place of St. Mark, adorned with sumptuous Fabricks, Statues, &c. is a place much frequented by the Gentry. This City is the only place where Policy, Warfare, and Merchandize have embraced one another: the Gentry are here held in such esteem, that it is held for the greatest honour they can bestow upon the best deserver, to make him a Gentleman of this City, and from them the Sonatours are chosen; and out of them the Duke, who in a manner is only titular, not having the Regal power, his Salary which is paid him out of the Common Treasury, is forty thousand Duccals yearly. In this Estate are two Patriarchs, and 34 Bishops. Dukedom of Mantoua.The Dukedom of MANTOƲA, seated Northwards of the Estates of Venice: Its chief City is so called, a place of good strength, encompassed on the sides with Water about a quarter of a mile broad, and on the other side with a Wall; it is seated on a River, which emptieth it self into the Po. In this City Virgil, that famous Poet, was born. Dukedom of Modena.The Dukedom of MODENA, formerly joyned to that of Mantoua, hath for its chief City, Modena, famous for the Battle between Anthony and Augustus, where Hirtius and Pansa, the two Consults, were slain, and An∣thony lost the day. This place is the residence of its Dukes, as Mantoua is of hers. Dukedoms of Parma, and Placentia.The Dukedom of PARMA and PLACENTIA, Northwards of Mantoua, hath for its chief place Parma, seated in a fruitful Plain five miles from the Appenuines. It is about four miles in circuit, adorned with many rich and stately Structures, is very populous, and well inhabited by Gentry, who are much addicted to Learning and Arms: it hath a fair and spacious Campagnia, which feeds abundance of Sheep; and here the Duke hath his Palace, which is a place of great delight and state. This Country boasts of its Parmasan-Cheese, so much esteemed by some. The chief place of Pla∣cenza is so called; it is seated on the Po, comodious for Traffick, and famous for its Fairs in Exchanges here quarterly kept, which are much resorted unto: it is about five miles in compass, a place of good strength and beauty, being adorned with many fair and rich Structures and Churches. Bishoprick of Trent.The Bishoprick of TRENT, whose chief City bears its names; it is seated in a Plain, and surrounded with Mountains of an excessive height, being always covered with Snow, by reason of which it is more fit for Wines than Corn. The City is not large, but indifferent strong; its Houses are fair and stately, its Streets large, its Churches beautiful and richly adorned, and its Royal Palace sumptuous and stately. This, City is famous for the general Council there held, for the establishment of the Roman Catho∣lick Religion.
ITALY, particularly so called. The second part of Italy, according to our method, will contain the Estates of the CHƲRCH and TOSCANE, which may again be subdivided into others, which are taken notice of in the Geographical Tables, of which in order. Territory of Ferraresse.The Territory of FERRARESSE, about 160 miles in length, and 50 in breadth, had once Dukes of its own, but now belongs to the Pope; its chief place is Ferrara, so called from the Iron-Mines about it; it is seated on the Po, which serves as a Rampire to defend it on the one side, as doth a strong Wall, well fortified with a spacious Mote, on the other side; it is about five miles in compass, beautifully built, and adorned with superb Edifices, and is accounted one of the pleasantest Cities in Italy, having in the midst thereof a spacious Green, into which doth open about 20 Streets, most of which are about half a mile in length, and so even and uniform, that from thence the utmost ends of each may be easily discovered: It is well inhabited, rich, and dignified with an Ʋniversity. Province of Bolognois.The Province of BOLOGNOIS, Eastwards of Modena, hath for its chief place Bologna, once the head of 12 Cities; it is seated on the River A∣posa, and in a large and fertil Territory for Corn, Wine, Fruits, and Olives; it is about five miles in circuit, and begirt with a Wall. This City is adorned with many fair and proud Buildings, in which they observe a uniformity, a∣mongst which is the Pope's Palace for his retirement, which for grandure and statelyness is fit to give entertainment to any Prince in Christendom. It is dig∣nified with the chief Ʋniversity of Italy, famous for the study of the Civil Law; it is proudly built, having spacious Courts. Province of Romandiola.ROMANDIOLA, or ROMAGNE, Eastwards of Bolognese, hath for its chief places, 1. Ravenna, seated on the Adriatick, and once a place of good account, having one of the fairest Havens in the World, which is now choaked up. This City was the seat of the Emperour Honorius, and his Successors, then of the Gothish Kings, and lastly of its Patriarch; but now, as its Haven is choaked up, so is the Land covered with water, which makes it become useless. 2. Rimini, seated on the mouth of the River Rubicon. 3. Cer∣via, seated on the Adriatick Sea, a place where so great quantity of Salt is made, that the Popes part is valued yearly at 60000 Crowns, and 4. Faenza. Dukedom of urbin.The Dutchy or Dukedom of ƲRBIN, not long since fallen to the Holy Seat, it lying in the midst of his Territories. Its chief places are, 1. Ʋrbin, seated at the bottom of the Appennine, formed like a Miter: 2. Belfort, seated in the Midland: 3. Fano, a Sea-port Town to Ʋrbin, where the Eng∣lish do enjoy many Immunities; and 4. Pisaro, a Maritim Town, enjoying a good Haven. Province of Marca Ancona.The Province of MARCA ANCONA, bounded with the Adriatick, Naples, the Appennine and Romagne; it takes its name from Ancona, its chief City seated on the Hill Cimmerius, which likes a Promontory shoots it self into the Sea, having the best Haven in Italy, towards the Adriatick Sea, the entrance into which is shut up by two Chains, the better to secure the Port. It is a City of good strength, being encompassed with Walls and Bulwarks; its Houses are fair, and its Inhabitants rich. 2. Loretto, famous for the Church of the Virgin Mary, which, as 'tis said was brought from Palestine in the Air by Angels for the Sins of the People, and is now a stately Structure, and richly adorned with the Presents dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and is much
resorted unto by Pilgrims. 3. Marcerata, the Seat of the Governours of this Province; and here is a Colledge of Lawyers for the hearing and determining of causes. 4. Adria, which gave name to the adjoyning Sea: 5. Ascoli the Fair: and 6. Fermo the Strong. Province of Perusin.The Province or part of PERƲSIN is Westwards of Ombriae, its chief place is Perugia, where Augustus besieged L. Antonius the Brother, and Ful∣via the wife of Anthony the Triumvir, which said place at the Siege became also obedient unto him; and nigh to this City is Lago de Perugia, of about thirty miles in circuit, near whose Banks, Hannibal slew Flaminius 15000 of his Romans: here is also Lacus Vademonius, where Dolabella vanquished such of the Gauls as had escaped the Sword of Camillus. Dutchy of Spoleto.The Dutchy of SPOLETO, anciently called Ombria, as scituate under the Appennine Hills; hath for its chief places, 1. Spoleto, of great antiquity, where are yet remaining stately Aqueducts, the Temple of Concord, &c. 2. Assisto, famous for little, but being the Birth-place of St. Francis. 3. Fuligne; 4. Todi; 5. Amelia; and 6. Rieti. Land of Sabine.The Land of SABINE, Southwards of Spoleto, hath for its chief place Narvy, which is of some Account. Province of Orietin.The Province of ORIETIN, Westwards of Spoleto, hath for its chief places, 1. Orvieto, seated on so high a Rock, that it amazes those that look into the adjacent Valleys; and 2. Aquapendente. St. Peters Pa∣trimony.The part or Province called St. PETERS Patrimony, contains also all Latium, or Campagna di Roma, and part of Ituria; it is washed with the Tyrrhenian Sea; and in this part are the Mountains called Gallicanum, in which Hannibal frighted that noble Captain Fab. Maximus with a Stratagem, which was by having 2000 Oxen, which carried fire on their Hons, by which means he passed over the Mountains. Its chief places are, 1. Ostria, seated at the Mouth of the Tiber, but its Haven is stopped up; it is honoured with the See of a Bishop, whose place is to consecrate the Popes. 2. Adrea, to which the Romans fled, after the Gauls had taken Rome. 3. Veij, a City of good anti∣quity, wealth, and largeness. 4. Alba, once the Seat of the Silvian Kings, and of good fame and beauty, but suffered much in the Wars by the hand of Tullus Hostilius. 5. Antium, a place of great delight, to which the Roman Emperours used to retire for recreation. 6. Civita Vechia, a Maritim Town, abounding in great plenty of Alom. 7. Viterbo; 8. Porto; 9. Corneto; 10. Veroli; 11. Pa∣lestrina; and 12. Trivoli, all places of some account; but above all Rome,The City of Rome. seated in the Territory of Campagna di Roma, once the Mistress of the World, famous for her noble Warriers, who were so exact in their Martial Discipline, for their Triumphs and Antiquities, and for being the place where the Spoyls and Trophies of all Europe, and a great part of Asia, were laid up; in brief, it was a place sufficiently memorized by the ancient and renowned Historians. This City, when in its pristine splendor, was said to be 50 miles in compass, whose Walls were beautified with about 750 Towrs, and said to contain about 463000 fighting men, that is, free Citizens, such as were inrolled, besides Ser∣vants, Women, and Children; but this City hath several times felt the jostlings of ill fortune, so that as to its present state it hath not the moiety of its pristine beauty and splendour, scarce containing 11 miles in circuit, being almost Orbi∣cular, in which space there is about one third part wast ground; yet it is a place of great splendor, beautified with many Princely Palaces, and sufficiently fa∣mous for being the Seat of the Pope, which makes it to be exceeding populous, being thought to contain about 200000 Inhabitants, besides an exceeding great confluence of Strangers which hither come, some for devotion, and others to please their fancies with its Antiquities and Curiosities; and of the Inhabi∣tants, two thirds may be reckoned for Clergy-men and Curtesans, the later of
which is esteemed to amount to about 40000, who pay 30000 Duccats yearly Tribute to the Pope, for which two Gallies are maintained and furnished for the service in Civita Vechia. This City is seated on the Banks of the Tiber, upon Campus Marus; it is Built upon ten Hills, on which are fair Structures, as on the top of the Vatican Hill, is seated the proud Palace of the Popes, large enough to give entertainment to three Princes at one time. It is beautified and enriched with excellent payntings and curiosities; and here are the Gardens called Belvidere, famous for its rare Plants, delightful Walks, curious Statues, &c. and on this Hill is the Church of St. Peter, being the most splendid and famous in all Rome, being adorned with rich Payntings, Tombs, &c. with di∣vers choice Curiosities, as the Spear that pierced our Saviours side, and the head of St. Andrew. In this City are about 300 Churches, Monasteries for Nuns, Religious Houses, and Convents; here are many Hospitals for the relief of the Distressed, likewise several gallant Libraries, as the Vatican, the Je∣suits Colledge, &c. And here the Pope liveth in more grandure than any Prince in Christendom, and the Cardinals have their Palaces richly adorned, and dwell in good state. TOSCANY. Dukedom of Toscany,The Dukedom of FLORENCE containeth the greatest part of Tosca∣ny, to which doth belong those of Sanese and Pisan, and which I shall in∣clude under the Dukedom of Florence. It is separated from Genoa by the River Magra, and the strong Town of Sarazana, belonging to the Genouese. Its People, even the Duke himself, are generally addicted to Traffick, by reason of which it is a Country very rich. Florence.Amongst the Cities in this Territory is Florence, seated in a no less fruitful than pleasant Plain, near the confluence of the Rivers Arne and Chiane, about six miles in compass; and by reason of being the residence of the Duke, is ve∣ry populous and rich, where he hath a stately and magnificent Palace, richly arned; and to make it a perfect place of pleasure, its Courts are fair, and its Gardens spacious and delightful, having therein excellent Fountains, Groves, Labyrinths and Walks, besides a place where all sorts of wild Beasts are kept. Besides this Palace, here are several fair and superb Edifices, being a place so extraordinary beautiful, that Charles the Arch-Duke used to say, It was fit to be seen only on Holy days. Here are 44 Parish Churches, about 50 Nunneries, 14 Fryeries, 12 Priorates, and about 30 Hospitals. This Ci∣ty was built by Sylla, that bloody Dictator, and was made a Colony by the Triumviri; It was razed by the Lombards, re-edified by Charles the Great, bought its Liberty of Rodolphus, and now continues subject to the Medices, Dukes of Florence. This City enjoys a great Trade, by reason of the Privi∣ledges and kind entertainment which they find; all sorts of Merchandize be∣ing here landed free from all Imposts, Duties and Customs, an advantage not found in many places. 2. Pisa, seated at the entrance of the River Arno into the Sea; It was once a very large City, and had great Territories, Corsica, Sardinia, and Baleares, having been under its subjection, being very rich and powerful both by Land and Sea; but the many shocks of Ill-fortune have reduced it within one half of its Ancient limits; yet its many good Build∣ings shew its ancient splendor. 3. Sienna, in Sanase, built by Brennus the Gaul, an Inland-City, seated in a large, pleasant and fertil Territory, adorned with beautiful Buildings both publick and private. 4. Pistoya, a City, though small, yet rich and well built, famous for its beginning that bloody faction of the Neri and Bianchi, as of the Guelfes and Ghibillines: And 5. Ligorne, seated at the mouth of the Arno, a fair and beautiful City, being accounted the strongest, and one of the principal Towns of Trade in the Mediterranean Seas. This City, not many years past, was purchased by the Florentines of the Genois, for 120000 Duckets; before which it was a place of no great note, nor beauty, being a reception for Thieves, Murtherers, Pirates, and
all sorts of Religions, or rather Irreligious people; but now it is well inhabited and resorted unto by Merchants, abounding in several rich Commodities. Common∣wealth of Lucque, &c.The Commonwealth of LƲCQƲE, the Signiory of PIOMBINE, the Isle of ELBE, and the Principality of MASSA, make up the rest of Toscany. This last is but small in circuit, but yeilds abundance of white Marble, and is beautified with the Cities of Massa and Carrara; the last oftner the residence of the Prince, the former strengthned with a stately Castle; both beautified with excellent Marble Statues. LƲCQƲE comprehends the Territory and Town of Lucca, which is seated on the River Serchius in a Plain, about three miles in circuit; a place of good beauty, being replenished with many fair Edifices and stately Churches, amongst which that of St. Martin is the chief; and the Walls are so adorned with Trees, that at a distance it seems a City in a Wood. It is of note for being the meeting place of Pompey, Caefar, and Crassus, all three famous Commanders, where they consulted and joyned into a Confederacy for the en∣larging their Possessions, and gaining more honour. Isle of Elbe.Next the Isle of ELBE, seated nigh the shoar, and opposite to the Isle of Corsica: Its chief places are, 1. Cosmopoli, and 2. Porto Longone. And oppo∣site to this Isle on the Toscane shoar, is the small Signiory of PIOMBINE. Kingdom of NAPLES. Kingdom of Naples.The third and last part of Italy in general, we have comprehended under the Kingdom of NAPLES, which by some have been divided into 6 parts, viz. Terra di Lavoro, Calabria Superiour, and Inferiour, Abruzzo, Pugia, or Capitanata, and Terra di Otranto. It is enclosed on all parts with the Sea, ex∣cept towards the Lands of the Church; it is every where very fertil, and by some accounted the richest in all Italy, abounding in excellent Wines, Silks, both raw, and wrought into many Fabricks; in Oils, Saffron, Almonds, Anniseeds. Argal, Brimstone, Mines of several Metals, &c. It is well water'd with Rivers and fresh Streams, affords plenty of Cattel, Fowls, and Grains, and is throughout replenished with fair, pleasant, and beautiful Cities and Towns. Its parts are: 1. TERRA DI LAVORO, in which part is seated Naples, the Me∣tropolitan City in this Kingdom, and one of the fairest of Europe, calied by the Italians, Napoli la Gentile, as being inhabited by so many Nobles and Gentle∣men. It is seated on the Mediterranean shoar, amongst pleasant Hills and fruitful Fields, a City of great antiquity, being said to be built by Hercules; it is about 7 miles in compass, fortified with 4 strong Castles, a strong Wall, with Towrs, Ditches, &c. so that it is in a manner impregnable; it is beautified with many superb Structures and magnificent Churches, Monasteries, Colledges, Courts, and Palaces of Princes and Nobles, adjoyning to pleasant and delightful Gardens: its Port and Haven is commodious and good, where are kept store of Gallies. This place of late years hath been famous for its strange Rebellion under Massanello, a poor Fisher-man; here is an Hospital, endowed with 60000 Crowns yearly, for the maintenance of the sick, maimed and impotent People. The second City is Cajeta, commodiously seated on the Sea-shoar, a place of good strength. 3. Potzol, a fair and beautiful City, seated on the Sea-shoar, en∣joying a commodious Port. 4. Capua, seated on the Banks of the River, Vul∣ternus; a place of great antiquity, and once very beautiful. 5. Nola, where Hannibal received an overthrow by Marcellus: and 6. Euma, once a fair and beautiful City, but now nothing but a heap of Ruins, nigh to which is the Lake Avernus, much famous amongst the Poets, whose unwholsom sulphureous stink so infecteth the Air, that Birds flying over it lose their lives; and here∣abouts (according to fiction,) the Poets descend into Hell, and here Aeneas went down into Hell to talk with his Father.
Part of Cala∣bria Superiour.2. CALABRIA Superiour, hath for its chief places 1. Tarentum, built by the Lacedemonians, and is the Birth-place of Architas the Philosopher. 2. Cotrone, whose Inhabitants were noted for their activity in the Olympick Games. 3. Sybaris, built and peopled by the Grecians after the destruction of Troy. 4. Amycle, formerly peopled by the Pythagoreans: and 5. Cosenza, a fair City, being the chief of these parts. Part of Cala∣bria Inferiour.3. CALABRIA Inferiour, whose chief parts are, 1. Peste, or Pessido∣nia, where Roses grow thrice a year. 2. Regio Rhezo, or Rhegium, so called, because that here it is thought that Sicily was by the Sea broken from Italy. 3. Salernum, famous for the study of Physick: and 4. Nicotera, seated on the Sea-shoar. Part of Abruz∣zo.4. ABRƲZZO hath for its chief places, 1. Aquila, seated near the Ap∣pennine. 2. Aquino, the Birth-place of that famous School Divine Thomas A∣quinas. 3. Sulmona, the Birth-place of Ovid the famous Poet. 4. Benevento, once called Maleventm: and 5. Molise, which some esteem to be the chief of the County. Part of Pugia.5. PƲGIA, whose chief places are, 1. Manfredonia, dignified with the Seat of an Archbishop. 2. Cannae, famous for the signal Victory gained by Hannibal against the Roman Consuls and the Romans, of whom were slain about 42700, 3. Barletta, a strong Fortress. 4. Venusia, the Birth-place of Horace. 5. Arpinum, the Birth-place of Tully: and 6. Mont St. Angelo, a fair City, not far from Manfredonia. Part of Terra di Otranto.6. TERRA DI OTRANTO hath for its chief places, 1. Otranto, the taking of which by Mahomet the Great, put all Italy into such a fright, that Rome was almost left without Inhabitants, and was not fully inhabited until the expulsion of the Turks the next year. 2. Brundusium, boasting in its Haven, which is esteemed not inferiour to any in Christendom. 3: Gallipoli, a place of some Traffick, affording abundance of Oyls and Cattle. 4. Leccie; 5. Tarantum; and 6. Brindici; all places of good account. In this Kingdom are 20 Archbishops, 127 Bishops, 13 Princes, 24 Dukes, 25 Marquesses, and 90 Earls. But let us proceed to the Italian Isles, and first with Sicily. The ITALIAN ISLES. SICILY. Island of Sicily.The Island of SICILY is the greatest neighbouring Isle to Italy, from which it is divided by a small Channel running between Messina and Regio, now called the Phare of Messina, and higher in this passage were the Scylla and Charybdis of the Ancients. This Isle was once called Trinacria, from its being Triangular, and abating 3 Promontories at each corner into the Sea, to wit, Cape de Faro, regarding Italy; Cape Passaro, regarding Morea; and Cap Boij, or Cape Coco, facing the Promontory Mercurio, of Africa. This Isle is termed the Queen of the Mediterranean Isles, not only for its greatness, being in compass about 700 miles; but for her other excellencies and admirable fer∣tility, yielding all things necessary for the use of man; it chiefly abounds in Wines, Oyls, Sugars, Honey, Wax, Salt, Saffron, Minerals, Alom, Agats, Coral, Emeralds, and Silk in great plenty, both raw and wrought, and such abundance of all sorts of Grains, that it was called the Granary of the Roman Empire, and is now found to furnish Malta, the adjacent Isles, Spain, and some part of Italy with her superities. Here are many Baths of different natures, which are found good for several Infirmities. The chief Hills in this Isle are Mount Hybla, famous for its Bees and Honey, and Mount Aetna, for its sending forth flames of fire, which in the year 1669 made such an eruption, that it destroyed
divers Towns; and for its height, whose top is exalted ten miles above its Basis, and is a good Land-mark to Saylers. This Island was first inhabited by a race of huge Giants, much spoken of by Homer, who called them the Le∣strigones; and the Cyclopes of which last was Polyphemus, so famoused for the entertainment of Ʋlysses and his Fellows. This Isle is divided into 3 Provin∣ces or Valleys. Its Parts and chief Places.1. VALLI DE NOTO, which is the South-east part, hath for its chief places, 1. Siracusa, once the Metropolis of the whole Isle, strongly fenced about with a Wall, and other Fortifications, being a Garrison of Spa∣niards. Its Buildings are fair, and shew something of its Antiquity; it hath two Havens, one towards the South, and the other towards the North-sides of the City. 2. Leontium, seated Northwards of Siracusa, with which it had divers times struglings for Priority: And 3. Enna, a Midland Town or City. 2. VALLI DE MAZORA containeth all the West part of the Isle; its chief places are, 1. Moreal, or Montreal, famous for its Archbishops See and Church. 2. Girgenti, the Seat of the Tyrant Phalaris, who afflicted Perillus in the Brazen Bull: and 3. Palermo, once a Colony of the Phoe∣nicians, and now the: chief City in the Isle, being the Seat of the Spanish Viceroy. It is beautified with magnificent Palaces and Temples, curious Buildings, and fair Streets, famous for being the Birth-place of so many brave Men, as was Siracusa. 3. VALLI DE DEMONA, possessing the North-east part of the Isle, and boasteth of its chief Town Messina, seated opposite to Rhegium in Naples, a place of great strength, as well by Nature as Art, haying before it the Sea, where they have a no less famous and commodious, than a strong Haven, and behind it are high Hills. It is the See of an Archbishop, beauti∣fied with fair and stately Edifices; and here the Vice-Roy hath a magnificent Palace adjoyning to the Arsenal, where their Gallies, &c. are kept; and here Venus, Neptune, Castor, and Pollux had their Temples, from whose ruins are now erected Christian Churches. The Gentry and Citizens here live in great delight and pleasure; this City is the chiefest place of Traffick in the Isle, be∣ing very well frequented by Merchants and Strangers. Its other places are Malaso, seated on the North Promontory; then Erix, where Venus was wor∣shipped; next Catania, where there is a Colledge for the studying the Sciences, but chiefly for the Civil and Canon Laws; and lastly Nicosia, a Mid∣land Town. SARDINIA. Isle of Sar∣dinia.The Island of SARDINIA; or SARDAGNE, is seated not far from Sicily; it is in length about 150 miles, and 90 in breadth; not so fertil as Sicily, yet it abounds in Corn and Cattle, but is deficient in Oil, and other Commodities. It is now subject to the Spaniard, and is divided into two parts, viz. Cape Logodori, and Cape Cagliari; Its chief places are, 1. Cagli∣ari, seated opposite to Africa, having a commodious Haven, which makes it to be well frequented by Merchants. The City is adorned with goodly Build∣ings, fair Temples, and magnificent Turrets, being the Seat of the Spanish Vice-Roy, as also the See of an Archbishop. 2. Bosa, likewise the See of an Archbishop. 3. Oristagni, and 4. Sassary, both places of good account. Its People are of a mean Stature, are very great Hunters, great Pains-takers, no lovers of the Spaniards, not much addicted to Learning, and in matters of Religion not over strict.
CORSICA. Isle of Corsica.The Isle of CORSICA, seated in the Ligurian Sea, opposite to Genoa, is about 100 miles in length, and 50 in breadth; the Soil, by reason of the Mountains, is not very fertil in Grain, but aboundeth in excellent Wines; it yieldeth likewise Oils, Figs, Raisons, Hony, Wax, Alom, Box-wood, and Iron-Mines; its Dogs and Horses are esteemed excellent. The chief places are, 1. Bastia, seated on the North-east part, hath a commodious Haven, and strong Garrison, dignified with the residence of the Genouese Governour, un∣der whose command the Island is. 2. Mariana; 3. Galvi; 4. Porto-Vechio; 5. Adiazzo; and 6. Bonifacio. The People are for the most part poor, head∣strong, churlish, and not addicted to Literature. The Vulcanian Isles.Besides this Island there are abundance of others, though of no great ac∣count, and far lesser; as the VƲLCANIAN Isles, lying on the Coast of Sicily, being 11 in number; the chief of which is Lipara, from whence the rest take their names, being about 10 miles in circuit; then Stromboli and Vulcania send forth a constant Smoak. Isles of Naples.The Isles of NAPLES are 18 in number, the chief of which are Ischia, Capreae, the retirement of Tyberius; and Aenaria. Ligurian Isles.The chief of the LIGƲRIAN Isles is Elba, famous for its two Potts Porto Ferraro, and Porto Longone; Its chief places are, 1. Cosmopolis, built by Cosmo di Medices; 2. Gallinaria; 3. Giglio and 4. Monte Christo, which is but a Rock. Other Estates.There are yet in Lombardy many little Estates, as of Mirandola, Guastella, Sabionetta, &c. about Mantoua, of Pallaviano, and Landa, &c. amongst the Estates of Parma and Placenza, of Manaco; on the Coast of Genoa, of Masseran in Piedmont. The Count of Pitiglian, and the Marquess of Malis∣pine in Toscany; all which Princes, though holding from under the protection of others, have Sovereign Rights. Italy, with its Isles, extends it self from about the 36th degree of Latitude unto the 46th, which are 250 Leagues from South to North, and from the 36th degree of Longitude to near the 48th, which are as much or little more from West to East; but its form scarce fills the third part of what is contained in these degrees. In Italy, I make little Account of other Rivers, than that of the Arno, Ti∣ber, and Po; the two first descend from the Appennine, the last from the Alpes.
TURKEY in EUROPE; or that which the Grand Sig∣nior posses∣seth in whole (or in part) in EUROPE; may be compre∣hended un∣der ESCLAVO∣NIA, which is possessed by the Turk, Hun∣garians, and Venetians, and may be divi∣ded into HUNGARIA, with its chief Cities belonging to the Grand Signior; as Buda, Gyula, Canissa, Alba Regalis, Quinque Ecclesiae. Belonging to the Emperour, or Hungarians, Presbourg, Strigonium, Zegith, Newhausel. ESCLAVONIA, with its Parts and chief Places, as they belong to the Turks and Venetians, Croatia, Turks, — Wihitz. Venetians, Sisseg. Esclavia, Turks, Posega. Venetians, — Copranitz. Dalmatia, Turkish, Narenza, Mostar. Venetians, Ragusa, Spalato, Sebenico, Zara. DACIA, (now belonging to the Turks) with its Pro∣vinces of Transilvania, Waradin, Hermenstad. Bosnia, Saraih, Bagnialuch, Jaycza. Servia, — Belgrad. Bulgaria, — Sophia. Moldavia, Zuccania, Lazy. Bessarabia, — Khermen, Walachia, — Targovisko. GREECE, as it is posses∣sed by (or un∣der the subje∣ction of) the Grand Signior; which may be divided into the Provinces, or Parts of ROMANIA, or ROMELI, of old, THRACE, Constantinople, Andrinopoli, Gallipoli, Caridia, Abdera, Pera, and Galata. MACEDONIA, with its parts of Jamboli, — Heraclea. Camenolitaria, Pidna, Pella. Migdonia, Salonichi, Stagira, ALBANIA, Durazzo, Valona, Croja, and Sintari. THESSALY, now by the Turks called JANNA, Anniro, Larissa. EPIRE, now by the Turks called CANINA, Preveza, Larta. ACHAIA, and ETOLIA, now called LIVADIA, Athens, now Sitines, Thebes, now Stives, Lepanto. PELOPONNESUS, now called the MOREA, Corinte, Misistra, Modon, Petras, and Coron. Together with divers ISLES, (which for the most part are in the possessi∣on of the Turks, except some few, which the Ve∣netians yet keep;) which as they lye in the AEGEAN SEA, are Negroponte, Negroponte, Caristo. Stalimene, of Old, Lemnos, — Lemnos. The Isles called the SPORADES, and CYCLADES; which are the Isles of Milo, Tira, Tiresio, Nio, Stapalia, Morgo, Nicfia, Levita, Zinara, Raclia, Siphano, Micone, Teno, Helena, Engia, Fermenia, Zea, Andri, Coos, Delos, Samothracia, — Samos: Tasso, Tasso. Pelagmisi, Pelagmisi. Sciro, — Sciro. Creba, or Candia, Candia, Canea, Suda. IONIAN SEA, are the Isles of Zante, — Zante. Zefalonia, Zefalonia, Augustali. Corfu, — Corfu. Cerigo, Cerigo. Santa Maura, Santa Maura. Strivalis, Strivalis. Val de Campara, — Val de Campara. ADRIATICK SEA, or GULPH of VENICE, are the Isles of (if any are so called,) Zara, Vegea, Lesina, Cherso, Curzolo, and Grissa.
The Em∣pire of the GRAND SIGNIOR, or GREAT TURK, holdeth In EUROPE, and Towards the higher ESCLA∣VONIA, Hungaria, in part, Buda, Gyula. Esclavonia, in part, — Pesega. Croatia, in part, — Wihitz. Dalmatia, in part, Narenca, Mostar. Towards the lower ESCLA∣VONIA, Bosnia, Jaycza. Bagnialuch. Servia, — Belgrade. Bulgaria, Sophia. On the BLACK SEA, Podolia, in part. Oezaco, towards Moscovia, Azac, or Azoff. In GREECE, which by the Turks is called ROMELI, the Parts or Provinces of Romania, Constantinople, Adrinopoli, Gallipoli. Macedonia, Salonichi, Heracle. Albania, Scutari, Durazzo, Vilona. Thessaly, — Armiro. Epiro, Preveza, Larta. Achala, and Etolia, Athens, or Setines. Thebes, or Stives, Lepanto. Peloponnesus, or the Morea, Corinte, Misistra, or Lacedemone, Petras. And divers Isles; the chief of which are Negroponte, Stalimene, Sancta Maure, &c. In ASIA, ANATOLIA, wherein are divers Cities, among which are Smyrna, Ephesus, Bursa, Chioutaige, Angoura, Cogni, Trebisonde, &c. Divers Isles, the chief among which are Rhodes, — Rhodes. Cypre, or Cyprus, Nicosin, Eamogousta. Metelin, — Metelin. Scio, Scio. Samos, Samos. Patmosa, or Patmos, Patmos. SOURIA; which is divided in Sourie, or Syrie, Aleppo, Tripoli. Phenicie, Sayd, or Sidon, Damascus. Judea, or the Holy Land, Jerusalem, Naplouse, Gaza. ASSYRIA, which is divided in Mesopotamia, or Diarbeck, Caramit, Asanchif. Chaldea, Bagdad, Balsora. Assyria, in part, Mosul, Chiahnezul. TURCOMANIA, and Georgia, in part, Stranu, Cori. Turcomania, Teflis, Derbent. ARABIA, in part, to wit, in the Stony, — Arach. Desart, — Ana. Happie, Zibid, Aden. In AFRICA, The Kingdom of ALGIER; where are four Parts or King∣doms, to wit, Telensin, — Telensin. Algier, Sargel, Tenes, Algier. Bugia, Bugia, Steffa. Constantina, Constantina, Bonna, and Tebessa. The Kingdom of TUNIS, with its eight Government; to wit, Four Maritime, Biserta, Gouleita, Sousa, Media, or Africa. Four Inland, Tunis, Cairoan, Begge, and Urbs. The Kingdom of TRIPOLI, with its parts of Tripoli, Tripoli, Lepeda. Desart of Barca, Corena, Alberton. EGYPT, with its three Parts; to wit, Errif, Alexandria, Roserta, Damierta. Bechrio, or Demesor, — Cairo, Sayd, — Sayd, or Thebes. Nigh unto EGYPT, Coast of Abex, in part, Suaquen, Arquico, or Ercocco. Between Egypt and Arabia, Sues. In EUROPE, restored from this Empire, The Signieury, and Republick of — Raguse. The Vayvodes, or Princes of Tranfilvania, Hermanstat. Valaquia, Tergovis. Moldavia, Saczou. And the Cham of the — Petit Tartaria, — Caffa.
map of Turkey SECVNDIS blazon or coat of arms of the earls of Winchilsea To ye Rt Honble Heneage Earle of Winchelsea Vist Maidstone Baron Fitz Herbert of Eastwell Lord of the Royall  of e and Lord Lei of Kent and  Mary is humble D.D by R.B. A MAPP of THE ESTATES of the TURKISH EMPIRE in ASIA and EUROPE signed by Monsr Sanson Geographer to the French King
Turkey in Europe. THE Estate or Empire of the Sultan, or the Ottomans, whom we call the Grand SIGNIOR, or Great TƲRK, is part in Europe, part in Asia, and part in Africa; the greatest part is in Asia, and the least in Europe; and yet this is not the least considerable, since the Grand Signior makes here his residence, and hath from hence his best Forces. That which he holds in Europe extends it self from the 35th degree of Latitude to the 45th, and sometimes near the 47th, which are 250 or 300 French Leagues; and from the 40th of Longitude unto, or beyond the 56th, which are likewise 300 Leagues. Division of Turkey.This part of the Estate of the Turks, which we call TƲRKEY in EƲ∣ROPE, may be divided into two principal Regions, viz. Sclavonia, or Esclavonia, and Greece. ESC LAVONIA, which shall be along the Da∣nube from Germany unto the Black Sea, and is bounded on one side with the Danube, and on the other with the Mountain Marinai: and under the name of Esclavonia may be understood Hungaria, especially so much as the Turk is Master of; the particular Esclavonia, with the Provinces of Croacia, Escla∣via and Dalmatia, of which parts the Grand Signior holds but one part; then the Kingdom of Dacia. The other Region, which I call GREECE, shall reach from the Mountain Marinai, a great way into the Mediterranean Sea, and advancing towards the South, in which are several Provinces, which we shall treat of. HƲNGARIA. Kingdom of Hungaria de∣scribed.The Kingdom of HƲNGARIA taken entirely, is bounded on the East with Transilvania and Walachia, on the South with Sclavonia, on the West with Austria, and on the North with Poland. It is part possessed by the Christians, and in part by the Turks. Its fertility.This Kingdom is of an exceeding fertil Soyl, yielding Corn thrice a year, and feeding such abundance of Cattle, that it supplied Germany, Sclavonia, and other adjacent parts, with about 100000 Oxen yearly; they have Deer, Pul∣lain, Phesants, Partridges, and all sorts of Fowl in such plenty, that they are free for any one that will take them; and their Rivers are found to afford ex∣cellent Fish, It also aboundeth in several good Commodities, as Hides,Its Commodi∣ties.But∣ter, Cheese, Copper, Hony, Wax, Fish, &c. Its Inhabi∣tants.The People are of a rude behaviour, not addicting themselves to Literature, nor Mechanical Trades. They use the Scythian Language; they are well proportionate, strong, and very valiant. The Females are denied the Estates of their Parents, neither have they any thing in Marriage; and until Men and Women are marryed, they are not allowed the use of Beds to lye upon. Its division.This Kingdom now stands divided between the Grand Signior and the Hungarians. The Turks have here four Beglerbies, to wit, of Buda, of Ca∣nisa, of Agrica, and of Temiswar; the chief Cities which they possess, are Buda, seated on the Danube, once the Metropolis of the Kingdom, and Royal
Seat of the Kings of Hungaria; it was taken by Solyman in 1536. Next Guyu∣la, a strong Town on the Confines of Transilvania, which was betrayed by the Governour to Solyman in hopes of a great Reward, which proved insuccessful unto him to the loss of his life: then Alba Regalis, which by the Germans is called Wisenburgh; also Quinque Ecclesiae, taken in the same year with Alba Regalis: And these are the strong places, and of good account with them. The chief places in the Emperours or Hungarians possessions, are Presburg, seated on the edge of Austria, and since the Turks became Masters of Buda, this hath been the Metropolis of Hungaria: next, Strigonium, or Gran, once taken by the Turks, but regained; also Zegith, taken by Solyman the Magni∣ficent in Anno 1566, who there ended his days: then Newhausel, which hath several times withstood the fury of the Turks. The other Towns in the Hun∣garians possession, were (if not are) Komara, in the Isle of Schut; then Bars, Novigrad, Vizzegrad, Papa, Sarwar, and Owar. The chief Order of Knighthood in this Kingdom, is that of the Dragon, instituted by Sigismund King of Hungaria, and Emperour. ESCLAVONIA. Bounds of Esclavonia.ESCLAVONIA hath for its Eastern bounds the River Drinus, and a line drawn thence to the Sea; for its Southern bounds the Adriatick Sea; for its Western, part of Italy; and for its Northern, Hungaria. The whole length of this Country is about 480 miles, and its breadth about 120; it is scituate under the 6th and 7th Climats, the longest day making 15 hours and a half.Its division. This Country is divided into the Provinces of Croacia, Dalmatia, and the particular Esclavonia, and are partly possessed by the Venetians, and part∣ly by the Turks. Its fertility.The Country is observed to be more fit for grazing and feeding of Cattle, than for Tillage, for the Sheep and other Cattle bring forth their young twice a year, and their Sheep are shorn four times a year; likewise their chief Com∣modities are Horses, for Service; Cattle, which yields them abundance of Hides, Tallow, Butter, Cheese, and Wool, of which they make Cloth. Here are also some Mines of Gold and Silver, which are in the Turks possession. In Esclavonia, the chief places in the Turks possession are Posega, a place of good account, and Barra: and in the Venetians possession is Copranitz, a fair, strong, and good City. Province of Croacia.The Province of CROACIA is in a manner wholly possessed by the Vene∣tians, the Turks only possessing the strong Town of Withitz: the chief pla∣ces possessed by the Venetians, are 1. Sisseg, or Sissaken, famous for its resisting the Turks in 1592, a fair and strong City. 2. Gardiskia, seated on the Savus. 3. Novigrod, also seated on the Savus: and 4. Bruman. Province of Dalmatia.The Province of DALMATIA, whose Southern parts are washed with the Adriatick Sea, is divided betwixt the Venetians, who hold the greatest part, and the Turks; whose chief places are, 1. Marenza, seated on the Sea-shoar; 2. Mostar, an Inland Town towards Bosnia; 3. Stagno, and 4. Sibioncello, both Maritim Towns; and nigh unto which is the Isle of MELEDA, which also belongs to the Grand Signior. The chief Towns in the possession of the Venetians, are 1. Rhagusa, seated on the Adriatick Sea, a City of great Traf∣fick and Riches, being a Commonwealth of it self. 2. Spalato, a Maritim Town on the Adriatick, and in a most pleasant Valley on the South side of great Mountains; and in the Wall towards the Sea, is to be seen a great re∣mainder of a Gallery in Dioclesians Palace. This Town is kept by the Vene∣tians as their only Emporium, plyed successively with two Gallies, which carry between this place and Venice such Merchandize as are Transported into Turkey, or from thence brought in. 3. Zara, a strong Fortress, feated on
the Adriatick within the Gulph, which, by reason of its commodions scitua∣tion, is most apt to command the whole Adriatick, and is strongly fortified and well Mann'd. In this City is a Temple of St. John di Malvatia, which was built by a company of Sea-men, who being in a great and dangerous Tempest, made a Vow, that if they escaped they would consecrate a Temple to the said St. John; and being saved, they Landed here, and performed their Vows. 4. Sebenico, seated on the Sea-shoar, having large Territories. 5. No∣na; and 6. Traw. DACIA. Its Bounds.The Kingdom of DACIA is bounded on the East with the Euxine Seas, on the West with Hungaria, and on the North with the Carpathian Moun∣tains. The Country throughout is very fertil, affording for Merchandize, Oxen, Butter, Cheese, Tallow, Hides, Hony, Wax,Commodities. and excellent Warlike Horses, whose Manes are said to hang down to their feet; their Fruits are good, and in great plenty, and the Earth is inriched with Mines of several Metals. It is seated in the Northern Temperate Zone, between the 7th and 10th Climates, which makes the longest day to be 17 hours. Its People.The People are well made and proportionate; they are head-strong, reso∣lute in their Opinions, and of no ready wit; they use the Sclavonian Lan∣guage, they are Christians, and follow the Greek Church. The Kingdom at present is divided into several Provinces, as in the Geogra∣phical Table of Turkey in Europe, is set down; all which are subject to the Grand Signior. Province of Transilvania.The Province of TRANSILVANIA hath for its chief places, 1. Wa∣ranine, far engaged towards the West, and it is a frontier Town to Hungaria, and of some account and strength. 2. Hermensted. more towards Moldavia. 3. Weisenburg; 4. Burges; 5. and Hanyad. Province of Bosnia.The Province of BOSNIA hath for its chief place, 1. Saraih, the Me∣tropolitan City, seated in a fruitful Valley, which on the North and South sides are immured with ridges of pleasant Hills, of an easie ascent. This City is said to contain about 80 Mescheetoes, and about 20000 Houses, which for the most part are but meanly built. 2. Bagnialuch, once the residence of the Bosnian Kings; and 3. Jayeza, the usual Sepulchre of those Kings. Province of Servia.The Province of SERVIA, whose chief Cities are, 1. Belgrade, once the Bulwark of Christendom, valiantly resisting the power of Amurath the 6th, and Mahomet the Great; but yielded to Solyman. Anno 1520, when this whole Country became a Turkish Province, 2. Stonebourgh, once the Seat of its Despot; and 3. Samandria. Province of Bulgaria.The Province of BƲLGARIA hath for its chief places, 1. Sofia, the Seat of the Beglerbeg of Greece, under whom are 21 Sangiacs, seated almost in the midst of a long and fruitful Valley, beautified with many fair Hanes and Baths, the chief of which hath hot, Fountains. Its Colledge is magnificent, and its Mescheetoes are many and beautiful, especially that in the midst of the City, which is the largest; and here the doors of the houses of the Christians and Jews are not above 3 foot high, which is so made to keep out the Turkish Hor∣ses, who would else in their Travels make them serve instead of Stables: so great is the slavery that they live under. 2. Oesco; 3. Novi; 4. Durostoro; and 5. Destor; all which are seated on the Danube. 6. Proslavia, seated at the mouth of one of the branches of the Danube at its fall into the Euxine Sea. 7. Calutra; and 8. Varna, both seated on the Euxine or Black Sea. Province of Moldavia.The Province of MOLDAVIA, whose chief places are, 1. Zuccania, once the Seat of the Vaivod. 2. Sotzowa; and 3. Lazy, both good Cities.
Country of Bessarabia.To the Province of Moldavia doth belong the small Country of BESSA∣RABIA, which lieth between Podolia and Bulgaria, and is commodiously seated on the Black Sea. Its chief places are Kherman, or Moncastro, the Seat of the Turkish Sargiack, seated on the River Tyras, not far from its influx into the Sea; and 2. Kilia, also seated on the Euxine Sea. Province of Walachia.The Province of WALACHIA, being divided from Bulgaria by the Danube, and is esteemed the richest Province in all Dacia. Its chief places are, 1. Targovisco, the Seat of the Vajuods; 2. Domboviza; and 3. Brailonum. GREECE. The Parts of Greece.The rest of Turkey in Europe may be comprehended under the name of GREECE, which is divided into several parts, to wit, Romania, which an∣swers to the ancient Thrace; Macedonia, whose divers parts have received di∣vers names, as that of Jamboli, of Camenolitaria, of Migdonia, or particular Macedonia, Albania, and Thessaly, which is now called Junna; Epirus, now Canina; Achaia and Aetolla, now Livadia; and Peloponnesus, now the Morea. Its Bounds.GREECE, esteemed the Mother of Arts and Sciences, hath for its Eastern bounds the Egean Sea, the Hellespont, Propontis, and Thracian Bos∣phorus; and for its Western, the Adriatick Sea and Italy. It is seated in the Northern Temperate Zone under the 5th and 6th Climates, the longest day being 15 hours. Its sertllity, and Commo∣ties.The Soil without doubt is very rich and fruitful, and would be very prosita∣ble to the Husbandman if pains were taken in tilling it; but the Great Turk seizing on their Estates, when and as often as he pleaseth, makes them careless to cultivate it; yet here are found several good Commodities, which are trans∣ported to other places, as Wines, Oils, Silk, both raw, and wrought into seve∣rai Manufactures, as Velvets, Damasks, &c. also Gragrams, Brimstone, Cop∣per, Vitriol, Cottons, Sopes, Carpets, Cute, Currants, Cuminseed, Anniseeds, &c. The Ancient and present Greeks.The Grecians, though a scattered People, since the Turks became Masters of their Country, vet still retain their Name, Religion, Customs, and Lan∣guage, as indeed they do in all other places where they live. They were once a Nation so excellent, that their Precepts and Examples do yet re∣main, as approved Canons to direct the mind to Vertue; they were Lovers of freedom, every, way noble; in matters of Government famous, in Arms glorious, in Arts admirable, and to whom the rest of the World were held Barbarians; but since they became under the Turkish yoke (for the gene∣raliay) their Spirits are so low, that their knowledge is turned into ignorance, their liberty into contented slavery, their Vertues into Vices, and their in∣dustry in Arts and Sciences into idleness. They are much addicted to drink and dancing, for which they had the name of Merry Greeks; they are of a good proportion, and of a swarthy complexion; their Women are well fa∣voured, brown, and excessively amorous; in matters of Habit they differ little from those amongst whom they live. The Christian Faith was here established by Timothy, to whom St. Paul wrote two Epistles. The Fathers which this Church most adhereth unto, are Chrysostom, Basil, and the two Gregories; and the Church is governed by Patriarchs, one of Constantinople, another of Alexandria, another of Jerusalem, and another of Antioch; freely exercising their Religion, which differeth much from the Church of Rome, as, I shall in place elsewhere take notice o, and have every where their Temples and Monasteries. If a Patriarch die, another is elected by the Synod of Bishops.
Famous Men here bred.This Country hath bred several famous Men, as Alexander the Subverter of the Persian Monarchy, Xenophon, Plutarch, Herodotus, and Thucydides, famous Historiographers; Epaminondas, Pyrrhus, Miltiades, and Aristides, Captains; Plato, Aristotle, Socrates, and Theophrastus, Divine Philosophers; Demosthenes, Aeschines, and Isocrates, eloquent Oratours; with several o∣thers, too tedious to name; but to proceed to the Provinces. Province of Romania.ROMANIA, particularly so called, a Country of it self, neither of a rich Soyl, nor pleasant Air, more inclining to cold than heat; yet by reason of the famous Cities of Constantinople, Adrianople, and others here seated, renders it the chief, and best inhabited of all Greece. Its chief places are Adriano∣ple, so called by the Emperour Hadrian, who repaired it; it was added to the Kingdom of the Turks by Bajazet, Anno 1362, and continued the Seat of their Kings till Mahomet the Great took Constantinople from Constantine Palaeolo∣gus, the last of the Eastern Emperours, about 90 years after. Blunt in his Voyage to the Levant, in his description of this City saith, That it is seated on three low Hills, of which that in the midst is the largest and fairest, on the top of which is a stately and magnificent Mosque, and in the Churchyard are about 30 or 40 Cocks under a stately Fountain, for People to wash before Di∣vine Service; as also at the bottom of this Building, on the North and South sides, are 20 Conduits with Cocks, and on the East side are the Priests Lodgings and Gardens; and round the Church-yard are Baths, Cloysters, and a Colledge for the Priests, with other useful Offices, all covered with Lead. In this City are several Besestines, or Exchanges, some of good account, as likewise many fair Hanes. To this City are four stately and lofty Bridges of Freestone, which make a pleasant shew, and is a fair, large, and well composed City. 2. Gallipoli, seated near the Hellespont, but within the Sea of Marinora. This was the first City that the Turks possessed in Europe, it being surprized by Solyman, Son to Orchanes, in Anno 1358. Here the Beglerbegh of the Sea hath his residence. A little below Gallipoli is the streightest passage of the Hellespont, a place formerly famous for Xerxes his Bridge, but especially for the two Castles of Sesto, on the European side; and Abydo, opposite to it on the Asian shoar, of note for the Loves of Hero and Leander; which Castles are now called the Dardanelli, and command the passage, and are the securi∣ty or Bulwark of Constantinople on this, as those on the Thracian Bosphorus are on the other. 3. Caridia, seated on the Thracian Chersonese, opposite to the Isle of Lemnos, as also to Troas in Asia, and therefore now called St. George's Arm. 4. Abdera, the Birth-place of Democritus, who spent his time in Laughing. 5. Pera, a Town of the Genoueses, opposite to Constanti∣nople. 6. Galata, also opposite to Constantinople, from which it is parted by a River, wherein is found a good Harbour for Shipping; and here all the Western Christians, as English, French, Dutch, and Venetian Merchants have their common residence, intermixed with Jews, Grecians, Armenians, and some few Turks: And lastly, Constantinople, the now Metropolitan City of all Greece, the Seat of the Grand Signior, and formerly of the Emperours of the East; first built by Pausanias a Làcedemonian Captain, about 660 years before the Birth of Christ. It is a City very commodiously seated for an Uni∣versal Empire, overlooking Europe and Asia, commanding the Euxine or Black Sea, the Hellespont, and Sea of Marinara or Propontis; on the upper part of which, and near the Thracian Bosphorus, it is seated, where it hath a Haven so deep and capacious, that the Turks for its excellency call it the Port of the World, so that for strength, plenty, and commodity, no place can compare to it. This City is in form Triangular; its Walls are composed of Stone and Brick, equally intermixed, to which it hath 24 Gates for en∣trance, whereof 5 regard the Land, and 19 the Water, being about 16 miles in compass; and supposed, with Pera and Galata adjoyning to it, and Scutari on the Asian side, to contain about 700000 living Souls, good part of which are Christians and Jews; and it would be far more populous, were it not for the Plague, which like a Tertian Ague here reigneth every third year, and
sometimes oftner. This City is adorned with many magnificent Buildings, both publick and private, as also with curious Statues, and other such like Orna∣ments, which were brought out of Rome, and other parts. There is no City in the World makes so stately a shew, if beheld from the Sea, or adjoyning Mountains, as this doth, whose lofty and beautiful Cypress Trees are so inter∣mixed with the Buildings, that it seemeth to represent a City in a Wood, whose seven aspiring Heads (for on so many Hills it is seated,) are most of them crowned with magnificent Mosques, all of white Marble; in form round, and coupled above, being finished at the top with guilded Spires, some having two, some four, and some six adjoyning Turrets, of a great height, and very slender: so that there is no City in the World hath a more promising Object, and being entred, so much deceiveth the expectation, ha∣ving many vacant places, several rows of Buildings, consisting only of Shops, the Houses not fair, lofty, nor uniform; the Streets exceeding narrow and ill contrived; yet here are many stately Houses, where the Great persons reside; also many Canns for Merchants, and abundance of Mosques, amongst which that of Sancta Sophia is the chief, once a Christian Temple. To every one of the principal Mosques doth belong publick Bagio's, Hospitals with Lodgings, Santons, and Ecclesiastical Persons, which are endowed with com∣petent Revenues: the inferiour Mosques for the most part are built square, many of them Pent-houses, with oper Galleries, where on extraordinary times they pray. The number of Mosques of all sorts, including Scutara, Pa∣ra, Galata, and the Buildings that border the Bosphorus, are said to be about 8000. This Temple of St. Sophia is almost every Friday, (which is their Sabbath) visited by the Grand Signior, by reason of its being so near his Seraglia, which is divided from the rest of the City by a lofty Wall, con∣taining in circuit about three miles, wherein are stately Groves of Cypresses intermixed with delightful Gardens, artificial Fountains, variety of Fruits, and curious Plains. The Buildings are low, but rich and stately, with seve∣ral fair Courts one within another; and to the South-side doth joyn the Grand Signiors Palace, in which are also several large Courts, and stately Structures. On the left hand of one of the Courts the Divano is kept, where the Bassa's of the Port administer Justice; out of the second Court is a passage into a third, into which Christians are not permitted entrance, but upon great fa∣vour: on the North-side stands the Grand Signiors Cabinet, in form of a stately Summer-house, having a private passage from his Seraglio; and from this place he takes Barge to delight himself on the Water. Not far from the Palace is a spacious place, encompassed with Houses, called the Hippodrom by the Ancients, and by the Turks, Almidan; where every Friday the Spachies of the Court play at Giocho di Canni, that is, they are mounted on Horses, and ride after one another, throwing Darts at each other, which they endeavour to avoid by their hasty turning. The Black Sea is distant from Constantinople about 15 miles; it is much troubled with Ice in the Winter, neither is it so Salt as other Seas: and here the Turks forbid Traffick to Forreigners, there being no passage into it but by Rivers; neither this passage of the Bosphorus hath been always, but forced by violence of Streams that fell into the over-charged Euxine; where it rusheth into the Bosphorus there are two Rocks, formerly called Cyancae and Symplegades, so near, that at a distance they seem but one. Here upon the top of a Rock, encompassed with the Sea, stands a Pillar of white Marble called Pompeys Pillar; the Bosphorus is in length about 20 miles, but very narrow, the broadest place not exceeding a mile. The Disposi∣tions, Manners, &c. of the Turks.Before I pass to the other Province in Greece, a word or two as to the Manners, Dispositions, Religions, &c. of the Turks. They are for the most part of a good complexion, full-bodied, proportionable, and of good statures; they keep the hair of their Heads shaved, only a lock on the hinder part; but their Beards they wear at full length, which with them is a sign of Gravity and freedom, they not allowing their Slaves to wear Beards; they are subtle, and of a quick wit, are generally very courteous to Strangers, but bear an
inveterate hatred against Christians; they are exceeding jealous of their Wives, denying them the liberty of the Streets, or going to their Mosques; their Salutations are with an inclination of the head and body, laying their hands on their bosoms; they use much Perfumes in their Garments, and all of them affect clealiness so religiously, that besides customary Lotions, and daily frequenting Baths, they never so much as make water, but they wash their hands and privities, at which business they couch to the Earth, fearing their Garments should be defiled with any of their Excrements, which is held a pollution and hindrance to the acceptation of Prayer; and if they bath not twice or thrice a week, they are esteemed Nasty: they use not much exercise, loving a Sedentary life, but delight in riding; yet generally they have some Trade, which they imploy part of the day in, even the Grand Signior. Their Food.Their Food is gross, refusing all dainties for a piece of fat Mutton, which they boil in Rice; and with Pease, Rice, and Mutton, they make Pottage; they abstain from Blood, Hogs-flesh, and things strangled, neither care they for Fish or Fowl, which are here numerous and so gentle, that they will suffer themselves to be taken: they have neither Tables nor Stools, but sit upon the Floor (which is covered with Tapestry, or the like) cross-legg'd; their Dishes are made with feet, and their Spoons have long handles like La∣dles. Their common drink is Water, also Sherbet, Ʋsaph, but above all Coffee, which is held in great esteem. As to their Sciences and Trades, they are not over ingenious, nor knowing, contenting themselves with such as are neces∣sary for them. By their Law they are exhorted to marry for the propagation of their Religion, every man being allowed four Wives, which must be of the Turkish Religion, besides as many Concubines (which are Slaves, and of any Religion) as he is able to keep; they buy their Wives of their Parents, re∣cording the Contract; and in their Nuptial Rites they observe many Cere∣monies, some of which I shall take notice of. The day before the Marriage is spent in Feasting, the Man his Friends, and the Woman hers, who at night bath and anoint her, and so depart till the next Morning, and then she is drest in her best Apparel; all things being ready, the Relations and Friends of the Bridegroom, who are all mounted on Horse-back, ride two by two to the Brides to conduct her to the Bridegrooms, who is also ready mounted and richly habited, according to his quality, to receive his never seen wife, who (after the Nuptial Ceremonies are performed) is conducted to the Bride-Chamber, where she is undrest and made ready for his enjoyment; the rest of the day is spent in feasting and merriment. By the Law, he is obliged to shew equal respect to all his Wives, and to give them due benevolence alike, and upon failure they may justly complain to the Cadi, who will grant her a Di∣vorce; but the Women are little better treated than Slaves, giving their Husbands respect and reverence due to a Master, not sitting at meat with him, nor medling with Houshold affairs, nothing being required, but to please their Husbands, to live peaceably together, and to nurse their Chil∣dren. Their Reli∣gion.Their Religion is contained in their Alcoran, made by Mahomet their Pro∣phet; it is written in Arabick Rhime, and forbid by him to be written or read in any other Language; which said Book is so reverenced by them, that it is not touched with unwashed hands; they call it the Book of Glory,The Alcoran now printed in English. and Guide to Paradice; They believe in God, and hold Jesus Christ for a greater Prophet than Moses, but Mahomet for the greatest; they deny the Divinity of Christ, yet confess him to be the Son of the Virgin Mary; that he was conceived by the smell of a Rose, which the Angel Gabriel brought her, and that she bore him at her Breasts; that he was free from the Tem∣ptations of the Devil and Original sin: he is called in the Alcoran, the Word and Breath of God, said to raise up the dead, to give sight to the blind, to cure the lame, to give speech to the dumb, to know the secrets of hearts, and that by his Vertues his Disciples wrought Miracles, and that he shall return to Judgment about 40 years before the end of the World to judge, save, and condemn Christians, as Mahomet shall do them. By
their Law they are obliged to pray seven times a day; their Sabbath is on Friday, which they strictly observe, and are very devout at their worship; and at the doors of the Mosques they put off their Shoes, as a place too holy to defile with dirty Shoes; and the Women are not permitted to come into their Mosques, but have apartments for themselves. They observe two Solemn times in the year, which are both Lents, one is called Ramdan, which continueth a Month, and the other Byram, which lasteth three days. They admit of no Hell for any, but those who believe not Mahomet; but allow of a Purgatory, which holds but till Dooms-day, where in their Graves (which they say is the place of Purgatory) they are inflicted with pain by a bad An∣gel, whose fury is lessened by a good one, according to the life the party led when living; and at the day of Doom, Moses, Christ, and Mahomet, shall bring their several Followers to Judgment, and intercede for them; and that Cain, the first Murtherer, shall be the Leader of the Damned; and all shall receive the reward due unto them, the Just into Paradice, and the Damned into Hell, where they shall be tormented for ever; yet they hold a distincti∣on amongst the Damned, for those that have committed no great sins shall go into Purgatory, from whence they shall shortly be delivered. Paradice, according to Mahomets description, is a place of all delight, where they shall have stately Palaces richly furnished, Christalline Rivers, Fields and Trees alwaies in their verdure, whose Fruits shall be delightful to the tast, and their shape pleasing to the eye; under whose fragrant shades they shall spend their time with amorous and handsom Virgins; not such as have lived in the World, but on purpose created for them, whose lost Virginities shall daily be restored to them, and that they shall ever continue young, the Men at the Age of 30, and the Women at 15; and that Boys of Divine features shall administer to them, and set before them all varieties of curious Meats. Their Justice.Their Justice is grounded on their Alcoran, in which they observe this Rule, To do as they would be done unto. Their Judges for the most part are always Ecclesiastical Persons, amongst which there are many Orders, of which the chief is the Mufty, who decides great Cases, and to him lie Appeals, and his Decrees the Grand Turk will not question: then the Cady, who hath over him the Monlacady, or Lord Chief Justice. All the Judges, except the Muf∣ty, are limited to set Precincts, and if they are found corrupt, are severely punished; the execution of their Justice is very severe and cruel, and very speedy; and if the business be matter of fact, upon the least complaint the Parties and Witnesses are brought before the Judge, and according to evi∣dence and Justice, gives his Sentence, which in few hours is executed; and a False-witness, if convicted, suffers the same punishment as the accused should have done, if found guilty. Their Forces.The Great Turk is very powerful in his Forces; his Infantry are of two sorts, the one raised out of Towns and Cities, and the other is the Janizaries, in which he puts the greatest confidence. Their Cavalry are also of two sorts, one the Spahyglans, from whom are chosen the Troops which guard the Grand Signiors person, and the other the Spahy-Tymariots, which are such as hold Land free from all Duties, in lieu of which they are obliged to furnish him with 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, or more or less Men and Horses at their own charge, as occasion requires, according to the quantity of Land they hold; and besides these there are other sorts of Horsemen, who are Volontiers; some serving for devotion to gain Paradice by dying for Mahomets Cause, others serving for the gains of the booty and spoils of the Countries, and others to merit a Timar; and all are very expert in Military affairs. As for their Sea Forces they are but small, as not much minding it, most of them being Gallies; yet are they often found troublesom to Christians. Their Fune∣rals.Concerning their Funerals, so soon as Life is departed several of their Priests are sent for, who after they have performed certain Ceremonies, and desired God to have mercy on their Soul, they wash the Corps, and wrap it in Linnen, but not tie it neither at head nor feet, then lay it on a Bier, setting a Turbant at the upper end, and so carry it to the Grave; which for the poorer
sort are usually made by Highway-sides and in Fields, having two stones of white Marble, one at the head and the other at the feet, with an Inscription concerning the deceased; but the better sort have Sepulchres in their Gar∣dens. As they are thus carried to their Graves, some of the Dervices go be∣fore with lighted Tapers, then follow the Priests singing, and after them their Relations and Friends: their Graves are boarded on the sides and bottom instead of a Coffin, and being laid in, are covered with another board to hinder the Earth from falling, but high enough that one may kneel; for they hold that two terrible and black Angels, which they call Gudequir and Mongir, do immediately come to the Grave and unite the Soul to the Body, demanding how he hath lived; and if he gives them satisfaction they depart, and two white Angels come and protect him unto the day of Judgment, one sitting at his head, and the other at his feet; but if he can give no good account of his life, then the terrible black Angels grievously torment him until the day of Doom. A Purgatory is so obnoxious unto them, that in their Maettins they beseech God to free them from the examination of those terrible black An∣gels, as also from the punishment of the Grave, and their evil Journey. But to proceed to the other Provinces in Greece. Province of Macedonia.The Province of MACEDONIA is at present severed into three parts, viz. into the Territory of Jamboli towards the North, whose chief places are Heraclea, Bylazora, Joro, and Sydero-Caspae, famous for its rich Mines of Gold and Silver. The second part is Camenolitaria, being its Southern parts, and on the borders of Thessaly; its chief places are, 1. Pidna, seated on the in∣flux of the River Alaicmon, which Town was besieged and took by Cassander, in which Siege he took Olympias the Mother, Roxane the Wife, and Hercules the Heir of Alexander the Great; all which he put to death. 2. Pella, seated on the same shoar, the Birth place of the said Alexander. 3. Edissa, and 4. Scydra, both Midland Cities. The third part is called Migdonia, or the particular Macedonia, lying in the midst of the Province; its chief places are 1. Salonichi, anciently called Thessalonica; to the People of which City St. Paul wrote two of his Epistles; it is seated on the Egean Sea, is very populous, inhabited with Christians, Turks, and Jews; but chiefly with the last, who are here more numerous than in any other part of Turkey, and is a place of great Commerce, and is the fairest and richest City in all Macedonia. 2. Stagira, the Birth-place of Aristotle; 3. Pallene, sacred to the Muses; and 4. Neopolis, on the confines of Romania. Province of Albania.The Province of ALBANIA lieth on the Adriatick Sea, famous for being the Country of that eminent and brave Souldier George Castriot, called by the Turks Scanderbeg; its chief places are 1. Durazzo, a place of great strength. 2. Valona, a good City seated on the Sea-shoar, opposite to Otranto in Naples. 3. Croja, under whose Walls Amurath the Second, that damned wretch; finished his wicked life 4. Scutari, or Scodra, famous for its resisting the Turks: and 5. Belgrado; and 6. Albanopoli. Province of Thessaly.]The Province of THESSALY, now called JANNA, is a Country no less fertil than pleasant; it lieth South of Macedonia, and is famous first for the Hill Olympus, which for its height, is by the Poets taken for Heaven; then for its pleasant Vale of Tempe, called the Garden of the Muses: and thirdly, for the Pharsalian Fields, where the Empire of the World was dis∣puted in two great Battles; the one betwixt Caesar and Pompey, and the other between Brutus and Casstus on the one side, and Anthony and Augustus on the other. The chief places in this Province are, 1. Armiro, now the Seat of a Turkish Sangiac. 2. Larissa, seated on a fair River, which at a small distance falls into the Gulph of Salonichi. 3. Tricca, and Pharsalis.
Province of Epire.The Province of EPIRE, now called CANINA, is very Mountainous, hath for its chief places (possessed by the Turks) Praveza and Lart, both Sea-Towns; and the chief places in the Venetians possessions, are Torre de Butrinto and Perga, both Sea-Towns and places of good account; opposite and nigh to which is the Isle of Corfou.Mount Pindus. In this Province is Mount Pindus, sacred to Apollo and the Muses; and here are also the Acroceraunean Hills, so called for their being so subject to Thunder-claps. Province of Achaia.The Province of ACHAIA, now called LIVADIA, washed on the East with the Aegean Sea; it is divided into these parts, viz. Aetolia, Attica, Baeotia, Locris, Megaris, Doris, and Phocis, in which parts are several good Cities and Towns; amongst which are 1. Athens, now Sitines, more famous for its Antiquity than any thing else, being now scarce any other than a Fishers Town; but formerly a large, rich and stately City, the Nursery of Learning, and a place from whence all Arts and Sciences spread themselves all over Aeurope. 2. Thebes, now Stives, seated on the River Gephisus, famous for the Wars here made between Polynices, and Eteocles, Sons to Prince Oedipus; it was sack'd by the Macedons, after which it was re-edified by Cassander, but of no account nor beauty to what it was formerly. Next to this City are the Streights not above 25 foot broad. 3. Lepanto, chief of Aetolia, seated in the bottom of a Gulph so called, and where Augustus and Anthony sought for the Empire of the World; and where more lately was that signal Battle be∣tween the confederate Christians and the Turks. This City enjoyeth a good Trade, and affordeth several good Commodities, as Silk, Oils, Cottons, Galls, Anniseeds, Wax, Hony, Currans, Wines, &c. 4. Marathon, of note for the Victory of Miltiades, gained against the powerful Army of Darius, which consisted of 100000 Foot, and 10000 Horse. 5. Megara, where Euclid taught Geometry. 6. Platea, nigh to which was fought an exceeding great Battle between the Grecians and the Persians. 7. Delphos, famous for the Temple of Apollo, which was destroyed by the Phocians, who took from it 60 Tuns of Gold. 8. Sparta, formerly of great Account; and 9. Micenae, famous for the Temple of Juno, as also for the habitation of Agamemnor. Nigh to this City was the Lake of Lerno, where Hercules slew the Lernian Seven-headed Hydra. In this Province is the famous Temple of Aesculapius; where is also the Mount Helicon and Parnassus, much famoused by the Poets; and here are also those pleasant Arcadian Plains, and the places where the Olympian Games were solemnized, with several other memorable places of Antiquity. Peloponnesus, or the Morea.PELOPONNESƲS, now called MOREA, is a Peninsula bound∣ed with the Sea, except where it joyneth to Achaia by an Isthmus of about six miles in breadth; the whole Peninsula is about 600 miles in compass, and contained once many flourishing Provinces, as ARCADIA, ARGORIS, ACHAIA PROPRIA, ELIS, LACONIA, and MESSENIA; but at present it is one sole Turkish Province. The People were accounted the chief of all the Grecians, and gave Rules to the rest as subordinate unto them. The chief places are, 1. Corinte, seated at the foot of the Acrocorinthian Hills, hard by the Fountain Pyrene; a small Town, and of little note to what it was, being out of the ruins of the ancient and famous Corinth; which was a place of great strength and power. 2. Misistra, once of good account: 3. Thalana, nigh unto which is Mount Tenarus, from whence Hercules drew Cerbenus; as also the Lake Lerna, where the said Hercules slew the Monster Hydra. 4. Selassia, where Antigonus vanquished Clomenus. 5. Nemaea, where Hercules slew the Lions: 6. Olympia, very famous for the Statue of Jupiter Olympicus, which was 60 Cubits high, and of a proportionate thick∣ness, being made of Gold and Ivory; and in honour to this Jupiter were the Olympick Games instituted by Hercules, and performed on the Plains of this City. 7. Megalopolis, the Birth-place of that eminent Historian Polybius. 8. Mantinea, nigh unto which the Theban Army, which consisted of 30000 Foot and 3000 Horse routed the Army of the Athenians and Spartans, which
consisted of 2000 Horse, and 25000 Foot, where that gallant Leader Epami∣nondas received his deaths wound. 9. Lacedemon, 10. Argos, 11. Thebes, now ruinated; but the chief places for Traffick now remaining, ar 12. Mo∣don, 13. Petras, and 14. Coron, all three Cities seated on the Sea-shoar, subject to the same Customs, and found to afford divers good Commodities, the pro∣duct of Turkey. The ISLES seated in the GRECIAN or AEGEAN, IONIAN and ADRIATICK Seas. IN these Seas there are several Isles, many of which are of good note, and well frequented by Merchants; most of which are in part, if not altoge∣ther in the possession of the Grand Signior; yet the Venetians are not quite expunged. But the Turk hath divided all or most of them into eight Begler∣byats, and 60 and odd Sangiacats, that is, into general and particular Govern∣ments. The AEGEAN or GRECIAN ISLES. Isle of Negro∣ponte.The chief of the Aegean Isles are 1. NEGROPONTE, in the power of the Turks, in circuit 365 miles; Its chief places are 1. Negroponte, seated in a Gulph so called; 2. Caristo, and Dion, a Sea-port Town. Isle of Stali∣mene.2. STALIMENE, of old LEMNOS, about 100 miles in circuit, well peopled by Grecians, except three Towns which the Turks keep strongly fortified to keep them in awe. Its chief Town is Lemnos, or Mirina, but of no great note. Here is a Sovereign Mineral against infection, called Terra Sigillata; the Earth thereof is made into small Pellets, and sealed with the Turks Stamp, and so dispersed and sold to Merchants for an excellent Anti∣dote. Isles of Spora∣des and Cycla∣des.3. The SPORADES and CYCLADES are a great body of several small Isles dispersed about this Sea or Archipelago, and lie so thick, that they oft-times become dangerous to Sea-men, especially in Storms. The chief of these Isles are, 1. Milo, so called for its abounding in Hony; it is about 60 miles in compass, very fertil, and affordeth store of Grain and Oil, but no Wine: its chief place is so called. 2. Tira, 3. Tiresio, 4. Nio, 5. Stapalia, about 50 miles in circuit, whose chief place is so called. 6. Morgo, 7. Nicsia, about 75 miles in compass. 8. Livila, 9. Zinara, 10. Raclia, 11. Siphano, 12. Micone, 13. Teno, 14. Helena, 15. Engia, in a Gulph so called; all small Isles. 16. Fermenia, about 60 miles in circuit. 17. Zea, about 50 miles in compass. 18. Andri, about 80 miles in compass, not far from Negroponte, and is found to afford the same Commodities; its chief place bears the same name. 19. Coos, more towards Asia minor, whose chief Town is so called, and is inhabited by Turks, but the rest by Grecians. In this Isle was born Apelles, that famous Painter; as also Hippocrates, that revived Physick when it was lost; and here Aesculapius had his Temples and Altars, where he was worshipped. 20. Delos, famous for the Temple of Apollo, as also for a Cu¦stom here used, not to permit the birth of Children, nor dying of People, being sent to Rhena, an Isle not far distant. 21. Namfio, 22. Policandro, 23. Pira, 24. Chiero, 25. Pergolo, 26. Serphino, 27. Pario, 28. Sirna, and 29. Sidrille; all small Isles of little note. Isle of Candia.4. CANDIA, or CRETA, (now in the Turks possession) an Isle seated in the Mouth of the Aegean Sea, in compass about 590 miles, of a fertil Soil, and affordeth to Merchants several good Commodities; but Corn is not over plentiful, which defect is supplied from Peloponnesus. It is
very populous, and hath many good Towns; the chief of which are 1. Can∣dia, the Bulwark of Christendom, till lately gained from the Venetians; in which Siege it was ruinated, being before a good City. 2. Suda, a Maritim Town, enjoying a commodious Haven, which by the Turks is well fortified and defended by two Castles. 3. Canea, and 4. Sittia. In this Isle lived Strabo, that famous Cosmographer. Isle of Samo∣thracia.5. SAMOTHRACIA, a small Isle, of note for being the Birth-place of Samo, one of the Sybils; and Pythagoras, that Divine Philosopher. Isle of Sciro, Schiati, &c.6. In the Aegean Isles, or Archipelago, are these Isles, 1. SCIRO, North∣wards of Negroponte, from which it is not far distant. 2. SCHIATI; 3. PELAGMISI, towards the Gulph of Salonichi. 4. TASSO, a small Isle, seated in the entrance of the Gulph of Contessa in Macedonia: and 6. LENIBRO, also a small Isle, not far from Lemnos. The IONIAN ISLES. Isle of Zante.The principal of the IONIAN Isles, are 1. ZANTE, about 50 miles in circuit, and about 7 Leagues from Peloponnesus, under the obedience of the Venetians; it is wonderful fruitful in Oils and Wines, but especially in Cur∣rants. The chief City bears the name of the Isle, a place not very large nor beautiful, but fortified with a strong Castle, which commandeth not only the Town and Harbour, but a good part round about it. The Isle is much troubled with Earthquakes, in regard of which they build their Houses very low. Isle of Zepha∣lonia.2. ZEPHALONIA, about 120 miles in compass, of a fertil Soil, and affords the same Commodities as Zante; but the Currants are smaller, and not so good. Its chief place bears the name of the Isle. 2. Augustali, 3. Guis∣cardo, and 4. Nollo. Isle of Corfu.3. CORFƲ, about 50 miles in length, and 24 in breadth, seated 12 miles from Epirus, and very convenient for the Venetians, who are the Masters of it, being in the Center of their Maritim Territories. It is fruitful in Oil, Hony, Wax, and some other Commodities; its chief City is so called, and is now reputed to be one of the Bulwarks of Christendom, and the Key of the Venetian State, being held impregnable, oft-times having resisted the fury of the Turks. It is seated at the foot of a Mountain, on the Summit of which are built two strong Castles, seated on high Rocks, which are as strongly for∣tified; the other place of note are Castello, St. Angelo, and Pagiopoli. Isle of Cerigo.4. CERIGO, 60 miles in compass, about five miles from Cape Malo in the Morea. It is defended by Rocks, which in themselves are inaccessible, out of which the Inhabitants take abundance of Marble: it hath many Ha∣vens, but none commodious for Shipping. Its chief Town bears the same name, where was formerly a Temple dedicated to Venus, out of which Helena the wife of Menelaus was ravished, and stoln by Paris. Isle of St. Maura.5. SAINT MAƲRA, where stood a Temple dedicated to Apollo, where Mad-brain'd and unfortunate Lovers were cured of their phrenzies, by casting themselves head-long into the Sea. Its chief place bears the name of the Isle, and is inhabited by Jews that were driven out of Spain; and this of all the Ionian Isles is under the Turks obedience.
Isles of Striva∣lis.6. STRIVALIS, seated opposite to Messina, two small Isles of no great account, inhabited by some few Greek Colonies, or Fryars, who never go out of the Isles; neither do they permit Women amongst them, but as they die, have a new supply; they live by their labour, their diet is on Herbs, Roots, Oil, Olives, and the like. Flesh they are denied, but may eat Fish some∣times. Isle of Val de Campara.7. VAL DE CAMPARA, about 56 miles in compass, Northwards of Zephalonia, famous for the Birth place of Ʋlysses. This Isle affordeth those Commodities that are found in Zant, and the Currants are the best and fairest, but in less quantities. The ADRIATICK ISLES. The Adriatick Isles.The Adriatick Sea is in length 700 miles, and about 140 in breadth; the Venetians are Masters of them, to whom the Duke is espoused every Ascension day by casting in of a Ring; a Ceremony performed with great state. Isles of Zara, Vegea, &c.The Islands seated in this Sea are not many, and those that be are neither great nor famous; the chief of which are ZARA, a small Isle, but the chiefest for Traffick, having divers good Harbours. It is fruitful in Wines, Grains, Cattle, and some Oils. 2. VEGEA, fertil in Wine and Pulse, about 10 Leagues in compass. 3. LESINA, about 50 Leagues in compass, being the largest of all the Adriatick Isles, very fertil throughout; its chief Town being so called, a place though unwalled, yet of good strength, by reason of its strong Fortress. 4. CHERSO, well stored with Cattle. 5. CƲR∣ZOLO, a fair, fruitful, and populous Isle, whose chief place is so called. 6. GRISSA, about 100 miles in circuit, an Isle rich in Salt-pits. 7. AB∣SIRTIDES; 8. LISSA; 9. ARBE; and 10. BRAZZIA, with some others of no great note. The chief Rivers in Turkey in Europe are the Drin, the Alsea, the Penea, the Wardar, the Mariza, and the Don, or Danube, which of all others is the strongest and most considerable; the others being, for the most part, only famous in Antiquity.
The King∣dom of FRANCE, with its E∣states and Provinces, as they are divided in∣to twelve General Govern∣ments, or 3 times 4, according to their sci∣tuation, to wit, Four on this side the LOIRE, whose Pro∣vinces, Parts, and chief places are PICARDY, Higher; as True Picardy, Amiens. St. Quintin. Vermandois, Lower; as Ponthieu, Abbeville, Calais. Boulenois, Vexin, — Roven, or Roa. NORMANDY, Higher; as Caux, Havre de Grace. Normandy, Lifieux. Lower; as Auge, Caen, Alenson. Bessin, Bayeux. Coutantin, Coutance; The ISLE of FRANCE; where are Isle of France, — Paris. Beauvaisis, Beauvais. Valois, Senlis. Soissonnois, Soissons. Brie, Meaux. CHAMPAIGNE; where are Remois, — Reims. Champaigne, Troyes. Chloons. Bassigny, Langres. Senonois. Sen. Four upon and about the LOIRE; whose Pro∣vinces, Parts, and chief places, are BRETAIGNE, Higher, Rennes. St. Maloes. Mean, Nantes, Vennes, Lower, Morlaix, Brest. ORLEANOIS, On this side the LOIRE, le Maine, — le Main. Perche, Mortalgne. Beauce, Chartes. Upon the LOIRE, Nivernois, Nevers. Orleanois, Orleans. Blaisois, Blois. Touraine, Tours. Anjou, Angiers. Beyond the LOIRE, Poictou, Poictiers. Aunis, Rochell. Angoumeis, Angoulesme. Berry, — Burges. BOURGOGNE, or BURGUNDY, Bourgogne,— Bourgogne, Dijon. Autun, Beaune. Countries ad∣jacent, Challonnois, Challon. Auxerrois, Auxerre. Bresse, Bourg. LIONNOIS, and AUVERGNE, Lionnois, Lionnois, — Lions. Forez. Monbrizon. Auvergne, Bourbonnois, Moulins. Anvergne, Clermont. la Marche, Gueret. Four beyond the LOIRE, whose Pro∣vinces, Parts, and chief places are GUIENNE, and GUASCOGNE, Guienne, Guienne, — Pourdeaux, Saintonge, Sainter. Piregort, Perigueux. Limofin, Limoges. Rovergue, Rodez. Quercy, Cahors. Agenois, Agen. Guascogne, Bazadois, — Bazas, Albret, Nerac. Condomois, Condom. Armaignac, Aux. Guascogne, Aire. les Landes, Dax. Basque, Bayone. Lower Navarre, St. Palais. Bearn, Pau. Lescar. Bigorre, Tarbe. Comminges, St Bertrand, LANGUEDOC, Higher, Toulousan, — Thoulouse. Carcassez, Carcassone. Foix, Foix. Albigeois, Alby. Lower, Narbone, — Narbone. Beziers, Beziers. Nismes, Monpelier, Nismes. The Severnes, Givaudan, — Mende. Velay, le Puy. Vivarais, Viviers. DAUPHINE, Lower, Vienne, Valence. Higher, Grenoble, Embrun. Part of Piedmont, — Pignerol. PROVENCE, Aix, Arles, Marscille, Forcalquier, Tolon, or Thoson. To which at present may be added LORRAINE; where are Barrois, Bar-le-Duc, St. Michael. Lorraine, Metz, Toul, Verdun, and Nancy. And divers small Estates and Principa∣lities Between Dauphin and Provence, the Country of — Avignon. In the Country of Avignon, the Principality of Orange, In Bresse, — the Sovereignty of Dombes, Trevoux, Towards the Low Country, the Principality of — Sedan. the Principality of Arches, Charleville.
FRANCE, with its Four Go∣vernments (and Pro∣vinces therein contained) on this side the Loire; which are Towards the Sea; as PICARDY, as it is divi∣ded in the Lower; where are Bousenois, Calnis, Ardres, Boulognois. Ponthieu, Monstrevil, Rue, Abbeville, St. Vallery. Mean, True Picardy, Amient, Doulens, Corbie. Santerre, Perone, Mondidier, Roye. Higher, Vermandois, St. Quintin, Castelet, Hem. Tierrasche, Guise, Fere, Capelle, Vervins, Marle. NORMAN∣DY, as it is divided into the Higher; where are Caux, Candebes, Dieppe, Havre de Grace. Vexin Normandy, Roven, or Roan, Gisors, Pont de l'Arche. Normandy, or Cham∣pagne, Eureux, Lifieux, Laigle, Hanfleur. Lower, Auge, Caen, Alenson, Seez, Falaise. Bessin, Bayeux, St. Lo, Vire. Coutantin, Coutance, Carenten, Cherbourg, Granville. Auranchin, Auranches, Mortain, Pone Orson, St. Michael. In-land; as The ISLE of FRANCE, with its parts In the Middle; where are Isle of France, Paris, St. Denis. Valois, Senlis, Crespy in Valois. Towards NORMAN∣DY, Vexin François, Pont Oyse, Maigny, Chaumont, in Vexin. François, St. Germain, in Laye, Poissy, Mante, Meulan, Breux, Monfort l'Amaury. Towards la BEAUCE, Gastinois, Dourdan, Narnours. Hurepoix, Moret, Melun, Corbeil. Towards CHAMPAGNE, Brie Françoise, Menux, Chasteau Thierry. Towards PICARDY, Beauvaisis, Beauvais, Clermont in Beauvaisis. Soissonnois, Soissons, Compeigne, Noyon. Laonnois, Laon, Chauny: CHAM∣PAGNE, with its parts Towards the LOW COUNTRY, as The Principality of Chasteau Regnaud, Sedan, Charleville. Retelois, &c. Retel, Rocroix, Donchery, Messieres, Mouson. True CHAMPAGNE, Remois, Reims, Fisines. Champagne, Troyes, Chaalons, Espernay. Pertois, Vitry le Francois, St. Menehoult. Towards LORRAINE, Valage, Bar upon Aube, St. Disier. Langres, Bassigny, Chaumont in Bassigny, Joinville. Towards the ISLE of FRANCE; Senonols, Sens, Joigny, St. Florentin, Tonnerre, Monte reau fautyoune, Brie Champagnoise, Provins, Sesanne, in Brie.
FRANCE, with its Four Go∣vernments (and Pro∣vinces therein contained) upon and about the LOIRE; which are Below the LIRE, as BRETAIGNE; which may be di∣vided into the Higher, Rennes, Vitray, Dol, St. Maloes, Dinan. Mean, Nantes, Vennes, Ploermes, St. Brien, Lamballe, Auray, Hannebout, Blavet, or Port Louys. Lower, Lantriguet, or Treguier, Leondoul, or St Pol de Leon, Morlaix, Brest, Quimpercorentia, or Corne∣vaille, Quimperlay. ORLEANOIS; under the name of which may be com∣prised the Provinces or Countries; as they lie On this side the LOIRE; as le Maine, le Mains, Mayenne, Laval, Domfront. Perche, Nogent le Retrou, Mortaigne, Vernevil, la Beauce, Chartes, Estampes, Chasteau Dun, Vendosme. Gastenois, — Montargis. Nivernois, Nerves, la Charite, Clamecy, Donzy. Upon the LOIRE, as Orleanois, Orleans, Gien. Blaisois, — Blois. Touraine, Tours, Amboise, Loches, Chinon. Ajou, Angiers, Saumur, la Fleche. Beyond the LOIRE, as Poictou, Poictiers, Maillezais, Luson, Chastelleraud, Niort, Lusignan, Monmorillou, Partenay, Touars, Loudun, Richelieu, Aunis, — Rochell. Angoumols, — Angoulesme. Berry, Burges, Issoudun, Chasteau Roux, Remorentin, Argenton, Sancerre. the Sovereignty of — Bois belle. Above the LOIRE, as BOURGOGNE, or BURGUNDY, which may be divided in the Dutchy of BOUR∣GOGNE; where are Bourgogne, Dijon, Autun, Beaune, Aussone. Challonnois, — Challon. Masconnois, Mascon, Tornus. Auxois, — Semur. the Country of Montagne, Chastillon upon the Seine. Countries ad∣jacent; as Charollois, Auxerrois, Bresse, Bugey, and Veromey, Balliage, Charolles. Auxerre. Bourge. Belley. Gex. LIONNOIS, and AUVERGNE; which may be divided in LIONNOIS; where are Lionnois, — Lions. the Sovereignty of Dombes, Trevoux. Forez, Monbrizon, Roenne, St. Estienne of Furens. Beaujolois, — Ville Franche. AUVERGNE, where are Bourbonnois, Bourbon the Archambaul, Molins. Nivernois in part, — St. Pierre le Moutier. Auvergne, Lower, Cleremont in Auvergne, Riom, Monferrand, Thiers. Higher, Vic le Comte, St. Elour, Orilhac, Brioude, Issoire. la Marche, Higher, — Gueret. Lower, Dorat, Belac.
FRANCE, with its Four Go∣vernments (and Pro∣vinces therein contained) beyond the Loire; which are About the GARONNE, as GUIENNE, and GUAS∣COGNE, GUIENNE; where are Saintonge, Saintes, St. Jean of Angely, Brouage. Guienne, Bourdeaux, Blaye. Perigort, Perigueux, Bergerac, Sarlat. Agenois, Agen, Toneina. Limosin, Limoges, Brive, Tulle. Quercy, Cahors, Montalbon, Figeac. Rovergue, Rhodez, Ville Franche of Rovergue, Vabres. GUASCOGNE; where are Bazados, Bazas, St. Foy. Lanes, — Dax. Guascogne, Ayre, St. Saver. Albret, — Nerac. Condomois, — Condom. Armaignac, Aux, Lectoure. Comminge, St. Bertrand, Lombes. Conserans, — St Licer. Bigorre, — Tarbe. Bearn, Pau, Lescar, Oleron, Ortes. Lower Navarre, — St. Palais: Basque, — Bayonne. Between the GARONNE, and the RHOSNE, as LANGUE∣DOC, which is divided into Higher LANGUEDOC; where are Toulousan, Toulousa, Montauban, la Vaur. Albigeoi, Alby, Castres. Auraguais, Castelnau darry; St. Papoul. Foix, Foix, Pamie, Mirepoix, Rieux. Lower LANGUEDOC; where are Quarter of Narbone, Narbone, Aleth, Limouth, Carcassone, St. Pons de Tomiere, Quarter of Beziers, Beziers, Agde, Pesenns, Lodere. Quarter of Nismes, Monpellier, Nismes, Beaucaire, Aiguesmortes, SEVENNES; where are Gevaudan, Mende, Mervcich, or Mervejoss. Velay, — le Puy. Vivarais, Viviers, le Pond St. Esprit, Uzes. Between the RHOSNE, and the ALPES, as DAUPHINE, with its Parts Towards the RHOSNE, or ROANE, Viennois, — Vienna. Valentinois, Higher, Valence, Romans, St. Marcelin. Lower, Crest, Montelimar. Tricastin, — St. Pol Trois chaux. In the midst of the Country Grisivaudan, — Grenoble. Diois, Die. Baronies, le Buijz, Towards the Alpes, Embrunois, Embrun. Gapensois, Gap. Briansonnois, — Brianson. PROVENCE, with its Pla∣ces Towards the Rhosne, or Roane, Arles, Tarascon. Upon the Sea, Marseille, Toulon, St. Tropes, Frejuls, Antibe, Crace, Vence. In the midst of the Country, Aix, Salon, Apt, Folcalquier, Riell Dragnignan. Towards the Alpes, Sisteron, Digne, Senez, Glandeve.
Estates, Counties, Bishopricks, Cities, &c. taken and purchased by (and in the Prote∣ction, Guard, and Possession of) the King of FRANCE, viz. In the Estates of the CA∣THO LICK KING, to wit, In SPAIN, as The County of Rousillon; where are Perpignan, Elne, Collioure, Salces, &c. The County of Cerdagne, — Puy, Cerda, &c. The Principality of Catalogne, and County of Barcelone; where are Barcelona, Girona, Vich, Solsona, Urgel, Manressa, Cardona, Cadegues, &c. In the LOW COUNTRY, as Part of the County of Flanders, Gravelines, Wasten. Part of the County of Artois, Arras, Hesdin, Bappaumes. Part of the County of Haynaut, Landrochy. Part of the Dutchy of Luxen∣bourg. Thionville, Damvillers. In the FRENCH COUNTY, as Part of the Balliages of Gray, Vesoul, Lure, &c. Part of the Balliages of Salins, Arbois, Poligny, Bletterans, St. Amour, Joux, &c. In divers Lands and Princi∣palities, the most part of which are e∣steemed in the Empire of GERMA∣NY, to wit, In the Estate of LORRAIN, as The Dutchy of Barrois, Barle Duc, Ligny, St. Michael, Pont a Moosson. The Dutchy of Lorrain, Nancy, Mirecourt, Newchasted on the Meuse, Dieuze, Sirke, &c. The Bishoprick of Metz, Vic, Moyen-Vic, Marsal, St. Avold, Alberstrof, Espernay. About LORRAIN, as The Principality of — Sedan. The Principality of Arches, or Charleville, Clermont, Stenay, Jametz. The County of — Biche. In and about the PALATINATE of the RHINE, as Part of the Palatinate of the Rhine, Bacharach, Creutznach, Altzheim, Oppenheim, Neustat, Landau, Cermosheim, &c. Part of the Archbishoprick of Mayence, Mayence, Bingen, &c. Part of the Bishoprick of Wormes, Wormes. Part of the Bishoprick of Spire, Spire, Udenheim, or Philipsbour. Part of the Estate of Bade, Baden, Durlach, Pfortzheim, &c. In ALSACE, or ALSATIA, as Low Alsace, Haguenau, Saverne, &c. Higher Alsace, Colmar, Schlestat, Brisach, Newbourg, &c. County of Pfirt, or Ferrette, and Country of Sungou, Ferrette, Tannes, Befort, Blome, Landseror, &c. About ALSACE, as The County of — Monbeliard, &c. The Bishoprick of Basle, Porentru, St. Usand, Dalsperg, or Delmont, &c. The County of Reinfield, Reinfield, Lanffenbourg, Waldshout. In the Dutchy of Wirtenberg, Hohen-Wiel, In Piedmont, — Pignerol, &c. In ITALY, In the Estates of the Duke of SAVOY, to wit, In the Principality of Pied∣mont, Turin, Suze, Avigliane, Chivas, Santja, Ast, Quierascq, Coni, Caours, &c. In the Marquisate of Saluces, Carmagnole, Demont. In the Estates of MONFERRAT, viz. In the Dukedom of Savoy, — Trin, &c. In the Dukedom of Mantoua, Casal, Aqui. On the River of GENES, The Principality of — Monaco, or Morgues.
map of France blazon or coat of arms of the Isham baronets Rt. Worshipfull Sr. Iustinian  of Lamport in Northampto¦shire Baronet.  Mapp is Humbly DD. by R. Blome GENERALL MAPP of the KINGDOM of FRANCE. Designed by Monsieur Sanson, Geographer to the French King.
FRANCE. FRANCE is esteemed the most fertil and powerful Kingdom in Eu∣rope, and the best, next to England, that can subsist without the help of others. It is seated about the 45th degrees of Latitude,Its Scituation. which is in the midst of the Temperate Zone. It is washed on the East with the Rhine, together with an imaginary line drawn from Strasburgh to Calais; on the South by the Mediterranean Seas, and opens a passage to the Northern Ocean; on the West by the Aquitain Sea; and on the North by the British Ocean.Its Bounds. It extends it self from the 42 degrees of Latitude unto the 51, and from the 15th of Longitude to the 29th, which makes its length and breadth to be above 200 French Leagues. It is conti∣guous to the Low Countries on the North, to Germany and Italy on the East, and to Spain on the South. Its Soil and Commodities.It is of an extraordinary fertil Soil, affording three excellent and useful Commodities in great plenty, viz. Corn, Wine, and Salt; also Oil, Almonds, Paper, Canvass, Linnen, both fine and course, Oade, Corral, Skins, Nuts, Stuffs, and several Manufactures, Toies, and Curiosities. It is very plentiful in all Provisions. Its People.It is exceeding populous and crouded with Towns and Cities, once num∣bring 100000 Parishes, which are now reduced to a less number. The Peo∣ple are well proportionate, and indifferent handsom, especially the Men; they are of a ready and Mercurial wit, of a courteous Behaviour, of a hot Brain, and soon moved to Broils; they are very active, and given to Exercises; in weighty Affairs, both Civil and Martial, they are not over subtle, their first attempt being like thunder, and their end like smoak. In matters of Religion they generally follow the Church of Rome, in which they are not over strict. It would be too tedious to observe all the different Orders and Governments in this Kingdom; we will content our selves to say, that in the Assemblies of the General Estates, where the Nobility, Clergy, and third Estate, have their Seats, it is divided into twelve several Government, of which four are on this side, or if you please, Northwards of the Loire; four upon and about the Loire, and four beyond the South of the Loire. The four on this side are Picardy, Normandy, the Isle of France, and Cham∣paigne; the four about the Loire are Bretaigne, Orleance, or Orlenois, Bourgogne, or Burgundy, and Lionois; and the four beyond the Loire are Guienne and Gascoigne, Languedoc, Dauphin, and Provence. In each Go∣vernment are several Parts or Countries, which are taken notice of in the Geographical Tables of the Kingdom, of which in order. Goverment of Picardy.PICARDY is divided into the Higher and Lower, in both of which are divers good Towns; in the Lower are 1. Calais, called by Coesar, Portus Iccius, held by the English near 200 years, and was then esteemed the Key of the Kingdom; it is esteemed one of the best Ports in Picardy, seated oppo∣site to Dover in England, from which it is distant about eight Leagues, once a place of great Trade, as being the Staple of English Wools; now only of note for its being the receipt of Passengers from this Kingdom to England, to
and fro. 2. Bulloigne, a strong Frontier Town, towards the Sea. 3. Abbe∣ville, also a strong Frontier Town. In the higher Picardy are, 1. Amiens, a Frontier City towards Flanaers, well fortified, and famous for the sudden loss, and as sudden and brave regaining it by Henry the Fourth. 2. St. Quintin, a strong Frontier Town. Dukedom of Normandy.NORMANDY, well watered with Rivers, amongst which are the Seine, Anon, and Orne. It is well garnished with Cities and Towns, many of which are commodiously seated for Trade, by reason of their vicinity to the British Ocean; the chief of which are, 1. Roan, its Metropolis, seated in the higher Normandy, on the banks of the Seine, over which there is a famous Bridge of Boats. Here is held one of the Parliaments of France, and it is a place of as great Trade as any in France, being one of the three principal Towns, where Exchanges are used. Here the English have a publick Hall allowed them for the sale of English Woolen cloth, to which place at certain days they are constrained to expose them to sale. 2. Havre de Grace, or Now Haven, the strongest place in all Normandy. 3. Dieppe, also a City of some Trade, being a common Landing-place for the English in their passage into France. 4. Caen, famous for its long resistance of Henry the Fifth of England. 5. Fabais, once a strong / Town: here it was that Duke Robert passing through saw some Maids a dancing, amongst which was one Arlet, a Skinners Daughter, who so nimbly footed it, that his desires were to enjoy her, thinking she would be as active in the Bed; whereupon he sent for her, and obtained his desires; in which she so plensed him, that he begat on her William the Bastard King of England, in spight to whom, and disgrace to his Mother, the English call Whores, Harlots. 6. Charenton, famous for the Preaching of that eminent Divine Peter du Moulin: and 7. Constance. Isle of France.The Isle of FRANCE, made so by the circlings and confluences of the Seine and other little Brooks: It lieth in the heart of all France, where we shall find not only its particular glory, but that of all the Kingdom, to wit, Paris,City of Paris. which for its Riches, Power and number of Inhabitants, may justly contend with any in Europe. It is about 12 miles in circuit, if all the Suburbs are reckoned, and in form rather round than oval; seated on the Seine, and in a Soil so fertil, that not many Cities know so great plenty. It is of no great strength, nor of much consequence in matter of Trade, only contenting themselves with enough to serve the Inhabitants and Court; yet in matter of Coin it giveth rule to all Cities in France, and is another of the three Cities where Exchanges are placed; a convenience for the Nobility, Gentry, and Courtiers, as also for Strangers. The chief ornaments of it are the Palace of the Louvre, so much famoused abroad; besides so many Palaces of the Nobility, amongst the rest that of Luxembourgh, its Palace-Royal, its Church of Nostre Dame, its Ʋniversity, formed by Charlemain in Anno 800, esteem∣ed the first in Europe, containing 55 Colledges, and particularly the Colledge of the Sorbona; also the Halls of Justice, or Courts of Parliament, being as our Courts of Judicature, are all remarkable. Next to this City may be reckoned, 1. St. Dennis, about three miles from Paris, famous for the Sepul∣chres of the French Kings. 2. Pont-oyse; 3. Meaux; 4. Beauvais, and 5. Soissons. In this Province is the beautiful House and Forest of Fontaine Bleau, built by Henry the Fourth, esteemed not only one of the fairest Palaces in all France, but of Christendom; here is also seated the Royal Mansion of St. Germains and Boys de Vincennes, where the puissant Henry the Fifth fini∣shed his days. In this Province is the Dukedom of Valois, whose chief places are Luzarch and Sen-lis: This Country abounds in Vineyards, which yields the sharp Wine called Vin de Paris. Province of Champaigne.CHAMPAIGNE, so called from being a Champain Country; its chief places are, 1. Rheims, famous for being the place where the Kings of France are usually Crowned, and anointed with an Oil here kept, which they say
came down from Heaven, and never decreaseth; and here is a Colledge for English Jesuits. 2. Chaaloons, 3. Langres, 4. Sens, and 5. Troyes, all places of some account. Province of Britany.BRETAIGNE, or Britanny, whose chief Port-Towns are Brest, Blavet, and St. Malos; and within Land the Cities of 1. Nantes, seated on the Loire. 2. Rennes, where the Parliament for this Province is held. 3. Vennes, seated on the South-Sea. 4. Breine; and 5. Morlaix, of note for its great store of Paper so called. Under the Government of ORLEANS, or ORLEANOIS, we comprehend divers Provinces on this side, upon, and beyond the Loire, viz. Province of Maine.MAINE, whose chief places are, 1. Maine, seated on the River Magenue, which dischargeth it self into the Loire: 2. Mayenne, 3. Laval, and 4. Dom∣front. Province of Perche.PERCHE, on the borders of Normandy, hath for its chief places No∣gent le Retrou, Mortaigne, and Vernevil; which by some are esteemed in Normandy. Province of la Beauce.LA BEAƲCE hath for its principal places, 1. Chartes, seated on the Loire, a fair and pleasant City, dignified with an Ʋniversity for the study of the Civil Laws. 2. Estampes, 3. Chàsteau Dun, and 4. Vendosme. Province of Gastenois.GASTENOIS hath for its principal place Montargis. Province of Nivernois.NIVERNOIS, or BƲRBON, well watered by the Loire and Al∣lier; its chief places are, 1. Nerves, of some account for its pretty Glass-works, and is dignified with an ancient Dukedom. 2. La Charite, 3. Clamecy, and 4. Donzy. Province of Orleanois.ORLEANOIS, whose chief City is Orleans, from whence the Go∣vernment or Province took its name; a City, if Paris excepted, may contend with any in France, having once been the Seat of a King of its own. Its pleasant scituation on the Loire makes it extream delightful, and although of no considerable Trade, yet is a great Thorough-fair for such Commodities as pass to Lions, and other places in the heart of the Kingdom. Province of Blasois.BLASOIS hath for its chief place Blois, where, by the command of Henry the Third, the Duke of Guise, the first stirrer up of the Civil Wars in France, as also the great contriver and promoter of the grievous Massacre at Paris, was slain in the Senate-house. Province of Touraine.TOƲRAINE hath for its chief places, 1. Tours, where the Prote∣stants first began, and from one of whose Gates (called Hugo's-Gate) they were called Hugonots. Nigh to this place it was that Charles Martel, Father of King Pepin, discomfited an Army of about 400000 Saracens, and slew of them about 370000. 2. Amboise, 3. Loches, and 4. Chinon. Province of Anjou.ANJOƲ, adjoyning to Maine, a small Province, but exceeding fertil, and affords the best Wines in France. Its chief places are 1. Angiers, digni∣fied with an Ʋniversity. 2. Saumur, a Town delightfully seated on the Loire, and dignified with the only Protestant Ʋniversity in France: and 3. la Fleche. Province of Poictou.POICTOƲ, a large and populous Province, numbring about 1200 Pa∣rishes, and dignified with three Bishopricks; its principal places are 1. Poi∣ctiers, seated on the River Clavius, famous for the study of the Civil Laws, and in greatness esteemed next to Paris; but of small account as to matter of Trade. 2. Maillezais, 3. Luson, 4. Chastelleroud, 5. Niort, 6. Lusignan, and 7. Touars. This Country is very fertil, especially in good Vineyards; and in these Fields were sought that memorable Battle, between John of France and Edward the Black Prince, who contrary to all expectation gained the day. Province of Aunis.AƲNIS, South of Poictou, hath for its chief City Rochel, commodiously seated on the Aquitain Ocean, by reason of which it enjoyeth a great Trade; it is a place of great strength, as may appear by the resistance the Protestants there inhabiting, made against the powerful Army of the French King.
Province of Angoumois.ANGOƲMOIS, South of Guienne, hath for its chief place Angou∣lesme. Province of Berry.BERRY, very fertil and hath rich Pastures, on which are fed abundance of Sheep, of whose Wool the Inhabitants make store of Cloth. Its, chief pla∣ces are 1. Burges, dignified with a flourishing Ʋniversity; 2. Issoudun, 3: Cha∣steau Roux, 4. Argentum, and 5. Sancerre. Province of Dutchy of Burgundy.BOƲRGOGNE, or BƲRGƲNDY, which is subdivided into se∣veral less parts, hath for its chief places 1. Dijon, built by the Emperour Au∣relian, proud in her Parliament, and for giving birth to St. Bernard. 2. Autun, once the chief City in the Province, and dignified with an Episcopal See. 3. Beaune, famous for its stately Hospital, equalizing many Princes Palaces; and these places are in Bourgogne, particularly so called. 4. Challon, in Chal∣lonnois, belonging to the House of Orange. 5. Mascon, in Masconnois, where the Devil made his visits and disputes to a Minister, which story is sufficiently known, being at large treated of in a Book entituled the Devil of Mascon. 6. Semur, in Auxois; and 7. Chastillon on the Seine, in the Country of Mon∣tagne. Several small Countries.Adjacent to this Province of Burgundy are the Countries of Charollois, Auxerrois, Bresse, Balliage, Beugey, and Veromey. The chief place of CHAROLLOIS, is Chorolles; of AƲXERROIS, Auxerre; of BRESSE, Bourge, a Town so well built and so strongly fortified, that it is esteemed impregnable; of BALLIAGE, which bordereth upon the Swisses and Savoy, Gex, which is not far distant from Geneve; and of BƲ∣GEY and VEROMAY, bordering upon Dolphin and Savoy; Belly, which is a place of some account. Province of Lionnois.LIONNOIS hath for its chief places, 1. Lions, seated upon the con∣junction of the Roane with the Soane, by some esteemed the second City of France, a famous ancient Mart Town, and the See of an Archbishop, who is Primate of all France. 2. Treveux, in the Sovereignty of Dombes; Mom∣brizon, in the County of Forez; and 4. Ville Franche, in the Country of Beaujolois. Province of Auvergne.AƲVERGNE hath for its chief places, 1. Bourbon the Archambaul; 2. Molins, seated on the Elaver, of note for their neat Cases of Knives and Scissers, both in the part or Country of Bourbonnois. 3. St. Pierre le Montier, in Nivernois: 4. Cleremont, the Seat of Vercingetorix, who so bravely op∣posed Caesar; 5. Riom, 6. Monferrand, 7. Vic le Comte, and 8. St. Flour, all in Auvergne, particularly so called. 9. Gueret, and 10. Dorat, in the Part of La Marche. Government of Guienne and Gascogne.In the Government of Guyenne and Gascogne are several Provinces and Countries, in which are seated many good Towns and Cities. In GƲYENNE are 1. the Province of Saintonge, whose chief place is Sainctes. 2. Guienne, which hath for its principal City Bourdeaux, seated on the Banks of the Gerende, famous for being the Birth-place of King Richard the Second, at present honoured with an Ʋniversity and a Parliament. It is a place of a very great Trade, and plentifully furnished with divers good Commodities, especially Wines and Paper. 3. Prigort, hath for its chief place Perigueux, seated on the Banks of Ila; 4. Agenois, whose chief place is Agen; 5. Limosin hath for its chief places Limoges and Brive; 6. Quercy, in which are seated Cahors, a rich and beautiful City, built on the ascent of a Hill; and Montalbon, scituate on the Garond, a place of good strength; and 7. Rovergue, whose chief places are Rodez and Vabres. Provinces in Gascogne.In GASCOGNE are also divers Provinces, which with its chief places are taken notice of in the Geographical Table of the four Governments be∣yond the Loire, beginning with Guienne and Gascogne. Province of Languedoc.LANGƲEDOC may be divided into three quarters, in which are seve∣ral parts. In the higher Langnedoc are the Cities of Toulousa, in Toulousan, a fair large City, though of no continuance, and is a place of a considerable
Inland-trade. 2. Alby, in Albigeois; 3. Castellan darry, in Auraguais; and 4. Foix, in Foix. In the lower Languedoc are 1. Narbone, the first Co∣lony planted by the Romans next to Carthage, out of Italy; 2. Aleth, 3. Li∣mouth, all in Narbone; 4. Beziers, 5. Agde, and 6. Pemenas, in the quarter of Beziers, 7. Montpellier, esteemed the healthfullest place for a pure Air in all France; 8. Nismes, and 9. Beaucaire; all in the quarter of Nismes. In the other part called Sevennes are, 1. Mende; in the quarter of Gevaudan; 2. Le Puy, in Velay; 3. Viviers, and 4. Ʋzes, in the part of Viva∣rais. Province of Daulphine.The Province of DAƲLPHINE is watered with the Roane and other Rivers, and honoured with the title of the Princes of France. It may be divided into three great parts, which are subdivided into others, viz. in the part or quarter towards the Roane are the Parts and Cities of Vienne in Vien∣nois, of some esteem for its excellent Sword-blades here made; 2. Valence, a fine City watered with the Roane; 3. Romans, 4. St. Marcellin, 5. Crest, and 6. Montelimar; all in the higher and lower Valentinois; and St. Pol Trois Chaux, in the part of Tricastin. In the quarter in the midst of the Province are 1. Grenoble, in Grisivanden; 2. Die, in Diois; and 3. le Bujiz, in Baronies: And in the quarter towards the Alpes, 1. Embrun, in Embrunois, 2. Gap, in Gapensois, and 3. Brianson, in Briansonnois. Province of Provence.PROVENCE, washed by the Mediterranean Sea, hath for its chief places towards the Roane, Arles, a Town well fortified by Henry the Fourth; and Tarascon. Upon the Sea, 1. Marseille, once a Colony of the Phoenici∣ans, commodiously seated on the Mediterranean shoar, enjoying an excellent Haven and Road for Shipping, which renders it a place of a considerable Trade, and is well frequented by Merchants. 2. Thollon, the best Sea-port Town on the Mediterranean in all France, having a capacious and safe Ha∣ven, and is well resorted unto by Merchants. 3. St. Tropes; 4. Grace, and 5. Vence. In the midst of the Province are 1. Aix, honoured with a Parlia∣ment; 2. Salon, 3. Apt, and 4. Riez: And towards the Alpes are Sisteron, Digne, Senez, Glandeeve, &c. To the Province of PROVENCE doth belong the Country of Avignon, and the Principality of Orange: In Avignon are many walled Towns and some Cities, the chief of which is Avignon, a fair City seated on the Roane, famous for being the ancient Seat of the Popes, till removed to Rome. This City is worthy of observation, in that here is said to be 7 Parish Churches, 7 Monasteries, 7 Nunneries, 7 Inns, 7 Palaces, and 7 Gates to its Walls; as also for being made a Ʋniversity. Principality of Orange.In ORANGE are several good Towns and Cities, the chief of which is Orange, seated on the Meine, of note for the wonderful and excellent An∣tiquities that are here to be seen; and this Country belongs to the Prince of Orange. To the twelve Governments we ought to add LORRAINE, where are the Cities of St. Michael, Metz, Toul, Verdun, and Nancy: also part of Ar∣tois; of Haynault and Luxembourg, where are the Cities of Arras, Avesnes, Moutmedy, &c. Likewise the Principalities of Sedan and Arches, whose chief place is Charleville; also Rousillon, on the Coast of Spain, whose chief places are Perpignan, Elne, Collioure, Salces, &c. Alsatia, on the side of Germany, and the Principality of Bress, belonging to Mademoiselle d'Or∣leance; but being to treat of these places in Germany, and elsewhere, I shall omit the description of them here. Bishops, Parli∣aments, &c. in France.All France hath 15 Archbishops, 105 Bishops, 10 Parliaments; amongst which the power of that of Paris extends as far as all the rest. Under these Parliaments are 105 and odd Balliages, or Justices-Royal, immediate depen∣dants on these Parliaments, 24 Generalities, and about 250 Elections and Re∣ceipts of Royal-Money: And in the general Governments of the Militia, about 2 or 300 Governments. Chief Rivers.This Kingdom is for the generality exceedingly furnished with Rivers, the principal amongst which are the Loire, Roane, Garonne, and Seine.
ALLE∣MAGNIA, or GER∣MANY, which may be consider∣ed in three great Parts, whereof The first about the RHINE, may be sub∣divided into three other parts, to wit, On this side the RHINE; where are The French County, Besanson, Dole. Lorraine, Metz, Nancy. The Catholick Low Countries, Anvers, or Antwerp, Brusselles, Gand, or Gaunt, Lille, Arras. Upon the RHINE; where are Alsace, or Alsatia, Strasbourg, Fribourg, Brisac, Haguenau. Palatinate of the Rhine, Hildeberg, Wormes, Spire, The Electorates of Mayence, Treves, Cologne. The Estates of Cleves and Ju∣liers, Dusseldrop, Wesel, Juliers. The Estates of the United Pro∣vinces, Amsterdam, Utrecht, the Hague. Beyond the RHINE; where are Franconia, Wirzbourg, Nuremberg, Francfort. Hessie, Cassel, Marpurg. Westphalie, Munster, Embden, Soest. The second about the DANUBE, may be also divided into three other parts, to wit, Higher, or SOVABIA; which is divided into Suisse, or Switzerland, Basle, Berne, Zurich, Geneve, Coire. Sovabia, Ausbourg, Constance, Ulme, Lindau, Stutgard. Mean, or BAVARIA; which is divided into Tirol, Inspruck, Feldkirck, Dutchy of Bavaria, Munick, Lanshout, Ratisbone, Saltisbourg, Passau. Palatinate of Bavaria, — Amberg. Lower, or AUSTRICHE or AUSTRIA; where are The Archbishoprick of Austria, Vienne, Lintz, Crems. The Hereditary Lands of Au∣stria, Stirie, Creacz, Carinthie, St. Veit, Carniola, Lau-bach, Cilley, Cilley, Vindis Marche, Metling. The third a∣bout the ELE, and ODER, may be divided into two parts, to wit, The Highest comprehendeth the Estates of BOHEMIA; where are the Kingdom of Bohemia, Prague, Cottenberg. Pilsen, Coningracz, Budweiss, Glatz. Provinces incor∣perated to Bo∣hemia, as Silicle, Breslau, Lignitz, Neisse, Gros Glogau. Lusacia, Baudisseu, Gorlitz, Soraw. Moravia, Olmutz, Brynne. The Lowest compre∣hendeth SAXONY in general, which may be divided inco into the Higher Saxony; where are The Estates of Saxony, Wittenberg, Dreide, Lipsick, Erford. The Marquisate of Branden∣bourg, Stendai, Brandenbourg, Berlin, Lansperg. Pomerania, Stettin, Straelsond. Lower Saxony; where are Two Archbishopricks, Magdebourg, Breme. Three Bishopricks, Ferden, Hildesheim, Halberstat. Several Dutchies; among which are those of Holsace, Kille, Gluckstad. Meclebourg, Rostock, Suerin. Lauvenbourg Lauvenbourg. Lunenbourg, Lunenbourg. Brunswick, Brunswick, Wolsenbuttel. Imperial Cities, Lubeek, Hambourg, Gosa.
GERMA∣NY about the Rhine, may be con∣sidered On this side the RHINE, in three Parts, to wit, FRANCHE COUNTY, or BUR∣GUNDY; where are The Balliages of Amont, — Gray. Dole, Dole. Aval, Salins. And some Mannors of the Empire, as The Archbishopr. and City of Besanson. The County of Monbeliard. LORRAINE; where are the Dutchies, &c. of BARROIS, Royal, — Bar-le-Duc. Ducal, St. Michael. LORRAINE, where are the Balliages of Francois, Nancy. Allemand, Vaudrevange. Vauge, — Mirecourt. Bishopricks, and Imperial Cities, Metz, Toul, Verdun. The CATHO∣LICK Low Country; where are The Dutchies of Brabant, Louvain, Brusselles. Limbourg, Limbourg, Mastcih. Luxembourg, Luxembourg, Thionville. The Counties or Earl∣doms of Flanders, Gand, or Gaunt, Brugge, Lille. Artois, Arras, St. Omer. Hayaut, Mons, Valenciennes. Namur, — Namur. The Marquisate of the Empire, — Anvers, or Autwerp. The Signiory of Malines, — Malines. Also the Archbishoprick, and Imperial City of — Cambray. Bishoprick, and Imperial City of — Liege. Upon the RHINE, in five Parts, viz. ALSACE, or ALSATIA, On this side the Rhine; where are The Sungou, — Altkirck, The Higher Alsace, Ensisheim, Blome. The Lower Alsace, Strasbourg, Haguenau. Beyond the Rhine, where are The Brisgou, Fribourg, Brissac. The Mormau, — Offenbourg. The Marquisate of Bade, Durlach. The PALA∣TINATE of the Rhine, under the name of which may be understood The Estates of the Palatinate, Heidelberg, Frankenal. The Estates of the Princes of the House Palatinate, Zweibruk, Simmere. The Bishopricks and Imperial Cities of Spires, Wormes. The ELEC∣TORATES Ecclesia∣sticks, or Archbishopricks of Mayence, Mayence, Aschassenbourg. Treves, Treves, Coblenz. Cologne, Cologne, Bonne. The Estates of the Succession of CLEVES and JULIERS, To the Marquess of Branden∣bourg, as The Dutchy of Cleves, Wesel, The County of Marck, Hamme. To the Palatinate of New bourg, as The Dutchy of Juliers, Juliers, The Dutchy of Bergor Mon, Dusseldrop. The Estates of the UNI∣TED PRO∣VINCES of the Low Countries; where are The Dutchy of Guelders, Nieumegue, Arnheim. The Counties of Holland, Amsterdam, Dordrech, the Hague. Zeland, — Mildebourg. Zutphen, Zutphen. The Signiories of West Friezland, Lievarden. Groningue, Groningue. Utrecht, Utrecht. Over-Ysel, Doventer. And part of the Dutchy of Brabant, — Bosteduc. Beyond the RHINE, in three Parts, to wit, FRANCO∣NIA; where are The Ecclesiasticks, or The Bishopricks of Wirtzbourg, Bamberg. The Order of Teut, — Mergetheim. The Laicks, or The Marquisate of Cullembach, Onspach. The Counties of Holac, Weickerseim, Wertheim, Wertheim. The Imperial Cities of Nuremberg, Francfort, Schweifurt, HESSE, or HESSIA, as it is divi∣ded into Hesse, or Hessia, Langraviat of Cassel, Marpurg. County of Waldeck, Corbach. Abbey of — Fulde. Witteravia,—divers Counties, Nassau, Solins, Hanau, Isenbourg. WESTPHA∣LIA; where are The Ecclesiasticks, or The Bishopricks of Munster, Paderborne, Minde. The D. of Westphalia, Arensberg. The Counties, &c. of Embden, — Aurick. Oldenbourg, Oldenbourg. Hoye, Nienbourg, Lippe, Lipstad, Ravensberg, Herwood, Benthem, — Benthem, The Imperial Cities, as Embden, Zoest.
The Coun∣tries, which consisteth of Seven∣teen Pro∣vinces, to wit, of Four Duchies, to wit BRABANT; where are the Quarters of Louvain, Louvain, Tilemond, Ascot. Brusselles, Brusselles, Nivelles. Anvers, Breda, Berg op Zom, Lire. Saint Ulit. Bosleduc, Bosleduc, Grave. LIMBO'URG; where are Limbourg, Limbourg, Vic de Mastric. Adjacent Lands, Fauquemont, Dalem, Rolduc. LUXEMBOURG, Luxembourg, Thionville, Arlon, Bastoigne, Monmedi, Dam Villers, GUELDRES, where are four Quarters; but that of ZUTPHEN is among the Counties, Betuve, Nieumegue, Bommel, Fort de Schenck. Veluve, Arnhem, Harderwick. Gueldres, Ruremonde, Gueldres, Venlo, Stefanswerdt, Seven Coun∣ties, viz. FLANDERS; which is di∣vided in Flanders Teutone, Gand, or Gaunt, Bruges, Ipres, Gravelines, Dunkirke, Ostend, Newport, Scluce. Flanders Wallone, Lille, Douay, Tournay, Orchies. Flanders Imperlale, Alost, Hulst, Axel. ARTOIS, Wallone, Arras, Hesdinfert, Bappaumes, St. Pol. Flamingant, St. Omer, Aire, Bethune. HAYNAUT, Mons, Valenciennes, Maubeuge, Avesnes, Landrechies, Philippeville, Marienbourg. NAMUR, Namur, Charlemont. HOLLAND; which is divi∣ded into North Holland, Alemar, Inchuse, Horne. South Holland, Dort, Delft, Leyde, or Leyden, Harlem, Amsterdam, Goude, Rotterdam, the Hague, the Brill. ZELAND, Mildebourg, Flushing, Ziriczee. ZUTPHEN, Zutphen, Doesbourg, Grolle. One Marquisate of the Empire, which consisteth but of the City of — Anvers, or Antwerp. Five Signieu∣ries, to wit, UTRECHT, — Utrecht. OVERYSSEL; where are the Quarters of Saland, Deventer, Campen, Swol. Tuente, — Oldenzee, Drente, — Coevorden. WEST FRISE, or WEST-FRISELAND, Leuvarden, Dockum, Franicker, Staveren. GRONINGUE, — Groningue: MALINES, — Malines. To which may be added the Archbishoprick and Seignieury of CAMBRAY, — Cambray. Bishoprick and Signieury of LIEGE; where are Liege, Tongres, Maestricht, Dinant, Huy. County of LINGEN, — Lingen.
The E∣STATES, or UNI∣TED PRO∣VINCES of the LOW COUN∣TRIES, possessed in EUROPE, The most Northern part of the LOW COUNTRIES, where are eight Provin∣ces, or Parts; to wit the Dutchy of GUEL∣DERS, Quarter of Betuve, Nieumegue, Bommel, Fort de Schenck. Quarter of Veluve, Arnhem, Harderwick. Counties of HOLLAND, North Holland, Alcrnar, Horne, Inchuse. South Holland, Dordrecht, Harlem, Delft, Leyde, or Leyden, Amsterdam, Goude, Rotterdam, the Hague, the Brill, Gorckum, St. Guitremberg. ZELAND, Mildebourg, Ziriczee, Flessing, Tolen. ZUTPHEN, Zutphen, Doesbourg. Grolle. Signleurles of UTRECHT,— Utrecht. OVER-YSSEL, Deventr, Campen, Swol, Covorden. WEST FRISE, Lieuvarden, Harlingen, Franicker, Dockum, Staveren. GRONINGUE, — Groningue. And in the Neighbouring Estates of the LOW COUNTRIES Part of the Dutchy of CLEVES, Wesel, Rees, Emmerick, Goch, Gennep, Part of the Estate of COLOGNE, Rhinsberg, Orsoy. And in the County of EMBDEN, — Roeroort. And in the most Southern part of the LOW COUNTRY, Part of the Dutchy of BRABANT, Bosleduc, Breda, Berg op Zom, Willemftad, Steenberg, Lillo. Part of the Dutchy of LIMBOURG, — Maestricht. Part of the County of FLANDERS, Escluse, Ardenbourg, Middelbourg, Isendik, Biervliet, Ter-Neuse. Philippine, Patience, Lifkenshoeck. In AFRICA, or AFRIQUE, AFRICA, or LYBIA, Upon the Coast, or near The Country of the NE∣GRO'S, Arguin, Goeree, GUINEE, St. George de la Mine, Fort of Nassau. AETHIOPIA, The Isles of St. THOMAS, — Cuidad de Pavoasan, LOANDA, St. Pol de Loanda. In ASIA, And in the East INDIES, On the Coasts of COROMANDEL, SIAM, Gueldres. Malaca. And in the East INDIAN ISLES, On the Coasts of Isle of CEYLAN, Isle of JAVA, Colombo, Jacatra, or Batavia. Part of the MOLUC∣QUES; to wit, in TERNATE, Talouque, Maylaye, Tacomma. MOTIR,— Nassau. MAQUIAM, Taffason, Naffaguia, or Maurice, Tabillola, or Telebola. BACHIAN, Labolia, Gamineduore. About the MOLUC∣QUES; to wit, in GILOLO, — Zabou. AMBOYNE, Coubella, Lovio, Hittou, Ambeyne. NERA, Isle of Banda, Nassau, Belgique, Revenge. POLEWAY. Isle of Banda, Nassau, Belgique, Revenge. Between CHINA and JAPON, HERMOSO, — Zeland. In AMERICA, or AME∣RIQUE MERIDIONALE; Part of BRAZILE; where are the Capita∣nies of FERNAMBUCO, — Olinde. TAMRACA, Tamaraca. PARAYBA, Parayba. RIO GRANDE, Potengi. CIARA, Ciara. MARAGNAN, — Maragnan. And near the Coast of VENEZUELA, the Isle of Curacao.
GERMA∣NY about the Danube, may be con∣sidered in three Parts, viz. Higher, or SOVABIA, which is sub∣divided into two parts, to wit, SOVABE, or SOVABIA; where are The Bishopricks of Ausbourg, Dilengen, Fuessen. Constance, — Mersbourg. Coire, — Marsoila. The Dutchy of — Wirtenberg, Stutgard, Tubingue. The Marquisate of — Burgau, — Guntzbourg. Part of the Marquisate of — Baden Durlach, — Baden. Thirteen Counties, among the which are Furstenberg, — Mekirk. Hohenberg, — Ehingen. Rhinfeld, Rhinfenden, Lauffenbourg. Divers Baronies, &c. The Barony of — Waldbourg. Thirty five Cities of the EMPIRE; among the which Beyond the Danube, are Ausbourg, Constance, Lindau, Uberlingue, Memmingue, Kempten, Ravensbourg. On this side the Danube, are Ulme, Norlingue, Drinckespuhel, Awlen, Halle, Hailbron, Eslingue, Guemunde. SWISSES, or SWITZER∣LAND; un∣der the name of which is understood Thirteen Cantons, where of The principal Cities are Basle, Berne, Zurich, Lucerne, Soleurne, Fribourg, Schasshouse. Twelve or Thirteen Al∣lies; among the which are The Abby and City of St. Gall. The Bishoprick of Sion. The Grisons, Coire. The Bishoprick of — Porentruy. The Cities of Geneve, Mulhausen, Newchastel, Rotweil. Twenty, or Twenty five Subjects; among the which are The County of — Chiavenne. The Val Teline, Sondrio, Wormes, or Bormio. The Balliages and Cities of Lugan, Bellinone, Bade, Frawenfeld. Mean, or BA∣VARIA; which is di∣vided into three parts, and where are The Estates of the Dukedom of TIROL; which com∣prehendeth The County of Tirol; where are Inspruck, Tirol, Cufstane. Towards the Lake of Constance, the Counties of Feldkirch, Bregaz. The Protection of the Bishopricks of Trente, Brixen. The Estates of the Dutchy of BAVARIA; where are comprised The Dutchy of Bavaria, Higher, Munich, Landsperg, Lower, Landshout, Straubing. Between the Ecclesia∣sticks, The Archbishoprick of — Saltzbourg. The Bishopricks of Passau, Ratisbone, Frissingue. The Provost of — Berehtogade. Between the Laicks, The Palatinate of — Newbourg. The County of — Hag. Cities of the Emperour Ratisbone, Ingolstat, Dona-wert. The Estates of the Palatinate of BAVARIA; which are In the Country of the Palatinate of Bavaria, — Amberg. To the Princes of the House Palatine, Sultzbach. In the Palatinate of Newbourg, Burglenfelt. To the Bishoprick of Aichster, Aichster. In the Langrave of Leuchtenberg, — Pfrein. Lower, or AUSTRICHE, or AUSTRIA; which is di∣vided into two parts, to wit, Archbishoprick of AUSTRIA, Higher, Lintz, Ens, or Ems, Wells, Freystat. Mean, Crems, Horne, Stain. Lower, Vienne, Newstat, Bade. And the Here∣ditary Estates of AUSTRIA; to wit, The Dutchy of Stitle, Higher, — Pruck: Lower, Graecz, Pettau. The Dutchy of Carnithie, Higher, Villach, Gurcz. Mean, St. Veit. Lower, — Lavemunde. The Dutchy of Carniole, Higher, or Seiche, Gorice, Gradisque, Czirknicz. Lower, — Laubach. The County of Cilley, — Cilley. The Windishmarch, or Marquisate of Vindes, Metling. Rudolsswerd.
The SUIS∣SES, or SWIT∣ZER∣LAND; and that which we understand under the name, ought to be con∣sidered in three Parts, to wit, in Thirteen Can∣tons, which (following their Anti∣quity) are URI, 1308 SUISSE, 1308 UNDERWALD, 1308 LUCERNE, — 1332 ZURIOH, — 1351 ZUG, 1352 GLARIS, 1352 BERNE, — 1353 FRIBOURG, 1481 SOLEURNE, 1481 BASLE, 1501 SCHASFHOUSE, 1501 APPENZEL, — 1513 or following their Ranges, &c. Zurich, Protestant, Zurich, Winterthur, Stein, Grisfensee, Eglifou. Berne, Protestant, Berne, Lausanne, Yverdon, Nyon, Mouldon, Morges, Peterlingen, Vevay, Lemzbourg, Burgdof, Aarbourg, Bruck, Thun. Lucerne, Catholick, Lucerne, Sursce, Sempach: Uri, Catholick, — Altorf. Suisse, Catholick, Suitz, or Suisse, Underwald, Catholick, Stantastad. Zug, Catholick, Zug. Glaris, Catholick and Protestant, Glaris. Basle, Protestant, Basle. Fribourg, Catholick, Fribourg, Corbers, Gryers. Soleurne, Catholick, Soleurne. Schafshouse, Protestant, Schafshouse. Appenzel, Catholick, — Appenzel. Their Allies; which are The Abbe and City of St. GAL, in Suisse, Wyll. St. Gall. The Bishoprick of SION, or County of Valais, Sittin, or Sion, Martinath. The GRISONS, divided into three Leagues or Confedera∣cies; as Higher, or Grise, Ilantz, Dissentis. Of the House of God, Coir, or Chur; Furstenow, Puschiae. Of the ten Communalties, Tafas, Meyenfeld. The Cities In Alsace, or Alsatia, — Mulhausen, In Sovabia, — Rotweil. Towards the Franche County, Bienne, Neuchastel, Vallangin. In Savoy, — Geneve. The Bishopricks of Basle in Suisse, Porentruy, Nuenftar, or Bonneville, Delmont. Constance, in Sovabia and Suisse, Mersbourg, Arbon, Bischofszel, Bollingen, Keiserstul, Clingenow, Reichenau, Steekburne. Coire, in the Grisons, — Marsoilachau. Their Sub∣jects, viz. Subjects to the Cantons, as At Glaris, the County of — Werdenberg. Ar Zurich, the County of Altsax, — Foriteckchau. At Suisse and Glaris, the Balliages of Gastal, Uznach▪ At Berne and Fribourg, the Balliages of Murat, Orbe, Granson, Schuartzembourg. Of the three most ancient Cantons, the Balliages in Italy, of Bellinzone, Valbrune, Polese, or Riviere. To the same, and at Glaris, the City and County of Rapperchuil. To the seven Ancient Can∣tons Part of Turgow, Dissenhofen, Psin. The Franck Provinces, — Meyenberg. The County of Sargans, Sargans, Wallenstad, or Riva. The City of — Fraenfeld. To the seven first in Range and Apenzel, the Bal∣liages of Rhintal, Rhineck, Alstetten. To the eight Ancient Cantons, the Balliages in Suisse of Bade, Bremgarten, Melingen. To the twelve more Ancient Cantons, the Ballia∣ges in Italy of Lugan, Lucarue, Mendris, Val Madie. Subjects to the Allies, as To the Abbe of St. Gal, the County of Toggenburg, Leichtensteg. To the Bishoprick of Sion, towards Savoy, St. Morice, Montech, Hochtal, or Val d'Aux. The County of Chiavenne, Chiavenne, Pleurs, Ruynee. The Valtelline, Morbegno, Sondrio, Tirano. The County of — Worms, or Bormio. And to the same the Protection of the Signieury of Haldenstein.
GERMA∣NY about the ELBE, and the O∣DER, con∣taineth in its Higher Part, The Estates of BOHE∣MIA, which may be divided into the Kingdom of BOHE∣MIA; where are Bohemia, particularly so called, Prague, Cuttenberg, Pilsen, Coningracz, Budweiss, Leutmaritz, Caurzim. The Quarter of Egra, or Heb, Elenbogen or Locker. And the County of — Glarz, Provinces incorporated to the Kingdom of BOHEMIA; to wit, The Dutchy of Silesie, Breslaw, Ligni, Neyse, Gros Glogan, Brieg, Toppau, Crossen, Jaggcrendorff. The Marquisate of M—o∣ravia, Olmutz, Brynn, Znaym, Iglau, Radisch, Neustad. The Marquisate of Lu∣sace, Bautzen, Gorlitz, Sittau, Sorau, Guben, Cotous. Lower Part SAXONY may be di∣vided into the Higher SAXO∣NY, where are found The Estates of the Dukes of SAXONY, The Dutchy of Saxony, Wittenberg. The Marquisate of Misue, Dreiden, Misue, Torgaw, Lipsick, Mersbourg, Naumbourg. The Dutchy of — Altembourg. Voitland, — Zuickaw. Turinge Langraviat, Erford. Dutchies, Jeve, Cobourg, Isenach. Counties, Schwartzenbourg, Mansfeld, Smalculd, Gleichen. Abbess, — Quedelimberg, Abby, — Salsfeldt. Imperial Cities, Mulhausen. Northausen. Principality of Anhalt, Dessau, Bernebourg. The Estate of the Mar∣quisate of BRAN∣DENBOURG, Alt-Marck, or Viele-Marck, Stendal, Havelberg. Mittel-Marck, or Moy∣enne-Marck, Brandebourg, Berlin, Francfort on the Oder. New-Marck, Landsberg, Sterneberg, The Dutchy of POME∣RANIA, which hath sometime been divi∣ded into the Dut∣chies of Stettin, Stettin, Anclam. Wolgast, — Wolgast. Gutskow, — Gripsuald. Barth, Straelsond, Barth, Rugen, Isle and Dutchy, Bergen. Ancien, — Stargart. Cassubie, Colberg. Vandalie, Stolpe. Pomerelia, — Lowenbourg. Lower SAXO∣NY, where are found The Archbishopricks of Magdebourg, Magdebourg, Halle in Saxony. Breme, Breme, Stade. The Bishopricks of Ferden, Hiddelsheira, Halberstat. And to the Archbishopr, of Mayence, the Country of Eychfeld, Dudderstat. Divers Dutchies, the chief of which are Holstein, or Holsacia, Kyel, Segeberg, Gluckstad Lunebourg, Luneburg, Celle, Harbourg, Danneberg. Brunswick, Brunswick, Wolfenbuttel. Grunbenhagen, — Limbeck. Gottingen, — Gottingue. Lawenbourg, Lawenbourg, Hadler. Mecklenbourg, Wismar, Rostock, Scierin or Schwerin, Gustraw. Imperial Cities; among which are Lubeck, Hambourg, Stoade.
The Estates of the Crown of BOHEMIA are The Kingdom of BOHE∣MIA, under which ought to be under∣stood BOHEMIA, as it is divi∣ded into Fifteen Provinces, where are Forty and three Royal Cities, to wit, in the Provinces of Pregensko; where is — Prague: Caurzimsko; where are Caurzim, Coln, Bohmish-Broda. Hradecsko, Kralow-Hradecz, G. Kinigingretz. Jaromirz, Bydchaff, Trantnow, G. Konighoff. Krabedur. Chrudimsko, Chrudim, Bamberg, G. Paumberg. Hohemauth, Policzka. Craslawsko, Hora, G. Cuttemberg. Czaslaw. Brechynsko, Budiejowize, G. Budweiss. Tabor, Pelhrzimow, Teyn suv Wultaw. Wltawsko, — Sedlezany. Podbredsko, — Beraun. G. Bern. Prachensko, Piseck, Suschitz, Wodnany, Prachatitz. Pilsensko, Pilsen, Klataw, Strzibro, G. Meisf. Domazliez, G. Tauss. Rockissan. Ziatecsko, Ziatecz, G. Satz. Most, Launy, G. Bruck. Cadan, Commota. Rakownicsko, — Rakonick. Slansko, Slaneywreh, G. Sehlan. Welwary. Litomierziesko, Litomierz, Leitomeritz. Auski, Melnick. Boleslawsko, Nymburg, Boleslaw. G. Jung Bunozel. And the Quarters of Hebsko, — Heb. G. Egra. Loketsko, — Loket. G. Elnbogen. Glatzko, — Glatz. The Provinces incorporated to the King∣dom of BO∣HEMIA, to wit, The Dutchy of SILESKA, as it is divided into Three Dutchies, Fifteen Principa∣lities, and Four Baronies; viz. Gros Glogaw, Dutchy, Gros Glogaw, Sprottaw, Freystadt. Crossen, Dutchy, — Crossen. Slagan, Dutchy, — Sagan. Jawer, Principality, Jawer, Lemberg, Buntslaw, Hirschberg. Lignitz, Princip. Lignitz, Goldberg. Wohlaw, Princ.— Wohlaw, Olsze, Principality, Olsze. Bernstadt, Principality, Bernstadt. Breslaw Princ. Breslaw, Namslaw. Schweidnitz, Principality, Schweidnitz. Brieg, Princ. Brieg, Olaw. Monsterberg, Princ. — Monsterberg. Neiss, or Grotkaw, Princ. Neiss, Grotkaw, Zuckmantel. Oppelen, Princ. Oppelen, Newstadt, Klein Glogaw. Ratibor, Principality, — Ratibor. Jegerndorff, Princ. Jegerndorff, or Carnow, Lubschitz. Troppaw, Princ. — Troppaw. Teschen, Principality, Teschen. Among the Baronies are Wartenberg, Pless. The Marquisate of MORAVIA, as it may be divided into the Dutchies of Olmutz, Brinn, Znaim, Their Cities are Olmutz, Brinn, Znaim, Jglaw, Hardisch, Newstadt, Kremsit, Krumlow, Meseritz, Niclasburg, Polna, Weiskirth. The Marquisate of LUSACE, or LUSATIA, now engaged to the Duke of Saxony, is divided into the Higher Lusatia, Baudissen, or Pautzen, Gorlitz. Sittaw, Lawben, Camentz, Liebaw. Lower usatia, Soraw, Guben, Cotbus.
The House of AU∣STRICHE, or AU∣STRIA, in divers Branches and Titles, possessed and lying within and near GER∣MANY, to wit, AUSTRICHE, or AUSTRIA; under the name of which may be understood, The Archbishoprick of Austriche, Vienna, Crems, Lintz. The Dutchy of Stirie, Grecz, Pruck. Carinthie, St. Veit, Lavemunde, Grucz, or Straspurg. Carniole, — Laubach. The County of — Cilley, — Cilley. The Marquisate of Vinde, or Vindishmarch, — Metlin, And towards Italy, the County of Gorice, Gorice, Gradisque. and part of Istrie, Triefte, Pedena. The Kingdom of HUN∣GARIE, or HON∣GRIE, in part; where are In the higher — Hungarie, Presbourg, or Poson, Sopron. or Oedenbourg, Raab, or Javarin, Comore, Fileck, Cassau, Tokay, Varadin. In the higher — Esclavione, Zagrab, or Agram, Copronitza. In the higher — Croacie, — Sisseg. And in the — Morlaquie, Sen, pr. Senia, St. Veit am Flaum. The Kingdom of BO∣HEMIA, and the E∣states incorporated to Bohemi to wit, The Kingdom of — Bohemia, Prague, Cutrenberg, Pilsen, Cogracz, Rudweis. The Dutchy of — Silesie, Breslau, Lignitz, Neisse, Gros Glogau. The Marquisates of Lusacia, Baudissen, Gorlltz, Sittau, Sorau. Moravia, Olmutz, Brinne, Znaym. The County of — Glarz, — Glarz. The Signieury of — Egra, — Egra, or Heb: TIROL; under the name of which are The Counties of Tirol, Inspruck, Hall, Cufstain. Veldkirck, or — Feldkirck. Bregentz, — Bregentz. The Protection of the Bishopricks of Trente, Brixen. In SOVABIA, the Marquisate of Burgau, Burgau, Guntzbourg. County of Hohenberg, Rotenbourg, Ehingen, Horb. City of — Yillengen, Lantgraviat of Nellenbourg, Stockach. In SUISSE, or SWIT∣ZERLAND, the County of Rhinselden, Rhinselden, Lauffenbourg. City of — Waldshout. County of Hapspurg, or Habsbourg. Protection of the Cities of Constance, Celle. Within or near the Grisous, Castelz, Pludentz. In ALSATIA, or AL∣SACE, the County of Pfirt, or Ferrette, Altkirck. Part of Sungou, Tannes, Befort. Langraviat of the higher Alsatia, Enfisheim, Keisersperg, Heiligen Creutz. Part of Brisgou, Fribourg, in Brisgou, Brisac, Newenbourg. The Palatinate of the RHINE in part, where are many Cities, among the which Oppenheim, Franckendal. BOURGOGNE in part, to wit, the County of Bourgogne; where are Dole, Gray, Salins. The Catholick LOW COUNTRY, for the most part; where are The Dutchies of And the Charollois, in part, Charolles. Brabant, Leuvain, Brusselles. Limbourg, — Limbourg: Luxembourg, Luxembourg, Thionville. Guelderland, in part, Ruremonde. The Counties of Flanders, Gand, or Gaunt, Lille. Artois, Arras, St. Omer. Hainault, Mons, Valenciennes. Namur, — Namur. The Marquisate of the Empire, where is — Anvers, or Antwerp. The Signieury of Malines, — Malines. And near the LOW COUN∣TRY, The Archbishoprick and Signieury of Cambray, Cambray. The County of Linghen, — Lighen
map of German states blazon or coat of arms of the earls of Bridgewater To ye Rt Hon John Egerton Earle of Bridgewater Visc: Berckley Bart of Elsmere Ld: Leiutenant Buckingham Shire & one of Ld: of his Matys most Hon. Privi Councell &c. This Mapp is Humbly Dedicated by R B A GENERALL MAPP OF THE EMPIRE OF GERMANY. with its severall Estates. Designed by Monsieur Sanson. Geographer to the French King &c.
GERMANY AND BELGIUM; Or, THE Low Countries. Its Bounds, Latitude and Longitude.GERMANY is in the midst of those three parts which we have placed in the middle of Europe, and extends it self from 45 ½ un∣to 54 ½ degrees of Latitude, and from the 28th unto the 41 of Longitude. This position shews, that it lies in the middle of the Temperate Zone. This Germany may be considered in three great parts, of which each may be subdivided into three others. We will call the great parts, Germany about the Rhine, Germany about the Danube, and Germany about the Elbe and the Oder; all which, with its lesser parts are taken notice of in the Geographical Tables of Germany, according to which method we will proceed; and then the first will be the Franche County, or BƲRGƲNDY, which is bounded with Bress, Switzerland, Lorraine, and Champaine. Its ancient Inhabitants were the Hedui, who first called Julius Caesar into France, and its People are at present esteemed warlike, marching under the Colours of divers Princes, and are known by the name of Walloons. It is a Country so fertil, that it hath been called the Flower of France, within whose bounds some do esteem it. It hath for its chief places 1. Besanson, the Metropolis of Burgundy, seat∣ed on the banks of the Doux, a City of good strength and beauty, and made an Ʋniversity by the commands of Charles the Fifth, and Pope Julio the Third. 2. Dole, in the Balliage of Dole, a Town of great strength, riches and beauty, famous for its Colledge of Jesuites: 3. Gray, in the Balliage of Amont; and 4. Salius, in the Balliage of Aval, of some account for its rich Salt Fountain. Besides these places in Burgundy are numbred 20 walled Towns, and about 160 Lordships. Province of Lorrain.LORRAINE, bordering on Burgundy, famous for having had for its Duke, Godfrey, Sirnamed Bulloigne, the Recoverer of the Holy Land from the Turks; its Dukes now enjoy little else save the Title, the Country being seized by the French. It is of a fertil Soil, affording plenty of Corn and Wine, and hath store of Salt. Its chief places are 1. Nancy, in the Balliage of Fran∣cois, once dignified with the Seat of the Duke; 2. Vandrevange; 3. Mire∣court; 4. Vancoleur, the Birth-place of Joan de Pucelle; 5. Pont-a-Mason, so named by reason of its Bridge over the Mosa; 6. Metz, and 7. Toul.
Country of Barrois.Between this Province and Champaine lieth the Country of BARROIS, and belongeth to Lorrain, whence the eldest Sons of these Dukes were styled Princes of Barri. Its chief places are Bar-le-Duc, and St. Mi∣chael. The several parts of the Catholick Low Countries.The Catholick LOW COƲNTRIES may be contained under the Dukedoms of Brabant, Limbourg, and Luxembourg; the Earldoms of Flan∣ders, Artois, Haynaut, and Namur; the Marquisate of the Empire; the Sig∣niory of Malines, &c. The whole Country is exceeding fertil, yet found not very advantagious to the Spaniards, who are Masters of it. Dukedom of Brabant.BRABANT, for the most part of an ungrateful Soil, yet well inhabited and stored with walled Towns and Villages; the chief amongst which are 1. Lovaine, a fair and large City, being about four miles in circuit within its Walls, and six without, wherein are many delightful Gardens and Meadows, and is of note for its Ʋniversity, where there is a Seminary for English Jesuits. 2. Brussels, a City for its fairness and elegancy of its Buildings (its extent being as large as Lovaine) giveth place to few in the Netherlands. It is at present the residence of the Spanish Governour for the Low Countries; and 3. Breda, once the Seat of the Prince of Orange, till taken by the Spa∣niards. City of Ant∣werp.To the Dukedom of Brabant doth belong the Marquisate of the EM∣PIRE, whose chief place is Anvers, or Antwerp, seated on the Schelde, out of which it hath eight Channels cut, the biggest of which are capable to receive about 100 great Ships, which doth much facilitate its Trade; it is a fair and large City, being about seven or eight miles in circuit within its Walls, which are strong, high, and broad enough for Coaches to pass, on which the Nobility and Gentry commonly use to recreate themselves. In this City are abundance of Painters and Gravers, whose work is well received abroad. To this Dukedom doth also belong the Signiory of Malines, whose chief place bears the same name: likewise the Archbishoprick and Imperial City of Cambria, of good account; and the Bishoprick and Imperial City of Liege, seated on the Meuse, a Town of good beauty, being so filled with fair Abbies and Monasteries, that it is called the Paradice of the Priests. Dutchy of Limbourg.LIMBOƲRG hath many good Towns, the chief of which are 1. Lim∣bourg, seated on the Banks of the Weser, and giveth name to the Dutchy. 2. Mastrich, a place of great strength, being held almost impregnable, yet was gained lately by the French; but through the assistance of the English, under the command of his Grace, James Duke of Monmouth. 3. Dalen, for∣tified with a Castle, &c. Dukedom of Luxembourg.LƲXEMBOƲRG, Northwards of Lorrain, said to contain about 1000 Villages, and 23 walled Towns, the chief of which are 1. Luxem∣bourg, seated on the Elze. 2. Thionville, which, with the other places, suffer∣ed much in the time of the Wars betwixt France and Spain. Forrest of Ardenna. The Spaw.In this Province is the famous Forrest of Ardenna, once about 500 miles in compass, now scarce 90; and in it, or on its edges, is the no less famous Wa∣ters of the Spaw, so much frequented by the Europeans in and about the Month of July, being found exceeding good for several Diseases in the body Man.
FLANDERS: Earldom of Flanders de∣scribed.FLANDERS should be the most famous of all these Countries, since it communicates its name to them all; it is divided into Tutone, Wallone, and Imperiale. The chief Cities and places in this Earldom are 1. Ghent, whose Walls are seven miles in compass, and was once of great beauty; but now through the Seditiousness of its Inhabitants it is much ruinated, a good part of it being wast-ground; it is watered by the Rivers Scheld and Ley, which run through the City and make 26 Islands, which are conjoyned by 98 Bridges. This place is particularly famous for being the Birth-place of John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster. 2. Bruges, seated on a large and deep Channel of the Sea, from which it is distant about three Leagues; once a famous Mart Town, but now of small account as to matters of Traffick, 3. Ipres, seated on a River so called, a Town of great strength. 4. Graveling, or Gravelines, feated on the Sea-shoar, a place of good strength; and 5. Lisle, of some account. The four principal Ports in Flanders are, 1. Dun∣kirk, now in the possession of the French, a place of good strength, especially of late, when the English were Masters of it; nigh to which is the impreg∣nable Fort of Mardike, also so made by the English. The Inhabitants of this Town are found very troublesom on the Seas, to those that are their Ene∣mies. 2. Ostend, an exceeding strong place, as is manifest by its holding out a Siege of three years, three months, three weeks, and odd days, against the Arch-Duke; nigh to which was fought that bloody Battel in 1660, between the Arch-Duke Albertus, and the States, where (by the valour of the Eng∣lish) the Victory was gained: and 3. Sluce, seated at the Mouth of the Chan∣nel of Bruges, where it enjoys a fair and commodious Haven, capable to re∣ceive about 500 Sail of good Ships; now subject to the States of Holland. Throughout all Flanders are a great many Religious-houses, and Nunneries, which are filled with vertuous Gentlewomen (for the most part, Maidens) who live a Religious life, and at spare times makes curious Works, which are dis∣posed of by the Lady Abbess. Earldom of Artois.The Earldom of ARTOIS, North of Flanders, is divided into Wallone and Flamingat, and said to contain about 750 Villages, and 12 walled Towns; the chief among which are 1. Arras, where the Tapestry Hangings, and Cloths of Arras were first invented and made. 2. Hesdinfert, a very strong Frontier Town towards Picardy; 3. Bappaumes, 4. St. Omer, and 5. Aire. Earldom of Haynault.The Earldom of HAYNAƲLT, West of Flanders, is said to number a∣bout 900 Villages, and 24 Towns; the chief amongst which are 1. Mons, an ancient and strong Town; 2. Valenciennes, so seated on the Scheld that it cannot be besieged, except with three Armies at one time. 3. Maubeugel; 4. Avesnes, about which are digged excellent white Stones for building; 5. Landrechies, and 6. Philippeville. Earldom of Namur.The Earldom of NAMƲR, North of Brabant, hath about 180 Villages, and 4 walled Yowns, viz. Namur, Charlemont, Bovines, and Valencourt. This Country is very fertil in Grains, hath store of Mines of Jasper, all sorts of Marble, and abundance of Iron. Under the subdivision of the Provinces upon the Rhine, may be compre∣hended Alsatia, the Palatinate of the Rhine, the Archbishopricks and Ele∣ctorates on the Rhine, the Estates of the Succession of Cleves and Julier, and the Ʋnited Provinces of the Low Countries, &c. Province of Alsatia.ALSATIA, Westwards of Lorrain, hath for its chief places, 1. Stras∣bourg, formerly Argentina, because here the Romans received the Tribute of the Conquered Nations, seated in Lower Alsatia near the Rhine, from which here is a Channel cut for the conveyance of Commodities. This City is about 7 miles in circuit, is a good place of strength, and famous for its many Rareties; as its admirable Clock, a description of which I shall here set down, which was given me by an Ingenious person, who took this particular account thereof.
FOR the curiousness of the Work it self I cannot set it forth, neither can any man take pleasure of the Workmanship, but such as see it. In the whole work there are Nine things to be considered, which ascend up one above another, as the description sheweth, whereof eight are in the Wall; the ninth, (and that the most wonderful) standeth on the ground, three foot or such a matter from the Ground and Wall, and that is a great Globe of the Heavens perfectly described, in which are three Motions; one of the whole Globe, which betokeneth the whole Heavens, and moveth about from the East to the West in four and twenty hours: the second is of the Sun, which runneth through the Signs there described, (by that Artificial motion it hath) once every year: the third is of the Moon, which runneth her course in 28 days. So that in this Globe you may view (as if you had the Heavens in your hand) the Motions of the whole Heavens, the motion of the Sun and Moon, every Minute of an hour, the rising and falling of every Star (among which Stars are the Makers of this work Dassipodius and Wolkinstenius) described, yea better than in the true Heavens, because here the Sun darkneth them not by day, nor the Moon by night. The Instruments of these Motions are hid in the Body of a Pelican, which is portraied under the Globe. The Pole lifted up to the Elevation of Strasburgh, and noted by a fair Star made in Brass: the Zenith is declared by an Angel placed in the midst of the Meridian. The second thing to be observed (which is the first on the Wall) are two great Circles one within another, the one eight foot, the other nine foot broad, the uttermost moveth from the North to the South once in a year, and hath two Angels, the one on the North-side, which pointeth every day in the Week, the other on the South-side, which pointeth what day shall be one half year after. The Inner circle moveth from South to North once in a hundred years, and hath many things described about it; as the Year of the World, the Year of our Lord, the circle of the Sun, the processions of the Aequinoctials, with the change of the Solstitial points, which things fall out by the motion which is called Trepidationis: the Leap-year, the Movable Feasts, and the Dominical Letter, or Golden Number, as it turneth every year. There is an immovable, Index, which incloseth for every year all these things within it; the lower part of which Index is joyned to another round Circle, which is immovable wherein the Province of Alsatia is fairly described, and the City of Stras∣burgh. On both sides of these Circles on the Wall, the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon are, which are to come for many years, even so many years as the Wall might orderly contain. The third thing which is to be seen, a little a∣bove this, is a weekly motion of the Planets as they name the day, as on Sunday the Sun is drawn about in his Charriot; accordingly as the day is spent, and so drawn into another place, so that before he be full in, you shall have Monday, that is, the Moon clean forth, and the Horses of Mars's Char∣riot putting forth their heads; and so it is for every day in the week: On this side there are nothing but dumb Pictures to garnish the Wall. The fourth thing, which is next above this, is a Dias for the Minutes of hours, so that you shall see every Minute pass. Two beautiful Pictures of two Children are joyned to either side of this; he which is on the North-side hath a Scepter in his hands, and when the Clock striketh, he telleth orderly every stroke. He on the South-side hath a fine Hour-glass in his hand, which runneth just with the Clock; and when the Clock hath stricken, he turneth his Hour-glass, which is run forth, and holdeth it running. The first thing which is next above the Minute-Dial, is the Dial for the hour, containing the half parts also: the uttermost circumference containeth the hours, but within it is made a curious and perfect Astrolabe, whereby is shewed the motion of every Planet, his aspect, and in what Sign, what degree, and what hour every one is in every
hour of the day; the opposition likewise of the Sun and Moon, and the Head and Tail of the Dragon. And because the Night darkneth not the Sun, nor the Day the Moon, or other Planets, therefore their Courses are here exactly seen at all times. The sixth thing, which is next unto this, is a Circle where∣in the two Signs of the Moon, rising and falling, at two several hollow places it is seen at what state she is, and her Age is declared by an Index, which is wholly turned about once every Month. The seventh thing, which is about this, are four little Bells, whereon the Quarters of the hour are strucken; at the First quarter cometh forth a little Boy, and striketh the first Bell with an Apple, and so goeth and stayeth at the fourth Bell until the next Quarter; then cometh a lusty Youth, and he with a Dart striketh two Bells, and suc∣ceedeth into the place of the Child; at the Third cometh forth a man in Arms, with a War-Mace in his hand, and striking three Bells he succeedeth into the place of the young Man; at the Fourth quarter cometh forth an Old man with a Staff, having a Crook at the end, and he with much ado, because he is Old, striketh the four Bells, and standeth at the Fourth quarter until the next Quarter; forthwith to strike the Clock cometh Death: in the Room above this, for this is the eight thing, (and this understand, that at every Quarter cometh he forth, thinking to catch each of those former Ages away with him;) but at a contrary side, in the same Room where he is, cometh Christ forth, and driveth him in: but when the last Quarter is heard, Christ giveth him leave to go to the Bell which is in the midst, and so striketh he with his Bone ac∣cording to the number of the hours, and there he standeth at the Bell, as the Old man doth at his quarter Bell, until the next Quarter, and then go they in both together. The ninth and last thing in this right Line, is the Town at the top of the Work, wherein is a noble pleasant Chime, which goeth at three, seven, and eleven of the Clock, every time a diverse Tune to one of the Psalms; and at Christmas, Easter, and Whitsontide, a Thanksgiving unto Christ: and when this Chime hath done (the Cock, which standeth on the top of the Town, on the North-side of the main Work,) having stretched out his Neck, shaken his Comb, and clapped his Wings twice, Crowseth then twice; and this verily he doth so shrill and naturally, as it would make any man to wonder; and if they list, which attend the Clock, they make him to Crow more times. In this Town whereon this Cock standeth, are conveyed all the Instruments of those motions which are in the foresaid described things. The other places of note in this Lower Alsatia, are 2. Altkirck, in the part of Sungou; 3. Ensisheim, in higher Alsatia; 4. Frisbourg, in Brisgou; 6. Offen∣bourg, in Mortnais; and 7. Bade, in the Marquisate. Palatinate of the Rhine.The PALATINATE of the RHINE, which is divided or severed into the Estates of the Palatinate, the Estates of the Princes of the House Palatinate, and the Bishopricks and Imperial Cities of Spires and Wormes. The chief places are Heidelberg, seated in a Plain, but environed on three sides with high Mountains, and the other regards the Rhine, from which it is distant about a mile; it is dignified with the Seat of the Palsgraves, as also with an Ʋniversity. 2. Spires, seated in a Plain about half a mile from the Rhine, a City of more Antiquity than Beauty and Trade, being of note for the Imperial Chamber here continually kept. 3. Wormes, a City also of good Antiquity for the many Imperial Parliaments here formerly held; and 4. Frankendal, a new, fair, strong and beautiful City, about which grow great plenty of Rhenish Wines. Electorates of Mayence, Trives, and Cologne.The Electorates and Archbishopricks on the Rhine, are those of MAY∣ENCE, whose chief places are Mayence and Aschaffenbourg; of TREVES, whose chief places are Treves and Coblentz; and of COLOGNE, whose principal places are Cologne and Bonne. Cleaveland.The Estates of the Succession of CLEAVELAND contain the Dutchies of Cleves, of Julier, and of Berge. The Dutchy of Cleves and County of Marke, is in the Marquisate of Brandenburgh,Dutchy of Cleves. and hath for its chief places Wesel and Hamme, in the County of Marks.
Dutchy of Juliers.The Dutchy of JƲLIERS hath for its chief places Aken, where the Emperour, after his Election, is invested with the Silver Crown of Germany; this place is of great esteem for its holy Relicks; and 2. Juliers. The Dutchy of BERGE, or MONTE, hath for its chief places Dus∣seldrop, Hattingen, and Arusberg. The ƲNITED PROVINCES. UNder the name of the Ʋnited Provinces of the LOW COƲNTRIES, or NETHERLANDS, are contained the Dutchy of Guelders, the Earldoms of Holland, Zeland, and Zutphen, and the Lordships of Ʋtrecht, Overyssel, Groningue, and Malines. Dutchy of Guelderland.The Dutchy of GƲELDERS, or GƲELDERLAND, West∣wards of Brabant, is divided into the Quarters of Betuve, Veluve, and Guel∣ders, particularly so called; wherein are the Towns of 1. Nieumegue, once a Free City, seated on the branch of the Rhine called Whael, and made one of the Imperial Seats in these parts by Charles the Great; the other two being Thionvil and Aken. 2. Arnhem, the usual residence of the Dukes of Guel∣ders; 3. Ruremond, so called from the River Ruer and Monde; 4. Harder∣wick, from a Village made a walled Town by Otho the third Earl; 5. Guelders; 6. Venlo; and 7. Bommel. Earldom of Holland.The Earldom of HOLLAND hath on the West and North the Seas, from which no part is above three hours distance; in this Earldom are said to be about 400 Villages, and 23 Towns; the chief of which are Amsterdam, which of late, by the addition of the new to the old, is a fair, strong, and beautiful City, being the most rich and powerful of all the Netherlands; fa∣mous for its great Trade to the utmost parts of the World, and as infamous for its toleration of all Religions: It is seated on the Tay, which like a large, but calm Sea, floweth on the North-side; and the River Amster, taking its course from the South, through three Lakes entreth the City, passeth through it, and falleth into the Tay. This City may be said to be the greatest Haven Town in the VVorld, where there are commonly to be seen about a 1000 Sail of Ships to ride; and by reason of its vast Trade to Foreign parts, is found to have great plenty of all known Commodities, as being general Traders to most places of Traffick. 2. Rotterdam, famous for giving Birth to Erasmus; 3. Delft, inhabited most by Brewers and their Relations; 4. Harlem, where Printing was first invented, and the first Book that ever was Printed was Tully's Offices; 5: Leyden, dignified with a famous Ʋniversity; the Town consisteth of 41 Islands, the passage from one to the other being by Boats and Bridges, there being about 40 of Wood and 110 of Stone. 6. Dort, where, in Anno 1618. was held a National Synod against the Arminians; 7. Brille; 8. Alemar; 9. Incluse; and 10 the Hague, a Village, but the largest in the VVorld, equalizing many fair Cities, numbring about 2000 Houses, and is very populous; it is adorned with the Palaces of the States General, who have here their Assemblies. It will not be improper to speak of the power of these States by Sea, which is so great, than in Holland, Zeland, and Friezland, they are able to put forth to Sea about 2500 Sail of Ships for burthen and war. Nor can it be forgot how Margaret,A strange Birth of 365 Children. Sister to Floris the Fourth, Earl of Holland, had at one Birth (being 42 years of Age) 365 Children, which were all Christned in two Ba∣sons in the Church of Lasdunen, by Guido Bishop of Ʋtrecht, who named the Males all Johns, and the Females Elizabeths; and the Basons are yet to be seen in the said Church.
The Earldom of ZELAND, quasi, Sea and Land,Zeland. consisting of seven Islands, the remainder of fifteen, which the Seas are said to have swallowed up, in which were abundance of good Towns and Villages. The seven Isles yet remaing are 1. Walcheren, whose principal Towns are Middlebourg, once enjoying a good Trade, by the residence of the English Merchant-Adventu∣rers; and Flushing, the first Town that the States took from the Spaniards; being now a place of good strength, and held to be the Key of the Nether∣lands. The second Isle is South Beverland, whose chief Town is Tergowse: The third Schoven, where are Sirexee and Brevers Haven: The fourth Tolen, whose principal place is Tertolen the other three Islands are North-Beverland, Duveland, and Wolferdike. This Country is destitute of Fresh-water and Wood, but in recompence is very fertil in Grains. Earldom of Zutphen.The Earldom of ZƲTPHEN, whose chief places are Zutphen, seated on the Yssel, a place of great strength. Barony of utrecht.The Barony of ƲTRECHT, North of Holland, hath 70 Villages, and 5 walled Towns; the chief of which are 1. Ʋtrecht, a City commodiously feated for passage by Boats to divers other Towns, which, with the benefit of the common Ferries, one may go in a day from hence to any of the 59 walled Towns, equally distant from it; and to Dinner to any of the 26 Towns, and return at Night. 2. Rhenen, 3. Amsford, 4. Wicket, and 5. Montfort. Barony of Overyssel.The Barony of OVERYSSEL, bounded on the East with Wes∣phalia; its chief places are Deventer, and Swoll, in the quarter of Saland: Oldenzee, in the quarter of Tuente; and Goevorden, in the quarter of Drente. WestfriezlandsThe Barony of WEST-FRIEZLAND is bounded on the VVest and North with the Sea, is said to number 340 Villages and 10 Towns, the chief of which are 1. Louvarden, where there is held the Common Council for the Province; 2. Harlingen, a Maritim Town; 3. Franicker, of late made a Uni∣versity; and 4. Dockum. Groningue.The Barony of GRONINGƲE is a Town in West-Friezland, having under its Jurisdiction 145 Villages, of which the chief are Groningue, Old Ha∣ven, and Keykerke. Under the name of Germany beyond the Rbine, we comprehend Franco∣nia, Hessia, and Westphalia. Province of Franconia.The Province of FRANCONIA is divided into three parts, viz. into Ecclesiasticks or Bishopricks, Laicks and Imperial Cities: the Bishopricks are those of Writzberg, Bamberg, and Mergetheim, Cites of good account; the Laicks are the Marquisates of Cullembach and Onspach, and the Counties of Holas, whose chief place is Weickersheim; and Wertheim, whose chief place bears the same name: and the Imperial Cities are 1. Nuremberg, seated in a barren Soil; yet by reason of the Industry of its Inhabitants is a place of good Riches, and well frequented by Merchants for their Wares, known by the name of Nuremberg-Wares. 2. Francfort, seated on the Moene, which severeth it into two parts, but joyned together by a fair Bridge. It is encom∣passed with a strong double Wall; it is a Free City of the Empire, and famous for the two Fairs or Marts for Books here annually held; the one in Lent, and the other in September: and 3. Schweinfurt. Lantgravedom of Hassia.The Lantgravedom of HASSIA, Eastwards of Saxony; its chief places are 1. Cassel, a City seated in a fertil Soil, yet of no great beauty; 2. Marpurg, an Ʋniversity, and the Seat of the Second House of the Lantgraves; and 3. Dormestad, the Seat and Inheritance of the youngest House of the Lant∣graves. To this Province doth belong the Country of WALDECK, whose Earls are subject to the Lantgraves; its chief place is Gorbach. Likewise to this Province belongeth WETTERAVIA, whose chief places are Nassau, Solins, Hanu, and Isenbourg.
Province of Westphalia.The Province of WESTPHALIA is divided into three parts, to wit, Ecclesiasticks, Counties, and Imperial Cities. This Province was the ancient habitation of the Saxons; the Soil is very fertil, wonderfully stored with Acorns, which makes their Swines-flesh excellent, and so much esteemed. The chief places in the Ecclesiasticks are those of Paderborne, Minde, and Arens∣berg; also the Bishopricks of Collen, Munster, and Triers. The Bishoprick of COLLEN taketh up a great part of Westphalia,Bishoprick of Collen, &c. and hath for its chief place Collen, a City well stored with Schools for the education of Youth; and here (according to Report) were interr'd the Bodies of the three Wise-men which came from the East to worship our Saviour, vulgarly called the three Kings of Collen. The Bishoprick of MƲNSTER hath its chief place so called, seated on the River Ems, where there is a Monastery so called, built by Charles the Great; 2. Warendrop, and 3. Herwerden. The Bishoprick of TRIERS hath for its chief places 1. Triers, an ancient City, seated on the Moselle; 2. Bopport, seated on the said River, and 3. En∣gers. The Counties belonging to Westphalia.The Counties belonging to the Province of Westphalia, are 1. EMB∣DEN, whose chief place is Aurick; 2. OLDENBOƲRG, whose chief place is so called; 3. HOYE, which hath for its chief place Nienbourg; 4. LIPPE, whose chief place is Lipstad; 5. RAVENSBERG, whose chief place is Herword; and 6. BENTHEM, whose chief place bears the fame name. And lastly, Imperial Ci∣ties. the Imperial Cities are those of Embden, seated low, and there∣fore no good VVinter City; but in the Summer is very pleasant: and Zoest, of some account. We have already subdivided Germany about the Danube; it parts, as they are set down in the Geographical Table of Germany about the Danube, are as followeth. Province of Sovabia, with its Parts.The Province of SOVABIA is divided into several parts and Bishopricks, viz. the Bishoprick of AƲSBOƲRG, whose chief places are Dillengen and Fuessen. The Bishoprick of CONSTANCE, whose chief place is Mersbourg. The Bishoprick of COIRE, whose chief place is Marsoila. The Dutchy of WIRTENBERG, whose chief places are Stutgard, dig∣nified with the Seat and residence of the Duke; and Tubingue, of note for being a University, both Imperial Cities. The Marquisate of BƲRGAƲ, which hath for its chief place Guntzbourg. Part of the Marquisate of BA∣DENDƲRLACK hath for its principal place Baden, seated on the Rhine, and honoured with the residence of the Marquess for the Winter Sea∣son, as Milberg is for the Summer. The County of FƲRSTENBERG hath for its chief place Meskirch. The County of HOHENBERG, whose chief place is Ehingen. The County of RHINFELD, hath for its chief places Rhinfelden and Lauffenbourg. The Barony of WALDBOƲRG, whose chief place bears the fame name. The Marquisate of ANSPACH, whose chief place bears the fame name. The Bishoprick of WEIRTSBERG, whose chief place bears fame name. The Bishoprick of MENTZ, whose chief place is so called, seated on the Moene; this Bishop is the chief Elector of Germany. The Bishoprick of BAMBERG hath for its chief places Bamberg, seated on the Moene; and Fochiam, where (as 'tis said) Pontius Pilate was born. Besides these Parts or Countries there are several IMPERIAL CITIES,Imperial Ci∣ties. as they lye on this side, and beyond the Rhine; as 1. Ausbourg, seated on the Leith, in a fruitful Plain for Corn and Pastures, Northwards of the Alpes, from which it is not far distant; it is a Free City of the Empire, governed by a Senate of Citizens, and is a place of beauty and good strength. 2. Constance, 3. Ʋberlingue, with twelve others, as are mentioned in the Geographical Table of Germany, about the Danube.
Switzerland, and its parts.The Province of SWITZERLAND, the SWISSES, or HELVE∣TIA, South of Italy and Savoy, is divided into 13 Cantons; and Confederates with them are 12 or 13 Allies, and 20 or 25 Subjects; all which, with the names of the several Cantons, &c. are set down in the Geographical Table of Switzerland. The whole Country is in length 240 miles, and about 180 in breadth; it is exceeding populous, and the Men being good Souldiers and ad∣dicting themselves to the Wars, serve under the Colours of any Prince that hireth them. This Country is said to lie the highest of any in Europe, as sending forth four Rivers, which run through its quarters, viz. the Rhine, Danube, the Po, and the Roanus. But to proceed to its chief places in the Cantons, and then with those Confederate with them; and 1. Basle, seated on the Rhine, which separates it into the greater and lesser Basle, once an Impe∣rial City, but now joyned to the Cantons; it is of note for its University, for the notable Council here held, and for the Sepulchers of Erasmus, Hottoman, Clareanus, and Pontanus. 2. Zurich, seated on the Lake Zurisca, which separates it into two parts, but joyned together with three fair Bridges, that in the midst serving for a Meeting-place for Merchants. 3. Lucerne, seated on the banks of a great Lake so called; 4. Steine; 5. Berne, 6. Soleurne, 7. Fri∣bourg, and 8. Schafshouse. Common∣wealth of Geneva.Amongst the Confederates with the Switzers, the chief are the Common∣wealth of GENEVA, whose Territories (though not above eight miles in circuit, and and the City not above two miles in circuit) is said to contain a∣bout 16 or 17000 Souls; it is seated on the Lake Lemanus, through which the River Rhosne takes its course, which divides the City in two parts; it is a fair City, well fortified, and wholly in the possession of the Protestants, and since the Reformation is become a flourishing University. The Government of this Estate is by a Common-Council, consisting of 200, the four chief amongst them are called Syndiques. The Magistrates of this City allow of all Civil Recreations on Sundays; to their Ministers they allow no Tithes, but give them yearly Stipends. The Grissons, Sangal, Vallais.The GRISSONS hath for its chief place Coire: also SANGAL; and the Territory of VALLAIS, or Valesia, seated wholly amongst the Alpes; a Country of no great bigness, consisting in craggy Rocks and im∣passible Hills, yet intermixed with delightful and rich Vallies. Its chief pla∣ces are Sittin, or Sion, the only walled Town in the Country, and is a place of great strength, as well by Nature as Art, being seated on a high and steep Hill, 2. Martinach, of note for its Antiquity; and 3. Augaunum, or St. Maurice, esteemed the Key of the Country, especially in the Winter, the Ice stopping all other entrances; here being a Bridge over the Rhine for that purpose, which is strongly built, and as well fortified and guarded for fear of a Surprizal. Besides these several other Places, Bishopricks and Cities, which are their Al∣lies and Subjects, which I have observed in the Geographical Table of Swit∣zerland. Province of Bavaria, with Its parts. Dukedom of Tirol.The Province of BAVARIA is divided into the Dukedom of Tirol, the Dutchy of Bavaria, and the Palatinate of Bavaria. The Estates of the Dukedom of TIROL is about 70 miles in length, and as much in breadth; it hath for its chief places 1. Inspruck, seated on the Oenus. 2. Trent, a Bishoprick, seated on the River Adesis, famous for the General Council there held by Pope Paul the Third, against the Doctrines of Luther and Calvin, which continued off and on for the space of 18 years. 3. Tirol, and 4. Feldkirch. The Soil of this Country is very fertil, and in many places hath store of Silver-Mines, which are found profitable to the Arch-Dukes. Dutchy of Bavaria.The Dutchy of BAVARIA hath for its chief places, 1. Munick, seated on the Aser, dignified with the residence of the Duke. 2. Saltzbourg, seated on the River Saltzech, a City honoured with a Bishoprick; and here lieth in∣terr'd the Body of Paracelsus. 3. Passau, famous for the often meeting here of the German Princes. 4. Ratisbone, seated on the Danow, of note for the
interview here made between the Emperour Charles the Fifth, and Maurice Duke of Saxony. 5. Frisingue, seated on the ascent of a Hill, and not far from the River Mosacus; and 6. Ingulstad, seated on the Danube, and dignified with an University. Palatinate of Bavaria.The Palatinate of BAVARIA hath for its chief places 1. Amberg, seated amongst Silver-Mines. 2. Newbourg, usually the portion of some of the younger Palatines. 3. Castel, where the Palatinates of the Rhine, when they sojourn in this Country, use to keep their Court. 4. Sultzbach, 5. Bur∣glenfelt, 6. Aichstet, and 7. Pfreimt. Dukedom of Austria, with its parts.The Arch-Dukedom of AƲSTRIA is seated on both sides of the Da∣nube, and hath united to it, as Horeditary possessions of that House, the Pro∣vinces or Dukedoms of Stirie, Carinthie, Carniole; the County of Cilley, and the Marquisate of Windischmarch. The particular Dukedom or Province of AƲSTRIA is separate from Hungaria on the East by the Leite;Austria. its chief places are 1. Vienna, seated on the Danube, at present the Seat of the German Emperours, as being the Me∣tropolitan, fairest, and most beautiful City in all Germany, being adorned with many magnificent Temples and stately Monasteries; but above all, with a most sumptuous and Princely Palace, where the Emperour keeps his Court. It is esteemed the Bulwark of the Country against the Turks, being of note for the repulse they gave the Turks in Anno 1526, when besieged by about 200000, under the conduct of Solyman the Magnificent, and were thence repulsed with the loss of about 80000 Men. 2. Ems, so called from the River on which it is seated; 3. Wells; 4. Crems, seated on the Danube; 5. Home, 6. Newstat, and 7. Bade. Dukedom of Stirie.The Dukedom of STIRIE is contiguous to Austria on the South; hath for its chief places Grecz, Pruck, and Pettau. Dukedom of Carinthie, &c.The Dukedom of CARINTHIE is South of the Alpes, and hath for its chief places 1. St. Veit, the Metropolitan City of this Country; 2. Lave∣munde, and 3. Grucz. The Dukedom of CARNIOLE, adjoyning on Italy Westwards, hath for its chief places Laubuch, Gorice, Gradisque, and Czirknitz. The Country of CILLEY, whose chief place bears the same name. The Marquisate of WINDISCHMARCH, which hath for its chief places, Metling, and Radolfswred. Germany about the Elbe and Oder, contains Bohemia, and the Higher and Lower Saxony: To Bohemia are incorporated the Dukedom of Silesia, and the Marquisates of Moravia and Lusatia. BOHEMIA. Kingdom of Bohemia.THe Kingdom of BOHEMIA is encompassed with the Hercynian Forests, which for a long time was a fence against the Romans; it hath on the East, Moravia and Silesia; on the South, Austria; on the West, Ba∣varia; and on the North, Luisatia. The whole Kingdom contains 550 miles in circuit; in which are said to be 780 Cities, walled Towns, and Castles, and about 32000 Villages. Its Inhabitants are much addicted to Drunkenness and Gluttony; but the Nobility and Gentry (for the most part) are of another temper. The Soil of the Kingdom is extreamly fertil, and enriched with Mines of all sorts of Metal, except Gold. It is severed into 15 Provinces, and hath for its chief places, 1. Prague, the Metropolis of the whole Kingdom, and seated in the midst, and on the River Mulda. This City consisteth of four seve∣ral Towns, and every one of them have their peculiar Magistrates, Laws, and Customs; to wit, the Old Prague, beautified with a famous Senate-house, a large Market-house, and several fair Structures: then the New Prague,
separate from the Old by a deep and broad Ditch; also the little Town, so called, which is divided from the Old Prague by the Mulda, to which it is joyned by a fair Bridge. In this City is the Hill Rachine, on the sides of which are many beautiful Houses inhabited by the Nobility; and on the summit there∣of is a magnificent Palace, and is the residence of the Bohemian Kings, and later Emperours: the fourth and last part is the Town of the Jews, as by them inhabited, where they have five Synagogues, and live according to their own Laws. 2. Coln, 3. Jaromirz, 4. Churdin, 5. Hora, 6. Tabor, 7. Pisen, 8. Ziatecz, 9. Rakonick, 10. Melnisk, and 11. Nimburg; all places of good account. The Provinces Incorporate to Bohemia, are the Dutchy of Silesia, the Mar∣quisates of Moravia and Lusasia. Dutchy of Silesia.SILESIA is Eastwards of Bohemia, and is severed into two equal parts by the River Oder, which hath here its beginning; it is divided into three Dutchies, fifteen Principalities, and four Baronies, whose names (with their chief places) I have taken notice of in the Geographical Table of Bohemia. Its chief places are 1. Breslaw, so called from a Duke of this Province, who built it: In the year 1341 it was totally burnt, but since the rebuilding is become one of the neatest Towns in this part. 2. Gros-glogaw, 3. Jawer, 4. Lignitz, 5. Breslaw, 6. Breig, 7. Monsterbeg, 8. Neiss, 9. Oppelen, 10. Ratibor, 11. Troppaw, and 12. Wartenberg. Marquisate of Moravia.The Marquisate of MORAVIA, West of Bohemia, is esteemed the most fertil Country for Corn in Germany, abounding also in Myrrhe and Frankin∣since, not growing on Trees, but out of the ground: It is severed into three parts, viz. Olmutz, Brinn, and Znaim; and hath for its chief places 1. Brinn, dignified with the Seat of the Marquiss. 2. Olmutz, seated on the Morava, from whence the Country takes its name, and is dignified with an Ʋniversity. 3. Iglaw, 4. Znaim, 5. Kremsir, 6. Krumlow, and 7. Polna; all places of good account. Marquisate of Lusatia.The Marquisate of LƲSASIA, South of Bohemia, is divided into the Higher and Lower Lusasia; a Country, though but little, yet able to Arm 20000 foot. It hath for its chief places, 1. Baudissen, 2. Gorlitz, 3. Sittaw, 4. Soraw, and 5. Guben. The County of Glatzko, and the Signiory of Egra, belong likewise to the Kingdom of Bohemia. SAXONY. Saxony, with its parts.THE Lower part of Germany, about the Elbe and Oder, is taken up by Saxony, which is divided into the Higher and Lower; in the higher are the Estates of the Dukes of Saxony, the Estates of the Marquisate of Bran∣denburg, and the Dutchy of Pomerania. In the Lower Saxony are several Archbishopricks, Bishopricks, Dutchies, and Imperial Cities; which I have taken notice of in the Geographical Table of Germany about the Elbe and the Oder. Higher Saxony, and its parts.The Higher SAXONY for the most part belongs to the Duke and Ele∣ctor of Saxony: It is bounded on the East with Lusatia and Brandenburgh, on the South with Bavaria and Bohemia, on the West with Hassia and Fran∣conia, and on the North with Lower Saxony and Brandenburgh. It is divi∣ded into the Dutchy of Saxony, the Marquisate of Misne, the Dutchy of Voitland, Turinge, with its several parts, and the Principality of Anhalt. The chief places in the Dutchy of Saxony are 1. Wittenberg, seated on a plain and Sandy barren ground, once dignified with the Seats of the Dukes of Saxony, famous for the Sepulchers of Luther and Melancthon; it is dignified with an Ʋniversity, and of this Town there is a common Proverb, That a man shall meet nothing but Schollers, Whores, and Swine, which last is their food: and 2. Worlets, seated on the Albis.
Province of Misne.The Province of MISNE hath for its chief places 1. Dresden, seated on the Albis, the residence of the Duke, and Prince Elector of Saxony; it is a place of great strength, having on its Walls and Bulwarks 150 Peeces of Ordnance, being the Dukes Magazin for Arms and Men, where, upon a days warning, he can make ready 30000 Horse and Foot. 2. Dipsick, seated in a fruitful Plain for Corn, a fair Town, graced with large Streets, and beautified with many lofty Buildings of Freestone, and is of some account for its Uni∣versity for the study of Philosophy: and it is observed, that these Philoso∣phers, amongst other Secrets in nature, find Beer so good, that the Duke gains by the Custom thereof, drunk by them and the Inhabitants, who follow their steps, about 20000 l. per annum sterling. Dutchy of Voitland.The Dutchy of VOITLAND is of no large extent, and of as little note; its chief places are Altembourg and Zuickaw. Province of Turinge.The Province of TƲRINGE, about 120 miles in length and breadth, is divided into several parts, and hath for its chief places 1. Erdford, a fair and large City; 2. Jeve, an University of Physitians; 3. Smalcald, famous for the Lutheran League here made, in Anno 1530, by the German Princes, which in a short time was propogated over all Christendom. 4. Cobourg, 5. Quedelimberg, 6. Salsfeldt, 7. Mulhausen, and 8. Northausen; which two last are Imperial Cities. The Principality of ANHALT hath for its chief places Dessau and Ber∣nebourg.Anhalt. Marquisate of Brandenbourg.The Marquisate of BRANDENBOƲRG, East of Poland, is in com∣pass about 520 miles, is separated into the parts of Altmark, Mittle, Mittle∣marck, Marche and Newmarck; its chief places are 1. Havelberg, scituate on the River Havel, the Seat of a Bishop. 2. Brandenbourg, which commu∣nicates its name to the Country. 3. Berlin, seated on the River Spre, the ordinary residence of the Marquiss. 3. Francfort, seated on the Oder, to di∣stinguish it from the other on the Meine, and in a fertil Soil for Corn and Wine; it is dignified with an Ʋniversity and a great Mart Town, but not comparable to the other Francfort, and 5. Landsberg. Province of Pomerania.The Province of POMERANIA, South of Brandenbourg, is divided into nine Dutchies, whose names are set down in the Geographical Table. Its chief places are 1. Stettin, the residence of the Prince, which from a poor Fisher Town is now become the chief of the Country. 2. Walgast, once a famous Mart Town, where the Russians, Vandals, Danes, and Saxons, had their particular Streets of abode for Trade; but now it is lost, and from thence removed to Lubeck. 3. Gripsvald, an University; 4. Straelsond, 5. Bergen, 6. Stargart, 7. Colberg, 8. Stolpe, and 9. Lowenbourg. That part of the Country about Stettin belong to the Swede, and that towards Colberg to the Marquisate of Brandenbourg. Lower Saxony, with its parts.The Lower SAXONY is divided into the Archbishopricks, Bishopricks, divers Dutchies, with some Imperial Cities, the names of all which are set down in the Geographical Table of Saxony. In this Lower Saxony are di∣vers good Towns and Cities, the chief of which are 1. Magdebourg, a City which gives name to its Territory. 2. Breme, which also gives name to its Territory or Archbishoprick, is one of the Hans-Towns, so called from the freedom of Traffick here used; it is commodiously seated on the Visurge, which runneth through the City, and at five miles distance falleth into the Sea. 3. Ferden; 4. Hiddelshein, 5. Halberstat; which three last are all Cities which give name to their Territories or Bishopricks. The several Dutchies are HOLSTEIN, or HOLSATIA, where are the Cities of Kyell, Se∣gelberg, and Gluckstad. Dutchy of Lunebourg.The Dutchy of LƲNEBOƲRG hath for its chief places 1. Lune∣bourg, said to be so called from the Moon, which the ancient Inhabitants wor∣shipped; it is an Imperial and Free City, of good strength, being well forti∣fied with thick Mud-walls and deep Ditches, and its Buildings are fair; a place well known for its salt untain here found, over which is built a
spacious House containing 52 Rooms, in every one of which are placed eight Chaldrons of Lead, in each of which are boiled a Tun of Salt every day; the profit of which is divided into three parts, one to the Duke, another to the City, and the other to the Monastery and some adjoyning Earldoms: And 2. Celle, the Seat of the Duke of Lunebourg. Dutchy of Brunswick &c.The Dutchy of BRƲNSWICK hath for its chief places 1. Brunswick, seated in a fertil Soil for Corn, a free Imperial City, strongly fenced about with Walls, besides the River of Ancor, which encompasseth it; this place is famous for its Mum, which the Inhabitants are so much addicted unto, that they commonly spend the Forenoons about their Affairs, and the Afternoons in good Fellowship. 2. Wolfenbutten, the Seat of the Dukes of Brunswick. The Dutchy of GRƲBENHAGEN, whose chief place is Lim∣beck. The Dutchy of GOTTINGEN, whose chief place is Gottingue. The Dutchy of LAWENBOƲRG, whose chief places are Lawenbonrg and Hadler. The Dutchy of MECKLENBOƲRG, West of Pomerania, hath for its chief places 1. Wismar, so named from Wisamarus, a King of the Vandals, Father of Rhadaguse, who, with Alarick the Goth, sacked Rome. 2. Rostock, an University; and 3. Scierin. Amongst the Imperial Free Cities, or Hans-Towns, which are about 72, most of which are seated on the Sea-shoar, or navigable Rivers, enjoying large Immunities, and able to put to Sea about 100 Sail of Ships; these following are of most note, 1. Lubeck, seated on the Trane, which on the North-side divides Germany from Denmark, and on a spacious Hill, on the top whereof is a beautiful Church, from whence lead Streets to all the Gates of the City, besides which there are nine other Churches; it is encompassed with a double Wall, one of Brick, and the other of Earth, and in some parts deep Ditches, where Ships of about 1000 Tuns are brought up to Winter from Tremuren, its Maritim-Port, seated on the Baltick Sea, from which it is about a miles distance. The Buildings of this City are of Brick, and very beauti∣ful, to which they have many pleasant Gardens; and the Inhabitants are to be commended for their civility to Strangers, as also for their strictness in the execution of their Justice. 2. Hambourg, seated on a large and Sandy plain, and on the banks of the Albis, where it divides Germany from Denmark; it is a strong City, encompassed with a deep Ditch, and on the East and North∣sides with a double Ditch and Wall, and hath six Gates for entrance, the Ha∣ven being shut up with Iron-Chains and strictly guarded: It is adorned with many fair buildings, as the Senate-house, the Exchange, &c. hath nine Churches for Divine Worship, and its private Houses are for the most part neatly built; it is very populous, well Inhabited, and frequented by Mer∣chants, especially by the English, who have here a Factory for Woolen-Cloth. In this City there hath been observed to be 777 Brewers, 40 Bakers, one Lawyer, and one Physitian; the reason of this great disproportion (as one wittily observed) was, that a Cup of Nimis is the best Vomiting potion, and their Controversies were sooner composed over a Pot of Drink, than by order of Law. 3. Stoad, commodiously seated for Traffick on the Elve, about five miles distance from Hambourg, once a place of a better Trade than now it is. These Cities are called Free, from their great Prerogatives in coyning Money, and ruling by their own Laws; and Imperial, as knowing no Lord or Protector, but the Emperour, to whom they pay two Thirds of such Contributions as are assessed in the Assemblies. Germany is a spacious Country, and very populous; the People are of a strong Constitution and good Complexion, are very ingenious and stout, much given to drink, but of a generous disposition: the Poorer sort great Pains-takers, and the Nobles (which are many, for the Title of the Father descends to all their Children) are either good Scholars or stout Souldiers, so that a Son of a Duke is a Duke; a thing which the Italians hold so vain and foolish, that in derision they say, That the Dukes and Earls of Germany, the
Dons of Spain, the Nobility of Hungaria, the Bishops of Italy, the Lairds of Scotland, the Monsieurs of France, and the younger Brethren of England, make a poor Company. There are so many inferiour, (yet free) Princes in this Country, that in a days Journey a Traveller may meet with many Laws, and as many sorts of Coin, every Prince making use of his own Laws and Coins, whose Laws the Emperours are sworn to keep; which made one say, that the Emperour is King of Kings, the King of Spain King of Men, and the King of France King of Asses, as bearing his heavy Taxes. The fertility and Commo∣ditles of Ger∣many.The Country is generally fertil and temperate, being scituate under the Tem∣perate Zone. Here are many Mines of Silver and other Inferiour Mettals; it hath store of Corn and Wine, which they transport to forreign Countries, as likewise Linnen, Laces, Woollen, and divers Manufactures, also Quicksilver, Alom, Arms of all sorts, and other Iron-works; and its Ponds, Lakes, and Rivers are well stored with Fish. Its chief Ri∣vers.The chief Rivers of Germany are, the Rhine, the Weser, the Elbe, and the Oder; for the Danube having but a small course in this Country, shall be else∣where spoken of. The Commo∣dities and Trade of Belgium.That part which we call BELGIƲM, or the Low Countries, is of a large extent, seated in the North Temperate Zone, under the 8 and 9th Cli∣mates, the longest day being 17 hours; the Air by reason of the industry of the Inhabitants in draining the Marishes, and turning the standing-Waters into running-Streams, is now very healthful, as being purged from those gross Va∣pours which did thence arise: the Country lieth exceeding low, and therefore subject to Inundations. The Commodities that these Countries yield, are, Linnens, Yarn, Thread, Sayes, Silks, Velvets, Tapestries, Pictures, Prints, Blades, Sope, Butter, Cheese, Fish, Pots, Bottles, Ropes, Cables, Armour, se∣veral Manufactures, &c. besides the Commodities of India, Persia, China, Turkey, and other parts, which are here had in great plenty, by reason of the vast Trade they drive in all parts.
The Estates of the Crown of POLAND, are POLAND; under the name of which is comprized, The Kingdom of POLAND, as it is divi∣ded into the Higher, or Little PO∣LAND, where are the Palatinates of Cracou, with its Castle∣wicks of Cracou, Vounicz, Sandecz, Biecz. Sandomirie, with its Castlewicks of Sandomitz, Vislicz, Radom, Zawichost, Zarow, Malogocz, Czeschow, Lublin, with its Castle — Lublin. Lower, or Great PO∣LAND; where are the Palatinates of Posna, where are the Castlewicks of Posna, Meseritz, Ragozno, Sremck, Brzesti, Crimn, Sandock. Kalisch, with its Castle∣wicks of Kalisch, Kamin, Gnesna, Landa, Nackel, Biechow. Sirad, with its Castlewicks of Sirad, Wieln, Rozpirz. Lencini, with its Castle∣wicks of Lencici, Bressini, Inowlocz. Dobrzin, with its Castle∣wicks of Dobizin, Rippin, Stouck. Ploczk, with its Castle∣wicks of Ploczk, Rasuntz, Sceps. Rava, with its Castle∣wicks of Rava, Sochaczow, Gostiny, Cowal. Divers Dut∣chies, with their Castle∣wicks, to wit, RUSSIA NOIRE, which is esteemed in the Higher Poland; where are the Palati∣nates of Leowenborg, or Leopolis, with its Castlewicks of Leowenborg Halicz, Drzemist, Zamoscie. Belz, with its Castlewicks of Beln, Chelm. CUJAVIA, which is esteemed in the Lower Poland; where are the Palatinates of Brzesti, with its Castle∣wicks of Brzesti, Krusnick, Cowal. Uladislau, with its Castle∣wicks of Uladislau, Bidgost. MAZOVIA, also e∣steemed in the Lower Poland, where are the Palatinates of Czersk, with its Castle∣wicks of Warzaw, Liw, Czersk, Wissegrod, Zakrotzim, Ciechanow, Wilna. PRUSSIA, or PRUSSE; as it is divided in POLAQUIE, PRUSSIA ROYALE; where are the Palati∣nates of Dantzick, with its Castlewicks of Dantzick, Elbing, with its Castlewicks of Elbing, Marienburg, with its Castlewicks of Marienburg, Culm, with its Castlewicks of Culm. PRUSSIA DUCALE, with its Palatinate and Castlewick of Koningsberg, with its Palatinate of Bielsk, with its Castlewick of — Bielsk. And divers o∣ther Estates, Dutchies, &c. united, or subject to the Crown of POLAND, viz. Dutchy of LI∣THUANIA, under the name of which are comprised, LITHUANIA; where are the Palatinates of Wilna, with its Castle∣wicks of Wilna, Osmiana, Wilkomirs. Braslaw, with its Castle∣wicks, Braslaw, Misdzial, Troki, with its Castle∣wicks, Troki, Kowno, Grodno, Lida. Minsk, with its Castle∣wicks of Minsk, Borissow, Robaczow, Rzeczica, Mary. Minsk, with its Castle∣wicks of Mscislnw, Mohilow, Orssa. Novogrodeck, with its Castlewicks of Novogrodeck, Slonim, Woskowiska. Polosczk, with its Castlew, of Polosczk. Vitepsk, with its Castlew. of Vitepsk. POLESIE, where is— Bresiici, with its Castlew. of Bressici. SAMOGITIE, with its Palatinate and Castlewick of Rosienie. Dutchy of VOLHYNIE, as it is divi∣ded in the Higher VOLHYNIE, with its Palarinate of Lusuc, with its Castle∣wicks of Lusuc, Wolodomiers, Krzemienec. Lower VOLHYNIE, with its Palatinate of Kiovia, with its Castle∣wicks of Kiovia, Owrucze, Zitomirz. PODOLIE, with its Palat. of the Higher PODOLIE, as Kamieniec, with its Castlew. of Kamieniec. Lower PODOLIE, as Braclaw, with its Castlewick of Braclaw. Part of MOSCO∣VIA, where are The Dutchies of Smolensko, with its Castlew. of Smolensko. Novogrodeck, with its Cast. of Novogrodeck.
POLAND. Poland, and its parts.THE Estates of the Crown of Poland ought to be considered in two sorts, the one called the Estates of POLAND, and the other of LITHƲANIA; these two having heretofore had their Kings and Dukes apart, and not having been united till within about 270 years. The Estates of Poland shall be, Poland which we will divide into the Higher and Lower, or Lesser and Greater; and into the Dutchies of Russia Noire, Cajavia, Mazovia, and Prussia. The Estates of Lithuania may be divided into Lithuania, Volhinia, Podolia, &c. all Dutchies; but Lithuania much the greater; wherefore he who possesseth them is entituled the Great Duke of Lithuania. Its extent.All these Estates of Poland and Lithuania taken together, extend from a∣bout the 48th degree of Latitude unto the 57th, which are about 225 French Leagues; and from the 38th of Longitude unto the 61, and have near as much Continent again as France. They are bounded on the East for the most part by Moscovy,Bounds. and part of the Petit Tartars; on the South the Mountains o Caprack and the River Neister divide them from Hungaria, Transilvania and Moldavia; on the West by Germany, and toucht in part on the Baltic Sea; and on the North they are bounded part by Livonia, and Mos∣covy. Ancient Inha∣bitants.The Ancient name of Poland was Sauromatia, from its Inhabitants the Sau∣romatae; afterwards by Lechius, the first Duke hereof, in Anno 550, it was called Poland, which signifies a plain Country, as generally it is. It was made a Kingdom by the Emperour Otho the Third, Anno 1000, Boleslaus being Duke, and hath ever had its Dukes and Kings elected by the States; who, by reason of their vicinity to the Turks, generally chuse a Warriour. Fertility, Commodities, &c.The Country is plain, well clothed with Firs and other Timber-Trees; the Air is so cold, that they have neither Wine nor Grapes, instead of which, ha∣ving store of Barly, they make use of the Old drink of England, viz. Ale The Country is well furnished with Grains and Fruits, but they are but lean their chief Commodities are rich Furs, Horses, Hony, Wax, Bow-staves, Buff-hides, Ambergreese, Flax, Linnen-cloth, Masts, Cordage, Boards, Wainscot, Timber, Rozin, Tar, and Pith of both kinds, Match, Iron, Stock-fish, Salt dig∣ged out of the Earth, Pot-ashes, Rye in great plenty, for which it hath made Dantzick famous. It is well furnished with Flesh, Fowl, and Fish; and to wads the Carpatian Mountains of Hungaria are found Mines of Gold and Silver, as also Iron and Brimstone. Its People.The People are ingenious, and much addicted to Languages, especially Latin; there being scarce a man, though of a mean condition, but understand it: according to their abilities, they are more inclined to prodigality than pe∣nuriousness; as for the Gentry, they are free, but the Pesants are no better than Slaves, being under subjection to their Lords. They are esteemed good Souldiers, are proud, much given to costly Apparel and delicious Diet; they use the Sclavonian Language: in matters of Religion they are said to em∣brace all, so they have any thing of Christianity in them; some following the Reformed Churches, some embracing the Doctrine of Calvin, others of Lu∣ther, and some of Augustine, Bohemian and Helvetian Confessions, and
blazon or coat of arms of Sir Robert Clayton To the Rt Worship Full Sr Robert Clayton of the Citty of London Kt and Alderman and Lord Mayr thee of Anno 1680 This Mapp is D D by R B P of the ESTATES of the CROWNE of POLAND, where are the KINGDOM of POLAND withits Palatinates the DUTCHES of RUSSIA-NOIRE CUJAVIA MOZOVIA PRUSSIA IA VOLHYNIA PODOLIA. &c Designed by Monsieur Sanson Geographer to the French King.
others are of the Church of Rome, which doth occasion the Saying, That he that hath lost his Religion, let him seek it at Poland. Written Laws they have but few, if any, Custom and Temporary Edicts being the Rule both for their Government and Obedience. The Revenue of the King.The Revenue of the King is not great for so large a Country, and that which is, he receiveth from them quarterly, the Kingdom being divided into four Parts, every one of which keepeth the King and Court a quarter; which Revenue is not certain, but more or less according to his occasions, by War, Marriage of his Daughters, or the like. Poland, with its parts and chief places.The Kingdom is divided throughout into Palatinates and Castlewicks. Poland, taken particularly, is divided into the Higher and Lower; in the Higher are the Palatinates of Cracou, Sandomirz, and Lublin. Places of most note in these parts are 1. Cracou, or Cracovia, seated in a Plain, and on the Banks of the Vistula, dignified with the residence of the King: It is in form round, the Houses fair and lofty, and built of Freestone; in the midst of the City is a large Quadrangle Market-house, where is seated the Cathedral Church, and the Senate-house for the Citizens, about which are several Shops for Merchants. The City is encompassed with two strong Stone Walls, and a dry Ditch; on the East-side of the City is the Kings Castle, being fair, well built, and pleasantly seated on a Hill, as also the Kings and Queens Lodgings; on the West is a Chappel where the Kings are interr'd, and on the North-side Lodgings for Entertainment and Feasting; the South-side being without Build∣ings: but as to matters of Trade, this City is of small account. Also Sandomirz and Lublin, both chief Cities of their Palatinates, are in the higher Polonia, or Poland. Lower Poland.In the Lower Poland are the Palatinates of Posna, Kalisch, Sirad, Len∣cin, Dobrzin, Ploczk, and Rava; whose chief Cities or places bear the same name, and are the residence of their Palatines. Besides which there are several other Towns of good note, which are taken notice of in the Geogra∣phical Table of the Kingdom, and in chief Posna and Gnesna, dignified with the See of an Archbishop, who during the Interregnum of the King, holdeth the Supream Authority in the Kingdom, and summoneth the Diets. To Poland doth also belong the Dutchies of Russia, Noire, Cujavia, Ma∣zovia, Prussia, and Polaquie. Russia Noire.RƲSSIA NOIRE hath for its chief places Loewenberg and Belz, both chief of their Palatinates. OƲJAVIA hath for its principal places Brzesti and Ʋladislau,Cujavia. both chief of their Castelwicks. Mazovia, with its places.MAZOVIA hath only one Palatinate, viz. Czersk, under which is comprised several Cities and Castlewicks, the chief of which is Warzaw, one of the fairest in the Kingdom, it oft-times being the residence of the Kings of Poland, a place noted for its excellent Metheglin here made. PRƲSSIA is considered in two parts, Prussia. which are called Royale and Du∣cale: Prussia Royale is immediately subject to the Crown of Poland, and hath its Palatinates in the Cities of 1. Dantzick, seated on the Vistula, at its influx into the Baltick Sea, and at the foot of a great Mountain, which hangs over it; it is the fairest, best, and of the greatest Trade of any in Prussia. Through this City runs a River very commodious to the Inhabitants, whereon are many Mills for the grinding of Corn, which is here found in great plenty; as also a Water-Mill, for the conveyance of water in Pipes to their Houses; and by reason of its great Trade for Corn with England and other parts, they have a great many Granaries or Store-houses for the same, which is hither brought them from Poland. 2. Elbin, though but small, yet a fair City, and indifferently well frequented by the English Merchants. 3. Marienburg, the Seat of the Masters of the Dutch Knights; 4. Culne, and 5. Thorn, which though it hath no Palatinate, is esteemed by many next to Dantzick. Prussia Ducale belongs to the Marquess of Brandenbourg, who holds it from the Crown of Poland. It hath only one Palatinate at Koningsberg, seated
on an Inlet of the Baltick Sea, and washed with the River Pegel; it is a fair City, a famous Mart, and a good University, and before its Coast is gathered great quantity of Ambergriece: This Ambergriece is the juyce of a Stone grow∣ing like Coral on a Rock in the North-Sea, continually covered with Water; and in the Months of September and December, by the violence of the Sea, is rent from the Rocks and cast into the Havens of the Neighbouring Coun∣tries. POLAQƲIE is a small Province between the Estates of Poland and Lithuania,Polaquie. and seems to have belonged to Mozavia; Bielsk is the Seat of its Palatinate. And hitherto we have treated of the Estates of Poland, al∣most all on the Vistula, or the Rivers that fall into it, on which are seated the three fairest Cities of these Quarters, viz. Cracow, towards its Spring; War∣saw, towards the middle of its course; and Dantzick, towards its principal Mouth falling into the Sea. Estates of Lithuania.The Estates of LITHƲANIA are East of Poland, and about the River Neiper; they are divided into the Palatinates of Wilna, Braslaw, Troki, Minsk, Novogrodeck, Polosczk, and Vitepk. Its chief places are Wilna, an Ʋniversity, and the Premier Palatinate; the other principal places bear the name of its Palatinate, and are of some account. Polisie. Samogitie.The Quarter of POLESIE hath for its chief place Bressisi. SAMO∣GIYIE hath no Palatinate, and hath for its chief place Rosienie, whose Houses are built with Mud and Straw walls. The Dutchy of VOLHYNIE is divided into the Higher and Lower, Volbynie. and hath the Palatinates of Lusuc and Kiovia; its chief places bear the names of their Palatinates. The Dutchy of PODOLIE is also divided into the Higher and Lower, Podolie. and hath the Palatinates of Kamieniec and Braclaw, whose chief places bear the same name. The Turks and Swedes posses∣sors of some parts of Pe∣land.The Turks are possessed of Oczacou in the Lower Podolia, and on the Black Sea; likewise of Dassau in the Lower Volhynia, and on the Borstyhenes. The Swedes have likewise, within these few years, taken all Livonia; the Dutchy of Curland, wherein is the City of Mittau remaining only of that Province under the protection of the Crown of Poland; and moreover the Vayvode of Moldavia, and sometimes likewise he of Valachia renders some Duties to Poland. In Lithuania are divers Dukedoms, as of Slusk, Neswies, Birga, &c. whose Princes are powerful and have great Priviledges. The Dukedoms of Smolensko and Novogrodeck, which are of a great extent, and run all along the Coast of Lithuania, towards Moscovia, belong at present to the Crown of Poland, although part of Moscovy. The principal Rivers in Poland are the Vistula, the Niemen, the Dovine, the Neiper or Borysthenes, and the Neyster; most of which are very conside∣rable for largeness, fairness, and swiftness of Stream.
SCANDI∣NAVIA, which with the Penin∣sula's and Isles about it, are the Estates of DANE∣MARK, which com∣prehendeth the King∣doms of DANE∣MARK; whereof the principal parts are The Peninsula of JUT∣LAND, as it is di∣vided into four Bisho∣pricks and two Dut∣chies; to wit, Ripen, Ripen, Rolding. Arhusen, — Arhusen. Alborg, Alborg, Scagen. Wiborg, — Wiborg. Sleswick, Sleswick, Flensborg, Hussen, Hadersleben, Friderickstad, Sunderborg. Holstein, or Holsace, Kiel, Segeberg, Krempe, Meldorpe, Gluckstad, Lubeck, Hambourg, Borg in Femeren. Divers ISLES, the chief of which are Seland, or Zeland, Copnhagen, Rschilt, Elsennor, Warorg. Fuinen,— Otrensoe. Falster, Nicopen. Gotland, Visby. Osel,— Arensborg. The Coast of GOTH∣LAND; where are the Provinces of Halland, Halland, Helmstad, La Holme. Bleckinge, Christianople, Christianstad, Elleholm. Sconen, or Scanja, Lunden, Elsenborg, Landscron, Malbogen. NORWAY, which con∣sisteth of Five Governments in SCANDINAVIA, viz. Bahus, — Marstrand. Aggerhus, Opslo, Schou: Bergenhus, Bergen, Staffanger. Trontheinhus, — Trontheinhus. Wardhus, — Wardhus. And divers Lands and Isles, in the Northern Sea, and in AMERICA Artick, the chief of which are Groneland, — Bearford. Izland Isle, Scalhold, Holen, Bellestead. Farre Isle,— Farre, SWEDEN; which com∣drehendeth the Regions of SUEONIE; whose parts are SUEONIE, with its Provinces of Upland, Stockholme, Upsal. Westermannie, Vesteras, Arbog, Koping. Dalecarlie, — Idra. Nericie, — Orebrog. Sundermannie, Nikoping, Strengnes. NORTHLAND, with its Parts of Gestricie, — Gevalie, Helsinge, Hudwickswalde. Medelpapie, Indal. Angermannie, Heronsand. Bothnie, — Torne. LAPPONIE, or Lapland, in part, to wit, LAPPONIE, most Southern, where are the Marches of Vina-Lapmarck, — Loisby. Pitha-Lapmarck, Sytovoma. Lula-Lapmarck, Torpajaur. Torne-Lapmarck, Sequara. Kimi-Lapmarck, — Somby. GOTH∣LAND, or Gothie; whose parts are OSTRO-GOTHLAND, with its Provinces of Ostro-Gothland, Wadstein, Schening, Linkoping, Norkoping, Sunderkoping. Smalandie, Calmar, Jenekoping, Vexjo, Ekesio, Westerwick. Ocland Isle, — Borkholm. WESTRO-GOTH∣LAND, with its Pro∣vinces of Westro-Gothland, Gotheburg, Scara, Mariestad, Lidekoping. Dalie, — Daleborg. Vermeland, — Carolstad. FINLAND, — Finland, Abo, Bienborg. And Provinces united to FINLAND, as Cajanie, — Ula. Savolaxie, Nyslot. Tavastie, Tavasthus. Nyland, Botgo. Carelie, Wyborg. Keholm, — Kesholm. INGRIA, which cannot be divided into Provinces,— Notteborg. LIVONIE, whereof the part belong∣ing to Sweden, may be divided into Esten, Hapsel, Revel, Nerva, Derpt. Letten, — Riga.
The King∣dom of DANE∣MARK, as it is com∣posed of three Parts, to wit, The Peninsula of JUT∣LAND, or JUTIE, as it is divi∣ded in North JUTLAND; where are the Bishopricks of Ripen, Ripen, Kolding, Weel, Warde, Rinkoping; Hostebro. Arthusen, Arthusen, Kalla, Hersens, Randersen, Ebelto, Grimastad, Hobro. Albourg, with its parts of Thyland, — Albourg. Hanheret, Thystad. Morsee, Nycopin. Venyssel, Selby, Scagen, Hirring. Wibourg, Wybourg, Lemwick, Holcker. South JUTLAND; where are the Dutchies of Sleswick, Sleswick, Hussen, Stenberg, Hadersleben, Flensborg, Gottrop, Ekelenford, Appenrade, Frederickstad, Holstein, or Holsatia, with its parts of Holsatia, Kiel, Rendesborg, Wilstet, Nienmunster, Borg en Femeren. Wagrie, Lubeck, Segeberg, Odesloe, Niestat, Oldenborg. Stormarch, Hambourg, Krempe, Bredenberg, Gluckstad, Tychenberg, Dilmarch, Meldrop, Heide, Lunden. Divers Isles, About the BELT, and between the Lands of DENMARK, as Zeland, or Seland, Copenhagen, Roschilt, Elsenour, Warborg, Fredericksbourg, Ringstede, Holbeck, Slages, Corsroer, Nestwede. Fuinen, or Fionie, Osell, Niborg, Swinborg, Kartemunde, Woborg, Assens, Bowens. Fimera, — Petersborne. Alsen, Osterholme, Gammelgard, Norbarch. Tusinge, — Niburg. Huen, — Vramburg. Arroe. — Koping. Longland, — Rudkoping. Laland, Maxcow, Rodby, Maribo. Falster, Nikoping, Stubekoping. In the BALTICK Sea, and between the Lands of SWE∣DEN; as Bornholme, Nex, Rattenby, Sunneckier. Gothland,— Visby, or Wisby. Oesel, — Arensborg. The Coast of GOTH∣LAND, or GOTHIE, to wit, WESTRO-GOTHLAND; where is the Province of Hallandis, Warborg, Lattolm, Helmstad, Falkenborg, Hallandia. OSTRO-GOTHLAND; where are the Provinces of Scania, or Sconen, Lunden, Helsinborg, Christiana, Malbogen, or Ellegeboges. Bleckinge, or Blekingea, Trelborg, Usted, Malinogia, Colmar, Christianople.
SWEDEN. The Estates of the Crown of SWEDEN, are compo∣sed of six different Regions, to wit, SWEDEN, particularly so called, whose parts are SUEONIE; where are the Provinces of Upland, Stockholm, Upsal, Enkoping, Sigtun, Oregrand. Westmannie, Westeras, or Arosia, Arbog, Koping. Dalecarlie, — Idra. Nericie, — Orebrog. Sudermannie, Nikoping, Strengnes, Tleg, Tsilia, Tvosa. NORLAND; where are the Provinces of Gestricie, — Gevalia. Helfinge, Hudwickswalde. Medelpadie, Indal. Angermannie, Hernosand. Pothnie, — Torne. LAPLAND; in part, to wit, LAPPONIE SUEDOISIE, or LAPLAND; where are the Parts of Vina-Lapmarck, Loisby, Semifierli. Pita-Lapmarck, Sytovoma, Lochtary, Arnyrfuy. Lula-Lapmarck, Torpajaur, Sirckflucht, Jokomuka. Torne-Lapmarck, Sequara, Tinquara, Pederjersi, Kittilaby, Sodenkyle. Kimi-Lapmarck, Somby, Kimiby, Kolajerfui, Kithyerfui, Marnselkeby. GOTHLAND, with its two parts, OSTRO-GOTHLAND, or Gothie Orientale, with its Pro∣vinces of Ostro-Gothland, Wadstein, Schening, Linkoping, Norkoping, Sunderkoping. Smalandie, Calar, Jenekoping, Vexjo, Ekesio, Westorwick. Oclald, — Borcholm. WESTRO-GOTHLAND, or Gothie Occidentale, with its Provinces of Westro-Gothland, Gotheburg, or Lodusia, Scara, Mariestad, Lidekoping, Falekoping, Skedui, Hio, Bogesund, Brtta, Lundos. Dalie, — Daleborg. Vermeland, — Carolstad. FINLAND, which may be divided in FINLAND, South Finland, Abo, Raseborg, North Finland, Biernborg, Raumo, Nystadh, Nadhendal. Aland Isles,— Castelholm. Provinces united to FINLAND, as those of Cajanie, Ula, Wassa, or Mustasar, Cajaneborg, Ulaborg. Savolax, — Nyslot, or New Castrum. Tavaste, — Tavasthus. Nyland, Borgo, Helsingfors. Caresie, — Wiburg. Kexhlm, — Kexholm, or Barelogorod. INGRIA, which is not subdivided into Provinces, Notteburg, or Orescu, Juanogorod. Caporia, Jamagorod. LIVONIA, in part; as (The rest be∣longeth to the Crown of POLAND.) ESTEN, or ESTONIE; where are the parts of Esten, — Febin. Vickeland, Pernajo, Habsel. Harneland, — Revel. Wireland, Wiesenburg, Tolsburg. Alantack, Nerva, Nyslot. Jervenland, — Wittenstein. Kikeland, — Derpt. LETTEN, with its parts and places, as they lie Towards the West, Riga, Segenwold, Wenden, Walmer. Towards the South, Koekenhaus, Creutzburg, Dunburg. Towards the East, — Maryenburg.
SCANDINAVIA, Wherein are the ESTATES of DENMARK AND SWEDEN. The extent, bounds, &c. of Scandinavia.SCANDIA, or SCANDINAVIA, is only a Peninsula, which ex∣tends it self from the 56th degree of Latitude, unto or beyond the 71, which are near 400 Leagues from North to South; and from the 26th degree of Longitude unto the 45th on the Baltick Sea, and on the Ocean unto the 53; but this Mass of Land cannot have in its greatest breath above 150 Leagues, finishing in two points towards South and North. Its scituation, &c. It is bounded on the North and West by the Northern Ocean, and on the South and East by the Baltick Sea; a continual Chain of Mountains dividing it into two almost equal parts, of which one is on the Baltick Sea, and the other on the Ocean; this possessed by the King of Denmark, the other by the King of Sweden. DENMARK. Its Commo∣dities.THe Estates of DENMARK contain two Kingdoms, to wit, DEN∣MARK and NORWAY. Denmark is between the Ocean and the Baltick Sea, composed of a Peninsula contiguous to Germany, and of a Coast contiguous to Sweden; and of divers Isles which are between the Peninsula and Coast; some likewise in the middle of the Baltick Sea, and near Livonia. It is scituate partly in the Northern Temperate Zone, and partly within the Artick Circle, extending from the 55th degree of Longitude, or the middle Parallel of the 10th Clime, where it joyneth to Germany as far as 71 degrees, where it is bounded by the Frozen Ocean, the longest day in the most Southern parts being 17 ¼ hours; but in the most Northern parts they have no Night for almost three Months: whereas on the other side, when the Sun is in the other Tropick; and most remote from them, they have no Day for the like time▪ This Country is very cold, and consequently not over fertil, nor affording good Fruits. The Commodities that this Kingdom affords are Fish, Hides, Tallow Furniture for Shipping, as Pitch, Tar, Cordage, Masts, &c. also Firr, Boards Wainscot, several sorts of Armour, &c.
map of Denmark VIRTUTE NON VI blazon or coat of arms To ye Rt. Honble  Lord  &  of  D & Earl of  and Ld of his Maitys most Honourable privy Councell &c 1678 of  & younger son of one of ye Danish Kings that came into England with William the Conquerour This Mapp is Humbly dedicated by R B PP OF THE KINGDOME OF DENNMARKE, WITH ITS SEVERALL DIOECESES OR PROVINCES, DESIGNED BY MONSIEUR SANSON, GEO
Its Inhabi∣tants.The Inhabitants for the most part are of a good statute and complexion, very healthful, ingenious, and of a ready wit, very punctual in performing their Promises, proud and high conceited of their own worth, lovers of Learn∣ing, as may appear by those Famous men it hath bred, viz. Tycho Brahe, the great Mathematician; John Cluverus, the renowned Philosopher and Phy∣sitian; Godfrey Gottricus, that stout Warriour, who not only setled the Go∣vernment of this Kingdom, but also shook the Realm of France; likewise Waldemare, Christiern the Second and Fourth; Canutus and Sueno, which two last were the Conquerors of England. They are great punishers of Offenders, especially Theft and Piracy; their Women are of a comly grace, very fair, and as fruitful in Children; discreet and sober. The Peninsula called JƲITLAND, once Cimbrica Chersonesus,Juitland. from the Cimbrians its ancient Inhabitants: it is divided into North and South Juit∣land. North JƲITLAND is severed into the Bishopricks of Ripen, Arthusen, Albourg, and Wibourg. Diocess of Ripen.RIPEN contains 30 Prefectures or Herets, (as they term them) 7 Cities or walled Towns, and 10 Castles. Its chief places are 1. Ripen, seated near the German Ocean, the chief place of the Diocess, and dignified with an Episco∣pal See: 2. Kolding, seated on a Creek of the Baltick Sea; 3. Weel, 4. Warde, &c. Diocess of Arthusen.ARTHƲSEN containeth 31 Prefecture, 7 Cities or walled Towns, and 5 Castles. Its chief places are 1. Arthusen, seated on the Baltick Sea, having a commodious and well frequented Port, and dignified with an Episco∣pal See. 2. Kalla, a strong place, seated in a large Bay, reaching two Dutch miles to the high Hill of Elemanberg; opposite to which lie the Isles of Hilgo∣nes, Tuen, Samsoe, Hiarneo, and Hiolm, &c. 3. Horsens, 4. Randersen, 5. Ebelto, and 6. Hobro. Diocess of Albourg.ALBOƲRG, which is divided into four parts, viz. Thyland, whose chief Town is Albourg, seated on the Bay of Limford, which, opening into the Baltick Sea, extendeth it self through the main Land, almost to the Ger∣man Ocean. 2. Hanebert, on the North-west of Limford Bay, containeth 4 Prefectures, and hath for its chief place Thystad. 3. Morsee, lying on the Ocean, contains 3 Prefectures, the Isle of Ageroe, the Town of Nicopin, and the Castle of Lunstead: and 4. Vensyssel, according to Mercator, Vandalo∣rum sedes, or the Seat of the Vandals, contains 6 Prefectures, 3 Towns, and 1 Castle, viz. Selby, Cagen, and Hirring. Diocess of Wibourg.WIBOƲRG contains 16 Prefectures, the Isles of Egholm, Hansholm, Bodum, Idgen, Cisland, and Ostholm; also it hath 3 Castles, and as many Cities or walled Towns; viz. 1. Wibourg, dignified with an Episcopal See, and the Courts of Judicature for both the Juitlands. The point of Scagen, or Scean, ends this Peninsula towards the North. 2. Lemwick, and 3. Holcker. South JƲITLAND is divided into the Dukedoms of Sleswick and Holstein. SLESWICK, a Country for the most part level, Sleswick. enriched with fertil Fields both for Corn and Pasturage; it is very well provided with good Bays on the Baltick, which are found commodious for Merchants. The chief pla∣ces in this Dukedom are, 1. Sleswick, seated on the Slea, which falls into the Baltick, where it hath a commodious and well frequented Haven; it is a fair Town, the chief of the Dukedom, and honoured with an Episcopal See. 2. Hussen, seated on the German Ocean: 3. Sternberg, the ordinary residence of the Governour for the King of Denmark; 4. Hadersleben, seated on a navigable In-let of the Baltick, and fortified with a strong and fair Castle: 5. Flensborg, seated on the Baltick amongst high Mountains, having a Port so commodious and deep, that Ships do lade and unlade close to their Houses: and 6. Gottrop, where there is a strong Fort belonging to the Duke of Sleswick, seated at the end of a large Bay of the Baltick, of note for the Custom-house or Tole-booth there, erected for Cattle, sent out of these parts into Germany.
Dukedom of Holstein.HOLSTEIN, or HOLSATIA, a woody, low and Marshy Country; is severed into the Parts of Holsatia especially so called, Wagrie, Stormarch, and Dilmarch. HOLSTEIN, or HOLSATIA, hath for its chief places 1. Kiel, seated on a navigable Arm of the Baltick, where it hath a large Haven, being a Town of a good Trade. 2. Rendesborg, said to be the strongest Town in all the Province; 3. Wilsted, and 4. Nienmunster. WAGRIE hath for its chief places, 1. Lubeck, an Imperial and free City, enjoying the priviledges of a Hans-Town; it is pleasantly seated on the con∣fluence of the Billew, and on the North-banks of the Trane, severing it from Germany, and empty themselves into the Baltick, being capable to receive Ships of a great burthen, which they lade and unlade at Tremuren, the Maritim Port, at about a miles distance; it is built on all sides upon a rising Hill, on the Summit whereof is placed a fair and beautiful Church called St. Maries, being the Cathedral, from whence, on an easie descent, there are Streets which lead to all the Gates of the City, which afford a fair prospect to the Eye; besides which, it is adorned with 9 other Churches, one of which being a decayed Monastery, is converted to an Armory to keep their Ammunition for War. It is about 6 miles in compass, encircling within its Walls divers fair and uniform Streets, beautified with good Brick-buildings, is very populous, and well in∣habited by Citizens and Merchants, who drive a considerable Trade on the Baltick Seas. But this City, as also Hamburgh, is esteemed rather part of Lower Saxony in Germany, where I have also treated of them. 2. Segeberg. 3. Odesloe, 4. Niestad, and 5. Oldenborg. STORMARCH hath for its chief places, 1. Hambourg, an ancient City built by the Saxons, since made an Imperial City, enjoying the Priviledges of a Hans-Town, seated on the North-banks of the Albis, which divides it from Germany, of which it is reckoned a part or member, and there treated of in the description of the Lower Saxony, to which I refer the Reader. 2. Krempe, seated on a River of the same name, which emptieth it self into the Store; a strong and well fortified Town, being reckoned for one of the Keys of the Kingdom. 3. Bredenberg, a Town of great strength, belonging to the Rant∣zoves: 4. Gluckstade, seated on a Bay or Creek of the German Ocean, and therefore well fortified, to command the passage up the Elbe: and 5. Tychen∣berg, seated on the Elbe, being so well fortified, that it is now held the strongest Town in this Kingdom. DILMARCH or DITMARCH, hath for its chief places, 1. Meldrop, seated on the Sea; a place of some account, and the chief of the Province. 2. Heide, and 3. Lunden, a Haven Town, seated on the Eider, which rising in this Peninsula, here emptieth it self into the Ocean. The BALTICK ISLES. THese Islands which are between Juitland and the Coast, and farther in the Baltick Sea, are in number 35, and are so called, as being dispersed in these Seas. The Baltick Sea begins at the narrow passage called the Sound, and interlacing the Countries of Denmark, Poland, Germany, and Sweden, extendeth to Livonia and Lithuania. The reason (according to the Opinion of many) why this Sea, which is so large, doth neither ebb nor flow, may be as well from its Northern scituation, whereby the Celestial influences have the less predominancy, as also from the narrowness of the Streight, which receiveth the Ocean. The chief of these Isles I have set down in the Geo∣graphical Table of this Kingdom, of which a word or two, and first with Zeland.
ZELAND, anciently Codanonia, from the Codani its Inhabitants; Zeland. the Isle is very fertil, the greatest and of most importance of any in the Baltick, to the King of Denmark, as lying not above three miles from the main Land of Scandia, which narrow Streight is called the Sound, through which all Ships must pass that have any Trade into the Baltick, all paying to the said King a certain Toll, according to the bigness or Bills of Lading, by which ariseth a great Revenue unto him; and for the security of this passage there are built two exceeding strong Castles, the one in this Isle, called Cronen∣berg, and the other in Scandia, called Hilsemberg, of which more anon. In this Isle are 7 strong Castles, and 13 Cities or walled Towns; the chief of which are 1. Copenhagen, or Haffen, the chief of the Isle, seated near the Sea, having a commodious Port; it is built orbicular, of a good strength, being defended by a powerful Castle; its Houses are but meanly built, yet it hath a spacious Market-place, and is dignified with the residence of the King for the Winter season; whose Palace is built of Freestone quadrangular, but of no great splendor, as also with the only Ʋniversity in the Kingdom. 2. Elsenour, seated on the Sea side; of it self but a poor Village, were it not for the great resort of Sea-men in their passage through the Sound into the Baltick, this being the place where they pay their Toll; and in this Village is the stately and well fortified Castle of Cronenburg, built in the very Ocean, and bravely resisting the fury of its Waves; now the ordinary residence of the King, being a pleasant prospect into the Sea; on the South-side of this Castle is a large and commodious Road for Shipping. 3. Roschilt, once a rich City, now only fa∣mous for being the Sepulchre of the Danish Kings, where, in the Cathedral Church, they have their Tombs; it is also dignified with the See of a Bishop. 4. Fredericksbourg, a Fortress built in a pleasant Plain, often visited by the King in his retirement, where he hath a delightful House seated in a Park. 5. Warborg, 6. Ringstede, 7. Holbeck, 8. Slages, &c. FƲINEN, or FIONIE, seated betwixt Zeland and Juitland,Fuinen. and almost joyning to the Main-land; it is of a fextil Soil, and pleasant scituation, being in length about 12 Dutch miles, and 4 in breadth. Its chief places are 1. Osel, or Ottonium, so called from Otho the Great, who founded here an Episcopal See, seated in the midst of the Isle, from which the other Towns are of an equal distance, which renders it very commodious for Traffick; it is not large, having but two Churches, and its Buildings are neat and ornamental enough. 2. Niborg, 3. Swinborg, 4. Kartemunde, 5. Woborg, and 6. Ascens; all, or most of them seated on some convenient Creek or Haven. FIMERA, a very fertil and well peopled Isle; Fimera. and here it was that Tycho Brache, the famous Mathematician, built an Artificial Tower, in which are (or were) many rare Mathematical, Instruments; its chief place is Peters∣borne, of some importance to the King of Denmark. ALSEN, a small Isle appertaining to the Dukedom of Sleswick;Alsen. is very populous, contains 13 Parishes, and 4 Towns, viz. Osterholme, Gammelgard, Norbarch, and Sunderburg; dignified with the residence of the Duke of Sleswick. TƲSINGE, a very small Isle, Tusinge. and of no great account by reason of its dangerous scituation; its chief place is Niburg. ARROE, a small Isle belonging to the Duke of Sleswick;Arroe. it contains three Towns, the chief of which is Koping, fortified with a Castle so called. LONGLAND, an indifferent long Isle, but not very broad; Longland. its chief place is Rudkoping, of some account. LALAND, not far distant from Zeland; abounds in Corn and Chesuuts,Laland. fraighting therewith many Vessels yearly; it is very populous for the bigness, contains 3 Towns, viz. Maxcow, Rodby, and Maribo; besides a great many Villages and some Castles. FALSTER, a small Isle, fertil in Corn, seated near to Laland;Falster. its chief places are Nikoping, of a pleasant scituation; and Stubekoping.
In the Baltick, and between the Lands of Sweden, are also several Isles the chief amongst which are BORNHOLME,Bornholm. seated not far from Goth∣land, an Isle very fertil, feeding abundance of Cattle: It hath many goo Towns and Villages, the chief of which are, Nex, Rottonby, and Suom∣neckier. GOTHLAND,Gothland. an indifferent large Isle, in form round and narrow, no in the possession of the Swedes: It yields white Marble, excellent for build∣ing; the City of Wisby, seated in the midst of the Isle, was once so famous fo Traffick, that it gave Maritim Laws to the Baltick Sea. That which the King of Denmark possesses, as particularly belonging to tha Crown, on the Coast of Scandinavia, is part of the ancient Gothland; th most Southern of which that we are now treating of, is divided into Westro-Gothland and Ostro-Gothland; which are again subdivided into the Provinc of Hallandia, which takes up Westro-Gothland; and into the Provinces o Scania and Blecking, which takes up Ostro Gothland; and first of Hal∣landia. HALLANDIA,Hallandia. now in the possession of the Swedes; this Country o Province for fertility of Soil, sweetness of Air, store of Fish, plenty of Lea and Brass Mines, and thickness of Towns and Villages, which are well inha∣bited, is not inferiour to any. Its chief places are 1. Warborg, seated on th Sea-shoar, and defended by a strong Castle, built on the summit of a Hill, s that it hath a great command over the Country. 2. Laholm, 3. Helmst▪ 4. Falkenborg, and 5. Hallandia, or Katterop. SCANIA,Scanr. or SCONEN, hath on the North Hallandia, and on all othe parts, the Sea; also now in the Swedes possession: It is about 70 miles long and 48 broad; the pleasantest Country in all Denmark, most abundant i Fruits, and richest in Merchandize, and on the Sea-side are sometimes such great sholes of Herrings, that they are found troublesom to Vessels. Its chie places are 2. Lunden, an Inland City, dignified with the sole or Metropolita Archbishop of Denmark; the chiefest beauty in this City is the Cathedra Church, a magnificent Structure, beautified with excellent pieces of Art, th chief whereof are the Clock and the Dial: the Clock being so composed b Artificial Engines, that whensoever it striketh, two Horsemen give one ano∣ther as many blows as the Clock striketh times: also upon the opening of  Door there is represented a Theatre, where the Virgin Mary is seated on  Throne with Christ in her Arms, to whom the three Kings, with their sever Trains, come in order, and with reverence present their Gifts to her, during which time two Trumpeters continually sound. And next the Dial, wher the year, month, week, day, and hour of the day throughout the year, as also the motions of the Sun and Moon through each degree of the Zodiack; th moveable and fixed Feasts, &c. are to be distinctly seen, being neatly set for in variety of delightful Colours. 2. Helsinborg, fortified with an impregnabl Castle, and one of the Forts defending the Sound: 3. Christiana, a place  great strength; and 4. Malbogen, a Port-Town, opposite to Copenhagen. BLECKLINGE,Blecklinge. also belonging to the Swedes, hath on the East an South the Baltick Sea: It is a Mountainous and barren Country, and hat for its chief places 1. Malinogia, the Birth-place of the famous Mathematicia Gaspar Bartholinus, who was said to be the inventer and maker of the afore said Clock and Dial. 2. Colmar, an important Fortress against the Swedes until they gained the Province. The Soil of Denmark is naturally better for Pasture than Tillage, and feed such multitude of Oxen, that at least 50000 are said to be yearly sent hence t Germany. Their other Commodities are Fish, Tallow, Furniture for Shipping Armour, Ox-hides, Buck-skins, Wainscot, Fir-wood, Furrs, Pipe-staves Copper, Wheat, Rye, &c.
map of Scandinavia A Generall Mapp of Scandinavia Where are ye Estates and Kingdomes of Danmarke Norwaye and Sweden by Monsieur Sanson blazon or coat of arms of the Eltham baronets To the Rt Worshippfull S.r Thomas Fitch of Eltham and Mount Mascall in the parish of North Cray in Kent K.t This Mapp D.D by R. B.
NORWAY. Its scituation, temperature, fertility, Com∣modities, &c.THe Country of NORWAY is bounded on the North with Lippia, on the East with the Dofrine Mountains, which divide it from Sweden, and on all other sides with the Sea; on which, with a disproportionate breadth, it stretches its Coasts for 1300 miles in length. The Country is extreamly cold, being partly under the Frozen Zone, and partly so near it, that it all suffers under the inclemency of bitter Colds. It is for the most part Mountainous, full of vast Woods, and of a Soil so barren and ungrateful to the Husbandman, affording so little Corn, that on many places the people live on dried Fish instead of Bread, (known to us by the name of Stock-fish;) but the richer sort of people buy Corn of such Merchants as come to Trade with them. The principal Commodities that this Country affordeth, is great plenty of Firrs, Deal-boards, Timber, Tar, Masts, and Furniture for Shipping, also Stock-fish, Train-oyle, rich Furrs, Copper, Pipe-staves, &c. which the Inhabitants exchange for Corn, Cloths, Kersies, Lead, Tinn, Stockings, &c. The Country is exceedingly annoyed with certain small Beasts about the big∣ness of a Mouse; by them called Lemmers, which at a certain time are so innu∣merable, that like Locusts they devour all the verdure of the Earth, and at a certain time die in heaps, which proves very noisom to the people, infecting the Air; and the Sea is as bad troubled with Whales. The Inhabitants are said to be just Dealers, punishers of Theft, and other Vices, and were accounted formerly great Warriors. Norway divi∣ded into five Governments, viz.This Kingdom is divided into five Governments, which take their names from the places where the Governours reside; in all which the Towns are ex∣ceeding thin, and the Houses as poor. The five Parts are as followeth. BAHƲS, belonging to the Swedes, is the most Southward; Bahus. the chief pla∣ces are Bahus, the residence of the Governour, to which are subject the Towns of Congel, seated on the Sea, and of some Trade; and Marstrand, seated in a Demi-Island, of note for the great quantity of Herrings here caught. AGGERHƲS, mounting towards the North, Aggerhus. whose chief place or Castle is so called, to which these Towns following are subject, 1. Opslow, or Asloya, dignified with an Episcopal See, as also with the Courts of Judicature. 2. Schou, of good account for its Copper and Iron-Mines: and 3. Frederickstad. BERGENHƲS, or BERGEN, whose chief place is so called, Bergenhus. dig∣nified with an Episcopal See, and the residence of the Governour, once a fa∣mous City of Trade, and one of the ancient Mart-Towns of Europe; yet still, by reason of its scituation at the bottom of a deep Arm of the Ocean, called (by them) Carmefunt, where it hath a commodious Port; is well frequented by Merchants, who bring them Corn, Bread, Wine, Beer, Aquavitae, and the like Commodities, to supply their wants; and in exchange take Stock-fish, Furs, Deals, Firrs, Cordage, Pitch, Masts, &c. TRONTHEINHƲS, or TRONDENHƲS,Trontheinhus. whose chief place and Castle, where the Governour resideth is so called; it is dignified with the Metropolitan Archbishoprick of all Norway, once a fair City, as being the Seat of their Kings, till the Danes became Masters of this Country, who have re∣duced this City to a small Town. WARDHƲS, seated beyond Cape Nort,Wardhus. which is the most Northern point of Europe. Its chief place and Castle, where the Governour resideth, except during the absence of the Sun, which is for about three Months in the year, is so called. This Town is serviceable to the King, because it was the Luppians, their Neighbours, as also commandeth the Natives; and profitable, because all the Ships going to Moscovy, must of necessity touch here.
To the Norwegian King do belong divers Lands and Isles in the Northern Sea,, and in America Artick; the chief of which are Groenland, Izland, Farre, &c. which I shall treat of in the Description of America. SWEDEN. THe Estates of the Swede are all on the Baltick Sea, and take up all those Regions which are on the West, East, and North of this Sea, and is Southwards of Poland, Germany, and Denmark. The Estates of the Swede are bounded on the West and North by the Estates of Denmark,The Bounds of Sweden, with its parts. on the East by those of Moscovy, and on the South by the Black Sea, Poland, and Denmark; they comprehend six principal Regions, viz. Sweden, Lapland, Gothland, Finland, Ingra, and Li∣vonie. SWEDEN,Sweden. particularly so called, is divided into the parts of Sueonie and Norland, in both which are several Provinces, which are taken notice of in the Geographical Table of Sweden: It is bounded on the East with Sinus Bodicus, on the West the Dofrine Hills, and on the South Gothland. The Country is very fruitful and delicious, unless in some places, occasioned by the cragginess of the Mountaine, the great Marishes yet undrain'd, and the vast Woods yet standing. The places of most note in this part are 1. Stockholm, seated in a watry Marish, in part upon the Lake Meller, and in part on the East Sea, out of which the great Trade for Shipping to this City doth come, its Port being capacious and safe; which is defended by two powerful Forts, as also the City by an impregnable Castle, well furnished with Ammunition. This City being the residence of the King, as the Metropolitan City, (whose Palace is more renowned for its Antiquity than Magnificence) makes it to be a place of a considerable Trade, and well frequented. 2. Ʋpsal, seated not far from the Bay of Bodner, dignified with a See of an Archbishop, as also with an Ʋniversity, and beautified with a Cathedral Church, no less large than fair, formerly the Burial place of the Swedish Kings. 3. Nikoping, a Mari∣tim Town, of good strength. 4. Copordel, famous for its abundance of Brass. 5. Westeras, or Arosia, of note for its rich Mines of Silver, which are exceed∣ing profitable to the King. 6. Hudwickswalde, seated on the Sea or Gulph of Botnie. 7. Orebrog, 8. Gevala, 9. Indal, 10. Hernosand, and 11. Torne. LAPLAND is the most Northern part of Scandinavia; the People are barbarous, Lapland. rude, void of Arts or Letters, great Idolaters, Sarcerers, and Witches, for which the place is famous, or rather infamous: of stature they are low, but strong and active, expert in the Bow, with which they kill their wild Beasts in hunting, eating the Flesh, and clothing themselves with the Skins, which they tie about them to preserve them from the pinching Cold. Lapland is divided into five parts, viz. Vina-Lapmarck, Pita-Lapmarck, Luna-Lapmark, Torne-Lapmarck, and Kimi-Lapmarck; and these parts are but thinly beset with Towns, contenting themselves with Sheds and Cabins, which they remove from place to place as occasion serveth. Its chief places I have set down in the Geographical Table of Sweden. GOTHLAND is divided into Ostro-Gothland and Westro-Gothland, that is, Gothland. the Land of the Eastern and Western Goths; and these two parts are sub∣divided into several Provinces, viz. Ostro-Gothland, Smalandie, and Oelald, in the first part; and Westro-Gothland, Dalie, and Vermeland in the other part. This is the richest and best Province of the North, and very fertil in Corn and Cattle; in it is the famous Lake Wenir, or Werett, which receiving 24 Rivers, disburthens it self at one Mouth, and with such noise and fury, that it beareth the name of the Devils-head. The places of most note in Ostro-Gothland
are 1. Wadstein, seated on a Lake; 2. Calmar, on the confines of Denmark, seated on the Baltick Sea, a large City, enjoying a good Trade, having a commodious Port, defended by a strong and beautiful Castle. 3. Linkoping, and 4. Vexio, both Episcopal Sees. 5. Westerwick, commodiously seated on the Baltick Sea. In Westro-Gothland are the places of 1. Gotheburg, or Lo∣dusia, a Town of great Trade by reason of its fair and commodious Haven. 2. Scara, an Episcopal Sea; 3. Daleburg, a fair Town, well fortified with a strong Castle; and 4. Carolstad. FINLAND hath on the East Sinus Finicus,Finland. on the South the Baltick Sea, on the West Sinus Bodicus, and on the North Bodinus. The Inhabi∣tants (according to Tacitus) are very barbarous and poor, being destitute of Arms (except Bow and Arrows) Horse, and Houshold-goods, contenting themselves with Herbs for their food, the Skins of Beasts for their clothing, and the Ground for their Bed; yet it is said to be very populous in Towns and Families; the chief amongst which are 1. Abo, seated at the bottom of the Bay of Finland, which separates this Province from Livonia, dignified with the See of a Bishop. 2. Bienborg, 3. Raumo, 4. Hadhendal, and 5. Castle∣holm, in the Isle of Aland. United Pro∣vinces to Finland.Provinces united to Finland, are 1. CAJANIE, whose chief places are Ʋla, Wassa, and Cajaneborg. 2. SAVOLAX, whose chief place is Nislot. 3. TAVASTE, which hath for its chief place Tavasthus. 4. NYLAND, whose chief places are Borgo, a place of great strength, near to which (with∣in the confines of Moscovy) are the two strong Frontier Towns of Viburg and Rivallia, the keeping of which stands the King of Sweden in 100000 Dollars yearly. 5. CARELIE hath for its for its chief place Wiburg: and 6. KEXHOLME, whose principal place bears the same name. Other Lands adjacent to Finland, are Bodia and Scrickfinnia. Lands adja∣cent to Find∣land.BODIA, hath on the South Finland, a Country not over fertil in Grain or Fruits; but in recompence hath great variety of wild Beasts, which affoes great store of rich Furrs. It chiief places are Virtis, Vista, and Helsinga, honoured with the Title of a Dukedom. SCRICKFINNIA hath on the South Bodia, and thence stretcheth it self between Lapland and the Frozen Ocean; a Country miserably cold; they have no use of Mony, but pay their Tribute to the King of Sweden in Skins and Furrs, of which they have great plenty, which they take in hunt∣ing. Towns here are very thin, if any, and those that are be on the Sea-shoar, and very poor, the Natives contenting themselves with Cabbins and Sheds. Province of Ingria.INGRIA, a small Province bordering upon Livonia, at the bottom of the Gulph of Finland, not many years taken from the Knez, or great Dukes of Mosco, by the Kings of Sweden; who have likewise robbed Germany of the best part of Pomerania, and Denmark of the Provinces of Schoven, Sca∣nia, Hallandia, Blekingea, Bahus, Gothland, Oesilia, Heroedalia, and Jemptia. LIVONIA, bounded on the East with Moscovy, and on the West with the Baltick Sea; a Country extreamly Mountainous and Fenny, but yet so fertil, that it supplies with Corn the defects of other Countries. It is severed into the parts, of ESTEN and LETTEN, and these again into several other lesser parts, which are set down in the Geographical Table. Its chief places are Felin, Pernajo, Revel, Wiesenburg, Nerva, Wittenstein, and Derpt, a Town of good Trade. In the part of LETTEN, towards the West, are Riga, the See of an Archbishoprick, and is a place of a good Trade; Segenwold, Wen∣den, and Walmer. Towards the South are the Towns of Koekenhaus and Creutzburg; and towards the East the Town of Marienburg: All these Towns in the part of Letten are subject to the Crown of Poland. Lakes and Rivers.In Scandinavia, or the Estates of Denmark and Sweden, are many Rivers, amongst which, some are large, but not famous: The Lakes and Gulphs, which are in great number, obscure the Rivers, and make the commerce only on the Coast. The Rivers of Ʋma, Pitha, Luda, Torne, and Kimi, give their names to the Marshes of Laponia, subject to the King of Sweden.
The principal Mountains in Scandinavia are the Dofrine Hills, which is a vast and continual ridge of Mountains,Mountains. which divide Sweden from Den∣mark. The Spil of Sweden is so fruitful in many places, The Soil. that it is a hard matter to see a Beggar, and the Air so pure and healthful, that it is ordinary to see men of 130 or 140 years of Age. Commodities. The Country abounds in Mines of Copper, Lead, Brass, and Iron; also hath store of Ox-hides, Goats and Buck-skins, Tallow, Tarrs, rich Furrs, Alom, Hony, Malt, Barly, Wheat, Firrs, &c. Its People.The People are naturally strong, active, stout Souldiers, industrious, laborious and ingenious, especially in Mechanical Aris, very courteous to Strangers, &c. The Women are said to be discreet and modest. The Christian Faith was first planted amongst them by Ansgarius, Archbishop of Breme, the general Apostle of the North. Revenue of the King.The Revenue of the Crown of Swedeland must needs be great, there being three ways allowed him for the receiving it, viz. the Tenths out of all in∣crease of Commodities, as well those of the growth as otherwise. Also by Customs upon all Goods exported and imported; and also the Revenue of the Church, which was seized on and incorporated to the Crown by Gustavus Eri∣cus, our of which there is ye an allowance to the Bishops and Clergy. And besides these ways, he hath power of imposing Taxes in time of War, according to the emergency of the occasion. In his Forces by Land or Sea he is very powerful, being able to put out to Sea about 100 Sail of Ships, and into the Field about 30 or 40000 Foot and Horse. As to the deciding of Controversies, &c. every Territory hath its Viscount, every Province its Lamen, and every Parish its Lanasnan or Consul; and there lieth an Appeal from the Consul to the Viscount, and from the Viscount to the Lamen; from whom also Appeals lie to the Council, and from the Council of Estate to the King, who alone decideth the same.
The Estates of the Great Duke of MOSCO∣VY or RUSSIA ALBA. To the West, and towards SWEDEN and POLAND, Part of LAPLAND; where are the People of Mouremanscoy Leporie, — Kola. Terskoy Leporie,— Jockena. Becesoy Lepori, Kandalax, Omy, iez, So, Colmogorod, Peg, St. Nicola, Arc-Angel. Towards the North, and between the Kingdoms of SWEDEN and NORWAY, and the i∣ver DWINE; where are the Estates or Provinces of. Cargapol,— Cargapol. Wologda, Wologda. Bieleero, — Bieleero. Pleskow, Pleskow, Opoliko. Novogrodeck, Novogrodeck, Stara Russa, Ladoga. Towards the South and the King∣dom of POLAND, and be∣tween the Rivers Don and Bo∣ristene; where are the Estates of Moscovia, particularly so called, Mosco, Mitrow, Salboda, Czirpach. Wolodomme, Wolodimer, Muron. Ter Twer, Tersack. Reschowa, Reschowa, Woloczk. Rezan, Rezan, Coloma, Cassira, Tula, Odojou, Coluga. Worotin, — Worotin. Biesski, Biela, Jaroslau, — Jaroslau. Rostow, Rostow, Uglitz, Calopigorod, Pereslaw. Susdal, Susdal, Castom, Gali. To the East, and towards TARTA∣RIA, Towards the North, and between the Rivers Dwine and Oby, where are the Estates of Outiouga,— Ustioga. Condora, Wcuria. Juhorki, — Juhora. Petzora, Pusteoziero, Papinowgorod. Beski, — Perw Weliki. Wiatka, Chlinow, Orlow, Slawaa, Cotelnicz. Towards the South, and about the Rivers Don and Volga; where are The Cities of Nifi Novogorod, Vafiligorod, Sura. The People, called the Czeremissi Logoway, Czeremissi Nagornoy, Morduates, Machines, Nagaiski, Meschoraki. The Fortresses of Perwolog Carawool, Cameni Caraw. Stapnio Car. Polooy Car. Keezujur Car. Ichkere Car. Uchoog Carawool. In the uc TARTA∣RIA, or Upon, and beyond the River Oby, are the Estates and places of Obdora, Tara, Zergolta. Calami, Calami, Japhanim, Tumen. Sevia, — Tobolk. Tingoefi, Narinskoia. Ginstiuski, Besowia. Loppia, Loppi. Samojedae, Toma, Vogulichi, — Tara. Locomoria, Zergolta, Pohem; Pega Horda, Comgoskoja, Lopin. Upon, and be∣yond the River Volga, are the Kingdoms of Casan, Casan, Belater. Bulgaria, Bulgar, Samara, Marnloria. Astracan, Astracan, Giildecha, Tsier. Estates, or Parts of Scibanski. Cosaski. Nagaja Horda.
MOSCOVIA, OR Russia Alba, OR BLANCHE. MOSCOVY, or RƲSSIA ALBA, (so called to distinguish if from Russia Nigra, a Province in Poland) answers to the whole Sarmatia of the Ancients, which they divided into Sarmatia Europaeana and Sarmatia Asiatica; the most Eastern part of Moscovy answering to this last, and the more W to the former; and this distinction hath made some to esteem it partly in Asl and partly in Europe; but it is by the generality esteemed all in Europe. Its excent, ounds, &c.The whole Estate of the great Duke of Moscovy is of a larger extent th any other in Europe, stretching it self 5 or 600 Leagues in length and bread▪ reaching from the 48th degree of Latitude unto the 70th or 72; and from the 50th of Longitude unto the 100th, and sometimes to the 110th. Moscovy hath its Estates bounded on the East by Tartary, and beyond the Rivers Volga and Oby; on the South, by the Caspian or Euxine Seas; on the North, by the Septentrional or frozen Ocean; and on the West, by Norway, the Estates of Sweden and Poland. ts Commo∣dities.The Commodities that this Empire yieldeth are, rich Furrs of divers sorts Pot-ashes, Hemp, Flax, Honey, Wax, Cables, Yarn, and other Cordage, Fea∣thers', Linnen Cloth both course and fine, Train-oyle, Rozin, Pitch, Caviare, Tallow, Iron, Salt, Sea-horse Teeth, Astracan-hides, Tann'd-hides, Rawhides, dried-Fish, great increase of Grains, with many other good Commodities; here are great store of Cattle, Elkes, Stags, Bears, Wolves, Venison, Tigres, Linxes, Hares, &c. great plenty of Fowl and Fish, common with us in England; and the Earth affordeth them plenty of Fruits, Roots, and Herbs, The Air is exceeding sharp and piercing in the Winter, and subject to excessive great Frosts; but what with their warm clothing with Furrs and their Stoves in their Houses, they endure it well enough: and as their Winte is thus cold, their Summer is as hot and troublesome, the Sun being as it wer above their Horizon. ts Lakes, Forests, &c.The Country hath every where many Lakes, and those of as large an extent as any in Europe, as those of Lodaga, Ouega, Biela, Osera, Ilmen, an others towards the North; those of Resanskoi-osera, of Iwanow-osera, an others towards the South. Here are many Forests, among which the most renowned is that of Epiphanow, very well clothed with Wood and stored wit
map of Russia To ye R.t Honrbl S.r Edu. Dering of Surrenden Dering in Kent Bart one of the Lords Comissioner of his May Treasury This Mapp is most humbly Dedicated by Richard Brome. blazon or coat of arms of the Dering baronets APP OF THE ESTATES OF THE GREAT DUKE OF RUSSIA BLANCH OR MOSCOVIA. Designed by Mouncr. n. Geographer to the French King:
wild Beasts and Fowl. Mountains here are but few, except those of Roglowi, between the Rivers Tana and Volga; and those of Camenopoij or Stolp, that is, the Pillars of the World, which are between the Dwine and the Oby. This Country (according to some) is called the Mother of Rivers,Rivers. amongst which the Volga, the Don or Tana, and the Dovine or Dwine, are the most fa∣mous; and especially the Volga, which is the greatest and noblest in all Eu∣rope, both for its course and the force of its Water, running 7 or 800 Leagues, and receives abundance of other Rivers. Moscovy ill inhabited.Moscovy for the most part is ill Inhabited, and especially towards the North and East; these quarters being cold, full of Forests, and some of their People Idolaters: that which is towards Sweden and Poland is more frequented, more civiliz'd, and its Cities and Towns better built: that which lieth towards the South, and in all likelyhood should be the best, is partly Mahometan, and often infected by the Petit Tartars. But a word or two of its People about Mosco, which by reason of its being the residence of the Great Duke, are sup∣posed to be the most civiliz'd and ingenious. Its People.The People are naturally ingenious enough, yet they addict themselves nei∣ther to Arts or Sciences, but chiefly to Traffick and Husbandry, in which they are very subtle; they are observed to be great Liars, perfidious, treacherous, distrustful, crafty, revengeful, quarrelsom, proud, much addicted to Women and strong Drink, but Tobacco is forbidden amongst them. Their Houses are but mean, and as ill furnished, contenting themselves to lie on Matts or Straw, in∣stead of Beds; they are gross feeders, yet have wherewithal to feed delici∣ously. Their habit (which they seldom or never change) is much the same with the ancient Greeks, wearing long Robes of Cloth, Sattin, Silk,Their Habit.Cloth of Gold or Silver, which is beset with Pearls, according to the quality of the person, by which, together with their attendance, they are known; and un∣der these Robes they wear close Goats and Drawers, begirting themselves with Swashes; on their feet they wear Buskins, and on their heads, Caps (instead of Hats) adorned with Pearl and precious Stones, which in their Salutations they move not, only bow their bodies. They are for the most part fat and corpulent, esteeming great Bellies, and long and great Beards, for a comliness; the Women, though indifferent handsom, yet make use of Paint. In the performance of their Nuptial Rites they use many Ceremonies, which are largely treated of by Adam Olearius, in his Book entituled the Ambassa∣dours Travels into Moscovy and Persin, whose description I shall make use of, wherein he saith, That young Men and Maids being debarr'd the Society of each other, Maidens not being allowed the freedom of the Street, or society with Men; Their Cere∣monies in Marriage. it happens that no Marriages are made but by the consent of the Parents; and the bargain being agreed on by them, the Wedding-day is ap∣pointed, the Night before which the young Man makes his never yet seen Bride a Present, according to their Qualities. He saith further, that there are two Women appointed by them, who are to take order for the making the Nuptial Bed, &c. which is made upon about 40 sheaves of Rye, which are encompassed with a great many Barrels of Wheat and other Grains. All things being made ready, the Bridegroom late in the Evening goes to the Brides, accompanied with his Friends and Relations, together with the Priest who is to marry them, riding before them; and being received in, are brought to a Table where three Dishes of Meat are brought, but none eats thereof; then after some Ceremonies, the Bride is brought in richly clad in a sitting dress for that Solemnity by the said Women, who places her by the Bridegroom; and to prevent their seeing one another, besides the Val over the Brides face, they are parted by a piece of crimson Tassety, which is held by two Youths: which done, the said Woman ties up her Hair in two knots, paints her, puts a Crown neatly made and gilded on her head, and habits her like a married Woman; the other Woman chosen by them paints the Bridegroom, and whilst this is doing, the Women get up on Benches and sing several Songs; then after several ridiculous Ceremonies they go to the Church, and before
the Priest gives them the Benediction, he carries them to the Offering, which consists of fryed Meats, Fish, and Pastry: the Benediction is given by hold∣ing Images over their heads, and the Priest taking the Bridegroom by the right hand, and the Bride by the left, and asks them three times, if they will love one another as Man and Wife ought, and whether it be by their consent; to which both answer, Yes: then all the People joyn hands and dance, whilst they and the Priest sing the 128 Psalm, which ended, he puts a Garland of Rue about their heads, saying, Increase and multiply; and then consumma∣ting the Marriage, saith, Whom God hath joyned together, let no man separate; which being pronounced, several Wax-Candles are lighted, and the Priest is presented with a Glass of Claret, and being pledg'd by the Married couple, he throws down the Glass, and he and the Bride tread it under their feet, saying, May they thus fall at our feet, and be trodden to pieces, who shall endeavour to sow discontent betwixt us. Then after several other Ceremonies, the Bride is put in a Sledge and drawn to the Bridegrooms house, where the Wedding is kept, and he following her on Horseback, and as soon as they are come, the said Woman conducts the Bride to her Chamber, undresses her, and lays her in Bed, during which time the Bridegroom and his Friends are seated at a Table well furnished with Meat; the Bride being laid in her Bed, the Woman fetches the Bridegroom from the Table, who is accompanied with about eight young Men, beating in their hands lighted Torches to conduct him to the Chamber, which being entred, they put them in the said Barrels of Corn, and void the Room, being each of them presented with two Martins Skins the Bride perceiving him coming, gets out of the Bed, putting a Gown about her, and receives him very submissively; and this is the first time he hath the sight of her face: then they sit down at Table, and having eaten go to Bed, all quitting the Room; and at the Door is placed one of the Old Servants, who is to demand, if the business is done; and when he saith, it is, the Tim∣brels, Trumpets, &c. play, till such time as the Stoves are made ready, where they hath themselves, but apart, and the two next days are spent in dancing, entertainments, and diversions; but for Citizens and Persons of a meaner Degree, less Ceremonies are used, and with lesser-state and cost. The Wed∣ding being past, the Bride betakes her self to a retir'd condition, being not much permitted the liberty of the Streets, nor do their Husbands, especially the Richer sort, care they should be brought to Houswifry, so that they be∣stow their time in Idleness, and playing with their Maids; and as some say, they are not well contented unless their Husbands gives them bating, being like Spaniels, the more they are beaten the better they love. Divorcements are frequent amongst them, for when they have a desire to part, they accuse her of Adultery, or want of Devotion, by suborning of false Witnesses, by which they are contented, without answering for themselves. Their Religion is the same with the Greek Church, of which they are a Member, Their Reli∣gion. but full of Superstition, as considering the Virgin Mary, the Evan∣gelists, Apostles, with abundance of other Saints, not only as simple Inter∣cessors, but also Co-operators and Causes of their Salvation, giving to their Saints and Images the same honour as is due only to God. They differ from the Romish and Reformed Churches in several points, as 1. Forbidding ex∣tream Ʋnction, Confirmation, and fourth Marriages. 2. Denying the Holy Ghost to proceed from the Father and the Son. 3. Denying Purgatory, but allow praying for the Dead. 4. They hold it unlawful to fast on Saturdays. 5. They reject graven or carved Images, but allow of the painted. 6. They observe four Lents every year. 7. Communicating in both kinds, but mixing warm Water with the Wine, and using leavened Bread, which they distribute both together with a Spoon. 8. They admit Children of seven years of Age to come to the Sucrament. 9. They admit of none to Orders, but such as are married, and forbidding the same to those that are in actual Orders. And 10. Believing that Holy men (before the Resurrection) enjoy not the pre∣sence of God; and for these and the like Tenents, there is a great feud and hatred between them and the Papists.
The Moscovites suffer all Nations to live amongst them in quietness, and give toleration to all Religions, except the Jews and Papists, whom they will not permit amongst them. They are great observers of Festival-days, of which they have abundance, all which are not observed, except by the Priests; but their great Festival-days are strictly observed, as also Sundays, on which they go thrice a day to their Devotions: Their Service consisteth in reading of Chapters and Psalms, saying, or rather singing of certain Prayers, St. Athanasius's Creed,Ceremonies observed by them. together with a Homily out of St. Chrysostom; they are such great Adorers of the Cross, that they will undertake no business, neither eat or drink before they have made the sign of the Cross; also they are as great worshippers of painted Images, there being scarce a Family without them; and also have them placed about the walls of their Churches, directing their Prayers to them; and these Images are adorned with Pearls and Precious Stones; and if it happen that any person is Excommunicated, both He and his Images are not allowed the liberty of the Churches, which are esteemed Sacred places by them, and are built round, and vaulted like a Dove-house in imitation of Heaven. Their Devotion is performed standing or kneeling, having no Seats in their Churches; and in their Communions they hold Transubstantiation. They are strict observers of Fasts, of which they have a great many, Their Fasts. besides every Wed∣nesday and Friday, on which they will not eat any kind of Flesh, nor that which comes from it. Their Fune∣rals.In their Funerals they also observe several Ceremonies. As soon as the sick person is deceased, they send for all his Relations and Friends near at hand, who stand by him lamenting his loss in a howling tone, demanding why he would die? whether he wanted any thing? whether his Wife was constant to him? or the like ridiculous Questions. Also they send to the Priest a Present of Aqua-vitae, Hydromel and Beer, that he may pray for the Soul of the de∣ceased. Their Lamentations being ended, they wash the Body of the de∣ceased, put a clean Shift and Shroud about him, as also a pair of new Bus∣kins on his feet, and so lay him in the Coffin and carry him to Church, the Priest going first, who carrieth the Image of his Saint; and being come to the Grave the Coffin is uncovered, and whilst the Priest says certain Prayers, the said Image is held over the Corps, and the Wife, Relation and Friends kiss him, and take their last farewel in grievous Lamentations; then the Priest puts betwixt his fingers a piece of Paper, which is a Pass directed to St. Peter, signed by the Patriarch or the Metropolitan of the place, wherein is declared what he is, how he lived in obedience to the Church, &c. as also a penny in his Mouth; after which the Coffin is covered and the Corps interr'd with his face to the East: then the People doing their devotions to the Images, return to the House of the deceased, where they dine and comfort up the Widow. Their usual time of Mourning is forty days, in which time they make three Feasts for the Friends of the deceased. They hold Baptism of great importance, Baptism. insomuch that they Baptize their Children so soon as born; and if it happen that through weakness the Child cannot be brought to the Church, then it is baptized at home; and in this they observe several Ceremonies. And the Child being baptized, the Priest assigns it a particular Saint, the Image of which he delivers to the Godfather, charg∣ing him to instruct the Child to have a devotion to his Saint. Ecclesiastical Government.Their Ecclesiastical Government consists of a Patriarch, which is the Head of the Church, and as it were Pope, who hath under him several Metropoli∣tans, Archbishops, Bishops, Arch-Deacons, Proto-Popes, and Priests. The Grand Duke of Moscovy is absolute Lord both of the Lives and Estates of his Subjects, whom he treats little better than Slaves, his chiefest aim be∣ing for what he can get, more than the good and welfare of his People, being, not subject to Laws, but makes what seemeth good unto him, which, though never so tyrannical, are strictly obeyed; yet he will seem to take advice of his Knez and Bojares, who are as his Privy Council. His Revenues and Riches cannot but be great from the several ways from which he raiseth it, as by Ille∣gal
Taxes, Customes, his Lands, and what he taketh from his Subjects at plea∣sure. He is apparelled like a King and a Bishop, wearing with the Royal Robes a Miter and a Crosiers-Staff, and observeth a great deal of state and gran∣dure. The Estates of MOSCOVY comprehend 3 Kingdoms, about 30 Dutchies or Provinces, and about 20 People or Nations, who live by hoords or Commu∣nalties, all which I have taken notice of in the Geographical Table of Mos∣covy. The Country is not so populous as spacious, nor very well frequented by Strangers, so that I cannot give so good account thereof, as otherwise I would, of which in order. Province of Dwina.DWINA, a Province of a large extent, but very barren, hath for its chief places Dwina, seated on the River so called, which falls into the Northern O∣cean; and on the Mouth of the said River, on the Sea-shoar is seated the City of St. Michael (commonly called Arch-Angel) a place of note for its great Trade, and much resorted unto by the English. PLESKOW,Pleskow. a large Province, whose chief place is so called, being large and fain, and the only walled City in the Empire; a place of great strength, very populous, and dignified with an Episcopal See. NOVOGRODECK,Novogrodeck. very Northernly seated, a Province also of a large extent, whose chief place is so called, seated on the River Naf, dignified with and Episcopal See, a City which for fairness and largness, might once compare with any in Russia, being formerly one of the Mart-Towns of Europe, which is now removed to St. Nicholas, a Port-Town, more convenient for the Moscovian Trade. CARGAPOL, WOLOGDA, and BIELEZERO, whose chief places bear their names, are Provinces of this Dukedom. Province of Moscovia.MOSCOVIA is one of the largest Provinces in all Russia, and seated in the midst of this large Estate, so called from Mosco its Metropolitan City, seat∣ed on a River so called, dignified with the Imperial Seat, as also with the See of the Patriarch. This City, before its firing by the Tartars, was 9 or 10 miles in circuit, but now not above half the compass; it is very populous, and hath for Divine worship 16 Churches, of which about half are made of Wood and Dirt, as are most of the Houses. The Palace of the Great Duke is seat∣ed in the heart of the City, a large Structure, well fortified with 17 Turrets and 3 great Bulwarks, which are always guarded with about 25000 Souldiers, which, with two Castles seated in the outward parts of this City, is its only de∣fence, being without a Wall or Ditch. WOLODOMIRE is a Dutchy very fertil in Corn,Wolodimire. its chief City being so called, once dignified with the residence of the Great Duke till removed to Mosco, from which it is distant 36 Leagues, now dignified with an Episcopal See. TWER is a fair, Twer. fertil and populous Province, washed by the Volga; its chief place is so called, dignified with the See of a Bishop, which for beauty and largness may compare with Mosco, from which it is distant about 140 miles. RESCHOWA,Reschowa. a Dutchy, Bielski. which takes its name from its chief City; as doth the Dutchy of BIELSKI, from Biela. REZAN is a Dutchy so fertil that its fellow cannot be found in all these parts yielding Corn to admiration; Rezan. its, chief City also hears the same name, which is seated on the River Occa, dignified with an Episcopal See.
WOROTIN,Worotin. a Province also, so called from its chief City, seated on the said River Occa, and defended by a strong Castle. PERMSKI,Permski. a Province of a large extent; its chief City is so called, seated on the River Vischora. WIATKA,Wiatka. a barren and woody Country, and much pester'd with the In∣cursions of the Crim Tartars; its chief place being so called. PETZORA is a Province fenced on all sides by losty Mountains and Rocks;Petzora. its chief place takes the name of the Province, seated on a River so called near its fall into the Sea, and on these Mountains are found excellent Hawks and Sables, which bring some profit to the Inhabitants. Other Pro∣vinces.INHORSKI, CONDORA, OƲSTIOƲGA, SƲSDAL, ROSTHOW, and JAROSLAƲ, are Provinces of this Dukedom. Towards the South, Cason. and about the Don and the Volga, are several Cities, People, and Fortresses, as are mentioned in the Geographical Table; as are several Provinces or Estates upon and beyond the River Oby. Besides these Provinces, the Grand Duke holds at present towards Asia, the Kingdoms of Casan, Bulgaria, and Astracan. CASAN is a Kingdom in Tartaria Deserta,Bulgaria. whose chief place is so called, seated on the Volga; now dignified with the See of a Bishop, is in the King∣dom of BƲLGARIA, whose chief place is so called. ASTRACAN lieth on the Volga,Astracan. whose chief place is so called, enjoyeth a good Trade, especially by the Armenians, by reason of its commodious scituation, on the branches of the Volga, about 20 Italian miles from the Caspian Sea.
The ISLES of GREAT BRITAIN, with the Territorles thereto be∣longing, are those of GREAT BRITAIN, where are at this day two Kingdoms and one Principallty, to wit, The Kingdom of ENGLAND, which according to the SAX∣ON HEPTARCHY, hath had Seven Kingdoms, viz. Kingdom of KENT, Canterbury, Rochester. Kingdom of SOUTH SAXONS, Southwards, Chichester, Winchelsey. Kingdom of EAST ANGLES, Norwich, Ipswich, Cambridge, Ely Kingdom of EAST SAXONS, Colchester, London. Kingdom of WEST SAXONS, Exeter, Bristol, Rath, Salisbury, Southampton, Dorchester. Kingdom of NORTHUMDERS, York, Lancaster, Durham, Carlifle, Barwick, Kingdom of MERCIA, Leicester, Lincoin, Nortingham, Darby, Oxford, Gloucester, Worcester, Leichfield, Chester, Hereford. The Principallty of WALES, as it was divided into SOUTH WALES, Brecknock, Cardigan, Cardiff, Monmouth. NORTH WALES, Flint, Denbigh, Carnarvan, Mongomary. The Kingdom of SCOTLAND, which hath once had the King∣doms of the SCOTS, beyond the Tay, Cromartly, Eigin, Aberdone, Perch, Dunkeldon. PICTS, on this side the Tay, Dunslafag, Dunkirton, St. Andrews, Dunblain, Sterling, Edinburgh, Glasco. IRELAND, or The Kingdom of IRELAND, with its Provinces, which were formerly so many Kingdoms, viz. ULSTER, Donegal, Dungannon, Armagh, Tredagh. MUNSTER, Cassile, Lymerick, Kinsale, Corke, Waterford. CONNAUGHT, Slego, Galloway, Refecomen, Letrim. LEINSTER, Molingar, Trymm, Dublin, Kildare, Kilkenny, And a great many small ISLES, to wit, those About SCOTLAND, The Oreades, — Kirkwall. The Isles of Sherland, Burgh. The Western Isles, Colmkill. About ENGLAND, The Sorlings, — St. Mary. The Isle of Man, Rusbin. The Isle of Wight, Newport. The Isle of Jarfey, St. Hllary. The Isle of Garnsey, St. Peters. In AFRICA, in the Kingdom of — Fex, — Tangler. Besides the several Factories belonging to the Royal Company, from Sally in South-Barbary to Cape Ronns Esperan, as at am, Rio, Nuno, Rio Grande, Siera, Liona, Serbro, Cestos, Ahin, Anta, Comenda, Cape, Corso, Acara, Cormentine, Adra, Renin, Cailabar, &c. In the East Indies, in ASIA, the several Factories belonging to the East-India Company; a Surat, Bambay, Curwar, Baricale, C∣liet, Fort St. George, Pentapoll, Musullpatn, Bellisar, Ougely. In the West Indies, or North A∣MERICA, On the Continent, New England, — Boston. New York, New York. New Jersey. Mary-Land. Virginia, James Town. Carolina, — Charlos Town. The ISLES of Newfound-Land. the Bahama Isles. Bermudes, — St. Georges. Jamaica, Port Royal. Barbados, St. Michaels. St. Christophers, Basse Terre. Nieves, — Bath-bay. Monferat. Autega. Angullia. St. Vincent. St. Dominies. Harbada.
The King∣dom of ENG∣LAND may be di∣vided into ENGLAND, particularly so eali'd, in which. If Monmouth∣shire were in∣cluded, there would be 40 Shires▪ and which, accord∣ing to the SAXONS Haptarchy, are thus divided, and that as they regard the 4 Quar∣ters, and then The Nine towards the East and South, and which made the King∣doms of KENT, where is only Kent, Ginerbry, Rochester, Dover, Sandwich. SOUTH SAXONS, which contained the Regm, are the Coun∣ties of Surrey, Sothwek, Kingsto. Sussex, Chichester, Winchelsey, Lewes. EAST ANGLES, which contained the Iceni, are the Counties of Norfolk, Norwich, Yrmouth. Suffok, swich, St. Edmonds-Bury. Cambridgshire, Cambridge, Ely. EAST SAXONS, which contained the Trinobantes, are the Counties of Essex, Colchester, Norwich. Middlesex, London, Westminster. Hartfordshire, Hartford, St. Albons. The Seven regarding the West, and which have made the Kingdom of the WEST SAXONS, are the Dammonii, of Coun∣ties of Cornwal, Launston, Padstow. Devonshire, Exeter, Plimouth, Dartmouth. Belge, of Counties of Somerseshire, Bristol, Bath, Wells, Bridgwater. Wiltshire, Salisbury, Malbury. Hamshire, Southampton, Winchester. Durotriges, or Coun∣ties of Dorsetshire, Dorchester, Weymouth. Berkshire, Windsor, edding. The Six towards the North, and which have made the Kingdom of the NORTHUMBERS, are the Counties of Yorkshire, York, Hull, Richmond. Lancashire, Lancaster, Lirpool. Durham, — Durham. Cumberland, Carlisle, Perih. Westmerland, Kendale, Apleby. Northumberland, Barwick, Newcastle. The Seventeen in the middle of the Country, and which have made the Kingdom of MER∣CIA, are the Iceny, or County of Huntingtonshire, Huntington, St. Ives. Canlejuanl, or Counties of Buckinghamshire, Buckingham. Bedfordshire, — Bedford. Coritanl, or Counties of Rutlandshire,— Upingham. Northamptonshire, Northampton, Peterborough. Lelcasershire, Lelcester, Harborow. Lincolnshire, Lincoln, Boston. Nortinghamshire, Nortingham. Derbyshire, Derby, Chesterfield. Dobimi, or Counties of Oxfordshire, Oxford, Henley. Glocesershire, — Gloucester. Cornavii, or Counties of Worcestershire, — Worcester. Warwickshire, Warwick, Coventry. Staffordshire, Stafford, Litchfield. Cheshire, Chester, Nantwich. Shropshire, Shrewsbury, Bridgnorch. Herefordshire, — Hereford. The Princi∣pality of WALES, where are 12 or 13 Coun∣ties, and all towards the West of Eng∣land, and whereof Six towards the North, and which have made the Kingdom of NORTH WALES, as the Counties of Flintshire, Flint, St. Asaph. Denbighshire, — Denbigh. Carnarvanshire, — Carnarvan. Isle of Anglesey, Bawmorri. Mersoetshire, — Harlch. Montgomeryshire, Monrgomery. Seven towards the South, and which have made the Kingdom of SOUTH WALES, as the Counties of Radnorshire, — Radnor. Bracknockshire,— Brecknock. Cardiganshire, — Cardigan. Pembrockshire, — Pembroke. Carmardenshire — Carmarden. Glamorganshire, Cardiff, Landaff. Monmouthshire, — Monmouth. In divers Isles, In the Great Ocean, to the West of Cornwal, as the SORLINGS,—St. Mary. In the Irish Ocean, to the South of Scotland, as the Isle of MAN, —Russia. In the Narrow passage near Hantshire, as the Isle of WIGHT,—Newport. near France, as the Isles of JARSEY, —St. Hillary. GARNSBY, —St. Peters.
The King∣dom of KENT, (wherein is only the County of Kent) may be divided Into The Lath of SUTTON, which again is subdivided into the Hundreds of Black-heath, Grenwich, Deptford, Wolledge, Eltham. Little and Lesues, Eryth, Plampsted. Bromley and Beckenham, Bromley, Beckenham. Rokesley, St. Mary Cray, Orpinton. Axtan, Dartford, Wimbleton, Greenhith. Godsheath, Sevenoke, Otford. Westram, Westram, Brafted. Somerden, — Speldherst. The Lath of AYLFORD; where are the Hundreds of Watlington, Pepenbury. Capell. Little Barnefeld, — Brenehely. Twyford, — Yalding., Lowy of Tunbridge, — Tunbridge. Little Field, — Royden. Wrotham, Wrotham, Stansted. Larkfeld, Malling, Aylesford. Maidstone, Maidstone, E. Farly. Eyhorne, Lenham, Stockberry. Gittingham and Chetham, Rochester, Chetham. Shamell,— Cobham, Tottingtrough, — Gravesend. Hoo, St. Maries, St. James. The Lath of SCRAY; in which are the Hundreds of Milton, Milton, Queenborow, Sittingborn., Tenham, Tenham, Dodington. Feversham,— Feversham. Bocton, under Bleane, Bocton, Under Bleane, Felborough, — God Marshal. Wye,— Wye. Kirchlt, Barony, — Kenington. Chart, — Ashford. Catehill, Pluckley, Egerton. Blackborne, Apledore, Orlaston. Barkley,— Byddenden. Cranbrook, Cranbrook, Stapleherst. Marden, Goodherst, Marden. Fincocks, — Bedgbury. Great Barnfeld, — Flimwell. Selbrightenden, — Sandhersl. Rolvenden, — Rolvenden. Tenderden, — Tenderden. The Lath of SHEPWAY; wherein are the Hundreds of Oxney, — Stone. Aloesbridge, — Brookland. Langport, — Lyde. St. Martin, — Snargate. Ham, — Ham. New-Church, New-Church, Bonington. Worth, Romney, Hyth. Streate, — Alington. Byrcholt Franchis, — Braborne. Stowting, — Stowting. Heane, — Saltwood. Lovingbergh,— Eltham. Falkston, — Folkston. The Lath of St. AUGUSTINE; in which are the Hundreds of Bewsbrough, Dover, E. Langden. Corniloo, Sandown, Deal. Easty, Sandwich, Barfrayston. Wingham, — Ruynes. Kinghamford,— Barnhamdown. Bredg and Petham, Canterbury, Patricksporne. Downhamford, — VVickham. Westgate, St. Stephens, Harbledown. Whitstable, VVhitstable, Seasalter. Bleangate, Reculver, Hearne. Breston, — Elmeston. Kingsloe, which is the Isle of Thanet, St. Johns, St. Nicholas, Mynster.
The King∣dom of the SOUTH-SAXONS, which con∣tained the Regni; and now the Counties of SURREY, which is divided into the Hundreds of Brixton, Southwark, Rotheriff, Lamboth, Batersey, Putney, Wandesworth, Clapham. Kingston, Kingston, Richmond, Mottlack. Croydon, Croydon, Cashalton, Cheame, Carshalton. Tanridge, Bletchingligh, Burstow. Reygate, Reygate, Horley. Copthorne and Effing∣ham, Ewell, Bansted, Ebesham. Darklug, Darking, Newdigate, Charlewood. Emley, Cobham, Waybridge, Walton. Chertsey, Chertsey. Egham, Frimley. Woking, Guilford, Ockham, Woking. Farnham, Farnham, Puttenham, Peperharo. Godalming, Godalming, Witley. Blackheath and Wotton, Albury, Cranley, Dunsfold. SUSSEX, which is divided into the Rapes of Chicester, Chichster, Mydhurst, Rogar, Binderton, Eastbourne, Chydham, Thorney, Emley, West Wittering. Selsey. Arundell, Petworth, Arundell, Storington, Hampon, Fering. Burpham, Barham, Billingshurst, Rudgwick. Bramber, Horsham, Shoram, Stening. Tarring, Shipley, Etchingfold, Rusper. Lewes, Lewes, Cuxfield, Brighthemsto, Myching, Oford, Stamner, Porstad, Wivelsfeld, Balcombe, Crawley. Pevensey, East Grinsted, Buckhurst, East-Bourn, Mayfield, Flerching, Haylsham, Bishopston, East Deane, Pemsey. Hastings, Winchesey, Rye, Hastings, Battle, Wartling, Warbleton, Euwood, Burwash, Flimwell, Nordiam.
The King∣dom of the EAST ANGLES, which con∣tained the Iceni, or Counties of NORFOLK as it is divided into the Hundreds of East Flegg, Yarmouth. West Flegg, Winterton. Happinge, Hicklinge. Tunstead, North Walsham, Worstead. North Orpinham, Cromere, Sheringham. Holt, Holt, Clay. Greenhaw, Walsingham, Wells. Gallowe, Burnham-Market. Smithdon, Snetsham, Tichwell. Febridge, Linn, Caftlerising. Brothercross, Fawkenham, Basham. Laundiche, Lexham. Haynford, Repenham. South Orpingham, Caston, Alesham. Taverham, Spikesworth. Blofelde, Burlingham, Tunstll. Clavering and Loddon, Wheataker. Humliarde, Norwich, Higham. Hensted, Castor. Forehoce, Windham, Hingham. Mitford, East Derenham. Wayland, Watton. South Greenhowe, Swaffam. Clacklowse, Downham, Southrey. Febridge in Mershland, Clenchwarton, Owtwell. Grimshoo, Hockhold. Shoreham, Buckenham, Thetford. Giltcross, Herlinge. Dis, Diffe. Depwade, Moulton. Erisham, Harleston. SUFFOLK, where are the Hundreds of Mutford, Kesland. Blithing, Sowould, Dunwich, Halesworth. Lothingland, Leystoft. Wagford, Beckles, Bungey. Hoxon, Wingfeld. Plumesgate, Saxmundham, Alderburgh, Orford. Looes, Framlingham. Treadling, Debenham. Hartesmere, Aye, Mendelsham, Buddesdale. Blackborne, Ikesworth, Ewston. Brandon, Lackford, Mildnall, New-Market. Risbridge, Haverill, Clare. Thingoe, Bury. Thedwestrie, Wulpett. Baber, Neyland, Lavenham, Sudbury. Cosford, Bilston, Hadley. Stow, Stow. Bosmere, Ipswich, Needham. Carleford, Rummere. Wilforde, Woodbridge. Colnes, Felixton. Sampford, Harksted, and Stretford. CAMBRIDGE-SHIRE, with its Hundreds of Chilford, Lynton. VVitlessord, Sawsted. Triplowe, Hawkeston. Arningford, Royston. VVetherlee, Barington. Stow, Caxton, and Gamlingay. Papworth, Cunnyngton, and Papworth. North Stow, Longstanton. Chesterton, Chesterton. Flendish, Cambridge. Radesley, VVillingham. Cheveley, Ditton. Stane, Botshman. VVichford, Reche, and Mersh. Staplehow, Sotham. Ely, Ely, and Littleport. VVisbich, VVisbich.
The King∣dom of the EAST SAXONS, which con∣tained the Trinoban∣tes, or Counties of ESSEX, in which are the Hun∣dreds of Becontrey, — Barkin. Havering Liberty, — Rumford. Chaford,— Brentwood. Bar tole, Horden, Billerekey. Rochford, Rayleigh, Foulness. Dengye, Maldon, St. Peters Chappel. Chelmesford, Chelmesford, Ingerstone. Onger, — High Onger. Waltham, Waltham Abby, Epping-street. Harlow, — Hatfield. Dunmow, Dunmow, Thaxted. Clavering, — Clavering. Utlisford, Walden, Audley-End. Freshwell, — Hempsted. Hingkford, Baryntre, Halsted, Hemingham Castle. Witham, Easterford, Witham. Thurstable, Totham, Tolesbury. Lexden, Colchester, Cogshall. Winstred, Verley, Marsey. Tenderidge, Harwich, Manytre, Horsey-Isle. MIDDLESEX, which is divided into the Hundreds of Osleston, London, VVestminster. Chelsey, Kensington, Fulham, Hamersmith, Cheswick, Acton, Hamsted, Highgate, Finchley, Newington, Hackne, Issington. Edmonton, Tottenham, Edmonton, Hadley, South Myns. Goare, Hendon, Edgware, Harrow-hill. Bithorne, Brentford, Ukbridge, Hillington, Hounslow, Ryslipe, Hayes, Harlington. Istleworth, Istleworth, Twittenham, Hounslow, Heston. Spetthorne, Stanes, Stanwell, Bedfont, Sunbury, Hampton Court. HARTFORDSHIRE; where are the Hundreds of Hartford, Hartford, Hodsdon. Caisho, St. Albans, VVatford, Rickmansworth, Barnet, Totteridge. Dacorum, Hamsted, Berkamsted, Trange. Hitching, Hitching, Kempton. Broadwater, Baldock, Hatfield, Stevenedge, VValkorn. Odsey, Royston, VVallington. Edwinstree, Barkway, Huntingford, Hadham. Braghing, VVare, Puckeridge, Bishops Sratford; Sabsworth.
Part of the Kingdom of the WEST SAXONS, which con∣tained the DAMON II, or Counties of, CORNWAL, with its Hun∣dreds of Penwith, — Pensans, St. Ives, Market Jew Kerrier,— Penryn, Helston. Powder, — Truro, Grampond, Foy. Pider, — St. Colombe, Padstow. Trigg, — Bodman. West, — Westloe, Liskerd, Listhyel. East, — Launston, Saltash, St. Germain. Lesnewth, — Boscastle, Camelford. Stratton, — Stratton. DEVONSHIRE, which may be considered as it is divided into the Hundreds of Roborough, — Plimouth. Tavestock, — Tavestock. Lyston, — Lyston, Okehampton. Black Torrington, Houlsworthy, Hatherlay. Hartland, — Horton. Shebbeare, — Bediford. Fremington, — Torrington. Banton, — Ilfarcomb, Barnstable, Comb∣merton, Sherwell, — Sherwel. South Moulton, — Moulton. Witheridge, — Chimligh. Bampton, — Bampton. Tiverton, — Tiverton. Halberton,— Halberton. Hayrudge, — Columbton, Bradmuch. Hemyocke, — Hemyocke. Axmilter, — Axmilter, Huniton. Cullington, — Culliton. St. Mary Otery, — Otre. East Budleigh, — Sidmouth. Clifton, — Broadclift. West Budley, — Cadbury. Crediton, — Crediton. North Tanton, — Bow, Burrington. Winckley,— VVinckley. Wonford, — Exeter, Chegford. Exminster,— Chidlay. Tinbridge, — Morton, Ashburnton. Heytor, — Newton Bushel. Colridge, — Dartmouth, Tornes. Stanborough,— Kingsbridge, Dodbrook. Armington, — Modberry. Plympton,— Plympton, DUROTRI∣GES, or County of DORCESTER∣SHIRE, with its several Hun∣dreds in each di∣vision, Bridport division, Whitechurch, — Lime, VVitchurch. Beamister,— Beamister. Redhoave,— Molverne. Eggarton, — Frampton. Goderthorne, — Birdport. Dorcester division, George,— Dorchester. Tollerford, — Evershot. Puddleton,— Piddlechinton. Colliford, — VVeymouth, Cheselton. Ugscombe, — Abbotsbury. Sherburn division Sherborn, — Sherborn. Redlane, — Sturmister. Newton, — Tudboroe. Brownsel, — Lydlinch. Yeatmister, — Yeatminster. Tortomb, — Cerne Abby. Buckland, — Buckland. Whiteway, — Middleton. Shaston division Badbury, — Winbornmister. Cogdeane, — Poole. Hanly, — Hanly. Cranborne, — Cranborne. Knowlton,— Knowlton. Upwimborne, — Shafterbury. Blanford division Pimperne, — Blandford. Rushmore, — Wareham, Lulworth. Barrow,— Whitlovington. Coombeditch, — Bloxworth. Beer, — Beer. Winfrith, — Morton. Rowbarrow, — Coyfe. Hasler, — Aren. ATTRE∣BATI, or County of BERKSHIRE, with its Hundreds of Faringdon, — Faringdon. Shirvenham, — Shirvenham. Lamborne, — Langborne. Kentbury, — Hungerford. Faircross, — Newbury. Compton, — East Ilsey. Wanting, — Wantage. Ganfeld, — Pusay. Oke, — Marcham. Hormer, — Abbington. Morton,— Wallingford. Theate, — Inglefeld. Reading, — Reading. Charlton, — Barkham. Sonning, — Okingham. Wargrove, — Wargrove. Bernersh, — Remneham. Bray, — Maidenhead. Ripplemore, — Windsor. Cookeham, — Binfeld.
Part of the Kingdom of the WEST∣SAXONS, which con∣tained the BELGE, or Counties of SOMERSETSHIRE; where are the Hundreds of Chewe, — Bristol. Portbury, — Clevedon. Hartclif, and Bedminster, Burton. Winterstoke, — Axbridge. Chewton, — Pensford. Keynsham, — Canesham. Bathfrom, — Bath. Wellow, — Phillips Norton. Frome, — Frowmselwood. Kilmersdon, — Stokeland. Bruton, — Bruton. Wells, and Welford, — Wells. Bempston, — Marck. Brent, — Wrinton. North-Petherton, — Bridgwater, and Huntspil. Whitleigh, — Weston. Glaston, — Glastonbury. Whitstone, — Shepton-Mallet. Norton Feris, — Whicaunton. Horethorne, — Hersington. Cattesayshe, — South Barrow, and Queens Camel. Somerton, — Somerton, and North Curry. Pitney, — Langport. Martock, — Martock, and Ilchester. Stone, — Evyll. Barwick, — Barwick. Coker, — Hardington. Houndsborough, — West Chenock. Tintenhull, — South Petherdon. Crewkerne, — Crewkerne. South Petherton, — South Petherton. Kingsbury, — Chard. Abdick, — Beacham, and Ilmister. Taunton, — Taunton. North Curry, — Wivescombe. Anderfield, — Brumfield. Cannington, — Stokeland Marsh. Willyton, and Fremanour, Watchet, and Dulverton. Carhampton, — Dunster, and Mynehead. Milverton, — Wellington, and Milverton. Bulston, — Curryvivel. WILYSHIRE; in which are the Hundreds of Malmesbury, — Malmesbury. Highworth, — Highworth, and Crekelade. Ramsbury, — Auburne. Kingsbridge, — Watton Basset, and Auburne. Selkley, — Marlborough. Calne, — Calne. Potterne, and Cannings, Alington. Damerham, North, — Christ Malford. Chippenham, — Castlecombe, and Chipnam. Bradford, — Bradford. Melkesham, — Trubridge. Whorwelsdown, — North Bradley. Westbury, — Westbury. Swanborne, — East Lavington, and the Devizes. Kingswarton, — Barbich. Elstube, and Everly, — Everly. Amesbury, — Amesbury. Alderbury, — Winterslow. Frustfield, — Stonley. Downton, — Downton. Underditch, — Salisbury. Branch, and Dole, Wishford. Harsbury, — Harsbury. Warmister, — Warmister Dametham, — Munkston Deverel. Mere, — Mere, and Hindon. Dauworth, — Swallowcliff. Chalke, — Norrinton. Cawden, and Cadworth, Wilton. HANTSHIRE; which may be considered as it is divided into the Hundreds of Christchurch, — Christchurch. Ringwood, — Ringwood. Fordingbridge, — Fordingbridge. New Forest, — Lymington. Redbridge, — Rumsey. Kingsunborne, — Rumsey, and Stokebridge. Budlesgate, — Crawley. Bartonstacy, — Bartonstacy. Hornor, — Tufton. Thornegate, — Bossington. Andover, — Andover. Pastrow, — Husborntar. Evinger, — Ashmansworth, and Whitechurch. Kingscleere, — Kingscleere. Holshort, — Silchester. Chuteley, — Wisherborne. Basingstoke, — Basingstoke. Overton, — Overton. Micheldever, — Micheldever. Buntesborow, — Swarwatton. Barmanspit, — Bradley. Odiham, — Odiham. Crundal, — Fernborow. Alton, — Alton. Selborne, — Hawkley. Sutton, — Alresford. Fawley, — Winchester. Eastermean, — Froxfield. Meanstoke, — Menestock. Waltham, — Southampton, and Bushwaltham. Mansbridge, — Hound. Titchfield, — Farnham. Portsdown, — Portsmouth. Finchdean, — Petersfield. Bosmere, — Southwood.
The King∣dom of the NOR∣THUM∣BERS, which con∣tained the Brigantes, or Coun∣ties of YORKSHIRE, with its se∣veral Hundreds, as they may be considered in the West Riding, Stancliffe, Settle, Skipton. Claro, Rippon, Borough-bridge, Ripley, Knaresburgh. Ansly, — Busshopthrop. Barkston, Sherborne, Selby, and Tadeaster. Skirack, Ledes, Otley. Morley and Agbrigg, Halyfax, Bradforth, Wakefield. Osgodcross, Pontefract, Snathe. Strasforth, Doncaster, Rotheram, Sheaffeld, Bautre, and Tickhill. Staincross, — Barnesley. North Riding, Gillingwest, — Richmoud. Haugwest, — Midlam. Hangeast, Masham, Bedall. Gillingeast, — Langton great. Hallikeld, — Tanfield. Bulmar, — York. Burford,— Thruske. Allerton, — Alverton. Langbargh and Whitby∣strand, Yarum, Stokesley, Gisburgh, Whitbye. Pickering, Scarbrough, Pickering, Rydale, Malton, Hovingham, Helmeley, Kirby-moreside. East Riding, Buckcross, — Setterington. Dickering, Bridlington, Kilham, Flamborough-head. Holderness, Headen, Sprunhead. Hunsley, Hull, Beverley. Bainton,— Bainton. Harthill,— Pocklington. Wilton, — Wilton. Holme, — Wighton. Ouse and Darwent,— Stilling fleet. Howdensher, — Howden. LANCASHIRE, where are the Hundreds of Loynsedale, Lancaster, and Hornby, Ulverton, and Dalton, Hawkshead, Sunderland-point. Amoundernes, Garstrange, Kirkham, Preston. Blackborne, Blackborne, and Hastingde, Colne, Bruntley, and Cletherow. Layland, — Wigan, and Eccleston. Salford, Manchester, and Rochdale, Bolton, and Bury. West Darby, Ormiskirke, Lerpoole, Warrington. The Bishoprick of DURHAM (as yet not divided into Hundreds,) whose chief places are Durham, Hartpoole, Bishops-Aukland, Darlington, Stayndrop, Bernard-Castle, Derwenfote-haven, Sunderland, Stockton. CUMBERLAND, (as yet not severed into Hundreds) hath for its principal places, Carlisle, Penreth, Brampton, Wigton, Wetheral, Ireby, Abby, Holme, Keswick, Kirkswald, Cockermouth, Irton, Werkington, Bottle, Egremond, Whitehaven, Ravenglass, and Bleunerhasset. WESTMORELAND, (also as yet not divided into Hundreds) whose chief places are Apleby, Burgh, Kirby-Stephens, Orton, Kirby-Landall, Burton, Kendal, and Ambleside. NORTHUMBERLAND, (as yet also not severed into Hundreds) hath for its noted places Newcastle, Tinmouth-haven, and Castl, Hexham, Morpeh, Alnewick, Barwick, Woller, Holy Island, Cocket Island,
Part of the Kingdom of the MERCIA, which con∣tained the ICENI, or County of HUNTINGTONSHIRE, with its Hundreds of Norman-cross, — Yaxley, and Ramsey. Huntington, — Huntington, and St. Ives. Leightenstone, — Kimbolton. Tosland, — St. Neats, and Godmanchester. CATEJU∣LARI, or Counties of BUCKINGHAMSHIRE; where are the Hundreds of Stoke, — Colbroke, and Eaton. Burnham, — Beconfield, High-Wickham, and Amer∣sham. Desburrow, — Marlow. Alesbury, — Alesbury, and Wendover, Ashenden, — Ashenden. Buckingham, — Buckingham. Cotslow, — Winslow, and Ivingo. Newport, — Newport, Stony-Stratford, and Oulney. BEDFORDSHIRE; in which are the Hundreds of Stodden, — Ryseley. Wylly, — Bedford. Barford, — Berford. Biggleswad, — Biggleswade, and Potton. Wixamtree, — Cardington. Redbornstock, — Ampthill. Flitt, — Luton. Clifton, — Shefford. Manshead, Woborne, Tuddington, Leighton, and Dunstable. CORITANI, or Counties of RUTLANDSHIRE, with its Hundreds of Allstoe, — Burley. East — Casterton. Martinsley, — Baroughdon, Wrangedyke, — Upingham. Oukhamsook, — Oakham. NORTHAMPTONSHIRE, which may be considered as it is divided into the Hundreds of Massaburgh, — Peterborough. Willibrooke, — Nassington. Corby, — Rockingham. Polbrook, — Oundle. Navisford, — Thrapston. Huxloe, — Kettering. Orlingsbury, — Walgrave. Rothwell, — Rothwel. Guilsborow, — Lilborn. Fausley, — Daventrey. Newbottlegrove, — Newbottle. Shephoe, — Northampton: Hampfordshoe, — Wellingboroe. Highamferyes, — Higham-Ferrers. Cleley, — Graston. Towcester, — Towcester. Wimersley, — Wotton. Norton, — Blakesly. Warden, — Edgcote. Sutton, — Brackley. LEICESTERSHIRE, with its Hundreds of West Goscote, — Ashby de la Zouth, Montsorel, & Lough∣borow. East Goscote, — Leicester. Framland, — Melton Moubray, and Waltham on the Would. Gartery, — Hallaton, Harburgh, and Billesden. Guthlixton, — Lutterworth, and Bennones. LINCOLNSHIRE, as it is divided into the parts of Lindsey, with its Hundreds of Sparkinhoe, — Bosworth, and Hickley. Manbie, — Burton, and Kirton. Yarbrough, — Barton, Glamfordbridge, and Limberg. Brodley, — Grinisby, and Thongcaster. Ludbrough, — Cawthorp. Walchcroft, — Binbrook. Aslacoe, — Bishops-Norton. Corringham, — Gainesburgh. Well, — Brampton. Lawris, — Lincoln. Wraggoe, — Rande. Gartre, — Horncastle, and Market-Stanton: Louthask▪ — Saltsflet, Louthe, and Market-Rosen▪ Calceworth, — Alford. Candleshoe, — Waynfleet, and Burgh. Hill, — Harrington. Bullingbrook, — Bullingbrook, and Spilsby, Horncastle, — Horncastle. Kesteven, where are the Hun∣dreds of Lango, — Blackney. Bothby, — North Hickham. Loveden, — Beckingham. Flaxwel, — Sleford. Ashwardhurn, — Howel. Wivebridge, — Ancaster. Grantham, — Grantham, and Belvoir Castle▪ Aveland, — Folkingham, and Bourn. Beltisloe, — Corbye. Ness, — Market-Deping, and Stamford Holland, with its Hundreds Ellowe, — Spalding, Holbeck, and Crowland. Rirton, — Dunington, and Kirton. Skirkeck, — Boston. NOTTINGHAMSHIRE; where are the Hundreds of Northclay, — Redford. Bassetlaw, — Worksop, and Blyth. Southclay, — Darlington. Thurgarton, — Nortingham, and Southwel▪ Newwark, — Newwark. Bingham, — Bingham. Rusaclyfe, — Codlingstock. Broxtow, —Maunsfeld. DARBYSHIRE, with its Hundreds of Highpeake, — Tideswal, Bakewel, and Chaple in the Frith Scardale, — Chesterfeld, Alfreton, and Belsover. Worksworth, — Wirkesworth, and Ashborne. Appletree, — Sherley. Morleston, — Darby. Reppington, — Newtonsony.
Part of the Kingdom of MERCIA, which con∣tained the DOBIMI, or Counties of OXFORDSHIRE; where are the Hundreds of Banbury, — Banbury. Bloxam, — Milcombe, and Hooknorton. Chadlington, — Chippingnorton. Wotton, — Oxford, Woodstock, and Deddington. Ploughley, — Burcester. Bullington, — Cuddesden. Bampton, — Burford, Witney, and Bampton. Dorchester, — Dorchester. Tame, — Tame. Lewkenor, — Emington. Pirton, — Watlington. Ewelme, — Warboro. Binfield, — Henley. GLUCESTERSHIRE; which may be considered as it is divided into the Hundreds of Kystgate, — Winchcombe, and Camden. Tewksbury, — Tewksbury. Botloe, — Newnham, and Newent. Westminster, — Apperley. St. Briavels, — Dean Magna. Westbury, — Westbury. Blideslow, — Blakney, or Blakley. Cleve, — Cleve. Tibolston, — Beckford. Chettenham, — Chettenham. Kingsbarton, — Sherenton. Dudstone, Gloucester. Rapisgate, — Elston. Bradly, — Lech. Slaughter, — Stow on the Would. Britlesbarrow, — Lechlade. Crotherne, — Cirencester. Biesley, — Stroud, and Panswick. Whitstone, — Leonard, and Stanley. Longtree, — Minchinhampton, and Tetbury. Grombaldash, Chipping-sods bury, Marsfeld, and Hor∣ton. Wotton, — Dursley, and Wotton Underedge. Gloucester, — Sutton. Barkley, — Barkley. Thornbury, — Thornbury, and Fairfield. Swinshed & Langley, Littleton. Henbury, — Compton Grenuyld. Barton, — Bristol. Pocklechurch, — Pucklechurch: CORNAVII, or Counties of WORCESTERSHIRE; where are the Hundreds of Halfeshire, Sturbridge, and Kiderminster. Droitwich, and Bromesgrove. Dodingtre, — Bewdly, and Tenbury. Worcester, — Worcester. Upton, — Upton. Pershor, — Pershore. Oswalderstow, — Throgmorton. Blakenhurst, — Evesholme. WARWICKSHIRE; with its Hundreds of Hemlingford, Solihul, Bermicham, Polesworth, Tam∣worth, Colchil, Suttoncofeld, Ather∣ton, and Nun-Eaton. Coventry, — Coventry. Knightlow, — Rugby, and Southam. Kyneton, — Warwick, Kyneton, and Shipton. Barlichway, Bitford, Stretford on the Avon, Aulce∣ster, and Henley in Arden. STAFFORDSHIRE; with its Hundreds of Totmonsloe, Leeke, Chedle, Uttoxater, and Pagits Bromley. Dyrehil, — Stafford, Newcastle, Eccleshal, and Stow. Cudleston, — Brewood, Ridley, and Penk rich. Seisdon, — Wolverhampton. Offelow, — Lichfield, Burton on Trent, Walsal, and Tamworth. CHESHIRE; where are the Hundreds of Wyrehal, — Legrange. Edesbury, — Frodesham, and Tarvin. Broxton, — Chester, and Malpas. Nantwich, — Nantwich. Northwich, Northwitch, Middlewich, Sambach, and Congleton. Macclesfield, — Macklesfield, and Stopford. Bucklow, — Knottesford, and Altringham. SHROPSHIRE; which may be considered as it is divided into the Hundreds of Narth-Bradford, Whitechurch, Draton, Prees, and Wem. Pimhill, — Elsmere. Oswestre, — Oswestre. Ford, — Strettons. Chirbury, — Chirbury. Purslow, — Bishops-Castle, and Shipton. Clunn, — Bettus. Munslow, — Didlesbury. Overs, — Ludlow. Stottesdon, — Bridgnorth, and Clebury. Shrewsbury, — Shrewsbury. Wenlock, — Wenlock. Condover, — Stapleton. Bradford, — Newport, and Wellington. Brimstry, — Bonyngal. HEREFORDSHIRE; in which are the Hundreds of Wigmore, — Kyneton. Hunlington, — Huntington. Ewiaslacy, — Hardwick. Webstre, — Madley. Wormelow, — Great Birch. Greytree, — Ross. Radlow, — Lidbury. Grimsworth, — Hereford. Broxash. — Bramyeard. Wolsey. — Lemster. Stretford. — Pembridge, and Webley.
WALES, which may be consider∣ed as it is divided in∣to NORTH WALES; where are the Counties of FLINT SHIRE, as yet not divided into Hun∣dreds; it hath for its chief places St. Asaph, Flint, Cajervis. DENBIGHSHIRE, as yet also not divided in to Hundreds, hath for its chief places Denbigh, Llanrost, Ruthin, Wrexham. CAERNARVANSHIRE, also as yet not se∣vered into Hundreds, whose chief places are Carnarvan, Bangor, Aberconwey, Newin, Pulhely, and Krekyth, Bardesey Island. ISLE of ANGLESEY, with its Hundreds of Tallibollion, Holyhead. Llyfon, Llandrogarn. Tyndaythwy, Bewmatis Twrkelyn, Llandourodok. Meney, Newburgh, Maltracth, Aberfraw. MERIONETHSHIRE; where are the Hundreds of Ardydwy, Harlech. Talibout, Dolgelhe. Ystymanale, Abedowy. Mowthy, Maynloyd. Penlyn, Bala. Ydeirmon, Corwen. MONTGOMERYSHIRE; in which are the Hundreds of Mechavy, Llanvilling. Ystrondmarchel, Montgomery, Welshpoole▪ Kery, Kery. Kidriorn, Newtown. Kare Eynion, Llandaguan. Kyfy Log. Machenlet. Yriostly, Llanidios. SOUTH WALES; in which are the Counties of RADNORSHIRE; where are the Hundreds of Rayadergowy, Rayadergowy. Knighton, Knighton. Kevenlice, Llanbadern. Radnor, New Radnor, Prestaine. Painscastle, Llanhedder. Collowini, Dyssart. BRECKNOCKSHIRE, with its Hundreds of Bealt, Bealt. Talgarth, Hay. Merthye, Merterkynok. Dyvynnock, Divynock. Penkelly, Brecknock. Crickhole, Crecowell. CARDIGANSHIRE, with its Hundreds of Tredvoir, Cardigan, Cardigan Island. Moythen, Llanbeder. Pennarth, Tregaron. Llanylar, Llanrusted. Llanbadarn, Aberysthwyth. PEMBROOKSHIRE, which is divided into the Hun∣dreds of Kemes, Newport. Kilgarvan, Kilgarvan. Dewysland, St. Davids, Ramsey Island, the Bishop and his Clerks. Dungledy, Lauhaden, Wiston. Rowse, Haverford, west, Rosemarket, Scaline Island, Stockholme Isle. Nerberth, Tenby and Narberth. Castle Martin, Pembroke, Caldey Island. CAERMARDENSHIRE; where are the Hundreds of Derllys, Kancharne. Elluet, Caermarden, and Newcastle. Kidwellye, Kidwyly, Llannelthye. Perue, Llanymdofry, Llangadok. Cayo, Llandilouawre. Cathinok, Abergerlech. GLAMORGANSHIRE; in which are the Hundreds of West Gowre, Swansey and Penrise, Mumbles point, Pennarth point; Oxwich point, Wormshead point. Llangevelach, Llansamled. Neath, Aberavon, and Neeth. Newcastle, Bridgend. Ogmore, Ogmore Castle, Nash point. Cowbridge, Cowbridge. Denispowis, Porkerry Castle, Barry Island, Sylye Isle. Cardiff, Cardiff, Landaff. Caerfily, Caerphilly. Lantrissent, Lantrissent. MONMOUTHSHIRE, (now an English County,) where are the Hundreds of Bergaveny, Abergavenney. Skenfrith, Mounmoth. Ragland, Ragland. Caldicot, Chepston, Goldeclyffe, Uske, Uske, Carlion. Wealooge, Newport.
ENGLAND. Small Isles be∣longing to Great Britain.THE Kingdom of England, with that of Scotland, forms an Island, which bears the name of Great Britain; unto which be∣longeth a vast number of lesser Isles, which may be considered under four heads or forts, viz. the Orcades, the Hebrides, the Sorlings, and the Isles of Scilly, with those of the Sporades. All which said Isles, with that of Ireland, are scitate between the 9th and the 23th degrees of Longitude, and the 50th and 59th of Latitude. England is divided from Scotland by the River Tweed and Solway, a line being drawn from the one to the other; and on all other sides it is begirt with the Sea. Its extent and division.The extent and form of these Isles, with their scituation to each other, doth appear in the Map, to which I refer the Reader. But 'tis probable that some may judge the Maps false, for that the true Geo∣graphical distances of places are lesser than the Itinerary. But these Reasons are sufficient to satisfie any to the contrary, 1. The unpassable Woods, which  between places; 2. the high Mountains and low Vallies; 3. the Marishes or Boggs; 4. the Rivers or Ponds; and 5. the Parks, or other enclosures, which cause the Traveller to leave his direct line and go about. It may be divided into two (though unequal) parts, to wit, England and Wales, separated each from other by the Severn and a line drawn to the Wye but the more certain division was by a huge Ditch (which beginning at the Influx of the Wye into the Severn, reached to Chester, where the Dee dis burthens its self into the Sea) 80 miles in length, made by Offa King of the Mercians, and called Claudh Offa. This Kingdom of England is severed into 52 Shires or Counties, of which 12 make the Principality of Wales; and these Counties are subdivided into Hundreds, Wapentakes, or Wards; and those again into Parishes, which comprehend Boroughs, Villages, Hamlets, Endships, or Trthings. Its division according to the Circuits of the Judges.England is also divided into six parts, for the Circuits of the 12 Itinerary Judges, two of which twice every year are alotted for each Circuit, i the chief Town or Towns of each County in the said Circuit, to sit and hear Causes, and to administer Justice for the ease of the Subject; and accord∣ing to this division, one Circuit doth contain the Counties of Wilts, Somerset, Devon, Cornwall, Dorset, and Hantshire. Another, those of Berks, Oxford, Gloucester, Monmouth, Hereford, Worcester, Salop, and Stafford. Another, those of Kent, Surry, Sussex, and Hartford. Another, those of Bedford, Bucks, Cambridge, Huntington, Norfolk, and Suffolk. Another, those of Northampton, Rutland, Lincoln, Derby, Nottingham, Leicester, and Warwick. And another, those of York, Durham, Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmore∣land, and Lancaster. The two remaining Counties, viz. Middlesex and Cheshire being exempted, the one for its vicinity to London, and the other as having its peculiar Judges for the administration of Justice. Its division ac∣cording to the Spiritual Ju∣risdiction.For Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, this Kingdom is divided into two Archbishopricks, viz. Canterbury and York, under which are 25 Bishops of which 22 belong to that of Canterbury, who is Primate and Metropolitan of all England, and but 3 to that of York. Now what these Bishopricks are this following Table will declare unto you.
map of Britain royal English blazon or coat of arms A GENERALE MAPP OF THE ISLES OF GREAT BRITTAINE, DESIGNED BY MONSIEUR SANSON, GEOGRAPHER TO THE FRENCH KING. & RENDERED INTO ENGLISH & ILLUSTRATED BY RIC BLOME. BY HIS MAIESTIS ESPECIALL COMMAND. London Printed for Ric Blome The most August, Charles the 2d by the grace of God ing of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, defendor of the Faith; &c  this Mapp with all humility is Concecrated by your Majestes Obedient subiect & Servant Ric: Blome
A Catalogue of the Archbishopricks and Bishopricks of England and Wales; together with what Counties are under their Jurisdictions, and what Parishes and Impropriations are in each Diocess. Archbishopricks and Bi∣shopricks, Counties under each of their Jurisdictions. Parishes in each Di∣ocess, Impropriations in each Dio∣cess, Canterbury hath Canterbury, and part of Kent, 257 140 York hath Yorkshire and Nottinghamshire, 581 336 London hath Essex, Middlesex, and part of Hart∣fordshire, 623 189 Durham hath Durham and Northumberland, 135 87 Worcester hath Worcestershire, and part of War∣wickshire, 241 76 Winchester hath Hantshire, Surrey, Isles of Wight, Garnsey and Jersey, 362 131 Bath & Wells hath Somersetshire, 388 160 Oxford hath Oxfordshire, 195 88 Bangor hath Carnarvanshire, Anglesey, Merio∣nethshire, and part of Denbigh∣shire, 107 36 Rochester hath part of Kent, 98 36 Ely hath Cambridgshire, 141 75 Chichester hath Sussex, and part of Hartfordshire, 250 112 Salisbury hath Wiltshire and Berkshire, 248 109 Lincoln hath Lincolnshire, Leicestershire, Bed∣fordshire, Huntingtonshire, Buck∣inghamshire, and part of Hart∣fordshire, 1255 577 St. Asaph hath part of Flintshire, and part of Den∣bighshire, 121 19 St. Davids hath Pembrookshire and Carmarthenshire, 308 120 Peterborough hath Northamptonshire and Rutlandshire, 293 91 Landaff hath Glamorganshire, Monmouthshire, Brecknockshire, and part of Rad∣norshire, 177 98 Carlisle hath part of Cumberland, and part of Westmerland, 92 18 Exeter hath Devonshire, Exeter City, and Corn∣wall, 604 239 Chester hath Cheshire, Richmondshire, Lanca∣shire, part of Cumberland, West∣moreland, Flintshire, and part of Denbighshire, 256 101 Bristol hath Dorsetshire, and the City of Bristol, 236 64 Norwich hath Norfolk and Suffolk, 1121 385 Gloucester hath Glocestershire, 267 125 Hereford hath Herefordshire, part of Shropshire, Worcestershire in part, and part of Radnorshire, 313 166 Coventry and Lichfield hath Staffordshire, Derbyshire, War∣wickshire, and part of Shorp∣shire 557 250 Besides peculiar to the Diocess of Canterbury, 57 14 To these may be added the Bishoprick of Sodor in the Isle of Man, under the Archbishoprick of York, but hath no place or Vote in Parliament.
ENGLAND is a Kingdom blest with a sweet and temperate Air, and for the generality of a fertil Soil,Its fertility and commo∣dities. and very grateful to the Husbandman, a∣bounding in all things necessary for the use of Man, both for Food and Ray∣ment, as Corn, Cattle, Fowl, Fish, Fruit, Roots, &c. In the bowels of the got else-Earth are store of excellent Mines of Lead, Tin, Iron, Copper, Black-Lead, not where in Europe, Coal, and some of Silver. It also produceth Hops, Linnen-Cloth, Tallow, Hides, Leather, Calves-skins, Lamb-skins, Sheep-skins, Cony-skins, and some Furrs; also Wax, Stockings, Hats, Saffron, Hony, Madder, Butter, Cheese, Herrings, Pilchers, and Barrel-Cod; but above all, Wool, of which is made great abundance of excellent Cloth, Serges, Bays, Kerseys, Worsteds, and the like Manufactures, which find great vent in Forreign parts; and for Building it affordeth all Materials. The Weights.The Weights currant in this Kingdom are of two sorts, viz. Troy and Aver∣dupois. Of Troy 24 grains make a penny-weight, 20 penny-weight an ounce, and 12 ounces a pound, from which pound wet Measures are derived, a pint making a pound: and by this weight, Gold, Silver, Silk, Pearl, Precious Stones, Bread, &c. are weighed. By the Averdupois is weighed Butter, Cheese, Flesh, Tin, Iron, Fruits, and generally all garbled and ponderous Com∣modities; and this weight is reduced into several denominations, as Tuns, Hun∣dreds, Quarters, Pounds, Ounces, and Drams; where note, that 16 drams make an ounce, 16 ounces a pound, 28 pound a quarter, 4 quarters a hundred, and 20 hundred a Tun. The Measures.The Measures are three, viz. dry, liquid, and long; the Dry are those in which all sorts of dry Commodities are measured, and consisteth also of seve∣ral denominations, as a pint, quart, gallon or half-peck, peck and bushel, which containeth 64 pints, or 32 quarts, which is 8 gallons: also 8 Bushels make a Quarter, 9 Bushels a Fat of Coals, which is a quarter of a Chaldron, 5 Quar∣ters a Wey, 10 Quarters a Last, and 20 Lasts a Combe. Liquid Measures are those in which liquid substances are measured, of which a Gill is the least, next a quarter, half-pint, pint, quart, pottle, and gal∣lon, which is 4 quarts, 8 Gallons make a Firkin of Ale, and 9 a Firkin of Beer; 2 Firkins a Kilderkin, 2 Kilderkins a Barrel, which is 36 gallons; 42 Gallons a Tierce, 63 Gallons a Hogshead; 2 Hogsheads a Butt or Pipe, and 2 Buts a Tun. But note that the Wine Measures are of less content than the Ale, for 4 Gal∣lons Ale-measure make 5 Wine-measure. Long Measures are those by which Cloth, Stone, Glass, Land, &c. is mea∣sured, of which an Inch, which is esteemed the length of 3 Barly corns (though divided into less denominations, as half a quarter of an Inch) is the least; and 12 Inches make a Foot, 3 Foot a Yard, which is divided into 16 parts or Nails; 3 Foot 9 Inches is an Ell, 6 Foot a Fathom, 5 ½ yards, or 16 ½ foot is a Rod, Perch, or Pole, 40 Rods a Furlong, 8 Furlongs an English Mile, which is 320 Poles, or 1760 Yards, or 1056 Paces, at 5 foot to the Pace. Of Weights, Measures, &c. used in particular Commodities, viz. The weight and measure of particular commodities.A Fodder of Lead is 19 ½ Hundred, a Load is 36 Formels or 175 Stone, and a Stone is 5 ⅜ pound. A Fagot of Steel is 120 pound, and a Barrel of Gad-Steel is 180 pound. A Stone of Glass is 5 pound, and 24 Stone is a Seam. A Last of Herrings is 12 Barrels, every Barrel 12 hundred, and every Hun∣dred 120 Herrings. A Last of Powder is 24 Firkins, every Firking weighing 100 pound neat, and the empty Firkin 12 pound. A Load of Timber, is 50 foot of square Timber. A Stack of Wood is 3 ½ foot in height, and 12 in length. A Fagot of Wood ought to be 3 foot in length, and 14 inches about, besides the Band.
Billets ought to be 3 foot and 4 inches in length, and the single Billet must be 7 ½ inches about; the Cast-Billet 10 inches, and the two Cast-Billets 14 inches about. Billets of a Cast must be nicked within 4 inches of the end, and Bil∣lets of 2 Casts within 6 inches of the middle. A full Sack of Coals is 3 Bushels. Ten Hides make a Dicker, and 20 Dickers a Last of Leather. A Rowl of Parchment is 5 dozen. Twenty Quires of Paper is a Ream, and 10 Reams a Bail. A Lath must be 5 foot long, 2 inches broad, and half an inch thick. A Plain-Tile must be 10 ½ inches in length, 6 ½ in breadth, and half an inch thick. Roof-Tiles must be 13 inches in length, with a good and equal proportion of breadth and thickness. Pan, or Paving-Tiles, must be 10 inches square, and 1 ¼ inch thick. A Brick must be 9 inches long, 4 broad, and 2 inches thick. Nails are sold by the 1000, and 120 to the hundred. A Truss of Hay is to weigh 56 pound, and 36 Trusses make a Load. A Truss of Straw should weigh 36 pound, and 36 Trusses make a Load. Courts of Judicature.As concerning the Courts of Justice of this Kingdom, they may be consi∣dered under three sorts, to wit, Ecclesiastical, Temporal, and one mixt of both; and under these three sorts are comprehended all the Courts of Judicature. For Ecclesiastical Affairs, are the Synod or Convocation of the Clergy, and the Provincial Synod, which is kept in both Provinces of Canterbury and York, viz. the Courts of Arches, the Courts of Audience, the Courts of Faculties, the Prerogative Court, and the Court of Peculiars. The Courts for Temporal Affairs are of two kinds, viz. for Law and Equity: for Law, those of the Kings Bench, Common Pleas, Exchequer, Assizes, Court of Admiralty, Dutchy Court, &c. And for Equity, those of the Chancery, Exchequer, Re∣quests, &c. And besides these Courts, there are several other Inferiour Courts held in particular Liberties for the Inhabitants thereof. And all these Courts have their peculiar Judges and other sub-Officers. As concerning Precedency,Precedency. all Nobles of each degree take place according to their Seniority of Creation, and not of years, unless descended of the Blood Royal, and then they take place of all others of that degree. Yet there are some that by their great Offices or Places at Court, or setting at the Helm of State, have precedency; as the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper, Lord Presi∣dent of his Majesties Council, Lord Privy Seal, Lord high Chamberlain, the Earl Marshal, the Lord Chamberlain, the Master of the Horse, &c. Precedency may be thus observed; the King, who is the fountain of Ho∣nour; the Prince of England, who is eldest Son to the King, and is born Duke of Cornwal, and about the age of 17 years is usually created Prince of Wales: Princes of the Blood Royal, who are the Sons, Brothers, Uncles, and Nephews of the King. The Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper; the Archbishop of York, Lord Treasurer of England, Lord President of the Privy Council, Lord Privy Seal, Dukes, Marquesses; Dukes eldest Sons, Earls, Marquesses eldest Sons, Dukes younger Sons, Vis∣counts, Earls eldest Sons, Marquesses younger Sons, Bishops, Barons, Vis∣counts eldest Sons, Earls younger Sons, Barons eldest Sons, Privy Counsellors that are not Noblemen, Judges, Viscounts younger Sons, Barons younger Sons, Knights of the Garter (if not otherwise dignified, as is rarely found,) Knights Bannerets, Baronets, Knights of the Bath, Knights Batchelors, Colonels, Ser∣geants at Law, Masters of Chancery, and Doctors and Esquires; and those may be comprehended under five several heads, 1. Esquires unto the Kings Body; 2. the descendants by the Male-line from a Peer of the Realm; 3. the eldest Sons of Knights of the Garter, Baronets, Knights of the Bath, and Knights Batchelors; 4. the two Esquires attending on the Knights of the Bath at their Knighting; and 5. Officiary Esquires, as Justices of the Peace, Barresters at Law, Lieutenant Colonels, Majors, and Captains; and lastly, Gentlemen.
At a Marshal Court held at White-Hall the 18th of March, An. Dom. 1615. it was declared and concluded on, that there are two degrees that establish and settle the Title of an Esquire by birth; the one, the younger Sons of Peers of the Realm, which do invest into the Heirs-males descended from them the Name and Title of Esquires; the other, the lineal Heir-male of a Knights House: and these may justly assume and challenge the Title of Esquire by birth; so that in all reason, the younger Sons of Peers are more worthy than Knights: so the setling of a Title proceeding from them, is more worthy and eminent than that derived from Knights. The Domi∣nions of Eng∣land.The Dominions of the King of England are very large, for besides that of England, Scotland, and Ireland, there are divers small Isles scituate nigh unto them, and do belong to one or the other; as the Isles of ORKNEY, or ORCADES, in number 32, seated against the North-cape of Scotland. The Isles of SHETLAND, also under the Scotish Dominions; the HE∣BRIDES, in number 44, seated Westwards of Scotland; the SOR∣LINGS, seated in the Westrn-cape of Cornwall; the SPORADES, being several Isles dispersed about the British Seas, amongst which these fol∣lowing are the chief: MAN, scituate between England, Scotland, and Ire∣land; JERSEY and GARNSEY on the French Coast; WIGHT, part of Hantshire; PORTLAND, part of Dorsetshire; STEEP∣HOLMS and FLATHOM, in Somerfetshire; AIBBRE, in Cheshire; DENNY, in Monmouthshire; CODLEY, in Pembrokeshire; ANGLE∣SEY, which is one of the Welsh Counties; SHEPPEY, in Kent; NOR∣THEY, OSEY, and HORSEY, in Essex; FERNE, COCKET, and HOLY Isle, in Northumberland; with several other small Isles not worth the naming, as indeed many of these are. Then in Africa, as TANGIER, GƲINEY, &c. In the East Indies several places, though belonging to the East India Company of London; and in America large Dominions, as NEW ENGLAND, NEW YORK, MARYLAND, VIRGINIA, CAROLINA, all which are on the Continent; also divers Isles, some of which are very considerable, as JAMAICA, BARBADOS, BER∣MƲDOS, ANTEGO, NEW FOƲNDLAND, &c. all which shall be treated of as they come in order; but first of the English Coun∣ties. County of Barkshire de∣scribed.BARKSHIRE, well clothed with Wood and watered with Rivers, is blest with a sweet Air, hath a rich Soil fit both for Corn and Pasturage, (espe∣cially in the Vale of Whitehorse;) and generally the whole County, for profit and pleasure, yieldeth to few Shires in England. The principal Commodity that this Shire produceth is Cloth, which finds great vent: and amongst the Rivers that water the County, the Isis, the Oke, and the Kenet (which affords excellent Trouts) are the chief. It is severed into 20 Hundreds, in which are 140 Parishes, and hath 12 Market Towns. Reading,Reading. pleasantly seated near the Thames, and on the Kenet, which is navigable for Barges to London, which adds much to its Trade, which is consi∣derable, especially for Cloth and Mault; 'tis a large Town, containing three Parish Churches, is beautified with well built Houses, hath fair Streets, is well inhabited and hath a very considerable Market for Grains, Malt, Hops, and most Country commodities, on Saturdays. 'Tis a Town Corporate, governed by a Major, 12 Aldermen, and as many Burgesses with sub-Officers, enjoyeth several Immunities, and sendeth Burgesses to Parliament. 'Twas formerly beautified with a fair and rich Monastery, and a strong Castle built by King Henry the First, where (in the Collegiate Church of the Abby) himself and Queen, with Maud their Daughter, were interr'd; both which now lie in their ruins. New Windsor,Windsor. pleasantly seated near the banks of the Thames, and adjoyn∣ing to a Park and Forest well stored with Game; 'tis a fair, large, well fre∣quented
and inhabited Town Corporate, governed by a Major and other sub-Officers, sendeth Burgesses to Parliament, and hath a very good Market for Provisions on Saturdays. This Town is of great note for its stately Castle and Royal Palace of his Majesty, seated on a great eminency, wherein is a Chappel for Devotion, a Colledge for Learning, and an Alms-house for decayed Gentle∣men, called the poor Knights of Windsor; and famous is this Castle, not only for giving birth to so many of our Kings and Princes, but for being the place where the ceremony of the Knights of the Garter is solemnized on St. Georges day. Nigh unto New Windsor is Old Windsor, a Town of greater antiquity, though not of so much splendor. Newbury,Newbury. well seated on the Kennet, and in a Champain Plain, a large, well inhabited and frequented Town Corporate, governed by a Major, Aldermen and Burgesses; beautified with a spacious Market-place and well built Market-house, sufficiently served with Corn, Flesh, Fish, and Fowl, on Thursdays. This Town had its rise out of the ancient Spinae, now a small Village near ad∣joyning, and called Speenhamland, and is of note for its Jack of Newbury, who got so great an estate by Clothing, which this Town at present is very considerable for. Wallingford,Wallingford. a Town of great antiquity, and in times past very strong and large, containing four Parish Churches within its Walls, which took up a mile in circuit. 'Tis at present a large Town Corporate, governed by a Major, Alder∣men and sub-Officers, enjoyeth large Immunities, and sendeth, Burgesses to Parliament. 'Tis commodiously seated on the banks of the Thames, over which it hath a fair Stone-bridge: its Market-house or Guild-hall, with a Free-School lately erected, is a fine pile of building, where the Major and Justices keep their Courts. It enjoyeth a good Trade for Mault and Corn, which is transported in Barges to London; and its Markets, which are on Tuesdays, and Fridays, which is the chief, is very considerable for Grain and Provisions. Abington, the Shire-Town, seated on the banks of the Thames,Abington. over which it hath a Bridge; a Town of good antiquity and note in former time for its rich Abby. 'Tis at present well inhabited, frequented and traded unto, espe∣cially for its Mault; is governed by a Major, enjoyeth several Priviledges, sendeth a Burgess to Parliament, and hath two Markets weekly on Mondays and Fridays, which are well served with Corn, Mault, and Provisions. This County is adorned with many fair and stately Buildings, hath been strengthned with 6 Castles, and graced with three of his Majesties Houses. In this Shire is the Vale of White-horse, one of the fruitfullest Vales in Eng∣land. County of Bedford de∣scribed.BEDFORD, a County for the generality of a fertil Soil both for Til∣lage and Pasturage; the North and North-east parts being of a deep Clay, the South a Chiltern, and the midst a Sandy-ridge of Hills well clothed with Wood. 'Tis a Country well inhabited and full of Gentry, which is occasioned through its vicinity to the Counties of Lincoln and Huntington, which in some places are troubled with unhealthful Fogs. The chief Rivers that water it, are the Owse and the Iwell. This County is severed into 9 Hundreds, in which are numbred 116 Towns, besides 59 Endships; and of these Towns 10 have the conveniency of Mar∣kets. Bedford, the Shire-Town, pleasantly seated in a rich Soil and on the Owse,Bedford. which divideth it in the midst, but joyned together by a fair Stone-bridge, which for the prevention of passage hath two Gate-houses; it was formerly strengthned with a Castle, but in its place is now a Bowling-green, much re∣sorted unto by the Gentry. The Town is large, numbering 5 Parish Churches, is well inhabited, and its Markets (which are on Tuesdays and Saturdays) are well resorted unto; that on Tuesdays being considerable for living Cattle, and that on Saturdays as great for Corn and Provisions. For Civil Magistrates, it
is governed by a Major, 2 Bayliffs, 2 Chamberlains, a Recorder, and other sub-Officers; enjoyeth several Immunities, and sendeth Burgesses to Parlia∣ment. Dunstable,Dunstablt. seated on a Hill in a dry Chalky-ground; yet by reason of a large Pond of standing-water in every one of the 4 Streets of the Town, the Inha∣bitants find no want. 'Tis a place of great antiquity, and was of note in the time of the Romans, as appears by the Coins in the adjacent fields, oft digged up, which the Inhabitants call Madning-money; and is at present of some note for the great abundance of Larks here caught. It took the name of Dunstable from one Dun, a notorious Robber, that used to pester these parts. The Town is fair, well inhabited, full of Inns, as seated on the high Road, and its Market, which is on Wednesdays, is very considerable for Corn, Cattle, and Pro∣visions. Bigleswade,Bigleswade. seated on the Ivell, which falleth into the Owse, over which it hath a fair Stone-bridge, and on the Road from London to York, which hath occasioned it to be well provided with Inns for the reception of Passengers, and its Market on Tuesdays is at present very considerable for Grain, Cattle, Milch-kine, and Provisions. At Sande and Chesterfield, near adjoyning, now a Warren, stood the famous City of Salena of the Romans; which, by the ruins of its Walls (in many places yet to be seen) makes it to have been of a large extent. Buckingham, shire describ'd.BƲCKINGHAM, a Country for the generality of a fertil Soil; it is di∣vided into two parts; that towards the South and East (which riseth up into Hills, which are sufficiently clothed with Wood) is called the Chilterne; the other, lying Northwards, (bein plain) is called the Vale, and is the most fruit∣ful for Tillage and Pasturage, seeding great abundance of Sheep and Cattle▪ It is well watered with the Owse, and the Thames. The ancient Inhabitants were the Catejulanii, who yielded themselves to Caesar, and upon the Saxons subduing the Romans, it became part of the Kingdom of the Mer∣cians. This County is severed into 8 Hundreds, in which are 185 Parish Towns, of which 13 have the conveniency of Markets. Buckingham,Buckingham. well seated on the Owse, which almost encircles it, over which it hath 3 fair Stone-bridges, and in a low fruitful ground. 'Twas once a Town of good strength, and of some note for its stately Prebend-house, and its Chappel of St. John Baptist, founded by Tho. Becket; now made use of for a Free-School. It is at present a fair and well inhabited Town Corporate, go∣verned by a Bayliff, 12 principal Burgesses, a Steward, &c. is dignified with the title of an Earldom, hath the election of Parliament men, and its Market on Saturdays is well served with all manner of Flesh, Corn, and other Provisions. Stony-Stratford,Stony-Strat∣ford. seated on the Owse, a Town of great antiquity, being the Romans Lactoradum, and built upon the ancient Causway called Watling∣street, and is at present of a good largness, containing 2 Parish Churches, is well accommodated with Inns, and hath a considerable Market for Corn, Flesh, and some Fish, on Fridays. Ailesbury, seated on a branch of the Tame, and in a fertil Vale, so called, which feeds store of Sheep. It is a fair and well inhabited Borough-Town, ele∣cting Parliament men, is honoured with the Title of an Earldom, is the u∣sual place where the Assizes for the County are held, having in the midst of the Town a fair shire-hall, and its Market on Saturdays is very well served with Corn, Cattle, and Provisions. High Wickham.High Wickham, well seated in a rich Soil, a Major Town, which for largeness and fair buildings, is not inferiour to any in the County, of note for its black Bone-Lace here made, and its Markets on Fridays is very great for Corn, Flesh, Fish, and all Provisions.
Cambridgshire described.CAMBRIDGESHIRE, a County of a different Soil, the Southern part being Champain and indifferent fertil, bearing excellent Corn and Barley, of which the Inhabitants make abundance of Mault: and here is gathered good store of Saffron, the dearest commodity that England produceth. And the Northern part (called the Isle of Ely, as made so by the Owse and its branches) is Fen∣nish, and not so pleasant and wholsom to live in as the Southern; but is recom∣penced with rich Pastures, which feed abundance of Cattle, which are very profitable to the Inhabitants, and affords also great plenty of Fish and Fowl. This County is severed into 17 Hundreds, of which 14 are in the Southern part, and 3 in the Northern, called the Isle of Ely; in which said Hundreds are 163 Parishes, and forthe accommodation of its Inhabitants is traded unto by 8 Market Towns. Cambridge, seated in an Air somewhat unhealthful,Cambridge. occasioned through the Fenny-grounds near adjoyning, and on the River Cam or Grant, (navigable for Barges) which separates it into two (but unequal) parts, which are joyned together by a Bridge. 'Tis a place of great antiquity, being said to derive its name from Cantabar, a Spaniard, who about 375 years before the Incarnation of Christ had there setled the Muses Seat; but more certain it is, that Sigilbert the first Christian King of the East Saxons established here several Schools; and of no less fame for its University or Seminary of true Learning, which is its chiefest ornament, being adorned with 16 Colledges and Halls, many of which are superb Buildings; and by reason of these Se∣minaries it is a place of a large extent, numbring 14 Parish Churches, is beau∣tified with well built Houses, its Streets are paved and well ordered, is well inhabited, enjoyeth a good Trade, and its Market on Saturdays is sufficiently furnished with Provisions, which are had at easie rates. It is a Town Corporate, endowed with ample Immunities, and sendeth 4 Burgesses to Parliament, viz. two for the Ʋniversity, and two for the Town. Nigh unto Cambridge Southwards, are Gogmagog-Hills, which are of a great eminency, and yet retain the remembrance of the Danish Station; and of these Hills the Country people tell fine stories. Ely, seated in a fenny and waterish place, and on the banks of the Owse,Ely. which rendreth it very unhealthful; it is a City of more antiquity than beauty, being but meanly built, nor overmuch frequented or inhabited, and would be far less, were it not for being the See of a Bishop, whose Palace is so ruinous, that it is uninhabitable; but its Cathedral or Minister is a lofty structure, and beautified with a stately Lenthorn of curious Architecture. It is a City that enjoyeth ample Immunities, for in the Isle of Ely the Bishop hath all the rights of a Count Palatine, and beareth chief sway therein, appointing a Judge for the hearing of Causes within the said Isle; he also holdeth Assizes, Goal-delivery, and Quarter-Sessions of the Peace, and hath his chief Bayliff and o∣ther Officers; and although the City is but meanly inhabited, yet its Market on Saturdays is well served with Provisions. New-Market,New-Market. seated part in this County and part in Suffolk, and in a large and pleasant Heath, so called; a place of some largness, containing two Parish Churches, and is well inhabited and much resorred unto by the Gentry, by reason of its commodious scituation for Horse-races and Hunting, being both Recreations that his Majesty taketh so great delight in, that he hath there his Palace for his reception; which adds no small advantage to the Town, often honouring it with his Royal presence. Its Market is on Tuesdays, which is not very considerable by reason of its vicinity to Bury and Cambridge. Caxton, seated in the Clay, and on the North-road; a small Town,Caxton. and hath a little Market on Tuesdays. Royston, seated on the high Road to Huntington in a bottom amongst Hills,Royston. and part in this County and part in Hartfordshire; It is a large, well inha∣bited Town, and hath a considerable Market on Wednesdays for Provisions, especially for Mault, here, and in parts adjacent, made in great quantities.
Cheshire, de∣scribed.CHESHIRE, a County Palatine, of a rich and fertil Soil both for Til∣lage and Pasturage, feeding abundance of Cattle, and affording plenty of Corn, Fish, (especially Salmon) Fowl, Butter, Cheese, and Salt, which is their staple commodity, and here had in great plenty: and out of the Rocks and Quarries, broad Slates and fair Stones for building are dug; as are Mill-stones out of Moucop-Hill. It is well furnished with Timber and Fuel from its Woods and Forests of Delamer and Maxfield; is plentifully watered with Rivers, Meers, and Pools, hath several Heaths and Mosses. The ancient People were the Cornavii of Ptolomy, and afterwards became part of the Kingdom of the Mercians. In this County are seated 86 Parish Churches, besides 38 Chappels of Ease, and hath Traffick with 13 Market Towns. Chester,Chester. or West-Chester, a City of great antiquity, said to be raised from the Fort of Ostorius, Lieutenant of Britain, for Claudius the Emperour, and of a pleasant scituation on the Dee, over which it hath a fair Stone-bridge, su∣stained by eight Arches, at each end of which is a Gate: but the Channel is now so choaked up with Sand, that it is scarce navigable for small Vessels, so that all Ships now come to a place called New-Key, about 6 miles distant. Its form is Quadrangular, and taketh up about two miles in circuit within its Wall, on which are 7 Watch-Towers, and which gives entrance by 4 Gates and 3 Posterns, and of these Gates the East-Cate is esteemed one of the state∣liest Gates in England. For its further defence it hath a large Castle, seated on a Rocky Hill, where the Shire Hall is (which something resembleth that of Westminster) where all matters concerning the County Palatine are tried by their peculiar Officers. The City is large, numbring to Parish Churches be∣side its Minster or Cathedral, a large structure, adjoyning to which is the Bi∣shops Palace; it is beautified with divers fair Buildings, both publick and pri∣vate, is graced with large and well ordered Streets, is well frequented and inhabited by Gentry and Assizes are kept, as also for being the usual place of taking Shippipng for Ireland, with which it hath a great intercourse, and hath a considerable Trade. It is governed by a Major, 2 Sheriffs, 24 Aldermen, a Recorder and Sub-Officers, enjoyeth ample Immunities, and sendeth Burgesses to Parliament, which no other Town: in the County doth. It is well served with Provisions, for besides its Shambles, it hath two considerable Markers weekly, on Wednesdays and Saturdays. Not far from this City is the Forest of Delamer, where Aedested the Mer∣cian Lady built a small City, long since reduced to ruins; which place is now called The Chamber in the Forest. Nantwich,Nantwich. seated on the Wever, the largest and best built Town next to Chester, in the Country, and is graced with a goodly spacious Church. It is a place well inhabited and frequented, chiefly occasioned for its Salt-pits or Salt-wich, for the making of white Salt, here had in great plenty; and its Market, which is on Saturdays, is sufficiently provided with all Provisions and necessa∣ries, especially Corn and Cattle. Malpas,Malpas. scituate on a great eminency, and on the River Dee, a fair Town▪ containing 3 Streets, which are paved and well ordered; it hath an Hospital and Grammar School, and its Market on Mondays is of good account. Middlewich,Middlewich. seated between Nantwich and Northwich, a large Town, containing several Streets and Lanes, its chief place being called the Kings-Mexon. The Town is of note for its Salt-pits, and making of Salt, and hath a good Market for Provisions on Saturdays. Maxfield,Maxfield. or Macclesfield, seated near a Forest so called; a very fair and large Town, graced with a goodly Church, which hath a high Spire Steeple, adjoyning to which is a Colledge. The Inhabitants drive a great Trade in ma∣king of Buttons, and its Market, which is on Mondays, is well served with Corn, Provisions, &c.
Cornwal de∣scribed.CORNWAL, encompassed on all parts, except on the East (by Devon∣shire) with the Sea, which thrusts forth its several Arms, and receives those many Rivers, which plentifully water the County; as the Foy, Newton, Dranes, Lo, nla, Seaton, Loo, Liner, Tavy, and Tamer. It is of a sharp; but healthful Air, generally very Hilly, consisting ordinarily of Rocks and Shelves; but crusted over with a shallow Earth, and more inolined to sterility than ser∣tility; but the parts towards the Sea, and the enclosures about the Towns▪ through the industry of the Husbandman are more sertil, bearing good crops, and feeding store of Cattle. It affordeth great store of game both for the Hawk and Hound; and its Seas and Rivers, plenty of several sorts of Fish and Fowl, as well those common to other Counties, as appropriate to themselves. In the bowels of the Earth are Quarries of sundry sorts of useful Stones and Slates for building; also Copper; precious Stones, called Cornish Diamonds; but chiefly Tin, which is here found in great plenty to the great inrichment of the Inhabitants, who, as to their Names and Language hold great affinity with the Welsh. The ancient Inhabitants were known to the Romans by the name of the Danmonti's, and became afterwards part of the Kingdom of the West Saxons. This County is severed into 9 Hundreds, in which are numbred 161 Parish Churches, and hath intercourse of Traffick with 23 Market Towns. Launston; seated on an eminency, and on a branch of the Tamer,Launston. a large Town Corporate, governed by a Major and his Brethren, and amongst other Immunities electeth Parliament men; 'tis a place well inhabited, enjoyeth a good Trade, and the more as being the place where the Assizes are held; and it's Market, which is on Saturdays, is well served with Provisions. Adoyn∣ing to this Town is an ancient Castle, seated on a great eminency, and encom∣passed at the top with a treble Wall, where there was a Colledge of Canons and Secular Priests. The lower part now compriseth a decayed Chappel, a large Hall, and a place made use of for the Common Goal. Liskerd, a Town Corporate, governed by a Major, 8 Magistrates,Liskerd. a Re∣corder, and other sub-Officers, electeth Parliament men, hath an eminent Free School, and is a large; well inhabited and frequented Town, whose Market on Saturdays is well served with Corn and all sorts of Provisions, and the Inhabi∣tants drive a considerable trade for Tarn every Market-day. Bodman, seated in a bottom between two high Hills,Bodman. which render it not very healthful, especially to new Comers; it is large, an indifferent well built and inhabited Town Corporate, governed by a Major, sendeth Burgesses to Parliament, and hath a great Market on Saturdays for Corn and Provi∣sions. Listhyel, or Listwithiel, seated on the Foy, not far from its fall into Foy∣haven,Listhyel. which formerly brought up Vessels to the Town; but its Channel being choaked up (by reason of the Tin-Mines) is a great obstruction to its Trade. It is a Town Corporate, governed by a Major and his Brethren, electeth Par∣liament men, hath its part in the coynage of the Tin; (but the Goal for the whole Stannery, and the keeping of the Courts is only here kept) and hath a small Market on Fridays. Foy, so called from its Haven, or Arm of the Sea on which it is seated,Foy. be∣ing strongly fortified at the entrance of the Haven with Block-houses, and in times past was a place very considerable for Shipping and Traffick; its Market, which is on Saturdays, is very served with Corn and Provisions. West-Looe, seated on a navigable Creek, over which it hath a fair Bridge,West-Loot. which leadeth to East-Looe, more commodiously seated, where there is an in∣different good Market on Saturdays. They are both Towns Corporate, and send Burgesses to Parliament. The chief benefit arising to the Inhabitants of these Towns, is their Fishing. Saltash, seated on the descent of a steep Hill, a pretty large Town Corporate.Saltash. consisting of 3 Streets, is governed by a Major, and 9 Aldermen, enjoyeth large Immunities, and sendeth Burgesses to Parliament. Its Market is on Saturdays,
which of late is much decaied to what it was; odito yet its Inhabitants gain well by their Mault and good Beer. Not far from this Town is Trematon Castle, once a place of great note, in which is kept the Trematon Court, wherein all Causes within he said Fee are tried; as also the Prison. Padstow,Padstow. a Sea-Port Town, of some Trade by reason of its commodious scituation with Ireland, and were its Haven secure, it would be of greater ac∣count. It is a Borough Town, electing Parliament men▪ and hath a good Market for Corn and Provisions on Saturdays. Falmouth,Falmouth. at present a very large and well inhabited Town Corporate, go∣verned by Major and sub Officers, enjoyeth a good Trade, is well resorted unto by Shipping, where there is a Key intended shortly to be built, and hath a very considerable Market for Corn and Provisions on Thursdays. The Haven whereon this Town is seated, and beareth its name, is very commodious for Ships, and so capacious that 100 Sail of Ships may safely ride at Anchor. And this Haven, with those of Milford and Plimouth, are the chiefest in the King∣dom. On the West side and at the very entrance of this Haven is Pendennis Castle, seated on a Hill so called; and on the other side, (but of a lower scituation) is St. Moze or Maudit, both which are a great security to the Coast and Haven. Truro,Truro. seated on a branch of Falmouth haven, at present the head Town in the County, being a fair, large, well inhabited and traded Borough Town, priviledged with a Majoralty, sendeth Burgesses to Parliament, hath the coyn∣age of the Tin, is a place where the Western Sessions are held, and its Markets on Wednesdays and Saturdays are well served with Provision, &c. Penrin,Penrin. seated also on a Creek of Falmouth-haven, a very considerable Toen Corporate, electing Parliament men, and hath weekly 3 Markets, viz. on Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays for Corn, and on Saturdays for Provi∣sion. Helston,Helston. seated on the Lowe, between which and the Sea there is a great breach or bar of Sand. It is a well inhabited and frequented Town Corporate, governed by a Major and Aldermen, electeth Parliament men, and its Market on Saturdays is well served with Provisions, and the two Markets before Christmas are so great, that they may be reckoned as Fairs. Near this Town is Godolphin-Hill, well known for its rich Tin Mines. Penzance,Penzance. seated on Monts-bay, and in an Inlet thereof; a very good traded Town, and hath a considerable Market for all Provisions, especially Fish, on Thursdays. St.Iv,St.Ivos. or St. Ithes, seated on an open Bay so called, chiefly frequented by Fishermen, for the taking of Pilchards and other Fish, which are here plen∣tifully caught. It is a Town Corporate, governed by a Major, a Justice, and 12 Aldermen, sendeth Burgesses to Parliament, and hath 2 Markets weekly, viz. on Wednesdays and Saturdays. It is observed that Men live here to a very great Age, and are stronger, hardy, and addicted to wrestling, pitching the Bar, and other boysterous sports, more than any other English men. By Helford is a great Rock lying upon the ground, the top whereof is hol∣low and filled with water, which ebbs and flows as the Sea doth. There is a very great Rock in this Shire called Mainamber, which rests upon other smaller Rocks, which with the push of a finger may be moved; but cannot be moved out of its place by all the Art men can use. Country of Cumberland described.CƲMBERLAND, a County far engaged Northwards, is very Moun∣tainous, and much inclined to sterility, yet not without many fertil Valleys, both for Tillage and Pasturnge. It hath an Air very sharp, and would be more, were it not for the high Hills that break off the Northern and Western Storms. In the howels of the Earth are rich Mines of Copper in great plenty; also those of Iron, Lead, Black-lead, oal, and some of Silver: and the Sea, and large Lakes and Meers, plentifully furnish the Inhabitants with Fish and Fowl.
And besides these Commodities this County produceth several Manufactures, amongst which, heretofore Fustians and now Linnen-cloth and course Broad∣cloths in great plenty. The Mountains of most note are Black-koum, Hard∣knot, Wrey-nose, Skiddow, and Crossfell, &c. It is well watered with Rivers, and hath many Lakes and Meers. This Shire of all others in England sheweth the most Roman Antiquities, for being in the utmost limits of their possessions it was always secured by their Garrisons, and defended by that admirable. Wall called the Picts Wall, which ran from Sea to Sea about 100 miles, and was 8 foot broad and 12 foot high, and having at every 1000 paces a Watch-Tower erected, in which Soul∣diers were kept; and on this Wall grows the Vulnerary Plant. And being thus in the confines of Scotland, it was exceedingly strengthned with Castles, having about 25 publick ones, besides the Houses of the Nobility and Gentry, which were generally built Castle-wise. It is severed into 5 Wads, in which are 58 Parish Churches, besides divers Chappels of Ease, and hath 15 Market Towns. Carlisle, a City of great antiquity,Carlisle. and no less pleasantly than commodi∣ously seated at the influx or meeting of several Rivers, viz. the Eden, Cauda, and Petterill, which on all parts, except the South, encompass it; and for its further defence, it is fortified with a strong and large Castle and Cittadel, and fenced about with a strong Wall, first built by Egfrid King of Northumberland, which was defaced by the Danes, and again rebuilt by King Rufus. Its Houses are fair and well built, is beautified with a Cathedral Church of curious workmanship, it enjoyeth several Immunities, sendeth Burgesses to Parliament, is governed by a Major, 12 Aldermen, 2 Bailiffs, and other sub-Officers. It is a place well inhabited, and traded unto chiefly for Fustians; and its Market, which is on Saturdays, is very considerable for Corn, Wool, Provisions, and several Country Commodities. Cockermouth, seated between the Derwent and the Coker,Cockermouth. which almost en∣compass it, over which are two fair Stone-Bridges, and between two Hills, upon one of which standeth the Church, a fair building, and upon the other a spacious and stately Castle. It is a well inhabited Borough Town, graced with fair Buildings, enjoyeth a good Trade, especially for course Broad-cloth here made, hath the election of Parliament men, and its Market, which is on Mondays, is esteemed the best in the County for Corn, next to Perith. Here is a Custom at their Fairs, holden at Whitsontide and Martlemass for the hiring of Ser∣vants, to which end all such that want Servants, or Services, do hither come; the like is observed at Perith, and most of the Market-Towns in the County. Whithaven, seated on a Creek of the Sea,Whithaven. indifferent commodious for Ship∣ping, which makes it to be well inhabited and frequented by Tradesmen, espe∣cially by Fishermen, and those that are related to Sea-Affairs, who drive a good Trade to Ireland, Scotland, Chester, Bristol, and other parts, having a Custom-house and several Vessels belonging to the Town, whose chief Trade is for Salt and Coals, here plentifully digged up. Its Market is kept Thurs∣days. Kavenglass, a well built Maritim Town, couched betwixt the Rivers Irt,Ravenglass.Esk, and Mite, with which the Sea doth encompass 3 parts of it, and is a good road for Shipping, which makes it to be a place of some Trade, and hath a Market on Saturdays. Keswick, seated in a Valley,Keswick. hemmed in with Hills and the Mountains cal∣led Derwent Fells, wherein are good Copper-Mines; and not far from the Town is dug up Black-Lead, or Wadd, in great plenty. The Town was for∣merly of greater account than now it is, when the Mineral-men had here their, Smelting-houses, being at present not very considerable. It hath a Market on Saturdays, chiefly for Meal, Flesh, Butter, and Cheese. Perith, seated on a Hill called Perith Fell,Perith. and near the Rivers Eimont and Lowther; a large, well built and inhabited Town, esteemed the second in the County, although neither a Borough nor Town Corporate; it is adorned with
a fair Church and a large Market-place, which every Tuesday is very much re∣sorted unto, being considerable for Corn, living Cattle, divers Commodities and all sorts of Provisions in great plenty. Derbyshire de∣scribed.DERBYSHIRE, a Midland County, but inclined towards the North, which makes it to be of a sharp Air, especially upon the Peak Mountains. The Soil is generally fertil, chiefly the South and East parts, which for the most part are enclosed and improved, yielding good Corn and Grass, and hath also store of Coal and Iron-stone. The North and West parts are very hilly and stony, and not so fertil, except in Lead-Oar, in which it much abounds, yet not without some rich Valleys; and on the Hills are bred good (though not large) Sheep in great abundance. For Fuel, it is not beholding to Wood, having such great plenty of Coal, that it supplies the defects of divers neighbouring Coun∣ties. It is well watered with Rivers, viz. the Trent, Derwent, Dove, and Wye, which are the chief, and are passed over by about 21 Stone-bridges, some of which are of considerable note; as Burton over the Trent, sustained by 35 large Stone-Arches; Swarkeston-bridge over the fame River, reputed near a mile long, but much of it is rather a Causway than a Bridge; Monks-bridge over the Dove, and St. Marys-bridge, at Derby, over the Derwent, which River severeth the County into East and West, and it is observed that on the East-side Coal is generally dug, and on the West, Lead. The Inhabitants were the Coritani of the Romans, and was afterwards part of the Kingdom of the Mercians. It is severed into 6 Hundreds, and contains 106 Parish Churches, besides se∣veral Chappels of Ease, and is traded unto by 9 Market Towns. Derby,Derby. well seated on the Derwent, over which it hath a goodly Stone-bridge; a Town of good Antiquity, and is at present a very large, populous, well frequented and rich Borough Town, numbring 5 Parish Churches, of which All-Saints, which is the chief, is a curious structure, and beautified with∣in with several Monuments. It is a Borough Town, electing Parliament men, is honoured with the Title of an Earldom, enjoyeth ample Immunities, is go∣verned by a Major, 9 Aldermen, 14 Brethren, 14 Common-Council, a Re∣corder, Town-Clerk, &c. is well traded unto, especially for Barley, which they make into Mault, which finds good vent, and its Market, which is on Fridays, is very considerable for Cattle, Corn, and all sorts of Provisions, besides a small Market on Wednesdays and Saturdays. Here is lately built a fair Hall of Free∣stone a the Counties charge, where the Assizes are constantly kept. Chesterfield,Chesterfield. pleasantly seated between two small Rivers, and in a good Soil, a Borough Town of great antiquity, is dignified with an Earldom, enjoyeth large Immunities, is governed by a Major, 6 Aldermen, a Recorder, 6 Bre∣thren, 1 Counsellors, &c. and hath weekly two Markets on Tuesdays and Sa∣turdays, which are very considerable for Corn, Lead, and most Country Com∣modities. Wicksworth, seated in a Valley, a pretty large and populous Town, beauti∣fied with a fair Church,Wicksworth. hath a Free-School and Alms-houses, and its Market on Tuesdays is well served with Provisions and Apples, especially for Lead, where the Merchants have their meetings for the Sale thereof. Bakewill,Bakewill. seated amongst Hills and on the banks of the Wye, an indif∣ferent large Town, and hath a good Market on Mondays for Lead and Pro∣visions. In the Peak Forest is a Well that obb and flows 4 times in one hour, keeping its exact Tides. At Buxton, out of a Rock, in 24 foot compass, 9 Springs arise, of which 8 are warm and one cold; and the Waters are found very good to bath in, and for the Stomach. And in this County is Eldenhole, being a Cave worthy of note.
Devonshire de∣scribed.DEVONSHIRE, of a sharp and healthful Air, very hilly and gene∣rally of an ungrateful Soil, without great pains and charges in manuring it; yet is it not without many fertil Valleys, and its sterility is recompenced by the rich Mines of Tin and Lead, as also by the great plenty of Herrings, Pil∣chers, and other Fish, taken on its Sen-Coast, from which the Inhabitants reap good profit; which, with its Clothings, Saerges and Bone-lace, are the chief Commodities of the County. The ancient Inhabitants were the Dannionii, and was afterwards part of the Kingdom of the West-Saxons. It is very well watered with fresh Streams, as the Ex, Tamar, Tave, Tawe, Pline, Dart, Turridge, Tinge, Plime, Culme, and Ottery, which are found very advantagious to the Inhabitants. It is divided into 33 Hundreds, in which are 394 Parishes, and for the ac∣commodation of its Inhabitants, hath about 30 Market Towns. Exeter, a fair, sweet and well compacted City, of great Antiquity,Exeter. and no less pleasantly than commodiously seated on the top of an easie Ascent, and on the Ex (whence it took its name) over which it hath a fair Stone-bridge. 'Tis a place of a good largeness, containing within its Wall and Ditches, about a mile and half in circuit, in which and in its Suburbs (which are large) are numbred 15 Parish Churches besides its Cathedral or Minster, founded by King Aethelstan, a fair and beautiful structure. It enjoyeth a considerable Trade, being much inhabited and resorted unto by Merchants and Tradesmen, having several Ships and Vessels belonging unto them, and is in a flourishing condi∣tion, enjoying ample Immunities, sendeth Burgesses to Parliament, is honour∣ed with the Title of an Earldom, is governed by a Major, 24 Aldermen or Brethren; a Recorder and other sub-Officers, and hath two very considerable Markets weekly, viz. on Wednesdays and Fridays for Provisions, and Searges in great abundance. Plymouth, seated on the Plime, and near the Tamer,Plymouth. at both their Influxes into the Sea, which from a poor Fishing-Village is become a very fair, large, well inhabited and frequented Town, resembling rather a City than a Town, although it hath but two Parish Churches; 'tis a place of great importance by reason of its commodious Haven and excellent Port, which doth occasion it to be so well resorted unto by most Ships both outward and inward bound, and is of great strength, as well by Nature as Art, being defended by a strong Fort, a Cittadel, and other Fortifications. It is a Borough and Town Corporate, governed by a Major, Aldermen, and Common Council, hath the election of Parliament men, enjoyeth a great Trade for most Commodities, and its Markets on Mondays and Thursdays are extraordinary well served with all sorts of Provisions, as also have living Cattle. Dertmouth, seated on the Dent, near its fall into the Sea,Dertmouth. where it hath a commodious Haven; a large, well inhabited, frequented and traded Port-Town, containing 3 Parish Churches, and its Market on Fridays is very well served with Provisions. 'Tis an ancient Town Corporate, is governed by a Major and his Brethren, and amongst its Immunities sendeth Burgesses to Parliament. Totnes, seated on the Dert, and on the descent of a Hill;Totnes. a Town of great antiquity, and of greater account than now it is, yet doth it retain several of its Immunities, sendeth Burgesses to Parliament, and is governed by a Major and his Brethren. The Town is large and hath a very great Market on Sa∣turdays for all live Cattle, Corn, Mault, and Provisions both Flesh and Fish. Ashburton, seated in a rich Soil under the Moor; a large Borough Town,Ashburton. com∣posed of several Streets, is beautified with a fair Church, electeth Parliament men, and hath a very good Market for Corn, Cattle, Sheep, and Provisions on Saturdays. Okehampton, seated betwixt the River Okement and a branch thereof;Okehampton. a Borough Town, which electeth Parliament men, is governed by a Major, Bur∣gesses, Recorder, and sub-Officers, and hath a very good Market for Corn, Pro∣visions and Yarn, on Saturdays.
Bediford,Bediford. commodiously seated for the reception of Vessels on the Towridge, over which it hath a large Stone-bridge of Arched-work; consisting of 24 Peers. 'Tis a large, well inhabited and traded Town, and its Market on Tuesdays is well served with Corn and Provisions. Barnstable,Barnstable. commodiously seated on the Tawe, over which it hath a large Stone-bridge: 'Tis a fine Borough Town, which electeth Parliament men, is a place of some Trade, and hath a considerable Market on Fridays for Cattle, Corn, and Provisions. South-Moulton,South-Moulton. seated on the Moul, which falleth into the Tawe, a pretty good Town, and hath a considerable Market on Saturdays for Corn and Provi∣sions. Tiverton,Tiverton. seated on the Ex, over which it hath a fair Stone-bridge, where the Leman falleth in. It is a large Town Corporate, electing Parliament men, is governed by a Major, 12 Burgesses, and other sub-Officers; is a place of good account for its Clothing here made, and hath a Market on Tuesdays, which is very well served with Provisions, &c. Crediton,Crediton. seated betwixt two Hills, and in a rich Soil, once the See of a Bi∣shop, till removed to Exeter. It is a place of a pretty largeness, being com∣posed of two Towns, the one called East Town and the other West, is beauti∣fied with a very fair Church built Cathedral-wise, to which belongeth a Free School, which hath 12 Governours; it is well inhabited, enjoyeth a good Trade for its Searges here made, and its Markets on Saturdays, for Corn and Provisions, is esteemed one of the best in the County. Dorsetshire described.DORSETSHIRE, of a healthful Air and fruitful Soil; the Northern part (which is severed from the South almost by a continual ridge of high Hills) is somewhat flat, abounding with rich Pastures, and is well watered with fresh Streams, which hath induced many of the Gentry to settle here, although the Winter season is very dirty and troublesom to the Traveller; which in∣convenience the South part is freed from, as consisting of Hills and Downs, which are overspread with flocks of Sheep; yet it is not without divers Val∣leys, in which (for the most part) the Towns and Gentlemens-Houses are seated. It is well watered with Rivers, the chief of which are the Frome and the Stower, which, with the Sea, do plentifully furnish the Inhabitants with Fish and Fowl. The chief Commodities that this County produceth are Cattle, Sheep, Corn, Wool, of which the Clothiers make Kerfies; Wood, Hemp, Tobacco-clay, Free-stones, &c. And for the better support of their Traffick, they have several good Haven-Towns, as Lime, Weymouth, Pool, &c. Its Inhabitants, known to the Romans, were the Durotriges; and when the Saxons became Masters of the Island, it became part of the Kingdom of the West Saxons. It is divided into 5 Divisions, and those into 29 Hundreds, in which are seated 248 Parish Churches, and for accommodation of its Inhabitants, hath Traffick with 18 or 19 Market Towns. Dorchester,Dorchester. a Town of great antiquity, and well known to the Romans, where they had their station; it is pleasantly seated on the South-side of the Frome, and on the Roman Causway called Foss-way, at present the chief in the County (though not so large as in former time, as appears by the circuit of its then Walls, first thrown down by the Danes) being neatly compacted with well built Houses, hath 3 fair Streets and as many Parish Churches, hath an eminent Free School and an Alms-house. 'Tis a Town Corporate, governed by 2 Bayliffs, 8 Aldermen, a Recorder, and other sub-Officers, electeth Parliament men, and giveth title to the Right Honourable Pierrepont, Marquess of Dorchester, &c. Its Inhabitants gain well by Clothing and other Merchandize, and its Market on Saturdays is very considerable for Corn, Flesh, Cattle, Sheep, and Country Commodities, usually sold in great Markets.
Weymouth, seated on the Wey at its influx into the Sea, opposite to which,Weymouth. on the other side of the River, standeth Melcombe, or Melcomb-Regis, but joyned together by a fair Timber-bridge; which Towns are now incorporated into one body, and governed by a Major, Aldermen, and other sub Officers; yet each of them still send 2 Burgesses to Parliament. Weymouth at present hath but one chief Street, which for a good space lieth open to the Sea, and on the bank thereof riseth a Hill of such steepness, that the Inhabitants are forced to climb up to their Chappel by 60 steps of Stone, from whence there is a fair prospect of the Town and Haven, which lieth under it. Melcombe, as seated on a flat, much surpasseth Weymouth for conveniency of scituation, affording room for Buildings, hath a good Market-place, good Streets and Yards or their Merchandize, which hath invited most of the Merchants to reside here; and these Towns thus united gain well by Traffick into New∣foundland, France, and elsewhere; and their Markets, which are on Tuesdays and Fridays, are well provided with all necessaries and provisions. Not far from Weymouth is the Isle of Portland, or rather a Peninsula,Portland Isle. so made by the Beech, which runneth from Abbotsbury. It is a place of great strength, as well by nature as art, being encompassed with inaccessible Rocks, except at the place of Landing, where there is a strong Castle called Port∣land Castle; and almost opposite to it on the Land-side towards Weymouth is another called Sandfoot Castle, which two command all the Ships that pass into the Road. The whole Isle, when got to the top of these craggy Rocks, sheweth it self in a flat, and is in compass about 7 miles. The ground is very good for Corn, and indifferent for Pasturage; it affordeth excellent Quarries of Free-stone for building, but is exceeding destitute of Wood and other Fuel. On the South-side standeth the only Church in the Isle, which is washed by the Sea-waves. And here Portland-race sheweth it self. Lime, or Lime-Regis, of great antiquity, seated on the banks of the Sea,Lime. a well known Haven, Borough and Town Corporate, governed by a Major and other sub-Officers, enjoyeth divers Immunities, and electeth Parliament men. The Town is large and built on both sides of the River Lime, but joyned together by a Bridge. It enjoyeth a good trade, and its Markets are well frequented. Cerne-Abbas, once famous for its rich and fair Abby near adjoyning;Cerne-Abbas. it is seated in a dry bottom, watered with a fine Rivulet, and in a Champain Country, affording great delight for the Hawk and Hound. The Town is but mean, yet hath it an eminent Market for Corn, Sheep, Cattle, &c. on Wed∣nesdays. Sherborne, of good antiquity and same,Sherborne. being formerly the See of a Bi∣shop; it is well seated and watered, and for largeness, fair Buildings, frequency of Inhabitants, and quick Markets, which are on Thursdays and Saturdays, for Corn, Flesh, Sheep, Cattle, and most Country Commodities, gives place to few or none in these parts. Shaftsbury, or Shafton, seated on a great eminency,Shaftsbury. and very destitute of Water, which for ordinary uses is brought on Horses backs from the foot of the Hill. It once contained (when in its glory) 10 Parish Churches, which at present are reduced to 3, and is a fair, large, well built, inhabited and fre∣quented Thoroughfare, Borough and Major Town, governed by a Major, 12 Aldermen, &c. electeth Parliament men, is honoured with the title of an Earldom, and hath a very considerable Market on Saturdays for Corn, Flesh, Cattle, and most Commodities. Blandford, a fair, large and well compacted Town, seated on the Stower,Blandford. over which it hath a Bridge which leadeth to St. Mary Blanford. It is well inhabited, enjoyeth a good Trade, and the rather as being neighboured by so many Gentry, and its Market on Saturdays is well provided with all things necessary, but chiefly with Corn, Sheep and Cattle. Pool, enclosed on all parts with the Sea, except on the North,Pool. where it ad∣mits entrance only by one Gate. A Town by reason of its commodious Ha∣ven, from a small Village is become a very large Town Corporate, governed
by a Major and other sub-Officers, electeth Parliament men, and hath two Markets weekly on Mondays and Thursdays, which are indifferent well served. In the Haven (contrary to all Ports in England) the Sea ebbs and flows four times in 24 hours. Worham,Worham. esteemed the ancientest Borough Town in the County, seated between the Frome and the Biddle, at their falling into Luckford Lake, where it had a good Harbour for Ships, and was a very considerable large place, containing several Churches, which are now reduced to 3; and its Haven being choaked up, doth much eclipse its Trade. It is a Town Corporate, governed by a Ma∣jor, &c. sendeth Burgesses to Parliament, and hath an indifferent good Market on Saturdays. Lulworth-Castle,Lulworth Castle. the Seat of Hum Weld Esquire, esteemed one of the best Houses in the County, as well for beauty and largeness, as for a pleasant sci∣tuation and prospect into the Sea. The Isle of Purbeck,Purbeck Isle. or rather the Peninsula, so called, hath veins of Marble running under the Earth. It is about 10 miles in length and 5 in breadth; in which tract are seated divers Towns, amongst which is Corfe-Castle, seated on a River, and in a barren Soil, between two Hills, upon one of which standeth the Castle. It is an ancient Borough Town, governed by a Major and Barons, enjoyeth ample Immunities, electeth Parliament men, and hath a small Market on Thursdays. County of Durham de∣scribed.DƲRHAM, a Bishoprick and County Palatine, of a sharp and piercing Air, but through the plentifulness of Sea-Coal the Cold is not so offensive un∣to the Inhabitants. It is of a different Soil, the Eastern part being Champain, the Southern most fertil and well inhabited, and the Western, hilly, barren, and thin of Woods and Towns, but is recompenced by the store of Coals, Lead, and Iron-Mines. The ancient Inhabitants known to Ptolomy were the Brigantes, and in the time of the Saxons became part of the Kingdom of the Northumbers. This County was formerly called St. Cuthberts Patrimony, from one St. Cuthbert, who was Canonied a Saint, and was born in this County. It is divided into 4 Wards, viz. those of Chester, Darweton, Easington, and Stockton, in which are numbred 118 Parishes, and is traded unto by fix Market Towns. Durham,Durham. a City of good Antiquity, dignified with the See of a Bishop, and sends Burgesses to Parliament. It is no less pleasantly than commodiously seated on an easie Ascent, and almost encompassed by the River Weare, over which it hath two large and spacious Stone-bridges, which give entrance into it, which, with its Wall and spacious Castle, make it to be a place of good strength. This City is fair and neatly compacted, containing 6 Parish Churches, besides its Abby or Cathedral, dedicated to St. Cuthbert, a large structure with a lofty Tower in the midst, and two Spires at the West-end, ad∣joyning to which are the Houses for the Dean and Prebends. It is beautified with fair Buildings, hath well ordered Streets, a spacious Market-place, which is well resorted unto every Saturday, is much inhabited and frequented by the Gentry of these parts, enjoyeth a good Trade, and its Shop-keepers are well furnished with Commodities. Hartley-pool,Hartley-pool. commodiously seated on the Sea-shoar, (which encompasseth it, except towards the West) and surrounded with Rocks and Hills. 'Tis an ancient Town Corporate, governed by a Major and sub-Officers, is indifferent large, but poor, and its Market at present disused; and were it not for its Har∣bour, which is good, it would be less frequented, Bishops-Aukland,Bishops-Auk∣land. well seated on the side of a Hill, and between the River Weare and the Rivulet Gaunless; of chief note for its Castle, which is the Bishops Palace for the Summer season, now beautifully repaired. Its Market is on Thursdays, which is indifferently well provided with Corn and Pro∣visions.
Darlington,Darlington. seated in a flat and on the Skerne, which falleth into the Tees; a Town of a good largeness, consisting of several Streets, hath a spacious Market-place, and its Market on Mondays is very considerable, and well fur∣nished with Corn, Cattle, and all sorts of Provisions. At Oxenhall, near Darlington, are 3 deep Pits, called by the Inhabitants Hell-Kettles, which are said to be made by an Earthquake. Stocton,Stocton. seated on the Tees near its fall into the Sea; a place of great trade for vending and exporting of Corn and Butter to London, and other parts. It is a Town Corporate, governed by a Major and sub-Officers, is well inhabited, and by reason of its commodious Port it enjoyeth a good Trade. County of Essex descri∣bed.ESSEX, a County of a large extent, and very populous; is well wa∣tered with Rivers, besides the Sea, which sendeth forth several of her branches, as the Stower, Blackwater, (where those excellent Oysters, called Walfleet, are caught) Crouch, Ley, &c. The Soil may be esteemed fertil, though in some places it is sandy and barren; it is well clothed with Wood, hath variety of Parks, great plenty of Fish and Fowl; nor is there any want of other Provisions: And for its Commodities affordeth Cloths, Stuffs, Hops, Butter, Cheese, Gunpowder, Oysters and Saffron. It is severed into Hundreds, in which are seated 415 Parish Churches, and for the conveniency of its Inhabitants hath 21 Market Towns. Colchester,Colchester. a place of great antiquity, said to be built by Collus the British Prince An. Dom. 124. and in former times of no less fame than largeness, numbring 15 Parish Churches, many of which are now reduced to ruin, with abundance of its Houses. It is no less pleasantly than commodiously seated on the Colne, which after about six miles course loseth it self in the Sea. It is governed by 2 Bailiffs, 12 Aldermen, who are clothed in Scarlet, a Recorder, with other sub-Officers; it enjoyeth several Immunities, sendeth Burgesses to Parliament, hath a Market on Saturdays, which is well served with Provi∣sions, and its Inhabitants (many of which are Dutch, and have their Church for divine Worship) drive a good trade for Sayes, Bares, and other Drape∣ries here made. It is also of some note for the great quantities of excellent Oysters here taken. This place gave birth to Lucius, Helena, and Constantine the first Christian King, Empress, and Emperour in the World. Harwich,Harwich. a Haven, Sea-port, and Borough Town, which electeth Parlia∣ment men, is of great great strength as well by nature as art. The Town is not large, but is well inhabited and frequented by those that have relation to Sea-Affairs; and the rather, by reason of its safe and commodious Haven, har∣bour for Ships and Vessels to Anchor in, it being oft-times the station of the Navy Royal, which (and for being the ready passage to Holland, where the Packet-boats are kept for that purpose) doth occasion it to enjoy a good Trade; yet its Market on Tuesdays is not very considerable. About 4 miles Northwards from Harwich is Horsey Isle; and about 2 miles further is the Ness, a Promontory well known to Sea-men. Maldon,Maldon. a Town of great antiquity and repute in the time of the Romans, (as Cambden noteth) and was the Seat of Cunobelin, King of the Trinoban∣tes. It is well seated on an Arm of the Sea, about 6 or 7 miles from the Main, before which lie small Isles called Northey and Osey; the Town is large, ha∣ving one Street about a mile in length, is well inhabited, enjoyeth a good trade, occasioned by reason of the commodiousness of its Haven; amongst its Immunities electeth Parliament men, is governed by 2 Bailiffs, 6 Alder∣men, 18 Brethren, a Recorder, High-Steward, &c. and hath a very consi∣derable Market on Saturdays for Flesh, Fish, Fowl, and other Provisi∣ons. Walden.Walden. or Saffron-Walden, seated on an Ascent amongst pleasant Fields of Saffron; a large, fair, well inhabited and frequented Town Corporate, en∣joying several Immunities, is governed by a Treasurer, 2 Chamberlains, and the Commonalty, and hath a very considerable Market on Saturdays, for Corn and all forts of Provisions.
Near unto this Town is that stately House Audley-end,Audley-end. built by the Right Honourable Tho. Howard, Earl of Suffolk, then Lord High Treasurer of Eng∣land, which said House now belongeth to his Majesty. Chelmesford,Chelmesford. seated in the Road and between two Rivers, over which are Bridges for conveniency of passage. It is a fair, large and well frequented Town, where the Assizes are usually kept, and hath a very great Market for Corn, Provisions, &c. on Fridays. Raleigh,Raleigh. a place of great antiquity, though not of largeness, and its Market which is on Saturdays is but small. Not far from this Town are the Isles of Wallop and Fowlness, that is, the Promontory of Fowls, which hath a Church in it. Also Canvey Isle, of a rich Soil, and feedeth good store of Sheep. Brentwood.Brentwood. seated on a Hill, and on the high Road; a place of good Anti∣quity, is well inhabited, and its Market on Thursdays is well served with Pro∣visions. Rumford.Rumford. a large thoroughfare, well frequented and inhabited Town, seat∣ed in the Liberty of Haverill, which enjoyeth large Immunities, being an ancient retiring place of the Kings. This Town of Rumford is of note for its great Market on Tuesdays for living Cattle; but for Corn and Provisions, which it is plentifully served with, it hath a Market on Wednesdays. Waltham,Waltham. or Waltham-Abby, seated on the River Leg, where it formeth several Eights, or small Isles, and in a large Forest so called, well stored with Deer and other Game. It is a Town of some note, and hath a Market on Tuesdays. Gloucestershire described.GLOƲCESTERSHIRE, a County of a healthful Air and fertil Soil both for Corn and Pasturage, yielding plenty of Corn, and feeding abun∣dance of Cattle and great flocks of Sheep (especially about Coteswold) whose Wool is much esteemed for its fineness. The part lying Eastwards, called Coteswold, riseth up with Hills, and is for grazing; the middle part (which is watered with the Severne) lieth low, and maketh a most fertil Plain; and the Western part, beyond the Severne, is overspread with Wood and called Dean Forest, which affordeth excellent Tim∣ber Trees for the building of Ships, and great store of Coal and Iron-Mines, where there are divers Furnaces and Forges for working the same. This Fo∣rest is of a large extent, being about 20 miles in length and 10 in breadth; within which tract of ground are numbred 3 Hundreds, 23 Parish Churches, 1 Castle, 1 Abby, 3 Market Towns, and 1 Major Town; and the Common thereof (besides the Purlieus and Abby-woods) is said to contain 32000 Acres of Ground. The chief Commodities that this County produceth, are Corn, Wool, Cloth, Iron, Steel, Wool and Timber; also Fruits here had in such great plenty, that the Highways and Lanes are beset with Apple, Pear, and Plumb-trees, which grow naturally without ingrafting. It is well watered with Rivers, amongst which are the Isis, Strowd, Churne, Avon, Wye, and Severne, which for broadness of Channel, swiftness of Stream, and plenty of Salmon and other excellent Fish, comes little short of any River in England. The ancient Inhabitants were the Dobuni, and in the time of the Saxons it became part of the Kingdom of the Mercians. This County is divided into 30 Hundreds, in which are numbred 280 Parish Churches, and is traded unto by 25 Market-Towns. Bristol,Bristol. seated between the Avon and the Froom, which after a small course fall into the Severne; the Avon dividing it into two parts, as the Thames doth London and Southwark, and are so joyned by a fair Stone-bridge, on which are also stately Houses. The greatest part of this City is in this County, and the least in Somersetshire, but it will owe subjection to neither, being an entire County incorporate of it self, enjoying large Immunities, sendeth Burgesses to Parliament, is governed by its peculiar Magistrates, as a Major, Court of
Aldermen, 2 Sheriffs, and other sub-Officers, and is dignified with the See of a Bishop and the title of an Earldom, now invested in the person of the Right Honourable George Digby, Earl of Bristol, &c. It is a City of a sweet and delightful scituation, and of far more beauty than antiquity, being adorned with many fair and well built Edifices; and its Streets so neatly ordered, by reason of the Avon that runneth through it, together with the common Sinks and Sewers under ground, that no filth is to be seen to annoy its Inhabitants. It is a City of a large extent, numbring 18 Parish Churches besides its Cathe∣dral, a fair structure. It is begirt with a Wall, and further defended with For∣tifications; its Port is good, and commodious for Ships of a considerable bur∣then, which doth occasion it to be a place of a very considerable Trade, and to be well inhabited, and frequented by Merchants and Tradesmen, insomuch that next after London it may justly claim priority of all others in England; and for the accommodation of its Inhabitants, besides its Shambles, its Mar∣kets on Wednesdays and Saturdays are plentifully served with all sorts of Pro∣visions. It is of note for its Bristol-Stones, taken out of St. Vincents-Rock near adjoyning. Gloucester,Gloucester. a City of good antiquity, and pleasantly seated on an easie As∣cent, and on the banks of the Severne, over which it hath a fair Stone-bridge. 'Tis a City not very large, yet hath it for Divine worship 12 Parish Churches, besides its Abby or Cathedral, dedicated to St. Peter, a fair and beautiful building, consisting of a continued Window-work, and hath large Cloysters and an excellent Whispering-place. It is also beautified with a handsom Col∣ledge, and many neat Buildings, being a place well inhabited and frequented, enjoying a good Trade; and its Markets on Wednesdays and Saturdays are well furnished with all Provisions, and very great for Corn and Cattle. This City is the See of a Bishop, to which belongs a Dean and 6 Prebends; 'tis a County within it self, enjoyeth large Immunities, sendeth Burgesses to Par∣liament, and is governed by a Major, 2 Sheriffs, 12 Aldermen, a Recorder, with other sub-Officers. Circester,Circester. seated on the Churn, over which it hath a Bridge, and in the Woulds very commodious for Mills. 'Twas a City once large, and of great account in the time of the Romans; at present it is a good Borough Town, enjoying large Priviledges, and sendeth Burgesses to Parliament, and hath weekly two considerable Markets, on Mondays chiefly for Corn, and on Fridays for Wool, Yarn, and Provisions. Tewksbury, commodiously seated on and between 3 Rivers,Tewksbury. the Severne, Avon, and Swilyat, over which are as many Bridges; a fair, large, well inha∣bited and frequented Borough and Town Corporate, electing Parliament men; of good account for making of Woollen-cloth, and for the best Mustard in England, and hath a very good Market on Saturdays for Corn, Cattle, and Provisions. Stroud, seated on a River so called, over which it hath a Bridge,Stroud. and on the banks of the said River are placed abundance of Fulling-Mills. It is a well built Town, which is of chief note for making and dying of Cloths, and espe∣cially for good Scarlets; and hath a good Market on Fridays for Provisions and Yarn. Tedbury, an indifferent good Town, beautified with a fair Market-house;Tedbury. and its Market on Wednesdays, for Corn, Cattle, Cheese, Mault, Tarn, Wool, Provisions, and other Country Commodities, is esteemed one of the best in these parts. Barkley, a place of good antiquity, honoured with a Barony,Barkley. and gives title to the Right Honourable Lord Berkley, &c. It is seated on a branch of the Severne, and hath an indifferent Market on Tuesdays. Dursley, seated on or near a branch of the Severne; a good Town,Dursley. much inhabited by Clothiers, and hath a small Market on Thursdays. Chipping-Sodbury, seated in a bottom of the Downs, and in the Road;Chipping-Sod∣bury. an in∣different good Borough Town, which hath a very great Market for Cheese on Thursdays, and is also well served with Corn and Provisions.
Hantshire de∣scribed.HANTSHIRE, of a fertil Soil for Corn, hath rich Pastures, which feed store of Cattle, is well clothed with Wood, affordeth plenty of Iron, which is here wrought from the Mines; also excellent Hony, and of their Wool they make abundance of Cloths and Kersies. Its Southern parts are washed with the Sea, and by reason of its of its several good Ports and Havens it is well resorted and traded unto, affording most Transmarine Commodities, The ancient Inhabitants known to the Romans, were the Segoutians in the North part, and the Belgae and the Regni in the South. In this County is New-Forest, about 30 miles in compass, and a place which affordeth great variety of Game; within this tract of ground was formerly 36 Parish Churches, which with the Houses thereto belonging were pulled down by command of William the Conquerour, that it might be a place for wild Beasts to harbour in. It is severed into 40 Hundreds, wherein are seated 253 Parish Churches, and is traded unto by 18 Market Towns, besides those in the Isle of Wight, being part of this County, which I shall anon treat of. Winchester,Winchester. a City of great antiquity, and famous in the time of the Ro∣mans, Saxons, and Normans, it being the Sepulchre of divers of their Kings and Queens, and was of note in the time of the Romans for making the rich Embroideries for their Emperours. It is a place pleasantly seated in a Valley betwixt Hills, and on the banks of a delightful River, which after about 10 miles course falleth into an Arm of the Sea, on which Southampton is seated. It is a fair City of about a mile and a half in circuit within its Walls, which gives entrance unto its Suburbs by 4 Gates; for Divine worship it hath five Parish Churches besides its Cathedral, dedicated to the Holy Trinity, a large and beautiful structure. It is garnished with good Buildings, amongst which are the Bishops Palate, the Prebends houses, and the Town-Hall, where the Assizes and Sessions for the County are kept. It is a place well inhabited and frequented, and its Markets, which are on Wednesdays and Saturdays, are well provided with all sorts of Provisions, especially that on Saturdays. It en∣joyeth several Immunities, and sendeth Burgesses to Parliament. Without the City, in the Suburbs, is a fair Colledge bearing the name of the City, ha∣ving a Warden, Masters, and an Ʋsher, and is undowed with a liberal Man∣tenance. Near unto this City, pleasantly seated on a fair River, is St. Crosses Hospital for the relief of 12 Poor men called Brothers, having a Master, Steward, and sub-Officers; and according to the Institution of the House, Bread and Drink is given to all Travellers that will require the same. Southampton,Southampton. commodiously seated on an Arm of the Sea, capable to re∣ceive Ships of a considerable burthen to its Keys, which are fair, and very con∣venient for the lading and unlading of Goods, by reason of which it is a place well inhabited by Merchants and Shopkeepers, who drive a good Trade. It is a large Town, numbring 5 Parish Churches besides its Hospital, called Gods-house. It is garnished with well built Houses, and is fenced about with a double Ditch and Walls, which gives entrance by 7 Gates. It is a Town and County of it self, governed by a Major, Bailiffs, and Burgesses, enjoyeth large Immunities, sendeth Burgesses to Parliament, is dignified with the title of an Earldom, and its Markets on Tuesdays and Thursdays are not very great, except for Provisions. Portsmouth,Portsmouth. at present one of the best Garrisons and Sea-port Towns in England, by reason of its commodious scituation, which makes it to be ex∣ceedingly resorted unto by Shipping, and is one of the usual stations for the Navy Royal, where his Majesty hath his Store-houses and Docks for the building and equipping his Ships, which adds no small benefit to the Town, which is large, well built, very populous, enjoyeth a good Trade, is well pro∣vided with all necessaries, and its Markets on Thursdays and Saturdays are very considerable for Provisions. This Town is seated in the Isle of Porsey, so made by the Sea and its two Arms, which are joyned by a River. It is a
Town Corporate, sendeth Burgesses to Parliament; and being a place of such concernment, is exceedingly fortified with two Castles and other Fortifications. Here they make Salt of the Salt-water. Basingstoke, seated on the Road,Basingstoke. a great thorough-fare Town for the We∣stern partt. It is a Town Corporate, governed by a Major, 7 Aldermen, as ma∣ny Burgesses, a high Steward, a Recorder, &c. and the Market on Wednesdays is very good for Corn, especially Barley. Silchester, a place of great antiquity, and of a large extent,Silchester. said to be the ancient City Vindonum, built by Constantius Son of Constantine the Great, and before it was destroyed by the Danes, was of a large extent. Here the war∣like Arthur was Crowned. The Isle of WIGHT, part of Hantshire,Isle of wight. of which it may part; for from Hurst Castle, which is seated on a Languet of Land which runneth forth into the Sea; it is not above a mile to the Western part of this Isle, and from Portsmouth not above six. And its Southern part lieth oppo∣site to France, from which it is distant about 35 Leagues. The form of this Isle is long, being about 20 miles in length, and where broadest 12, and hath about 60 miles of Sea-Coast. It is blest with a healthful Air, and is of a fertil Soil both for Corn and Pa∣sture, and hath plenty of Conies, Hares, Partridges, Sea-fowl, and other Game; and for excellent Fish may compare with any Country whatsoever; nor is it wanting in any thing either for pleasure or profit, except Wood, and that they are supplied with from Hantshire. It is a place of great strength, as well by Nature as Art; for besides its Castles, Block-houses, Forts, and Militia; it is fenced about with a ridge of craggy Rocks and Cliffs, with dangerous Banks; amongst which those of most note to Sea-men are the Needles, Shigles, Brambles, the Mixon, &c. It is very populous, and garnished with 36 Parish Churches, and hath for its chief places, Newport, a large, populous and well frequented Major Town,Newport. which hath the election of Parliament men, is dignified with the title of an Earldom, and at present the only Market Town in the Isle, which is here kept on Wednesdays and Saturdays, both very considerable for Provisions, Corn, Cattle, and other Commodities. It is seated within 4 miles of the Sea, and on a naviga∣ble Creek for small Vessels to the Key, which doth much facilitate its Trade. Yarmouth, a fair Borough Town, which electeth Parlament men,Yarmouth. and had formerly a Market; is beautified with well built Houses, which for the most part are of Free-stone and covered with Slate. Its scituation is in the Western part of the Isle on the Sea-shoar, with which and its Arms it is now encom∣passed, and hath 3 strong Fortifications raised with a Draw-Bridge, and the West end is defended by a powerful Castle on the Key. The Cows, seated at the entring in of the Creek that goeth to Newport; a place very eminent for the harbouring of Ships. About this Isle are several other small ones, or rather Rocks, as those called the Black-Rock, the Mixon, the Don, Moss, Challorne, Goss, Warden, Ather∣field, and Chalk-Rocks; and on the North part, between it and Portsmouth, as dangerous Sands, as the Brambles, the Horse, and Nomans Lands. Hartfordshire described.HARTFORDSHIRE, blest with a wholsom Air, and for the gene∣rality is of an indifferent fertil Soil for Grain, affording good store of Wheat and Barley, of which they make Mault, especially in the Vale of Ringtail or Ringdale, and hath plenty of Meadows and Pastures, which feed store of Cattle; but of its own nature it is apt to bear Wood and Copses. It is well stored with Parks, and hath many pleasant and ancient Seats of Gentry, commonly called Beryes, that is, Mannor-Houses, Court-Houses or Halls. It is well watered with Rivers, the chief amongst which are the Lea, Stower, Stratford, Redburne, Flamsted, Colne, &c.
The ancient Inhabitants known to the Romans, were the Trinobantes and the Cattieuchlamans, and became afterwards part of the East Saxons. It is severed into 8 Hundreds, in which are seated 120 Parish Churches, be∣sides 15 Chappels of Ease, and is traded unto by 18 Market Towns, most of which are of good account. Hartford,Hartford. seated on the Lea, said to be formerly navigable, once a place of a larger extent, and of more beauty, strength and esteem than now it is; yet is it the Shire Town, where the County Goal is kept, and as a Borough Town electeth Parliament men. It is governed by a Major, 9 Burgesses, 16 Assi∣stants, a high-Steward, who is always a Noble-man, a Steward of the Court of Records and other sub-Officers, and hath a Market on Saturdays, which is well frequented and served with Commodities. St. Albans,St. Albans. seated on the Colne, a Town of great antiquity, being raised from the ruins of that famous City Verulam, so splendid in the time of the Romans, as may appear by the Pillars, Pavements, Arched-Vaults, Idols, and Coins oft digged up; at which time it enjoyed ample Priviledges and Im∣munities, many of which it yet keepeth, being dignified with the Title of an Earldom, and as a Borough Town electeth Parliament men. For its chief Magistrates hath a Major, 10 Aldermen, a Steward and Chamberlain. It is a fair, large, well inhabited and frequented thorough-fare Town, divided into four Wards; for Divine worship hath 3 Parish Churches, in one of which was (if not is) a Font of solid Brass brought out of Scotland, which was there made use of for the baptizing the Scottish Kings Children, and hath a Market on Saturdays, which is well served with Commodities, &c. Barnet,Barnet. or high Barnet, a large, dry and pleasant Town, highly seated, and on the Road, a place of some account for its Medicinal-waters, as also for its Swine-Market on Mondays, which makes it to be well frequented, and to be well accommodated with Inns. here was fought a bloody Battle between the Competitors of the Houses of York and Lancaster on Easter-day, in which Edward the Fourth became Victor. Watford,Watford. seated on the Colne; a large and well inhabited Town, whose Market on Tuesdays is well frequented, affording all necessaries, especially Corn in great plenty. Not far from Watford is Langley Abby, where was born Nicholas, Sur∣named Break-Spear, who was afterwards Bishop of Rome, and called Pope Hadrian the 4th. He taught the Norwegians the Christian Faith: he was of so proud a Spirit, that he had his Stirup held by Frederick the Roman Em∣perour. Berkhamsted hath a fair Free School,Berkhamsted. and a pretty good Market on Mon∣days, chiefly for Mault. And here it was that the English Nobles met in Council for the shaking off the Normans Yoke. Hatfield,Hatfield. a place of great delight and recreation, by reason of its Parks and other places of pleasure, once dignified with a Royal-house of the Kings, which now belongeth to the Earl of Salisbury; it hath a Market on Thurs∣days. Ware,Ware. a large, well frequented and inhabited thorough-fare Town, seated on the Lea, hath a Market on Tuesdays, which is well provided with Com∣modities; a place well known to many for its great Bed. Stratford,Stratford. or Bishops-Stratford, seated on the side of a Hill; a very large, fair, and well inhabited and frequented Market Town, full of Inns for the giving entertainment to Strangers, and its Market on Thursdays is very well resorted unto, and provided with Provisions and most Country Commodities. Here are the ruins of a Castle, raised on an artificial Mount, within which is a deep and dark Dungeon called the Convicts Prison, by which it may be sup∣posed that some great Priviledges did belong unto it. Baldock;Baldock. a considerable large Town, seated between the Hills in a Chalky Soil fit for Corn, of chief note for its many Maulsters; yet its Market on Thursdays is but small.
Royston, a famous Market Town,Royston. which is kept on Wednesdays for Corn and Mault here made, being seated in a fat Soil, and between Hills in a bottom. The Town is large, well inhabited and full of Inns, part being in this County and part in Cambridgeshire. Herefordshire described.HEREFORDSHIRE, a County every where exceeding fertil, ha∣ving great plenty of Grains and rich Pastures, which feed store of Cattle, especially Sheep, whose Wool is much esteemed for its finess; and for Wheat, Wool and Water it yieldeth to no County in England. It is well clothed with Wood, and watered with Rivers, the chief amongst which are the Wye, Mu∣now, Wades, Doive, Lugg, Froom, &c. All Fruits here grow in great plenty, and of their Apples they make such abundance of Sider, that besides what they use themselves (it being their general drink) of late years it is become a considerable Commodity, especially that which is called Red-streak. Its ancient Inhabitants were the Silures, a stout and warlike People, who sorely perplexed the Romans for 9 years space, through the valour and noble exploits of their Commander Charactacus, and became afterwards part of the Kingdom of the Mercians. It is divided into 11 Hundreds, in which are numbred 176 Parish Churches, and hath Traffick with 8 Market Towns. Hereford,Hereford. a City of great antiquity, and raised out of the ancient Arconium, now called Kenchester, about 3 miles distant; a place of good account in the time of the Romans, and so continued until it was shaken to pieces by a vio∣lent Earthquake. It is no less pleasantly than commodiously seated amongst delightful Meadows and rich Corn-fields, and almost encompassed with Ri∣vers, to wit the Wye and two others, over which are two Bridges. It is of a large place, beautified with good Buildings both publick and private, amongst which are the Bishops Palace, the Colledge, the Cathedral, the Prebends houses, and Hospital, and numbreth 6 Parish Churches, (two of which in the late Troubles were demolished) besides its Cathedral, to which belongeth a Bishop, Dean, Chancellor, 6 Canons, 27 Prebends, with a Chanter, Treasurer, 12 Vicars Choral, besides Deacons, Queristers, and other Attendants. This City enjoyeth large Immunities, sendeth Burgesses to Parliament, is governed by a Major, 6 Aldermen, a Common Council, Recorder, and other sub-Officers, and is very well served with Commodities, having weekly 3 Markets on Wednesdays, Fridays, and Saturdays, which are of considerable account; that on Fridays for Cattle, Sheep, and Hogs, and the other for Grain and all sorts of Provisions, besides Gloves here made and sold in great quantities. Near to this City is Gilden Vale, so called from the fertility of the Soil and pleasant scituation. Ross,Ross. seated in a fertil Soil on the banks of the Wye; a fair Borough Town, which hath a very great Market on Thursdays for Corn, Cattle, and Provisi∣ons, being much resorted unto by the Inhabitants of Gloucestershire and Mon∣mouthshire. Lidbury,Lidbury. near adjoyning to Malvern Hills; a fine well built Town, seated in a rich Clayey-ground, much inhabited by Clothiers, who drive a good Trade, and its Market on Tuesdays is well served with, Corn, Cattle, and Pro∣visions. Lemster, a large, ancient and pleasant Town,Lemster. seated in a rich Soil and on the Lugg, which runneth through it, over which are several Bridges. It is governed by a Bayliff, a Recorder, Justices of the Peace, and 24 of the Chamber or Common Council; it sendeth Burgesses to Parliament, and hath a very good Market on Fridays for Corn, Cattle, Sheep, Provisions, Hops and Wool, for which this Town is of note, it being called Lemster-Ore. Kyneton, also seated on the Arrow; a pretty large and well built Town,Kyneton. whose Inhabitants drive a good Trade for narrow Cloths. Its Market on Wed∣nesdays for Corn, Cattle, Provisions, and several Country Commodities, is esteemed the best in the County.
County of Huntington described.HƲNTINGTONSHIRE, a County for the generality of a fertil Soil both for Corn and Tillage, garnished with delightful Hills, and towards the East; where it joyneth on the Fens; it hath rich Pasturage, which feed store of Cattle. It is well watered with Rivers, the chief amongst which is the Ouse, which divideth it self into several streams. It is severed into 4 Hundreds, in which are seated 79 Parish Churches, and is traded unto by 5 Market Towns. Huntington,Huntington. pleasantly seated on a rising Ascent, and on the North-banks of the Owse, over which it hath a fair Stone-bridge, which leadeth to God∣manchester on the other side of the Owse; a very large County and ancient Borough Town, seated in a rich Soil, and well inhabited by Yeomen and Far∣mers. It is a Town of great antiquity, was once very populous, numbring no less than 15 Parish Churches, which are now reduced to 4, and enjoyed great Immunities, and had a Mint for Coynage. At present it is dignified with the title of an Earldom, sendeth Burgesses to Parliament, is governed by a Major, 12 Aldermen, (of which the Major is one) and Burgesses; is well inhabited and frequented, and the rather as being a thorough-fate Town from London, Cambridge, and other Southern parts of England, into the North and into Scotland; and also for being the place where the Assizes are kept for the County; and its Market on Saturdays is very well served with Pro∣visions. St. Ives,St. Ives. so called from one Ivo a Persian Bishop, who 'tis said about the year 600 travelled through England preaching the Gospel, and here ended his days, and his Body was from hence removed to Ramsey Abbey; a fair, large and ancient Town, seated on the Owse, over which it hath a very good Stone-bridge, hath a Market on Mondays, which is well served with Provisions, and is of chief note for living Cattel. St. Neots (so called from Neotus,St. Neots. a Monk of Glastenbury;) a large and well built Town, beautified with a neat Church, is commodiously seated on the Owse, over which it hath a fair Stone-bridge, which leadeth to Bedfordshire. Its Market is on Thursdays, which is well served with Provisions, and through the commodiousness of the Owse the Neighbouring Towns are from hence furnished with Coals. Ramsey,Ramsey. seated in the Fenny part amongst rich grounds both for Tillage and Pasturage, and near the Meers of Ramsey and Whitlesey, which with the Ri∣vers that plentifully water it, afford excellent Fish and wild Fowl in great plenty. It is a good Country Town, which was held in great esteem for its rich Abby so called, and its Market on Wednesdays is well frequented. County of Kent described.KENT, a County of a large extent, and although very hilly, for the ge∣nerality is of a rich and fertil Soil both for Corn and Pasture, and is well stored with Cattle, Fish, Fowl, and Fruits. The Air is temperate and good, except in the Weald and Marshes, which are Aguish. It is well watered with Rivers, many of which are Navigable; as the Thames, which washes its Northern parts; the Medway, which in a manner divideth the Shire in the midst, and is the station for his Majesties Navy Royal (which said River loseth it self under ground, and riseth again near Cox-heath) besides 10 others of considerable account, which opening with several Creeks and Havens, are found commodious for Ships to ride in, of which four bear the name of Cinque Ports, viz. Dover, Sandwich, Rum∣ney, and Hith; and on the banks of these Rivers, which are crossed by divers Bridges, are seated several good Towns. This County boasteth it self for being the first Kingdom of the Heptarchy; of having a particular King to it self; that it was never subdued, but yielded upon Articles to the Normans, and to keep their ancient Customs; That their Kings and Commons, amongst all the Saxons, were the first Chri∣stians.
This County is enriched with two Cities and Episcopal Sees, is strengthned with several Castles, is graced with 4 of the Kings Palaces, beautified with many splendid Buildings; well replenished with Gentry, sufficiently stored with safe Roads and secure Harbours for Ships; plentifully garnished with good Towns, is a place of a considerable Trade, affording Corn and other Grains, Cloth and several Draperies, Fullers-Earth, Madder, Flax, Iron, Wood, Fruits, both Apples and Cherries, in great plenty; and by reason of its vicinity to France is well known and frequented by Strangers. As to its division, it hath 14 Bailywicks, 17 Franchises and Liberties, which have Courts of Record to hold pla of all Actions real, personal, and mixt, and 14 Corporations; For the names of all which see the Volume of Britannia, pag. 122. lately published by me. It is severed into 5 Laths and 64 Hundreds, in which said Hundreds are numbred 400 and odd Parishes, and hath intercourse of Traffick with 28 Market Towns. Lath of Sutton with its chief places.The Lath of Sutton, or SƲTTON at Hone, is severed into 8 Hundreds, hath two divisions of Justices of the Peace, and for its chief places hath, Sevenoke,Sevenoke. a Town of good resort, so called from its Founder Will. Seven∣oke, Lord Major of London, Anno 1418. who erected a Free School and an Hospital; hath a Market on Saturdays, which is well served with Corn and Previsions. Dartford,Dartford. seated on the Darent, not far from its influx into the Thames, and on the high Road from London to Canterbury; 'tis a good large Town, full of Inns and Houses of Entertainment, and hath a Market on Saturdays, which is well stored with Corn and Provisions, and is much frequented by Corn-Chandlers and Meal-men. Greenwich,Greenwich. a large, well built and very pleasant Town, seated on the Bank of the Thames, being much inhabited and frequented by Gentry, and enobled with a once stately Palace of the Kings, out of the Ruins of which is now erecting a curious Pile of Buildings; and adjoyning to this Palace is a small, but pleasant Park, which affords a delectable prospect. And here it was that Queen Elizabeth, with divers other Princes, were born. Adjoyning to Greenwich is Black-heath, a place of note in former times for Military Affairs; and it is supposed, that here might be dug excellent Sea∣Coals, but is not encouraged for fear of hindring the Newcastle-Trade. Eltham, seated on the South-side of Shooters-Hill amongst Woods;Eltham. a well built Town, neatly scituated, well inhabited by Gentry, and was once ho∣noured with a Palace of his Majesty, said to be built by Anthony Beck, Pa∣triarch of Jerusalem, who gave it to Queen Eliantor, wife to King Edward the First. Aylesford Lath described.The Lath of AYLESFORD is of a large extent, reaching from North to South, is serveed into 15 Hundreds, is divided into 3 divisions of the Justices of the Peace, and hath for its chief places Rochester, an ancient City, and once larger than now it is,Rochester. being at present but small, having but one principal Street, which is of a good length, and for the most part inhabited by Tradesmen and Inn-keepers, and graced with well built Houses; besides its Cathedral, built by Ethelbert King of Kent, dedicated to St. Andrew, a fair structure, to which belongeth a Deanary and 6 Prehendaries. It is a City no less pleasantly than commodiously seated on the banks of the Medway, over which it hath a stately Stone-bridge, sustained by divers Arches, which leadeth unto Stroud, a good, fair and well inhabited thorough-fare Town from London to Canterbury, (as is Rochester). This City enjoyeth several Immunities, is dignified with the Title of an Earldom; go∣verned by a Major, Court of Aldermen, with other sub-Officers, hath the election of Parliament men, is well resorted unto, and its Market on Friday is well served with Provisions.
Adjoyning to this City is Chetham, also seated on the banks of the Med∣way; a long thorough-fare Town, which is chiefly inhabited by Sea-men, and those that have alliance thereunto, and the more as being the station of the Navy-Royal, and where there is a stately Dock for the building and equipping of his Majesties Ships. Graves-end.Graves-end, seated on the banks of the Thames; a place of great resort, as being the common Landing-place for Strangers and Sea-men in their pas∣sages to London; as likewise the accustomary place for the taking of Shipping, and the ready Road to France, which doth occasion it to be well furnished with Inns, Taverns, and Houses of entertainment, and its Market on Wed∣nesdays and Saturdays to be well provided with Victuals; yet all things here want for no price. And here is seated one of the Block-houses, the other being opposite unto it in the County of Essex; which said Blockhouses are for the securing the passage of the Thames up to London. Maidstone,Maidstone.seated on the Medway, (over which it hath a fair Bridge) which, with the branch it sendeth forth, severeth the Town. It is a large, fair, sweet, populous, and well built and frequented Borough Town, which electeth Par∣liament men, enjoyeth several Priviledges, and as the Shire-Town here is one of the Prisons for the County, and where they keep their Sessions and Assizes. Its Market is on Thursdays, which is very considerable and well provided with Corn and all sorts of Provisions. Tunbridge,Tunbridge. seated on a branch of the Medway, over which it hath a Bridge, and is said to take its name from its many Bridges. It is a well frequented Market Town, which is on Fridays for Corn and Provisions, and is of chief note for its healthful and Medicinal Waters near adjoyning, which are much visited by the Gentry in the Summer season. Lath of Scray described.The Lath of Scray taketh up the mid-part of the County, is divided into 16 Hundreds, hath two divisions of Justices of the Peace, and hath for its chief places, Feversham,Feversham. not far from the Isle of Shippey, so made by the Medway, which with the Sea encircleth it; out of which said River there cometh a Creek up to the Town, by reason of which it is well frequented by Hoyes and such like small Vessels, which here drive a good Trade, it being the principal Port-Town for all this part of Kent. The Town is large, well built, and inhabited by Tradesmen, Inn-keepers and Victualers; and its Markets on Wednesdays and Saturdays are well served with Provisions. Near this Town are very deep Pits, which are narrow at the mouth and broad below, with Chalk Pillars as it were to support them, and have parti∣tions or rooms within them. Queenborough,Queenborough. seated in the Isle of Shippey (which is about 21 miles in circuit, and of an exceeding fertil Soil, feeding great flocks of Sheep, from whence 'tis said to take its name;) a Borough Town of great antiquity, but is very small and mean. For the defence of the passage up the River of Thames here was a very strong Castle, now reduced to ruin; but of late his present Majesty hath caused a powerful Fort to be raised at Shyreness, the better to secure the passage up the Medway to Gellingham and Chetham, where the Navy Royal rideth. In the Isle of Shippey there are no Moles, and if any be carried thither, they are said to die. Ashford,Ashford. not far from the Stower, hath a well frequented Market on Satur∣days; and in this Town is kept a Court of Record upon every Tuesday three weeks for Actions, wherein the debt or damages do not exceed 20 Marks. Lath of Shep∣way.The Lath of SHEPWAY is severed into 13 Hundreds, hath one division of Justices of the Peace, and for its chief places hath, Hyth,Hyth. once a place of good note and largeness, as being one of the Cinque-Ports, but now not much frequented, by reason of the Seas forsaking it, and its Haven being choaked up; yet doth it still retain its priviledges as other Cinque-port Towns, and hath a Market on Saturdays, which is indifferently well furnished with Provisions; and here are yet two Hospitals, which are both under the government of the Major and Jurats of the Town.
Rumney, another of the Cinque-Port Towns, seated in a Marsh so called,Rumney. of about 14 miles in length and 8 in breadth; now more famous for the fertility of the Marsh in grasing of Cattle than for the goodness of the place, by rea∣son of the Seas leaving it; and for its unwholsom Air, the Town being not large nor the Buildings good, yet is it the chiefest Market Town in the Marsh, which every Thursday is indifferently well served with Provisions; yet doth it still enjoy the priviledges of other Cinque-port Towns. Lath of St. Augustine.The Lath of St. AƲGƲSTINE is washed on the North and East with the Sen; it is severed into 12 Hundreds, hath one division of Justices of the Peace, and for its chief places hath, Canterbury, a City of great antiquity,Canterbury. being said to be built 900 years be∣fore the birth of Christ, and in former time was held in great fame and much resorted unto, and the more for being the Burial-place of St. Thomas Becket there slain, a person so greatly reverenced by the Romanists. This City is encompassed with a Mote and Wall, on which are (or were) several Cittadels or Watch-Towers, without which are its Suburbs, in which and within the City are numbred 14 Parish Churches besides its Cathedral, a large and su∣perb structure, not inferiour to St. Pauls at London, when in its pristine gran∣dure and splendour, having two lofty Towers, which much add to the prospect of the City, and within its bounds or limits are several fair Edifices belonging to the Dean and Prebends, as also a Free School called the Kings School. It is a City graced with divers good Buildings and a fair Market-house, over which are Rooms made use of by the Major and Aldermen for the publick concerns of the City. It is dignified with an Episcopal See, who is Primate of all England; is governed by a Major and Court of Aldermen, and hath a Recorder and other sub-Officers. It enjoyeth several Immunities, electeth Parliament men, is well inhabited and traded unto for its Stuffs made by Walloons there inhabiting, and is well provided with Provisions; for besides its Shambles it hath weekly two Markets on Wednesdays and Saturdays, which it the most considerable. Dover, commodiously seated on the Sea-shoar,Dover. which together with its strength, as well by Nature as Art (being loftily scituated between high Cliffs, commanding both Sea and Country adjacent, and defended by a strong Castle and other Fortifications;) as also the commodiousness of its Haven, for being one of the Cinque-port Towns; and for its short and ready passage into France (being about 21 miles) makes it a place of considerable note. It also enjoy∣eth a good Trade, and its Markets on Wednesdays and Saturdays are well frequented and furnished with Provisions. It is a Town Corporate, governed by a Major and other Officers, enjoyeth ample Immunities, and was of a larger extent than now it is, having formerly 7 Parish Churches, which are reduced to 2. Its Castle (built by Julius Coesar) is esteemed a place of great importance to the Nation, and is strongly guarded. At the west part of the Peer is a Fort called Archliff-Fort; and in the Cliff under the Castle is a Fort called Motes Bulwark: and at the other side of the Castle-hill is a Tower or Light-house, made use of for direction of Ships, called Breden-stone, and by some, the Devils drop of Mortar. Along the Shoar, going towards Sandwich, are St. Margarets-bay, Kings∣down, Walmer Castle, Deal Castle, and Sandown Castle. Sandwich, another of the Cinque-port Towns, being incorporated,Sandwich. and amongst its Immunities electeth Burgesses. It is a place of good strength both by Nature and Art, but by reason of the ill-commodiousness of the Har∣bour is not well frequented; yet hath it weekly 2 Markets on Wednesdays and Saturdays. Isle of Thanet.The Isle of THANET doth here present it self, which is about 9 miles long, and about the same breadth where broadest. It is very populous and plentifully stored with Provisions, especially Corn, and hath in it several Towns, whose names appear in the Map.
County of Lancaster de∣scribed.The County Palatine of LANCASTER, for the generality of an un∣fertil Soil as to the Moorish part; yet not without a sufficiency of Corn, Cattle, Fish, Fowl, Coals, Flax, &c. The Eastern part is very Mountainous, and full of stony, barren and craggy Hills, being the habitation of Foxes, Conies, and some Otters; but where the ground is plain and Champain it is very grateful to the Husbandman, except some moist and unwholsom places, which they call Mosses, which are not unlike Irish-bogs, from which the Inhabitants are sup∣plied with Turf for Fuel; and throughout the County there is great store of goodly Cattle, which are there sold at easie races. The Air of this County is sharp and serene, but very healthful to the Inha∣bitants. It is very well watered with Rivers, amongst which are the Mersey, Irwel, Roch, Irke, Dugless, Tarrow, Ribel, Derwent, Codar, Lune, Brochwyre, Keere, Kent, Dudden, &c. with the Sea, which watereth its Western parts, to∣gether with the Meers; it aboundeth in Fish and Fowl. The ancient Inhabitants were the Brigantes; and when the Saxons be∣came Masters of the Isle, it was part of the Kingdom of the Northumbers. Although there are but 61 Parishes in the County, yet it is very populous, the Parishes being large, containing within them several Chappels of Ease, which may be reckoned as Parishes in other Counties. And amongst these Parishes there are 27 Market Towns, many of which are large, well frequented and traded unto. Lancaster,Lancaster. a place of good antiquity, pleasantly seated on the River Lune, over which it hath a fair Stone-bridge sustained by 5 Arches. It is at present indifferent large, containing (though but one Parish Church, which is large and fair,) yet several well ordered Streets, and graced with good Buildings; the chief amongst which are its Church, Bridge, Market-house or Town-hall, where the Major and his Brethren keep their Courts, and Castle, seated on the top of the Hill, now made use of as a Prison for the County, and where the Assizes are kept: And although the Shire Town, yet it is not much frequented nor inhabited by Tradesmen, but chiefly by Husbandmen, as lying in a good Soil; but its Market, which is on Saturdays, is well served with Corn, Cattle, and Provisions, especially Fish, and chiefly with Salmon. It is a Town Cor∣porate, governed by a Major, 2 Bailiffs, 6 Brethren, 24 Burgesses, 2 Cham∣berlains, a Recorder, &c. and amongst its Immunities electeth Parliament men. Manchester,Manchester. seated betwixt the Irke and Irwel, and upon a stony Hill; a Town of great antiquity, being the Fort and station of the Romans, and at present is large, beautified with fair Buildings, (the chief amongst which are its Colledge, Market-place, and Collegiate-Church, which is very ornamental) is well inhabited, much resorted unto, and enjoyeth a considerable trade for most Commodities, but chiefly for its Linnen and Woollen-Cloths; also for its Cottons, known by the name of Manchester Cottons, which are held in great esteem; and its Market on Saturdays is very considerable for the above-said Commodities, as also for Provisions. Opposite to Manchester, on the other side of the River, is Salford, a pretty large Town, with a Chappel of Ease. Warington,Warington. seated on the Mersey, over which it hath a curious Stone-bridge, which leadeth to Cheshire. It is a fine large Town, much resorted unto by Welshmen; is of note for its Lampries, and hath a considerable Market for Linnen-Cloth, Corn, Cattle, Fish and Provisions, on Wednesdays. Lerpool,Lerpool. or Leverpool, commodiously seated on the East-side of the goodly River Mercy, where it affords a bold and safe harbour for Ships, which hath much advanced its Trade, being inhabited by divers wealthy Merchants and Tradesmen, whose Traffick (especially into the West Indies) makes it famous; its scituation affording in greater plenty and at reasonabler rates than most parts of England, such exported Commodities proper for the West Indies, as likewise a quicker return for such imported Commodities, by reason of the Sugar-Bakers and great Manufactures of Cotton in the adjacent parts; this
Town having intercourse of Traffick with Ireland, and divers considerable Counties in England. The chief Commodities that this Town affordeth, are Corn, Butter, Cheese, Beef, Pit-Coal, White Salt from Cheshire, Silver and Gold Watches, Lead, Saddles, Shoes, Bees-Wax, all sorts of Nails and Iron Tools; and for Flesh, Fish, Fowl, and all sorts of Provisions, its Market on Saturdays, is sufficiently well provided with. It is an ancient Borough and Corporation, sending two Representatives to Parliament; 'tis governed by a Major, Bailiffs, Aldermen, Recorder, Town-Clerk, and Common-Council, consisting of 40 Burgesses. It is of late, at the great charge and industry of the Family of the Moors of Bank-ball, beautified with many goodly Build∣ings, to the great enlargement of the Town, there being Streets that entirely beat their name. Wigan, seated on the Douglass; a large and well built Town Corporate,Wigan. is governed by a Major, Bailiffs, and Burgesses, hath the election of Parlia∣ment men, enjoyeth a good Trade, hath two Markets weekly on Mondays and Fridays for Meal and Provisions, is much inhabited by Brasiers, Pew∣terers, Dyers, Weavers of Rugs, Coverlids, and Ticking, for Bedding, and is of note for its Fuel called Cannel, being the choicest Coal in England. Preston, a large, fair, well built and inhabited,Preston. and frequented Borough Town, where the Court of Chancery and Offices of Justice for the County are held: It hath the election of Parliament men, and is governed by a Major, Baileffs, Burgesses, Recorder, and other sub-Officers. It is seated on the Rible, over which it hath a fair Stone-bridge, and for the accommodation of its Inha∣bitants hath weekly 3 Markets, viz. on Wednesdays, Fridays, and Saturdays, which is the chief, and very considerable for Corn, living Cattle, Provisions, and several other Commodities in great plenty. Cartmel, seated near the Sea, and amongst the Hills called Cartmel-Fells.Cartmel. It is beautified with a very fair Church built Cathedral-wise in form of a Cross, and hath a very good Market on Mondays for Corn, Sheep and Fish. Dalton, seated in a Champain Country in the lower Farness.Dalton. Here is an ancient Castle, now belonging to his Grace Christopher Duke of Albemarle, wherein is kept the Records and Prisoners for Debt for the Liberty of Farness. It hath a Market on Saturdays, which is very well served with Corn, Cattle, Fish and Fowl. County of Leicester de∣scribed.LEICESTERSHIRE, a Champain Country, and but thinly clothed with Wood, which defect is supplied by the great plenty of Pit-Coal, digged up in the Northern parts, which is called the Would, and although barren breedeth store of Cattle. Its South-west and North-east parts are of a good Soil for Tillage and Pasturage; and its South-east part is exceeding fertil, ha∣ving rich Pastures, and produceth all sorts of Grain, especially Pease and Beans. It is well watered with Rivers, as the Stour or Sour, Trent, Wreke, Weeland, Sence, Eye, &c. It is severed into 6 Hundreds; for Divine worship hath about 200 Parish Churches, and is traded unto by 12 Market Towns. Leicester, delightfully seated in a healthful Air, rich Soil,Leicester. and on the Banks of the Stour, over which it hath two Bridges. It is a place of more antiquity than beauty, being said to be built by King Leir, and called Caer-Lerion, wherein Authors say he placed a High-Priest to serve in the Temple of Janus, which he caused to be built, and wherein he was buried. This Town was also had in great request in the time of the Romans; also Ethelred, King of the Mercians, erected here an Episcopal See, which he soon translated elsewhere to its great impoverishment; but the noble Lady Edelfled not only repaired it, but also encompassed it with a strong Wall, and much added to its Riches, so that it soon became a place of a great Trade; which glory and riches it lost by the Spoils it sustained by Rob. Bossu, the Crouch-back Earl of this Shire. As to its present state, it is a Borough and Town Corporate, governed by a Major, Aldermen, and sub-Officers, is dignified with the title of an Earldom,
is well inhabited, hath indifferent good Buildings, sendeth two Representatives to Parliament; containeth 3 Parish Churches, and its Market on Saturdays is well served with Corn, Provisions, and Country commodities. From this Town Crouch-back Richard set forth with great strength and pomp to Redmore, near Bosworth, where, on the 22 of August 1485, in a bloody Battle there fought (for the deciding the differences betwixt the Houses of York and Lancaster) he was slain, yielding both himself and the victory to Henry of Richmond, who was proclaimed King in the field; and the next day the body of the said Richard was disgracefully brought back torn, and naked, and as meanly buried in the Gray-Friars of Leicester in a Stone-chest, which now is made use of in an Inn for a Drinking-trough for Horses. Loughborough,Loughborough. delightfully seated on the banks of the Sour, over which it hath a Bridge, amongst fertil Meadows and near Charwood Forrest: It is a handsom Town, beautified with fair Buildings and a large Church, and hath a very considerable Market for Corn, Cattle, Sheep, and Provisions, on Thurs∣days. Melton-Mowbray,Melton-Mowbray. well seated in a fertil Soil and on the banks of the Eye, which almost encircleth it, over which are two fair Stone-bridges. It is an indifferent large and well built Town, and hath a very considerable Market on Tuesdays for Corn, Cattle, Hogs, Sheep, Provisions, &c. Lutterworth,Lutterworth. seated on the Swift, and in a good Soil; an indifferent Coun∣try Town, beautified with a large and fair Church, which hath a lofty spired Steeple; and its Market on Thursdays is well served with Corn and Country commodities. Near this Town is a Spring so cold, that in a short time it turns Straws and small Sticks into Stone. LINCOLNSHIRE,County of Lincoln de∣scribed. a County of a large extent, and doth divide its form, bounds and division into Hundreds. The Soil is of a different temperature, the Western and Northern parts being very pleasant and grateful to the Husbandman both for Corn and rich Pastures, which feed great store of Cattle; and the Eastern and Southern parts are fenny, barren, and unfit for Corn; but in recompence hath great plenty of Fish and Fowl. The Air upon the South and East parts is thick and foggy, occasioned through the Fenny grounds; but the other parts good and healthful. It is well watered with Rivers, as the Humber, Trent, Idell, Dane, Wash, Witham, Welland, &c. which lose themselves in the Sea. The chief Commodities that this County produceth, are Corn, Cattle, Fish, Fowl, Flax, Wool, Alablaster, &c. This County is severed into 3 principal Divisions or Parts, viz Lindsey, Holland, and Kesteven, which are divided into 30 Hundreds, in which are numbred 631 Parish Churches, and is traded unto by 31 Market Towns. Lincoln,Lincoln. a City of great antiquity, and hath been far more magnificent and spacious than now it is, whose ruinous places doth witness the same, be∣ing said to have had 50 Churches, which now are reduced to 15, besides its Cathedral or Minster, said to be one of the finest, loftiest, and stateliest stru∣ctures in England. This City in the time of the Britains was of great strength and fame, containing 1070 Mansions, and 900 Burgesses, with 12 Lage-men, having Sac and Soc; and in the time of the Normans it was e∣steemed one of the best peopled Cities in the Isle, and enjoyed a great Trade both by Sea and Land, insomuch that King Edward the Third ordained here his Staple for the Mart of Wools, Leather, and Lead. But its pristine glory has been much eclipsed by the several shocks of ill Fortune it hath met with; ne∣vertheless it is a place well inhabited and frequented, enjoyeth a good Trade, and its Markets on Fridays is well served with Provisions, and its Shops fur∣nished with Commodities. It is pleasantly seated on the side of a Hill, and on the River Witham, which divideth it self into several streams and waters in the lower part of the City, over which are divers Bridges for the accommoda∣tion of the Inhabitants in their passage to and sro. It is dignified with an
Episcopai See, where the Bishop hath his Palace, and whose Diocess is the greatest of any in England, numbring within its Jurisdiction 1255 Parishes, of which 577 are Impropriations. The civil Government of this City is committed to the care of a Major, 2 Sheriffs, 12 Aldermen, who are clothed in Scarlet, besides a Recorder, Town Clerk, 4 Chamberlains, a Sword-bearer, 4 Serjeants at Mace, &c. It enjoyeth ample Immunities, sendeth two Repre∣sentatives to Parliament, and is a County within it self, whose Liberties ex∣tends about 20 miles in compass, and is called the County and City of Lincoln. The Isle of Axholme, made so by the Rivers Trent, Dun, Idel,Isle of Ax∣holms. and others. It is a large tract of ground, in which are seated several Towns: the flat and lower part of the Isle towards the Rivers is Moorish, and yieldeth a sweet Shrub, called by the Inhabitants Gall. In this part have been great and tall Fir-trees digged up. And the middle part (which is a rising ground) is fertil, and produceth great store of Flax. Barton, seated on the Humber,Barton. where there is a considerable Ferry into Yorkshire, which doth much advantage the Town, which is large and stragling, yet hath but an indifferent Market on Saturdays. Grimsby Magna, seated near the Humber, or rather the Sea,Grimsby Magna. and in a flat and Marshy rich ground. This Town was formerly very large, having two Parish Churches, enjoyed a good Trade; but its Harbour (which was then commodious) being choaked up, hath much eclipsed its trade and grandure, having now but one Church, which for largeness giveth place to few Cathe∣drals. Here was formerly a Castle, an Abby, a Nunnery, 2 Priories, and 2 Chantries, which time hath reduced to ruins, and in their places are erected Houses. It is a Town Corporate, enjoyeth several Immunities, hath the benefit of a Port Town, and keepeth Courts for trial of Causes. and Felons, sendeth Burgesses to Parliament, is governed by a Major, 12 Aldermen, a Recorder, 2 Justices of the Peace, 2 Town Clerks, 2 Chamberlains, and other sub-Officers, and hath a good Market for Provisions on Wednesdays. Thong-Caster, or Caster, a well compacted Town,Thong-Caster. which hath a very consi∣derable Market on Saturdays, chiefly for Swine, Sheep and Cattle. This Town is of note for its ancient Castle so called, said to be built by Hengist the Saxon, who had a grant from Vortiger for so much ground as an Ox-hide would compass, which he cut into small Thongs, so that it encompassed a tract of ground, on which he built the Castle, and there seated and defended himself. Lowth, a large, well built and inhabited Town Corporate,Lowth. governed by a Warden and 7 Assistants, and hath weekly two Markets, on Saturdays and and Wednesdays, which is the chief, and is very considerable for Cattle, Horses, Swine, Corn, and all sorts of Provisions. Stamford,Stamford. seated on the Weland, which being now made navigable is no small advantage to the Town and Country adjacent, its Inhabitants driving a considerable Trade, especially for Mault and Free-stone. It is a Town of good antiquity, from whence the Roman High-street leaded to the North, and in the Reign of King Edward the Third here was a Colledge for the Professors of the Arts and Sciences, who thence removed to Brazen-Nose Colledge in Oxford. It is a large, well inhabited and frequented Town containing several Streets, hath 6 Parish Churches, is beautified with fair Buildings, is begirt with a Wall, and hath weekly 2 Markets, on Mondays, which is but small; and on Fridays, which is well furnished with Corn, Cattle, and all sorts of Provision in great plenty. Grantham,Grantham. seated on the Witham; a Borough Town, of good account and well inhabited; is governed by an Alderman and 12 Justices of the Peace, and hath the election of Parliament men. The Town is beautified with a fair Church, which hath an exceeding lofty Spire-Steeple; and its Market on Saturdays is very considerable, and well served with Corn, Mault, Sheep, and all sorts of Provisions.
Boston,Boston. a fair, large Borough and Town-Corporate, of good antiquity, en∣joyeth several Immunities, electeth Parliament men, and is governed by a Major, 12 Aldermen, Burgesses, a Recorder, &c. It is commodiously seated on both sides the Witham, over which it hath a fair Woodden-bridge, and be∣ing near its influx into the Sea, is a place of considerable account, is well fre∣quented and inhabited, enjoyeth a good Trade, and its Markets on Wednes∣days and Saturdays are very great, especially for Provisions both Flesh, Fish, and Fowl. Its Market-place is fair and spacious, as also its Church, whose Lanthorn or Tower serves as a Landmark to Sailers. Kirton,Kirton. seated on a Sandy-ground, and so called from its Church; a fair structure built of Free-stone Cathedral-wise in form of a Cross with a broad Steeple in the middle. This whole Township is very large being divided into 4 Hamlets or Vintins, viz. Kirton-Willington, Kirton-Meers, Kirton-Skel∣dike, and Kirton-Holme; and had formerly a Market, which is now dis∣used. Crowland,Crowland. or Croyland, a Town of good account amongst the Fenny-people; but much greater in times past for its famous Abby, founded by Aethelbald King of the Mercians in Anno 716. It is seated very low and dirty, and so shut up that there is no access to it but by the North and East-sides, and that by narrow Cawswaies not admitting of Carts, insomuch that the Inhabitants have a Proverb, That all the Carts that come to Crowland are shod with Silver. And the scituation is much like to Venice in Italy, the Streets being severed from each other by Dikes or Water-courses, on the banks of which are set Willow-trees. The chief Riches here gained is by Fish and Fowl, which are taken in great plenty; and here is a small Market. Spalding,Spalding. a pretty fair Town, seated very waterish and by a navigable Ri∣ver, which doth occasion it to have a very good Trade, having several Vessels and Barges belonging to them; and here is every Tuesday a very good Market for Corn, Cattle, and Provision. Dunington,Dunington. seated in a flat, like Spalding; an indifferent Town, but hath a very considerable Market on Saturdays for Provisions, and Hemp in great a∣bundance. MIDDLESEX,County of Middlesex, de∣scribed. a County of a small extent, but every where gar∣nished with Towns and fair buildings, which are the habitations of the No∣bility, Gentry, and Citizens of London. It is blest with a sweet and wholsom Air, and for fertility of Soil both for Tillage and Pasturage, may compare with any shire in England, especially for its bigness. It is severed into 6 Hundreds, in which are seated 73 Parish Churches, (be∣sides those of London, and its several Chapels of Ease) and is traded unto by 4 Market Towns, besides the Markets in London. As to the description of the Towns in this County, I shall treat of those of most note, and conclude with London, the Metropolis of the whole Kingdom, and first with Ʋxbridge. Ʋxbridge,uxbridge. seated on the high Road from London to Oxford; a large, well inhabited and frequented Town, well accommodated with Inns, is governed by two Bailiffs, 2 Constables, and 4 Headboroughs, and hath a Market on Thursdays, which is well served with Corn and Provisions. Hampton,Hampton. seated on the banks of the Thames, of chief note for its Palace of the King called Hampton-Court (delightfully seated by two Parks) first built by Cardinal Woolsey, and afterwards much enlarged by King Henry the Eighth, containing now within it several large Inner-Courts, which are in∣closed with fair Buildings, in one of which is a stately Fountain. Istleworth,Istleworth. or Thistleworth, a fair large and pleasant Town, seated on the banks of the Thames, well inhabited by Gentry and the Citizens of London; as are Twittenham, Teddington, Chiswick, Hamersmith, Fulham, and Chelsey, Towns all seated on the banks of the Thames.
Nigh unto Thistleworth is Sion-house, a large Structure,Sion-House. now belonging to the Countess of Northumberland, but in times past was a Monastery, erected by King Henry the Fifth to the honour of our Saviour, the Virgin Mary, and Bridget of Sion, for Religious Virgins, where he appointed so many Nuns; Priests, and Lay-Brethren, as in number did equal our Saviour his Apostles and Disciples; and on the other side of the Thames opposite unto it he erected another for Carthusian Monks, named Jesus of Bethlehem. Brentford.Brentford, containing the Old and the New, both seated on the Western Road, which doth occasion it to be so well accommodated with Inns. In New Brentford is kept the Market, which every Tuesday is very well served with Corn and Provisions, which are much bought up by the Londoners. Kensington.Kensington, a thorough-fare Town, well inhabited by Gentry and Persons of Honour; as are Hampsted, Highgate, Hornsey, Tottenham-Highcross, Muswel-Hill, Edmonton, &c. Towns near adjacent to London. London.London, the epitomy and glory of the Kingdom, was the Seat of the British Empire, as now the Royal-Chamber of our Kings; a City of great antiquity, said to be built by Brute the Trojan; but all agree it was re-edified by King Lud in Anno Mundi 5131, who called it Luddestown. It is seated in a healthful Air, and no less pleasantly than commodiously on the banks of the Thames, which severeth it into two (but unequal) parts, which are joyned to∣gether by a stately Stone-bridge, so covered with Houses that it seemeth rather a Street than a Bridge. This City is begirt with a Wall, first built by Constantine the Great, at the suit of his Mother Helena, and hath for entrance 7 principal Gates; but now as contemning bondage it hath enlarged it self on all sides with spacious Sub∣urbs, insomuch that she hath joyned her self to the City of Westminster, which name is now swallowed up, all passing under the general name of Lon∣don. The City of Westminster, according to Mr. Norden in his description of Middlesex, was in time past called Thorney, or Dorney, and was an Isle en∣compassed with the Thames; which divided it self, and one branch passed be∣tween Chairin-Cross and Kingstreet through St. James's, including Tut-hill; which said Isle was so called, as being overgrown with Briars and Thorns; but in the time of King Lucius it is said to be cleansed, and the foundation of the great Temple of St. Peters was laid, which was raised out of the ruins of a former, delicated to Apollo, where the Trinobantes, or Troinovantes, did sacrifice Bulls, Bullocks, Stags, and such like Beasts, to Diana Tauropolia, whom the Gentiles called the Queen of Heaven. This City or part of London is the noblest (though not the longest) being taken up by the King, the Nobility, Gentry, and such as have their depen∣dancy on the Court or Law, being sufficiently graced with fair and beautiful Edifices; as 1. The Palaces of his Majesty Whitehall and St. James's, to which is joyned a small, but delightful Park, wherein is a Pall-Mall, said to be the best in Christendom, 2. The Courts of Judicature and Houses of Parlia∣ment, now all known by the general name of Westminster-hall, and was an∣ciently the Palace of the Kings of England. 3. Its Collegiate-Church of Westminster, which was formerly the Temple of St. Peter, and now renown∣ed for its Chapel built by King Henry the Seventh, being beautified with the Tombs of the Kings and Queens, and many of the Nobility of England; nor is it less famous for the Inauguration of our Kings and Queens. 4. The Palace of her Majesty, Somerset-house; and, 5. The Houses of the Nobility. And thus much for the City of Westminster. The Eastern part, or Suburbs of London beyond the Tower, is taken up by those that have relation to the Sea; and the whole City thus taken is now of a great extent, being in length from Black-wall in the East to Tuttle-fields in the West, about six miles; in breadth 1, 2, and in some places 3 miles, and is said to make in circuit about 14 or 15 miles, in which extent are numbred about 500 Streets and Lanes, and contains (according to computation) about 75000 Houses; and by the great number of Houses the Inhabitants may be
guest at, which without doubt are very numerous; and if we consider its great Trade and Commerce with other Nations, its Riches, Jurisdiction, bounds, and populousness; its good Government, the ingenuity of its Inha∣bitants in Letters, Arts, and Manufactures, &c. it may deservedly be num∣bred with any City of the highest rank in the World. The Buildings of note belonging to this City, are its Inns of Court and Chancery. Guildhall, a stately Structure, where the Courts of Judicature are held, and where the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council meet, for the negotiating the Affairs of the City, The Royal Exchange, built qua∣drangular, now said to be the best in the known World. The Tower, a place or large extent, well furnished with a Magazin or Arsenal of warlike Muni∣tion both for Sea and Land-service, and doth contain (according to observa∣tion) a Kings Palace, a Prison, an Armory, a Mint, a Wardrobe, and an Artillery, each having their peculiar Officers; and for Buildings resembleth a Town, having a Parochial Church, exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop. Gresham Colledge, given to the City by Sir Tho. Gresham, with the allowance of liberal Salaries to professors of several Arts and Sciences, to read Lectures for the advancement of Learning amongst the Citizens. The Colledge of Heralds, called the Heralds Office, where the Records for the Arms, Descents, and Pedigrees of the Nobility and Gentry are kept. Doctors Commons, which is taken up by the Civilians. The Colledge of Physitians. The Halls of the several Incorporated Companies. The Houses of Correction, amongst which that of most note is Bridewell, a large Building. The Hospi∣tals, viz. St. Bartholomews, Christ-Church, and the Charter-house (or Suttons Hospital) being the noblest Hospital in the Kingdom, in which are well main∣tained 80 Old men, and 40 Boys. The Sessions House, for the trial of Ma∣lefactors; and lastly, its Churches and Free Schools. This City within the Walls and Freedom is divided into 26 Wards, and the Government thereof committed to the care of so many Aldermen, each ha∣ving the overseeing of his several Ward; and besides these Aldermen there are 2 Shoriffs, which are yearly chosen, as also a Lord Major, who is the principal Magistrate. To the making a compleat City there are several principal parts or helps required for the supportation thereof, and without which it cannot well stand; to wit, Husbandry and Artificers, for the providing Food and Rayment for its Inhabitants; Arms and Ammunition, for its defence; the Priesthood, for Di∣vine worship; Judges, Councellors, &c. for the administration of Justice; and Traffick, for the bringing in of Riches: In all which this City in a liberal measure is blest with. County of Monmouth.MONMOƲTHSHIRE. This County (formerly part of Wales) is blest with a healthful Air, and although very hilly and woody, yet is exceed∣ing fertil, (especially the Eastern parts, which are not so hilly as the Western) the Hills feeding abundance of Cattle and Sheep, and the Valleys bearing great crops of Corn and Grass; and the rather for its being watered with so many fresh Streams; the chief of which are the Ʋske, Wye, Munow, Ebunith, Scoway, and the Rumney, which fall into the Severn Sea. It is divided into Hundreds, in which Tract are seated 127 Parish Churches, and is traded unto by 7 Market Towns. Monmouth,Monmouth. no less pleasantly than commodiously seated on the banks of the Wye and Munow, which doth almost encircle it, over each of which is a Bridge. In the midst of the Town, near the Market-place, standeth a (once stately, but now ruinous) Castle. It is a fair, large, well built, and inhabited and frequented Town, enjoying large Immunities, and sendeth a Burgess to Parliament. It is governed by a Major, 2 Bailiffs, 15 Common Councellors, a Town Clerk, and other sub-Officers; and hath a considerable Market for Corn and Provisions on Saturdays. Chepstow,Chepstow. seated on the side of a Hill which is washed with the Wye, near its fall into the Severn; a Town formerly very famous, and of great resort,
being said to be raised out of the ruins of Venta Silurum, the chief City of the Silures. It is a large, well built, inhabited and frequented Town, and hath a Market on Saturdays, which is very good for Corn and Provisions, and very considerable for Swine. Carlion, or Caerleon, an ancient and flourishing City of the Romans,Carlion. which is evidenced by the ruins of its stately Buildings; as Palaces, Temples, and Theaters, enclosed within fair Walls, the Water-pipes, Vaults, Hot-houses, and Roman Coins oft digged up. And here the Noble Arthur kept his Court; and here was a famous Colledge for 200 Students in Astronomy, and other the liberal Arts and Sciences. This Town (which is indifferent large) is com∣modiously seated on the banks of the Ʋske, over which it hath a large wooden Bridge; yet its Houses for the generality are built of Stone, and its Market (which is but indifferent) is on Thursdays. Ʋske, seated on a River so called; a large Town,uske. beautified with well built Stone-houses, and hath a very good Market on Mondays and Fridays. Abergavenny, seated at the meeting of the Ʋske and the Keveny,Abergavenny. once a place of great strength: It is a large Town, hath well-built Houses, enjoyeth a good Trade for Flanels and Straw-Hats, here made in great plenty; and its Market, which is on Tuesdays, is very considerable for Cattle, Provisions, &c. County of Norfolk.The County of NORFOLK is of a different Soil, but may be comprised under two heads, to wit, Champain and Wood-land; yet notwithstanding about the Towns it is of a Claiey, Chalkey, and fat Earth, and not without Wood. That which is comprised under the head of Champain is along the Sea-Coasts, and from Thetford to Burnham, and so Westwards, and affords great plenty of Corn; and on the Heaths great flocks of Sheep are fed. The Wood-land part is chiefly for grasing; yet not without Corn ground. The ancient Inhabitants known to the Romans were the Iceni, and after∣wards became part of the Kingdom of the Angles. The Commodities that this Country plentifully affordeth, are Worsteds, Stockings. Norwich Stuffs, and Herrings. The chief Rivers that water this County are the Owse, Waveny, Yare, and the Thryne. It is generally well inhabited with Gentry, is very populous and full of Towns and Villages, numbring 660 Parish Churches, which are the most of any County in England; and is traded unto by 27 Market Towns. Norwich, a City of great antiquity,Norwich. and formerly of as great splendor when the Seat of the East Angles; since which it hath undergone several calamities by Fire, Sword, and Pestilence; and notwithstanding all its shocks of Ill fortune, it is at present a fair, large, and populous City, and enjoyeth a great Trade, especially for their Stockings, Stuffs, and Manufactures here made. It is commodiously seated on the banks of the Yare, which severeth it; but is joyned together by several Briges, and in a pleasant Valley. It is about a mile and half in length, and almost of the like breadth, and is encom∣passed with a Wall (except on the side seated on the River,) and hath 12 Gates for entrance, and for Divine worship 32 Parish Churches, bisides Chapels. Its chief buildings are the Cathedral, the Bishops Palace, the Palace of the Duke of Norfolk, the Market-house, the Cross, and the House of Correction, made of Free-stone. Here is an Hospital where 100 poor Men and Women are maintained. This City may not improperly be called an Orchard in a City, or a City in an Orchard, by reason of the pleasant intermixture of the Houses with Trees. It was first governed by 4 Bailiffs; but in the Reign of Henry the Fourth it was incorporated into a Majoralty, and made a County, whose limits extend to Eaton-Bridge. It enjoys several Immunities, sends Burgesses to Parliament, and is the See of a Bishop. Its Markets on Wednesdays, Fridays, and Saturdays, are very great, and well stored with Corn, living Cattle, Leathen, Yarn, Worsteds, and all sorts of Pro∣visions.
Lynn,Lynn. or Lynn Regis, seated almost at the influx of the Owse into the Washes; a fair, large, and well-built Borough Town, numbring 3 Parish Churches, of good antiquity, enjoying ample Immunities, which were granted them for their good service against the outlawed Barons in the Isle of Ely. It is governed by a Major, 12 Aldermon, hath a Recorder, Sword-Bearer, and other sub-Officers, sendeth its Representatives to Parliament; for its defence, is encompassed about with a Wall and a deep Trench; is well watered, having 2 Rivulets which run through the Streets, which are passed over by 15 Bridges. It is well inhabited by Merchants and Tradesmen, having a commodious Haven; and its Markets on Tuesdays and Saturdays are well served with Commodities and Provisions. Yarmouth,Yarmouth. seated on the Yare, at its influx into the Sea. It is a place of great strength, as well by Nature as Art, being esteemed the Key of this Goast. The Town is large, yet hath but one Church, but that is so large that it serveth for two Ministers. Its Buildings are good; it is a place of a great resort, is well inhabited and traded unto, and the more as being the ready passage to Holland for the Packet-Boat, and other Vessels. About this Coast, great abundance of Herrings are caught in September, and as great quantities of Mackerels in the Summer season. It is a Town Corporate, having for its chief Magistrates 2 Bailiffs; it enjoyeth several Immunities, and sends Bur∣gesses to Parliament. Its Market is on Saturdays, which is very great for Corn, Fish, and Provisions. Windham,Windham. seated in a dirty bottom, hath an indifferent good Market for Corn and Provisions on Fridays; but chiefly for Stockings, Wooden-Spoons, Yapps, and Spindles, which are here made and sold by the Inhabitants in great abundance. Swasham,Swasham. seated on a Hill; a large and well built Town, full of Inns, end well inhabited by Shopkeepers, who drive a good trade. Its Market, which is on Saturdays, is very well served with Corn and Provisions, being esteemed one of the best Market Towns in the County. North Walsham,North Walsham. seated in a level, not far from the Sea; a fine Market Town, which on Thursdays is well provided with Corn, Flesh, and other Commo∣dities. County of Northampton described.NORTHAMPTON, an Inland County, of a fat and rich Soil both for Tillage and Pasturage, every way recompencing the Husbandmans pains and industry, both for its excellent Grain, and for feeding and breeding of store of Sheep, Horses, and Cattle, insomuch that here is observed to be less wast ground than in any County in the Kingdom. It is blest with a healthful Air; it is very populous and full of Gentry, in∣somuch that in many places 20 or 30 Sleeples present themselves to view at one time. It is well watered with Rivers and fresh Streams; as the Welland, the Ne or Aufona, the Owse, Charwel, &c. This County is severed into 20 Hundreds, in which are numbred 326 Pa∣rish Churches, and is traded unto by 11 Market Towns. Northampton,Northampton. delightfully seated on the banks of the Nyne, which wash∣eth its South and West parts, over which it hath two Bridges. It is a Town of good antiquity, and once very large, but this, as all other places in the Kingdom, selt the sore hand of the Dane, with other Calamities, and lately in was laid in its Ashes by a merciless Fire; but is again almost rebuilt, and will be of better lustre than before. Its extent is large, numbring 4 Parish Churches within its Walls, which were of great strength before their demo∣lishment. On the Western side of the Town, on an Eminency, is mounted a large Castle, but so ruinous that it seemeth ready to fall. It is a Town Cor∣porate, sendeth Burgesses to Parliament, is governed by a Major, 2 Barliffs, 12 Magistrates, a Recorder, Town Clerk, with other sub-Officers. It enjoy∣eth a very considerable Trade, is very well inhabited, being the place where the Assizes are kept, and the general place for the Justices of the Pence to
meet for the County; and its Market, which is on Saturdays, is very great for Cattle, Corn, Provisions, Leather, Shoes, and several Country Commodi∣ties. Peterburgh, seated on the River Aufona, or Nen,Peterburgh. (which is navigable for Barges, over which it hath a Bridge which leadeth to Huntingtonshire,) and in a Marshy ground. It is a City of great antiquity, and was of good account in the time of the Saxons; for it is said that Wolpher, King of the Mercians, for the expiating his crime in the cruel murthering his Sons Wolphald and Rufin for embracing the Christian Religion (to which he was some years after converted himself) in Anno 633. finished a most stately Monastery, and dedi∣cated it to St. Peter, from which the City took its name, being before called Madeshamstede. It is at present a City of no great extent, having but one Parish Church besides its Cathedral, raised out of the Monastery; a stately structure, where lieth the Bodies of two unfortunate Queens, Katherin of Spain, and Mary of Scots. This City enjoyeth several Immunities, sends Burgesses to Parliament, is honoured with the Title of an Earldom and the Seat of a Bishop, as also of a Dean, who keepeth his Court for the hearing of Causes. Its Streets of late are indifferent well ordered, its Houses well built, and hath a spacious Market-place, well resorted unto on Saturdays. Not far from this City, Westwards, was seated the ancient City Durobrivae, called by the English Saxons, Normanchester. Oundle, pleasantly seated on the banks of the Nen,Oundle. over which it hath two good Bridges; a well built uniform Town, beautified with a fair Church, and a Free School; hath a very great Market for Cattle, Corn, Flesh and Fowl on Saturdays. Higham-Ferrers, scituated on an Ascept, and on the banks of the Nen;Higham Ferrers. an ancient Borough and Town Corporate, governed by a Major, 7 Aldermen, 13 Capital Burgesses, a Steward, &c. is graced with a fair Colledge, hath a Free School for the education of Youth, and an Alms-house for the relief of poor People; and hath a Market on Saturdays, which is well resorted unto. Wellingborow, seated also on the Nen; a large and well inhabited Town,Wellingborow. of some note for its Springs of Medicinal-water, not far distant from the Town. It is beautified with a fair Church, and a Free School; is a large and well inhabited Town, and hath a Market on Wednesdays, which is well served with Corn and Provisions. Daventry, seated on the side of Borow-hill; a good Town,Daventry. govermed by a Bulliff, Aldermen, a Steward, and 12 Freemen, and hath a Market on Wed∣nesdays, which is well provided with Horses, Cattle, Sheep, Corn, and Provi∣sions. Not far from this Town is Wedom, which was a Station of the Romans, and where there was a Monastery founded by the holy Virgin St. Werberg, Daugh∣ter of King Wolpher, who had here his Royal Seat. Brackley, seated on a bank of the Owse,Brackley. and on the edge of the County towards Buckinghamshire; an ancient and large Town Corporate, containing two Parish Churches, had formerly a Colledge, now made use of for a Free School; is governed by a Major and Aldermen, sendeth Burgesses to Parlia∣ment, and hath a small Market on Wednesdays; which in former time was con∣siderable, being the staple Town in the County for Wool. County of Northumber∣land.NORTHƲMBERLAND, a County of a sharp and piercing Air, and much troubled with pinching Frosts, boisterous Winds, and deep Snows, which would be more troublesom to its Inhabitants, were it not for the great abundance of Sea-Coal here had in great plenty. It is a County, for the most part, of an ungrateful Soil, being very rough, hilly, and very hard to be manured; but the parts towards the Sea, by the industry of the Husbandman in manuring it with the Sea-weed, are indifferent fertil.
It is well watered with Rivers, which (with the Sea) afford to the Inha∣bitants great plenty of Fish and Fowl. In this County are numbred 46 Parish Churches, many of which are very large, having their Chapels of Ease, and is severed into 6 Wards; and for the accommodation of the Inhabitants is traded unto by 6 Market Towns. The Inhabitants that possest this County before the Romans, were the Otta∣dini, and being brought to the Jurisdiction of the English Saxons by Osca Brother to Hengist, and by his Son Jebusa, had first official Governours under the fealty to the Kings of Kent: After that, when the Kingdom of the Be∣renicii was erected, that which reached from the Scotish Frith to the Tees (being the best part) was subject to the Kings of Northumberland, who ha∣ving finished their period, that which lay beyond the Tweed passed for Scot∣land; then was it yielded up to Egbert King of the West Saxons, who laid it to his own Territory: and soon after the expulsion of the Danes it was go∣verned by Earls. This County sheweth abundance of Antiquities, not only along the Picts Wall, which runneth by its Southern part, but elsewhere; amongst which these following are worthy of note: Readsquire, a steep Mountain, was oft∣times the place of Conference for the East Marshes. The Hermitage, not far from Wakeworth, by the Water; a Chapel cut out of a Rock, without Beams, Rafters, or any piece of Timber, and the Altar was also hewed out of the same Rock; and this was the place of devotion for a Hermit, who lived in a Cell within the Rock. Risingham, seated on the River Rhead, a place of great Antiquity, which ('tis said) God-Magon for sometime defended against a certain Soldan, or Heathenish Prince. Through the Picts Wall runneth the Tyne, which watereth two Dales, each having their Hills so boggy, with standing Water on the top, that no Horse-man is able to ride through them; and yet in many places are great heaps of Stones (called Laws) supposed to be cast up in memory of some persons there slain. The chief places are, Newcastle,Newcastle. scituate on an Eminence, and on the North banks of the Tyne, over which it hath a fair Bridge. This Town before the Conquest was called Monk-chester, as being in the possession of Monks, which name was changed to Newcastle by Robert, Son to William the Conquerour, from a Castle there built by him. It is a Town and County of it self, being incorporated and go∣verned by a Major, 12 Aldermen, a Recorder, and other sub-Officers; and amongst its Immunities sends its Representatives to Parliament; 'tis a place of good largeness, numbring 4 Parish Churches, besides one in Gates-head; it is beautified with good Buildings, and by reason of its deep and secure Haven is much inhabited and frequented by Merchants and Tradesmen, having several Vessels belonging to the Town, but is of chief note for its Coal trade. It is a place of great strength, for besides its Castle, now something ruinous, it is be∣girt with a strong Wall, on which are many Turrets, and hath for entrance 7 Gates. Here are weekly two Markets, on Tuesdays and Saturdays, which are both very considerable for all sorts of Provisions. Morpeth,Morpeth. scituate on the Wensbeck; a very fine incorporated Town, go∣verned by 2 Bailiffs, and sendeth Burgesses to Parliament. It is strengthned with a Castle, and hath a Market on Wednesdays, which is esteemed the best in the County for Corn, Cattle, and Provisions. Barwick,Barwick. commodiously seated betwixt England and Scotland, but on the North or Scotish side of the Tweed, over which it hath a stately Bridge, su∣stained by 14 or 15 Arches, being a Town and County of it self. It is a Place of great strength, as well by Nature as Art, being almost encompassed with the Sea and the Tweed, and strongly fenced about with Walls, a Castle, and other Fortifications, as being a place of such great importance to England. It is a Town Corporate, governed by a Major, Bailiffs, and Burgesses, and hath the election of Parliament men. It is large and populous, its Houses well built, enjoyeth a good Trade, especially for Salmon and Corn, and its Market on Saturdays is very considerable.
Along the Coast of this County are the Isles of Cockes, Fern, and Holy Isle, which are small Isles of a barren and ungrateful Soil, and but thinly in∣habited. NOTTINGHAM, a County blest with a wholsom Air;County of Nottingham. its Soil is diffe∣rent, the South-east part, which is watered with the Trent and other fresh Streams, is most fertil and apt for Corn and Grass, and is called the Clay part; and the Western part, wherein is the Forest of Shirwood, a large tract of ground, which is well clothed with Wood, and provided with Game; and this part, from the temperature of the Earth, is called the Sandy part. This County produceth a Stone softer than Alablaster, but being burnt maketh a Plaister harder than that of Paris, with which they floor their up∣per Rooms. The form of this Shire is oval, doubling in length twice its breadth. It is severed into 8 Hundreds or Wapontacks, in which are numbred 168 Parish Churches, and hath intercourse of traffick with 9 Market Towns. Nottingham, commodiously feated on an Eminence and on the banks of the Leane,Nottingham. which at a small distance loseth it self in the Trent, over each of which Rivers there is a fair Stone-bridge, besides two others over two Ponds, called the Cheney Bridges. It is a large Town, numbring 3 Parish Churches, is re∣plenished with well built Houses, its Streets are fair, and graced with a spa∣cious Market-place; on the West side of the Town is the Castle, which (be∣fore its defacement in the late Wars) was a place of great strength and im∣portance. It is a Town of good antiquity, and amongst its places of remark here are many strange Vaults hewed out of the Rocks, especially under the Castle, which are descended by divers steps, and have their several Rooms and Stairs artificially made; also in the Hill are Houses, with Rooms, Chimneys, winding Stairs, and Windows, wrought out of the solid Rock. This Town enjoys several Immunities, electeth Burgesses for Parliament, is governed by a Major, 6 Aldermen, 2 Sheriffs, a Town Clerk, and other sub-Officers; it enjoyeth a good Trade, is well inhabited and frequented, and hath weekly 3 Markets, viz. on Wednesdays, Fridays, and Saturdays, which is very con∣siderable for Cattle, Corn, and Provisions. Newark, scituate on the high Road to York, and on the Trent,Newark. over which it hath a Bridge. It is a good large Town Corporate, governed by an Alder∣man and 12 Assistants, is well inhabited, enjoyeth a good Trade, and hath a considerable Marker for Corn, Cattle, and Provisions on Wednesdays. Mansfield, scituate in the Forest of Sherwood; a well inhabited,Mansfield. well built, and large Town, enjoying a good Trade for Mault, and hath a very considerable Market for Corn, Cattle, Mault, Swine, and Provisions on Thurs∣days. Redford, scituate on the River Idel; an ancient Town Corporate,Redford. which electeth Burgesses to Parliament, is governed by 2 Bailiffs, 6 Aldermen, and a Steward, and hath a great Market for Corn and Provisions on Satur∣days. The County of OXFORD is blest with a delectable Air,County of Oxford de∣scribed. which doth oc∣casion it to be much inhabited by Gentry; and the rather, as being of a fertil Soil for Corn and Fruits, well stored with Cattle, and interlaced with pleasant Hills, wherein (and in the Downs) are found variety of Game. It is well watered with Rivers, as the Owse, or Isis, the Tame, Cherwel, Windrush, and Ebenlode. It is divided into 14 Hundreds, in which tract is seated 280 Parish Churches, and is traded unto by 12 Market Towns, and graced with a beautiful and state∣ly City. Oxford, the Seat of the Muses, exceeding all Universities in the World,Oxford. except her Sister Cambridge. It is a place of great antiquity, said to be con∣secrated unto Learning in the time of the Old Britains; and was much che∣rished and countenanced by King Elfred, who sent thither his Son Ethelward
on purpose to invite the young Nobles to study the Arts and Sciences. It is a City commodiously seated both for pleasure and profit between the Isis and the Charwel, which encompasseth three parts of the City, over which for the convenience of passage it hath several Bridges. The City is large, numbring 14 Parish Churches besides its Cathedral, a large Structure, and is at present a fair and stately City, adorned with well-built Houses, and beautified with di∣vers curious Structures, as the Kings Palace, now the Mannor House, the 16 Colledges, 8 Halls, the Schools, wherein is a stately Library, and The ater newly erected. It enjoyeth ample Immunities, keepeth Courts for all Acti∣ons without limitation of some; hath the election of 4 Burgesses, 2 for the University, and 2 for the City. It is a place very populous, and well resorted unto, hath weekly two Markets, on Wednesdays and Saturdays, which is the chief, and very considerable for Provisions and all sorts of Grain, especially Barly; and also enjoys a great trade for Mault. Burford,Burford. scituate on an Ascent near the Downs, and on the River Wind∣rush, which springeth out of the Cotswold; a large and fair Town Corporate, governed by two Bailiffs, and other sub-Officers, and hath a well frequented Market for Corn, Cattle, and Provisions on Saturdays; and is of chief note for Saddles here made. Woodstock,Woodstock. a well compacted Borough Town, governed by a Major, 4 Alder∣men, &c. enjoyeth several Immunities, sends Burgesses to Parliament, and hath an indifferent good Market on Tuesdays. It is delightfully seated, and of some note for its large Park, wherein was Woodstock-Bower, built by King Henry the first, and where he kept his Mistress, the beautiful Rosamond Clifford, which was here poysoned by his enraged Queen Elianor. Banbury,Banbury. seated on the Cherwel, and in a Flat; a pretty large, wealthy and beautiful Town Corporate, governed by a Major, 12 Aldermen, &c. sends Burgesses to Parliament; hath a very considerable Market for Cattle, Sheep, and Provisions on Thursdays, and is of some note for its Cakes and Cheese. Tame,Tame. pleasantly seated on the River so called, which (with its branches) doth almost encompass it, and over which it hath a Bridge which leadeth into Buckinghamshire. It is a large Town, having one spacious Street, in the midst of which is the Market-place; and its Market, which is on Tuesdays, is well resorted unto by Grasiers and Butchers, from London and other parts, it being very considerable for Cattle. Henley,Henley. or Henley upon Thames, as being thereon seated, over which it hath a fair Bridge; a large Town Corporate, governed by a Warden for its chief Magistrate, enjoyeth a considerable trade for Maulting, and much inhabited by Bargmen and Watermen, who are employed for the carrying of Mault, Wood, &c. to London; and in return, bring such commodities as they and the Neighbourhood have occasion of. Its Market is on Thursdays, which is very considerable for Corn, especially Barly, there being oft-times about 300 Cartloads sold in one day. RƲTLAND,County of Rutland de∣scribed. the smallest County in the Kingdom, making in circum∣ference not above 40 miles; and although for quantity the least, yet for qua∣lity may be compared with the best, being of a very fertil Soil both for tillage and pasturage, especially about the Vale of Catmose. It is well clothed with Wood, watered with fresh Streams, is blest with a sweet Air, and hath more Parks (considering its extent) than any County in England. This County is severed into five Hundreds, in which are 48 Parishes, and hath two Market Towns; viz. Oakham,Oakham. scituate in the rich and pleasant Valley of Catmose; and although not large, yet is the Shire Town, where the Assizes and Sessions are held; its Buildings are indifferent good, especially its Church, Free School, and Hospital; here is an old decayed Castle, which is now made use of for the Assizes. It hath a Market on Saturdays, which is indifferently well served with Provi∣sions.
Ʋpingham, highly seated; a neat compacted and well built Town,Upingham. hath the accommodation of a Free School, and an Hospital; and its Market, which is on Wednesdays, is well resorted unto, and served with living Cattle, Corn, and Provisions. SHROPSHIRE, being a frontier County to Wales,County of Salop de∣scribed. is well replenished with Towns and Castles, the better to over-awe the Welshmen in the bordering Marches: and divers Noblemen in this tract were called Barons of the March, and enjoyed in their Territories certain Priviledges, and held Courts for the administring of Justice. This County is of a fertil Soil both for Tillage and Pasturage, abounding in Wheat and Barly, is well clothed with Wood, feedeth good store of Cattle, and in the bowels of the Earth are Mines of Iron and Pit-Coal. It is well watered with Rivers, as the Tern, Clun, Rea, Teame, Roden, and Severn, be∣ing the chief; which in a crooked passage severeth the Shire in the midst. It is very Hilly and Mountainous, especially towards the Southern and Western parts. In this County are 170 Parish Churches, and hath for its Towns of chief note. Shrewsbury, raised out of the ancient Ʋriconium,Shrewsbury. the Seat of the Princes of Powis, until forced thence by the Saxons. It is pleasantly seated on an easie Ascent, and on the banks of the Severn, which almost encompasses it. It is a place which for largeness, numbring 5 Parish Churches besides a Chapel, neatness of Buildings, both publick and private, largeness and variety of Streets, and populousness, may be set down in the rank of Cities. It is a Town of good strength, as well by Nature as Art, being fenced about with a strong Wall, defended by a Castle, Bulwarks, and other Fortifications. It is a place of a great resort, and well inhabited both by English and Welsh, and enjoyeth this place being the common Mart between England and Middle Wales. The Town enjoys large Immunities, keepeth Courts, sendeth its Representatives to Parliament, hath a large Free School, is governed by a Major, 24 Aldermen, 48 Common Council-men, a Recorder, Town Clerk, with other sub-Officers; and hath weekly 3 Markets, on Wednesdays for Provisions, on Thursdays for Cottons, &c. here sold in great abundance, and thence sent to London; and on Saturdays for Cattle, and all sorts of Provisions in great plenty. Oswestre, so called from Oswald King of the Northumbers,Oswestre. who was here slain in a Battel, and cruelly torn in pieces by Penda the Pagan Mercian Prince. It is a Town Corporated, governed by two Bailists and Burgesses; and before the Mart for Welsh Cottons was hence removed to Shrewsbury, was of greater account than now it is; yet is it of some trade for Flannels, and its Market, which is on Mondays, is well resorted unto, and furnished with Cattle and Provisions. Wenlock Magna, seated in the road from Worcester to Shrewsbury;Wenlock Magna. a Town Corporate, governed by Bailiffs and Burgesses, hath the election of Parliament men, is of some note for its Lime and Tobacco-pipes, here made in great plenty; and hath a very good Market on Mondays for Corn and Pro∣visions. Bridgnorth, a large Town Corporate, governed by 2 Bailiffs and Burgesses,Bridgnorth. and hath the election of Parliament men. It is seated on the Severn, over which is a fair Stone-bridge, is well inhabited, containeth 2 Parish Churches, and hath a good Market for Corn, Cattle, and Provisions. Ludlow, seated on the Temd, a Town more fair than ancient,Ludlow. being beau∣tified with divers good Buildings, amongst which is the Palace of the Presi∣dent of the Marches. It is a large Town Corporate, governed by Bailiffs and Burgesses, hath the election of Parliament men, and hath a very great Market for Corn, Cattle, and Provisions on Mondays. The Town is strong, being defended by a Wall and Castle, is very populous and well inhabited, and is of
chief note, for being the place where the Courts for the Marches of Wales are kept, for the easment of the Welsh and Neighbouring Inhabitants; and here Prince Arthur kept his Court. County of Somerset de∣scribed.SOMERSET, a large and wealthy County, and of a rich and fertil Soil both for Tillage and Pasturage; yet not without Stony-hills. It is ex∣ceeding populous, and well frequented, occasioned through its commodious Havens and Sea-port Towns, and is every where well watered with Rivers; as the Severn, Avon, Parret, Frome, Brue, Ivel, &c. which with the Sea plentifully serveth the Inhabitants with excellent Fish. As to the bounds, extent, and division of the Shire into Hundreds, see the Table. This County hath been the Theater of divers bloody Battles; for instance, at Pen, near Cadbury, Edmond, surnamed Iron-sides, gave the Danes a no∣table foyl in his pursuit of Canutus the then Usurper of the English Crown. Not far from Bridgwater, Ealstan Bishop of Sherbourn, gave a great over∣throw to the Danish Camp. At Cadbury King Arthur obtained a great and memorable Victory against the English Saxons: And near this place Keni∣walsh, a West Saxon, obtained the like Victory against the Britains, to their ever after dread of the English Saxons. And not far from Banes-down King Elfred gave the Danes such an overthrow, that constrained them to a sub∣mission, and caused Godrus their King to be baptized, and was his God∣father. In this County are numbred 385 Parish Churches, and hath intercourse of Traffick with 30 Market Towns. Bristol, a City part in this County, and the greatest part being in Gloucester∣shire, it is there treated of, and therefore omitted here. Bath,Bath. seated on the Avon, over which it hath a fair Stone-bridge, and in a low and small Plain, which is encircled with Hills, out of which issue forth several Springs, which pay their Tribute to this City. It is a City of great Antiquity, as doth appear by the many Roman Inscriptions and Images com∣monly found in the Walls which encompass it; and where the Abby standeth was a Temple consecrated to Minerva, the Goddess of Fountains and Baths, It is a fair and neat City, replenished with well-built Houses, for Divine worship hath at present but one Parish Church besides its Abby or Cathedral, a superb Building. It is governed by a Major, Aldermen, Common Council, with other sub-Officers, enjoyeth several Immunities, sendeth its Represen∣tatives to Parliament, and hath two Markets weekly, on Wednesdays and Satur∣days, which are well served with Corn and Provisions; it enjoys a good trade for its Clothing here made, and is a place well inhabited and resorted unto, and the rather for its Medicinal Baths, for the curing of several diseases in the body of Man. Of these Baths there are four, and the Water, as to heat, is of a different temperature: The Cross-Bath, which is of a temperate heat, is enclosed with a Wall, and about the sides are placed 12 Seats of Stone: The second is of a much hotter temperature, and therefore called the Hot-Bath: Adjoyning to these Baths is a Spittle-house, for the relief of poor diseased people. The third and fourth (as joyned together) are the greatest and best, being seated near the Abby, and called the King and Queens Baths, they are enclosed with Walls, and have 32 Seats made of Arched-work, and so ordered that Men and Women sit apart. Wells,Wells. seated at the foot of a Hill, so called from the Springs and Wells there springing up; a small City, but well inhabited, and of a good account, being dignified with an Episcopal See, under whose Jurisdiction is that of Bath. It is garnished with fair and stately Buildings, both publick and pri∣vate, as its Cathedral, dedicated to St. Andrew, a beautiful Pile of building; the Bishops-Palace, adjoyning to the Cathedral, built Castle-wise; then the Prebendaries Houses, and the Market-house, sustained by Pillars. It is go∣verned by a Major, 7 Masters, 16 Burgesses, a Recorder, Town Clerk, &c. enjoyeth several Immunities, sends Burgesses to Parliament, and hath weekly 2 Markets, viz. on Wednesdays and Saturdays, which are well served with Provisions.
Pensford, seated on the River Chue, near its falling into the Avon;Pensford. a Town of good account, and much inhabited by Hatters and Bakers. It hath a Market on Tuesdays, which is well served with Corn and Provisions. Glassenbury, seated near the Tor;Glassenbury. a good Town and hath a Market on Tuesdays, which is well served with Corn, Fowl, Fish, and other Provisions. This place is of note for its once famous and stately Abby of Glassenbury, where (as 'tis reported) the Body of Joseph of Arimathea, whom Philip the Apostle of the Gauls sent into Britain to preach the Gospel of Christ, lieth interr'd; and here King Inas built a fair and stately Church, and in the Church-yard was the Sepulchre of King Arthur. Near adjoyning, on a high and steep Hill is placed a Tower, now called Glassenbury-Tor, which commandeth a great prospect round about, and serveth as a Land-mark to Sea-men; and on the top thereof the last Abbot was hanged by command of King Henry the Eighth. Bruton, seated on the River Brew; a well built and inhabited Town,Bruton. of a good trade for Clothing, Searges, and Maulting, and hath a very great Market for Provisions, &c. on Saturdays. The Town is graced with a very beautiful Church, hath a Free School, founded by King Edward the Sixth, and a most goodly Alms-house, that hath rather the resemblance of a Colledge than an Hospital. Evill, or Yeovell, a Borough Town, governed by a Port-Reve;Evill. and keepeth Courts for the trial of Actions. It is seated on a River so called, and hath a very considerable Market on Fridays for Corn, Cheese, Hemp, Flax, and Pro∣visions in great plenty, taking its rise from the decay of Ilchester, near ad∣joyning. Ilchester, a Town of great antiquity,Ilchester. and in former times of as great strength; for at the coming of the Normans it was so populous that it had in it 107 Burgesses, and numbred 16 Parish Churches; but at present it▪ hath but two Churches. It is a Town Corporate, governed by a Bailiff and 12 Bur∣gesses, hath the election of Parliament men, is the place where the County Goal is kept, and hath a pretty good Market on Wednesdays. Taunton, pleasantly seated on the Tone,Taunton. which is navigable for Barges within three miles of the Town, where it hath a fine Bridge. It is a very fine, neat, and well-built Town, graced with spacious Streets, containeth 2 Parish Churches; is well inhabited both by Gentry and Tradesmen, especially Clo∣thiers, who drive a considerable Trade for Searges and Clothing, being e∣steemed the best Town in the County; and its Markets, on Wednesdays and Saturdays, are very great, and well provided with Corn, Flesh, Fish, and Fowl. It was formerly a Major Town, but at present a Bailiwick. Bridgwater, seated on a navigable River,Bridgwater. over which it hath a fine Stone-bridge. It is a large, well frequented and inhabited Borough Town, hath the election of Parliament men; is governed by a Major, and other sub-Officers; was formerly a place of good account, having a Castle and an Abby. Its Market is on Thursdays, which is well served with Corn and Provisions, and in the Summer season with Cattle. Mynehead, seated on the Sea-shoar; a Borough Town,Mynehead. electing Parliament men, hath a very good harbour for Ships of a considerable burthen to ride in, and is a place of some Trade, especially into Ireland; yet its Market is but small. County of Stafford.The County of STAFFORD, seated much about the midst of England; of a healthful Air, and different Soil, the Southern parts being generally bar∣ren, as sandy, gravelly, or heathy, except on the banks of the Rivers; yet by the Husbandmans pains in manuring it, it beareth good Corn; and the Northern parts are hilly, and full of grat Heaths and Moors, and is made use of for seeding of Cattle: And although an Inland County, yet by reason of the many Rivers and Brooks it is plentifully furnished with excellent Fish. To speak of the Country in general, there are more Heaths, Moors, and wast Ground, than in any County in England, as to its bigness, insomuch that
you may go the whole length of the County and see little but Heaths and Moors; but these are not without profit, as breeding store of Sheep, Conies, and Deer, as well as pleasure for the Gentleman, both for the Hawk, Gun, and Hound; and for Parks and Warrens few Counties doth exceed it. The Commodities that this Shire affordeth to others, are Cattle, Sheep, Horses, Butter, Cheese, Wool, Bacon, Iron, Iron-ware, chiefly Nails, Alablaster, &c. The number of Parishes are 130, and hath 18 Market Towns, many of which are of considerable account. Litchfield,Litchfield. a City and County of it self, seated in a pleasant Champain Country, divided from the Cathedral and Close, but joyned together by two Bridges and Cawseys. It is a City of great antiquity, formerly called Licid∣feld, that is, the Field of dead Bodies, which name it had from the great number of Christians there slain in the Dioclesian Persecution: and here Oswin, King of the Northumbers, having vanquished the Pagan Mercians, erected a Church, and made it the Episcopal See of Duina the Bishop, which afterwards was made an Archiepiscopal Pale by Pope Hadrian, in the Reign of King Offa, which dignity expired with his life. This City is well built, is indifferent large, containing 3 Parish Churches besides its Cathedral, a beau∣tiful and curious Structure; adjoyning to which is the Bishops Palace, and the Prebends-houses: the Streets are payed and well ordered, and is a place much frequented by Gentry. It is governed by 2 Bailiffs, a Sheriff, (which are elected out of 24 Burgesses) a Recorder, Town Clerk, with sub-Officers; and amongst its Immunities sends Burgesses to Parliament. Its Markets are on Tuesdays and Fridays, which are plentifully served with Corn and Provi∣sions. Stafford,Stafford. well seated on the River Sowe amongst rich Meadows; a fair Town, indifferent large, containing 2 Parish Churches, hath a Free School, and a fine square Market-place, in which the Shire-Hall is kept for the Assig and Sessions of the County; the Streets are paved and well ordered, and its Houses well built; it is governed by a Major and Burgesses, hath a Recorder, Town Clerk, and 2 Serjeants at Mace. The Town enjoys large Immunities, sends Burgesses to Parliament, is well inhabited and frequented, and its Mar∣kets, which is on Saturdays, is well served with Corn, Flesh, and other Pro∣visions. New-Castle under Line,New-Castle. seated on a little Rivulet; a large Town Corporate, governed by a Major, Bailiffs, and Burgesses, hath a Court of Record, to hold plea in all Personal Actions under 40 l. and amongst its Immunities sends Burgesses to Parliament. It hath a great Market on Mondays for Cattle, some Horses and Sheep, with plenty of Provisions; and after Low-Monday, a Market (or rather a Fair) every Fortnight for some time. Ʋttoxater,uttoxater. pleasantly seated near the Banks of the Dove amongst excellent Pasturage. The Town is not very well built, but pretty large, hath a well built Market-place; and its Market, which is on Wednesdays, is said to be one of the greatest in these parts of England for Cattle, Sheep, Swine, Butter, Cheese, Corn, and all Provisions. Tamworth,Tamworth. seated on the Banks of the Tame, which divides the Town, one part being in this County and the other in Warwickshire. The Town at pre∣sent is of good account (though not of that splendor as in former times) be∣ing incorporated, governed by Bailiffs, a high Steward, under-Steward, Re∣corder, and other sub-Officers, sends Burgesses to Parliament, and hath a Market on Saturdays, which is indifferent good for Corn and Provisions, and in the Spring time for Cattle and Sheep. Walsall,Walsall. seated on the top of a Hill; a well-built Town Corporate, governed by a Major, and other sub-Officers, hath a Court of Record, enjoyeth a good Trade for divers Manufactures made of Iron, as Nails, Bridle-bits, Stirrups, Spurs, and also Bellows, here made in great plenty; yet its Market, which is on Tuesdays, is not very great.
Wolverhampton, pleasantly seated on a Hill,Wolverhampton. beautified with reasonable well built Houses, and its Streets handsomly paved; is much frequented by Gentry, hath a neat Collegiate Church, and its Market, which is on Wednesdays, is ve∣ry considerable for Corn, Cattle, and Provisions, being esteemed the second Market Town in the County. County of Suffolk de∣scribed.SƲFFOLK, a County of a various Soil, and consequently hath sundry growths and Manufactures; the Eastern parts all along the Coasts, and for 5 or 6 miles Inland are generally very bleak, but healthy, sandy, full of small Hills and Springs, and employed in Tillage for Rye, Peas, Brank, Hemp, and for Sheep-walks. The more Inland part, commonly called High-Suffolk, or the Wood-lands, is pretty level, close and dirty, and is made use of chiefly for Dayries, driving a great trade for their Butter and Cheese; and the parts about Bury are Champain, and affordeth great store of grain of all sorts. It is a County of a large extent, is well stored with Parks, watered with fresh Streams, and blest with a most healthful and sweet Air, which makes it to be so well inhabited by Gentry, and is traded unto by 27 Market Towns, and numbreth 575 Parish Churches. Ipswich, seated by the Banks of the Orwell,Ipswich. near the place where its fresh Water and salt meet, which (with the Tide) gives it the conveniency of a Key. 'Tis a place of great antiquity, and was once fenced about with a Wall or Rampier, which was thrown down by the Danes. It is at present a place of a large extent, numbring 12 Parish Churches besides St. Georges Chapel; and for its abundance of Streets, which are clean and neatly ordered, its po∣pulousness and good trade that its Inhabitants drive both by Sea and Land, it may be ranged in the number of Cities. It is a Town Corporate, well Privi∣ledged, sends Burgesses to Parliament, and is governed by 2 Bailiffs chosen out of 12 Port-men, and 24 Common Council, also a Recorder, Town Clerk, and other sub-Officers. It is well served with Provisions, for besides its Shambles here are weekly 3 Markets, viz. on VVednesdays and Fridays, for Fish and Butter, and on Saturdays for Provisions of all sorts in great plenty. And this Town gave birth to Cardinal Wolsey, who here began a magnificent Colledge, which still bears his name. Bury, or St. Edmonds-Bury, so called from King Edmond the Martyr,Bury. here interr'd, who was shot to death at Hoxon by the Danes, for not renouncing the Christian Faith. This Town is very pleasantly seated, and in an Air so health∣ful, that makes it to be much inhabited and frequented by Gentry. It is a Town Corporate, governed by an Alderman for its chief Magistrate, besides a Recorder, and other sub-Officers, and sends its Representatives to Parliament. It is of a large extent, yet consisteth but of two Parish Churches, hath well built Houses; its Market-hill, Fair-sted, and Corn-Cross, are spacious and handsom, but its Streets are ill paved, chiefly occasioned by the heavy Carriages which come to its Markets on VVednesdays, which are much resorted unto, being the chief Market. Town in the County for Grain, and is also well furnished with fresh Fish, Pigeons, wild Fowl, and most sorts of Provisions. This Town was famous for its Abby, which for fairness and Prerogatives exceeded all o∣thers in England. Here is kept the Quarter Sessions for the liberty of St. Ed∣mond; and in the Abby-yard stands the Shire-house, where the Assizes are ordinarily held for the County. New-Market, composed of a well built Street;Newmarket. a great thorough-fare Town, full of Inns; it consists of two Parish Churches, the one in this County and the other in Cambridgeshire; but its Market-place and Street is wholly in Suffolk. Its Market is on Tuesdays, which is well frequented and served with Fish, wild Fowl, and other Provisions; and by reason of the scituation of the Town near the spacious Heath, which bears its name, so commodious for Horse-races, and in a part of the Country so fit for Field-sports, it is much resorted unto by his Majesty, where he hath his Palace, and the Nobility and Gentry.
Mildenhall,Mildenhall. seated on a branch of the Owse; a large Market Town, graced with a fair Church, with a tall Steeple, and very populous, having distant Streets called Rows (as Beck-row, How-row, &c.) to the Fenward belonging to it, as big as some little Towns. It hath a well frequented Market (especi∣ally for Fish and wild Fowl) on Fridays. Sudbury,Sudbury. seated on the Stower, over which it hath a fair Bridge leading into Essex; an ancient, good large Town, containing 3 Parish Churches, and by reason of its trade of Clothing is well frequented. It is a Borough Town, ele∣cting Parliament men, and is governed by a Major, 7 Aldermen, 24 Burgesses, and other sub-Officers. Its Market, which is on Saturdays, is well resorted unto. Hadleigh,Hadleigh. a large Town Corporate, governed by a Major, Aldermen, Coun∣cil, &c. hath the accommodation of two Markets weekly, viz. on Mondays, very considerable for all Provisions, especially Meat; and a smaller on Satur∣days. It is graced with a sumptuous Church, was a place of great Trade in former times for Clothings; but at present hath lost much of its trade for Turky-ware, as also for Bays and Says. Stow-Market,Stow-Market. seated in the center of the County, and between the branches of the Gypp or Orwell; a large and beautiful Town, graced with a spacious Church, on whose Steeple is a lofty Pinacle, not easie to be parallel'd. It hath a Market on Thursdays, which is well served with Provisions and Retail-wares; and the grand Trade of the Town is now in Tammeys, and other Norwich-Stuffs, being the only Town in the County considerable for that employment. Woodbridge,Woodbridge. a large Town, watered with several fresh Springs, having a plea∣sant prospect down the Channel, chiefly at High-water, being about 6 miles from the Main; a Town of good Traffick by Sea and Land; it is well enough built, excepting the lowness of the oldest Houses, and part of the Streets are well paved; it hath a fair Church, in which are several Monuments. Its Market, which is on Wednesdays, is of considerable resort, and well traded unto for its Commodities, viz. Pouldavis, Sack-cloth, Plank, Butter, Cheese, but chiefly for its Hemp. As to its Sea-trade, they have several Vessels both great and small, which are imployed by them, and have here 4 or 5 Docks for the building of Ships. Aldborough,Aldborough. a Coast Town, pleasantly seated in a Dale; a large, long, and plain built Town, composed of two or three Streets of low Houses, all in a row. At a small distance from this Town is Slaughden, where they have a commodious Key, with Ware-houses, or Fish-houses, the only employment of the Town being for Fish, having great conveniences for drying their North-Sea Fish; in which Fishing-trade, with a little in the Coal-trade, they employ several Vessels, but not so many as formerly. It is a Town Corporate, governed by two Bailiffs, 10 Capital Burgesses, with 24 Inferiour, enjoyeth ancient Priviledges, and sends its Representatives to Parliament. For their defence Sea-wards, they have about 20 great Guns planted. Its Market is on Satur∣days, which is but small. Dunwich,Dunwich. an ancient Town Corporate, sending Burgesses to Parliament, and is governed by two Bailiffs, and other sub-Officers, and hath a small Market on Saturdays. It is a Town of great antiquity, being in the year 640 made an Episcopal See by Felix the Burgundian, in the reign of William the Conquerour; it contained 236 Burgesses, had a Mint, and its Inhabitants were rich; but through the removal of its Episcopal See, and the encroachment of the Sea, which hath swallowed up a great part of it, and decay of its Shipping and Trade; it is rather the Remains of a Town than one. Bungay,Bungay. sufficiently watered by the Waveney, which severeth it from Nor∣folk. It is a good large Town, containing two Parish Churches, one of which is fair; and between both, in the midst of the Town, is to be seen the Ruins of a famous Nunnery. Its Market is on Thursdays, which is great, and well resorted unto, especially by those of Norfolk.
Beckley, seated also on the Waveney; a very large Town,Beckley. having a conside∣rable, much frequented, and well served Market on Saturdays, and hath a Passage-trade by Water to Yarmouth; the Town is but plain built, having several Thatched Houses, but graced with a fair Church, and a bulky tall Steeple, on a Hill. County of Surrey de∣scribed.SƲRREY, a County of a different Soil, not over fertil, (especially in the midst,) yet the parts near the Thames, which is plain and Champain, is grate∣ful to the Husbandman; and the parts called Holmesdale, by reason of the aspiring Hills, Rivers, Parks, Meadows, Groves, and Fields, is a place of great delight. The Air is very healthful. It is garnished with the Seats of several Gentlemen, and is better stored with Game than Grain. Here are seated 140 Parish Churches, and hath the accommodation of 9 Market Towns. Southwark, or the Borough of Southwark,Southwark. on the South-side of the Thames opposite to the City of London, to which it is joyned by a stately Stone-bridge, and is a member thereof, being annexed by King Edward the Sixth; but doth still enjoy several of its ancient Priviledges, as electing Burgesses, holding of Courts within themselves, &c. It is a place, which for largeness of good Buildings, and quantities of Inhabitants, may be ranged with Cities; en∣joying a good Trade, and is well resorted unto. Croydon, seated low, near the Spring-head of the River Wandle,Croydon. and in a manner begirt with aspiring Hills, which for the most part are well clothed with Wood, of which great store of Charcoal is made, for which this place is of note. It is a large Town, dignified with the Seat of the Archbishop of Canterbury, is beautified with a large and fair Church, hath an Hospital for the relief of Poor people, and a Free-School for the Education of Youth. The Town is large, its Houses well built, and its Market, which is on Saturdays, is considerable, and well served with Corn and Provisions. From this Town to Farnham runneth the Downs, called Banstead-Downs, which affordeth great diversion for Hawking, Hunting, and Horse-Races. Kingston, a large and ancient Town Corporate,Kingston. enjoying large Immunities, and is of chief note for being the place where (upon a Stage in the open Market-place) stood the Chair of Majesty, where Aethelstan, Ethelred, and Edwin, were Crowned Kings, and received their Imperial Scepters, from whence 'tis said the Town took its name, being before called Moreford. It is pleasantly seated on the Banks of the Thames, over which it hath a fair Bridge which leadeth to Kingstonwick in Middlesex, about a mile from Hampton-Court, the Palace of his Majesty. Its Houses are well built, and hath several Inns and Taverns; it is the usual place for the Assizes, and its Market on Saturdays is very considerable for Corn and Provisions. Reygate, seated in the Vale of Homes dale,Reygate. of note for its bloody Battles here sought against the Danes, in which they were vanquished; and also for its ancient, but ruinated Castle, where (in the midst of a large Court) there is a Vault of a great depth and length, at the end of which is a spacious Room, where (according to report) the Barons met in Council, in their War against King John. Here is Fullers-Earth dug up in great plenty. It is a large Borough Town, which sends Burgesses to Parliament, and hath a very considerable Market on Tuesdays, being well served with Corn and Provisions. Not far from this Town are Blechingley and Gatton, two ancient Borough Towns, which electeth Parliament men, once places of good account, espe∣cially Gatton. Guilford, no less pleasantly than commodiously seated on the River Wey,Guilford. which is navigable for Barges, very commodious to the Inhabitants for the conveyance of their Goods by water to London. It is an ancient Borough Town, governed by a Major, and other sub-Officers, hath the election of Par∣liament men, and was a place of a larger extent when the English-Saxon Kings had their Palace here, than now it is; yet is it a fair, neat, well built, and
large Town, containing three Parish Churches, one of which is a fair Structure. It is a place well inhabited and frequented, where the Assizes are oft kept; and as seated on a High-road, is well furnished with Inns and Ta∣verns for the reception of Travellers; and its Market, which is on Saturdays, is of good Account, and well served with Corn and Provisions. Farnham,Farnham. said to be so called from the great store of Fern here growing. It is a good Town, seated on the River Wey, of note for being the place where King Elfred (with a small Power) subdued the Danes with a great slaughter; and for its spacious Castle, highly seated. It hath a great Market on Saturdays for all Provisions, but chiefly Oats and Barley. County of Sussex de∣scribed.SƲSSEX, a large County, in form long and narrow, which, with its extent, bounds, division into Rapes, scituation, &c. may appear by the Table. The Air, though clouded with Mists and thick Vapours, which arise from the Sea, yet is it good and healthful. It is well watered with Rivers, which fall into the Sea, which washeth its Southern parts; and although its Sea-Coast is of so large an extent, yet it is but thin of Harbours, and those not very good, being dangerous for entrance by reason of its Rocks and Shelves. The Soil is fertil: the Sea-Coast called the Downs is hilly, but very plea∣sant, and feedeth good store of Cattle. The North-part is overshadowed with Woods and Groves, where (in times past) was that famous Wood Andrads∣wald, being about 120 miles in length, and 20 in breadth; and in these parts are many Iron-Mines. The Commodities that this County affordeth, are Iron unwrought, and wrought into Guns, &c. Corn, Cattle, Sheep, Wool, and Wood. This County is severed into 6 Rapes, all which traverse the Shire, and have each of them their particular River, Forest, and Castle; and in these Rapes are 65 Hundreds, in which are numbred 312 Parish Churches; and is traded unto by 16 Market Towns. In Chichester Rape are 7 Hundreds, and its chief places are, Chichester.Chichester, seated on the Banks of the Levant, which at a small distance falleth into the Sea. It is an indifferent large City, containing 5 or 6 Parish Churches besides its Cathedral; it is graced with good Buildings and spacious Streets, especially the 4 which lead from the 4 Gates of its Wall, and cross one another at the Market-place, which is a fair Stone-Building, sustained with Stone-Pillars. It is dignified with an Episcopal See, and Seat of a Bishop. It is a City endowed with many Priviledges, electeth Parliament men, is go∣verned by a Major, Aldermen, Recorder, with sub-Officers; is a place of pretty good Trade, and its Markets, on Wednesdays and Saturdays, are well provided with Corn, Cattle, and all sorts of Provisions, both Flesh, Fish, and Fowl. Nigh unto this City is Selsey-Isle, or rather a Peninsula, as being almost encompassed with the Sea and its Arms and Branches, at present of chief note for its Cockles and Lobsters, here taken in great plenty; but in former time was of note for its City so called, now devoured by the Sea, where there was an Episcopal See, which afterwards was removed to Chichester. Arundel,Arundel. pleasantly seated near a Forest so called, and on the Banks of the Arum, over which it hath a Bridge. It is an ancient Borough Town, govern∣ed by a Major, and sub-Officers, and amongst its Immunities sends Burgesses to Parliament; it was once of note for its ancient and strong Castle, which flourished in the time of the Saxon Empire. The Town is indifferent large, and its Houses well built, and hath a Market. Horsham,Horsham. seated near St. Leonards Forest, said to be so called from Horsa, Brother to Hengist, who were the first Leaders of the English Saxons into this Isle. It is a large Borough Town, governed by Bailiffs, sends Burgesses to Parliament, is the place where the County Goal is kept, as also the Assizes; and hath a very great Market on Saturdays for Corn and all sorts of Provi∣sions, especially Fowl, which is bought up by London Haglers.
New Shorham, seated on an Arm of the Sea,Shorham. which renders it to be a place of some Trade, and would be more, had it but a good harbour for Ships. It is a Town Corporate, governed by a Constable and Burgesses, electeth Parlia∣ment men, but hath not the benefit of a Market. Lewes, scituate on the banks of the Arun; a Town of good antiquity,Lewes. where King Athelstan appointed the Mintage of his Money. It is a Town Corporate, governed by 2 Constables, enjoys several Immunities, electeth Parliament men, and hath a very good Market for Corn and Provisions on Saturdays. This Town for fairness of Buildings and Streets, populousness of Inhabitants, both of Gentry and Tradesmen, and largeness, numbring 6 Pa∣rish Churches, and having large Suburbs, may be esteemed one of the best Towns in the County. At the entrance of the River Arun into the Sea, is New-haven, of late made a pretty secure Harbour for Ships, which hither put in in Foul weather, which these Seas are subject unto. East-Grinsted, seated on an Eminence;Grinsted. a small Borough Town on the con∣fines of the County towards Surrey, is graced with a fair Church, hath the election of Parliament men, is governed by a Bailiff and Burgesses, is the place where the Assizes are often held, and hath a good Market on Thurs∣days. Winchelsey, of good antiquity,Winchelsey. and once of far greater account than now it is, and that occasioned by the Seas unkindness in forsaking it; yet doth it still enjoy its Priviledges, as keeping of Courts, in being a Member of one of the Cinque-Ports, in sending Burgesses to Parliament, and by being governed by a Major, (who is Lord of Yarmouth for the Fishing-Trade) and Jurats. The Town is seated on a Rock or sandy Cliff, and on an Inlet of the Sea, where it makes 4 Cataracts, and were its Haven not choaked up it would be a place of Trade. It was formerly a large Town, numbring 18 Parish Churches, which are all reduced to ruin except one, and its Buildings also wasted and ruinous for want of Inhabitants, so that its Market is now disused. Rye, one of the Cinque-Port Towns,Rye. which began to flourish upon the de∣cay of Winchelsey, being walled about (where the Cliffs defend it not) in the Reign of King Edward the Third. It is at present a fair and well-built Town, with paved Streets; is well inhabited and frequented, chiefly by Fisher-men, being of note for its excellent Herrings here taken, and for being the ready Port-Town to Normandy. It is governed by a Major and Jurats, hath a commodious Haven, and hath weekly 2. Markets, viz. on Wednesdays and Saturdays, which are very well served with Corn and Provisions. Hastings, of good antiquity, being Incorporated,Hastings. governed by a Major and Jurats, is one of the Cinque-Ports, enjoys large Immunities, and is of note for being the place where William the Conquerour set up his Fortress at his Landing at Balver-hith, not far distant, where he caused his Fleet to be burnt. It is a large Town, containing 2 Parish Churches, chiefly composed of as many Streets, in each of which there being a Church, and its Markets on Wednesdays and Saturdays are well resorted unto, and served with Corn and Provisions, especially Fish, which is here had in great plenty. As to the sci∣tuation of this Town, it is couched between a high Cliff Sea-wards, and as high a Hill Land-wards. County of Warwick de∣scribed.The County of WARWICK, seated (as it were) in the midst or heart of the Kingdom, and participates with her in the best, both for richness of Soil, pureness of Air, and pleasure to its Inhabitants. It may be divided into two parts, the one called Feldon, and the other Woodland, and these are in a manner separated by the River Avon, which in a crooked passage runneth through the County. That called Feldon is more Champain, affording rich Meadows, feeding store of Cattle, and is exceed∣ing grateful to the Husbandman in their Crops of Corn: That called Wood∣land, of old Arden, took its name from the great plenty of Wood, which is now much wasted by the Iron-works, and this part is more ungrateful to the Husbandman.
It is severed into 5 Hundreds (in which are numbred 158 Parish Churches) and is traded unto by 17 Market Towns. Coventry,Coventry. well seated for an Inland City, being esteemed the chief place of Trade in these parts; a place very well inhabited and frequented, and the more for the great quantities of Cloaths here made and vended. It is a fair, neat, and large City, containing 3 Parish Churches, of which that of St. Mi∣chael and the Holy Trinity, are loftily built, and is beautified with good Build∣ings and well ordered Streets, and its Cross (now lately repaired) is com∣posed of curious work, and delightful to behold. Here it was that Godiva, wife to Leofrick, Earl of the Mercians, for the purchasing the Citizens free∣dom, and to be eased from those heavy Taxes which he imposed upon them for some Offence, about Noon-day rode naked through the chief Streets of the City. It is a place which enjoyeth several Immunities, being a County in∣corporate of it self, having within its Liberties several Towns; is governed by a Major, 2 Sheriffs, and other sub-Officers; keepeth Courts for the hearing of Causes and trial of Felons, having a Goal for Offenders, and sendeth Burgesses to Parliament. It is a place well served with Commodities, and its Market on Fridays, is very great for Corn, Cattle, Provisions, &c. Warwick,VVarwick. a Town of great antiquity, said to be built by Gurgunstus almost 400 years before the birth of Christ; and in the time of the Romans it was in a very flourishing condition, large and populous, where they kept a Garrison, which was a Band of Dalmatian Horsemen. It is at present a Town of good account, seated on a steep Rock, and washed on the River Avon, over which it hath a strong and well-built Stone-Bridge. It is indifferent large, containing 2 Parish Churches (besides several demolished;) its Houses are well built, its Streets well-ordered and large, hath a stately Market-house, enjoyeth a good Trade, chiefly for Mault, and is the place where the Assizes and general Sessions for the County are kept. It is governed by a Major, 12 Brethren, 24 Burgesses, a Recorder, with sub-Officers. Amongst its Immunities electeth Parliament men; and its Market, which is on Saturdays, is very great for Corn and Provisions. Near unto this Town is Guy-Cliff, most pleasantly seated amongst Groves and fresh Streams, where Guy of Warwick is said to have built a Chapel; and after he had left off his exploits, here led an Hermetical life, and was here interr'd. Stratford,Stratford. seated on the Avon, over which it hath a fair Stone-bridge, su∣stained by 14 Arches. It is a good large Town, having for Divine worship two Churches, is well inhabited, enjoyeth a considerable Trade for Mault here made, and hath a Market on Thursdays, which is very well served with Corn and Provisions. Bromicham,Bromicham. seated very dry on the side of a Hill; it is a large and well built Town, very populous, much resorted unto, and enjoyeth a very great trade for Iron and Steel Wares and Tools here made; also for Saddles and Bridles, which find good vent at London, Ireland, and other parts; and its Market is on Thursdays, which is very considerable for living Cattle, Corn, Mault, and Provisions, besides the Manufactures of the Town. At Newenham-Regis is a Spring, whose Water (if drunk with Salt) loos∣neth; and if with Sugar, bindeth the Body; and is said to be very Sovereign against Ʋlcers, Imposthumes, and the Gout. County of Westmoreland described.The County of WESTMORELAND, so called, as lying amongst Moors, and high Hills or Fells, generally of a barren Soil, and very Moun∣tainous, but not without many fruitful Valleys both for Tillage and Pasturage; and is well watered with fresh Streams. Here are several Meers and Lakes, as Winder-Meer, which is the greatest standing water in England; Rydale-water, Ester-water, Gresmere-water, Kent-Meer, Ʋlles-water, Brother-water, Hawse-water, and others.
This County is divided or severed into two Baronies, viz. Kendale Ba∣rony, which is divided into the Wards of Kendale and Lonsdale; and the other Barony, called the Barony of Westmoreland, is divided into East-Ward and West-Ward; and of these in order. Kirby-Lonsdale,Kirby-Lonsdale. or the Church-Town in Lonsdale, seated on the Lon, over which it hath a large Stone-bridge, and in a rich Vale. It is a large and well built Town, beautified with a fair Church; a well inhabited and frequented Town both to Church and Market, esteemed the greatest in the County next, to Kendale; and its Market on Thursdays is well served with Provisions, and traded unto for Cloth. Kendale,Kendale. or Kirby-Kendale; a very fair, large, well-built, inhabited and frequented Borough, and Market Town, which for good Buildings, largeness, neatness, and good Manufactures is the chief in the County. It is a place of a considerable Trade, the people much addicting themselves to Traffick, not only in their old Manufacture of Cotton and course Woollen Cloth; but of late in Druggets, Serges, Hats, Worsted-Stockings, &c. to the much enriching the Town and adjacent parts. It is most pleasantly seated in a Valley, so called, amongst Hills, and on the River Can or Kent, over which it hath two fair Stone-bridges, besides one of Wood, which leadeth to the Castle, now rui∣no. The Town is built in form of a Cross, and is beautified with a fair and large Church, sustained by five rows of Pillars, with several Apartments; near unto which is a Free-School, well endowed; and to this Church belongeth 12 Chapels of Ease. As to the Government of this Town, it is committed to the care of a Major, 12 Aldermen, 20 Common Council-men, a Recorder, Town Clerk, and two Attorneys, who attend their Sessions and Courts of Re∣cord. Here are belonging to this Town 7 Companies, viz. Mercers, Shear-men, Cordwainers, Tanners, Glovers, Taylors, and Pewterers, each having their Hall or place of meeting; and for the accommodation of its Inhabitants hath a very great Market for Corn, living, Cattle, and Provisions, on Satur∣days. Apleby,Apleby. of note for its scituation and antiquity, being for the most part en∣circled with the River Eden; but so slenderly peopled with idle Inhabitants, and the Buildings so mean, although of late much amended, that were it not for the Assizes and Sessions here held, it would be little better than a Village. It is a very ancient Town Corporate, governed by a Major, and 12 Aldermen, with sub-Officers, enjoys large Immunities, sends Burgesses to Parliament, and is discharged from paying Toll in all places, except London and York. Here is an Hospital or Alms-house erected, and liberally endowed by the Lady Clifford for the relief of 13 decaied Widows, who are called the Mother and her 12 Sisters. The Market is here kept on Saturdays, which is well served with Corn and Provisions. Kirby-Stevens,Kirby-Stephens. beautified with a fair Church, seated near the Hills towards Yorkshire. It is a good and well known Town, which of late is much improved by the trade of making Stockings, and hath a good Market on Fridays. At Stainmore, a great Hill, is a Cross said to be erected upon a Peace conclu∣ded between William the Conquerour and Malcolme King of the Scots, and that by the said Place each Kingdom should know their limits; and on this Stone-Cross which is called Ree-Cross, that is, the Cross of Kings, was engra∣ven the Arms of the Kings, on the South-side those of England,Ree-Cross. and on the North those of Scotland. County of Wilts.WILT-SHIRE, an Inland County, no less fertil than delightful. Its Northern parts hath delectable Hills, well clothed with Woods and watered with fresh Streams, amongst which is the Isis, which soon becometh the chief of the Kingdom. Its Southern parts are more even, and exceeding fertil in Corn and Grass, feeding great flocks of Sheep; and are also well watered with the Avon, Willy, and Alder; and the midst of the County is plain and level, bearing the name of Salisbury-Plain, which is a large tract of ground which feedeth good flocks of Sheep.
In the midst of this County is a Dike called Wansdike, which runneth ma∣ny miles in length, and is a place of some wonder, being said to be made for the dividing the Kingdom of the Mercians from that of the West-Saxons; this being the place where they fought for the enlargement of their Domini∣ons. And here it was that Ina the West-Saxon joyned Battle with Geolred the Mercian, whence both of them quitted the Field with equal loss. This County is divided into 29 Hundreds, in which are seated 304 Parish Churches, and hath for the accommodation of the Inhabitants 20 Market Towns. Salisbury.Salisbury. a City of great antiquity, being the Seat of the Romans. It is commonly called New-Sarum, as raised out of the Old, which was seated on a great Eminence, being designed for Strength and War; yet honoured with an Episcopal See, and a fair Cathedral. This City of New Sarum is pleasantly seated on a River, whose Streams commodiously water its Streets, which are large and spacious. It is beautified with fair Buildings, and its Minster or Cathedral is a stately Structure, having as many Doors for entrance as Months in the year, as many Windows as Weeks, and as many Pillars (great and small) as Days in the year; and its Spire proudly sheweth it self from a great distance; near unto which is the Bishops Palace: then its Town-Hall, seated in a spacious Market-place, is a fair Building. This City (amongst its Immu∣nities) sends Burgesses to Parliament, is a place well inhabited and frequented, enjoyeth a good Trade, and its Markets, which are on Tuesdays and Saturdays, are very considerable for Corn and Provisions, and for living Cattle on Tuesdays. This City is encompassed with open Fields and Plains, where (at about 6 miles distance) is that wonderful piece of work called Stone-Henge, com∣posed of great and unwrought Stones, some being 28 foot high, and 7 broad, and so laid thwart one another that it is wonderful to behold. And these Stones are said to be thus raised by the Britains, as a Monumental Sepulchre of the Vertue and Manhood of Ambrosius Aurelianus, who took upon him the Imperial Purple-Robe of Britain in the declension of the Roman Empire, succoured his languishing Country, and by the aid of that warlike Arthur repressed the furious rage of the Enemy, vanquishing powerful Armies, and in the end, in the last Battel sought on this Plain, lost his life. Wilton.Wilton, well watered with the Willey and another River; a Town in for∣mer time of such great note that it was the chief in the County, and was dig∣nified with an Episcopal See, had a Monastery and enjoyed great Immunities; but at present it is become a small, mean Borough Town, electing Parliament men, is the place where she Knights of the Shire are chosen, where the Sheriff keeps his Monthly County-Courts; yet hath but a small Market on Fridays. Divizes.Devizes, seated near Blackmere-Forest; a Town of greater note and strength in former times than at present, being defended by a powerful Castle; yet is it a large Town, being well inhabited and traded unto for divers Com∣modities, especially for Mault; It hath the election of Parliament men, and its Market, which is on Thursdays, is very considerable for Horses, Cattle of all sorts, Corn, Provisions, and divers other Country-commodities. Chipnam.Chipnam, seated on the Avon, a Borough Town, electing Parliament men, and hath a noted Market for Corn and Provisions on Saturdays. Marlborough.Marlborough, seated on the Kenet near Savernake-Forest and Aldburn-Chase, and in a Chalky Soil, a Town of great note in former times, where there was a Parliament held, and a Law made for the suppressing of all Tumults called the Statute of Marlborough. And here was once a strong Castle be∣longing to John Sirnamed Sans Terre, who was after King of England. It is at present a good, large, and well built Borough Town, electing Parliament men, is governed by a Major and Burgesses, and hath a very considerable Market for Corn, Mault, Provisions, Butter, and especially Cheese on Saturdays. Not far from this place are divers Stones, some of a vast bigness pitched up an end.
Swindon.Swindon, seated near a rich Vale, and on the Summit of a Hill, a Town of no largeness, but its Houses are generally well built of Stone, and hath a con∣siderable Market for fat Cattle on Mondays. Malmesbury.Malmesbury, pleasantly seated on the Banks of the Avon, which almost en∣circleth it, over which it hath 6 Bridges. It is a Town of great antiquity, where Maidulph an Irish-Scot, a man of great Holiness and Learning, under a Hill in a solitary Grove built a Cell or little Monastery, and lived an Herme∣tical life, and where his Successor Adelma built a, fair Monastery, It as it, present a good Borough Town, governed by a Major and Aldermen, enjoyeth several Immunities, sends Burgesses to Parliament, and hath a good Market for Corn and Provisions on Saturdays. County of Worcester.The County of WORCESTER is of a fertil, Soil both for Tillage and Pasturage, bearing good Crops of Corn, and feeding store of Cattle. It is inter, laced with aspiring Hills, well clothed with Wood, as the Malvern, Bredon, Woodbery, Aberleg, &c. and through its Valleys run those many Rivers, which so plentifully water the County, as the Severn, Avon, Salwarp, &c. This Shire hath such great abundance of Fruits, that even the Hedgerows and High-ways are beset therewith, whose Fruits are free to all Passengers; and here Sider and Perry is had in as great plenty, as Beer at London. Here are many Salt-Pits or Wiches, which afford a most excellent high prized Salt for the Gentries Table, which for fineness, whiteness, and hardness, imi∣tateth Loaf-Sugar. This County is severed into 5 Hundreds in which are seated 152 Parishes, and is traded unto by 11 Market Towns. Worcester,Worcester. no less pleasantly than commodiously seated on the Severn, over which it hath a fair Stone-Bridge, with a Tower upon it. It is a City of great antiquity, said to be built by the Romans, the better to secure themselves from the Britains, who were Masters of all beyond the Severn, and was held in good repute in the time of the Danes and Saxons; and although it hath re∣ceived so many shocks of ill fortune by Fire and Sword, yet is it a place of good largeness, numbring 9 Parish Churches, besides St. Michaels and its Ca∣thedral, a stately Structure, in whose Quire are several graceful Tombs. This City enjoyeth ample Immunities, electeth Parliament men, is dignified with the See of a Bishop, is governed by a Major, Sheriff, 6 Aldermen, 24 principal Citizens, with 48 less, called Common-Council-men, 2 Chamberlains, a Recorder, Town Clerk, with sub-Officers; is graced with good Buildings and well ordered Streets, is well inhabited, enjoyeth a good Trade, especially for Clothings, here made in great quantities, and its Markets on Wednesdays, Fridays, and Saturdays, are very considerable, especially that on Saturdays for living Cattle, Corn, Flesh, Fish, and all Provisions, which are here had at easie rates. Evesholme,Evesholme. seated on a Hill, arising from the River Avon, which almost en∣compasseth it, where it hath a Stone-bridge. This Town was of note for its Abby, founded by Edwin, by the helping-hand of King Kenred, Son of Wol∣pher King of the Mercians. It is at present a large and well-built Major-Town, esteemed the best in the County, next to Worcester, containing two or three Parishes, sends Burgesses to Parliament, is well inhabited and frequented, enjoyeth a good Trade, principally for Stockings; and its Market, which is on Mondays, is very considerable for Corn, Cattle, Provisions, and Stockings. This Town gives name to a Vale near adjoyning, which for fertility of Soil may deservedly be called the Granary of these parts. Droitwich,Droitwich. seated on the River Salwarp; a pretty good Bailiwick-Town, but its Market (which is on Fridays) is but small. This Town is of great note for its Salt-Pits or Wiches, having three Fountains that afford great plenty of Water for the making of Salt, which is excellent white and good, for which here is drove a good Trade.
Sturbridge,Sturbridge. seated on a Flat, and on the Stower, over which it hath a Bridge; it is a good and well-built Town, hath the accommodation of a good Free-School, with a Library, and its Market on Fridays is well furnished with Corn, Provisions, and Swine. Kidderminster,Kidderminster. feated under a Hill, and on the Severn, where the Stower loseth it self, dividing the Town in twain; an ancient Bailiwick-Town, beau∣tified with a fair Church, hath well-built Houses, is well inhabited, and much traded unto for its Stuffs called Kidderminster-Stuffs, and its Market, which is on Thursdays, is considerable for Corn, Gottle, Provisions, and several Country-commodities. Bewdley,Bewdley. a Bailiwick-Town, which sends Burgesses to Parliament, plea∣santly seated on the Severn, and near the Forest of Wire, which in former time was a place of great delight, and much resorted unto. It is a neat and well-built Town, enjoyeth a good Trade for Mault, Leather, and Caps, called Bewdley-Caps, here made, and hath a Market on Saturdays, chiefly conside∣rable for Barly. YORK-SHIRE,County of York describ'd. the largest County in England, being above 300 miles in compass; and although thus spacious, for the generality is indifferent fertil, yielding good plenty of Cattle, Corn, Fowl, and Fish; for if one part is stony, sandy, and barren, other parts make amends: and although there are great store of Heaths and Moors, which are barren ground, yet are they profitable to the Inhabitants for the feeding of Cattle. In this County the Romans had several Stations; and here were abundance of Abbeys, Monasteries, and Religious Houses, many of which were of great note, eminency, and wealth. The chief Manufactures of this Shire, are Stockings, Alum, Jett, Lime, Knives, Pins, &c. but above all Cloth in great plenty. It is fevered into three distinct parts, and called the North-Riding, the East-Riding, and the West-Riding; which said Ridings or Parts are subdivided into 26 Wapontacks, or Hundreds, viz. the North into Eleven, the East into Six, and the West into Nine; and in all these Wapontacks are numbred 563 Parish Churches, besides abundance of Chapels of Ease, by reason of the largeness of the Parishes, many of the Chapels being as large as Parishes in other parts of England. The North-Riding of Yorkshire may not improperly be divided into Rich∣mondshire; Cleaveland, a fertil part; North-Allerton, and Blackmore, ve∣ry Mountainous, Craggy, and Moorish. The chief places in this Riding are, York,City of York. which next to London claimeth the Priority of all others in the King∣dom; a place of great antiquity and fame, having its rise from the Romans, who had it in such great esteem, that Severus their Emperour had here his Palace, and here ended his days, and had those Funeral Rites solemnized on his Corps according to their custom. And here Fl. Valerius Constantius, sur∣named Chlorus, bid adue to the World, and in his room his Son Constantine was here proclaimed Emperour. Nor did this City thus flourish only in the time of the Romans, but was of great repute in all succeeding Ages, and hath in all the revolutions and changes under the Saxons, Danes, and Nor∣mans, preserved its ancient lustre, and is at present a fair, large, and beautiful City, adorned with many splendid Buildings, both publick and private, is very populous, much resorted unto, and well inhabited by Gentry and wealthy Tradesmen, and numbreth about 30 Parish Churches and Chapels, besides its Cathedral or Minster, a most stately Structure dedicated to St. Peter. Amongst its publick Buildings of note these may be taken notice of; The Bishops-Palace; its Chapter-House, a curious piece of Architecture; the Princes-House, called the Mannor; and the Courts of Judicature, held for the Neighbouring Marches, according to that of Ludlow. It is a City and County within it self, enjoyeth large Immunities, sendeth Burgesses to Parliament, is governed by a Lord Major, 12 Aldermen clad in Scarlet, 2 Sheriffs, 12 Common Council,
8 Chamberlains, a Recorder, Town Clerk, Sword-Bearer, and Common Ser∣jeant, with other sub-Officers. It is a place of great strength, being well for∣tified, and enclosed with a strong Wall, on which are many Turrets or Watch∣houses, and hath for entrance 4 Gates and 5 Posterns. Its scituation is no less pleasantly than commodiously seated on the Owse, which severeth it in two parts, but joyned together by a fair Stone-bridge; and to conclude, its Markets on Thursdays and Staturdays are very considerable, and well served with Flesh, Fish, Fowl, &c. as are its Shambles on the Week-days with Provisi∣ons. Malton, or New-Malton, seated on the Derwent,Malton. over which it hath a good Stone-bridge. It is composed of two Towns, the New and the Old Malton, and both containing 3 Parish Churches; it is a place well inhabited, and ac∣commodated with good Inns, hath weekly two Markets, on Tuesdays and Saturdays, which is one of the best in the County for Horses, living Cattle, Provisions, and most Country-commodities, especially Ʋtensils for Husbandry; and as a Borough Town (which is but meanly built) electeth Parliament men. Pickering, or the Honour of Pickering, a pretty good Town,Pickering. belonging to the Dutchy of Lancaster, hath a famous Old Castle (now ruinous) in which they keep their Courts for the hearing of Causes under 40 s. in the said Ho∣nour, which includeth several Villages, which (as it were) encompass it, so that the adjacent Country is called Pickering-Lith, the Forest of Pickering, and the Liberty of Pickering. Its Market, which is on Mondays, is well served with Corn and Provisions. Scarborough, a place of great strength, as well by Nature as Art,Scarborough. being seated on a steep Rock, with such craggy Cliffs, that it is almost inaccessible, and beareth so into the Sea; that it is washed on all parts, except on the West, where it yieldeth access by a strait passage, Cliff, or Gullet, where it hath a strong Wall. On the top of this Rock is a very fair, green, and large Plain, containing about 60 Acres of ground, and hath a little Well of Fresh-water springing out of the Rock; and for its further defence hath a strong Castle, now made use of by his Majesty for a Garrison. This Town is not very large, but well built and inhabited, enjoyeth a good Trade, having a commodious Key, with several Vessels belonging to it, which are employed by them; and during the Herring-season for the Fishing Trade, they being plentifully taken on this Coast. This place is of note for its famous Spaw, much resorted unto, as well by Foreigners as the English. It is a Town Corporate, electing Par∣liament men, is governed by two Bailiffs, and a Common Council; and hath two Markets weekly, on Thursdays, which is of good account, and on Satur∣days, which is but small. Not far from this Town is Robinhoods-Bay, so called from Robinhood, that noted Robber in the Reign of King Richard the First; and here is found Jett, or black-Amber, Whitby, well seated on the River Esk, at its influx into the Sea,Whitby. over which it hath a Bridge. It is a well built Town, enjoyeth a considerable Trade, (especially for Alum and Butter, called Whitby-Butter) there belonging to it about 100 Sail of Vessels, having a Custom, and would be more considerable were its Peer finished; and its Market, which is on Saturdays, is very great, and well served with Flesh, Fish, Fowl, &c. On this Coast is seated Skeningrave; a small Town,Skeningrave. but well frequented by Fishermen: And near unto Hunt-Cliff, not far from the Shoar, at a Low-water, appear Rocks, about which the Seal-sish come in great Sholes, and lie sleeping and Sunning themselves in fair and warm weather; and (according to observation) whilst these Fish do thus sleep, there is one of them which watch∣eth as a Sentinel, and when any danger approacheth, they are awaked by its slinging it felf into the Sea, and making a noise, and so escape. North-Allerton, seated near the Swale, a large Borough Town,North-Allerton. which e∣lecteth Parliament men, and hath a great Market on Wednesdays, for Horses, Cattle, Corn, and Provisions, and is a Town of a good Trade.
The other part of this Riding beareth the name of Richmondshire,Richmondshire. so called from a Castle there seated. It lieth very high, and is Mountainous and Rocky; hath good Mines of Lead, Copper, and Pit-Coal; is interlaced with fertil Val∣leys. It containeth within its Jurisdiction 5 Wapontacks, and hath for its chief places, Richmond,Richmond. seated on the Northern Banks of the Swale, over which it hath a Stone-bridge. It is a large Town Corporate, containeth 2 Parish Churches, is begirt with a Wall, which hath 3 Gates for entrance, which leadeth into so many Suburbs; is fortified with a strong Castle, highly seated on a Rock; is graced with well-built Houses, many of which are of Free-stone, and its Streets are paved and well ordered. Its Market-place, which is well resorted unto, and plentifully furnished with Cattle and Provisions, on Saturdays, is very spacious. It is well inhabited by Gentry and Tradesmen, and enjoyeth a very good Trade for Stockings and Woollen Knit-Caps for Sea-men. It is governed by a Major and Aldermen, with sub-Officers, enjoyeth large Immunities, and hath a Court of Record for all Actions, without limitation of some for the said liberty. The East parts of this Riding, lying on or near the Sea-shoar and the Banks of the Derwent, are of a good Soil and fertil; but the midst, called the Wold, is very hilly and barren. Its chief places are, Hull,Hull. or Kingston upon Hull, commodiously seated on the Mouth of the Ri∣ver Hull, at its influx into the Humber; a Town of no great antiquity, taking its rise from King Edward the First, where he made a Haven and a Free-Burgh, and granted to its Inhabitants (who were Free Burgesses) ample Im∣munities. It is at present a very large Borough and Town Corporate (though containing but 2 Parish Churches) graced with fair Buildings, and well or∣dered Streets, which are sufficiently furnished with Shop-keepers, one of which resembleth Thames-street, near the Bridge in London, where Pitch, Tar, Cordage, Sails, and other necessaries for Ships are sold, and to which the Ships and Vessels come to lade and unlade their Goods, having a Custom-House and Key; and the commodiousness of the Town for Shipping, makes it to be a place well inhabited, and much resorted unto by Merchants; this Town be∣ing inferiour for Trade to none in England, next to London and Bristol. It is a place of exceeding great strength, being able to bid defiance both to a Navy and a Land-Army, and that by reason of its strong Block-houses, Castles, VValls, Forts, Trenches; and the Inhabitants and Souldiers within it, being a considerable Garrison of his Majesties. It is governed by a Major, 12 Alder∣men, a Common Council, and other sub-Officers; amongst its Priviledges, gives Vote in Parliament by its Representatives. It is very well served with Pro∣visions, as well in its Shambles as in its Market, which is on Saturday. In these Seas are taken abundance of Herrings, to the great profit of the Inhabitants. Bridlington,Barlington. or Barlington, a Sea-Port Town, seated on a Creek near Flamborough-head (a place well known to Sea-men) and hath a sase Road for Ships to ride in, and a very commodious Key for Ships to lade and unlade at, by reason of which it enjoyeth a good Trade; and its Market, which is on Saturdays, is well served with Provisions, &c. Beverley,Beverley. seated on the River Hull, which gives passage into the Humber for Boats and Barges, for the conveyance of their Goods to and fro. It is a large and well-built Borough and Town Corporate, containing two Parish Churches besides its Minster; it enjoyeth large Immunities, electeth Parlia∣ment men, is governed by a Major, 12 Aldermen, with sub-Officers; is a place well inhabited by Gentry and Tradesmen; and its Markets, which are on Thurs∣days and Saturdays, are well served with Provisions. Howden,Howden. seated near the Rivers Owse and Derwent; a good large Town, which gives name to a small Territory called Howdenshir, and hath a very great Market for Cattle, Corn, and Provisions, on Saturdays.
The West Riding is the largest of the three, is every where well watered with Rivers, and replenished with good Towns; the chief amongst which are, Halifax, seated in a barren Soil, and on a steep descent of an Hill;Halifax. a place of note, as well for being the Birth-place of Johannes de Sacro Bosco, the In∣venter of the Sphere, as for its strict Law in the sudden beheading of such as are taken in the act of Theft. As for the largeness of the Parish, it contain∣eth 11 Chapels of Ease, of which two are Parish Chapels; is very well in∣habited, and driveth a great Trade for Cloth and other Manufactures. It is a very good Town, graced with Stone-built Houses, and well-ordered and paved Streets, and hath a considerable Market for Corn and Provisions on Thurs∣days. Sheafield, seated on the Don or Dune;Sheafield. a place of chief note for the great quantity of Smiths there inhabiting (by reason of the many Iron-Mines in these parts) who drive a good Trade for all sorts of Edge-Tools, and other things of Iron, especially Knives, which bear the name of Sheafield-Blades. The Town is large, its Houses built of Stone, and hath a great Market on Tuesdays for several Commodities, especially Corn, which is much bought up for the supply of some parts of Darbyshire, Nottinghamshire, and the West of Yorkshire. Rotheram, seated on the Don, over which it hath a fine Stone-bridge;Rotheram. a well built Town, with Stone-houses, and hath a very great Market for Cattle and Provisions on Mondays. Tickhill, yet retaineth something of its ancient Castle and Fortifications,Tickhill. demolished in the late Wars. It hath a distinct Liberty, called the Honour of Tickhill, being part of the Dutchy of Lancaster, and hath a Market on Satur∣days. Doncaster, seated on the Done, and on the great Road to London;Doncaster. an anci∣ent Town, of good Antiquity, once defended by a Castle, now reduced to ruins; and in Anno 759 this Town suffered much, great part (with its Cittadel) be∣ing consumed with Fire; but was rebuilt with a fair Church, erected in the place where the Cittadel stood. It is a large, well-built and inhabited Town Corporate, governed by a Major and Aldermen, enjoyeth a good Trade, espe∣cially for Stockings, Knit-Waistcoats, Petticoats, and Gloves, and hath a very good Market for Corn, Cattle, and Provisions, on Saturdays. Selby, honoured in giving birth to King Henry the First, seated on the Owse,Selby. which gives passage for small Vessels to York, which doth occasion it to be a Town of some Trade, and hath a good Market for Provisions and Merchandize on Mondays. Ponfract, very delightfully seated in a dry tract of ground;Pontfract. a neat Town Corporate, beautified with good Buildings, was once strengthned with a strong and stately Castle, which was demolished in the late Wars. It is governed by a Major and Aldermen, sends Burgesses to Parliament, and hath a very great Market for Corn, Cattle, Provisions, and divers Country-commodities, on Saturdays. Wakefield, seated in a large Lordship so called, having its Steward.Wakefield. It is a large Town, of good antiquity, beautified with well built Stone-houses; it is a place well known for its Clothing here made, and hath a great Market on Thursdays and Fridays for Cloth, Corn, Provisions, and divers Country-commodities. Leeds, seated on the Are; an ancient Town,Leeds. where the Kings had for∣merly their Royal Palace; and here Oswy, King of the Northumbers, put to flight Penda the Mercian. It is a large and well built Town Corporate, go∣verned by a Major and Aldermen, with sub-Officers, electeth Parliament men, is very well inhabited, especially by wealthy Clothiers, who drive a great Trade for their Cloth; and hath two considerable Markets, on Tuesdays and Saturdays, which are well traded unto for Corn, Provisions, Woollen-Cloth, and divers good Commodities.
Knaresbrough,Knaresbrough. delightfully seated on the Nid, and on a ragged rough Rock, on which is seated a Castle. It is a well-built Town Corporate, electing Parliament men, and hath a good Market for Corn and Provisions on Wed∣nesdays. Nigh unto this place, in a Moorish boggy-ground, ariseth a Spring of Vitrio∣line tast and odour; and not far off is also a Sulphur-Well, which is good for several Diseases; here is also a droping petrefying-Well, which turns, Wood, Moss, &c. into Stone. Rippon,Rippon. feated between the Yore and a Branch thereof, over which are two Bridges. It is a place of good antiquity, and of much same for its Religious Houses, but especially for its stately Monastery, built by Wilfrid Archbishop of York. It is at present a large and well-built Town Corporate, governed by a Major and Aldermen, hath the election of Parliament men; the Town is well inhabited by Gentry, and its Market, which is on Thursdays, is very great for Cattle, Corn, Provisions, and chiefly for Wool, which is much bought up by the Cloathiers of Leeds. This Town is beautified with a very fine Ca∣thedral Church with a lofty Spire-Steeple; and in this Church was St. Win∣frids Needle, a place famous in our Fore-fathers days, being a narrow Hole in the close Vaulted-room under ground; in which place (as 'tis reported, but not Recorded for Truth) Womens Honesty was used to be tried; for, according to the story, those that were Chast could easily pass through, but the kind∣hearted Souls were (by an unknown means) held fast, and could not pass through.
WALES. THE Island of great Britain, in ancient time, was severed into three Parts; the first, fairest, and greatest, contained all within the French Seas, the Rivers of Severn, Dee, and Humber, and was called Lhoyger, which name in Welsh it still retaineth; and in English, England. The second took up all the Land Northwards, from the Humber to the Orkney Isles, and was called Mare Caledonium, or Deucaledonium, and now Scotland: And the third lying between the Irish Seas, the Rivers of Severn and Dee, was anciently called Cambria, and now Wales; to which the Britains being outed of their Country, were forced to retire, and there fortified themselves. The Bounds.This Country of Wales is bounded on all sides by the Sea, except towards England, from which it is severed by the River Dee, and a Line drawn to the River Wye; but anciently it was extended to the River Severn Eastward, for Offa King of the Mercians forced them to quit the Plain Countries beyond that River (which now is called the Marches of Wales,) and to betake them∣selves to the Mountains, which he caused to be separated from England by a great Ditch, called Offa's Dike; in Welsh, Claudh Offa; in many places yet to be seen; which Dike beginneth at the influx of the Wye into the Severn, and reacheth unto Chester, which is about 84 miles; where the Dee disburthens it self into the Sea. And over this Dike (by a Law made by Harald) no Welshman was permitted to pass with a Weapon, upon pain of losing his Right hand. Very Mountai∣nous and Bar∣ren.The whole Country is Mountainous and Barren, yet affordeth several good Commodities, and is not without many fertil Valleys, which bear good Corn, and breed great abundance of small Cattle, with which they furnish England, as also with Butter, Cheese, Woollen-Cloths, called Welsh-Frizes, Cottons, Bays, Herrings, both White and Red, Calve-skins, Hides, Hony, Wax, &c. and the Country is well stored with Quarries of Free-stone for building, and Mill∣stones; as also hath Mines of Lead, Lead-Oar, Coals, and some of Silver and Tin. And these Commodities are generally brought to Shrewsbury, Oswestre, Bristol, Worcester, and other adjacent parts, and thence dispersed into Eng∣land. Its Ancient division.About the year of Christ 870, Rodericus Magnus, King of Wales, divided this Country into three Regions, Territories, or Talaiths, which were so ma∣ny Kingdoms, to wit, Gwineth, Venedotia, or North-Wales; and this part he gave to Anarawd, his eldest Son; Deheubarth, or South-Wales, which he gave to Cadelh, his second Son; and Powis, or Powis-Land, which he gave to Mervin, his third Son: and in each of these three Kingdoms he appointed a Royal Palace, as at Aberffraw, in the Isle of Anglesey, for North-Wales; at Dynefar, or Dynevowr-Castle, not far from Carmarthen, for South-Wales; and at Matravan, in Montgomery-shire, for Powis-Land. Present divi∣sion.But at present, according to Act of Parliament, made in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, it is severed into two Parts, to wit, North-Wales and South-Wales, both which have as it were devoured all Powis-Land; and in each of these parts there are 6 Counties; in the North, those of Anglesey, Caernarvon, Denbigh, Flint, Merioneth, and Montgomery; and in the South, those of Brecknock, Cardigan, Carmarden, Glamorgan, Pembroke, and Radnor.
Again, Wales (like unto England) is divided into four Circuits for the Ad∣ministration of Justice; and then the first shall contain the Counties of Den∣bigh, Flint, and Montgomery; the second, those of Brecknock, Glamorgan, and Radnor; the third, those of Cardigan, Carmarden, and Pembroke; and the fourth, those of Anglesey, Caernarvon, and Merioneth. But to proceed to the description of these Counties, and first of North-Wales. NORTH-WALES. Isle of Angle∣sey.THe Island of ANGLESEY is severed from Caernarvon-shire by a narrow Streight of the River Menai, and on all other parts it is washed with the Irish Seas. It was the ancient Seat of the Druids, and brought with no small difficulty under the Roman Scepter by Julius Agricola. It is so fertil, and abounding in all things, as Corn, Cattle, and Provisions, that the Welsh term it the Mother of Wales, supplying its defects; although for fight it seemeth dry, stony, and hilly. It produceth a sort of Stones called Molares, very fit and good for Mill-stones, and Grind-stones. In this Isle were formerly seated 360 Towns and Villages, but at present but 74, and hath intercourse of Traffick with two Markes Towns, and hath seve∣ral good Ports and Harbours, as also divers Ferries, for the conveyance of Passengers to and fro. Its chief places are, Beau-Morish.Beau-Morish, seated on a Moorish-ground, but commandeth a fair prospect into the Sea, where it hath a very good Harbour for Ships. It was built by King Edward the First, the better to secure his Conquest, who fortified it with a powerful Castle, now in good repair. It is a pretty good handsom Town Cor∣porate, governed by a Major, Recorder, 2 Bailiffs, who are Justices of the Peace, and 21 Common Council, called Burgesses. It is the chief Shire-Town, where the Assizes and Sessions are held, sends a Burgess to Parliament, is in∣differently well inhabited and frequented, as being the usual place for the re∣ception of Passengers from London to Ireland, before their taking Shipping at Holyhead. It hath weekly two Markets, on Wednesdays and Saturdays, which are indifferent good. Newburgh,Newburgh. seated near Brant River, where it formeth a Bay, and falleth into Menai River; a small Borough Town, governed by a Major, 2 Bailiffs, and a Recorder, and hath a Market on Tuesdays. County of Caernarvon de∣scribed.The County of CAERNARVON, before Wales was divided into Shires, bore the name of Snowden-Forest from the principal Hill therein seated, which is of a very great height and extent, and affordeth excellent sweet Mutton; on the top of this Hill floateth a Meer, and maketh a River, and falleth into the Sea at Trathe-Mawer. It is a County of a sharp Air, ve∣ry Mountainous; yet not unfertil, and feedeth good Herds of Cattle. In this County are seated 68 Parish Churches, and hath six Market Towns: Caernarvon,Caernarvon. commodiously seated on the Sea-shoar, where it hath an ex∣cellent prospect into the Isle of Anglesey. It was a place of good account, where the Princes of Wales had their Exchequer and Chancery for North-Wales; and is a place of great strength as well by Nature as Art, being en∣compassed on all parts (except towards the East) with the Sea and two Ri∣vers, and had a strong Castle, where, in a Tower thereof called Eagle-Tower, Edward the Second, the first Prince of Wales was born. It is a place of no great extent, having but one Parish Church; its Houses and Streets are well built and ordered, is well inhabited, enjoyeth several Immunities, sends a Burgess to Parliament, is governed by the Constable of the Castle, who is ever Major, and hath for his assistance an Alderman, 2 Bailiffs, a Town-Clerk, with Sub-Officers; and its Market on Saturdays, is very good for Corn and Provisions.
Bangor, lowly seated on the Sea-shoar; a Town in Ancient time so large,Bangor. that it was called Bangor the Great, and was defended by a powerful Castle, which long since was laid level to the ground. It is at present but a small City, or rather a Town, yet dignified with the See of a Bishop; its Cathedral is large and well built, its Houses indifferent good, is pretty well inhabited, is governed by the Bishops-Steward, who keepeth Court-Leets and Courts-Baron for the Bishop; and hath an indifferent good Market on Wednesdays. Nigh unto Bangor is Penmaen-maur, that is, the Great Stony-head,Penmaen-maur. being an exceeding high and steep Rock, which at High-Sea so hangeth over, that it affordeth a very narrow and dangerous passage; but having passed this, and Penmaen-byehan, that is, the Lesser Stony-head, the Country openeth it self in a broad Plain as far as the River Conwey. Aberconwey, seated at the Mouth of the Conwey,Aberconwey. raised out of the Ruins of the ancient Canonium of Antonine, being strongly fenced both with Walls and a Castle. It is a pretty good Town, governed by an Alderman and 2 Bailiffs, which for largeness and good Buildings, doth rather deserve the name of a City than a Town, especially were it thicker inhabited, and better resorted un∣to; yet its Market, which is on Fridays, is well served with Provisions and several Country-commodities. Pulhely, seated on the Sea-shoar, and between two Rivers;Pulhely. a pretty large and indifferent well-built Bailiwick Town, which hath a good Market on Wednesdays for Corn and Provisions, and enjoyeth a good Trade by Sea. County of Denbigh de∣scribed.DENBIGH-SHIRE, a Country very Hilly, several of which are of so great a height, that they retain Snow, and the tops thereof in the Summer season are the Country-mans Morning-Almanack, to denote a fair day by the rising of certain Vapours. It is of a different Soil; the Western part being Heathy, is much inclined to sterility, and but thinly inhabited, except the part which lieth towards the Sea; the Eastern (beyond the Valley) is much more barren; and the middle, where it lieth flat, is a pleasant and fertil Vale, and well inhabited with Gentry. Here are seated 57 Parish Churches, and is traded unto by four Market Towns. Denbigh, seated on the hanging of a Rocky-Hill,Denbigh. and on a branch of the Cluyd; once a place of good strength, when fortified with a strong Wall, and an impregnable Castle. The Town is indifferent large, well built, inhabited by Glovers and Tanners, enjoyeth a good Trade, by some esteemed the best Town in North-Wales; is governed by 2 Aldermen, 2 Bailiffs, and 25 Capi∣tal Burgesses, with sub-Officers; electeth a Parliament man, and hath a good Market for Corn, Cattle, and Provisions, on Wednesdays. Ruthin, seated on the Cluyd, which washeth a rich Vale,Ruthin. of note for its once large and fair Castle. It is a large, well inhabited and frequented Town Cor∣porate, governed by 2 Aldermen and Burgesses, hath a large Hospital, and a Free School, governed by a Warden; and hath a very considerable Market for Corn and Provisions on Mondays, which is esteemed the best in the Vale. Wrexham, seated in a good Soil, affordeth plenty of Lead,Wrexham. and on a small River which falleth into the Dee. It is an indifferent large, well-built and in∣habited Town, graced with a fair Church, whose Steeple is not inferiour to any in England; and hath two Markets weekly, viz. on Mondays, which is but small, and on Thursdays, which is very great for Corn, Cattle, and Provi∣sions. In this County is Llansainan, seated on the River Aled;Llansalnan. a small Town, but of note for its Cave made in the side of a Rock or Stony-hill, wherein are 24 Seats, some bigger and some lesser, known by the name of Arthur's Round-Table; a place much frequented by Shepheards and Heardsmen.
Flintshire de∣scribed.The County of FLINT is not over Mountainous; and those that are being interlaced with fertil Valleys, affordeth plenty of Corn and Pasturage; it hath great abundance of Hony, but is very defective of Wood and Fruits. It is indifferently well watered, hath several safe Harbours for Ships to Ride and Anchor in; and this part of the County hath plenty of Mines of Pit-Coal, and the adjacent Mountains have store of Lead-Oar. This Shire is famous for St. Winfrids-Well,St. Winfrids-Well. not far from Cajervis, in English, Holy-Well; a place of great note, and much resorted unto, as well by those to Bath in, as being esteemed very good for several Diseases; as by Pilgrims, out of their devotion in memory of that Christian Virgin Winfrid, who was there ravished by a young Lord or Prince of the Country, and to stop her Acclamations, cruelly slew her and cut off her Head; out of which place (ac∣cording to Report) did immediately gush forth a Spring, which is of so rapid a Stream, that at a small distance it is able to drive a Mill. Over the Head of this Spring or Well there now standeth a Chapel built of Free-stone, of curi∣ous workmanship; and in the Chancel, on the Glass-window is lively pour∣traied the History of St. Winfrid; of her life, and how her Head was cut off, and set on again by St. Reuno. In the Well there groweth Moss, of a most sweet and pleasant smell, which is said to be St. Winfrids-hair. Here are seated 28 Parishes, and hath two Market Towns. Flint,Flint. well seated on the Dee, of chief note for its now old and ruinous Castle; and although the Shire-Town is but small, and hath no Market; but as a Borough-Town, electeth Parliament man. St. Asaph, seated on the Elwy,St. Asaph. where it receiveth the Cluyd, over each of which there is a Bridge; a place of more fame for its antiquity, than largeness or beauty, being an ancient Episcopal See, founded by Kentigerne, a Scot, Bi∣shop of Glasco, in Anno 560, of which about 300 that were unlearned, em∣ployed their times in Husbandry within the limits of the said Monastery, and the rest to a Holy life. By this it may be judged their Bounds were exceeding large; and upon his return into Scotland, he ordained Asaph (a godly man) to be his Successor, from whom the Town or City took its name, which at pre∣sent is not large, not its Buildings very good, chiefly glorying in its Cathedral. It hath a small Market on Saturdays. County of Merioneth de∣scribed.The County of MERIONETH is exceeding Mountainous and Rocky, very unpleasant, and for the generality much inclined to sterility, bearing but thin Crops of Corn; yet is found to feed good flocks of Sheep, and Herds of Cattle, from which the Inhabitants draw their chief Maintenance. It is ob∣served, that these Mountains are of so great an height, that in many places two men may stand and discourse together, each upon a several Mountain, but must travel some miles before they can come to meet. It is well watered with Rivers, and is well provided with red Deer, Fowl, and Fish; and as this County is thus Mountainous and barren, so is it as thinly inhabited, numbring but 37 Parishes, and those but ordinary, and hath but three Market Towns. Harlech,Harlech. seated on a Rock on the Sea-shoar; a small Borough Town, which is but thinly inhabited, nor its Houses over well built, although the chief of the County. It is governed by a Major for its chief Magistrate, sends a Bur∣gess to Parliament, and hath a mean Market. This Town was once of a greater account for its strong and beautiful Castle, highly seated, commanding both Sea and Country adjoyning; but was reduced to Ruins in the late un∣happy Wars by the Parliamentteers, this being a Garrison of the Kings. Bala,Bala. seated near Pimble-Meer, which is of a large extent, through which the Dee is said to run, but not to mingle with its water, which is proved for that the Salmons, plentifully taken in the Dee, are not found in this Meer; and likewise the Fish called Gwyniaid, much like unto Whitings, which is in as great plenty taken in this Meer, are never found in the Dee. This Town is Incorporated, enjoyeth some Immunities, is governed by Bailiffs, hath an indifferent Market on Saturdays; but the Town is mean and small.
County of Montgomery described.MONTGOMERY-SHIRE, very Hilly and Mountainous, but in∣terlaced with fertil Valleys both for Tillage and Pasturage, and was in ancient time of note for its good breed of Horses. Here are seated 47 Parish Churches, and is traded unto by 6 Market Towns. Montgomery, the Shire-Town, so called from Roger de Montgomery,Montgomery. Earl of Shrewsbury, the first builder thereof. It is well seated amongst rich grounds, and on an easie Ascent of a Hill; a place once fortified with a powerful Castle, and fenced about with a Wall, which was dismantled in the late Wars. It is an indifferent large Town Corporate, governed by Bailiffs, sends a Burgess to Parliament, and its Market, which is on Thursdays, is well resorted unto, and hath a good Shambles. Welch-Pool, seated on the Severn, and in a rich Vale;Welch-Pool. the greatest and best built Town Corporate in the County, governed by Bailiffs, is well inhabited, enjoyeth a very good Trade for English Commodities from Bristol, and its Market on Mondays is very considerable for Cattle, Provisions, and Flannels. Its Castle, called Powis-Castle (which within the compass of its Wall con∣taineth two Castles,) is of late a large and stately Pile of Building. Llanvilling, scituate in a Flat amongst the Hills,Llanvilling. and between the Cain and the Ebir; it is a good Town, and hath a considerable Market for Cattle, Corn, Wool, and Provisions, on Thursdays. Within three miles of this Town is Matravan-Castle, sometimes the Royal Seat of the Princes of Powis-Land. SOƲTH-WALES. County of Pembroke de∣scribed.PEMBROKE-SHIRE, called in Welsh, Brechinean, is said to take its name from one Brechanius a Prince, who had a great Off-spring of 24 Daughters, and all Saints. It is a County for the generality very Moun∣tainous, some of which are exceeding high, especially Monuchdenny-Hill, not far from Brecknock, which exalteth it self above the Clouds; and although thus Hilly, yet is not without many large and fertil Plains and Valleys, both for Corn and feeding of Cattle; and the more by reason of the Rivers, Ʋske and Wye, which receive those many Streams that so plentifully water the County, and afford to the Inhabitants great abundance of Fish, especially Salmon and Trouts, in the Wye. Here are seated 61 Parish Churches, and 4 Market Towns. Brecknock, seated at the meeting of the Rivers Hodney and Ʋske,Brecknock. over which it hath a fair Stone-bridge. It is a place of good antiquity, and at pre∣sent a very large Bailiwick Town, containing 3 Parish Churches, one of which is a Collegiate Church; its Houses are well built, was once strengthned with a stately Castle, as also with a strong Wall, which gave entrance by 3 Gates. It is governed by 2 Bailiffs, 15 Aldermen, 2 Chamberlains, a Town Clerk, &c. amongst its Immunities sends a Burgess to Parliament; is a place well inha∣bited, and the rather as being the Shire-Town where the Assizes are held. It enjoyeth a good Trade for Clothing, and hath weekly two Markets, on Wed∣nesdays and Saturdays, which are very well served with Cattle, Corn, and Pro∣visions. About two miles from this Town is a large Meer or Pool some miles in compass, called Brecknock-Meer, where in former times stood a fair City, which was swallowed up by an Earthquake. Hay, seated between the Wye and the Dulas;Hay. a Town of good note in the time of the Romans, being then sortified with a Castle and a Wall. It is at present a good Town, and hath a very great Market for Corn, Cattle, and Provisions, on Mondays. Bealt, pleasantly seated amongst the Woods, and on the Banks of the Wye,Bealt. over which it hath a very large Wooden-Bridge, which leads into Radnorshire; at present a pretty small Town, enjoying a considerable Trade for Stockings,
and hath weekly two very good Markets, on Mondays for Cattle, and on Saturdays for Corn and Provisions. County of Cardigan.CARDIGAN, a County of a different Soil, and ill clothed with Wood; the Southern and Western parts being plain and very fertil (yet not without some Hills,) and its Eastern and Northern parts are Mountainous, and not so fertil, amongst which is the Plinillimon-Hill, a Mountain of a very great ex∣tent and height. Here are numbred 64 Parish Churches, and hath 4 Market Towns. Cardigan,Cardigan. formerly strengthned with a Wall, and a fair and spacious Castle, built on the side of the Tywye upon a Rock, long since brought to ruin. It is a Town no less pleasantly than commodiously seated on the said River Tywye, o∣ver which it hath a fair Stone-bridge, sustained by several Arches, and is of no great distance from its influx into the Sea; and being the Shire-Town where the Assizes are held, and the County-Gaol kept; is well inhabited and frequent∣ed, being a large Town, though containing but one Church, which is a fair Structure, and is graced with a well built Shire-Hall, with several good Buildings; and as a Town Corporate, is governed by a Major, Aldermen, Common Council, with sub-Officers; enjoyeth several Immunities, electeth a Parliament man, and hath an indifferent good Market on Saturdays. Llanbeder,Llanbeder. seated on the Tywye, over which is a Bridge which leadeth into Caermarden-shire; an indifferent good Town, governed by a Port-Reive and Steward, and hath a Market on Tuesdays, which is well resorted unto for Grain and Provisions, and from the latter end of April to the beginning of Ju∣ly, is very great for Sheep, Heifers, Cows and Calves. Aberysthwy,Aberysthwy. seated on a Rising-ground, and on the Banks of the Ridall, near its influx into the Sea; a Town once strengthned with a Wall and Castle, now ruinated. It is a long and ill-built Town, governed by a Major, with sub-Officers, hath a very great Market for Corn, Wool, Cheese, and Provisions, on Mondays, and is a place much resorted unto by reason of its Fishing-trade, and would be more were its Inhabitants industrious. Near unto this Town is Lhan-Badernvaur; a well-built Town, graced with a fair Church, which was formerly an Episcopal See, and is now the Parish Church of Aberysthwy. County of Caermarden.CAERMARDEN-SHIRE is generally of a fertil Soil both for Til∣lage and Pasturage, as not being so Mountainous as its Neighbouring Counties, and is well watered with Rivers, as the Tovye, Taoy, Lough, or Taff, which (with others) discharge themselves into the Sea, plentifully serving the Inha∣bitants with Fish and Fowl; and in many places are dug Pit-Coal. Here are seated 87 Parish Churches, and is traded unto by 8 Market Towns. Caermarden,Caermarden. pleasantly seated on the Towy, over which it hath a fair Stone-bridge, and is navigable for small Vessels, having a good Key for the lading and unlading of their Merchandizes. It is a place well inhabited and traded unto, and as a Town Corporate is governed by a Major, 2 Sheriffs, e∣lected out of 16 Burgesses or Aldermen, all clad in Scarlet, with other sub-Officers. Amongst its Immunities electeth a Parliament man, keepeth Courts for the trial of Causes, is the place where the Assizes are held, and hath weekly two Markets, on Wednesdays and Saturdays, which are very great for Corn, Cattle, and Provisions, both Flesh, Fish, and Fowl, in great plenty. This Town glorieth in giving birth to Merlyn, that famous British Prophet, or South-sayer. Llancharn,Llangharn. or Llangharne, seated on the Towye, near its influx into the Sea; a well-built Town, of some Trade, having several Vessels belonging to it, and its Market, which is on Fridays, is very good for Corn and Provi∣sions. Near unto this Town is a Wich, or Salt-work, where good quantity of Salt made.
Llanelly, seated on a Creek of the Sea; a pretty good Town,Llanelly. which is well traded unto for Sea-Coal, and hath a Market on Thursdays, of good ac∣count for all sorts of Cattle, Corn, and Provisions. Llandilovawre, seated on the Towy, over which it hath a fair Bridge;Llandilovawre a pretty good Town, having two Markets weekly, on Tuesdays and Saturdays, for Cattle, Corn, and Provisions; and the Parish to which this Town belongeth is about 13 miles in length, and 7 or 8 in breadth. Llanymdofry, seated amongst Rivers;Llanymdofry. a pretty fair Bailiwick and Town Corporate, and hath two very great Markets weekly, on Wednesdays and Sa∣turdays, for Provisions, and the greatest in the County for Cattle and Sheep. County of Glamorgan de∣scribed.The County of GLAMORGAN is of a temperate and healthful Air, and of a different Soil and Scituation, the Northern parts being extreamly Mountainous, full of thick Woods, very barren, and thinly inhabited; yet are found to feed good Herds of Cattle, and to send forth several fresh Streams, the chief amongst which are the Tavye, Taff, Ogmore, Rumney, Elay, Nid or Neath, &c. and the Southern part, which is washed by the Severn Sea, and re∣ceiveth the said Rivers, is more upon a level, is very fertil both for Corn and feeding of great quantities of Sheep and Cattle, is well inhabited, and thick beset with Towns and Houses of the Gentry. This County numbreth 118 Parish Churches, and hath the accommodation of 8 Market Towns. Cardiff, the fairest Town in all South Wales, well seated on the River Tave,Cardiff. or Taff, over which it hath a fair Bridge, to which Vessels of small burthen do come to lade or unlade their goods; and in a rich and fertil Soil both for Til∣lage and Pasturage. It is a large and well built Town, with good ordered and clean Streets, containing within its Walls two Parishes, but hath but one Church; without the East-Gate is a large Suburb called Crockerton, without the North-Gate stands the White-Friers, and without the West-Gate a small Suburb adjoyning to the Black-Friers, and in this part is seated the Castle, which is a strong, spacious, and stately Building. It is a Town Corporate, go∣verned by a Constable, 12 Aldermen, as many Capital Burgeffes, a Steward, Town-Clerk, with sub-Officers, enjoyeth several Immunities, electeth a Par∣liament man, is the place where the Assizes are kept; is well frequented and traded unto, its Inhabitants having a great intercourse of Traffick with Bri∣stol, and its Markets on Wednesdays and Saturdays are very good, especially that on Saturdays, which is the best in the County, and very considerable for Gattle, Corn, Swine, Sheep, and all sorts of Provisions in great plenty, and at easie rates. Llandaff, a City seated on the Taff, but of a small extent,Llandaff. scarce comparable to an indifferent Town, having not so much as a Market kept, which is occa∣sioned by its vicinity to Cardiff. Its Cathedral is a spacious and superb Stru∣cture, and near adjoyning are the Ruins of an Old Castle, which was the an∣cient Palace of the Bishops. Neath, seated on a River so called, over which it hath a Bridge,Neath. to which small Vessels come for the lading of Coals here had in great plenty to the profit of its Inhabitants. It is a Town of great antiquity, and of a good extent, yet is it indifferent large, is governed by a Port-Reve, and hath a good Market for Provisions. Swansey, commodiously seated on the Sea-shoar,Swansey. an ancient Port-Reve Town, which is large and well built, which for Riches and Trade is esteemed the chief in the County, and that by reason of their Coal-Pits, and the great industry of its Inhabitants. It hath weekly two Markets, on Wednesdays and Saturdays, which are very well frequented and traded unto, affording great plenty of Commodities and Provisions.
County of Pembroke de∣scribed.PEMBROKE-SHIRE, is of fertil Soil both for Tillage and Pastu∣rage, is well stored with Cattle, and replenished with Rivers, which (with the Sea) plentifully serveth the Inhabitants with Fish and Fowl, and in the bowels of the Earth are plenty of Pit-Coal. It is well inhabited and garnished with Towns, numbring 145 Parish Churches, and is traded unto by 8 Market Towns. Pembrook,Pembrook. the chief Shire-Town, seated on the Eastern and innermost Creek of Milford-Haven, over which it hath two fair Bridges for the con∣veniency of passage. It is a place of good account, well frequented and inha∣bited by Gentlemen and Tradesmen, is much resorted unto by Shipping, by reason of which they have a Custom-house. It is a place of good strength, be∣ing fortified with a Wall, on which are several Towers, having three Gates for entrance, and also with a strong Castle seated on a Rock. It is a large Town Corporate containing two Parish Churches, is graced with well built Houses, is governed by a Major, with other sub-Officers, enjoyeth several Immunities, sendeth a Burgess to Parliament; and its Market, which is on Saturdays, is very good, and well served with Provisions, &c. This Milford-Haven is esteemed the best in all England,Milford-Haven. not only for its largeness, being capacious enough to give entertainment to about 1000 Sail of Ships at one time, and to ride secure at a good distance one from the other; but also for its variety of deep and safe Creeks and nooked Bays for Ships to harbour in, having within it 13 Roads, 16 Creeks, and 5 Bays, all which are known by their several names. St. Davids,St. Davids. seated within a mile of the Sea in a barren Soil, and very de∣stitute of Wood. It was once a City of good account, but at present is very small, but thinly inhabited, and its Market disused; yet is it the See of a Bishop, and its Cathedral kept in good order, but the Bishops Palace is much ruinated. Near unto St. Davids is a Promontory called St. Davids Land or Head, from whence in a clear day Ireland may be seen; and on the Rocks in these parts the Falcons have their Airies and breed. Also here is Whitesand-Bay, and at the extream point of the Promontory Ramsey Isle sheweth it self, nigh to which are several small ones, which together bear the name of the Bishop and his Clerks. Haverford-West,Haverford-West. a Town and County of it self, commodiously seated on the side of a Hill, and on a Creek of Milford-Haven, over which it hath a good Stone-Bridge which leadeth to Prendergast, where there is a Church. It is a very large and fair Town Corporate, containing three Parish Churches, is beautified with good Houses, is well inhabited, enjoyeth a good Trade, having several Vessels belonging to the Town; is the place where the Assizes are held, and the County Gaol kept, and hath weekly two Markets on Tuesdays and Saturdays, which are very great for Cattle and Provisions. It is go∣verned by a Major, a Sheriff, and Common Council, with Justices of the Peace; it enjoyeth several Immunities, keeping Courts, and sending a Burgess to Par∣liament; and near to this Town divers Gentlemen have their Seats. Tenby,Tenby. seated on the Sea-shoar, where it hath a commodious Haven or Road for Ships, being formerly much frequented, especially by Fishermen, having a good Key, enjoyeth a considerable Trade, and its Inhabitants were wealthy; but the Spoils it suffered in the late Wars hath much impoverished it, notwith∣standing it keeps its two Markets weekly, on Wednesdays and Saturdays, which are very well resorted unto for Corn, Provisions, and Fish. Newport,Newport. seated near the Sea-shoar, and on the foot of a high Hill; a large, but ill built and inhabited Town, governed by a Port-Reeve and a Bailiff, and hath a good Market for Corn, Cattle, and Provisions; and here is a Wear for Fishing.
County of Radnor de∣scribed.RADNOR-SHIRE. This County is of a sharp and piercing Air, and very ungraceful to the Husbandman, as being so Mountainous and Rocky; yet is it well watered with Rivers. It hath but 52 Parish Churches, and is traded unto with three Market Towns. New Radnor.New Radnor, well seated near the Spring-head of the Somergil, and in a pleasant Valley, at the foot of a profitable Hill for the feeding of Sheep and Cattle, called the Forrest of Radnor. It is a very ancient Town Corporate, whose Jurisdiction reacheth 10 or 12 miles in compass, is governed by a Bailiff and 25 Burgesses, enjoyeth large Immunities, and hath the election of a Par∣liament man. It had formerly a Market on Tuesdays, but now disused. Prestaine, seated on the Lug, and in a pleasant and rich Vale, which from a small Village in former days, is now become a fair large and well built Town,Prestaine. with paved Streets, is well inhabited and frequented, where the Assizes are held, and the County Gaol kept; and its Market, which is on Saturdays, is very good for Provisions and Grain, especially Barly, of which they make good store of Mault. Knighton, seated in a Valley, and on the Teme, over which it hath a Bridge;Knighton. a very fair and well built Borough Town, of a good resort, whose Inhabitants enjoy a good Trade, and its Market on Tuesdays is very well served with Cattle, Corn, Provisions, Iron-ware, Hops, Salt, Linnen and Woollen, and other Commodities.
The King∣dom of SCOT∣LAND, as it is divi∣ded in Firm Land, where are thirty fie Provinces, to wit, Thirteen be∣yond the TAY (which with the Pro∣vince of LORNE, made the an∣cient King∣dom of the SCOTS,) whereof Five are towards the NORTH and WEST; as, Strath-Navarn, trabubaster, Tounge. Gathanes, Giego, Wick. Sutherland, Dornok▪ Dunrobi. Rosse, Skyrassin, Cromarty, Canonry, Lovet. Loquabrea, Kyntaile, Innerlethey. Eight towards the EAST and SOUTH; as, Murray, Elgin, Invernes, Forres, Rothes, Bean, Narden, Badgenoth. Bucquhan, Rothemay, Stanes. Marria, Aberdean, New Aberdone, Kildrumy. Mernis, Fordon, Dumnotyr. Brechin, Anguis, Monross, Dunde, Glammes, Forfar. Perth, Perth, Scone, Dunkeldon. Athole,— Blaire. Braidalbin,— Encerlothea. Twenty two on this side the TAY (which, except the County of LORNE, made the ancient Kingdom of the PICTS) whereof Nine are towards the Gulph of DUNBRIT∣TON; as, Lorne, Dunstafge, Tarbart, Bergonum. Cantyr, Swin, Sandell. Arran, &c. Arran, Rothsay. Argile, — Duwwin. Lennox, — Dunbriton. Cuningham, Yrwin, Androssan, Largis, Kilwein. Kyle, Ayre, Uchiltre. Carrickt, Bargeny, Blaquhan. Galloway, Witherne, Wighton, Kikoubrick, Cardines. Six towards the Gulph of EDINBURGH; as, Fife, St. Andrews, Cupre, Disert, Kinghorne. Strathnaverne, — Abergeny. Menteith, Dumblain, Clackmannan. Striveling,— Sterling. Linlithquo, Linlithquo, Falkirck. Lothien, Edinburgh, Dunbar, Leith, Haddington, Dalkith. Seven in the Valleys to∣wards ENGLAND; as, Cluydesdale, Glasquo, Lanrick, Hamiltown, Reynfraw, Douglasdale. Nithesdale, Dumfreis, Solway. Anandale, Anan, Lochmabain. Liddesdale, — Harlay. Eskdale, — Aefica, Teifedale, Peblis, Seltkirck, Drimlar, Roxburgh, Yedburg. Merch, Hum. Coldingham. ISLES, which make three Bodies, viz. those of ORCADES, to the North of SCOTLAND, Mainland, — Kirkewall. SCHETLAND, to the N. North-east of ORCADES, Mainland, — Burgh. INCH GAL∣LES, or We∣stern Isles, To the West of SCOT∣LAND, among the which are Lewis, — Sterwaye. Skye, — Tranternes. Eust, — St. Maria. Ila, — Dunweg. Sura, — Sodore. Mulla,— Arrois. Colm-kill, — Colm-kill. Rawghlin, — Dowaneny.
The King∣dom and Isle of IRE∣LAND, hath for∣merly been divided in∣to four Kingdoms, which are at this day as many Provinces, which are subdivided into Coun∣ties, and thus scitua∣ted, viz. Towards the NORTH, the Province of ULSTER; where are the Counties of Dunagall, or Tyrconnell, Donegal, Derry, or London Derry. Calebek, Tirconnel. Upper Tyroen, Strebane. Lower Tyroen, Dungannon. Colrane, Colrane. Antrim Knoekfergus, Antrim. Downe, Downe, Newry, Srangford, Arglass. Louth, Trodaugh, Dundalke, Carlingford, Ardeth. Armagh, Armagh, Mountnorris. Monaghan, Clogher, Churchland. Cavan, Cavan, Kilmore. Fermanagh, Baltarbet. Towards the SOUTH, the Province of MOUNSTER; where are the Counties of Tipperary, or Holy-Cross, Cassile, Holy-Cross, Clomel, Caryck, Emeley. Lymerick, Lymerick, Kilmalock. Kerry, Dingle, Ardart, Trayley. Desmond, Donekyran, Downbay. Corke, Corke, Kinsale, Ross, Voghall. Cloney. Watersord, Watersord, Dungarvan, Ardmor, Lismore. Towards the WEST, the Province of CONNAUGHT; where are the Counties of Majo, Killaloy, Refraine. Slego, Slego, Dundroes, Dunbroyle. Galloway, Galloway, Kilmaculo, Clonford, Kingstown. Clare, or Twomond, Clare, Kylaloe, Kilfenerog, Toam. Rosecoman, Rosecoman, Atlon, Omacoghlan, Elphin. Letrym. Letrym, Mewkerke. Achonry. Towards the EAST, the Province of LEINSTER; where are the Counties of Dublin, Dublin, Newcastle, Houth, Malcheal, Wicklo, Glandelour, Malehid. East Meath, Trim, Aboy, Slane, Galtre. West Meath, Molingar, Delvin, Kelskery. Longford, Longford, Ardragh. Kildare, Kildare, Mainoth, Athie, Carbre. Kings County, Philipstown. Lee. Queens County, Queenstown, Rheban. Caterlough, Caterlaugh, Carickbrak, Areklo. Wexford, Wexford, Ross, Ternes, Eniscort. Kilkenny, Kilkenny, Thomas Town. Callan.
SCOTLAND. Its scituation.THE Kingdom of SCOTLAND maketh the Northern part of Great Britain, and is divided from England by the Rivers Tweed and Solway,Ancient Inha∣bitants. together with the Cheviot-Hills. A Coun∣try formerly inhabited by the Picts, who were divided into two Nations, viz. the Dicalidonii and the Vecturiones; but when the Scots became the chief Rulers (as Mr. Cambden noteth) it was shared into seven Part,Ancient divi∣sion. and amongst as many Princes. The first contained Enegus and and Maern; the second, Atheold and Goverin; the third, Stradeern, with Meneted; the fourth, Forthever; the fifth, Mar, with Bucken; the sixth, Muref and Ross; and the seventh, Cathanes, which Mound a Mountain in the midst divideth, running on forward from the West Sea to the East. It was also (according to the relation of Andrew Bishop of Cathanes) se∣vered into seven Territories, which Mr. Cambden also taketh notice of, as fol∣loweth. The first, from Frith or Scotwade to the River Tae; the second to Hilef, according as the Sea fetcheth a compass to the Mountain Athran in the North-east part of Strivelin; the third, from Hilef to Dee; the fourth, from Dee to the River Spe; the fifth, from the Spe to the Mountain Brunalban; the sixth, Mures and Ross; and the Seventh, the Kingdom of Argathel, which is the Border of the Scots. Modern divi∣sion, and its Inhabitants.But the Kingdom at present, according to the habitation of the People, may be divided into Highland-men and Lowland-men; or into the Northern and Southern parts. The People of the former live either on the Western Coast, and are very rude, having much of the nature, disposition, speech, and habit of the Tories or wild Irish, or in the out Isles, and are utterly Barbarous. The Lowlanders, as bordering on England, have much of the disposition, ci∣vility, language, and habit of the English, and are supposed to be descended from the Saxons; which is confirmed by the Highlanders, who are the true Scoti, and are supposed to descend from the Scythians, who with the Getes in∣festing Ireland, left their Issue behind them. Its extent.This Kingdom is very spacious, extending it self from North to South about 250 miles in length; and in breadth, where broadest, about 150; but contra∣cting it self narrower and narrower as it approaches its extream Northern li∣mits, as doth appear by the Map. Its name.It is said to have been called Scotia from Scoti, Scitti, or Scythi, a People of Germany, over whose Northern limits the name Scythia did extend; although there be many that will have it to be so called from Scota, Daughter to an E∣gyptian Pharaoh. Its fertility and commo∣dities.Although this Kingdom is less fertil than England, and its Fruits not so plentiful, nor so pleasing to the palate, (occasioned through the coldness of the Clime,) yet is it found to have great plenty of Cattle, though but small; and for Fish and Fowl an innumerable quantity, amongst which is a Fowl called the Soland-Geese, which in many places are taken in very great plenty, and are sound very profitable to the Inhabitants, not only for their Flesh to eat, but for their Feathers and Oil. Their chief Commodities are Course Cloths, Freezes, Lead-Oar, Feathers, Sea-Coal, Alum, Iron, Salt, Salt-Peter, Linnen-Cloth, Train-Oil, Hops, Wood, Alablaster, some Hides and Tallow, &c.
map of Scotland blazon or coat of arms of the dukes of Monmouth To ye Rt Noble Iames Duke of Monmouth, & Buckleuch Earle of Doncaster & Dalkeith, Baron of Kendale Mieke & Ashdale Kt. of ye Garter, & one of his Majs most Honbl prvy Councell This Mapp is most humbly dedicat by Ric Blome.
A MAPP of the Kingdome of SCOTLAND By Ric Blome by His Majys comand
Its Inhabi∣tants.The Inhabitants (especially those Southernly) are of a good feature, strong of body, very hardy, couragious, and fit for Martial affairs; and their Nobi∣lity and Gentry, which are of several degrees, as Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Barons, Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen, are generally very in∣genuous, and accomplished men in all civil knowledge. Nobility and Gentry of Scotland. Their Sessions of Parliament.This Kingdom, like unto England, consisteth of a King, Nobility, Gentry, and Commons; and these with the Lords Spiritual, assemble together in Par∣liament, as often as they are called together by Writ from the King: And by reason of his Majesties residence in England, so that he is not here at their Ses∣sions of Parliament, he constituteth and sendeth one to act as his Vice-Roy, who is commonly called Lord Commissioner; and such at present is the Right Noble John, Duke of Lotherdale, &c. Things wor∣thy of note.Amongst the things worthy of note in this Kingdom for Antiquity, famous was that Fortification drawn from Abercorne upon Edenborough Frith unto Alcluyd, now called Dunbritton, opening upon the West Sea, where (as Speed noteth) Julius Agricola set the limits of the Roman Empire, past which, ac∣cording to Tacitus, there were no other bounds of Britain to be sought for. And here the second Legion of Augusta, and the twentieth of Victrix, built a part of the Wall; as also an ancient coped Monument of an high and round com∣pass, which according to the opinions of some, was a Temple consecrated to the God Terminus; but others there be that will have it to be a Trophy raised by Carausius, who fortified this Wall with seven Castles. Caledonian Wood.Here began that Wood Caledonia, which name Tacitus attributeth to all that Tract of ground which lieth Northward beyond Grahames Dike, or the Wall of Antonius Pius, which Ptolomy divideth into several Nations, as the Cale∣donii, Vacomagi, Epidii, &c. who are all known to the Romans by the gene∣ral name of the Picts, from their painting themselves. This Wood or Forrest was very spacious, and over-shadowed with Thickets and tall over-spreading Trees, which rendred it impassable, and was divided by Grampe-Hill, now cal∣ed Grantzbain, that is, the crooked bending Mountain. Solinus is of opi∣nion that Ʋlysses was in Caledonia, and to confirm his belief therein, he saith, there was a Votive Altar with an Inscription in Greek Letters. Plutarch aith, that Bears were brought out of Britain to Rome; but for more truth  may be said, that here were bred the wild white Bulls, a Beast of nature erce and cruel, whose thick and curled manes resembled the Lions. In the ays of Severus Argetecox, a petty Prince reigned over this Tract of Ground, hose Wife being reproachfully called by Julia the Empress, an Adulteress, oldly made this Answer, We British Dames have to do with the best of men,Cámbden, p. 32. t you Roman Ladies secretly commit the same with every base and lewd Companion. Two famous Loughs.In this Kingdom are two famous Loughs, Nessa and Lomund, the former ne∣ver Friezeth though in the extreamest cold weather; and the waters of the atter, most raging in the calmest and fairest weather; and herein is an Island, that the Wind forceth or moveth to and fro. In the Rivers Dee and Done, besides the great abundance of Salmons, is taken a Shell-fish, called the Horse-muskle, wherein Pearls are engendred, which are very good in many Physical Medicines, and some of them not much inferiour to the Oriental Pearl. Courts of Judicature, Court of Parliament.As to their Courts of Judicature they are peculiar to themselves, and are several. The chief amongst which is the High Court of Parliament, consist∣ing of Lords and Commons, hath the same Authority as that of England, and is also summoned by Writ from his Majesty at his pleasure, as occasion re∣quireth. Colledge of Justice.The second Court is the Sessions, or Colledge of Justice, consisting of a Pre∣sident, 14 Senators, 7 of the Clergy, and as many of the Laity (unto whom was afterwards adjoyned the Chancellor, who is the chief, and 5 other Sena∣tors) besides 3 principal Scribes or Clerks, and as many Advocates as the Senators see convenient: And this was thus constituted by King James the Fifth in Anno 1532, after the form of the Parliament at Paris. These sit and
administer Justice with equity and reason, and not according to the rigour of the Law, every day (except Sundays and Mondays) from the first of Novemb. to the 15 of March; and from Trinity Sunday to the first Calends of August; and all the time between (as being either Seed-time or Harvest) is vacation. They give judgment according to the Parliament Statutes, and Municipal Laws; and where they are defective, they have recourse to the Imperial Ci∣vil Law. Other Courts.There are likewise in every Shire or County inferiour Civil Judicatories or Courts kept, wherein the Sheriff of the Shire, or his Deputy, decideth the Controversies and Law-suits of the Inhabitants; from which there are oft∣times Appeals to the Sessions or Colledge of Justice. And these Sheriffs are for the most part Hereditary. Besides these Courts, there are other Judicatories, which they call Commis∣sariots, the highest whereof is kept at Edenburgh; and these have to do with Ecclesiastical affairs, as, Wills and Testaments, Divorcements, Tithes, &c. In criminal Causes, the Kings Chief Justice holdeth his Court at Eden∣burgh. Likewise the Sheriffs in their Territories, and the Magistrates in some Bo∣roughs may sit in Judgment of Manslaughter, in case the Manslayer be taken within 24 hours after the fact committed, and being found guilty by a Jury, may be put to death; but if the said limited time is past, the matter is referred, and put over to the Kings Justice, or his Deputies. There are also Civil Courts in every Regality holden by their Bailiffs. Ecclesiastical Government.This Kingdom, as to Ecclesiastical Government, is divided into two Arch∣bishopricks, viz. of St. Andrews (the Primate of Scotland) and of Glasco, and under these are several Suffragan-Bishops, viz. under him of St. Andrews, those of Dunkeld, Aberdon, Murray, Dunblan, Berohiu, Ross, Cathanes, and Orkney: And under him of Glasco, those of Galloway, Argile or Lismore, and the Isles. Ancient Inha∣bitants of Scotland.The ancient People of this Kingdom were, 1. The Gadeni, who possessed the Counties of Lothien, Merches, and Teifidale or Tivedale. 2. The Sel∣govae, or Counties Liddisdale, Eusedale, Eskedale, Annadale, and Nidthes∣dale. 3. The Novantes, or Shires of Galloway, Carrickt, Kyle, Cunningham, and Arran. 4. The Damnii, or Counties of Cludesdale, Striveling, Lennox, Menteith, and Fife. 5. The Caldedonii, or Shires of Stratherne, Argile, Cantire, Lorne, Albany or Bruidalbin, Perch, Athol, and Anguis. 6. The Vermines, or Counties of Mernis and Marr. 7. The Talgali, or County of Buquhan. 8. The Vacomagi, or Counties of Murray and Loquabrea. 9. The Cantae, or Shires of Ross and Sutherland. 10. The Catini, or County of Ca∣thanes: And 11. the Cornubii, or County of Strathnaverne. Scotland di∣vided into Sheriffdoms.These parts are again (according to their Civil Government) divided into Sheriffdoms, Stewarties, and Bailiffwicks; viz. the Counties or Sheriffdoms of Edenburgh, Lynlythio, Selkirk, Roxburgh, Peblis, Berwick, Lanarke, Renfrew, Dunfreis, Wighton, Aire, Bute, Argile, Tarbet, Dunbarton, Perch, Clackmannan, Kinros, Fife, Kincardin, Forfair, Aberdene, Bamff, Elgin, Forres, Narne, Innerness, Cromartie, Orknay, and Shetland. The Stewarties of Menieith,Stewarties.Kircudbrieht, Stratherne, and Annandale. The Bailiwicks of Kile,Bailywicks.Carrickt, and Cunningham. Its further division.Again, Scotland (according to the scituation of its Parts, Provinces, or Counties) may be divided into two parts, to wit, Southwards, and on this side the Tay, which made the ancient Kingdom of the Picts, (so called, for that they painted their Bodies like the ancient Britains, from whom they are said to descend, which is the more confirmed, for that the Northern Britains, con∣verted to the Faith by St. Colombe, were called Britain Picts.) And Eastwards, Northwards, and beyond the Tay, which made the ancient Kingdom of the Scots; besides abundance of Isles dispersed in its Northern and Western Seas, the chief of which shall be treated of.
Its Counties.The Counties comprehended in the South-part, are Lothien, Merche, Teifi∣dale or Tivedale, Eskdale, Euskdale, Liddesdule, Annadale, Nydthesdale, Galloway, Carrickt, Kyle, Cunningham, Cludesdale, Lennox, Striveling, Men∣teith, Fife, Stratherne, Argile, Lorne, Cantyre, and Arran. And these in the North part are, Albany or Badalbin, Paerch, Athol, Anguis, Mernis, Buquihan, Marr, Muray, Loquabrea, Ross, Sutherland, Strathnaverne, and Cathanes. And of these in order. Its name and fertility.The County of Lothien, in former times by the Picts called Pictland, shooteth it self forth from Merche unto the Sea; a Country very Hilly, and but thinly clothed with Wood: but for the fertility of its Earth, and the civi∣lity of its Inhabitants, is deservedly esteemed the flower of all Scotland. The chief places are, Its chief pla∣ces.Edenburgh, or Edenborow, of old, Castrum Alatum, the Metropolis of the Kingdom. Its scituation is high, in a wholsom Air, and rich Soil; and by rea∣son of its commodious Haven (called Leth-Haven,Edenburgh. not above a mile distant) it is a place of good Trade, and well resorted unto by Shipping. This City chiefly consisteth of one Street, which runneth about a mile in length, which receiveth divers petty Streets and Lanes, so that its circuit may be about three miles, which is strongly begirt with a Wall; and at the West-end of the City, on the top of a Rock, is seated a fair and powerful Castle, with many Towers, which commands the City, and is esteemed in a manner impregnable. It be∣longed once to the English, till in Anno 960. the Scots took it from them, when oppressed by the Danish Tyranies. It is well watered with clear Springs and Fountains, is adorned with many fair Edifices, as well publick as private, the principal amongst which is the Kings Palace, a fair Structure; and its private Houses are generally fair, lofty, built of Free-stone, and so well inhabited, that several Families have their abodes under one Roof. It is also dignified with the Courts of Judicature, High Courts of Parliament, and with an Ʋniver∣sity. And being the Scale of Trade for the Kingdom, it will be necessary to give an account of their Coins, Weights, and Measures. As to their Coins,Their Coins, Weights, and Measure note that 13 ½ d. sterling, makes a Mark Scotch; 6 ¼ d. sterling, a Scotch Noble; and 20 d. sterling, a Scotch Pound. Their Weight used in Merchandizes, is the Pound of 16 Ounces, 100 of which make their Quintal or C, which is found to make at London 108 l. Averdupois. Their Measures for length is the Ell, and is a∣bout 4 per Cent. greater than the English Ell. Their Liquid Measures are such as in England, but of a double content, a Pint being an English Quart, and so answerable. Their Dry Measures are also the same with those of England, but also bigger. Athelstanford, so called from Athelstane, a chief Commander of the English,Athelstanford. which was there slain with most of his Men, about the year 815. Haddington, seated in a wide and broad Plain; a place of good account,Haddington. and which the English fortified with a deep and large Ditch, and other Fortifications. Dunbar, scituate on the Sea-shoar, once defended by a strong Castle,Dunbar. which was the Seat of the Earls of Merch; a place which hath oft-times been taken by the English, and as often retaken by the Scots, which was the cause of its demolishment; since which it is honoured with the Title of an Earldom. North-Barwick, seated on Edenbrough-Frith,North-Barwick. a place in former Ages famous for its House of Religious Virgins. Not far from this place, and near the Shoar,Bass-Island. lieth a small Isle called Bass-Island; which feemeth to be a high craggy Rock, and to be almost cut through by the undermining Sea-waves. It hath a Fountain of Water, and fresh Pa∣stures; and above all is remarkable for the exceeding great abundance of those Geese called Scouts and Soland-Geese, which here frequent and breed, which (as I before noted) is very profitable to the Inhabitants in these parts. Lyth, hath a most commodious Haven, being the present Port to Edenburgh.Lyth. Abercorne, seated on the Forth or Frith,Abercorne. in former time of note for its famous Monastery; as at present for giving Title of an Earldom unto the Duke of Ha∣milton.
Linquo,Linquo. or Linlithquo, said to be the ancient City of Lindum, mentioned by Ptolomy; a place once beautified with a House of the Kings, and a fair Church. County of Merch de∣scribed.MERCH, a County so called, as being a March; it is wholly on the German Ocean, was of great note for its Earls thereof; and hath for its chief places, Coldingham,Cadingham. called by Bede the City Coldana; a place of great antiquity and note for its chaft Nuns; for it is said, that they (together with Ebba their Prioress) cut off their own Noses and Lips to render themselves deformed, that the Danes might not deflour them; but this so exasperated them, that they not only burnt their Monastery, but them therein. Not far from Coldingham is Fast-Castle;Fast-Castle. and here the Sea thrusteth it self forth into a Promontory called St. Abbs-head. Kelso,Kelso. formerly famous for its Monastery, which (with thirteen others) King David the First raised from the ground, for the advancement of Gods glory. Its chief pla∣ces.TEIFIDALE, that is the Vale by the River Teifie or Teviat, adjoyning to England; a craggy hilly Country. Its chief places are, Roxburg,Roxburg. which gives name to a Territory adjoyning, seated between the Rivers Tweed and Teifie, once a place of great strength, being defended by a Castle and towred Fortifications; and here it was that King James the Se∣cond of Scotland, was unfortunately slain by the breaking of a Cannon at the Siege. Jedburgh,Jedburgh. a well frequented and inhabited Borough-Town, seated near the confluence of the Rivers Teviat and Yed. Peblis,Peblis. seated on the Tweed, and a branch thereof; a Market-Town of some account. Merlos,Merlos. seated also on the Tweed, formerly of note for its ancient Monastery of cloistered Monks, that gave themselves to Prayer, and to get their livings by their handy labour; and this place holy King David restored, and reple∣nished with Cistertian Monks. ESKDALE,Eskdale. a small Territory, so called from a River which passeth through it; its chief place was, Aesica,Aesica. that ancient City, wherein the Tribune of the first Band of the A∣stures kept Watch and Ward against the Northern Enemies. EƲSKDALE,Euskdale. another small Territory, which takes its name from the River that watereth it. LIDDISDALE,Liddisdale. also another small Territory, which receiveth its name from the River that passeth through it. Its chief places are, Brankensey,Brankensey, &c.Harlay, and Armetage. ANNADALE, that is, the Vale by the River Annan. Its chief places are, Annadale,Annadale. seated at the Mouth of the River Annan. And Lough-Mahun,Lough-Mahun. a Town of good strength, as well by Nature as Art; nigh unto which is a strong Castle. Of a fertil Soil.NITHESDALE, or NIDDESDALE, a County so named from the River Nid, which watereth it; a County of a fertil Soil, which beareth good Corn, hath rich Meadows and Pastures; and in the Solway, which water∣eth its Southern part, are taken great store of excellent Salmons, which the Inhabitants (for their Recreation) oft-times hunt on Horse-back with Spears. Its chief places are, Dunfreys,Dunfreys. seated between two Hills, and on the River Nid, near its influx into the Solway, once strengthned with a Castle; a Town of good account for making of Woollen-Cloths; out more remarkable for the Murther of John Cummin, a man of great eminency amongst the Scotch, who was slain by Robert Brus in the Church, out of fear lest he should fore-close his way to the Kingdom. Nigh unto this Town is Solway,Solway. a small place, which seemeth to retain some∣thing of the old name of Selgovae.
Caer-Laverock, seated at the Mouth of the Nid,Caer-Laverock. in former time of so great strength, that (for a good while) it stoutly resisted the power of King Ed∣ward the First, who besieged it. Corda, also a flourishing Town in former Ages.Corda. GALLOWAY, a County so called of the Irish, who once here inhabited, in former times had Princes and Lords over it. It is a Country much inclined to Hills, which renders it more fit for Grasing than Tillage, breeding abundance of small and well limbed Nags, which for their nimbleness and hardiness are esteemed excellent for a Traveller: And the Sea, by which it is washed, toge∣ther with its Bays, Creeks, Meers, and Loughs, affords the Inhabitants store of excellent Fish. Its chief places are, Kircoubright, the most commodious Port-Town on this Coast;Kircoubright. and the se∣cond Stewarty of Scotland. Cardines, a place or Fort of great strength, as well by Nature as Art,Cardines. being seated on a craggy high Rock, by the River Fleet, and fenced about with strong Walls. Wigton, seated on a Bay of the Sea, between the Rivers Cre and Bladno;Wigton. a good Haven-Town. Not far from this Town, and on the Sea-shoar, Ptolomy placed the ancient City Leucopibia, which is now called Wytherne; and here it is said, Ninia,Leucopibia. or Ninian, a holy Britain, who first instructed the South-Picts in the Christian Faith, in the Reign of the Emperour Theodosius the younger, had his Seat, and built a Church to the honour of St. Martin. CARRICT, a County that hath rich Pastures, and is well furnished with all necessaries both by Land and Sea, where it beareth the name of Dunbritain-Frith; a large and capacious Bay, which with its Rivers and Loughs, affords its Inhabitants plenty of Fish. Its chief places are, Barganie, a place of great antiquity. Arduntoun and Cosregall.Barganie. KYLE, a fertil County, and well inhabited; and hath for its chief places,Arduntoun. Aire, seated on a River so called, where it looseth it self into the Frith;Cosregal. a place of some account, being a Sheriffdom: And Ʋchiltre.Aire. Uchiltre. CƲNNINGHAM, also washed with Dunbritain-Frith; a County no less commodious and fertil, than pleasant, being plentifully watered. Its chief places are, Irwin, a Borough-Town, seated on a River so called,Irwin. at its influx into the Frith, where it hath a Haven, though now choaked up. Largis,Largis. where Alexander the Third destroyed abundance of the Norwegi∣ans: And Androsan.Androsan. CLƲDESDALE, a County so called from the River Cluid, that wa∣tereth it. Its chief places are, Glasco, pleasantly scituate on the River Cluyd,Glasco. over which it hath a fair Bridge sustained by eight Arches. It is a City of good account, well frequented and inhabited, enjoyeth a good Trade, and is dignified with the See of an Arch∣bishop, as also with an Ʋniversity. Douglass, seated on a River, and in a Vale so called.Douglass. Lanrick, the Hereditary Sheriffdom of the Hamiltons,Lanrick. who take their name from Hamilton-Castle, seated on the fruitful Bank of the Cluid.Hamilton. Reinfraw, which gives name to a Barony.Reinfraw. Paslay, in former times a famous Monastery,Paslay. founded by Alexander the Se∣cond, High Steward of Scotland, which for a stately Church, with rich Furni∣ture, was inferiour to few. LENNOX, a County very Hilly, and well watered with Rivers, amongst which is the Cluid, and the large Lough Lomond, about 20 miles in length,Lomond Lough. and in breadth, where broadest, about 8, in which are many small Isles, amongst which some are said to float about; a place noted for great plenty of Fish, e∣specially for a Fish called a Polloc, found no where else: This County is ho∣noured in giving Title to the Right Noble the Duke of Richmond and Lennox, &c. Its chief places are,
Dunbritton;Dunbritton. that is, the Britains Town, for that the Britains held it long∣est against the Scots, Picts, and Saxons; being the strongest place in all the Kingdom, as well by Nature as Art, being loftily seated on a rough, craggy, and two-headed Rock, at the meeting of the Rivers near the large Lough Lo∣mond, and in a green Plain; in one of the tops is, or was placed a Watch-Tower, and on the other several Fortifications or Bulwarks, on the East-side it hath a boggy Flat, which at every Tide is covered with water, and on the South it hath the River Cluid. Alcluyd,Alcluyd. an ancient City, by some said to be the same Dunbritton. Of a fertil Soil.STRIVELING, or STIRLING, a County of a fertil Soil, and well inhabited; and here is that narrow Land or Streight by which Edenburgh-Frith and Dunbrith-Frith (thrusting themselves far into the Land, out of the East and West Seas) are separated from meeting together; which space was forti∣fied with Garrisons between, by Julius Agricola, so that all the part on this side was in the possession of the Romans, and their Enemies were forced to retire themselves into the more Northern and Hilly part of the Kingdom; but this lasted not long, for Agricola being called home, the Caledonian Britains forced the Romans back as far as the River Tine: and when Hadrian arrived in Bri∣tain, about 40 years after, instead of going farther, he gave command that the God Terminus (which used not to give ground to any) should be withdrawn back; and that a Wall of Turffs (commonly now called Grahams-Dike) should be made between the Rivers Tine and Eske Southward; on this side Edenburgh-Frith, for about 100 miles, which proved successful unto them. And along this Wall hath been oft-times found several Inscriptions, and pieces of Romish Antiquities. And of remark was that ancient round building, 24 Cubits high, and 13 broad, open at the top, and framed of rough and unpolished Stones, without any Cement, Lime, and Morar; some call this the Temple of the God Terminus, others, Arthur's Oven, and others, Julius Hoff, as supposing it to be raised by Julius Caesar; but Cambden would rather believe it to be built by Julius Agricola, who fortified these parts, had not Ninius said, it was built by Garausius, as a Triumphal Arch in memory of some Victory. The chief places in this County are, Stirling,Stirling.Striveling, or Stirling-Borough, a place of good strength, and for∣tified with a powerful Castle, high mounted on the brow of a steep Rock; a place dignified with the birth of King James the Sixth of Scotland, and First of England, who afterwards caused it to be beautified with new Buildings. Falkirke,Falkirke, &c.Cumirnald, and Torwood. MENTEITH, a County so called from the River Teith: Its chief places are, Dunblain. Clackmannan.Dunblain, seated on the River Teith, being the See of a Bishop; and Clack∣mannan. Of a very fertil Soil.FIFE, a fertil County in Corn and Pasturage, hath Pit-Coal, and the Sea with its two Arms, Forth and Tau, which almost encompass it, affordeth store of Oysters and other Fish. Its chief places are, St. Andrews,St. Andrews. of old, Regimund, that is, St. Regulus Mount, which Ʋng or Oeng, King of the Picts, gave to God and St. Andrew, that it should be the chief and Mother Church of the Picts Kingdom. It is a City pleasantly seated on the Sea-shoar near Fif-ness, is fortified with a fair and strong Castle, is dig∣nified with an Archiepiscopal See, which is Primate of all Scotland; and is al∣so honoured by being the Seat of the Muses. Disert,Disert. seated on the rising of a Hill, and in an open Heath so called, where there is a large place called the Cole-plot, that affordeth good store of Bitu∣men. Dunfirmling,Dunfirmling. a famous Monastery in old time, and of note as well for its Building, and being the Burial-place of King Malcomb the Third, as for giving Title to the Earl of Dunfirmling. Falkland,Falkland. well, and pleasantly seated for Hunting, for which purpose the Kings have had here their Retiring-house. Cupre,Cupre. a Borough-Town, of some note.
STRATHERNE, that is, the Vale along the River Ern, hath for its chief places, Abergenny.Abergenny, once a City of good account, being the Royal Seat of the Picts Kings, which (as 'tis said) Nectane their King dedicated to God and St. Bridget, with a Tract of ground thereto belonging. Drimein.Drimein-Castle, well seated on the River Ern. Tulibardin.Tulibardin-Castle scituate also on the same River. ARGILE, a County well furnished with Pools, in which, together with the Sea, and its many Arms which it sendeth forth, are taken great plenty of good Fish; and in its Mountains are bred a kind of wild Deer. Places of good account are none in this County. LORNE, a Country of an apt Soil for bearing of Barley, is well wa∣tered, being divided by the large Lough or Lake called Leane. Its chief pla∣ces are, Dunstafage.Dunstafage, seated near the said Lake, once dignified with a House of the Kings. Tarbar.Tarbar, where King James the Fourth ordained a Justice and a Sheriff, to administer Justice to the Inhabitants of the out-Isles:Bergonum. and Bergonum. CANTTRE, that is, the Lands-head, as thrusting it self forth with a long and tapered Promontory, which Ptolomy called the Promontory Epidiorum;This County seated near Ireland. Kiltan. Sandell. between the extream point of which and Marlock, or Tor-Bay in Ireland, there are scarce 13 miles. Its chief places are Killtan and Sandell. Isle of Arran.ARRAN, a small County and Isle near unto Cantire, hath for its chief places Arran and Rothsay. The High∣landers.ALBAINE, or BRAID-ALBIN, whose Inhabitants are called the Highlanders; a kind of rude and warlike People, and much of the nature of the Irish in habit and disposition. Its chief places are Enrer Lothea and Foyre. PERCH, a large and fertil County, hath for its chief places, Perch.Perch, or St. John's Town, a place of good account, and once larger than now it is, being built by King William; it is pleasantly seated between two Greens, and on the River Tau, which is navigable for Barges. Dunkelden.Dunkelden, dignified by King David with an Episcopal See, supposed to be a Town of the Caledonians. Berch.Also on the Tau stood the little City of Berch, which was washed away by the overflowings of the said River, together with many of its Inhabitants, a∣mongst which was an Infant-Child of the Kings in its Cradle. Scone.Scone, seated on the farther side of the Tau, dignified with an Inauguration of the Scotch Kings before their Union to England, Westminster now being the place; and where the Chair, in which the Kings were then Crowned, is, which is at present made use of upon the like occasion. Caladonia Wood.ATHOL, an indifferent fertil County, and well clothed with Wood, where is that large and overshadowed Wood Caladonia, already treated of; a Country said to be infamous for Witches. Its chief place is Blaire. Very fertil and well watered.ANGƲIS, a fertil County both for Corn and rich Pastures, is well wa∣tered with several Rivers, which lose themselves in the Sea, which serveth for its Eastern bounds: It is interlaced with Hills and Forests, and garnished with divers Forts and Castles, Its chief places are, Dundee.Dundee, seated on the Mouth of the River Tay; a noted and well resorted Town for Trade, by reason of its commodious Port for Ships. Brechin.Brechin, scituate on the River South-Eske, near its fall into the Sea, and dig∣nified by King David the First with an Episcopal See. Nigh unto this Town is Red-head, a place not unknown to Seamen. Montross,Montross. of old Celurca, of some account for being honoured with the Title of an Earldom. Arbroth, seated near the Sea; a Town endowed with large Revenues,Arbroth. and by King William dedicated to a Religious use, in honour of Thomas of Can∣terbury.
MERNIS,Very fertil. or MERNIA, a small, but plain and fertil Champa Country, which shooteth it self forth on the German Ocean: Its chief plac are, Dunnotyr,Dunnotyr. defended by a strong Castle, seated on an high and inaccessib Rock, near the Sea. Fordon,Fordon. seated also not far from the Sea. BƲQƲIHAN, washed with the Sea, whose Waves did here cast up mighty Mass of Amber of an inestimable value; it hath good Pastures, most to feed Sheep, whose Wool is excellent; and its Rivers breed store of Salmon▪ which are had at such easie rates, that it is scarce worth the trouble of taki them. Its chief places are Rotheniay and Stanes. Adjoyning to this Country lieth Boena and Bamff, a small Sheriffdom; al Ajuza, a little Territory of no great note. MARR,Marr. a long and narrow County, somewhat inclined to Mountains, b well watered with the Done or Dee, well stored with Salmons; and other Fis Its chief places are, Aberdene,Aberdene. feated on the Sea-shoar, at the Mouth of the Done, dignified wi an Episcopal See, hath an Hospital, also a Free-Grammar-School, and is of no for taking of Salmons:Kildrumy. and Kildrumy. MƲRRAY,Murray. a pleasant and fertil County, and the rather as watered wi the Spey, Findorne, and the River and Lake Nessa, which reacheth abo 23 miles in length, the water whereof is observed to be so warm, that it nev is sound to freez; and this Lake is its Northern limits, as the Spey is its Easterr all which empty themselves in the Sea, where it formeth a Bay. Its chi places are, Innernes,Innernes.Bean-Castle; which Ptolomy thinks to be Banatia; and here Anno 1460. a Marble-Vessel artificially engraven, full of Roman Coins, w found. Narden,Narden. or Narne, an hereditary Sheriffdom; and here stood within a b land a strong Fortress of a great height, which was kept by the Danes agai the Scots. Innernes,Innerlothea. and Innerlothea, in former times two eminent Fortifications. Al Elgin and Rothes,Elgin. Rothes. places honoured with the Titles of Earldoms. LOQƲABREA, a County well stored with Rivers and Lakes, whic empty themselves into the Sea; it hath also good Pastures, yet is it very Moutainous, and well clothed with Wood, and in the bowels of the Earth are Min of Iron.Iron-Mines. Its chief place is, Innerlothey,Innerlothey. once of good account, being well frequented and traded unto but through the Pyracies and Wars of the Danes and Norwegians, who raz it, it hath now scarce any Remain left. ROSS,Its sertility. a large, Mountainous, and Woody County, which reacheth fro one Sea to the other; hath great plenty of Stags, Deer, Wild-fowl, and Fis▪ Its chief places are, Cromarty,Cromarty. or the Haven of Safety, as having so secure and capacious an Ha bour for Ships.Ness-mouth. Lovet.Ness-mouth and Lovet. In this County is the Territory of Ardmanoch,Ardmanoch. very Mountainous, fro which the second Sons of the Kings of Scotland bear their Title. SƲTHERLAND, regarding the Sea, is well watered with Rivers, b sides the large Lough or Lake Shyn, almost in the midst of the Country; We wards of which are great store of Hills, from which is dug excellent whi Marble, very good for curious Works. It is a Country more fit for breedi of Cattle,Dunrobin. Dorne. than for Tillage; and hath for its chief places Dunrobin an Dorno. Very cold and barren.STRATHNAVERNE, a County far engaged Northwards, whic with Cathanes have the utmost Northern Coast of all Britain, which must o casion it to be of a very cold temperature; it is very much inclined to sterilityStrabubaster. Tounge. is Mountainous, and but ill inhabited. Its chief places are Strabubaster an Tounge.
map of Ireland A MAPP of the Kingdome of IRELAND by Ric Blome by his Matys. Com blazon or coat of arms of the earls of Burlington To ye Rt Honbl Ric: Boyle Earle of Burlington, & ron Cliford of Lansborro in England. Earle of Corke. Viscount Dungaruen.  & Lord High Treasurer of Ireland &c. And to ye Rt. Honbl Roger Boyle Earle of Orrery & Baron  Broghill in Ireland and of his Majs most Honble privy Councell &c This Mapp is humbly Dedi blazon or coat of arms ye Rt Honble Sr. Rob: Kilrray of Terry & Bon, in England. Kt. & Bart  of Londonderry & Baron of Crallon  in  County in  &c. his estate in Ireland being called Medinshill This Mapp  of  is DD by Ric: Blo blazon or coat of arms of the earls of Arran (Irish creation) ye Rt Honble Earle of Arran, Visc llough Baron Butler of Clougrenan &  of his Maies most Honble privy Councell  This Mapp of ye Province of  is humble DD by Ric: Blom blazon or coat of arms Honble  Baron of  Mais Army of  his  most Honble . This Mapp of ye Provence of  Humbly DD by Ric: Blome.
CATHANES, a County washed with the Eastern Ocean, where it form∣eth several Creeks, and is well watered with Rivers, which afford good store of Fish, from which, and by the grasing and feeding of Cattle, the Inhabitants get the greatest part of their livelyhood. Its chief places are, Dornock, a mean place, yet the See of a Bishop.Dornock. Catnes, a Maritim Town, dignified with an Earldom.Catnes. Nigh unto this Town Southwards is Ness-head, and Northwards Dunesbe-head, both Maritim pla∣ces: and Girnego.Girnego. Three Moun∣tains.In this Tract are three Promontories, to wit, Ʋrdehead, of old Berubium; Dunsby or Dunscanby, of old Virvedrum; and Howbum, of old Orcas. There are several Isles dispersed about this Kingdom of Scotland, as the Or∣cades, Shetland, and Hebrides, which may properly be said to belong there∣unto; but as to the description thereof, they shall be treated of amongst the other small Isles belonging in general to great Britain, after we have treated of the Kingdom of Ireland. IRELAND. Its scituation.IRELAND, environed on all sides by the Sea, and next to Great Bri∣tain may claim priority of all others in Europe: It is a Country gene∣rally of a fertil Soil, and plentifully stored with Cattle, Fowl, and Fish;Fertility. but is Mountainous, Woody, Waterish, and full of unprofitable Loughs or Bogs, which oft-times prove dangerous (especially to New-comers) and occasion Rheums and Fluxes, for the cure of which they drink a sort of hot Water, called Ʋskebah. Its Air and Temperature.It is blest with a mild and healthful Air, its Summer being not so hot, nor its Winter so cold as in England, but more inclined to soggy Mists and Rains, which makes it more unfit for Tillage than Pasturage, the Clime being not very fa∣vourable for ripening of Corn or Fruits, but beareth such great abundance of long and sweet Grass, that the Cattle (which are the Inhabitants chiefest wealth) are soon fat, and fit for slaughter therewith: And it is further observed, That the Air is so pure, that it neither breedeth nor suffereth any venemous Beast, Serpent, or Insect, being brought out of other Countries, long to retain their life. Its Names.Many have been the Names (according to Tradition) that this Island hath been known by; Orphaeus, Aristotle, and Claudian, named it Jerna: Juvenal and Mela, Iverna, or Hibernia; Diodorus Siculus, Iris; Eustachius, Oyernia and Bernia; the Britains, Yuerdon; the Natives, Eryn; and the English, Ireland. Why so cal∣led.Some there be that will have it called Hibernia, from Hyberno tempore, that is, from its Winter season; others, from Hiberus a Spaniard; and others, from the ancient River Iberus; whilst some strive to have it so called from the Irish word Hiere, which signifieth West, or Western Coast, whence Eryn may seem to fetch its derivation. Festus Avienus calleth this Island, Sacram Insu∣lam, the Holy Island; for that the People are soon drawn thereunto, witness the many Saints that it hath produced. Ireland long ago inhabited.If you will take for truth what the Irish Historians report, this Island hath been exceeding long inhabited; for, according to Cambden, 'tis said that it was possessed by Caesarea, Niece to Noah, before the Floud; that Bartholanus a Scythian arrived here near 300 years before the Deluge; that many years after Nemethus, with his four Sons, arrived here, but was soon forced hence by the Giant-like sort of People of the Nimrods Race here inhabiting; that after
this the Five Grecians seized this Island; and that soon after (being about the time of the Israelites departure out of Aegypt) Gaothel, with his Wife Scota, Daughter to Pharaoh King of Aegypt, landed here, and called the Island Sco∣tia, from his Wifes name. And further, the British History saith, that some Ages after Hiberius, Hermion, Euer, and Erimon, Sons of Milesius King of Spain, by permission of Gurguntius the British King, here planted Colonies after that the Country had been wasted by a Pestilence, and from the eldest Son was called Hibernia. Nor is it much to be doubted, but that the Britains set∣led themselves here, seeing there is so great affinity betwixt them and the Irish in their natures, dispositions, and speech. Its Extent, Scituation.This Island contains in length about 240 miles, and in breadth about 120; 'tis scituate under the 10th and 12th Climates, the longest day making about 16 hours. It is a near Neighbour to Scotland, from which it is separated by an Isthmus of about seven miles; but England far more remote, being from Dub∣lin, its Metropolitan City, to Holy-land in the Isle of Anglesey (the usual place for taking of Landing) about 50. Its strength.It is an Island of great strength, as well by Nature as Art, by reason of its scituation in such Tempestuous and dangerous Seas, and the several Fortifica∣tions and Castles that the English have built since they became Masters thereof. Its chief Ri∣vers.It is a Country well watered, having several great Rivers, the chief amongst which are those of Shannon, being about 60 miles navigable, and after its course of about 200 miles, looseth it self into the Western Ocean. Liff, Showre, Awidaff, Slanie, Sione, &c. And besides these Rivers there are several Lakes or Loughs, amongst which that of most note is Lough-Erne, about 30 miles in length, and 15 in breadth, in which are several small Isles. Its Commodi∣ties.The Commodities that this Island affordeth, are, great abundance of Cattle, Hides, Tallow, Cheese, Wool, of which they make course-Cloth, Freezes, Rugs, Mantles, &c. also Furs, Pipe-staves, Salt, Hemp, Linnen-Cloth, Hony, and Wax; and its Seas likewise afford great plenty of Cod-fish, Herrings, Pilchards, Oysters, &c. Its Inhabitants.Its Native Inhabitants were extreamly rude and barbarous; they made use of Women in common, without any difference of other mens Wives; they were very bold, couragious, and greedy of honour, constant in love, impatient of Injuries, of an easie belief, much addicted to phantastical conceits, as hold∣ing it ominous to give their Neighbours Fire on a May-day, with many the like Fooleries; they are much inclined to superstitious Idolatry, as worship∣ping the Moon, after her change; about their Childrens Necks they hung the beginning of St. Johns Gospel, a piece of Wolves-skin, or a crooked Nail of a Horse-shoe, which they thought preserved them from danger; the Hoofs of dead Horses they held Sacred; with many such like ridiculous Fancies. They ac∣counted Ease and Idleness their greatest Liberty and Riches, not coveting Worldly possessions, contenting themselves with mean Cottages, Hovels, or Cabins; nor were they profuse in their Apparel or Diet, being well satisfied if they had wherewith to keep them warm, and to fill their Bellies, their chief food being Herbs, Roots, Butter, Milk, Oatmeal, and the like. For their dy∣ing, they hired Women to Mourn, who expostulated why they would die, tel∣ling them, that they had such and such things; and the Corps were accompa∣nied to the Grave with howlings, clapping of hands, and such like sorrowful actions. But many of these ridiculous and absurd Customs, since the English are setled amongst them, are forgotten. The Christian Faith was here first planted by St. Patrick;The Christian Falth first planted by St. Patrick. this Patrick (ac∣cording to Writers) was the Son of Calphurus, by St. Martins Sister, and born at Glasco in Scotland, who in his Youth was taken Captive by the Irish Pi∣rates, and sold for six years as a Slave in the meanest condition to Macbuain; yet in this dejected condition he much desired the Conversion of this Nation, from their extream Idolatrous ways to the true serving of the living God, in∣somuch that he dreamed, that the unborn Babes cried unto him for Baptisin; and being at length redeemed from his bondage, by a piece of Gold, which he
found in the Field, (that was rooted up by some Swine) he lest the Isle; but still having his thoughts on these People, in his Aged years he again returned, (and in better state than before) preached the Gospel, converted the People, became Bishop of Armagh; and when dead, was received or canonized as their Saint. The English become Ma∣sters of Ire∣land.These Irish, having civil dissentions amongst them, prompted the English in the Reign of K. Henry the Second, to attempt the Conquest of this Kingdom, who in Anno Dom. 1172. landed his Army there, and obtained the Regal Do∣minion thereof, which being passed over unto him by their Nobles and Com∣monalty, their Charter so signed, was transmitted to Rome, and was confirmed by a Patent of Pope Hadrian, by a Ring delivered unto him in token of his investure; and was farther confirmed by the Authority of certain Provincial Synods: and ever since that time it hath remained in the possessions of the Kings of England. The Tempo∣ral Govern∣ment of Ire∣land.The Temporal Government, since the English became Masters thereof, hath most commonly been, by one Supream Officer, sent over by the Kings of Eng∣land, and called Lord Deputy, or Lord Lieutenant, who for Majesty, State, and Power, is not inferiour to any Vice-Roy in Christendom; living in great grandure, and having ample and Royal Power and Authority granted unto him; and as Assistant unto him in so weighty a concern, he hath his Privy Council, being a select number of honourable and prudent persons chosen out of the Nobility, Clergy, and Capital Officers of State: for their Degrees of Ho∣nour, and Offices of State, they are the same with those of England, already treated of. The present Lord Lieutenant is the Right Noble his Excellency Arthur Capell, Earl of Essex, Viscount Maldon, Baron Capell of Hadham, &c. Its Laws and Courts of Judicature.The Laws of this Kingdom have correspondency with those of England, and have likewise there several Courts of Judicature; as the Chancery, Com∣mon-Pleas, Kings-Bench, Exchequer, &c. but above all the High Court of Parliament. There are likewise in each County Justices of the Peace, for the quiet governing and well ordering the Inhabitants, as in England. The Arch∣bishops and Bishops.As to the Ecclesiastical Government of this Kingdom, it is committed to the care of four Archbishops, under whom are divers Suffragan Bishops, whose names are as followeth. Under the Archbishop of Armagh, who is Primate of Ireland, are the Bishops of Meath, or Elnamirand, Conuer, Rathluc, Dune, or Dundalethglas, Ardachad, Derry, Dal-Liquir, Chlocor, or Lugundum, and Rathbot. Under the Archbishop of Dublin, those of Ferne, Lechlin, Glen∣dalach, Ossery, and Kildare. Under the Archbishop of Cassile, those of Lim∣rick, Waterford, Corke, Laonie, or Kendalnan, Gellumabrath, Lismore, Arde∣fret, the Isle of Gathay, Clon, De Rosalither, Melite, or Emilech, and Ross, or Roscree. And under the Archbishop of Tuam, those of Elphin, Gonany, Clon∣fred, Enachdun, Achad, Duac, or Killmacduoc, Mage, Killmundach, Cellaiar, Roscomon, and Lade, or Killaleth. According to the Temporal Government of this Kingdom, it is severed into four Provinces, to wit, Leimster, Ʋlster, Connaugh, and Mounster, which are again subdivided into several Counties, which comprehend several Baronies, in which are seated several Towns: And of these Provinces in order. LEIMSTER. Its fertility.THis Part of Ireland (for the generality) is of a fertil Soil, affording great plenty of Corn, Cattle, Fowl, and Fish, enjoyeth a wholsom and temperate Air, is well watered with Rivers, the chief amongst which are the Shour, Neor, and Barraeo,Its Bivers. which have their rise out of that great Mountain called by Giraldus, Bladinae Montes: It is very well inhabited, as well by the Gentry as the Commonalty, and the rather by reason of Dublin, the Me∣tropolitan City of this Kingdom therein seated. Its form may be said to be triangular, for from South-east to the West-point, is above 80 miles; from
thence to the North-west, about 70; and her East-Coast, about 18; the cir∣cumference making about 270 miles. And for its bounds, it hath on the West the Province of Connough; on the North, that of Leimster; and on the East and South, the Sea which regards England, from which (that is, from Holy-head in the Isle of Anglesey) it is distant about 50 miles: a Sea very dangerous for Saylers, by reason of the Flats and Shallows that lie over against Holy-point, which are called the Grounds. And as to its division, it is severed into ten Counties, to wit, Dublin, East-Meath, West-Meath, Longford, Kildare, Kings County, Queens County, Caterlough, Weixford, and Kilkenny; all which are again subdivided into several Baronies; and of these Counties in order. County of Dublin de∣scribed.DƲBLIN, or Divelin, a fertil County for Corn and Cattle, but ill pro∣vided with Wood, which defect is supplied by Peat or Turff, dug up in the clammy places, as also by Sea-Coal brought from England. It is severed into seven Baronies, viz. New-Castle, Ʋpper-Cross, Rath-down, Castle-knock, Coo∣lock, Balrudery, and Nether-Cross; and by reason of its City Dublin, the Me∣tropolis of Ireland, is very well furnished with Towns, and inhabited by Gen∣try. Its chief places are, Dublin,Dublin. the capital City in the Island, by Ptolomy called Eblana, by the Latinists, Dublinium, and Dublinia; by the West-Britains, Dinas Dulin; and by the Irish, Balacleigh, that is, the Town upon Hurdles, by reason that when it began to be first built (the ground being wet and moorish) the Founda∣tion of its Houses were laid upon Hurdles. It is a City of great Antiquity, and said to be built by Harold the first King of Norway, who brought most of the Kingdom under his obedience, though not without great Spoils; and after the Conquest of the English, was Peopled by a Colony of Bristol-men. It is no less pleasantly than commodiously seated on the River Liffie, (which after a small course emptieth it self into a capacious Bay of the Sea, where it hath a good Haven) and a fair prospect; and on the South it hath delightful Hills, which, with the several Parks here adjacent afford great Recreation to the Gentry. It is a City dignified and enriched with the residence of the Lord Lieutenant, as also with the See of an Archbishop, with an Ʋniversity, and the Courts of Judicature, by reason of which it is a place of good Traffick, being well inhabited and frequented by Nobility and Gentry, as also by a∣bundance of wealthy Merchants and Shop-keepers. It is beautified with ma∣ny fair Buildings, both publik and private, the principal amongst which are the Lord Lieutenants Palace, a stately Structure, built by order of King Hen∣ry the Second, in the East-Suburbs; then the Cathedral Church, dedicated to St. Patrick, consisting of a Dean, Chanter, Chancellor, Treasurer, two Arch-Deacons, and twenty Prebendaries: Nigh unto which is the Archbishops Palace, both which are without the City in the Suburbs called St. Patricks: Then the Collegiate Church consecrated to the Holy Trinity, commonly called Christ-Church, seated in the midst of the City, which Queen Elizabeth dig∣nified with the Priviledges of an Ʋniversity; and not far from this is the Town-Hall, called Toles-tale, a fair Stone-building of a quadrangular form; and here the Lord Major, Sheriffs, Aldermen, and other the Magistrates of the City assemble together for the management and consulting on the publick Concerns of the City; as, to hear Causes, hold Sessions, &c. Then a beautiful Colledge, with several other fair Edifices. It is at present a City of a large Ex∣tent to what it formerly was, and doth daily increase in its Buildings, especially in its Suburbs, which is severed from the City by a Wall, which gives entrance by six Gates. As touching the Trade of this Kingdom, I shall include it under this City, as being the chief place of Traffick. The Commodities exported are the product of the Country already treated of; and those imported are all sorts of English Commodities, especially Apparel, Silks, Stuffs, &c. also Wines, Oils, and several other Commodities. Their Coins, as being under the Juris∣diction of England, have correspondency therewith, and are here currant, as also those of Spain; and an Irish Pound, which consisteth of 20 s. is but 15 s. sterling, which makes their Shilling but 9 d. sterling. And as to their Weights and Measures, they are the same with those of England, where see further.
Wickle, seated on the Sea,Wickle. where over the narrow Haven there standeth a Rock, enclosed with a strong Wall instead of a Castle, and serveth for a place of defence. New-Castle, a Town which regardeth the Sea,Newcastle. where there are Shelves of Sand (which they call the Grounds) reaching a great length, between which and the Shoar is said to be about seven Fathom water. Houth, seated on the River Liffy, at its fall into the Sea,Houth. which almost en∣closeth it. Malcheal, also seated on the Sea,Malcheal. nigh unto which is a small Isle called Lambey. County of East-Meath described.EAST-MEATH, a County watered with the noble River Boyn, which cutteth the Country into two parts, and after it hath received the Waters of Lough-Ranmore, dischargeth it self into the Sea. It is severed into twelve Baronies, viz. Moyfenragh, Dunboyne, Ratoth, Duleeke, Kells, Morgallon, Skreen, Navan, Lune, Slane, Foore, and Decce: And hath for its chief place, Trim, seated on the River Boyne, a Town of good account and Trade.Trim. Aboy, a well inhabited and frequented Town.Aboy. Navan. Drodagh. Slane.Navan, Drodagh, and Slane, which also hath a Barony. County of West-Meath described.WEST-MEATH, so called as lying Westwards, as the other is for lying Eastwards. It is divided into twelve Baronies, viz. Farbill, Moyeashell, Clun∣lonan, Brawney, Moygoish, Delvin, Corkery, Demyfoore, Maheredernon, Rath∣conrath, Kilkenny-west, and Fartullagh: And hath for its chief places, Molingar, the chief Shire-Town,Molingar. as being commodiously seated in the midst of the County. Delvin, seated on the Summit of a Hill, a Town dignified with a Barony:Delvin. and Kelskery.Kelskery. County of Longford described.LONGFORD, a County almost encompassed with Lakes and Rivers; amongst which is the Shannon, the noblest River in the Kingdom. It is severed into six Baronies, viz. Ardagh, Granard, Moydow, Longford, Rathline, and Abbyshrewle: And hath for its chief places, Longford, which gives name to the County, seated on the Lake Eske,Longford. or rather on the Shannon. Ardragh, another good Town.Ardragh. County of Kildare de∣scribed.KILDARE, a rich and fertil County, severed into ten Baronies, viz. Salt, Nass, Ikeathy, or Oughtereney, Claine, Connel Magna, Carbury, Ophaly, Noragh and Rabane, Kilkullen half, Kilcah and Moon: Whose chief places are, Kildare, a fair Inland Town, being well frequented, defended by a Castle,Kildare. and dignified with the See of a Bishop: A place much celebrated in the Infancy of the Irish Church for its St. Brigid an holy Virgin, who was the Disciple of St. Patrick. Mainoth, defended by a Castle, and is a place of good account,Mainoth. and well fre∣quented. Naas, Athie.Naas and Athie, seated on the River Barrow, both Towns of some ac∣count. Kings County described.KINGS COƲNTY, so called in honour to Philip King of Spain, Husband to Mary Queen of England. It is divided into ten Baronies, viz. Cooles-Town, Philips-Town, Marrius-Town, Ballicowen, Kilcoursey, Balliboy, Clonliske, Garricastle, Ballibritt, and Fercale: And hath for its chief places, Philips-Town, or Kings-Town.Philips-Town. Queens-Town described.QƲEENS COƲNTY, full of Boggs and Woods, is divided into eight Baronies, viz. Balliadams, Ʋpper-Ossery, Portnehinch, Tenehinch, Cullinagh, Mary-burrough, Slewmargigh, and Stradbally: And hath for its chief places, Queens-Town, a place of good account, and is the chief in the Coun∣ty.Queens-Town. Rheban, once a City, but at present of small note.Rheban.
County of Caterlough de∣scribed.CATERLOƲGH, a fertil County, and well clothed with Wood. It is severed into five Baronies, viz. Ravilly, Caterlough, Forth, Idronye, and St. Mullin in part: And hath for its chief places, Caterlough,Caterlough. seated on the River Barrow, of good account and strength. Leighlin,Leighlin. also seated on the Barrow, once dignified with an Episcopal See. Tullo,Tullo. seated on the River Slane. Carickbrak, Areklo.Carickbrak and Areklo, which two last are seated on the Sea. County of Wexford de∣scribed.WEXFORD, or WEISFORD, washed by the Sea; a County in former time (according to Ptolomy) possessed by the Menapians, a sort of People which came out of Low-Germany. It is divided into eight Baronies, viz. Gory, Scarwalsh, Ballagheene, Bantry, Shellmaleere, Forth, Bargy, and Sheelburne. And hath for its chief places, Wexford,Wexford. supposed to be the ancient City Menapa, scituate at the Mouth of the River Slane, where it hath a good Haven; a fair Town, and of note for being the first Town that imbraced a Colony of English, as also for its Herring-fishing; which makes it to be well inhabited and frequented. Ross,Ross. seated on the River Barrow, which after a small course falleth into a Bay or Arm of the Sea. Ternes,Ternes. scituate on the Slane, dignified with the See of a Bishop, and was in former time fortified with a Castle. Eniscort,Eniscort. a Borough and Town Corporate. County of Kilkenny de∣scribed.KILKENNY, a very fertil County, well graced with Towns, is divi∣ded into ten Baronies, viz. Gowran, Fassaghdining, Kilkenny, Cranagh, Galmey, Callen, Iverke, Sheelelogher, Kells, Knocktopher, Ida-Igrin, and Iber∣con. And hath for its chief places, Kilkenny,Kilkenny. seated on the River Nur, which traverseth the County; a fair and wealthy Borough-Town, far exceeding all other Mid-land Borough-Towns in the Kingdom. It is divided into the English and the Irish Town, that part belonging to the English being fenced on the West-side by a Wall, and defend∣ed by a Castle; and that part which belongeth to the Irish, (being as it were the Suburbs) is of the greatest Antiquity, having in it the Canicks Church, and is honoured with the See of the Bishop of Ossery. Thomas Town,Thomas Town. seated beneath the River Nur, a small walled Town. Callan,Callan. seated on a River so called, a Borough and Town Corporate. Religious Houses.Amongst the places in this Province set apart for Divine Worship, these fol∣lowing were of great note, viz. the stately Abbey called Thomas Court at Dublin, built by King Henry the Second, in expiation of the Murther of Tho∣mas Archbishop of Canterbury; the Monasteries of St. Maries, of Oustmanby and Tintern; and the Abbey founded by William Marshall Earl of Pembroke, to the praise of God, for his safe delivery out of a desperate Storm and Ship∣wrack, which he was in.
ULSTER. Its tempera∣ture of Soil.THis Province is of a large Extent, and of a different Soil, some places be∣ing very fertil, and others as barren, which would be otherwise if it were well manured; but generally it is inclined to fertility: It hath many thick and shady Woods, as also divers large Lakes, in which are several small Isles;Its Lakes and Rivers. which said Lakes or Loughs, as also the Rivers which water the Province, plen∣tifully furnish the Inhabitants with Salmons, and other good Fish: and for Flesh, Fowl, and Corn, they have more than they can well spend. This Province by the Welsh-Britains is called Ʋltw, and by the Irish, Cui Guilly.Its Name. Its Bounds.It is bounded on the South with the Provinces of Leimster and Connaugh, and on all other parts is washed with the Sea, which receiveth the Waters of those many Loughs or Lakes, many of which are of a large extent, and have within them several small Isles, the names of some are as followeth, Lough-Neaugh, Lough-Foylle, Lough-Swillie, Lough-Earne, and Lough-Cone. Its Extent.It is of a large Extent, reaching from Black-Abbey in the East to Calebegh-Point in the West, about 130 miles; and from Coldagh-Haven in the North to Kilmore in the South, about 100; and in circumference about 420 miles. This Province is divided into Ten Counties, viz. Tir-conell or Dunagall,Division.Tyroen, Colrane, Antrim, Downe, Louth, Armagh, Monoghan, Gavan, and Fermanagh; all which are again severed into divers Baronies▪ And of these Counties in order. County of Tir-conel de∣scribed.TIR-CONEL, or DƲNAGAL, a Champain Country, and well wa∣tered with Rivers and Loughs, which discharge themselves into the Sea, which washeth its Southern, Western, and Northern parts, and affords to the Inhabitants great plenty of Fish and River-Fowl. It is divided into five Ba∣ronies, viz. Tirhugh, Boylagh, Kilmacreanan, Raphoe, and Enishowen: And hath for its chief places. Derry, or London-Derry, a Colony of the Citizens of London;Derry. a fair and well built Town, where sometime stood a flourishing Monastery. Dunegall, which gives name to the County, seated on a Bay of the Sea,Dunegall. where it hath a good Haven, and between the Mouth of Lough-Earne and Balewilly-Bay. Calebeck, scituate on the Sea, where it hath a commodious Haven,Calebeck. and Robogh. Several Isles and Promon∣tories along the Coast. St. Patricks Purgatory.Along the Coast of this County are seated several small Isles, viz. Torr-Isle, the Isles of Cladagh, North-Aran, &c. also the Promontories of Fair-foreland, Rams-head, and St. Hellens-head: And in this County is St. Patricks Pur∣gatory, a Vault or narrow Cave in the ground, of which strange Fancies are believed by the simple sort of the Irish. County of Tyroen de∣scribed.TYROEN, a large, rough, and rugged, yet fertil County, which is divi∣ded by the Mountains of Sliew-Gallen into the Upper and the Lower, in both which are three Baronies, viz. Omagh, Strabane, and Dungannon: And hath for its chief places, Cloghar, dignified with the See of a Bishop.Cloghar. Dungannon, the ancient residence of the O-neals.Dungannon. Strebane. Charlement.Strebane, and Charlemont. In this County is e large Lake Neaugh, well stored with Fish, in which are several small Isles; the chief amongst which are Enis-Garden, and Sidney-Isle. County of Colerane de∣scribed.COLERANE, a small County, seated in the most Northern part of the Province, and washed with the Sea, as also with the large Lake Foylle, adjoyn∣ing to the Sea on its Western part, and watered with the River Band on its Eastern, which carrieth a proud stream into the Sea from the Lake Neaugh, which breedeth great store of excellent Salmons. The chief places in this County are,
Colerane,Colerane. which gives name to the County, seated on the River Band. Banchor, Kilrough.Banchor, and Kilrough. County of Antrim de∣scribed.ANTRIM, the nearest County to Scotland, from which it is not far di∣stant, being almost encircled with Waters, having on the West the River Band, on the South the large Lough Neaugh and Knockvergus-Bay, and on all other parts the Sea, where along the Shoar are several very small Isles, except it be one, to wit, the Raglins, which is indifferent large. This County is severed into eight Baronies, viz. Toome, Antrim, Killconway, Massereene, Bellfast, Dunluce, Glenarne, and Carie: And hath for its chief places, Knock-fergus,Knock-fergus. by the Irish, Carick-vergus, that is, the Rock of Fergus, seated on a large Bay so called, where it hath a commodious Port. It is a place of good strength, is well inhabited, and better frequented than other places on this Coast; and at the Mouth of this Bay lie several Isles. Not far from this place once stood the famous Monastery of Magio, so much commended by Bede. Antrim,Antrim. seated on a small River, at its influx into the Lake Neaugh. Glastalagne,Glastalagne. scituate on the Band. County of Down de∣scribed.DOWNE, a large and fertil County, washed on the East with the Sea, where it thrusteth it self forth with a large Creek or Arm into the Lough Cone, which extendeth it self in length many miles, and formeth two By-lands; That Southwards called Lecall, which is exceeding fertil, and whose extream point is called St. Johns Foreland; and That Northwards called Ardes: It is severed into five Baronies, viz. Kinalearty, Lower Evagh, Ards, Ʋpper Evagh, and Lecale: And hath for its chief places, Downe,Downe. of old Dunum, seated in the part called Lecall, near the Lough Cone; a Town of good Antiquity, and dignified with an Episcopal See, as also with the Tombs of St. Patrick, St. Bridget, and St. Columbe. Newry,Newry. seated on a River which falleth into Carlingford-haven. Stranford,Stranford. seated on the large River Coyn, or rather an Arm of the Sea, where it hath a safe Harbour. Arglas,Arglas. where (as 'tis said) St. Patrick founded a Church. Conner,Conner. or Conereth; an Episcopal See. Kilwarny,Kilwarny. much anoyed with Bogs, and full of shady Woods. County of Louth de∣scribed.LOƲTH, a County of a fertil Soil, very grateful to the Husbandman, and is washed on the East with the Sea. It is divided into four Baronies, viz. Lough, Dundalke, Ferrard, and Atherdee: And hath for its chief places, Tredaugh,Tredaugh. or Droughdagh, seated near the Mouth of the Boyne, which di∣videth it, but joyned together by a Bridge; and by reason of its commodious Haven it is a good Town, being well inhabited and frequented, nigh unto which stood Mellifont Abbey, founded by Donald a K. of Ʋriel. Dundalke,Dundalke. seated on the Sea, where it hath a commodious Haven, and in former times was strengthned with a Castle, which with the Town was burnt by Edward Brus, Brother to the King of Scots, who proclaimed himself King of Ireland; but for this good act, was soon after (with above 8000 of his Men) flain; not far distant. Carlingford,Carlingford. another good and well frequented Port-Town. Lough,Lough. a fair Town, conveniently seated on the River Warren. Ardeth,Ardeth. a good Inland dry Town. County of Armagh described.ARMAGH, a County of an exceeding fertil Soil, and not inferiour to any in the Kingdom. It is severl into five Baronies, viz. Fowes, Orrior, Tawrane, Onelan, and Armagh: And hath for its chief places, Armagh,Armagh. scated on (or near) the River Kaisin, an ancient (but ruinated) City, yet dignified with the See of an Archbishop, who is Primate of all Ire∣land; which name it is said to receive from Queen Armacha; and is supposed to be the same which Ptolomy calleth Dearmach. And here (according to St. Bernard) St. Patrick the Apostle of the Irish ruled, during his life, and when he departed this World, was here Interr'd, in honour of whom it was a place greatly reverenced.
Not far from Armagh is Owen Maugh, the ancient Seat of the Kings of Ʋl∣ster;Owen-Maugh. and on the River Blackwater are two Forts, one which beareth the same name, and the other called Fort Charles. Mount Norris. Dornous.Mount Norris, another Fort: And Dornous. County of Monoghan de∣scribed.MONOGHAN, a County very hilly, and well clothed with Wood, is severed into four Baronies, viz. Monoghan, Trough, Bartrey, and Cremorne: And hath for its chief places, Clogher, seated on the River Blackwater.Clogher. Monoghan, a large Fort; Churchland, and Lishanahan.Monoghan. County of Cavan de∣scribed.CAVAN, a small County, and of less account, yet is divided into seven Baronies, viz. Clonehy, Tulloghgarvy, Casterahan, Clonmoghan, Tullahagh, Tullabonobo, and Loughtee. And hath for its chief places, Cavan, and Kilmore.Cavan, and Kilmore, the one seated on the Lake Cane, the other on the Lake Nivity, both which are joyned to the Lake Earne, by the River Black∣water. County of Fermanagh described.FERMANAGH, a County well clothed with Wood, and very boggy in the midst, having several Lakes or Loughs, the chief amongst which is that of Earne, which is the largest and most famous in all the Kingdom, having therein seated divers small Isles; and in this Lough are such great store of Sal∣mons, Trouts, and other Fish, that they are oft-times found troublesom to the Fishermen, by breaking their Nets. This County is severed into three Baro∣nies, viz. Magherestrephana, Maghereboy, and Clanawly. And hath for its chief places. Bal-Tarbet,Bal-tarbet. seated on the same Lake. Inis Killing.Inis Killing, the principal Fort in this Tract, which in Anno 1593. was de∣fended by the Rebels, but taken from them by the valiant Captain Dowdall: and near unto this place is a great downfal of water, called the Salmon-leap. CONNAUGH. Full of Bogs, and Woods.THis Province, called by the Irish Conaughty, is full of Woods and Bogs, yet not unfertil, nor wanting in Provisions. In this Province, at Knock∣toe, that is, the Hill of Axes, the greatest rabble of Rebels that ever were seen together in the Kingdom, were gathered together, and commanded by William Burk O-Brien, O-Carrol, and Mac-nemare, grand Rebels in that time, but were discomfited by the noble Valour of Girald Fitz-Girald, Earl of Kildare, and his party. And about the Year 1316. upon the occasion of two Princes or Lords falling at odds, there were said to be slain on both sides about 4000 Men, and so great misery came amongst them through Famine, (being forced to eat one another) and other calamities; that of about 10000 there were left alive not above 300. Its Bounds.This Province hath for its Eastern Bounds, Leimster; for its Southern, Mon∣ster; for its Northern, Ʋster; and for its Western, the Sea, where it hath many commodious Bays, Creeks, and Navigable Rivers. Its Extent.Its Extent from Tromer in the East to Burrag-Bay in the West (being the breadth) is about 80 miles; and from the River Shennon in the South to Enis∣kelling in the North (being the length) is about 120; and in circumference about 400 miles; and for its division is parted into sir Counties, viz. Mayo, Slego, Galloway, Clare or Twomond, and Letrym; all which are subdivided into se∣veral Baronies, as hereafter shall be named: And of these in order. County of Mayo de∣scribed.MAYO, apleasant and fertil County, stored with Cattle, Deer, Hawks, and Hony, and well watered with the two large Loughs of Meske, and Garogh, in which are several Isles, which with the Rivers that fall into the Sea, where are seated several Isles; the Inhabitants are plentifully supplied with Fish and Fowl. It is severed into nine Baronies, viz. Tirrawly, Eris, Gallin, Coragh, Burishoole, Muriske, Kilmaine, Clonmoris, and Castello; And hath for its chief places,
Killaloy,Killaloy. dignified with an Episcopal See, which formerly was at Mayo, where (according to Bede) there was a Monastery for 30 English men, built by an Irish Bishop; and was in a flourishing condition in the Reign of King John. Refraint. Stackby.Refraine and Stackby, both seated on the Sea-shoar. SLEGO, a County full of rich Pastures, which breed and fatten store of Cattle,County of Slego de∣scribed. and is well watered with the Sea, and the Lough Earne already treated of. It is divided into six Baronies; viz. Carbury, Corran, Leny, Tirrarill, Tirreragh, and Coolavin. And hath for its chief places, Slego,Slego. seated on a Bay of the Sea so called, where it hath a commodious Road for Ships, and is defended by a Castle. Dundroes. Dunbroyle.Dundroes and Dunbroyle, both Maritim-Towns. GALLOWAY, a large and fertil County both for Tillage and Pasturage, whose Western part is washed with the Sea,County of Galloway described. which thrusteth forth several Arms, and hath lying on its Shoars divers Isles, of which the three largest (which bear the name of Aran) are Great-Island, Ifor-Island, Small-Island, all seated in the Mouth of Galloway-Bay. It is separated into fifteen Baronies, viz. Moycullin, Ballinananen, Clare, Downamore, Bealamo, Killehane, Kilconel, Clanemactonene, Longford, Tiaquin, Athenry, Dunkillin, Kilcartan, Lough-Reagh, and Letrim. And hath for its chief places, Galloway,Galloway. a fair, large, and strong City, dignified with an Episcopal See, and is commodiously seated for Traffick on a spacious Bay of the Sea so called, by reason whereof it is well inhabited, frequented, and enjoyeth a good Trade. Nigh unto this City is the Lough Carble or Carbles, about 20 miles in length, and 3 or 4 in breadth, in which are abundance of small Isles. Inis-Ceath,Inis-Ceath. a place in times past well known for its Monastery. Inis-Bovind,Inis-Bovind. which Bede calleth White-Castle-Isle. Aterith. Clan-Ricard. Kilmaculo and Clonfert.Aterith, or Athenry, once a place of good strength. Clan-Ricard, Kilma∣culo, and Clonfert. County of Clare de∣scribed.CLARE, or TWOMOND, a County shooting it self far into the Sea towards the West, with a tapred Promontory, which with the River Shannon, and the Lough Derg (both full of small Isles) doth almost encompass it. It is a Country well provided of all things necessary for the sustenance of Man, is severed into nine Baronies, viz. Burrins, Corcomroe, Ibrickam, Inchiquin, Islands, Clanderlagh, Moyfertagh, Bounraty, and Tullogh. And hath for its chief places, Clare,Clare. seated on a Creek which floweth out of the Shannon. Kylaloe,Kylaloe. seated on the Shannon near the Lough Derg, dignified with an E∣piscopal See. Kilsennerag. Bunraty.Kilsennerag and Bounraty, not far from the Shannon; a Town of some ac∣count. County of Roscomon de∣scribed.ROSCOMON, a long but narrow County, of a very fertil Soil, and breedeth store of Cattle; but Northwards, where the Curlew Mountains are, it is inclined to sterility. It is divided into seven Baronies, viz. Roscomon, Boyle, Bealanioo, East and West Ballintuber, Athlone, and Moycarne. And hath for its chief places, Roscomon,Roscomon. seated near the Lough Ree, once a place of good account and strength. Elphen,Elphen. honoured with the See of a Bishop. Athlone,Athlone. scituate on the Lough Ree, defended by a Castle, and beautified with a fair Stone-Bridge. And under the Curlew-Hills in former time was a famous Abby, together with the Abby of Beatitude. Country of Letrim de∣scribed.LETRIM, a hilly County, yet very fit for grasing of Cattle, which are here in great abundance. It is severed into five Baronies, viz. Letrim, Dru∣maheire, Rosdogher, Carrigallin, and Moyhill. And hath for its principal place, Letrim. Meukerk.Letrim, seated in a fertil Soil, near the Lough Alyne; and Meukerk.
MUNSTER. Its Commo∣ditles.THis Province in Irish called Mown, and in Latin, Momonia, is Mountai∣nous, Woody, and of a different Soil, but for the generality very fertil, and abounding in Corn, Cattle, Fowl, and Fish; and the rather as being so well watered with Rivers and Bays, which lose themselves in the Sea, which al∣most encompasseth it, except towards the East and North, where it butteth upon the Provinces of Leimster and Connaugh; which said Bays afford good Harbours for Shipping, the chief amongst which being those of Bautre, Mare, Dingle, and Sennon: And along the Shoar are seated abundance of small Isles. It is of a large extent,Extent. being from Waterford-Haven in the East to Feriter-Haven in the West, about 100 miles; and from Baltimore-Bay in the South to Galloway-Bay in the North, about 90; and in circumference, tracing its many Promontories and Indents, above 500 miles. And as to its Temporal Government, it is at present severed into six Counties, Counties,Division.viz. Limerick, Tipperary, or Holy-Cross, Kerry, Cork, Desmond, and Water∣ford; all which are subdivided into several Baronies, as shall be treated of as they come in order; and first with Limerick. County of Limerick described.LIMERICK, a fertil and well inhabited County, is severed into eleven Baronies, viz. Abbey-Outheney-boy, Limerick-Liberty, Clan-Williams, Small-County, Coshma, Coshlea, Killmalock, Poblebria, Kenry, Cuonagh, and Connelloe. And hath for its chief places, Limerick, in Irish, Loumeagh, the chief City in the Province,Limerick. seated in an Isle, so made by the River Shennon, which after 60 miles course loseth it self in the Sea; and by reason of its commodious scituation, the River being Naviga∣ble to the very City, makes it to be a place well inhabited and frequented, is graced with good built Houses, beautified with a Cathedral Church, and a fair Stone-Bridge, is honoured with the See of a Bishop, and is strongly fortified with a Castle, and begirt with a Wall. Kill-Mallo, a well inhabited Town, which is also begirt with a Wall.Killmallo. Adare, seated on the Shennon, once a Town of good account: And Clan-William.Adare. County of Tipperary, or Holy-Cross de∣scribed.TIPPERARY, or HOLY-CROSS, more fertil in its Southern parts than elsewhere, is divided into twelve Baronies, viz. Slevardagh and Compsey, Kilnemana, Ikerin, Iffa and Offa, Iliogurty, Middle-third, Owney and Arra, Clan-Williams, Ileagh, Kilnelougurty, Ʋpper-Ormond and Lower-Ormond; and hath for its principal places, Cassile, seated on the Showr, and dignified with an Archiepiscopal See,Cassile. by Eugenius the Third, Bishop of Rome. Holy-Cross, seated on the River Showr or Swire,Holy-Cross. once a place of good ac∣count and note for its famous Abby, which was well frequented by Pilgrims, and other devout persons, who came to see and worship a piece (as was gene∣rally supposed) of the Holy-Cross, from whence the Country adjoyning is ge∣nerally called County of the Holy-Cross of Tipperary. Emeley, dignified with the See of a Bishop; once a place of good account,Emeley. and well inhabited and frequented. Clomel, seated on the River Showr, a well frequented Town.Clomel. Carick-Mac-Griffin. Thurles, and Tipperary.Carick-Mac-Griffin, scituate on a Rock. Thurles and Tipperary. The North part of this County (which is very hilly, and not over fertil) beareth the name of Ormond, and is honoured in giving Title to his Grace James Butler, Duke, Marquess, and Earl of Ormond, Earl of Brecknock and Ossery; Viscount Thurles, Baron of Arklow and Lanthony, Lord Steward of his Majesties Houshold, Knight of the Garter, and one of the Lords of his Ma∣jesties most Honourable Privy Council, &c.
County of Kerry de∣scribed.KERRY, a County watered with the Sea, where it thrusteth forth a larg Bay called Dingley-Bay, and hath on its Shoar divers small Isles. It is ver Mountainous and Woody, but interlaced with fertil Valleys. 'Tis divided int eight Baronies, viz. Glaneroughty, Iveragh, Dunkerone, Moygunnyhy, Trug∣hanackme Corkaguiny, Iraghticonnor, and Clanmorris; And hath for its chie place, Dingle,Dingle. which hath a commodious Port, on the other side of which is Smer∣wick-Sound, a good Road for Ships. Ardart. Traley.Ardart, a place of mean account, although the See of a Bishop; and Trale County of Desmond described.DESMOND, a Mountainous County, and well washed with the Se which thrusteth forth its Arms a good way into the Land, and forms thre Promontories, viz. first that of Eraugh, lying between Baltimore and Banr a Bay sufficiently well known for the great store of Herrings here taken. Se∣condly, that of Beare, being enclosed between the Bays of Maire and Dingl It hath for its chief places, Donekyran. Ardes. Downbay.Donekyran, defended by a Castle: Ardes, and Downbay. CORKE, a large County, lying on the Sea, where it hath good Roads an Ports for Ships.County of Corke de∣scribed. It is severed into fifteen Baronies, viz. Duhallo, Condon a Clangibon, Orrery and Killmore, Fermoy, Imokillire, Barrimore, Corke, Chursey Kinsale, Barriroe, Ibawne, Beare and Bantry, Musbery, Carbury, and Ba∣rets. And hath for its chief places, Corke,Corke. the chief City in the Province, dignified with the See of a Bisko commodiously seated on a Bay of the Sea, where it hath a good Haven, b reason of which it is a place well inhabited, and frequented by Merchants an Tradesmen, who drive a good Trade; and is a place of some strength, bein begirted with a Wall, besides a River, over which it hath a Bridge. Kinsale,Kinsale. seated at the Mouth of the River Bany, where it hath a good Por and is a place well fortified. Ross,Ross. seated on the Sea-shoar; once of good account, when it had a go Road and Port, which now is barred up. Yoghall,Yoghall. fortified with a Wall, and scituate on the River Broadwater, at i influx into the Sea, where it hath a good Haven, which makes it to be well i habited, and to enjoy some Trade. County of Waterford described.WATERFORD, a pleasant and fertil County, washed with the Sea,  divided into seven Baronies, viz. Deeceis, Gualtier, Cashmore and Coshbrid Middle-third, Ʋpper-third, Glamhery, and Waterford-Liberty. And hat for its cheif places, Waterford,Waterford. by the Britains and Irish called Portblargy, said to be built  certain Pirates of Norway, seated on the River Showr, on which it hath  commodious and capacious Port, where about a 1000 Sail of Ships may safe ride at Anchor: It is a fair and well inhabited City, enjoyeth a good Trade,  dignified with the See of a Bishop, and is esteemed the second place of te i the whole Kingdom. Dungarvan,Dungarvan. a well fortified Town on the Sea-shoar, where it hath a goo Road for Ships, which makes it to be of some account. Ardmore,Ardmore. also seated on the Sea-shoar. Lismore,Lismore. a place of some note. Divers small Isles in the British Sea.And thus much for the Description of Ireland, besides which, and Grea-Britain, there are a vast number of lesser Isles, which may be comprehende under the denomination of the British Isles, and may be considered under fou sorts or heads; viz. the Orcades, the Hebrides, the oringes, and the Isles o Scilly, with those of the Sporades: And of these in order.
maps of the Shetland Islands, the Isle of Man, the Isle of Wight, the Orkney Islands, Jersey and Guernsey. MAPP OF THE ISLES  WIGHT, IARSEY, GARNSEY, RKE, MAN, ORCADES, D SHETLAND, BY RIC: Blome, by his Matys. Comand. SHET∣LAND ISLE OF M blazon or coat of arms of the earls of Derby To ye Rt Honble Will: Earl of Derby, Ld Stanley and Strange: of  &  & Ld Lieutenant  County &  of Lancaster & Chesir & Admirall of ye  & Lord of Man . This Mapp of  humbly dedicated by Rich Blome.. E OF WIGHT blazon or coat of arms of the baronetcy of Barrington, Essex To ye Worship¦full, Thomas Bucclugh of Swaynston & Brixton in ye Isle of Wight Esq; Son & heir to ye Sr. Io Barington of Barrington hall in Essex Kt. and Bart. This Mapp of ye Isle of Wight is Humbly dedicated by Ric Blome. ORCADES ARSEY blazon or coat of arms of the Carteret baronetcy To ye Rt Honble S.r George Carteret Kt & Bart  Chamberlaine of his Majs household & one of his Matys most honble privy Councell &c This Mapp of Jarsey is humbly dedicate by Ric Blome. blazon or coat of arms of the Hatton baronetcy GARNSEY To ye. Rt. Hon Christopher Haton, Baron Hatton of Kirby, Governour of ye Isle of Garsey &c. This Mapp of Garnsey is Humbly DD. by Ric: Blome.
Isles of Orkney, when first dis∣covered, and how subdued.THe ORCADES, or ISLES of ORKNEY, are in number 32, and scituate against the Northern Cape of Scotland, from which it is se∣parated by a narrow Streight. In Solinus his time they were uninhabited, and overgrown with sledgy or rushy Weeds, and at present they are not over∣crowded with People, as not being very commodious to dwell in, being very cold, destitute of Woods, and unfit to bear Wheat, so that instead of Bread-corn they make use of dried Stock-fish, which they beat to powder. And these Isles, according to Tacitus, are said to be first discovered by Julius Agricola, when he sailed round Britain with his Fleet, at which time he brought them under his subjection: After that, according to Ninnius, Octha, and Ebissus, Saxons (who served under the Britains) sailed about the Picts Country with 40 Sail of Cyules, that is, Flyboats, or roaving Pinnaces, and sorely wasted these Isles: Soon after this they fell into the hands of the Norwegians, who kept the possession thereof until the Year 1266, at which time the Scots waging War with them, Magnius, the Fourth of that name (then King of Norway) was constrained to surrender them up again upon composition unto Alexander the Third, King of the Scots, which was afterwards confirmed by King Haquin: And in Anno 1498, Christian the First, King of Norway and Denmark, upon the Marriage of his Daughter to James the Third, King of the Scots, renoun∣ced all his Right for himself and his Successors thereunto. Its People.And the People that inhabit these Isles, as well in Language as Behaviour, resemble much of the wild Irish, and are called Redshanks, a sort of People utterly rude and barbarous. The chief of these Isles are as followeth: POMONIA, by Solinus called Pomona Diutina,Pomonia. and by the Inhabitants Mainland, for that it is far larger than all the rest, being about 26 miles in length, and 6 in breadth; an Isle well stored with Lead and Tin, is indifferent∣ly inhabited, and hath for its chief Town, Kirke-wale, a large Town, dignified with an Episcopal See,Kirkwale. is fortified with two Castles; and for Divine Worship hath 12 Churches, one of which, to wit its Cathedral, is a fair Structure. Hoy, with other Isles.HOY, indifferent large, having several Towns; Souna, Flotta, South-Ranals, Burra, Siapins, Eglis, Roous, Wester, Papa, Fana, Heth, or Eda, Streoms, Sand-Isle, and North-Ranals, with divers others of less note, and not worth the naming. Shetland Isles.The ISLES of SHETLAND, by some (though falsly) esteemed the Thule of the Ancients, and by the Commentator upon Horace, the Fortunate Island, where (according to the fabulous Opinion of Tzetzes) the Souls of good men are Ferried over into those Elysiian Fields, which are always cloth∣ed in their Summer-Livery; but the mistake is very gross, for on the con∣trary, this Isle lying in the Latitude of 63 degrees, is extreamly Cold, and the greatest part of the Year pestered with Ice and Snow; and the more, as lying on every side open to the bitter Storms of the Northern Ocean. Isle of Hebrides described.The HEBRIDES, HEBƲDES, or Western Isles, as seated West∣wards of Scotland, are about 44 in number, and for the generality are plen∣tifully provided with Corn, Woods, Sheep, Salmons, Herrings, and other Fish, as also with Fowl, Deer, and Conies. And for the People (according to So∣linus) they are said to be uncivil, ignorant of Religion, Arts, and Literature, contenting themselves in a mean condition, for Food, Rayment, or Habita∣tion; and all these Isles were anciently ruled by a King of their own, which was not by succession, but election; and to that end their Kings were prohi∣bited to marry, but were permitted to enjoy other mens Wives, which he fancied, when, and as long as he pleased. And 'tis said, that in the other part of Scotland (according to ancient Custom) the Virginity of all New∣married Wives were the Landlords due, until such time that King Malcolme made a Law, that half a Mark should be paid for redemption. It seemeth Maiden-heads in these parts were then of no great value, for a Mark Scotch is little above a Shilling English. The chief of these Isles are,
LEWIS,Lewis-Isle. or LEVISA, the largest of all these Isles, being about 60 miles in length and 30 in breadth; an Isle full of steep, craggy, and stony Hills, not over-thronged with Inhabitants, but hath several small Towns. SKYE,Skye-Isle. adjoyning to the Sea-Coast of Scotland, almost as large as Lewis, hath several Inlets of the Sea, is Hilly and Barren: And hath for its chief places, Tanternesca,Tranternesca. seated on the Sea-shoar, before which lieth a small Isle. Dunbegan. Dunskaca.Dunbegan, seated on a Creek or Arm of the Sea, and Dunskaca. EƲST,Eust-Isle. an Isle (or rather Isles) of a long, but narrow extent, in which are seated several small Towns. And near unto the Southern part of this Isle lie several small ones, the chief amongst which is Barray. MƲLA,Mula-Isle. by Ptolomy called Maleos, about 28 miles long, and 20 broad, is seated near unto the County of Lorne in Scotland, from which it is severed by an Arm of the Sea, where are such abundance of small Isles, that the passage is almost choaked up. It is an Isle (as all the rest) hilly, and not over fertil, but affords good store of Fish and Fowl, and hath Mines of Lead and Tin. Its chief places are, Arroisca,Arroisca. scituate on the Sea-shoar, which regardeth the County of Laque∣bra in Scotland. Dovert-Castle,Dovert-Castle. also scituate towards the Coast of Scotland Eastwards. ILA,Ila-Isle. of old EPIDIƲM, of about 24 miles in length, and 16 in breadth, almost divided into two parts by Inlets of the Sea. It is plentifully stored with Cattle and Herds of Red-Deer, and its Land, which is of a Champain and fer∣til Soil, beareth good Corn, and participating something with the quality of Ireland, from which it is not far distant. In this Isle are seated several Towns, amongst which are Gwelwal, Kylmany, and Dunweg. SƲRA,Sura-Isle. a small Isle, lying between Ila and Scotland, where, at Sodore, formerly the Seat of a Bishop, who had Jurisdiction over all these Isles, stood a Monastery famous for the Tombs of the Scotish Kings, and the frequent re∣course of Holy men thereunto; amongst whom Columbe, the Apostle of the Picts, was of chief note, and from whose Cell the Isle is also called Columb-Kill. ARRAN,Arran-Isle. which Antonius calleth Glotta, is an Isle seated in the Dunbri∣tain-Frith, between the Counties of Cantyr, Argile, Kyle, and Galloway. It hath for its chief places, Arran, Brydyk. Glenkill.Arran, seated on a Bay of the Sea. Brydyk, and Glenkill. All the rest of the Isles, comprehended under the name of the Hebrides, are very small and inconsiderable, being either stony, very barren, or else inacces∣sible, by reason of the craggy Clifts; wherefore I shall omit the naming of them. The Isles of Scilly.The ISLES of SCILLY, by the Dutch called the Sorlings, and by the ancient Greeks the Hesperides and Cassiterides, are scituate against the most Western Cape of Cornwall, from which they are about 24 miles distant, and are about 145 in number; all being plentifully stored with Coneys, Cranes, He∣rons, and other wild Fowl, which breed in the craggy Cliffs and Hills, and some of them fertil in Grain. Amongst these Isles, these following are of chief note: SCILLY,Scilly. which communicates its name to the rest of the Isles; Armagh, Agnes, Sampson, Brefar, Rusco, St. Hellens, St. Martins, Arthur, and St. Maries, the largest and most fertil of all both for Corn and Pastures, is about eight miles in circuit; is strengthned with a Castle, called Stella Maria, built by Queen Elizabeth; and hath a large and commodious Harbour for Ships. Under the Name of the SPORADES, may be comprehended several ISLES, which are dispersed about the British Seas. And first the Isle of Man.
Isle of Man.MAN, an Island scituate in that part of the British Ocean, which is called St. Georges Channel, and lieth between the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, to wit, South of Scotland, West of England,Its scituation. and East of Ire∣land; from all which it is not so far distant, but that in a clear day, on the top of Sceaful-Hill (which is in the midst of the Isle) all the three Kingdoms may easily be seen. Its Names.This Isle by Ptolomy was called Moneda; by Pliny, Monabia; by the Bri∣tains, Menow; by the English, Man; and by the Inhabitants, Maninge. Its Air, tem∣perature, and fertility.The Air is sharp, but healthful, and subject to high Winds; yet the Frosts are short, and the Snow lieth not long in the Valleys. The Soil is reasonable fruitful (yet very Mountainous) affording good store of Wheat and other Grain, especially Oats, of which the Inhabitants make their Bread; and its Pastures feed good Flocks of Sheep, and Herds of Cattle, which for smallness resemble those of the ancient Irish breed. Here are great store of Fowl of sundry sorts, especially in the Isle of Calf, a very small spot,Isle of Calf. seated in the South-part towards Anglesey, where there are also abundance of Puffines, a certain Sea-Fowl that breeds in Cony-holes, and are chiefly useful for their Feathers, and the Oil made of them; yet their Flesh, if pickled or salted, comes little short of Anchova's, by reason of their Fish-like tast. Here are also Red-Deer, a∣bundance of Coneys, and in its fresh-water Rivers and Sea-Coast, are taken store of Fish. It produceth Hemp and Flax in great plenty; also Wool, Hides, Tallow, Goats-skins, Lead-Oar, Herrings in small quantities, and Corn, when they are assured that there is enough to serve themselves. Its Trade and Commodities.The Inhabitants do not much addict themselves to Traffick, only contenting themselves in way of Barter for such Necessaries as they have most occasion for, as Iron, Salt, Pitch, Tar, and the like; and for support of this their small Trade, they make choice of certain Merchants, which are chosen by the Inha∣bitants at the Tinewald-Court, and accordingly are sworn by the Deemsters or Judges to deal uprightly, and for the profit of the Inhabitants. And these Merchants are the only persons that do negotiate with such as bring Commo∣dities unto them in way of Barter; and what Bargains the said Merchants make, the Inhabitants are obliged to stand unto; and the said Commodities so taken in Truck, are equally distributed to every one according to the Goods he parted with. Its Form.The form of this Isle is long and narrow, being about 30 miles in length, and about 9 in breadth, where broadest. It is very destitute of Wood, which makes the Inhabitants use Turff and Peat for their Firing. It is generally an High-land on the Sea-Coast, and guarded with Rocks, at a farther distance than the Low-water-mark. Its Inhabi∣tants.The Inhabitants were anciently the Hehrides or Highlanders, which is ap∣parent by their Language; and before Christianity had footing here, were very rude and barbarous; but at present they are a civil and laborious People, no ways voluptuous in their Diet, nor costly in their Apparels or Habitations; they are very Religious, and neglect not the Church, yet (as all People) they are inclined to Venery; Contentions and Strifes they are not much addicted unto, living in Amity together; and for Recreation, they are so much addicted to the musick of the Violin, that there is scarce any Family but is provided therewith. The Govern∣ment.As to the Government for Spiritual Affairs, it hath a Bishop, who at present is the Right Reverend Dr. Henry Bridgman, and is called Lord Bishop of So∣dore; and for Temporal Affairs, a Lieutenant, or Governour, with two Deem∣sters or Judges, a Controller, a Clerk of the Rolls, a Receiver, a Water-Bailiff, an Attorney-General, and other Officers. And to their further assistance (as occasion requireth for the deciding of Controversies, &c.) are usually called the 24 Keys of the Isle, especially once every year, to wit, upon Midsomer-day at St. Johns Chapel to the Tinewild-Court, where (upon a Hill adjoyning to the said Chapel) the Inhabitants of the Isle, being there assembled, hear the Laws
and Ordinances agreed upon before in the Chapel, which is performed with no small ceremony and pomp, especially if the Lord of the Isle be present, who is seated on a Chair of State, with a Canopy over his head, and attended by his Barons, viz. the Bishop, the Deemsters, the Gentry, and the Yeomanry. The present Lord of the Isle (who is called King in Man) is the Right Honourable Charles Stanley, Earl of Darby, Baron Strange of Knocking and Mohan, &c. a Dignity hereditary to him and his Heirs. Good Orders observed in their Law.The Inhabitants have a great happiness above those of England, in that they are freed from necessary and chargeable Suits, and heavy Fees of the Lawyers; for here no Judge or Clerks take any thing for drawing up Orders, or making up Processes, all Controversies being ended by the Deemsters with∣out Writings, or matter of Charge; and for the deciding the same they have their several Courts, kept at certain times of the year for the Inhabitants of such a sheading or division of the Isle, where they have particular Officers, which do observe good Rules and Orders. The People do here observe two very good Customs; the one, in not per∣mitting the Poor to get their living by Begging; and the other, that when the Women go abroad, they begirt themselves with their Winding-sheet, to put them in mind of their Mortality. This Isle is severed into two parts, viz. South and North, whereof the In∣habitants of the one have affinity with the Scots, and the other with the Irish. And in these parts are numbred 17 Parishes, and many Villages; is desended by two Castles, and for intercourse of Traffick hath five Market-Towns. Its chief places are,Its chief places. Douglas,Douglas. the best Peopled Town, and of the greatest resort by reason of its commodious Haven, unto which the French and others come to Traffick with them for their Commodities, as aforesaid; and for the security of the Harbour here is a Block-house. Russin,Russin. or Castle-Town, where (within a small Isle) Pope Gregory the Four∣teenth instituted an Episcopal See: It is fortified with a strong Castle, but of no great importance, as to the security of the place, by reason of its distance from the rocky and shallow Harbour. Laxi-Town.Laxi-Town, seated on a Bay so called. Ramsey,Ramsey. scituate on the Sea, where it hath a Haven, which for defence hath some Guns mounted thereon. Peel,Peel. or Peel-Castle, seated in St. Patricks-Isle, a place of great strength towards the Sea, and defended by a Castle, being a Market-Town, as are the former. Amongst its other places are these following; Balacuri, honoured with the Palace of the Bishop, Kirh-Androw, Kirk-Patriark, Kirk-Bala∣lough, Kirk-Mighill, Kirk-Lennon, Kirk-Brodon, Kirk-Santon, and Kirk-Christ. The Isle of Jersey de∣scribed.JERSEY, seated near the Coast of Normandy in France, and opposite to Hantshire in England, of which it is a part; it is a place of good strength, as well by Nature as Art, as being fenced about with Shelves and Rocks, and defended by several Castlos. It is an Isle of a fertil Soil, and the more by rea∣son of their rich manuring it, bearing good crops of Corn, and other Grain, and breeding store of Cattle, especially good Flocks of Sheep, whose Wool is fine, of which they make Jersey-Stockings in great plenty. It is ill clothed with Wood, instead of which they use for Fuel a kind of Sea-weed, which they call Vraic, which plentifully groweth on the Rocks, and in the craggy Islands, and this being dried, they burn, and with the Ashes they manure the Land: Nor are they permitted to gather it, but in the Spring and Summer-season, and then upon certain days, according to the appointment of the Magistrates. Its extent.This Isle containeth in length, from Mount-Orguil-Castle in the East to Sent∣won-pool in the West, about 10 miles; and in breadth, from Dubon-point in the South to Plymouth-Bay in the North, about 6; and in circumference about 38 miles.
Its Air and temperature.It is blest with a sweet, temperate, and wholsom Air, not being subject to any disease, except Agues in September. It is well watered with fresh Streams, and hath great plenty of Fruit: and the Inhabitants, who are much of the nature of the French, in their Language, Manners, &c. live very happily, enjoy the fruits of their labour, addicting themselves to Fishing, but principally to the Manufacture of Stockings, which finds good vent in England, and else∣where. The Government of this Isle is as followeth;Government.viz. a Governour or Captain is sent over by the King of England, who appointed Sub-Officers, as a Bailiff, who together with twelve Jurates, or sworn Assistants, which are elected our of the 12 Parishes, by the choice of the Inhabitants, sit and administer Ju∣stice in Civil Causes; but in Criminal matters, he sitteth with seven of them; and in Causes of Conscience, which are to be decided by reason and equity, with only three. This Isle is every where furnished with commodious Creeks and Havens, and is garnished with twelve Parishes, besides several Villages.Its chief places. Its chief pla∣ces are, St. Hillares, so called from St. Hillary Bishop of Poictiers,St. Hillares. who was hither banished, and here interr'd: a Town seated on the Sea-shoar, nigh unto which is a small Isle so called, which is fortified with a Garrison; and this Town is the principal in the Isle for its Market, Commerce, plenty of Inhabitants, and for being the place where the Courts of Judicature are kept. St. Albans, seated not far from the Sea, where it hath a a Haven;St. Albans. as also a small Isle so called. St. Clement, seated on an Arm of the Sea;St. Clements. not far from which is the Castle of Mount-Orguil, seated on a steep Rock on the Eastern-shoar;Mount-Orguil. nigh unto which is a place called the Rock, and another called St. Katharines-point: also these Towns, Trinity, St. Johns, St. Lawrence, St. Brelade, St. Peters, St. Owen, St. Maries, and Greve de Leke; not far from which on the North-shoar, is seated the strong Castle of Groness. The Isles of Garnsey, de∣scribed.GARNSEY, seated about 15 miles North-west from Jersey, and on the same Coast; an Isle not so large, nor altogether so fertil as Jersey, by reason the Inhabitants do not addict themselves so much to cultivating and manuring it, as they do to Traffick, for which this is more eminent; yet doth it in a liberal manner answer the Husbandmans labour, bringing forth good increase, and breeding good store of Cattle. This Isle is seated very high, having many steep Rocks, amongst which is found a hard and sharp Stone called Emerill, which is used by Lapidaries, for the cleansing, cutting, and burnishing their precious Stones; as also by Glasiers, for the cutting their Glafs. And for ma∣ny reasons this Isle may be preferred before Jersey, as for its greater strength, more commodious Havens, which are better resorted unto by Merchants, and for that it suffereth neither Toad, Snake, Adder, or any other venemous Crea∣ture to live, which the other doth. Its Govern∣ment.The Government of this Isle, as also the People, as to their Language, Cu∣stoms, &c. are much the same as in Jersey. Chief places.In this Isle are numbred ten Parish Churches, besides Villages; the chief a∣mongst which are, St. Peters, a Town not very large,St. Peters. but well inhabited and replenished with Merchants. It is a place of good strength; for the entry of the Haven, which is Rocky, is fortified on both sides with Castles, as also by Block-houses, of which that on the right hand called Cornet, is seated on a high Rock, which at every High-water is encompassed with the Sea; and here resideth the Gover∣nour, as also (for the generality) the Souldiers, which are kept for the secu∣rity of the Isle; and is well provided with all sorts of Ammunition for War, if occasion should so happen. Its other places are, Tortuville, St. Saviours,Other places.St. Andrews, Trinity, St. Martins, St. Maries, St. Sampsons, and St. Michaels. On the West part of the Isle, near the Sea, is a Lake of about a mile and an half in compass, which is well replenished with Fish, especially Carps.
This Island, as also that of Jersey, with several other small ones on the Coast of Normandy and Britain, are under the Diocess of Winchester; amongst which Isies are those of Serke,Serk-Isle. encompassed with steep Rocks. And Jethew, which serveth as a Park for the Governour of Garnsey,Jethew-Isle. to feed Cattle, to keep Deer, Coneys, and Phesants, and was formerly a solitary place of Regular Ca∣nons, and after for the Franciscan Friars. Isle of Wight.ISLE of WIGHT, opposite to Hantshire, of which it is a part, already treated of in the description of the said County. PORTLAND,Portland-Isle. a small Isle, adjoyning to the County of Dorset, of which it is also a part, and already there treated of. And besides these Isles, there are divers others which may not so properly be ranged under these four heads aforesaid; and such are those of Londay,Londay-Isle. seated over against Devonshire, about two miles in length, and as much in breadth, very fertil and strong, whose chief place beareth the same name.Chaldey and Dennoy Isles. Also Chaldey and Dennoy, all in the Severn Sea. Isles of Sheppey and Thanet.Also the Isles of SHEPPY and THANET, in (and near) Kent, already taken notice of; and lastly those of FARN, COCKET, and HOLY-ISLAND, on the Coast of Northumberland, likewise there treated of. Thus having given a Description of EƲROPE, we shall in the next place take a View of ASIA.
ASIA, as it is divi∣ded into Firm Land; whereof the principal Paris are, TURKEY in ASIA, which comprehendeth the parts and chief places of Anatolia, Smyrna, Ephesus, Lampsaco. Bursa, Scutari, Tripoli. Sourie, Aleppo, Tripoli, Damascus, Sayd. Diarbeck, Caraemit, Achanchive, Samosat. Turcomanie, Erzerum, Cars, Majaferequin. GEORGIE; which comprehendeth the parts and chief places of Mingrelie, Fazze, Savatopoli. Gurgistan, — Cori. Zulrie, Chipeche, Stranu. Little Turcomanie, — Derbent. ARABIA; with its parts and chief places of Arabia the Stony, Busseret, Moab. Arabia the Desert, — Anna. Arabia the Happy, Medina, Mecca, Aden. PERSIA; with its chief Provinces and places of Servan, — Tauris. Gilan, — Gilan. Gorgian, — Gorgian, Churdistan, — Choy. Ayrack, Hispahan, Casbin. Chorazan, — Kayen. Chusistan, — Souster. Fars, — Chiraef. Kherman, — Giroft. Sablestan, — Zarani. INDIA, as it is divided into the Empire of the GREAT MO GOL; wherein are compre∣hended divers Kingdoms, the chief of which are Attock, — Attock. Calul, — Cabul. Lahor, — Lahor. Delly, — Delly. Agra, — Agra. Malway, — Rantipore. Guzurate, or Cambaya, Surat, Cambava. Bengala, — Bengala. Decan, — Goa. Peninsula of INDIA without the Ganges, with its several Kingdoms, &c. the chief of which are, Golconda, — Golconda. Bisnagar, Bisnagar, Harsingue: Malabar, — Calicut. Peninsula of INDIA within the Ganges; with its Kingdoms and chief places of Pegu, Pegu, Boldia. Siam, — Banckock. Malacca, — Malacca. Cochinchina, — Pulocacein. Tunquin, — Keccio. CHINA; with its chief Provinces and Cities of Pequin, — Pequin. Nanquin, — Nanquin. Scianton, — Xanton. Quicheo, — Quicheo. Canton, — Canton. Chequian, — Chequian. TARTARIA; with its five Parts, and chief places of Tartaria Deserta, — Cumbalich. Usbeck, — Jarcham. Turchestan, — Chialis. Cathay, — Cambalu. True Tartaria, — Tartan. ISLES, to wit, In the Ocean; as the Isles of JAPON; as Niphon, — Meaco. Xicoco, — Sanuqui. Ximo, — Bungo, PHILLIPPINE Isles; as Luson, — Luson. Mindanao, — Mindanao. Isles of MOLUCCO'S; as Molucques, — Gamma. Celebes, — Celebes. Gilolo, — Gilolo. Isles of SONDE; as Sumatra, Achem, Aru. Borneo, — Borneo. Java, Bantar, Jacatra. Isles of LARRONS, or THEVES, — Deserte. Isles of CEVLAN, — Colombo. Isles of the MALDIVES, — Tilla don Matis. In the Medi∣terranean Sea; as In the LEVANT Sea; as Cvprus, — Famagouste. Rhodes, — Rhodes. Scarpanto, — Scarpanto. In the ARCHIPELAGO; as Scio, — Scio. Tenedo, — Metelin. Samo, — Samo. Nicaria, — Nicaria. Lango, — Lango. Stampalia, — Stampalia.
ASIA. ASIA is one of the Tripartite division of our Continent; and if we consider the advantages which the Author o Nature hath given it, if the Actions which have passed in it both before and after the Flood;Asia the first place of Mo∣narchies, of all. Religions, &c. that the first Monar∣chies, and all Religions have here had their beginnings; that the chief Mysteries (both of the Old and New Law) have there been laid open; we may be induced to prefer in before all other parts, either of the one or other Continent. And as of the two Continents ours is much the greater, the more noble, and most considerable; so is Asia among the three parts of our Continent, the Greatest, the most Oriental, the most Temperate, and the Richest. Its Extent from West to East is from the 55th Meridian or degree of Longi∣tude unto the 180, containing 125 degrees of Longitude, which are about 2500 of our common Leagues;Its length and breadth. and from South to North from the Equator to the 72 Parallel or degree of Latitude, which is 72 degrees of Latitude, and makes about 1800 of our Leagues. In this length and breadth we do not compre∣hend the Islands which belong to Asia, which are as great, as rich, and possibly as numerous, as all the rest of the Universe. Its Scituation.Its Scituation, for the most part, is between the Circular Tropick of Cancer, and the Circle of the Artick Pole scarce extending it self beyond this, but surpassing the other in divers of its Isles, which it expands under the Equator: so that almost all Asia is scituate in the Temperate Zone; what it hath under the Torrid, being either Peninsula's or Isles, which the Waters and Sea may easily refresh. Asia the rich∣est of all the four Parts.ASIA being the greatest, the best, and most temperate part of our Conti∣nent, it must by consequence be the richest; which not only appears in the goodness and excellencies of its Grains, Vines, Fruits, Herbs, &c. but likewise in its great quantities of Gold, Silver, Precious Stones, Spices, Drugs, and other Commodities and Rarities, which it sends forth and communicates to o∣ther parts, and particularly to Europe. Amongst the three divisions of our Continent, Asia is that which hath the fairest advantage for its greatness, and for its scituation; being that Country which saw the Creation of the first Man, the making of the first Woman; which fed the first Patriarks, gave a place to the Terrestrial Paradise; that which received the Ark of Noah after the Flood; which was the Portion of Sem, the eldest Son of Noah, which built the Tower of Babel, which fur∣nished the rest of the World with Inhabitants; which established the Monar∣chies of the Assyrians, Medes, Babylonians, and Persians; which formed the
map of Asia A Generall MAPP of ASIA Designed by MOUNSIER SANSON Geographer to the FRENCH KING & Rendred into English, & Ilustrated by RIC: BLOME. By his MAJtis Especial Command LONDON Printed for Ric: Blome 1669
blazon or coat of arms of the earls of Albemarle To The Rt. Noble Christopher Duke of Albemarle. Earle of Torington, Baron Monk of Potheridge, Beauchamp and Teys, Kt. of ye. most noble order of ye Garter, Lord Leivtenant of Devon-shire & Ess ex, Captaine. of his Matys. Guards of Horse, one of ye Gentlemen of his Bed-Chamber, &c one of ye Lords of his most Honbl. Privy Councell This Mapp is most humbly D.D. by R.B
Arts and Sciences, Letters and Laws; which first and after the Law of Na∣ture received Paganism, Judaism, Christianity, and Mahumetanism; which saw the Birth, Life, Death, and Resurrection of the Saviour of the World: And therefore for all these Reasons we ought to esteem Asia much above either Africa or Europe. But let us proceed to its Name, Bounds, and Divi∣sions. Its Name.The Name of ASIA is derived diversly by sundry Authors, but whether it took its name from a Virgin-Woman, or a Philosopher; whether from some City, Country, or Marish, or from whatever it were, most certain it is, that that Name was first known to the Greeks, on that Coast opposite to them to∣wards the East; afterwards it was given to that Region which extends to the Euphrates, and which is called Asia Minor, and was communicated to all the most Oriental Regions of our Continent. Its Bounds.Its Bounds are towards the North, with the Northern frozen, or Scythian Ocean, to wit, that which washes Tartary; on the East and South with the Oriental or Indian Ocean, the Parts of which are the Seas of China, India, and Arabia. Towards the West, Asia is separated from Africa by the Red-Sea, from the Streight of Babel-Mandel unto the Isthmus of Suez; and from Europe, by the Archipelago, by the Sea of Marmora, and by the Black-Sea; drawing a Line cross all these Seas, and passing by the Streight of Ga∣lipoli, or the Dardanelles; by the Streight of Constantinople, or Chanel of the Black-Sea, by the Streight of Caffa or Vospero; the Line continuing by the Sea of Zabaque, and by the Rivers of Don or Tana, of Volga and of Oby, where they are joyned the nearest one to another. Its division.Asia may be divided into firm Land, and Islands; the firm Land compre∣hends the Kingdoms of Turkey in Asia, Arahia, Persia, India, China, and Tar∣tary: We will follow this order, and then end with the Isles.
TURKY in ASIA, or that which the Grand Sig∣nior doth possess in whole, or in part, in ASIA; wherein are several Re∣gions, Countries, Isies, &c. may be con∣sidered as they lie Westernly, and to∣wards EUROPE; as, ANATOLIA, or ASIA. MINOR, wherein are com∣prised several Provinces; all which are at present by the Grand Signior included under four Beglerbeglies, that is, Lord Lieutenants; to wit, those of Anatolia, particularly so called, Smyrna, Ephesus, Pergama, Troya, Burfia, Comana, Chaloedoine, Scutari, Sinopi, Castele, Angouri, Sardis, Philadelphia. Caramania, Archalich, Side, Nigdia, Tarsus, Satalia, Antiochia: Tocat, Amasia, Tocat, Trebisonde, Caisaria, Caraisar, Marast, Arsingan, Sukas. Aladuli, Vardar, Adana, Maaraz, Manbeg. South-westernly; as, Divers ISLES, as they lie in the ARCHIPELAGO, ME∣DITERRANEAN, and AEGEAN Seas; the chief of which are, Cyprus, Nicosia, Paphos, Salamis, Amathus, Arsinoe, Famagusta. Rhodes, — Rhodes. Metelin, of old, Lesbos, Metelino, Medina. Samos, — Samo. Tenedos, — Tenedos. Scarpante, — Scarpante. Lero, — Lero, Negropont, — Colchis, Coos, — Coos, Lero, — Lero, Pathmos, — Pathmos, Scio, or Chios, — Scio, Icaria, of old, Icarus, — Nicaria, Southernly, and re∣garding Arabia and the Mediterranean Sea; as, SOURIA, or SYRIA; with its parts of Syria Propria, Aleppo, Aman, Zeugma, Antioch, Samosat, Hemz, or Emsa, Hierapolis, Alexandretetts. Phoenicia, Tripoli, Sayd, or Sidon, Tyre, or Sor, Damascus, Acre. Palestine, formerly Judea, Canaan, or the Holy-Land, Jerusalem, Samaria, Naplouse, Gaza, Joppa, or Jussa, Southernly, and to∣wards Arabia De∣serta; as, ASSYRIA, now DIAR∣BECK; with its parts of Chaldea, or Babylonia, now Yerack, Bagded, or Babylon, Balsera, Cousa, Orchoe, Sipparum. Mesopotamia, or the par∣ticular Diarbeck, Orpha, Caraemid, Merdin, Asanchif, Carra, Sumiscasack, Virta. Assyria, now Arzerum, Mosul, of old, Ninive, Schiarazur. Easternly, and re∣garding Persia; as, TURCOMANIA; with its parts of Turoomans, Erzerum, Cars. Curdes, Schildir, Bitlis. Georgiens, Derbent, Tiflis. North-Easternly, and towards the Caspi∣an Sea; as, GEORGIA; with its parts of Avogasia, — St. Sophia, Mingrelie, Phazza, Savatopoli. Gurgista, Cori, Bassachiuch. Quiria, Zitrach, Stranu, Chipicha. Northernly, and to∣wards Moscovy; as, COMANIA, Asof, Maurolaco, Serent.
blazon or coat of arms of the earls of Winchilsea and Nottingham VERS SECVNDIS To ye Rt Honble Heanage Earle of Winchelse Vist Maidstone Baron Fitz Herbert of Eastwell Lord of the Royall Mannour of Wye and Lord Leiutenant of Kent and  This Mapp is humbly D. D by R. B A MAPP of THE ESTATES of the TURKISH EMPIRE in ASIA, and EUROPE Designed by Monsr Sanson Geographer to the French King
Turky in Asia. UNDER the name of TƲRKY in ASIA we understand not all which the Great Turk possesses, but only certain Regions which he alone possesses, or if there be any Estates intermixed, they are inconsiderable. And in this Turky we shall find Anatolia, which the Ancients called Asia Minor; the greater Souria, which the Ancients called Syria the Great; Turcomania, by the Ancients called Armenia the Great; then Diarbeck, which answers to Mesopotamia, and to divers parts of Assyria; and the Chaldea, or Babylonia of the Ancients. ANATOLIA is that great Peninsula, which is washed on the North by the Black-Sea, Mare Major, or Euxine Sea; and on the South by that part of the Mediterranean which we call the Levant Sea; which extends Westward to the Archipelago or Aegean Sea, and thence to the Euphrates, which bounds it on the East. The Parts of Asia Minor, or Anatolia.The Ancients divided this Great Asia Minor into many lesser Regions; of which the principal are, viz. Pontus, Bithynia, Little Asia Minor; into Lycia, Galatia, Pamphilia, Cappadocia, Cilicia, Caria, Ionia, Aeolis, Lydia, Phrygia Major and Minor, Paphlagonia, Lycaonia, Pysidia, Armenia Minor, Mysia, the Isle of Rhodes, &c. But at present the Turks do in general call this Great Asia Minor, Anatolia, which signifies Orient: That part of Anatolia, which is most exposed to the North, to wit, Pontus, Bithynia, Galatia, and Cappadocia, by the appellation of Rumla: The more Meridional parts they call Cottomandia, which are Lycia, Pamphilia, and Cilicia: The Little Asia Minor, which is on the Archipelago, hath no other name than that of Anatolia. But all these Names are little known amongst them, much less those which are attributed to the lesser parts of Anatolia.The Turks di∣vision of Ana∣tolia. The Turks divide it into four Beglerbeglies, which are as our Lord Lieutenancies; under which are 35 or 34 Sangiacats, which are as our particular Governments. The Beglerbeglies are of Anatolia, of Caramania, of Toccat, and of Ala∣duli: The two first compose all the Western part of Anatolia; the two last all the Eastern part. The Beglerby of Anatolia, hath under him eleven or twelve Sangiacks. The Beglerby of Caramania hath only seven or eight; he of Toccat likewise seven or eight; and he of Aladuli, five or six. The Cities where the Beglerbies keep their residence, are Cuitage or Cutage, formerly Cotyaeum, for him of Anatolia; Cogna, once Iconium; others put Cae∣saria, once Caesaria penes Anazarbum, for him of Caramania; Amasia, which keeps its ancient name; and sometimes Trebizonde, formerly Trapezus, for him of Toccat; and Maraz, for him of Aladuli. But to proceed to the Pro∣vinces of Anatolia. The Province of Pontus de∣scribed.PONTƲS is a Country of a large extent, and taketh up all the length of Anatolia, and was by the Romans anciently separated into four parts; viz. Polemoniacus, Pontus Galaticus, Pontus Cappadocius, and Metapontus, or Pontus especially so called. POLEMONIACƲS hath for its chief places, Nixaria, formerly Neo-Caesarea, which is the Metropolis; Zela, enlarged by Pompey, and called Me∣galopolis, Barbanissa, and lastly Sebastia, so called in honour of Augustus,
whom the Greeks called Sebastos; a place for strength very considerable, and contended against Tamerlane; which was no sooner taken by him, but (to satisfie his Revenge) he caused most cruelly to be buried alive in great Pits a∣bout 12000 Men, Women, and Children. Nigh to this City is Mount Stella, where Pompey gave Mithridates his fatal overthrow.Here Mithri∣dates had his overthrow. This Mithridates was a great and eminent King of Pontus, who for 40 years withstood the Romans; not more excellent in War, than in Learning and Memory, who spake 22 seve∣ral Languages, who invented that Counter-poyson, from him named Mithri∣date; who at last, by the Rebellion of his Son, and the Valour of L. Sylla, Lu∣cullus and Pompey, was vanquished; where Pompey, upon a small Island at the entrace of the Euxine Sea, erected a Pillar, which at this day bears his name, and is by the Inhabitants shewed to Strangers, as a memorial of his Victories in these parts. In this part of Pontus, on the rise and fall of the River Thermodon, and on the Banks thereof, the Amazons, a sort of Warlike-Women were here said to reside, so called, either because they used to cut off their right Breasts, which otherwise would be an impediment to their shooting, or because they used to live together. They were at first Scythians, and accompanied their Husbands to these parts, about the time of the Scythians first coming into Asia, in the time of Sesostris King of Egypt. These People held a great hand over the Themiscyrin, who inhabited this Region, and the Nations round about them, and at last by Treachery were murthered;A short ac∣count of the Amazonian Women, who here inha∣bited. but their Wives being grievously angred (as well through Grief and Fear, as Exile and Widdow-hood) set up∣on the Conquerors, under the conduct of Lempado and Marpesia; who not only overthrew them, but also much added to the largeness of their Domini∣ons, and for a considerable time continued in great reputation. The Names of the chiefest of the Amazon Queens were, Lampedo, Marpesia, Ortera, Antio∣pa, and Peuthesilea, who with a Troop of gallant Virago's came to the Aid of Priamus King of Troy: who at last was slain by Pyrrhus, Son to Achilles. These Amazons, in matters of Copulation, used to go to their neighbouring Men thrice in a year; and if it happened that they brought forth Males, they sent them to their Fathers; but if Females, then they kept them, and brought them up in the Discipline of War and Courage. Chief places in Pontus Ga∣laticus.PONTƲS GALATICƲS is Eastward of Pontus; its chiefest Cities are, viz. 1. Amasia, remarkable for the Martyrdom of St. Theodorus, also being the Birth-place of Strabo the famous Geographer, and in these latter times for being the residence of the eldest Sons of the Grand Signior, fent hither as spon as circumcised, who are not to return till the death of their Father. It is a great City, about 4 days Journey from the Black-Sea. 2. Themiscyra, now Favagoria, seated on a large Plain near the Sea. 3. Diopolis, remarkable for the great Overthrow Lucullus gave to Mithridates. 4. Sinope, of note for being the Birth and Sepulchre of Mithridates. 5. Castamona, the chief City of the Isfendiars, which for strength and scituation, is by them preferred be∣fore Sinope. Chief places in Pontus Ca∣padocius.PONTƲS CAPADOCIƲS hath for its chief places, viz. 1. Cerass, from whence Cherries were first brought into Italy by Lucullus, after he had finished his War with Mithridates. 12. Pharnacia, built by Pharnaces a King of Pontus 3. Trebezond, the Metropolis of the Comneni, famous for the Trade of Fish, caught by the People on the Euxine-shoars, here salted, and then transported in great quantities to Constantinople, Cassa, and elsewhere. In this City did anciently reside the Deputies of the Grecian Emperours, for the se∣curity of the Out-parts against the Incursions of the Persians; and now is the place of such Gallies, as by the Grand Signior are appointed for the scouring and securing their Trade on the Coasts of the Euxine Sea. The chief pla∣ces of Meta∣pontus.METAPONTƲS, whose chief places were, 1. Flaviopolu, so called in honour to Flavius Vespasianus. 2. Claudiopolis, in honour to Claudius, Em∣perour of Rome. 3. Juliopolis, in honour of the Julian Family; all which are Mid-land Towns. 4. Diospobis, of grent resort, on the Euxine Sea, so named from a Temple consecrated to Jupiter. 5. Heraclia, a Colony of the
Phocians, remarkable for being the Seat of a Branch of the Imperial Family of the Comneni. But above all is Tocat, a good fair City, built at the foot of a very high Mountain, spreading it self round about a great Rock that is in the midst of the Town, on the top of which is seated a Castle, with a good Garri∣son. It is well inhabited by Armenians, Greeks, Jews, and Turks, who have the command thereof; its Houses are well built, but its Streets are narrow, and amongst its Mosques there is one very stately. Here the Christians have 12 Churches, hath an Archbishop, under whom are 7 Suffragans. Here are two Monasteries for Men, and two for Women; the greatest part of the Christians are Tradesmen, and generally Smiths: this is the only place in all Asia, where plenty of Saffron groweth. This City is one of the most remarkable Thorough∣fares in the East, where are continually lodged the Caravans from Persia, Diarbeck, Constantinople, Smyrna, Synopus, and other places; and here the Caravans turn off as they are variously bound. Here are excellent Fruits and Wine, and Provisions are had at easie rates. The Province of Bithynia bounded.BITHYNIA hath on the North the Euxine Sea; a place famoused for the Victory of Alexander against the Persians; then for Mount Stella, where Pompey overthrew Mithridates; and Tamberlain with 800000 Tartans, en∣countred Bajazet with 500000, where 20000 lost their lives, and Bajazet in the pride of his heart being taken, and penn'd up in an Iron-Cage, beat out his own Brains against the Bars. Its chief places are, 1. Nice,Chief places in Bithynia. where the first Ge∣neral Council was held by the appointment of Constantine the Great, for the expelling of the Arian Heresie. 2. Chalsedon, where the 4th General Council was, to repel the Nestorian Heresie. 3. Scutari, opposite to the Haven of Constantinople, in which place the Persians received their Tribute from the other Cities of these Parts; and lastly, 4. Bursa, once the Seat of the Ottaman Kings in Asia, till they gained Adrianople in Europe, by Mahomet the First; now inhabited by Turks, Jews, and Greeks; by some accounted as fair, rich, and populous as Constantinople, and enjoys a great Trade. It is seated on the Foot of Mount Olympus for its defence, and is adorned with fair Mosques, and many Tombs of the Ottoman Princes. The Province of Lycia bounded, and its Cities de∣scribed.LYCIA hath for its Southern bounds the Mediterranean Sea, and is envi∣roned on 3 sides with the Mountain Taurus, which makes it very strong: It was formerly exceeding populous, containing about 60 Cities; the greatest part whereof remained in St. Pauls time, but now are reduced to ruins. The chiefest of which were, 1. Mira, the chief City of this Province. 2. Patera, adorned with a fair Haven, and Temples; one of which was dedicated to A∣pollo, having therein an Oracle, and for Wealth and Credit suitable to that at Delphos. 3. Telmesus, whose Inhabitants are famous for interpreting of Dreams. The Province of Galatia bounded, and its chief pla∣ces treated of.GALATIA is bounded on the East with Cappadocia. Towns of note; viz. 1. Augoura, seated on the River Sangar, 16 days Journey from Constanti∣nople, famous for the Synod here held in the Primitive times, and is one of the greatest and richest places of this quarter, furnishing Turky with a great number of Chamlets and Mo-hairs. 2. Tavium, where there was a Brazen Statue of Jupiter, in whose Temple there was a priviledged Sanctuary. To this Province St. Paul did dedicate one of his Epistles. The Province of Pamphylia, and its chief places.PAMPHYLIA hath for its Southern bounds the Mediterranean Sea. The principal Cities are, 1. Satalia, (founded by Ptolomy Philadelphus, King of Egypt,) is the strongest, and best for Traffick of all its Coasts, communica∣ting its name to the neighbouring Gulph, called Golfo di Satalia, and to the most Oriental part of the Mediterranean Sea; famous for the rich Tapestries that are here made. 2. Side, famous in the time of the Gentiles for a Temple of Pallas. 3. Perge, renowned in Old time for the Temple of Diana, and for the Annual Feasts there held in honour of her; and yet more famous for St. Pauls Preaching here. 4. Aspendus, and Inland Town, strongly scituate, once the Metropolis of the Province, famous of old for its Musicians. These Provinces were converted to Christianity by the Apostles, St. Paul (who Jour∣nied through most Cities in these quarters,) St. Peter, and St. John, as doth
appear by Holy Scripture. The Country for the most part is very Mountainous, which proceed from Mount Taurus, as branches thereof: Here are abundance of Goats, of whose Hair are made great quantities of Grograins and Chamlets, which for fineness are not inferiour to Silk, with which it serves other Coun∣tries, being its chief Commodity; but nearer the Sea it is more fruitful, being well watered and planted, more populous and pleasant. The Province of Cappadocia bounded.CAPPADOCIA hath for its chief places, 1. Mazaca, enlarged and beautified by Tiberius the Emperour; and in honour to Augustus Caesar, by him called Caesarea, being the Metropolitan City of Cappadocia, as also the E∣piscopal See of St. Basil. 2. Nyssa, the See of Gregory, Surnamed Nyssenus, and Brother to Basil. 3. Nazianzum, also the Episcopal See of another Gre∣gory, Surnamed Nazianzenus, which 3 for their admirable abilities in all kind of Learning, and for their Piety, are not to be parallel'd. 4. Comana, remark∣able of old for its Temple consecrated to Bellona, whose Priests, and other in∣feriour Officers of both Sexes, in the time of Strabo amounted to about 6000. 5. Erzirum, scituate in the Confines of Armenia Major, which is the Rendez∣vous for the Turkish Army, when they have any design against Persia; at which place they are likewise disbanded and sent home, being a Frontier Town. It is seated an the end of a large Plain, circled with Mountains; its Houses are not very well built, but hath several great Inns for entertainment of Passen∣gers, as at Tocat; and it is observable, that Barly after 40 days, and Wheat af∣ter 60, is fit to cut: And, 6. Pterium, memorable for the great Battel fought between Croesus King of Lydia, and Cyrus of Persia; in which Croesus lost not only the Field, but also his Kingdom. The Country is very rich in Mines of Silver, Iron, Brass, and Alum; hath great plenty of Wine, and several sorts of Fruits; also Crystal, Jasper, and the Onyx-stone: But the greatest Wealth which they have is their Horses. The People of this Country were anciently very Vicious, and prone to all kinds of Wickedness; but since Chri∣stianity was received amongst them, their former Vices are now changed to Vertues. The Province of cilicia, and its chief places.CILICIA hath on the South the Mediterranean Sea. Places of note here found are, viz. 1. Tarsis, pleasantly seated, famous for the Birth-place of St. Paul; 2. Anchiala, on the Sea-side; both which, with some others, were built in one day by Sardanapalus King of Assyria. 3. Epiphania, the Birth-place of George the Arian, Bishop of Alexandria. 4. Adena, seated in a fruitful Soil, abounding in Corn and Wine, defended by a strong Castle. 5. Alexandria, built by Ale∣xander the Great; and to distinguish it from Alexandria in Egypt, was named Alexandretta, but now Scanderone; a famous Haven-Town, serving for the Scale to Aleppo, which is distant from it about 100 English miles, to which all Shipping, either out of the Ocean or Mediterranean, come to lade and unlade their Goods, which are hence transported by Camels to Aleppo; and here the English, French, and Venetians, have their Vice-Consuls to protect their Goods and Ships. 6. Amavarza, a City in the time of Strabo, of great antiquity. 7. Nicopolis, founded by Alexander in memory of his great Victory: And 8. Issus, seated on a large Bay, famous for the Battel here fought between Ale∣xander (with an inconsiderable Army of Macedonians) and Darius, and his vast Army, which consisted of about 600000 Assyrians; whereof about 160000 of the Persians were slain, and about 40000 taken Prisoners; in which Battel, the Wives and Daughters of Darius were taken, Alexander not losing above 200 of his Men. On the Right-hand of Cilicia is Isauria, which may bear the name of a Province: It is fruitful in Vines, and several sorts of Fruits, having a rich Soil. The chief Cities are, 1. Claudiopolis, into which Claudius the Empe∣rour brought a Roman Colony: And, 2. Seleucia, founded by Seleucus. The Province of Caria bounded, and its chief pla∣ces described.CARIA hath for its Southern bounds the Carpathian Sea. Its chief places are, 1. Miletus, not far from the Hill Latmus, the Birth-place of Thales, one of the 7 Wise-men of Greece; to this place St. Pauls called together the Bi∣shops of Ephesus and other of the adjoyning Cities. 2. Mindus, which being but a small City, and its Gates so big, made Diogenes the Cynick to cry out, to
have them shut their Gates, lest the City should run out at them. 3. Milasa, famous in old time for two Temples dedicated to Jupiter: And 4. Borgylia, where Diana also had a Temple. In this Country is the Hill Latmus, which was the retiring place of Endy∣mion, who by the study of Astronomy did there find out the Changes and Courses of the Moon, by the Poets feigned to be her Favourite; others there be who would have it, that in a Cave under this Hill Jupiter hid him, and ca∣sting him in a deep sleep, descended sometimes to kiss him. The Province of Ionia bounded, with its chiefest pla∣ces.IONIA, bounded on the West with the Aegean Sea. Places of note in this Country are, 1. Ephesus, famous for many things; as, First, for being the Burial-place of St. John the Evangelist, who (as some say) went here alive into the Grave. Secondly, for the Temple of Diana, which for its Greatness, Furniture, and stately Workmanship, was accounted one of the Wonders of the World. Thirdly, for St. Pauls directing an Epistle to the Inhabitants thereof. Fourthly, for being the Episcopal See of Timothy the Evangelist, first Bishop hereof: And, Fifthly, for its Ecclesiastical Council here; but now much ruined from its ancient beauty, it being now reduced to a small Village. 2. Smyrna, which is now the only City of Trade in these parts; famous for be∣ing one of the 7 Churches of Asia, to which St. John dedicated his Revelation, being one of those 7 Cities that strove for the Birth of Homer, where (in a Cave hard by) he is said to have writ his Poems: But now violated by the Mahometans, her Beauty is turned into Deformity, her Religion into Impiety, and her knowledge into Barbarism. This City is seated on the bottom of a Bay or Gulph, called the Gulph of Smyrna, where the English, French, and Venetians keep Consuls to protect their Merchants, and keep up their Trade, it being under the Jurisdiction of the Grand Signior. 3. Colophon, another of those Cities which strove for the Birth of Homer: Here the People are so well skill'd in Horsemanship, that whose side soever they took in War, were sure to gain the Victory. 4. Erythra, the habitation of one of the Sibyls, from whence called Sibylla Erythraea. 5. Ipsus, remarkable for the great Battel betwixt Antigonus and Seleucus, two of Alexanders chief Commanders, wherein An∣tigonns lost both the day, and his life. 6. Lebedus, of note in ancient times for those Plays here yearly held in honour to Bacchus. 7. Priene, the Birth-place of Bias, one of the 7 Wise-men of Greece: And, 8. Clazomene, seated on a small Ilet near the shoar, beautified with a Temple dedicated to A∣pollo. The Province of Aeolis, and its chief pla∣ces.AEOLIS, North of Ionia, hath for its chief places, 1. Cuma, the habita∣tion of Sibylla, Surnamed Cumana. 2. Elaea, on the Mouth of Caicus, being the Port-Town to Pergamus. 3. Myrina, which in honour to Augustus is called Sebastopolis. 4. Pitane, not far from the Aegean Sea; and here they had an art in making Bricks that would swim above water. The Province of Lydia, and its chief pla∣ces.LYDIA: Its chief Cities are, 1. Sardis, in which was one of the 7 Churches in Asia, being the Royal Seat of Croesus, and the Kings of Lydia, until it was subdued by the Persians: and, 2. Philadelphia, on the Banks of the River Cay∣strus. Its People are said to be the first Inventers of Dice, Chess, and other such Games; as also the first Hucksters, Pedlers, and the first Coyners of Mony. The Country by reason of the great plenty of gallant Rivers renders it very fruit∣ful and pleasant, being enriched with Mines of Gold and Silver, as also pre∣cious Stones. The Province of Phrygia Ma∣jor bounded, and its chief places.PHRYGIA MAJOR, bounded on the East with Galatia. The chief places are, 1. Gordion, the Seat of Gordius, which from the Plough-tail was taken and chosen King of this Kingdom, who tied such a Knot, (called the Gordian-knot) which Alexander the Great cut in pieces, when he could not unty it. 2. Midium, the Seat of Midas, Son to this Gordius; who covetously petitioned Bacchus, that whatsoever he touched should be turned into Gold; which was granted, but soon was forced to lose the benefit of it, else he would have been starved, his Victuals turning into Gold: and falling into a second oversight in Judgment, in preferring Pan's Pipe before Apollo's Harp, he for his small Judgment in Musick, was rewarded with a comly pair of Asses-ears.
3. Colossi, to whom St. Paul writ one of his Epistles. 4. Pesinus, where the goddess Cybele was worshipped, being called Dea Pesinuncia. This City is pla∣ced in the Borders of Galatia. The Country is very rich, pleasant, and well watered with Rivers, the People being anciently more Superstitious than in any other place of Asia, as is manifest by the Rites used in their Sacrifices of Cybele, and other of their goddesses, being accounted such as use Divination. They are a People which much delight in Effeminacy. Here Reigned Tantalus, who wanting wisdom to make use of his great Riches, is by the Poets feigned to stand in Hell up to the chin in water, under a Tree whose Fruit doth touch his Lips, but yet cannot reach them. The Province of Phrygia Mi∣nor bounded, with its chief places.PHRYGIA MINOR, bounded on the South with the Aegean Sea. Places of most note, viz. 1. Dardanum, or Dardania, being the Town and Patrimony of Aeneas. 2. Troy, seated on the Banks of the River Sca∣mander, famous for having sustained a Ten years Siege against the Greeks; in which time the Trojans lost 860000 Men, and the Grecians 666000 Men, be∣ing then so famous a City, that it might be counted the glory of the East, from whence all Nations desire to derive their beginning; but now remaining no∣thing but Ruins. Four miles from which there was another City, built by Lysimachus, one of Alexanders Captains, which from other Cities there ad∣joyning was peopled; by him called Alexandria, or Troas Alexandria, or New Troy, in honour of Alexander the Great, who begun the Work, which though not so great, rich, and famous as the first, yet was the Metropolis of the Province; but now by the Turks quite ruinated, by their carrying the Stones and Pillars to Constantinople, for the beautifying of their Bashaws Houses. 3. Sigaeum, the Port-Town to Troy. 4. Assus, called by Pliny, Apollonia, in which place the Earth will consume the Bodies of the Dead in 40 days. 5. Lyrnessus, opposite to the Isle of Lesbos, destroyed by Achilles and the Greeks in the beginning of the Trojan War. The Province of Paphlagonia, and its Cities.PAPHLAGONIA hath for its chief Cities, 1. Gangra, remarkable for a Council there held in the Primitive times, called Synodus Gangrensis. 2. Pom∣peiopolis, so called by Pompey the Great: And, 3. Coniata, or Conica, fortifi∣ed by Mithridates, when he was Master of this Country. The Province of Lycaonia, and its chief places.LYCAONIA, bounded on the East with Armenia Minor. The most e∣minent places in this Country are, 1. Iconium (now Cogni) the Regal Seat of the Aladine Kings; a place of great strength, whose scituation is in the Moun∣tains, advantagious for defence and safety. 2. Lystra, famous for the Birth-place of Timothy, and where Paul and Barnabas having healed a Cripple, were adored for Mercury and Jupiter: And, 3. Derbe, where the said Apo∣stle preached. The Province of Pisidia, and its chief pla∣ces.PISIDIA hath for its chief places, 1. Seleucia, built by Seleucus. 2. Sa∣galassa, scituate in the most fruitful part of this Country. 3. Selge, a Colony of the Lacedemonians: And, 4. Termessus, strongly seated. This Country was famous for the Battel fought betwixt Cyrus and Artaxerxes; where Cyrus lost his life, and the Victory; out of which Xenophon made that notable Retreat with his Grecians, in the despight of 20000 Men, which pursued him. Armenia Minor, and its Cities.ARMENIA MINOR is bounded on the East with the Euphrates, which separates it from Armenia Major. Cities of hote, viz. 1. Meteline, the Metropolitan City, now called Suur, abounding in great quantities of Wine and Oil. 2. Nicopolis, built by Pompey in remembrance of a Victory he there obtained against the Forces of Tygranes, King of Syrid. 3. Garnasa, a strong Town. 4. Oromandus; and, 5. Arabyssus, remarkable for the exile of St. Chrysostom, Patriarch of Constantinople, confined here by the malice of the Empress Eudoxia. This Country, as to its fertility, pleasantness, &c. is the same as Cappadocia afore-mentioned. The Province of Mysia, and its chief pla∣ces.MYSIA hath for its chief places, 1. Cyzicus, seated in the Propontis, in an Island of the same name, but so near the Continent, that it is joyned to it by two Bridges. The Metropolis of the Consular Hellespont, a place of great strength and beauty, whose Walls, Bulwarks, Towers, and Haven, were made of Marble. 3. Adramyttium where Paul took Shipping to go to Rome:
And, 4. Pergamus, seated in a goodly Plain, on the Banks of the River Caicus; a place of great strength, beautified with a Library of about 200000 Volumes or Manuscripts, all writ in Parchment; famous also for those costly Hangings known to us by Tapestry. Here was one of the 7 Churches of Asia, to which St. John writ his Revelation; and lastly, famous for the Birth-place of Galen, the eminent Physician, who lived to the Age of 140 years in good health. Mountains in Anatolia; wor∣thy of note.The Mountains and Rivers in Anatolia may have somewhat in particular observed of them. Mount Taurus begins between Lysia and Caria, and ex∣tends it self all the length of Asia, being a continual Ridge of Hills, running through Asia from West to East; which for its length, height, and the branches it casts forth on one side and the other, the greatest and most famous Mountain in the World. On Mount Ida, the Trojan Paris judged of the Beauty of Juno, Pallas, and Venus, and giving the Golden Apple to the last, drew on himself and his Friends the enmity of the other two. On the Mountain Tmole in Lydia, Midas, having esteemed Pan's Pipe to be more pleasant than the Harp of Apollo, was by him pulled by the Ears, not to make them greater, but so hard as gave occasion to the Poets to jeer him, and say, that he had Asses Ears. This Mountain is very fruitful, especially in Vines and Saffron. On Cra∣gus was feigned to be the Monster Chimera, which Bellerophon made tractable. On Latmus in Caria passed the Loves of the Moon, and Endymion, &c. Amongst the Rivers,Rivers.Pactolus hath rouled down so much Gold in its Streams, since Midas washed there, that the Riches of Croesus, and others, are come from thence. The Granick was witness of the Victory of Alexander the Great, against the Satrapes of Darius; but Alexander washing himself in the cold waters of Cidnus, had near lost his life. The River Acheron, and the Lake Acherusia, near Heraclia in Bithynia, are esteemed to reach to Hell; and that this way Hercules brought up the Villain Cerberus. Halys (at pre∣sent Lali) served for the bounds and limits between the Kingdom of Croesus and the Empire of the Persians; but it proved fatal to Croesus, &c. Things wor∣thy of note in Asia Minor.There are many other things observable about, and within the lesser Asia. The Bosphorus of Thrace, or Channel of the Black-Sea, or Streight of Con∣stantinople, is so narrow, that Darius Hystaspes built a Bridge over it, and passed with his Troops over it from Asia into Europe, to make War against the Scythians. Xerxes, the Son of Darius, did as much over the Hellespont or Streight of Gallipoli, or the Dardanelles, which we call the Castles of Sestos and Abydos, which are seated three Leagues above the entrance, and at the narrowest place of the Hellespont, opposite each to other: Formerly famous for the unfortunate Loves of Hero and Leander, drowned in the merciless Surges. Here also Xerxes, whose populous Army drank Rivers dry, and made Mountains circumnavigable, is said to have passed over into Greece on a Bridge of Boats. Sestos is strongly seated on the side of a Mountain, descending to the Sea on the European shoar; Abydos, on a low Level on the Asian shoar. The Amaniden Streights, or Passes of Mount Aman, between Cilicia and Syria, are easie to keep; the Way for about 2500 Paces, being between Rocks and Crags; the Feet of which are washed with many streams which fall off from the Mountains. Here it was that Alexander the Great vanquished Darius. The ISLANDS about ASIA MINOR. THe ISLANDS about ASIA MINOR have been very remark∣able to Antiquity, though not so at present:Islands. They are almost in the Ar∣chipelago; some in the Mediterranean Sea, almost none in the Black Sea; yet at the entrance into that Sea, and near the Bosphorus of Thrace, aren="1." Cyanees. The two Islands called CYANEES, so near the one to the other, that the Ancients would make us believe they joyned.n="2." Lesbos.METELIN, of old LESBOS, famous for the City Meteline, which for its greatness and ex∣cellency of its Wines, gives name to the Island. In this place was born Sappho,
the Inventress of the Sapphick Verse: Pittacus one of the Sages of Greece; and Arion, the Dolphin Harper.n="3." Scio.SCIO, or CHIOS, distant from the Ionian shoar four Leagues, being in compass about 126 miles; remarkable for the Church of its Convent of Niomene, one of the fairest in the World. It affordeth excellent Fruits in great plenty, but of most note for its Mastick, not found elsewhere; it is now under the power of the Grand Signior.n="4." Icaria.ICA∣RIA, now called Niceria, in compass 12 Leagues; here Icarus suffered Ship∣wreck; abounding in Corn and Pasturage.n="5." Pathmos.PATHMOS, in compass a∣bout ten Leagues; Mountainous, but reasonably fruitful, especially in Grain. Here it was that St. John being banished by Domitian, writ his Revelation to the Churches of Asia.n="6." Parmacusa.PARMACƲSA, near Miletum, where Caesar was taken by them.n="7." Claros.CLAROS or CASAMO, about 13 Leagues in compass, very Mountainous, but hath good Harbours; in former times sacred to Apollo; abounding in great plenty of Aloes, where they are gathered and transported to other Countries.n="8." Lero.LERO, noted also for Aloes.n="9." Coos.COOS, seated in the bottom of the Aegean Sea, furnished with sweet and pleasant Streams, which refresh this Island, and makes it very fruitful; it is in compass 23 Leagues, having its chief place so called, fortified with a strong Tower, now a Garrison of the Turks. This Island is remarkable for being the Birth∣place of so many famous men, especially Hippocrates, the Revivor of Physick, when almost decayed, unto the ancient practice of Aesculapius, unto whom this Island was consecrated, having therein a Temple, made rich with the Offerings of those that had been sick, whose Cures were there Registred; and Apelles the famous Painter.n="10." Scarpante.Scarpante, stored with the best Coral in the World.n="11." Nicosia.NICOSIA, which was the Seat of the Kings of the Family of Lufigua, and the See of an Archbishop, and Peopled with 40000 Families.n="12." Farmacusa.FARMACƲSA, scituate on the Sea, much stronger than Nicosia.n="13." Bapho.BAPHO, of old Baphus, famous for its Temple, dedicated to Venus. Mount Olympus, now St. Michaels Mount, stands in the middle of this Island.n="14." Negroponte.NEGRO-PONTE, where the Sea ebbs and flows seven times a day; which because Aristotle could not unriddle, he here drowned himself; the chief City is Colchis.n="15." Samos.SAMOS, about 30 Leagues in compass, strongly seated almost on all sides with Rocks, having a fair Haven, fertil in Fruits, e∣specially in Oil and Olives; the Island much infected with Pirates. This is the only place in the World for Spunges, under whose Rocks they grow in the Sea; for the getting of which they have People which from their Infancy are bred up with dry Bisket, and other extenuating diet, to make them lean; then taking a Spunge wet in Oil, they hold it part in their Mouths and part without, and so they dive down into the Sea to get it; those that have been used to this trade, can abide under water almost an hour together.n="16." Tenedos.TE∣NEDOS, scituate at the Mouth of the Hellespont, opposite to Troy, remark∣able for the concealing the Grecian Navy, which proved the final destruction of Troy.n="17." Rhodes.RHODES, scituate in the Carpathian or Rhodian Sea, being in compass 46 Leagues; a place of great strength, its Soil fertil, its Air tempe∣rate, plentiful in all things, as well for delight as profit, full of excellent Pa∣stures, adorned with pleasant Trees, whose Leaves are alb the year long in their verdure. In this Island the Sun is so powerful and constant, as it was anciently dedicated to Phoebus. This Island, as Sandys in his Book of Travels noteth, was held Sacred to the Sun, to whom they erected that vast Colossus of Brass, which may well be accounted one of the Seven Wonders of the World: He saith,The Colessus. this Colossus was in height 70 Cubits; every Finger as big as an ordinary Statue, and the Thumb too great to be fathomed. It was 12 years a making, the bigness was such, that being erected at the entrance of the Port, Ships past between its Legs; but in 66 years, by an Earthquake it was thrown down and broken in pieces: And besides the Mass of Stones contained therein, 900 Camels were laden with the Brass, which was used about it. This City bearing the name of the Island, is seated 4 miles from the ancient City, famous of old for their Government, their expert Navigations, and since for the abode of the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, now in the hands of the Turk. This City and Island
of Rhodes, as indeed Tenedos, Samos, and the rest of the Isles in this Sea, are of little or no Trade; yet they are found to produce several good Commodi∣ties: And,n="18." Cyprus.CYPRƲS, which amongst all is the greatest, being in circuit about 183 Leagues distant from the Cilician shoar, about 20 Leagues it stretch∣eth it self from East to West, in form of a Fleece, and thrusting forth a great many Promontories. This Island, during the Empire of the Persians and Macedonians, was accounted for Nine Kingdoms, most of them bearing the names of their principal Towns; but by Prolomy divided into these 4 Provin∣ces, viz. 1. Lapethia, 2. Paphia, 3. Salamine, and 4. Amathusia.Provinces in Cyprus. Places of most note are, 1. Nicosia, the Metropolis of the Island, being a walled City, in form round, five miles in compass, adorned with stately Buildings, resem∣bling some Cities in Florence, as well for its beauty and pleasant scituation, as for its plentifulness in People. 2. Tremitas, the Birth-place of Spiridon, a fa∣mous Bishop of the Primitive times. 3. Paphos, seated near the Sea, built by Paphos, Son of Pygmalion, King of Phoenicia and Cyprus, where stands Pyg∣malions Statue; which (as the Poets feign) was by the power of Venus turned into a Woman; where she had her so much celebrated Temple, and where her Votaries of both Sexes in their natural nakedness, did perform her Sacrifices. 4. Salamis, once the Metropolitan City in the Island, but now turned to Ruins; in which there was a famous Temple consecrated unto Jupiter. 5. Aphro∣disium, so named from Venus, where she had another Temple. 6. Famagusta, though but small, yet one of the chiefest in this Island, strongly seated. 7. Ar∣sinoe, famous for the Groves of Jupiter. 8. Amathus, renowned for the An∣nual Sacrifices made unto Adonis, the darling of Venus, where she had another Temple. 9. Episcopia, where Apollo had both a Temple and a Grove. This Temple was held so Sacred, that those which touched it were thrown into the Sea. The scitua∣tion, fertility, and Commo∣dities of Cy∣prus.This Island is seated under the Fourth Climate, which makes the longest day to be but 14 hours and a half. It is exceeding rich and fertil, abounding in Corn, Wine, Oil, Silks, Cotton, Turpentine, Wool, Hony, Salt, Verdigreace, Alum, Storax, Colloquintida, Laudanum: All sorts of Metals, &c. To this Isle, as to all other parts of Turky, no English are suffered to Trade, except those of the Company of Levant Merchants; where they have a Fa∣ctory, and a Consul, who is generally elected by the said Levant Company, and established by the Ambassador. The People are very civil to Strangers,The People of Cyprus. delighting in Hospitality, also addicting themselves to War, being strong and active; and the Women were in former times given to unchastity, by reason of their so great adoration of their goddess Venus, it being the custom of these Women to prostitute themselves on the Shoars to Passers by; where their Virgins would do the same. But upon their receiving of Christianity, by the Preachings of St. Paul and Barnabas, being the Birth-place of the latter, this (with other of their uncivil and barbarous Customs) were laid aside. This ANATOLIA, or ASIA MINOR, which I have hitherto treated of, is seated (for the most part) all in a healthful and temperate Air, the Soil being generally fruitful, once very populous, and replenished with many fair and goodly Cities, now lamenting the loss of about 4000, some of which by Earthquakes, but most by the Wars the Turks brought against them. The Commodities or Merchandizes which it abounds with,Commodities in Asia Minor. and communicates to other Nations, are chiefly excellent Wines, Goats-hair, Camels-hair, Gro∣grain Yarn, Silk, Cotton Wool, Cotton Yarn, Cloth of a course make, Coral, Gauls, though not so good as those of Syria, Grograins, Chamlets, Mohairs, Turky-Carpets, Spunges, Turpentine the best in the World; Mastick, with some other Commodities of less note which the English, French, Venetians, and Dutch fetch from hence; but chiefly from Smyrna, it being the chief Town of Trade, being a flourishing Factory, where those Nations (as hath been said be∣fore) keep their Consuls.
SOƲRIA, or SYRIA. Its Bounds.SOƲRIA, formerly SYRIA the Great, and at present Soristan with the Eastern People, is near hand that which the Romans called their Diocess of the East, as may seem by our now calling it the Levant. It extends from the Mediterranean Sea, which washes its Western Coast, to the Euphrates, which on the East divides it from Diarbeck; and from Mount Aman, or Monte-Negro, which bounds it on the North, and separates it from Cilicia unto Ara∣bia and Egypt, which border on its Southern parts. The Ancients have divided it into three principal Parts: the particular Sy∣ria, called Syria Propria, which (as the greatest and best) held the name of all Phoenicia, and Judaea or Palestine: This last stretcheth more towards the South,Its Parts, or Division by the Turks.Syria towards the North, and Phoenicia remaineth in the middle; and all are along the Mediterranean Sea, from Anatolia into Egypt; the particu∣lar Syria alone touches the Euphrates, the rest upon Arabia. At present the Turks divide all Syria into two Beglerbeglies, Aleppo, and Damascus; some make a third of Tripoli of Syria: and give to this last five Sangiacats, nine or ten to Damascus, and seven to Aleppo; which in all are 16 or 20 Sangiacats, whose Names and Scituations are for the most part unknown; we will content our selves to speak something of the Cities, which have been, or which yet are, the principal of all these Quarters, beginning with those of Syria. SYRIA PROPRIA. Syria Propria, its bounds, fer∣tility, and peo∣ple.SYRIA PROPRIA is bounded on the East with the River Euphrates, and on the West with the Mediterranean Sea. It is very fertil, affording plenty of excellent Fruits, Cotton-Wool, Sheep, which have Tails that weigh about 30 pounds, with several other good Commodities. The People were formerly very industrious, but much addicted to Gluttony, as did appear by their often and great Feasting; they were subtle in their dealings, much given to Superstition, being worshippers of the goddess Fortune, and other of their Syrian goddesses, much addicted to Plays and Pastimes, and given to Scoffing and Laughter.Its chief pla∣ces. The chief Places in this Country are, 1. Antioch, or Antiochia, once the Metropolis of Syria, once so fair, that it held the third or fourth de∣gree amongst the best Cities of the Roman Empire. Its Walls are yet stand∣ing, and the most beautiful that Eye ever beheld; within it is nothing but Ruins. Its scituation is on the River Orontes, so called; at present Assi, or Ha∣ser, four Leagues from the Mediterranean shoar; a place of great strength, having for its Fortification an enchosure of two strong Walls, on which for their further defence were erected about 460 Towers, together with a strong Castle. The City before its Ruins being adorned with stately Palaces, Tem∣ples, &c. fit for so great a City, being formerly the Seat of some of the Roman Emperours, and of the chief Officers of their Empire in the Orient. It was the first Seat of a Patriarch, that St. Peter established, and which held in the Infancy of the Church, 1. The Diocesses of Thrace, Asia, Pontus, and the East. 2. Daphne, about five miles from Antioch, so named from Daphne, one of the Mistresses of Apollo, who was here worshipped, famous for having here his Oracle and Grove, which was about 10 miles in compass, all encompassed with Cypresses and other Trees, so tall and close together, that the Beams of the Sun could not dart through, though in his greatest power; watered with pleasant Streams, beautified with Fountains, and enriched with abundance of Trees, which yield variety of excellent Fruits, as well for tast as tincture; for its Temples dedicated to Apollo; for its Sanctuary or Asyle, and for the place where Daphne was changed into a Laurel, that it hath been compared with
the Valley of Tempe in Thessaly. 3. Aleppo, built upon four Hills, at present is the greatest and principal Town of all Syria, and one of the most famous of the East, being the ancient Hierapolis, having large Suburbs, which are for the most part taken up by Christians. It is seated between the Euphrates and the Mediterranean Sea, and in that place where that Sea and the Euphrates make the nearest conjunction, which makes it capable of the best and greatest com∣merce of the World, to wit, of all the Levant, with the West, by the passage of the Gulph of Ormus and Balsora, which brings Commodities up the Eu∣phrates, just against the City of Aleppo; from whence the Caravans bring them by Land to Aleppo, and carry them from thence to Alexandretta or Scanderoon, scituate on the Mediterranean Sea; and thence into the parts of Asia, Africa, and Europe, which border upon the Mediterranean, and farther into that Ocean. This City is the ordinary residence of a Turkish Bassa, who commands all the Country from Alexandretta to the Euphrates. 4. Aman, or Ama, seated between Tripoli and Aleppo, in the midst of a great Plain, encom∣passed on all sides with very pleasant Hills, abounding in Grains, Wines, with abundance of Orchards, stored with varieties of Fruits and Palm-Trees. It is almost encompassed with the River Orontes, and with a great Lake; the Gardens are watered with many Channels, drawn from the Rivers; there are very excellent Pastures, so that Seleucus Nicanor there fed 500 Elephants, 30000 Horses, and a great part of his Militia. And to this day this City is the best peopled of all Syria, next to Aleppo and Damascus. 5. Emsa, or Hemz, seated in the spacious and fruitful Plain of Apamene, watered with many pleasant Streams, which, for its Scituation, is almost the same with that of Aman; and because the Arabes call it Hamsi, and that name comes somewhat near to Hus, some Authors will have it to be the Country of the Patient Job. 6. Ara∣dus, seated in a Rocky Island of a mile in compass, just opposite to the Mouth of the River Eleutherus, which from the Continent is distant not above a League. 7. Seleucus, so called from him, as being the Founder of it, who was esteemed the greatest Builder in the World, founding 9 Cities of this Name, 16 in memory of his Father Antiochus, six bearing the name of his Mother Laodice, and three in remembrance of his first Wife Apamia; besides several others worthy of note in Greece and Asia, either repaired, beautified, or built by him. 8. Laodicea, built by Seleucus (as aforesaid) abounding in ex∣cellent Wine, and choice Fruits. 9. Larissa, now Laris, seated four Leagues Southwards of Laodicea, much noted in the Stories of the Holy Wars. 10. Hierapolis, a City of great note in Ancient times for their Idolatry, in adoring and worshipping the Syrian goddess. The Temple was built by Stra∣tonice, wife to Seleucus, in the midst of the City, encompassed with a double Wall about 300 Fathom in height, the Roof thereof in-laid with Gold, and built with such sweet Wood, that the Cloaths of those which came thither were as it were perfumed, Without the Temple were places for the keeping of their Oxen, and other of their Beasts for Sacrifice; as also a Lake of about 200 Fathom in depth, for the preservation of their sacred Fishes. The Priests, besides other subservient Ministers, which here attended, were about 300 in number. 11. Zeugma, seated on the Banks of the Euphrates. Here it was that Alexander the Great, with his Army, passed over on a Bridge of Boats. 12. Heraclea, nigh to which Minerva had a Temple, where, for a Sacrifice, they used once a year to offer a Virgin, which afterwards was changed to a Hart. 13. Samosat, seated near the Banks of the Euphrates, over which the was a Bridge which served for a passage to Mesopotamia. In this City was born Paulus Samosatenus, Patriarch of Antioch, who, for his teaching that our Saviour was not the Son of God, was (in a Council here held) con∣demned of Heresie. 14. Palmyre, at present Faid, seated in a Desart and Sandy Plain, was built by Solomon in the Wilderness, where one their Kings Odenat, and his wife Zenobia, have been well known for their Victories, di∣vers times gained against the Parthians; and for endeavouring to gain the Empire of the East. 15. Resapha, a Town of great note in the Holy Scripture: And, 16. Adida, memorable for the Victory that Aretas, K. of Arabia, obtained against Alexander, K. of Jewry.
PHOENICIA. Phoenicia bounded, and its Cities, &c. described.PHOENICIA hath for its Eastern and Southern Bounds, Palestine; for its Western, the Mediterranean Sea; and for its Northern, Syria Pro∣pria. This Country was adorned with several great and beautiful Cities, though of no great extent: For the most part seated on the Sea-shoar, which makes it much frequented by Merchants, there being several good Commodi∣ties found therein, as Corn, Oil, Hony, excellent Balm, &c. The People were here held to be very ingenious and active. Places, of most note are, 1. Tyre, at present Sor or Sour, seated in a Plain so advantagious, (that is, on a Rock almost quite encompassed with the Sea) that it oft disputed the Priority with Sidon, and in the end gained it. Nebuchadonozor ruined it after a Siege of 14 years; then Alexander the Great, after a Siege of 7 or 8 months. It was many times restored to its power and splendor, by means of its Purple, and of its Trade: and when it was in its glory, it might be said, That if only its sci∣tuation were considered, it was a Fortress; if its Traffick, a Mart; if its Mag∣nificence, a Royal-Court; and if its Riches, the Treasure of the Universe. The Cities of Carthage, Ʋtica, Leptis, and others in Africa, and of Cadiz in Spain, without the Streights were its Colonies. And some have adventured to say, America was peopled by them. Its Haven is likewise the best of all Phoe∣nicia, and the Levant. 2. Sidon, at present Sayd, and sometimes Sayette, hath been much esteemed in the Ancientest of times: It was built, or at least took its name from Sidon, the eldest Son of the Children of Canaan, scituate upon a Rock along the Coast of the Sea, and with a fair Port. The Neighbouring Champain is very fertil, and watered with divers Streams which descend from Libanus, with which they watered and enriched their pleasant Orchards. It hath been very famous for Arts and Sciences, and particularly for being the first Authors of Arithmetick and Astronomy; The first Inventers of Letters; the first Navigators and Builders of Ships; the first Inventers of Glasses; and the first that exercised Arms. From hence it was that Solomon and Zorobabel had their principal Workmen, both for Stone and Timber, which were employed in the building of the Temple. It hath Peopled divers Colonies; among o∣thers, Thebes in Boeotia. The Persians were the first that ruin'd it, after them others, and at last the Turks; who at present are Masters of it, as also of Tyre. The present Sidon is built somewhat West of the Old; but of small note in re∣spect to the splendor of the Old, yet still hath some Trade. The chief Com∣modities being Corn, Galls, Wools, Cottons, Cotton-Yarn, white Silk, and Wax. 3. Damascus, called by those of the Country Scham; seated in a very fruitful Plain, and begirt about with curious and odoriferous Gardens and Orchards, which abound in all sorts of pleasant and delightful Fruits: watered with the River Chrysorrhous, which sendeth forth many Rivulets; by which the whole City is so well furnished, that not only most Houses have their Fountains; but also their Gardens and Orchards receive the benefit of the cool Streams, which gently glide through them:The fertility of the Coun∣try. The whole Country round about being enriched with plenty of excellent Vines, which beareth Grapes all the year long; as also great plenty of Wheat. A place so surfeiting of Delights, that the vile Impostor Mahomet would never enter into it, lest by the ravishing Pleasures of this place, he should forget the business he was sent about, and make this his Paradise. This City is famous, first, for her Founders, who were Abrahams Servants; next for the Temple of Zacharias, which was garnished with 40 stately Porches, and adorned with about 9000 Lanthorns of Gold and Silver, and last of all, for the Conversion of St. Paul, who here first preached the Gospel; for which he was forced to make his escape out of the House, being let down the Walls in a Basket. Josephus believeth that it was built by Ʋs, the Son of Abraham, Grandchild to Noah: However it were, after Type and Sidon began to decay, this began to be in some repute, and hath been esteemed
the chief City of Phoenicia, and sometimes of all Syria. It is beyond Mount Libanus, in respect to Tyre and Sidon; seated in a Soll so fertil and delightful, by reason of the Rivers and Fountains, that in Holy Scripture it is called a fa∣mous City, a City of Joy, a House of Delight and Pleasure; and some Authors call it the Paradise of the World. Yet hath it felt very great changes, as well as Tyre and Sidon: It hath been taken, retaken, ruined, and re-established di∣vers times, by the Assyrians, Babylonians, Persians, Macedonians, Romans, Parthians, Saracens, Tartars, by the Soldans of Egypt, and in fine, by the Turks, in whose hands it is at present, very flourishing and rich. The Houses of private persons are not so fair without as within; the publick Buildings are very beautiful; the Castle is in the middle of the City, built by a Florentine. 4. Serepta, seated on the Sea Coast betwixt Tyre and Sidon, memorable in Holy Scripture for the Prophet Elijah, in raising from death the poor Widows Son. Here is found excellent Wines, accounted as good as those of Grece. 5. Acre, of old Acon, and Ptolemais, is bounded with the Sea on two sides; the third is joyned to a Plain of the Continent. The City is very strong, being walled with a double Wall, fortified throughout on the out-side with Towers and Bulwarks, and in the middle of the City a strong Castle, on the top of which there was every Night set Lights, which served to direct Ships at Sea to their Port. The Plain is fertil and well watered with Streams, which descend from the Neighbouring Mountains. The Christians took, lost, and retook this place divers times, when they made War into the Holy Land; in which, none more famous than Richard the First, and Edward the First, both Kings of England. The same did likewise the Saracens; the Soldans of Egypt ruined it, and after re-built it; and at present it remains in the hands of the Turks. 6. Tripoli of Syria, (for distinction from Tripoli of Barbary) seated in a rich Plain, is at this day by some esteemed the Metropolis of Phoenicia, thought it hath three times more Ruins than whole Houses; and seated about two miles from the Sea, but not above half a mile from its Haven, which formerly served for a Port to Aleppo, but since removed to Alexandretta or Scanderone: But yet a place of some small Trade, affording Corn, Cotton-Wool, Yarn, Silk, some Drugs, Pot-Ashes, and other Commodities. The Buildings are generally low, and the Streets narrow, excepting those which lead towards Aleppo, which are fair and broad; having many pleasant Gardens, which are watered with delightful Streams, in which Gardens they keep great quantities of Silk-Worms. The Soil is excellent good, if it were well tilled; but the Air is unhealthful. 7. Biblus, now Gibbeleth, was the habitation of Ciniras, the Father of Myr∣rha, Mother to the fair Adonis; from whence the neighbouring River took its name, remarkable in the infancy of Christianity, for being the See of a Bi∣shop; but now by the Turks made desolate. And, 8. Barutt, or Beryte, a place formerly of great Trade, but now of great concourse, and much frequented by Merchants, and others; it being the Road for all those Caravans that travel from Aleppo, Damascus, and Jerusalem; to Cairo, and Mecca. It is subject to the Grand Signior. Near to this Town is that noted Valley, where (as some Authors say) St. George by killing the Dragon, which had his abode in a Cave here, redeemed the Kings Daughter, which was to be delivered to his fury. PALESTINE. Palestine bounded.PALESTINE, formerly called Judaea, Canaan, or the Holy Land, is bounded on the East with Mount Hermon, so much spoken of in Holy Scripture; on the South, with part of Arabia Petraea; on the West, with the Mediterranean Sea, and part of Phoenicia; and on the North, with the Anti-Libanus, which separates it from Syria and the rest of Phoenicia. Its scitua∣tion is between the Third and Fourth Climates, which makes the longest day to be 14 hours and a quarter. So populous, that before the coming in of the Israelites, they had 30 Kings; and afterwards David numbred 1300000
Fighting men, besides those of the Tribe of Benjamin and Levi. This last and most Meridional part of Syria, which we call Palestine, first received the name of the Land of Canaan, because the Children of Canaan first seised it, and parted it amongst them; when God had promised it to Abraham and his Poste∣rity, it was called the Land of Promise; but when it fell into the hands of the Hebrews, after their return from Egypt, and that they had divided it by Tribes, it took the name of the Land of the Hebrews, under which it was governed by Prophets, Judges, and Kings; but under these Kings it was soon divided into two Realms, which they called Judah and Israel. Under the Romans it was only known by the name of Judea, or Palestine: of Judea, because that the Tribe of Judah was always the most powerful of the Twelve; and the Kingdom of Judah the most noble, and preserved it self longer than that of Israel: of Palestina, because the Philistines, which possessed a part of the Maritim Coast of Judea, were powerful, and very well known to Strangers. After the death of our Saviour Jesus Christ, all this Country was called the Holy Land.A description of the Jews, and their Re∣ligion. The People which anciently possest this Country were the Jews, being of a middle stature, strong of body, of a black complexion, goggle-ey'd, a subtle and ingenious people, and such as will live in any place, much given to Traffick, Usury, and Brokage; not lending without Pledges, and taking the forfeitures of them. Their Law or Religion was given them by God the Fa∣ther, which, with the several Ceremonies and Rites, &c. prescribed to them, may be found in the five first Books of Moses; their Synagogues are neither fair within nor without, save only adorned with a Curtain at the upper end, together with several Lamps, and in the midst is placed a Scaffold in form of a Reading-Desk, for their Priest which readeth their Law, and sings their Li∣turgy; they read in a strange tone, and sing as bad: during the time of their Service, their heads are veiled with Linnen fringed with Knots, answerable to the number of their Laws, and observing a continual motion of their body to and fro, and often jumping up, which they account for great zeal in their devo∣tion; they observe much reverence to all the names of God, but especially to Jehovah, insomuch that they do never use it in vain talk. Their ancient Lan∣guage was Hebrew; they keep their Sabbath on Saturday, in which they are very strict; they marry their Daughters at the Age of 12 years, as not affe∣cting a single life.The fertility of the Coun∣try. This Country is so fertil in all things, that it was termed a Land flowing with Milk and Hony; adorned with pleasant Mountains and luxurious Valleys, enriched with pleasant Streams, and where the Inhabitants are neither scorched with Heats, nor pinched with Colds. To speak of all the memorable transactions that have happen'd in this Country would require a Volume by it self; I shall only run over some of the chief, and then proceed to the description of some of the Cities and Places of most note that are found therein. It is famous for bringing our Saviour Jesus Christ into the World, where he wrought so many Miracles; but infamous for their horrid action of crucifying him,Memorable Transactions in this Coun∣try. the Lord of Life. Here it was that the Lord appeared to Ja∣cob; here, out of the Plains of Moab, the Ark was built of Sittim Wood; here, on Mount Tabor, Christ was transfigured; on Mount Moriah, Isaac was to be sacrificed; on Mount Sion was the Tower of David; on Mount Calva∣ry, as some aver, was the Burial-place of Adam, our Forefather. Here, over the Brook Kedron, David passed in his flight from Absalom; over which our Saviour, when he went to his Passion, passed: Here runneth the River of Jordan, sufficiently famous; nigh to which stood the Cities of Sodom and Go∣morrha: Here, at a place called Endor, Saul consulted with a Witch; near to Sichem, Jacob had his Wells: Here, at Ashdod, in the Temple of Dagon, the Ark of the Lord was brought, when taken; upon the entrance of which their Idol fell down: Here, at Hebron, is the Plain of Mamre, where Abraham, sit∣ting in his Tent, was visited by God from Heaven in the likeness of a Man; this City he bought for a Burial-place, for him and his Posterity, where Sarah his Wife was first interr'd: And on Mount Seir was the habitation of Esau, after his departure from Canaan. I shall cease to trouble the Reader with the mentioning of many more remarkable Passages which were here transacted,
but only refer them to the Books of the Old and New Testament, where they shall find them recorded; also great satisfaction may be received from Jose∣phus, a Book of good repute. This Country is at present possessed by the Turks, as Masters of it, but in∣habited by Moors, Arabians, Greeks, Turks, Jews, nay, I may say with People of all Nations and Religions; But setting aside matters of History, let us proceed to say something of the principal places found herein, and first with Jerusalem. Jerusalem; its chief Places.Jerusalem is so well known in the Holy Scriptures, that we must confess it hath been not only one of the greatest, but one of the fairest Cities in the World, being called the City of the Lord. Its Kings, High-Priests, Temple, and Royal Palaces, have made it famous even amongst the remotest people; Its circuit was onto 50 Furlongs, which are only 6250 Geometrical Paces, but so well builded, that it was capable of the receiving of 150000 Families. Its Temple and Palaces, especially those of Solomon, were the fairest, greatest, and most magnificent which ever eye beheld: Its Gates, Walls, Towers, Ditches, cut out of the Rock; and its scituation in the Mountains made it seem impreg∣nable. This City, once sacred and glorious, elected by God for his Seat, pla∣cing it in the midst of Nations, like a Diadem, crowning the head of the Mountains, the Theater of Mysteries and Miracles, was once the glory of the World; but its Pride, and other horrid Sins in the end lost it divers times. Nebuchadonozor was the first that ruind it; Pompey contented himself to dismantle it of its Walls, and to fill up the Ditches; Vespasian and Titus Caesar utterly razed it and destroyed in the place 1100000 People that were assem∣bled to the Pass-over; Adrian ruined likewise some Towers and Walls, which had been left to lodge the Roman Garrison; and after caused a new City to be built, partly on its ancient Ruins, and partly without them. But with the divers changes it hath since fallen under, its beauty and magnificence is quite decayed: Yet is it not so lost, but that there are several Places yet remaining worthy of note, together with several others that were since built; as on Mount Calvary, where Christ the Saviour of the World was Crucified, there is a rich, magnificent and large Temple, built by the vertuous Helena, Daugh∣ter to Coilus, a British King, and Mother to Constantine the Great, which not only possesseth the Mount, but also all the Garden below, where his Sepulchre was; and in this Temple there are several rich Structures, as one where Christ was imprisoned before his Crucifixion, another where Christ was nailed to the Cross, another where he was Crucified; also one where the Sepulchre was, the Altar of the Holy Cross, the Altar of the Scourging, the Chapel of the Ap∣parition, the Chapel of the Angels, the Chapel of the division of his Gar∣ments, the Chapel of St. Helena, who built this Temple, the Chapel of St. John, the Sepulchre of Joseph of Arimathea under ground; together with several others, too long to recite. To this place there is a great resort, as well of Protestants as Papists, though for sundry ends, which brings a great Re∣venue; none being permitted to enter without paying some Mony, which the Jews here inhabiting do Farm of the Grand Signior at a large yearly Reve∣nue, and so become Masters thereof, making a great profit by shewing them to Strangers, which come hither from all Nations. Several other places are yet remaining, as the Castle of the Pisans, the Monastery of the Franciscans, the Church of St. James; the Church of St. Mark, where once stood his House; a Mosque, where stood the House of Zebedaeus; a Chapel, where stood the House of St. Thomas; the Church of the Angels, where the Palace of Annas the High-Priest stood; the Church of St. Saviour, where the Palace of Cai∣phas stood; the Court of Solomons Temple, yet remaining; but in the room of the Temple a Mosque. Near about Jerusalem there are several places of note yet remaining, as in the way between Jerusalem and the City of Bethlem, there are the Ruins of Davids Tower, the Tower of Simeon, Bathsheba's Fountain, the Cistern of Saget, the Monastery of Elias, Jacobs House, the Sepulchre of Rachel, the Cistern of David, the House of Joseph, the Monastery of Bethlem, the Mo∣nastery
of the Holy Cross. And at Bethlehem, over the place where Christ was born, the vertuous Helena erected also another fair and goodly Temple, which is possest by the Franciscans of Jerusalem, being called by the name of St. Maries of Bethlehem. Nigh to Jerusalem is the Desart of St. John Baptist, where is yet the Ruins of a Monastery over his Cave, and the Fountain; as also the Mountains of Judah, where is the Church of St. John Baptist, the Fountain, and the House of Elizabeth, also the Sepulchre of Zachary, a part of the Pillar of Absalon, and the Cave of St. James. At Bethania, two miles from Jerusalem, is the House of Simon the Leper, the House of Laza∣rus, as also his Sepulchre, where is the Mount of Olives, where is the Sepulchre of the Virgin Mary, where Christ was often, and from whence he ascended up into Heaven. Joppa, or Jaffa, serves for a Port to Jerusalem, from which it is 10 miles distant; and it was thither that the Wood and Stones, taken from Mount Li∣banus, and destined to the building of the Temple of Solomon, were brought by Water, and from thence by Land to Jerusalem. This is the Port where Jonah embarked to flie from the face of the Lord. From this History the Heathens made the Fable of Andromeda, and pretended to shew in the Rock, which is before the Port, the marks of the Irons, to which Andromeda was chained, and exposed to the Sea-Monster. After Jerusalem there rests yet Gaza, now Gazere, greater and better in∣habited than Jerusalem. 1. Jericho, seated on the River Jordan, about 30 miles distant from Jerusalem. a City once of great fame, being in the time of Chri∣stianity an Episcopal See; also noted for her beautiful Palms, but especially for her Balsmum; but now turned to Ruins, in the place whereof stands a few poor Cottages, inhabited by the Arabians. 2. Samaria, once the Seat of the Kings of Israel, hath now nothing left but the Ruins of some proud Buildings. And, 3. Sichem, now Naplouse, hath some Samaritans, and re∣mains the Capital of that Quarter, and the best inhabited, but with many Ruins; and to speak truth, there is now scarce any place of mark in all the Holy Land; whereas under the Cananites, under the Hebrews, under the Jews, there were so many People, so many Kings, so many Cities, so rich, and so powerful, that throughout the whole Continent of the Earth there was no Country might compare with it. Jerusalem is at present governed by a Bassa, and Naplouse by another, which obey the Beglerby of Damascus. DIARBECK. Diarbeck, and its Parts.DIARBECK, taken particularly, answers only to Mesopotamia, which is but part of the ancient Assyria; taken in general, it answers to the three parts of that Assyria, of which the particular Assyria is now called Ar∣zerum, Mesopotamia, Diarbeck, and Chaldea or Babylonia, or Yerack. The first is the most Oriental, and almost all beyond the Tygris; the second the most Occidental, and is between the Euphrates and the Tygris; the third the most Meridional, and lies on both sides the Tygris. Its fertility and People.This Country of Chaldea, now Yerack, is for the most part exceeding fruit∣ful, yielding ordinarily 200 fold, the blades of their Wheat and Barly being about four fingers broad, having yearly two Harvests. The People anciently were much given to Divinations, South-sayings, and Idolatry. Places of most note are, 1. Babylon, formerly Babel, the ancientest City in the World, seated on the Bank of the Euphrates,Its chief pla∣ces. first built by Nimrod, and much enlarged and beautified by Nebuchadnezzar; so that it was accounted one of the nine Wonders of the World. This City was so vast, that its Walls stretcht in cir∣cumference 365 Furlongs, in height 66 Yards, and in breadth 25, scituate on both sides of the Euphrates, which also ran through the City, emptying it self into divers Rivolets; over this River Euphrates there was a stately Bridge, at each end of which there was a sumptuous Palace, beautified also with the
Temple of the Idol Bell; the whole City being adorned with fair Buildings, stately Palaces, and Temples, with a number of fair and large Streets, famous for its Tower of Babel which exalted it selt 5164 Paces in height, which is something above 5 miles, having its basis or circumference equal to its height. A City once esteemed the Mistress of the World, and so rich, that it is said, that Alexander at his taking it found treasured up 200000 Talents of Gold, (a Ta∣lent of our Money being esteemed at 4500 Pounds) a vast Treasure; but the sins of the People drew the wrath of God upon it; and by reason of its Inva∣sions by the Medes, Persians, and Macedonians, who subdued it, so runed, that it soon lost its pristine glory and magnificence, being reduced to Ruins; out of which was raised a new City called Bagdad,Babylon, now called Bagdad. so named from its many Gardens therein contained, but not to compare to the old Babylon, neither in largeness nor glory, being not above 7 miles in compass, but yet re∣mains to this day a place of great Trade; between which and Aleppo are found many Caravans to travel with many thousand Camels laden with rich Commodities brought from India, and elsewhere, abounding with the same Commodities as Aleppo doth. At this place they make use also of Pigeons, as they do at Alexandretta and Aleppo, which serve instead of Posts, which, when occasion serveth, as upon the arrival of Ships, Caravans, or the like, they take these Pigeons and tie an Advertisement (which they write in a little piece of Paper) about their Necks, which done, they carry the Pigeon to a high place, and toss it up, and immediately it flieth to the other place to which it is designed, which gives notice to them. The Palaces in this City most wor∣thy of note are, the Mosque, a large and rich Structure, built of Free-stone, re∣sembling Marble, in form orbicular; then the Sultans Palace adjoyning to the Buzzar, or great Market-place, is a rich, large, but low Fabrick; next the Bridge, whose passage is over Boats, which are chained together, which, upon occasion may be separated, having resemblance to that of Roan in Normandy; and lastly, its Coho-houses, which are Houses of Good-fellowship, being in the nature of Coffee-houses with us, which in this place are many, to which a great resort of People cometh to sip Coffee, which by them is highly esteemed, as indeed by most People in these Regions: 3. Balsera, the Port-Town to Bagdad, seated near the place where Tygris loses it self in the Persian Gulph; which is likewise called the Gulph of Balsora and Ormus. This City is said to have 10000 Houses, and answers to the ancient Teredon. 4. Coufa, was sometime the Sea of the Califfs, and near it was Ali interr'd; whence it hath likewise been called Masad-Ali, or Merat-Ali, the House of Ali; and there is always a Horse kept ready to mount Mahomet Mahadin, the Son of Almansor, the Son of Ocem, the Son of Ali, when he shall come to convert the whole World to the Law of Mahomet; for this Conversion is to begin at Coufa: but they hitherto have had, and may for the future have time enough to curry their Horse, expecting the coming of their Cavalier. 5. Orchoe, now so called, is the Ʋrchoa of Ptolomy, and Ʋr, the place of Abrahams Nativity. 6. Bor∣sippa, by Ptolomy called Barsita, famous for the great Victory which Cyrus, the first Persian Monarch, here obtained against Nabonius King of Babylon. 7. Ctesiphon, seated on the Tygris; And, 8. Sipparum, noted for the great Trench made near it, which was made to receive the overflowings of the Eu∣phrates, which was in compass 160 miles, and in depth 20 Fathoms, which was made to preserve the City of Babylon from overflowings. Bagdad and Balsera have each their Beglerbies, and many Sangiacs; but to speak truth, sometime the Turk, sometime the Persian possesses these Quarters; the last took Bagdad in the year 1624, which the Turks regained in 1638. Fame now speaks it the Persians.
MESOPOTAMIA. Mesopotamia bounded, and its fertility.MESOPOTAMIA, bounded on the West with the Euphrates. The Southern part of this Country is very barren and full of Desarts, scarce affording any Herbage, nor hardly so much as Trees. But as this part is so much deficient, that towards the North hath as great plenty, which makes a∣mends, abounding with great store of Corn and Wine, together with all such hecessaries as are required for the life of man.Its chief Pla∣c. Place of most note are. 1. Rohai, or Orpha, which is the ancient Edesse, being 10 miles in circuit, scituate on the River Scirtas, which passes through the midst of it, not far from the Euphra∣tes into which it falls. 2. Caraemid, anciently Amida, seated near the Tygris, encompassed with a strong Wall, a Frontier Town of great strength, being much desired by the Persians; now the chief Seat of the Bassa, which governs this Country for the Turk, where the Patriarch of the Jacobite Christians also had his residence. 3. Merdin, not above 4 or 5 miles in circuit, but is ve∣ry strongly seated on a high Mountain, and having a Castle of about a mile in circumference; not far from which, in the Monastery of Saphran, is the Patri∣archal See of the Jacobite Sectaries 4. Asanchif, esteemed the Metropolis of the Country▪ yet not being of above 4 or 5 miles compass, but hath four great Suburbs well filled with Inhabitants. 5. Carra, where Crassus and the Romans were defeated, is now called Herren, or Harrar, the City to which Abraham did remove when he went towards Canada; remarkable in former times for its famous Temple, dedicated to the Moon, which was here worship∣ped under both Sexes. 6. Sumiscasack, not far from Edesse, hath its Castle seated very advantagiously. The Castle of Corna, that is pointed, is one of the most important places the Turks possess in all these quarters, being built a∣bove the place where the Tygris and Euphrates meet, to keep in awe both these Rivers: And 7. Virta, by some Authors supposed to have been built by Ale∣xander the Great, encompassed with Walls, and fortified with Towers and Bul∣warks, that it was in a manner impregnable. ASSYRIA. Assyria bound∣ed.ASSYRIA, particularly so called, hath for its Western limits Mesopotamid, and is called at this day, Arzerum. A Country very fruitful, seated in a Plain,Its People, and their Customs, &c. and watered with several good Rivers; the People were anciently much addicted to Marshal-affairs, yet very demure in their Habit and Behaviour, not going out of their Doors without first being perfumed, adorned with Rings on their Fingers, and a Scepter in their Hands; they were much given to Bathing, and especially after Copulation. In their Nuptial Ceremonies, they never see the Woman until they are married; but when they hear a good Re∣port of a Maiden, being such as liketh them, they go to her Parents, and with them agree; which done, on an appointed time they meet in the Church, in such a part of it as is designed for that use, where there is a Partition with a Hole in it: on one side the Bridegroom and his Friends stand, and on the other the Bride and her Friends; then the Cassisse or Priest bids the Bridegroom put his hand through the Hole, and take his Bride by the hand; which no sooner done, but her Mother, or some other of her Friends, being prepared with a sharp Instrument, pricks his hand all over; and if he doth not pull away his hand when he is so pain'd, but still holds her so fast that she cries, they hold it a sign that he will love her; and if he lets her go, a sign of no great love. Chief places in Assyria.Places of most note: 1. Ninive, first built by Nimrod, and afterwards so en∣larged by several succeeding Kings, that it became at last to exceed Babylon, as well in largeness as otherwise; its Walls being in circuit 60 miles, being about
33 yards in height, and 24 in breadth; and on whose Walls there was (for further strength) 1500 Tunrets, or Towers, which made it to be thought impreg∣ble, To this City the Lord sent Jonah the Prophet, to Preach Repentance to them; but afterwards for their Sins, it was destroyed by Astyages King of the Medes, out of whose Ruins the City, 2. Mosul was aised, which at present is the chief City of Assyria, seated on the Tygris, most eminent for being the re∣sidence of the Nestorian Patriarch, where, are founded 15 Christias Churches. It is enclosed within a Wall, and is the residence of a Bashaw, a place much ruined, but of note for the great concourse of Merchants, this being a thorough∣fare City. 3. Scheree zull, or Schihrazur, is very near to Persia, and is the Seat of a Turkish Beglerby, or Bassa, who hath 10000 Timariots under his command, for the defence and security of this Country. It is near to, if not the same as Arbela, renowned or the Victory of Alexander the great against Darius, and is said to retain its ancient name, and to be an Arch∣bishoprick of the Jacobites. 4. Ggilamela, noted for the last and greatest Battel betwixt Alexander and Darius, King of Psia, in which Alexander gained the Victory. 5. alach, built by Nimrod, being one of the Cities to which Sainanassar transplanted the Ten Tribes. 6. Arbela seated on the Banks of the River Caprus, by some supposed to be the place where Noahs Ark was framed: And 7. Sittace, pleasantly seated in a fruitful Soil. TƲRCOMANIA. Turcomania pouded.TƲRCOMANIA, or ARMENIA MAJOR, touches the Ca∣pian Sea between Georgia and Servan; and on the Black Sea, between Anatolia and Georgia, it extends from East to West little less than 200 Lege, and from South to North, 150 answering to the great Armenia of the Ancients. Its People.Some divide it only into two sorts of People, the Turcomans and the Curdes; I would add at least the Armenians and the Georgians, these possessing a great part of the Country as well as the others, who are the natural and most an∣ent Inhabitants: for the Turcomans are esteemed to descend from Turquestan in Tartary, from whence come the Turks, and to whom they are most resert∣bling; the Curdes descend from the ancient people of Assyria, Mesopotami, Chaldea or Babylonia; the most Easternly of these three parts being yet cal∣led by the Turks and by the Persians, Curdistan, or the Country of the Curdes: and the Georgians descend from Georgia, which is above, and contiguous to our Turcomania. Of these four sorts of People, the Armenians are the most indurstrious and civil, addicting themselves to Merchandize, as appears by their Manufactures, especially in their rich Tapestries, Grograins, watered Chamlets, &c. with which they drive a trade; being also proper Personages and good Archers. The Turcomans apply themselves to the Field, and to look after their Flocks▪ the Curdes are almost ever on Horse-back, having much of the Arabick Na∣ture: the Georgians are the most docil, and the most peaceable. The Tarco∣mans and the Curdes are Mahometans; the Georgians and Armenians, the greatest part Christians. And the Armenian Tongue is one of the most gene∣ral in all Asia; extending it self likewise other where, and having Armenian Patriarchs and Bishops, not only in Armenia, but likewise in Anatolia, Persie, the Holy Land, Aegypt, Russia, and Polonia. Amongst the Ceremonies observed by the Armenians, I shall take notice of some few, as I find them in the Travels of Tavernier. They are very costly in adorning their Churches, especially the Choir and the Altar; at the cere∣mony of the Mass they light abundance of Tapers, and after the Gospel is read, several of the Noviciates, some having Bells fixed to long Sticks, and others having Copper-plates hung about with Bells, shaking and striking them one against another, together with the Ecclesiasticks and Laity, who sing, and make an indifferent harmony; during which the Archbishop and Bishops per∣forms
several Ceremonies, and says certain Prayers; which being done, having the Chalice in his hand, and the Bread upon it, he turns towards the People, who immediately prostrate themselves on the ground, beating their Breasts, and kissing the Earth, whilst the Archbishop pronounceth these words, This is the Lord, who gave his Body and Blood for you: then he turns towards the Altar, and eats the Bread dipt in Wine, (for they never drink the Wine;) then he turns again to the People with the Chalice in his hand, and they that will receive, taking the Bread from the Archbishop; and this Bread is consecrated the day before. That which is observable amongst them, they give the Com∣munion to Children of 2 or 3 Months old; and they never administer the Sa∣crament all the time of their Lent: They have four Feasts in the year besides their Lent, at which times they observe the same Ceremonies as at Lent, eat∣ing no Flesh, Fish, Butter, Eggs, or Oib for 8 days; the Feasts are Christmas, the Ascension, the Annunciation, and St Georges. When a man designs his Son for the Priesthood, he brings him to the Priest, who puts the Cope about his Shoulders, open on both sides; after which he takes him home, and keeps him till the age of saying Mass, which is 18 years; then he goes into the Church, out of which he is not allowed to depart for a year, during which time he is employed in the service of the Church. And the Priest that is married after he hath said Mass, must be 5 days before he re∣turns home to eat, drink, or lie with his Wife. They generally Baptize their Children on Sundays, which is performed by putting it naked into the Water, then gives it to the Godfather, anoints it in several places in form of the Cross with holy Oil, and pronounceth these words, I baptize thee in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and sayeth several Prayers suitable to the occasion. In their Marriages the Ceremonies are too many here to repeat:See Tavernier, fol. 173. I shall take notice of some few. They are permitted to marry at 3 or 4 years of age; the agreement is made betwixt the Mothers, or for want of them, by the Fe∣males next of kin; which agreement the Father stands unto, and after a Ring is presented to the intended Bride, the Contract stands. The Bridegroom and Bride never seeth one another till after the Nuptial Ceremonies are ended, both riding to the Church with their faces Vailed, the Bridegrooms is a Car∣nation Tiffany, or else Gold and Silver Net-work, and the Bride with a large white Veil, which covereth her body; thus Riding, they are attended by their Relations and Friends with Tapers in their hands, also the Drums, Trum∣pets, and other Musical Instruments wait on them to the Church-door: being entred and advanced near the Altar, they lean Forehead to Forehead, then the Priest lays the Bible on their Heads (instead of a Desk) and so pronounceth the Ceremony, which is much like ours; after the Benediction they hear Mass, and so return to the House of the Bride. At their Feasting the Men sit by themselves, and the Women by their selves; the Man goeth to Bed first, and the Woman pulleth off his Breeches, but putteth not off her Veil till Candles be put out; and at all times of the year the Woman riseth first, so that the poor Bridegroom knoweth not whether he hath met with a Beauty, or a course and ill-favoured piece of flesh; but be she what she will, he must keep her. About their Dead; the Body is washed, wherein is put some Holy-water, then it is drest with a clean white Shirt, a pair of Breeches, a Waist-coat, and a Bonnet; then it is put in a Linnen-Sack, and sewed up; then it is carried to the Church, accompanied with the Friends and Relations of the deceased, who carry in their hands Tapers, and being come to the Altar, after some Prayers are said, they leave the Corps there all Night; the next Morning the Bishop or Priest, attended as before, says Mass; several Prayers being said, and Dirges sung, the Corps is puts in the Grave, and the Bishop casts 3 handfuls of Earth in, one after another, saying, From earth thou camest, to earth thou shalt return, and stay there till our Lord comes; then the Grave is filled up, and the Rela∣tions and Friends that will, go back to the House of the Deceased, where a Col∣lation is prepared. These, with many other Ceremonies, are performed by them.
Its Air, and fertility and trade.The Air is healthful, though its temperament be cold, because of the Moun∣tains and Hills, which overspread the Country; but intermixt with fertil and and delightful Valleys, the Soil producing more Grain and Fruits than Vines; It yields Bolearmoniack, Hony, and, towards Servan, Silk, together with some Mines of Silver. The Pastures are every where excellent, and particularly for Horses, of which they make great account; for when Armenia was subject to the ancient Kings of Persia, it furnished them yearly with 20000 Horses. At present the Turk possesses the greatest part of the Country, and keeps still, or did not long since, Beglerbies at Erzerum, Cars, Revan, Van, Schildir, Tefflis, and Derbent: besides which there are many Cities of considerable note, some of which the Persians hold. 1.Its chief Pla∣ces.Erzerum, on the Euphrates, near the black Sea, on which, and not far from Erzerum, is Trebisonde, which facilitates a great trade between the East, West, and North; for coming from the Indian Ocean by the Gulph of Ormus, and so up the Euphrates, they may receive passing by what comes from the West to Aleppo, and carry it unto Erzerum; from whence, to Trebisonde by land, is not above 25 or 30 Leagues. 2. Gars, Chars, or likewise Chissery, is four or five days Journy from Erzerum towards the East, on the River Eu∣phrates; it hath been taken and retaken divers times by the Turks and Per∣sians. The same may be said of Revan, Schilder, and Van: this last is not great, but well Walled, and with greater Ditches, and hath a Castle whose sci∣tuation is such, as renders it almost inaccessible. 3. Tefflis is likewise in some esteem at present, but much more formerly under the name of Artaxata, which Artaxias, Father of Tigranes King of Armenia, caused to be builded and fortified at the perswasion of Hannibal. 4. Derbent, of great antiquity, being supposed to have its foundation laid by Alexander the Great; who also erected that no less great than strong Castle, which is called Kastow, adjoyning to the said City, which is the greatest and most ordinary passage between Turcomania, Persia, and other Southern Provinces of Asia, to Zuire, the Kingdom of Astracan, and other more Northern Estates of Europe and Asia. Its scituation is upon the utmost Mountains, which regard the Taberestan, or the Caspian Sea: and all is so well fortified, that the Turks have took occasion to call the place Demir, or Temir Capi, or the Port of Iron: and the name of Derbent signifies a Streight Port; and in all likelyhood these are the Caspiae Portae, so famous among the Ancients; because that in the black Sea, and the Sea of Tabarestan, which is about 3 or 400 thousand Paces: It is all high, Mountainous, and hard to be passed; and if there be any passages, they are in∣famous for Robberies and Incursions, which the Inhabitants of the Countries, or the Princes which possess them, make. This City is a place of great strength, being invironed with two strong Walls, and fortified with Towers and Iron-gates, being accounted the Key or Inlet to Persia, now in the hands of the Grand Signior. 5. Bitlis, and Manuscute, belong to the Curdes, who have here many and divers Lords, better affected to the Persians than the Turks. Bitlis is between two Mountains, watered with a River, which re∣ceives many fair Fountains. The Houses are built with Stones, which is rare in that Country; others being of nothing but Wood and Earth. The Castle is seated advantagiously, but I believe this place is not now in the hands of the Turks; and to speak truth, we have at present little knowledge of any thing concerning these quarters. ARMENIA was much better known, and more famous in Ancient time than at present, under the name of Turcomania.The Bounds of Armenia. Its Bounds are very advan∣tagious, being quite encompassed with high Mountains, large Rivers, and washed by divers Seas, and seated Northwards of the Caspian Mountains, which divides it from Media, now called Servan. The Moun∣tains of Ar∣menis.This Country is well replenished with Mountains, Vallies, Rivers, and Lakes. The Mountain Anti-Taurus divides it East and West, almost from one
extremity to the other; whose most Easternly point is called Abus, from whence the Euphrates, Tigris, and Araxes take some of their Streams. The Gordian Mountains pour forth the greatest supplies to Tigris; and the Pariardes increase most the Streams of Euphrates, Araxes, and Farza. Chief Rivers in Armenia.Farza turns his course towards the North, and after having passed Colchida, and pressed through 100 or 120 Bridges, falls into the Euxine Sea. Araxes turns towards the East, watering the fairest and richest Plains of Armenia; and falls into the Caspian Sea between Media and Albania. Both the one and the other Euphrates descend towards the West; but approaching the Euxine Sea, it turns again towards the South; and reunites its two Channels into one, traverses the Anti-Taurus and Taurus, divides Armenia and Mesopotamia from Asia Minor, Syria, and Arabia; descends into Chaldea, where it waters the ancient Babylon, and loses it self in the Tigris. This last descends from Mount Abus, and the Georgian Mountains, falls into divers Lakes, loses it self and rises divers times out of the Earth; cuts the Mountain Niphates, separates Mesopotamia from Assyria, washes Ninive, Seleucia, Ctesiphon; receives all the branches of the Euphrates, and discharges it self in the Persian Gulph. Lakes of most note in Arme∣nia.The greatest Lakes of Armenia are, Thospitis, Areessa, and Lychintes; this last is towards the Araxes and the Caspian Sea: Areessa is the same that Pliny and Solinus call Arethusa. Thospitis, according to Ptolomy, is another Lake the Tigris likewise crosses; after which it loses it self the second time. The first hath its Water so, as it will take spots out of Cloaths, but is not good to drink. Kings of emi∣nent note in Armenia.Among the Kings of Armenia, which made themselves most known to the Romans or Parthians; Tigranes, Son-in-law to Mithridates King of Pontus, hath been the most famous. This Tigranes, after having been an Hostage in the hands of the Parthians, regained his Estates by their means, in recom∣pence of which he gave them 70 Valleys, on the confines of Media and Assy∣ria; but after he knew and had gathered together his Powers, he retook all those Vallies, beat the Parthians out of them, pillaged Assyria as far as Ni∣nive and Arbela, subjected to himself a part of Media; and afterwards all Mesopotamia, Syria, Phoenicia, and Cilicia. But whilst he believed himself above Fortune, Mithridates his Father-in-law was divers times defeated, and driven from his Realm of Pontus by Lucullus and the Romans, and retiring himself into Armenia to his Son-in-law, his refusal to abandon or deliver him into the hands of Lucullus, drew the Romans into Armenia, where Lucullus several times defeated Tigranes, took Tigranocerta, where was his Regal Dia∣dem, and likewise in a great Set-Battel, where Tigranes had 150000 Foot, and 1000 or 1200 Horse, flew 100000 Foot, and the greatest part of his Cavalry, constraining him to yield to the Romans the Provinces of Cilicia, Syria, Phoe∣nicia, and Mesopotamia, and content himself with Armenia only; but for the present let us lay aside History. The division of Armenia, according to Ptolomy.Ptolomy divided Armenia into four principal Parts, and allotted to the first 7 Regions or Provinces, 6 to the second, 3 to the third, and 4 to the fourth: placing in the first part 30 Cities, 27 in the second, 12 in the third, and 18 in the fourth; which are in all 4 Parts, 20 Regions or Provinces, and 87 Cities. Pliny accounts 120 Strategies in Armenia, which are the Governments or par∣ticular Jurisdictions of every Province; six for each, and one as much as the other. Armenia is not only known in prophane History, but likewise in Holy Writ. After the Deluge, the Holy Scripture makes mention, that the Ark of Noah rested upon the Mountains of Armenia: to say precisely at present which they were (there being so many in Armenia) Authors cannot agree. We only conjecture, that they must be either Abus, which ends the Anti-Taurus, or the Pariardes, or the Gordons, which are the highest in all Arme∣nia; and from whence the Euphrates, the Tigris, the Phazza or Phasis, and Araxes descend. Now Euphrates is called Frat or Forat, the Tigris, Diglath or Digelath; these two names, Frat and Diglath, are found among the four Rivers, which Moses saith came forth from the Terrestrial Paradise: We must therefore seek this Paradise not far from hence; the difficulty is to find the other two Rivers, Phison, and Gihou.
The Terrestrial Paradise in Armenia.Almost all Authors conclude the Nile for Gehon, and the Ganges for Phison; but as the Bible describes these Rivers no us, they must descend from the same place; which the Tigris, the Euphrates, the Nile, and the Ganges cannot do. The Tigris and the Euphrates have some Springs, which are not far distant the one from the other; but those of Ganges are more than 200 Leagues, and those of the Nile more than 1500 Leagues from those of the Tigris or Eu∣phrates; and moreover those of Nile and of Ganges, are more than 2000 Leagues one from the other. Phasis hath its heads in the same Mountain with the Euphrates, and may therefore better answer to Phison then can the Ganges. The Araxes hath its Springs in the same Mountains with the Phasis and Euphrates, and so may better answer to the Gehon than the Nile; for as for the Gehon, or Jehun, which we now know it answers to the Oxus of the Ancients; which runs be∣tween Bactriana and Sogdiana, and discharges itself into the Caspian Sea; but it hath its Springs in Mount Caucasus in India, a little on this side the Springs of the Indus, which are likewise 8 or 900 Leagues from those of Ti∣gris and Euphrates. Since then the Tigris, Euphrates, Phazza, and Araxes, have here their Springs, we may judge that the Terrestrial Paradise was in these Mountains. The Holy Scripture saith, that it had in the midst of it a Fountain, from whence issued a River alone, which divides itself into four others, which it names Phison, Gehon, Diglath, and Fratt. It is to be believed, that this Fountain was in the midst of the World, to the end the Rivers might have a course al∣most equal to water all parts of the World. It must likewise be concluded, that this Fountain must be in some high part of the World, to the end that Ri∣vers might have an equal fall. The Mountains of Armenia are directly in the middle of our Continent: which may easily be proved by casting the eye upon the whole Continent: they are likewise the highest in the World, since they were first discovered after the Deluge, and those on which the Ark of Noah rested; and the modern names of the Rivers not being very different from the ancients, at least the three or four; I am bold to say, that if there yet remains any marks by which we may discover the place where the Terrestrial Paradise hath been, it is rather in these quarters than any other. GEORGIA. Georgia, and its parts.A Bove Turcomania, and between the Black Sea and the Caspian, as far as Mount Caucasus, lies GEORGIA; which is divided into three or four parts, Mingrelia, Avogasia, Gurgiston, and Quiria: Avogasia is some∣times comprehended under the name of Mingrelia; and on the other side a part of the ancient Armenia passeth likewise under the general name of Georgia: Mingrelia and Avogasia together, are the same with Colchis of the Ancients, or little more: Gurgiston, to the ancient Iberia, and sometimes like∣wise to that part of Armenia, which falls under the general name of Georgia: Quiria answers to the ancient Albania. The Georgians are docil, peaceable, lovers of Christianity, much addicted to drinking, and the stronger the Drink the better acceptable: At Feasts the Women never eat with the Men. They are great lovers of Onions and Herbs, are much addicted to Trade, are great Travellers, are very expert at the Bow and Arrow, and are esteemed the best Souldiers in all Asia. Its chief pla∣ces.The Cities of Phans, or Phazza, and Savatopoli, are the most famous of Mingrelia and formerly of Colchis. Savatopoli, once Sebastopolis, and be∣fore that Dioscurias had the confluence of 300 different Nations, and different Tongues, which came hither from the North, in way of Traffick. Phazza, anciently Phasis, on the River of the same name, was the abode of Aeetes, who kept the Golden Fleece, which the Argonauts took away, after having van∣quished all those difficulties which presented themselves to their hindrance.
Of the Golden Fleece.I believe that this Golden Fleece was no other thing, than a Trade of Wool, Skins, and Furrs, which all the Northern People brought to Phasis, which Jason and the Greeks, among all the People of Europe were the first Disco∣verers of: And because there was great profit, and many hazards and dangers in the first Navigations, it was feigned that the Fleece was of Gold, and that it was guarded by furious Bulls; Men well armed, and a horrible and affrightful Dragon. It may be added, That Jason with the Golden Fleece brought Me∣dea with him, which after caused so many displeasures in his Family; that is, that Riches having introduced some Luxury among the Greeks, their Women became more proud and troublesom. Places in Georgia.Cori and Bassachiuch are the best Cities of Gurgistan: Tefflis and Derbent the fairest of that part of Armenia, which passes under the name of Georgia; Bassachiuch may answer to the ancient Artamista; Cori to Harmastis, or Ar∣mactia; Tefflis to Artaxata; and Derbent to Caspiae Portae: Bassachiuch and Cori, with some other places of Gurgistan, have their Princes, of which there are many throughout Georgia; Cori is most advanced towards the Sea, and Bassachiuch more engaged with the Mountains. Tefflis and Derbent are in the hands of the Turks, as we have said in Turcomania. Country of Quiria, its Pro∣vinces, and the chief Places.QƲIRIA extends it self from the particular Georgia, which lies on the West and South unto Mount Caucasus, which bounds it on the North side. Some Authors divide it into two, others into three Provinces; of which the chief Cities are Stranu, Zitrach, and Chipicha; instead of Stranu: others put Zambanach; and instead of Zitrach, Gorgora; possibly these names are not different but to divers People, though they be the same places. However it be, Stranu, or Zambanach, answer to the ancient Albana, Metropolis of Al∣bania; Zitrach, or Gorgora, answers to the ancient Getara, which the Greek Text in Ptolomy writes Gagara, and both the places are on the Sea: they have been, and may possibly yet be, rich and Merchandizing. Chipicha is far∣ther up in the Land, and was the ancient Chabala. COMMANIA. Commania, and its bounds.A Bove Georgia lies COMMANIA, little known by the Ancients, and less at present; Mount Caucasus bounds it on the South, and separates it from Georgia; the River Don or Tana is its Northern limits, and parts it from Muscovia; the Euxine or Black Sea, and the Sea of Zabaque or Tana, doth wash it on the West, and divides it from the petty Tartars: the Caspian Sea, or the Sea of Taberestan lies to the Eastward of it, and gives it Traffick and Communication with Persia and Tartaria. Its length and breadth.This Region may have 300 Leagues of length from the Streight of Vospero unto the River Volga, which are its extream bounds from East to West, and about 100 from North to South.Its People. The People pass all under the general name of Circasses, which the Polonians call Peint Zeorstki, that is, the Inhabitants of the five Mountains. They are free, having some Chiefs or Governours, and living very near after the manner of Switzers in Europe, hiring them∣selves to War, sometimes to the Turks, their Neighbours, on the Black Sea; sometimes to the Tartars or Moscovites, which are next them on the Sea of Zabaque and River Don; and sometimes likewise to the Soldan of Persia, who is their Neighbour on the Caspian Sea. They have been Christians of the Greek Churches, but with many Superstitions; at present, for want of Teachers, many let themselves fall to Mahumetism, others to Idolatry. They are warlike, nor care they for fortifying their Towns, confiding in their Arms, and in the scituation of their Country. At their Funerals, the Rela∣tions and Friends of the Deceased scarifie their Flesh, prostrating themselves on the ground, and tear their Hair. If a man have no Children by his Wife, he may take others to raise up Issue; and Women are allowed their Gallants, and the more she hath, the more she is respected; which proceeds from her
handsomness, Beauties being admired by them; and this is no disgrace to her Husband, as amongst us: and if the Man or Woman cannot agree, they are parted. The People for the generality are of an excellent Complexion, especially the Women. All the Country People are slaves to the Lord of the Village where they live, and are employed to till his ground, and other services. its ancient People the Amazons.But the People of these Quarters have been much more famous formerly, under the name of Amazons; for this was their true and natural Country, from whence they came, and made their incursions into divers parts of Eu∣rope and Asia. They had Soveraignty in Colchida, in Albania, in Cappa∣docia, in Asia the Lesser, in Cilicia in Syria; and did in divers places build many fair Cities, as Themiscyra in Cappadocia, and on the Euxine Sea; Mir∣lea in Bithynia, and on the Propontick, Pytane, Myrina, and Cuma on the Coast of Aeolia; likewise Ephesus, Smyrna, and Pyrene: On the Coast of Ionia, (these two Quarters, Aeolia and Ionia, being on the Aegean Sea,) Mitelene in the Isle of Lesbos, and Paphos in the Isle of Cyprus, who made themselves known in those Wars they sustained against Hercules, near The∣miscyra; against Theseus, near Athens, whither they carried the War against the Greeks, before Troy, whither they went in favour of Hector, against the Persians, and other People, in divers occasions. Some of them made their abode at Themiscyra, others at Alope, which was afterwards called Ephesus; and others at Zeleja, not far from Troy. To conclude, the Ancients have spoken so many wonders of them, that the least of them have passed for Fables. It may be believed, that some Estates in these Quarters being fallen under the Government of Women, their Hus∣bands being deceased, and their Children young, or for some other reason, these Women administred the publick Affairs with so much conduct and gene∣rosity, both in Policy and War, that they excelled the greatest part of Men; from whence the Greeks, according to their ordinary custom, took occasion to speak things not only beyond the Truth, but all that came nigh to Truth. And so much for Turky in Asia.
ARABIA, which may be consider∣ed in LAND, with its three Parts, as they lie Between the RED-SEA, and Gulph of BALSERA and ORMUS; as, HYAMAN, GEMEN, or ARABIA the HAPPY. Medina, Chaibar, Algiar, Egra, Soquia, Mecca, Ziden, Nageran, Dhafar, Magara, Zerzer, Cubid, Gilan, Zibith, Sanaa, Mechlaf Atherda, Aden, Abin, Odeida, Laghi, Almacharama, Saada, Fartach, Agiaz, Caxem, Gubit, Dolfar, Pescher, Nerbante, Guebelhaman, Alibinali, Calhar, Cor, Tybi, Dayma, Curiac, Spalheiro, Cueva, Cerique, Hor, Calajaoe, Mascates, Sohar, Orfacan, Doba, Mocandon, Mirabat, Masfa, Syr, or Sour, Mascalat, Jemen, Zirisdin, Lalach, Elcatif, Bahar, Ahso, Manabon, Fararan, Jamama, Borani. Near PALESTINE, or the HOLY LAND; as, BARRAAB, or ARABIA the STONY, Madian, Medava, Sur, Thara, Herat, of old Petras, Moab, Bussereth, St. Catherine. Near CHALDEA, and the EUPHRATES; as, BERIARA, or ARABIA the DESART, Anna, Mexat-Ali, Mexat Ocem, Sumiscasac, Sukana, Faraa, Kadhema, Anna, Abadon, Tangia, Thaalabia, Remala, Maaden Alnocra. ISLES ad∣jacent, as they lie In the PERSIAN GULPH, or GULPH of BALSORA, and ORMUS; as, Baharem, Manama. Oulximi. Cori. Tome. Andrani. Quaro. In the SOUTHERN OCEAN; as, Mazira, Mazira. Curia. Muria. In the RED-SEA, or Sea of MECCA; as, Tincce. Camaran, Camaran. Decor. Zaiban. Turach. Muchi. Monte Marzoan. Genaman. Chifale. Cajas.
map of Arabia ENERALL Mapp of ARABIA, with the Red Sea and Circumiacent Lands, Designed by Monsieur Sanson. blazon or coat of arms of the Brouncker viscounts To the Rt. Honorable William Viscount Brouncker of Lyons, and Baron Brouncker of New Castle in the Kingdome of Ireland. This Mapp is humbly DD. by R.B.
ARABIA. Arabia; Its Bounds.ARABIA hath for its Eastern Limits, the Persian Gulph and Chal∣dea; for its Southern, the Ocean; for its Western, the Red Sea and some part of Egypt; and for its Northern Limits, the River Euphrates, together with some part of Palestine. Arabia, hath been well known both to the Ancients, and at present. They commonly divided it into three parts: Baraab,Its Paru. or Arabia the Stony, which lies near the Holy Land; Berjara, or Arabia the Desart, near to Chaldea and the Euphrates; Hyaman, or Gemen, or Arabia the Hap∣py, which advances it self between the Red-Sea, which separates it from Afri∣ca and the Gulph of Ormus, which divides it from Persia, into the Indian O∣cean. And this part is the greatest, the richest, and best inhabited of all. Arabia the Stony, and its chief places.Arabia the Stony hath for its chief places, 1. Petra, now called Herat, which signifies a Rock, whereon it was built with an advantagious scituation; a place of great strength, and much noted as well in prophane History as Holy Writ. 2. Bostra, now called Bsesereth, rebuilt after its former Ruins by Au∣gustus Caesar; a City of great Antiquity, and memorable for being the Birth-place of Philip, one of Alexanders Successors, who was the first of the Ro∣mans Emperours which embraced Christianity. 3. Medava, now Moab, ac∣cording to the Translation of the Septuagint; and being so, the name may be taken from Moab, Son of Lots eldest Daughter, from whence the Moabites descended, of whom mention is made in the Old Testament. 4. Berenice, so named from an Aegyptian Queen, but better known by the name of Esion-Geber; here it was that the Children of Israel did encamp; where also those Ships employed by Solomon to Ophir, did make their ordinary Harbour. 5. Sur, one of the chief Cities of the Amalekites, giving name to a Wilder∣ness there adjacent, remarkable for the great Victory which Saul gave the Amalekites, where also the Children of Israel first encamped after their passage through the Red Sea. 6. Thara, where Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, were punished: And, 7. Madian, seated towards the Red Sea, being the City of Jethro, whose Daughter Zipporah, Moses took to wife. Remarkable things here transacted.Besides these Cities there are some others, yet the Country is for the most part Desart, and is the same where the Children of Israel wandred 40 years; there, where then inhabited the Moabites, Amalekites, Midianites, Idumae∣ans, and others; there, where are the Mountains of Sinai and Horeb. The Israelites being in these Desarts, lay a whole year near this Mountain, and du∣ring that time Moses received from God the Decalogue, dedicated the Taber∣nacle, ordained a High Priest, Priests and Levites, and established Ecclesiasti∣cal and Political Laws. There is at present a Monastery of St. Katherine, built by Justinian,; and all sorts of Pilgrims are received by the Caloyers, that is, Religious Greeks which inhabit there. The Burning Bush, in which God appeared to Moses, was near Mount Horeb. The Rock which Moses struck to have Water, was of this Mount; and likewise on this Mountain it was that Moses besought God for the Israelites against the Amalekites: also Mount Hor, bordering on Idumea, where Aaron died. On the Coast of the Red Sea is the Castle Tor, a Borough or Walled Town, and a Port very famous, where it is believed, that the Israelites having passed the Red Sea, entred the Desarts this way: And it is likewise a great Passage, where the Caravans stop at their return from Mecca.
Arabia the Desart descri∣bed.ARABIA the Desart, so called by reason of the vast Sandy Desarts; and the uninhabitableness thereof, scarce affording either food for Man or Beast; so that those which travel this Country are forced to carry with them their Provision, and guide themselves to the place design'd by the help of Stars, as they do at Sea; and are forced to go in great Companies or Caravans, for fear of being robbed and rifled by the wild Arabs (who here inhabit in Tents, which they remove as occasion serveth from place to place, either for fresh Pa∣sture, or otherwise,) and yet much travelled by Merchants, who Trade into Babylonia, Egypt, and elsewhere. Some Authors have observed in the course of their Trade, that the Sandy Desarts are their Seas, the wild Arabs their Pirates, and their Camels their Ships; each Camel carrying 600 or 1000 pound weight. Its People.The People are much addicted to Theft, by which they get their chief li∣ving, being stout and warlike Men, and not Tilling the Earth, and planting Fruits, Plants, or the like; their chief food being Venison, Milk, Fowls, and Herbs. They go half naked; their Wives they hire for what time they please, who in way of a Portion bring a Tent and a Spear to their Husbands. Both Sexes are much given to Carnal lusts, and when Women are delivered of a Child, they leave it without troubling themselves with it. Its chief Ci∣ties.There are found in Arabia the Desart two Cities of the name of Anna or Anua, one on the Euphrates, and the other on the River Astan, not far from the Gulph of Balsora: this last is least famous; the other is the most conside∣rable of the Province, seated both on the one and the other Bank of the Eu∣phrates; but the greatest part and the richest is on the Arabian side. There is in all about 4000 Houses, which have been much ruined in the late Wars be∣tween the Turks and Persians. The City contains divers Isles, on one of which is a Castle. At Suskanna, a Borough upon the great Road between Anua and Aleppo, Texera saith, That the Women are as fair as Angels; if he had like∣wise said as wise, and had spoken truth, all Men from the four Corners of the World had been obliged to go to seek them. 3. Mexat Ali, that is, the Ora∣tory of Ali, had once 6 or 7000 Houses, when the Sect of Ali bore sway in those quarters: there remains at present not above 500 Inhabitants. 4. Mexat Ocem, that is, the Oratory of Ocem, is not walled, nor hath above 4000 Houses. Saba, now Simiscasac, according to the opinion of Guillandin, is the place from whence the Three Wise-men departed to go to Bethlem, to adore the Saviour of the World. This Arabia the Desart, according to some, hath divers Lords, which com∣mand it, and which for the most part are Vassals or Tributaries to the Great Turk; who holds likewise a part. But these People being more inclined to the Mahometan Sect of Ali, which is that of the Persians, than to that of Omaz, which is that of the Turks, are more affectionate to the Persians than to the Turks; and some of these Lords likewise hold of the Persians. Others give all Arabia the Desart to one King, and will have the City, or rather the Court of that Prince, to have a wonderful disposition and scituation; and that the Prince can make it all a March or Walk when and as often as he pleases, which is still by going thither where they may best find food for their Horses and Camels; and they say, that the place being chosen, they dispose the Quarters and Streets after the ordinary manner: and at the same time pitch all the Tents; that of the Prince in the midst, and the others about al∣waies in the same fashion; that part which is towards the North, South, East, or West never changing. And the Quarters and Streets have their Names and their Tents in the same form; insomuch that who once knows the order, may easily find any which inhabit therein. This moving City, or rather this Court Errant, contains not only the Militia of the Prince, which are above 2000 Men, but likewise a great number of their Nobility, Merchants, Artizans, and divers Strangers which follow this Court. Arabia the Happy bound∣ed.ARABIA the Happy is a great Peninsula, which stretcheth it self from the Mountains which divide it from the other two parts of Arabia to the O∣cean, being 3, 4, and in some places 500 Leagues long and broad. The Gulph
of Balsora, and Ormus, otherwise the Persian Gulph, washes it on the left side; the Red Sea, or Sea of Mecca, otherwise the Arabian Gulph on the right; and the Oriental or Indian Ocean, which is there called the Sea of Arabia on the Front. Its fertility and commo∣dities.Arabia the Happy may aptly be so called by reason of the fruitfulness and richness of the Soil, which produceth plenty of Corn, Wine, Fruits, Odorife∣rous Spices, great increase of Cattle; also abounding in Gold, Pearls, Balsom, Myrrhe, Frankinsence, several sorts of Drugs, together with divers useful and beneficial Commodities. Also seated in an exceeding healthful and tem∣perate Climate, and inriched with many pure and pleasant Streams and Foun∣tains, whose Waters are Medicinal. Its People.These People are very faithful and punctual in their Promises, boasting of their Nobility, as being descended from Jupiter; hating any base or mecha∣nical Art, but applying themselves, some to grasing of Cattle, and others to Merchandize. Here it is held Adultery for a Man to enjoy any Woman, save those of his own Kin, as his Sisters, Mother, Cousins, and the like; whom also they take as Wives. Here in this Country are great quantities of Ostriches, which for the most part abide in the Desarts. The Ancients mentioned a great number of different People, Cities, and Kingdoms; and we at this day find the same. The Turks possess one part, the Persians another, but much less than the Turks. The Sultan, or Xecque or Mecca, another; and divers Princes, People, and some Republicks, the rest. Its chief Places.Its chief Cities towards the Red Sea are, Medina, or Medina-Elnabi, or Talnabi, that is, the City of the Prophet; and Mecca: this last the Birth-place, that the Burial-place of Mahomet. Medina, though scituated in a bar∣ren and desolate place, adjoyning on Arabia the Stony; yet by reason of its being the Sepulchre of that vile Impostor Mahomet, is become a fair City (though not containing above 6000 Houses) being a place of great Trade and resort, by reason of the Pilgrims which hither flock to pay their blind Devotion. This Sepulchre or Tomb, wherein their Prophet lieth,Mahomets Tomb. is enclosed within an Iron-Grate, and covered with Green Velvet, having the supply of a new one every year from the Grand Signior, and the old one being the Fees of the Priests, they cut into little shreds and pieces, which they fell for great Relicks to the Pilgrims, which brings a great Revenue to them. In this Tem∣ple there are about 3000 Lamps of Gold and Silver, wherein is Balsom, and other such rich Odours, Oyntments, and Oils, which are continually kept burning. Thus much for his Tomb: now a word or two concerning his Life. He was (as I said before) born at Mecca, distant from Medina about 60 Leagues, seated also in a barren Soil; but of great resort and Traffick, abound∣ing in the Commodities of Persia and India, which from hence are trans∣ported on Camels to Egypt, Palestine, Syria, and other parts of the Turks Dominions. The City is very fair, filled with about 6 or 7000 well built Houses, having a very sumptuous Temple; the place not Walled, except by Mountains, between which there are four passages, which give entrance and issues to the City. Here it is made death for any Christian to approach within five miles. But to proceed:A story of the life and death of the Impo∣stor Mahomet. The Father of this Impostor was an Idolatrous Pagan, and his Mother as perverse a Jewess; at the age of two years he was left to the tuition of his Uncle, who after he had kept him to the age of 16 years, to quit himself of further charge and trouble, sold him to the Ish∣maelites, who in their Markets sold him again to a rich Merchant; who at first was employed about servil work, till at last the Merchant perceiving him to be of so ripe a wit and solid judgment, advanced him from his Kitchin to be his Factor, sending him with his Camels laden with Merchandize, into Egypt, Persia, Syria, and other places; in which he was so fortunate, that he gained his Master a great Estate, together with no small fame and credit to himself. He was of personage low, but comly, with which his Mistress was so much taken, that upon the death of her Husband, his Master, she soon married him, and endowed him with her wealth. He was much troubled with the Falling-sickness, which he said were Heavenly raptures, in which he had conversion
with the Angel Gabriel; he was well skill'd in Magick, by which he taught a white Pigeon which he kept to feed at his Ear, where he put Barly-corns; and this Pigeon he reported was the Holy Ghost, which instructed him in the Law he afterwards published, which was a new Religion, whereby he might bring the Jews, Gentiles, and Christians into one form of Religion; where, in a Cave not far from Mecca, with the help of Sergius a Nestorian Monk, and the aid of a certain Jew, he made the Alcoran; a Book so highly adored by them, that on the Cover is written, Let none that are unclean touch this Book, 3. Ziden, seated on the Red Sea, and in the midst of all the Coast of Arabia, serves for a Port to Mecca, from which it is distant 40 miles; well built, rich, and of great resort, which hath been walled and fortified since the Portugals have made themselves known, and are become powerful in the East. 4. Egra, by the Arabians called Algier; seated on the Red Sea, serving for a Port-Town to Medina, from which it is distant about three days Journey. Mecca, Medina, and a good part of Arabia the Happy doth belong to Xeriff, descended from Hascem, great Grandfather to Mahomet, and for this reason both the Turks and Persians do much respect him, suffering him freely to enjoy his Estates without his paying Tribute to either: for on the contrary, the Turk causeth to be given him a third part of the Revenues of Egypt, that the Pilgrims which go to Mecca may be protected against the Arabs Beduins, who by their incursions much trouble those quarters; and not only Pilgrims, but likewise Emperours, Kings, and Mahometan Monarchs, often make him great Presents. 5. Zibit, near the Mouth of the Red Sea, is fair, rich, well built, and of a good Trade in Drugs, Spices, Perfumes, &c. It was once the Seat of a Kingdom till the Turk seized it, when he did Aden, causing the King of this place to be hanged at the Yards-arm of his Ship, and the others head to be strucken off. Seated nigh the Red Sea in a large Plain, being the residence of the Turkish Beglerbeg.Aden, and its great Trade. 6. Aden is the strongest, fairest, and most pleasant City of all Arabia, enclosed with Walls towards the Sea, and Mountains to∣wards the Land. On the top of these Mountains are many Castles of a curious prospect; it hath about 6000 well built Houses, and inhabited by a miscellany of People, as Arabians, Turks, Indians, Persians, and Ethiopians, which here reside for the benefit of that great Trade, which is here driven from several parts of the World. It is scituate without the Red Sea, at the beginning of the great Ocean, and by the industry of the Inhabitants is made an Island, fortified with a strong Castle, which commands the Road. This City or Island is now become the Magazine for the Commodities of India, Persia, and Arabia. Other Cities in Arabia.Above Aden, and farther in the main Land, are many fair Cities, as Laghi, Agiaz, Almachazane, Sanaa, and others, subject to the Xecque of Mecca. Laghi is not far from the Sea; Agiaz, or Hagias, sometime gave its name to these quarters. Almachazane is seated on the top of a very high Mountain, and of a difficult access; it hath a Cistern capable to hold Water to furnish a 100000 Men: The Xecque ofttimes keeps Court here. Sane, or Sanaa, stands at the foot of a Mountain, and is one of the greatest, fairest, and strongest of Arabia, having many Vineyards, Meadows, and Gardens within its Circuit. Its Houses are well built, its Vineyards and Gardens well cultivated, its Walls 10 Cubits high, and its Ramparts 20 Cubits thick. Its Territory is watered with many Fountains, produceth excellent Fruits, and feeds the best Horses of Arabia. Kingdom and City of Far∣tach, its People and Trade.Towards the East, and almost 150 Leagues from Aden, is Fartach, a King∣dom and City near the Sea, and having a Cape of the same name. The Tar∣quins are valiant, and their King defends himself couragiously against the Turks, having seen their treatment to his Neighbours of Aden and Zibit. The Ports of Dolfar, (which is the Turks) and Pescher, are the most renowned of this Coast, and send forth the best Frankinsence of Arabia in great quan∣tity. Higher on the Coast, and farther on the Land, are the Cities and King∣doms, or as they call them, the Sultanies of Gubel haman, Alibmahi, Ama∣zirifden, and others.
Other Cities and Kingdoms.The rest of the Coast unto Cape de Raz-al-gate is very barren; from Cape de Raz-al-gate unto that of Moccandon, the Soil is the best of all Arabia; and some would here alone confine the name of Hyaman, which signifies Hap∣py. There are here many fair Cities, both on the Sea-coast and higher in the Land; one of chief Traffick between the East and Arabia the Happy, was formerly called Sohar; but this Trade was after transported to Ormus on the Persian side. In our time it was restored to the Arabian side, to wit, at Mas∣cates held by the Portugals: Sohar and Mascates are between the Capes of Raz-al-gate, and Moccandon, and are not above 20 Leagues distant from each other. Within the Land are Masfa, a City and Kingdom, Mirabat, Sour, or Lyr, and others. Beyond the Cape Moccandon, and advancing towards the Mouths of the Ti∣gris and Euphrates, among many other places we have Elcatif, or El-Catif, a famous Port, and which communicates its name to the adjacent Gulph, which the ancients called Sinus Bersicus, and we at present the Gulph of Bal∣sora and Ormus. Near Elcatif is Bahar, whose Territory is called Bahareim, or Baharem; and the Isle and City before Baharem, farther in the land, is Mascalat, a City and Kingdom; Jemen, likewise a Kingdom and: City, according to some; Lazach, or Lassach, likewise a Kingdom and City; where are of the best Horses of Arabia, as at Sanaa. Lassach, Elcatif, and some other are the Turks; Elcatif is the ancient Gerra, and that part of the Gulph nearest the City called Gerraticus Sinus, and the Isle of Barem is the ancient Tylos. There yet remains some Cities, of which some have their Kings or Sul∣tans▪ others live in Republick, which is very rare in Asia.The Arabs Bengebres, a free People. Towards the mid∣dle of Arabia are the Arabs Bengebres, a free People, and which live only of the Prey and Tribute they force from their Neighbours; yet possess they 200 or 250 Leagues of Country, and are for the most part in the Mountains. The Beduins towards Mecca are of the same nature. Bound about Arabia are a great number of Isles which belong unto it, which are dispersed either in the Southern Ocean, Red Sea, or the Persian Gulph. Arabian Isles in the Sou∣thern Ocean.In the Southern Ocean are found three Isles, which bear the name of COCCONATI, seven by the name of ZENOBII, and two by the name of Insulae AGATHOCLIS; and lastly, CƲRIA and MƲRIA, where there is found white Tortoises, whose Shells are great curiosities. In the Red Sea.In the Red Sea these Islands; 1. CANARAN, very hot, but fruitful. 2. DALAQƲA, being the largest of all, in length 125 miles, and not above 12 broad, having a City of the same name, where they gather Pearls; And, 3. and lastly, the Samaritan Islands. In the Persian Gulph.In the Persian Gulph these Islands are found: BAHAREM, the most fa∣mous, because it hath the Pearl-fishing, the best in the Oriental parts. This Isle is between Balsora and Ormus, about a 100 or 120 Leagues from Balsora, and 150 from Ormus: It is near the Coast of Arabia, and directly opposite to the Coast of Elcatif, which is the Turks; but the Isle of Baharem, which is still the Persians, once belonged to the Kingdom of Ormus. The Waters here are almost all salt; but near Manama, the Capital City of the Island, there are Springs of Fresh-water at the bottom of the Sea, which the Divers go and fetch, gathering it into Borracho's or Goats-skins, with much cunning, and bringing it forth of the Sea, do afterwards sell it. The Pearls of this Isle are very much esteemed, both for their largeness and roundness; and this fishing is yearly worth 500000 Ducats, besides the value of 100000 and more, which is diverted. Those of the Isle of GIONFA are of no great value: those of the other neighbouring Isles are less; except it be at MASCATES, 60 Leagues from Ormus. They fish here all June, July, and August; if they begin sooner the Pearls are unripe, and not hard enough. The Air of all Arabia is very healthful, but not; nor Rains it in some places above twice or thrice in 3 or 4 years: but the abundance of the Dew makes their Fruits excellent.
The People of Arabia; their Manners, &c.The People for the most part are of a mean stature, lean, swarthy complexi∣oned, effeminate voices, very swift of foot, and expert in the Bow and Dart. They first exercise themselves in Manufactures, using all sort of Trade and Traffick far off; and some addict themselves to Learning, particularly to Phi∣losophy, Physick, the Mathematicks, and to Astrology; there have been amongst them many Grammarians, Rhetoricians, Historians, and Interpreters of the Alcoran, which is in their Tongue, and which hath made the Arabick Lan∣guage spread itself through all the East, at least in the most Southerly parts of Asia, and part of Africa, but little in Europe. Those which range the Country are great Wanderers, and greater Thieves; they are divided into many Families, which know each other, and how to di∣stinguish the one from the other. Every Family, how numerous soever it be, hath a principal Xecque, that is, a Chief, which conducts and commands them, they living almost in the same manner as the 12 Tribes of Israel did in the Desarts: They preserve a good Intelligence amongst themselves, their chief design being only upon Strangers. They assault likewise the Caravans, if they think themselves able enough to master them, or snatch any thing from them. Their Horses commonly are little, lean, and sparing Feeders; yet couragious, swift, and of great labour: They are so skilful in managing them, that they command them as they please; and themselves are so active, that at full speed they will shoot an Arrow within the breadth of a Shilling, take from the ground those Arrows they have shot, and avoid an Arrow flying directly to∣wards them; nor do they manage less skilfully the Sling, either in charging, retiring, or flying. The first rise of Mahometism.Mahomet came not into the World till about the year 570 after Christ, and began not to publish and shew abroad his Doctrine till a little after the year 600; a Doctrine intermixed with Christianity, Judaism, and Paganism, that he might draw both the one and the other; and which established its principal end in Delights, carnal and sensual Pleasures, whereto the Oriental People were very much inclined; and withal he found the means to make use of Arms for the establishment of this Doctrine; his Califs or Successors in a short time carried their Government and Religion into the best parts of Asia and Africa, and into some places of Europe. Its People are almost all Mahometans. There are some Greek Christians to∣wards the Mounts of Sinai and Horeb; likewise towards the Red Sea, and in the Desarts of Arabia the Stony, and Arabia the Desart. Arabia the Happy is unhappy in having the fewest; yet the Portugals hold Mascates, Calasates, and some places about it, which are Catholicks.
PERSIA, or the Em∣pire of the SOPHY of PERSIA, with its se∣veral Pro∣vinces, as they lie Towards the CASPIAN Sea, or Sea of BACCU and SALA, which makes the Northern part of PERSIA; and are those of Servan, Tauris, Sammachi, Servan, Ardevil, Serga, Bacca, kera. Gilan, Rast, Gaxhar, Mazandaran, Layon, Mosun, Gilan, Cassabi, Gadiour. Dilemon, Allamoed, Dilemon, Thalekan. Tabarestan, Aerad, Zar, Magn. Gorgian, Gorgian, Oboen, Daregan, Semnan. Rhoemus, Bestan, By, Zabrawar, Thous, Masndn, Feraway. In the MIDDLE; to wit, those of Churdistan, Naksivan, Merend, Choy, Maraga, Salmas, Ourmaya, Cormaba. Ayrack, or Yerack-Age∣mi, Hispahan, Casbin, Saltania, Dankane, Hamadan, Hrey, Sauwa, Kom, or Com, Kargh, Cassian, Yesd. Chorasan, Thabs Gilack, Kayem, Thon, Zuzan, Mexat, Nichabour, Zarchas, Firabad, Maruwe, Bonregian, Balch, Herat. Sablestan, Zarang, Bost, Necbesaet, Gisna-Cassaby. Tocharestan, — Thaalan. Candahar, — Candahar. Patanes, — Grees. Bach, — Balch. Towards the South, and washed by the ARA∣BIAN, or INDIAN Ocean; and by the Gulph of BALSORA and ORMUS; and are those of Chusistan, Souster, Askar Moukera, Ardgan, Hawecz, Ramhormoz, Siapour, Saurac. Fars, Chiraef, Aftackar, Lar, Darabegred, Stahabonon, Gombroun. Kherman, Cherman, Girost, Zirgian, Mocheston, Guadel, Nahyan, Patanis. Sigistan, — Sistan. Mackeran, Mackeran, Basir. Together with several ISLES, as they lie in the Gulph of BALSORA, and nigh unto PERSIA; the chief among which are, Ormus, — Ormus. Queixome. Pulor. Coyar. Ficor. Lar. Mulugan. Garge.
PERSIA. THe Kingdom or Empire of the Sophy of the PERSIANS is one of the most famous and greatest of all Asia; it extends it self from the Tigris and Euphrates on the West, almost to the River Indus on the East; and from the Gulph of Persia and the Arabian and Indian Sea, which bounds it on the South, unto the River Gehon, and to the Caspian Sea, now the Sea of Baccu, or Tabarestan, which are its Northern limits;The extent, bounds, scitua∣tion, &c. of Persia. so containing about 600 Leagues of length, and 500 of breadth, being seated under the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth Climats. Nevertheless this is but a part of the ancient Empire of the Persians; for the Assyrians having ordinarily held in Asia all that which both Turk and Persian at present possess; and that Monarchy having begun under Ninus, and lasted under thirty and odd Kings 13 or 1400 years, ending in Sardanapalus, divided itself into that of the Medes and Babylonians, who continued it little less than 300 years, afterwards the Persians made themselves Masters of it: and these during 200 and odd years, which they Reigned, remitted to it the best part of what the Medes and Babylonians had possessed. But when they would have passed into Europe, and have seized on Greece, the Macedonians and Greeks leagued themselves together,The Persian Empire for∣merly much larger than now it is. and naming Alexander King of Mace∣don their Chief, descended into Asia, several times defeated Darius, ruined the Empire of the Persians, and gave a beginning to that of the Mace∣donians. Alexander the Great held this Empire but few years, and dying, it was di∣vided among many of his Captains; who took in the end the title of Kings, and waged War against each other, till the Romans seized the Western, and the Parthians the Oriental part of that Monarchy; these Parthians freed them∣selves from the Rule of the Macedonians 250 years before the Birth of Jesus Christ, and Reigned near 500 years. Artaxerxes restored the Persians 228 years after Christs Nativity. The Caliphs of Bagdat became Masters about the year 650. The Tartars in 1257, or 58. The Turcomans in 1478. Xa, or Xecque Ismael-sophy re-established the Persians, a little after the year 1500; and though they possess only the Oriental part of the ancient Empire of the Persians, yet it is still very great and powerful. The several Parts, or Re∣gions of Persia.And we find at present under it, all that the Ancients knew under the names of Media, Hircania, Margiana, Assyria in part, Parthia, Aria, Paraponisa, Chaldea, or Babylonia in part, Susiana, Persia, Caramania, Drangiana, Ara∣chosia, and Gedrosia; all these Regions taken apart being great, fair, rich, and populous. The Province of Servan.The Province of SERVAN hath for its principal City, 1. Tauris, being the Summer-Seats of the Persian Sophies, containing in Circuit about 16 Miles, and including above 150000 Inhabitants, before its being so often taken, and re∣taken by the Turks and Persians. It is strongly fortified, seated about six days Journey from the Caspian Sea, in a cool and wholsom Country, and encom∣passed with several great Towns of note, famous for their Manufactories. The People in this part being more addicted thereunto, than unto the Sword. The Commodities that are here found,Its Commodities. are Silk, raw, and in several Manu∣factures; Cottons, Wool, Galls, Alum, some Spices and Drugs, with several other Commodities. 2. Sammachi; And, 3. Servan, once both the Metropolis
map of Persia blazon or coat of arms of the Courtenay baronetcy To ye Right Worshipfull Sr: William Courteney of Powderham Castle in Devonshire Bart. This Mapp is Hu-mbly didicated by RB A MAPP OF THE EMPIRE OF THE SOPHIE OF PERSIA, WITH ITS SEUERALL PROUINCES. Designed by Moncr. Sanson Geographer to ye French King.
Metropolis of this Province, abounding in Silk and excellent Carpets, to which the People are wholly addicted. 4. Ardevil, was the Signory and Birth-place of Xeque Aidaz, Father Ismael-sophy, who restored this Empire to the Per∣sians about the year 1500. Here are many Tombs of the last Kings of Persia. 5. Bocca, a place of so great trade, that the Caspian Sea oft takes its name: Near the City there is a Spring of Black Oil, which serves to burn throughout all Persia. Province of Gilan, and its chief places, &c.The Province of GILAN, or GƲEYLAN, contains five Governments, of which the chief Cities are Rast, Gaxhar, Layon, Gilan, Mosun, and Gadiour, besides about 30 fair and rich Cities; Mazandaran, which some separate from, others joyn to Gilan, hath in its Government 25 Cities, and in the City of Mazandaran about 50000 Souls. All these quarters would have revolted in 1594. but Xa Abbas soon brought them to their duty, and chastised them for their offence. Province of Dilemon.The Province of DILEMON hath its Metropolis of the same name; then Allamoed, Gowar, and Thalekan. In the description that those of the Country give us of these places, Allamoed seems to answer to Dilemon. Province of Tabarestan.The Province or TABARESTAN extends more than 60 Leagues on the Coast of the Caspian Sea, which is often called TABARESTAN from the name of this Province. It stretches 100 Leagues up the Land, containing in its Territory 12 fair Cities; of which Asterabad, or Starabat, which hath something of common with the name of the Province, is the principal; then Maglasen, Zariach, and others: this Country affords quantity of Silk. Province of Gorgian.The Province of GORGIAN touches not the Sea, the chief City is of the same name; then Obscoen, Damegan, and Semnan. Gorgian answers to the ancient Hircania Metropolis. Province of Rhoemus.The Province of RHOEMƲS is in the East of TABARESTAN and GORGIAN: Its chief Cities are, 1. Bestan; then 2. Beyad; 3. Zab∣awer; and 4. Thous, higher in the Land; 5. Feraway; 6. Masinon, and others toward the Sea and Mouth of the River Gehon. Nassir Eddin, that excellent Mathematician, was a Native of Thous, who drove Mustalzin from his Caliphat or dignity of Babylon, because Mulstalzin had demanded of him, Where were his Horns. So dangerous it is to mock a man of Spirit and Courage. The City of Thous is esteemed very considerable, being large, and encompassed with a noble Wall, adorned with stately Structures, and among others with about 200 or 300 Towers, distant from one another a Musquets∣ot. It is famous for the stately Sepulchre of Iman Risa of the Family of Ali, one of the Twelve Persian Saints, where great Devotions and Ceremo∣ies are performed by them, which brings in a great Revenue to this City. Province of Churdistan.The Province of CHƲRDISTAN is divided into three Parts or Pro∣vinces, of which Salmas is the chief City of the first, Maraga of the second, nd Cormaba of the third. Besides which there are a great number of fair Cities, as 1. Nakziovan, 2. Choy, 3. Guienche, &c. Salmas is near the Salt-Lake of Kannudhan, which yields Fish only at a certain time of the year. This City hath under its Jurisdiction 20 other strong and fair ones; yet is not without those wandring People which live under their Tents. Maraga is  or 4 days Journey from Tauris, 5 or 6 from Salmas. Near Maraga the Per∣ans were defeated by the Sarazens, about the year 650, and their Monarchy ell into the hands of the Califfs. Cormaba is on the East of Tigris, and not at from Bagdad and Mosul. Its Inhabitants are esteemed the true Curdes, as good at incursions as the Arabs, who lose nothing they can catch. Near Choy are the Calderonian Champains (of Chelder,) renowned for the Battle between Selim, Emperour of the Turks, and Ismael Sophy of the Persians; where this last, who had till then almost always been Victor, was defeated and lost a great Battel; and after it Tauris, where was his wife Tallucanum and his Treasures: but whilst he prepared new Forces, the Turks retired to Amasia. At Guienche, formerly a City and a Kingdom, contains likewise 7 or  fair Cities, the Can Caidogli caused to be builded one of the fairest and strongest Towers that is in Persia; besides the Stone, making use of the Heads
of 540000 Turks, which he had defeated in those quarters, and which he caused to be bruised among the Morter. Province of Ayrack, its Commodities, &c.The Province of AYRACK is the fairest and richest of Persia. The So∣phies have for sometime past made here their residence; formerly at, 1. Cas∣bin, at present at. 2. Hispahan, which are two great Cities; 3. Cassian, 4. Ha∣madan, 5. Dankana, 6. Sauwa, 7. Com, 8. Yesd, 9. Soltania, 10. Hrey, 11. Cochera, 12. Kargh, with several others, are likewise very fair. Near Hrey is gathered excellent Manna. Soltan hath great quantity of the fairest Fountains, and takes its name from the Soltans, which sometimes resided here. Yesd yields the richest and fairest Tapestries in the World. Near this City, and on the Mountain Albors, there are yet some worshippers of Fire, which have used it above 3000 years. Hamadan hath born the title of a Kingdom, and had 15 Cities under it. Casian produceth many Silk and Cotton Manufactures, and hath drawn to it all the Traffick that was at Com, not suffering any Vaga∣bonds or Beggars. Com hath been as great as Constantinople; but Tamerlain having ruin'd it, it could never regain its splendor. The Inhabitants addict themselves to labour in their Vineyards and Gardens. Its Bridge is of Stone, and the fairest in all Persia. Casbin was the residence of Xa-Thamas, when the Turks had taken Tauris: Some esteem it the ancient Arsacia, others Ec∣batana. It is not well built, but great, and filled with no less than 100000 Souls; its fair Palace, its many Bazars, and its Atmaiden, are remarkable. Bazars are places or great Streets, where there are but one sort of Merchants; the Atmaiden, or greater Market, which is about a mile in Circuit. Hispahan the chief City of Persia.Hispahan, the Metropolitan City of the Persian Monarchy, seated in the Parthian Territory, which in its scituation is pleasant and delightful; in its Soil, fruitful, and well watered by the River Sindery; in its Air, serene and healthful; and for bigness, is now become the greatest City in all Persia, whose Walls are in circumference a reasonable days Journey. Its buildings, which are many, (scarce containing less than 75000 Houses) are proud and elegant, and was said to be once so populous, that it gave entertainment to 500000 Inhabitants. But after a certain Revolt, (for which they were severely chastised by the command of the Prince) it hath not had so great a quantity of People; yet it is exceeding populous, and much frequented by Strangers; rich in Trade, eminent for all sorts of Exercise, and more magnificent as being the residence of the Sophy of the Persians, who had here built divers Palaces, which are inhabited by his Nobles; so rich and stately, with Gardens so de∣lightful and magnificent, that not the industry of man, nay, scarce his thought can comprehend or imagine any thing more beautiful. This City, besides its Walls, is fenced about with a Ditch, and defended by a strong Castle. The chief buildings are the Palaces, the Mosques, the Hummums or Hot-houses, and the Mydan or Market-place, which without dispute is the fairest, richest, and noblest Building in the World, being about 1000 Places in length, and 200 in breadth: The inside resembles our Exchange, being filled with Shops, where all sorts of rich Commodities are vended; and sustained by Arches; and below, furnished with such things, both for Food and Rayment, as the Coun∣try affordeth.Its Palaces and Seraglio's, ex∣ceeding stately and delightful. On the West-side are seated two stately Palaces or Seraglio's, for the King and his Ladies, far exceeding in state and magnificence all other the proud Buildings in this City; the Walls being of Red Marble, and pargetted with divers colours, and the whole Palace paved with fretted and Checkered work, over which it is spread with stately Carpets; the Windows are made of Alablaster, and white and spotted Marble; and the Posts and Wickets of massy Ivory, checkered with glittering Ebony, so curiously wrought in wind∣ing knots, that it may sooner stay than satisfie the eyes of the Beholder. To which stately Structure there is joyned a no less pleasant, and delightful Gar∣den, wherein are no less then 1000 several Fountains, Brooks, and Rivolets, furnished with store and variety of curious Fruits, together with what else may make a place delightful. The great place of the City is before the Palace, where the Sophy ordinarily resides. The Fruits in and about this City are the best in the World; their Vines yield in nothing to those of the Canaries:
Their Horses and Mules are fair and good; their Camels so strong, that they carry almost twice as much as those of other places. They have permitted in this City some Monasteries of Christians, as of Carmelites, Augustine Fryars, Capuchins, and others. The Inhabi∣tants of this Ci∣ty negotiate their affairs on Horse-back Hispahan and its Commodi∣ties.The Inhabitants do all their affairs on Hors-back, as well publick as private, in the buying and vending of their Commodities. But the Slaves never ride, which makes the difference betwixt them. This City being the residence of the Sophy, and being inhabited by so many eminent persons, which always at∣tend this Monarch, makes it to have a great Trade, and be much frequented by Merchants almost from all places; as English, Dutch, Portugals, Arabians, Indians, Turks, Jews, Armenians, &c. whereby it is furnished, not only with all the Native Commodities of Persia, as Gold and Silver, Raw Silk, in such great quantity, that they furnish most part of the East; as also other places, some Drugs and Spices, Wine, Fruits, &c. Also sundry curious Manufactures, as, Carpets, Arras-work, Hangings, &c. Cloth of Gold and Silver, Fine Cotton Cloths, with several other Commodities which are here made; but also with those of Arabia, India, China, and Turky, which hither are brought in exchange for theirs, by Caravans or Camels, Dromedaries, and Mules, by reason they want the benefit of the Sea. They had formerly the benefit of several good Ports, as, Tauris and Balsora, but now in the custody of the Grand Seignior, toge∣ther with some others: The Ports that they now enjoy, and make use of, are Ormus and Jasques. In this City is erected a Column or Pillar, composed of the Heads or Skulls of Men and Beasts, being about twenty foot in circumfe∣rence at the Basis, and exalting it self near sixty foot in height. Now the rea∣son of erecting of this terrible and horrid Column and Monument, was this. The People surfeiting with Luxury, through their Pride and Impudence, denied their duty to their Soveraign, not only in refusing to contribute a small sum of money (being towards the extirpation of the Turks and Tartars, who did much annoy the Kingdom) but also audaciously opposed his entrance; where∣upon he vowed revenge: And having made a forcible entrance, in his rage fired a great part of the City, pillaged each House, and in two days, he put to the Sword near 30000; and to terrifie others, erected a Column or Pillar of their Heads. Province of Chorazan, its chief Cities & Commodities, &c.The Province of CHORAZAN, is the greatest of all Persia; some di∣vide it into Cohazan, Chorazan, and Chowarazan, which others esteem to be the same. It hath every where a great number of brave Cities, as, Kahen on Kayem, which yields great store of Saffron. 2. Thou abounds in Silk Manu∣factures. 3. Mesched or Mexat, is the chief of Chorazan, and shews the Tombs of many Persian Kings. It is about twelve miles in compass, and hath about 100000 Inhabitants. Its Territory is fertile, its Inhabitants well made, strong, and warlike. 4. Herat is likewise called Salgultzar; that is. The Ci∣ty of Roses; it producing greater quantities then any City, in the World be∣sides. It yields likewise Rhubarbe and Vines, which last a long time; and so much Silk, that there are sometimes 3 or 4000 Camels loaden in one day. 5. Ni∣chabour so near to Rhoemus, that some conceive it belonging to it; others make it a particular Province: The City hath been much better peopled then now it is. Tamerlane here, and hereabouts, put to death in one day about 400000 persons. 6. Bouregian, is near a great Lake of the same name. This Lake receives many Rivers, but like the Caspian Sea, sends not one to the Ocean. But let us return to the more Southerly parts of Persia; we will say nothing here of Yerack, since the Turk at present holds it, with several others. Province of chusistan, its chief places, &c.The Province of CHƲSISTAN, answers to the Ancient Susiana, the Soyl is so fruitful, that it often yields 100 or 200 for one. Its Cities are Souster, Ardgan, Hawecz, Asker-Moukeran, and others. 1. Souster is the Ancient Susa. Here the Prophet Daniel had the Vision concerning the determination of the Persinn Monarchy, and the beginning of the Grecian; and where Aha∣suerus kept his great Feast, which continued 183, days, for his Princes and Lords, imitated to this day by the Sultans of Persia, who do annually enter∣tain their Nobles, where Ahasuerus kept his Court, when Esther demanded
grace, in favour of the Jews; andt here where Mordecai was exalted to the place and charge of Haman, who was hanged on the same Gibbet which he prepared for Mordecai.The Persians observe great Feasts. It is held, that the ancient Palace was built by Mem∣non (Son of Tithonus, who in the Trojan Wars was slain by the Thessalans,) of the spoyls of the Great Thebes in Egypt; and that with such expence and magnificence, that the stones were bound together with Gold; but whether this be true or false, without doubt, it was very rich; for it is said, that Alex∣ander found here 50000 Talents of uncoyned Gold, besides Silver Wedges and Jewels of an inestimable value. This City is of about 25000 paces in circum∣ference, and is the residence of the Sophy in the Winter season. 2. Ardgan a fair City, on the borders of this Province, and not far from Hispahan. 3. Hawecz called by the Arabian of Nubia, Ahuaz, and made chief of the Cities of Chu∣sistan, which he calls Churdistan. He places next to it Askar-Mocran, alias Askar-Moukeran, on the River Mesercan, where there was a Bridge suppor∣ted by twenty Boats. 4. Tostar with a River of the same name. And 5. Sau∣rac with some other. The heats in these parts, in the Summer season, are so great, especial∣ly towards the South part of the Mountain; that the Inhabitans are forced to forsake the Cities, and retire themselves into the Mountains for cool∣ness. Province of Fars, its chief places, fertility &c.The Province of FARS or FARC, formerly Persia, now a particular Province, hath a great number of large, rich, and beautiful Cities. As 1. Chirdef, which is said to be about 20000 paces in circumference; where some∣times the Sophy hath made his residence, scituate in a large and pleasant Plain, well built, and beautified with fair Gardens, and magnificent Mosques. Two of which are larger than the rest, and beautified with two Spires or Steeples, covered with a painting of Gold and Azure: These Mosques, by reason of 1000 Lamps which are kept burning, are as light by night, as by day. This City for its good Wine, pleafant Fruits, gallant People, and above all, for its pritty Women, may compare with the best in all Persia. The Ladies here are so fair and pleasant, that Mahomet passing through these quarters, would not enter this City for fear lest he should lose himself in its delights. The Soyl is very good, and Mastick is gathered in its Forests. The Arms they make here, are excellent. 2. Astachar was one of the greatest of these quarters, as like∣wise in the time of the Arabian of Nubia. The ruines of its Castle Chilminare, shew the remains of the ancient Palace that Alexander the Great burned, at the solicitation of the Curtisan Thais. At the taking of which City, Alex∣ander for his share found 120000 Talents of ready money, besides the Plate, Images of Gold and Silver, and Jewels of a vast value: But its beauty did sur∣pass it riches, having its Royal Palace built on a Hill, environed with a treble Wall; the first in height sixteen cubits; the second 30; and the third 60: All of them of Black polished Marble, with stately Battlements, on which were 100 Turrets. Nor was the outside more stately than the inside, which was built with Cyprus Wood, and beautified with Gold, Silver, Ivory, Amber, and such like. 3. Lar or Laar, hath been the chief of a Kingdom, and giveth name to the Larins, Pieces of very good Silver which they coyn. 4. Near Stahabonon, a pritty Town, the Momnaki-Koni, that is, the precious Momy is drawn out of a Rock; but it is onely gathered for the Sophy, who careful∣ly keeps it: Being a most assured counter-Poyson or Antidote, and an excellent Salve against all Cuts or Ruptures, even within the body. Bezar comes like∣wise from this quarter. 5. Chabonkera. 6. Darabegerd: and 7. Baesd, are on the confines of Fars and Kerman. Some esteem them under the Province of Fars, others under that of Kerman; others make that a particular Province, which takes its name from the first of them, and which certainly is the great∣est and the fairest. Darabegerd, as I believe, is the Valasegerd of the Arab, and the ancient Pasagardae; there, where sometime resided, and where was the Tomb of Cyrus, who here by this place defeated Astyages, the last King of the Medes, And 8. Gombrone, seated on the Gulph of Persia, a fair Town, well frequented; and where the English, Dutch, and Portugals, keep
their Factories for the benefit and support of the Trade; this place being now the Scale of Trade for all Persia (as was formerly Ormus and Jasques, being at present of little use.) Province of Kherman, its Commodities, chief places, &c.The Province of KHERMAN, of old Caramania, is one of the greatest, but not one of the best of Persia; yet they send forth several Commodities, as Steel, Tarquesses, Rose-water, Tutty, Bourbatan, Hebe, or Kilworm, of which they make the Confection Alkermes, Sarmack, which are black and shi∣ning Stones, which cures sore eyes, and paints black. Carpets the best in Per∣sia, after those of Yesed (those of Chorazan hold the third degree.) Arms which the Turks buy at any rates, and Scimitars, which will cut a Head-peece without blunting the edge. The Country is somewhat uneven and Mountai∣nous, which causeth barrenness; but the Vallies are very fertil and delightful, every where adorned with Flowers, and especially Roses, of which they make a great Revenue. Amongst its Cities, which are many, 1. Cherman, which communicates its name to the Province, makes a great quantity of Cloth of Gold and Silver; As also those Scimitars aforementioned. 2. Zirgian. 3. Nahyan, and others, are likewise in some reputation; but the Coast of Ormus is of great esteem, after it Mochestan.The Isle and City of Ormus with its Trade and Commo∣dities. 4. The City of Ormus is seat∣ed in an Isle at the Mouth of the Gulph of Persia, being in compass about 20 miles; the City well built, and strongly fortified, seated at one end of the Isle, be∣ing in compass about two miles, adorned with a fair Market place, and some Churches; famous throughout the World for the great Trade, there negoti∣ated; but of itself, exceeding barren, and only composed of Salt Rocks, of which their Houses and Walls are made; and in the Summer, is found so excessive hot, that the Inhabitants are forced to ly and sleep in Wooden Cisterns made for the purpose, and filled with Water, where both the Men and Women ly naked up to their Chins. In this Island there is no fresh Water; but what they fetch from other places there adjoyning, which they keep in Cisterns; from whence they likewise get other Provision for their Food, be∣ing seated not above 12 miles from the Continent. The Commodities that are here found, are the rich Gems and Spices of India; The Tapistries, Carpets, &c. of Persia; the Grograms, Mohairs, and Chamblets, of Turky; the Drugs of Arabia, &c. The People hereof, in their Religion,The People of Ormus. in their per∣sons and habit, have something of the Arabians in them, but more of the Persians. 5. Mochestan is the ordinary residence of the Kings of Ormus, because it is cool, its Waters excellent to drink, and its Land fruitful in Corn and Fruits, which is not found in the Island. 6. Guadell: and 7. Patanis, are the most famous Ports of the Coast. Province of Sablestan.The Province of SABLESTAN, inclosed with Mountains, between Chorazan and Khermon; it answers to Caramania Deserta; yet it hath many Cities and inhabited places, amongst others, Zarany towards Khermon. 2. Bost. 3. Nechesaet, and 4. Gisna-Cassaby, towards Chorazan. Some place here Bala∣san, from whence come the Balais Rubies. Province of Sigistan, Sistan, Candahar, and Mackeran.The Province of SIGISTAN, SISTAN, or SAGESTAN; PATANES, CANDAHAR, and MACKERAN, are the most Easterly Provinces of all Persia, and nearest the mouth of the Indus. Sistan is the chief City of Sigistan; Mackeran of Mackeran, which is seated on the Sea; and also Basir, which seems to keep its ancient name Parsis. The River Ilmenel, wa∣ters all these Provinces, and falls into the Indian Ocean, not far from the Gulph of Indin. Also Grees is the chief of Patanes, and Candahar of Candahar. The Neigh∣bors of the Persians.These are the Estates of the Persians, and we are to observe, that his prin∣cipal neighbours are, the Turks on the West, the Tartars on the North, the Mogols on the East, and the Portugals on the South, in and about the Gulf of Ormus. These last cannot deprive him of any great part, their design be∣ing only to maintain their commerce in the Indies, yet they cease not to per∣plex him on the Sea; and have divers times taken and retaken Ormus from him. The Mogols; the Tartars, and the Turks, are troublesom neighbours unto him, and oft times his Enemies; because they are powerful and capable to seise on whole Provinces; which he recovers rather by strength, then otherwise:
For it must be confessed, that the Persians are more Active in their Arms, then all their Neighbours, except the Portugals: And they are likewise e∣steemed more courteous to strangers, more civil in their conversation, and more exact in their Policy and Government,The Persians much different from the Turks. then all the Mahometans. And if we would compare the manners of the Turks, with those of the Persians, we should find a great difference, and often much contrariety: For the Persians are courteous to strangers, the Turks abusive: The Persians esteem study, the Turks neglect it: The Sophies of the Persians hold in honor, their Brothers and Kinsmen, the Turks oft put them to death: The Persians have amongst them great quantity of Nobles, the Turks make account of none but the Officers sent them from the Port: The Persians have the Cavalry, the Turks the better Infantry: both the one and the other are Mahometans, but they explain their Alcoran so diversly, that that alone is capable to carry them to the ruine of one or the other Empire, if they could effect it; and it seems, that the disposition of the one, and the other estate is very different, caused by their contrary manners, which makes them follow Maxims quite different from one another. The Empire of the Turks is divided into many parts, cut asunder by several Seas, one upon the neck of another, and bygre at navigable Rivers; as the Danube in Europe; the Nile in Africa, and the Euphrates in Asia; which gives it great advantages, both for Trade, and the transport of its Forces; Whilst the Empire of Persia, consisting of an entire and solid Mass, full of Mountains in the middle of the Countrey; few navigable Rivers, and those which are distant one from the other, and falling into divers Seas, that they can have no communication one with another. Trade cannot be commodious, but abroad; and if they have occasion to transport any Troops from one Coast to a∣nother,The Persian forces consists in Cavalry. it cannot be done without the expence of much time and pains: And it is for this reason, the Persians serve themselves more of Cavalry, who at a need, are able to put into the field One hundred thousand Horse, and they have for the most part ready, 30, 40 or 50000: They entertain little Infantry, and those for the most part are strangers. The Empire of Persia of a dif∣ferent Soyl.The Empire of PERSIA, is of a large, and of so different a nature, as one would not take it to be the same, being in some places very barren, cold, and comfortless, scarce affording either Food for Man or Beast, as are the North parts which ly betwixt Mount Taurus, and the Hircanian-sea, whereas Southerly it is very fruitful, the Soil rich, affording plenty of Corne, Wine, and all things neces∣sary for the use of man, being pleasant, full of rich Pastures which are stored with abundance of Cattle, the Country watred with streams. The Persians are of a low stature,The People of Persia, and their habits. yet have great limbs, and strong, they are of an Olive colour complexion, hawked nos'd, and black hair'd, which they shave every eight days, and those which have not black hair naturally, by art make it so, as being in great esteem amongst them, they paint their hands and nails of a reddish colour. In their habit they follow much of the Turks, their clothes have no proportion to their bodies, hanging loose and large, much in the fashion of the Womens; their Mendits, by the Turks called Turbants, are made of Cotton, Cloth or Silk, Stuff, which is fine and of several colours, which they wear on their heads, as we do Hatts, many of them wear them of Red, but the Priests, as also his other Garments are white, their Garments they girt about their waists with a Scarf; under these Garments they wear breeches like our drawers, their stockings are for the most part made of Cloth without any shape in them their shoes are picked toed, and like slippers; by reason of their often putting them off and on, not wearing them in Houses. The Women wear much finer Stuffs then the men, and have nothing to ty about their waists, their drawers, stock∣ings, and shifts are like those of the men; they wear their hair loose about their shoulders in several tresses, having no other Ornament except it be 2 or 3 rows of Pearls, which they fasten to their fore-head, and so hangs down on each side of their face to be fastned to their chin; the young Maids wear rings, and brace∣lets about their hands and armes, also rings with precious stones in their right nostrills, as the Tartarian Women do. The Women in the Streets goe with while Vails over their faces, down to their knees. The People in this Na∣tion
as well Men as Women, according to their degrees in honour, or riches do exceed in costly habits, in which they are exceeding neat and curious, not admitting so much as a spot upon their Clothes, which neatness they like wise observe in their Houses, which are for the most part well furnished; as also in their meats and drinks, which are excellent, delightful and curious. They are great dissemblers, and much addicted to ill language if provoked to it. They are of a good nature, and very sensible of kindness done to them; but where they hate, are mortal enemies: They are couragious and good Souldiers, great haters of Cowards; very ingenious, of a ready Witt, and sound Judg∣ment, much addicted to reading several Authors, which tend to the knowledg of Poetry, Philosophy, the Law, Medicine, several of the Mathematicks,Their manners dispositions, &c. as Arithmetick, Geometry, Astronomy, and its influences, as Astrology, which they give much credit unto. These and the like Arts and Sciences are studied and taught young Students at several Colledges and Ʋniversities, by expe∣rienced persons in the same, who there reside. They are very ingenious in Fire and Water-works, are great lovers of their pleasure, in several recreati∣ons, as Hawking, Hunting, Riding a tilt, &c. they are very complemen∣tory, obliging, and curteous, especially to strangers, not addicted to cove∣tousness, usury being forbidden amongst them; they are generally much given to Luxury, not contenting themselves with several Wives, but must also have the use of Concubines, which is allowed them; they are also given to Sodomy, but Adultery they severely punish. When a young man desires to marry, and hath heard of a maid as he thinks he can love, he hath some of his friends to treat with her parents or friends about it; for the maid is not to be seen, and if they agree, then they proceed to Articles,Their Marri∣ages. which is to be performed by the friends of the Bridegroom, it not being there the custom for the man to receive a portion with her, as it is here with us, but contrarily, the Dower which by both of their friends is agreed on, he either sends unto her two or three days before the consummation of the Marriage, which is either in Money or Goods, as a recompence to her Parents or Kindred, for their care in her education; or else engages to pay her if in case a Divorce should happen, which is usual amongst them upon a dislike or disagreement, as being allowed of by their Law, this done their Agents, in the name of the betrothed couple, go to their Priests or Ecclesi∣astical Judge, who being satisfied that it is done by the mutual consent of their friends, marries them by the said Agents, but very privately: the Marriag day being agreed upon, the Bridegroom sends his Bride several toyes, as Pendants, Bracelets, Rings or the like Ornaments; also several dishes of meat, for the en∣tertainment of her friends and relations; who about the evening brings the Bride to the Bridegroom, being mounted on a Horse, Mule or Camel, being cove∣red with a Vail of Crimson Taffety, over her face down to her knees, and accom∣panied all the way with Musick, and being entred the Mosque, the Muloy de∣mands their liking; then the Bride requireth three things, viz. Bed-right, Food and Rayment; and the Parents having declared their consent, the Priest encir∣cles them with a cord, conjoynes their hands, takes a reciprocal Oath, and calls Mahomet to witness, which ended the Caddi enrolls their names, with the day of the month, year and hour of the day of their Nuptial, and so dismisses them; and being come to the Bridegrooms House, they take her off, and lead her into a room where she and her friends sup, the Bridegroom and his friends being in a∣nother room, and after supper is ended, they conduct her to another room where she is to ly, to which the Bridgroom is soon brought, where he receiveth his first sight of her, the campany with-drawing themselves out of the room, he falls to his embracing her, and after the first enjoyment of her, he leaves her, and goeth to his friends, to spend some hours in their company; if he finds that she hath lost her virginity before, he hath-power to cut off her Ears and Nose, and to turn her, and her relations and friends out of doors, which is a great dis∣grace unto her and them; but if she be a pure Virgin, then he sends the tok∣ens of it, by an ancient Woman, to her relations, and then for joy they con∣tinue their entertainments three or lour days together, having several diver∣tisements, as Musick, Singing, Dancing, or the like, the next day after their
Marriage, they both wash and bathe themselves, they are allowed by the Law four Wives, (of which the first hath the preemency,) but they must be of their own Religion; and for Concubines, they may be of any Religion, and have the liberty of taking as many as they please, paying them a certain stipend or salary,Men allowed many Women. as they shall agree by they week, moneth, or longer, as they shall agree, at the end of which term, they are quit from their Obligation; and may leave each other without another agreement made betwixt them, the men are exceeding jealous of their Wives, insomuch as they are forbidden the liberty of society with any man, which custom is used among the Italians. Their Feasts are munificentIn their Feasts they are very stately, having not only all varieties of Meats, as Flesh, Fowles, Fish, Baked-meats, with excellent Wine, and great attendance, but also pleasant Fruits, stately Banquets of Sweetmeats, and to make their enter∣tainments complent, they are furnished with curious Musick, as well Vocal as Instrumental, their Rooms or Halls, where they make these entertainments, are very spacious, and curiously adorned with stately Hangings of Tapestry, and beautified with varieties of Paintings, but most of them being naked Figures which amongst us would be accounted unseemly, their rooms being perfumed with sweet Odors and Waters, so that nothing is wanting for the pleasing of the senses; their way is to sit upon the ground on Carpets, being the Custom of the Turks and other Eastern Countries so to do; being also used to Collations in af∣ternoons and nights, wherein they have excellent Fruits, Sweetmeats, Wine, Musick and Dancing.They are much addicted to Women. They are great lovers of Women, insomuch that at their Feasts they are always furnished with them, being such as they call Dan∣cing-women, who being brought up in Dancing, Singing, and playing on In∣struments, make it their imployment so to do at Feasts; these Women for the most part are very handsom, and richly attired, having about them costly Jew∣els, Pendants, Rings, having about their legs Bells, like Morris-dancers; and he who hath a desire to enjoy a Woman, riseth from his Seat, and taketh which of these Dancing-women he most fancies, and goes into a private room, and after he hath enjoyed her to his content, he comes to his place, and the Woman goes to Dancing, without any shame to the one, or notice taken of the other. They are much given to drink Wine, Tea, and Coffee. The Persians very supersti∣tious.The Persians are very strict, superstitious, and ceremonious in their Religi∣on, (as the Turk is, but differ much from them in the exposition of their Alcoran) as in their Pilgrimages to Mecca, in their Sacrificings, in their observing of days, on some of which they will not do any business, either tending to profit or pleasure, refraining from all Acts of Sin as nigh as they can, and one of these days they hold to be the next Wednesday before the Vernal Equinox, by which they begin their new year, in their processions, and celebrated Fe∣stivals in commemoration of their several Saints, which they perform with great devotion, mixt with no less state in their several Sepulchers, where their Saints are interr'd, which are very large and magnificent Structures, so rich in Gold and Silver, with which it is adorned, as well in Lamps and Candlesticks, as otherwise, that it can hardly be exprest; in which places they have their Priests, which attend and offer up their devotions and explain the Alcoran, which they read out of Books, which they have in their Library being Manu∣scripts either upon Paper or Parchment, being curiously bound, neatly pain∣ted within, and covered with Plates of Silver or Gold, caryed or imbossed, or with paintings; also the Persians have not the same Miracles, the same Saints, the same Mosques,Their Religion and the same Ceremonies as the Turks have; they use Circum∣cision, but not till the Children are 7, 8 or 9 years old, they are very devout, espe∣cially in their prayers, which they use five times a day, as being obliged by their Religion so to do; also in their Prayers for the dead, over their Graves which de∣votion is used during the time of their Lent, which they keep for a month, in which time they neither eat nor drink betwixt Sun-rising and Sun-setting, but in the nghts they eat and drink what they please; yet for a sum of money they may have a dispensation: they interr their dead within three hours after the life is departed, unless it be in the night, so that then they let the corps alone untill the morning, they wash or bathe the bodies of their dead, before
they are interred, in a great Cestern,Ceremonies in their burials. which they have for the same purpose near the Church, to which place they are carried on a Bier in their Clothes, and after they are stript and Washt, they put them in clean linnen, anoint them, and so bear them to the Grave, being accompanied with his Friends, Relations, Servants, &c. in this order; first goeth those of his blood, rext his Varlets, who go naked to the Waist, the rest in troozes, who to express their love, scratch, and burn their Breasts, Arms, and other parts, so that the blood oft issueth forth; then follow many youths on whose shoulders are affixed some texts taken out of the Alcoran, together with Elegies of the deceased, in the next place follow several persons of the best ranck, each holding a cord that is affixed to the Hearse; and on every side abundance of People bearing in their hands, Garlands of Flowers, Lawrels, and such things as befit the Season, then follow some Horse-men half naked, who oft times massacre their carcas∣ses, and in the last place follow weeping-Women, that is, such as are hired to weep and howle, the better to provoke others to passion; and being brought to the Grave, the Priest after he hath performed several Ceremonies which he readeth out of the Alcoran, the Corps is interred with his head towards Mec∣ca, his face towards Heaven, and his armes expanded, (as they say) to im∣brace their Prophet Mahomet, placing two Stones, one at the head, and the other at the foot of the Grave, on which are ingraven in Arabick Characters, the persons name, quality and time of burial, and so take their leave, but for a good while cease not to visit the Grave twice a day, beseeching Mahomet to succour him against his two bad Angels, of whom they have this opinion; So soon as the Corps is interred, there are two hiddeous Devils assaile him, the one they call Muengar, which is armed with an Iron Club, and the other Quarequar, armed with a Hook of Flaming brass, and in this horrid posture, they view the Carcass, and in an insolent manner, command him to raise his head, to fall prostrate upon his knees, and begg his soul, which then re-enters the body, and gives an account unto them of all the actions of his life, and upon examination and confession, if it appear that his life was good, they vanish away like Spi∣rits, and two good Angels come (apparelled in white) to be a comfort unto him, and protect him untill the day of doom, not stirring from him, but sit∣ting one at his head, and the other at his feet. But on the contrary, if it hap∣pen that his life is found bad, then these Infernal Imps are his tormentors, the one knocking him on the head such blows with his Iron Club, as beats him (as they say) ten yards into the Earth, and the other drags him up with his Flaming hook; and thus is he knockt down by one, and dragged up by the o∣ther, untill Mahomet sends him a deliverance; and this (as Sir Tho. Herbert relateth in his book of Travels) is their belief, which if it be true, I doubt they will have many a sound knock and torne place before their delivery. To persons of quality, they observe more Ceremonies than to those of the ordina∣ry degree, making Feasts on the third, seventh, and fortieth day after the Corps is laid in the Grave, at which Feasts they are charitable to the poor in their Almes Deeds. The King of Persia his pow∣er.The King of Persia governs by an absolute power, disposing of the lives and estates of his Subjects as best pleaseth him, making his Will his Law, not any one daring so much as to murmure, though his actions are never so much un∣just. Their Kings come to the Goverment by succession, and not by e∣lection, insomuch that if the King hath no Children which are lawfully begot∣ten as by his Wives, for want of such those of his Concubines shall suc∣ceed him. The Coronati∣on of their Kings.Upon the Coronation of their Kings, amongst other Ceremonies, he is pre∣sented with a Crown, by one of their chiefest Lords, which he takes putting it to his forehead, and after kissing it thrice in the name of Mahomet, and of Aaly, he delivers it to the grand Master of the Kingdom, who puts it on his head, the People making great shouts and acclamations, kissing his feet, and presenting him with great presents, which done, the rest of the day they spend in feasting and other jovialties, but in all their Ceremonies there is not so much as an Oath imposed upon him; as, for his well governing them, and
keeping and preserving their fundamental Laws, and other of their rights; as amongst us done, but all being left to his sole power, as being absolute. There are belonging to the Court several Officers, as Chancellor, Secretary of State, Controller, Master of the Horse, Master of the Ceremonies, toge∣ther with several other Officers,Their Courts of Judicature, and their Ju∣stice. as amongst our Courts are found. The Admi∣nistration of Justice is decided by the King, but first tried by the secular Judges who examine the same, and deliver up their opinion to the King. They have several strict and severe punishments, which they inflict upon the offenders ac∣cording to the hainousness of their crimes, for some offences they cut off the Ears or Nose, sometimes the Feet or Hands, for others to be beheaded, for some again, they are tyed between two boards and so sawed asunder, with se∣veral other cruel deaths which are too tedious to name. In their Military affairs they are very experienced,Their Military Affairs. their Army consisting only of Horse, who have for their Armour Darts and Javelins, yet have they some in the nature of our Dragoons, which are mounted on Horses, who have Muskets for their Arms, as for an Army of Foot, together with the assistance of great Guns by them, is not so much set by, as being troublesom, and a detarder of them from their speedy and great marches, they are very expert in all stratagems of War, which gives them a great advantage over their enemies. Here doth inhabit a sort of People called Gaurs, and are of a much different Religion from the Persians, observing divers Ceremonies peculiar to them∣selves. In their Baptism they use no Circumsition, instead of which they wash the Child, &c. At their Nuptials after the Priest hath said some Prayers, he takes water, washes both their fore-heads, and gives the Benediction. When they are sick they make Confession to the Priest, and bestow their Almes in hopes of Pardon of their Sins. They bury not their dead, but carry them to certain enclosed places, where they fasten them to high Stakes, with their fa∣ces towards the East. They bear a great adoration to Fire. They are exceeding cleanly in all things, and wash often in Cows-piss, which they hold to be a good purification. Upon confession of their Sins to their Priests, they are constrained to Penance, in which several Ceremonies are observed. They have so great e∣steem for Doggs, that when any die they are carried out, and prayers are made for them. They have great quantity of all sorts of Cattle, Grain and Fruits. Amongst their Fruit-trees, they have great quantities of white and black Mulberry-trees, which grow not above 5, or 6 foot high, so that one may easily reach up to the branches, and in the Spring time, when these Trees begin to shoot forth their leaves,A discourse of Silk-worms, and making of Silk. they begin to hatch their Silk-worms, which they do by carrying the seed under their arm-pits in little baggs, which in seven or eight days will re∣ceive life, then they put them into a wooden dish, upon the Mulberry-leaves, which they once a day change, and take a great care that they be not wet, at the end of five days they sleep three, after which they dispose of them into Rooms or Barns, prepared for the same purpose, upon the beams of these build∣ings they fasten laths, or such like pieces of wood, upon which they lay Mul∣berry-branches, which hath the leaves on, whereon they put the Silk-worms shifting them every day, and as they grow in bigness, so oftner to twice or thrice a day; before they begin to spin, they sleep about eight days more, after which they begin, and in 12 days they have finished their Cod, the biggest they make choise of for seed; all the rest they cast into a Kettle of boyling Water; into which they often put a whisk made for the purpose, to which the Silk sticks which they immediately wind up; and that which they keep for Seed, they lay upon a Table, out of which, in the space of fifteen days comes forth great Buggs, which afterwards turn to things like Butter-flies, which in a few days they gender and lay Eggs, and then die, not eating any thing from their first spin∣ning; which is much, for things to live so great a while without eating any thing: And of these Silk-worms thus ordered they make a great Revenue.
INDIA, or the EAST INDIES; which (ac∣cording to its form and disposition of its E∣states) may be divided into three several Parts; to wit, The Empire of the GREAT MOGOLL, which comprehendeth that which is upon the Main Land, wherein are contained several King∣doms or Provinces; the chief of which are, Cabul, — Cabul. Attock, — Attock. Multan, — Multan. Candahar, — Candahar. Buckor, — Buckor-Suckor. Tatta, Tatta, Diul. Soxet, — Janagar. Cassimere, — Sirinaker. Bankish, — Beishar. Kabares, — Dankalar. Naugracut, — Naugracut. Siba, — Serenegar. Jamba, — Jamba. Bakar, — Bikaner. Samball, — Samball. Gor, — Gor. Kanduana, — Barabantaka. Patna, — Patna, Jesual, — Rajapore. Udessa, — Jekanac. Mevat, — Narvall. Pitan, — Pitan. Guzurate, or Cambaya, Surat, Baroche, Cambaya, Armadabad, Diu. Chitor, — Chitor. Malway, — Rantipore. Candis, — Brampore. Berar, — Shapor. Gualeor, — Gualeor. Narrar, — Gehud. Bengala, Bengala, Chatigan, Goura, Halabass, Satigan. Lahor, — Lahor. Jenupar, — Jenupar. Jesselmere, — Gislemere. Bando, — Bando. Delly, — Delly. Agra, — Agra. The Peninsula of INDIA without the GAN∣GES, and Westwards, and between the Mouths of the INDUS and the GANGES; with its several Kingdoms, or Countries of DECAN, Amedanager, Chaul, Visapor▪ Paranda, Goa, Doltabad. GOLCONDA, Golconda, Musulipatan. BISNAGAR, or NAR∣SINGUE, Onor, Bisnagar, Trivalur, Gingi, Negapatan, Sadrapatan, or Fort St. George. Maliapur, Geldia. Madure, Tutucori, and Manancor. MALABAR, Calicut, Cochin, Cananor, Coulan, Cranganor, Cotate, Cota, Changanara. The Peninsula of INDIA within the GAN∣GES, and Eastwards; wherein are contained several Kingdoms, Countries, Isles, &c. the chief among which are PEGU, Pegu, Brema, Canarane, Ava, Tinco, and Prom. SIAN, Odiaa, Banckock, Lugor, Martaban, Camboya, Sacortay. Peninsula of MALACCA, Tanasserin, Juncalaon, Queda, Pera, Malacca, Ihor, Patane. COCHIN-CHINA, Palocacein, Keccio. ISLES in the Gulph of SIAN, among which are Macara, Panian, Goeteinficos. ISLES in the Gulph of BENGALA, among which are, Chubedu, Chudube, Durondiva, Dos Cocos, Andemaan.
The Em∣pire of the GREAT MOGOLL; with its se∣veral King∣doms, or Provinces, as they lie Westwards, and towards PERSIA, from the first Streams of the INDUS unto its falling into the Sea, are those of Cabul, Cabul, Gaidel. Attock, Attock, Pucko. Multan, Multan, Seerpore. Candahar, Candahar, Gusbecunna. Buckor, Buckor-Suckor, Rauree. Tatta, Tatta, Diul, Lourebander. Hajacan, Chatzan, Dunki. Soret, Janagar, Cacha. On the North, and between the Mountains which divide this Empire from TARTARIA, or between the Springs of the GANGES and the INDUS, are Cassimere, Syrinakar, Chonab. Bankish, — Beithar. Kakares, Dankalar, Purhola, Naugracut, Naugracut, Callamaka. On this side, or without the GANGES; where are those of Siba, Hardware, Serenegar. Jamba, Jamba. Balcery. Bakar, — Bikaner. Samball, Samball, Menepore, Chappergat. Within the GANGES, are those of Gor, — Gor. Kanduana, — Barakantaka. Patna, — Patna. Jesual, — Rajapore. Udessa, — Jekanac. Mevat. — Narvall. Pitan, Pitan, Camojo. Southernly, and towards the Gulphs of BEN∣GALA and CAMBAYA, and the Peninsula of INDIA within the GAN∣GES, are those of Guzurate, or Chambaya, Surat, Baroche, Cambaya, Armadabad, Agra, Diu, Brodra, Cheytepour, Bisantagan, Mangalor, Jaquete. Chitor, Chitor, Chitapur. Malway, Rantipore, Ougel, Narvar. Candis, Brampore, Mandow, Pala. Ranas, — Gurchitto. Berar, — Shapor. Gualeor, Gualeor, War. Narvar, — Gehud. Bengala, with its Parts of Patan, Bengala, Chatigan, Goura, Patana, Tanda, Daca, and Bannara. Prurop, Ragmehel, Holobass. Bengala, Satigan, Mandaran, Ougely, Xore, Bellesor, and Angara. In the Middle of the EMPIRE; and are those of Lahor, Lahor, Fetipore, Temmeri, and Guzurat. Jenupar, Jenupar, Sirima, Tanasser. Hendowns, Hendowne, Mearta. Jesselmere, Gislemere, Moulto, Radinpore. Bando, Bando, Toury, Asmere. Delly, Delly, Acarnapori. Agra, Agra, Secandra, Fetipore, Scanderbade, and Ilay.
The Penin∣sula of INDIA without the Ganges: In which are the se∣veral King∣doms, or Countries of DECAN, with its Parts of Decan, particularly so called, Amedanager, Chaul, Dabul. Cunkan, Visapor, Soliapor, Paranda, Goa, Pagode, Zanguizara. Balaguate, Lispor, Beder, Doltabad. GOLCONDA, Golconda, Musulipatan, Guadavari, Vixaopatan, Narsingupatan, Orixa, Palhor, Calecote. BISNAGAR, or NARSIN∣GUE; with its Estates and Coasts of Canara, Onor, Gorcopa, Barcelor, Baticala, Magalor, Bacanor. Bisnagar, particularly so called, Bisnagar, Narsingue, Vellur, Cangevaran, Cirangapatan, Trivalur, Tripity. Gingi, Gingi, Cindambaram, Chistapatama. Tanjaor, Tanjaor, Castan, Trinidi. Maritim Places in BISNAGAR, GINGI, and TANJAOR, bearing and known by the name of the Coast of Choro∣mandel. Negapatan, Triminapatan, Trangabar, Coloran, Fort St. George, or Sadrapatan, Maliapur, Paliacate, Chiricole, Musulipatan, Caletur, Gueldria, Pentapou. Madure, Madure, Brimaon, Periapata, Punicale. Maritim Places of MADURE, and called the Coast of Pescheria, Jacancury, Manapar, Vaipar, Trichandur, Chereacale, Tutucori, Isle of Kings, Bembar, Calecure, Mananco, Cmcir. MALABAR, with its serveral Kingdoms, or Provinces, to wit, On the Sea, or Coast of Ma∣labar, as Calicut, — Calicut. Cochin, — Cochin. Cananor, — Cananor. Coulan, — Coulan. Chambais, — Chambais. Montigue, — Montigue. Badara, — Badara. Tanor, — Tanor. Cranganor, — Cranganor. Porca, — Porca. Calecoulan, — Calecoulan. Travancor, — Travancor. Cotate, — Cotate. In the High Land, as Cota, — Cota. Auriola, — Auriola. Cottagan, — Cottagan. Bipur, — Bipur. Coucura, — Coucura. Panur, — Panur. Curiga, — Curiga. Muterte, — Muterte. Marta, — Marta. Batimena, — Batimena. In the Moun∣tains, as Mangat, — Mangat. Paru, — Paru. Pimienta, — Pimienta. Changanara, — Changanara. Trivalar, — Trivalar. Panapelli, — Panapelli. Angamala, — Angamala. Ticancutes, — Ticancutes. Punhali, — Punhali. Caranarette, — Caranarette. Pande, — Pande.
The Penin∣sula of INDIA within the Ganges: In which are the Kingdoms, Countries, Isles, &c. of PEGU, with its Kingdoms or Parts of Martavan, Manar, Tangu, Marsin, Jangoma, Brama, Pegu, Brema, Canarane, Pandior, Mandranelle, Cassubi, Boldia, Ava, Tinco, Prom, Tolema, Largara, Tipoura, Chacomas, Maon, Arracan, Dogon, Ledoa, Cosmi, Xara, Dunbacaon, Chibode. SIAN, with its Kingdoms or Estates of Sian, Odiaa, Banckock, Ogmo, Lugor, Mirgin, Sacotay, Juropian. Martaban, Martaban, Macura, Cuidad de los Reyes▪ Macaon. Jangoma, — Jangoma. Camboia, Camboya, Ravecca, Langor, Carol, Tarvana, Peninsula of MALACCA, whose Parts Towards the Gulph of BEN∣GALA, and Westwards, are Tanasserin, — Tanasserin. Juncaldon, — Juncaldon. Queda, — Queda. Pera, — Pera. Malacca. — Malacca. Towards the Gulph of SIAN, and Eastwards, are Ihor, — Ihor. Pahang, — Pahang, Patane, — Patane. Singora, — Singora. Brodelong, — Brodelong. Ligor, — Ligor. COCHIN-CHINA, with its King∣doms, People, &c. of COCHIN-CHINA, par∣ticularly so called, with its Provinces of Chiampaa, — Pulocacein. Ranran, — Baday. Pulocanbis, — Naroman. Quagiva, — Ciomoy. Cacciam, Cacciam, Faifo, Turaoh. Sinuva, — Sinuva. TUNQUIN, with its Parts or Provinces of Bochin, whose chief place is Keccio. Ghean, whose chief place is Keccio. Tinhoa, whose chief place is Keccio. Beramar, whose chief place is Keccio. Kedom, whose chief place is Keccio. Kenam, whose chief place is Keccio. Kethay, whose chief place is Keccio. The People called the Layes. The Kingdom of Ciocangue. The People called the Gueyes. Timocoves. ISLES seated in the Gulph of SIAN, viz. Macara. Panian, Cara. Goeteinficos▪ Tyamciefi. Cosyn. ISLES seated in the Ocean, called the Gulph of BENGALA; viz. Chubedu, Chudube, Ledoa, Dos Alevantados, Durondiva Siriaon, Sobollas, Dos Cocos, Andemaon, Dos Caboses, Tanassesi, Tavay, Alta, Crara, Caremubar, Raza, Dos Sombreros de Palm, Siano, Sambilano, Batun, Pera, Pinaon, Ganal de St. Jorgo, Nicubar.
map of India A General Mapp of the East Indies Comprehending the Estats or Kingdoms of the Great Mogol, the Kingdoms & Estats of Decan, Gol∣conde, Bisnagar, Malabar &c in the Peninsula of India with out the Ganges, & the Kingdoms Isles of Pegu, Sian, Malacca, Cochinchina &c in the Peninlula of India within the Ganges. with the Isles of Maldives. by Monsieur Sanson
blazon or coat of arms of the East India Trading Company DEUS IN DEAT To the Honorable the Governer Deputy and Court of Committies of the Company of Marchants tradeing in to the East Indies This Mapp is humbly dedicated by Ric: Blome.
INDIA, OR THE EAST-INDIES. Its Name.INDIA, of which we treat at present, is that which the Ancients have known under the name of India, or the Indies, and which the Moderns call the Asiatick, or East-Indies; because they likewise call America, though very improperly, the West Indies; these lying West, those East from our Meridian. But under the name of East Indies di∣vers Authors comprehend all the most Oriental parts of Asia, that is to say, all that is above and beyond the River Indus, from whence the Country takes its name; and likewise China, and the Isles of Asia, which are in the Oriental Ocean, pass under the name of these Indies. Its bounds, and division into Parts.But leaving China and the Isles of Asia apart, we may divide India, both because of its Form and the disposition of its Estates, into three several parts; of which, the first shall comprehend that which is upon the Main Earth, the rest shall be in two Peninsula's; of which, the most Western, and between the Mouths of Indus and Ganges, shall be called The Peninsula of India without the Ganges; and the most Oriental, and beyond the Ganges, shall be called The Peninsula of India within the Ganges. We will esteem in the first part, that which the Great Mogoll at present pos∣sesses, and what is engaged in his Empire. In the two Peninsula's we shall have a great number of Kingdoms and Principalities; neither the one nor the other having less than fifty, which by little and little are reduced into a less number, the strongest becoming Masters of the weakest. Thus the great Mo∣goll made himself Master of 35 or 40 Kingdoms, of which some had before ruined many others. The Empire of the GREAT MOGOLL. OF the several Provinces, or Kingdoms, under the Empire of the Great Mo∣goll, as appears in the Geographical Table of the Empire apart, have their Names common with those of their chief Cities, and are all rich, and since their separation they compose fair and powerful Estates: And first with Cabul. Kingdom or Province of Cabul.CABƲL, whose chief City bears the same name, is the most advanced towards Persia, with Ʋsbeck or Zagatha. The Springs of Nilab and Behat, which fall into the Indus, and possibly likewise of Indus, are in this Kingdom or Province. The City of Cabul is great, but the Houses low; its strength lying in the two Fortresses, and in the great Road of Lahor to Samarcand in Ʋsbeck; and to Yarchan, the chief City of Cascar, from whence they bring Silk, Musk, and Rhubarb, from China and Cathay.
ATTOCK is on the Indus;Attock. Its City is fair, the Fortress good; and when the Limits of the Estates of the Kings of India lay between Lahor and At∣tock, it was of greater consideration than possibly it is at present. MƲLTAN is rich,Multan. by reason of the fruitfulness of its Soil and Traffick, which the Rivers of Indus, of Behat, of Nilab, and of Rawey, which fall into the Indus, do much enrich. The City of Multan is great, ancient, and not above two or three Leagues distant from the Indus. Its principal Commodi∣ties are Sugar, Galls, Opium, Brimstone; several Manufactures of Silk and Wool, &c. CANDAHAR is far engaged towards Persia, its chief City being so cal∣led, which is great,Candahar. and of some Trade. BƲCKOR hath for its chief City Buckor-Suckor,Buckor. which lies along the River Indus (which runs through the Province) which makes it very fertil. The City is of an indifferent extent, and of some Trade. TATTA,Tatta. whose chief City bears the same name, is divided by the River Indus into several Isles. In this City and Province are held to be the most in∣dustrious Tradesmen of the whole Kingdom, by reason of which here is found a good Trade, drove by Merchants of several Countries. Buckor, there where the Rivers of Rawey and Caul fall into the Indus, and between Multan and Tatta; and Tatta where Sinde goes, between Buckor and the Sea: Lourebander and Diul serve for Ports to Tatta. Lourebander, there where the Indus begins to divide it self into several Branches; Diul on the great Sea. Moreover Diu and Diul are two different places, being distant 150 Leagues from each other. Diu in the Kingdom of Guzurate or Cambay, belongs to the Portugals: Diul in that of Tatta, is the Great Mogolls, who keeps there a Governour. The Province of HAJACAN, Westwards of the Indus; of very small account,Hajacan. having no places worthy of note. SORET is seated between the Kingdoms of Tatta on the West,Soret. of Gu∣zurate on the East. It hath for its chief City Janagar; the Province is but of little extent, but very fruitful, rich, and well Peopled. Cassimere, Bankish, Kakares, Naugracut.CASSIMERE or QƲERIMƲR, BANKISH, KAKARES, and NAƲGRACƲT, are between the River Indus and Ganges; all encom∣passed with the Mountains of Bimber towards the Indus, of Naugracut to∣wards the Ganges, of Caucasus towards Tartaria, of Dalanguer which crosses them, and separates the one from the other; and they, the Forests of these Mountains, which yielded so much Wood for the Vessels which Alexander the Great caused to be builded, to descend the Indus. And these are at present those Forrests which give so much divertisement of chase to the Great Mogoll. Sizinaket, or Sirinakar, though unwalled, is the chief City of Cassimere; Beishar of Bankish; Dankalar, and Purhola, of Kakares; and Naugracut of Naugracut. In this last the Temple of the Idol Marta is paved, Wans∣cotted, and Seiled with Plates of Gold: And in Callamacka there are Fountains very cold, and near to Rocks, from whence seem to flash out flames of fire. The Province of SIBA hath for its chief City Hardware,Siba. which gives its rise to the River Ganges; and Serenegar on the River Mansa. The Province of JAMBA gives name to its chief City.Jamba. The Province of BAKAR lieth on the West of the Ganges,Bakar. and hath for its chief City, Bikaner. The Province of SAMBAL takes its name from its chief City so called.Sambal. This Province is likewise called Doab, that is, two Waters; its scituation be∣ing between the Ganges and Semena: which, together with the three Pro∣vinces last mentioned, are without, or on this side the Ganges, reaching almost from its Spring-head unto the River Semena, or Gemeni. The Province of GOR takes its name from its chief City,Gor. and gives its rise to the River Perselis, which falls into the Ganges; the Province being very Mountainous. The Province of KANDƲANA hath for its chief City Karakantaka.Kanduana. This Province, and that of Gor, which is beyond the Ganges, doth end the E∣states
of the Mogoll towards the North, meeting with the Tartars of Tur∣questan. The Province of MEVAT is very barren, whose chief City is Narval,Mevat. which ends it towards the People called Maug; and others which we esteem to be in the Peninsula of India, which is in the Ganges. The Province of ƲDESSA,Udessa. is the utmost of the Mogolls Territories to∣wards the East, which is also within the Ganges; its chief place is Jebanac. The Province of PITAN is on the West of Jamba,Pitan. being very Moun∣tainous, whose chief City gives name to the Province. The River Randa runs through the City and Province, and falls into the Ganges. The Province of PATNA is fruitful, whose chief City is so called,Patna. seated on the River Persely; but we have a very feeble and incertain knowledge of all these Parts or Kingdoms; but those which are towards the South, and par∣ticularly Guzurate or Cambaya, and Bengala, are better known. Gusurate, or Cambaya, ex∣ceeding rich and fertil.The Province of GƲSƲRATE, by the Portuguese called the Kingdom of CAMBAYA, hath more than 30 great Trading Cities, and is without doubt the noblest, greatest, richest, and most powerful Province of all the Mogolls Country, yielding a yearly Revenue of 15 or 20 Millions of Gold; and its King hath brought into the Field 150000 Horse, and 500000 Foot, 1000 Ca∣mels, &c. The Country likewise is esteemed the most fertil of all India; pro∣ducing all sorts of Grains, Fruits, and living Creatures, quantity of Drugs,Its Commodi∣ties and Trade.Spices, and precious Stones, not having any Mines of Gold or Silver, but three Plants which bring it an inestimable quantity; as well from the Gulph of Persia and the Red Sea, as from all the Coasts of India and China. These Plants are Cotton, Anniseed, and Opium: besides which there are varieties of other rich Commodities, as Oil, Sugar, Indico, Ambergreece, Soap, Comfits, Medicinal Drugs, Paper, Wax, Hony, Butter, Salt-Peter, Manufactures of Cotton, Linnen-Cloth, Carpets, Cabinets, Coffers, Cases, with a thousand other curiosities, which its Inhabitants know how to make and sell, being the ablest Merchants of India. Its InhabitantsThey are likewise of a good Spirit, and addicted to Letters; serve them∣selves of all sorts of Arms, yet know nothing of Nobility, but by abundance of Riches: They are all Pagans or Mahometans. The Pagans for the most part are Pythagoreans, holding the immortality of the Soul,Pythagoreans. and that it passes from one body to another: for which reason they so much honour Beasts, that they eat them not, but keep Hospitals to receive such as are sick and lame. The Cows here are in such esteem with them, that a Merchant Banian (ac∣cording to the report of Texera) spent 10 or 12 thousand Ducats at a Nuptial, marrying his Cow with his Friends Bull. This Kingdom is in part Peninsula, between the Gulphs of the Indies and Cambaya, and in part on the Main, which stretches it self towards Decan.Its extent by Sea. This Province though of a large ex∣tent, yet hath above 120 Leagues of Sea-Coast, on which it hath several fair and rich Cities, and of a good Trade: As also great quantities of Inland Towns and Cities, the chiefest whereof are, viz. Surat,Surat. seated on the River Tapta, which falls into the Sea 12 miles below the City. It is a City no less great and rich, than populous and famous, and enjoyeth as great a Trade as any City in India; being much frequented by the English and Dutch, where they have their Presidents and Factories, and where they have their Houses for the negotiation of their affairs, which are spacious and well built. This City is built four square, its Houses flat, after the Persian mode, and reasonably beautiful, having the benefit of pleasant Gardens: It hath several Mosques, but none deserves commendation; it is defended by a strong Castle, and hath a strong Wall on all sides, except on that which is seated on the River, and for its entrance hath three Gates: Its Port is six miles from the City, where the Ships are unladen, and the Commodities brought to the City by Land. The Inhabitants are either Benjans, Bramans, or Mogolls; but there are several other Nations which here reside, as Persians, Turks, Arabians, Arme∣nians, Jews, &c. driving a Trade; but none comparable to the English or Dutch. Its other places of note are. 1. Brodra,Brodra. seated on a sandy Plain upon
a small River, well fortified with Walls and Forts, the Inhabitants being for the most part Dyers, Weavers, and other workers of Cottons, for which it is the chiefest place in the whole Province. The Governour of this City hath also under its Jurisdiction about 210 Towns and Villages.Baroche. 2. Baroche, 12 Leagues from Surat, and 8 from the Sea, seated strongly on a Mountain with Walls of Free∣stone; it is well Peopled, most following Dying, Weaving, and making of Cot∣tons, as they do at Brodra. About this City are very fertil Fields, which bring forth Wheat, Barly, Rice, and Cotton, in great abundance; and out of the Mountains they find the Agats.Cambaya. 3. Cambaya, seated on a River, and on a Sandy place, encompassed with a Wall of Free-stone about 10 Leagues in circuit; its Streets are strait and broad, its Houses fair and large, having 12 Gates for en∣trance, 3 large Market-places, and 4 stately Cisterns, large enough to keep Water for the Inhabitants all the year long. They have also about this City 15 or 16 publick Gardens, for the recreation of the Inhabitants, being places of great pleasure and delight. The Inhabitants are for the most part Pagans, Benjans, or Rasboutes. This City is at the bottom of its Gulph, and so fa∣mous, and of so great Traffick, that the Kingdom sometimes bears its name, being frequented by most Nations, where the English and Dutch keep a Factory.Amadabad, the Metropolis of Guazarete, 4. Amadabad is the Metropolis of Guzurate, being about 7 Leagues in compass; a place of good strength, the Buildings are very stately and fair, especially the Mosques, the Governours House, and other publick Places; the Streets are large and many; is very populous, and of a great Trade, abounding in divers Indian Commodities. It is seated on a small River, which falls into the Indus about 45 Leagues from Surat, and is by the English compared to London. Here the Merchants pay no Custom; the Governour of this City is Vice-Roy of all Guzurate, being answerable for what he doth to none, but the Great Mogoll; he liveth in a greater state than any King in Europe: his Court large and stately; his attendance great, not stirring abroad without great pomp and state, as in his attendance of Nobles, and others, in his Guards of Horse and Foot, in his Elephants with brave furniture, together with several playing on certain Instruments of Musick. His Revenue is ex∣ceeding great, which by some is accounted to be about Ten Millions of Gold yearly: out of which he is at great expences, as in the maintaining the charge of the Kingdom, his own expences, and the keeping 12000 Horse and 50 Ele∣phants, for the Mogolls service. In and about this City there are great quan∣tities of pleasant Gardens, plentifully stored with variety of Fruit-trees. 5. Diu is in an Island of the same name,The City of Diu, its Trade and Commo∣dities. and lieth about 20 Leagues from the River Indus, and not far distant from the main Land. It is now subject to the Portugals, who have strongly fortified it. This City is well built, indifferent big, and hath a great and good Haven, being a place of great Trade, and ha∣ving a concourse of Merchants of divers Nations, by reason of which it brings a great profit to the King of Portugal, whose chief Commodities are Cotton-Linnen of sundry sorts, which we call Callicoes, Cocos-Oil, Butter, Pitch, Tar, Sugar-Candy, Iron; several sorts of curious Desks, Chests, Boxes, Standishes, which they make of Wood neatly carved, guilded, and variously coloured, and wrought with Mother of Pearl; also excellent fair Leather, which is artificially wrought with Silks of all colours, both with flowers and figures, which is there (and elsewhere) used instead of Carpets and Coverlids. 6. Bisantagan, by reason of the fertility of the Country there adjacent, is of good repute, well peopled, having in it about 20000 Houses. 7. Cheytepour, is seated on a small River, the Inhabitants being Benjans, who by Profession are Weavers, who make great quantities of Cotton-Linnen. Here are also several other Cities of less note, as Nassary, Gaudui, and Balsara, which are under the jurisdiction of Surat,Agra, a plea∣sant City, and much fre∣quented by the Mogoll. from which they are not far distant. 8. Agra, seated on the River Gemini, which falls into the Ganges; of a very large ex∣tent, and strongly fortified with a Wall and a great Ditch. Its Houses are fair, it Streets spacious; several being inhabited by those of one Trade, each Trade having its Street alloted it. It hath a fair Market-place, and hath for the ac∣commodation of Merchants and Forreigners about 80 Caravanseraes or Inns,
which are large Houses, wherein are good Lodgings, and Ware-Houses for their Goods. In this City there are about 70 great Mosques or Churches, besides divers little ones; in the greatest of which are several Tombs of their Saints. Here are al∣so a great quantity of Baths or Hot-Houses, which are much used amongst them. The Great Mogoll doth often change his dwelling; so that there is scarce any City of note, but what he hath abode in, and where he hath not Palaces, but there is none which hath his presence so much as this, it being the most de∣lightful of all others, where he hath a sumptuous Palace, as also several Gar∣dens and Houses for his retirement without the City. His Palace is seated upon the River Gemini, and if some Authors may be credited, is about 2 Leagues in compass; it is very strong, being encompassed with a strong Wall, and a great Ditch, or Moat, having at every Gate a Draw-bridge which are strongly guarded. For the description of this Palace, I must be beholding to J. Albert de Mandelslo, in his Book of Travels, where he saith, That being entred in at the Gate, there is a spacious Street with Shops, which leads to the Mogolls Palace; to which there is several Gates which are called by several names. Under the Gate called Cistery, is the place of Judicature, to which is adjoyned a place where all Ordinances and other Writs are sealed, and where the Records are kept: At the entrance of this Gate is the spacious Street aforesaid. The Gate called Achobarke Derwage is a place of great respect with them, and it is the place that the Singing and Dancing Women are lodged at, who are kept for the diversion of the great Mogoll, and his Family; these Women dance be∣fore him naked. There is another Gate which they call Dersame which leads to a River, to which he comes every morning to worship the Sun at his rising: Near this place it is, that his Nobles and Officers about his Court, come every day to do their submission to him; to which place he comes every day, except Fridays (which is set apart for their Devotions, (as Sunday is with us) to see the fighting of Lions, Elephants, Bulls, and the like fierce Beasts, which are here used for his recreation.) He speaketh of another Gate which leadeth into the Guard-Hall, through which, at the farther end of a Paved Court, under a Portal, there is a row of Silver Pillars, where there is a continual Guard also kept to hinder all people, except great Lords, to enter any farther, it leading to the Mo∣golls Lodgings, which are exceeding rich and magnificent; but above all is his Throne, which is made of massie Gold, and inriched with Diamonds, Pearls, and other precious Stones: Above the place where this Throne standeth, is a Gallery where he sheweth himself everyday, and receiveth the complaints of those who have received any injury; but they must be sure to prove it, else he runs a great hazard of his life, to trouble him vainly. But in his inner Lodgings there is no person to enter, save the Eunuchs, who wait upon the Ladies in his Seraglia, which is about 1000. Among the several fair Structures which are within this great inclosure, there is one great Tower, rich without (being covered with Gold) but not to compare to the wealth within; in which, are 8 spacious Vaults, which are filled with Gold, Silver, and Precious Stones of an Inestimable value. Province of Agra.This City of Agra gives name to a Province or Kingdom which is of a fertile Soyl, and well peopled and frequented, and ows its beauty and enlargement to Ekebar, Emperor of the Mogolls. The Palace of the Great Mogol, as I said be∣fore, is of 2 Leagues circuit; the other Palaces of Princes and Lords, which are also seated along the River, stretching towards the North, are all proudly built, but not of so large an extent; that of the Great Mogolls being the fairest, rich∣est, and most magnificent of all the East. On the other side is the City of Secan∣dra, about 2 Leagues long, almost all inhabited by Merchants. Fetipore, that is, Desire accomplished, 12 Leagues from Agra; and towards the West, is likewise one of the works of Ekebar, who having obtained Children to succeed his E∣states, caused this place to be built for pleasure, with a very stately Palace and Musqueito or Temple; but its ill Waters have caused it to be abandoned. Biana to the West of Fetipore, hath the best Wood of all India. Scanderbad on the West of Bayana, hath been the Residence of some Kings, and the Castle above it is very advantagiously scituated, where Xa Selim kept himself, till such time as Ekebar had streightly besieged him, and forced him to retire into the Moun∣tains.
The name of this place, and likewise this of Secandra, directly opposite to Agra, retain something of the name of Alexander. Province of La∣hor.The Province of LAHOR or PENGAB, is large, very fertile in all sorts of Fruits and Grains, which makes it considerable, its chief City bears the name of the Province; and I believe this City to be the same with Alexandria Bucephalus, which Alexander the Great built, and named of his name and that of his Horse Bucephalus. The Ancients place it by the River Hydaspes, which may at present be Bowey. The City hath been so much enlarged by Xa Selim, that it contains 24 Leagues of circuit. It is very pleasantly seated, espe∣cially towards the River, on which it hath many delightful Gardens: Its For∣tress is good, is adorned with many stately Palaces and great Houses where their Nobles and persons of quality reside; among others, that of the Kings, which is (though seated within the City,) yet separated from it with a high Wall, being magnificent, and adorned with great quantities of fair Pictures. Here is also by reason the Inhabitants are Mahometans, abundance of Mosques and Bathing-places, for their ordinary purifications, which is a ceremony much used amongst them. Here it is by many thought, that Noah seated himself af∣ter his coming out of the Ark; and likewise, that from hence Ophir and Havi∣lah, Sons of Joktan, removed towards the Ganges and Malacca. This Province is esteemed one of the most pleasant Countreys in all India, being so well shaded with Mulberry and other Trees, whose verdure is no less delightful to the eye of the beholder, then refreshing to the wearied Traveller, under whose Boughs he may rest, and shade himself from the shallure of the Sun. At Fetipore, not far from Lahor, the Sultan Gansron, the Son of Selim, but a Rebel, was by his Father defeated; from whence the place had its name, which signifies Desire accomplished: As the other Fetipore near Agra was built by Ekebar, after ha∣ving obtained Children to succeed him in his Estates. This Countrey bears the name of Peng-ab, that is, five Waters, by reason it is watred with five different Rivers. Province of Delly.The Province of DELLY gives name to its capital City, which is on the Road from Lahor to Agra; watred by the River Gemini or Semena. Before the Mogolls descended into all these quarters, the Kings of India made it their Residence, were here Crowned, and here had their Tombs: There are yet found some very fair Obelisques, believed to have been erected in the time of Alex∣ander the Great, and the Greeks. Kingdom of Bengala▪The Kingdom of BENGALA occupies all the lower part of the Ganges, and may be divided into three parts. Prurop on this side the Ganges, Patan beyond it. The particular name of Bengala may be given to that which lies between the Branches of the Ganges, and along the Coast. This Kingdom hath been divided into 12 Provinces, which have been so many Kingdoms, and which took their names from their principal Cities; but we have no certain knowledg either of their names, or situations. Bengala likewise is placed by some be∣tween the Branches of the Ganges, by others beyond it: Some esteem Chati∣gan its chief City, when as others will have it to be Goura on the Ganges, high∣er in the Land, and more then 100 Leagues from the Sea. However it be, Ben∣gala is of so great Traffick, and so rich, that the Kingdom and Gulf of Ganges, on which it is at present, is called the Kingdom and Gulf of Bengala. The City of Chatigan is pleasantly seated on a fair and large River, whose imbosure is not far distant from that of the Ganges. This River hath so fierce a Current, that Boats and Vessels, without the help of Sails or Oars, are driven in 24 hours about 100 Miles; so that those who have no occasion to pass up and down this River, are forced to fasten their Vessels to certain Trees or other things which are for the same purpose fixed along the shore. By which means they are sheltered from the violence of the Tides, which else would spoyl them. Here are several o∣ther Cities, as Ragmehel, Daca, Banara, Tanda, Patana, Holobasse on the joyning of Gemini and Ganges, is one of the fairest and greatest Cities of India, and I esteem it in the place of the Ancient Palibothra, where the streams of the Jomanes and Ganges do meet, with other Cities of less note.
The extent of Bengala.This Kingdom of Bengala extends it self 300 Leagues from East to West, and sometimes 200 from North to South, having no less then 150 Leagues of Coast, which is much frequented by Merchants of several Countries, which hither come for their Commodities, which by reason of the temperatness of the Air, and the fertility of the Countrey do here abound. The Inhabitants are courteous,Its Inhabitants. but deceivers: Their Kings have been esteemed as rich and as powerful as any in India. Province of Candis.Between the Kingdoms of Cambaya and Bengala, are those of Candis, Chitor, Malway, Berar, Gualeor, Narvar, Ranas and Berar. Brampore is the chief City of Candis, seated on the River Tapta, which descends into the Gulph of Cambaya, below Surat. The City is great, but ill built, unhealthful, and a place which hath been unfortunate to many Children of the Great Mogolls. In the old City of Mandow, are the Sepulchres and Remains of the Palace of its Anci∣ent Kings; the new City is better built, but less. Province of Chitor.The Province of CHITOR, with its City of the same name, is quite engag∣ed in the Mountains, which meet in the way of Amedebat and Cambaya to Agra. The City was of 5 Leagues circuit, before Ekebar took it from Raja Cana, and ruined it. It hath now little more then the Remains of 100 and odd Temples, and of a great number of Buildings which have been stately and magnificent. The Castle was in a place so advantagious and strong, that the Kings of Delli could never take it; and Sultan Alandin was constrained to raise the siege, after ha∣ving been 12 years before it. Province of Malway.The Province of MALWAY, hath its Territory fruitful, and for its princi∣pal place Rantipore, others put Ʋgen or Ougell. Its chief Fortress is Narvar, whose City is near the Spring-head of a River, and at the Foot of Mountains of the same name, and which stretch themselves from the Kingdom of Guzurate, unto that of Agra and Narvar; and in these Mountains abide some Princes which obey not the Mogoll. Province of Gualeor.The Province of GƲALEOR takes its name from its chief City, where there is one of the best Cittadels or Fortresses of the Estate, wherein the Mogoll confines such as are Prisoners of State, and those Lords of which he hath any jealousie; and where he also keeps a great part of his Treasure. Province of Ranas.The Province of RANAS, hath for its chief place Gurchitto, seated on a high Hill. Province of Narvar.The Province of NARVAR, hath for its chief City Gehud, seated on a River which falls into the Ganges, and touches on the Mountains of Narvar. Province of Berar.The Province of BERAR, hath for its capital place Shapor, which reach∣es Southward, and touches that of Guzurate, and the Mountain of Rana. Several other Provinces.In the midst of all the Mogolls Estates, are the provinces of JENƲPAR, HENDOWNES, JESSELMERE and BANDO. The Province of Jenupar, takes its name from its chief City. Hendowns of Hen∣downs, which is towards the Indies. Jesselmere, whose chief City is so called, in whose Castle Ammer in 1548. Zimlebege, Wife of Hymayon, flying into Persia Lay in of Ekebar, who restored the Mogolls, and made their Estates so great and powerful in the Indies. And lastly, the Province of Bando, whose chief City bears the same name, is between the Cities of Jesselmere, Delli and Agra, at 70 or 80 Leagues from the one and the other, besides its City of the same name. Asmere is famous for the Sepulchre of Hogimondee, a Mahumetan, whom the Mogolls esteem a Saint, and there where Ekebar made his devotions, to the end he might obtain a Son to succeed in his Estate; and afterwards caused to be set up at every Leagues end, a Pillar of Stone, and several Lodgings to be built on the way, to receive Passengers and Pilgrims. The extent bounds, &c. of the Great Mo∣golls CountreyThese are the Provinces or Kingdoms which the Great Mogoll possesses; whose Empire stretches from South to North 500 Leagues, and from West to East 6 or 700, is bounded either with Mountains or the Sea. Its Neighbours are the Ʋsbeck, the Cascar, the Thibet, and the Turquestan, parts of Tartary to∣wards the North; the People of Maug, and others which have been of Pegu, to∣wards the East; the Persians towards the West; and the Kingdom of Decan and Golconda towards the South. The Indian Ocean, where are the Gulfs
of Indus and Cambaya on one side, and that of Bengala on the other side, wash the rest. The Tartars & Persians, very troublesome to the Mogol.Of all his Neighbors, the Tartars and Persians are the most powerful: The Tartars, nevertheless, being divided into many Estates, where they border on him, are more likely to damage him by Inroads, then by open War. The Persian regained from him Candahar, some years past: which he lost not a∣gain, till he had at the same time to deal with the Mogolls, and Turks. The others have much ado to defend themselves against him; as the Kings of Gol∣conda and Decan; this last having lost some part of his Estates, and the other giving him some present in the way of Tribute. But the great Mogoll would make nothing to seise both these Kingdoms, if he were not often perplexed with intestine War; and if there remained not in his E∣states divers Princes, which they call Rahias or Kings; and many people of whom he cannot absolutely dispose, neither the one nor the other obeying him, or paying any Tribute to him, but by constraint; and the greatest part paying it only when and how they please, and sometimes not at all. Amongst these little Kings and People are the Rahia Bossou,Petty Kings & people under the Mogoll. who resides at Temery, 50 Leagues from Lahor. The Rahia Tulluck Chan, who resides at Naugracut 80 Leagues from Lahor. The Rahia Decomperga is 150 Leagues from Agra, residing at Calsery; the Rahia Mansa is 200 Leagues from Agra, residing at Serim∣gar. The Rahia Rodorou is beyond the Ganges, residing at Camayo. The Muggi likewise beyond the Ganges to the South of Rahia Rodorou, is very powerful as well as the two last; between the Armes of the Ganges, is a Prince of the ancient family of the Kings of Delli, who likewise maintains himself. Above Cassimere the Rahia Tibbon acknowledges neither Mogoll, nor Tartar; descending often, and making incursions both on the one and the other. The People called Balloches or Bulloques, do unpunished live like Vagabonds in the Province of Haiacan; likewise the Aguvanes, and the Patanes in Candahar, likewise the Quilles or Colles, and the Resbutes in the Mountains between Cam∣baya and Decan, and sometimes the Colles of Decan, the Rebustes of Cambaya, and the Patanes of Candahar have raised Tribute. These Kings and People are almost all Pagans, descending from divers Kings and People which possessed divers parts of the Indies before the Mogolls. There is one Rahia of the Colles above Amadebat; another the Rahia Par∣taspha near Breampure, who hath some time taken and pillaged Cambaya. The Rahia Rana resides at Gorchitto; and after having well defended himself a∣gainst the ancient Kings of India, yields now some Tribute to the Mogoll. Yet is the Great Mogoll one of the greatest, and most powerful Princes of Asia;Mogol very potent. he can bring into the field 200000 Horse, 500000 Foot, and 2 or 3000 Elephants; he gives pensions to the greatest part of the Princes, Lords, Nobles and Gentry of the Country, on condition that they keep for his service, some 1, some 2, 3, 4, 5, some 10, some 100, some 1000 and upwards of Horses, which are to be always in readiness; his Armies nevertheless consist for the most part of 100000 Horse, and 200000 Foot; and this besides his ordinary Garrisons. His Subjects are strong and robustious, use all sorts of Armes, go freely to all occasions, wanting nothing but Order and Policy. They have no considerable Forces at Sea, since the Portugalls hold from them in the Kingdom of Cambaya, the City and Fortress of Diu, Daman, Basaim of the Isle of Saltette near Ben∣saim, the Fort of Manora, and the Rock of Asserim. The Country stored with Cattle, Fowle, and Fish.The whole Country is stored with several sorts of tame and wild Creatures, as Buffes, Oxen, Cowes, Sheep, Deer, Wild-Asses, Bores, Hares, &c. Variety of Fowl and Fish; here are also found Crocodiles, some of which are 30 foot long; Cormorants, and Bats as big as Crows. The Mogols guard.The great Mogolls ordinary Guard consists of about 12000 men, besides 600 of his life guard; he never stirs abroad to hunt, take the Air or the like, with∣out the attendance of about 10000 men of all degrees; besides to make his stare the greater, there are 100 Elephants richly trapt, and covered with Scarlet, Velvet, or the like; on these Elephants there are seated two men, the one to guide him, and the other which supports a large Banner of Silk, richly em∣broydered
with Gold and Silver; but on some of the Elephants which go fore∣most, instead of carrying Banners, they play upon Simbretts, and other such like Instruments; after these 100 Elephants, comes the Mogoll, either mount∣ed on an excellent Persian Horse, or else in a Coach, or Sedan, attended by his Nobles and other Courtiers, after whom come about 500 Elephants, Camels,His State and great attend∣ance. and Wagons which are to carry the Baggage; for commonly he encamps in the Field, in which he takes great delight by reason of the coolness, as also by reason few Cities are able to give entertainment to so great a retinue; and be∣sides his going thus to hunt or take the Air, he often changes the place of his abode according to the seasons of the year. The Mogoll celebrates with great pomp and state the first day of the year. They have several Festival daies which they keep in great triumph, wherein they have several divertisements of sports and recreations, and especially the birth day of the Mogoll. The lan∣guage which the Great Mogoll, and most people of quality speak, is the Per∣sian tongue. The Inhabitants are very expert at the Bow. The diseases which are common amongst them, are Fevers, and the Bloody Flux. Their Horses are not good, but their Oxen are excellent, being here used instead of Horses, which are very mettlesome. As in this great extent of ground (which we call the Mogolls Country) there are several sorts of People, so likewise are there divers sorts of Religions, some of which I shall speak a word or two of. The Benjans are Pagans, they use neither Circumcision nor Baptisme; they believe there is a God who created them, and made the Universe; but they worship the Devil, believing that God created him to govern the world, and do mischief to mankind, to which end in all their Mosques they have the figure of him in Statues of Gold, Silver, Ebony, Ivory, Marble, Stone and Wood; this figure in shape is ugly and horrid to look on; it is placed on a Table of Stone, which serves for an Altar, and receives the Offerings which are made to the Pagode; on the right side of this Table is placed a Trough, in which those who intend to do their devotions wash and Purifie themselves; and on the other side there is a Chest in which is put their Offerings, night to which in the wall is a Vessel, out of which the Braman or Priest takes out a kind of yellow stuff, with which he marks the foreheads of them; this Braman sits at the foot of the Altar, from whence he riseth often to say Prayers. In their Mosques they always burn Lamps, and about the Walls of them are abundance of Figures, as Beasts, Devils, &c. which they adore. They much use as a part of their Reli∣gion corporal purification, bathing themselves every day. They are very in∣genious, subtil, and civil, there being no trade but what they apply themselves unto, and are very expert in the adulteration of all Commodities. They are civil in their Apparel, but their Children go naked untill the age of 5 or 6 years, and at 7, 8, 9 or 10 years of age they marry them, seldom staying untill the age of 12, especially the female sex, as thinking it a great shame to live so long un∣married; and in their marriages they observe several ceremonies. The Men are not only permitted to marry twice, or thrice in case of mortality, but also if their Wives prove barren; but the first hath a preeminence as being mother of the Family; their Sons are Heirs to their Fathers Estates, but withall they must maintain the Mother, and take to Wife their Sisters. The Bramans or Priests are of great authority, and highly respected a∣mongst them, insomuch that the Benjans will hardly engage themselves in any matter of concernment, without the advice and approbation of them. These Priests besides their expounding the mysteries of their Religion according to their fancies (which soon take impression in the minds of these superstitious people) have an oversight of Schools where Children have their education. When the men are to go a journy they desire the Braman to have a care of their Wives, untill they return, and to supply their places; another custom they have, that when any are married, the Bride is brought to the Braman, and he is earnestly requested to enjoy the first fruits of her, without which they think the marriage is not blest, and for so doing he hath gifts presented him according to the qualities of the persons. The Benjans believe the transmigration and immortality of the Soul, thinking
that the Soul of a good man is departed into the body of a Chicken or a Pigeon, that of a wicked or cruel man into a Lion, Tiger or Crocodile, that of a glutton into a Swine, that of a crafty man into a Fox, &c. for which reason they nei∣ther eat nor kill any thing that hath life; nay they are so far from destroying them, that on the contrary they will purchase them of the Mahometans, and set them at liberty, and for those that be lame, or sick, they have Hospitals for them as in Persia. J. Albert de Mandelslo, in his Book of Travels saith, that the Benjans are divided among themselves, into 83 principal Sects, besides an infinite number of others; those of most note as comprehending all the others, are those of Samarath, Ceurawath, Bisnow and Goeghy. The Parsis and their Religion.Besides the Benjans there is another sort of Pagans whom they call the Par∣sis, who for the most part reside by the Sea-coast, addicting themselves to Trades and Commerce; they believe that there is one God, preserver of the Universe, who acts alone and immediately in all things; but he hath as they fancy about 30 several Servants, to whom he giveth an absolute power over the things which he hath entrusted them with, but withall they are obliged to give an account unto him; and for these Servants they have a great veneration, who have each their particular charge, as one having the Government of the Earth, another of Fruits, another of Beasts, another of Military affairs: Others who have influences on men, some giving understanding, others wealth, &c. Another who takes the possession of the Souls departed; which conducts them to the Judges where they are examined, and according to their good or evil deeds, receive their Sentence, and are carried by the good or bad Angels, who attend the Judges to Paradise or Hell, where they think they shall abide until the end of the world, which will be 1000 years; after which time, they shall enter into other Bodies, and lead a better life then they did before. Another hath the goverment of Waters, another of Metals, another of Fire, which they hold Sacred, &c. They have no Mosques or publick places for their Devotion; they have a very great esteem of their Teachers and Doctors, allowing them a plentiful Estate. Their Widows are suffered to marry a second time. Adultery and Fornication they severely punish. They are forbidden the eating of any thing that hath life. Drunkenness they likewise strictly punish. These People are much given to Avarice, and circumventing those they deal withal. The Ma∣homitans or Mogolls that here inhabit are of a good stature, have their Hair black and flaggy, but are of a clearer Complexion then the other sort of People aforementioned.Their habit & behaviour. They habit themselves something like the Persians; their Garments about their Waists, are close to their Bodies, but downwards wide; they use Girdles and their Shoos and the Covering of their Head, is much the same with those of the Turks. And they are likewise distinguished by their Glothes, which according to the degree and quality, and the person, doth ex∣ceed in richness. They are very civil, ingenious, and reserved, yet are expen∣sive in their Appareb, Feastings, and great lovers of Women. And so much for the Mogolls Countrey. The Peninsula of INDIA without the Ganges. Its bounds.THe Peninsula without the Ganges, is between the Mouths of Indus and Ganges, and advances from the East of the Great Mogoll, unto the eighth degree of Latitude, on this side the Aequator. The Ocean or Indian Sea washes it on three sides; to wit, the Gulf of Bengala, once Gangeticus Sinus, on the East; the Gulph of Cambaya, anciently Barigazenus Sinus, and the Sea which regards Arabia, on the West; towards the South, that which regards Cylan on one side, and the Maldives on the other.
We will divide this Peninsula into four principal parts, which shall be De∣can, Golconda, Narsingue or Bisnagar, and Malabar. The three first,Its parts. and the greatest, have each their King; or if there be more, they depend and hold of one alone: The fourth and last part, hath likewise formerly been a Kingdom alone; at present is many, but which hold one of another. DECAN. THe Kingdom of DECAN is washed on the West, by the Indian Ocean, the Gulf of Cambaya. It is divided into three others,Kingdom of Decan. which they call Decan, Cunkan and Balaguate; the two first on the Coast. Balaguate is East∣ward of the other two up in the Land, and composed of Vallies which are be∣low, and between the Mountains of Gate; beyond which, are the Kingdoms of Golconda and Narsingue or Bisnagar. In the particular Decan, are the Cities of Amedanagar, Chaul, Dabul, &c. In Cunkan are the Cities of Visapor, Soliapor, Goa, Paranda, Pagode,Its chief places&c. Likewise in Balaguate, Lispor, Beder, Doltabad, Hamedanager, Visapor and Be∣der, are the principal Cities, and those where the Dealcan or Idalcan makes his residence; but none more considerable then Goa, though they are fair, well built, large, and populous. Goa is a City as fair, rich, and of as great Traffick as any in the East; being situated in an Island of the same name, which the Rivers of Mandova and Guari make at their falling into the Sea. Alphonso Albuquerque took it in the year 1510. and since the Portugals have established themselves so powerfully, that their Vice-Roy, a Bishop, and their Council for the East-Indies have here their Residence. The Commodities found in this City (being the Staple of the Commodities of this part of the Indies, as also of Persia, Arabia, China, Ar∣menia, &c.) are Precious Stones, Gold, Silver, Pearls, Silk raw and wrought, Cotton, of which they make several Manufactures; also Spices, Druggs, Fruits, Corn, Iron, Steel, with divers others which the said Countreys afford, but the Natural Commodities of Goa are not considerable. Besides their great Traffick with several Nations, their Riches and Policy which they observe,Its riches beau∣ty, &c.Vincent Blanc makes account that its Hospital is the fairest, the best accommodated and served, and the richest of any, making it exceed that of the Holy Spirit at Rome, and the Infermerica at Malta, which are the best of all Christendom. Their Streets large, their Houses fair, especially their Palaces and Publick Buildings which are very magnificent: Their Churches are stately and richly adorned; their Windows are beautified with Mother of Pearl, and Shells of Tortoises of divers colours; which are ingeniously cut in neat Works. This City is in compass above 15 miles, and though it is without Gates or Walls, yet by reason of its Castle, Forts, and the strength it receiveth from the Island, is a place of great strength and force: It hath a great and good Haven,Its strength. which they make their Harbor for their Indian Fleet, by which they command the Seas there abouts. The Portugals here live in all manner of delight and pleasure; and with a pride and presumption so great, that the least and most beggerly among them, take to themselves the titles of Gentlemen of the House and Chamber of the King, Knights, Esquires, &c. being very highly conceited of themselves, and exceed∣ing proud and stately, but withal very civil and courteous; no person of quality walks the Streets a-foot, but are carried by their Slaves in a Palanquin, or ride on Horses, and the Women seldom go abroad publickly. Both Sexes are extreamly given to Venery, by reason of which, the Pox is very frequent among them, of which abundance dies: Their Women have an excessive love to white Men, and will use their uttermost endeavours to enjoy them. The Men are so jealous of their Wives, that they will scarce suffer their nearest Relati∣ons to see them, by reason they are so much desirous of the enjoyment of Men, and they so much of them. In their Apparel, as also in the furniture of their Houses, they are very cost∣ly. The Women are here delivered without pain, and not having the use
of a Midwife, or any one but her self; and no sooner is she delivered, but she is about her occasions, not observing the custom among us, in keeping their Chamber a month together. Most of them live to the age of 100 years, and that in perfect health; but these are not the Portugals, but are the Natives which are Pagans and Benjans. To this City do resort Merchants from Arabia, Persia, Armenia, Cambaya, Bengala, Siam, Pegu, China, Java, Malacca, and from several other Countries, it being the Staple of all Indian Commodities. In the heart of the City, is a Street, where every morning, from seven to nine, not only the Merchants meet for the vending and buying of Commodities, which are here set forth for sale, like our Fairs; but also the Gentry of the Ci∣ty meet, as well to hear news, as to satisfie their fancies in the sight of the Com∣modities: And besides this Street, every Trade hath its particular Street, one Trade not intermixing with another. Besides Goa, the Land of the Bardes, the Islles of Salsette, of Coran, of Divar, and some other Lands about Goa, are the Portugals: As likewise, the City of Chaul, on the Coast, where they have a great Trade of Silk; and from these places they have their provision brought them, and that at very easie rates; for the Island of it self is so barren, that it will scarce produce any thing. Decan taken altogether, hath one King alone, which they call Idolcan or Dialcan. The Great Mogoll hath taken from him some places in the particu∣lar Decan, and the Portugals Goa, Chaul, and some other places on the Coast. This Prince is yet powerful, at least in regard of the Indians: He hath taken Dabul from the Portugals, and ruined it. He once besieged Chaul, and divers times Goa, leading in his Armies near 200000 men. In fine, he made Peace with the Portugals; the Vice-Roy of the East-Indies for the Crown of Portu∣gal, having always an Ambassador at the Idolcans Court, and the Idolcan ha∣ving one at Goa with the Vice-Roy. And though this Prince is so powerful in men, and so well provided with Ammunition, and his Artillery greater and better then any Prince about him, yet is he become Tributary to the Great Mo∣goll. Its Commodi∣ties.All the Country is good, fruitful, watered with several Rivers, hath store of precious Stones, of Cotton and Silk, of which they make divers Manufactures; of Pepper, of Fruits and other Commodities. The Inhabitants or Natives of the Country are Pagans, and for the most part Benjans, but eat any kind of Flesh, except that of an Ox, Cow, Buffe, Swine or Wild-Bore. A Swine they abhor, but have a great veneration for a Cow or an Ox. But as to the manner of their life, as in their Marrriages, Interments, Purifications, and other Ceremonies in their Religion; as also in their Habits and Houses, which are very mean, their Houses being made of Straw, and with∣al, small and low; having no light but what enters in at the door, which is not so high as a mans Waist: In which, their chiefest furniture and houshold-stuffs, are Mats to lie upon in the night, on which they also eat their Meat; their Dishes, Drinking-cups, &c. are made of Fig-leaves, which they daub and plaister together. In these, and the like Ceremonies and Customs, they imitate the Benjans aforementioned, The rest of the people which here inhabit, are Mahometans and Jews, which here enjoy the freedom of their Religion, but the Subjects of the King of Portugal are Catholicks, those of the English Pro∣testants.
GOLCONDA. The Kingdom of Golconda; its bounds and extent.THe name of GOLCONDA hath been known but for few years; nevertheless this is a powerful and rich Kingdom; but which hath been confounded with the name of Orixa. It is upon the Gulph of Bengala, which it regards towards the East and South, neighbouring on the Mogolls and the Kingdom of Bengala, towards the North. It stretches 200 Leagues on the Coast in length, and near 100 up in the Land in breadth. It yields 20 Millions of yearly Revenue, is very well peopled, and its People addicted to all sorts of Manufactures. They make Cotton Pintado's so artificially, and with such lively colours, that it is esteemed better than Silk. They build great Ships, trade to Mecca, Aquem, Bengala, Pegu, and throughout all the Indies: Its chief pla∣ces or For∣tresses.There are in this Estate 66 Castles and Fortresses, where the ordinary Gar∣risons are kept; and these Castles are on inaccessible Rocks, which they call Conda. Golconda, which the Persians call Hidrabrand, is the chief and resi∣dence of the King; it is distant from the Port of Musulipatan about 60 Leagues, which is a fair City seated on an Arm of the Sea; adjoyning to the Kingdom of Bisnagar, and not far from Cape Guadavari. Hath its Air pleasant, its Soil fruitful, of about 5 or 6 Leagues circuit; nor doth its King yield much to the Great Mogoll in Riches, precious Stones, in store of Elephants, or all sorts of magnificence. But his Estates being much less, and his People less warlike, constraineth him to send him every year 400000 Pagodes in form of Tribute. The Country rich in Dia∣monds and Precious Stones.This Country moreover hath no Mines of Gold, Silver, or Copper, some it hath of Iron and Steel, but many of Diamonds and other precious Stones, so rich and abundant, that in 1622 the King caused it to be shut up, and the labour to cease, fearing lest the too great quantity should make them neglected. Others say, for fear it should draw the Great Mogoll into his Estates. Condapoli; its chief Fortress is so great, that in circumference it contains six others; and these six are one above the other, each having Wood, Fruits, and Land sufficient to maintain the Garrisons destined for their defence, which amount to 12000 Men. Candavara is another Fortress, 15 or 16 Leagues from Condapoli; and thence at certain intervals there are Towers, on which with certain Lights they give signal of all that passes in the Country. On the Sea-Coast or Gulph of Bengala, are seated several Towns, some of which are well known by Merchants; as Guadavari, which gives name to a Cape, on which it is seated, Vixaopatan, Narsingapatan, Pulacate, Palhor, Manicapatan, Calecote, Caregara; on the Cape Segogora, or Das Palmas, Polarin, Contiri∣patan, and others. The Portugals have a Fortress at Masulipatan, which is one of the best Ports of the Country; the City is not walled, and belong to the Prince. The Air and fertility of the Country.The Air is every where healthful, the Soil fertil, producing twice or thrice a year Grains, Fruits, &c. almost all different from ours. Their Seasons are distinguished in three manners; they have very great heats in March, April, May, and June; and that is their Summer. Much Rain in July, August, Sep∣tember, and October; and that is their Autumn. Fresh Weather, or little heat in November, December, January, and February, which is their Spring: For Winter they have none. One of their principal Revenues comes from Salt, which alone yields 1800000 Pagodes, or so many Crowns. Their other Re∣venues are drawn from several Commodities; amongst the rest Diamonds, of which all above 5 Carats belong to the Prince; nor dare any keep them on pain of death.
BISNAGAR, or NARSINGƲE. The Estates of Bisnagar; and its Parts.SOuth of Decan and Golconda are the Estates of BISNAGAR other∣wise NARSINGƲE; these two places being the principal ones of the Realm. Narsingue, not far from the Port of Paleacate, about the midst of the Coast of Choromandel: Bisnagar, towards the Mountains of Gate, and near Canara. The whole Estate is divided into three principal quarters, and these 3 quarters into 7 Kingdoms, and extends it self on two different parts of the Indian Sea, on the Gulph of Ganges or Bengala, towards the East; and on the Gulph of Indus or Cambaya, towards the West. On this side, the Coast is 65 Leagues long; in the other 250. The three principal quarters are called CANARA, BISNAGAR, and CHOROMANDEL. Canar occupies all the Western Coast, between the Estates of Decan and Malabar; Bisnagar and Choromandel hold all the Eastern Coast: the last towards the Coast of the Peschery, and Isle of Ceylan; and the first towards Golconda. Canara hath the Kingdoms of Onor and Baticala on the Sea, and that of Borsopa farther in the Land, which stretches to the Mountains of Gate. Bisnagar hath the Kingdoms of Tienlique and Bisnagar; Choromandel, those of Choromandel and Tamul. The chief Ci∣ties and For∣tresses.Onor, Baticala, and Gorcopa, are the capital Cities each of their Kingdoms; the two first to one, the last subject to a particular King; but all Tributaries to Bisnagar. Those four on the East and Gulph of Bengala, are immediately subject to the King of Bisnagar, except that the Portugals hold Maliapur and Negapatan. But moreover the Estates of the Naicques, of Tanjaor, of Gingi, and of Madure, are esteemed to be of Bisnagar, because they make part of it, and are likewise at present Vassals and Tributaries of the King of Bisnagar. Formerly these Naicques were only Governours of the Quarters they at pre∣sent possesse, these Governours revolting, and each seising his Government. The Kings of Bisnagar having long made War upon them, to reduce them to their duty: They in the end remained Naicques, that is, Hereditary Lords, and absolute over those Quarters, paying some Tribute to the Kings of Bisnagar. The City of Gingi is esteemed one of the greatest and fairest of India, in the midst of which is a Fortress, and in that Fortress a Rock almost inaccessible; they give likewise to this Naicque the City of Cindambaram, after it Chista∣patama; and on the Coast of Choromandel, Coloran, the Princes of Trinidi and Salavacca, are subject to him. The Naicque of Tanjaor hath his Estate between those of Gingi and Ma∣dure, and near the Port of Negapatan, which belongs to the Portugals. Besides Tanjaor and Castan in the Upland, the Cities of Triminapatan, of Trangabar, and of Triminavez, belong unto him. The Naicque of Madure, besides Madure his capital City and a very fair one, holds almost all the Coast of the Pesoheria, and the little Isle of Manar near Ceylan. This Coast extends from the Cape of Comori unto the Cape of Negapatan, viewing in the Ocean the not far distant Isle of Ceylan: And the name of the Pescheria hath been given it, by reason of the Pearls which they yearly fish there for about the end of March and the beginning of April; and this Fishing endures only 15 or 21 days, there being then about 50 or 60000 Persons employed either to fish, or to keep the Fishermens Vessels from trouble. These Pearls are exposed to sale in July, August, and September. Tutucori and Manancor, are the best Cities of this Coast, which is of 75 Leagues length, where there is about 25 Cities. The people of Paravas are mixed along the Coast, and live in some form of a Republick, paying some rights to the Naicque of Madure; and these are they that fish or the Pearls: this fishing being all the riches of the Country, which of it self is neither fertil nor pleasant, but dry and scorched. The King of Bisnagar very powerful.Yet is the King of Bisnagar very powerful, formerly marching against the Idalcan, it hath been accounted that he had in his Army 40000 Horse, 700000 Foot, and 700 Elephants. His chief City is Bisnagar or Visnagar, a City very beautiful, seated in a temperate Air, and by reason of the fertility of the
Country about it, which brings forth sundry Commodities naturally, besides the industry and ingenuity of the Inhabitants in several Manufactures; but especi∣ally in their fine Cotton-Linnen, which they make of divers colours, and inter∣woved with several sorts of Loom-works and flowers, which are esteemed bet∣ter than Silk. Also the goodness of its Haven, hath made it a place of as great Commerce as any City on the Coast of Choromandel;An English Factory at Musulipatan, though at Musulipatan the English have settled a Factory (both for the providing and lading hence the Commodities of the Country,) more by reason of its scituation, than for the goodness of place, it being of no beauty nor grandure; its Houses being low and ill built, and its Streets not many, and those that are, narrow and ill contrived; but above all it is seated in a barten Soil, by reason of the extraor∣dinary Heat, which here rages from March to July; them from July to No∣vember, the great Rains and Winds, which reign continually, so that their Temperate weather is but from November to March. Vincent le Blanc saith, That the City of Bisnagar is able to set forth 100000 Horse; next to it Narsingue, on the side of a little Hill towards the Sea; Tripi∣ty, not far from Chandegry; and Cangevaran, not far from, Maliapor, or St. Thomas Trivalur, is famous for the great number of its Idols. Cirangapatan is between Chandegry and Mangalor, which is on the Coast of Canara: the Fortress of Vellur, between Chandegry and Narsingue, was the Kings Court in 1609. All the Country is healthful, rich, and fertil in Corn and Fruits,The fertility, temperature, &c. of the Country. breeding store of Cattel and Fowl; and Diamonds are found in the Mountains of Gate, near Chandegry, and in other places quantity of Amethysts and white Saphirs. They have all sorts of Beasts, both tame and wild: their Elephants are docil, their People healthful and well disposed, but not couragious. The Pepper of Onor is esteemed the most weighty and the best of all these quarters: the Por∣tugals lade from thence 7 or 8000 Quintals a year. Baticala, a Port of Rice of several sorts, different both in price and goodness; the black Rice is esteem∣ed more healthful, and better than the white. Between Peleagate and Narsingue, there is an obscure and deep Valley full of Trees, which still drop water like those in the Isle of Ferr in the Canaries: near this Valley there is abundance of Sugars, whose Canes prest serve to feed Beasts, among which Hogs most delight in them, which makes them contract a favour rather of Sugar than Salt; yet are they worth little. The Revenue of the King.Some give the King of Narsingue but 10 or 1200 l.Sterling of yearly Re∣venue, whereas others report him to have 10 or 12 Millions of Gold yearly, which is most likely. He entertains ordinarily 40000 Naires, 20000 Horses; and for the service of his House 12 or 15000 Persons, 1000 Horses, and 800 Elephants. Its People.Almost all the People are Idolaters, some Mahumetans, and a few Catholicks. The Jesuites have two residences; one at Chandegry, and the other at Vetlur, to no small benefit. Amongst the Customs of these Barbarians, they have the inhuman custom for the Women to burn themselves with the Corps of their deceased Husbands. Texera saith, that the Naique of Madure deceasing in his time, his 400 Wives and Concubines cast themselves into the same Fire, and burnt themselves with the Kings Body. There was 375 burnt with the Naique of Taujaor, in the year 1600, and as many or more with the last Naique of Gingi. Here the Wo∣men burn themselves with the Corps of their deceased Husbands.As for the form and custom observed in the burning of these silly wretches, I shall borrow from Sir Tho. Herbert, as he hath it in his book of Travels, p. 362. where he saith, that the Husband being dead the Wife prepares her self for her Funeral, habiting her self in transparent Lawn; her Nose, Ears, and Fin∣gers she adorns with Precious Stones, &c. but her Legs, Thighs and Arms she fettereth with Chains, which they hold as expressions of Love; in one hand she holds a Ball, and in the other a Nosegay of Flowers, both as Em∣blems of Paradise: and being thus habited, she is accompanied to the place by all her Relations, Friends, and Acquaintance; and all the way going the Branch∣man or Priest denotes the joys she is to possess, together with the assu∣rance of enjoying her Husband in the Elysium: which words do much excite her to valour; so that when she cometh to the place, seeth the flame,
and the Carcass of her dead Husband, whom she longeth to be with in Ely∣sium, being as it were like a hot-headed Lover, transported with joy, she takes leave of her Friends and Relations, and jumps into the flame, in which the Corps of her Husband was first put, which soon unites in Ashes; during which time they have several sorts of Musick: and to make the Ceremony the better, their Branchman exhorts them not to quit their Husbands, casting store of sweet Wood and Oil into the fire, to take away the unsavoury smell; and this Law was made, because the Women did frequently poyson their Husbands upon any discontent, and so took others: but as Linscot says, this is only a Custom for their Nobles and Priests, it being prohibited to the meaner People. A Cu∣stom, I think, not greatly to be desired by any; and besides this Heathenish Custom, they have several others as bad and Idolatrous, Satan having here dis∣played his Banner of Impiety, being a People for the most part averse to Law and Morality. Likewise the Custom which they observe in their Marriages is as strange; for the Branchman, with a Cow and the Man and Woman, go toge∣ther to the Water-side, where the Priest (after he hath muttered a short Prayer) joyns their hands to the Cows Tai), and having poured upon them hallowed Oil, he forceth the Cow into the River, where she continueth a good while, and being come out they unty them; and this they hold for a solemn Marriage, and sacred for ever, the Cow being a creature which by them is highly esteemed and reverenced. The Coast of Choromandel, and its Trade.Among the places which are on the Coast of Choromandel, Negapatan, and Maliapur, belong to the Portugals, and formerly they alone of the Europe∣ans had all the Traffick; now the Hollanders hold Gueldria, the English the Fort St. George, called by the Indians Sadrapatan; and both have their Fa∣ctors throughout the Coast. Megapatan is great of Trade, though seated in an unhealthful Climate, uttering many valuable Merchandizes: They gather Rice in quantity sufficient to serve their Neighbours. Maliapur a small, but well known Town on this Coast, is the place where those of the Country be∣lieve that St. Thomas was Martyred and interr'd; and there were many Chri∣stans who called it St. Thomas, when the Portugals entred the Indies; they are still a considerable body, and may easily be made return to true Christianity. The old City is ruined, the new was rebuilt by the Portugals, where there is a Chapel dedicated to St. Thomas; and it is erected into a Bishoprick under the Archbishop of Goa. MALABAR. Malabar, its fertility, com∣modities, &c.MALABAR is the last of the four parts we have proposed in the Pe∣ninsula of Indus without the Ganges; the least in Continent, but not in goodness. All the Country is healthful, fruitful, and rich: It hath little Wheat, but instead of it, it hath great plenty of Rice, Mayz, and other Grains, Fruits, quantity of Drugs and Spices, Precious Stones, Silk, Gin∣ger, Cassia, and abundance of all sorts of Beasts, yields Wood, and such fair Trees for the Masts of great Ships, that Norway boasts not better; yet its greatest Riches consists in its Pepper and Precious Stones. Its Limits.Some extend Malabar from the River of Aliga, or from the Cape of Ra∣mos unto that of Comorin; but all that is between the River of Aliga and Cangerecora, having already passed under the name of Canara, where the Kings are Tributaries to him of Bisnagar; we will follow the others, who limit Malabar between the River of Cangerecora and the Cape of Comorin; where there are many Kings, all once subject to the Samorin of Calicut: At present those of Calicut, Cochin, Cananor, and Coulan, are the most powerful. The Coast of Malabar, and its Parts or Kingdoms.The Coast of MALABAR is about 125 Leagues in length, and is divi∣ded into several Kingdoms, of which the King of Cananor holds 20 Leagues, he of Calicut 25, he of Cochin 15, and he of Coulan with Travancor, 40 and odd; the rest is possessed by many. Those of Chambais, Montigue, and Ba∣dara, are very near one another, and between Cananor and Calicut: Those of Tanor and Cranganor, are between Calicut and Cochin: Those of Porca
and Calecoulan are between Couchin and Coulan; and he of Travancor, be∣tween Coulan and Cape Comorin, near which the Country is not so good as the rest of Malabar. In the High-lands are those of Cota near Cananor, of Auriola, of Cottagan, of Bipur, of Coucuran, of Panur, and of Curiga; above Calicut, Tanur and Cranganor; Those of Muterte, of Marta, and Batimena, towards Cochin: In the Mountains are those of Mangatt, of Paru, of Pimienta, of Changa∣nara, of Trivilar, of Panapelli, of Angamale (where there was an Archbishop of Christians of St. Thomas, reduced to a Bishoprick; and transferred to Cranganor:) two of the Ticantutes, of Punhali, of Caranaretto, and others. The people called Maledus, and those of the Mountains Pande live in the form of a Republick Cotate, near Cape de Comori, is of the Kingdom of Travanco, and hath good trading. Calicut is esteemed able to bring more than 100000 men into the Field; Cananor few less, Cochin and Coulan each 50000. They use little Cavalry, because the Country is low, moist, and divided by many streams. Calicut pretends to have some authority over all the Kings of Malabar, for which those of Cananor, Cochin, and Coulan, to which Travancor is sometime past united, seem to care little at present, a good part of the rest still hold for him. Cananor, besides what it possesses in the firm Land, holds likewise some Islands among the Maldives, for having assisted one of their Kings against his Rebells; he possesses for the same reason the Isle of Malicut, 35 or 40 Leagues to the Northward of the Maldives: and the five Isles of Diavandorou, likewise 30 Leagues North from Malicut. All these Isles are small, Malicut of only 4 Leagues circumference, the others each 6 or 7: they are more healthful than the Maldives, their Inhabitants rich, and trade to the Continent, to Malabar, and to the Maldives, and elsewhere. Cochin hath gained some reputation since it allied it self with the Portugals, by whose means it is freed from the tribute it ought to the King of Calicut, and hath drawn to its Estates the greatest trade of all Malabar; and the City is so increased, that it is not now inferior to Calicut. The chief Cities.And in all these Kingdoms aforementioned, contained in (and along the Coasts of) Malabar, there are several good, large, and well built Cities, being well inhabited, rich, and of a considerable trade; but those of most note in the said Kingdoms are called by the same names, as that in Calicut, Calicut; that in Ca∣nanor, Cananor, &c. The Natives and Inhabitants of Malabar.The Original Inhabitants of Malabar, are divided into Bramenis, Nayres, and People. The Bramenis are the priests, Sacrificers to Idols; some addict themselves to Arms with the Nayres, others to trade; but to whatsoever vo∣cation they apply themselves, they have a particular manner of living. The Nayres addicted themselves wholly to Arms. The People meddle only with labour, Manufactures, Fishing, &c. and are like Slaves. Besides the Natives, there are many Strangers, who live only on the Coast, and these are called Malabares, whence the name is communicated to the Country. These Malabares are Mahumetans, whereas the others are Pagans, and very Superstitious, worshipping an Idol seated on a Brazen Throne, and Crowned, but of a horrid form, enough to fright one; and unto this Idol, be∣sides their Religious Ceremonies, they offer up the Virginity of all their Daugh∣ters before they are married, or else to their Priests. This Idol having in the place of his Privy parts, a sharp bodkin of Gold or Silver fastned, on which the Bride is forcibly set, which by reason of the sharpness forceth great store of blood to come; and if, though by her Husband, she proves with Child the first year, they believe this Idol got it, which they highly esteem; but by reason of the pain, the Priests by enjoying them first, doth quit them from the other, out of which two, all are served: they commonly marry at 10 or 12 years of age; they are very black, and well limbed; they wear their Hair long, and curl'd about their shoulders; they go naked, having only a cloth about their middle to hide their nakedness, which hangs down to their knees; they are treacherous, cruel and bloody-minded; there are likewise some Jews, and since the Portugals have set footing, many Christians, besides those which they call of St. Thomas; these being of the Mountains, and those of the Coast.
The Peninsula of INDIA, within the GANGES. THE Peninsula of India,its bounds. which is beyond or within the Ganges, is our third and last part of the Asiatique, or East-Indies. We will give unto it all that rests of India unto China, and bound it on the East by China, and by the Sea of the Philippine Islands; on the South with that Sea, which flows amongst the Islands of Sonde; On the West by the Sea or Gulf of Bengala, and by the Estates of the Mogoll; and on the North we will stretch it as far as the Tartars: so that it will take up all India beyond the Ganges, what is pos∣sessed by the Mogoll excepted. It Kingdoms and parts.We have in this Peninsula a great number of Kingdoms, which we will con∣sider under the three Principal ones; viz. Pegu, Sian, and Cochinchina. Under the name of Pegu we will range all those Estates and Kingdoms which lie upon the River, which descend from the Lake of Chiamay unto Pegu; under the name of Sian, all the Estates and Kingdoms which are about Sian; and under that of Cochinchina, all that is nearest to and on the West West of China. This last part is most Easterly of the three, the second most Southerly, and the first more to the West; and this hath almost all been subject to the King of Pegu; the other to the King of Sian, and the last was part of China. PEGƲ. The Kingdom of Pegu, and its parts.THE Kingdom of PEGƲ when in its splendor was so rich and power∣ful, that some would equal it to China. Vincent Blanc saith that it con∣tained two Empires, and 26 Kingdoms or Crowned Estates; I believe that the two Empires were Pegu and Siami, or possibly Sian, this having been subject or tributary to Pegu: and the Kingdoms are Martavan, Manar, Tangu, Mar∣sin, Jangoma, and Brama, whose chief Cities are Pegu, Brema, Canarane, Pandior, Cassubi, Ava, Boldia, Mandranelle, Tinco, Prom, Dunbacaon, Tole∣ma, Maon, Arracon, Largaray, Cassubi, Ledoa, Tipoura, Xara, and Chacomas. The greatest part of these Estates taken apart, are rich, and powerful, being able to set forth to War, some 2, some 3, some 400000 men. They have in ma∣ny places Mines of Gold, Silver, and Precious Stones, besides Grains, Fruits, Herbs, Fowl, and Beasts, which are here found excellent. The Kingdoms of Tan∣gu and of Brama are the most powerful; since this hath sometime seized, and the other with that of Arracan ruined the Estates of Pegu. Brama and its fertility, and chief places.Brama besides its Mines of precious Stones, hath Benjamin, India-Lake, and certain Herbs, from which they take Silk; they make divers Manufactures, particularly Caps much esteemed. Ava abounds in all sorts of Victuals, hath divers Metals, Musk, and Rubies. Canelan hath the finest Rubies, Saphires and other Stones. Prom hath Lacque and Lead. Tinco fetches many Merchan∣dizes from China. Vincent Blanc esteems the City of Canarana as rich and mag∣nificent as any in India; he places it between the Rivers of Jiama, and of Cay∣poumo or Pegu, giving it four Leagues Circuit, and making it Metropolis of the Kingdom of Caypoumo, which is likewise called Canarana. This Country hath Turquesses, and Emeralds the fairest of all the East. Cassubi is in a Plain, bounded with high Hills, from whence descend many streams, which water the Plain, where there are excellent Fruits, among the rest Pomegranates the largest and best of India, excellent Raisins and Manna, which must be gathered before Sun-rise, which else dispatches it. Their Mountains are filled with sa∣vage Beasts, where they get the Skins and Furs of Ermines and Sables of di∣vers sorts, all very exquisite. The people of Transiana are fair, and white; the Women exceeding beautiful, and the Men very proud: They have Mines of Gold, Silver, and Diamonds; their King keeps ordinarily 50000 Horse, 1000 Ele∣phants,
and paies his tribute to the King of Pegu in Horses, which are very ex∣cellent. Their Forests have many Wild Beasts; among the rest, that which gives the Bezoar. The Inhabitants of Boldia are esteemed the most honest and civil of all these quarters: So that they cannot but be people of Trade; and indeed all these Kingdoms have divers Commodities which make them rich. Pegu exceeding rich in Gold, Silver, and Pre∣cious Stones.The Kingdom of Pegu, which hath commanded, and had for Subjects or Tri∣butaries almost all these Estates, and likewise others towards Sian, and Sian it self, cannot but be extreamly rich and powerful. And truly, Gold, Silver, Pearls, and Precious Stones, have been as common in the Courts of the Kings of Pegu, as if all the Orient had brought all its Riches thither. The Floors of Buildings, the Moveables, and the Vessels, with which they served themselves for diver∣tisement, were so inriched within and without, with Gold and Azure, that it is not imaginable, if we did not know this to be the Aurea Regio, and likewise the Argentea Regio of Ptolomy: Yet this must be believed to have been long since; but however, that it is at present the richest Country of all the Indies: And for the same reason, one of the best peopled, and most powerful. Its fertility and Commo∣dities.This Country, by reason of the overflowing of the River Pegu, which runs through the Kingdom, makes it become exceeding fruitful, and of a fat and rich soyl; so that it produceth great abundance of Grains, Fruits, and other pro∣ducts of the Earth in great plenty. Also Beasts, Fowl, and Fish, great store of Civet-Cats, from whom they take Civet, Lacque, which is made by Ants, (as Bees make Wax with us) Gold, Silver, Precious Stones, Drugs, Spices, Lead, Sugar, &c. This Kingdom hath plenty of good Towns and Cities,The City of Pegu, the chief of the King∣dom, described. its Metro∣polis bearing the name of the Kingdom. It is divided into the Old and the New; the one and the other together make a Square; being encompassed with a strong Wall, and a great Ditch well fortified, having on each side five Gates, besides many Turrets richly beautified. It is large, strong, rich, and stately; the King and his Nobility and Courtiers takes up the New City, which is sepa∣rated from the Old by a Wall and Ditch well watered; in which are kept many Crocodils for the watching the place by night: The Wall hath several Gates on all sides, for the convenience of the people to pass in and out. The Streets are very fair, straight, and so broad, that fifteen men may ride a-breast on both sides. The Houses well built, having before every door Palm-trees, which are set, not only to make a pleasant show, but also to keep the Passengers from the heat of the Sun, which is very great. The Palace Royal.The Palace Royal is seated in the midst of the City, having its particular Wall, Moat, and other Fortifications; the Palace being very stately and large the greatest part of the Buildings being sustained by Pillars of Jet, and all the Stones so shining, that those which are without, represent the Neighbouring Gardens and Forests; and those which are within the Paved Chambers, other Rooms, and the Ceilings above, so well, that one seemeth to walk on Gold and Azure. Nor doth this his stately Palace exceed his Magnificence and Pomp, without which he is never so much as seen. The Old City is inhabited only by Merchants, Artificers, and Sea-men, where there is great store of Ware-houses strongly built of Brick to prevent fire (which the City is much subject unto,) in which the Merchants keep their Goods. And for the better encrease of Trade, the King doth constitute Eight Brokers, whose Offices are to look after and sell the Goods, as well of strangers, as the Inhabitants; giving a very just account thereof: For which, they are allowed two pence per Cent. The like is observed in the buying of Commodities. And these Brokers by their places, are obliged to provide Strangers or Merchants with a House, and orders certain Maids of the City to go to him, that out of them he may make his choice; which done, he contracts with her friends to pay them a certain sum for the use of her, as they can agree, which is not great; and this Maid serveth him as his Servant by day, doing what he commandeth; and as his Wife by night: And at the expiration of the term agreed upon, he leaveth her, and she goeth to her Friends without any disgrace at all. The People are of a mean stature,The People, their Habit. nimble and strong, great lovers of Women, which takes them from warlike affairs, in which they are not very expert. Their habit is but mean, contenting themselves
for the most part, with a piece of Linnen to cover their nakedness; they all black their Teeth, because they say Dogs teeth are white. They are generally all Pagans,Their belief. and believe that God hath under him several other Gods; that he is the Author of all good which arriveth to mankind: But he leaveth all evils which belong to man, to the Devil; by reason of which, they so much adore and fear him, lest he should hurt them; which God, being good, they say, will not. Their Devotion they perform on Mundays, their Priests going about with Tin-basons, making a noise to waken the People, and inviting them to their de∣votions, in which they chiefly exhort them to Morality, as to avoid Theft, Adul∣tery, Murder, &c. and to love Vertue. They have a great esteem for their Priests, who live a very solitary and exemplary life. They have Five principal Feasts which they observe very strictly, ceremoniously, and with greast state and pomp.Marriage not kept during life. They that Marry buy their Wives of their Parents; and when he is weary of her, he may send her home, but must lose the Money he paid for her: But if she leave him, as she may do, then he may receive the Money paid for her. SIAN or SIAM. Kingdom of Sian, its parts.THe Kingdom of SIAN, and those Estates, which we will comprehend under the name of Sian, are to the North of Pegu. We may consider them in two principal parts; of which, one shall retain the name of Sian, and the other that of Malacca. This latter is a Peninsula, which extends it self from the first degree of Latitude, unto the 11 or 12; from whence the first ad∣vances it self into the Main Land, unto the 19 or 20 degree on this side the Equator.Its extent. They reach then each 250, and together 4 or 500 Leagues from South to North. But the Peninsula of Malacca is very streight, not being above 10 or 12 Leagues broad in the Isthmus, which separates it from Sian; in other places 20, 30, 40, and some times 80. Sian is almost of an equal length and breadth. Under the name of Sian, separated from the Peninsula of Malacca, we com∣prehend the Kingdoms of Sian, Martaban, Jangoma, and Camboya; under the name of Malacca, those of Tanacerin, Juncalaon, Singora, Queda, Pera, Pa∣tane, Pan, Malacca, Ihor, and others, as in the Geographical Table. The chief places of the particular Sian.The Kingdom of Sian, especially so called, hath several Cities of note, viz. First, Odiaa which some call Sian; the Metropolis being a City of a large ex∣tent, a place of so great strength, that in 1567. they stoutly defended themselves against an Army of 1400000 fighting Men, which the King of Pegu brought against them, for twenty Months together: By reason of which, together with several other mutations that have since hapned amongst them, the City hath been much eclipsed of its former beauty, splendor, and riches; yet by reason of its commodious scituation on the River Menam, is still a place of great Trade and Commerce, is rich, and populous. The Houses are built very high, by reason of the annual overflowing of this River about the Month of March: So that it covereth the Earth for about 120 Miles in compass; which renders these Coun∣tries very fruitful, as the Nile doth Egypt. During this Inundation, Its Inhabi∣tants retire to the upper Rooms of their Houses; and to every House there is a Boat, or other Vessel belonging; by which means, they negotiate their affairs, until the River returns to her usual bounds. Its Commodi∣ties and Trade.The principal Commodities of this City, or indeed of the Kingdom, are Cotton-Linnens of several sorts, Benjamin, Lacque, of which they make excellent Hard Wax; Also that costly Wood which the Portugals call Palo Dangula, and Calamba, which is weighed against Silver and Gold; for  Perfumes; and the Wood Sapon, used by Dyers; also Spices, some Drugs, Diamonds, Gold, Camphora, Bezar-Stones, Musk, Porcelaine; and lastly, that excellent Wine, or Distilled Liquod, which they call Nipe, which they make of Cocos or Indian Nuts, being of great esteem over all India, and elsewhere. Its other places are Bankock, noted for excellent Pepper. Lugor seated on the Sea-shore, and Socotay, famous for having a Temple only made of Metal, which
is 80 Spans high, and answerable in length and breadth, being adorned with a∣bundance of Idols, built by one of their Kings at his coming to the Crown. Martaban, its commodities; &c.The Kingdom of MARTABAN, towards the Gulph of Bengala, is con∣tiguous to Pegu, to which it hath been subject, at present is to Sian. This Kingdom hath many Ports frequented for Trade; for besides its Grains, Fruits, Oils, and Medicinal Herbs, it is rich in Mines of Gold, Silver, Iron, Lead, Steel, and Copper. It hath Rubies, Lacques, and Benjamin, &c. And they make Vessels of Earth, which they call Martabanes; of which some are so great, that they hold a Bushel. This is a kind of Porcelain varnished with black, and wherein they keep Water, Wine, Oil, and all sorts of Liquors; and for this reason they are esteemed in all the East. Jangoma, and its commo∣dities.JANGOMA, on the confines of Pegu, Siam, and Brama, hath been sub∣ject or tributary sometimes to one, and sometimes to another. It hath Gold, Silver, Copper, Musk, Cotton, of which they make Manufactures, Pepper, &c. Its People are more addicted to Horse than Foot service. CAMBOJA is the last and most Southerly part of the Peninsula,Camboja. which is between the Gulphs of Sian and Cochin-china. The principal Cities are Ravecca and Camboja, of which the Kingdom takes it name, which is under the 10th or 11th degree of Latitude, and on the principal and most Easternly branch of the River Menam, which (as it is believed) comes from China; but it should be said from some Regions formerly subject to, or which were part of China. Its People.The People in their Manners and Customs resemble those of Sian, whose Subjects they have been, and whose Tributaries but lately they were. MALACCA. Peninsula of Malacca; its parts, commo∣dities, &c.IN the Peninsula of Malacca are divers Kingdoms, which are taken notice of in the Geographical Table; which all (except the City of Malacca) are likewise tributary to that of Sian. Tenasserin is a Country of Trade, by reason of its Archipelago, which contains several Islands; and of its Isthmus, which facili∣tates the transportation of Merchants from one Sea to another; and of its Ports, which are commodious. Its other places are Juncalaon, Zueda, Pera, and Malacca, all which places afford Nipe of burning Wines. Ihor, its chief places and commodities.IHOR is beyond Cape de Sincapura, and on the utmost point of the Pe∣ninsula: Its chief City was taken and ruined by the Portugals in 1603, who took from thence 1500 Brass Cannons. The King of Ihor for revenge besieged Malacca in 1606 with 60000 Men, but was constrained to raise his Siege; there are some petty Kings which are his Tributaries, Pahang hath Lignum Aquila and Calamba, near to that of Cochin-china; of Camphire, like to that of Bor∣neo: Gold, but of a lower alloy than ours; Petra Porea, of near as much ver∣tue as the Bezoar against poyson; Diamonds, Nutmegs, Mace, &c. Patane, and its Trade.PATANE within few years is grown famous; the Kingdom being fre∣quented by divers Nations, particularly by the Chinois, who bring thither Porcelaine, divers Manufactures and Instruments of Husbandry; instead of which they carry back Timber for Building, Cordage made of Cocos, Rice, and divers Skins, &c. The Pepper is excellent, but dearer than at Bantam. Their Saroy-Boura, that is, the matter of Swallows Nests, which we shall speak of in Cochin-china, is much sought after. The Soil is good, producing Fruit every Month in the year. Their Hens, Ducks, and Geese, often lay Eggs twice a day. Amongst an infinite number of Fowl they have white Herons and Turtles of various colours, like Paroquetoes. Patane, Singora, Brodelong, and Ligor, are on the same Gulph, which may be called also by Patana, and makes part of that of Sian: Patane and Ligor towards the two ends; Singora and Brodelong in the midst, and at the bot∣tom of this Gulph; and these two last are head Cities of Provinces (others call them Kingdoms) under Sian; the two first Kingdoms are tributary to Sian: They have nothing particular above Patane, to which they are all united.
The chief City of Patane takes its name from its Kingdom so called,The City of Patane, and its Trade. seated on the Sea-side betwixt Malacca and Siam. Its Houses are well and handsomly built, either of Timber or Canes. The Palace Royal is encompassed with a Pallisado, and its Mosques are made of Brick. This City (as also the whole Kingdom) is very populous, and enjoying a good Trade. Its People are inclined to a Swarthy brown complexion, well proportioned, ingenious, using Arts, e∣specially Navigation; but above all, great lovers of Women. The Country affordeth most of the Indian Commodities, by reason of which it hath a good Trade.The City of Malacca, and its Trade.Malacca, a City and Kingdom, is at present the most famous of all those which of the Peninsula we have comprehended under the name of Ma∣lacca: It hath been subject to the King of Sian. A particular King had made himself Master of it, before that the Portugals entred the Indies: the Coun∣try remaining still to the Kings of Sian. That which hath made this City great, rich, and powerful, (though the Air be unhealthful, and the Soil almost barren) is the advantage of its scituation, being seated on the River Gasa, which is about 3 Leagues broad, and in the center of the firm Land, and of all the Islands of the East Indies, commanding a Streight, which is the Key which makes it the Staple of all the Indian and China Commodities; by reason of which it is a place of great Traffick, and very populous, containing about 12000 Families, besides Strangers. Its Houses are low, and not over curiously built, and the Streets narrow; the City is about 2 miles in length, and of half the breadth, being a place of good strength, and defended by a strong Wall and Castle; is watered by the River Gaza, and the chiefest place of pleasure is the Buzzar. Before, and nigh to this City, are the Islands by the Portugals, called Ilha de Naos, and Ilha de Pedra. The usance of divers Nations of the Indies hath so fashioned the Malayois Language, that it is the best and most elegant of all others. Arbor tristis, a great rarity.Among the Rarities of Malacca, or rather among the wonders of the World, may be counted Arbortristis, or the Sad Tree, which bears Flowers only after Sun set, and sheds them so soon as the Sun rises, and this it doth every Night throughout the whole year. These Flowers are almost like to (but faire and more odoriferous than) Orange Flowers. Some of these Trees have been transported and brought as far as Goa, and some other places of the Indies; but no care could ever preserve them unto Europe. The Provinces of thin Kingdom of SIAN are very populous,The People of Sian, their ha∣bit, dispositi∣on, &c. especially those which have the benefit of the Sea or navigable Rivers; but inhabited by different People, but for the most part well proportioned, of a Swarthy complexion, more addicted to Venus than Mars; ingenious, but lazy, uncon∣stant, and deceivers. Their habit is a painted Cloth, which they wear about their middle, and hangeth down to their knees; besides which the Men wear short Shirts, and the Women cover their Breasts with a piece of Linnen, which they tie about their Necks, all observing one fashion; the Persons of Quality being only known by their attendance. Their Marriages, Burials, and other Ceremonies, are much the same as those aforesaid; they bring up their Chil∣dren very well, instructing them in Arts: by which, according to their abili∣ties, they are advanced to preferment. In their Punishments they are severs and different,Their Arms. according to the nature of the crime. His Army doth consist of his own Subjects in the nature of our Trained-Bands, which are to be ready upon all occasions, and not of a standing Army. Their Arms are Bows and Arrows, Swords, Pikes, and Bucklers; they have no Fire-Arms; their Horse is not good, their chief strength consisting in their Elephants. The Kings of Sian absolute Monarchs, are rich, powerful, and live in great state.The Kings of Sian are esteemed absolute Monarchs in their Dominions, ma∣king and breaking Laws as they please; imposing Taxes on their Subjects; punishing, condemning and seising the Estates of those who speak or act con∣trary to their minds; make War and Peace as often as they please. These and the like actions he doth of himself, without consent of any; yet he hath a Council, which are his Nobles, of whom he will hear their Opini∣ons and Advice, but act as best pleaseth him. He hath but one Wife, who bears the title of a Queen, but hath many Concubines. In his Apparel
and Attendance he is very magnificent and stately, not stirring abroad without great pomp; by reason of which, as also through his austerity, he hath great veneration shewed him. His Revenue is very great; he bestoweth his Ho∣nour or Preferment on those who best please him, not regarding Birth and Edu∣cation, it being not hereditary. For the administration of Justice, most Cities have their Jurisdictions and Judges. This great Kingdom is not in all places alike; for in some parts it is covered with Wood, in others Mountainous, and to the Sea-side, Marshy, Flat, and Fertil, affording divers and rich Commodities, as aforementioned; and being plentifully furnished with Rivers, Bays, and Harbours, for the conveniency of Shipping. COCHIN-CHINA, TƲNQIN, &c. Cochin-china, its bounds and extent.I Esteem under the Name of COCHIN-CHINA taken in general, all that lies to the Eastward of the Kingdoms of Camboja, Sian, Pegu, and Ava, &c. to the Westward of China, and the Gulph of Cochin-china; and which is washed on the South with the Oriental Ocean, and bounded on the North by those high Mountains which limit Tartary; extending it self from the 9th degree of Latitude on this side the Equator, unto the 34th or 35th towards the North, which make more than 6000 Leagues; the breadth not being above the 8th or 10th part of its length. Its Name, why so called.The name of Cochin-china, according to some, signifies West China: so the Natives of the Country call it Onam or Anam, that is, the Occidental Quarter; and this extends to the view of China, of which it was once part, and whose Language, Manners, Customs, Government, Religion, and other Ceremonies they yet retain, (which having occasion to treat of in China, as more conve∣nient, for brevities sake I omit them here, referring the Reader to the de∣scription of China.) But these Quarters being retired from the subjection of the Chinois above 800 years ago, were a little after as easily divided into divers Estates. The name of Cochin-china being kept in the most Southern parts; that of Tunquin having taken the middle and more Northernly parts, passing under the name of the People called Lays, the Kingdom of Ciocangue, the People Gueyes, Timocoves, &c. who have in part taken and received the man∣ners and barbarousness of the Tartars, their Neighbours. Its parts and chief places.Cochin-china likewise is divided into Chiampaa and Cochin-china: Chiam∣paa, between Camboja and Cochin-china, regards the Isles of Sonde towards the South; the Philippines towards the East, and touches on Tunquin to the North. Its principal City bears the same name, according to most Authors; but according to others, Pulocacein. It hath nothing which is not common to Cochin-china, and therefore we shall say no more. Cochin-china particularly taken, is better known than all the neighbouring Countries, because it is wholly upon the Sea, having 150 Leagues of Coast, and not above 40 or 50 in breadth, between the Mountains of Kemois (a bar∣barous People) and the Sea. Its Provinces are descending from North to South: Sinuva, Cacciam, Quangiva, Quingin or Pulacambis, and Ranran. The two first touch upon Tunquin, the last touch on the Kingdom of Chiampaa. The King makes his ordinary residence in the Province of Sinuva, or at Cacciam, Cities of the same name with their Provinces. Its fertility, commoditi temperature, and people.All the Country is fertil, abounding in Rice, Fruits, and Herbs, breeding many Fowls and Beasts, and the Sea excellent Fishes. It produces Cinnamon, Pepper, Lignum Aquilae, Calamba, and Benjamin. Its temperature is plea∣sant, though under the Torrid Zone; the Air healthful, and the Soil so abun∣dant in all things, that the Inhabitants have no knowledge either of Con∣tagion or Famine. They have Gold, Silver, Silk, Porcelain, and divers other valuable Commodities. All sorts of Nations frequent its Coast, by reason of the goodness of its Ports; and because its Inhabitants are Courteous, Liberal, kind to Strangers, and faithful in their dealings.
They are couragious, and more warlike than those of Tunquin or China, hand∣ling all sorts of Arms with no small activity. They are Idolaters: Christia∣nity was introduced in 1620, and began to flourish; but their Kings have of date very much persecuted them. Amongst the particularities and rarities of the Country, we must place the Lutt, an Inundation, which in Autumn covers with its Waters almost all the Country; it renews from 15 to 15 days, remaining only 3 days at a time, ma∣king the Earth so fruitful, that it brings forth its increase twice or thrice a year. Their Saroy-Boura,Several Rari∣ties here found. or matter wherewith certain Swallows make their Nests, which after those Birds leave dry and hardned, they gather in great quantities, which being steeped and moistned in Water, serves for Sawce to all sorts of Meat; and as formerly Manna communicating such a variety of taste, that it seems to be composed of Cinnamon, Cloves, Pepper, and other Spices. Their Lignum Aquilae and Calamba come from the same Tree; the first from the Trunk of a young Tree, the last from the Trunk of an old Tree: but this last is much more esteemed than the other, both for its odour and vertue. A pound of it on the place where it is beaten down is worth 5 Ducats, being brought to the Port, 15 or 16; and if transported to Japan, 200. If some piece be found to make a whole Pillar, it is worth 3 or 400 Ducats the pound. The Lignum Aquilae amongst other things, serves to burn the dead Bodies of their Kings, Princes, and Priests. Wood as hea∣vy as Iron, and which con∣sumes not, ex∣cept burnt.Among the Wood they use for Buildings, there are two sorts which they call uncorruptible, whether in Water or Earth; their Trees they call Thins: the Wood of the one is near as black as Ebony, the other near the colour of Yew. Both the one and the other taken out of the Bark is smooth and glib, so solid and weighty, that it sinks to the bottom of the Water, and serves also for Anchors for Ships. They make Pillars, on which they erect their Buildings; and before the time of the Lutt, they drive Joists and Planks be∣tween those Columns, and with Canes and Reeds accommodate divers Apart∣ments, which they take away in the time of those Inundations, that the Wa∣ter may run the freer. TƲNQƲIN. THe Kingdom of TƲNQƲIN is part on the Sea, and part on the Main Land;The Kingdom of Tunquin, its bounds, ex∣tent, and sci∣tuation. it bounds on the Sea at the bottom of the Gulph of Cochin-china, there where it divides China from Cochin-china, and hath about 150 Leagues of Coast. On the Land it extends it self from the seventeenth degree of Latitude, on this side the Equator, unto the twenty third, which are likewise 150 Leagues from North to South: Its breadth being only about 100 Leagues from East to West. Its Parts.This Kingdom contains Seven Provinces, of which the three most Sou∣thernly are, Bochin, Gehan, and Tinhoa; the four most Northernly are, Bera∣mar, Kedom, Kenam, and Kethay. Bochin touches on Cochin-china, and the two other advance along the Gulph towards the North; amongst the four last, Beramar and Kedun are towards China, Kenan and Kethay towards the People Layes.The King very powerful. The King of Tunquin ordinarily entertains a Militia of 50000 Men, taken from the three Southernly Provinces, and paid by the four Nor∣thern, because these last lately revolted, and the other remained in obe∣dience. Its chief Pla∣ces.Kecchio is the chief City of the Kingdom, where the King ordinarily re∣sides. It is not above twenty miles in circuit, but hath a Million of Inhabi∣tants. Some Authors will have it called Tunquin, that is, the Court of the West, and that the Kingdom took its name from it. The Land hath beautiful Plains, and watered with many great Rivers; which with the Rains and melting of the Snow, which descends from the Mountains that separates it, from the Layes, the Kingdom of Ciocangue, China, and Cochin-china, make it
fruitful by their Inundations, rendring it better and more abundant than Cochin-china. Yet hath it neither Corn, Vines, nor Olive Trees;Its fertiliy and commodities. but they gather Rice twice a year, of which they make Bread; they fetch in Wine, and instead of Oil make use of the matter taken from Swallows Nests, of which they have no less quantity than Cochin-china. They have neither Asses nor Sheep, but many Horses, Elephants, and Rhinocerotes, whose Flesh, Skins, Bones, Teeth, Nails, and Horns, serve for Antidotes against Poyson; they have so much Pullain, Pigeons, Turtles, and other Fowl, that they give them almost for nothing. Amongst their Fruits they have fair Pomgranates, which beyond the ordi∣nary excellency of that Fruit hath here a particular and delightful Juice. For Fish they make account, that in the Seasons there daily goes 10000 Barks out of their Ports to Fish.They embrace Christianity. The Catholick Religion was so introduced here some years past, that there was esteemed to be more than 200000 Christned Souls, 200 great Churches, and a great quantity of Chapels and Oratories: there hath since happened divers changes. In these Kingdoms the Portugals have several Towns and Cities, by which they have a great Revenue. Isles seated on the Gulph of Sian.In the Gulph of Sian are seated several Isles, some of which are well known; as the Isle of Goeteinficos, about 27 Leagues long, and 15 broad, seated about three or four Leagues from Ligor and Bordelong, in the Penin∣sula of Malacca; and between this Isle and the Land of Malacca lieth several small Isles. The next of note are the Isles of Macaria and Panian; then the Isles of Cara, which are four in number; and the Isles of Cosyn, which are three in number; with several others of no account. Isles seated in the Sea, called the Gulph of Bengala.In the Gulph called the Gulph of Bengala, are likewise seated several Isles; the chief of which are the Isles of Chubedu, Chudube, and Ledoa, of Dos Ale∣vantados, Aligada, and Durondiva, whose chief place is Siriaon; the Isles of Andemaon, which are 10 in number, two of which are indifferent large; likewise the Isles dos Cocos, dos Caboses, Tanasseri, Tavay, Alta, and Craro, which said Isles are not far distant from the Sea-shoar of the Land of Sian, two of which are each about 20 Leagues in length; and the one 10, and the other about 7 in breadth. Also in this Gulph are the Isles of Caremubar, of Raza, dos Sombreros de Palm, Siano, Sambilano, Batun, Pera, Pinaon, Canal de St. Georgo, Nicubar, and others; many of which are well known and frequented by Merchants, affording several of the Indian Commodities.
The King∣dom of CHINA, with its Provinces and Isles, which may be consider∣ed as they lie Northernly, and Regarding the Sea; as Leaoton, Leaoton, or Leaoyang. Richeo Pequin, Peking, Quangping, Himpin, Tianchevoy. Scianton, Xanton, or Cinan, Pamnihu, Cincoyan, Laicheu, or Lincheu. On the Firm Land; as Sciansi, Taven, Lugan, Tatong, Sciansi, Pingans, Suchio. Sciensi, Siganfu, Jengan, Pingleang, Pichin, Linyao. Honan, Honan, Temechio, Caifung, Nanyang, Chinchio. Southernly, and On the SEA; to wit, Easternly, as Nanquin, Nanking, Chicheu, Lucheu, Funiam, Xanuchi. Chequian, with its Isles of Quinsay, now Hancheu, Haugcheu, Liampo, Aucheo, Succu, Chequia. Mochosa, or Cheuxan, Sunkiam, or Changque, Suan, Olepio, Avarello, Chaposi. Fuquien, Chincheo, Focheu, Yenping, Chining, Hinghoa, Isles of Lanquin, Baboxin. Southernly, as Canton, Canton, Nanhium, Lampaca, Quanycheu, Uchuen, Zauquin, Luicheu, Isles belonging to Canton; as Aynan Kinchensu, Bancao, Thinosa, Amacao, Omandari, Pulotio. Quancy, Quancy, Colin, Nangan. Zunnan, Junnan, Hilan. Within Land; as Chiamsi, Nanchang, Kiencham, Linkiang, Juencheu, Nangam. Huquan, Cingiang, Huchang, Vuchang, Yocheu, Cangte. Suchuen, Paoning, Xunking. Quicheu, Quincheo, Rueyang, Hiauchoau, Liping, Cipan, Pauhu. In Isles and Peninsula's about the Coast of CHINA; as those of Corey, Hianking, Kingzan, Civenlo. Larrons. Fuego. Lequejo Grande. De los Roys Mages. de Pescheurs, Gillira, Wankan, Tayoan. Formosa. Tabaca Miguel. Tabaca Xima. Hainan.
map of China A New Mapp of y Empire of CHINA With its severall Provinces or kingdomes Together wth. the adjacent Isles of Iapon or Niphon Formola Haman etc. To ye Worshipfl Thom Robinson of ye Inner Temple London  cheif  of his Maty Court of Comon Pleas This Mappe is humbly DD by RB
CHINA. The Kingdom of China.CHINA is on the East of Asia, and of all our Continent; and if we consider its greatness, fruitfulness, riches, the great number and politeness of its Inhabitants, the beauty of its Cities, its Manu∣factures, and for having had the inventions of Silk, Printing, Pa∣per, Artillery, &c. it is worthy of note. Its several Names.Ptolomy knew this Country under the name of Sinarum Regio; but it hath been observable by us, that the Chinois knew not any thing of that name; and that when this great Empire falls from one Family to another, he that begins the Family gives such a new name as he pleases to the Kingdom: and these names are very specious; as formerly it had the name of Than, that is, Bound∣less; Yu, that is, Repose; Hin, which signifies, Great; Sciam, which is an Ornament; Cheu, that is, Perfect, and so others: The Family that reigns at present gave it the name of Miu, that is, Brightness; and the last Kings of the same Family have added Ta, which is, Kingdom, so that Ta-Min signifies the Kingdom of Brightness. The People neighbouring upon China take little heed of the changing of these names; but on the contrary, some name it in one manner, and some in another: Those of Cochin-china and Siam call it Cin, from whence we have formed the name of China; those of Japhan, Than: the Tartars, Han: the Saracens and Mahometans of the West call it Cathay; under which name is likewise comprehended the Eastern part of Tartary. Its greatness extends from the 18th or 19th,Its extent. unto the 43th or 44th degree of Latitude: and from 147 to 166 degrees of Longitude, and in some places from 145 to 172; that is about 24 degrees of Latitude, which amount to 600 Leagues from North to South; and 18 or 20, and sometimes 25 degrees of Longitude, which amount to 4, 5, or 600 Leagues from West to East: some Authors have esteemed this Kingdom greater; but the Father Jesuites have observed the height of Pequin, and its most Northern parts. The number of its Provin∣ces, Parts, Ci∣ties, and Towns.It contains 16 Provinces, all rich, plentiful, and which might well merit the name and title of Kingdoms; they are subdivided into 28 Regions, or less Provinces, of which some have 12, some 15 fair Cities; amongst which are 180 great Cities, 319 great Towns, and 1212 lesser; in all 1771 Cities and fair Towns. China very populous.However it be a great number, there is the same likewise of lesser places; insomuch that in Anno 1557 there was found in China more than 40 Millions of Men which paid Tribute or Tax: In 1616 there was near 60 Millions. A∣mong which the Women, Young men under 20 years, Eunuchs, Souldiers, Offi∣cers, Sick people, and those of the Kings kindred were not comprehended, which together would amount to a very great number. Divers Kings subject to the King of China.There are accounted likewise Tributaries to the King of China, 3 Kings to∣wards the East, 53 towards the West, 55 towards the South, and 3 towards the North, which are 114; and many have assured his Revenue to be 150 Millions of Gold per annum. China bound∣ed.The bounds of this great Monarchy are very advantagious, the Sea washing it on the South and East, where there are divers little Islands and Rocks along the Coast; a Mountain of above 500 Leagues long being its Northern bounds, and great sandy Desarts and Forests, mixt with Mountains, limit it on the West unto the South Sea: these were its natural defence; but upon the Tartars often
invading them, and being at once Master of 33 important Towns, and fearing lest they should be quite subdued, concluded a Peace with the Tartars, agreeing to pay them 2000 Picos of Silver for the defraying the charges of their Army, and they to return home and render up the 33 Towns to the Chinoises. This Peace continued a good while; but they fearing the incursion of the Tartars again, the King at a general Council with his Peers, for their further peace and safety did agree to build a Wall about their Kingdom, or rather Empire, which might serve for a Bulwark against all Invaders, in pursuance whereof there was raised 10000 Picos of Silver, which at 1500 Ducdts, each Pico amounts to 15 Millions of Gold; and entertained 25000 Men to carry on this work, whereof 3000 were appointed as Overseers of the rest; and thus in the space of 27 years,A Wall about China. they quite finished the circumference of the Wall, which is 70 Jaos, in length each Jao being 3 Leagues, which is 650 miles. This Wall is 30 foot high and 10 foot broad, being made with Lime, Sand, and Plaistered on the outside, by means whereof it is so hard, that it is Cannon proof; instead of Bulwarks it hath Watch-Towers 2 Stages high, flancked with high Buttresses as thick as a Hogshead, and exceeding strong; the expences for the performing of this Work was divided into 3 parts, of which the Commonalty paid one, the Priests and Isles of Aynan another, and the King and Peers the other: and in this great enclosure there are but 5 Entries, in which both the King of China and Tartary keep Garrisons; in each of which the Chinois continually keep at great expences about 6000 Horse, and 1000 Foot, which for the most part are all Strangers of different Nations bordering upon this Empire, which are kept for defence thereof, when occasion shall serve; in all this length of Wall there is 320 Companies, each of them containing 500 Souldiers, which in all are 160000, besides Officers, &c. which will make up the number 200000, and are all maintained at the Kings charge; but most of these are Malefactors, which doth much lessen the pay, they working for nothing. But for all this strong Wall, and their great care in keeping it, the Tartars of late have al∣most over-run all China. Besides its extent, the great number of its people, and the Forces of this Kingdom, the Soil is generally exceeding rich and fertil, and abounding in all things; and so divided by Rivers and Navigable Chan∣nels, that some have affirmed that there are as many River-boats in China, as in all the World besides. Its Fertility and Fruits.They have all sorts of Grains and Fruits, except the Olive and the Almond, in∣stead of which they have many others not found elsewhere; and moreover their Grains, Fruits, as also their Plants and Herbs; are far beyond ours in excellency and goodness, and their Flowers more beautiful and various than ours. This Country produceth all sorts of living Creatures, as Beasts and Fowl, both tame and wild; and so excellent, that the flesh of their Camels, Mules, Asses, Dogs, &c. are sweet, and good to eat; all Provision is here found so plentiful, that a fat Cow is not worth above 10 Shillings. a Buffter a Crown, a Hog 2 Shillings; all sorts of Fowl they sell by the pound, the common rate after their Feathers are off, being not above 2 Pence, and Fish they have in such great plenty, as well in their Rivers as in the Sea, that they are not worth the selling. The like may be said of their Grains and Fruits, which are found in as great abundance; they have also as great plenty in divers rich Commodities,Its Commodi∣ties. as in excellent Sugar, Wax, Hony, all sorts of Spices, several Drugs, Rice, Wool, Wines; great quan∣tities of Silk and Cotton, of which they make a great number of different Manufactures. They have all sorts of Metals, but their Gold and Silver is of a lower alloy than ours; and therefore it is that they so much esteem English Gold, and Pristols and Rials of Spain: they have much Rhubarb and Amber, quantity of Musk Civet, which would be the best in the World, if they did not falsifie it: their Capphire is not near so good as that of Borneo, and their Pearls are all Barroques. They have much Saltpeter, with which they make (besides Gunpowder) a thousand divices and artificial Fires. They have so great plenty of Salt, that the Custom only in the Town of Canter, (as Mr. Lewis Roberts reports) doth bring in to the King 180 thousand Ducats yearly.
They Chinoises very ingeniousThey have abundance of very fine Inventions, of which some are common with us, but which they had before us; as the disposition of their Poasts, their Pa∣per which they make of the bark of Bambus or Canes, but so thin, that it will bear Ink on both sides. In their writing they make use of Pencils, and not Pens, which by reason of the smoothing of the Paper, they cut their Characters ex∣ceeding neat, their writing consisteth only of Characters,Their way of writing. which make so-ma∣ Syllables, and the Syllables so many different names, whose signfications are various; of these Monosyllables they have neer 60 to 80000, they write from top to bottom, advancing their lines from the left hand to the right, and almost all their knowledg consists only in reading well. In their Printing, they are so expert, that they can take away, augment, or change as much or as little as they please in a moment. Their Artillery which they dismout by pieces, and their Chariots which they make run with a Saile, &c. Their Manu∣factures of Silk, which they say they have had 3 or 4000 years. They make use of Tables and Seats when they eat, and of Beds when they repose, which their Neighbours do not. Their High-ways are straight, paved, and cut sometimes out of the Mountains. They have Salt which they extract from the Sea-wa∣ter and from Mines. They make and subtract their Sugar, Honey and Wax, from diverse things, to wit, from Bees, from the fruit of certain Trees, and from cer∣tain little Worms they keep in those Trees; and this sorts is the best, the whitest, and its Candle burns the clearest of all. Those things which they have most particularly, are their Drinks, which they make with the leaves of certain Shrubs; a Gumm, and an excellent Var∣nish, which they get from the Barks of Trees. Also their Porcelain, which they make of Earth, in the Province of Quiamsi, of which they make excellent Cups, Dishes, &c. far exceeding Glass-Metal. Their shape & stature.The Chinoisses are for the most part well shaped, of a good Stature; they have commonly broad faces, flat noses, little eyes; they never cut the hair of their heads, but on the contrary they wear little or no Beards, and as to their com∣plexion they differ according to the Climat under which they abide, as those in the Province of Pequin lying in the most Northern part of China, are of a fair complexion like the English, when as those towards the South, as in the Pro∣vince of Canton, &c. are like the Moors of Barbary; their Women are handsom, yet make use of Paint; they seldom are seen abroad. Their habit.They wear their Garments very long, with long loose sleeves; those of the Northern Provinces make use of Furs, and those of the Southern wear Silk; but persons of quality are richly habited and adorned with many Pearls and Pre∣cious Stones. They are great lovers of Women, as also of their bellies, com∣monly eating thrice a day, their diet being good and cleanly drest, and they as neat in eating it, making use of Knifes and Forks. They are ad∣dicted to Arts and Sciences.They are very ingenious, and much more industrious and Politick then their Neighbours, having the use and understanding of Arts and Sciences, both liberal and Mechanical, as Philosophy, Physick, Astronomy concerning the Heavens and Stars, the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, &c. in the which they have a∣bundance of vain fancies. Also they are expert in Musick and making of Musical Instruments, Navigation, Architecture, Painting, Sculpture, making of Clocks, casting of Metals in Images, Medals or the like; these with several other in∣ventions too tedious to name, they had the benefit of before us; yet are they not in that perfection as they are with us. And as for Armes, they have their courage so low,Not good Soul∣diers. that both the Souldiers and the Commanders submit themselves to the whip, when they have been wanting in their duty; so that it was said that when the Tartars affaulted them, it sufficed them only to have shewed them the whip, to have put them to slight, as the Scythians their predecei∣sors once served their slaves, who during their long absence had married their Mistresses. It is likewise reported that the China Horses could not suffer the weighing of the Tartarian Coursers; and the Chinois Cavaliers being of the same humor, they were more likely to run than fight.
Moreover the Chinois are very ceremonious, courteous, and great comple∣menters, for which they have several Printed Books which they teach their children, not passing by any one, that they know, without kind salutations; and if they happen to espy any friend which comes out of the Country, besides their kind greeting, his first question will be to ask him whether he hath dined or sup∣ped; which if he hath not, he will carry him to a Tavern and give him a treat∣ment of Flesh, Fowle and Fish; and if he hath din'd, a collation of Fruits and Conserves. They are also very costly in their Feasts and Entertainments, as in variety of Meats, Fruits, Preserves, to which may be added other delights; as Musick, Singing, Dancing, Plaies, and other pastimes. And for persons of quality they observe more state, some Feasts lasting about 15 or 20 days. They have several days which they make great account of in Feastings and merriments, but above all others, their new years day, which is in March, where also their Priests are present at their rejoycings, adding to the solemnity of the day Sacrifices which they make to their Gods. In their Marriages they also very expensive in their Feasts; for the Bride∣groom receives no other Portion from her friends, then what they bestow in their entertainments; but on the contrary, he gives her a Portion, which the gives to her friends in thankfulness for their care in her education. Their Religion and belief.The Chinois may be held as Pagans and Idolaters, not knowing the true Religion, but worshipping Idolls; they invoke the Devil, they hold the im∣mortality of the Soul, and after this life it goeth to eternal bliss, or torment; they also hold a kind of Purgatory, and that their friends and relations upon their prayers and supplications, may have some ease, for which purpose they have a day set apart for the performing of this ceremony. They have four orders of Re∣ligious men; they observe all one fashion, but are distinguished by their colour; they all shave their beards and heads, they make use of Beads, and say their Matins, &c. as the European Monks do. Mandelsloe saith that they are much addicted to incantations and charmes, not doing any thing of concernment, with∣out they have first consulted it by their charmes; and if they prove not accor∣ding to their desire, they will raile and abuse their. Gods with scurrilous lan∣guage, fling them down, beat them, whip them, and tread upon them; but when their choler is asswaged, they will cogg with them, give them good words, and pretend sorrow; and if the charme favour them, then they offer to them Geese, Ducks, boiled Rice, &c. These charms are commonly two small pieces of wood, one side being flat, and the other being hallow, which they, fling upon the ground; and if it happen that the round side of both, or of one is downwards, they take it for an ill omen; if uppermost, for good. They be∣lieve that all things visible and invisible were created by Heaven, who by a Vice∣gerent governs the Universe, another who governs all Sublunary things; they also add three principal Ministers; one looks to the production of Fruits, and the generation of Men and Animals, another governs the Air, and causeth Rain, &c. and the other governeth the Waters and Sea. Mandelsloe saith also,Their funeral Ceremonies. that at their Funerals they have several ceremonies; as soon as any person is deceased, they wash his body, put on his best Clothes, and set him in a Chair, where his Wife, Children, and other Relations kneeling down about him, take their leave of him, which done, they put him into the Coffin, set it upon a Table, covering him with a Winding-sheet, which reaches to the ground, on which they draw the Picture of the deceased, where they leave him 15 days, during, which time in some other Room they set on a Table Wine, Fruit and Lights, for the Priest who watcheth; after which time, they carry the Corps to the Burial place, his Relations commonly mourn∣ing for a year. The King go∣verns by his own Will.The Government of the Kingdom or Empire of China, is wholly at the pow∣er of the King, either to change, take away, or augment Laws, when and as oft as he pleases; yet doth he not execute any rigorous Laws upon them scarce acting or imposing any thing upon his Subjects, without the Advice of his Council of State; besides this Council of State, he appoints others, as well for
the Administration of Justice, as for the oversight of other affaires in the King∣dom; but they neither inflict any punishment to Criminals, or determine any thing of themselves, but make their report to the King, who decides the same. They are very circumspect how they condemn any person, not passing their sentence, till the offence is found so clear and evident, that the offendor is not able to justifie himself, they use fair means first for the finding out of the truth; and if that will not do, they then inflict several tortures upon them; their ex∣ecutions are various and more cruel according to the offence committed; some being hanged, some they impale, some they burn; their greatest punishment is inflicted on thieves, which they much abhor. Debtors they imprison; for which purpose there being so many, there is in every great City several Prisons, in which they are strictly kept and lookt unto; by reason of which that their lives may not be burthensome unto them, they have in their Prisons, Gardens, Courts, Walks, Fish-ponds, Drinking-houses and Shops, which furnish the Pri∣soners with such things as they have occasion for. Kings of China hereditary.The Dignity of the Crown of China is hereditary, falling to the eldest Son of the King after his decease; the King they highly reverence, calling him the Son of Heaven, the Son of God, or the like, not that they think him so, but being the chiefest of men, they esteem him dear to the Gods, and as a gift of Heaven. The Chinois have many Books and descriptions of their Kingdom: ob∣serving exactly all that their Provinces particularly possess: what is the ex∣tent, quality, and force of each, how many Cities they have, how many Officers, how many men which study, how many which bear Armes, who pay Tribute, and a Thousand particularities; of which however writers have recounted to us but few things, scarce can we gather the Names of the sixteen Provinces, and of some Cities and Rivers; these Names being so diverse in several Authors, that it is a difficulty to reconcile them; we will say something of them giving them those names which seem to us best received. The division of China into Provinces.CHINA is divided into two principal parts, Northern, and Southern: there are six Provinces in the Northern part, and ten in the Southern: The River Jamchucquian traverses these; and the River Caramoran those. Of the six Northern parts, three are washed by the Sea, as Leaoton, Pequin and Scianton, and of these three, the two first touch the great Wall or Mountain; the three other Provinces are on the firm Land; as Sciansi, Sciensi, and Ho∣nan, likewise of these three, the two first touch the great Wall; amongst the ten Southern ones, there are six on the Sea; three towards the East, as Nan∣quin, Checquian, or Aucheo and Fuquien; and three towards the South, as Canton, Quancy, and Yunnan; the other four Provinces are up in the Land, and are called Chiamsi, Huquan, Suchuen, and Quicheu. And of these Pro∣vinces in order. Province of Leaoton de∣scribed.The Province of LEAOTON is almost quite separated from the rest of China: Its chief City bears the same name; this City, as also most of the Ci∣ties in China, is well built, and of one form, being square, and with good Walls made of Brick, and plaistered over with Porcelain, which renders it exceed∣ing hard and strong; they are commonly broad, and having the benefit of se∣veral Towers, as well for beauty as defence. Its Soil amongst other things produces the Root Ginsen, which preserves the well in health and strength; strengthens and restores health to the sick; they sell it commonly at double its weight of Silver. Its Inhabitants are less civilised then the rest of China, but more robustious and proper for Warr. Its other places of most note are Richeo, and Chincheo, and both seated on the Sea. Province of Pequin, and its chief places.The Province of PEQƲIN, though of great fertility, yet by reason of its popuusness, occasioned by the residence of the Kings of China in its principal City lo Xunthienfu by us called Pequin, makes it that it cannot furnish Mayz, Wheat, Rice, and other Provisions enough for its Inhabitants and resort of People; which defect is supplied from the adjacent Provinces. The City of
Xunthienfu or Pequin is of a vast bigness, containing within its Walls (made of Free-stone, and strongly fortified with Bulwarks) which are in circumfe∣rence near 30 Leagues, about 3300 Pagodes or Temples, wherein are continu∣ally sacrificed a great number of Wild-Beasts and Birds: These Pagodes, espe∣cially those of the Order of the Menegrepos, Conquinys and Talagrepos, who are the Priests of the 4 Sects of Xaca, Amida, Gizan and Canon, are sump∣tuous Structures. To the Wall which encompasseth this City, for the conve∣niency of its Inhabitants are 360 Gates, to each of which is joyned a small Fort where a Guard is continually kept, as also a Register, to take the names of all Persons that pass thereat. The Streets are long, broad, and well composed, and its houses fair and lofty; each of the chief Streets having its Captain and other Officers, who are to look after the same, which every night are shut up by Gates. Here are about 120 Aquaeducts or Canals, which traverse the City, upon which are near 1800 fair Bridges sustained on Arches. Without the City in a tract of 7 Leagues long and 3 broad, are about 80000 Tombs of the Man∣darins, which are small Chapels, richly beautified, nigh unto which are about 500 great Palaces, which they call the Houses of the Sun, which are inhabi∣ted by those that can no longer bear Armes for the Emperour of China; either through age, sickness or other infirmities. Also here are about 1300 stately Houses inhabited by Religious Men and Women. There are several Streets of a great length, only possessed by People of one profession, as one by near 14000 Taverns; another by innumerable many Courtizans, and another by about 24000 Oar∣men, which belong to the Emperours Panourers. Here are also 32 great Col∣ledges for those that study the Laws. Likewise there are abundance of large Houses, with spacious inclosures of Gardens, Woods, provided of Game, near this City, which said Houses or rather Inns, serve only to give entertainment to people of all degrees, by seeing of Plaies, Combates, Bulbaitings, &c. and the Palace Royal of the Emperour, which is in this City for its largeness, fairness and richness, is not inferior to any in the East; this City being his resi∣dence for the Northern Provinces, as Nanquin is for the Southern. And thus much for the City of Pequin; its other chief places are, first, Tian∣chevoy; secondly, Himpin; and thirdly, Cichio, seated on a fair River about 70 Miles from the Sea. The Province of Scianton, its fertility, &c.The Province of SCIANTON, is between that of Pequin and Nanquin; it is well watered with Rivers, which makes it very fertile, abounding in so great plenty of al sorts of Flesh, Fowl, Fish, Grains, Fruits, &c. that its Inhabitants, which are esteemed about seven Millions of Persons, cannot devour the encrease but are forced to furnish other Provinces; they have also great store of Silk, and other rich Commodities. It hath several great Cities, the chief of which are, 1 Xanton, not far from the Sea; 2 Pamnihu, 3 Cincoyan, and 4 Linceu, seated in an Isle so called: Besides which, here are found in this Sea, 9 other Isles, most of which do belong to this Province, and are well known, affording many of the China Commodities. The Province of Sciansi, its fertility and chief places.The Province of SCIANSI, which Purchas calls Cansas, hath many Mountains, by reason of which it is not so fertile, as that of Pequin; neither is it so large, so populous, nor so pleasant; yet with the industry of the In∣habitants, it produceth Corn, Rice and Mayz; but in recompence it breeds great quantity of Cattle, and hath so many Vines, that it furnishes the whole Kingdom with Pickled Grapes and Raisins. It hath likewise two sorts of Mines, the one of Brimstone, the other of Stones which burn, and may be called Coals. In the Sulphur Mines they make little holes, to draw out heat enough to boyl any thing they need. The Mines of Coals are inexhau∣stible, encreasing from time to time: and these Coals well prepared, will keep fire day and night without being touched. In this Province are about 90 Cities and great Towns, six of which are of con∣siderable note; as, 1 Sciansi, 2 Taven, 3 Lugan, 4 Talong, 5 Pingans, 6 Su∣chio; all which are well built and very populous.
The Province of Sciensi de∣scribed.The Province of SCIENSI or XEMSI, which Purchas calls Soyohin, Mendoza, Sinsay, is the most Westward of all the Six Northern Provinces, and the greatest of all the 16 Provinces; Siganfu is esteemed its chief City; the great Mountain and Wall doth bound it from the Tartars; the Soyl is dry, yet yields good store of Wheat, Mayz and Barley, but little Rice; it feeds much Cattle, and the Sheep are sheared thrice a year, in Spring, Summer and Autumn; their first shearing is the best: It yields Musk, which is the Navel of a Beast, of the bigness of a Hinde. They have Gold, which they gather amongst the Sand of the Rivers; for the Mines, though it hath some, yet they are not open. It produceth divers Perfumes and Rhubarb, which they carry into Persia, and other places: And it is through this Province, that the Caravans come from the West. This Province is very populous, and is well stored with great Towns and Cities, having 8 great Cities, as, 1 Siganfu, its Metropolis, afore spoken of, 2 Jengun, 3 Pingleang, 4 Pichin, 5 Lynyao; with a great many of less note. The Province of Honan, and its chief placesThe Province of HONAN, which Purchas calls Oyman, is very fertile, and the Climate very temperate; the freest from Mountains, and the farthest from the Sea. It produceth the best Fruits in the World, as well those known to us in Europe, as others; and that in so great quantity, that they are scarce valued. The River of Caramoran after having divided the Provinces of Sciansi, and Sciensi takes its course through the middle of Honan, and discharges it self into the Sea, by the Province of Nanquin. It comprehendeth 7 great Cities, the chief of which bears the name of the Province; its other chief places are, 1 Temchio, 2 Caifung, 3 Nanyang, and 4 Chinchio, besides about One hundred less ones, all well inhabited. Hitherto we have surveyed the six Northern Provinces of China; we come now to the 10 more to the South. The Province of Nanquin its Cities.The Province of NANQƲIN is the fairest and richest, and its Inhabi∣tants the most civilised of all the Kingdom; and the Kings of China did alwaies make their residence at Nanquin, till of late they have made it at Pequin. It comprehends 14 great and fair Cities, viz. 1 Ʋmthienfu or Nanquin, which is the Metropolis of the Province, 2 Chicheu, 3 Lucheu, 4 Funiam, and 5 Za∣nuchi, all which are very populous; some of which have about 200000 people, which only work in making of Calicoes: All which are commodiously seated on arms of the Sea, which make several Isles. And beside these Cities, there are about 100 small ones of less note: I shall only speak something of Nanquin. The City of Nanquin de∣scribed.Ʋmthienfu or Nanquin, as we call it, yet ceases not to be the greatest, fair∣est and richest City of the whole Kingdom, next to Pequin. The form and Symmetry of its Buildings in its Palace, in its Temples, in its Gates, in its Towers, and in its Bridges, as likewise in its publick and particular Houses, and their Ornaments, are wonderful. It is situate upon the River of Batampina, and upon an indifferent high Hill; so that it commands all the Plains there ad∣jacent. The circumference is 8 Leagues, 3 long, and 1 broad, all encompassed with a strong Wall of hewed Stone; about which there are 130 Gates, at each of which there is kept a Porter with two Halberdiers, whose Office is to take the names of every one that passes every day in and out; and besides the strong Wall, there are for further defence 12 Forts or Cittadels. In this City there are accounted above 800000 Houses, besides 80000 Mandarins Houses, 60 great Market places, 130 Butchers Shambles, each containing about 80 Shops, 8000 Streets, whereof 600 are fairer and larger then the rest; all which are broad, straight and well disposed, and are compassed about with Ballisters of Copper. The Houses are about two stories high, and built of Wood, except those of the Mandarins, which are composed of Hewed Stone, and encompassed with Walls and Ditches, over which they have Stone Bridges, with rich Gates and Ar∣ches. The Houses or rather Palaces of the Chaems, Auchacys, Aytans, Tutons, and Chumbims, which are Governors of the Kingdoms or Provinces of the Em∣pire of China, under the Emperor, are stately Structures of about 6 or 7 stories high, and richly adorned with Gold, in which are kept their Magazins for Arms, Ammunition; as also their Treasuries, their Wardrops, and their Fine
Porcelain, which by them is so highly esteemed. Here are about 2300 Pa∣godes, a thousand of which were Monasteries for Religious Persons, which are exceeding rich. Here are also about thirty great Prisons which will contain about two or three thousand Prisoners a-piece: Also a great Hospital for the relief of the Poor. At the entrace of every principal Street, for the security of the Inhabitants, there are Arches and Gates which are kept shut every hight; and in most of the chief Streets are pleasant Fountains. In this City there is accounted about ten thousand Trades for the working of Silks, which from thence are sent all over the Kingdom; which at every New and Full Moon, amongst divers other Commodities, are vended at Fairs in several places of the City. Its Traffick and Commerce bring thither so great a multitude of People, that its Streets are scarce able to be passed for the throng. Its Commodities and Manufactures are in so great esteem, that they utter bet∣ter then others; and all the neighbouring Countries make a great number of Manufactures. The Revenue which the King receives from this Province is exceeding vast, the Inhabitants paying into his Exchequer Sixty Millions of Crowns yearly; besides great Excises upon all Commodities, if Mandelsloe may be believed; and if he receiveth so much out of one Province, judge what a vast Revenue he hath from all the Provinces, many of which are no ways inferior to this. The Province of Chequian.The Province of CHEQƲIAN which Purchas calls Essiram, passes likewise for one of the best Provinces of China. The pleasant Rivers which run through it, and the many good Ports, with its Isles it hath on the Coast, doth facili∣tate the utterance of its Merchandizes; and particularly, both Raw Silk, and prepared in Thred, and in Stuffs, which it distributes to the other Provinces of China, and throughout all the World; the other Provinces of China, not having enough for their use. Of this Silk there is one sort which is re∣served to be employed in divers works mixed with Gold, with great art and curiosity, and those are only for the Kings Palace. This Province hath a∣bout seventy Cities,Its chief places of which six are of considerable note, as 1 Quinsay, now called Hamceu, once the Metropolis of China; 2 Liampo, a fair City seated on the Sea; 3 Aucheo also commodiously seated on the Sea; 4 Scanutanu an In-land City, 5 Chequian also an In-land City, but fair, well built, and frequented; and 6 Succu, seated on the Sea, and about 25 Leagues from the City of Nanquin. All which are fair, strong, well built, and very populous Cities, but not com∣parable to Quinsay, of which a word or two. The City of Quinsay de∣scribed.Quinsay or Hamceu, as I said before, was once the Metropolis of China, be∣ing (if we may give credit to Authors,) 100 miles in circuit, and having in the midst thereof, a Lake of about 30 miles in compass, in which are two fair Islands, and in them two stately Palaces adorned with all necessaries, either for Majesty or Conveniency; the City having variety of stately Palaces. Its Houses as well private as publick, are fair and well built, having abundance of Pagodes, the Streets large, well ordered and paved with Free-stone. To this City are said to belong about 10000 Sail of great and small Vessels, which are inhabited by People, who there negotiate their affairs, and remove from one place and City to another, as their occasions serve them. There are said to be in this City about 15000 Priests, and besides the vast number of Inhabi∣tants, there are about 60000 persons which are employed in working of Silk. But this City, since Pequin and Fanquin are become the Residence of the King and Court, hath much-lost its former splendor. This Province is observed to have a great number of Temples magnificently built, and the Lake Sibu bordered with stately Palaces, and encompassed with Hills covered with Trees and rare Plants. A place so pleasant and de∣lightful, that the greatest and richest of the Province pass here their time, and expend their goods. There are also in this Province whole Forests of Mulberry-trees, by reason of which they have the greatest product of Silk, of any Province in China; which they furnish several Kindoms with, as well in Europe, as in Asia.
Along the Coast of this Province are seated several Isles, some of which are very considerable, as Mochosa and Sunkiam, which is about 25 Leagues broad, and as many long; high to the shore of which ly several others, but of a lesser bigness. Its other Isles, are 1. Suan. 2. Olepio, 3. Avarella, and 4 the Isles of Chaposi, which are a body of several small Isles. The Province of Fuquien. Its Commodi∣ties and chief places.The Province of FƲQƲIEN is not so fertile as Chequin and Canton, between which it is situated. Its Inhabitants endeavour to repair that default by their Trade with Strangers, and principally with Japan, the Philippines, Fermosa or Fair Island, which is directly opposite to their Coast. The Earth produceth Gold, Iron, Steel, Sugar, Calamba, Spices, Drugs, Quicksilver, Precious Stones, Fruits, Grains and Cattle; also Silk and Cotton, of which they make divers Manufactures, as also they make all sorts of Paper. There are in this Province several Cities of note, but its chief are 1 Fochen, seated on a fair River not above 17 Leagues from the Sea; 2 Chincheo, also commodiously seated on a fair River or Arm of the Rea, from which it is dist∣ant about 10 Leagues, 3 Yenping, 4 Chining, and 5 Hinghoa. The Inhabitants of Fermosa are almost all Savages, the Spaniards have built one Fortress on the East side, and the Hollanders another on the West side and towards the Continent, which they call Zealand. The Air is temperate, and healthful, which makes the Province become very populous; and along the Coast are seated several Isles, as Lanquin, Baboxin, &c. The Province of Canton, its Fertility, com∣modities, &c.The Province of CANTON or QƲANTƲNG, though one of the least Provinces of China in extent, yet by the reason of the goodness of its Soyl, and the conveniency of its situation, being the first that presents its self to those of Europe, Africa and Asia, which come to China, it abounds in Wheat, Rice, and other Grains, Sugar, Gold, Precions Stones, Pearis, Steel, Quick-silver, Silk, Salt-Peter, Calamback-wood and Copper, Iron and Tin, of which they make curious Vessels, which they varnish with Charam, and which are brought to Europe. They make also the Barrels of their Guns in that nature, that though they are never so much laden, yet they do not break. Its Inhabitants:The Inhabitants are very civil, industrious and ingenious, but they are bet∣ter in imitation then invention; being in the first so great masters, that there is no rarity or manufacture whatsoever that comes to their sight, but they will exactly pattern as well as the Europeans; and in all manner of Goldsmiths work they far exceed them. Three things noted in this Province.In this Province are observed to be three things which are not in the other Provinces, that is, Men which spit Blood continually; Mountains without Snow; and Trees always green. Its chief placesIn this Province are about 80 Cities both small and great, the chief whereof are 1 Quangchen or Canton, under which I shall include the Trade of China, as being the chiefest place of Traffick. It is well built, of great Traffick, rich, and very populous; to which the Portugals have a great Trade, being commodi∣ously seated on an Arm of the Sea. The Isle and City of Amacao and its Trade.2. The Island and City of AMACAO is seated opposite to the City of Canton, on the North side of a Bay, which is at the mouth of the great River of Canton, which issueth out of the Lake of Quancy. This place is inhabited by the Portugals, intermixed with the natural Chinois; their particular Trade is with the City of Canton, which may be counted the Staple of all the China Commodities, whether they are permitted to come twice a year; at which time there are Fairs kept for the vending of their Commodities, which they carry to Malacta, Gon, and so into several parts of Europe. But though they are admitted the liberty of Trade, yet are they denied the freedom of lying in the City at nights, neither to enter the Walls without setting down their names in Books, which are kept by persons at each Gate for the same purpose, which when they depart at night, they cross out. Its other chief places are 1 Xauquin, a Maritime City, 2 Luicheu, also seated on the Sea, very commodious for Traffick, and opposite to the Isle of Aynan, from which it is distant about 5 Leagues, 3 Lampaca, also seated upon the Sea, and 4 Nanhium seated far within Land, and among the Mountains which parts this Province from Chiamsi.
The Isle of Ay∣nan, & its com∣modities.The Isle of AYNAN is also comprehended under this Province, and is the greatest of all the Islands that belong to China. It is distant from Amacao, on the South 50 or 60 Leagues; it is almost as long as broad, having 50 Leagues from South to North, where it almost joyns upon the Southern Coast of China, and on the other side regards Cochinchina. It abounds in Grains, Fruits, Tame and Wild Beasts: The Sea hath Pearls, Lignum Aquilae and Calamba. Their Craw-fish taken out of the Water die, and grow hard like a Stone; which being reduced to Powder, serves for a remedy against many diseases. The Earth hath Mines of Gold and Silver, for which the Inhabitants care little. In the midst of the Island, the People are likewise half Savages: The chief City is Kincenfen, seated on the Sea-shore, and regarding the Province of Canton. The Province of Quancy, and its chief Cities.The Province of QƲANCY, which Purchas calls Guansa, enjoys the same temperament with Canton, yields the same Commodities, and with the same plenty, but is not so much frequented by Mexchants, nor hath scarce any con∣fluence of Strangers; the reason is, because its Rivers loose and discharge themselves all in the Province, and at the City of Canton, which forces them to pass through the hands of those of Canton, to utter their Merchandizes, and receive those of others. In this Province there are Ten large Cities, of which Quancy is chief, all well built and very populous, besides about one hundred small ones. The Province of Zunnan, and its chief places.The Province of ZƲNNAN, which Purchas calls Vanam, is the last on the South Coast, where it is washed by the Gulf of Cochinchina, and on the West, where it touches on the Kingdom of Tunquin, and on divers People beyond those Mountains which inclose the West of China. The Women have here the liverty to go in publick to buy and sell, which those of other parts of China do not. It hath Mines which yield a kind of Amber redder and less pure then ours; but which hath some particular vertue against Fluxes. Besides this, it transports few Merchandizes into other places. This Province hath likewise good store of small and great Cities, the chief of which bears the name of the Province, and Hilan, seated on a Lake so called, which is inform of a Crescent. The Province of Chiamsi, its Trade & chief places.The Province of CHIAMSI, which Purchas calls Lansay, is inclosed with Mountains, which have their passages open to the Neighbouring Pro∣vinces, and particularly on the Coast of Canton. On the Mountain of Muilin there is a great concourse for the carriages of Merchandizes, which are trans∣ported from Canton to Nanquin, which is done by mounting the River of Can∣ton, unto the foot of the Mountain: From whence the carriages being taken out of the Vessels, are loaden, and born upon Mens backs to the other side of the Mountain, where there is found another navigable River, which crosses the Province Kiamsi, till it falls into the famous Jamchuquiam, which leads to Nanquin, and the Sea. This Province is so peopled, that a part of its Inhabitants are constrained to spread themselves through all other Provinces of China, to seek their fortune. It is in one of the Cities of this Province that they make Porcelain; the Water here being fit to give it perfection: The Earth is fetched from other places, bea∣ten and fashioned at the same time; the tincture they most commonly apply, is Azure, some lay on Vermilion, others Yellow. In this Province are 12 great Cities, besides about sixty small ones, its chief City being called Nanciam, seat∣ed on a Lake, as is Quianhanfu, and others. Its other chief places are, 1 Ki∣enchan, 2 Linbiang, 3 Juencheu, 4 Nangam. The Province of Huquam, and its Commodi∣ties.The Province of HƲQƲAM is so abundant in Rice, that it is able to furnish a good part of China: It is likewise rich in Oyls and Fish. The Jam∣chuquian, and many other Rivers and Lakes cross it on all sides, and carry its Commodities towards Nanquin, and to Quincheu. It is very populous, con∣taining 15 great Cities, and about 100 small ones, the chief of which are, 1 Chin∣giang, 2 Huchang, 3 Suchang, 4 Yocheu, &c.
The Povince of Suchuen de∣scribed.The Province of SƲCHƲEN, which Mendoza calls Susuan; Purchas, Soin, is one of the lesser Provinces of the Kingdom; it is high scituated, and pours down its Rivers into the Neighbouring Provinces. Here is found good store of yellow Amber, and excellent Rhubarb. Its chief Cities are in number 8 together with about 120 lesser ones; all which are exceeding populous, the chief bearing the name of the Province. The Province of Quicheu, and its chief pla∣ces.The last of the Provinces I have to treat of is QƲICHEƲ, or likewise CƲTCHEƲ, according to Purchas. It borders on the People Timocoves, Gueyes, the Kingdom of Ciocangue, and the People called Layes: Here is that famous Lake Cncui-Hai, from whence comes divers Rivers which water China. They make here quantity of Arms of all sorts, to serve against those People which border upon them which once belonged to China; but which now, for the most part, are Enemies to it. This Province is Hilly and unever, which makes it not very fertil in Corn, Fruits, &c. but it hath abundance of Quicksilver; and also it breeds the best Horses of any Province in all China. Cities in this Province are very few, there being not above 15, both small and great; the chief of which are, 1. Quicheo, seated on the River Yanchuquian 2. Rueyang. 3. Hianchoau. 4. Liping. 5. Cipan. &c. All these Provinces, or rather all these Kingdoms of China, are governed by divers Magistrates, which those of Europe call in general Mandarins. These are persons that have Patents, whom the King or chief Officer of State doth chuse, after knowledge of their capacity and honesty; the degrees given to Students, the general and particular Governments, the charges of the Militia, the receipt of, and management of Revenues, the building and repairing of Publick Buildings, the Civil and Criminal Justice, are in their hands. And there are Appeals from one to the other, according to the order and nature of Affairs. The Council of Estate always resides near the person of the King, and hath a general eye over the Kingdom. But it shall suffice; what we have said of China let us finish by saying, That we have described it as it was before the Tartars made an irruption in 618. These Tartars kept it wholly for some years, since which the Chinois have re∣pulsed them, and have established their former estate, receiving likewife Chri∣stianity with hopes of great fruits and progress; but of late they have broke into China again, and have committed great Spoils. The Isles a∣bout China.Besides the Isles already spoken of, here are about the Coast of China several others, as the Isle of Corey in the Gulph of Nanquin, of good account, and well frequented, affording many of the China Commodities. It is of a large extent, being 100 Leagues in length, and about 50 in breadth. Its chief places are, Tauxem, seated on the Northern part of the Isle, regarding the Province of Leaoton; from which it is parted by a Streight or Gulph not above two Leagues broad. 2. Corey, seated on the Gulph of Nanquin, Southernly. 3. Tasoran, also seated on the Sea Eastwards; and on the South of this Isle are seated a Body of several Isles, called the Isles of Larrons. Likewise the Isles of Fuego, Lequeio Grande, Les Roys Mages; the Isles of Pescheurs or Fishers; of Paan or Formosa; of Tabaco Miguel, and Tabaco Xim.
TARTA∣RIA may be consider∣ed, as it is divided in∣to the Parts of TARTARIA DESERTA, Cumbalich, Glustins, Jerom, Risan, Frutach, Centaz, Risan, Divasi, Caracus. USBECK, or ZAGATHAY, with its Provinces or Parts of Usbeck, particularly so called, Jarchan, Samarcand, Nesaph, Mogalachfu, Horne, Xibuar, Reven, Targama, Teras, Sachi, Tanchit, Tersis, Sachania. Sacae, Sachi, Istigias, Busdascha, Rigul, Coman, Termend, Escalcand, Sermegan, Asareft, Kax, Etaican, Nesaph. Sogdlans, Bachars, Pogansa, Madrandn, Carassat, Zahaipa, Corui, Chiargan, Corfim, Bechet, Siminan, Cant, Chesolitis, Caracol. TURQUESTAN, with its Kingdoms or Proviaces of Chialis, Chialis, Turfan, Cuchia, Uga. Chinchintalas, Camul, Aramul. Cascar, Emil, Sark, Cassia, Taskent. Thibet, Andegen, Raofa, Tamafi. Cotam, Cotam, Pinegle, Cogricamri, Peim. Ciartiam, Ciartiam, Lop, Sazechiam, Carazan, Vociam. CATHAY, with its Kingdoms or Provinces of Tainfu, Cambalu, Achbaluch, Tinzu, Xandu, Caidu, Gouza. Tenduc, Tenduc, Zambir. Ciandu. Egrigaja, Ciangli, Tudinfu, Serr, Suidio, Mulon. Tanguth, Sachion, Quiqui. Hoyam, Gauta. Ergimul, Campion, Ergimul. Serguth,— Erzina. Belgian, — Belgian. True TARTARIA, with its Provinces or Hords of Mongul,— Mongul. Molair, — Caracoran. Tartar, — Tartar. Bargu, — Catacoran. Carli,— Taingin. Naiman,— Naiman. Cavona,— Cavona. Colmack, — Colmack.
map of Tartary To the Right Worshipfull Sr Iames Shaen of Shyne in Surrey Knight and Baronet This Mapp is humbly D. D. by R. Blome. A MAPP of ye Kingdome of TARTARY. By Monsieur Sanson.
TARTARY. Tartary, its extent.TARTARY, or TARTARIA, is seated in the most Northern part of all Asia, and extends it self from East to West, from the River Volga and Oby, which separates it from Europe, unto the Streight of Jesso; which separates it from America; and from South to North, from the Caspian Sea, the River Gehon, and the Mountains of Courasus; and Ʋssonte, &c. which divides it from the more Sou∣thernly part of Asia, unto the Northern Frozen or Scythian Ocean. Its length and breadth.It reaches in length from the 19th unto the 180th degree of Longitude, which is the half of our Hemisphere; and in breadth, from the 35th or 40th unto the 70th or 72th degree of Latitude, which is half the breadth of all Asia; So that it may contain 1500 Leagues from West to East, and 7 or 800 from North to South. Its position is almost entirely in the Temperate Zone;Its Position. nevertheless its more Southern parts being in the midst of this Temperate Zone, and the rest advancing to the Cold or Frozen; and its Southern parts being almost all bounded with very high Mountains, which keeps off the heat of the mid-day Sun, and ren∣ders it more cold towards the North; We may say, that Tartary in general hath its temperature much more cold than temperate. Its Neighbours are the Moscovites, on the West; the Persians,Its Neighbours. the Indians or the Mogolls and the Chinois, on the South; the rest is washed by that Sea of which we have little knowledge; some place towards the East, the Streight of Anian, which should separate it from America; others, the Streight of Jesso, which divides it from the Land or Isle of Jesso, which is between Asia and America, as we shall declare after Japan. Some esteeming the Northern Ocean in one manner, and some in another. Its Name, why so called.The name of Tartaria is apparently taken from the River, Quarter, or Hord of Tartar; from whence these People being issued, have over-run and made themselves known in all parts of Asia. Others take it from the word Tatar or Totar, which in the Syriack signifies Remnant or Forsaken, because they esteem them the Remnant of the Jews, of which Ten Tribes were trans∣ported into Media by Salmanzer. They must then add, that these Ten Tribes passed from Media into Scythia, which is not observed by the Ancients. However it be, the Persians yet call this Country Tartar, and its People Tata∣rons; the Chinois, Tagun. The People which possess this Country differ something from one another,Its Inhabitants. as well in Personage as in Religion and Manners; but of the most part they are of an indifferent Stature, ugly countenances, thick Lips, hollow Eyed, flat Noses, broad Fated very strong, stout, valiant and good Warriers; very active, vigilant, and exceeding quick of Foot; patient in all Afflictions; they are very rude, barbarous and revengeful, not sparing their Enemies, whom in revenge they eat, first letting out their Blood, which they keep, using it as Win at their Feasts. Their Habit is very mean, which is for the most part made of course stuff,Their Habit which reaches but to their Knees; yet are they very proud, despising all other Nations, and thinking their Cham to be the greatest Prince in the World; whom they greatly fear and reverence, being no better, than his Slaves. They are very nasty and sluttish, much given to drink of a treacherous and thievish nature.
Religion.In matters of Religion, they are generally Pagans and Mahumetans, which about the year 1246. crept in amongst them, which since hath spread it self over their Country, and intermixing with Paganism; yet hath it not so much prevailed as to extinguish Christianity, which was first planted amongst the Scythians (which were the Ancient people of Tartary) by the preaching of two of the Apostles, St. Philip and St. Andrew, which of latter years hath much lost it self, and not only by the prevailing of the Nestorian Sect, but chiefly for want of instructing the People in the true Orthodoxal points of Christian Religion. Dyet.Their Food is mean and very sluttishly drest; yet use they entertainments, and refuse nothing but Swines flesh, and eat all without Salt. They are much given to Hawking, and other Sports; but not much to Arts or Literature: The Women are much of the nature with the Men. Their from of Government.The Government (as Heylin observeth) is Tyrannical, their great Cham or King being Lord of all, in whose breast lieth their Laws, taking the Estates and Lives away of whom he pleaseth; whom they so much reverence, that they call him the shadow of Spirits, and Son of the Immortal God, and esteem him the Monarch of the whole World. In their execution of Justice they are very severe, punishing every small offence with sudden death. His Revenue without doubt must be very great;The Revenue of the Cham. for besides the sole trade of Pearl-fishing, which upon pain of death none dares to fish for, besides those employed by him; also all the Gold and Silver that is either found in, or brought into the Kingdom, he doth assume to himself, as also the Tenth of all things that the Country doth produce; and also what else he thinketh fit; as being (as I said before) Lord over them all. Here the Men have the liberty of 2 or 3 Wives, which they never choose but out of their own Tribe: and every Tribe hath a Chief, who is one of the Nobility of the Country, and carries for his Banner a Horses-Tail fastned to a Half-Pike, and died of the colour belonging to his Tribe. Their Forces.As concerning the Forces that the Great Cham is able to raise, they may be supposed to be very great, by that which may appear by Tamerlanes Army, which consisted of a 1200000 Horse and Foot; besides, if we consider what a disturber he hath been, and how he hath enlarged his Territories of his Neigh∣bours, as the Chinois, the Moscovites, &c. we may judge him powerful; but as his power is great on Land, it is as weak by Sea, scarce being Master of any Ships, and as little doth he regard them, though other Princes esteem them as a great security to their Kingdom. Tartary divi∣ded into parts.I shall divide Tartary into five principal Parts; which are, Tartaria the De∣sart, Ʋsbeck or Zagathay, Turquestan, Cathay, and the True Tartaria; the first and last are the most Northern, barbarous, and unknown. The others more Southerly, are better civilized and known, having abundance of fair Cities, and driving a good Trade. TARTARIA the Desart answers to the ancient Scythia intra Imaum; Ʋsbeck or Zagathay to the ancient Bactriana and Sogdiana; both the one and the other new Name retaining, in my opinion, something of the ancient; Sogdiana of Zagathay, and Bactriana of Ʋsbeck: Turquestan to the ancient Scythia extra Imdum. Cathay is the Serico Regia. As for the True Tartary it is unknown unto the Ancients, or at least it holds the most Northern part of the one and the other Scythia. Tartaria De∣serta, its bounds.Tartaria Deserta is bounded on the West with the Rivers Volga and Oby, which divides it from Moscovy on the East, by Mount Imaus, which separates it from the True Tartaria, and from Turquestan; on the North by the Septen∣trional Ocean; on the South by the Caspian or Tabarestan Sea, by the River Chesell, and by certain Mountains which joyn themselves with Imaus, and di∣vide it from Ʋsbeck or Zagathay. All the Country is inhabited by Peoples or Tribes, which are Troops or Bands which they call Hordes, having very few Walled places, whither they only retire themselves when forced; for they have no settled stay or abode,Its People, and the manner of their abode. but wandring perpetually, carrying and driving with them their Tents, Chariots, Families, and all they possess,
stopping only there were they find the best food for their Cattel, to which, as also in Hunting and War, they most addict themselves. They Till not the Earth, though it be good and fertil; and hence it is that this is called Tartary the Defart. The chief places in this part are; 1. Cumbalich, seated on a Lake. 2. Gerstina, seated between the two other Lakes, which are conjoyned toge∣ther by a River. 3. Jerom, on a branch of the River Oby. 4. Risan, seated on the River Jaick. 5. Frutach. 6. Centan. 7. Caracus. 8. Organci, and 9. Da∣vasi. The People that inhabit in this part, have their rise from three several Originals, which are disposed of into many several parts; as, 1. The Circas∣sians, which are for the most part Christians, and border upon the Euxine Sea. 2. The Samoyeds, who are altogether Idolaters, inhabiting towards the Nor∣thern Ocean: and, 3. Tartars, which are Mahometans, and seated betwixt both the other. And those again are subdivided into divers Tribes or Hordes; the chiefest of which are, 1. The Nagajan Tartars,The Nagajan Tartars, &c. which are held to be more fierce and cruel, and better Warriers than the other Tartars, but void of all Arts; despising Mony, or the use of Corn, accounting Mares-milk and House-flesh their best dyet, which they are not over-curious in dressing, it sufficing if it is only heated, though with the Sun: and this Horde paies yet some Tribute to the great Duke of Moscovy, to whom likewise part of this Tartaria Desert a belongs. 2. The Thumenenses, who are also a warlike People, and much ad∣dicted to Divinations and Sorceries. 3. The Zavolhenses are very powerful. The Kirgessi are also very strong and warlike; they are partly Gentiles, and partly Mahometans: They care not to bury their Dead, because of their so after removing, thinking never to see them more, and so leaving them hang∣ing upon Trees. The Country is very fertil, if tilled, being fit to produce se∣veral good Commodities, and is also very fit for Traffick, having commodious Havens; and if they would addict themselves to it, would soon gain a good Trade with several other Nations. ƲSBECK, or ZAGATHAT,Usbeck, id bounds. extends it self from the Caspian Sea unto Turquestan, and from Persia and India unto Tartaria Deserta: possessing all that is upon the Rivers of Chesel, and of Gehan or Albiamu. Its People are the most civil and ingenious of all the Western Tartars,Its people. fierce in War, being strong and active, patient in labour, not much addicted to vices, Thest they punish severely; they have a great trade with the Persians,Their trade. to whom they have sometimes been Subjects, sometimes Enemies, and sometimes in good Intelligence; and with the Indians, where they have likewise some∣thing to do; and with Cathay, where they utter their much prized Manna, bringing back Silk, which they make into Manufactures, and sell in Mos∣covy. This part of Tartary did contain several Provinces: 1. Zagathay, especially so called. 2. Sacoe. 3. Sogdiana, with some other of less note, in all which are not many considerable Cities, the most famous of which are Snarcand, which was both the Cradle and Grave to Tamberlan the Great, from whom the Great Mogolls boast themselves to be lineally descended, who enriched it with the fairest Spoils of Asia, and adorned it with an Academy, yet in some repute among the Mahometans: Also Bachara and Budaschan, and also Ba∣lick, according to some; but which I esteem in Chorasan, which hath divers times been in the hands of the Chams of Ʋsbeck. Badaschian is likewise on the Frontiers of Chorasan, Bochara or Bachara, where lived Avicenna one of the most famous Philosophers and Physicians of all the East.Its parts, chief places and fer∣tility. The Country is of a different Soil; that of Zagathay is indifferent fertil, which is much aug∣mented by the industry of the Inhabitants, who are likewise held the most in∣genious, being lovers of Arts, and well skilled in Manufactures, by reason of which they have a good trade with Merchants, which come from several places. Sacae is very barren, and ill manured, and full of wild Desarts, Forrests, and Uninhabited places, by reason of which the Inhabitants remove their Herds of Cattle from place to place, where they can find best food for them. Sogdian hath very rich Pastures, and watered with many good Rivers, which much conduces to its fertility; in which, as also in Zagathay, are several Towns
and Cities; as 1. Jarchan. 2. Sachi. 3. Istigiaes. 4. Busdaschan. 5. Bachara: and 6. Pogansa, which last is seated on the Sea. Turquestan, its bounds and chief places.TƲRQƲESTAN lies East from Ʋsbeck or Zagathay, West from Ca∣thay, North from India, and South from True Tartary. It is subdivided into some Kingdoms, of which the best known are Castar, Cotam, Chialis, Ciartiam, Thibet, Chinchintalis, &c. A part of their chief Cities being of the same name. Some name Hiarchan instead of Cascar, and Turon or Turphan instead of Chialis, for the chief Cities of the Kingdom. That of Cascar is the richest, most fertil, and best cultivated of all: That of Ciartiam is esteemed the least, and all sandy, having in recompence many Jaspars and Cassidoines; but that of Cascar hath likewise excellent Rhubarb,Its fertility and commo∣dities, &c. and in great quantity. Those of Cotam and Chialis have Corn, Wine, Flax, Hemp, Cotton, &c. Thibet is more ad∣vanced towards the Mogolls of India, and the most engaged in the Mountains of Imaus, Caucasus, and Ʋssontes. It hath many wild Beasts, Musk, and Cinnamon; and they make use of Coral instead of Mony. The Relations which have been given in 1624 and 1626, have made this Estate so great and rich, that they would confound it with Cathay: but those of 1651 make the Region very cold, and always covered with Snow; esteeming its King wholly barbarous, and less powerful than him of Serenegar, who is only a Rahia in the Estates of the Great Mogoll: so little assurance is there in the most part of these Relations. The other places of note in Turquestan are, Camul, Turfan, Emil, Sark, Cassia, Andegen, Raofa, Cotain, Peim, Finegle, Lop, Ciartiam, Sazechiam, and Vociam; and in this part is the Lake of Kithay, which is 65 Leagues in length, and 40 in breadth. CATHAY is the most Eastern part of all Tartaria,Cathay, its bounds. and esteemed the richest and most powerful Estate. It is contiguous to Turquestan, on the West, to China on the South, to True Tartary on the North; and on the East is watered by the Streight of Jessa. Some esteem all Cathay under one only Monarch or Emperour, whom they call Chan or Ʋlacan, that is, Great Cham, and speak him one of the greatest and richest Princes in the World. Others account divers Kings, but all Subjects to the Great Cham.Its ertility and commo∣dities. The Country is much frequented, well tilled, and in most places very fertil, abounding in Wheat, Rice, Wool, Hemp, Silk, Musk, Rhu∣burh, great Herds of Camels, of whose Hair they make Chamlets, and abun∣dance of Horses, with which they furnish other Countries, and especially China,Its chief place Cambalu. with what other things can be desired. Cambalu is esteemed its Metro∣politan City, in which the Great Cham resides, pleasantly seated in a fertil Soil, and on the River Palysanga, which hath its course through the City, which is seated in the midst of the Country, being as it were the center to others. This City, besides its Suburbs, is esteemed to be 28 miles in circuit, being as it were four square, each Angle being 7 miles in length, all encompassed with a strong Wall 10 paces thick; to which, for entrance into the City, there is at each Angle 3 Gates, to every one of which there is a Palace; besides in every Angle a more sumptuous Palace, in which the Armour of the Garrison Soul∣diers are kept, which are accounted 1000 of each Gate. The Buildings are (for the most part) of Free-stone, and very proportionably built; the chief Streets large, and so strait, that one may see from one Gate to the other, which gives it a gallant prospect. The Great Chams Palace.In the midst of this City is a stately Palace, where the Great Cham resides; together with his Queens and Children. This Royal Palace is four square, and of a vast bigness, having besides its Out-walls several other enclosures; adorn∣ed with stately Structures, beautified with pleasant Walks, Gardens, Orchards, Fishponds, with several other places for Recreation. His Attendance, State, and Riches, is great. Without the Walls are 12 Suburbs, each 3 or 4 miles in length,Its Trade and Commodities. adjoyning to each of the 12 Gates; and in these Suburbs the Merchants and Strangers reside, each Nation having a several Cane or Store-house, where they both lodge and exercise their Trade, bartering their Commodities for one anothers, being of a great Trade, and frequented by Merschants and Strangers of several Countries, but more especially by the Persians, Chinois, Indians,
and the Tartars themselves, which renders it very populous, it being the chief place for Trade in all Tartary, abounding not only in those Commodities afore∣said, but also in the Spices of India, the Gems of Pegu and Bengala, the Drugs of Arabia; also the Carpets, Tapestries, Silks and Manufactures of Persia, &c. Their Monies.The Mony currant here, and throughout this large Territory, is very diffe∣rent, neither is it made of Gold, Silver, or Copper, as with us; but of the mid∣dle Bark of the Mulberry Tree, which being made smooth and firm, they cut round into great and small pieces, on which they imprint the Kings Mark, as we do on our Mony; and these pieces, according to the bigness and thickness, are valued at a certain rate, and are passable for the buying of all Commodities; and it is deemed death for any one to counterfeit, or make any of this Mony. But in some places under the Great Chams jurisdiction, they use polished Coral instead of Mony: and in other places they use twigs of Gold, which is distin∣guished into several parcels by weight, but without Stamp or Character, and this is held in case of great importance: they also use in some places Porcelain instead of Mony; likewise they make a kind of Mony of Salt, which they boil until it be congealed hard, and then make it up into round lumps, on which is put the Princes Stamp. And these are the several sorts of Mony which pas∣seth amongst them; yet by reason of the Trade that this place hath with other Countries there adjacent, their Coyns are here found currant, as are those of the Grand Signior, as also those of Moscovy. Besides this Palace aforementioned, he hath another which is esteemed the principal of his abode, which is not far from this City, which Merchants are not permitted to enter; the Palace is called Zaindu, being four square, and, if Authors may be believed, every Square is 8 miles in length, and within this Quadtant is another, whose sides are 6 miles in length, and within that ano∣ther of 4 miles square, and this is esteemed the very Palace it self, and between these several Walls are stately Walks, Gardens, Orchards, Fish-ponds, Parks, Forrests, Chases, for all manner of pleases and game, as also several other places for all manner of Courtly and Military exercises. This Palace is ex∣ceeding richly built, having many sumptuous Edifices; his attendance great, 12000 Horse being his daily guard, besides an exceeding great number of other Attendance and Servitures. Tanguth, and is chief pla∣ces.The greatest and most potent Parts or Kingdoms of Cathay, are TAN∣GƲTH, whose chief City is Campion; where the Caravans of Forreign Merchants stop, it not being permitted them to go farther; a City well built, and where the Christians, in the time of Paulus Venetus, had 3 fair Churches; but of later time have much lost themselves through the great increase of the Gentiles, who have here several Monasteries, where they keep and worship their Idols, where they have also several Religious persons only dedicated to their service; and this Kingdom hath much Rhubarb. The Kingdom of TENDƲC, with its City of the same name,Tenduc. furnishes Cloth of Gold and Silver, Silks, Chamlets, &c. and it is thought that Prester John resided in these quarters; there being yet a particular King, who is a Christian, but of the Sect of the Nestorians, and subject to the Great Cham. THAINFƲR is known for the great number of its People,Thainfur. for the ex∣cellency of its Vines, for the goodness of its Arms, and of its Cannon, &c. for the rest, all great Travellers count Marvels, of the greatness, power, and mag∣nificence and riches of this Great Cham; of the extent of his Estates,The state and power of the Great Cham. of the Kings subject to him, of so many Ambassadors always in his Court, of the re∣verence and respect bore him, of the power and infinite number of his Men of Arms; but it is so far from Europe, that we could scarce believe them, till he made seen his power in 1618, having possessed the Ports and Passages of that great Mountain and Wall which separates Tartaria from China; casting an in∣finite number of Men into the great Kingdom, taking and pillaging its fairest Cities, and almost all its Provinces, forced the King of China to retire himself into Canton; leaving him in possession of not above 1 or 2 of its Provinces: But the relations of 1650 gives the King of China re-entrance into the great∣est
part of his Estates; its other parts are, Egrigaja, whose chief places are Serra and Mulon: also Egrimul, whose chief place is so called; then Serguth, whose chief place is Erzina; and lastly, Belgian, whose chief place is so called. The People of Cathay.The People in this part of Tartaria are generally strong of body, stout, warlike, and couragious, though in the greatest dangers; also very active, and patient in afflictions, ingenious, and given to Manufactures, more civil and courteous to Strangers than the rest of the Tartars; loving to wear good Ap∣parel, and feed deliciously, which the others are negligent of; in Stature they are but of a mean size, but well proportioned, and of an indifferent good Com∣plexion. Their Reli∣gion.In matter of Religion they are either Gentiles, Christians, or Mahometans, which latter is most used, it being publickly and generally allowed amongst them, in which Religions they observe several Ceremonies, not much different from those of other Countries, especially in Christianity and Mahometism. The True Tartary de∣scribed.The True and Ancient TARTARY, is the most Northern of all the parts of Tartary taken together, and likewise the coldest, the most untilled, and most barbarous of all: nevertheless it is from hence that the Tartars issued in the year 1200, and having made themselves Masters of 6 Hordes most adjacent to theirs, have since made themselves known, and have carried their Arms and their Government into the greatest and fairest parts of Asia. This is the place where the Ten Tribes are supposed to have rested, which were transported into Media; and some say, that the name of Dan, Nepthalim, and Zebulon, are yet found amongst them; but it is easie to forge what names men please in parts wholly unknown. The Kingdoms, Provinces, or Hordes of the Great Mogoll, of Bargu, Tartar, Nayman, Annibi, &c. are the most known. Some Authors place here Gog and Magog, which others will have to be in the Estates of the Mogoll, and of China, and towards Maug, above the Lake of Chia∣may. Its Commo∣dities.The principal Riches of the True Tartary consists in their Cattle and Furs, among which most esteem is had of their white Bears, black Foxes, Sables, &c. they live on Milk and Flesh, of which they have great plenty, neither caring for Fruits nor Grains; and in a word, have still something of the an∣cient Scythian. Some amongst them have their Kings; others live by Hordes, or Communalties; almost all are Shepherds, and the greatest part subject to the Grand Cham of Cathay. The chief places in this part of Tartary, do commonly take their names from their Kingdoms, Provinces, or Hordes, in which they lie.
The ISLES of JAPON, which may be consider∣ed under The GREAT ISLE of JAPON, or NIPHON, with its Parts of JAMAYOIT, Nagato, Amanguchi, Juami, Jezuma, Aqui, Bingo, Bitchu▪ Bigen, Mimalaca, Janaba, Foqui, Isle of Oqui. JETSENGO, Meaco, Vacasa, Vechisen, Tamba, Tango, Ozaca, Sacay, Cavachi, Ixe, Xima, Quinocum, Isle of Avangi. JETSEGEN, Yomda, Inga, Voari, Mino, Xinano, Micava, Tatomi, Yetchu, Canga, Noto, Isle of Sando, Nivata. QUANTO, Yendo, Conzuque, Cai, Surunga, Idzu, Sangami, Canzula, Ava. OCHIO, Aquita, Aizu, Voxu, Fitachi, Kimotauque, Isles of Marayxima, Toy, Xynoxima. The ISLE of XICOCO, or TOKOESI, Sanuqui, Tofa, Xyo. The ISLES of XIMO, or SAYCOCK, Fige, Bugen, Funay, Bungo, Fingo, Nanaqui, with the Isles of Firando, Fica, Goto, Amacusa. The PHI∣LIPPINE ISLES, which may be compre∣hended un∣der Great, as the ISLES of LUSON, Manille, Luson, Cagajon: MINDANAO, — Mindanao. PARAGOYA, — Damacan. Small, and lying Between the Great ISLES, as Mindora, — Mindora. Luban. Banon, Masbate. Rebujan. Negoas. Cebu, — Ville de Jesus. Bohol, Matan. Panay. Coyo. Eastwards, as Pondam. Catandanis. Paracella. Tandaya, — Acha. St. John,— St. Joari. Das Palmas. Southwards, as Taylaya. Carangaon. Sagym. Solo. Tagyma. Candagari. Westwards, as Kapull. Philippina. Northwards, as —Babuyonnes.
THE Oriental Isles OF ASIA. The Oriental Isles of Asia.THe Isles of Asia are as many in number, and as great, rich, and po∣pulous as those of all the rest of the World. They are spread here and there, in the great Oriental or Indian Ocean, and for the most part about the Indies. I shall divide them into 5 Parts or Bodies, and call the Isles of Japan, those which are on the East of China; the Philippine Isles, those which are likewise on the South East of Chi∣na; the Isles of the Moluccoes, those which are to the South of the Philippines; the Isles of the Sound, those which are to the West of the Moluccoes; and I put for the fifth Ceylan and the Maldives, which are East, and South-East from Cape Comori, the utmost point of Malabar. There are moreover many Isles which belong to Asia, but not to compare with these; of which we shall also speak a word as occasion offers. The Isles of Japan, are on this side the Tropick of Cancer; the Philippines between the Tropick and the Equinoctial Line; the Moluccoes, the Isles of the Sound, and the Maldives, are about this Line, returning from East to West. The Isles of JAPAN or JAPON. The Isles of Japan.WE call the Isle or Isles of Japan, a certain multitude of Isles, and of diffe∣rent bigness, which are on the East of China, distant from it about 100 Leagues; and so are seated in the most Oriental part of our Continent: They stretch together in length about 300 Leagues from West to East, and from South to North 40, 50, 60, and sometimes 100 Leagues in breadth. Amongst these Isles there are 3 very considerable. The first and which is much greater then the two others, is called by us Japan or Japon; by its Inhabitants, Hippon or Niphon, which signifies The Spring of Light, or of the Sun: A name proper for it, since it lies to the East, and Sun-rising of all Asia, and of all our Continent. The second is called Ximo, that is, a Low Countrey or Saycock; that that is, Nine Kingdoms. The last Tokoesi or Xicoco, that is, Four Kingdoms. We must likewise make account that these three great Isles are cut asunder by several Channels, which divide them into several Isles; but because these Channels are very narrow, these parts are esteemed pieces contigious in regard of the others, where the Channels, or rather the Arms of the Sea which divide them, are much larger.
They have all those Fruits, Trees, Herbs and Beasts, which we have in Eu∣rope, with several others not known amongst us; as also abundance of several Fowls, both tame and wild; the surface of the Earth is well clothed with Woods and Forests, in which are found very lofty Cedars; and the bowels of the Earth stored with divers Metals, as Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead, Iron, &c. though not so good as in the Indies, except it be their Silver, which is excel∣lent and abundant. Their Pearls are great, red, and of no less esteem then the white ones. These with several Manufactures which are her made, are the chief Commodities of this Island, Chief places. Meaco describ∣ed.In this Island are several Cities of some note; as 1 Meaco, seated in the midst of the great Isle of Japan, a fair and large City, formerly 21 miles in compass; but now by reason of their Wars, it is reduced to the third part of what it was, in which the Jesuites did formerly esteem it to have 180000 Houses, and judg∣ed it to have near 100000 when they were there. This City is the ordinary residence of the Triumviri, or the three principal Magistrates, which rule or sway the affairs of these Islands; of whom the first is entituled the Dayri or Voo, that is, the Emperor, who hath the care of Civil Affairs; the second is the Cube or King of Tenza, who is chief of the Militia, managing the Affairs of Peace or War; and thirdly the Zazo or Xaca, who is chief in Religion and Sacred matters. The City is divided into the higher and low∣er; the one and the other together were not above 20000 paces long, and 8 or 10000 paces large. The Palace of the Dayri was in the higher City, great,The Palace of the Dayri. stately and adorned with all things which may add to its luster; and the Houses or Palaces of his Conges, with the Houses of the chief Lords of all Japan, were about that of the Emperor. The lower City was almost contigious to Fuximi, which serves for a Fortress to Meaco. This City, as most of all those in these Islands, are unwalled; but its Streets in the night are chained up, and a Watch of two men at each end of every Street, who are to give account of the trans∣actions that happen in the night. Its Streets are large and well composed, its Houses well built, and most of Wood; all their Pagodes are made of Wood, they are neither large nor high; and in these Pagodes they have several ill-shapen Figures, to which they address their Prayers, and bestow on them great gifts in way of Alins, which their Priests make use of. Nobunanga was the first that lessened this City, which he did by burning a part of it in 1571 and since it hath received divers jostlings of ill fortune. 2. Amangucki, a Maritime Ci∣ty, and the fairest of the Kingdom of Nangato, hath been formerly well known for its Trade, containing few less then 10000 Families. It was burned in 1555 during some revolt; it was builded again, and again burnt, and afterwards re∣built. These fires happen often in Japan, the greatest part of their building being of Wood; but the wood is very near and curious, marbled; &c. Nanga∣saki was the most famous of the Isles of Saycock, and there are a great number of fair Cities through all Japan. Amongst these Cities, that of Sacay, on the South of Meaco; which Ferdi∣nand Mendez Pinto (provided that he doth not lie) says, he hath known not to have depended upon any King or Lord, but was governed of it self, in form of a Republick, created all its Magistrates and Officers; and he assures us, that all the Masters of Families rich or poor, make themselves be called Kings and Queens, and their Children Princes and Princesses. This liberty and vanity is observable if it be true. The City of Yendo.Mandelssos in his Book of Travels, makes mention of a City called Yendo, which he makes to be a fair, large, and well built City; in which, he saith, there is a Castle about two Leagues in compass, being strongly fortified with 3 Walls, and as many Moats▪ The building is very irregular but fair, having to the Walls abundance of Gates: Within the last Gate, he saith, there is a Magazin of Arms, for 3 or 4000 men, on which all the Streets that are fair and broad take their rise  in which said Streets, on both sides, are many magnificent Palaces for the Nobles. In the midst of this Castle, is seated the Emperors Palace, ha∣ving belonging to it many stately edifices and apartments, as Halls, Chambers,
Galleries, Gardens, Orchards, Groves, Fish-Ponds, Fountains, Courts, &c. as also several Select Houses for his Wives and Concubines. And here is his ordina∣ry Residence, being in the Province of Quanto, about 120000 paces from Me∣aco, between which are abundance of stately and magnificent Palaces and Houses, for the entertainment of the Emperor in his journey between Jendo and Meaco: But the most beautiful Palace next to Yendo, is that of O Jaca on the Sea, and South of Meaco; the buildings of Yendo, are so beautified with Gold, as well without as within; that at a distance it seems to be rather a Mountain of Gold than a building. The Moun∣tains of Japan.Amongst the Mountains of Japan, there are two very well known. Figeno∣jama, four Leagues from Meaco, renowned for its height, which stretches it self above the Clouds; and Juy or Juycan in the Kingdom Hietcheu, which vomits Fire in great abundance, as some time did Aetna in Sicilia, Vesuvius at Naples, and the Isles of Volcan and Strongoli among those of Liparia: And on the top of this Mountain, the Devil, in a white and shining Cloud, shews himself in divers forms, but only to such of his Votaries as live about this Mountain an abstemious life, like the ancient Hermits, as in Fasting, undergo∣ing many austerities, and compleating the Vow they made for this purpose. The People of Japan their dispositions.The Country hath hot and medicinal Waters in several places; the common Waters are healthful; the Inhabitants of a good stature, strong and active; in complexion they are inclining to an Olive colour, well disposed, judicious, apt to learn, of sound memories, subtile in their dealings, more in∣clined to Arms then Letters, though they become perfect in both, having ma∣ny Academies and Ʋniversities: They are ambitious of glory, patient in af∣fliction, hating Idleness, Gaming, or all ill-husbandry; as also slandering, swearing, lying, theft, and generally all vices, which they severely punish, and oftentimes to death. Their Arms are esteemed the most excellent of all the Indies, they being more valiant and warlike then the Chinois, and more patient of labour; one of their Kings conceived no less then that he could conquer China, and to that pur∣pose levied 2 or 300000 men, which went against it, and brought back good booty. They have long used the Art of Printing, they are very civil, and much given to visits and entertainments; they delight in rich and costly furni∣ture in their Houses, with the adornment of Pictures, Cabinets, Arms, &c. They are very punctual in performing their promises. Their Religion and belief.In matters of Religion they are for the most part Gentiles, adoring ancient∣ly the Sun, Moon and Stars, giving adoration to Wild Beasts; but they chiefly worship the Devil, and that partly for fear of hurting them: To which pur∣pose, they have in all their Pagodes, which are numerous, several ill-shapen Figures which they pray to. And to these Pagodes, there belongeth a great many Priests, to whom they shew a great respect, and allow a good subsistence who by their habit are known from other persons, and live a very strict life, abstaining from Flesh, even to the use of Women. Amongst them they have several Sects, which possibly are so many different ways in performing their Devotions, in which they are not over strict, nor over devout. Some of them believe the immortality of the Soul, that the Body is reduced to its first principles, and becomes dust and ashes; and that the Soul is either raised to joy, or condemned to eternal sorrow, believing the Resurre∣ction; and that at its return into the World, it shall find good or evil, according to its actions: Whereas others make no account of the dissolution of the World nor put any difference between the Souls of Men and Beasts. They are very jealous of their Wives and Concubines, not admitting them the liberty of walking abroad, or society with men at home; they are very mo∣dest, and not given to meddle with any kind of business that appertains to their Husbands. Adultery they severely punish, but Fornication is permitted a∣mongst them: They are very indulgent to their Children and give them good education: They are very tender of their honor, being shie of doing any thing which may eclipse it; and as they will give no injuries to others, so they will take none.
The state power, &c. of the Emperor.Their Emperor dwels in great state and pomp, having attendance of Nobles and others: He is highly esteemed and reverended of his Subjects, even to ado∣ration. In his Government he is in a manner tyrannical, having in his power, the Lives and Estates of his Subjects, though he doth not often shew it; his Revenue is exceeding great, and his power, as hath been spoken of before, very strong. All his Nobles (which are very many) live exceeding stately, and have great Revenues: And when any of them happen to die, they have a custom, that a∣bout 20 or 30 of their Slaves do voluntarily kill themselves to wait upon the Souls of their deceased Lords, which they hold to be a great honor to them, and a discharge of their fidelity and love they bear to them. But there are many defaults observed in their government, and in their man∣ner of living: The great number of their Kings and their Princes, which still endeavour to make themselves great; The Revolts and Rebellions, to which those people are subject on the least occasion; The principal form of the Go∣vernment, which is almost wholly tyrannical. The little care they have of Tillage, and of keeping fowl at home, or Flocks in the Field, makes them of∣ten want needfull Food. And it is observed, That they have many manners and customs different, and often contrary to ours, or those of their Neighbors:The Japanoi∣ses differ in ma∣ny Customs from other Na∣tions. As when they go out of the house, they leave off their Cloak, which they put not on again, till they come in; whereas we leave it off in the house, and put it on abroad. When they meet a friend, they salute him by putting off their Shoo, and shaking their foot; we salute by uncovering the head. In walking they give the left hand, esteeming it most honourable, whilst we be∣lieve the right so to be. Receiving a friend at home, they remain seated on the ground; we stand till he who comes to see us is seated. The Earth covered with Mats, serves for Bed, Table and Seat, (for they uphold themselves on their knees, on that Mat, when they eat;) our Bed, Table and Seat, are rai∣sed from the ground, for our repose or eating. They esteem Black Hair and Black Teeth; we Fair Hair and White Teeth. They mount on Horse-back from right to left; we from left to right. They set the name of their Family before their proper name; we our proper name before that of our Family. They will not that those Women they take in Marriage should bring any riches; here we seek after those who have most. So soon as their Women are married, they have no longer liberty to go abroad; here more then before. Black is their sign of joy, and White of mourning; Black our mourning, and White our joy. Their richest Tapestries are Mats, thin, close, and of divers colours; ours of Wool, Silk, and oftentimes of Gold and Silver. Their Stone Buildings have neither Morter nor Plaister; here they build not without both. They despise all Precious Stones, and esteem more their Vessels of Earth, which serve to keep their Drink; which we make little esteem of, but much value Precious Stones. They drink nothing but what is hot; those most delicate with us is cool. Their Physick is sweet and odoriferous; ours bitter and unpleasant. They ne∣ver let their sick Blood; which with us is very common upon the least occasion. These with several other customs, contrary to ours, do they observe amongst them, which are too long to set down. Nor want they fine Reasons to sustain their Customs better then ours; they say we must conserve our Blood, as one of the principal sustainers of our Life; that we must not give a sick person that which is displeasant, troublesom, and sometimes affrights him to see, much more to drink or eat; that hot water augments the natural heat, opens the conduits, and quenches thirst; that cold closes the Pores, begets the Cough, weakens the Stomach, and quenches natural heat; that their Vessels, of which they make such esteem, are necessary for many things in a Family, which Pre∣cious Stones are not; that their buildings may be easily taken down, carried other where, and erected in another manner, when they will; which ours cannot, &c. Amongst their Manners, there are some very good; they hate Games of Hazard; they are very patient in bad fortune; they maintain themselves ho∣nestly in their Poverty; suffer hot themselves to be transported with Passion; speak not ill of the absent; know not what it is to swear, lye, or steal; suffer
easily all incommodities of heat, cold, famine, or thirst; yet all this, rather to get the honor of being esteemed constant and vertuous, then being so truly; for they are subject to Vices, as well as their Neighbors. But lot us leave their Manners, and speak a word of their Government, which of late hath encoun∣tred a diversity, and deserves to be known. The general Estate of all these Isles, was not long since divided into 66 King∣doms; of which the Isle of Japan alone had 47, which with some little Neighbouring Isles was made up 53, that of Ximo or Saycok had 9 according to its name, and Chicock the other four. The Estate of these Isles.At present the order is much changed; the whole Estates are fallen into the hands of one alone, as it hath been formerly; and is divided into 7 Provinces, or principal parts; and those 7 parts subdivided into many others; which ought to pass under the name of Lordships; some of which yet retain the name of Kingdoms, others of Dutchies, Principalities, &c. Those which command in the lesser parts, are called generally Tones. Caron ranges them in six different degree, and calls them Kings, Dukes, Princes, Knight-Barons, Barons and Lords, which according to our degrees of honour are distinguished by Kings, Princes, Dukes, Marquisses, Earls and Barons. Caron makes 21 Kings; some of which possess 1 or 2, and some 3, and in all 30 and odd of the 66 ancient Kingdoms. After the Kings, he puts 4 Dukes, 6 Princes, 17 Knight-Barons, 50 Barons, and 41 Lords, giving each a Re∣venue of at least 100000 Livers per annum, and so augmenting to the greatest to whom he gives 10 Millions and more; and makes account that the Cube or Cesar of Japan spends at least 100 Millions of Crowns yearly, as well in the expence of his house, as in his Militia, and what he disburses to the Tones. The parts of Japan.The names of the 7 principal parts, into which the Estate of Japan is divided, are Saycock, Xicoco, Jamasoit, Jetsengo, Jetsegen, Quanto and Ochio. Saycock with the Isles which belong to it, is the nearest to China; Chicock is on the East of Saycock; the other five parts are in the great Island, and extend them∣selves advancing from East to West. Jamosoit being the most Western part of all, and answering to the 12 Kingdoms, which the King of Nangato or Amanguci hath formerly possessed. Jetsenco and Jetsegen together make the middle of the great Island, and apparently that which passed under the name of Tenza, and contained 20 others. Quanto and Ochio advance themselves from the East, unto the streight of Sangaar, which divides Japan from the Land of Jesso, of which more anon; Quanto, comprehended 8 Kingdoms, and Ochio the rest, and in these parts there are abundance of Cities and Towns, which I have observed in my Geographical Tables. But because the diversity of names of Dayri or Emperor, of Cube or Cesar, of Tones or Kings, Princes, Dukes, &c. may breed some confusion; to give a more particular knowledge, we will say succinctly, that before the year 1500 there was in all Japan only one Soveraign, which they called Voo or Dayri, that is Emperour. The Isle or Land of JESSO. The Isle of Jesso.AFter the Isles of Japan, let us speak a word of the Isle or Land of Jesso, Yedzo or Jesso, for divers Authors write its name differently, some calling it the Isle, some the Land abovesaid, and to the East of Japan, in the manner that the English, Portugals and Hollanders deseribe it, this Land must extend from Asia to America: They say that from Tessoy, which is the most Western point of it, opposite to Coray, and near Tartary, advancing towards the East, it is 60 days journey to the Province of Matzumay; and that from Matzumay unto the most Easterly point, and neerest America, it is likewise 90 days jour∣ney, so that it is 150 days journey from one end to the other, which after only 8 Leagues a day will be 1200 of our Leagues. Its breadth is not spoke of.
The streight of Tessoy.The Streight of TESSOY, which separates this Isle from Tartary, hath great currents, caused by the discharging of several Rivers which come rom the Northern parts, and from Tartary and Jesso. The other streight which separates it from America, may in all likely-hood be that Anian; and those two streights, limit the two extremities of Jesso, towards the midst, must be the Province of Matzumay and apparently beyond the Streight, which separates the Isle of Japan, from the Land of Jesso; and this streight may be called the streight of Sangaar, which is the utmost East-Land of Japan. The traverse, or traject of this streight is not above 10 or 12 Leagues; o∣thers say not above so many miles; others there are affirm it no streight, but an Isthmus which fixes Japan to Jesso; and that both the one and the other toge∣ther are but one Isle; so difficult it is to find the truth of a thing so far distant. This Isle or Land of JESSO is so great and vast, that the Inhabitants can∣not but have different manners; those which are nearest Japan, resembling the Japanois, those which are near Tartary, the Tartars; and those near Ameri∣ca, their neighbouring Americans; and in all likelihood they are more barba∣rous then all their neighbours. Its Inhabitants.They are all Idolaters, covering themselves with the skins of Beasts, which they take in Hunting; having their bodies all hairy, and wearing their Beard and Mustachoes very long: they are Warlike, Cruel, and Formidable to the Japanois; In War they have no other remedy for their wounds, but washing them in salt water. Its fertility.The Land is little inhabited; it would be rich if it were well tilled; it hath many Mines of Silver, and quantity of excellent Skins and Furs, which make it appear that the Earth stretches to the Northward. They have some Trade with Aquita, which is on the East of Japan; but those of Aquita go seldom into Jesso, because they cannot with security reside with, or trust those Barbarians. The PHILIPPINE Islands, or of LUSON and the MANILLES. Philippine IslesTHe PHIPPINE Islands are so called by the Castilians, because they conquered them under Philip the second, King of Castile. The People of the East call them the Isles of Luson, because of the greatest and most famous of these Isles, which they call Luson, a principal City of this Isle, being likewiseThe Irnames. so called. The Portugals call them Manilles, from the City them Manilles, from the City Manilla, at pre∣sent the chief City of the Isle of Luson. They are in the Oriental Ocean, to the Southward of China, to the Eastward of India, North of the Moluccoes, and Westward of the Islands of Theeves: But they are 4 or 500 Leagues distant from these, not above 100 from China, and much nearer the Moluccoes, and the the Isles of the Sound. Their scituation is between the Equator, and the Tropick of Cancer;Scituation. to wit, from the 5 unto the 20 degree of Septentrional Latitude: and from the 155, unto the 170 Meridian or Degree of Longitude; and so contain 15 or 16 de∣grees of Longitude and Latitude, extending themselves in length and breadth 3 or 400 Leagues, The chief Isles and places de∣scribed.LƲSON, MINDANAO and PARAGOYA, are the greatest: Luson towards the North, Mindanao towards the South, and Paragoya to: wards the West; so that they form almost an Equilateral Triangle. Tandaya otherwise Philippina, Mindora, Panay, Masbate, Rebujan, St, John, Cebu or the Pintados, Negoas, Matan, Bohol, and few others are of a lesser circuit. Tan∣daya is South-East from the most Southerly point of Luson; and the streight be∣tween is called of Manilla, not because of the City Manilla, more then 100 Leagues distant; but because of the Isles of Luson, which are called likewise of Minilla. Mindora on the South of the Isle of the Gulph, and City of Manilla: The rest are between Luson and Mindanao.
We might likewise make account of Messane, Calegan and Buthuan, near Ce∣bu; of Abuyo and Capuli; of Banton, Rebujan, Vireges, Marinduque and Luban, between Masbate and Mindora; of Iloques, Mauris, Coyo, Bankingle and Ka∣pull, between Mindora and Paragoya, and between Paragoya and Mindanao; of the Little Philippine on the West; of the Babuyonnes on the North; of Ca∣tandanis, Paracalla, Linton, and others on the East of Luson; of Palmes and St. John on the East of Mindanao. But we cannot name them all, there being so great a number, that some esteem them 1000 or 1200 of considerable note, and in all 10 or 12000. Magellan was the first of the Europeans, who discovered these Islands in 1520 In 1564 Don Lewis de Valasco, Vice-Roy of Mexico, sent Michael Lapez de Legaspes to establish some Spanish Colonies; and facilitate by that means their Traffick from Mexico with China and Japan, who seised upon Luson, Cebu, &c. The Spaniards possess at present above 50 of them, among which, Luson, Ten∣day and Cebu, are the most famous. The Isle of Luson.Luson sometimes called New-Castle, begins before the 13, and ends after the 19 degree of Latitude on this side the Equator, which are not above 6 degrees or 150 Leagues; but it stretches one of its points towards the East: So that from Cape Bojador towards China, unto that of Caceres towards Tenday, is more then 200 Leagues, passing cross the Isle. Its breadth is very unequal, and sometimes only 20, 25, and sometimes likewise 50, 60, and 75 Leagues. Manille is its chief City, seated in the most Southernly part of the Island; well built, after the modern way; and its Houses are of Free-stone, strong, and so great, that the Spaniards have been forced to divide some part of it from the rest, to serve them for a Cittadel, in case of necessity; by which means, they are not at so great a charge in keeping of so great a number of Soldiers, as would o∣therwise be requisite for the security of the place. They have a good Port, the entrance into which is yet somewhat difficult, by reason of the Isles and Rocks of Mirabelles, at the opening of the Gulph or Bay of Cavita or Cavite, at the bottom of which, is Manilla. The Governor or Vice-Roy of these Isles, as also an Archbishop, who hath a Spiritual Jurisdiction over all the Philip∣pine Islands, which he exercises by three Suffragan Bishops, and some Priests have here their Residence. This City is very populous, here commonly resid∣ing about 15000 Chinois, besides Japonesses, and a great number of Spaniards which drive a Trade, in several good Commodities which the Earth and their ingenuity produces, which are brought hither, as being the chief City, of which I shall speak anon. The other Cities of the same Isle are Cagajon or Nueva Segovia, in the most Northern part; then Caseres, in the most Southern part of the Isle. The City of Luson is by all Authors described on the Coast, which regards China: And this name hath been most famous. Now it is difficult to know, whether Luson or Manilla are two Cities; Linscot thinks them one and the same. The Isle of Mindanao.Mindanao is composed of three different Isles, which are almost contiguous, the greatest, which is in the middle of the other two, retains the name of Min∣danao, having about 100 Leagues of length, and little less of breadth. Canola towards the West, 75 Leagues long, and 25 or 30 broad. Las Buenas Sennales, or the Good Ensigns; or likewise St. John on the North East, hath only 25 or 30 Leagues of length and breadth: And these three together, are between the fifth and the ninth Parallel or degree of Longitude, and between the 162 and 169 Meridian or degree of Longitude, and contain little less then 200 Leagues from the Point of Galere on the West, to Cape Bicajo on the East. They belong to divers Mahometan or Pagan Kings, who are all in good in∣telligence with the King of Ternate of the Moluccoes, and ill-affected to the Portugals. Their principal Cities are Mindanao, which others call Tabouc, Sa∣ragos or Suriaco, Lomiaton, or Lomiatan, Dapita and Canola. Of the scituation of other Cities, of which some Authors make mention, we have no assurance.
The Isle of Paragoya.PARAGOYA or CALIMIANES of Boterus, is the same thing as Calamian of Linscot; and as Puloam or Puloaym of Maginus, and others: it begins almost at the 8, and ends not till the 11 Degree of Latitude, stretching it selt from South-East to North-East, in length more then 100 Leagues, not ha∣ving above 10, 15, or 25 of breadth. Boterus and Pigafette say, that it bears Figs half as long and as thick as ones Arm; and others, only of a Palm long, but better then that of Dates. Its King is Vassal to him of Borneo. The Isle of Tandays.TANDAYA is about the twelfth Degree of Latitude, and the 167 of Longitude; Its utmost length is about 50 Leagues, and its breadth about 40. It hath born alone the name of Philippine, for being the first discoverer of these Islands, and that name hath been communicated to the rest. It is esteeined the best and most pleasant of all; Fruitful, rich, easie to be approached, and its In∣habitants courteous. Its chief place is Achan. The Isle of Mindora.MINDORA is not much less then Tandaya, but not so famous; yet the Streight between the Isle of Manilla and Mindora, is called Mindora; from whence it may be judged, there is likewise a City of Mindora on that Streight and that this place hath formerly been famous. There are here Mines of Gold. The Isle of CbuCEBƲ is in the midst of the Philippines. The Spaniards have built on the East Coast Ville-Jesus, under the 10 Degree of Latitude, and 165 of Lon∣gitude. The Port is good, and here it was that Magellan contracted Alliance with the King of this Isle, received him into the Protection of the King of Ca∣stile, and in his favour passed into the Isle of Matan, and made war upon its King, where he was killed. Their FertilityAll these Isles in general, are very fruitful, and yield a great quantity of Grains, of Rice, Fruits, Wine, Honey, &c. which are given almost for nothing. They have Wine of Dates, which yields not to those of Grapes, and which are as strong as Sack: They feed much Cattle, and Fowl, as Oxen and Sheep, which they carry into New-spain; Hogs, whose Flesh is excellent, Goats, Pul∣lain, &c. They have many Wild Beasts, as Stags, and several sorts of Venison, Wild Boars, Tygers, Foxes, Bears, Lions, Apes, Civet Cats, &c. which in∣habit in their Forests and Mountains; and in their Rivers they have Croco∣diles and an infinite number of several sorts of Fish, which are likewise found in their Seas: Amongst others Tortoises, whose shels are much esteemed for the beauty, and variety of their colours, there being none found like these, and those of the Maldives. Their Commo∣dities.They produce likewise Gold, Iron, Steel, Saffron, Wax, Cinnamon, Long Pep∣per, Ginger, Sugar, with several other Metals, Spices, Drugs, and Precious Stones. They fish Pearls on their Coasts, and particularly near to Negros and Abujo. Its Trade.But besides the cheapness and abundance of Victuals which these Isles afford, and the Traffick which they have so commodiously with China, and with Mex∣ico or New Spain, hath made the Spaniards resolve to keep them: And therefore they built some Fortresses in 1589 and transported some Families from New Spain, with Horses, Sheep, and other Beasts to breed a Race. The Chinois have a great Trade to these Islands, bringing hither all their Commodities, as Silk, Cotton of all colours, Porcelain, Brimstone, Cannon Pow∣der, Iron, Quick-silver, Steel, Copper, and other Metals; also Chests, Cabinets, Pictures, Laces, Coiffs, Vales, and other curiosities for Women. Of all these Commodities, there remains a part in the Philippines, and the Castilians take away the other, and with the Gold, Wax and Spices, which they get in these Isles, carry them to Mexico: From whence they bring what is proper, both for the Philippines, for China, and the East-Indies. And this trade which is driven by the South, or Pacifick Ocean, is a great, and frequent, as that which is between Spain and Mexico by the Ocean, or North Sea.
The MO∣LUCCO ISLES; which may be compre∣hended un∣der the The ISLES of the MOLUCCOES, particularly so called; as the Isles of Ternate, Gamma-Lamma, Nostra Sennora dello Rosaria. Tidore, Marieco, Castello Viejo. Timor, — Nassaw. Machian, Tabillol. Mauricio. Bachian, Marigoram, Gammeduore. The Greatest ISLES of the MO∣LUCCOES; as, The Isle of the CELEBES, Celebes, Ciaon, Bantachaja, Machasar. The Isle of GILOLO, Gilolo, Tolo, Isiau, Jaffougo, The Land of PAPOUS, Bay a Fonda. Bay a de Ant-Boto. Small ISLES about and be∣tween the Isles of CELEBES, GILOLO, and the Land of PAPOUS; as On the South of CE∣LEBES, are the Isles of Buquerones. Solayo. Cobana. Cabinces. St. Mathews. Flores, Lasataja, Batuliar. Susu. Malva. Cabanazze, — Timor. Solar, — Adonare. Ombo. Teralta: On the East, and North-East of CELEBES, are the Isles of Wawany. Xulla. Paugay. Tasouro. Meao. Saranbal. Syem. Between the Isles of CELEBES and GILOLO, and on the South Coast, or Sea of the Land of PAPOUS, are the Isles of Bouro. Rilan. Manipe. Attabuti. Ouby. Sinomo: Mesol. Seram-Cambello: Amboyna, — Amboyna. Pulorin. Puloway. Celayon. Guligiej. Subiana. Corer. Away. Tenimber. Kedguey. Aru. Banda, London, Ortattan, Comber. Nassau, Belgleque, Labetack. Poloway. — Reve. Gumanapy, — Gumanapy. Pulorin. On the North of GI∣LOLO, are the Isles of Morotay, — Sian. Camafo, Noba. The ISLES of LAR∣RONS, or THEEVES, viz. The ISLES of LARRONS, or THEEVES, particularly so called, where are the Isles of Deserte. Malabrigo. Englese. Angloise. Mana. Chemochoa. Gregua. Agan. Artomagan: Guagan. Cheraguan. Natan. Sepan. Metan. Can. Volia. Botaba, and Bacim. ISLES Westwards, and between the Isles of LARRONS and the PHI∣LIPPINE Isles; as those of Pulo-Vilan. De los Arecisos: De los Matelotes, De Bidima. ISLES Southwards of the Isles of LARRONS; as those of Dancers, Martyrs▪ Birds.
THE ISLES OF THE MOLUCCOES. The Isles of Moluccoes ∣ny.I Comprehend under the name of the MOLƲCCOES, not only the Isles of TERNATE, TIDORE, MOTILL or TIMOR, MACHIAN, and BACHIAN, which are particularly called the Moluccoes; but likewise those of GILOLO, of the Land of PA∣POƲS, which lie on their East; of CELEBES, which are on their West; of them of CEYRAM, of FLORES, and TIMOR, which are towards their South, and several others thereabouts. They make a Body of many and divers Isles, South of the Philippines, Eastwards of those of the Sound, West of New Guiney, and North of Terra Australis, and are under or near the Equinoctial Line, stretching themselves only to the third degree on this side that Line, and to the 10th or 12th beyond it, and extending themselves from East to West, from the 160th degree of Lon∣gitude unto the 180th; and thus they have together 15 degrees of Latitude and 20 of Longitude, which are almost 400 Leagues of breadth and 500 of length. The English were the first of any Christians that traded hither. The Isles of Celebes, Gilolo▪ &c.CELEBES, the Lands of PAPOƲS and GILOLO are the great∣est; then CERAM, FLORES, and TIMOR, those which are the parti∣cularly called the Moluccoes are the smallest, Celebes is 200 Leagues long, and about 100 broad: Gilolo about 100 Leagues long, and near as broad: Ceyram, Flones, and Timor, each 60 Leagues long; but for the most part their breadth is not above a third or quarter of their length. The True Moluccoes are only 2, 3, 4, or 5 Leagues long, and 5, 6, 10, 12, and 15 in circuit. Their Com∣modities and Ferillit▪Amongst all these Isles, the True Moluccoes are the most known by reason of their Cloves, with which they abound and furnish all Asia and Europe. They have neither Grains nor Mines of Gold, few Beasts, much exellent Fruit, and several Spices, as Ginger, Cinnarion, Mace, Nutmegs, &c. and divers Drugs; amongst others, a kind of Wood, that being put to the fire, burns, flames, and yet consumes not. The Cloves are their principal Riches; Ter∣nate, Tidore, and Machian have the most, and Machian fewer. Ternate yields yearly 400 Bahars of Cloves; Tidore and Machian, each 300▪ And in the great Harvests, which are but once in seven years, Machian yields 15 or 1600▪ Tidore, 12 or 1300; and Ternate, 1000 or 1200; each Baher is 600 li.Flemish. Their scitua∣tion.These Isles lie to the Westward along the Coast of Gilolo, so neat the Equator, that the most Southerly part is not above 24 or 25 Minutes beyond that Line, nor the most Northerly above 48 or 50 Minutes on this side i so that together they have not above one degree of Latitude, and about 10 or 12 Minutes, which maks 30 Leagues. Their Longitude▪ is between the 0th and 30th Minutes of the 168 Meridian, or degree of Longitude.
The Isles of Ternate, Tidore, &c.TERNATE is the most North; and from it Southward are, TIDORE, TIMOR, MACHIAN, and BACHIAN, for little account is made of the rest. Bachian is 15 or 16 Leagues circuit, Ternate, Tidore, and Machian, 10 or 12; Timor, 5 or 6. the rest less. The Isle of Ternate, its chief places, fertility and commodities.TRENATE is esteemed the principal Isle, being about 8 Leagues in cir∣cuit, and its Kings the most powerful, both of the True Moluccoes and of all that I have passed under the general name of Moluccoes; yet he suffers in Ternate, Nostra Seniora della Rosario, and Gammalamme in the hands of the Spaniards, Ta-comma, Talucco, and Malayo in the hands of the Hollanders, which are in good intelligence with him, as Enemies to the Spaniards. The chief place is called Gamma-Lamma, is seated on the Sea-side, more long than broad, and of an indifferent bigness; its Houses, Mosques, as also its Palace-Royal, are built of Canes or Timber; its Road and Haven is good, and fre∣quented by Ships. The Country is not bad, yet it yields but little provision be∣sides Poultry and Goats; it yields also excellent Almonds, and bigger than or∣dinary, and that in great plenty; they have also abundance of Cloves, and other Spices, some Drugs, with such other Commodities as are found in the rest of the Islands. The Isle of Tidore, and its chief places, &c.TIDORE, (those of the Country say Tadura, which signifies Beauty) is a little greater than Ternate, and as fruitful. Here the People are very indu∣strious in pruning and watering the Clove-trees, by which means they are ex∣ceeding fair and strong. Here grows white Sandall-wood, which is held the best in all the Indies. Here are also found the Birds of Paradise. It hath its particular King. The Spaniards hold Taroula, Castello-Viejo, and Marieco, which the Hollanders have sometimes taken. Timor or Mother was once so ill treated by the Spaniards, that its Inhabitants abondoned it and retired to Gilolo. The Hollanders built the Fort of Nassan, and have invited near 2000 of its Inhabitants to return. Machian as well as Timor, belongs to the King of Ternate; the Hollanders hold Taffasso, Tallibola, Nuhaca or Naffaquia, and Mauritio; it is peopled with about 9 or 10000 persons. The Isle of Bachian de∣scribed.BACHIAN, or BAQƲIAN, is the greatest of all the Moluccoes, but ill peopled, and having but few Cloves; but in recompence it hath plenty of Fruit, and its Sea stored with Fishes. It is divided by several little Channels scarce navigable, which yet divide it into many parts, of which Marigoram is in the midst of the others, where the King of this Isle resides. The Hollan∣ders hold on the Coasts the Forts of Gammeduore and Laboua, both once cal∣led Barnevelt. This Isle is of an indifferent large extent; the King is abso∣lute, the Soil good, and would become very fertil, if the Inhabitants would leave off their Idleness, and give it Tillage. MACHIAN is indifferent large and fertil, and well inhabited; its chief places are 1. Tassaso. 2. Tabillola: 3. Mauricio: and 4. Nubaca. TIMOR, Motir or MOTIL, is of a less compass, and Triangular. Its chief place is Nassaw. The Isle of Gilolo descri∣bed.GILOLO or BATOCHINE extends it self to the second Degree on this side, and only to the first beyond the Equator: It hath then 3 degrees of Latitude. Its Longitude begins a little after the 168th Meridian; and reaches to the 172, which are near 4 Degrees, which amount to little less than 100 Leagues of length and breadth; but it is composed but of 4 Penin∣sula's, of which one advances towards the North, the other three towards the East; and of these three the middle one reaches so near the Land of Papous, that there is but a Streight between them. Its People, and chief places.It is subject in part to the King of Ternate, in part to the Kings of Gilolo and Loloda. It hath Savage People on the North part, where is the Coast of More, and in some Mountains in the middle of the Country; and the City of Mamaye is in form of a Republick. The City of Gilolo is not above six Leagues from Ternate towards the North. Those of Gilolo, Sabugo, and Aqui∣lam, are near together Eastward of Tidore, and on the West Coast of Gilolo. On the other side, and towards the East, are the Fortresses of Tolo, Isiau, and Jaffougo; these six places are in the Spaniards hands. The Hollanders hold
Sabou and Coma; Sabou a little above Gilolo, Tacoma or Cuma on one of the three Eastern points. The Air.The Air of Gilolo is intemperate hot, which makes it unhealthful; the Soil not very fertil, yet hath it great plenty of Rice, wild Hens, and other Fowls. On its Shoars it hath Shell-fish, whose Meat in taste is much like Mutton, and about the Isle plenty of Trees, which they call by the name of Sagou; from which they have a Fruit which they make their Bread of; of the Sap or Juice they make a pleasing Drink, which they use instead of Wine; and of a Hair which grows on its Bark they make their Cloaths. It hath but few Cloves, neither have they many Cattle, except tame and wild Hogs. The People are well proportioned, but rude and savage; some of them Gentiles, the rest Ma∣hometans. The Isle of Celebes descri∣bed.CELEBES is composed of many Islands so near the one to the other, that they are commonly esteemed but one. They are fruitful in all Provisions, espe∣cially Rice; they yield Gold, Ivory, Saunders, and Cotton; feed much Cattle, and their Sea affords plenty of Fish and Pearls. The Air is healthful, though al∣most in the same scituation with Gilolo, except that they advance to the 6th degree of Latitude towards the South. They are well peopled, and its People are tall and comly. They are Idolaters, and much addicted to Piracy. Here is esteemed to be six principal Kingdoms; of which that of Macasar, which gives sometimes a name to all these Isles, is the most powerful; that of Cion the second; then those of Sanguin, Cauripana, Getigan, and Supar. the greatest Cities are Macasar and Bantachia, 30 or 40 Leagues one from the other; as also Celebes, seated on the Sea. The Land of Papous.The Land of PAPOƲS, that is, of Blucks is little known, yet is no other than New Guiney, and other than the Isle of Ceyram, though some would con∣found it with them. This last is to the Westward of it, and the other to the Eastward; both the one and the other more towards the South. There are some Whites among its Inhabitants, but few; all lean, deformed, and Traytors. They have Gold, Ambergreece, and Birds of Paradise, with which they pay Tribute to their Kings, and to the King of Ternate. The Isles of Ceyram, Flores, &c.CETRAM hath the same qualities, and its Inhabitants like to Papous, and well peopled. Flores, Solar, Malva, Susu, Timor, Ombo, Terralta, &c. are divers Isles under the 8th, 9th, and 10th degrees of South Latitude, and which advance from the 160th unto the 175th degree of Longitude. Timor (an other than that Timor of the Moluccoes) is the most esteemed. It pro∣duces store of Grains and Fruits, feeds many Cattle and Fowl; amongst its Drugs and Spices, it hath Ginger, Cinnamon, and whole Forrests of white and yellow Saunders. Its Inhabitants are Idolaters, half Savages, and had the use of Fire but lately. Malva on the West of Timor, hath quantity of Pep∣per. Solar is other than Soloe, or Solayo. This last is 10 Leagues from Celebes, and between the 6th and 7th degree of Latitude; that 15 or 16 Leagues from Timor, and between the 8th and 9th degree of Latitude. The City Adonare is the residence of the King of Solor, and there is a great trade for Saunders between this Isle and Cabanazza in Timor. Solor hath likewise Gold and Pearl. Almost in the midst of these Isles, which we call in general the Moluccoes, are those of Amboyna and Banda, which are but small, yet are in great esteem. Those of Amboyna are, Amboyna, Veranula, Hittou, Noesan, and some o∣thers. The Isle of Amboyna, its fertility and commodities.The Isle of AMBOYNA hath its chief City of the same name, which is of some considerable note, besides several other small Towns and Villages. This Island was first discovered by the Portugals, who had here the command of a Castle and other Forts, which the Hollanders took in 1605, and have pos∣sessed likewise the Fortress of Coubella, Lovio, and the Redout of Hittou, in the Isle of Hottou. The Spaniards dispossessed them a little after 1620, and the Hollanders have regained them since, where they drive a great and profi∣table Trade. The Land at first was barren, but by their industry it is now be∣come very fertil, producing Rice, Sugar, quantity of Fruits, especially Lem∣mons
and Oranges, Coco-Nuts, Bonanas; several Spices, but principally Cloves; of which alone they receive great profit. Here it was that the Hollanders did once, with a never to be forgotten cruelty and barbarousness, murther the English that resided and traded thither, on purpose to gain the whole Trade to themselves. Its InhabitantsThe Inhabitants were heretofore Brutish Cannibals, insomuch as they would eat one another, though their nearest Relations, when age or sickness seised them; and all Pagans: but since by reason of the Commerce they had with the Persians and Arabians, Mahometism is somewhat received amongst them, as also Christianity, by reason of the Portugals and Dutch; which in time may come to some perfection, though at present it is but very small. But notwithstanding they make use of their Paganish Superstitions, adoring the Devil, who appears to them when they invoke him; in which they are very superstitious and ceremonious. They are much given to Sorcery and Conju∣rations, very prophane, barbarous, not given to Arts or Literature. They are naturally unsaithful, thievish, covetous, stupid, and very timerous. In their Marriages they make no great Ceremonies, taking one anothers words, which as slightly they evade, leaving one another upon the least occasion of offence, and are free for another. The Isles of Banda, Nera, and Gumanapi described.The Isles of BANDA are three principal ones. Banda, which communi∣cates its name to the rest, Nera and Gumanapi, and 3 or 4 lesser ones, Wayer, Poloway, and Pulorin; some add Poelsetton, the most Western of all. Banda hath the Cities or Towns of Londor, Ortatan, and Combor; Nera hath that of Nera and Labetach; Gumanapi hath only one of its name, underneath a Mountain which vomits Fire; Nera is the chiefest of all. The Hollanders hold in the Isle of Nera the Forts of Nassau and Belgica, and in the Isle of Poloway the Fort of Revenge. These Isles are unhealthful; the Nutmegs and Mace, which these Isles pro∣duce, make them frequented by Strangers. These Fruits they gather thrice a year, in April, August, and December. Besides these Isles already spoken of, there are these following which are ranged and numbred with those of the Moluccoes, and are found as they lie, either on the Coast or Shoar of the Isles Celebes, Gilolo, or Land of Papous, to participate of their nature, temperature, soil, or the like; which I have taken notice of in the Geographical Table. Its People.The Inhabitants are Mahometans, in which they are very zealous and super∣stitious, not entring into their Mosques without washing their Feet; and when they are there, very fervent in their Prayers, which they use often. They are very obstinate, and the Men are much given to idleness, minding their Recreations, and leaving their affairs to their Wives. The People are here observed to live to a great Age. The People of all these Isles, which have passed under the names of Moluccoes, are of different humors; those which are on the Coasts most frequented by Strangers, are the most civil; yet others more barbarous. And on the Coast they are either Mahometans or Christians, the rest Idolaters; but the Spaniards and Portugals on one side, and the Hol∣landers on the other, do much trouble these Islands, making themselves Ma∣sters now of one, and then of another; for the most part making War betwixt themselves, or with the Islanders; among which there are divers Kings, some subject to the Portugals, and others to the Hollanders. Amongst all these Kings the most powerful is he of Ternate,Their Kings. to whom belong Ternate, Mothir, and Bachian; likewise Cayoa, and Gazea, amongst the True Moluccoes; and thereabout, those of Mean, where are built his Carcoles, that is, Vessels of War; Tofoura, Xullo, Buro; those of Amboyna, among which Ceyram seems to be comprized: Then part of the Land of Papos; part of Gilolo, and the Celebes, whose Kings are tributary to him. Argensola faith, That in 70 Islands, which are in his Estates, he can raise 200000 Men and that he keeps ordinarily a great number of Carcoles, with many Cannons, and all things necessary; and that the Captains of his Militia are aged Men, which have been bred and edu∣cated in Arms.
The Isles of LARRONS, or THEEVES. The Isles of Larrons de∣scribed;WE have almost nothing to say touching the Isles of THE EVES. They are 16 or 20 different Isles, which continue from about the 8th unto the 20th and 21st degree of Latitude on this side the Equator, and are almost all under the 188 Meridian. Their names, scituation and greatness, a guess may be given of by the Chart. The Isle of Dancers, of Martyrs, of Birds, &c. Towards the South those of Pulo Vilan, De los Arecisos, De los Matelotes, and Bidima, &c. are to∣wards the West, and between the Larrons and Philippines: The Volcanis towards the North, where there is Cochineal: Malpelo towards the North-East, but indeed rather towards the East, and seeming to belong to America. Also the Isles of Bacim, Botaba, Volia, Can, Mata, Sepan, Natan, Chereguan, Guagan, Artomagan, Agan, Gregua, Chemochoa, Mana, Englese, Angloise, Malabrigo Deserte, &c. All these Isles are poor, having little to live on; scarce any tame Beasts, no Metals; the Inhabitants are naked, active, great Thieves, particularly of Iron.
The ISLES of the SONDE; which may be compre∣hended un∣der Great ISLES, and particu∣larly called the Isles of the SONDE; and such are those of SUMATRA, with its King∣doms of Achem, Achem, Daya. Pacem, Pedir, Pacem. Aru, Aru, Bancalis. Baras, Baras, Batham. Camper, — Camper. Guadahyri, — Guadahyri. Priaman, Priaman, Potenban. Menancabo, Menancabo, Batacapas. Jamby, Jamby, Votaboura. Baras, Baros, Palimbam. BORNEO, Borneo, Hormata, Bendarmassin. JAVA, with its Kingdoms or Cities of Bantam, Jacatra, Sura, Japara, Tuban, Jortan, Panarucan, Balambuan, Depresado, Surbaja, Sidajo, Saraboy, Carovang, Materan. Small ISLES; and may be considered as they lie On the Coast of JAVA; among which are those of Madura, — Madura. Baly, — Bali. Pater Noster. Mulusura. Luboc. Graciosa. Sapy. Cariman Java. Selam. On the West, and South-West Coast of SUMATRA; as Engano. Nassau. Good Fortune. Calippes. Nays. Gavia. Oura. Cocos. Between SUMATRA and BOR∣NEO, are those of Pedra. Bruca. Bitam. Linga. Monpin, — Banca. Billeton. Lucubare. Suronton. On the North-West, North, and North-East Coast of BORNEO; and belonging to it are the Isles of Tomveta. Timbolan. Ananiba. Matuma. Tigaon. Tiga. Ciumbabon, St. Maria. St. Michael. Zolo. St. John. Boquerano. The ISLES of CEY∣LAN, with its King∣doms, Cities, and Isles, as they lie North-Easternly, and on the Sea; as, Jafanapatan. Trimquilemale. Baticalo. Westernly, and on the Sea; as, Punto Gallo. Colombo. Chilao. Within Land; as, Jala. Ceitavaca, Candea. Das sette Corales. Isles about, and Close to CEY∣LAN; as Manar, — Manar. Grande. Barra de Cardiva. The ISLES of the MALDIVES, as they are know buy the Names of the ATTOLLONS of Tilla don Matis. Milla doûe Madoûe, Padypola. Malos Madou. Aiatollon. Male Atollon. Poulisdou. Molucque. Nillandoux. Collomadous. Adoumathis. Sovadou. Adou, and Pove Molucque,
THE ISLES OF THE SOUND. The Isles of the Sound. Their situati∣on.THE Isles of the SOƲND are those of Sumatra, Borneo, Ja∣va, the greater and lesser, and others: They are underneath and about the Equator, advancing on this side, to the seventh and eighth degree of Latitude, towards the North; and beyond it, unto the ninth or tenth degree of South Latitude; beginning at 135 Degrees of Longitude, Westward, and ending about the 160 Eastwards: So that they are together 16 or 18 Degrees of Latitude, which are 400 and odd Leagues; and 24 or 25 Degrees of Longitude, which are 600 or there∣abouts. Their Name.The Portugals called them the Isles of the Sound, because they are to the South of Malacca, as Pyrardus saith. I believe rather, because of the Streight of the Sound, which is between the two chief, and best known of these Islands, to wit, Sumatra and Java major; or else, because of the Port of Bantam, which is called of the Sound, being the best Port, and of the greatest concourse that is in all these Islands. The Isle of Sumatra, in si∣tuation.The Island of SƲMATRA is 10 or 12 Leagues from the Peninsula of Ma∣lacca, and extends from the sixth Degree of Latitude on this side, near to the sixth on the other side the Equator, which are about 11 or 12 Degrees of Lati∣tude; but it lying from North-west to South-east, stretches from its Northerly point towards Achem, unto that of Labansamora towards the South, and on the Streight of the Sound, near 400 Leagues, being not above 50, 60, or at most 80 broad. Its parts.Some Authors divide it into 4, others into 10, and others into 30 Kingdoms. It is to be believed, that it had sometimes more, sometimes less, or that the least were Vassals or Tributaries to the greatest. At present those most famous are Achem, which holds likewise Pedir, to which it hath been subject, and Pacem on the Northern Coasts towards India; Camper almost underneath Palimbam, Jamby, Guadahyri, Priaman, Baras, and Manancabo, beyond the Equator: All which are the Seats of so many of their Kings. But a word or two of A∣chem, which is of the greatest esteem. The City of Achem de∣scribed.The City of Achem is seated on the side of a very broad River, and in a large Plain: It hath neither Gates nor Walls to defend it self, but a Castle, which is the Palace Royal, which is fortified with a good Wall and Pallisado, and well armed, and so seated, that it commands the whole City: They enter into this Castle or Palace by seven several Gates, one after another, which are guarded by Women that are expert at their Weapons, which are also the ordinary Guard of the King's Person; and without the leave of the King, or his Guard, none are suffered to enter the Pallisado. The Buildings in this Castle are but mean, which are the same with those of the City, which by reason of the often overflowing of the River, are built upon Piles, and
covered with Coco Leaves, but the furniture which is rich and costly. On two sides of the Castle, there are pleasant Forests, well stored with Apes, Herns, and all manner of Birds, and other delights, in which the King recreates him∣self; as also in Cock-fighting, Hunting the Elephant, or Bathing Himself in the River. In all which, he seldom is without a Company of Women, in whom he most delighteth. He observes great state, seldom shewing himself; he is much reverenced by his Subjects, whom he uses no better than Slaves: In his Laws he is very severe; and in his Punishment cruel. His Government being absolute and meerly arbitrary. His Revenue, without doubt, must be great, by reason of the rich Commodities that are found here. He is so powerful, that in 1616 he put to Sea 60000 Men of War, in 200 Ships and 60 Galleys, with store of Cannons and Ammunition, to make War against the Portugals in Ma∣lacca; and he alone drove them from the Fort which they had in Pacem; and hindred them from taking footing in Sumatra. The Fertility, Commodities, &c. of these Isles.The Air, by reason of the great heats, is very unhealthful, but withal, is very fertile, abounding in Rice, Millet, Oyl, Beefs, Goats, Sheep, Fowls, Fish, store of Fruits; also it is rich in Gold, though of a lower alloy, in Silver, Cop∣per, Iron, Tin, in Precious Stones, in Silks, in several Spices, as long and com∣mon Pepper, Ginger, Cinnamon, Cloves, Nutmegs,; also in Medicinal Drugs, in Wax, Honey, Camphire, Cassia, Bezar, Lignum, Musk, Civet, Amber, Alloes, whole Woods of white Sandale, abundance of Cotton, &c. The Hollanders are in good intelligence with the people, and Kings of Sumatra; and particularly with him of Achem: They have no place or For∣tress in the Isle, but at Jambay, a Kingdom, City, and River of the same name; in one degree and fifty minutes beyond the Equator. They have built on this River, and 25 Leagues from the Coast, a House to accommodate their Traffick with the Islanders: Their Trade is for the most part Pepper, which they send from this House to the Sea by Canoes. The Inhabitants are many of them good Artificers and expert Mariners; they are for the most part Gentiles, yet of late Mahometism hath crept in amongst them: They are of an Olive co∣lour Complexion, flat-faced, but indifferent well proportioned, and content themselves with a mean habit. The Isle of Bor∣neo, its situati∣on; and ferti∣lity.The Island of BORNEO, like to Sumatra, is part on this side, and part be∣yond the Equator; but it reaches on this side unto the seventeenth degree of North Latitude, and beyond only to the fourth of South Latitude. Its Form is almost round, having only 250 Leagues from North to South, and little less from West to East; containing in its Continent more than Sumatra, or any other Isle we have knowledge of in Asia; but it is not so well inhabited, nor of so great Trade as Sumatra, yet more fertile, and besides the same Commodites hath quantity of Myrabolans. Its Forests are full of Trees, which bear the most excellent Camphire in the World, which is uttered in the Indies, being too dear to be brought farther: That which comes to us from China, is so falsified, and of so little value, in respect of that which comes pure from Borneo, that one hundred pounds of the one, is not worth one pound of the other. It hath also plenty of Provision. Borneo, Bendarmissin, Lave, and Hormeta, are the fair∣est Cities, or at least the best known of the Isle; for we yet know nothing of the Eastern Coast. Borneo is on a Salt Lake, or rather at the bottom of the Gulf of the Sea, as Venice is, and is on the North-West of the Island. Its Houses are built of Wood, and upon Piles, and are accounted to be 20 or 25000. Through every Street runneth a Channel or River of Water; the Palace of the King, and the Houses of the principal Lords are of Stone, and on the firm Land, Ben∣darmassin and Lave are towards the South, regarding the great Java, and both belong to the same King: They build many Juncos at Bendarmassin. The River of Succadan, and the Neighbouring Forrests furnish them easily with Wood, and all that is necessary for the building of those Vessels. Lave is near a River of the same name; and this River, as Succadan, yields Diamonds. Hormeta, is described by the Hollanders on the Coast, Westwards of the Isle, and they esteem it to have 2 or 3000 Houses.
Its InhabitantsThe Inhabitants are great, of an Olive colour, of a good countenance; their Women brown and chaste, a thing very rare in the Neighbouring Islands. They trade little to distant places, being more inclined to Theft and Piracy, then to Trade; exercising this only with their Neighbours, the others with strangers far off. They are expert in all sorts of Arms, of good Wits, and capable of Arts. Their Apparel is much the same with the Indians, which is a Linnen Cloth about their privy Parts, and on their Heads Tur∣bets. In their Religion they are either Mahometants or Gentiles. Several small Isles.About Borneo are a great quantity of little Isles, Bonquerano 3 Degrees, St. John 4. Jolo or Zolo 5. Tagyma 6. and Combahan 8 Degrees of La∣titude: This last is on the North of the Gulph, and City of Borneo; near that Gulph is Pulogitgan, &c. all these Islands belong to the King or Kings of Borneo. Isles of Java Major and Mi∣nor, their situa∣tion, length, and breadth.The two Islands of JAVA Major and Minor are to the South of Bor∣neo: however there is much dispute about the seat of the little one, the great∣er lies from the sixth, unto the eighth, ninth, or tenth Degree of South La∣titude, for we know not its certain breadth: And from the 145 Meridian beyond the 155, this length being 250 Leagues, and its breadth little less. We have scarce knowledge of any but the North-coast of this Island, none at all of its Southern. The City of Bantam de∣scribed, with its great trade.Along the North-Coast of Bantam, where is one of the greatest Trades of all the East-Indies, and where the Merchants of the East-India Com∣pany of England have their residence, and where once there was a like Com∣pany for the Hollanders, which they have transported to Jacatra or Bata∣via. Bantam is at the foot of a Hill, from which descend three Rivers; of which one passes through the middle, the others long, and on the two sides of the City, communicating by divers Channels, convenient for the Mahometans, who believe themselves purged from their sins, as often as they wash, but all too shallow for Ships to sail in; the Walls of the City are of Brick of no great strength, as also are their Gates, which makes them have the greater care in guarding them: The City is indifferent great, yet have they but three principal Streets, and these all but upon the Ca∣stle; at every corner of the Streets there stands a guard, and at Sunset they make fast all passage Boats, so that in the night there is no stirring in the Streets. The Houses are but meanly built, either of Reeds or Straw, and covered with Coco leaves; but for preservation of Goods, they have Store∣houses made of Stone; they have several places or Markets for the sale of Com∣modities, as also an Exchange where Merchants meet. Its Commodi∣ties.The Commodities of Bantam are these of the Isle, as all sorts of Druggs, Pepper, Sugar, Preserved Ginger, and all sorts of Sweet-meats, both wet and dry; Rice, Honey, &c. Also in this City is found several good Commodities, which are the product of other places, which are here had at easie rates, viz. Spices, precious Stones, Ammunition, Sandal-wood. Silk both raw and wrought into seve∣ral Fabricks, as Velvets, Sattins, Damask, Cabinets, Lacque, Porcelain, Callicoes, Frankinsence, Camphora, Benjamine, &c. It is governed by a Supream or Sovereign Prince, whom they entitle the Mattaran, and hath four Deputies or Tetrarchs his Subordinates. It is very well peopled; the Houses of persons of quality are better built then the rest, having square Courts at their entrance; and commonly there is a Mosque be∣longing to every one of them, as also a Cistern to wash themselves in. The Palace is indifferently well built; shewing some kind of State; here the Chi∣nesses (who are great traders to this City, bring in most of the Commodities ex∣cept Pepper, Cotton, Wool, and Rice) have a place of meeting for their worship. The Cities of Jacatra,Fifteen or twenty Leagues from Bantam is Jacatra, now Batavia, since the Hollanders have builded this on the ruins of the other, where they had a fair Magazine: The King of Jacatra assisted by some English, besieg∣ed it about the year 1618. the Hollanders defended themselves till March 1619. that their General Koen returning from the Moluccoes raised the
siege; took and ruined Jacatra, and rebuilt Batavia, with a very good Cittadel: This place is at present the Seat or Court of the General and Coun∣cellors of the East-India Company, for the Ʋnited Provinces. Continuing along the Coast,Japara. and 100 or 120 Leagues from Batavia is JA∣PARA, a City and Kingdom with a good Port, and a fair River. TƲ∣BAN 20 or 25 Leagues from Japara, likewise a City and Kingdom, and Gulph:Jortan. Fifty Leagues farther is the City, River, and Port of Jortan, which is of great concourse, for those that go or return from Bantam to the Moluc∣coes, and from the Moluccoes to Bantam;Passaruam.Passaruam is 20 Leagues from Jor∣tan, and Panarucan yet 8 Leagues farther: This makes the most Easterly point of Java Major: Balambuan is 12 or 15 Leagues from Panarucan, in∣clining towards the South. All these Cities have each their Kings. Balam∣buan regards the Isle of Baly,Balambuam. and the streight that is between them, takes its name from Balambuan as the most famous. Many Portugals remained at Pa∣narucan to facilitate the Commerce they had of the Moluccoes, of Amboyna, Banda, Timor, &c. with Malacca, or those places they possess on this side, Panarucan being in the way between. Near this City a Sulphurous Mountain cast forth such great quantity of Stones and Cinders in 1588, that 10000 per∣sons were stifled. In the midst of the Isle of JAVA, and towards the South Coast is the City of Maderan or Materan,Maderan de∣scribed. the residence of the most powerful King of Java: This City is 100 Leagues from Bantam, 100 or 120 from Balambuan, and on∣ly 35 or 40 from Japara. This King once commanded the whole Isle; he yet commands those Kings which are in the High-land, and on the South Coast: Those on this side have freed themselves from his Rule, rendring him only certain Duties, yet some places he holds on this Coast. The Isle of Java Minor.We have no certain knowledge of JAVA Minor, if we do not esteem it to be those Isles to the East of Java Major, and whose Northern Coast we only know. Mark Paul of Venice, who made the first Relation, saith that it contained 2000 Leagues Circuit, which would be more then our great Java, as we know it at present; he saith it had eight Kingdoms, of which he had seen six; gives to the soil the same qualities with the great one; but that its Inhabitants were more savage, and some Man-eaters: we shall presently speak a word or two of both Java's. The Isles of Baly and Ma∣dura.On the East of Java is BALY Isle, which hath not above 40 Leagues Circuit, yet is peopled with 600 thousand Souls, hath its particular King, rich, and magnificent. Madura Ifle on the North-East of Jortan in the Java Ma∣jor, is likewise full of people; Its Cities are very fair; hath its particular King; its people are wicked and perfidious. Its People.The people of all these Isles are Mahometans on the Coast, up in the Coun∣try great Idolaters; and some Man-eaters. They have many Kings, and have hitherto been able to hinder the Spaniads, Portugals, and Hollanders, from building on their Coasts; yet these last have lately got Butavia, which they bravely maintain. The people are corpulent, of a middle stature, broad-faced, little eyes; they wear long hair, of a Chestnut complexion; they are addicted naturally to theft, stout and couragious, very malicous when angred, very proud, de∣ceitful, and great lyars; their cloathing is as the other Indians, that is, only a piece of cloth tied about their privy parts. Yet some exceed, whereas o∣thers go quite naked. They yet retain divers barbarous Customs and Ceremo∣nies, as well in matters of Religion as otherwise. Their weapons are the Bow and Arrows, the Dart, the Lance, and Shield, and Crizes, a strange and cru∣el weapon. Its Fertility.The Country or Islands are very fertile, affording very many rich Commo∣dities, as hath been spoken of already, which are all very excellent; they have several sorts of both tame and wild Beasts, abundance of Fowls and Fishes, a∣mong the rest Oysters, which if Mandelsloes may be credited, weigheth 300 pound weight; among their Serpents they have Crocodiles very large; and for their Fruits, they may compare with most places, as well for the fairness, pleasant tastes, as for the great variety of them.
This Isle is much troubled at some part of the year with dreadful Thundrings and Lightnings. Let us now make a short observation on the one and the other Java, and the neighbouring Isles and Countries, according as Mark Paul of Venice hath described them. It seems that his great Java must be the Isle of Borneo, his Isles Sondor and Condor must be Pulo Londor, his Province of Beach, the Pe∣ninsula of Malacca, his Isle Patan, that of Sumatra, and his Java minor our present Java major: And it is to be believed that Borneo, Sumatra, and Java are likewise the three Sindes of Ptolomy. The Isles of CEYLAN, and the MAL∣DIVES. The Isles of Ceylan, and the Maldives.NOt far from the Cape of Comori are the Isles of CEYLAN on one side, and the MALDIVES on the other. Ceylan, 60 Leagues towards the East; and the Maldives 150 between the East and the South. Ceylan, its sci∣tuation and extent.CEYLAN is the Trapobane of the Ancients, though Ptolomy makes it unmeasurably greater then Ceylan is now found. Its scituation is on this side the Ganges, and near Cape Comori, of old Comaria Extrema; likewise near Cape de Cael, of old Gori or Caligicum promont. and on the streight of Manar or Quilao, of old Argaricus Sinus, near which, or a little farther, is the Land of Madura, of old Madura Regia Pandionis, and divers other particulars making sufficient proof. The Indians name it Tenerasin, that is, the Land of Delights; the Arabs Zeilan Dive, that is the Isle of Ceylan. It extends it self from 6 to 10 De∣grees of Latitude, and so comprehends four whole Degrees, which makes 100 Leagues from South to North: It hath but two Degrees and a half, or lit∣tle more of Longitude, which amounts to sixty and odd Leagues from East to West: The whole Circuit is about 300 Leagues; its form is almost Oval, or ra∣ther like a Pearl or Pear, whose tail is North, and its head South. Some place in this Isle 7 Kingdoms, others 9, and others more;Its parts. that of Ja∣fanapatan is the most Northerly; those of Trinquilemale, and Baticalo are the most Easterly; those of Chilao and Colombo the most Westerly; and that of Jaba the most Southward; those of Candea, of Sette Coralles, and Cei∣tavaca, hold the middle. Candea is at present the most famous; those of Co∣lombo and Ceitavaca have sometimes been the residence of Kings, which have commanded all the Island. The Portugals here inhabit.At present the Portugals hold Colombo, Chilao, Manar Isle and Fortress, Jafanapatan, and some other places on the Coast, which regard the streight of Chilao and Manar. Columbo and Chilao are not above 60 Leagues, or little more, from Cape Comori, Manar 25 or 30 Leagues from Cape de Cael, and Jafanapatan 15 or 20 from the Cape of Negapatan. The best Ports of this Isle are those of Gallo, Columbo, and Chilao: That of Galla is one of the best known of all Indra, because all that come, or go, are constrained to make the point of Gallo, for fear of falling on the Banks of the Maldives: Some years past the Hollanders took this important place from the Portugals. Its Air, Fer∣tility, and Commodities.The Air is so temperate, and the Land so fruitful, that some esteem it the Earthly Paradise. Its Fruit, Herbs, and Plants have a marvellous pleasant odor; its Cinnamon is the best in the World, and particularly towards Colombo and Ceitavaca, there is found much Cardamom, Areca, Nutmegs, Pepper and other Spices, and several Druggs, also Lignum Aquilae, Lignum Serpen∣tis, Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron and other Metals; though the Mines are not wrought; many precious Stones, among others those which the Portugals call Oats-eyes; they have no Diamonds, but many Pearls, which they fish for in the streight between this Island and the Continent. The Soil produces Corn, Oyl, Wine, Cotton, abundance of Rice, several roots for Diers. A∣mong
their Beasts their Elephants are so excellent, and so docile, that those of other places bear honour to them as to their Superiours. They have great plen∣ty of Fowls, Cattle; and their Rivers yield great store of Fish. As concerning the Coyns, Weights, and Measures of the Isles of Ceyland, and the Maldives, I have no certain account thereof, wherefore I omit them. The Islanders are generally great,The Inhabi∣tants. black, deformed, having their Ears long, and their Nostrils large, for the rest well disposed and active, great Dancers, insomuch that they may furnish all India with Comedians and Juglers; they are rich, and smother themselves in delights, all things agreeing to it, yet are they inclined to War. In those places possessed by the Portugals are many Christians, the rest Idolaters or Mahometans. The MALDIVES. The Isles of the Maldives, their situation, and parts or At∣tollons.THe MALDIVES take their name from Male the chief City of these Islands, and Dive which signifies and Island; they are an infinite num∣ber of very little Islands, all seated in the Indian Ocean, on this side Cape Co∣morî, beginning at the eighth Degree of Northern Latitude, and not ending till the third or fourth of the South, the Equinoctial Line passing over them, so that they extend in length 300 Leagues, in breadth not above 15, 20 or lit∣tle more. They are divided into thirteen Attollons, separated the one from the other by certain Channels, and containing each a great number of little Isles: From hence the King of Maldives terms himself King of 13 Provinces, and 12000 Isles; though there be many less, and the most of them desart, and which the Sea covers when it is high. The disposition of these Attollons is admirable; then their Banks, their En∣trances, their Currents; the Attollons are almost round, or Oval; each having 30, 40, or 50 Leagues circuit; and succeeding one another from North, North-west, to South, South-east, there resting between them but certain Currents, large, little or more, but all dangerous. These Attollons are each encompassed with a great bank of stones, there being no human Art could better wall a place, then these banks do their At∣tollons, the Sea breaking its waves against the banks, and within the Attol∣lons there being a perfect calm, and but little depth of water. The entrances are certain open places of 40, 50, some of 100, 200 common paces, which the Author of Nature hath given to every Attollon; that is four to each, to faci∣litate their passage from one Attollon to another; for the Currents which are between the Channels, being carried six Months to the East, and six Months to the West; it was impossible to pass from one Attollon to another, if there were but two openings, one opposite to another. These Currents moreover are so rapid, that when it is calm, and when the wind goes with them, they carry a Vessel sometimes to Malabar and Ceylan, and sometimes to Sumatra, without possibility of stopping of it; and on the other side, even to Arabia and Africa. The names and order of these Attollons descending from North to South, are Tilladou Matis, that is the high point, and by the Spaniards, Cabexa das Ilhas, head of the Islands; then Milla doue, Madoue, Padypola, Ma∣los: Caridon, Ariatollon, Male Attollon, where is the Isle of Male Poulis∣dou, Moluque, Nillandoux, Collomadoux, Adoumatis, Souadou; Addou and Poue Moluque, the two last being esteemed but one. The largest Channels, and there where the Currents are the strongest, are those of Malos, Madoue, Caridon, Aldou, and Sovadou. Francis Pirard a great Traveller was shipwrackt on the first, and remained five years in the Maldives, where at leasure he learned the tongue, situation, and manners of the Inhabitants, and hath set out a publick description of every particu∣lar.
The King of these Isles resides in the Isle of Male, which is one of the great∣est, though not above a League and a half in Circuit: It is one of the most fruitful, and seated in the middle of the Longitude of three Islands. Strangers frequent it, because of the Court. There are no Cities through all, their dis∣position being sufficiently commodious; their situation denotes a great heat, yet the days being equal to the nights, and the nights subject to great Dews, they refresh the Earth; so their Summers are without rain, and their Winters without ice; but these pouring down rain with a constant West South-west wind, the Feaver among the Maldives is very common, and dangerous to Strangers, whom it often kills in few days. Provision very plentiful.There grows neither Rice nor Wheat; yet are Provisions better cheap than in the rest of the Indies. They have Rice from the Continent and gather at home Millet in abundance, and the Grain of Bunbi, like to Millet, but black. They have much Fruit, Citrons, Pomegranates, Oranges, Bananes; and a∣bove all, so great abundance of that Nut of India, called Cocos, that no Coun∣try in the World hath so much. All the Levant is furnished hence, lading e∣very year several Ships. They have many Animals, little Beef or Mutton; no Dogs, for they abhor them: Quantity of Fish. Shells pass in∣stead of Mo∣ney.They have many little Shells, which pass in many places for Money, and they lade yearly 30 or 40 Ships with these Shells for Bengala only, besides what they lade for other parts. Their Tortoise Shells are much esteemed at Cambaya, because they are smooth, black, and well figured; with which they make Combs, Cases of Looking-glasses, &c. Their Tavarcarre or Cocos, particularly of the Maldives, is very Medicinal, and of greater value then their Amber-greece, and their black Coral. The King alone is to have this Tavarcarre and Amber∣greece, not permitting his Subjects to trade in it. There is brought to the Maldives, in exchange of their Commodities, Rice, Cloth, Silk, Cotton, Oyl, Areca, Iron, Steel, Spices, Porcelain, Gold and Silver, which come not thence again. Its Inhabitants make use of all sorts of Arms, yet their King is neither rich, nor powerful, except in his Isles, and in regard of his own Subjects. The Coco-Nu and Tree of great use for several things.Amongst the rarities of this Isle, their Candou and their Coco's are observable. They make Planks of the Wood of Candou, with which they draw out of the Sea all sorts of weights, though of 10000 pound. Their Tree is as great as our Walnut-Tree, leaved like the Aspin, and as white, but very soft: It bears no Fruit; they make Fisher-boats of it, and with rubbing two pieces of this wood together, kindle fire as we do with a Flint and Steel; yet it neither burns nor consumes. As for the Coco's or Walnut of India, it furnishes them with all things necessa∣ry for mans life; they extract from it Wine, Honey, Sugar, Milk, Oyl, and But∣ter. Its Kernels they eat instead of Bread, with all sorts of Meat; the Leaf be∣ing green, serves for Paper to write; being dry, they fold it in little Bands, and make Panniers, Dossers, Ʋmbrello's, Hats, Coverlids, and Carpets; the Sprig which is the middle of the Leaf, being dry, hardneth, and of it they make Ca∣binets, Chests, and other Moveables; of the Shell, which incloses the Fruit, they make Ladles, Spoons, Plates, Cups, &c. They may build a whole House out of these Trees; the Trunk may serve for Beams and Joynts; the Branches cut in two or three for Pails, to pail in Gardens or Houses, and for Laths to co∣ver them; and the Leaves sewed together and disposed in ranks upon those Laths, cast off the Water as well as our Tiles. They build likewise many Ships only out of the Coco-Tree; the Keel, Sides, Planks, Pins, Hatches, Masts and Yards, Cordage, Anchors, Sails, and even all the Utensils of a Ship, are ta∣ken from this Tree, and sometimes their Lading, whether for Provision or Move∣ables, or to furnish Rigging for other Ships, is likewise taken out of this Tree alone. And so much for the Eastern Isles and all Asia.
AFRICA, as it is di∣vided into AFRICA, or LIBYA, Exteriour or Outward, and compre∣hendeth BARBARY, which containeth the King∣doms of Morocco, — Morocco. Fez, Fez, Sala. Telensin, — Telensin. Algier, Algier, Bugia. Tunis, — Tunis. Tripoli, — Tripolis. Barca, — Barca. Desart of Barca, — Ammon. BILIDULGERID, which containeth seve∣ral Kingdoms and Pro∣vinces, the chief of which are, Sus, or Tesset, — Tesset. Darha, — Darha. Segellomessa, — Segellomessa, Tafilet, — Tafilet. Tegorarin, — Tegorarin. Zeb, — Nesta. Bilidulgerid, Fezzen, Gademes, EGYPT, which is di∣vided in Sayd, or Bechria, — Cairo. Errif, Alexandria, Rosetta. Coast of the Red Sea, Sues, Grodol. Interiour, or Inwards, and compre∣hendeth ZAARA, or SAARA, where are the King∣doms and Cities of Zanhaga, — Tegassa. Zuenziga, — Zuenziga. Targa, — Targa. Lempta, — Lempta. Berdoa, — Berdoa. Gaoga, — Goaga. Borno, — Borno. The Land of NE∣GROES, where are the King∣doms, People or Countries On this side the Niger, as of Gualate, — Gandia. Genehoa, — Genehoa. Tombut, — Tombotu. Agades, — Agades. Canun, — Cano. Cassena, — Cassena. Gangara, — Gangara. Between the branches of the Niger, as of The Jaloses People, — Solul. The Biatares People, — Biatares. The Souss People, — Beria. Beyond the the Niger, as of Melli, — Melli. Mandinga, — Mandinga. Gago, — Gago. Guber, — Guber. Zegzeg, — Zegzeg. Zanfara, — Zanfara. GUINEE, with its Kingdoms, Parts, and chief Places of Melegutte, — Bugos. Particular Guinee, or the Ivory Coast, St. George de la Min▪ Cape of Palme. Benin, — Benin. AETHIOPIA, Higher, or under Egypt, and compre∣hendeth NUBIA, where are the Kingdoms, Countries, and Cities of Bugia, — Bugia. Jalac, — Jalac. Nuabia, — Nuabia. Dancala, — Dancala. Cusa, — Cusa. Gorham, — Gorham. Damocla, — Damocla. Somna, — Somna. The Empire of the A∣BISSINES, where are several Kingdoms, Countries, and Cities; the chief of which are, Tigremahon, — Chaxumo. Barnagasso, — Barva. Angota, — Angotina. Dancala, — Degibeldara. Amara, — Amara. Bagamedri, — Beza. Ambian, — Amasen. Damute, — Damute. Agag, — Agag. Cafates, — Cafates. Narea, — Zeb. Ambiam, — Ambiam. BARBARY, or ZAN∣GUEBAR, which is divided into Zanguebar, with its King∣doms and Cities of Mozambique, Quiloa, Quilmanca. The Coast of AJAN, with its Kingdoms and Cities of Adea, Adel, Magadoxo. The Coast of ABEX, with its chief Places and Isles of Arquico, Suaquen. Lower, or In∣teriour, and compre∣hendeth CONGO, with its seve∣ral Kingdoms or Pro∣vinces; the chief of which are, Loango, — Loango. Pemba, — Pemba. Angola, — Engaze. Bamba, — Bamba. Songo, — Sonho. The Coast and Country of CAFRES, with its several Estates, Kingdoms, Capes, Ports, and Isles; the chief of which are the Cape of Good Hope, Cape of St. Nicholas, Port of Carascalis, Isles of St. Christophers, Isles of St. Lucia. MONOMOTAPA, with its Kingdoms and chief Places of Monomotapa, — Monomotapa. Butua, — Butua. Monoemugi, — Agag. Zesala, — Zesala. In divers ISLES In the Mediterranean Sea, — Malta, — Valetta. In the Western Ocean, as the Canary Isles, Canaria. The Isles of Cape Verd, St. Jago. The Isles of St. Thomas, Pavoasa. In the Eastern Ocean, as Madagascar, Vingagora. Zocotora, Zocotora.
map of Africa A New MAPP of AFRICA Designed by Mounsir Sanson, Geographr to the French King. Rendered into English and Ilustrated with Figurs By Richard Blome By the Kings Especiall Command
blazon or coat of arms of the earls of Carlisle VOLO VALEO To The Right Honible Charles Howard Earle of Carlisle Viscount Morpeth, Baron Dacres of Gisland, Lord Leivtenant of Cumberland & Westmoreland Vice Admirall of ye Caost of Northum∣berland Cumberland Westmoreland Bishopricke of Durham Towne and County of Newcastle and Maritin parts adjacent &  of the Lords of his Maities most Honble privy Councell &. This Mapp is most humbly D. D. by R. B.
AFRICA. AFRICA is a Peninsula so great, that it makes the Third and most Meridional part of our Continent. It approaches so near to Spain, that only the Streight of Gibraltar divides them; and touches so little upon Asia, that only an Isthmus of 30 or 40 Leagues, between the Red Sea and the Mediterranean, joyns them together. Its Bounds.Besides this Isthmus, Africa is bounded on all sides by the Sea, as appears by the Map. The Latins called it most commonly Africa,Its Name. and the Greeks, Libya; yet both the one and the other are indifferently found in the Authors of the one and the other Tongue. The first was given by one Afer, descending from Abraham and Kethura; others say, of one Afer, Son of the Libyan Hercules; or (according to the Greeks) it is taken from , that is, Sine Frigore, because (according to its sci∣tuation) it must be without Cold. According to the Arabs the name should be taken from Ifriquia, that is, Divided; because were it not for that Isthmus which joyns it to Asia, it were quite divided from our Continent. According to the Punick Tongue it signifies the Land of Corn, for the abundance of Grains gathered in that particular part called Africa. The name of Libya, is taken either from Libya, the Daughter of Epaphus, the Son of Jupiter; or from Libya, one of the three Lakes which descend into the River Triton; or from , which in the ancient Greek Idiom signi∣fies Black, because its Inhabitants are Black; or from Lub, which among the Arabs signifies Thirst, because a good part of the Country wants Water. But these Histories, Fables, and Etymologies, are taken from divers Authors of di∣vers Tongues; and for different Reasons there may be new ones found or made, to content those which are covetous of them. Its Form and Promontories.The Form of Africa is near Triangular, yet it advances four Promontories to the four principal places of the World. Cape Bona, towards the North; the Cape of Good Hope, towards the South; Cape Guard a Fuy, towards the the East; and Cape Verd, towards the West: the three last are on the Ocean, and the first on the Mediterranean Sea. Its length and breadth.Its length, taken from Cape Verd to Cape Guard a Fuy, is about 2000 Leagues, Its breadth, from Cape Bona to that of Good Hope, is about 1800 Leagues;
but both its length and breadth, are found much less in all other places. Its Scituation.Its scituation is under or about the Torrid Zone; the Equinoctial Line passing over it, and cutting it in two, though unequal parts. The most part of Africa is between the two Tropicks, which it out passes 11 ½ Degrees, and and 15 Degrees on one and the other side, to wit, 11 ½ Degrees beyond the Tropick of Capricorn, and 15 on this side that of Cancer. How Inha∣bited.It is every where inhabited, though not so well as Europe or Asia; whether by reason of the insupportable Heats which reign there, or because it hath many Countries dry and without Water; or because it hath others, where there is much Sand easily removed by the Wind, often burying Men in it; or by reason of the great number of venemous, fierce, and cruel Beasts, which are found through the whole; or because they sell and transport one another for Slaves, I leave to judge. It is moreover observable, that it is fresher and cooler under and about the Equator, than under and about the Tropicks. The reason is, because the Sun makes two Summers and two Winters, under and near the Equator; and that the Nights are equal to the Days, which is a great refreshment. Its Division.Divers Authors divide Africa in a very different manner; yet most agree to make first the Division into two great parts, calling that Oriental which is on the East of the Nile, and that Occidental which is on the West; others by the Equator, calling it Northern on this side, and Southern on the other side the Equator: Others by the Colours of the People, observing that on this side the Tropick of Cancer they are white, and beyond it black. But all these Divisions have many faults, to avoid which, and to make our Di∣vision of Africa into two great Parts, agree with that of ancient Authors, and with the disposition in which the Country is now found, I draw a Line from the Gulph of St. Thomas unto the extremity of Egypt, on the Red Sea. This Line carried along where the Estates are distinguished one from the other, di∣vides Africa into two equal parts, cuts no Estate in two; and that which is on this side is called by the Ancients, and by the Modern more precisely, Africa or Libya; that which is beyond this, is called both by the one and the other Ethiopia. This first Division will facilitate those of the other parts, dividing Africa or Libya into two, and Ethiopia likewise into two; Africa or Libya into the higher and farther, in regard of us; and exteriour and interiour in regard of those of the Country. Ethiopia into high and low, according to the Moderns, or into Ethiopia under Egypt, and Ethiopia Interiour, according to the An∣cients. Its Parts, and their bounds.In the Higher and Exteriour Africa or Libya we have Barbary, Billedul∣gerid, and Egypt: In the Farther and Interiour Africa and Libya, Saara or Desart, the Country of the Negroes and Guinny. In the Higher Ethiopia, or under Egypt, are Nubia, Abissina, and Zanguebar: In the Lower or Inte∣riour Ethiopia, Congo, the Mono-Motapa, and the Cafres. Barbary extends it self along the Mediterranean Sea, from the Ocean unto Egypt, and is bounded on the South by Mount Atlas. Billedulgerid lies a∣long this Mountain, likewise from the Ocean unto Egypt, bounded on the South by Saara or Desart. Egypt is only one Valley, from the Cataractes of Nile unto the Mediterranean Sea. This last part hath retained its anci∣ent name; the other two put together, answer to what the Ancients called Mauritania, Africa proprie dicta, and Libya likewise proprie dicta: so that the most Western parts of Barbary and Billedulgerid together make Mauritania, the Middle Africa, and the most Eastern Libya. Likewise Saara or Desart, the Country of the Negroes and Guinny, stretch themselves from the Ocean unto the High and Low Ethiopia: And the most Western part of Saara answers to the ancient People Gatuli, the Easternly part of Garamantes. The Country of the Negroes, to Nigritarum Regio: Guinny to many People, of which the most famous have been the Perorsi. This Guinny is 750 Leagues long: The Country of the Negroes near 1000: Saara, Billedulgerid, and Barbary, each 11 or 1200 Leagues;
their breadth being only 100, 200, or 300 Leagues. The length of Egypt, from South to North is not above 200 Leagues. Its breadth, if we esteem it only the Valley along the Nile, is very narrow; and sometimes only 5, 10, sometimes 12 or 15 Leagues. We have divided Ethiopia into the Higher and the Lower, placing in the Higher, Nubia, Abissina, and Zanguebar; in the Lower, Congo, Mono-Motapa, and Cafres. Nubia is for the most part on this side, and to the West; Abissina above, and Zanguebar beyond the Nile, and in the most Easternly part of Ethiopia. Congo makes the most Western part of Ethio∣pia; the Mono-Motapa, and Cafres, the most Southern: This on the Coast, the other within Land. Nubia, Abissina, and Zanguebar together, answer to the Ethiopia sub Egypto of Ptolomy; Nubia to the most Northern part, and nearest to Egypt; Abissina more Southern; Zanguebar to that which is on the Coasts, and there where Ptolomy describes the Regions of Barbary, Azania, and Troglo∣ditica; which answer to the particular Zanguebar, on the Coast of Ajan, and the Coast of Abex; which we esteem under the general name of Zanguebar. In the Lower Ethiopia, Congo answers to the Hesperii Aethiopes, the Mono-Motapa to Agisymba Regio, the Cafres to the Anthropophagi Aethiopes. The Coast of Cafres reaches 1200 Leagues; the Mono-Motapa is 4, 5, or 600 long and broad; Congo 6 or 700 long, and 300 large; Nubia 400 long, and 200 broad; Abissina 7 or 800 long, and 4 or 500 broad; The Coast of Zanguebar stretches 15 or 1600 Leagues, with not above 100 of breadth, like to that of Cafres. Its chief Mountains, viz.The Mountains of Africa are in great number, and very remarkable, both for their height, extent, the Metals wherewith they abound, and other particulars. The most famous are Atlas, those of the Moon, and Serre Lione. Atlas was the most famous Mountain among the Ancients,Atlas. who believed it bounded the World on the South. Its name was taken from Atlas, King of Mauritania, whom Perseus turned into a Mountain, by making him see the Head of Medusa; and because he had been an Astronomer the Poets feigned, that he bore up the Heavens. It is true, this Mountain is so high that it seems to touch the Skies; it extends it self from the Great Sea or Occidental Ocean, to which it hath given the name of Atlantick, even near to Egypt, for the space of more than 1000 Leagues, leaving Barbary on the one side, and Billedulgerid on the other; casting forth branches under divers names on both sides. There is the Great and Little Atlas. The Moun∣tains of the Moon.The Mountains of the Moon, now of Beth, are higher than any of Europe, and are alwaies covered with Snow and Ice: But these Mountains make divers branches towards the Cape of Good Hope; they are called Picos Fragosos; towards the East of Congo, the Mountains of Chrystal; above the Lakes of Zaire and Zafflan, the Mountains of the Sun, and of Salt-Peter; and it may well be, that the highest between Abissina, the Mono-Motapa and Cafreria, retain the name of the Mountains of the Moon. The Moun∣tains of Serre Lione.The Mountains of Serre Lione, by the Portugals, Sierre Lioa, are the Chariot of the Gods of the Ancients: And this name was given, because from their top they send forth continual Lightnings and Thunders, as if the Gods could not march with less noise. Their principal ridge is between the Country of the Negroes and Guinny, where they make two Branches; one advancing into the Farther Africa or Libya, and the Higher Ethiopia; the other between the Higher and Lower Ethiopia: this seeking the Mountains of the Moon, the other Atlas. Its chief Ri∣vers, viz. The Nile.The largest and most famous Rivers of Africa are the Nile and the Niger; the Nile hath been known in all times. Ancient and Modern Authors have been troubled to tell where its Head-spring is, and more to give the reason of the Increase and Decrease of its Waters; we will speak something of it in Egypt. Its course is 1200 Leagues in a strait line, and little less than 2000 in its turnings: It descends from the Lake Zaire, traverses the Higher Ethiopia,
Nubia, and Egypt, and falls with several Mouths into the Mediterranean; about the middle of its course it embraces the Isle of Meroe or Gueguere: And this Isle hath many Estates and Signories, and may boast it self the great∣est and fairest of all River Isles that we have knowledge of. The Niger.The Niger hath its Springs in the Kingdom of Damont, above the Lake Niger, and not far from the Nile, when it is out of the Lake of Zaire. This Niger doth in some part divide the Higher Ethiopia from the Lower, ap∣proaches Nubia, and the Countrey of the Negroes; hitherto rolling its streams from South to North, till losing it self in the Earth, it rises again near the Lake Borno; turns its course, and continues it to the West, traversing the whole Country of the Negroes 200 Leagues from the Sea, it divides it self into many Branches, which have divers names, and falls into the Ocean between the 11th and 16th degrees of Latitude. Its course is a little longer than that of the Nile; its streams more violent, and hath the same property of over∣flowing and fatning the Earth; engenders the same Creatures, but not so strong; hath grains of Gold in its Sand: But the Country which it traverses is neither so well habited, rich, nor known, as that of the Nile. Some be∣lieve the Nile and the Niger come from the same Springs, and that they begin not to divide but between the Higher and Lower Ethiopia; one con∣tinuing its course towards the North, the other turning from East to West: So the Arab of Nubia calls both, Nile; and to distinguish them adds, Nile of Egypt, and Nile of the Negroes. The Zaire.The other Rivers of Africa are not to compare with these. Zaire in Congo may be considered for the quantity of Waters it streams down, and for the greatness of its Mouth at the Sea, and so some others: but let us pass to the Promontories. Its Promon∣tories.We have already touched a word or two on the principal ones, to wit, the Capes of Bona, Hermea, Promontorium, Cape Verd, Arsinarium Prom, Gard a Fuy, Aromata Prom; (this Name was given, because of the Drugs and Spices of the East, which passed before, this Cape to descend by the Red Sea into Egypt, and from Egypt into the Mediterranean, and through all the West,) and of the Cape of Good Hope, of which the Greeks and Latins have had no certain knowledge, much less those before them; nevertheless we find some Authors among the Ancients, who would make it appear that the Bar∣barians, that is, the stranger Nations, have made (or caused to be made) the Circum-navigation of Africa, which could not be done without knowing of this Cape. The Empe∣rours and Kings which possess Africa.The Kings, Emperours, or Princes, which at present possess Africa, are in very great number; the most powerful and considerable are the Great Turk, or Sultan of the Ottomans, who holds all Egypt, a great part of Barbary, and almost all the Coast which touches the Red Sea. The Negus of the Abissines, who possesses the fairest and greatest part of the Higher Ethiopia; the Xeriffs of Fez and Morocco, which have held those two Kingdoms in Bar∣bary, and likewise Dara, and Segelmesse in Billedulgerid. The King of Tombutt, among the Negroes: the Mona's or Mani, that is, Kings of Congo, Monotapa, and Emugi; and the Soba of Angola, in the Lower Ethiopia; he of Adel, in the Coast of Ajan; besides which there are many Xeques of the Arabs, many free and vagabond People, who (for the most part) live with∣out Chiess, Faith, or Law. The Kings of Castile and Portugal hold many places on the Coasts of A∣frica; those of Castile hold some on the Mediterranean Sea; those of Por∣tugal hold a great number on all parts of the Ocean, which encompasses Africa; but the Hollanders have taken some from them, and others are de∣livered to the English. Languages or Tongues spo∣ken in Africa.Amongst a great number of different Tongues that are in Africa, the three or four principal and most general ones are the Beribere or African, which comes from the Ancient Punick, the Arabick and Ethiopian. The African and Arabick extend themselves through all Barbary, Billedulgerid, Egypt, and Saara, according as the People of these Countries, descend from the
Africans or Arabs. The Ethiopian is in the greatest part of Ethiopia; if it be not on the Coast, where the commerce and confluence of Strangers hath long since changed the Tongue: But the Negroes seem to have a particular Language. These Tongues have divers Idioms, and very different the one from the other; all (or at least the three first) descending from the Hebrew, or Tongues derived from it. Their Religi∣ons.The Religions which have course in Africa may be reduced to four; Ma∣hometism, Paganism, Christianity, and Judaism. Mohometism possesses Bar∣bary, Billedulgerid, Egypt, Zaara or the Desart, part of the Negroes, and a good part of the Coast of Zanguebar. Paganism holds part of the Negroes and Nubia, Guinny, and almost all the Lower Ethiopia (I comprehend the Cafres with the Pagans,) part of Zanguebar, and some mixture other∣where. Christianity holds in Africa almost the whole Empire of the Abis∣sines, part of Egypt; but the most part Schismaticks; and along all the Coasts of Africa, where the Portugals are the strongest, they have introduced Christianity: as in Congo, Angola, and some Coasts of the Cafres and Zan∣guebar. As for Judaism, it is scattered in many Cities on the Coast of Bar∣bary; as at Morocco, Fez, Algier, &c. Likewise in Egypt, and on the confines of the Abissines and the Negroes, they have the Kingdom of Ximen tributary to the Abissines; but the Jews are but a small number in Africa in comparison of the others. I make account that Africa being divided into 16 equal parts, Mahometism would possess 5 or 6, Paganism 6 or 7, Christianity 3, and Ju∣daism only one. Its division into Parts, as at this day known.AFRICA, as it is at this day known, may be divided into these 8 parts following, viz. 1. Barbary, (in which is found the Kingdoms of Morocco, Fez, Algier, Telensin, Tunis, Tripoli, and Braca.) 2. Billedulgerid or Nu∣midia. 3. Egypt. 4. Zaara or Libya Interiour, in which is comprehended the Country of the Negroes, Guinny, with some certain Isles. 5. Nubia. 6. The Empire of the Abissines, or the higher or greater Ethiopia, in which I comprehend Zanguebar. 7. Ethiopia the Lower, in which are found the Kingdoms of Congo, the Empire of the Monomotapa, the Land of Cafres: And 8. and lastly, the Isles of Africa. And of these in order.
Under the Name of BARBA∣RY, are compre∣hended se∣veral King∣doms, to wit, The Kingdom of MOROCCO, wherein are several Provin∣ces; and which may be con∣sidered as they lie On the Sea, as Susa, Taradante, Messa, Tagavostum, Tojouta, Gartguessemum. Hea, Tednest, Teculethum, Goza, Tefethna. Within Land, as Guzula, — Guzula. Morocco, Morocco, Agmer, Elguimha, Temella. Hascora, Elmadina, Tagodaft. Teldes, Teiza. Tedza. Ducala, Azamor, El Medina, Asafi. The Kingdom of FEZ, with its several Provinces; which may be considered as they lie On the Ocean, as Temesne, Anfa, Almansor, Rabatt, Adendum. Fez, Fez, Mahmora, Salla, or Sally. Asgar, Cafar-el-Cabir, Lharais. On the Streight of Gi∣braltar, Habar. Arzila. Tangier, Tettinguina. On the Mediterranean Sea, as Errif, Gomer, Bedia. Garret, Mellila, Fetis. Up within Land, as— Chaus, Teza, Dubdu, Gasis. The Kingdom of ALGIER, with its Provinces; which may be considered as they lie On the West, as Telensin, with its Quarters Telesin, Telesin, Oran, Marsalquibi. Hanghad, Guagida. Beni-Rafid Batha. Tenez, Tenesa, Sersela, Meliana. In the Middle, as— Algier, Algier, Temendfufta, Taddeles. On the East, as Bugia, Bugia, Chollum, Gergelum, Steffa. Constantina, Constantina, Bona, Tabarca, Tebessa. The Kingdom of TUNIS, with its Governments; and which may be considered as they lie On the Sea, and are Ma∣ritim, as Benserta,— Benserta. Goletta, Tunis, Goletta. Sousa, Susa, Hammmetha. El-Media, or Africa,— El-Media. Within Land, as Beija, or Bege, — Beija. Urbs, Urbs, Arbes, Musti, Marmagena. Cayroan, Cayroan, Cafsa, Hama. The Kingdom or Province of TRIPOLI, whose chief Maritim places are those of Capes, Et-Hamma, Tripolis the New, Lepeda, Tripolis the Old. The Country of BARCA, or LIBYA, which may be divided into The Kingdom of BARCA, as it regards the Sea, and makes the most Eastern Coast of BARBARY, whose chief places are Camera, Bernichum, Torachara, Tolometa, Zadra, Barca, Cayroan, Boni-Andreas, Musolomarus, Albertonus, Rox. Ripaealba. The Desart of BARCA, within Land, more Southward, and under the Tropick of Cancer; whose chief places are, Ammon, Gorham, Angela, Alguechet, Erner, Sert, Ascor, Ebida, and Couzza.
map of the Barbary coast A GENERALL MAPP OF THE COAST OF BARBARIE, WHERE IN ARE THE KINGDOMS, AND ESTATES OF MOROCCO, FEZ, ALGIER, TUNIS, AND TRIPOLIS ALSO THE KINGDOMS, ESTATES, AND DESERTS OF BARCA, EGIPT, LIBYA, BILEDULGERID SEGELMESSE, AND DARHA; With the Circumjacent Counteries. By Mounsieur Sanson Geographer to the French King; and Rendred into English, and Illustrated By Richard Blome: By his Majesties Especiall Command. London Printed for Ric Blome Ao 1667. Francis Lamb Sculpit
MOROCCO. Kingdom of Morocco, its bounds.THE Kingdom of MOROCCO is the most Western part of Bar∣bary, bounded by the Ocean, the River Sus, Mount Atlas, and the River Ommiraby: The Ocean washes it on the West; the Ri∣ver Sus separates it from Tesset on the South; Mount Atlas di∣vides it from Darrha, and Segelmesse, on the East; and the Om∣miraby from the Kingdom of Fez, on the North. In Provinces.It is divided into 7 Provinces: those of Sus, Hea, Guzula, and Moroc∣co, are between the Rivers of Sus and Tensift; the two first on the Sea, and the other within Land. The Provinces of Teldes, Hascora, and Ducala, are between Tensift, and Ommiraby: the two first up in the Land, the other on the Ocean: and these three last stretch towards the North and East; the four first towards the South and West. Province of Sus, its chief places, &c.1. The Province of Sus is about the River Sus, and is sometimes extended as far as Cape de Non. Taradante, not far from Atlas, is esteemed the chief City of this Province, its Governours and Kings having here made their resi∣dence; much enriched of late by the English and French Merchants, who have here a Staple for their Sugars. The Town is large and well built, seated in a spacious Plain, which affordeth great plenty of Sugar. 2. Messa, at the flux or mouth of the River Sus, it is composed of three little Cities walled apart; and betwixt which the River passes. 3. Tejent, seated higher; and on the same River, on a spacious Plain, is likewise composed of three Towns, each distant a Mile from each other, having their Temple common in the midst of the three. 4. Tedsa, beyond the River Tagavost, containing about 8000 Houses; its chief Ornament being a fair Mehometan Temple. 5. Capo d' Aguer, seat∣ed on a Promontory so called, and is a place of great importance. The Fortress, and City of Guarguessen in the midst of the Coast, and on a branch, which this Mountain under the name of Idevacall, stretches into the Sea, belongs to the Crown of Portugal. Province of Guzula, its bounds and chief Places.The Province of Guzula is to the East of Sus; to the South of Hea, and Morocco; to the West of the Province or Kingdom of Darrha; and to the North of Tesset. Here are observed to be no walled Cities, or Fortresses of note: but it hath many Burroughs and Towns of 1000 or 1200 Houses: where there are Markets kept thrice a week, and a great Fair yearly, which lasts two Months, to which many People from most parts of Africa do resort. The chief place bears the name of the Province; the People are rude and barba∣rous, and with much ado are subject to the King of Morocco. In the Country are many rich Mines of Gold, Brass, Iron, and other Metals. Province of Morocco, and and its chief Cities.The Province of Morocco, particularly so called, lies all between the Ri∣vers of Asifnuall, and Tensift; from their Springs at the Mount Atlas; until they meet about 15 or 20 Leagues from the Sea, Asifnual divides it from Gu∣zula, and Hea; Tensift from Hascora, and Ducala. The City of Morocco is the chief of the whole Kingdom, and hath been a long time in great esteem, and once accounted the Metropolis of all Barbary, and reckoned amongst the greatest Cities in the World. At which time it had twenty four, or twenty five Gates, being in circuit 12 Miles, and contained about one hundred thousand Families. It is strongly girt about with Walls, and adorned within with many publick and private Buildings; as, its Palace,
which they name the Alcasar. Its Churches or Mosques are very fair, espe∣cially one,Morocco, its Trade and Commodi∣ties. which is held the greatest in the World, seated in the midst of the City, adorned with many sumptuous Pillars, which were brought out of Spain when the Moors had the possession of the Country. It hath a very large and strong Castle, esteemed as big as a reasonable Town. Here is also a Burse for Merchants, who trade hither. But of late, by reason of the deface∣ment and Spoils which it hath suffered by the Arabians, together with the removal of the Seat Royal to Fez, now the Metropolis of all Barbary, it hath lost much of its splendor, a great part of the City being deserted, so that they make use of but 4 or 5 Gates; neither is that part so populous, rich, nor hath so good a Trade as formerly. 2. Agmett, seated on a River of the same name; and at the meeting of divers passages which descend from Mount At∣las in the Plains of Morocco, hath been very fair and populous, and its Hills and Valley about it so fertil, and beautified with pleasant Gardens, that it was called the Little Morocco; at present it is almost Desart. 3. Elgiumuha, near the Mountain, and on the River Secsiva. 4. Imegiagen, seated on a Mountain very steep on all sides: And, 5. Tenezze, a Town of some note. All which are strong places, and very advantagiously scituated. Province of Hea, its ferti∣lity, People, and chief places.HEA, West of Morocco; a Province Mountainous and Woody, yet watered with many good Rivers; the Soil indifferently fertil, and would produce seve∣ral good Commodities, were it inhabited by industrious People; these being a sort of idle and in a manner barbarous, altogether ignorant of Arts, except some Teachers of their Law, which can hardly read; as also some Chirurgions, who are chiefly employed in the circumcision of their Children; they are generally very courteous to Strangers, but very contentious among them∣selves. Its chief Cities are, 1. Tednest, once a place of good esteem, seated on the River Savens. 2. Hadequis. 3. Teguleth: and, 4. Tejeut, places of good note and Trade, the first containing about 1000 Houses, having the benefit of a good Port, and beautified with a fair Mosque, with some Hospitals. But about the year 1500 they were much ruined by the Portugals, in whose possession they are, who have since somewhat added to its former Estate. Tednest hath about 1600 Houses, the most part Jews, which are esteemed the chiefest. In the Mountains, Tesegdelt is most considerable, containing above 1000 Fami∣lies, and well scituated; its Walls being no other than thick Rocks. So are Ileusugagen, Tegtesse, Eitdeset, Culejat, &c. scituated upon Mountains, and of good strength. Tefethna, on the Coast, and at the Mouth of a River of the same name,The Isle of Mogadour. hath a Port, where there is some Trade. The Isle of Mogadour, near the Cape of Ocem, is distant from the Coast two little Leagues. The Kings of Morocco have built here a Fortress to keep some Mines of Gold and Silver which are in the neighbouring Mountains. Its Mountains west inhabi∣ted.The Mountains of Aidvacall or Idevacall, near Cape de Guer; of Demen∣sera, near the Province of Guzula, and Gebel el Haden, near the Tensit, take up a part of the Province; and are so well inhabited, that the last can set forth 12000 fighting Men, the first 20000, and the other 25000. Provinces of Hascora and Teldes, and their chief places.North of the Province of Morocco are those of Hascora, and Teldes sepa∣rated the one from the other by the River Quadel Habid. Tefza is the chief City of Teldes, and near the River Derna, which falls into the Ommiraby; a rich City, built by the old African Moors, and beautified with many Ma∣hometan Mosques; and its Walls were made of a kind of Marble. 2. Elma∣dine is the chief City of Hascora,Its People. peopled with about 10000 Families, scituate in a pleasant Valley, and begirt with Hills; it is well built; its Inhabitants are civil, ingenious, and addict themselves to Arts, Traffick, and Manufactures: the Women are fair, as in 3. Tagodaft, which is on a Mountain, whose Foot is washed with many little Streams, which water their Gardens. 4. Elgiumuha, towards the South, built by the People, and in a like scituation with Tagodaft. And, 5. Bzo, likewise a City of some Trade. Between the Mountains Teldes hath more than 50 walled Towns, built near the streams of the River Darha. These Provinces are fertil, having rich Fields, feed a great quantity of Goats. of whose Skins are made the Cordovants, and of their Hair, plain and watered
Chamlets; also store of Cattle, Grains; excellent Fruit amongst others their Grapes as big as Pullets-eggs; they have plenty of Fowl,The fertility & Commodities. and their Rivers breed store of Fish. Province of Ducala.Ducala the most Northern part of Morocco, and possesses that which is be∣tween the River Tensift, and Ommiraby: a Land fruitful for Grains. Its best Cities are, 1. Azamor where the Ommiraby enlarges and forms a Gulph to disburthen it self into the Sea, which before the Portugals became masters of it, had above 5000 Houses. It sell again into the hands of the Moors, and en∣tirely restored, having a strong Garrison. 2. Elmadine towards the Sea, and in a fair Plain, hath been esteemed the Capital of the Country. 3. Magrize∣na-Sanut, which they have fortified; and on the same Coast have dismantled Tite, the easier to fetch in Tribute thence, and from the Neighboring places. 4. Asafi or Satfy not far from Tensift, is strong, and hath a good Trade, where the French hath a Consul. Kingdom of Morocco.The Kingdom of Morocco hath suffered great changes, within these few Cen∣turies of years; having been often united, and as often separated from that of Fez. And sometimes likewise its South parts, Sus and Gurula have made a Kingdom apart. Its principal Ports are those of Messa Azafi,Its chief Ports, Promontories and Rivers.Mazagan and Azamor. Its Promontories those of Guer, Ocem, Cantin and Carvos,. Its Ri∣vers; the Sus, which waters its Southern parts; Tensift which divides the Estate in 2 equal parts; and Ommiraby which separates it from the Kingdom of Fez. Its Air, Fertili∣ty and Commo∣dities.The Air of the Plains, and Fields of Morocco is much hotter then in Eu∣rope, that of the Mountains according to their height is more or less cold. In general this Kingdom is provided with all things necessary for mans life; they have Grains and Pulse in abundance; as also Fruits which are excellent, espe∣cially their Grapes. They have likewise Flax, Hemp, Honey, Wax, Sugar, Gold, Silver, Iron, Copper, Marble, Cordovants, Amber, Chamlets and many good Manufactures. The Kingdom of FEZ. Kingdom of Fez.THe Kingdom of FEZ lies between that of Morocco and the Mediterra∣nean; and between the Ocean, and the Kingdom of Telensin or Argiers▪ Its Provinces are Temesne, Fez and Azgar on the Ocean;Its Provinces.Habat on the Streight; Errife and Garret on the Mediterranean Sea; and Chaus, all up in the Land. Province of Temesne.Temesne extends its self from Mount Atlas, unto the Ocean, hath formerly been so flourishing, that it numbred 40 Great Cities, more then 100 middle sized, and 300 little ones, besides an infinite number of Villages. Besides the Intestine Wars of the Country, the Portugals have divers times level'd and ruined the fairest Cities of the Coast as Anfa and Al-Mansor in 1468. and afterwards Rabatt likewise suffered their Incursions and Plunders. Rabatt and its Fortress, are on a Rising ground between the River of Buragrag, and the Se. King Mansor caused it to be built after the Modell of Morocco; but much less, and made it one of the most considerable places of all Barbary, erecting many Palaces, Temples, Hospitals, Colledges, Baines, Shops, &c. and without the South Gate a Tower as high as that of Morocco; it was very popu∣lous and of a good Trade. And because the Waters round about were salt, he made an Aquaeduct as beautiful as those about Rome. But at present these fair Edifices are almost ruined, it being possessed with not above 500 families, and much souldiery because of the Neighbourhood of the Portugals; most of the ground within the Walls being turned into Gardens, Vineyards, and Meadows. Anfa on the Coast, and in a delightful Plain, hath been one of the most fa∣mous Cities of Africa, for its Trade with the English and Portugals; but its being addicted to Pyracy, was the cause of its ruine, as of that of Al-mansor on the River Guir.
Within the Land, Muchaila on the Guir, and in the Road from Morocco to Rabat, hath been rich, well built, with a great Territory, and fruitful in Grain. It was ruined by the Kings of Morocco; and is not known at present, but for the Tomb of one of their Morabuts whom they esteem a Saint, and where the Country people lay in pledg their Ploughs and Instruments of labour, which no persons dare touch. They have another Morabut near Thagia, whom they be∣lieve to work Miracles, and to preserve them when they are met by Lions; a place much frequented by those of Fez, as being the Sepulcher of one of their Prophets to which they go in exceeding great numbers in Pilgrimage. Adendum towards the Sea, well walled, and fenced on one side by a Lake or Pool. Tegeget above the Ommiraby hath store of Grains, where the Arabs have a Toll, once of great note. The Ornament of this Province, and of the whole Kingdom (nay we may say of all Barbary) is Fez, which the Mahometans call the Court of the West: It is 100 Thousand paces from the Ocean, and as much from the Mediterranean. Its form is a long square, of which the middle is in a Plain, the two ends on Hills; and without several Suburbs, some of 500, some 1000, and others of 2000 Houses. This City bears the name of Fez, from the abundance of Gold which was found in the digging the Foundation thereof. It hath 12 principal Quarters or Re∣gions, 62 great places for Trade, and much frequented by Merchants, of di∣vers Nations who are allowed a publick meeting place for their Commerce, and lodging for their residence, and also Store-Houses for their Commodities; this place may rather be called a Court, than an Exchange, it being inclosed within a strong Wall, in which are 15 fair Streets, for several Nations to meet and re∣side for the better negotiating of their affairs; to this inclosure there are 12 Gates which every night are shut up and kept guarded at the Cities charge for the security of their Goods and Persons. Its Houses are well built, hath abundance of Temples, amongst which about 50 are well built, and beautiful. The greatest and most sumptuous of all, is seated in the heart of the City, containing about a Mile in Circuit, hath 31 great high Gates; and round about are several Porches containing 40 yards in length, and 30 in breadth, under which are the publick Store-houses of the City: The Tower is sustained by 35 Arches in length, and by 20 in breadth: All the Temple hath 900, and almost all these pieces enriced with Marble. Its Revenue is 200 Duckats a day, others say 400, which are either 75 or 150 thousand Duckats yearly. Within and without the City there are above 200 Hospitals, of which 25 are for the sick people of the Coun∣try, among which one can daily provide for 2000 Persons, others are for strang∣ers; but their Revenues are much squandred, and they give nothing but the Bed and Coverlet, but in some Food for three daies. There is likewise 200 Ba∣nias or Stews, 200 Inns, of which some have more then 100 Chambers, 400 Mils which daily work 1200 Mules. Among its Colleges, the building of that of King Hahu Henon cost 500 thousand Duckats, being a most curious and delicate Building, all enriched with Mosaicque work of Gold, Azure and Mar∣ble; its Gates are of Brass. In this Colledge are abundance of stately Buildings, as Cloisters, Halls, Baines, Hospitals, &c. It hath a stately Library, in which besides other Books are 20000 Volumes in Manuscript. They have 150 pub∣lick necessary houses built so commodiously, that the Waters carry away the ordure. To its Walls it hath 86 Gates which serve for entrance into the City. South East of the old Fez is the new City,The New Ci∣ty of Fiz. at a Mile or 1200 paces distance; this is almost only for the House, and for the Officers of the King. The Palace where he ordinarily resides, and the Palaces of the principal Lords, the Mint, a stately Temple, &c. are in the first quarter. The Officers of the Court, and the Captains of the guard hold almost all the second, and the Kings Guards alone had formerly the third. Now a good part of this last quarter is possessed by Jews and Goldsmiths; and part of the second, by divers Merchants and Artisans.
In this City of Fez, (as generally throughout these parts) they have abun∣dance of Conjurers, Fortune-tellers, Juglers, and Inchanters, who are in some War esteem amongst them. Its People are of a duskish or blackish complexion, of sly, Stature tall, and well proportioned; they are of an active disposition for and Horse-manship, otherwise excessive idle; they are very subtle; close, perfidi∣ous, inconstant, proud, much addicted to Luxury, and therefore by consequence very jealous of their Wives, whom they keep with great severity, and that the more according to their external graces; they are very revengeful if injured, and hard to be reconciled. In their gait they have much of the Spaniard in them; in their Apparel they go very sumptuous and rich, but their Food is but very gross. Their Religi∣on.As to their Religion they are either Mahometans or Heathens; and are for the most part inclined to Literature and Arts. Their Magi∣strates and Justice.In this City are four sorts of Magistrates: one for the Canon-Law, one for the Civil-Law, another for Marriages and Divorcements; and another as an Advocate, to whom they make their appeal. In the Administration of Justice they are more or less severe, according to the hainousness of the offence. In their Marriages they observe many Ceremonies; as being agreed, they are accompanied to the Church by their Parents, Relations, and Friends; which Ceremony being ended, they are invited to two Banquets, the one at the Bride∣grooms cost, and the other at the Brides Relations; which being done, the Bridegroom causeth the Bride to be conducted to his House with Musick and Torches, being accompanied with their Friends; and being entred the House, she is immediately lead to the Chamber door; and delivered by her Father, Brother, or some of her Kindred to his Mother (if living) who there waits for her coming, who immediately is redelivered to him; who forthwith conducts her to a private Chamber, where he enjoyeth her; and if she is found to be a Virgin, which will appear by the blood which will proceed, which perceiving they drie up with a Napkin, and carry in their hands to shew the Company, with great joy; and then they make Feasts, and are very merry: But if she be contrary, and that no blood is caused, then they judge her Virginity lost; and thereupon the Marriage is frustrated, and with great disgrace she is turned home to her Parents. This with several other Ceremonies are omitted in the Marriage of a Widow. Here the Women at the death of their Friends assemble themselves together, habit themselves in Sack-Cloth and Ashes, and sing a Funeral Dirge to the praise of the Deceased; and at the end of every verse, howl and crie; and this they do for seven daies together; during which time her Friends send in Pro∣visions, and come and comfort her; for their custom is not to have any meat drest in the House of Mourning, during the said time, especially untill the Corps is interred. 1. The City of Mahmora fell into the hands of the Portugals in 1515, was presently retaken by the King of Fez, who defeated 10000 Christians, and gained 60 pieces of Artillery, The Kings of Spain likewise made themselves Masters of it 1614 and have fortified it because of the goodness of the Port. 2. Sa∣la or Sally, hath been the residence of some Kings of Fez. It is composed of two Cities, the Old and the New; and hath a great Trade with the English, French, Hollanders and Genoueses. Its Fortress is on a rising ground, with a high Tower which discovers the Sea. In the Castle the King Mansor, and o∣thers his successors, have their magnificent Tombs. The place was taken by the Castilians, and retaken from them some years past; and afterwards abundance of the Moors of Granado driven from Spain, retiring thither, have fortified and enriched it with their Piracies. 3. Mech∣nese between Sally and Fez, is in the middle of a Plain, where for 5 or 6000 paces, there is only Gardens filled with excellent Fruits. The City is well built, its Streets large and well ordered. Its Inhabitants liberal, and civil, but alwaies in jealousie against those of Fez. Divers Aqueducts bring water to the City, and furnish the Temples, Bains, Hospitals and Colledges, and pri∣vate Houses.
Asgar is a Province between the Rivers of Suba,Province of Asgar. and Lusus or Lixa, on the Coast; it extends itself far up the Land, towards the City of Fez, and hath fair and fertile Fields, with an Air so pleasant, that formerly the Kings of Fez passed here a part of the Spring in Hunting. 1. Elgiumha or Elgiuhma, in the way from Fez to Larrache, and formerly the fairest of the Provinces; serves now only as the Granary, where the Arabs store up their Corn. 2. Casar∣el-Cabir, a place of pleasure which Mansor caused to be built between the Fens, the Forests, the Sea, and the River, may now have about 1500 Houses, a∣dorned with a stately Hospital, a Colledg, and many Temples. The Battel which Don Sebastian King of Portugal lost, was here fought. In which it is obser∣vable, that the three Chiefs of the Armies, which that day met, all died, viz. Don Sebastian of Portugal, in the field of the Battel; Muley Mahomet of Fez, in favor of whom Don Sebastian passed into Africa, was drowned passing the River of Mucazin to save himself in Arzile; and Abdelmelech of Morocco, the Conqueror, died with labour and pains, or with the sickness with which he was seised before the Battel; all three competitors for this Kingdom; with se∣veral others of eminent quality. 3. Lharais or Larrache, once Lixos; which some among the Ancients say, was greater then the Great Carthage, and hath made the Royal Residence of Antaeus, whom Hercules defeated, and from whence he brought the Golden Apples, gathered in the Hesperides Gardens. It is at present one of the principal Fortresses of the Kingdom, and hath often been attempted by the Portugals and Spaniards. The Province of Habat is part on the Ocean,Province of Habat. part on the Mediterranean Sea, and holds all the streight of Gibraltar on the African side, opposite to Spain in Europe. The principal Cities of this Province are, Arzila, which the Portugals took in 1471, carrying away all its inhabitants, and among the rest Muley Mahomet el Oataz, then seven years old, after King of Morocco, who remembring more his imprisonment, then the liberty he had from Spain, in the year 1508 raised 10000 Moors, besieged, and took the City of Arzila, and the Castle, the Por∣tugals hardly defending themselves in a Tower, which was yet relieved, the City and Castle retaken, and the Moors well beaten. The Portugals after∣ward, and under some pretext, abandoned this place, which Muley Mahomet called the Black, returned it to Don Sebastian, King of Portugal in 1578, but which the Xeriffs retook again, and do at present possess. The City is great and strong, with a Port on the Ocean; the soyl produces more fruits and Pulse, then Grain and Wood. 2. Tangier, of old Tingis, hath been the most famous among the Ancients, builded, as they say, by Antaeus; and so renowned, that the neighbouring Mauritania took from it the name of Mauritania Tingitana and the Streight, of Fretum Tingitanum; yet were its Bishop and Government united not long since to that of Ceuta, where they had their residence, till the dis-union of the Estates of Portugal and Castile; Ceuta remaining in the hands of the Spaniards; Tangier and Cazar Ezzaghir returning to the Portugals. The former of the two last is now delivered into the hands of the English upon the marriage of Donna Catharina, Infanta of Portugal, with our Soveraign Lord King Charles the Second, of happy memory. Where we have a good Fort and Mold, for the convenience of shipping; by which means, it may be in time a place of a considerable Trade. It is made a very strong place since the English have been masters of it, and doth contain about 1500 Houses well built; they have pleasant Gardens. Near to this place it is said, that Hercules over∣came Antaeus, a monstrous Giant of 64 Cubits high. 3. Tettuan or Tetteguin, hath not above 800 Houses, which are as well built as any in Barbary; and a good part of the Moors driven from Granada, being retired thither, it is maintained in a good estate; they are continually coursing on the Sea, and keep many Christians their Slaves. In this Country are abundance of other Cities, though of no such considerable note as those aforementioned. Its Mountains which are counted about 8, are inhabited by the Tribes of Gumera, who drink Wine, though contrary to the Law of Mahomet, and pay some 3, some 4, others 6000 Duckats yearly. That
of Rahon hath Vineyards, and its Inhabitants make quantity of Sope and Wax. Benifensecare, besides its Wax, yields Hides and Linnen-Cloth; and on its Srturday Markets, the Christians muy Trade. Benihurus is almost dis-inha∣bited, by reason of the Neighborhood of Gazar Ezzaghir, under whose go∣vernment it hath been. Chebib on the contrary, is much augmented, after that the Portugals took Tangier, the ancient Inhabitants of this retiring thither. Benichessen hath its Inhabitants addicted to Arms; as likewise Quadres near the Streight, and Bemguerdarfeth near Tittuan, to whose go∣vernment they are obedient, serving against the Garrison of Centa. They have formerly furnished the Kings of Granada with a great power, and among them with one Helul, whom their Poems and Romances esteem the terror of all Spain. Angera hath Flax, of which they make Linnen-Cloth; as also Timber fit to build Ships. Province of Errif.Errif above the Mediterranean Sea, and between the Rivers of Gomer and Nochor, advances it self in the Land as far as the Mountain which separates it from the Provinces of Fez and Chaus. It is very Mountainous and Woody; it is little fruitful in Grain, abundant in Barley, Vines, Figs, Olives and Al∣monds: Hath quantity of Goats, Asses and Apes; few Sheep or Oxen. The Houses are only of one Floor, and ill covered; the Inhabitants are valiant but much addicted to drink. Its Cities are almost all on the Coast, as Gomer, Terga, Bedis, Mezemma, and others. The most part ill inhabited by reason of the Neighborhood of the Spaniards. 1. Gomer is seated on a River of the same name, 2. Those of Terga use much Fishing, uttering their Salt-Fish to the Inhabitants of the Mountains; but at present almost quite deserted. 3. Be∣dis or Belis, with its Castle, its Palace, and its Port, is in some esteem, and maintains some Gallies: But much molested by the Fort of Pennon de Velez, which the Spaniards hold in an Island not above 1000 or 1200 paces from Be∣dis. 4. Mezemma seated on a Mountain, formerly great and well peopled, hath now nothing but Walls. The Mountains have Vines, Barly, Horses, Goats, Fruits, &c. Some pay some tribute, and others none at all. That of Bemguazeval can arm 25000 men, hath quantity of Towns, and a City fa∣mous among them, and a Volcano which continually casts forth fire. Susaon is one of the most fruitful and most pleasant places of Africa. Its people under their Xeque keeping themselves in liberty. Province of Garret.Garret possesses the rest of the Coast upon the Mediterranean Sea, unto the River Mulvia, which separates it from Telansin. Mellila hath been its chief City, at present in the hands of the Castilians; as is Chasasa, and both the one and the other have their Port; that of Mellila much better, and may count 2000 Houses, serves as a passage to the Traffick between those of Fez, and the Venetians. There are excellent Mines of Iron in the neighborhood. The mid∣dle of this Province is Mountainous. Its extremity towards the South, joyning to the Province of Chaus, is untilled, and without Water. Province of Chaus.The Province of Chaus is so great, that it contains a third part of the King∣dom: The Rivers of Cebu or Suba, of Mulvia, of Nocor, and some others have here their Springs at the foot of divers Branches of the Atlas. This Country is but meanly inhabited, considering its bigness; and its people fierce and war∣like, to which they are addicted, not caring much for Traffick or Tilling their Ground, which if well ordered, would produce several good Commodities. A∣mong its Cities, Tezza is the chief, and is esteemed the Third of the Kingdom of Fez, and makes no less then 5000 Houses. The Nobility have here many rich Palaces, but the private Houses are not fair. It is adorned with 3 Colledges, 23 Baniaes, many Hospitals, about 100 Mosques or Temples, among which there is one greater, though not richer then that of Fez. It hath a magnificent Castle, and the Kings Marins sometimes made here their residence, and gave it to their second Son; as well because of the beauty of the City, and the civility of its Inhabitants; as for the goodness of the Air, and the abundance of all sorts of Fruits, which they gather there. 2. Turet is beyond the River Mulvia, and on the River Quhas; so advanced on the Frontiers, that the King of Fez and Telensin have often carried it, the one from the other. It is seated on a Hill in
the midst of a Plain, but encompassed about with Desarts, very advantagiously inclosed with strong Walls; well built within, and filled with about 3000 Hou∣ses. 3. Dubdu is on the side of a high Mountain, from which many Fountains descend, and run through the City. 4. Garsis. And 5. Haddaggia are on the Mulvia. 6. Gherselvin only is beyong the Atlas, and on the borders of Segel∣lesse, it is handsom within, but beautiful without, &c. The Inhabi∣tants of its Mountains.Among the Inhabitants of the Mountains, there are some rich, who pay little or nothing; others poor and over burthened with Tribute. The Plains of Sabhelmarga, hath almost nothing but Charcoal-men, by reason of the ad∣jacent Woods; that of Asgari-Cameren, Shepherds, because the Grass grows all the year; that of Guregra, Husbandmen, the Land being proper for Grain. In this Province there is a remarkable Bridge over the River Sebu, which runs between Rocks so high,A strange Bridge. that this Bridge is 150 yards from the Water. It is a Basket or Pannier hung upon two Cords, which turn upon two Pullies fast∣ned to the ends of two great Piles of Wood, on each side of the Valley: And those who are in the Basket (there may go about ten persons) draw them∣selves from one side to other by the Cords which are made of Sea-Bulrush, as well as the Basket. The Country of Fez and Mo∣rocco of a diffe∣rent nature.The Kindoms of Fez and Morocco, ought to be considered in four sorts of Lands, Mountains, Vallies, Plains, and Coasts; and the most part of their Provin∣ces have these sour sorts. The Mountains are almost all in the hands of the A∣rabs and Bereberes, who live partly free, partly tributary. The Vallies are almost all the same, according as they are more or less engaged in the Moun∣tains, or near the Plains. The Plains are all obedient. The Coasts in part be∣long to the Kings of Fez and Morocco, in part to the Portugals and Spaniards; these holding what is on the Mediterranean Sea, the others on the Ocean. So that considering the Continent of these two Kingdoms, even when they were united, there was always a quarter or third part which obeyed not the Xeriffs, or Kings of Fez and Morocco. But if they had been absolute in these two King∣doms, they might easily have brought into the field One hundred thousand Horse, and more then so many Foot. The Moors of this Kingdom, and their dis∣position.The Moors of Fez and Morocco, are well disposed, strong, Active, and yet melancholly; they may marry four Wives, and repudiate them when they will, giving them the Dowry they promised when they espoused them. And if they would be rid of them better cheap, they treat them ill; and these Wo∣men may forsake their Husbands, quitting their Dowry. Besides these four Wives, they may have as many Concubines as they can keep; but the Law permits them not to lie but with the one or the other of the four Wives. Per∣sons of Estate spend so much on their Weddings, that they say commonly, That the Christians spend the greatest part of their Goods in Law-suits; the Jews, in their Paschal-Feasts; and the Moors in their Nuptials. They enterr their dead in Virgin-Earth, that is, where no person hath been before enterred, fearing least at the general Resurrection it should be difficult to unmix all their pieces. Arabs here in∣habiting which much annoy the Countrey.Besides these Moors, in the Estates of Fez and Morocco, there are many A∣rabs which go by Cabilles or Lineal Descent; and which make War and Peace as they please, between themselves, and with the Moors: Wandering conti∣nually, and pillaging now one Coast, and then another. They either assault or convoy the Caravans according to their interest; sometimes serving the Kings of Morocco, sometimes making War upon them. Those that are in the highest Mountains of Atlas, are so rude and barbarous, that the Ancients have believed them to be Satyrs, Pans, Aegipans, that is, Half Devils. In some Cities there are quantity of Jews; almost no Christians, except they be Slaves, or some Merchants.
The Kingdom of ALGIER and TELENSIN. The Kingdom of Algier.THe Kingdom of ALGIER is at present the most famous, or rather the most infamous on the whole Coast of Barbary: As well for its Rich∣es and Forces, as for those Pyracies it exercises towards the Christians, and the barbarousness it useth towards its Captives. Its name is taken from the principal City, seated in the midst of its Coast on the Mediterranean Sea; towards the West, it is separated from the Kingdom of Fez, by the Rivers of Zhas and Mulvia; towards the East, divided from that of Tunis, by the Guad-il-Barbar. The Northern Coast is washed by the Mediterranean Sea; the South confined by the Mountains of Atlas, which divide it from Segelmesse, Tegorarin, and Zeb, parts of Billedulgered. Its length from West to East, is near 300 Leagues, its breadth 50, 60, or 75 Leagues. Its Division and parts.We will divide it into five parts, of which that of Algier shall make the middle one; Telensin and Tenes shall be on the west; Bugia and Constantina on the East. The Turks (as Grammajus saith) hath established 20 Governments, whereof 10 are on the Coast, and 10 others within Land. On the Coast there are 5 West ward of Algier, and 5 Eastward of Algier. Sargel, Tenes, Marsalquibir, Hunain, and Haresgol, advance towards the West: Algier, Bugia, Gigell, Con∣stantina, and Bona, towards the East. Of the 10 Governments which are within Land, Grammajus places 6 in the Mountains of Telensin, or Benrasid, Tenes, Al∣gier, Bugia, Constantina, and Bona. These names of Mountains being taken from Cities, neighboring on them, and almost all on the Coast. The 4 Governments re∣maining are, Steffa, Necab or Necaus, Mezella or Mesila, and Mastin, which are the names of their chief places. But Grammajus not contenting himself with this division within Land, makes yet other 10; of which, 4 he calls Kingdoms, and which are only Tributary. Hu∣erguela or Guergela, Cuco, Tricarta or Techcort, and Labes. 2 Provinces, Be∣nirasid, and Tebesse. 2 Dynasties or Signiories, Meliana, and Angat: And likewise 2 Kingdoms subject, Telensin and Tenes. Of these 10 pieces, Telensin, Angat, Benirori, Tenes and Meliana, are towards the West; Coco, Labes and Tebesse, towards the East; Guerguela and Techcort, far towards the South. These 2 last are so engaged in Billedulgerid, that I cannot well describe them with the Kingdom of Algier, though they be Tributary to it. And the Govern∣ments or Provinces within Land, are so near, and sometimes so engaged with those of the Coast, that I will not change the order I have taken to consider this Kingdom in 5 principal parts; in each part observing the Governments, Pro∣vinces and Kingdoms therein. Hunain, Haresgol and Marsalquibir, on the Coast; Telensin, Hanghad and Benirafi, within Land, shall compass the quar∣ter of Telensin. Tenes and Sarsell, on the Coast, and Meliana, within Land, shall be the quarter of Tenes. Algier on the Coast, and Cuco, within Land, that of Algier. Bugia and Gilgili, on the Coast, Stefe, Labes, Necaus and Me∣sila, withing Land, that of Bugia. Bona on the Coast, Constantina and The∣besse, within Land, that of Constantine. Province of Telensin.The City of Telensin, which those of the Country now call Tremecen and Tilmisan, hath once been chief of a Kingdom of the same name; of which, the Provinces of Telensin, Tenes, Algier and Bugia, were the parts. The City is not above seven or eight Leagues distant from the Sea: It hath been one of the greatest and fairest of all Barbary. This may appear in that there remains but eight Mosques of consideration, it having had 250; but four Bania's of 160; but two Inns for the Franks, and four for the Moors of 34; but six Hospitals of thirty or forty. It had 16000 Houses about the year 1000, 20000 about the year 1200, 25000 in the year 1550, and the Jews had ten great Synagogues. The divers changes which it suffered, and the rude treatment which they re∣ceived from the Turks, hath made many of its Inhabitants retire into Fez, and some other where, which hath reduced it low. That which remains, is
magnificent, its Houses better built, its Streets more large and spacious, its Gardens more embellished: Its People more civil, and its Merchants of better credit then those of Algier. It hath a Cittadel built after the Modern Fortifica∣tions.Humain. 2. Humain, which others call Humanbar and Ʋnhaim, is the ancient Artifiga. Its Port is not great, but good; its Land hath much Figs, Oranges, Citrons, Pomgranates and Cotton; of which, the Inhabitants make divers Manufactures. In 1535 this place was ruined by the Castilians, and not re∣stored till long after.Haresgol 3. Haresgol is the ancient Siga, a Roman Colony, the residence of Syphax, (sometimes King of this Country) before he seised the Estates of Massanassa: Its scituation is on a Rock, whose foot is washed by the Sea, and hath no communication with the firm Land, but on the South side. This City hath been much greater then it is; the takings and retakings which it suffered by the Kings of Fiz, by the Califfs, by the Moors, by the Castili∣ans, and by the Arabs reduced to the estate it is at present under the Kings of Algier,City of Oran. who kept a Garrison in its Castle. 4. Oran and Marsa-el-Quibir, which belongs to the Marquisate of Oran, are in the hands of the Catholick King. Oran which the Africans call Tuharan, the Arab of Nubia, Vaharan, is the Cuisa of the ancients; and Marsa-el-Quibir, there Portus Magnus, since this name signifies, the great Port. This was taken by the Marquess of Comares, in the year 1505; the other by the Cardinal Ximenes, in the year 1509. At the taking of this last, the Castilians lost only 30 men, killed 4000 Moors, and delivered 20000 Christian Captives. This City of Oran before it was taken, had above 6000 Houses, abundance of Temples, Hospitals, Canes, Bania's, &c. and had sometimes been the residence of the Catholick Kings: The Venetians, Ge∣nouese, Catalonians, &c. having here so great a Trade, that its riches and power inclined its Inhabitants to deny Tribute to the Kings of Telensin, and to make some incursions on the Coast of Spain, which was the cause of their loss. At present it is a Suffragan Bishoprick to the Archbishoprick of Toledo; it hath some Convents and Hospitals, among others one very rich. It is strongly seat∣ed on the Mediterranean Shore, powerfull at Sea in their Gallies, and is a place of some Trade, affording most of the Commodities the Country produ∣ceth.Marsalquibir. 5. Masalquibir hath one of the fairest, greatest and most secure Ports that is in all Africa. The Government or Marquisate of Oran comprehends likewise some Castles and Mountains, where there are good Garrisons which keep the Neighborhood in jealousie. Mazagran with its Castle on the Coast, is in the hands of the Moors. Province of Anghad.The Quarter of ANGHAD or RANGƲAD, though for the most part desart, yet hath some fertile places, where are the Cities Ggida, and others. Guagida hath yet about 3000 Families, its Land fruitful in Grains, and watred with many Rivers. The Desart is possessed by the Arabs, and a∣mongst them many Lions, Wild-Boars, Stags, and above all Ostriches, in hunting of which, the Arabs often exercise themselves, making profit of their Feathers, eating their Flesh, and currying their Skins to carry their Baggage in. They keep the heart to make use of in Charms or Witcherasts, the Fat to mix in their Medicaments, and the Nails or the Horn to make Pendants for the Ears, to deck themselves with, when they utter the other parts. Province of Benirasid.BENI-RASID or BENIRAXID, hath some Plains towards the North, many Mountains toward the South, is fruitful almost every where, and hath three or four places of some consideration in these Mountains. 1. Beni-Arax, of Old Bunebora, is not walled, it contains more then 2000 Inhabitants. 2. Calaa or Calat-Haoara, of Old Ʋrbara, between two Mountains, is strong. 3. Moascar, of Old Victoria, hath a Castle where the Governor of the Countrey resides. 4. Batha, of Old Vaga, on the River Mina, having been ruined by the Inhabitants of the Mountain of Guanseris, some Morabut out of their opinion of his sanctity, restored it in Anno 1520. And 5. Medua.
Province of Tenes, its chief places, fertility and people.The Province of TENES is between that of Telensin and Algier, to whose Kings it hath been subject sometimes to one, and sometimes to others, and sometimes it self hath born the Title of a Kingdom. Its principal places on the Sea are, Tenesa and Sargel; within Land, Meliana. 1. Tenesa, part on the side of a Hill, and part on a Plain descending to the Sea; hath a Castle and a Palace, formerly the abode of its Kings or Lords, now of its Governours: Its Inhabitants are addicted to Traffick. The Country, both in the Mountains and Plains, yields them Grains, Fruits, Hides, Wax, Hony, and some other Commodities. 2. Brischa: and 3. Sersela, East of Tennesa, and between Ten∣nes and Algier, have many Roman Antiquities. The first is the ancient Icosima, the other is Rusubricari. This hath suffered divers Ruins; the Moors driven from Granada rebuilt it, and enriched it with their Piracies, with their Silks and Fruits. The Inhabitants both of the one and the other, are for the most part Weavers. 4. Meliane, or Malliana, is on a Mountain, where yet the most part of the Houses have their Fountains and Wall-nut Trees. 5. Mezume, is adorned with a Castle, a Palace, and a fair Temple. 6. Teguident hath a large circuit, which had been empty, had not sometime since a Marabut re∣peopled it. These two places are by some esteemed in the Quarter of Telen∣sin. Among the Mountains Beni-Abucaid, is near to and of the appurte∣nances of Tennes. Guanseris can set forth 2 or 3000 Horse, and 15 or 16000 Foot. The Quarter of Algier, and its parts and places.The Quarter of ALGIER comprehends likewise that of Couco, in the Mountains of Eguiel-Vandaluz alias Couco, and Tubusuplus, which is the principal place, built on the top of a Rock, craggy on all sides. It may con∣tain about 1600 Houses: the Kings or Lords of the Country reside here, and have oft disputed their liberty with the Kings of Algier. These Mountains are two or three days Journey long, and their approaches very difficult: They yield Olives, Grapes, and especially Figs, of which the King makes his principal Revenue; Cattle, Iron, Saltpeter; and the Plains afford Corn, and every where Spring of Running-water. The People are Bereberes and A∣zuages, well armed and couragious. The Metropolis of the Kingdom is ALGIER, at present the most famous place of all the Coast of Barbary,The City of Algier de∣scribed. either for its Riches and Power, or for the extent of its Estates. It is seated on the declension of a Mountain in form of a Triangle, so that from the Sea all its Houses appear one on the top of another, which renders a most pleasant prospect to the Sea. Its circuit is not above 3400 Geometrical paces, fortified with some ill-disposed Bastions; but the Island, which was before it, is joyned to the City some years past; where is built a Pentagone, the better to secure the Port and Island, and keep it from being fired, as in 1596, 1606, &c. It is a City not so large as strong, and not so strong as famous: Famous for being the receptacle of the Turkish Pirates, who so much domineer over the Mediterranean Sea, which too often proves to the great damage of all Mer∣chants who frequent those Seas. This City hath at present 12 or 15000 Houses; it had not when J. Leon of Africa wrote above 4000. The Streets are but narrow, but the Houses fair and well built, yet one which runs along the Sea is fair and large; they count 100 Mosques, whereof 7 are very sumptuous; 5 Houses or Lodgings of Janizaries, capable to hold each of them 600 Men; 62 Bania's, of which two are very beautiful; 100 Orato∣ries of Turkish Hermits, and almost as many publick Schools. Out of the City are many Tombs of Turks, Moors, and Jews; the burying place of the Christians is without ornament. Among these Tombs is remarkable that of Cave, Daughter of Julian, Earl of Baethica, who having been ravished by Roderic King of the Goths, was the cause of the Moors descent into Spain. It hath almost no more Suburbs, the City being encompassed with many Hillocks and rising Grounds, whose sides and Vallies are covered with 12 or 15000 fair Gardens, abounding with store of pleasant Fruits, with their Fountains and other places of delight. Beyond these Hills is the Plain of Moteja, 15 or 16 Leagues long, and 8 or 10 broad, very fruitful in Grains. This place is famous for the Shipwreck which Charles the Fifth here suffered,
who besieging this Town,Here Charles the Fifth suf∣fered Ship∣wreck. lost in its Haven at one Tempest (as Heylin noteth,) besides a great number of Karvels and small Boats, divers strong Gallies, 140 Ships, a great many Pieces of Ordnance, about half his Men, and such great quantity of gallant Horses, that in Spain they had almost like to have lost their race of good and serviceable Horses. The Cities, 1. Temeudfusta, about 7 or 8 Leagues from Algier, with a good Port: and, 2. Teddeles, 18 or 20 are the best places of the Coast: the first answers to the ancient Jomnium Municipium, the other to Rusipisir; likewise Municipium. 3. El Col de Mudejares, of old, Tigisi, is newly repeopled by the Morisque Mudejares of Castile and Andalusia; and the Tagartins, which were of Valentia: It is 8 or 10 Leagues from Algier, beyond the River Selef, which they here call the River of Saffran. 4. Gezaira, a City seated on the Sea-shoar. 5. Mensora: And 6. Garbellum, both Sea Towns. The Fertility and People of Algier.The Air about Algier is pleasant and temperate: The Land hath excellent Fruits, as Almonds, Dates, Oils, Raisins, Figs, some Drugs, &c. The Plain of Moteiia is so fertil, that sometimes it yields 100 for one, and bears twice a year good Grains. In the most Desart Mountains are found Mines of Gold, Silver, Iron, quantity of fierce Beasts. The Country affords excellent Bar∣bary Horses, also Estridge Feathers, Wax, Hony, Castile Soap, &c. Besides they have good quantities of most Commodities, which by reason of their Piracy they take from other Nations, to the great inriching of the place, most of the Inhabitants living by it, setting out Vessels in Partnership and sharing the Gains, selling the Commodities and the Men they take as Slaves in open Markers. The Natives of Algier are fairer, and not so brown as the Moors; but the City is filled with all sorts of Nations. The Janizaries make the greatest part of the Militia: The Turks have the chief Trade, who are found to transport several Commodities to other Countries; but there are many of the Moors driven from Spain, and others who have retired themselves from the Mountains; many Arbas, Jewish, and Christian Slaves. The number of the Inhabitants of this City cannot be esteemed by the 12 or 15000 Houses it con∣tains; for there are some Houses where are found 100, 200, or 300 Persons; the Christian Slaves only amount to about 30 or 40000 within and about the City; and there are no less than 6000 Families of Renegadoes. But the Right Honourable the Earl of Sandwich, late General of the English Fleet, by order from King Charles the Second, put out to Sea with a Fleet of Ships, scoured those Seas, forced them to deliver up all the Slaves, who were Subjects in any of the Kings Dominions, as well as Englishmen, and brought them to very honourable terms: By which they are not to seize or stop any English Ship, but give them free liberty of Trading where they please; and the like Peace is made with Tunis, and other of the Turks Territories: But these per∣fidious People soon violated it. Province of Bugia, its chief places and fer∣tility.The Province of BƲGIA is between the Rivers Major and Sefegmar. This on the East, that on the West. On the Coast are two principal places, Bugia and Ghegel; in the Land are Steffa, Labes, Necaus, and Messila, in some consideration. 1. Bugia is a great City, its circuit capable of 20000 Houses, but hath not above 8000; but that which is uninhabited is Mountainous and in∣convenient: It was built by the Romans on the side of a lofty Mountain, which regards the Sea; now the chief City of this Province. Its Streets and Houses are in good order; it is adorned with many sumptuous Mosques, some Monasteries and Colledges for Students in the Law of Mahomet, and many fair Hospitals for the relief of the Poor: Its Castle is good and strong, seated on the River Guad al Quibir, that is, Great River. 2. Ghegel, formerly famous, is now only a Borough of 500 ill-built Houses. Its Castle is very good; its Land hath little Corn, store of Hemp, Figs and Nuts. They hold this place to have been the beginning of the fortune of Barbarossa. 3. Labez makes a separate Estate above Bugia, and consists only in Mountains of so difficult access, that the Kings of Algier, and the Turks, can scarce force them to pay Tribute. The chief Fortress of these Mountains, and the residence of their King or Xeque, is Calaa. The others are, 4. Coco de Teleta; 5. Tezli, at the foot of the Mountain.
These Mountains have little Corn or Fruit; they can raise 5000 Horse, 5000 Harquebusiers, and 20000 Men, armed after their mode; all valiant, and bet∣ter defenders of their liberty than those of Couco. 6. Necaus. 7. Mesila, are beyond the Abez, but near the same River. Necaus is the most pleasant place of all Barbary: It hath something of particular in its publick Buildings, every House hath its Garden so embellished with Flowers, Vines, Fruits, and Fountains, that it seems a Terrestrial Paradise. 8. Chollum. 9. Gergelum, &c. Province of Constantina, its parts and chief places.The Province of CONSTANTINA hath sometime had its Kings. This is the New Numidia, of the Ancients the most Occidental part of the True Africa, and which touches on Mauritania to the West, the River Su∣gefmar making the separation. This Province comprehends three quarters, of which that of Constantina extends to the Sea, and a good way in the Land; that of Bona likewise on the Sea, but little on land; that of Tebessa is farther in the Land, touching on Billedulgerid. 1. Tebessa, formerly Thebeste,The City of Tebessa, sur∣passes (as they say) all other Cities of Barbary in three things: In the force of its Walls, beauty of its Fountains, and great number of its Wall-nut Trees. In counter-change its Inhabitants are brutish, its Houses ill built, and its Air unwholsom. 2. Bona, of old Hippo Regnis; ill inhabited at present,The City of Bona. part of its Inhabitants being retired into the Mountains: hath been famous to Anti∣quity for its greatness, but much more for its Bishop St. Augustine, so famed among the Doctors of the Church. It hath suffered great changes under the Romans, Vandals, Moors, and afterwards under Barbarossa. 3. Tabarca, a City and Isle is of this Government, likewise the Hills and Mountains of Bona, where are gathered much Fruits of Jujubes, Grains, and store of Cattle; and the Coast hath red, white, and black Corral, which the French near to Bona, and the Genouese near to Tabarca, go to fish for. The Family of the Lomolins in Genoua having a Fortress in the Isle of Tabarca, the French a Bastion between Tabarca and the Point of Mascara; the one and the other for the security of their Fishing and Commerce. 4. Constantina,The City of Constantina. which the Moors called Cusuntina, the Ancients Cirta Julia, is a great City, not having less than 8000 Houses. Its scituation on a Mountain, which hath but two Ad∣venues, the rest being Precipice, makes it strong. The River Sufegmar washes the foot of the Mountain; its Castle stands to the North, Collo and Sucaicada (on the Coast) are under the Government of Constantina, likewise the Moun∣tains which extend themselves to the Mediterranean Sea, and to the confines of Bona. The Country about Constantina is fertil, its Mountains tilled. Collo hath its Inhabitants more civil than those of Constantina, those having no trade but with those of Billedulgerid, the others with those of Europe. The Inhabitants of the Mountains can raise about 40000 Men, and maintain themselves almost in liberty, both against the Kings of Algier and the Arabs. 5. Cirta, in the Roman History, was the residence of many Kings of Numi∣dia;The City of Cirta. among others of Massinissa, afterward of Syphax, who drove Massinissa from his Estates, and settled himself at Cirta with his Wife Sophonisba, who had been promised to Massinissa. This Woman a little after having per∣swaded Syphax to favour Carthage, of which she was against the Romans; drew their Arms into his Estate, where Scipio defeated and took Syphax Pri∣soner, Massinissa besieged, and took Cirta where Sophonisba was; who had so many attractions, and so much cunning, that in the same day she beheld her self Captive and Wife to Massinissa: But she killed her self soon after, that she might not fall into the Romans hands, and be led in Triumph through Rome. 6. Stora: and, 7. Mabra, both Maritim Towns.
The Kingdom of TUNIS. The Kingdom of Tunis, and its division Into Govern∣ments.THE Kingdom of TƲNIS, besides its particular Province, hath some∣times extended it self over Constantina and Bugia on one side, and over Tripoli and Ezzab on the other. At present it hath only its own Province, and something in Billedulgerid. This Kingdom of Tunis is divided into 4 Maritim Governments, and 3 or 4 Inland ones. The Maritim are, Biserta, Goletta, Sousa, and Africa; Begge, Ʋrbs, Cayroan, and part of Billedulgerid, are the third or fourth within Land. Altogether extend themselves from the River Guad il Barbar, unto that of Capes: this separating them from the Kingdom of Tripoli, the other from the Province of Constantina. The chief Ri∣vers of Tunis.The River Guad il Barbar, or Hued il Barbar, takes its source near Ʋrbs, which it waters with a Channel made on purpose, and discharges it self into the Sea near Tabarca. In its course it makes so many turnings and windings, that it must be passed 25 times in the Road between Bona and Tunis, and that with much difficulty and danger, there being no Bridges, and scarce any Boats to Ferry over. The River Capes, of old Triton, descends from Billedulgerid, and waters at first a very Sandy Country, leaves Capes on the Right, and on the Coast of Tripoli, and disburthens it self into the Little Syrtes, now the Gulph of Capes. Magrada, another River, hath its Spring likewise in Bille∣dulgerid on the Confines of Zeb, which it waters in part, washes Tebessa of the Province of Constantina, cuts the Kingdom of Tunis into two almost equal parts, and disburthens it self in the Sea near Garilmesse, between Tunis and Hammamet. Its increases are sometimes extraordinary, and all of a sudden, so that Travellers are often forced to wait some days for a passage. The Govern∣ment or City of Benserta.BENSERTA, of old Ʋtica, is a City but of an indifferent greatness, but strong, and peopled with about 6000 Families. It looks Eastward on a Gulph so called, which is about 16000 Paces long, and 8000 broad. Here is a fair Burse or Exchange for Merchants; two great Prisons for their Slaves, and some Bastions to defend the Port, which is good and large. This place is famous for the death of Cato, sirnamed Ʋticensis, who for fear of falling into the hands of Caesar, here slew himself; and is of note in the Carthaginian Wars. The Govern∣ment or City of Goletta.The Government of GOLETTA is much esteemed, because of the neighbouring Carthage; or rather, because of Tunis, whose Key it is. It is a Fortress built in the neck of the Gulph between Tunis and the Sea, by which all must necessarily pass: And it hath given occasion to build a Fort on the top of a Hill, whose foot is washed by the Sea. There was heretofore the old Fort, and the now; the Old was only an intrenched Bastion, guarded by 30 or 40 Janizaries; the New is great, well fortified and furnished with all things ne∣cessary. A Fountain of Running-water crosses the place, so that it seems ra∣ther a City than a Fortress. Charles the Fifth took this Fort in 1535, which the Turks retook in 1574. Under this Fort was it, that General Blake with the English Fleet,The City of Tunis. fired the Pirate Ships of Tunis in 1654. Tunis, at the bottom of this Gulph, is at present one of the fairest Cities of Barbary; it counts 8 Gates, 8 chief Streets, which are crossed by abundance of others, 10 Places or Markets, more than 300 Temples and Synagogues of the Jews, and many Oratories, some likewise for the Christians; 150 Bania's or Hot-Houses; 86 Schools; 9 Colledges, where Youth is nourished and instructed at the publick expence; 64 Hospitals, and a great number of Canes or Inus for Merchants and Christians, &c. The Buildings of the Royal Palace are magnificent; it had long since 10000 Houses, and is much increased since the Moors of Grana∣da were driven out of Spain. Among its Inhabitants are many Merchants, Apothecaries, Druggists, Confectioners, Cooks, Bakers, Butchers, and above all, Drapers and Weavers, &c. Their common Bread is kneaded with Oil, of
which they have abundance, and utter quantity into Egypt. Their Linnen and Manufactures have vent through all Africa: It is a place of great Traffick,Its Trade and Commodities. and much frequented by Merchants of Foreign parts, affording several other good Commodities, as Gold, Saffron, Wax, Oil, raw and salted Hides, variety of Fruits, Wool, Spunges, Hard Soap; they have also a great trade for Horses and Ostrich Feathers, &c. and above all for Christian Slaves. Commodities most vendible here are, English Cloths, Perpetuanoes, Iron, Lead, &c. They have no Water either of Well or of Fountain, (except that which is reserved for the Bassa,) but make use of Cisterns and Rain-water: They are fain to have their Mills turned by their Slaves, or by Oxen. The Arab of Nubia, Sanutus, and some others, esteem Tunis to answer to the Ancient Tarsis. This place (as Heylin noteth) is observable in the History of the Holy Wars, for the Sieges and Successes of two of our English Princes, viz. Edward the First, in his Fathers life time, and Henry the Fourth, then but Earl of Darby; by both of which the City was forced to a composition. But the Ruins of Car∣thage,Tunis received its splendor from the ruins of Carthage. from which Tunis had its increase are remarkable, because of the An∣tiquity, Scituation, Greatness, and Power of this City. The beginning of it is given to Dido, the Phoenician, who inclosed with the Wall the Quarter or Castle of Byrsa, which is two miles and a half in Circuit, which in the Country they still call Bersac, and Byrsa signifying a Hide to the Greeks, and a Fortress to the Phoenicians; the one agrees with the Fable that Dido had bought, and builded the place on the greatness and extent of an Oxes Hide; the other, to the scituation and advantage of the place where this Fortress was built. This Scituation, and the goodness of the neighbouring Port, drew so many People, that it became one of the fairest Cities in the World. Its cir∣cumference in its splendor was 360 Stadia, like to that of Babylon, and its In∣habitants have been so rich and powerful, that they disputed with the Romans for the Empire of the World, being once called the Lady and Mistress of Africa. The particular power of this City was not known till the third and last Punick War; when after having had to do with Massinissa, to whom they yielded a good part of their Estates, after having granted and put into the Romans hands their Ships of War, their Elephants, their Arms, and their Hostages, which were demanded: when they commanded them to leave the City, and to inhabit from the Sea-Coast, despair made them resolve on the War. They made other Arms, built new Ships, the Women and Virgins giving their Hair to make Cables and Cordage, and defended themselves yet 3 or 4 years. It was afterwards restored, and at divers times; but the Vandals, and in the end the Arabs, have wholly ruined it, there not remaining above 7 or 800 Houses of Fishermen, Gardiners, &c. The Govern∣ment of Soussa its Cities, People, &c.The Government of SOƲSA contains the Cities of 1. Hammametha, which communicates its name to the neighbouring Gulph, at the bottom whereof it is scituated; its Walls are strong, and its Harbour safe. 2. Susa is in a higher and lower City; the former on a Rock, and of difficult access; the last on the Sea, with a good Port, where are laded great quantities of Oils. both the one and the other well built. The Duke of Savoy made an enter∣prize on them in 1619. 3. Monastero, so called, because there was once a fa∣mous Monastery of the Order of St. Augustine. The Riches about Susa is in Olives, Pears, and other Fruits and Pastures for Cattle. The ordinary Food for the Inhabitants is Barly-bread, the Country affording no other Grain. The Inhabitants of Susa and Hammametha addict themselves to Traffick, others to Whitning of Cloth; they make Charcoal, and draw some profit from their Fishing. The Govern∣ment or City of Africa, or El-Madia.The Government of AFRICA, or EL-MADIA, hath nothing conside∣rable; but this place may be made far better than it is. Its scituation is in a Peninsula, which touches not the Main but by an Isthmus of 2 or 300 Paces, where there is likewise some Marsh; and on this side the City is invested with a double Wall and good Ditches. Its Port within the City is capable to lodge 50 Gallies; but its entrance is so narrow, that a Galley is forced to lift up its Oars to pass.
The Coasts about Sousa and Elmedia, and what Transactions hapned there.The Coasts about Susa and Elmedia have been well known in the Roman. History, in the time of the Wars between Caesar and the Party of Pompey. Caesar landed at Rhuspina, now Susa, Adrumetum, now Hammametha, being in the Enemies hands; and in the beginning had divers little favourable en∣counters thereabout. In the end he happily defeated both Scipio and Juba, near to Thapsus, now Elmedia; and after that defeat, Cato despairing slew himself at Ʋtica, now Benserta: Scipio saved himself in some Ships; but being met by Caesars Fleet, passing his Sword through his Body, he precipitated himself into the Sea. Juba would have retired to Zama, where he had left his Wives, Children, and Treasures; but Zama having refused to open him the Gates. He and Petrejus retired into a House in the Fields, where they killed themselves. During this War, and almost upon the landing of Caesar, hapned near Hammametha a thing incredible, which was, that 30 Gaul-Horsmen assaulted a Post of 2000 Moorish Horse, put them to rout, and pursued them into the City. For Zama, or Zama Regia, it is far distant from the position which Pto∣lomy gives it, and from that of Ortelius, which we at other times, and which all others have since followed. This Author places it 500000 Paces from Car∣thage, and 600000 from Adrumetum; but it appears both by the Roman Hi∣story, and by the Itinerary Table, not to be distant from Carthage above 100, or 120000 Paces, and from Adrumetum 100000 Paces, or little more. The Govern∣ments or Ci∣ties of Bigge and urbs.BEGGE or Beija, and ƲRBS; this in the Road from Tebessa to Tunu, that in the way from Constantina to Tunis; are both seated in fair Plains, so fertil in Grains, particularly Begge; that those of Tunis say, that if they had two Begges, they would yield as many Corns as there is Sand in the Sea; and nigh to Ʋrbs is Camud, Arbes, Musti, and Marmagen; all fair Cities. The Govern∣ment or City of Cayroan.CAYROAN, of old, Thesdrus, ought as it seems to be among the Maritim Governments, since it holds on the Coast Tobulha, Asfachusa, and some other places; but its principal place being on the main Land, its Government is like∣wise esteemed to be within the Land. This City is seated in a Sandy-plain, which affords neither Grain, Fruit, nor scarce any Water but what is preserved in Cisterns; it is about 100 miles from Tunis, and about 36 from any part of the Sea. It was first built by Hucha, who was the first that conquered Africk for the Saracens; who adorned it with a stately Mosque, supported on Pillars of Marble, of which two or three are very fair ones, and of a prodigious greatness, who also placed in it a Colledge of Priests, and now in much esteem, being the residence of a High Priest of the Law of Mahomet: and to this place (from all parts of the Country) the Corps of their chief Men are brought to be interred; who believe, that by the Prayers of those Priests, they shall find a shorter way to Heaven, than if interred at any other place. Its Inhabitants are now reduced to about 4 or 500 Families. Not far from Cayroan,Mountains of Zaghoan and Gueslet, are the Mountains of Zaghoan and Gueslet, the last not above 12000 Paces distant; both the one and the other have divers foot-steps of Roman Buildings. But I believe it was from the last that Scipio considered the Battel between Massinissa King of Numidia, and Asdrubal chief of the Carthaginians; and of this encounter Scipio would sometimes say to his Friends, That he was the third who had had the pleasure to see a famous Battel, without having run any resigoe; to wit, Jupiter from the top of Mount Ida, and Neptune from some eminence in the Isle of Samothrace, who beheld the Battels between the Trojans and Greeks; and himself this between Massiniss and the Carthaginians. The other Cities of this Kingdom of Tunis, and to∣wards Billedulgerid, are Caffa, Hama, Techios, Neifa, and Nafta.
The Kingdom of TRIPOLI. Kingdom of Tripoli.THE Kingdom of TRIPOLI takes up the just moiety of the Coast of Barbary from Capes unto Egypt, and divides it self into two prin∣cipal parts or Provinces, which bear likewise the Title of Kingdoms, to wit, Tripoli and Barca. Tripoli is between the two Syrtes, now the Sands or Banks of Barbary. These are Gulphs of different greatness, but of the same nature; infamous for the Shipwreck of Vessels lost on their Flats or Rocks: among which the depth of the Water is very unequal, and changes often, there being sometimes much, sometimes a little, and sometimes none at all. The Little Syrtes, now the Gulph of Capes, separates Tripoli from Tunis: The Great Syrtes, now the Gulph of Sydra, divides it from Barca; this to∣wards the East, the other towards the West, and on the South it is bounded with Billidulgerid, and on the North with the Mediterranean Sea. Its prin∣cipal Cities are El-Hamma, Capes, Zoara, the two Tripolies, Old and New, Sarmana, Lepeda, &c. 1. El-Hamma is in the Land,Its chief pla∣ces and peo∣ple.Capes and the rest on the Sea; between El-Hamma and Capes is a Lake excellent against Leprosie. 2. Capes of Old Tacapa hath good Walls, and a good Castle; but its Port dange∣rous, and incapable to receive either many or great Vessels; it is scituate at the fall of the River Triton into the Lesser Syrtes. 3. Zoara, of old Pisida, between Capes and Tripoli, hath its Land so dry, that the Inhabitants are forced to water it, and yet will scarce produce any thing save Barley and some Fruits; among which, Lotos, with which they make an excellent Metheglin, but it lasts good not above 9 or 10 days. Flesh is here very scarce, they not having wherewith to feed Beasts. The Arabs frequent their Markets, and serve them with Wools, wherewith they make Cloaths and other Manufactures. 4. Tripoli the Old, of old Sabrata, and which the Arab of Nubia calls the Tower of Sabrat, hath only some Hamlets, and Remnants of fair and stately Edifices. 5. The New Tripoli, of Old Oea, is better maintained,Tripoli, and the Trade thereof. though it hath many Ruins, by reason of the divers changes it hath had. The disposi∣tion of its places, Streets, and the order of its Buildings is agreeable, being a∣dorned with many fair Mosques, Colledges, Hospitals, &c. The Inhabitants subsisted only on their Commerce, which is of what they got from their Palm-Trees, Lotos, and Linnen-Cloth, which they uttered in Africa, Sicily, and Malta; besides their black and Ethiopian Slaves, which they sold; till of late they have much enriched themselves by Piracy, it being the usual retreat for Pirates, who infest these Seas, and do much mischief to Christian Mer∣chants on the Coasts of Italy, Sicily, and elsewhere. 6. Lepeda is in some repute, as it was in the time of the Arab of Nubia, and more under the Ro∣mans: Farther is the Great Syrtes, at the bottom of which is the Isle Sydra, which communicates its name to the Gulph; and on the Firm Land are the Tombs of Philenes or Arae Philenarum, which set the Limits between Africa and Libya; and afterwards between the Estates of the Carthaginians and the Cyrenians; and in fine, of the Eastern Empire against that of the West: And, 7. Sebeicum, a City near the Sea-shoar, nigh to which are three small Isles. Along the Coast are some Isles, among which that of Gerbes is well known;The Isle of Gerbes descri∣bed. formerly it was joyned to the Firm Land by a Bridge. It had two Cities; now hath nothing but one Castle worth notice, and many Hamlets which gather little Corn, but much Fruits; among the rest Lotos, so sweet and pleasant, that the Companions of Ʋlysses having tasted them, sought no longer to go into their Country. This Isle hath about 18000 Paces circuit, yields one of the greatest Revenues to the King or Bassa of Tripoli, by reason of the confluence of Merchants, who fetch thence Cloth and divers Scuffs, and carry them to Alexandria in Egypt, &c. one of the principal parts of the Revenue of the same Bassa, is the Saffron of the Mountain of Garian, which is on the South of Tripoli: And this Saffron is found the fairest, and the best of all others.
BARCA. Barca, on the Coasts of Bar∣bary described.THE rest of the Coast of Barbary, is now known under the name of BARCA; it is bounded on the East with Egypt, on the South with the Desart of Nubia, on the West with Tripoli, and on the North with the Mediterranean Sea, which is also some of its Western bounds. The Ancients called it particularly Libya, comprehending that which is farther in the Land, and which we call the Desart of Barca, and divided this Libya into the Cyrenaick, the Marmarick, and Libya Exteriour. This last being the nearest to Egypt; the Cyrenaick to Tripoli; and the Marmarick resting for the middle. Likewise the most Northern and Maritim part of the Cyre∣naick, hath passed under the name of Pentapolis, because it had five fair Cities; to wit, 1. Bernichum. 2. Torochara. 3. Ptolemais, now Ptolometa: and 4. Boni-Andreas; and these four are on the Sea; the fifth, Cayroan, within Land. This, by much the most famous, was a Colony of the Lace∣demonians, and hath yielded Learned Men: Its scituation is on an eminence that discovers the Sea; and its Campaign, as of those other Cities, is moist∣ned by divers Waters; and their Soil so fruitful, that some have esteemed the Hesperian Gardens with their Golden Apples about Berenice. Its other chief Towns and Cities are, 1. Barca, an Inland City of some account. 2. Melela. 3. Careora. 4. Camera. 5. Zunara. 6. Avium: and 7. Sa∣line. All Maritim Towns and Cities, and of some account. Battus gave the first beginning to Cyrene, and he and his Successors reigned near 200 years; after which the City was sometimes in Liberty, and sometimes under Tyrannism: Among which Nicocrates having put to death Phaedimus, Husband of Aretaphila, to espouse her; she endured him some∣time her Husband, and that until she had occasion to gain the Brother of Nicocrates, named Leander; to whom she gave her Daughter in marriage, and by his means rid her self of Nicocrates, and soon after (by the means of her Daughter) of Leander also, and so set the City at liberty; which en∣dured till the time of Alexander the Great, when the Country fell to the Ptolomies, Kings of Egypt; afterwards, to the Romans, to the Soldans of Egypt, and to the Turks; having almost always followed the For∣tune famous of this Quarter, and hath given its name to the Kingdom. The Arab of Nubia makes much account of it in his time, and lays out divers ways, and gives the distances from this place to others farther in the Desart. Moreover this quarter of five Cities is called by some Mesrata, and its Inha∣bitants esteemed rich.The fertility of the Coun∣try, its Trade and Commo∣dities. They trade both with the Europeans, Negroes and Abissines, fetch from them Gold, Ivory, Civet, Musk, and Slaves, which they transport into Europe, besides their Native Commodities; and bringing from Europe, Corn, Linnen, Woolen Cloth, &c. which they carry to the Ne∣groes, Abissines, and elsewhere. Its other chief places in the Kingdom of Barca are, 1. Doera. 2. Forcella. 3. Salinae. 4. Luchun. 5. Solana. 6. Muso∣lomarus. 7. Cartum. 8. Albertonus. 9. Roxa. 10. Raibba; and, 11. Ripae∣alba. All Maritim Towns and Cities; and most of which having good and commodious Roads, Ports, and Havens, and well frequented and inha∣bited. Between Cayroan and Alexandria, there is on the Coast the Port of Alber∣ton Paraetonium, which is considerable both for its goodness and greatness: And sometimes the Ancients have called it Ammonia, because from hence was a way to the Temple of Jupiter Hammon. This Temple hath been very famous among the Pagans. Bacchus returning from Asia, which he had overcome, caused it to be built in honour of his Father, who under the shape of a Ram had shewed him, as he passed with his Army, where to find Water in those Desarts; and he first consulted the Oracle, and put it in such
repute, that divers other Heroes afterwards consulted it. Perseus, when he was sent to fetch the Head of Medusa, the Gorgon: Hercules going from Mauritania, where he had overcome Antaeus, towards Egypt, where he was to defeat Busiris. Alexander the Great, to make it believed he was likewise the Son of Jupiter, and that the Empire of the World was destin'd to him. But Cambyses, the Son of Cyrus, having a design to pillage this Temple, beheld his Army perish in these Desarts, and was saved himself only to see his own madness, and to die unhappily by his own Weapon. About this Temple there are some Springs of Running water, and some Trees, which makes this quarter pleasant. Among these Waters, that which they called the Fountain of the Sun, had this particular quality, that it was very hot at Midnight, and very cold at Noon-day; the cold in∣creasing from Morning till Noon, and diminishing until Evening; and from thence the heat increasing till Midnight, and diminishing until the Morning. There were three several ways which they used ordinarily to go to this Oracle: the shortest was by Alberton, which (as we have said) was upon the Coast, and from whence it was but 1300 Stadia, which are about 162000 Paces. Another way was from Cayroan; from whence it was 3000 Stadia, or 375000 Paces. 'Pliny saith, 400000; the difference is 25000 Paces. The longest way was from Memphis, from whence it was 3600 Stadia, or 450000 Paces. These are 180 Leagues for this last, 150, or little more, for the second, and 65 for the first. All these ways are very difficult, the Country being only Desarts of Sands; so dry, that the Wind moves them like the dust of the High-way, and that in so great a quantity, that they are able to interr Carravans. And if there be any Habitations in these Desarts, and where there is any Springs of Water, they are distant one from the other 40, 50, 60, sometimes a 100 Leagues; and these Habitations have little or nothing, since that of Hammon, the most considerable, is not above 80 Stadia, or 4 Leagues circuit; and yet it had a King, a Great Priest, &c. The Desart of Barca, with its chief Places and People described.In the Desart of BARCA there are some Parts peopled and frequented amongst those vast and floating Sands; as, 1. Angela, where there are three Cities, and many Villages; and their People have a great power against the Serpents, and therefore may answer to the Ancient Billi, (if the South-wind have not buried these in the Sand, for resolving to make up∣on him, because he had dried up all their Waters,) 2. Serta, which hath been once a great City, but at present reduced to Ruins. 3. Alquechet, which hath three Cities, and some Villages; and possibly Elchochat or Eleocath, is the same; or if they be two, they answer to the ancient Oasis Magna, and Oasis Parva. Its other chief places are, Sabia, Ernet, Couzza, Ascor, Angela, Ebaida, Gorham, and Ammon, spoken of be∣fore. Among these Desarts are many Arabs, of which some are powerful in Horse and Foot, and will not suffer any Cities, except of some Africans, which pay them Tribute. The People of Barbary.At present the People of these Desarts are in part Africans or Bereberes, part Arabs, and all extreamly barbarous. And since we are faln on these People, and that we have here the occasion, let us say, That Barbary, Bille∣dulgerid, and likewise Znaxa, and part of Nubia, are for the most part inhabited by these two sorts of People. The Africans and Bereberes are, the Natural Inhabitants of the Country, or at least have been long seated there. They are divided into five principal Races, to wit, of Zanhagia, Musmuda, Zeneta, Haora, and Gumera: And these five Races are sub∣divided into more than six hundred Branches or numerous Lines, which distinguish themselves very well the one from the other, being very curious to keep the Antiquity of their Race, and to know from what People they are descended.
The Race of the Arabs which inhabit in Barbary.The Arabs passed into Africa in the year of Grace 999, or the 400 of the Aera of Mahomet: and there was but three Races which passed, viz. those of Esquequin and Hilel, coming from Arabia Deserta, and that of Maquil from Arabia the Happy, they might make together 50000 Fighting men; but they so multiplied afterwards, that the Race of Esquequin hath eight or nine principal Lines, under which are many Branches, which they call Heyles or Cob-Heyles, that is, Assemblies, and live by Aavares, which are like Boroughs, of 100, 150, or 200 Tents, which they carry along with them, and dispose as they think fit; they may make together about 40000 Horse, and 400000 Foot, in 1200 Advares. The Race of Hilel is divided into 11 Lines, these Lines into many Branches, and may make 30000 Horse, and 150000 Foot. The Race of Maquil hath 23 First or Second Lines, and may raise about 30000 Horse and 400000 Foot; which are for the three Races 100000 Horse, and near a Million of Foot. We cannot find how many Advares or Communalties are in the two last Races. And these Arabs are on all Coasts among the Bereberes; yet so, that they have their Habitations distinct the one from the other, some in one quarter, some in another of the same Province. And it is to be observed, that there are Bereberes and Arabs still in the Cities, and others still in the Field; but these are accounted the most Noble, because the freest, often reaping the Harvest of their Neighbours labour.
BILLE∣DULGE∣RID, with its several Kingdoms, Parts, or Provinces, which may be consider∣ed as they lie Southwards of MOROCCO, as The Kingdom of SUS, or TESSET, with its Quar∣ters and Ci∣ties of Ydausquerit, Extues, Nun, Tesset, Guadenum, Istena, Archa, Ydausquerit, Simotamat, Ydiausan. Ydunadaf. Mereit, Deudyzdud, Yduquinsus. Arabala, Aragati, Ynduzel, Denseniz, Tizitit, Aytiacoli, Buleza, Tesset, Suana, Ydaubagul, Deursumugt, Monasterium, Ausulima, Buaadora, Nun, Albene, Utemila, Intrena Castra. The Kingdom of DARHA, with its Cities of Taragalel, Benisabih, Quitera, Temesguit, Tagumadert, Timesguit, Darba, Tabarnost, Timulin, Tamegurut, Tesut, Afra. Southwards of FEZ and ALGIER, as The Kingdom of SEGELOMESSE, with its Estates and Cities of Gastrium, Segellomesse, Tamaracrostum, Zebbelum, Chasaira, Manunna, Mazaligum, Abuhinanum, Feghiga Castra, Melelum, Tebelbotta Castra, Humeledegum, Vnaelhefenum, Tebubassatum, Sugailfilum. Southwards of ALGIER, and TUNIS, as The Quarter of TEGORARIN, with its Parts of TEGORARIN, Tegorarin, Tegdeat. Calamati. TESSEBIT, Tessebit, Tuat, Teguat, Benigorait. The Quarter of ZEB, with its Estates of ZEB, Peschata, Borgium, Dusena, Teolacha, Nesta, MEZZAB, Macaza. Mezzab. Deuser. TECHORT, Techort, Neau, Statio. GUERGUELA, Guargals, Statio, Statio. Southwards of TRIPOLI, as The Quarter of BILLEDUL∣GERID, with its Parts of BILLEDULGERID, par∣ticularly so called, Tensar, Caphesa, Nesiioa, Chalbiza, Clemena, Neszara. GADEMES, Gademes, Statio, Stat, Stat. FEZZEN, Fezzen, Samela, Nati Morti. JASLITEN, — Jasliten. TEORREGU, Teorregu, Masta, Statio, Tega, Stat, Serai Mons, Stat.
BILLEDULGERID. Billedulgerid, its Bounds and Parts.BILLEDƲLGERID is very improperly called Numidia by the Mo∣dern Authors: Numidia having been upon the Mediterranean Sea, which Billedulgerid touches not at all. Its confines are on the North of Barbary, from whence it is separated by Mount Atlas, on the South Zaara, on the West the great Ocean Sea, and on the East Egypt. Its principal Parts, King∣doms or Provinces, are, Sus or Tesset, Darha, Segelomesse, Tegorarin, Zeb, Billedulgerid, and the Desart of Barca, which stretch themselves from the Ocean unto Egypt. And this length is of 1000 or 1200 Leagues, its breadth being for the most part not above 100, or little more, from which they have what is needful for them.Its People. The Air is healthful, they live long, are deformed, are held base People, ignorant of all things, are addicted to Theft, murther, are very deceitful, they feed grosly, and are great Hunters. They acknowledge Mahomet for their Prophet, whose Principles of Religion they observe, though they differ in many Ceremonies; their Garments are but mean, and so short, that not above half their body is covered with them; the better sort are di∣stinguished by a Jacket of blew Cotton, which is made with wide Sleeves. They make use of Camels, as we do of Horses. Among them are many A∣rabs, which live by Advares, that is, Communalties, each of 100, 150, or 200 Tents, which they transport whither they please, that is, where they find best feeding for their Cattle; and when they stop, they dispose their Tents in a circle, making therein divers Streets and common places; and leaving some inlets and outlets, which are shut up and guarded like a City. These Arabs esteem themselves the most noble of all, calling those which till the Earth and prune Vineyards, Servants; and those which abide in Cities, Courtiers, and Effeminate: And these Arabs are esteemed more civil and ingenious than the Numidians are. The Kingdom of Sus, and its parts.SƲS, which Sanutus passes under the name of TESSET, and which is called the farthest Sus, to distinguish it from that of the Kingdom of Morocco, is the most Western part of Billedulgerid: It may be divided into seven Quarters, of which Ydausquerit, Extuca, and Nun, are on the Sea; Tesset, Guadenum, Ifrena or Ʋfaran, and Archa within the Land. Each of these parts have many Cities,Its chief pla∣ces, and its fertility. Castles, and Villages; and the most part of its People are Bereberes, Africans, or Arabs. 1. Ydausquerit is the best Quarter, and the most fruitful, yields Fruits sweet and sowr, as Oranges, Citrons, &c. Also Wheat, Barley, &c. Feeds much Cattle, among others multitudes of Horses; can raise 5000 Horse, and 30000 Foot: They are held the best Souldiers in all Billedulgerid, and almost of all Africa. 2. Extuca is proper only for Pa∣stures, abounds in Goats. 3. Nun hath but little Barley, and few Dates. 4. Tesset is a Town of about 400 Houses, hath some trade with the Negroes. The Inhabitants of Guadenum live of Goats Milk, by Hunting, and of Dates; and the Country hath Ostriches. Those of Ifrena trade with the Portugals at Guarguessen, and those of Archa hath only Dates. And in these seven Quarters there are several other Towns and Cities, as Buzedora, Ʋtemila, Albene, Ausulima, Buleza, and Suana, all Maritim places, opposite, and not far from the Canary Isles.
The Kingdom of Darha, and its chief pla∣ces.DARHA is on the East of Tesset and Morocco: It is divided commonly into three parts, of which the chief retains the name of Dara; the other are, Taffilet and Ytata, which pass likewise under the name of Taffilet. All these parts have been divers times under the Dominion of the Xeriffs of Fez and Morocco. Darha is about a River of the same name; and where the River doth overflow it, it is indifferent fruitful. Among its chief Cities are, 1. Be∣msabih. 2. Quitera, Tagumadert, from whence came the Xeriffs of Fez and Morocco. 3. Taragalel, of 4000 Houses, and a Jewry of 400. 4. Tinzulin, the most spacious of all. 5. Timesguit, of 2000 Families: And, 6. Tesuf, once the Royal City of all these Quarters, now in Ruins. The Kingdom of Taffilet, with its chief pla∣ces.TAFFILET hath born the Title of a Kingdom, as well as Dara; and its chief City of the same name hath more than 2000 Families of Bereberes. To this place (as Heylin observeth) did Mahomet the Second, Son of Mahomet Ben Amet, and second King of Morocco, of this Family, confine his eldest Brother Amet, having took him Prisoner in Anno Dom. 1544. Ytata is for the most part esteemed under Taffilet, though near upon as great. The Land be∣longing to the one and the other, are harsh and Mountainous, and scituated be∣tween Dara and Segelomessa: Taffilet toward Morocco, from whence it is sepa∣rated from Mount Atlas: Ytata towards the Saara or Desart, where is that of Zuenziga. The Kingdom of Segelomessa described.SEGELOMESSA is one of the greatest and best Provinces or King∣doms of all Billedulgerid. Its chief City bears the same name, is made fa∣mous by the Arab of Nubia: It hath been ruined and rebuilded within 100 and odd years; it is seated in a Plain, and on the River Ziz: Where, and on those of Ghir, Tagda, and Farcala, are likewise some other Cities; more than 300 walled Boroughs, and a great number of Villages. The Rivers over∣flow, and make fertil the Country, as doth the Nile in Egypt. The Inhabi∣tants may raise about 120000 Men to bear Arms: they have sometimes been subject to their Lords, sometimes to the Kings of Fez and Morocco; now are partly divided into Lines and Communalties, and partly subject to the Arabs. Several small Estates in and about Segelo∣messa.Under the name of Segelomessa we will pass with Sanutus 12 or 15 little Estates, which have but few Cities or walled Towns, and some Villages; Poor, and almost all subject to the Arabs. QƲENEG hath 3 Cities, of which Zeb∣bellinum the chief, is on a very high Rock, and holds the passage of Segelo∣messa to Fez by Mount Atlas. Gastrirum, another City, is on the side of a Mountain. Tamaracostum is on a Plain. Besides these Cities there are about 12 Towns, and twice as many Villages. They have sometimes aided the Xe∣riffs of Fez and Morocco with 8000 Men. Helel is the principal of its quarter, and the residence of the Lord of Malgara. Manunna the chief of Rheteb, is peopled with Moors and Jews, all Merchants and Artizans. These places are on the Ziz, descending from the Atlas towards Segelomessa. Suhail, Humelede∣gi, and Ʋmmelhefen make each their Estate apart. The last is on the way from Segelomessa to Dara. The Land is quite Desart, covered with Sand and black Stones. TEBELBETTA hath 3 Cities, 12 Villages: FARCALA, 3 Cities, 5 Villages: TEZERIN, 5 Cities, 15 Villages: BENIGOMIA, 8 Cities, 15 Villages; the Cities Mazalig, Abuhinanum, and Chasaira, make each their Estate: BENIBESSERI, GƲACHDA, and FEGHIGA have each 3 Cities, and some Villages. Those of Feghiga addict themselves to Traffick and Let∣ters; gather quantity of Dates, as doth likewise Guachda: An excellent Mine of Iron employs those of BENIBESSERI, in carrying it to Segelomessa: A rich Mine of Lead, and another of Antimony, yields profit to those of Cha∣sair, who carry them to Fez: the others bear only Dates, and their Inhabi∣tants are oppressed by the Arabs, who rule over them. Togda, besides its La∣bourers of the Land, hath some Tanners of Leather, and the Soil yields Grains and Fuits. I have made Tegorarin and Zeb the 4th and 5th Parts of Billedulgerid, taken in general. Under the name of Tegorarin I shall comprehend Tesebit and Benigorait; under that of Zeb I comprehend Mezzab, Techort or Te∣chortina, and Guergela.
Quarter of Tegorarin de∣scribed.TEGORARIN hath more than 50 Cities or walled Towns, and 100 or 150 Villages; the chief of which are, Tegorarin, Tuat, and Tegdeat. The Country is abundant in Dates, yields Corn when watered; feeds no Cattle, except it be a few Goats for their Milk. Its People addict themselves to Trade, fetch Gold from the Negroes, which they carry into Barbary, and bring from thence several Commodities to carry to the Negroes: Receiving Strangers with delight, and letting nothing be lost that they can leave with them to en∣rich their Country. Tesebit or Tesevin hath 4 Cities, 28 Villages; the most part of the Men are black, the Women only brown and comly. All poor, as likewise in the Desart of Benigorait. Province of Zeb, and its chief places.The Province of ZEB is more to the East than Tegorarin, it touches the Kingdom and Province of Algier and Bugia, near Mesila, on the North, is di∣vided from the Regions of Mezzab, Techort, and Guergela, towards the South, by divers Mountains. Its principal Cities are five, Pescara, Borgium, Dusena, Nesta, Teolacha, and Macaxa. One part of these Cities were ruined when the Arabs entred into Africa, a part by Barbarossa; the most part after∣wards resloted. At present the Turks, the Kings of Couco and Labes, and the Arabs, receive some Tribute from them. The Inhabitants of Pescara live in the Fields in the Summer, being constrained to abandon the City by reason of the multitude of Scorpions, whose biting is mortal; as is that of the Black Scorpions, which are towards Calaa in the Kingdom of Labes: yet here the Inhabitants taking but two drams of a little Plant, it cures them though bitten, and preserves them a whole year (saith the Arab of Nubia) from biting. Borghia is well peopled, hath many Artizans and Labourers. The Water which passes at Deusen is hot, as likewise that which passes at Nefta. The In∣habitants of Teolacha are proud and haughty. Quarter of Mezzab, its chief places, &c. described.The Quarter of MEZZAB is to the South of that of Zeb, and is a great passage from divers parts of Barbary to go towards the Land of the Negroes; which makes those of the Country trade on the one, and the other side. They have six walled Towns, and a great number of Villages; are Tributary to some Arabs. The Estates of Techort and Guerguela.The Estates of Techort and Guerguela have each their Prince or King; they have sometimes been free, sometime Subjects or Tributaries to Morocco, Telen∣sin, Tunis, and in fine to the Kings of Algier, to whom they give a certain number of Negroes in form of Tribute. Each Estate takes its name from its chief City; besides which they have each of them many walled Towns, and about 100 or 150 Villages, and about 150000 Duckats of Revenue: They can raise 40 or 50000 Men, but they are but bad Souldiers. Techort, though on the top of a Mountain, and having 2500 Houses, was yet taken by the Turks of Algier with a very few people and 3 Pieces of Cannon. They have abundance of Dates, from whence flows their Riches; they want Corn and Fish, they treat Christians favourably, and are more civil than their Neighbours. Quarter of Billedulgerid, with its parts and chief pla∣ces.BILLEDƲLGERID, or BELED-ELGERED, that is, the Country of Dates, is a particular Province of Billedulgerid taken in general. This Pro∣vince is above the Coast of Tripoli, and we add the Quarters of Teorregu, Jasliten, Gademez, and Fezzen. The particular Billedulgerid is so rich in Dates, that it takes thence its name, and hath communicated it to the neigh∣bouring Countries, and to all that part which is above Barbary. Its principal Cities are Tensar, Caphsa, and Nefsaoa, and a great number of Villages, Teor∣regu hath 3 walled Towns and 26 Villages, of which the chief bears the name of Teorregu. Jasliten 3 or 4 Towns, and 30 Villages, and the chief so called. Gademez hath 16 walled Towns, and about 60 Villages, the chief of which are Gademes and Statio. Fezzen more than 50 Cities or walled Towns, and above 100 Villages. The two last Estates are free, the other subject to the Turks, or to the Kings of Tunis and Tripoli. Caphsa, of old, Capha, which is believed to be built by the Libyan Hercules, is put by some among the Governments of Tunis.
EGYPT may be di∣vided into three Parts, and then The first shall contain the Twelve Cassi∣lifs or Govern∣ments within EGYPT; as In the Higher EGYPT, the Cassilifs of GIRGIO, Asna, Barbanda, Girgio, id, Chiana, MANFEOUT, Mao, Aotha. AEBENSUEF, Fium, Mni, Benisuaifa. MINIO, Assuana, Chana, Minio, Ichmina. CHERKFFI, Almona, Paulicella; Anthium. FIUM, Fium, Cosora. GIZA, — Gez. CAIRO, Cairo, Sues, Elmena, Larnabula, Antli, Emelcocena. In the Lower EGYPT, the Cassilifs of MANSOURA, Heroa, Mansoura, Belbesa, Sahidum, Berlies, Mesela, Elboera, Teexa, Faramida, Cassia. GARBIA, Damiata, Petra, Bourles, Beltina, Mig, Eliala, Demanohoura. MENUFIA, — Menufia. BASBEIH, or CALIOUBIEH, with the Territory of ERRIF, or ALEXANDRIA, Tureta, Zuga, Euo, Sebennets, Alexandria, Turis, Bochira, Arabum, Rosetto, Atacona, Tunia, Turamania, Alhaman, Democuria, The Second Part shall contain the Cities seated on the RED SEA; among which are those of Buge, ibid, Sa, Cosur, Ficte, Dacati, Suguam, Libelezaita. Azirut, Grodol. The Third shall be the Cassilif or Government of BONHERA, or BAERA, without the True EGYPT, and in LIBYA, but under its Jurisdiction; whose chief places may be considered as as they lie On the Sea, among which are those of Ripaealba, Roxa, Lagoseium, Albertonus portus, Solona, Musulomara, Trabochus portus, Patriarcha portus, Salinae, Favara, Forcella, Bon Andreas, Doera, Laaneum, Zadra, Tolomea, Taochara, Berzebona, Berichum, Careora, Camera, Avum portus; Salinae. Within Land; as Cayroan, Barca, Solue. Altahune, Nachel, Maghar Alacquin.
EGYPT. OF all the parts of Africa, EGYPT is the nearest, and only con∣tiguous to Asia, and this Neighbourhood hath perswaded some Authors, both Ancient and Modern, to esteem Egypt either in whole, or in part, in Asia. At present we hold it all in Africa, and give for its bounds the Red Sea,Egypt bound∣ed. and the Isthmus which is be∣tween the Red Sea and the Mediterranean, on the East; the Desarts of Bar∣ca on the West, Nubia on the South, and the Mediterranean Sea on the North. The Nile alone washes this Region through its whole length, which is from its Cataracts to the Sea, about 20 Leagues or more; its breadth not being above half so much, and of that breadth, that which is between the Mountains, which incloses the Valley of Nile on the East, and the Coast of the Red Sea, is but Desart; there being nothing inhabited but the Valley, which lies on both sides the Nile, inclosed with Mountains, and very narrow in the higher part of Egypt, but enlarging it self much more as it approaches the Sea. Of this Figure which the Country makes, the Ancients have taken oc∣casion first to divide it into high and low;Its Division and Names. after into high, middle, and low: Higher, which they called Thebais, by reason of Thebes, at present Saida: Middle, which they called Heptanomos, by reason of the 7 Nomi, Provostships or Governments it contained, at present Bechria, or Demesor: Lower, and more particularly Egypt, and sometimes Delta, the best part of the lower having the form of a Greek △, the two sides of which were inclosed by the branches of the Nile, and the third by the Sea, and this part is now called Errif. The Romans changed something in the number, and in the names of these Provinces, which we shall now omit. At present Egypt is divided into 12 principal Cassilifs, Sangiacats or Go∣vernments, of which five answer to the Higher Egypt, viz. Girgio, Manfe∣lout, and Aebensuef, on the left hand of the Nile; Minio and Cherkeffi on the right, still descending the Nile; two, with the Territory of Cairo, answer to the Middle Egypt, viz. the Cassilifs of Fium and Giza on the left, and Cairo with its Territory on the right hand of the Nile: then four others answer to the Lower, viz. Mansoura, Garbia, Menoufia, Callioubech, or Basbieh, with Alexandria and its Territory: for the Cassilif of Bonhera, or Baera, is out of the limits of the ancient and true Egypt, and in Libya, which passes commonly under the name of the Kingdom of Barca. Egypt of great Antiquity.EGYPT is very famous in that they would make us believe, that the first Men were here formed; and as there are yet formed a great number of Crea∣tures, which appears when the Inundation of the Nile diminished; saying, that the Gods, after them the Heroes, and in fine, Men have reigned for almost an incredible number of years. Of these Gods there are three degrees, of which Pan was the most ancient of the eight first, Hercules of the 12 second, and Denis of the  third. They divide the times of their men Kings by Dynasties, that is, Dominations of divers Families; and give so great a number to their Kings, and so great a time to their Reigns, that they must have be∣ginning long before the Creation of the World; and likewise by their account, their Gods and Hero's had reigned before Men the space of 20 or 25000 years: They attribute the foundation of most of their Cities to their Gods, Hero's, and Kings; and these they make, and build many Labyrinths, Pyramids, Obelisques, Colosses, &c. not knowing how to expend their Treasures, or employ their Peo∣ple.
In the History of the Kings of Egypt, one Sesostris or Seostris, subdued all Europe and Asia, if we will believe them. Joseph an Hebrew servant, and after master of the House of Potipher, from the prison, rose to such favour with the King, that he alone had almost the whole Government of the King∣dom, established his brothers in Egypt; and their descendants multiplied so that in the end, the Kings of Egypt became jealous and fearful, lest they should make themselves masters of the Kingdom, another Sesostris subdued Syria, Assyria, Media, the Isles of Cyprus, &c. and was esteemed as much▪ or more then any of his predecessors. Mephres or Memnon it was that dedicated his Statue to the Sun, which it saluted at its rising, and shewed some signe of Joy, so artificial was it made. Busiris treated the Hebrews so ill, that he left him the name of an infamous Tyrant. Cenchres was the Pharaoh who was drown'd in the Red Sea. Proteus gave occasion to say that he turned himself into a Lion, sometimes into a Bull or Dragon, &c. by reason of his different arming his head, or possibly for his different actions. Rempsis had no other care but to keep up riches. Chemnis caused to be built the first and greatest Pyramid, imploying therein three hundred sixty thousand men, for the space of twenty years, of which more anon. Sesac or Sesouchis, armed four hundred thousand Foot, sixty thousand Horse, and One thousand two hundred Chari∣ots against Rehoboam; took and pillaged Jerusalem and its Temple. Boccho∣ris though weak of body, was so prudent, that he gave Laws to the Egyptians. This was he that leagued himself with Hosea against Salmanazar King of the Babylonians. Sevecho or Sebeko reigning in Egypt, Sennacherib King of the Assyrians being come to assault him, an infinite number of Wild Rats, knaw∣ed in one night the Arrows in the Quivers, and the Strings or Cords of the Bows, and the Thongs of the Assyrians Armes, which caused on the morrow both their flight, and overthrow. Necao or Necaus began the Channel be∣tween the Nile, and the Red Sea, passed by the Meridional or Aethiopian Ocean, by the Occidental or Atlantick Ocean, reentred by the streight of Gibraltar, and returned into Egypt, at the end of three years; he van∣quished Josias King of Judea, and was also vanquished by Nebuchodonozar. Apryes happy in his beginnings, was in the end defeated by those of Cyrene in Libya; and saw all Egypt revolt, who chose for their King Amasis, un∣der whose reign there were counted twenty thousand Cities in Egypt, as Pli∣ny saith. Under this Amasis, the Estate fell into the hands of the Persians, after to the Macedonians (Greeks,) and then to the Romans, &c. Among the Kings of Persia who ruled in Egypt, Cambyses was the first and best known; among the Macedonians and Greeks, Alexander the great; after whom the Kings of Egypt took the names of Ptolomies, from the name of him who first bore the title of King after Alexander, but after the Romans had to do with the affairs of Egypt, there was nothing more remarkable of their Hi∣story but Cleopatra; after whom Augustus reduced this Kingdom to a Roman Province: and it remained under the Romans, and under the Emperours of the East, near seven hundred years, till about the year of Grace six hundred and forty, that the Arabs seised it under their Califs, who resided first at Me∣dina, then at Bagdad, Damascus, and sometime at Cairo. The Soldans a∣bolished this Califate in Egypt, and among them the Christians have but too well known one Saladine, who drove them out of a great part of the Holy Land. Among these last Soldans, Campson, Gaurus and Tomombey were esteemed va∣liant, yet were so ill served, that the Turks under their Emperour Selimus, became Masters of Egypt in 1518, and do yet possess it. The Tribute they pay to the Bassa,At present the Port sends a Bassa to command in Egypt, and the 12 Cassilifs or Governours of the Country depend on this Bassa, and are as it were only his Farmers: They give him every year a certain number of Purses, (every Purse of 750. or 760 Lion dollars) some 25, 30, 40, some only 10 or 12, according to the goodness of the Country, or the greatness of their Cassilifs or Governments, some having only 40 or 50 Towns, other 100, 200, 300 and more: besides these Purses for the Bassa, they give to the Tihaja or Haja (who is as it were his Chancellor) and other Officers, about the sixth, or at least the fifth part of what
they give to the Bassa. And for the Prince, or Grand Signior, some pay 6 times more, others ten times more then they give to the Bassa; and besides these Pur∣ses they furnish a certain number of Ardeps, or measures of Grain, Pulse, &c. The constant Profit or Revenue that the Grand Signior drawsrom this King∣dom is 1800000 Zeccheens yearly,The Grand Signiours reve∣nue from Egypt. each Zeccheene is valued at 9 s. sterling, which is 8 millions and 10000 l. sterling, and this Revenue is divided into 3 e∣qual parts, of which one is allotted for the furnishing and accommodating the Annual Pilgrimage to Mecha; the second goes for the payment of the Souldi∣ers and Officers, with other necessary charges for the management of the King∣dom, and the third and last goes clear into his Chequer. The several Cassilifs in Egypt.The Cassilif of Girgio, or of Sait is one of the best and richest; it passed not above 100 years since for a Kingdom, and received its Bassa from the Port. It hath likewise its Dievan, disposes its Cassilifs, or under-Governments, which lie in its extent, the Soyl is fruitful, bears much Corn, and feeds many Cattle. The Cassiliffs of Manfelout, and Benesuef, are not so great but better peopled, and worth little less then that of Girgio. On the other side of the Nile are those of Minio and Cherkeffi. which have as large an extent as the other 3 to∣gether; but are incomparably less as to the goodness, scarce yielding the tenth part of what the others do; so great difference is there in being at the foot, and on the East of a Mountain. These 5 Cassilifs answer to the higher Egypt, or the Thebais of the Ancients; in which are a great many Cities, Walled Towns and Villages, as are generally found throughout all Egypt, as anon I shall have occasion to treat of. Those Cassilifs of Fium and Giza with the Territory of Cairo to the middle. The Cassilifs of Fium and Giza have very good Earth, and which is easily watred by the Nile; it yields store of Grain, Fruits, as Raisins, &c. Flax, Milk, feeds many Cattle, &c. but the Cassilif, or Go∣vernour of the last hath not a free sword, that is, hath not power of life and death as he pleases, as the others have, being out of the course of the Arabs, and too near Cairo, of which a word or two. City of Cairo described.This City of CAIRO hath for a long time been all the Ornament of E∣gypt: It was the Residence of the Sultans, is now of the Bassa, some make it very great, others much less; the first compose it of 4 parts, to witt, Old Cairo, New Cairo, Boulac and Charafat; there being some void places between each; they say that these 4 parts together with their Suburbs may be about 10 or 12 Leagues long, and 7 or 8 broad; nor give they it less then 25 or 30 Leagues Circuit. They count 16 or 18000 Streets, 6000 Mosques, and if the particu∣lar Oratories be comprised above 20000, as also they account about 200000 Houses, among which are divers Bazars or Markets, Canes or Magazines of certain Merchandizes, many Hospitals, and magnificent structures. The Castle is great, strong, and well fortified, scituate on the top of a Rock, which o∣verlooks the City, and discovers the Plain on all sides, even to the loss of sight. The buildings, paintings, and other Ornaments which yet remain, do testify the magnificence of the Soldans. This Castle (as Heylin noteth) for largeness, Walls, and divided into many Courts, in which were stately buildings, but now hath lost much of its glory; being in part destroyed by Selimus; that which now remains, serveth for the Court or habitation of the Bassa. In and about this City, are abundance of delicate Orchards, which are places of great de∣light in which are excellent Fruits, Walks, &c. and nigh to this City, there is a pleasant Lake which is much frequented by the Inhabitants, who for their recreation pass some time daily on this Lake in boates, for their further mutual society, and seeing their friends and acquaintance. Coesar Lambert his description of Cairo.Coesar Lambert of Marsillia in his relations of the year 1627, 28, 29, and 32, saith, that Cairo (separated from the other Cities and Towns) is not so great as Paris, (and if an eye witness of both may be believed he speaks truth) and takes for witnesses some eminent French Gentlemen then at Cairo; who confesses that joyning it to the Cities and Boroughs adjacent, it may with reason be called Grand Cairo; but however he maintains
this to be but almost the shadow of Cairo, as it was 100 and odd years since, so much is the trade diminished, and that according to the report of the people of the Country. He saith likewise that the Castle hath been much greater, and more magnificent then it is at present, and observes several foot∣steps or proud buildings, now of no use; and after all, saith, that this is not strong. Sandys his de∣scription of Cairo.Sandys in his book of Tavels among other remarkable things, makes this description of it, saying, that this great City called Grand Cairo, is inhabited by Moors, Turks, Negroes, Jews, Copties, Greeks and Armenians, who are observed to be the poorest, and yet the most laborious, the civillest and honestest of all others; they are not subject to the Turk, neither do they pay him any Tribute of Children, as other Christians do; and it they happen to be taken in Wars, they are freed from bondage; and this priviledge they gained, by a certain Armenian that foretold the greatness and glory of Maho∣met. Here he saith they hatch▪ Eggs by artificial heat, and that in exceeding great numbers, which they do in this manner. In a narrow entry, on each side are 2 rows of Ovens, one over the other. On the floors of the lower they lay Flax, over those Mats, and upon them Eggs. The floors of the upper Oven, are as roofs to the under, being grated over like kilns, onely having tunnels in the middle, which have covers over them. These gratings are covered with mats, and on them they lay dry and pulverated dung of Camels, &c. three or four inches thick, at the farther and higher sides of these upper Ovens are tren∣ches of Lome, which are about a handful deep, and two handfuls broad,The hatching of Chicken. and in these they burn the aforesaid dung, which yieldeth a gentle heat, without any fire, under the mouths of the upper Ovens are conveyances for the smoak, having round roofs, with vents at the top to open and shut; and thus ly the Eggs in the lower Ovens for the space of eight daies, turning them daily, and looking that the heat be gentle and moderate, then they put out the fire, and put the one half into the upper Ovens, then they shut all close, and let them alone ten daies longer, at which time they become hatched. Sir Henry Blunt his description of this City Cairo.I shall conclude my description of this City, with some observations which Sir Henry Blunt hath observed during his abode there, first, he saith that there are Mosques and Oratories to the number of thirty five thousand, some of which are very stately and magnificent; next he saith there is twenty four thousand noted Streets, besides by-Streets and Lanes, and some of these Streets are about two miles in length, and to all these Streets, at each end, there is a Door which every night is lockt up and kept guarded, by which means tu∣mults, robberies, fire or the like is prevented; and without the City to hinder the Incursions of the Arabs from abroad, there doth also watch every night four Saniacks, with each of them one thousand horsemen, the number of men that do every night guard this City is twenty eight thousand. This City is built, he saith, after the Egyptian manner, high, and of large rough stones, with part of Brick, the Streets are but narrow, but as the Houses decay, they are rebuilt after the Turkish manner, mean, low, and made of Mud and Tim∣ber; yet their Palaces are stately, with spacious Courts, wherein are fair Trees to keep them from the heat of the Sun; also other Courts belonging to their Palaces adjoyning to curious Gardens, wherein are variety of excellent fruits, and watred with Fountains, nor want they any state in their Edifices, which are vast, lofty, and very magnificent. This City notwithstanding its greatness, he saith, is so exceeding populous, that the people pass to and fro, as it were, in throngs; near to this City are Josephs 7 Granaries, now brought to ruines, yet 4 of them are so repaired, as they are made use of to keep the publick Corn. On the South end of this City, he saith, there yet remaineth a round Tower, wherein Pharaohs daughter lived when she found Moses in the River which runs hard by it. South West of Grand Cairo, on the other side of the Nile, about four Leagues distance, stands the three oldest and greatest Pyramides; the Jews af∣firming them to be built by Pharaoh, who was drowned in the Red Sea; the fairest for himself, the next for his Wife, and the least for his only Daugh∣ter. The greatest of the three, and chief of the Worlds Seven Wonders,
is made in form Quardangular, lessening by equal degrees; the Basis of every Square, is 300 paces in length; and so lessening by degrees, ascending by 250 steps, each being about 3 feet high; the Stones are all of a bigness, and hewed four square. And in this, as also in the others, there are several Rooms. There are also about 16 or 18 other Pyramides, but of less note, and not so ancient as these 3 aforesaid are, which I shall pass by. Nigh to this City, in the Plain, is the place where they did inter their dead; in which, they used such art, that the bodies of their dead remain to this day perfect sound; and these we call Mum∣mies. The places where these bodies ly, are about ten fathom under ground in Vaults; either in the Sand, or upon an open stone: The Earth is full of dry Sand, wherein moisture never comes; which together with their art of Embalm∣ing them, doth thus preserve the bodies for some thousand years past. In the brest of these Mummies is set a small Idol, some of one shape, some of another, with Hieroglyphicks on the back side of them. This City of Grand Cairo was formerly of a very great Trade but that which hath now ruined it, as likewise that of Alexandria, is the discovery of the East Indies by the Cape of Good Hope▪ by which, the English Portugals and Hollanders, at present go to these Indies, and bring into the West all those Drugs, Spices, Precious Stones, Pearls, and a thousand other Commodities which came before by Aleppo, or by Egypt; but passing by Cairo, let us come to the other Cassilifs. The Cassilifs in the lower Egypt.In the lower Egypt, are those of Garbia, Menufia, and Callioubech, with∣in the Delta, and between the Branches of the Nile. That of Mansaura, without, and Eastward towards the Holy Land, and Arabia: Likewise with∣out, and Westward of the Nile, is the Cassilif of Bonhera or Baera, which stretches it self from the Nile unto the Cape of Bonandrea. This last Cassilif is almost quite out of Egypt, though within its Government, and the length of its Sea Coast, not less then that of all Egypt along the Nile: But that which is distant from the Nile, is subject to the Arabs, and very Desart; that which is near it is better worth. Its Governor is obliged to Mannel a Callech or Chan∣nel of 100000 paces in length, to carry water from the Nile to Alexandria; and when a new Bassa arrives in Egypt, this Governor hath likewise to furnish him with Horses and Camels for himself, his Train and Baggage, and to defray his charges from Alexandria unto Cairo. But since the Wars with the Veneti∣ans, the Bassa's have generally come round by Land, and not adventured by Sea to Alexandria. Among the Desarts of this Cassilif, those of St. Macaire have had 360 and odd Monasteries: And here is likewise to be seen, a Lake of Mineral Water, which converts into Nitre, the Wood, Bones, or Stones, that are thrown into it. The Cassilifs of Callioubech, Menousia and Garbia, being between the Bran∣ches of the Nile, and out of the course of the Arabs, ought to be esteemed the best in Egypt; and particularly, the last which yields more abundantly Sugar, Rice, Milk, Grains, Oyl, Flax, Herbs, Honey, Fruits, &c. And Maala, one of its principal Cities, which they call the Little Medina, is a place of great devotion with them, where they hold yearly a famous Fair, which the Gover∣nor opens with great pomp, observing many Ceremonies. The Cassilif of Mansoura doth produce the same Commodities, but not in so great a quantity, though of a greater extent then Garbia; but more over it yields Cassia. These four or five Cassilifs take up the whole Coast of Egypt, and of its Government, and on this Coast are the Cities of Alexandria, Rosetto, Damiata, and some others. The City of Alexandria.Alexandria, among the Turks, Scanderia, was built by the command of Alexander the Great, and by him peopled with Greeks, immediately after the conquest of Egypt; and the Moddel traced by the Architect Dinocrates, who for want of other matter, made use of Wheat-flower to mark out the cir∣cuit; which was taken for a good Augury. It was afterwards beautified by many, but especially by Pompey. It is scituated Westward of the Delta, over against the Isle of Pharos, and built upon a Promontory, thrusting it self into the Sea; with which, on the one side, and on the other, the Lake Mareotis. It is a place of good defence; its circuit is about 12000 paces, adorned with
many stately Edifices, among which, the most famous was the Serapium, or the Temple of their god Serapis. Which for curious, workmanship and the stateliness of the Building, was inferior to none but the Roman Capitol, then the Library erected by Ptolomy Philadelphus; in which there were 200000 Volums, which Demetrius promised to augment with 300000 more. And this in the War against Julius Caesar was unfortunately burnt. And this is that Philadelphus who caused the Bible, to be translated into Greek by the 72, Interpreters, which were sent him by the High Priest Eleazar. In this City, in Anno 180, Gantenus read Divinity and Philosophy; who, as it is thought, was the first institutor of Ʋniversities. This City hath been enriched with 400 high and strong Forts and Towers; and the Ptolomies or Kings of Egypt, having made here their residence after the death of Alexander the Great, and caused many stately and magnificent Palaces to be built: Under the Houses are Gisterns sustained with Pillars of Marble; as also Pavements for their refreshment, being their Summer habitation; their ancient custom, by reason of the heat, being to build their Houses as much under ground as above, the upper part serving for their Winter habitation. It was their custom also to e∣rect great Pillars of Marble or Porphyry; among others, that of Pompey, which stands upon a four square Rocky Foundation without the Walls, on the South side of the City: It is round, and of one intire piece of Marble, and of an incredible bigness, being above One hundred foot high, not far from the place where he was slain in a Boat at Sea, and where his ashes were laid. In this City are also two square Obelisks, full of Egyptian Hieroglyphicks of a vast bigness, and each of one entire piece of Stone; said to be thrice as big as that at Rome, or that at Constantinople. Near these Obelisks, as Sir Henry Blunt relateth, are the ruines of Cleopatra's Palace, high upon the shore, with the private Gate, whereat she received Mark Antony after their overthrow at Actium. And he saith, That about a bow shoot further. upon another Rock on the shore, is yet a round Tower, which was part of Ale∣xanders Palace. This City, after the Romans were Masters of Egypt, was steemed the second of their Empire: And when the Arabs seised it, there was counted 12000 Sellers of Herbs, 4000 Bathing-houses, 400 Play∣houses, &c. Thus was the former state of this City, but at present almost a heap of ruines, especially, the East and South parts; not the moyety of the City being inha∣bited. And were it not for some conveniencies of Trade, or the like, more then any pleasure of the place, by reason of the evil Air which reigns there, it would be soon left wholly desolate. It is now inhabited by a mixture of Na∣tions, as Turks, Jews, Greeks, Moors, Copties and Christians. Now remark∣able for a Mosque, in which St. Mark, their first Bishop, was said to be buried: Yet their rests still within, and near the City, many Obelisks, Columus, Foot∣steps of pround Building, &c. The City of Rosetto.Raschit or Rosetto, a pritty little City, seated on the Nile, four miles from the Mediterranean Sea; a place of no strength, but of a great Trade, and well furnished with several sorts of Commodities. Its Buildings are stately, both within and without, and is only defended by a Castle, being without Walls, or other Fortifications. This City in ancient times, was noted for a place of all kinds of Beastliness and Luxury. Damiata is a fair City,The City of Damiata, and its Land ex∣cellent, famous for the often Sieges laid unto it by the Christian Armies, in Anno 1220. Who for 18 Moneths continuance, did stoutly defend themselves; till in the end, the Enemy hearing no noise, some of them did adventure to Scale the Walls, who finding no resistance, the Army marched in; who then found in every house and corner, heaps of dead bodies, and none to give them burial; and searching them, found them to die of Famine and of the Pesti∣lence, which grievously raged amongst them: Which lamentable spe∣ctacle, must needs add terror to the beholder. This City was built, as some Authors say, out of the ruines of Pelusium, which was built by Pe∣leus, the Father of Achilles; who for the murther of his Brother Phocus,
was by the gods commanded to purge himself in the adjoyning Lake. This place (as Heylin noteth) was the Episcopal See of St. Isidore, sirnamed Pelusiotes, whose Pious and Rhetorical Epistles are yet extant. And at this place Ptolomy, the famous Geographer, drew his first breath. And these three Cities, after Cairo, are at present the fairest of Egypt. There are a∣bundance of other Cities which are yet in some repute; as Suez and Cossir, seated on the Red Sea; Suez noted for its Arsenal; and Cossir, for its recepti∣on of the Merchandizes of the East; and Saiet, a fair Town not far from Cairo, on the Nile, by some said to be the dwelling place of Joseph and Mary, whither they sled with Christ for fear of Herod, where are yet the ruines of a fair and beautiful Temple, which as they say was built by Helena, the Mother of Constantine, with several others too tedious to name. But to speak truth, Egypt is nothing in regard of what it was under its first Kings, with several o∣ther, as I have set down in my Geographical Tables, as they are found in the said Twelve Cassiliffs; and are all commodiously and pleasantly seated on the Banks of the Nile, which traverses the whole Countrey, dividing it self into several streams, especially in the Higher Egypt, where with several Mouths it full into (or receives) the Mideterranean Sea: Also I have noted several Cities seated on the Red Sea, to which I refer the Reader. The Lakes of Bucheira and Moeris.In this Countrey are two Lakes, the one is called The Lake of Bu∣cheira, in the Territory of Alexandria, and is about twelve Leagues in length, and seven in breadth; the other is called The Lake of Moeris, in the Cassilifs of Giza and Fium; and is about 27 Leagues in length, and 20, 15, 10, 5, and 3 in breadth. Thus much for the Description of the Countrey; In the next place, I shall treat of the Inhabitants, as to their Laws, Religion, Customs, Antiquities, Hie∣roglyphicks, Stature, Habit, &c. Also the Fertility and Rarities of the Coun∣trey, amongst which I shall end with the Description of the Nile. Their Laws & execution of Justice.Their Laws, as to Justice and Government, are perfectly Turkish; and therefore I shall refer the Reader to the Description of the Turks, as ye may find it treated of in the Description of Constantinople, their Metropolitan Ci∣ty. Yet for rigor in their punishments, they exceed other parts of Turkey, and that by reason of the treacherous, malicious, and base dispositions of them; their executions being different according to the quality of the Crime, for some offences they use slaying alive; for others impaling; cutting them off with a red hot Iron at the Waist; for others oynting with Honey in the Sun; also, some they hang by the Foot, and the like cruelties. The ancient People of this Countrey were Heathens, worshipping the Sun, Moon and Stars, sacrifi∣cing to Apollo, Jupiter, Hercules, and the rest of the gods; also attributing divine honors to Serpents, Crocodiles, as also to Garlick, Onions, and Leeks. But the god which thay most adored, was Apis, a coal-black Ox, with a white Star in his Fore-head, two Hairs only in his Tail, and the form of an Eagle on his back; but now Mahometism is much received amongst them. The Chri∣stian Faith was here first planted by St Mark, who was the first Bishop of Alex∣andria. And these Christians are all of the Jacobites Sect, observing the same Customs and Forms of Ceremonies in their Religion, as those formerly treated of in Asia. Its antiquities.Among the many Rarities or Antiquities of this Countrey, are the Pyra∣mides; as also the Obelisks and Columns spoken of before; next on the Banks of the River Nile, stood that famous Labyrinth built by Psamnicus; a place of an exceeding great bigness, containing 1000 Houses, besides 12 Royal Pa∣laces, within an intire Wall, Which had but one entrance; but exceeding many turnings and windings, which caused the way to be exceeding difficult to find, the building being as much under ground as above. The buildings were of Marble, and adorned with stately Columns: The Rooms were fair and large, especially a Hall, which was the place of their general Conventions, which was adorned with the Statues of their gods, and composed of polished Marble. Not far from the Pyramides doth stand the Colossus, being in form of an Aethiopian Woman, which heretofore was adorned as a Rural Deity.
This Colossus is of a vast bigness, and is made out of the natural Rock, toge∣ther with huge flat Stones. Also the Isle and Tower of Pharos, opposite to Alexandria; a place of a great bigness, and of great rarity and magnificence; its Watch-Tower, was of an exceeding great height, being ascended by steps, and on the top of this Tower there were placed every night abundance of Lant∣horns with Lights, for the direction of Sailors, by reason of the dangerous∣ness of the Sea on that Coast, being so full of Flats. The Egyptians instead of Letters, made use of Hieroglyphicks; of which,Their several Hieroglyphicks. an example or two shall suffice; viz. For God, they painted a Falcon; for Eternity, they painted the Sun and Moon; for a Year, they painted a Snake with his Tail in his Mouth; for any thing that was abominable, they painted a Fish; with a thousand more in the like nature too tedious to name. They are said to be the first that invented Arithmetick, Geometry, Musick, Philo∣sophy, Physick; and by reason of the perpetual serenity of the Air, found out the course of the Sun, Moon and Stars; their Constellations, Risings, Set∣tings, Aspects and Influences; dividing by the same, Years into Moneths, grounding their divinations upon their hidden properties. Also the first Ne∣cromancers and Sorcerers. These People are much given to Luxury, prone to Innovations, Cowardly, Cruel, Faithless, Crafty and Covetous; much ad∣dicted to Fortune telling, wandring from one Countrey to another, by which cheating tricks they get their livelihood: But these people are not the same as the ancient Inhabitants were, being a Misceline of other Nations as aforesaid, these People not addicting themselves to Arts or Letters, as the former did. They are of a mean stature, active, of a tawny complexion, but indifferently well featured; and their Women fruitful in Children, sometime bringing two or three at a time. Their habit is much after the Turkish dress,Their habit. in which they are not over curi∣ous. They have in this Countrey a Race of Horses, which for one property may be esteemed the best in the World; that is, they will run without eating or drinking, one jot, four daies and nights together: And there are some Egyp∣tians, which with the help of a Sway bound about their body, and carrying with them a little Food to eat, are able to ride them. For shape, these Horses do not surpass others; and for this property they are held so rare, and esteem∣ed at three years of age, to be worth 1000 pieces of Eight, and sometimes more: And for this breed of Horses, there are Officers appointed to look af∣ter them, and to see the Foles of them, and to register them in a book with the colour, &c. which they receive from the testimony of credible persons, to avoid cheats. But these Horses are not fit for any other then such a Sandy Countrey, by reason of their tender feet. But let us come to the Nile, which is the principal piece in all Egypt: I hold it for one of the most considerable Rivers of the World. The length of it, course, and the divers Mouths by which it discharges it self into the Sea. Its inundation at a perfixed time, the quality of its Waters, and the fertility and richness it leaves where it passes, are my inducing Reasons. It begins towards the Tropick of Capricorn, ends on this side that of Cancer, running for the space of above 45 degrees of Latitude, which are 11 or 1200 Leagues in a streight line, and more then 2000 in its course, crosses a great Lake, embraces the fairest River Island, and waters the richest Valley, we have knowledge of. Among its Inhabitants this is particular, that naturally some are black and some white; and that in the same time, the one have their Summer, or their Winter; when the others (which is not known elsewhere) have their Winter, or their Summer. Its true Spring is likewise almost unknown, it is certain that the River that comes out of the Lake of Zair, and takes its course towards the North, is that which we call the Nile: But this Lake re∣ceives a number of Rivers which descend from the Mountains of the Moon. To tell whether any of these Rivers bears the name of Nile, and which they be, cannot be done: Though there have been Kings of Egypt, Roman Emperors, Sultans, and Kings of Portugal, which have made the search.
In sum, and according to Ptolomy, who hath said as much as any hitherto, it must be that most advanced towards the South, and which washes at present the City of Zambery, crosses the Lake of the same name, or of Zair; the City of Zair being likewise on the same Lake. At the coming out of the Lake, the Nile passes between the Kingdoms of Damont and Goyame in the Abissines; receives a little on this side the Equator, the Zafflan, which comes out of the Lake of Zafflan; near the Isle of Mero or Gueguere, the Cabella or Taguezzi, which de∣scends from the Lake of Barcena; and at the entrance into Egypt of the River Nubia, which crosses Nubia, and comes from Saara and Billedulgerid; and ap∣parently answers to that, which Juba believed to be the true Nile. These 3 Ri∣vers are the greatest of all those which disburthen themselves in the Nile, and carry a great many others. But in Egypt the Nile remains alone, passes be∣tween two ranks of Mountains, approaching the Sea, the Valley enlarges, and the Nile divides it self into many Branches, and glides by many Mouths to the Sea. The Ancients made account of seven, nine, or more, now except in the time of Inundation, there are only two principal ones, which pass by Ro∣setto and Damiata, and three lesser by Turbet, Bourles and Maala: These not be∣ing Navigable, but during the Inundation; the others always. This Inundation of the Nile is wonderful, some attribute it to certain Etesian winds, that is, North-West, which repulse the current, and make it swell: Others to the quantity of Snows which melt; and to the continual Rains which fall there, where the Nile hath its beginnings, or there where it passes. Others will have the Ocean then to swell, and under ground communicate its waters to the Nile, &c. But there are so many different opinions touching the cause of this Inundation, and so many Reasons are given pro and con, that a whole treatise might be made of it. This Inundation begins about the sixteenth or seventeenth of June,Its Inundation and effects. increases for the space of forty daies, and decreases for other 40 days; so that its greatest height is about the end of July, and it ends about the beginning of September. If it begins sooner or later (which is observed by certain Pillars in the Towns; and particularly in the Castle of Rhoda, which stands in a little Isle opposite to old Cairo, and where the Bassa resides, during the solemnity of opening the Channel, which passes through and fills the Cisterns of Grand Cairo; and in the Fields by the Aspes, Tortoises, Craw-fish, Crocodiles, &c. who remove their Eggs or Young from the Banks of the Nile, immediately before the Inundation, and lay them there where it will bound) they give judgment, whether there will be more or less Water; and the people are advertised, to the end, they may take order for what they have to do. The King Maeris had expresly caused to be dug the Lake of Maeris, to receive the Waters of the Nile, when it had too much, or to furnish it when too little: At present they remedy it when little, by Channels, advanced towards the higher Countrey, that they may be water'd: When too much, by certain Flood-Gates which they open to let the Water slide away. For the effect of this Inundation, is, That all that the Nile covers with its Water, is made fruitful, and no more. It Rains sometimes in the Lower Egypt, very little in the Higher, and not sufficient to moisten the Earth; but when the Nile increases too much, or too little, it doth hurt: At 12 Cubits, it is yet Famine; at 15 or 16 sufficient; at 18 or 20 abundance. The little cannot moisten the highest Lands, and nearest the Mountains. That which lies too long, leaves not time to Sow the lower Grounds; but the little, or none at all, is more dangerous then the too much; and often besides the Fa∣mine, presages some other misfortune near. So before the death of Pompey, there was little; before that of Anthony and Cleopatra, none at all. Moreover, the Dew which causes this inundation, is imperceptible, as the same Author says: He assures us however, that so soon as it falls, the Air is purified, and all Diseases and Pestilential Feavers of the Countrey, (which are there very rife) cease; which makes it appear that these Waters are excellent, and indeed all Authors agree, that the Waters of the Nile are sweet, healthful, nourishing, and that they keep a long time without corrupt∣ing; so that they be discharged from the Mud and Sand they bring along with
them from the Grounds, through which they pass. The first Kings of Egypt made so much account of them,Its Water ex∣ceeding nou∣rishing. that they drank nothing else than the Waters of Nile; and when Philadelphus married his Daughter Be∣renice to Antiochus. Theos, King of Assyria, he gave order, That from time to time there should be the Water of Nile carried her, that she might drink no other. And the fruitfulness which these Waters cause, is not only known by their making the Earth so exceeding fertil, (which otherwise is as barren) so that if they do in a manner but throw in their Seed, they have four rich Harvests in less than four Months; and in that they produce and nourish an infinite number of strange Creatures, as Crocodiles, which from an Egg no bigger than that of a Goose, cometh to be 20, 25, and sometimes to 30 foot long: His Feet are armed with Claws, his Back and Sides with Scales so hard not to be pierced; but his Belly soft and tender, by reason of which he receiveth many times his deaths wound: His Mouth is exceeding wide, hath no Tongue; his Jaws very strong, and armed with a sharp set of Teeth as it were indented: His Tail is equal to his Body in length, by which he infoldeth his prey and draws it in the Water: At the taking of his prey he gives jumps, and it is a pretty while ere he can turn himself; so that if it be not just before him, it may escape him. Four Months in the year it is observed to eat nothing, which is during the Winter Season; the Female is said to lay one hundred Eggs at one time, which she is as many days a hatch∣ing; and they will live to the age of one hundred years, and growing to the last. Also this River breedeth River-Horses, of old called Hippo∣potami; they have great Heads, wide Jaws, and armed with Tusks as white as Ivory; they are proportioned like a Swine, but as big in Body as a Cow; smooth Skinned, but exceeding hard. Also River-Bulls, about the bigness of a Calf of a Twelve month old, and in shape like a Bull. Also here are found abundance of great and small Fishes. And lastly, the fruitfulness of these Waters is shewed, in that the Women and Cattle which drink thereof are very fruitful, ordinarily bringing forth their Children and Young by two and three, and sometimes by four and five at a time. There are yet many fine things might be said of the Nile, as its divers Names, its Cataracts, &c. But we have likewise omitted many things which might be said of Egypt, which hath been famous in Holy Writ as well as in Prophane, and which would swell into a Volume. Let us end with saying something of the fertility of the Country, what Commodities it produces and communicates to other Countries. It is plentifully furnished with several Metals;The fertility of the Coun∣try, and its Commodities. the Ground along the Nile produceth abundance of Corn, Rice, Pulse, and other Grains, that it may well be termed the Granary of the Turkish, as it was formerly of the Roman Empire: and it feeds much Cattle, produceth great plenty of Fish, hath store of Fowls, yields excellent Fruits, Lemmons, Oranges, Citrons, Pomegranates, Figgs, Cherries, &c. Also, Capers, Olives, Flax, Sugars, Cassia, Sena, Oil, Balsom; some Drugs and Spices, Wax, Civet, Elephants Teeth, Silk, Cotton, Linnen Cloth, with several good Manu∣factures; also Hides, besides the Ashes of two little Weeds growing a∣bout Alexandria, whereof quantity are transported to Venice; and with∣out which they cannot make their Chrystal-Glasses. We may add, that Incense, Coffee, and other Commodities of Arabia and India, pass through this Country, to be transported into the Western parts of Turky. Throughout the Countrey they have abundance of Palm-Trees,Its Palm-Trees, and the na∣ture of their growing, &c. which may be reckoned among the Rarities of the Country, and that for se∣veral Reasons. These Trees are observed always to grow in couples, Male and Female: They both thrust forth Cods full of Seeds; but the Female is only fruitful, but not except it grows by the Male, and having his Seed
mixt with hers, which they do not fail to do at the beginning of March. The Fruit it bears is known by the name of Dates, which in taste resemble Figs. The Pith of these Trees is White, and called the Brains, which are in the uppermost parts. And this is held an excellent Sallad, in taste much like an Hartichoke; of the Branches they make Bedsteads, Lattices, &c. Of the outward Husk of the Cod, Cordage; of the inner, Brushes; and of the Leaves, Fans, Feathers, Mats, Baskets, &c. This Tree is held among them to be the perfect Image of a Man, and that for these Rea∣sons: First, because it doth not fructifie, but by Coiture: Next, as having a Brain in the uppermost part, which if once corrupted (as Mans) doth perish and die: And lastly, in regard that on the top thereof grow certain Strings which resemble Hair; the great end of the Branches appearing like Hands extended forth; and the Dates as Fingers. And so much for Egypt.
LIBYA INTE∣RIOR, which doth compre∣hend ZAHARA, or SAARA, with its Parts or Pro∣vinces of ZANHAGA, — Tegassa. ZUENZIGA, Zuenziga, Ziz, Ghir. TARGA, Hair. Targa. LEMPTA, Lempta, Dighir, Agades. BERDOA, — Berdoa. BORNO, Borno, Kaugha, Amasen. GAOGA, — Gaoga. The Land of NEGROES, with its Parts or King∣doms, as they lie On this side the Niger, as GUALATA, Guadia, Angra, Arguya. GENEHOA, Genehoa, Walade, Ganar, Samba-Lamech. TOMBUT, Tombut, Salla, Berissa, Guegneve. AGADES, Agades, Deghir, Mura. CANUM, Cano, Tassana, Germa. CASSENA, Cassena, Nebrina, Tirca. GANGARA, Gangara, Semegonda. Between the Branches, and about the Mouth of the Niger, as JALOFFES, Emboule, Lambaya, Yagoa, Bersola, Nabare, Besu, Catcheo, Boyla, Codan, Julieto. GAMBIA, CASANGUAS, BIAFARES, Emboule, Lambaya, Yagoa, Bersola, Nabare, Besu, Catcheo, Boyla, Codan, Julieto. Beyond the Niger, as MELLI, — Melli. SOUSOS, — Beria. MANDINGUE, Mandinga, Tocrur. GAGO, Gago, Dau. GUBER, — Guber. ZEGZEG, Zegzeg, Channara. ZANFARA, Zanfara, Reghebil. GUINY, and regarding the Atlantick Ocean; with its Parts or Kingdoms of MELEGUETTE, with its chief Places, as they lie On the Sea, as Bugos, Timaa, Bagga, Serbora, Masfah, Faly Hamaya, Samwyn, Crou, and Growaly. Within Land, as Bolombere, Quinamora. GUINY, particularly so called, or the IVORY or GOLD Coast, with its chief places, as they lie On the Sea, as Tabo, Taboe Petoy, Wetoe, Moure, Nassau, St. George del Mina, Cormantir, Berku, Pompena. Within Land, as Laboure, Uxoo, Quinimburm, Acanes Grandes, Dauma, Araus, Adios, St. Eaurenco, Zabandu, Buma, Roggis, Jamo. BENIN, with its chief Places, as they lie On the Sea, as Popou, Jackeyn, Loebo, Fosko, Borli, Bodi, and Cesge. Within Land, as Bdin, Overre, Aovon, and Curamo.
ZAHARA, That is, DESART. Zahara, its name, and de∣scription of the Country.IN our Africa or Libya Interior, we have placed ZAHARA, the Country of the NEGROES and GƲINY. Zahara is an Arab name, and signifies Desart; and this name is taken from the quality of the Country: so the Arabs divide the Land into three sorts, Cehel, Za∣hara, and Azgar. Cehel hath only Sand, very small, without any Green. Zahara hath Gravel and little Stones, and but little Green. Azgar hath some Marshes, some Grass and little Shrubs. The Country is generally hot and dry; it hath almost no Water, except some few Wells, and those Salt: if there fall great Rains the Land is much better. But besides the leanness of the Soil there is sometimes such vast quantities of Grasshoppers, that they eat and ruin all that the Earth produceth. Through this Country the Caravans pass, which adds no small advantage unto it. It is so barren and ill inhabited, that a Man may travel above a week together without seeing a Tree, or scarce any Grass; as also without finding any Water, and that Water they have is drawn out of Pits, which oft-times is covered with Sand, and tastes very brackish, so that many times Men die for want of it; which knowing the defect, those Merchants which travel in this Country, carry their Water, as well as other Provisions, on their Camels backs. Its People.The People are Bereberes and Africans, likewise Abexes and Arabs; of which the first are seated in the most moist places, the others wander after their Flocks: Some have their Cheques or Lords, almost all follow Mahome∣tism. Though the Air be very hot, yet it is so healthful, that from Barbary, the Country of the Negroes, and other places, Sick people come as to their last remedy. Its division and parts de∣scribed.This great Desart is divided into seven principal Parts, of which the three Western are, Zanhaga, Zuenziga, and Targa or Hair: The four towards the East are, Lempta, Berdoa, Gaoga, and Borno. Almost every part reaches the full breadth, and all together make but the length of this Desart. ZANHAGA is most Westward,Zanhaga. and touches the Ocean; with this De∣sart are comprehended those of Azaoad and Tegazza. This last yields Salt like Marble, which is taken from a Rock, and carried 2, 3, 4 or 500 Leagues into the Land of the Negroes, and serves in some places for Money, and for this they buy their Victuals. These People use it every moment, letting it melt in their Mouths, to hinder their Gums from corrupting; which often happens, either because of the heat, which continually reigns; or because their food corrupts in less than nothing. In the Desart of Azaoad, and in the way from Dara to Tombut, are to be seen two Tombs, the one of a rich Mer∣chant, and the other of a Carrier: The Merchants Water being all gone, and ready to die for want, buys of the Carrier (who had not overmuch) one Glass full, for which he gave him 10000 Ducats; a poor little for so great a Sum: but what would not a man do in necessity? yet at the end the Carrier repented his bargain, for both the one and the other died for want of Water before they could get out of the Desart. Those near the Sea have some Trade with the Portugals; with whom they change their Gold of Tibar for divers Wares.
map of Libya blazon or coat of arms of the Company of Royal Adventurers or Royal African Company To ye Honoble. ye Governour, Sub Governour, Deputy Governour, & Court of Assistants of ye Honoble. Company of Royall Adventurers of England tradeing into Affrica: This Mapp is humbly dedicated by Ric. Blome. FRICA or LIBIA ULTERIOUR Where are the COUNTRIES of SAARA DESERT he COUNTRIE of NEGROES and GUINE With the Circumjacent Countries and Kingdoms Designed by Monsieur Sanson Geographer to the French King and Rendered into English by Richard Blome By the Kings Especiall Command Printed for Richard Blome
The Country or Desert of ZƲENZIGA,Zuenziga. under the name of which passes that of Cogdenu, and is more troublesom and dangerous than that of Zanbaga, as also more destitute of Water; and yet it hath many People, among others certain Arabs, feared by all their Neighbours, and particularly by the Negroes, whom those Arabs take and sell for Slaves in the Kingdom of Fez: But in revenge, when they fall into the hands of the Negroes they are cut into so many pieces, that the biggest that remains are their two Ears. Its chief places are Zuenziga and Ghir. The Desart of TARGA or HAIR (some esteem this last the name of the Principal Place,Targa. and the other of the People) is not so dry nor troublesom as the two others. There are found many Herbs for Pastures, the Soil indiffe∣rent fruitful, and of a temperate Air. They have some Wells, whose Water is good. In the Morning there falls store of Manna, which they find fresh and healthful, of which they transport quantity to Agades, and other places. Its chief places are Targa and Hair. LEMPTA is likewise esteemed the name of a People,Lempta. and its principal place also Digir. This Desart is dry, and more troublesom than that of Targa; and its People haughty, brutish, and dangerous to them that cross it, going from Constantina, Tunis, and Tripoli, to the Negroes. BERDOA is no less Desart than that of Lempta;Berdoa. but it hath Dates a∣bout those places, which are inhabited, and which are well furnished with Wa∣ter. They count three little walled Cities and some Towns, the chief bearing the name of the part. Borno and Goaga.BORNO and GOAGA are scarce Desart. They have each their King. He of Borno is of the Race of Berdoa, and his People part Black, part White, are civil, and drive some Trade. But they have likewise their Wives and Children in common, and scarce any Religion, as formerly the Garamantes. The King of Goaga descended from a Black Slave, who having seized on the estate of his Master, after having bought some Horses, ran over the Neigh∣bouring Countries, traded for some time for Slaves against Horses, whom he made mount on his, and became Master of this Estate more than 200 years ago. Part of his People are Christians, as those of Egypt; but ignorant, and almost all Shepherds. The chief places in Borno are, Amasen, Kaugha, and Borno; the two former seated in the Lake Semegda: The chief place of Goa∣ga bears the same. The Land of NEGROES. The Land of Negroes, its Name, People, and Parts de∣scribed.THE Negroes are People about the River Niger, which hath taken its Name from these People; and these People from their Colour, and not the People from the River, as some have believed. They are divided into ma∣ny Parties or Kingdoms, of which some are on this side, others beyond, and others between the Branches of the Niger. We have placed on this side the Kingdoms of Gualata, Genehoa, Tombut, Agades, Canum, Cassena, and Gan∣gara. Beyond, those of Melly, Sousos, Mandingue, Gago, Guber, Zegzeg, and Zanfara. Between the Branches, and about the Mouths of Niger, are a great number of People, Kingdoms, and Signiories. The principal People are the Jaloffes, between the Branches of Sanega and Gambea; the Casanguas, between St. Domingo and Rio Grande; and the Biafares beyond and along Rio Grande. The most famous Kingdoms of the Jaloffes are those of Sanega and Gambea: Among the Casanguas, those of Casamanse and Jarem; among the Biafares those of Guinala, Biguba, and Besegue. All these Kingdoms and People, and likewise the others which are about the Niger, are so little known, that some think it not worth the pains to set down their Names. We will speak only of what shall seem most remarkable.
Kingdom of Gualata.GƲALATA is one of the least, having in it not above three Towns, of which Guadia is the chief; besides some few Villages. Fruitful in Dates: they are coal black; live in a mean condition, and without any form of Go∣vernment or settled Laws. They have no Gentry among them, but to their power are civil to Strangers. Kingdom of Geneboa.GENEHOA is rich in Grain, Cotton, Cattle, and Gold; for which they have a good trade with the Merchants of Barbary; and by reason of the overflowing of the Niger, the Soil is very fertil; yet have they not many Towns: that most known is where their King resideth, who is a Vassal to the King of Tombut, beareth the name of the Kingdom. And here it is that their Priests, Doctors, and Merchants inhabit. The Priests and Doctors wear white Apparel, and for distinction all the rest wear black or blew Cotton. Its other places are, Samba-Lamech, Ganar, and Walade. Kingdom of Tombut.TOMBƲT hath quantity of Gold, is well watered with the Niger, which makes it very fruitful, especially in Grains, and it hath good Pastures, which feed many Cattle. The chief place gives name to the Kingdom, scituate on a branch of the River Niger: It is the residence of their King, who hath a fair Palace, built of Lime and Stones, all the rest of the Houses (except one fair Church) is made of Mud, and Thatched. It is well filled with Merchants, who drive a good Trade betwixt this and Fez. This King, within this 100 and odd years, hath subdued and made tributary a great part of the Negroes, is magnificent in his Court, of the Mahometan Religion, keeps ordinarily 3000 Horse for his Guard, and hath marched against the Xeriffs of Morocco with 300000 Men. Its other places are Salla and Berissa, also seated on the Niger, Gugneve, Carogoli, and Cassali. Kingdom of Agades.AGADES hath great quantities of Cattle, and are much given to gra∣sing and looking to them, making it their livelyhood, using the Ancients cu∣stom of Tents, and removing up and down for the conveniency of fresh and good Pasture for their Cattle; and among their Moveable Towns their chief bears the name of the Kingdom in which the King resideth, who is Tributary to him of Tombut. Its other places are, Deghir, Mayma, and Mura, seated on a Lake of the Niger. Kingdom of Canum.CANƲM, besides its Cattle, hath Grain, Rice, Cotton, and Fruits; hath Springs of Running-water, as also a good River, which issueth forth many little Rivulets; it is well stored with Wood, is very populous; and hath seve∣ral Towns; the chief being Cano, wherein is the Palace of their King, who is also Tributary to him of Tombut. This Town is environed with a Wall of Chalk-Stone, of which most of the Houses are built, and well frequented by Merchants. Its next chief place is Germa. Kingdom of Cassena.CASSENA is craggy, barren, and very Woody; yet it yields some store of Barley and Millet. The People live very meanly, wanting many things that the other Kingdoms have plenty of; and their Houses and Towns are as poor, among which Cassena is the chief, next Nebrina and Tirca. Kingdom of Gangara.GANGARA is rich in Gold, hath not many Towns, the chief whereof bears the name of the Kingdom, in which the King resideth, being also the habitation of many Merchants; and its King is very absolute, and hath a great Revenue. His Militia is in some esteem among the Negroes, being observed to keep in continual pay 500 Horsmen, and 7000 Men which use Bows and Sci∣mitars. The next is Semegonda, seated on a branch of the Niger. Kingdom of Melly.MELLY is a spacious and fruitful Kingdom, seated all along on a branch of the River Niger, which makes it very fertil in Corn, Cattle, Dates, Fruits, Cotton, Wool, &c. And by reason of the conveniency of the said River, hath a good Trade for their Commodities with other Countries. Its chief Town takes its name from the Kingdom, containing about 6000 Houses, indifferently well built, but unwalled. It is the Seat-Royal of their King; they have like∣wise here a famous Colledge, and many Temples, which are well furnished with Priests and Doctors, who read the Mahometan Law, and under whom the youth of this Kingdom, as also those of Tombut, and other parts of the Negroes are educated. These People are esteemed the most ingenious, the wittiest, and
most civil to Strangers of all the Negroes. Their King is also tributary to the King of Tombut. Kingdom of Souson.SOƲSOS hath divers petty Kingdoms, and all subject to their Concho or Emperour; among which, that of Bena hath seven others under it. Its quar∣ter is Mountainous, covered with Trees, and well watered with Rivers. It hath some Towns; its chief takes its name from the Kingdom, and yields Corn, Cattle, Fruits, &c. Kingdom of Mandingue.MANDINGƲE begins at the River Gambea, and reaches near 200 Leagues up in the Land: They have quantity of Gold, good Ships of War, and Cavalry; and there are divers Kings or Lords in Guiny, which are his Tributaries. Kingdom of Gago.GAGO hath store of Gold, Corn, Rice, Fruits, and Cottle, but no Salt be∣sides what is brought from other places, and which is ordinarily as dear as Gold. The People are idle and ignorant, but bear so great a respect to their King, that how great soever they be, they speak to him on their knees; and when they are faulty, the King seises on their Goods, and sells their Wives and Children to Strangers, who remain Slaves all their lives. But besides these, there is here (as well as in other parts of the Negroes) great Traffick for Slaves, either of certain Neighbouring people, which those of the Country can take, or of the Malefactors of the Country, or of the Children whom the Fathers or Mothers sell, when they are in need, or when they please them not: And these Slaves are bought by many people of Africa; but more by the Europeans, who transport them into the Isles of St. Thomas, Cape Verd, the Canaries, Brasil; and the English, to the Barbadoes, Carolina, Jamaica, and elsewhere for Slaves. They have many Towns and Villages, among others that of Gago is the chief, and is the residence of their King; as also of many Merchants, and containing about 4 or 5000 Houses, but unwalled. Kingdom of Guber.GƲBER is well fenced with Mountains, doth produce Rice and Pulse; and above all, have exceeding great flocks of Cattle, from which they get their livelyhood. This Kingdom is very populous, and well stored with Towns, its chief bearing the name of the Kingdom, which is well inhabited by Mer∣chants, and containing about 6000 Houses; being also the residence of their King. The People are ingenious, good Artificers, and make several rich Manu∣factures. And the King∣doms of Zegzeg and Zanfara.ZEGZEG and ZANFARA are barren, the People idle and ignorant, have some Towns, whose chief are so called; the Land yields, Corn, Grass, &c. and feeds great quantities of Horses. The fertility of the Land of the Negroes.The Country of the Negroes is esteemed as fertil as those watered with the Nile. It bears twice a year, and each time sufficient to furnish them with Corn for five whole years; which makes them not sow their Lands, but when they judge they shall have need. They keep their Corn in Pits and Ditches under Ground, which they call Matamores. GƲINEA, or GƲINY. The Coast of Guiny, its ex∣tent and bounds.GƲINY is the Coast of Africa, which is found between the River Niger and the Equinoctial Line. Some give it a larger extent, some a less: There are they who begin it on this side the Niger, and continue it unto the Kingdom of Congo. We have comprehended in the Country of the Negroes that which is about the Niger; and in the Lower Aethiopia, that which is be∣yond the Gulph of St. Thomas: And so Guiny will remain between the Cape of Serre Leon, which will bound it on the West, and against the Negroes, to the River of Camarones, which is on the East, will separate it from the Lower Aethiopia. This Coast right from East to West is 7 or 800 Leagues long, and not above 100 or 150 in breadth. The form being much more long than broad, we will divide it into three principal parts, which we will call MELEGƲETE,Its parts de∣scribed.GƲINY, and BENIM: This the most Eastward, the first the most West,
and the other in the middle; yet each of these three parts separated make the breadth, and the three together the length of this Guiny. After this Guiny we will speak something of what is on this side towards the Niger, and of some Isles which are beyond,The Parts of Meleguete and Guiny. as St. Thomas, &c. Under the name of MELE∣GƲETE, we comprehend that which is between the Capes of Serre Leon and of Palmes: Under the particular name of GƲINY we esteem not only that which is between the Capes of Palmes and of Three Points; but like∣wise that which advances to the River Volta, and beyond, where the Kingdom of Benim begins, and ends not till the River Camerones. Of these 3 parts Guiny is the largest and best known, communicating its name to the rest. Its Coast, which is between the Capes of Palmes and that of Three Points, is called the Coast of Ivory; that which is beyond the Cape of Three Points, the Coast of Gold: for the abundance of Gold and Ivory found in the one and the other. The Ivory and Gold Coasts, and their Trade.The Coast of IVORY is very commodious, and well inhabited. The Eng∣lish, French, Hollanders, and Hanse-Towns trade likewise in divers Ports on the same Coast; fetching thence, Gold, Ivory, Hides, Wax, Amber-greece, &c. On the Gold Coast are divers Kingdoms or Realms, as of SABOƲ, FOETƲ, ACCARA, and others. The Kingdom of SABOƲ is esteemed the most powerful of all, and that his Estates extend sixty and odd Leagues on the Coast, and near 200 up in the Land. In 1482 the Portugals built on the Coast of FOETƲ the Fort of St. George de la Mina, and long time after the Hollan∣ders that of Nassau, adjoyning to the Town of Moure, on the Coast of Sa∣bou; the one and the other to maintain their Traffick. Its other places, and which are within Land are, Labore, Ʋxoo, and Quinimburm. The Part of Meleguete.MELEGƲETE took its name from the abundance of Meleguete, here gathered of divers sorts: It is a Spice in form like French Wheat; some of a taste as strong and biting as Pepper: from which the Portugals receive great gain, but the English, French, and Hollanders bring it. The Portugals call it Pimienta-del-Rabo; the Italians, Pepe della Coda; Tail Pepper, that is, Long Pepper. Of their Palm Trees they make Wine as strong as the best of ours: They have likewise, Gold, Ivory, Cotton, &c. Its chief place is Bugos, on the Cape of Sierre Leonne. The Kingdom of Benim, with its Inhabitants described.The Kingdom of BENIM hath more than 250 Leagues of the Coast; Cape Formoso dividing it into two parts: That which is on the West forms a Gulph, into the middle of which the River Benim disburthens it self; and more to the West that of Lagoa: That which is on the East extends it self on a right line, where the Rio Real de Calabari, and the Rio del Rey, disburthen themselves near to that of Camarones, which ends the Estate towards the East. This last part is more healthful than that of the particular Guiny, the Inha∣bitants living 100 years and more. The Land produces the same Fruits, and feeds the same Beasts with Guiny, and its People are more courteous to Stran∣gers. Their principal City, so called, is esteemed the greatest and best built of any, either in Guiny or the Land of the Negroes. Its King is powerful, and very loving to his Subjects; they are all much addicted to Women, the King being said to keep about 5 or 600 Wives, with all which, twice a year he goeth out in great pomp, as well for Recreation, as to shew them to his Subjects; who according to their abilities do exceed; Those of the gentile or better sort keeping 20, 30, 40; others 50, 60, or 70: and those of the poorest rank 5, 10, or 12. Their Custom both for Men and Women, till they are married, is to go naked, and after their cloathing is only a Cloth, which is tied about their Middles, and hangs down to their knees. Its other chief places are, Ouwerre, Focko, Boni, and Bodi. The Soil of Guiny.The Soil of Guiny is generally fertil, the most part bearing twice a year, because they have two Summers and two Winters. They oall it Winter when the Sun passes their Zenith, and that the Rains are continual. All the whole Country is very fertil,Its fertility and commodi∣ties. abounding in Corn, Rice, Millet, and in many sorts of Meleguete; in Fruits, as Oranges, Citrons, Lemmons, Pomegranates, Dates, &c. Also in Gold, both in Sand and in Ingots, in Ivory or Elephants Teeth in
great abundance, in Wax, Hides, Cotton, Amber-greece; they extract Wine and Oyl from their Palm-Trees; and of this Oyl, and the Ashes of the Palm-Tree, they make excellent Soap. They have many Sugar-Canes, which are scarce at all Husbanded: They have Brasil-Wood, better then that which com∣eth from Brasil: they have abundance of Wood, proper to build and Mast Ships; and Pearls, which they find in Oysters, towards the River Des Ostros, that is, of Oysters; and of St. Anne, between the Branches of the Niger.Commodities here found. And for these good Commodities in way of Barter, they truck or take course Cloth, both Linnen and Wollen; Red Caps, Frize Mantles and Gowns; Leather Baggs, Sheep-skin Gloves; Guns, Swords, Daggers, Belts, Knives, Hammers, Ax∣heads, Salt, Great Pins, little pieces of Iron, which they convert to several uses; Lavers and great Dutch Kettles with two handles. Basons of several sizes, Platters, Broad Pans, Posnets, Pots, &c. made for the most part of Cap∣per, which are sometimes Tinned within. Some of which Ʋtensils are made of Tinn, and others of Earths, which are here desired: Also Looking-Glasses Beads, Corals and Copper, Brass and Tinn Rings, which they wear about them for their adornment. Hors-tails which they use to keep away the Flies which annoy them, as also when they Dance. And lastly, certain Shels which pass instead of Money; having here, and in many other Countries, no current Money of Metal, as the Europeans have; but make use of those Shells, which they hang in bundles upon strings; for which they buy in their Markets such things as they want. Its Beasts and their nature. The Elephant.Among their Beasts they have Elephants, which are said to be the biggest of all four footed Beasts: Of nature they are very gentle, docile, and tractable; they live to a great age, seldom dying till the age of 150 years. They are very serviceable, both in War and Peace, and as profitable by reason of their Tusks. It is said, That when the Male hath once seasoned the Female, he never after toucheth her. Next the Elephants may be reckoned the Musk-Cats,The Musk-Cats which with Springs they take in the Woods, when they are young, and keep them in Hutches, and take from them the Musk, which they keep in Glasses or Pots, and so vend it: And these Cats they vend to the English and other Nations at good rates. Then their Apes, Monkeys and Baboons,Monkeys, Apes, and Baboons. which are strong and lusty being taken and brought to it young, serve like men: They send them to fetch Water at the River, make them to turn meat at the Fire, serve at Table to give Drink; but they must be very watchful, otherwise they will do mischief, and eat the meat themselves; and these are much beloved by their Women, doing the duty of Men, which they are as desirous of themselves, and hating Men. Again, there are some of these Monkeys or Apes, which love Men and hate Women. They have variety of Birds, among which,Its Birds. Its Fruits. they have several sorts of Parrots which are brought to talk. Their Fruits are excellent, as Oranges, Lemmons, Citrons, Pomegranates, Dates, Annanas or Pynes, which for smell and taste, resembleth all Fruits. Trennuelis, a Fruit so delicate and delicious that 'tis thought it was the Fruit in Paradise which was forbidden Adam and Eve to eat of. Iniamus, Battatas, Bachonens, the Palm-Tree, and above all here is a Tree called the Oyster Tree, by reason of its bearing Oysters thrice every year; a thing, if report may be credited, is true; and if true, very strange. The Inhabitants, especially before the coming of the Portugals,Its People. were rude and barbarous, living without the knowledge of a God, Law, Religion, or Go∣vernment, very disingenious, and not caring for Arts or Letters.Their disposi∣tion. They are much addicted to Theft, and take it for an honor, if they can cheat or steal any thing, (though not considerable) from a White Man. They are very perfidious, Lyars, given to Luxury; in matter of Justice, they are indifferent severe,Their Justice. punishing ofttimes with death; but paying a fine will free them; and the place of Judicature is in the open Market Place. Their Food is gross and beastly,Their Food and Apparel. as is their Habitations, mean and beggerly. They go naked, save about their Waist they tye a piece of Linnen; yet very proud and stately:Their Stature. They are of a Corpulent body, flat nosed, broad shouldred, white eyed. and teeth'd,Their Religi∣on & belief.small eared, &c. In matters of Religion, they are great Idolaters, worshiping
Beasts, Birds, Hils, and indeed, every strange thing which they see; they hold there is two Gods, one doth them good, and the other hurt; and these two Gods, they say, fight together. Also they believe there is a God, which is invisible, which they say is black; yet of late they have tried many Forms of Religion, as Judaism, Mahometism and Christianity; but care not much for any. Nevertheless, some of them believe they die not, and to that end, give their dead bodies something to carry with them into the other World. They keep their Fetissoes day, that is, one day in seven for a day of rest, as their Sab∣bath, which is on a Tuesday, (a day that no other Nation in the World keeps) very strict; at which time, they offer Meat and Drink to their Fetisso or God, on a four square place, covered with Wires or Fetissoes straws, which the Birds (by them called Gods Birds) devour. During which time, the Fe∣tissero sits upon a Stool with a Pot of Drink in his hand, using several Ceremo∣nies.Their Marri∣age, theira∣bode. Amongst their Barbarous Customs they have one very good, and that is, when their Daughters are of a fitting age to marry, they put them into Houses, which are in the nature of Monasteries, where for a year they are e∣ducated by Old Men of good repute amongst them. And at the expiration of the said year, they are brought well habited (according to their Custom) and accompanied with Musick, and Dancing; and when a Young-man makes choise of any of them, he bargains with her Parents, and satisfies the Old Man that educated her, for his pains and charges (which is not much) and then takes her to Wife. The Portion being thus paid, they meet one another naked, and the Woman swears to be faithful to the Man, both at Bed and Board, and so the Marriage is concluded: But the Man sweareth not, being at liberty; so that upon the least offence, he may put her away, or force her to pay a Fine of so many Potoes of Gold: And according to the ability of a Man, he may buy and keep as many Wives as he pleaseth; among which, the eldest is subservi∣ent to the youngest. The Man never lieth with any of his Wives, neither eateth with them, but on Tuesdays, which is their Sabbath. And although the Husband commands, yet the Wife is the Purse-bearer until she be with Child, and ready to be delivered; at which time, being stark naked, and in the Field, among the People, she throweth the bag to her Husband, until tak∣ing a handful of Manniget and a spoonful of Oyl, she goeth abroad the next day, as well as if she had not been with Child, or suffered any pain; and then feasteth her Neighbors, circumciseth the Child; and after it hath lain spraw∣ling upon the ground two or three daies, she taketh it, and carrieth it on her shoulders,How they bring up their Children. like those which we call Gipsies; and is about four years of age, the Mother bringeth it to the Father, who teaches it to Swim, make Nets, Fish and Row, giving it nothing but what it can earn; and when it can be master of so much Gold as will purchase Linnen to make it a Wast∣cloth, it is rich. In Guiny there are several Petty Kingdoms who make War one against the other;Their War. during which War, they destroy and burn the Countrey, to the end that the enemy may find no succour, removing their Goods to a Neighboring Kingdom, with whom they have peace; and the whole Kingdom surrounds the King,Their Wea∣pons. for his defence and safeguard; and thus they march. Their Wea∣pons are the Bow and Arrows, with which they are so expert, that they can shoot within the breadth of a Shilling. Also they make use of the Poniard, the Dagger, the Shield and Turbant. In which Wars, those they kill, they eat; those they take, they make Slaves; and such are those, that the English, Dutch and other Nations buy of them; and whom they subdue, they take Hostages from.The Riches, Revenue, State and Power of their Kings. Their Kings are not over-rich, that Revenue which they have comes from the Customs and Tithes upon Goods; as also in the two Ounces of Gold paid by every Man that lieth with anothers Wife: Likewise, in Fines levied for Theft for their ransom; and lastly, in the Sixpenny forfeitures for bringing their Weapons within any of their Cities: Neither do they live in great pomp and grandure; a poor Cottage with us, being with them a Princes Palace. Yet they are had in such reverence, that none cometh to speak with them (though of their Nobility and Gentry) but must crawl upon the hands and
knees, and so deliver their business unto them. But the White Men are had in so much respect (though never so poor) that they sit cheek by jowl by their Kings. Upon the Coronation day, as also upon the Quarter days, when the Kings receive their Customs, they make a maguificent Feast which lasteth for two or three days; at which times they have all the varieties in their way as the Countrey will afford; and many of them are held very pow∣erful. And here, on this Coastof Guiny, the Dutch have been great Traders, ha∣ving several Holds and Factories, but of late in Anno 1663 and 64, the English have had many struglings with the Dutch, whom they have pretty well sub∣dued; and have now settled their several Factories, and are incorporated into a Society at London, called the Royal African Company, who have many Fa∣ctories and settlements, driving a very considerable Trade, to the great benefit of the Nation. Isles of St. THOMAS, &c. BEtween Guiny and the Lower Aethiopia, is a Guph, where are the Isles of St. THOMAS, Princes Island, Fernand Poo, Annobon or Bon Anne; and farther in the Great Sea, St. Matthew, the Ascention, St. Helena, &c. These Isles have their names from the day whereon they were discovered: That of the Prince, because its Revenue was designed for the Prince of Portu∣gal; that of Fernand Poo, from him that discovered it. But of all these Islands that of St. THOMAS is by much the greatest,The Island of St. Thomas de∣scribed. and the best: Its form is almost round, it is thirty, others say forty; others, and with more apparent truth 60000 Paces Diameter; which are 180000 Paces, or 65 Leagues circuit, seated under the Aequator; and by reason of the excessive heats which are there predominant: The Air is found very prejudicial and unhealthful to strangers, especially to the Europeans, who scarce ever reach to the age of fifty years, and the Women much less: Yet the Natives of the Countrey live commonly 100 years, and without sickness. They have no Rain but only in March and September, yet by reason of the Dews, which at all other times of the year falls, the Earth is well moistned, so that it brings forth all sorts of Fruits, Roots and Pot-Herbs; but their principal riches is their Sugars, of which, they have sometimes exported 150000 Arro∣bes, each Arrobe being 32 l. weight, which is five Millions of pounds yearly: Also Ginger, &c. there is carried them in exchange for their Commodities, Wines, Oyls, Cheese, Stuffs, Beads, Drinking-glasses, Corn-Flower, and little white Shels which serve for Money in Aethiopia, as in Guiny, &c. They Trade in the Neighbouring Coasts, where are the Rivers of Barca, Campo, St. Benito, St. Juan, and the Isle of Corisco: Those Grains and Vines which they would have sown and Planted, have not thriven, the Earth being too fat. They make their Bread of divers Roots; have their Wood from Palm-Trees: They feed much Fowl, have abundance of several sorts of Fish, both great and small, a∣mong others, Whales. They have also great store of four-footed Beasts, among others, their Hogs bear the Bell; which being fed with Sugar-Canes, after the Juyce is drawn out, grow fat, and become so excellent, that their Pullain is accounted for no value to them, even for sick people. The middle of the Isle is filled with Mountains, which are loaden with a great number of Trees, which are always covered with Clouds, which so moisten the Trees, that from them alls so much fresh water, as makes many little streams, which waters all parts of the Island. The Portugals have built the City Pavoasan, containing about  or 800 Houses, and some Forts, to defend the Port: They have erected a Bishoprick, and do allow of no Religion, but the Christian. This Town is vell frequented by Portugal Merchants, who trade in the Commodities afore∣said. The Inhabitants are Negroes, and very black.
PRINCES ISLAND hath a little City, and the Inhabitants live con∣veniently; the Isle being fruitful,Princes Island. yielding Fruits, Sugar, some Ginger, &c. Once taken by the Hollanders, who for some reasons soon abandoned it. The Island of Annobon.The Island of ANNOBON yields Sugars, Cottons, Cattle, and excellent Fruits especially large Oranges. In this Isle there is a Town of 100 or 120 Houses of Blacks, who are governed by some few Portugals. The Isle of St. Hellena.The Island of St. HELLENA was first discovered by the Portugals upon the 21 of May; on which day, is celebrated the memory of St. Helena, the Mother of Constantine the Great; from whom it took its name. This Isle is so fertile, that it is observed no place in all Europe yields the like plenty; for with manuring and cultivating the Earth, it produceth excellent Fruits, which are here found all the year: It hath great store of Barbary Hens, Feasants, Partridges, Pigeons, Quails, Peacocks, with several sorts of small Birds in great plenty; it hath also Goats, Swine, &c. Yet this Isle is not inhabited, but serves for the English, Portugals, Spaniards and Hollanders, to refresh themselves in going, but for the most part in returning from the Indies; it being sufficient to furnish Ships with Provision for their Voyage; here being Salt to preserve the Meat from stinking; and besides, the Air is so healthful, that they often leave their sick people there, who in a short time are restored to perfect health; and by the next Ships that put in there, are taken in again. During which time, they find wherewithal to feed them: But some years ago, the Hollanders ruined all that was good, only to spite the Spaniards, who af∣terwards did the same, that the English, Hollanders, &c. might have no profit by it. This Island is well furnished with good Waters, which alone is a great refreshment to Ships. Other Isles not inhabited.The Islands of FERNAND POO, St. MATTHEWS, and AS∣CENSION, are also not inhabited, and of no great account, nor much known; which we shall pass by, saying only, that they have some Fowls, Wild Beasts, and their Seas yield Fishes. NƲBIA. Nubia and its bounds.NƲBIA is bounded on the North, West and South, almost every where with Mountains; which separate it from the Desart of Barca and Egypt on the North; from Saara and the Negroes, on the West; and from the A∣byssins, on the South; the rest towards the East, is hounded in part by the Nile which separates it from the Isle of Gueguere; in part by an Imaginary Line, which separates it from divers Provinces; of which, some belong to the Turks; who hold all that is on the Red Sea, which they have taken from the Abyssins. Its length and breadth. Its chief placesNƲBIA thus taken, makes a long square, whose length from South-West, to North-East, is about 400 Leagues; and its breadth from South-East, to North-West, almost every where, 200 Leagues. The chief Cities of Nubia, are, Cusa, Gualva, Dancala, Jalac and Sula, according to the Arab of Nu∣bia: Moreover and in the same Author, I find that Tamalma, Zaghara, Ma∣than, Angimi, Nuabia, Tagua, and some others fall likewise in Nubia; and by some Authors Gorham, which some would put among the Negroes, should be likewise in Nubia, because it is on the Nile: There where it can have no communication with the Negroes, who ought to be upon, and about the Ni∣ger. Likewise Damocla, towards the Negroes, and Bugia towards Egypt, ought to be esteemed in Nubia. The City of Gorham.Gorham is on the Nile, and on the Coast of the Isle Gueguere. Sanutus make: a Kingdom, a Desart, and a People of this name, and extends them almost al the length of the Isle Gueguere; not making any mention of the City of this name, nor John Leon of Africa, nor the Arab of Nubia, nor Vincent Blanck, who saith, he hath been in these quarters, and speaks only of the Desart o Gorham. Other Authors make mention of this City, and describe it on the Nile. Sanutus saith, that there are found Emeralds in those Mountains, which bound Gorham on the South.
Except only Gorham, the Arab of Nubia observes the distances between all the other Cities which we have taken notice of; and saith, that Tamalma hath many Inhabitants, no Walls; makes little account of Mathan and Angi∣mi: Moreover, he esteems Mathan the Residence of the King of Canem, who holds here many Cities; makes Zaghara better, and saith, it hath some Trade, Tagua and Nubia more, from which last the Region and People took their names. John Leon and Sanutus after him, esteems Dancala or Dangala, the chief of the Kingdom, seated on the Nile, and that it hath about 10000 Families. And he saith, its Houses are built with Chalk, and covered with Laths or Boards: The Inhabitants civil and rich, driving a good Trade through all Egypt, even to Cairo; whither they carry Arms, Cloths, Civet, Sanders and Ivory. They have a certain Poyson worth 100 Ducats an Ounce, which they sell only to strangers, which promise not to use it in the Countrey. And also Bugia seated on the Nile, a City of some account and Trade; as is Jalac, Gualva and Cusa, also seated on the Nile.
The Empire of the ABIS∣SINES or the HIGH∣ER AETHI∣OPIA, wherein are comprehen∣ded divers Kingdoms, Countreys, Coasts, Isles, &c. which may be con∣sidered as they lye Northernly and towards EGYPT, as The Kingdom of NUBIA with its Estates and Cities of Gorham, Jalac, Mathan, Gualva, Dancala, Cusa, Zaghara, Bugia, Angimi, Tamalma, Sula, Tagua. North-Easternly and towards the Red Sea, as The Coast of ADEX which compre∣hendeth the Kingdom of BARNA∣GASSO. Suaquen, Ercocco, Carna, Corberia, Barva, Zama. ISLES of Bahia, Suaquem, Mire, Macruma, St. Peitre. Easternly and towards the Sea of ZANGUEBAR; as The Coast of AJAN which compre∣hendeth the Kingdom of ADEA Brava, Magadoxa, Barraboa, Quilmanca. Kingdom of ADEL Adel, Zeila, Barbora, Meta. ISLE of — Zocotora. The Coast of ZANGUEBAR with its E∣states and Cities of Mongale, Chelicia, Pate, Lamon, Angos, Mongalo, Melinda, Mombaze, Angos, Quiloa. Mozambique, Darcelum. ISLES about the Coast of ZANGUE∣BAR, as Monfia, Santus Rochus, Zanzibara, Penda. Southernly, Westernly and towards the Kingdom of CONGO or the LOWER AETHIOPIA, where are the Kingdoms or Provinces of TIGREMAHON Chuxumum, Saibana ANGOTA Angotina, Bugano, St. Maria. XOA — Xoa. FATIGARA — Mundinae, CANCALA Degibeldara, Degibelcora. BAGAMEDRI Chilcut, Ermita, Azuga, Baza, Machanda, GOYAME Chilcut, Ermita, Azuga, Baza, Machanda, AMBIAN Cemenia, Ambiami, Amasen, Syre. DAMBEA Ambadara, Chedaflan. VANGUE Matagazi, Vangue. DAMOUT Damute, Harode, Gaga. AMARA Amara, Fungi, Baraena, Burn. AMBIAM Ambiam, Therva, Azuga, Ougne, Losa, Sesila, Agola. GEMEN Gemen, Dara, Jaflan. GORGA Gorga, Bara, Gafat. GAVI-GASA — Gasabella. NAREA Falaccia, Gavi, Zet. GAFATES Cafates, Maurama. FUNGI — Fungi. QUARA Quara, Nova. AGAG Agag, Gorava, Giarva.
map of the Abyssinian or Ethiopian empire A MAPP OF THE HIGHER AND LOWER AETHIOPIA. COMPREHEND YE SEVERAL KINGDOMES. &c IN EACH. TO WITT IN THE EMPIRE OF THE ABISSINES THE COAST OF ZANGUEBAR, ABEX, AND AIAN, WITH THE KINGDOMES OF NUBIA, AND BIAFARA, &c IN THE LOWER AETHIOPIA THE KINGDOM OF CONGO. YE EMPIRE OF MONOMOTA AND MONOEMUGY. Y• COAST AND LANDS OF CAFRES. AND OF THIS SIDE CAPE NEGRES. With the Isles of Madagasoar &c by Monsieur Sanson Geograper, to ye French King blazon or coat of arms of the Glynne baronets To the Rt. Worshipfull Sr. William Glynne of Bissister in Oxfordshire & of Hawarden in Flintshire Bart. This Mapp is humbly DD by R.B.
THE EMPIRE OF THE ABYSSINGS, Or, THE Higher Aethiopia. Empire of the Abissins, its ex∣tent, length, & breadth.ABYSSIN, or the Empire of the ABYSSINS, is commonly called the Higher and Great AETHIOPIA; because it makes the greatest and better part of the one, and the other Aethiopia; and is the greatest and most considerable Estate of all Africa, un∣der one name. It extends it self on this side, and beyond the E∣quinoctial Line; from the Mountains of the Moon, and the Springs of the Nile, even near unto Egypt; and from the Kingdoms, and Estates of Congo, and the Negroes, unto the Coasts of Zanguebar, Ajan and Habex. Its greatest length from South to North, is 800 Leagues. Its breadth from West to East, 4, 5 and sometimes 600, and in Circuit about 2500. Its parts.Some divide this great Estate into many Kingdoms and Provinces, as are set down in the Geopraphical Table of the Higher Aethiopia; we shall observe the most known. Kingdom of Barnagasso de∣scribed.BARNAGASSO signifies King of the Sea, because formerly all this Kingdom or Government held all the Coast of the Red Sea, from Egypt unto the Kingdom of Dancala; which is 250 Leagues; At present the Turks hold this Coast, where are Suaquen, Mezzua, Arquico which we will describe with Zan∣guebar, under the name of the Coast of Habex. Barva or Daburova is esteemed the chief of Barnagasso; after which some put Canfila, Daffila, and Emacen: o∣thers esteem Canfila and Daffila Provinces or Governments, and Emacen a City of the Government of Daffila, 20 Leagues from Barva; 50 from Suaquen. Cha∣xumo is the chief of Tigre; a fair City, and according to the common opinion, the Ordinary Residence of the Queen of Sheba or Saba, that came to see Solo∣mon. Both the City and Quarter of Sabain, not far from Chaxumo, seem to re∣tain the name. There are every where, here abouts, found a great many fair Churches: Angotine is a City in the Kingdom of Angota, and here they use Salt, or little pieces of Iron instead of Money. Kingdom of Amara describ∣ed.The Kingdom of AMARA is farnous, by reason of its Mountain, where the Children, and nearest of Kinred to the Grand Negus are guarded: This Mountain is very high, of a great circuit, and whose approaches are very diffi∣cult, being craggy on all sides, and easie to defend; which made this use be made of it, to keep those which may cause any commotion in the Estate. The top of
the Mountain is formed into a great Plain, where there are fair Buildings, many Cisterns, a rich Monastery, &c. Some speak wonders of this Mountain, and that the Grand Negus being deceased, they take thence him who is the trueinterior, if he be capable to govern the Estate, if not the second or third, &c. in order. Others say that there are no such things as they put here, neither Monastery, Library, Gold, Precious Stones, &c. Kingdom of Bagamedri with its Pro∣vinces &c. de∣scribed.BAGAMEDRI is subdivided into Provinces, like to Tigre; hath a great∣er extent, and should be better, lying along the Nile. The Prince resides of∣ten at Dambea, which is beyond the Nile, as well as Damout. Some place the Springs of the Nile in Goyame, others in Cafates. The one and the other Kingdom being about the Lake of Zaire. Goyame where this Lake reduces it self into a River, which is the Nile: Cafates on one of the principal Rivers of those that fall into the Lake; which apparently should be called the Nile. Narea is between the Lake of Zaire and Zafflan; which are two Lakes, from whence descend the principal Rivers which make the Nile. The Air ferti∣lity, commodi∣ties, &c. of the Abissin.The Air of Abissin is very temperate considering its situation: Tigremaon particularly is esteemed so, by reason of the Northerst Winds which reesh it. All the Country is in Plains, except some Mountains, which are espeally towards its bounds. The Soyl is generally good, fruitful in Grains and Pulse, of which, it hath excellent, not known to us; they have few Vines, as also few Herbs, the Grasshoppers much annoying them. The Land feeds many tame and wild Beasts; and much Fowl, among others an infinite number of Turtles. Their Rivers have Croodiles and River-Hoses, which they call Goma∣ras; it is a hardy Fish, and will assault men in the Water. It hath much Metals, as Gold, Silver, Lead, Tin; and the Mountains so full of Sulphur, that they may afford wherewith to make Salt-peter more then any Country in the World, Tigremahon hath Mines of Gold, Silver, Iron, Lead, Copper and Sulphur: Da∣mout hath more Gold, then all the rest: Bagamedri and Goyame hath likewise Gold. The Inhabitants are generally black; some more, some less; they are (for the most part) of a good stature, flat nosed, woolly haired, of a nimble spirit, and very jovial: They have scarce any thing of Literature, neither do they much desire to attain to any. They Coyn neither Gold nor Silver, but receive it by weight. Some Authors make this Prince so rich, that there is scarce any in the World hath so much present Gold in his Coffers. Sanutus saith, that he once offered to the Kings of Portugal a Million of Drams of Gold, and as many men to exterminate the Infidels.Its People. And Queen Helena writing to Emanuel of Portu∣gal, and speaking for her Grand-child David, saith, that if the King of Portu∣gal would furnish them with 1000 Vessels of War and People fit for the Sea, that she would on her part,Its Kings very rich and pow∣erful. furnish them with all things necessary for the War, and give them 200 Millions of Gold; and that she had Men, Gold and Pro∣visions, in suchgreat number and plenty, as there were Sands in the Sea, or Stars in the Firmament. Zaara, King of Aethiopia, led against Asa, King of Judah, 90000 Foot, and 10000 Horse; which are 100000 Men. Pliny esteems the Isle of Meroes alone have 250000 Men fit to bear Arms; and 400000 Artisans. At present, the Grand Negus is held able to raise a Million of Men; and Barnagas alone to furnish 200000 Foot, and 20000 Horse. The Prince is always in the Field, and 5 or 6000 Tents attending on him, where are are Churches, Hospitals, Shops, Taverns, &c. which furnished with all things necessary for himself, and his Train. There are scarce any Fortresses in the Countrey, except where Mountains of themselves make them. The Neighbors to this Estate, are the Turks, who hold all the Coast of Haber on the Red Sea, the King of Adel, and some others, on the Coasts of Ajan and Zanguebar; the Monomotapa, or the Monoemugi, towards the Mountains of the Moon; the Congo, or some Estates neighboring on Congo, and the Negroes towards the West; some Kings of Nubia, towards the North. Except the Turks, the Abissins having no Civil War, can easily reduce the greatest part of them to reason, or at least, hinder them from mo∣lesting him.
ZANGƲEBAR. Zangbar, its Coasts or Parts, and their Situati∣on.UNder the name of ZANGƲEBAR, I comprehend all the Coasts of the Higher Aethiopia: And these Coasts are on the Aethiopian Ocean, and the Red Sea or Gulph of Arabia. I subdivide them into three parts, the Coast of Zanguebar, the Coast of Ajan, and the Coast of Abex. The Coast of Zanguebar extends it self from the Cafres to under the Equator, for the space of 5 or 600 Leagues: That of Ajan is between the Equator and the Streight of Bab-el-Mandel, likewise 600 Leagues: The Coast of Abex advances from that Streight to Egypt, and hath not above 4000 Leagues. The first part was called by the Ancients Barbaria Regio, the second Azania Re∣gio, and the last Trogloditica Regio. The particular Coast of Zanguebar towards the East regards some Isles,Zanguebar. among which that of Zanguebar, which hath communicated its name to the Coast, and then those of Penda and Monfia are the best known. Maffy makes mention here of the Isle and City of Querimba, and Texera of Anisa; the one and the other possibly, answer to some of those which Sanutas calls St. Rocq and Monfia, which (he saith) are four Islands, two great and two small. Penda and Zanguebar are the greatest,Penda. and according to the form Sanutus gives them, are each of 100 Leagues circuit, Monfia 50, and the others much less. All, and particularly Zanguebar, produceth quantity of Grains, as Rice, Millet, &c. quantity of Fruits, as Citrons, Oranges, &c. and many Sugar Canes, which they know not how to resine; nor want they Fountains of fresh Water. Aniza and Querimba hath Manna, but not so much esteemed as that of other places. On the Coast are the Estates or Kingdoms of Mongale, on one of the branches of Cuama, Angos or Angouche, on another Branch, or on another River of the same name, Mozambique Isle and City on the Coast, as likewise Quiloa and Mombaze. Melinda is no Isle, but on the Coast: so are Lamon, Pate, &c. Mongalo and Angos are little considerable; their Inhabitants black, Mahometans and Pagans; they traffick in Gold, Ivory, Calicoes, and Silk. The Isle and City of Mozambique is on that Coast of Africa which regards the Isle of Madagascar towards the East,Isle and City of Mosambique described. and just between the Capes of Good Hope and Guardafuy, near 1000 Leagues from the one and the other, some account is made of this City and its Fort, for the goodness and depth of its Port, though small; but of a very important retreat for the Vessels of Por∣tugal, after they have passed the Cape of Good Hope, where oft-times the Heat, or the working or motion of the Ship distempers many Men, who re∣fresh themselves here, there being a very good Hospital, and a Magazin al∣ways furnished with what ever is needful, to finish their Voyage to the East Indies; this Port serving them going to the Indies, as the Isle o Sancta He∣lena doth in their return. The whole Isle is not above a League and half in circuit. Its City is not so beautiful as many have believed it, but of a good Trade, wealthy and well frequented by the Portugals. Its Castle is good, since it hath sustained divers Assaults of the Hollanders. The Soil is dry, hath none, or very little Fresh-water; but the great number of Fruits, as Cocos, Oranges, Citrons, as others common to the Indies; and the quantity of Cat∣tle, as Oxen, Sheep, Goats, Hogs, &c. which are found here, recompence these Inconveniences. Their Figs are long and large, being excellent and halth∣ful. The Tree sprouts, and dies every year; it shoots forth but one Branch, where many Figs ripen one after another, so that they are found to continue almost all the year: the Leaves are so great, that two will cover a person of a moderate Stature: dying, it leaves a Root, which shoots forth another Fig-Tree the year after
Their Swines-flesh is so healthful, that Physicians order it for Sick people. Their Pullain are good and delicate, though their Feathers, Flesh, Blood, and Bones, are very black, and if boiled in Water as black as Ink. Here they are said to have Sheep, whose Tails weigh about 25 pound weight. Kingdom of Quiloa, its chief places, &c.QƲILOA is 150 Leagues, or little more from Mozambique, in a strait line: and near 250 by Sea: It hath two Cites, the Old and the new; the Old on the main Land, the New in an Island, divided from it by a small Channel: This last is much the fairest; its Houses high, magnificent, and well furnished; accompunied with Gardens, where they gather excellent Fruits throughout the whole year. The Kings of Quiloa once commanded all the Coast into Mo∣zambique and Sofala; but this Estate hath received a great change since the coming of the Portugals into these quarters.Its People. Its Inhabitants are yet rich, and have a great traffick for Gold, which they bring from the Main Land, where there is near as much as on the Coast of Sofala; as also Silver, Ambergreece, Pearls and Musk: They are part black, part white; these coming from Arabia, and are Mahometans; the others of the Natives are partly Idolaters both the one and the other go clad after the Arab or Turkish manner; the richest wearing Cloaths of Gold and Silver, Silks, fine Calicos, and Scarlet, inriching the Guards of their Swords and Daggers with fair Pearls and Precious Stones, as the Women do their Ear-Pendants and Bracelets. They are very comly, of a civil behaviour, neat in their Houses, and love to go in rich Apparel. Here the People are observed to use a strange custom to those of the Female Sex, which is not used by any other Nation or People, save themselves; which is that they sow up the Privy-parts of the Female Children, only leaving a small vent for the issuing forth of their Urine. And thus sowed, they keep them carefully at home until they be mar∣ried; and those that are by their Husbands found not to have this sign of their perpetual Virginity, are sent to their Parents with all kind of ignominy, and by their Parents are as disgracefully received. The Country, though unhealth∣ful to the Europeans, ought to be esteemed good, since the Inhabitants are rich, the Soil fruitful in Grains and Fruits, feeding many Beasts and Fowl. Its Forests full of Game, and its Neighbouring Sea full of excellent Fish. The Isle and City of Mom∣baze.MOMZAMBE is 150 Leagues from Quiloa, seated on a little Hill, and an in Island, at the bottom of a Gulph, where great Ships may ride safe at Anchor. This City was formerly great, being about a League in circuit, encompassed with a strong Wall, and fortifled with a good Castle; well Peo∣pled, of a good Trade; its Streets in good order, and its Houses high, and well built with Stone and Chalk, appearing almost all towards the Sea. It was found out when Vasco de Gama was in the Indies, and afterwards taken and re∣taken divers times by the Portugals, who keep a Fort by reason of the good∣ness of the Haven, and to maintain their trade. The Isle of Mombaze is but small. The Kingdom of Melinda described.MELINDA is another Kingdom, but of a small extent; yet made con∣siderable by the good intelligence it hath always preserved with the Por∣tugals. Since Vasco de Gama passed there the first time in 1489, until this present, which hath stood it in good stead; the Neighbouring States having been taken, pillaged, and burned divers times. This kept entire, maintaiming its Trade with the Portugals, and with the East: Its chief City bears the name of the Kingdom, seated in a fruitful and delightful Soil, yielding great plenty of Rice, Millet, Flesh; good store of Fruits, as Lemmons, Citrons, Oranges, &c. But not well furnished with Corn, the greatest part whereof is broughtout of Cambaya, a Province in India. This City is fair, well Walled, and the Houses built after the Moorish manner, with many Windows and Terrasses.Its People. The Inhabitants on the Sea Coasts are of the Arabian breed, and of the same Religion. Those of the Inlands, which are the Original Natives, are for the most part Heathens, and of an Olive colour, but inclining to white; and their Women of a very white Complexion, as in other places. They are said to be more civil in their Habit, Course of life, and entertainment in their
Houses, than the rest of this Country; and great Friends to the Portugals, who return the like kind usage to them. This Kingdom of Melinda is not distant from Mombaza above 30 Leagues by Land, and 60 by Sea; whose People are of the same nature and disposition with those of Melinda. Estates of Lamon, Pate, and Chilicia.The Estates of LAMON, PATE, and CHELICIA, and likewise some others, are under the Government of Melinda. Panebaxira, King of La∣mon, and Brother to the King of Chelicia, surprized in 1589, Rock Brito, Go∣vernour of Melinda, and some other Portugals, whom they sold to the Turks. The Admiral Thomas Sousa Cotinho assaulted them, took, and cut off the Head of the King of Lamon, quartered the others, and hung them up in divers places to serve for example. These Kings are almost all Mahometans; yet here are found some few Christians which inhabit among them. We have observed on the Coast of Zanguebar but five or six different E∣states or Kingdoms; there are some others, but of lesser note, and all Tributary, or in good Intelligence, and trading with the Portugals. The Coast of Ajan descri∣bed.Thee Coast of AJAN contains the Republick of BRAVA, which Sanu∣tus calls Barraboa; then the Kingdoms of MAGADOXA, ADEA, and ADELL: some of their People on the Coast are White. BRAVA is well built, an indifferent Mart; rich, and pays Tribute to the Portugals. It is the only Republick at present in Africa, being governed by 12 Councellors or Statesmen. MAGADOXA is its chief City, and hath sometimes been so powerful, that it ruled over all this Coast; it is scituate in a delightful and fruitful Soil, and neighboured by a safe and large Haven, which is much fre∣quented by the Portugals, and is very rich, affording Gold, Hony, Wax, and above all Abyssin Slaves, which by the Portugals are held in great value; for which they bring them in exchange the Silks, Spices, Drugs, &c. of India. ADEA extends it self but little towards the Sea: The Country is fertil in Grains, as Wheat, Barley, Rice, &c. It is well shaded with Woods and large Forrests, which are plentifully furnished both with Fruits and Cattle, besides a greatincrease of Horses. The Inhabitants are of the Mahometan Religion,Its People. and follow the Arabians in many of their Customs, from whom they were descended, keeping much of their Language, and in their Habit naked, save only from the middle downwards. Of Complexion, for the most part of an Olive colour, and well proportioned; not very expert in Arms, except in poy∣soned Arrows. Its other chief places are Barraboa and Quilmanca, seated on the Sea, which is called the Coast of Ajan, as is Magadoxa. ADELL within these few years is become the most powerful of all these Kingdoms: Its Estates extending both on the Arabian Gulph or Red Sea; and on the Great Ocean, stretching 200 Leagues on each side; Cape Guar∣dafuy ending both the one and the other towards the East, regards in the Sea the Isle of Zocotora, famous for the quantity and goodness of the Aloes here gathered, which they call Zocotorin; about which are several other Isles, but not so considerable, being small, and many not inhabited. The Arab of Nubia would make us believe, that Alexander the Great was in this Island, drove thence the Inhabitants, and planted Greeks the better to manage the Aloes, which Aristotle had so much prized to him. Its chief City takes its name from the Kingdom; its others places of most note are, 1. Zeila, of old, Avalis, and its Gulph Avalatis Sinus, is one of the best places of the King∣dom of Adell, though about the City there wants Water; yet the Country farther off furnishes Wheat, Barley, Millet, Oil of Sesamum, Honey, Wax, Fruits, Gold, Ivory, and Incense. They fell to the Turks and Arabs abun∣dance of Abyssin Slaves, which they take in War; and in exchange receive Arms, Horses, &c. This Zeila is a noted Port Town, well frequented with Merchants, by reason of the variety of good Commodities that it yields. Once of great beauty and esteem, till in the year 1516 it was sacked and burn∣ed by the Portugals; before which it was esteemed the most remarkable Em∣pire of all AEthiopia for the Indian Trade. 2. Barbora, and 3. Meta, are two of the most noted Sea-Port Towns in all Adell, both under the Turks Juris∣diction. The first is seated on the same Sea Coast, as Zeila is, well frequented
by Merchants, nigh to a lofty Promontory, which they call Mount Fellez: And the last is seated near the Cape of Guardafuy. The People inhabiting on the Sea Coasts are descended from the Arabs, and of the Mahometan Religi∣on; but those towards the Inland Countries, of the old Aethiopick Race, and wholly Gentiles. The Coast of Abex, with its chief places and Isles.The Coast of ABEX hath for its principal places, Aquico, of old Mag∣num Littus, Maczuma Isle, Macaria Insula, and Suaquem Ptolomais Fera∣rum. The Turk hath a Bassa at Suaquem, and some say another at Maczuma or Aquico. Suaquem is in the midst of the Coast of Africa, which lies on the Red Sea or Arabian Gulph, distant from Sues in Egypt, which ends this Gulph, 250 and odd Leagues; and from Babel-Mandel, which begins it, 260, or little more: So the Authority of this Bassa exten almost quite over this Sea. The Isle of Maczuma hath good Pastures, feeds much Cattle: Aquico is al∣most opposite to Maczuma, and both have commodious Havens. Its other chief places are, Canfila, Daffila, Emacen, Barba, Zama, Corberia, and Carna. About this Coast of Abex are several other Isles, as Bahia de Cabras, Suaquem, Mire, Meger, Ballaccia, Maczua, St. Peitre, with several others not worth the naming. All this Coast of Abex hath been under the Government of Bernagasso in Abyssin, and belonged not to the Turk till within this hundred years. A Coun∣try dry, untilled, but of some Trade: the People fierce, retaining much of their ancient Barbarism. They Fish Coral near the Isle of Suaquem and A∣quico; they frequently pass from Suaquem to Ziden, in Arabia, which serves for a Port to Mecca, and is about 100 Leagues over. This is the Traject which the Arab of Nubia describes between Adhab and Giodda, which an∣swer to Suaqnem and Ziden.
The Em∣pire of the ABYS∣SINS; or the LOWER AETHIO∣PIA; with its Empires, Kingdoms, Land, &c. which may be divided into (or comprehen∣ded under) three Parts, or Heads; and then: The First shall contain The Kingdom of CONGO, with its Kingdoms or Provinces of LOANGA, Loango, Sette, Majumba, Quanvi, Quiloogo, Sellaga, Kaye, Katte. PANGO, Pango, Cundi Funquenes, Angote, Chicaco de Lula. SUNDA, Sunda, Betequa, Quincasso. SONGO, Sonho, Bommo, Matinga, Cascais, Melemba, Calinde, Palmarinho, Mombalas, Quivala. BAMBA, Bamba, Mussula, Lengo, Loanda St. Pavo, Fort Mols, Motole, Bengo, Azele. PEMBA, St. Salvador, Pemba, Tinda, Simba, Lemba. BATTA, Batta, Agisimba, Gongou. ANGOLA, Engaze, Maisirgan, Benguela, Quicongo, Manikimsombo, Manikilondo, Gunze, Mapongo, Embacca. GIAQUES, Zaire, Dagar, Elifie. MALEMBA, Meri. Debsan. The Second shall contain The Empire of MONOMOTAPA, with its Kingdoms or Parts of SUTUA, Batua, Carma, Zet, Dobdel, Augesa. Calburas, Bafat, Quiticui, Degme, Hagala, Giera, Amara, Matagasi, Bera, Armeta, Gallica. MONOMOTAPA, particularly so called, Monomotapa, Zuggi, Tialso, Zimbro, Jouros, Garma, Mosata, Vigiri Magna. The Empire of MONOEMUGI, wherein are some Kingdoms, whose chief places are Agag, Astagoa, Leuma, Camur, Beif, Bagametro, Zembre, The Third shall contain The Land and Coast of CAFRES, which encompasseth the Em∣pire of MONOMOTAPA, with its Parts of MATAMAN, Angra dos Negros, Cabo Negro, Doileus portus. Coast of CAFRES, particularly so called, Cape St. Anthony, Cape St. Lucia, St. Martins-Bay, Cape of Good Hope, Carascalis Portus. Biscarius Portus, St. Nicholai. CHICANGA, — Zimbaos. QUITEVA, Deje, Cuama. ZEFALAN, — Zefalan.
THE EMPIRE OF THE ABYSSINS, Or, THE Lower Aethiopia. The Lower Aethiopia, and the Power and Riches of its Emperours.THE Empire of the ABYSSINS, Heylin makes to be the Dominions or Empire of Prester John, and saith, That he is of such great force, that he is able to bring into the Field upon a sudden occasion, a Million of Fighting Men; and of his Wealth and Riches many speak wonders, some saying he is able to pur∣chase half of all the World, if it were to be sold: Others make it not so great, but say, that besides his necessary expences in the management of State Af∣fairs; the payment of his Army, the pomp in his Court, &c. he lays up yearly in his Treasury Three Millions of Crowns. But without doubt his Re∣venue and Force is great; for it is said, That he himself proffered the Portu∣gals a Million of Money, and another of Men, if they would employ them in a War against the Infidels. The Government of this Emperour is absolutely Tyrannical, the People being used more like Slaves than Subjects, treating them as he pleases, as well to their lives as Estates; giving Honours to whom he pleases, which upon any slight occasion he taketh away again. He is held in such great reverence among all his Subjects, as well Rich as Poor, that at his name they bow their Bodies, and touch the ground with one of their fingers; and reverence his Pavilion as they pass by it, though he is not in it. And to keep up this Reve∣rence, which he holds due to him, he seldom shews himself to his Subjects, and then not without his Crown on his head, a Silver Crucifix in his hand, and his Face covered with a Veil of Taffety, which according as he is pleased to grace the person he talketh with, he lifteth up and putteth down, to shew him his Face. His Titles.The Title of this Great and Mighty Emperour, I shall borrow from Heylin, who thus hath it: N. N. Supream of his Kingdoms, and the beloved of God; the Pillar of Faith; sprung from the Stock of Judah; the Son of David, the Son of Solomon, the Son of the Colomn of Sion, the Son of the Seed of Jacob, the Son of the Hand of Mary, the Son of Nahu, after the Flesh; the Son of St. Peter and Paul, after the Spirit: Emperour of the Higher and Lower Aethiopia, and of the most Mighty Kingdoms, Dominions, and Countries of Xoa, Goa, Caffares, Fatigar, Angotae, Balignazo, Adea, Vangne, Goyame,
where the Fountains of Nile, Amara, Banguamedron, Ambea, Vagucum, Ti∣gremean, Sabaim, the Birth-place of the Queen of Sheba; Bernagassum; and Lord of all the Regions unto the confines of Egypt. They prosess the Christian Religion,Their Religi∣on. which was first made known unto them by the Eunuch of Queen Candace, who was baptized by Philip the Evange∣list, and more generally received by the Preaching of St. Matthew the A∣postle. Since which they have much swerved from the purity of the true Religion, by their many corrupt Opinions which are crept in amongst them; as they use Circumcision both to their Males and Females, when they are Chil∣dren; and they Baptize their Males 40 days, and their Females 80 days after Circumcision: That Infants dying unbaptized, are sanctified by the Womb, by vertue of the Eucharist which the Mother receives after her Conception: They administer the Eucharist to Infants, presently after they are Baptized. They Baptize themselves in Pouds and Lakes every Epiphany-day, as sup∣posing that to be the day that John Baptized Christ in Jordan. They hold, that the reasonable Soul of Man is derived from their First Parents by Semi∣nal Propagation. They acknowledge but one Nature, and one Will in Christ. After the receiving of the Sacrament, they hold it unfitting to Spit until Sun-fet. Those Beasts which in the Old Law are held unclean, are so esteemed with them. They keep their Sabbath-day on Saturdays: they allow their Priests no yearly means or slipends, neither do they suffer them to beg; but they are forced to get their livelyhoods by the sweat of their brows, and labour of their hands. They accept only of the three first General Councils. They have moreover a Book, which is writ in eight Volumes (and as they say) by the Apostles assembled at Jerusalem for that purpose, the Contents thereof they most strictly keep. We have divided AETHIOPIA into the Higher and Lower; esteemed the Higher, that which is towards the North and the East; the Lower, that which is towards the South and West. We have succinctly discoursed of the Parts of the Higher, proceed we now to the Lower. Lower Aethio∣pia, its extent and bounds.This Lower AETHIOPIA extends it self from the River of the Cama∣ronts, where the bottom of the Gulph of St. Thomas is, and so turning about the Capes of Negro, Bona Esperanza, and Des Carientes, into the River of Cuama; which bounds it from Zanguebar, part of the Higher Aethiopia, as the other doth from the Kingdom of Benim, part of Guiny, which is in Libya Interior. We have like wise subdivided this Lower Aethiopia into three parts,Its division and parts.viz. into Congo, Monomotapa, and the Country of the Cafres. We may yet subdivide these three Parts, each into two others, which will make six. The first shall be what is between Guiny and Congo; the second, Monomotapa and Mona-Emugi; and the last, the Land of Cafres on this side, and Westward; and the Land of Cafres beyond, and Eastward of the Cape of Good Hope. Between Guiny and the Kingdom of Congo there are divers Kingdoms, and divers People: The Ambosins and Camarones are on the Sea; then the Kingdoms of the Capones, the Country of Angra, the three Kingdoms of Cacombo, Gabom, and Pongo; of which this last is most powerful. Among these Estates are the Capes of Lopo Gonsalves; up in the Land are the Kingdoms of Biafra, Me∣dra, Dauma, &c. The Land of AMBOSINS and CAMARONES, are near the Ri∣ver of Camarones; a Country very fertil. The Lands of Capones and Angra are pleasant, because of the many fresh Streams which water them. The first are poor, the Capones are malicious, those of Angra addicted to Arms. The Estates or Kingdoms which are about the Cape of Gonsalves,Its People. have their Peo∣ple of the same Tongue, the same Religion (who are Idolaters,) and the same Manners; and their Kings and Lords are in peace, and in good intelligence with one another: Those nearest the Sea are the most courteous and civil, by reason of the confluence of Strangers; and when they trade with those of Europe, they white their Faces with Chalk? their beautiful Garments are made of Mats, tissued with the Rind of certain Trees, and properly accom∣modated. Those of Biafra more advanced in Land, are very barbarous,
addicting themselves to Witcherafts, and sometimes sacrificing their Children to Devils. Those of Medra, Dauma, and some others further off, are almost quite unknown, and possibly not worth regard. The Portugals traded here alone a long time, and possessed several Parts on this Coast: within few years the Hollanders have taken divers places from them, some of which they have since retaken. The Kingdom of CONGO. Kingdom of Congo, with its Parts or King∣doms descri∣bed.BEyond the Equinoctial Line and unto Cape Negro, lies the Kingdom of CONGO, under the name of which we comprehend many others, which have been Subjects, Tributaries, or Allies to the King of Congo; as are the Kingdoms of Loanga and the Anziquaines, to the North; of Cacongo, and the People Gallas or Giaquas, to the East, of Angola, Malemba, Mata∣man, and others, to the South. Kingdom of Loanga descri∣bed.The Kingdom of LOANGA hath its principal City of the same name; others say, Banza Loango, or simply Banza; it is seated on the Sea, as is Quilongo, Quanvi, and Majumba. It comprehends six Provinces, and is throughout indifferent fertil in Grains; affords excellent Fruits, Wine of Palms; breeds many Cattle, and all things necessary for life is found here; it is well stored with Elephants, having more than any other Country in these parts; they have quantity of Ivory, but have neither Gold nor Silver. The Country is very hot, by reason of its lying under the Line; but indifferent healthful and well peopled. Their King once subject, writes himself now but Ally to the King of Congo, and is called Mani-Loango, and the Governours of the six Provinces, likewise Mani, that is, Lord of such or such a Province. Their Subjects are all Bramas, who by Religion are Heathens. Kingdom of Congo, and its Provinces.The Kingdom of CONGO may be said to be the fairest of the Lower Aethiopia, though those of the Monomotapa, and Mono-Emugi, have more extent, yet hath he alwaies been esteemed the most Polite; hath had all his neighbours Subjects, and the most part yet his Allies. It may have in length 200 Leagues, and about 120 on the Coast. It is subdivided into six great Pro∣vinces, to wit, Bamba, Songo, Sunda, Pango, Batta, and Pemba: which together hath 30 or 40000 little Towns. Songo, Sunda and Pango lies upon, and mounting from the Sea up the River Zaire. Bamba, Pemba and Batta are towards the River of Coanza, and the Lake of Aquilonda; these three last making the most Southern parts, the three other the most Northern of the Kingdom: and all take their names from the principal places where the Governours of the Provinces reside. The Country of BAMBA is well stored with Beasts and Birds,Bamba. both, tame and wild; well watered with Rivers, hath Mines of Silver, and its People exceeding strong. Its chief places are, Bamba, on the River Loze; Motole, on the River Dorati; Bengo, also Pavo, Lengo, and Mussulo, on the Sea. SONGO lies on both sides the River Zaire,Songo. which sends forth many tur∣bulent Streams, and hath so many Islands that one part of it hath very little to do with the other; its chief places are Sonho, nigh to Cape de Pedro, and on a branch of the Zaire; also Bommo, Matinga, Cabinde, Malemba, and Cas∣cais, which three last are on the Sea. SƲNDA is indifferent fertil,Sunda. hath several rich Mines of Metals; among the rest the Inhabitants set the greatest esteem upon Iron, by reason that of it they make their Materials for War; it is parted by the Zaire. This Coun∣try furnishes forreign Merchants with several rich Furs, as Sables, Martrons, &c. Its several chief places are, Sunda, Betequa▪ Iri, and Quincasso. PANGO is but barren,Pango. its Inhabitants barbarous, but strong in Arms: Its chief places are Pango, Cundi-Funquenes, and Angote; and this Country is watered with the River Zaire.
BATTA is also of a barren Soil, and its People also barbarous,Batta. but indiffe∣rent well skill'd in Arms; and that being forced to it rather to defend them∣selves, than to offend others. Its chief places are Batta, Agisymba, and Gongou. PEMBA is held to be the richest and pleasantest Province of all Congo,Pemba. being very fertil in Grains, Fruits, &c. hath good Water; the Air is healthful; the Inhabitants, since the Portugals sat footing there, are become very civil, imitating them both in Behaviour and Apparel. Its chief City called Ban∣za, that is, the Court, and which the Portagals call St. Salvador,Its chief pla∣ces. is the resi∣dence of the King, seated on an eminence, which discovers the Country on all sides. This scituation together with its being in the middle of the Estate, gives it a great advantage; some esteem it to have 10000 Inhabitants, others 100000: possibly those understand 10000 Families, and those 100000 Souls; for the King being powerful, and his Court always great, there cannot but be multitudes. The Isle and City of Loanda, on the Coast of Bamba, were not long since in the hands of the Portugals; now the East India Company of the Ʋnited Provinces have seized it. Its other chief places are Simba, Pemba, on the River Danda, Lemba and Tinda. The chief Ri∣vers of Congo.The most famous Rivers of this Kingdom are the Zaire, the Lelunda, the Danda, and the Coanza; the three last descend from the Lake of Aquilonda; the Zaire from the Lake of Zaire, from whence descends likewise the Nile; the Zaire hath 400 Leagues course, is very rapid, by reason of the many Ca∣taracts or great falls which it hath from the Mountains; at its entrance into the Estates of Congo it enlarges it self much, embraces quantity of Islands, and at its Mouth hath no less than 8 or 10 Leagues breadth, yet presses its Waters 15 or 20 Leagues farther into the Sea, and that with so great a violence, that its Waters retain their natural sweetness, without being corrupted or inter∣mingled with the Salt-waters of the Sea. The Rivers Danda and Coanza are Navigable, and receive great Ships. The Isle of Loandu is near the Mouth of the last: It is observed, that when the Sea is high the Springs of Running-water are fresh, and when the Sea falls they become salt. The Congolans are naturally very sweet and easie, able and strong,Its People. but dull and idle: they will not take the pains to tame Beasts for service, nor to em∣ploy their fine Stones in Buildings, nor make their Birds of Prey for Hawking; yet make they curious Cloths, Velvets, Damasks, Brocats, &c. They have no harmony in their Instruments of Musick, but a confused mixture of many cords or strings and many Voices content them; their Money is of grey shells, taken on the Coast of the Province of Bamba, and these Shells (especially the Females) are much esteemed, even in other Kingdoms, and almost through all Aethiopia. Their Grains, Fruits, Waters, Fowl,Its Fertility. Sea and River Fish are ex∣cellent. They have store of Elephants, Mines of Silver, Iron, Chrystal, Marble, Jaspar, Porphyre, &c. They know not their Histories but by the Reigns of their Kings, and without specifying the time, for they have no Letters, much less Learning; and hereupon some would make us believe, that Emanuel of Portugal having sent a famous Ambassador into Congo with many Presents, among others three fair Books excellently bound, and which contained the Cannons, the Laws Imperial, the Ordinances, Civil Right, the Infortiate, the Rubricks, &c. and with these Books, many Doctors of Law to teach the knowledge of them; and when the King of Congo did understand the subject that these fair Books contained, and knew the profession of the Doctors, he was so surprized that he remained sometime silent; but in the end he caused these▪ Books to be burned, saying, That he feared they would overihrow the very foundation of his Estate; and that he contented himself to judge ac∣cording to reason, and need no other Interpreter than Common sense; but withal protesting, that he would remain a good and intire Friend to Emanuel King of Portugal; and so sent back his Doctors. The Author of the Essay of the Wonders of Nature applies this story to the King of the Abyssins: It is much at one; let us return to Congo.
They say, that the Province of Bamba can furnish at a need 400000 strong and Warlike men; the other Provinces are no less, nor possibly worse peopled than this, but less addicted to Arms. This being esteemed the Bulwark of the Kingdom, affected to the service of their Prince, and so strong, that at one, blow of a Sword they can strike off an Oxes head, or cut a Slave in two. Their Elephants are so great, that some of their Teeth are found to weigh 200 l. and they make such esteem of their Tails when they are old, that sometimes they exchange three Slaves for one Tail. They make of them divers Orna∣ments and Cords for their Instruments of Musick. The Kingdom falls only to the Males, and in default of Legitimates to Bastards: to shun all process, all Riches belong to the King, who disposes of them to whom he pleases, keeping to himself a certain Revenue. Christianity hath been introduced about 150 years ago, but not without much difficulty in its beginning. Estate of Cacongo.East of Congo, and South of Anziquaines, is the Estate of CACONGO; and South of Cacongo are the Giaques or Jaggas, which the Abyssins call Gal∣las, and others Imbagolas. These People are Vagabonds, Cruel, Men-eaters, like to the Anziquaines and Moceveies, living only on what they steal from their Neighbours. The great Jagge disposes absolutely, both of their Idolatry and their War. Kingdom of Angola.The Kingdom of ANGOLA, once Abonda, is between Congo on the North, Mataman on the South, Malemba on the East, and the Sea on the West. This Kingdom hath 100 Leagues of Coast, to wit, from the 10th unto the 4th degree of Meridional Latitude; and that which continues unto Cape Negro, and belongs to divers Lords, tributary to it. The principal City of the Coun∣try is Engaze, and likewise Dongo, which Modern Authors place at the meet∣ing of many Rivers: It is 75 or 80 Leagues from the Sea. The Mountains of Cambamba, rich in Mines of Silver, are in this Country, which the Portugals cause to be laboured. Its other chief places are Massirgan, on the River Co∣anza; Benguela, seated on the Sea, on the Bay of Thora; and Quicongo, a Sea-Port Town. Its Trade.Through the whole Country there is a great traffick for Slaves, 20 or 25000 yearly being transported from the Port of Loanda. There are such multitudes in this Kingdom, that the Grand Soba (as they say) can in a moment raise 100000 Men; and that in Anno 1584, he raised 1200000. In Anno 1585, 600000. Yet these last were put to flight by 200 Portugals at the head of 10000 Ae∣thiopians. The first by 150 Portugals at the head of 8 or 10000 Congolans, which may make us judge of the goodness of their Militia. The Kingdom is divided into Provinces or Mirindes, which have each their Sobas, which a 100 years ago, or little more, were only Governours for the Kings of Congo, now subject all to the Great Soba of Angola, who makes only some Present to the King of Congo. Its People use the same Tongue, Mony, and Arms, with those of Congo. The Empire of the MONO-MOTAPA. The Empire of the Mono-Motapa, its ex∣tent, state, and power of their Kings.THE MONO-MOTAPA, that is, the Emperour, King, or Sovereign of Motapa, is (according to Vincent Blanc) called by his People Taba∣qui, and possesses an Empire so great, that it is made of 1000 Leagues circuit: It is said by him, that this Prince deports himself with gravity, and that there is no access to his person but with very great submissions: That he is always adorned with Chains and Precious Stones, like to a Woman, or rather like a Spouse: Is pleased to receive Presents, but gives little; keeps a great Sera∣glio of Women, which it is forbid to approach; and one part of his Guard (according to some) is likewise composed of Women, who are active at their Arms, and couragious. He calls his principal City Madrogan (which is the Mono-Motapa of others) where his Royal Palace is, which is magnificent and great, flanked with Towers without, with four principal Gates; within hung
with Tapestries of Cotton mixed with Gold, and adorned with many rich and stately Moveables.His Habit, &c. This Prince is always clothed after the manner of his Pre∣decessors, nor may he change any thing, except the Ornaments of his Neck and Buskins. He wears no Forrein Stuffs for fear of Poyson and Witchcraft; his Drink  Wine of Palm distilled with Manna, Amber, and Musk. He spends much in Odours and Perfumes, making them be mixed in those Lights which are carried before him, and which serves where he is. His Court hath a great many Officers, which serve with order and silence; besides which, they are thronged with People. His Officers are easily known, because they carry the Talmassara on their Shoulder, more or less enriched, according to their con∣dition or degree of place; but all in the same fashion with the Kings. The Inhabitants are all black, of a mean stature, active, and such good Foot-men,Its Inhabitan that they are said to out-run Horses: They are couragious, addicted to Arms, as also to Trade. The Commonalty cover themselves but below the Waist, for which their Apparel is made of Skins of Beasts, Cotton, Cloth, or the like; but the better sort have Cloths and Stuffs, which are brought them from the Indies: The Maids cover nothing of their Body till they are married. Their Houses are of Wood, or Earth whited, fashioned like a Clock, or rather like a Bell. Those of the greatest Lords are the highest. They have as many Wives as they please; but she who is the first espoused is always the chief, and her Children alone inherit the Fathers Goods and Estate. The Women are here used very respectfully, none offering so much as to take the Wall of them. The Maids are here not thought fit to be married, till their Menstrua or Natu∣ral Purgations shews their ability for Conception, which makes them solem∣nize with a great Feast their first Flux. They have no Prison in all the Coun∣try, but all Affairs are determined and ended on the place, so soon as they are convicted of the fact or crime; but above all Offenders, those for Theft, Adul∣tery, and Witchcraft, are the most severely treated. And this sudden execu∣tion of Criminals, makes the King to be reverenced by his Subjects. Christia∣nity found here some difficulties at the beginning; at present it is established by the consent of the King, who hath likewise permitted the Portugals to work the Mines of Gold and Silver, which in this Country are in great quan∣tity, and so rich, that there are some who call this Prince, The Emperour of Gold. Not only the Mines, but likewise the Rivers have Gold in their Sand: among which, those of Dos Infantos, of the Holy Ghost, and of Cuama, to∣wards their Springs, which are towards the Lake Zachaf; but those of the Country care for no more of it, than is necessary to truck for what they have need of. Its Fertility.The Woods have great store of Elephants, which yields them Ivory; as also other Beasts. Hath rich Pastures, which are well furnished with Cattle, hath Grains, Fruits, Fowl, is well watered with many Rivers, in which are abun∣dance of Fish. The Air is temperate, except that their Winter is colder than may be expected in that Climate, by reason of the Mountains which enclose it on all sides, and cross the Country: And their Winter is in the same time when we have our Summer, to wit, when the Sun is about the Tropick of Cancer. The power of the King.The Mono-Motapa is said to be one of the most powerful Princes of Africa, if we consider the greatness of his Estate, his Riches, and the great number of Princes which hold of him, or are under his Dominion. They yearly receive the Fire which the Mono-Motapa sends them, or upon refusal are accounted Rebels. But all these People, though hardy and addicted to Arms, are un∣expert in them: so that their Number would do them little good, if assaulted by the Europeans. They believe only in one God, and punish with death Ido∣laters and Sorcerers. The chief pla∣ces in the Em∣pire of the Mono-Motapa.But a word or two of the chief places of this Empire, and first of the Kingdom or Province of BƲTƲA, whose chief places are, Butua, Carma, Gallita, Zet, seated an the Lake Zachaf; Dobdel, Calburas; Tialso and Zimbra, both under the Tropick of Capricorn; Bafat, Quiticu, Armeta, Maitagasi, Boro, Amara, Giera, and Hagala; most of which are Cities of some account, and seated on Rivers.
The chief places in MONO-MOTAPA, particularly so called, are Mono-Motapa, the chief of the Empire; Zuggi, Jouros, and Mosata. The chief in ZEFALA bears the same name, seated in an Isthmus so called. The chief in QƲITEVA is Cuama, seated on the River so named. Ab the Shoar of Zefala are several Isles, among which three bear the name of ƲCIQƲE PARVAE; three of ƲCIQƲE MAJORES; and two of SPICHELLAE; and farther; a Sea; and towards the Isle of Madagascar is the Isle of BAIXOS DE INDIA. The chief place of SEDANDA is so called: And the chief places of CHICANGA are, Zimbdos and Buro. And these are the Parts com∣prehended under the Empire of the Mono-Motapa. The Empire of the Mono-Emugi.The Mono-Emugi, that is, Lord of Emugi, hath his Empire or Estates be∣tween the Abyssins, the Cafres, the Mono-Motapa, and the Zanguebar; so that it is about the Mountains of the Moon. The Giaques or Zaggaes, which joyn to Congo, are likewise esteemed subject to this Empire: He hath often War with the Mono-Motapa, of which he seems once to have been a part, is in peace with the King of Zanguebar, that he may have commerce to the Sea, for he hath much Gold, Silver, Ivory, and the same Commodities as Mono-Motapa; but its People are more barbarous and brutish. The chief places in the Mono-Emugi are, Agag, Astagoa, Leuma, Camur, Beif, Bagametro, and Zembre, seat∣ed on the bottom of the Lake Zaire. CAFRERIA, or the Land of CAFRES. The Land of Cafreria de∣scribed.CAFRERIA, or the Land of CAFRES, makes the most Southern Coast of all Aethiopia, winding like a Semicircle about the Cape of Good Hope; some begin it from Cape Negro, and continue it unto the River of Cuama; this separating it from Zanguebar, and the other from Congo, or what we have esteemed with Congo. Others begin it and end it with the Tropick of Capri∣corn, as well on this side as beyond the Cape of Good Hope. I esteem under the name of Cafres all the Coasts which environ the Mono-Motapa, both to∣wards the West, South, and East: so that we may call these Cafres, Occidental, Meridional, and Oriental. This distinction being taken in regard of the na∣tural scituation in which these People are from the Mono-Motapa; or we may chuse rather to consider them in Occidental or Oriental, as we have already done; the Cape of Good Hope then keeping the one from the other. It hath formerly been believed, that these People had neither Kings, Law, nor Faith, and therefore were called Cafres, that is, without Law. But it hath since been known, that they have divers Kings and Lords; as those of Mataman, where there are divers Metals, Chrystal, &c. And of Melemba, among the Occidentals; those of Chicanga, Sedanda, Quiteva, and Zefala, among the Orientals; and others we know not, towards the South and Cape of Good Hope. On the Coast of Cafres are these places and Isles, viz. St. Nicolai, Piscarius, the Port of Carascalis, the Cape of Good Hope, St. Martins Bay, and the Cape of St. Lucia. Also these Isles, 4 bearing the name of St. Lucia, 2 of St. Christo∣phers, 5 of Crucis, and 3 of Aride. Many of which, as likewise the Capes, are well known by Sea-men, especially the Cape of Good Hope. All these Coasts of Cafreria are bounded within Land by a Chain of Mountains, formed by the Mountains of the Moon, and which inclose Mono-Motapa. That part of these Mountains which advance towards the Cape of Good Hope, are called by the Portugals,The Cape of Good Hope.Picos Fragos, that is, Watry Points or Rocks. This Cape is the most remarkable piece in Cafreria; the most Southern point of Africa, and of our Continent; and the most famous Promontory of the whole World. Vasco de Gama knew it in 1498, and after having doubled it, found the way by the East-Indies to the Great Sea; and from hence the Portugals boast to have been the first that had the knowledge of this Cape. But we have made appear in the general discourse of Africa, that the Ancients have both known and spoke of it. Near the Cape of Good Hope, and farther towards the South, is
the Cape of Needles, which should be more famous, since it is more Southern∣ly than the other by 12 or 15 Leagues: But the name, Cape of Good Hope, is given to all that Head of Land which is the most Southern of Africa. The Air, Fer∣tility, Commo∣dities, &c. of the Country.The Air of this Country is sometimes temperate, and sometimes cold, by reason of the Mountains which are covered with Snow and Ice, from whence descends quantity of cold Waters. The Vallies and Lower Countries pleasant and fertil; hath store of Woods and Forests, in which are abundance of Beasts and Fowls, as Deer, Antilopes, Baboons, Foxes, Hares, &c. Also Ostriches, Herons, Pelicans, Pheasants, Partridges, Geese, Ducks, &c. They are well supplied with good Water, feed much Cattle, which they truck with Strangers for Knives, Scizzars, Spoons, and divers Toys; they have likewise much Fish in their Rivers. The People and their Trade.The Inhabitants are Black, have thick Lips, flat Noses, long Ears; and in a word, very ill-shapen. They are more barbarous and brutish than the rest of Africa, they are Man-eaters; their chief ornaments in their Apparel are, Chains of Iron, Brass, Beads, Bells, or the like; and cutting and slashing their Skins in several shapes. Clothing they have none, only in the Cold season they wrap them∣selves about with Skins of Beasts. Towns they have none, or very few, for the most part living in the Woods and Forests, like brute Beasts. But the Cafres on the East are much more civil than the others; most of them have made a part, and are yet subject to the Mono-Motapa, who about 50 years ago divided his Estate into four parts, giving to his eldest Son what is within Land, and by much the greatest part; and to his three younger Sons, Zuiteva, Se∣danda, and Chicanga, towards the Sea-Coast, for their Portions. Cefala or Ze∣fala seems to make its piece apart, whose King pays Tribute both to the Mono-Motapa and the Portugals; and these have divers Fortresses on the Coast, Sena, Tete, Cuama, &c. Zefala is so abundant in Gold and Elephants, that some take it for the O∣phir whither Solomon sent his Fleet every three years: And they give for a reason, that the Gold, Ivory, Apes, &c. which that Fleet brought, are here found in abundance; That this Fleet parting from the Red Sea, there is no likely∣hood it should go to Peru, which some take for this Ophir; besides, that there is there neither Ivory nor Apes; but that it was rather to some part of Asia or Africa. They add, that there remains not far from Zefala some footsteps of ancient Buildings and Inscriptions, left there by Strangers long time ago: Nay likewise, that there is some notes and Books how Solomon sent thither his Fleet. Moreover, the Septuagint translate Sophira instead of Ophir, and the name of Sophira is not overmuch different from Sopholo. However it be, there is here store of Gold both in the Mountains and Rivers, and often very clean and pure, as well in Powder as Sand; and this Gold is esteemed the best and finest in Africa, ours seeming but Brass in comparison of it. The Country is healthful and pleasant, seated only on the Coast, the Mono-Motapa confining it within Land: A part of its now Inhabitants are not the Natives, but descended from that Coast which belonged to the Mono-Motapa. The Natives (as I said before) are Black, and Idolaters or Cafres, the others very swarthy, and for the most part Mahometans. They have a great Trade on this Coast for their Gold, two or three Millions being yearly brought hence, and that for Toys and things of a very small value, which are carried them from divers parts of Asia and Europe, and some parts of Africa.
The ISLES of AFRI∣CA, as they lie and are found In the Mediterranean Sea, And on the Coast of BARBARY, as the ISLES of MALTA, Marzasirocco, Vallett, il Borgo, Madalena, Medina, St. Maria Meleca, St. Maria Loret, Rodumifessa. GOZA, Goza Cast, Scilendo. Cumin, — Cumin. Forfala, Gamelera, Chercura, Lampedusa, Limosa, Panthalaria, Galata, Albusama. In the Occidental or At∣lantick Ocean; as On the Coast of MO∣ROCCO; as the ISLES of Madera, Tonzal, Sancta Cr, Porto Sancto. The CANARY ISLES, or ISLES of Forteventura, Forteventura, Chabras, Lanegala, Lancellotta, Lancellotra, Porto de Cavallos. Grand Canaria, Canaris, Tedele, Arginogy. Teneriffe, Laguna, St. Crux. Gomer, — Gomer. Fer, — Hierro, Palma, Palma, St. Andre. The ISLES seated a∣bout those of the CA∣NARIES, Graclosa, Alegria, St. Clara, Rocco, Savages. The ISLES of CAPE VERD; or the ISLES of St. Antonio▪ St. Vincent, St. Lucia, St. Nicholas, Salt, Bonavista, Mayo, Fuego. Brava, St. Jago, St. Jago, Ribera Grande. In the Meridional of AE∣THIOPIAN Ocean, as Between GUINY, and the Lower AETHIO∣PIA, where are the ISLES of St. Thomas, — Pavoasan, Princes, Anncabon, St. Matthew, Assension, St. Helena, Perdinando Po▪ Tristan de Cunha, Goncalo Alvarer. On the Coast of ZAN∣GUEBAR; as the ISLE of Madagascar, or St. Laurence, Vinggora, Tombaja, St. Andrew, Cacambout, Port of St. Vincent, St. Anthony, St. Augustine, Boamarage, Angoada. The ISLES seated a∣bout the Isle of MA∣DAGASCAR, and in the Sea of ZANGUE∣BAR, particularly so called; among which are those of Zocotora, Penda, Zanzibara, Sanctus Rochus, Monfia, St. Christophers, St. Esprite, Comerae, Aliadorae, Syrtium, Nona, Baixos, St. Anthony, St. Maria, Radix, St. Maurice, Mascarenhae, Diego Roix, Johannis de Lisbo, Sancta Clara, Sancta Just, or Juliani, St. James, St. Vincent. In the Red Sea, or Sea of Mecque, And on the Coast of the Higher AETHIOPIA; as the ISLES of Bahia Cabras▪ Suaquem, Miri, Meger, Maczuam, Balaccia, St. Pitr.
THE ISLE OF MADAGASCAR, OR St. LAURENCE. Isle of Mada∣gascar, with its length and breadth.THE Isle of MADAGASCAR, or St. LAƲRENCE, is much greater than any about Africa, if not the greatest of both Continents. It stretches it self from a little on this side the 12th unto a little beyond the 26th degree of Meridional Latitude, which are more than 14 degrees of Latitude; but sloping from North North-West to South South-East, it is from Cape St. Sebastian to that of St. Romain about 400 Leagues long. Its breadth ought to be considered at twice; in that part nearest the Equator it is 60 or 75 Leagues broad; in that part towards the South the least breadth passes 120, and stretches sometimes to 150 Leagues. Its Commodi∣ties and Trade.Our last Relations say, That it hath Mines of Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron, Rocks of Chrystal, and excellent white Marble; that there are found Emralds, Saphirs, &c. many sorts of Gums and Rozins, especially great store of that Gum which the Druggists call Dragons Blood, which they extract out of the Flowers of a certain Tree which grows there. They have also Talque, Cotton, Indico, Sugar Canes, Saunders, Ebony, Ivory, Honey, Wax, Hides. Their Ground yields Salt, Salt-Peter, and in most places Grains; and upon their Sea Coasts is found abundance of Ambergreese. And for these, and several other Commo∣dities that are here found, are brought them in exchange, Corals, Pater-Nosters, Chains, Beads, Bracelets, Glass-Pendants, and divers Toys, &c. Its People and their abode.Its Inhabitants are for the most part Black or very Tawny, and some White, which in all appearance came from Asia. They are of a good Stature, and well shaped, are very tractable and courteous to Strangers, and more especially to the French, than any other Europeans; are addicted to idleness, and not caring to cultivate the Earth; their clothing is only a piece of Cotton-cloth of several colours, which they fasten about, their Middles, and hangs down to their knees; and on their Heads, a Cap made of the Bass of a Tree; besides which, they a∣dorn themselves about their Neck, Arms, Legs, &c. with those Toys aforesaid. Their Feeding is exceeding gross; their Houses are no better than Hog-sties, or little Huts made of Branches of Trees, except those of their princes which are made of Wood; but of no large size, nor over handsom: They lie upon Mats; and their Cloth which they wear about them in the day, serves for a Coverlid in the night. They are Heathenish, and given to Adoration, (some say they adore the Devil) using Sacrifices, which they do in the Woods, not having Churches; they have no Civil Form of. Government, but he that can make the greatest party, and hath the greatest Family, is in most esteem and com∣mand to which end they have as many Wives as they can keep, to increase their Progeny.
The Isle very plentiful of Cattle.They have a great number of Oxen, Sheep, Kids, Hens of divers sorts, and quantity of Rice; they make Wine with Hony and certain Roots, which is so strong that they are frequently drunk with it; they have for the most part those Beasts that are found among us; but yet all with some difference: Their Oxen have between their Neck and Shoulders a great lump of Fat, which they esteem excellent: Their Sheep have their Tails 20 Inches about, and as much in length: Their Goats are very high, and their Hogs little. They have Sa∣lamanders, Camelions of divers colours; Apes of many kinds, and believe that these Apes would speak, but for fear they should be compelled to la∣bour. They have Crocodiles and Tortoises, of which some have their Shells so great, that they will cover 10 or 12 Persons; and they find sometimes 5 or 600 of their Eggs as big as Hens Eggs: their Flesh is delicate and fat, in taste resembling Veal. They have other Tortoises which are only 3 or 4 foot dia∣meter; and their Shells being polished are figured with divers colours, of which they make Cabinets, little Boxes, and other pretty Moveables esteemed in the Indies and in Europe.Their Fowls. Their Pheasants are stronger and fairer than ours, their Partridges bigger, and of divers colours: They have Paroquets as big as Crows, and black; another middle sort, and some as little as our Larks; the one and the other of divers colours: They have Singing-Birds not yield∣ing to those of the Canaries. Their Bees are little, their Hony excellent; their Ants flie, and leave on the Bushes where they light a white Gum, which they use instead of Glue. Their Colibri or Fly-Bird scarce weighing two Bees, so little is it, feeding only on the Dew it sucks from Flowers. They catch in their Seas an infinite quantity of Fish; among others, Skates so great, that they are able to satisfie 300 persons one meal. Their Date-Trees supply them with Drink, their Orchards with Fruits, their Cotton with whereof to make Thred and Stuffs for Clothing, their Indico with a Blew colour, their Tamarind refreshes them; their Rape or Balasier blacks their Teeth, which by them is esteemed a great Beauty; they gather Aloes from several Trees. One of the principal riches of the Country is Ebony, both for its beauty, smoothness, and black colour, and for the flame and odour it yields in the fire: Its Sap infused in Water, heated and taken luke-warm, purges Flegm, and cures Venerial di∣stempers. Their Fruits.Among their Fruits they have Damsons twice as big as ours; Mirabolans of many kinds, Anana's, Citrons, Oranges, Pomegranates, Grapes, Dates, Coco-Nuts, &c. They gather Maniguet, Ginger, and divers Roots, which they eat instead of Bread, and which serves for divers other uses; they have quan∣tity of Rice, Millet, Beans, Pease, French-Beans, both red, white, green, and all sorts of Pulse. The Sensitive Herb is found among the Tapates, whose Leaf touched, they all close and shut up one within anothen, hanging towards the ground, and not raising up nor opening themselves again till a good while after, and that by little and little. Its chief pla∣ces.The Isles hath many good Roads and commodious Ports, and every where are found good Water and Victuals; but the Air is unhealthful to the Euro∣peans, by reason of the great Heat which here reigneth, it lying under the Torrid Zone; yet the French have established a Colony sometimes in one place, and sometimes in another. The Bay of Anton-Gil, or of St. Anthony, is the best in all the Island. On the same Coast, and farther towards the North, is Boamarage; more towards the South Arganda, and continuing Cacambout, Manialoufe, Manajara; or the Port of Prues, Matatane, Manapate; or the Port of Gallions, Manatenga, Andboul, Romag. near the Port St. Cace and Antipere; or Sancta Clara near Cape St. Romain. All these places or Ports are builded with Wood, covered with Leaves, and inclosed with Pallisadoes, as throughout all the Isle. On the other side towards the West, and directly opposite to the Coast of Africa, are Vingagora, St. Andre the Bay of Pra∣cel, St. Vincent, St. James; the Port or Guph of St. Augustine, the best next to Antongil, Tombaja, &c. The middle of the Isle rises into Mountains covered with Wood, where is Ebony, Saunders, Orange-Trees, Citron-Trees, &c.
The Isle of Sancta Mary described.About Madagascar are a great many of Isles, as that of SANCTA MARY, near the Bay of Anton-Gil, about ten or twelve Leagues in circuit, is fair and fertile; affords store of Provisions, and Potters Earth, and their Seas quantity of Whales, which they catch by darting on them a certain Iron fixed to the end of a Cord; which when they have tired themselves, they make to the shore; and of these Whales they make Oyl, with which, as also with their Provisions and Potters Earth, they drive a Trade. The Isles of Comeres descri∣bed.The Isles of COMERES, are Five principal ones, as St. Christophers, St. Esprit, Loura, Comera, and Gasidsa. The Inhabitants of this last are perfidious; the others more civil, and under one King alone, who resides at Ansuvanny, where there is some Trade; the most part are Mahometans; the Soil is pleasant and fertile, because of the Rivers which descend from the Mountains, and water their Fields. They have all sorts of Birds, they have no Iron; they fetch from Madagascar, Rice, Millet, Amber-greece, and Slaves, which they transport into Arabia, and the Red Sea; from whence they bring Stuffs, and Indian Habits, Amfium or Opium. In 1613. the Hollanders tauched on this Island, and received great refresh∣ment. It is observed, that for a Quire of common Paper, they had an Ox; for a common Looking-Glass another; for a Dozen of Little Bells which they fastned to Hawks Legs another; for a Bar of Iron, three Oxen, &c. The Isle of Maurico de∣scribed.The Isle MAƲRICE or SANCTA APPOLLINA, between 19 and 20 degrees, seems to have been inhabited before the Hollanders esta∣blished a Colony. It is about 15 Leagues in compass. Mandelslo saith, that this Island hath a good Haven, both deep and large enough for fifty Said of great Ships to harbor in, which makes it to be very pleasant, having many Mountains which are well cloathed with Trees, and always green; among which, some are so lofty, that they seem to overtop the Clouds. And its Valleys as pleasant and green, and adorned with several sorts of Trees, as well those that bear Fruits, as Cocoes, Dates, Oranges, Citrons, &c. as those which yield none; as great quantity of excellent Ebony, and other Trees; some of whose wood is Yellow, others Red, others mixt; and all with fair and lively colours. The Leaves of their Palm-trees are large enough to cover a man; the Birds are here so tame, that they suffer themselves to be taken with the hand, or killed with a stick. They have Tortoises strong enough to bear a man, but fourfoot∣ed Beasts they have none. Besides these Isles aforesaid, there are several others which are seated about the Isle of Madagascar, as Two bearing the name of Deigosoares: Two by the name of Nunni Pereirae: Three by the name of Deigo Roix: Four by Sancta Clara: Two by St. Romanus: Three by St. Julianus: Three by St. Jacobus: Nine by St. Vincent: Three by St. Christophers: Three by Comora: And eight by the name of Bugi. Also the Isles of Boamarage, St. Anthony, St. Maria Radix, Mascarenhae, Johannis de Lisboa, Syrtium, and Mosambicha-Nova, with some others. The Banks of India very dangerous for Shipwracks.Between the Isle of Madagascar, and the main Land, about 70 Leagues from the Isle, 100 from Cefala, and 150 from Mozambique, are the Banks of India infamous for Shipwracks, and particularly for that of the Admiral Fernando Mendoza in 1586. The Banks and Rocks are of sharp Stones, and with divers points like to Coral, some black, others white, others green, but all horrible even to behold. There rests a great number of Islands to the North and East, and between the North and East of Madagascar, and among these Isles many Banks and Rocks. We will omit a particular description of them, as unnecessary, and only say, that the French have often designed to establish a powerful Colony in the Countrey; encouraged by its Commodities, and the great Commerce it is like to maintain.
The Isles of CAPE VERDE. The Isles of Cape Verde de∣scribed, viz.ONe hundred and fifty Leagues from Cape Verde, and towards the West, are a body of Islands which extend themselves from 13 ½, unto the 19 de∣gree of Latitude, and from 153 ½, unto 157 or thereabout of Longitude. They are called in general the Isles of Cape Verde, because that Cape is the nearest main Land to them. Amongst these Isles there are 10 in some consideration, though a part of them not inhabited; they are ranged almost in form of a Cressant or Semi-Circle, of which, the convex part regards the Continent, and the two Points, the Ocean: That which makes the Point towards North and West, is that of St. Antonio, which those of St. Vincent, St. Nicholas, and Sancta Lu∣cia follow, advancing between East and South; then those of Salt, Bona Vista, and Maya, descend from North to South, and are the most Easterly of all: Those of St. Jago, of Fuego, and Brava, the most Southern; returning from East to West, and advancing a little towards the South. So that St. Anthony and Brava make the two Ends or Points towards the West; Bona Vista makes the middle of the half Circle towards the East. SANCTA LƲCIA,St. Nicholas. St. NICHOLAS, and St. JAGO, are the greatest, having each 100 or 120000 paces of length; 15, 20 or 30000 of breadth; and 200 or 250000 paces of circuit. St. Anthonio and St. Vincent are less by more then half, and not of above 100000 paces in circuit; the rest, which are the least, have not above 30, 40 or 50000 paces. I make no account of seven or eight others, whose names have not been given us, and which are rather Rocks than Isles. St. JAGO is the greatest and the chief of all, having a Bishops seat in the City of the same name;St. Jago. besides which, are Ribera Grande, with a good Port towards the West, Praya towards the East, St. Mary towards the North, all with their Ports. Some place likewise St. Thomas, whose Port is dange∣rous, others St. Domingo, others St. Michael: possibly these fall under some of the others. Ribera Grande hath 500 Houses; the Air is unhealthful, the Land hilly, but the Valleys fruitful in Grains, Vines, Fruits, Sugar Canes, Millons, &c. Feeding much Fowl and Cattle, and particularly Goats in a∣bundance: These Beasts bringing forth young every four Moneths, and three of four at a time; and the Kids are very fat and delicate. Sancta Lucia, St. Vincent, St. Anthony.SANCTA LƲCIA is the best peopled after that of St. Jago. St. Ni∣cholas, St. Vincent, and St. Anthony, have been esteemed Desert, yet they appear to have many Inhabitants, though not so many as they could feed: The Ships of the Ʋnited Provinces passing here in 1622. found in that of St An∣thony 500 persons, Men, Women, and Children, all Aethiopians. St. Vincent and St. Nicholas, had no less. At Mayo these Aethiopians are strong, and of good stature; but it is to be believed, that every where are some Portugals to keep the rest in aw. Salt. Bona Vista.The Isles of SALT, of BONA VISTA, of MAYO, and of St. JAGO, yield so great quantity of Salt which is made naturally of the Water which the Sea from time to time leaves, that besides what they consume in the Coun∣trey, they laded every year more then 100 Ships, which is transported into o∣ther Countreys; and yet there remains six times as much, which becomes use∣less. It is reported, that the Isle of Mayo could make alone, lading for two thousand Sail of Ships yearly; and the others not much less. The other rich∣es of the Countrey lies in the Skins of their Goats, which are in so great quan∣tity through all these Isles, that many flocks are seen of 1000 Head. The Skins are sent to Brasil, Portugal, and other places, and make excellent Cordo∣vants. The Flesh is salted in the Countrey, and sold to Ships going and re∣turning from Brasil to the Indies. Besides the Salt and Woats which are the principal riches of the Countrey, they have many Wild Horses, Oxen, Apes, &c. also Cotton, whereof they make several Manufactures.
Also Rice, and many sorts of Grains. Among their Fowl, they have one kind particular to them, which they call Flamencos; the Feathers of their Bodies are all White, and those of their Wings Red as Blood. Their Tortoises are not a∣bove two or three foot long; they come out of the Sea, and lay their Eggs in the night, covering them with Sand, and the heat of the Sun hatches them.Fuego, Brava. In Fuego and Brava they gather Wines which yield little to those of the Cana∣ries. The Sargasso Sea.Between the Islands of Cape Verde, and the main Land, inclining towards the Canaries, the Sea is called Sargasso, because from the 20 to the 24 degree and for the length of 30, 40 or 50 Leagues, the Sea is covered with an herb like to that which is found in the bottom of Wells, and which the Portugals call Sargasso. This Herb, except that it is more Yellow, resembles Sea-Parsley, bearing certain Grains or Fruit at the end, but of neither taste nor substance. Many have been much troubled to know from whence these Weeds come, which are distant from the Isles, and from the firm Land more then 60 Leagues, and in a part of the Sea, where there is no bottom found: Nevertheless, they are so close, and in so great quantity, that the Water seems rather a Meadow or Green Field, then a Sea. Ships which fall among these Weeds, had need of a good Wind to disingage themselves; and I believe it was these which hin∣dred Sataspes from finishing his course about Africa, and were the cause of his misfortune. This Sataspes, Son of Teaspes, one of the Achemenides,A story of Sa∣taspes. having ravished the Daughter of Zopyrus, the Son of Magabises, was condemned by Xerxes to be crucified. His Mother, the Sister of Darius, caused this punish∣ment to be changed into another, to wit, he was caused to make the Circum∣navigation of Africa; which could not be done without great difficulty and hazard. He embarked in Egypt, passed the Pillars of Hercules, entred into the Occidental Ocean, and passed far to the South, along Africa; but know∣ing that it would yet require much time and pains to end this course, he retur∣ned into Egypt, and thence to the Court, where he said he had met with some∣what that hindred his Ship from passing farther. Xerxes took him for a liar, and made him suffer the death he was before condemned to. But to continue:The Isles of Cape Verde. The Position wherein the Isles of Cape Verde are now found, answers much better to the Position of the Fortunate Isles of Ptolomy, then that of the Cana∣ries. Ptolomy places his Fortunate Isles between the 10 and 16 degree of La∣titude; the Isles of Cape Verde are between the 13 and 19; the Canaries be∣yond the 26. The Meridian of the Fortunate Isles of Ptolomy, is at 8 degrees of Longitude from the Coast of Africa, and towards the West. The least Meridian of the Isles of Cape Verde, is at 8 degrees of Longitude from the same Coast, and towards the same side. The least Meridian of the Canaries tou∣ches the Coast of Africa. Ptolomy confines his Fortunate Isles under one Me∣ridian, and extends them from South to North, between the tenth to the sixteenth parallel or degrees of Latitude, which are five degrees of Latitude. The Isles of Cape Verde are not justly under one Meridian, but under two or three, and extend themselves from the 13 ½ to the 19, which are five degrees of Latitude. The Canaries, on the contrary, are all couched from West to East, and almost under the same parallel or degree of Latitude, which is the 27; lengthning themselves from the first to the 6 of Longitude. These four Reasons are very strong to prove, that the Isles of Cape Verde do rather answer to the Fortunate Isles of Ptolomy, then the Canaries. Their distance in regard of the Aequator, is not different from that of the Fortunate Isles of Ptolomy, but three degrees; that of the Canaries, is 15. Their distance in regard of the Coast of Africa, agrees with that of the Fortunate Isles, not with that of the Canaries. The disposition of their scituation from South to North, approaches near to that of the Fortunate Isles; and the number of the degrees of Latitude which they contain, absolutely agrees with it. The scituation of the Canaries from East to West, and the little Latitude they contain, are much contrary. Notwithstanding all these Reasons, we shall yet make it appear, that oft-times we must not conclude on the Positions of Ptolomy, and that the Canary Islands
answer to the Fortunate Islands of Ptolomy, and the Ancients, and not these of Cape Verde. Let us speak first a word of the Madera's and Porto Sancto, which belong to the Crown of Portugal as well as those of Cape Verde. But before I pass to the Madera's, a word or two concerning its Inhabitants, who Mondelslo maketh to be black, corpulent, but well proportioned; he saith, they are en∣vious, mischievous, and dangerous people; for the most part Pagans, worship∣ping the Moon, and adoring the Devil, whom they call Cammate: Some of them are Mahometans, as far as Circumcision. They marry many Wives, whom they make to labour like Slaves, as well in the Fields as in their Houses; and they are accustomed to such hardship, that as soon as they are delivered, they go and wash themselves and the Child in the Sea or next River. They are not admitted to sit at meals with their Husbands, but wait till they have din'd or supt. They believe the Resurrection of the Dead, but withal think that they shall rise White, and trade there as the Europeans do. He saith, they are great Drunkards, and their debauches are always at the Funeral of their Friends, which commonly lasts four or five days together: During which time they do nothing but drink and weep in remembrance of their Friend departed. They are very turbulent and quarrelsome, being always at wars with their Neighbours; their Arms are the Bow, and a kind of Lance, in which they are very expert. He saith also, that the greatest Marks of their Victories, are the Privy-parts of their Enemies, which they cut off, and give to their Wives who wear them as Neck-laces, which by them are esteemed far beyond Pearl. The Countrey is indifferently fruitful,The Fertility. hath store of Cattle, as Oxen, Beufflers, Elks, &c. whose Hides they have a good Trade for; as also for Elephants Teeth, Wax, Rice, Amber-greece, Sugar Canes, Cotton, whereof they make se∣veral Manufactures, Cordovants, &c. MADERA Island. The Madera Isle first dis∣covered by the Portugals.THe Isle of MADERA or MADEIRA as the Portugals say, is un∣der the 32 degree of Latitude; about 25 Leagues long, 8 or 10 broad, and 60 of circuit. It was discovered in 1420 by John Gonsalvo and Tristan Va∣ez, under the Auspicies of Henry Infanto of Portugal; and under the same Johannes Zarco, and likewise Tristan Vaez, discovered Porto Sancto in 1428. The one and the other were Desert, and particularly Madera was so covered with Wood, that they were fain to set it on fire to make room for what they would Till. The History saith, that this fire lasted six or seven years, before it ran through all the Island and consumed the Woods; and among the first In∣habitants, some were constrained to save themselves in the Water, to avoid the heat of the Earth; but yet their design so well succeeded, that the Earth, for a long time after, yielded sixty for one; which by little and little, diminish∣ed to 50, 40, 30, and possibly now to twenty five for one. The Air is almost always temperate,Its Air, Fertili∣ty, and com∣modities. many Fountains, and seven or eight Rivers so refresh this Countrey, that it is very pleasant and fertile. The Vines bear more bunches of Grapes than Leaves, and their wine is strong and racy; their Wheat excel∣lent, though the Countrey be Mountainous: Their Sugars delicious, bearing the Bell from all others; they have much Fowl, as Hens, Pigeons, Quails, Partridges: they have quantity of Fruits, as Oranges, Citrons, Pomegra∣nates, Honey, Wax, Dragons Blood, Cordevants, Cedar-wood, with which they make all sorts of Joyners work so artificially, that it is transported into Europe, and elsewhere. Those Mountains and Woods which are restocked, have Wild Boars,Its chief piaces.&c. Its principal Towns, are Tunghal or Tonzal; the chief of the Island, and a Bishoprick, Moncherico or Monchico, and Sancta Crux. All the Island contains 36 Parishes, 5 or 6 Religious Convents, 4 Hospitals, 6 or 7000 Houses, and about 25000 Persons; so many Castles and Gardens in the Field, that it seems a Garden of Pleasure.
Porto Sancto.The Isle of PORTO SANCTO or the Holy Port, hath almost the same Commodities with Madera, but is not above 8 or 10 Leagues in circuit; hath no Fortress, which was the reason that in 1606. the Pyrates took away 6 or 700 persons. Madera answers to the Ancient Cerne Atlantica, and some have esteemed Porto Sancto to answer to the Ancient Ombrio or Inaccessibilis; but we shall shew the Countrey in the Canaries. The CANARY Islands. The Canary Islands descri∣bed, viz.THe CANARY Islands are Westward of Africa, almost opposite to the Capes of Bojador or Non; they are to the number of Seven, seated between the 26 and 28 degrees of Latitude; and between the 5 and 6, or little more of Longitude. If we comprehend some little Isles above Lancelotta, and likewise the Salvages, they would reach to the 29 or near the 30; if likewise the Madera, and Porto Sancto, they would pass beyond the two and thirtieth degree of Latitude. But there are few Authors esteem the Salvages, almost none the Madera, among the Canaries, because this last is too far distant and belonging to the Crown of Portugal; the Canaries to the Crown of Gastile; and the Salvages being Desert, almost no account is made of them. And now we shall make it appear, that the Body of the Seven Isles of the Canaries, an∣swers in all things to the Body of the Seven Fortunate Isles of the Ancients. Canary Isles; the Fortunate Isles of the An∣cients, & why.We have before set down those Reasons which might make us believe, that the Isles of Cape Verde might answer to the Fortunate Islands, but now shall produce others, and those stronger for the Canaries. In the Occidental or At∣lantick Ocean, and to the West of Africa, Ptolomy makes account of only one Body of Islands, which he describes to the number of six. We find now in that Ocean, and not far from Africa, three different Bodies of Islands, and each ve∣ry considerable; to wit, the Azores, the Canaries, and those of Cape Verde. Of these, the Canaries are nearest to Africa, and the most Eastern; the Azores, the farthest and most Western; and those of Cape Verde do remain in the mid∣dle, as to Longitude: And moreover, those of Cape Verde are the nearest the Aequator, and most Southernly; the Azores the farthest off, and most northern∣ly; and the Canaries in the midst, as to Latitude. Now the one of these three Bodies of Islands must answer to the Fortunate Isles of the Ancients, and of Ptolomy, placed in the first Meridian; and among Modern Authors, if there be any which would give the first Meridian to the Azores; and others to those of Cape Verde; and others to the Canaries; it is for the most part out of the belief they have, that one or the other answer to those Fortunate Isles. Ptolomy having made account but of one body of Islands in the Occidental Ocean, it is more likely to be that which is nearest the Main Land, and Gades, then those farther off. This reason makes for the Canaries. Pliny, Soli∣nus, Capella, and others, have made account of three different Bodies of Islands in this Ocean; to wit, the Fortunate Islands, the Gorgades or Gorgons, and the Hesperides, placing their Fortunate Isles near the Coast of Mauritania, the Gorgades two days sail from the Coast, and the Hesperides, forty days sail far∣ther then the Gorgades, and at the bottom of some Gulf; so that these answer, either to the Azores, or to the Isles of St. Thomas, in the bottom of the Aethi∣pian Ocean; or rather to the Antilles or Caribes in the Gulf of Mexico, as we shall speak more in another place: They cannot answer to the Canaries, nor can the Gorgades answer to others than those of Cape Verde; the Canaries then remain for the Fortunate: This is another reason for the Canaries. But the goodness of the Air, the fruitfulness of the Soyl, their proximity to the Coast of Africa, the names and particularities of every one of the Fortunate Isles, absolutely concluded them the Canaries.
The Fortunate Isles received this name from the Ancients only, because of the healthfulness of the Air, and fruitfulness of the Soyl. The Canaries are excellent healthful, the Azores little, and the Isles of Cape Verde not at all healthful; likewise the Canaries have the best Grains, Wines, Fruits, &c. that are in the World, which they transport every where. The Corn of the Azores will not keep, and their Wines are consumed in the Countrey, not being strong enough to be transported to other places. In the Isles of Cape Verde, the In∣habitants can scarce gather Corn and Wine necessary; exporting nothing but Salt and Goats Skins. Pliny esteems some of his Fortunate Isles 8000 paces from the Coast of Africa; the Azores are 300 Leagues; those of Cape Verde, 150: Among the Canaries, Forteventura is not above 10 or 12 Leagues from Cape Bojador. The Air, Soyl, and Neighborhood to the Coast of Africa makes then for the Canaries: Let us proceed to confer their old and new names, and other particulars. Ptolomy calls his Fortunate Isles, Aprositos, that is, Inac∣cessibilis; Herae, that is, Junonis Insula, Pluitalia; Ortelius reads Pluita∣lia, Casperia, Canaria, Centuria, which interpreters write Pinturia. Pliny, Solinus, and Capella, call them Ombrio, Junonia, Junonia Minor, (instead of which, Ortelius puts Theode) Capraria, Nivaria, and Canaria. In the numbring of these Isles; Pliny and his two Apes or Copiers, Solinus and Capella, agree upon six, changing little in the rank, names, and number of Ptolomy; but Pliny makes mention of one Pluvialia, among his Fortunate Isles, a little before he comes to number the other Six. This Pluvialia must then be a Seventh, and possibly Theode the 8. Conferring the Fortunate Isles of Ptolomy, with those of these three Authors, we shall find that his Aprositos answers to their Ombrio; his Herae Insula, to their Junonia: There is nothing answers to their Junonia Minor, or Theode, whether they be two different, or only the same Island: His Pluitalia an∣swers to the Pluvialia of Pliny, which the two others did not know; his Cas∣peria to their Capraria; his Canaria, to their Canaria; and his Centuria or Pinturia, to their Nivaria. Some names being corrupted by others. At present it will be hard to judge which of the Canaries answer to each of the Ancients Fortunate Isles; yet let us see if we can effect it, and do it better then others have done; there is no difficulty for the Great Canary, since it retains its ancient name: The Isle of Ferr also most apparently answers to the Pluitalia of Ptolomy, or rather to make all particulars better accord with the Pluvialia of Pliny, where he saith, Non esse aquam nisi ex imbribus, as at this day according to the common opinion, it hath no Water, but what di∣stills from a certain Tree, always covered with Clouds. The Isle of Teneriffe likewise, whose Pike is always covered with Snow and Clouds, may answer to their Nivaria, quae nomen accepit à perpetua nive. Nebulosam, saith Pli∣ny; ab aere Nebuloso, saith Solinus and Capella. There remain four or five Islands wherein will lie the difficulty, Aprositos, Junonia, Junonia Minor, The∣ode, if it be other then Junonia Minor, and Capraria. Pliny seems to joyn this Capraria with Pluvialia, and saith after Sebosus, Junoniam abesse a Gadibus 150000 pa. ab ea tantundem ad occasum versus Pluvialiam, Caprariamque. Seeing the great distance he gives between these Isles, and from East to West, it may be said, that Pluvialia and Capraria are the most Western of the Fortunate Isles; Junonia the most Eastern; and that of the Isles of Ferr and Palma, being the most Western of the Canaries; that of Ferr being already allowed for the Pluvialia; Palma will rest for the Capraria of Pliny. On the other side, Junonia being the most Eastern, and 750000 paces from Gades, it must either answer to the Forteventura or Lan∣celotta, which are the most Eastern of the Canaries, and 6 or 700000 paces from Gades or Cadiz. But Pliny and Solinus make mention of two Junonias, of which, one being less than the other, we will give Lancelotta, which is the least, for their Junonia Minor; and Forteventura the Greater, for the o∣ther Junonia: And it seems in this passage, Pliny would observe those he met with first, from the nearest to the Coast, to the farthest off. Of the Seven Ca∣nary Islands we have given Six, which answer to the other Six among the For∣tunate
Isles. There remains the Isle of Gomer, among the Canaries; and Ombrio or Aprositos, among the Fortunate Isles: This might make it be judged, that none must answer to the other; but there are many reasons to the contrary. The name of Aprositos, that is, Inaccessible, or of Ombrio and Ombriona, as Capella writes it, shews, that this Isle hath been in a manner un∣known, in regard of its Neighbors; nay, it seems impossible to be landed upon. Gomer is between the Isles of Ferr, Palma, and Teneniffe; these three having been known, Gomer being in the midst and near these Islands, must likewise be known; and the Port of Gomer being one of the best, and most frequented of the Canaries, it cannot answer to the Aphrositos of the Ancients. Let us therefore leave this Gomer for Theode, and say, That farther in the Sea, and about 100 miles, or, as others say, 100 Leagues from the Canaries, is an Isle they call San Borondon: Authors say, that those which think not of it, find it sometimes by chance; but that it is never found by those who expresly seek it: However it be, it is held for truth, and Vin∣cent Blanc assures us, that from the top of Teneriffe, whence may be seen all the Canaries, this is likewise sometimes seen, yet that those which attempt to go to it, cannot find it, though with great pains; whether it be that the Fogs hide it, or that some Current carries them from it; and for this reason they have given it the name of Fortunada, Incontada, and Nontrovada, &c: After all these particularities, I can doubt no longer, but this Isle is the Apro∣sitos, Inaccessible, and the Ombrio, that is, the shadow of the Ancients. And so the whole body of the Canaries, will answer to the whole Body of the For∣tunate Isles, without adding the Madera; and from hence we have reason to place the first Meridian in the Canaries, as Ptolomy hath placed it in the For∣tunate Isles, since these first answer to the last; which will give a great facility to the reconcilement of Ancient and Modern Geography, otherwise not to be done. Let us proceed to what each of the Canaries may have at present con∣siderable, beginning with those nearest the main Land. The Isle of Forteventura described.Forteventura, once Erbania, is not far distant from the Cape Bojador, a∣bove 10 or 12 Leagues; from the Great Canary 16 or 18; from Lancelotta 6. Its greatest length is 25 Leagues, 15 or 16 its greatest breadth. In the middle, it streightens so much, that there remains only a League or two from one Sea to another: And this part was crossed with a Wall, which separated the Island into two Estates, when it was discovered. The Land is partly Mountainous, and partly in Plains; fruitful in Wheat and Barley: Along the Coast glide many streams of Fresh Water: and along these streams are the Tarbais Trees crooked and soft, which bear Gum; of which is made pure white Salt. In the Countrey, besides the Palm Trees, which bear Dates, the Olive Trees, Mastick Trees, and the Orsolle, a Grain for Dying, there is a kind of Fig-tree, from which they have Balm as white as Milk, and which is of great vertue in Physick. They make Cheese of their Goats Milk, with which the Countrey is so well stocked, that they may afford more then 50000 yearly; and besides the profit made of their Skins, and their Fat, (each Beast yielding 30 or 40 pound) their Flesh is excellent. The Ports of this Island are not proper, but for smaller Vessels. Its chief places towards the Sea, are Forteventura, Ric∣querocque, Chabras, Baltarhays, Lanegala, Fozonegro, and Tarafulo. Most of which are well frequented by Merchants, especially by the English, who of late are incorporated into a joynt Fellowship and Stock; and not only to this Isle, but to all the Seven Canary Isles. The Isle of Lancelotta.LANCELOTTA is 16 or 18 Leagues long, and 10 or 12 large: The access to it, is difficult on the North and West Coast; the Countrey is plain to∣wards the East, and the Continent where its Town and Ports are, as Cayas or Lancelotta, Porto de Nayos, and Port de Cavallos: These last are near one to the other; the Isle hath the same properties with that of Forteventura.
The Great Ca∣nary Isle.The GREAT CANARY is almost equal in length and breadth, which is about 18 or 20 Leagues. It is the principal of these Islands, both because of its greatness, fertility, and the goodness of its Air; and because the Governor and Bishop of these Islands, whose yearly Revenue is 12000 Ducats, have their Residence in the City Canaria,Its Inhabitants, chief places, fertility, com∣modities, and Trade. which is fair, its Inhabitants well clad, and ci∣vil; and how hard soever it rains, its streets are dry, being only Sand. Its other places are Tedele, Galder, Argores, Gusa, and Del Douze Ingennos, or Twelve Sugar Engines. This Island it exceeding fruitful, and the Soyl so fertile, that they have two Harvests in one year, reaping their Wheat, Bar∣ley, and other Grains in February and May. Their Wheat excellent, and its Bread very white; but from the excellency of its Fruits, as Oranges, Citrons, Pomegranates, Figs, Olives, Apples, Pears, Peaches, Melons, Potato's, and above all, from its Wine, which is far beyond that of Spain. (Which among all others, bears the Bell with us in England.) From these we may judge of the goodness of the Island. They have also several other good Commodities, as Honey, Wax, Sugar-Canes, Cheese, and Wood, in great abundance; and breeds such plenty of Cattle, that the Leather is not one of the least Commo∣dities they vend to other Nations, as Spain, England, Holland, &c. They have also store of Fowl; it is well covered with Firr Trees, Dragon Trees, Palm Trees, &c. And its Rivers well filled with Fish; but above all, they have Plantons which delights in Water; it is cut and shoots forth yearly into three or four Branches; each Branch bears 30 or 40 Apples, resembling a Cucumber; they incline to black; being ripe, they eat more deliciously then any Comfit in the World. The Isle of Teneriffe, with its high Pike Teitha, descri∣bed.TENERIFFE, which some call Enfer, is distant from the Grand Ca∣nary 16 or 18 Leagues, towards the North-West: Its utmost length is about 24 or 25 Leagues, and 12 or 15 its greatest breadth. The Land is raised in little Hills, and towards the middle, is the Pike of Teitha or Terreira, a streight and round Mountain, which reaches in height 45000 English paces, which is 45 miles, (some make it not so high, others higher;) but all agree that it is the highest Mountain in the World; even so high, that it may be seen in a clear day 60 Leagues distance at Sea; and from the top of it, a man may easily dis∣cover, and count all the other Canary Islands, though some of them be above 50 Leagues distance from this. It often casts forth fire and Sulphur: Its Sum∣mit is in form of a Sugar Loaf or sharp point, called the Pike of Teneriffe: For two or three miles about it, are only Cinders and Pumice Stones; two or three Miles lower, all is covered with Snow throughout the year, though there ne∣ver fall any in those Islands; and yet lower are found the great Trees Vintaico, whose Wood is very weighty, and never rots in Water. Under these Trees Laurels cover almost 10 or 12 miles of the Countrey, where the Singing Birds of the Canaries, known among us by the name of Canary Birds, warble their pleasant notes. The foot of the Mountain casts forth divers Branches, and ex∣tends it self into a good part of the Island, which abounds more in Corn, then any of the rest; and sometimes it alone feeds them all. The Countrey between Ro∣tana and Realejo, is so fruitful and pleasant, that its like can scarce be found in the World, such quantity it produces of Grains, Wines, Fruits, Honey, Wax, Su∣gar, Flax,Its Fertility.Silk, &c. And from hence they have their Vines which they carry to the West Indies; the best of which grow on the Coast of Ramble. There are certain Shrubs which yield a liquor like to Milk, which after it is thickned, makes an excellent Gum called Taybayba. From the Dragon Tree, cut towards the Root, they draw a red liquor which they call Dragons Blood, well known to Apothecaries.Its chief places Its principal City Laguna so called, because of the Lake near to it, is 4 or 5 Leagues from the Sea, contains two parishes, and is the residence of the Governor of the Island. The other Cities, are Sancta Crux, Rotana, Rajale∣sa, Carachico, and Adeca. When it was discovered, its Kings to the number of se∣ven dwelt in Caverns, and the bodies of their dead were set up about Caves, where they became as dry as Parchment; among which, the most honorable had a stick put in their hand, and a vessel of Milk before them.
The Isle of Gomer descri∣bed.GOMER is 8 or 9 Leagues from Teneriff, is 10 or 12 Leagues long. Its chief City of the same name, often receives the Indian Fleet, and furnishes them with Corn, Fruits, Sugar, and Wines, as well as those of Teneriff, and Ca∣naria. The Countrey is high, plain, bears many Dragon-trees, feeds small Cattle. Its Roads are deep and large: The People of this Isle were formerly more barbarous than those of the other Canary Isles, using many strange Cu∣stoms not known elsewhere; among which they held it for a great sign of Hos∣pitality, to let their Friends lie with their Wives, and receive theirs in testimo∣ny or return of kindness. Isle of Ferr de∣scribed.The Isle of FERR is the most West of all the Canaries, distant from Palma 15 or 16 Leagues; from Gomer only 5 or 6. This Isle in reason should be well known, many persons having been there, and many Authors treated very amply of it; yet I will a little shew the diversity found touching the greatness, and quality of the soyl; as also the Water with which the Isle is served. Its chief place is called Hierro, seated on the Sea shore. Here is found plenty of Hogs, Goats, and Sheep; also of Beasts, Fowl, Fruits, and quantity of Grains and Sugar Canes, and hath much Cattle which yield abundance of Milk and Cheese.A Tree whose Leaves destil Water, which serves the Isle, there being no Rain or Rivers. Here is said to be no fresh Water, only in the middle of the Isle there grows a Tree, whose Leaves are much like those of the Olive, which being alwaies covered with Clouds, drops from its Leaves into a Cistern which is underneath it, very good Water; and in such great abundance, that it suffices all the Inhabitants; as al∣so all the Cattle and living Creatures in the Island. One Jackson an English∣man, who reports to have seen, considered, and measured this Tree in 1618, saith, That the water falls into a Pond containing 20000 Tuns, which in one night is filled; and that from this Pond the water is by divers Channels con∣veyed into other Ponds or Cisterns, through the whole Isle, which is very well peopled: some say it hath in it about 8000 people, and above 100000 head of Cattle, which for an Island but of six Leagues Circuit is very well; for if the Tree be in the middle of the Isle, it cannot be above a League distant from any extremity; and moreover more than 20000 Tuns of water, for 100000 months will be a Tun a day, for every five months, which is too much drink, if they drink nothing but water. These particulars are contradicted by others. The Conquest of all these Isles saies many Trees, not one alone, otherwise it would be immortal. Sanutus saith, that the Cloud begins to rise about noon, and in the evening quite cover∣eth the Tree, which at the same time destills water, drop by drop along the trunk, branches and leaves; and that it continues so till day. Others say, that this water falls from Noon all night, until a little after the Sun be risen. But most will have the Cloud perpetually about the Tree, and that it destills conti∣nually. Suarez makes the Pond or Cistern of not above 20 Tuns. The rela∣tions of 1602. say, two reservers, each 20 foot square; but neither Suarez nor others makes any mention of other reservers in the Isle; but will have this water in one place alone whither all go to fetch it. But let us pass from the O∣cean, into the Mediterranean Sea, and come to Malta, which is one of the best, but none of the least considerable pieces of Africa. Nigh unto these 7 Islands, called the Canary Isles, are the Isles of Roco, Sancta Clara, Gratiosa, Alegria, and the two Savage Isles. PALMA is distant from Gomer, 12 or 15 Leagues to the North West. It is round or oval, and its Circuit about 25 Leagues: Abounds in Corn, Wine, Su∣gars, and all sorts of Fruits. It is well stored with Cattle, and therefore made the victualling place of the Spanish Fleet that pass to Peru and Brasil. The City of the same name, hath great confluence, by reason of its Wines, loaden for the West-Indies, and other places. Its best, and like to Malvoisie, is made about Brenia, whence are taken more than 12000 Pipes yearly; also St. Andre, and Tassa Corde, are on the Sea. It hath little Corn, which is brought from Teneriff. Four Sugar Engines: the Church of Palma, and the Governors House, are esteemed fair.
The Island of MALTA. The Isle of Malta.THe Isle of MALTA is in the middle of the Mediterranean Sea, and almost at an equal distance from the main Land of Asia, and Europe. It is about 600 Leagues from the Coast of Souria, and 500 from the Streight of Gibralter: This Streight beginning the Mediterranean Sea towards the West; and that Coast ending it towards the East. Likewise from Malta to the nearest firm Land of Europe,Its scituation. which is Italy; and to the nearest Coasts of the firm Land in Africa, which are the Coasts of Tunis, and Tripoly, (these bound∣ing the Mediterranean Sea on the South, that on the North) is 80, 90, and near 100 Leagues. The Antients have esteemed it rather in Africa, then in Europe, and the o∣pinion hath been followed by almost all modern Authors: though it be near∣est the Isle, and Kingdom of Sicily, which is in Europe, and from which it like∣wise holds, then to Africa: and though it be in the hands of the Knights of Malta who are all Europeans, the native tongue of the Country, and most of their Customs, have alwaies more resembled those of Africa, than Europe. This Isle at present is very famous,The Isle fa∣mous for being the seat of the Knights of Malta. not for its greatness, nor for its fertility, nei∣ther for Antient renown; but by reason it is the residence of the Great Master, and Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, whom at present we call of Malta, where they have settled since they lost Rhodes: and because it serves as a powerful Rampire for all Christendom, and particularly for Sicily and Naples. Its length and breadth.The length of the Isle is not above 20, or 25000 paces, its breadth 10, or 12000, and its Circuit about 60000 paces, which are 20, or 25 Italian miles in length, 10, or 12 in breadth, and 60 in Circuit. The Soil except the Anti∣ent City of Malta,Its soil and Commodities. is almost all stones, craggy, and dry: yet it produces Wheat, Barley, Cummin, and all sorts of Fruits; among others Figgs, Apri∣cocks, Citrons, Melons, Grapes, &c. It feeds Horses, Asses, Mules, Hogs, Goats, Sheep, Hares, Conies, Hens, Partridges, Quails, Faulcons, and other Birds of prey. And its Beasts, Fowl, Grains, Fruits, as likewise their Ca∣pers, Honey, and Cotton, of which they make Cotton Cloth, and several Manu∣factures, are excellent; yet it wants much Corn, and Wine for the necessary food of its Inhabitants, which are 75 or 80000 souls: and among which there are about 15 or 16000 Souldiers, besides the Knights, so that they are con∣strained to fetch their provision from Sicily, which they have at a certain rate, and with priviledge to pay no Custom. Its Inhabitants.The natural Inhabitants of this Island are said to be miserable, churlish, and uncivil people, of complexion, not less tawny then the Moors; use the African Language, but follow the Religion of the Church of Rome, which the Knights are bound to defend. Their women are fair, who are debarred the society of men, and go veiled, as not desiring to shew themselves, and are guarded after the Italian manner; they have here a great many of Curtizans, which are to∣lerated, who for the most part are Grecians, who sit at their doors playing on Instruments, &c. to intice men in to them. Its Ports, Roads, and chief places.On the Coasts of this Isle, and beginning by Malta, and turning towards the East, South, and West, &c. to make the Circuit, the Ports, Roads, and Har∣bours, which present themselves, are Marza, or Marza-scala: then Marza sirocco, where the Turks landed the 19 of May 1565, when they had a design to besiege Malta. The Great Master Vignacour hath since caused to be built two Forts, which defend the entrance,; and a third upon that languet or tongue of land, which advances into the middle of the Port, enough to hinder any for the future from casting Anchor there in quiet; continuing towards the Coast which regards the South, and far towards the West, is nothing but Rocks, except it be a little Bay or Golfe of Pietra Negre, others call it Pietra Sancta, where the 5 of July arrived the first succour in favour of Malta. This relief was but of six hundred men, who passed from Pietra Sancta to the old City and from
thence to the Bourg Il-Borgo, which the Turks besieged, after having taken the Fort of St. Elmo, and this assistance served much to the defence of that place. Pietra Sancta regards towards the South,The Isle hath oft withstood the fury of the Turks. the Rock of Forfolo or Fur∣fura. Towards the West are the Golfes or Bayes of Anteofega, the Islanders call it Hayntofeca, then Muggiaro where the Turks first cast Anchor the 18 of May 1565. Between the West and North is the Bay or Port of Melecca, where the great relief arrived the 7 of December following. Melecca regards the Island of Goza, and in the streight or channel between both are the Isles of Cu∣min, and Cuminat. This part of the Isle about Melecca is almost divided from the rest, by the Golfe or Port of the Saline Vecchie, or old saltpits towards the East; and that of Muggiaro towards the West; and if the Turks had seized the pass which is between them, this assistance had proved vain. Next to the Golfe of the old Saline, is the Creek and Chapel of St. Paul, where according to common tradition he was ship wrackt: next is the Creek of new Salines, and the Creek of St. George, where the Turks dis-imbarked their Ammunitions to serve to assault the Fort St. Elmo. And in fine, the Ports of Marza Massetto, and Marza grande are those where at three several times have been builded, and fortified three Cities, and divers Forts contiguous to each other. It Bor∣go, or the Bourg is 2000 paces in Circuit, the Isle of Sengle 1500, each of 1000, or 1200 houses, the one and the other so well fortified, that they receiv∣ed 70000 Cannot shot, and sustained an incredible number of assaults of 60 or 70000 Turks. The Arsenal for the Gallyes is yet in the Bourg, but there re∣sides there only Malteses, and Mariners, and in the Isle of Sengle Mariners and Souldiers of Fortune. The residence of the Great Master.The great Master and the Knights reside at present in the City of Valetta, which is now by much the most considerable of these Cities, both for its force, the advantage of its scituation, and the beauty of its publick and private build∣ings. It is built upon Montit Sceberros, which forms a Languet of Land all of a Rock; and between the Ports of Marza Massetto, and Marza grande commanding on all sides, and into all parts of the one and the other Port, and its ditches to the landward, which are cut out of the Rock, which are exceed∣ing broad, of a very great depth, strongly flankt, and well fortified. The Walls are strong, joyn to the Rock, and are about 60 foot high, and are well provided with Guns, &c. against any occasion. It contains above 2000 houses, which are for the most part uniform, builded of Free-stone; they are commonly two stories high, flat at top, and with Tarrasses. The Market place is spacious, from whence several fair Streets do take their rise; to every house there is a Cistern to preserve water for their occasions; besides these houses there are se∣veral stately Structures, as the Great Masters Palace, which is a gallant Edi∣fice, having a Tower which overlooketh the whole Island; the Hall or Cham∣ber of Assemblies where they sit in Council, is curiously adorned and painted, wherein their Fights both by Sea and Land, as well at home as abroad, are live∣ly represented; and this as also the Armory, which may on a suddain Arm 20 or 25000 men, are in the Great Masters Palace; then the Churches of St. Paul, and St. John Patron of the Order, the one the seat of a Bishop, and the other of a Prior, are magnificent; likewise the seven Alberges of the Knights like so ma∣ny Palaces, where the Commanders of the seven tongues treat the Cavaliers at the expence of the Order. The Arsenal near Porto Reale is as well furnished with all sorts of Munition as any in Christendom. Also the Hospital of St. Johns towards the Castle of St. Elmo doth merit fame, not only for its buildings which are curious, but for the entertainment there given to those that fall sick, where the Knights themselves lodge when sick or wounded to receive cure, where they are exceeding well attended, have excellent good dyet, served by the Ju∣nior Knights in silver, and every friday visited by the Grand Master, accompa∣nied with the great Crosses: a service which was from the first institution com∣manded; and thereupon called Knights Hospitallers. Here are, as Sandys saith, three Nunneries, one for Virgins, another for Bastards, and the third for penitent Whores.
Castle of St. Elmo.The Castle of St. Elmo is at the end of the City of Valetta towards the Sea, and at the opening of two Ports. During the siege of Malta it was taken, and sackt by the Turks, after having wasted 18000 Cannonshot, given divers assaults, and lost 4000 men of their best Militia, among others Dragut, one of their most famous Coursaiers. The Christians lost 1300 men among whom many Knights. But this Fort was restored to a far better Estate than before: and is separated from the City only by a ditch cut likewise in the Rock; on the other side, and on the point of the Borgo is the Fort of St. Angelo; and like∣wise above the Borgo, and the Isle of Sengle, have been made new works to hinder the Turks from lodging there. Besides these three Cities, and the Forts about them, the ancient City of Malta, Medina, is in the middle of the Island, on an easie ascending hill, and in an advantagious scituation. The Turks assaulted it in 1551 but soon retired. The Bishop of the Isle hath here his residence; and near the City is yet the Grotte and Chapel of St. Paul where they believe he preached, and where he lay when he suffered shipwrack, and this place is of great account among them. All these Cities and Forts have 250 or 300 pieces of Cannon on their Rampart;The Isle very strong and well provided for War. and their Magazins are so well provided with Powder, Shot, Wood, Bisket, Salt-meats, and all Provisions, and Ammunition, that they call it Malta Flor del Mondo, Malta the Flower of the World: being provided alwaies with Am∣munitions and Provisions for a three years siege; yet this is to be understood, not only because of its Fortifications, and Ammunitions, but likewise because of its force, and the resolution of its Knights. The Order of Knighthood first instituted.This order of Knighthood according to Sandys, received their denomination from John the charitable Patriarch of Alexandria; though vowed to St. John Baptist as their Patron. Their first seat was the Hospital of St. John of Jerusa∣lem, built by one Gerrard, at the same time when the Europeans had some∣thing to do in the Holy-Land, where they received such good success, and be∣came so famous that they drew divers worthy persons into this society: which by Pope Gelasius the second, was much approved of. He saith, that one Ray∣mond was the first Master of this Order, who did amplifie their Canons, and en∣tituled himself The poor servant of Christ, and Guardian of the Hospital in Je∣rusalem; and at the allowance of one Honorius the second, were apparelled in black garments, signed with a White-Cross; this Order we have said began at Jerusalem, and at first meddled not but with the Government of the Hospital of St. John, and were called Fryers Hospitallers, or simply Hospitallers, as those of the Temple Templers; but when these Hospitallers were constrained to make profession both of Hospitality and Arms, they were called Knights Hos∣pitallers, or Knights of the Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem;These Knights oft forced to remove their habitations. after the loss of Jerusalem, they held their Convent in the City and Fortress of Margatt, then in Aicre or Ptolomaido; and all the Latine Christians being driven from the Holy Land, and from Souria, they retired into Cyprus. But during their stay in Cyprus, they gained Rhodes, and established themselves there so pow∣erfully, that they were called Knights of Rhodes. Margaret was taken from them in 1285. Aicre in 1291, little less than 200 years after Godfrey of Bulloin had Conquered the Holy Land, and this order began before; after the loss of Aicre they lived in Cyprus from 1291 to 1309. in which year they took, and settled in Rhodes, and maintained it more than 100 years, sustaining four sieges, till in 1522 Sultan Solyman became Master of Rhodes; they then retired into Europe, now into one place, and then into another, and in fine to Malta, which Charles the fifth gave them in 1530. with some little neighbouring Isles, as likewise the City of Tripoly in Barbary, which they could keep no longer then 1551. that place being too far engaged in the Enemies Country. These Knights are of divers Nations, and are divided into eight Tongues, to wit of Province, of Auvergne, of France, of Italy, of Arragon, of England, of Germany, and of Castile; so that the three first are in France, and the last in Castile; each Tongue contains many Priories, and each Priory many Commanderies; these three Tongues which are in France, have near 300 Commanderies. The other five Tongues which are in Italy, Arragon, England, Germany, and Castile, made near 400.
but there are no more in England,England. the Kings of England when they confiscated the goods of the Church, having likewise seized the goods and Commanderies of the Knights of Malta; and in Germany a part of these Commanderies being fal∣len into the hands of Lutherans, and Calvinists, serve no longer: so that at present France alone furnishes little less than half the Commanderies of Malta. And it hath been observed that from the first establishment of this Order, un∣to this very present, of 57 great Masters, there hath been 37 French, only 4 or 5 Italians, 7, or 8, Spaniards, and 11 whose Nation and Tongue the Histo∣ry could not observe; but apparently the most part were French, since this Or∣der began by the French; of these 34 known, 12 were in the Holy-Land, and in Souria, 13 in Rhodes, and  in Malta unto Father Paul of Lascaris; of eve∣ry one there is a Grand Prior, who lives in great reputation in his Country, who orders the affairs of their Order; and for England, St. Johns by Clarken-well in times past was a mansion of the Grand-Prior. There are several Coun∣cels among these Knights,Their Govern∣ment. as that for deciding of differences which may hap∣pen among them; the Councel of War, the General Chapter, which may aug∣ment, or moderate the Authority of the great Master, renew the Ordinances and Government of the Religion, or their Order, and which is held every five years. The Ceremo∣nies performed in making these Knights.The Ceremonies used in Knighting are these which follow; first being cloathed in a long loose garment, he goeth to the Altar with a Taper in his hand of White Wax, where he kneeleth down, and desires the Order of the Or∣dinary; then in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, he recei∣veth a sword, therewith to defend the Catholick Church, to repulse and van∣quish the enemy, to expose himself to death for the Faith, to relieve the oppres∣sed, and all by the power of the Cross, which is desigured by the cross hilt, then is he girt with a belt, and thrice struck on his shoulders with his sword, which signifies that he is cheerfully to suffer all afflictions for the honour of Christ: who taking it of him, flourisheth it aloft three times, as a provokement to the adversary, and then sheaths it again. Then he that gives him Knight∣hood, doth exhort him to get true honour by laudable and couragious actions, to be vigilant in the Faith, &c. then two other Knights of the said Order, do put on a pair of gilt spurs, which doth signifie that he should do no ignoble acti∣on for gain, and to value Gold no more than dirt; and thus with a Taper in his hand he goes to Mass, where he is excited to Hospitality, to works of Piety, redemption of Christian Captives, &c. Also he is asked whether he is resolved to live among them, to quit the Authority of secular Magistracy, to revenge their injuries, whether he be of any profession, whether a freeman, joyned in Matrimony, or vowed to another Order; and having answered thereunto, upon the receipt of the Sacrament he vows in this order: I vow to the Al∣mighty God, to the Virgin Mary his immaculate Mother, and to St. John Bap∣tist, perpetually by the help of God, to be truly obedient to all my superiours, ap∣pointed by God and this Order, to live without any thing of mine own, and with∣al to live chastly; which done he is received as a member of them; besides o∣ther prayers, they are commanded to say daily 150 Pater-nosters, for such as have been slaves in their Wars. None are admitted to this Order, but those who can prove their Gentility for six descents, which is examined and approved by the Knights of their Nation; they remain a year upon approbation, before they are admitted into the Society, where they come very young, that they may the sooner come to a Commendum at home. Their habit as we noted before, are black Cloaks, with large white Crosses of fine linnen set on the shoulder place; but in time of War they wear Mandilions of Crimson with the said White Crosses set behind and before, and about their necks they wear a Riband with a branch of the Cross. If one of these Knights be convicted of a Capital offence, he is in the first place publickly degraded in the Church of St. John, where he received his Knighthood; also strangled, or thrown into the Sea. There are of these Knights 1000, whereof 500 alwaies reside in this Island; the other 500 dispersed throughout Christendom, at their several Seminaries, which upon
any summons are to make their personal appearance; every Nation do feed by themselves in their several Alberges, and sit at table like Friers. Of these there be 16 of great authority (Councellors of State,) called the Great Crosses, out of whom the Officers of their Order, as the Marshal, the Admiral, the Chancellor, the Master of the Hospital, &c. are chosen, and who together with the Master punishes the trangressors as aforesaid. Now when the Great Master hapneth to die, they suffer no vessel to go out of the Land, until ano∣ther be chosen, lest the Pope should intrude on their election, which is thus performed, The several Seminaries nominate two Knights, and two also are nominated for the English; and these 16 from among themselves chuse 8, and these 8 chuse a Knight, a Priest, and a Frier servant, and they three out of the 16 great Crosses, elect the Great Master who being thus chosen, is stiled The most illustrious and most reverend Prince, the Lord Frier A.W. great Ma∣ster of the Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem, Prince of Malta and Goza. The Great Master being thus chosen, and received with these and many other no∣ble Ceremonies, hath a great power over all the Commanders and Officers of the Order; he assembles the Councels, calls the Officers of Justice, who exer∣cise in his Name, and execute under his Seal; he Coins money, disposes of Trea∣sure, imprisons, and sentences the faulty, pardons the Condemned, creates Knights of Grace, confers even to the eighth dignity of the Great Cross, &c. In the Councel and at Table he sits under a Canopy of State, and is bravely atten∣ded, and served by Knights according to their Order, and without Fee, and doth all the acts, of Soveraignty, and hath a great revenue to support his Dig∣nity. Their possessi∣ons.Besides Malta, the Great Master, and the Knights of Malta possess the Isles of Cumin, and Cumiot which are very little; Forfola or Furfura, which is but a Rock, (and when they would iest with any among them, or play on some young Knight, they call him Prince of Forfola,) The Isle of Goza of which the Great, Master takes the title of Prince; this is the Gaulos or Gaudos of the An∣tients; and to this day called Gausditch by its Inhabitants, and Gausdosch by the Moors. It is about 6 or 8000 paces from Malta, and about 20000 paces in Circuit, its form approaching to an Oval. Its Fortress is on an uncommanded hill, and the Town beneath it; all the Isle though mountainous is peopled not by Villages, but by Hamlets, and houses scattered here and there, the Air be∣ing very good, and the land watered with many streams. It may assist Malta with its Corn, Fruits, Muttons, Hares, Fowl, Honey, &c. they take here ex∣cellent Faulcons; and that which is presented to the Vice-Roy of Sicily in the name of the Great Master of Malta, and for Malta, likewise those which are presented to the King of France, are for the most part taken here. This Isle of GOZA was taken, and pillaged by the Turks in 1551, who car∣ried near 4000 souls Captives, there remaining almost as many. At present it is restored, and the Castle well fortified, and all the approaches of the Isle de∣fended with some Forts. Its Governour is one of the Knights whom the Grand Master sends from three years to three years; the Inhabitants speak Arab, or Moresco, as at Malta, have the same manners, and are all Catholicks. Likewise LAMPEDOZA, and LINOSA or Limosa distant from Malta, about 10000 paces, belong to these Knights, but both are esteemed desart. West of them and towards the Cape of Bona is the Isle of Pantaleria, which belongs not to the Knights, but to the Catholick King; but because we have not re∣membred it before, we will here speak a word of it. Its Circuit is about 30000 paces. Its City, and Port regard Sicily towards the North; and Malta to∣wards the East. Above the City is a Castle or Rock, which nature hath made craggy, and inaccessible on all sides. The Land bears little Corn, quantity of Pulse, and Kitchin-herbs; produceth abundance of Cotton, Anniseeds, Figgs, Melons, Capers, and excellent Grapes, &c. The manners, habit and tongue of the Islanders retain much of the Moors, yet they are all Catholicks like to Mal∣ta, and under the Vice-Roy of Sicily. In the midst of the Island, and in a Cave is a Pitt, which exhales continually an obscure vapour, which spreading it self on all sides on the Rock, dissolves into water, and distills with such abundance,
that it furnisheth all the Inhabitants have need of not only for their drink, and other uses, but for their Beasts; nor is there any other fresh water in the Isle, the Land being dry, reddish, and so hot that a naked foot can scarce suffer it. For the rest the Knights of Malta are alwaies in Arms against the Moors, Mahometans, and all the Pyrates of the Mediterranean Sea,Knights alwaies in Wars. and by their ex∣peditions with those few Gallies, they have delivered out of their hands a great number of Christian Captives, reduced many Mahometans to the Christi∣an Faith, maintain their Arms in good reputation, and on all occasions which present themselves, whether of their own, or with other Princes of Christen∣dom, they freely employ and venture both their lives and goods in favour of Christians in general and particular. But it is time to finish Africa, and to say that if we would have believed cer∣tain Authors among the Antients, this Africa had been represented to us with unsupportable heats, unsufferable droughs, fierce and cruel Beasts, perfidious Men, horrible and afrightful Monsters, whereas time, which daily discovers things unknown to the Antients, hath made us see that the greatest heats of A∣frica have some refreshments; that the driest sands have some wells, some wa∣ters; that the vastest solitudes have some green fields, some Fruits; that the Beasts are not so dangerous, but that Men may desend themselves from their fu∣ry; nor the Men so faithless, but that they have Commerce and Society among themselves, as also with Strangers; that their Dragons, Serpents, Griffons, &c. are for the most part imaginary. And moreover, the generosity of its Ly∣ons, the docility of its Camels, the Feathers of its Estriches, the odour of its Ci∣vets, the swistness of its Barbes, the agility of its wild Asses, the greatness of its Elephants, the strength of its Eagles, the diversity of its Parroquets, and the wantonness of its little Monkeys, &c. recompence the mischief which other Beasts may do. And though there are as yet some people fierce, and Man-ea∣ters, the most part of the others are very ingenious and tractable. The Egyp∣tians have long since sufficiently made known their cunning in Sciences, Arts, and Arms, so have the Carthaginians, &c. and the Antients esteemed the Ae∣thiopians the most innocent and justest men in the world, believing the Gods sometimes banqueted with them. Besides there are many particulars worthy of observation in Africa; what City was ever fairer, or more magnificent than THEBES, in the higher Egypt? Than MEMPHIS in the middle? Or A LEXANDRIA in the lower? Out of Egypt, what City was ever richer, more powerful, or more proud than CARTHAGE, except Rome? And at present PEZ is so splendid, that there is no City in Europe to be compared with it; though many believe it not to compare to CAIRO in Egypt: Among the Se∣ven Wonders of the World, some place three in Egypt alone, the Statue of MEMNON at Thebes, the PYRAMIDES near Memphis, and the PHARƲS of Alexandria. Commodities of Africa.Not only these beautiful Works, and fair Cities, not only the infinite quanti∣ty of Gold, and other Metals, Precious stones, Grains, Fruits, Spices, Druggs, Wines, Oyls, Sugars, Honey, Wax, Cordovants, Amber, Ambergreece, Ele∣phants-teeth, Estriches-feathers, Saffron, Coral, Civet, Musk, Incense, Coffee, Capers, Olives, Ivory, Silk, Cotton, Flax, &c. of which they make Velvets, Silks, Damasks, &c. a thousand several Manufactures which are found there, ought to make us account Africa very considerable: but its extent which is lit∣tle less than Asia, twice as great as Europe. Its position is in the Southern part of our Continent; the South is esteemed after the East, before either North or West: It was the portion of Cham, second Son to Noah, which may make us judge it the second in greatness and goodness. Its first Monarchies have been known before those of Europe; some will say before those of Asia. Arts, Sciences, Letters, and Laws, have been in great reputation here, before they passed into Greece or the rest of Europe.
AMERI∣CA as it is divided into SEPTEN∣TRIO∣NAL, which may be divi∣ded into CANADI∣ANE where there shall be The ARCTICK LANDS, as Island — Bellested. Groenland, — Beareford. North Wales, — Sea hor(c-p) in South Wales, — Hudsons Bay. CANADA, or NEW FRANCE, whose chief parts and people are those of Estoriland, — Hope advanced. Saguanay, — Quebec. Canada, — Mont Real. Acadie, — Martengo. New England, — Boston. Mary Land, — Marys town. Virginia, — James town. Carolina, — Charles town. The Hurons, — St. Peter. Isle of Bermuda's, — Southampton. Florida, — St. Hellens. MEXICANE, with it Audi∣ences, Provin∣ces, &c. of MEXICO with its Provinces and chief pla∣ces of Mexico, — Mexico. Panuco, — Panuco. Mechoachan, — Mechoacan. Thascala, — Thascala. Guaxaca, — Antequera. Tabasco, — No. en. de la victoria. Jucatan, — Merida. GUADALAJA∣RA with its Provinces of Gudalajara, — Guadalajara. Xalisco, — Compostella. Chietlan, — St. Sebastian. Culiacan, — St. Michael. Cinaloa, — St. John. Los Zacatecas, — Zacatecas. New Biscay, — St. John. Quivira, — St. Fee. Anian, — Anian. Cibola, — Cibola, California, — Port de Montere. GUATEMALA with its Provinces, &c. of Guatemala, — St. Jago de guatemala. Vera Pax, — Vera Pax. Soconusco, — Gueyet lan. Chiapa, — Cui dad Real. Honduras, — Valladolid. Nicaragua, — Leon. Costarica, — Cartago. Veragua, — la Conception. St. DOMINGO with its Isles, the chief of which are Cuba, — St. Jago. Jamaica, — Sevilla. Hispaniola, — St. Domingo. Soana, — St. Germaine. MERIDI∣ONAL, which may be divided into PERUVIA∣NE where three shall be TERRA FIRMA, with its Provinces, &c. of Panama, — Panama. Carthagena, — Carthagena. St. Martha, — St. Martha. Rio de la Hacha, — Rio de la Hacha. Venezula, — Venezula. New Andalousia, — Comana. Paria, — Macureguaa. Caribes, — Taupuramune. Guiana, — Macurewaray. Popayan, — St. Fee de Antiochia. Granada, — St. Fee de Bogata. PERU with its Audi∣ences of Peru, — Quito. De los Quixos, — Baesa. Pasamores, — Loyola. Lima, — Lima. De la Plata, — de la Plata. Chili, — Copiopo. Magellanick Land, — St. Phillip. BRAZILI∣ENE, where there shall be BRAZILE with its Capitaines, or Go∣vernments of St. Vincent, — Sanctos. Rio Janieto, — Schastian. Spiritu Sancto, — Spiritu Sancto. Porto Seguro, — Porto Seguto. los Isleos, — Los Isleos. Baya de los Sanctos, — St. Salvador. Seregippe, — Seregippe del Rey. Fernambuco, — Olinda. Tamaraca, — Tamaraca. Parayba, — Parayba. Rio Granda, — De los tres Reys. Siara, — Siara. Maranhan, — Junipara. Para, — Para. PARAGUAY or, RIO de la PLATA, with its Provinces, &c. of Paraguay, — Paraguay. Chaco, — Chaco. De la Plata, — Aslumption. Tucoman, — St. Jago del Estera. Urvaig, — la Conception. Parana, — St. Ignatious. Guayr, — Ouidad Real.
map of America A New Mapp of AMERICA SEPTENTRIONALE Designed by Moūsieur Sanson Geographer to the French King, and Rendred into English, and Illustrated by Richard Blome By his Majesties. Especiall Command. London Printed for Richard Blome
blazon or coat of arms of the earls of Shaftesbury To the Rt. Honble. Anthony Earle of Shaftesbury Baron Ashby of Wimbourne St. Giles and Lord Cooper of Paulet. This Mapp is most humbly D.D. by R.B.
AMERICA. AMERICA is a Continent different from that wherein we inhabit, or which we call Ours; for the surface of the Globe being described into two Hemispheres, divided by the first Meridian; America is in that Hemisphere which is oppo∣site to ours. The Voyages of Columbus, Cabral, and Visputius into America.In 1942, and some succeeding years, Chri∣stopher Columbus, a Genouese, for and in the name of Ferdinand King of Arragon, and Isa∣bella Queen of Castile, made divers Voyages into the Islands which are before this Continent, and discovered part of the Coasts of the Con∣tinent. In 1501 Alvares Cabral, for and in the name of Emanuel King of Portugal, Navigating along the Coast of Africa, on a Voyage to the East-Indies, some Eastern Winds carried him so far to the West, that he discovered the Coast of a main Land, which was afterwards called Brazil; where a little after Americus Vesputius, a Florentine, was expresly sent with a particular charge to discover this Country: In which he was so happy, that his name was given to that part of the Coast which he discovered; and in fine, to the whole Continent. From these Voyages of Columbus, Cabral, and Americus Vespu∣tius, the Spaniards pretend to be the first who discovered, or caused to be discovered, and gave knowledge of this Continent. America known by the Ancients.The Greeks and Latins have given fair testimonies, that the Ancients have had some knowledge of America. Plato in his Timaeus, and in his Critias, calls in the Atlantick Isle, and esteems it as great or greater than Asia and Africa together. It seems that Plato (or Solon, or the Priest of Egypt, &c.) had knowledge of the greatness, scituation, and form of the two parts of Ame∣rica; so well they agree to Asia and Africa: the Northern America with Asia, the Southern with Africa. America bounded.AMERICA is almost divided into two parts, of which one is between the Equator and the North; the other, in regard of us, is towards the South, and part under the Equator. After Plato, Theopompus, either in his Treatise of Wonders, or in his Hi∣story, makes mention of another Continent besides ours, and touches divers particulars: Among others, that its greatness is so vast that it was not wholly known; that its Men were greater, stronger, and lived longer than we; that
they had Gold and Silver in so great quantity, that they made less account of it than we do of Iron: That they had a great number of Cities, and among others two very great ones, and of Customs much different; the principal aim of the one being to War, and the other to Religion; which I esteem a∣greeing with Cusco and Mexico, which we have so found when first known to us; Mexico more inclined to War, and Cusco to the adoration of its Divi∣nities. AMERICA having been known to the Ancients under divers names, and all these names preserved till now, there remains to know from whence the People of this America should descend, whether from Europe, Asia, or Africa. It is to be believed, that the first of our Continent which were carried into America, were so either by chance or by force; the Eastern Winds having driven them from the Coast of Africa or Libya, where they sailed, and car∣ried them so far into the West that they have found these Lands. And it is likewise to be believed, that of those which have been so carried, some have been unfurnished of Victuals for so long and impremeditated a Voy∣age, and so have been constrained to eat some among them to preserve the rest, as others since have done. And thus America may have been peopled by di∣vers Nations,How America became first peopled by those of our Continent. and at divers times, and according to the Parts from whence they were, according to the hunger and necessity they suffered upon the Sea, they became more or less barbarous. And that some have been carried by chance or force from our Continent to the other, we may judge both by An∣cient and Modern Histories. Diodorus Siculus makes mention of certain Phoenicians, (Aristotle had said almost the same before of the Carthaginians) who sayling along the Coast of Africa or Libya, were carried far into the Occidental Ocean, where they found a very great Isle, distant from our Main Land many days sail, and the Country as beautiful as that of Toscany, so that some of Carthage would here have settled; but that the Republick prohibited any more to pass, fearing lest it should weaken their Estate, commanding those which were passed to retire, and abolishing as much as they could the know∣ledge of their Country; yet with design to retire thither, if they should be∣come so unfortunate as to fall under the Romans subjection. Those particulars which Authors apply to this Isle, agree better with America Meridionalis, which is almost an Isle, than with the Isles on this side it. Besides these Authorities of the Ancients, the accident which arrived to Alonzo Zanches de Guelva, in Adalousie, or whatever other Pilot he was, who landing at the Madera, where was Christopher Columbus, who told him how he had been carried by force into the West, which he had discovered, and how he had returned: And the like accident which happened to Cabral in 1501, (as we have already said) makes it sufficiently appear how the same thing may have hapned to other Saylors; and particularly to those Nations on this side. which lie upon the Ocean, as the Moors, Spaniards, Celtes, and Bretons, &c. And those who traded on the Ocean, as the Phoenicians, Car∣thaginians, and Tyrrhenians; and this is the more easily, because between the two Tropicks, the Eastern Brises or Winds do for the most part blow, and easily carry, nay sometimes force Ships from East to West. It is true, that it is hard to turn from East to West by the same course: And possibly from these two so different things the Poet took occasion to say, —Facilis descensus Averni; Sed revocare gradum superasque revertere ad auras, Hoc opus, hic labor est. Understanding it easy to descend from our Continent into the other, which we esteem the Lower Hemisphere; but hard to return from that to ours, which we esteem the Higher: the means to return with least difficulty not being found out but with time; and after having (and that at divers times) essayed all courses, which is, by disingaging themselves from between the Tropicks, which some attribute to Pedrarias de Avila, who about the year 1514 began to give
Rules for the time of parting; and the course was to be held, to go from our Continent to the other: and likewise the time and course to return from the others to ours. Since some have passed from this world of our Continent, and by our Coast into the other Continent: It may likewise be believed, that others have passed from the other Coast, that is to say, from Asia. Whence it comes that some believe, that the Inhabitants of Peru and Mexico, descend rather from the Chinois and Japanois, than from the Europeans or Africans. But this subject will be too tedious to handle, let us therefore content our selves to speak a word or two of this America in general, before we descend to particulars. AMERICA considered in its whole Body, is part on this side, and part beyond the Equator: It stretches it self to near 54 degrees beyond, and ex∣tends it self to 80 or more on this side, which are more than 130 degrees of Latitude; our Continent not having much more than 100: But the breadth of America is very unequal, this Continent being composed of two great Peninsula's, almost divided the one from the other by the Equator; its breadth here is not in some places of above 30, 40, or 50 Leagues,The bigness of America. though in other places 1000 or 1200, and possibly much more in America Septentrio∣nalis, if the Land of Jesso be contiguous to it. The scituation and Land of Jesso.This Land of JESSO, or YEDSO, is between America and Asia, and we know not yet whether it joyn upon Asia or America, or make a Piece a∣part; if it be divided both from the one and the other, and that New Den∣mark and Greenland are upon it, as there is much reason to believe, it makes a Piece not less than the three parts of our Continent, or of the two of the other; but possibly it makes a third part of the other Continent: Let us pro∣ceed to the two parts of America, as they are esteemed and known at present. AMERICA SEPTENTRIONALIS. AMERICA SEPTENTRIONALIS, is that part of America which is not only the most Northern of the two America's, but likewise doth all lie between the Equator and the North;The length and breadth of America Septentrionalis. it extends it self from the 8th or 10th degree of Latitude, even beyond the Artick Circle; and if we comprehend the Artick Lands with America, it advances at least to the 88th degree of Latitude, which are 70 degrees for its height from South to North. Its length from West to East possesses near all the degrees of Longitude of the other Hemisphere, to wit, from about the 180th, where ours end, even beyond the 300th, which is the end of the other. The Mer del Nort is on the East of it, the Mer del Sud on its West; to∣wards the North its bounds are unknown, there being Land found even beyond the 80th degree of Latitude,Its bounds. with appearance that they extend yet farther towards the Pole: so that we cannot judge to what degree, or whether it be contiguous to New Denmark and Greenland, or whether it be in Islands; and on the South it makes America Meridionalis. We will divide this America Septentrionalis into Canadiana and Mexicana. Under the name of Canadiana is understood that part of America which is about Canada, where the English, French, Hollanders, Danes and Swedes have divers Colonies: And under the name of Mexicana,Its division, according to Mons. Sanson. that part of Ame∣rica which the King of Spain doth almost alone possess, and where he hath established abundance of Colonies, subdividing Canadiana into the Artick Lands, and Canada or New France; and Mexicana into New Mexico, and Mexico or New Spain. Of these four parts, Mexico or New Spain is the most advanced towards the Equator and the South, the Artick Lands towards the North,Its scituation. the other two parts rest in the middle; Canada or New France towards the East, and New Mexico towards the West. The first is under and about the Tropick of Cancer,
the second under or about the Polar Circle, the two others lie from 25 or 30 unto 60 degrees of Latitude; so that the first is within or very near the Tor∣rid Zone, the second within or near the Frozen Zone, and the two in the middle quite in the Temperate Zone. The first and most Southernly ought to be called Mexico or New Spain, Mexico, because Mexico is by much the fairest City, and the Dominion of the ancient Kings of Mexico extended over the best part of it: New Spain, be∣cause the King of Spain possesses near all of it, having established a great many Colonies; a Vice-Roy, divers Archbishops, Bishops, Audiences, and Govern∣ments: the Natives of the Country that are left, being almost all Tributaries to him. The second may be called the Arctick Lands, because it approaches the Ar∣ctick Pole,Arctick Lands. and is for the most part comprehended within the Arctick Circle: these are but little known. We understand well that they are divided by some Streights, and that it apparently consists in many and divers Isles, which hath been the cause a Passage hath been sought to go this way to China and the East-Indies. The Natives do here enjoy a full and entire liberty, the People of Eu∣rope not thinking it worth their pains to establish Colonies. Of the two middle parts, the most Easternly and nearest to Europe, ought to be esteemed under the general name of Canada or New France:Canada, or New France. of Cana∣da, because in that particular Region the Europeans first Landed; of New France, because the French did first establish themselves here before any other Europeans. The most Western and farthest from Europe may in general be called New Mexico, because the Spaniards of Mexico or New Spain disco∣vered it not till after they had been sometime settled in this other. Of these four parts of America Septentrionalis, to wit, Mexico or New Spain, New Mexico, Canada or New France, and America Arctica: New Spain is washed by Mer del Nort, and Mer del Sud: America Arctica like∣wise by both Seas; New France only by Mer del Nort, and New Mexico only by Mer del Sud. These four great parts are subdivided into many less, which we call Regions, Peoples, Provinces, &c. We will observe the chief of them the most clearly and succinctly as possibly we can; but because New Spain touches on America Meridionalis, we will begin our America Septentrionalis by the Arctick and New France; so proceeding to the one and the other Mexico, that we may pass in order to the parts bordering on America Meridionalis. And likewise, because the Arctick Lands of America are very little known, and that we can∣not judge to make a particular discourse of them, we will content our selves to speak something here before we pass to the other parts. That part of America which is comprised for the most part between the Arctick Pole and Circle, or which at most descends unto the 60th or 55th degree of Latitude, is named according to our method, America Arctica. In all this part we know only some Coasts and Gulphs of that which is most towards Eu∣rope: There we have the Isles of Iseland and Groenland, we might likewise put Shetland, which we know not whether Isles or parts of the New Conti∣nent, as we are likewise ignorant of all the rest of America Arctica. ISELAND,Iseland. subject to the King of Denmark, is 150 Leagues long, and little less than 100 broad.Its Inhabitants Its Inhabitants are very lusty, and live above an 100 years; they scarce addict themselves to any thing but the feeding of their Beasts, and Fishing. The Coast toward the South is much better, and best in∣habited. The Governour of the Island resides at Bellested on the Coast, Scal∣hold and Holdon,Bellested, Scal∣hold, and Hol∣don, its chief Towns. within Land, are Bishops Sees. The Mountains of Hecla and Helga often vomit Fire, though the Circle of the Pole Arctick passes over this Island, and incloses part of it in the Frozen Zone, leaving the other in the Temperate, if that can possibly be, which lies so contiguous and near to the Frozen; yet doth it not hinder them from enjoying many rare things in their Mountains, in their Lands, in their Fountains and Rivers, in their Beasts, and in their Fish. Iseland doth (in my Judgment.) apparently answer to the Thule of the Ancients, though some Authors of the Country maintain the con∣trary.
Groenlandt, or Greenland.GROENLANDT, that is, GREENLAND, hath been long known to those of Iseland and Norway. Account is made that one Torwald, and his Son Errick of Norway, passed into Iseland about the year 800; and that from Iseland, Errick and his Son Lieffe, passed a little after into Groenlandt where they established some Colonies of Norwegians: And the same History saith, that Lieffe had some Combats with the Ancient Sekreglingres and Native In∣habitants of the Country, and that those of Norway held but a small part in the East Coast of Groenlandt, the Sekreglingres keeping the rest with∣in the Country; and that what the Norwegians possessed and knew in Groenlandt, was not the hundreth part; but that there were divers People, go∣verned by several Lords, of which the Norwegians had no knowledge. Its Fertility.They say, that in several parts of Groenlandt there are Lands which bear as good Wheat as any Ground in the World; and Chestnuts so large, that their Kernels are as big as Apples; that the Mountains yield Marble of all sorts of colours; that the Grass for Pastures is good, and feeds quantities of great and small Cattle; that there are Horses, Stags, Wolves, Foxes, Black and White Bears, Beavers, Martles, &c. That the Sea is full of great Fishes, as Sea-Wolves, Dogs, and Calves, but above all of Whales; that the white Bears live more on the Sea than on the Land; and that as the Black ones feed only on Flesh, the White ones do on Fish, and are especially greedy of little Whales, which causes a great Antipathy between them and Whales, who pursue them where∣ever they can scent them:The Marhval, a strange kind of Fish. That their Fish Marhval carrieth a Tooth or Horn so strong and long, that it fights against and pierces the Whale, as the Rhino∣ceros does the Elephant: and they assure us, that the Horn is of the same greatness, form, and matter, and hath the same properties as those which we here esteem in the Ʋnicorns. The Norwegians and Danes, who sometime since have passed into Groenlandt, say, that the Language of its Inhabitants is so different from that of Norway or Denmark, that there is little appearance they could descend either from the one or the other; and that if formerly there have been any Colonies of Norwe∣gians, they are quite extinct. In 1636 the Danes which went thither to Trade, demanded by signs, if beyond that ridge of Mountains there were any Men; the Savages made them to understand, they were innumerable, higher,Its Inhabitants and stronger than they; and that they used great Bows and Arrows, and would not have any Commerce, nor suffer the sight of Strangers. The Habits of those with whom the Danes traded (some of which they brought into Denmark) were of Skins of Wild Beasts, their Shirts of the Entrails of Fish, and their Wastcoats of the Skins of Birds with their Feathers. These same Relations make mention of an Old and New Groenlandt; this descending towards the South, the other mounting towards the North; but that some years since the North Seas have been so loaden with Ice, that the first ones not being melted before Winter, and the other having continued from time to time, to add to them, and lie in heaps one upon the other, the Sun in the end hath not had power to break them, and in succession of time this way hath been stopt up, and the communication of Iseland with Old Groenlandt lost.
CANADI∣ANE; In which may be considered The ARCTICK LANDS, called AMERICA ARTICA, with its chief places; and such are, ISELAND, Bellested, Schalhod, Holdon. GROENLAND, Bearesord, Mudder Point, Trime Point, Warusick Foreland, Warwick Sound, Cape Farwel, Resolution Isle. NORTH WALES, Seahorse Point, Cape Pembrook. SOUTH WALES, Hudsons Bay, James Bay, Cape Henretta Marie. CANADA, or NEW FRANCE, with its chief Parts and Places; and such are those of ESTOTILAND, Sir Tho. Smiths Foreland, Merchants Isles, Cape Charles, King James Foreland, Cape Prince Henry, Hope advanced, Ganse Bay, Slapers Haven, Clapmuts Bay, Orang Bay, Hollandsche Bay. SAGUANA, Quebeck, Tadousac, Bay Savage, Brest, Port de Quartier, Port de St. Nicholas, Chichekedec, Port Neuf, Jaus Coudres, Isle of Orleance, Sillery. CANADA, Mont Real, Richelieu, Point Verte, Croipapequiac, Cape de l'Evesque, Assumpsion Isle, Isle of Plate, Isle of Birds, Isle of Ramec, New-found-land, Isle of Brien, Isle of Cap. Breton, Isle of St. John. ACADIE, Martengo, Macomode, Paspay, Port de Rosignal, Cape de Sable, Port Royal, Cape de Mines, Isles of Forchu. de Sable. NEW ENGLAND, Boston, Plimouth, Charles-Town, Dorchester, Cambridge, Ulielands Isle, Long Isle. MARY-LAND, Maries Town, Calverton, Herrington. NEW YORK, — New York. VIRGINIA, James Town, Elizabeth Town, Dales Gift, Wicocomoco, Pouhatan, Bermuda, Secotam, Cape Henry, Smiths Isle, Isle of Paquiwock, Croatoan, Wokokon. CAROLINA, — Charles-Town. The HURONS, St. Peter, St. Francis, Alexis, St. Michael, St. Joseph. Isle of BERMUDES, Southampton, Harington, Pagets. FLORIDA, St. Hellens, Port Royal, St. Matthews, St. Augustine, St. Jago.
CANADA, OR New France. UNder the name of CANADA, or New France, we esteem that which is on both sides the great River of Canada or St. Laurence, with the Isles that are before its Mouth, unto, and so far as this River is known; and from the Gulphs and Streights of Davis and Hudson, unto New Spain or Mexico. In this extent we have the Isles of New-found-land, Terra di Librador, Canada, which communi∣cates its name to the rest, Acadia, Saguenay, the Irocois, the Hurons, the Al∣gonquins, with about a hundred other sorts of people, whose names are known. The Isles of NEW-FOƲND-LAND, or according to the Biscains,New-found-land. of Bacallaos, that is, of God-fish, are so called by reason of these Fishes here found in such great quantity, that sometimes they seem to hinder the sayling of Ships; in like manner are they found in the Gulph or Bay of St. Laurence. Besides the Cod-fish here are other sorts of Fish in great plenty, as Thornback, Ling, Salmons, Oysters, &c. The greatest of these Isles, and which commonly takes the name of New-found-land is 4 or 5 Leagues circuit. It is scituate betwixt the degrees of 46 and 53 of Northern Latitude, and is severed from the Continent of Ame∣rica by an Arm of the Sea, and is distant from England about 600 Leagues. A Country ill-inhabited towards the East and South, the Inhabitants being re∣tired farther within Land; but the English have of late settled some Colonies to maintain their Fishing-Trade.Its Inhabi∣tants. The Natives are of a reasonable good Sta∣ture, and well proportioned; but full-ey'd, broad-faced, beardless, and of an Oker complexion, not over ingenious; their Houses are very mean, and their Apparel and Furniture worse. The Country being for the generality reputed fertil, if well cultivated, and would yield good Grains; is enriched by Nature with plenty of Fish, Fowl, and wild Beasts, and is blest with a wholsom Air, though the rigour of the Winter season, and the excess of Heats in Summer do something detract from its, due praise. East of New-found-land is a great Bank, a thing as remarkable as any in all Canada. This Bank is much different from those which are covered with Wa∣ter when the Sea is high; uncovered and dry on an Ebb: Saylors must shun such Banks like death. This, which we now speak of, is like a Country overflown, always covered with the Sea, and having at least 20, 30, or 40 Fa∣thom water, for the depth is unequal. Off from this Bank, on all sides, the Sea is no less than 200 Fathom deep; and yet this Bank is 200 Leagues long, 20, 25, and sometimes 50 broad. It is on this Bank that the New-found-landers, (that is, those Ships that go to fish for Cods of New-found-land) do for the most part stop and make their freight.
About this great Bank, and more towards the Main Land than the Ocean, there are some others much less, but of the same nature. It is almost incre∣dible how many Nations, and of each how many Sail of Ships go yearly to fish for these Cods, with the prodigious quantity they take; a Man being able to take 100 of them in the space of an hour.The manner of Fishing. They fish with Hooks, which are no sooner thrown into the Sea, but the greedy Fish snapping the Bait is taken by the Hook, and drawn on Ship-board they lay him presently on a Plank; one cuts off his head, another guts it and takes out its biggest bones, another salts and barrels it, &c. Which being thus ordered, is hence transported by the English and other European Nations into all parts of Europe, as also into the other three parts of the World. They Fish only in the day time, the Cod (as they say) not biting in the night; nor doth this Fishing last all Seasons, but begins a little before Summer, and ends with September: In Winter the Fish retires to the bottom of the deep Sea, where Storms and Tempests have no power. Another kind of Fishing.Near New-found-land there is another kind of fishing for the same Fish, which they call dried Fish, as the other green Fish. The Ships retire into some Port, and every Morning send forth their Shallops, one, two or three Leagues into the Sea, which fail not to have their load by Noon, or a little after: They bring them to Land, lay them on Tables or Planks, and order it as the other; but after the Fish hath been some days in salt, they take it forth, exposing it to the Air and Wind, lay it again in heaps, and return it from time to time to the open Air till it be dry. That this Fish may be good, it must be dried in a good and temperate Air; Mists moisten it, and make it rot; the Sun hardens it and makes it yellow. At the same time they fish for Cods, green or dry, the Fishers have the plea∣sure of taking Fowl, without going forth of their Vessels. They take them with a Line as they do fish, baiting the Hook with the Cods Liver; these Fowl be∣ing so greedy, that they come by flocks, and fight who shall get the Bait first, which soon proves its death: and one taken, the Hook is no sooner thrown out again, but another is catch'd in the like nature. But enough of these, and of Cod-fishing. In the year 1623, Sir George Calvert, Knight, the Principal Secretary of State, and afterwards Lord Baltimore, obtained a Patent of part of New-found-land, which was erected into the Province of Avalon, where he settled a Plantation, and erected a stately House and Fort at Ferry-land, where he dwelt some time: And after his death it fell to his Son, the Right Honourable Caecilius, late Lord Baltimore, also Proprietor of Mary-land. CANADA taken particularly, is on the Right hand, and towards the lower part of the great River;The River Canada. and its name is communicated both to the River and Neighbouring Country. This River is the largest of America Septentriona∣lis, and one of the fairest in the World: It is about 200 Fathom deep, and at its Mouth 30 Leagues broad. Its course (according to the report of those of the Country) is already known for 4 or 500 Leagues; and there is some likelyhood that we may in the end discover, that the Lake which seems to be its head-Spring, disburthens it self into the Sea by two or three different courses; one towards us, which is that of Canada; another towards the West, and above California; the third towards the North, and into the Christian Sea; and that the Mouth of this may shew us the way we have so long sought, to go to the East-Indies by the West. People with whom the French Trade. Their Colo∣nies.The People with whom the French trade here are the Canadans, the Hu∣rons, the Algonquins, the Attiquameques, Nipisiriniens, Montagnets; those of Saguenay, Acadia, &c. And to this purpose they have divers Colonies on the great River at Tadousac, at Quebeck, at Three-Rivers, at Sillery, at Riche∣lieu, at Montreal, and without the Bay of Chaleur, at Miscou, at Port-Royal, &c. This Trade is only managed by Exchange; they give the Skins of Bevers, Otters, Martles, Sea-Wolfes, &c. for Bread, Pease, Beans, Plumbs, Kettles, Cauldrons, Hatchets, Arrow-heads, Pinchers, Coverlids, &c. But to instruct them in Christianity, many Ecclesiasticks of Religious Orders have had divers
disbursements, and residences; likewise an Hospital and Seminary of Ʋrsi∣lines: The Jesuits have the chief care of these Houses. North of Canada is ESTOTTILAND,Estottiland. or TERRADE LA∣BRADOR near Hudsons Streight; it is called sometimes the Land of Cor∣tereal, and sometimes new Britany; however, I esteem it a part of new France; the Country is Mountainous, Woody, full of wild Beasts, well furnish∣ed with Rivers, rich in Metals, of a fertil Soil in most places, and would pro∣duce grains, fruits, &c. if its Inhabitants would give it tillage. South of Ca∣nada are New England, New York, Maryland, Virginia, and Caroline; of which in Order. New England described.NEW ENGLAND, North of Maryland according to the report of Captain Smith, hath seventy miles of Sea Coast, where are found divers good Havens, some of which are capable to harbour about five hundred sail of Ships from the fury of the Sea and winds by reason of the interposition of so great a quantity of small Isles which lie about the Coast to the number of about two hundred. And although it be seated in the midst of the Temperate Zone, yet the Climate is more uncertain as to heat, and cold, than those European King∣doms which lie parallel to it. Yet the Air is found very healthful and agree∣able to the English, which hath occasioned the settlement of divers Potent Colonies here who live very happily, and drive a considerable Trade for their provisions to our American Plantations, especially to the Barbados. This Country is Inhabited by divers sorts of people, the chief amongst which are the Bessabees about the River Renobscot; and the Massachusetes, a great Nation,The Native Inhabitants. and every one are governed by their particular Kings, and do much differ in Cu∣stoms and Manners from one another, as they do in the other parts of Ameri∣ca, living generally at variance with each other; Their chiefest riches is in their Furrs and Skins which they sell to the English in truck for Commodities; they are for the most part ingenious, well disposed, and with little pains would be brought to Christianity. This Country is for the generality of a fertil soil, is well watered with Rivers, hath plenty of Fish, as Cod, Thornback, Sturgion,Their Fish.Porpuses, Haddock, Salmons, Mullets, Herrings, Mackeril, Plaice, Oysters, Lobsters, Crab-fish, Tortoise, Cockles, Muscles, Clams, Smelts, Eels, Lamprons, Drums, Alewives, Basses, Hollibuts, Sharks, Seals, Grampus, Whales &c. Here are great variety of Fowl as Phesants, Partridges, Pigeons, Heathcocks,Fowls.Oxeyes, Geese, Turkeys, Ducks, Teal, Herns, Cranes, Cormorants, Swans, Brants, Widgeans, Sheldrakes, Snipes, Doppers, Blackbirds, Loon, Hum∣bird, with divers others too tedious to name. They have also great plenty of Beasts both tame and wild, as Cows, Sheep, Goats, Swine, and Horses;Beasts. and for wild Lyons, Bears, Wolves, Foxes, Martins, Rackoons, Mooses, Musquasus, Otters, Bevers, Deer, Hares, Coneys, &c. Amongst the hurtful things the Rattlesnake is the most dangerous; and here are several sorts of stinging Flies which are very troublesom to the Inhabitants.Trees. Here are sundry sorts of trees as the Oak, Cyprus, Pine, Cedar, Chesnut, Walnut, Firr, Ash, Elm, Asp, Alder, Ma∣ple, Birch, Sassafras, Sumach, &c. also several Fruit-trees, as Pomgranates, Maracocks, Puchamins, Olives, Apples, Pears, Plumbs, Cherries, Grapes,Fruits. with those common in England. And their ground also produceth Potatoes, Carrots, Turrips, Parsnips, Onyons, Cabbages, with most of the Roots and Herbs found in England, The soil being very agreeable for them. But the fruits are not found here so good as in Virginia, nor in Virginia as in Caroline, as lying more Southwards, and having the greater influence of the Sun. This Country afford∣eth several rich Furrs, hath Iron, Amber, Pitch, Tarr, Masts, Flax, Linnen, Ca∣bles,Its Commodi∣ties. and Grains in great plenty. The English which now Inhabit this Country are very numerous and powerful, having a great many Towns several of which are of considerable account, and are governed by Laws appropriate to them∣selves, and have their Courts of Judicature, and assembling together, each Town having two Burgesses for the looking after the affairs of the Colony.Government. And as to matters of Religion and Church Government, they are very strickt, and make a great show, being much of the stamp of the ridged Presbyterians. Amongst their Towns these are of chief note. 1. Boston, commodiously seated for
Traffick on the Sea Shore;Its chief Towns. at present a very large and spacious Town, or rather a City being composed of several well ordered streets, and graced with fair and beautiful houses, which are well inhabited by Merchants, and Trades∣men who drive a very considerable Trade; It is a place of great strength, ha∣ving two or three hills adjoyning, on which are raised Fortifications with great Pieces mounted thereon which are well guarded. 2. Charles Town seated on and between the Rivers Charles and Mistick; it is beautified with a large and well built Church, and near the River-side is the Market place from which runs two streets, in which are divers well built houses. 3. Dor∣chester, an indifferent Town seated near the Sea. 4. Cambridge commodi∣ously seated on a River, doth consist of several streets, and is beautified with two Colledges, and hath divers fair and well built houses. 5. Reading com∣modiously seated about a great Pond, and well Inhabited. 6. St. Georges Fort seated on the mouth of the River Sagadebock. 7. New Plymouth, seat∣ed on the large Bay of Potuxed. With divers other Towns of some account, most of which bear the Names from those of England; but amongst the Indi∣ans are known by other names. New York de∣scribed.NEW-YORK, formerly New Netherland is seated betwixt New En∣gland and Virginia; It is now called New York from his Royal Highness the Duke of York the Proprietor thereof, by grant from his Majesty. It is a Coun∣try of a fertile soil, is well watered with Rivers, and is found to produce the same Beasts, Birds, Fowls, Fish, Fruits, Trees, Commodities, &c. and in as great plenty as New England, so they need not be taken notice of here. This Country is also possessed by sundry sorts of people, not much unlike those of New England, and are very expert at their Bow and Arrows, which is their chief weapon of War; are found to be of a ready wit, and very apt to learn what is taught them; in their Religious Rites divers ceremonies are observed amongst them,Its Native In∣habitants. and are said to worship the Devil whom they much fear; their Priests being little better than Sorcerers, who strangely be∣witch those silly people. When any woman findeth her self quick with child she keepeth her self chast from man until her delivery, the like she observeth in the time of her giving suck, a strange Custom which our European Dames would not well relish; upon the least offence the man turneth away his wife, and marrieth again, and the Children begotten by her she keepeth; Furnication is here permitted; they are very dutiful to their Kings, they be∣lieve the transmigration of the soul, and concerning the Creation of the world have strange foolish opinions. They are much addicted to sports, recreations, and dancings, and observe Festival times. Their habit is but mean as the rest of the Indians, yet do they paint and besmear their faces with several colours, which they hold Ornamental; their dyet and habitations are also mean; Here is one very considerable Town now called New York, being well seated both for security, trade and pleasure in a small Isle called Mahatan regarding the Sea made so by Hudsons River, which separates it from Long Island: The Town is large containing about 500 well built houses, and for Civil Government it hath a Major, Aldermen, Sheriff, and Justices of the Peace, for security of the Town here is raised a Fort called James Fort, a place of considerable strength; The Town is Inhabited by Dutch as well as English; and hath a conside∣rable Trade with the Indians, and is like to be a place of considerable Account. Province of Maryland de∣scribed.MARYLAND, is South of Virginia, from which it is severed by the River Patowmeck. The Bay of Chesopeak, giving entrance to Ships into Virginia, and Maryland passeth through the heart of this Province, and is Navigable for about 200 miles, into which fall the Rivers of Patowmeck, Pa∣tuxent, Severn, and Sasquesahanough, which lie on the West side of the Bay, and to the East those of Choptanke, Nantecoke, Pocomoke, with some others to the great improvement of the soil. The Country of late years since the felling the Woods, and the people accustoming themselves to En∣glish dyet, is very healthful and agreeable to their Constitutions few dy∣ing at their first coming, of the Countreys disease or seasoning; and as to temperature of the Air, the Heats in Summer nor the Colds
in winter are offensive to its Inhabitants.Its soil. The soyl is rich and fertil na∣turally producing all such Commodities as are found in New England, and doth abound in the said several sorts of Beasts, and Fowl, both tame and wild; hath also the same Fish, Fruits, Plants, Roots, Herbs, Trees, Gums, Balsams, &c. but the Fruits are more excellent and in greater plenty; here Mulberry trees grow wild, and were the people industrious, the Silk trade might be soon brought to perfection, but their imployment is altogether taken up in plant∣ing and ordering their Tobacco,Trade. which is the only and Staple Commodity of the Countrey which they vend for such necessaries as they have occasion for. They yearly freighing about one hundred sail of Ships there with.People. The Na∣tives as to their Complexion, Stature, Costoms, Laws, Religions, Dispositi∣ons, Habit, Dyet, &c. are much the same with the Indians in the other parts of America, and are of divers Tribes or sorts of People, and each governed by their particular King. This Province of Maryland is by Pa∣tent granted to the Right Honourable the Lord Baltimore and to his Heirs and Assigns, being absolute Lord and Proprietor of the same, having Royal Jurisdictions and Prerogatives both Military and Civil, as making of Laws, pardoning of Offences, conferring of Honours, Coyning of Money, &c. and in acknowledgment thereof paying yearly to his Majesty and his Successors two Indian Arrows at Windsor Castle on Easter Tuesday. This Province is severed into ten Counties, viz. five Eastwards,Division of the Province into Counties. and five West∣wards of Chesopeak Bay, and in every County there is held an inferiour Court every two months for small matters, from which there lyeth Appeals to the Provincial Court at St. Maryes, and each County have their Sheriffs,Government. and Justice of the Peace. The English which are reckoned about 16000 have begun of late to build some Towns, which 'tis hoped in few years will come to good perfection, as Calverton, Herrington, and Harvy-Town, all commodiously seated for the benefit of Trade, and conveniency of Shipping, but the principal Town is St. Maryes, seated on St. Georges River, beauti∣fied with several well built houses, where his Lordship Charles Lord Balti∣more, hath his House, and where the general Assemblies and Provincial Courts are held, and publick Offices kept. But his Lordship's general Resi∣dence is at Mattapany about eight miles distant, where he hath a fair and plea∣sant house. Virginia by whom first de∣scovered.VIRGINIA is said to be first discovered by Sir Francis Drake (as in∣deed all this tract of Sea Coast) and was so named by Sir Walter Rawleigh in honour of Queen Elizabeth, who then Reigned; but before it was brought to any perfection much time was spent with no small expence, and loss of mens lives. And about the Reign of K. James, a Patent was granted to certain persons, as a Corporation, and called the Company of Adventurers of Virginia; but upon divers misdemeanours and miscarriages about the year 1623, the Patent was made void, and hath been since free for all his Majesties Subjects to Trade unto. It is scituate Southwards of Maryland,Its Bounds. and hath for its Eastern limits the At∣lantick Ocean. It is blest with a good Air, and the Clime of late since the clear∣ing of woods is found very agreeable to the English, so that few die of the Country disease called seasoning.Its Fertility. The soil is so fertil that an Acre of ground commonly yields 200 bushels of Corn, and is very apt to produce what is put therein, as English Grains, Roots, Seeds, Plants, Fruits, &c. besides those appropriate to the Country and other adjacent parts of America; and it is observed that their Fruits (which are in great abundance and of various sorts) for goodness may compare with those of Italy or Spain, which are esteemed the best in Europe. They have great abundance of Beasts, Fowl, and Fish,Its Beast, Fowl and Fish much the same as in New England. which I have taken notice of in New England, and their Turkeys are said to weigh about six stone; amongst their small Birds is the Mock-Bird which coun∣terfeiteth the notes of all Birds, for which it is esteemed excellent.Its Commodi∣ties. The Commodities which this Country doth or may produce, are Flase, Hemp, Woad, Madder, Pot-Ashes, Hopps, Honey, Wax, Rapeseed, Anniceseed, Silk (if they would make it Mulberry Trees here growing in so great plenty) several sweet Gums and excellent Balsomes, Alome, Iron,
Copper,; several sorts of Woods, Plants, &c. used by Dyers, Pitch, Tarr, Ro∣sin, Turpentine, sundry sorts of rich Furrs, Elk-skins, and other Hides, but a∣bove all Tobacco, which is their principal Commodity, and the standard by which all other Commodities are prized; but it were to be wished the Inhabitants would imploy their time about other Commodities as well as Tobacco, and they would soon find the profit, and their Tobacco would not be such a drugg as now it is.Its Rivers. This Countrey is well watered with several great and strong Rivers which loose themselves in the Gulph or Bay of Chesopeak, which gives entrance for Shipping into this Countrey, as well as to Maryland; and is a large and capacious Bay found very commodious for Shipping, being said to run up into the Country Northwards above 200 miles; amongst the Rivers those of most note are Pawhatan now James River, found Navigable about 150 miles; Pa∣maunke now York River, also large and Navigable about 60 miles; and Rapa∣hanock which is long and Navigable about 120 miles; And near or adjoyning to these Rivers for the conveniency of Shipping the English are seated, and have some Towns,Its chief places. the chief of which is James Town commodiously seated on James River, a neat Town, and beautified with well built Brick Houses, and here are kept the Courts of Judicature, and Offices of publick concern for the Countrey. Next to James Town may be reckoned Elizabeth, a well built Town, seated on the mouth of a River so called. Also Dales-gift, Wicocomoco, Bermuda, and others. The Governour of this Country is sent over by his Majesty, and the Country is governed by Laws agreeable with those of England; and for the better observing the same, the Country possessed by the English, is divided into the Counties of Caroluck, Charles, Glocester, Hartford, Henrico, James, New Kent,Its division in∣to Counties.Lancaster, Middlesex, Nansemund, Lower Norfolk, Northam∣pton, Northumberland, Rapalianock, Surrey, Warwick, Westmorland, the Isle of Wight, and York, and in each of these Counties are held petty Courts every Month, from which there may be Appeals to the Quarter Court at James Town. As to the Natives which here Inhabite, they are much of the nature of those already treated of, so I shall omit them here. Only say that it is the Habitation of divers sorts of Indians, which have no dependance upon each other, being of particular Tribes, and having their peculiar King to govern them, every Indian Town being the habitation of a King, and these people do rather live at enmity than amity together. Its scituation bounds.CAROLINA a Colony not long since established by the English, and is that part of Florida adjoyning to Virginia, in the Latitude of 36 degrees, and extendeth it self to that of 29, which makes it extream Southern bounds; on the East it is washed with the Atlantick Ocean, and on the West it hath that large tract of Land which runneth into the Pacifick Ocean. It is a Country blest with a wholsom and temperate Air, the heat in Summer, nor the cold in Winter (which is so much as to check the growth of Plants, Trees, &c. the se∣veral fruits and plants having their distinct seasons) being no waies trouble∣some to its Inhabitants, but very agreeable to the English; and being found thus healthful hath occasioned several persons to remove from the Bermudes to settle here, who dwelling in so pure an Air durst not venture in any other Country. Nor do those from the Bermudes only remove hither, but from most of the American Plantations, as well as from England, it being esteemed by all one of the best Colonies that ever the English were Masters of, for here is altogether Health, Pleasure, and Profit, centered together, which cannot be met with in so large a measure in any other part of the Indies. This Country has first Inhabited by the English about the year 1660, and became a Proprie∣torship, which his present Majesty King Charles the Second,The Proprie∣tors. granted by Pa∣tent, to the Right Noble George Duke of Albemarle, the Right Honourable Edward Earl of Clarendon, William Earl of Craven, Anthony Earl of Shafts∣bury, John Lord Berkley, Sir George Cartwright, Sir Jo. Colleton, and Sir William Berkley, and to their Heirs and Successors; and the said Lords Pro∣prietors having by their Patent power to Establish a Government, and make Laws for the better regulation thereof, and the inviting of Inhabitants, have formed a Model so well framed for the good and welfare of the Inhabitants, that
it is esteemed by all judicious persons without compare. The Natives of Caro∣lina according to the observation of one Ledener, (who made three several journeys from Virginia to Carolina about the Year 1670, for a discovery of those parts,The Native Inhabitants. and the nature and disposition of the Inhabitants) are said to be of a ready wit and good understanding, they instruct their Children in such things as relate to their Families, and Country, which is so preserved from Ge∣neration to Generation. They worship one God, as Creator of all things, to whom their High Priest offers Sacrifice, but believes he hath something else to do than to regard Humane affairs, committing them to lesser Deities, viz. to good and evil Spirits, to whom their inferiour Priests make their devotion and Sacrifice. They believe the transmigration of the soul, and when any one di∣eth they interr with them provisions and Housholdstuff for the next World, which they fancy to be beyond the Mountains, and Indian Ocean. In their Marria∣ges they are very Superstitious; for the generality they are of a good and ho∣nest meaning, much addicted to mirth and dancing, and above all are much prone to Honour and Valour which they place above all other vertues. They are great favourers of the English, living together in love and friendship, and upon all occasions ready to contribute their assistance unto them. The Coun∣try is by them divided into several Kingdoms, and the people in the one keep no correspondence with those that border upon them, often waging War against one another. The Soil is rich and fertile, and produceth excellent Fruits, as Apricocks, Peaches, Grapes, of which the English have made good Wine; O∣lives, of which good Oyl is made; Wallnuts, Apples, Pears, Plumbs,Its Fruits.Cher∣ries, Figgs, Mulberries, Strawberries, Water-Mellons, Marachocks, Quin∣ces, and other Fruits known to us in Europe, which for goodness are no wales inferiour to them, and in the Southern part Oranges, Limes, Pomegranates, and Pomecitrons, and the earth is generally very apt to produce and bring to maturity Corn, all sorts of Garden Herbs, Roots, &c.Commodities. The Commodities which this Country doth and may produce are Wines, Oyls, Silk, Mulberry-trees growing wildly, Cotton, Indico, Ginger, Tobacco, Masts for Shipping which for length, streightness and bigness are the best in the World, &c. And it is believ∣ed that here may be made more Wines, Oyls and Silk than England will vent. Besides the Mulberry-trees, here are Cedar, Oak, both white and red,Its Trees.Poplar, Bay, Ash, Pine with divers others whose names are not yet known. The Woods are well stored with Pheasants, large Turkeys, Partridges,Fowls.Turtle-Doves, Pigeons, great variety and plenty of small Birds, also Deer, Hares, Co∣nies &c. The Country is well watered with Rivers, which with the Sea suf∣ficiently furnish the Inhabitants with excellent Fish and such common in Vir∣ginia; here are great plenty of wild Fowl, as Geese, Cranes, Herons, Swans, Curlews, Heath Cocks, Oxeys, Brants, Dotterels, Widgeons, Teal, Duck and Mallard in an undestroyable quantity. Here are at present two considerable Settlements, viz. at Albemarle River in the North, and at Ashley River in the middle of the Country which is likely to be the scale of Trade for the whole Country as being very commodiously seated for Shipping, and in a healthful place. In all these parts, which we have passed under the name of CANADA, the the people are very barbarous, having neither Religion, nor Learning. Di∣vers people have diversity of Languages: they count their years by the course of the Sun, their months by that of the Moon, their four Seasons by any remar∣kable thing hapning in them. They are of a middle stature,The People of Canada. well proportion∣ed, disposed to running and swimming, of an olive or tawny colour, because they go for the most part naked, often anointing themselves with a certain Oyl to hinder the Flies from tickling them; they wear few Ornaments on their bo∣dies, though their Women do; making themselves Necklaces, Bracelets and Scarfs, formerly of Fishes, Shells, Porcelain, &c. now of Glass, Chrystal, and Toys, carried hence. Customs obser∣ved among them.They make Feasts at their Marriages, at their Victories, at the reception of their friends; and take much Tobacco. They eat sometimes the flesh of their enemies which they have taken in the War, and fed well before, whom they
kill with excessive cruelties. They use Bows and Arrows, in which they are very expert. FLORIDA. FLORIDA may be esteemed a part of New France, since the French were the first that established there any Colony, by the consent of the people of the Country. It may likewise be esteemed part of New Spain, since at present the Castilians have two Colonies under the Jurisdiction of the Au∣dience of S. Domingo, one of the four Audiences of New Spain, but these two Colonies are so weak, and so near the one to the other, and the Country is so that that is not considerable. We may say, that Florida is between new France, and new Spain, and that it extends it self from the River of Palmas, which bounds it from the Province of Panuco in new Spain, unto the River Jordan, which divides it from Virginia, which I have esteemed in Canada or New France.Its Coast. The greatest part of its Coast is on the Gulph of Mexico, which flows on its South: Another part on Mer del Nort, which washes it on the East: Between this Gulph and the Sea, Florida stretches out a Peninsula towards the South; where the Cape of Florida is not distant from the Port of Matnasas in the Isle of Cuba, above 35 or 40 Leagues. The more Western Coast of Florida, reaches 450 Leagues, the Eastern 150; the Peninsula be∣tween both, advancing 150 Leagues from the Coast, and not being above 60 or 75 Leagues broad, makes yet another Coast of 350 Leagues; so that all Flori∣da hath not much less than 1000 Leagues of Coast on the Sea. The Castilians have no Colony on the Gulph of Mexico, nor on the Coast, where the French have formerly been. Those two Colonies they have here, are St. Augustine, and St. Mathew, 15 or 16 Leagues one from the other, on the Eastern Coast of the Peninsula, and there where it approaches the Coast, where the French had settled: the North and West of Florida is enclo∣sed with Mountains, which divides it from New France, and New Mexico. St. Augustine which is the best, and strongest of the two Colonies, was taken and pillaged by Sir Francis Drake in Anno 1585. Florida first discovered by the English.FLORIDA was first discovered in 1496 by the English, under the Con∣duct of Sebastian Gabott, whom Henry the Seventh, King of England, sent to seek by the West a passage to fall into the East: he contented himself to have seen the Country yet unknown, and to make report thereof to his Master; af∣terwards better searched into by John de Ponce of Leon,Also by John de Ponce and o∣thers. who in 1512 would have established a Colony for his Master the King of Castile, were it not for the resistance of the Country made against him, who oftentimes made him re∣treat, and at last forced him to return to Puerto Ricco of which place he was Governour; where, on a desperate wound in his last encounter, which he there received, he ended his life. In 1524 Lucas Vasques of Aillon, and some other Spaniards, landed divers times at Florida, with no other design than to take away its Inhabitants, whom they transported to Hispaniola, and Cuba to work in their Mines, wherein they had already consumed the greatest part of its Inhabitants. Pamphilus Narvaes was likewise there in 1528, who traversed it as far as the Mountains of Apalachi, where he hoped to find Gold. The most famous landing that the Spaniards have ever made in Florida was in 1534,Ferdinand Soto his landing here. under the conduct of Ferdinando Soto; who being rich with the spoils he had gained, in his Conquest of Peru, led hither 350 Horse, and 900 Foot, with which force he traversed Florida almost on all sides, without endeavour∣ing to bind a Colony; much molesting those of the Country, by whom he was in like manner turmoyled, during the many years he coasted it; till in the end, not finding those riches he expected, he died with grief, and was buried at the bottom of a River, for fear lest his body should fall into the hands of his Enemies. His people returned in 1543, there remaining about 30 Horse, and 300 Foot. All the advantage Soto received by his travel, was, the giving
the name of Florida to the Country, either because he arrived there the day of Pasquae Floriae; or because that, landing, he found the herbs and flowers in their prime and verdure. In 1549 the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and the Council of the Indies thought it not good to send any more Armed men, but rather some Religious persons, to sweeten the fierce humours of these barbarous people Lewis of Barbastre,Lewis of Bar∣bastre a Bene∣dict massacred here. of the Order of St. Benedict went with some o∣ther Fathers; but presently those of the Country seized and massacred him, with his two Companions, fleaing them, and hanging their skins at the doors of the Cabanes; the rest saved themselves, by retiring into those Ships that brought them. The French were not in Florida, save under the Reign of Charles the Ninth. Francis Ribaut was sent in 1562. He made alliance with those of the Country, and built the Fort Caroline on the River May. Ribaut being returned to France, with promise to bring thither more people: but too long delaying his return, his men grew diffident and mutinous, and built a strange kind of Vessel, and with the small stock of provisions they could stow in her, put to Sea, where they endured so great want, that they were forced to cast lots to eat one another; which fell first to him who had been the cause of their discord. An Exploit of the Spaniards.Rene Laudoniere returned in 1564, restored the Fort Caroline; but the Ca∣stilians, jealous to see this establishment near their New Spain, resolved to drive them thence: they landed with show of no design against the French; but their intentions were otherwise, for in the end they surprized the Fort, out of which Laudionere could scarce save himself, took Ribaut on the Sea who had before been Shipwrack'd; hanged the Souldiers, and flead Ribaut, as Lescarbott saith. Another by the French.In 1567 Dominic de Gourgues, a Gascon, and of Mont de Marsan, made an attempt of his own head to revenge this Affront: he put to Sea at his own ex∣pence, with a hundred and fifty Souldiers, and eighty Mariners; landed in Flo∣rida, and with the aid of those of the Country, who affected the French, re∣took Caroline from the Spaniards, with two other Forts which they had new built; caused them to be hanged on the same trees whereon they had hanged the French; razed the Fort, and returned into France in 1568, where he had no small trouble to clear himself for his exploit. The fertility of Florida.Florida being between the twenty fifth or thirtieth and fortieth Degrees of Septentrional Latitude, the Countrey cannot chuse but be good, their Woods and Forests are well cloathed with trees, as lofty Cedars, large Oaks, Cy∣prus and Bays, trees of a large proportion, also great store of that wood called by the French Sassafras; as also another tree called Esquine, the Bark of which trees are an excellent remedy for many distempers, especially the French Dis∣ease. And in these Forrests and Woods are found all sorts of Beasts and Fowl; the Country is well stored with several sorts of Fruits, as Grapes, Cherries, Plumbs, Mulberries, Chesnuts, &c. It is enriched with Mines of Gold and Silver, but in no great plenty, nor much regarded by the Natives. It is well watered with fresh Streams, which are stored with variety of Fish, and Crocodiles, which they eat; they have all sorts of Fowl and Venison as we have. The people are of an Olive-colour, great stature,Its Inhabitants, as to their Sta∣ture, Habit, Customs, &c. but well proportion∣ed; their hair is black which they wear very long; their women do far exceed other adjacent Nations in handsomness, which makes them much desired by Strangers, and their shape and beauty is more discernable in that they go naked till their Purgations, and afterwards only they make use of skins of Beasts, ta∣ken in hunting, which they embellish with Feathers, of divers colours, which they tie about their waists, and hangs down to their knees, only to hide their Privities; and their Arms, Back, Breast, Knees, and other parts which are exposed to sight, are stained with several sorts of Paintings, not to be washed off, which is esteemed a great ornament among them. They bear some re∣verence to the Sun and Moon; they are accounted very crafty, cunning, deceit∣ful, revengeful, and much addicted to War; their Arms are Bow and Ar∣rows, as are almost all the Americans; they know the nature of their Herbs,
and have Flowers of fine colours; they pass a part of the year in the Woods, where they live on Hunting; and part near the Lakes, Rivers and Sea where they Fish. They have a Custom among them, that is, the Women when their Husbands die, do cut of their hair, and strew it on his Sepulcher, and are restrained from marrying again till their hair is long enough to cover their Shoulders. The Country yields great plenty of Mayz, which is their natu∣ral bread, which they sow and reap twice in one year: this Grain they ga∣ther, and put into publick places, and distribute it to every Family as occasion requires. The manner of their Whale Fishing.Their Whale Fishing is made with a cunning and boldness, which those of Europe. dare not attempt. The Fisherman having discovered one, enters in∣to his Canott, then leaps upon his back, and there riding takes his time to plunge a stick into one of his nostrils; and what ever endeavour he uses, though he plunge under water, he holds fast; and expecting his rising, fastens another stick on the other side, and then retires with a cord fastned to these sticks; the Whale not able to breath, grows weak; and then by little and little, he draws it to the shore, where assisted by his Companions, he cuts it in pieces, drying it to make Flowr, and of that Flowr Bread, which lasts a long time. The people of Florida are governed by their Paraousti's, who lead them to War where they kill the men, but preserve the women and children; they have their Jovona's, or Sacrificers, who serve as Physicians, and to whom they bear honour. Their Paraousti's being dead, are interred with many Ce∣remonies; living, are much feared and obeyed. They have many wives, a∣mong which one is esteemed the chief, whose children may hope for the charge and dignity of their Father. The House of Paraousti Ovade (when Captain Albert was there to beg of him some provisions; besides divers moveables and ornaments) was hung as high as a Pikes length with Tapestry, made of rare Feathers, and of most beau∣tiful colours, composed of such Artifice, that they were worth the most part of ours. The Coverlid of his Bed was white, tissued in divers copartiments and with a fringe of Scarlet about it. Rivers in Flo∣rida.Rivers of most note in Florida are: 1. Rio de Flores. 2. Rio de Spiri∣to Sancto. 3. Rio de Neives. 4. Rio Grande. 5. Rio Secco. 6. Rio Garunna. 7. Rio Charente. 8. Rio Axona, and some others. Chief Towns.Chief Towns (or rather Cottages) in Florida, are: 1. St. Hellens. on a pro∣montary so named. 2. Port Royal, a good and well frequented Haven, seated on the mouth of a River so named. 3. St. Matthews, 4. St. Augustine. 5. St. Phil∣lip. 6. St. Jago, once (if not at present) possessed and fortified by the Spani∣ards, with some others of less note.
The ISLES of BERMUDES. EAst of Virginia and Florida we have the Isles of BERMƲDES, so called from John Bermudes, a Spaniard, by whom it was first discovered; also called the Summer-Islands, from the Shipwreck which one Sir George Sum∣mers, an English-man, there suffered: It is about 15 or 1600 Leagues from England, 400 from Hispaniola, and only 300 from the nearest Coast of Vir∣ginia and Florida. Of these Isles the greatest, called St. Georges,Its Parts. is five or six Leagues long, and almost throughout not above a quarter, third, or half a League broad; the others are much less. All together make a body which form a Cressant, and inclose very good Ports; as those of Southampton, Har∣rington, Pagets, the Great Sound, Dover, and Warwick. Its Air.The Air is almost always serene, sometimes moist and hot, but very health∣ful, agreeing well with the English Bodies, who have here at divers times settled and established a fair and powerful Colony, and have strongly fortified the Approaches, which at present are very difficult; and the Earth is exceed∣ing fertil, yielding two Crops a year;The Earth fertil. their Mayz they gather in July and De∣cember: They have excellent Fruits, as Oranges, Dates, Mulberries, &c. They have plenty of Tortoises, which is their ordinary food, and the Hogs which the Spaniards formerly carried thither are excellent, and much in∣creased; they have many Sea-birds, and other' Fowl; they have no fresh Water but that of Wells and Pits, there being neither Fountain nor Stream in these Islands. They have no venemous Beasts, their Spiders not being poy∣sonous, but of sundry and various colours;No venemous Beast here. and in the Hot weather they make their Webs so strong, that ofttimes Birds are entangled and catched in them. Cocheneil and Tobacco, with some Pearls and Amber,Its chief Com∣modities. are their prin∣cipal Riches, for which they have a good trade. Their Governour is sent them by the King of England, who governs them by our English Laws, whom they also own as their Supream; and it is observed, that scarce any are found to die but with Old age.
MEXICA∣NE, with its several Audiences of MEXICO, whose Provinces, with their chief Places, are those of FLORIDA, St. Hellens, Port Royal, St. Matthews, St. Augustin, St. Jago, Naguater. MEXICO, particularly so called, Mexico, Chulula, Tezcuco, Quitlavaca, Queretaro, Mestitlan, Cuyocan, Acapulco. PANUCO, St. Jago de los Valles, Pabuco, St. Lewis de Tempue. MECHOACAN, Mechoacan, Colima, St. Philip. THASCALA, Thascala, los Angelos. GUAXACA, Antequera, Spiritu Sancto. TABASCO, Nos. Sen. de la Victoria. JUCATAN, Merida, Campeche. GUADALAJABA, whose Pro∣vinces, with their chief Places, are those of GUADALAJARA, Guadalajara, St. Maria de las lagos. XALISCO, Compostella, la Purification, Xalisco. CHIAMETLAN, St. Sebastian. CULLACAN, St. Michael, Past. CINALOA, St. John. LOS ZACATECAS, Zacatecas, Nombre de Dios. NEW BISCAY, St. John, St. Barbara. QUIVIRA, St. Fee. ANIAN. CIBOLA, Cibola. CALIFORNIA, Port de Montere. Port de Roque. GUATEMALA, whose Provinces, with their chief Places, are those of GUATEMALA, St. Jago the Guatemala, St. Salvador, la Trinidad, St. Michael, Xeres. VERA PAX, Vera Pax. SOCONUSCO, Guevetlan. CHIAPA, Cuidad Real. HONDURAS, Valadolid, Gratias di Dios, Truxillo, St. George de Olancho. NICARAGUA, Leon, Granada, Jaen. COSTARICA, Cartago, Nicoya, Castro de Austrio. VERAGUA, la Conception, Trinadad, Sancta Feo, Parita. St. DOMINGO; In which are the Isles of ANTILLES, or CAMERCANES, otherwise called the Isles of LUCAYES, and the CARIBE Isles; the chief among which are those of CUBA, St. Jago, St. Spiritus, Porto del Principe, St. Christophoro. JAMAICA, St. Jago, Port Royal, Passage, Melilla. HISPANIOLA, St. Domingo, Porto del la Plat, St. Jago, Monto Christo. SAONA, St. Juan del puerto Rico, St. Germain. BOREQUEM, St. Juan del Puerto Rico. St. CRUX. St. CHRISTOPHERS, Sandy point, Basse terre. NIEVES. ANTEGO. MONT SERRAT. GUADELOUPE. MARIGALANTE, MARTINIQUE. St. OLOUZIA. BARBADOS, St. Michaels, Little Bristol, St. James, Charles Town. St. VINCENT. GRENADO. BARBADA. ANGUILLA. DOMINICA.
MEXICO, OR New Spain. MEXICO, or NEW SPAIN, is the fairest and most famous part of America Septentrionalis, and sometimes the Spani∣ards, comprehended under this name all that America: We may esteem that which belongs to the Catholick King for the greatest part; in which we shall have several Provinces, and all comprised under four Audiences or Courts of Parliament: viz. that of St. Domingo; of Mexico, which bears the particular name of New Spain; of Guadalajara, or Nova Gallicia; and of Guatimala. The Audience of St. Domingo.The Audience of St. DOMINGO hath under it all those Islands which are before the Gulph of Mexico; then Florida which is North-West of them, and in America Septentrionalis; and Venezuela, New Andalousia, and Rio del Hacha, which are towards the South of them, and in America Meri∣dionalis. The Audience of Mexico, and its Provinces.The Audience of MEXICO hath the Provinces of Mexico, Panuco, Me∣choacan, Tlascala, Guaxaca, Tavasco, and Jucatan. That of Panuco is North of Mexico; Meochan, West; Tlascala, East; Guaxaca, Tavasco, and Jucatan, continuing likewise towards the East. The two last lie wholly upon Mer del Nort; Guaxaca, and Tlascala, on the two Seas of North and South; Mexico and Mechoacan only on that of the South, and Panuco on that of the North. The Audience of Guadala∣jara, and its Provinces.The Audience of GƲADALAJARA contains the Provinces of Gua∣dalajara, Xalasco, Los Zacatecas, Chiametlan, Cinaloa: some add New Bis∣cany, and others likewise Cibola, Quivira, Anian, California, &c. New Bis∣cany, and Los Zacatecas, touch not the Sea; Guadalajara, little; to wit, between Xalisco and Chiametlan: and these begin on Mer del Sud. Others advance themselves far into that which they call Mer Vermejo or the Red Sea, the Isle of California being on the other side. The Audience of Guatimala, and its Pro∣vinces.The Audience of GƲATIMALA, South-East of that of Mexico, con∣tinues between the Seas del Nort and del Sud, advancing towards America Meridionalis. There are under it the Provinces of Guatimala, Soconusco, Chiapia, Vera Pax, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Castorica: and these two last lie on both Seas; Honduras and Vera Pax on the Gulph of Honduras, towards the Mer del North; Chiapa, within Land; Guatimala, and Soconusco, on the Mer del Sud. The Audience of MEXICO, so called from its principal City; now known by the name of Nova Hispania; and by this City of Mexico the Spaniards began to make themselves absolute Lords of all these Quarters. Which before their arrival was very populous; but in the space of 16 or 17 years, destroyed above six Millions of its Inhabitants by cruel and unchristian-like deaths, as
roasting some, cutting off the Members of others, putting out the Eyes of o∣thers, casting others alive to be torn in pieces and devoured by wild Beasts, and the like horrid deaths; and only to act their Tyranny over them, rather than to reduce them to obedience, which might have been otherwise obtained without shedding so much Blood.The City of Mexico de∣scribed. This City was called by its ancient Inhabi∣tants Tonoxtitlan, and was the residence of their Kings, and is at present the fairest of all America, seated in the midst of a Lake, in some places 10 Leagues long, and 7 or 8 broad, having 25 or 30 Leagues circuit: It is not joyned to the Main Land, but by 3 Caus-waies, of which, that towards the West is but 3 quarters of a League long; that towards the North a League and an a half, and the last, 3 Leagues. It was by this last that Cortez and the Spaniards made their approaches, and took the City. All this Lake is salt; but there falls into it another almost of the same bigness, which is fresh, and good to drink; both together are 45 or 50 Leagues circuit, in which are said to be about 50000 Wherries continually seen to row and carry Passengers; they have about 50 Burgs or Towns on their Banks, whereof some have once been esteemed great Cities: The salt Lake yields quantity of Salt, the other so much Fish, that its Fishing hath been farmed for 100000 Crowns yearly. In this City may be found 4000 Natural Spaniards, 30000 Indians or Ameri∣cans, (there having heen formerly 200000) 20000 Negroes; and its Juris∣diction contains 250 Towns, of which some have their Schools; more than 3000 (some say 6000). Estancia's, that is, Farms; and in all 500000 Ameri∣cans Tributaries.The residence of a Vice-Roy, &c. It is the residence of the Vice-Roy of America Septentrio∣nalis, as also of an Archbishop, and many other Officers of Justice of the Mint, and of the Inquisition. It hath a famous Academy, 150 Monasteries for the one and the other Sex. It is distinguished (as under its Ancient Kings) into these Quarters, which at present are called that of St. John, of St. Maria the Round, of St. Paul, and of St. Sebastian, and of St. James, formerly Tla∣telulco. In this last, which is very great and the fairest, is the Palace of the Vice-Roy, the House of the Archbishop, the Court of Audience, the Mint, and other Offices. In this City of Mexico is a Cathedral Church, which was be∣gun by Cortez with so much haste, that to raise two Columns, for want of Ma∣terials they made use of the Stones which had made part of the Statues of the Idols. Here is also a Printing-house, several Houses of Jesuits, Dominicans, Franciscans, Augustinians, and other Religious Orders; some Colledges, abun∣dance of Hospitals, and other publick Buildings; all of great state and beauty. They have here four things which are remarkable for Beauty, viz. their Women, their Apparel, their Horses, and their Streets. Chulula de∣scribed.Among those places which are, or have been on the two Lakes of Mexico, Chulula is reckoned one of the fairest; scarce excepting that of Mexico, with which it in times past contended as well for state as bigness, once containing near 20000 Houses, and beautified with so many Temples as there are days in the year. The People were said to be so addicted to Idolatries, and so barba∣rous in their bloody Sacrifices,Its Inhabitants that it sacrificed yearly no less than 5000 Infants of both Sexes on its Altars before its Idols.Tezcuco de∣scribed.Tezcuco, once twice as great as Sevil in Spain; its Streets are fair and large, its Houses stately and Beautiful, and adorned with many Conduits and Aquaeducts, which furnished them with fresh Water; though seated on the brinks of the Salt-Lake of Mexico. Quitla∣vaca,Quitlavaca described. built on divers little Islands like to Venice, was joyned to the Continent by a Caus-way made of Flint-stones of about a League long, but narrow; cal∣led by the Spaniards, Venezuela, containing about 2000 Houses. Yztalpa∣lapa,Yztalpalapa described. seated part on the Lake and part on the Banks, with a Paved way to Mexico, from which it is distant two Leagues: once a large City, having no less than 10000 well built Houses, which were plentifully supplied with fresh Waters from its many Ponds, as well as its beautiful Fountains. Queretaro hath two Fountains,Queretaro described. of which one is so hot, that its Waters at first burn, being cold, fatten Cattle; the other runs four whole years continually, and ceases other four whole years; having likewise this property, that it increases in dry, and diminishes in moist and rainy weather.Mestitland described.Mestitlan, once of good repute, con∣taining
about 30000 Inhabitants, seated on an high Hill, begirt about with pleasant Groves and fertil Plains, which affords excellent Fruits, and very good Grains. Cuyocan, of about 50000 Houses, and Mexicaltzingo of about 4000,Cuyocan and Mexicaltzingo described. both upon the Lake, were in times of Paganism adorned with many beautiful Temples, so rich, that at a distance they seemed to be made of Silver; but now their lustre is decaied, most of them being converted to Monasteries and Religious Houses. Acapulco, a City and Port on Mer del Sud,Acapulco de∣scribed. seated on a safe and capacious Bay, full of convenient places or Docks for Ships to ride in, so that it is said to be the safest Haven of all those Seas; it is distant from Mexico 100 Leagues. The Mexicans keep here some Vessels, and trade to the Philippines, and to China, from whence they are distant 3000 Leagues. The Air of Mexico.The Air of Mexico is sweet and temperate, though scituate under the Torrid Zone, the Heats thereof much qualified by the cooling Blasts, which rise from the Sea on three sides of it, as also by the frequent refreshing Show∣ers, which always falls in June, July, and August, which is their hottest Season of the year: The Soil is so fertil that they gather their Crop twice a year; yet want they good Wine and good Oil by reason of the Summer-Rains.Its fertility. It is believed, that no Country in the World feeds so much Cattle, some private persons having 40000 Oxen or Cows, others 15000 Sheep, &c. and an infinite number of tame Fowl, as Hens, Turkies, &c. whence it comes that Oxen, Sheep, Goats, Hogs, and tame Fowl are hardly worth the buying. Their Horses are excellent, the Race coming from the best of Spain. Mines in Mexico.There are few Mines of Gold, though many of Silver, about Mexico; as those of Comana, Fuchuco, Archichica, Temozcaltepeque, Zacualpa, Tasco, Ymiquilpo, Cu Tepeque, Talpajava, Zumpango, Guanaxuato, and others. And these Mines are not so rich as those of Peru; but easier wrought, and with less expence and loss of Men. The principal Riches of the Country, after their Silver, Gold, Iron and Copper, are their Grains, Fruits, Wool, Cotton, Sugar, Silk, Cocheneel, the grain of Scarlet, Feathers, Honey, Balm, Amber, Salt, Tallow, Hides, Tobacco, Ginger, and divers Medicinal Drugs.Its Inhabitants The Natives of this Country are more ingenious than the rest of the Savages, and are much civilized since the Spaniards had to do here; they are excellent in many Me∣chanical Arts, especially in making fine Pictures with the Feathers of their Cincons, which is a little Bird living only on Dew, and place their Colours so well, that the best Painters of Europe admire the delicacy, they far exceeding a piece of Painting. They have some memories of their Histories, make use of certain Characters instead of Letters of our Alphabet; their Tongue was extended so far as they could extend their Dominion, though in divers Pro∣vinces there were diversity of Languages: They are excellent in refining of Metals, expert Goldsmiths, and curious in Painting upon Cotton. The Plant Magney, a very great rarity.Among their Rarities of this Country there is a most admirable Plant called Magney, from which they extract several things; it hath on it about 40 kinds of Leaves, which are fit for several uses; for when they are tender they make of them Paper, Flax, Thread, Cordage, Girdles, Shoes, Mats, Mantles, Stuffs, &c. upon them grow Prickles so strong and sharp, that they make use of them instead of Saws, also they serve for Needles. The Bark, if it be roasted, maketh an excellent Plaister for Wounds; from the top Branches comes a kind of Gum, which is a sovereign Antidote against Poyson: from the top of the Tree cometh a Juyce like Syrup, which, if seethed, will become Hony; if pu∣rified, Sugar: they make also Wine and Vinegar of it, and it affordeth good Wood to build with. In this Country are two Mountains, one which vomits flames of Fire like Aetna, and another in the Province of Guaxaca, which sendeth forth two burning streams, the one of black Pitch, and the other of red. The Kings of Mexico were rich and powerful in regard of their Neighbours, having no less than 2 or 3000 Men for their ordinary Guard, and having been able to raise 2 or 300000 Foot; among the 25 or 30 Kings, which were his Tributaries, some could arm 100000 Men; their Revenues vast, which they raised out all Com∣modities, as well of Natural as Artificial, which the King received in kind,
participating of the Fruits of all Mens labour, and sharing with them in their Riches. Their Palaces were magnificent, both that within the City, and those in divers parts of the Kingdom; they kept great Attendance, lived in great Pomp, were much reverenced of their Subjects; in their Vestments stately, being adorned with Gold, Pearl, and Precious Stones, wearing a rich Crown resembling that of a Duke; their Coronations held with great pomp, at which times they used bloody Sacrifices of Men and Children, which for the most part were their Enemies, but sometimes their own; their Temples were state∣ly, with many Idols whom they worshipped; which were attended with abun∣dance of Sacrificers or Priests; and to excite their Souldiers to valour, they used three degrees of Honour or Orders of Knighthood, which according to their merit were conferr'd upon them; the first was distinguished by a red Ribband, the second called the Tyger or Lion-Knight, and the third the Gray-Knight; which among other things were priviledged to apparel themselves in Cotton in a different habit, and to adorn themselves with Gold and Silver, which things are prohibited to others. The descent of the Mexi∣cans.Moreover, the present Mexicans descended not from the Ancient Inhabi∣tants of the Country, but from divers People, which had their residence in the North, and not unlikely from that which we call New Mexico. The History they produce of the manner how they came from these quarters at divers times, of the time which the one and the other, and particularly of him whom they last employed in their Voyages, those Ceremonies they observed, and likewise the name of their chief Mexi, seems to accord somewhat with the Voyage of Moses and the Hebrews, when he led them to the Land of Pro∣mise. These People becoming Masters of Mexico, formed a considerable Go∣vernment, and gave it divers Kings. Montezuma, under whom Ferdinand Cortez entred the Country, was but the ninth in number. The story of the Ynca-Mango-Capac, and his Wife Coya Mama-Oelho.The Ynca-Mango-Capac, and his Wife Coya Mama-Oelho, were the first that led them to a human and civil life, they made themselves be believed to be Brother and Sister; Children of the Sun and Moon; and that they had been sent here below for the good of Men. And with this belief they withdrew them from the Mountains, Caves, and Forrests, and gave them the first know∣ledge of the Law of Nature. Ynca-Mango-Capac taught Men how to till the Earth, to graft Plants, to feed Flocks, to gather the best Fruits, to build Houses and Cities, &c. Coya Mama-Oelho, learnt Women how to Spin, Weave, Sow, make Habits, &c. and above all instructed, that their principal care ought to be to serve and obey their Husbands, and feed and instruct their Children. And these People finding themselves in a better and more reasonable way of living than before, easily submitted themselves to the Government of these Ynca's; addicted themselves to the Religion they taught them, which was to adore the Sun, as that Star which above all the rest did most visible good to Men, Beasts, Grains, Fruits, Plants, &c. and so soon as these Ynca's knew the affection of the People, they raised Arms, assembled Troops, and reduced to the same Government and the same Religion many neighbouring People; but still more by sweetness than force: and in the end, composed an Estate or Empire, which for its greatness and riches, and likewise for its Laws, was one of the most considerable of the World. And if we should put in parallel the Politicks of the Ynca's of Peru, or of those of Mexico, with them of the Greeks and Romans; Acosta maintains that these would have the advantage, and that the Ynca's had so great a care of the good and repose of their Sub∣jects, that there cannot be found in all History any King or Emperour that ever bore himself with so much sweetness, freedom, and liberality towards his Peo∣ple, as did the Ynca's, Kings of Peru and Mexico. So soon as a Province en∣tred under their Obedience, they made Channels every where to water the Lands; and that these Lands might be the more commodious for Tillage, they caused to be laid level what was unequal, evening by degrees what was too steep: The Lands proper for Tillage were divided into three parts, viz. for the Sun, for the King, and for the Inhabitants of the Country; and if these were
in so great number, that the third part of the Land was not sufficient for their food, so much taken from the Third of the Sun and of the King, as was needful. The Lands being equally parted according to the ability of every Family, the labour began with those of the Orphans, Widows, the old and impotent, and Souldiers when they were in War; after these, every one laboured and cultivated his own: then those of the Curacca's or Governours, which were to be after the Private persons; those of the King and of the Sun were the last. And this Order was so religiously observed, that a Governour having caused the Field of a Kinsman of his to be tilled before that of a poor Widow, was hanged in the Field he caused to be tilled before its degrees: so careful were they of the Poor. Besides this labour for the Tillage of the Lands of the Sun and the Ynca's, Private persons were obliged to make Cloaths, Hose, Shoes, and Arms for the Souldiers, as also for those whom Age or Sickness made in∣capable of Travel or Labour. The Wool or Cotton was taken from the Flocks; and on the Lands belonging to the Sun and the Ynca's: and each Province gave only what was easie and common, and each Private person only his labour: young Men under 25 years, Men above 50: Women and Lame people were exempt from these Tributes. They made no account of Gold, Silver, or pre∣cious Stones, but for their adornment, beauty, and splendor, nor needing where∣with to buy Victuals or Cloaths; their Lands and ordinary Occupation yield∣ing and furnishing them with what ever was necessary. Yet if at their hours of leasure they could discover any, they made a Present of it to their Curaca's: these to the Ynca, when they went to salute him at Cusco, or when the Ynca visited his Estates; and then it was employed either for the Ornaments of the Royal-house, or the Temples of the Sun.The Temple of the Sun at Cusco. The Temple of the Sun at Cusco was so stately, and enriched with so much Gold, Silver, and precious Stones, that it is incredible. In this Temple, besides the principal Apartment which was for the Sun, there was others for the Moon, Stars, Lightning, Thunder, Thunderbolt, and Rainbow, which was the device of the Ynca's. They esteemed the Stars as waiting-Maids, which followed the Moon, and all the rest Executioners of the Justice of the Sun; to whom alone they sacrificed Sheep, Lambs, Rabbits, Fowls, Spices, Henbs, Habits,Their Sacri∣fices. Their Priests.&c. besides Men and Children, as was said before. The Priests of this Temple were all Descen∣dants of the Ynca's. In the Temples of other Provinces it sufficed, that they were descendants of the Priviledged Ynca's, Curaca's or Governours of those Provinces. They called Priviledged those to whom the Ynca-Mango-Capac had communicated this Title for them and their Children; but ordinarily the great Priest was Ʋncle, Brother, or one of the nearest kin to the Ynca. To make appear the Riches in some respect of this Temple,The richness of the Temple. that which in∣closed the divers apartments of the Sun, Moon, Stars, &c. were all wainscotted with Plates of Gold. The Sun, placed on his Arter towards the East, was of one Plate of Gold much thicker than the others, and the Figure in the same manner as our Painters here describe it; viz. a round Visage, environed with Rays and Flames. At the taking of Cusco, this piece, or the Image of the Sun, fell to Maneca serra de Lequisano, a Castilian; who being a great Gamester, lost it one Night at play; which made it to be said, That he had plaid away and lost the Sun in a dark Night, long before it was day. On the two sides of the Sun were the Bodies of the Kings or Ynca's, deceased, ranged according to their times, and enbalmed in such manner that they appeared living: They were seated in Thrones of Gold, raised upon Plates of the same, and accommo∣dated in degrees or ascents: The Bodies of the Queens were according to the same order in the apartment, and on both sides the Figure of the Moon, where all the Ornaments, Doors, Wainscots, Thrones, &c. were of Silver. Near this Temple was a Garden, where the Herbs, Plants, Flowers, Trees, and where Beasts of all sorts, as also Birds, even to Butterflies and Flies, were of Gold and Silver; and so lively represented, that they seemed Natural. And there were likewise of these Gardens near the Palace of the Ynca's, and near the
Houses of the Virgins vowed to the Sun. In all the Provinces there were Temples of the Sun, built after the model of those of Cusco, but not so rich: Here the Virgins that vowed to the Sun were taken from the Curaca's, or the fairest in the Province: Of these the Ynca or King might make use; but not of those of Cusco, being reserved only for the Sun, and which the Ynca him∣self might not see. Though these Ynca's and their People adored not, nor made any Sacrifice but to the Sun, yet the most knowing among them esteem∣ed, much beyond the Sun, the Pachachamac, that is, the Author of the Ʋni∣verse;The Opinion of the Ynca's. but whom, not seeing, they contented themselves to adore in their in∣ward parts. They had likewise some knowledge of the Deluge, believing that the Souls could not die, and that the Bodies should revive. Their Amau∣ta's or Philosophers addicted their principal study to the Morals, cared little for the Metaphysicks, Medicine, or Astronomy; yet observed the Equinoxes, the Solstices, and called the Eclipses the Anger of the Sun, and the Sickness or Sleepiness of the Moon, from which they wakened her by making great noises. Their Poesies were on divers honest Subjects; their Comedies and Tra∣gedies on divers accidents of human life, or on the Victories and Triumphs of their Ynca's or Curaca's. But we are entred too far into this matter: The Ynca G. de la Vega saith, that there is Subject to many Volumes if we would recount all observable and good in the ancient Government of Peru, touching the Order established, to know the number of Persons that was in each City and each Province; what was its Revenue; what Forces might be raised; touching the Judges, the Curaca's or Governour, and other Officers of Policy or for the Militia; touching the publick Magazins for Provisions, cloaths, and Arms; touching their Ceremonies in their Sacrifices, in their Feasts, in their Funeral Pomps; in their mourning a whole year after the death of their Kings; likewise in the establishment of their Colonies; of their Schools; of their Post-houses on great Rods, which they had built so stately that the Romans had not the like.The Spaniards great enemies to the Meni∣cans. But, as he saith, the best of these good Laws and Policy was abolished when the Spaniards became Masters of the Country; adding, that if there were Barbarism before the reign of the Ynca's, after them the Spa∣niards brought in another worse than the first: The Inhabitants of the Coun∣try, for the most part, not having what was necessary for life, whatever labour or service they rendred their Masters; who ought to have contented them∣selves with the Riches they had reaped, and may yet reap, from the goodness of the Country. The ransom of Atahualpa, the pillage of Cusco, and the first incursion which the Spaniards made into Peru, yielded them the value of 20 Millions of Ducats; but Pizarre and Almagre, the two first Spanish Chiefs which conquered Peru, and put to death Atahualpa; and in likely∣hood Guascar, likewise Brothers and Ynca's, were so blinded with the Gold they found, and became so cruelly covetous, that each seeking to have all, they began between themselves an unhappy War, and in the end murthered, hanged, strangled, and beheaded one another till there was not left one of them, their Children or Brothers, &c. By which God seemed not only to have chastised their unbridled Ambition and insatiable Avarice; but to revenge the Blood of the Ynca's they had unjustly slain, and their ill treating the In∣dians. Province of Panuco, and in fertility.The Province of PANƲCO is 100 Leagues long, and as many broad, di∣vided by a River of the same name into two almost equal parts: That which is Southward, and towards Mexico, is the most fertil and best tilled; the other towards the North, and Florida, being worse. Like wife, that which approaches the Sea is worth much more than that within Land. The Castilians have e∣stablished only three Colonies,Its Colonies and chief pla∣ces described. of which St. Stevan del Puerto is the Metro∣polis, seated on a River of the same name, and 12 Leagues from the Sea; the greatest Town of Traffick in this Province, built by Ferdinando Cortez out of the Ruins of Panuco, once the chief City of the Province till destroyed by him. Next, St. Jago de los Valles, likewise on the same River, scituate on an open Country, and therefore fenced about with a Wall of Earth. And, Thirdly, St. Lewis de Tempico, seated on the North Banks of the River Panuco, and near
the Coast of the Gulph of Mexico. These Colonies are so weakned by the incursions of the Inhabitants, who now knock one on the head, and then ano∣ther, that the best had not above sixty Native Spantards, An. 1600. They have Mines of Gold in the Country, which are not wrought; good Salt-pits, out of which they draw the greatest profit, &c. The Province of Mechoacan and chief pla∣ces described.The Province and Bishoprick of MECHOACAN, between those of Mexico and New Gallicia, stretches on the Coast of Mer del Sud near 100 Leagues, advances within Land from that Coast to the Zacatecas near 150 Leagues. Places of most note are, 1. Colina, seated ten Leagues from the Sea, built by Gonsalvo de Sandoval in the year 1522. 2. Zacatula, on the Mer del Sud, and at the Mouth of a River of the same name. 3. Mechoacan, the Metropolis, which takes its name from the Province so called, now the Seat of the Archbishop. 4. Zinzouza, once the Seat of the Kings of Me∣choacan. 5. Pazcuaro, once the Seat of the Bishop. 6. Valladolid, seated near a Lake as large as that of Mexico, once the Seat of the Archbishop, till removed to Mechoachan. 7. La Conception de Salaga. 8. St. Michael, built by Lewis de Velasco, then Vice-Roy of Mexico. 9. St. Philip, built by the said Velasco at the same time, to assure the way going from Mechoacan or Mexico, to the Silver Mines of Zacatecas: this way being often pestered and frequented by the Chichimeques, Otomites, Tarasques, and other barbarous and as yet unconquered People, who greatly perplex and annoy the People that border upon them. Some place likewise in this Province the Cities of Leon, of Zamora, of Villa de Lagos, and about 100 Towns, of which many have their Schools. The Soil of this Province, and its Com∣modities.The Soil of this Province is very different, but every where fertil, and in most places yields such great increase of all sorts of Grains, Fruits, &c. that it hardly hath its fellow in the whole World. It produceth likewise Cotton, Ambergreese, Gold, Silver, Coppers soft and hard; of the soft they make Vessels, of the hard Instruments instead of Iron. They have black Stones so shining, that they serve them instead of Looking-Glasses. They have store of Plants, Medicinal Herbs, Mulberry-trees, Silk, Hony, Wax, &c. The Coun∣try is said to be so healthful, and of so sweet an Air,Its Air. that Sick people come hi∣ther to recover their health. It is well stored with Rivers and Springs of fresh Water, which makes their Pastures exceeding rich and fat. Cattle and Fowl are here found in great plenty, and their Rivers and Lakes afford store of Fish. The vertue of the Plant Go∣zometcath.Between COLIMA and ACATLAN is found the Plant Gozometcath or Olcacazan, which takes Blood-shot from the Eyes, preserves the strength of the Body, or restores it to the Weak, cures the Tooth and Head-ach, resists all Poysons; and in fine, is most excellent against all Diseases. Those of the Country will judge of the event of any Sickness whatsoever it be, when they apply the Leaf on the party: If they fasten easily, they soon hope a cure; but if they resist or fall off, they expect nothing but a great and long sickness or death. The Province of Thascala with is Cities described.THASCALA, or LOS ANGELOS, is between Mexico and the Gulph of Mexico, from whence it advances unto the Mer del Sud, stretching it self on the Coast of this Sea 25 Leagues; on the other 75, or 80. Places of most note are, 1. Thascala, which gives name to this Province; once the Seat of a Bishop, and once governed in form of a Common-wealth, and ex∣ceeding populous. It had four principal Streets or Quarters, which in time of War were each of them governed by a Captain; and in the midst of these Streets it had a most spacious Market-place, which was always thronged with People for the negotiating of their Affairs: It is scituate on an easie ascent be∣twixt two Rivers, encompassed with a large, pleasant, and fruitful Plain, about 20 Leagues in compass. 2. Los Angelos, (or the City of Angles,) a fair City, built by Sebastian Ramirez, Anno 1531, now the Bishops Seat. 3. Vera Crux, built by the said Cortez, being a place of great concourse by reason of its near scituation unto the Gulph, from whence it is a thorough-fare to the City of Mexico, which is distant from it 60 Leagues. Its Port of St. Joan de
Ʋlva, though but bad, is in some esteem, being the best on the Mer del Nort, and held more commodious than that of Mexico. 4. Zempoallan, seated on a River of the same name, the Inhabitants whereof did Ferdinando Cortez▪ good service in his conquest of Mexico. Beside those Towns or Cities, they count in this Bishoprick or Province 200 Towns, 1000 Villages, and 250000 In∣dians under its Jurisdiction, which are exempted from all extraordinary charge and imposition, because of their assisting the said Cortez in his conquest of Mexico. The Country is more hot than cold, fruitful in Corn, Mayz, Sugar, Wine,The fertility of the Pro∣vince.Fruits; feeds much Cattle, full of rich Pastures, well watered with fresh Streams. In the Valley of St. Paul was a Country man possest of 40000 Sheep, which were the product of only two, which were brought him from Spain. The Inhabitants are much of the same nature and condition with those of Mexico aforesaid. The Province of Guaxaca, with its chief places de∣scribed.GƲAXACA is between the Mer del Nort and Sud. The Plain of the Pro∣vince makes a Lozenge, whose 4 sides are each 75 Leagues, or little more. Its Cities are, 1. Antequera, a Bishprick, and which sometime communicated its name to the Province. It is seated in the Valley of Guaxaca, and adorned with stately Buildings, and beautified with a magnificent Cathedral Church, whose Columns are of Marble, and of a prodigious height and thickness. 2. St. Jago, seated in the Valley of Nexapa, but upon a lofty Hill. 3. St. Ilefonso, on a Moun∣tain in the Province of Zapoteca. 4. Spiritu Sancto, in the Quarter and on the River of Guaxacoalco, near the Mer del Nort. 5. Cuertlavaca, of note for a Labyrinth, not far distant, hewed out of a Rock. 6. Aquatulco, a noted Port on the Mer del Sud, well frequented by those who transport the Merchandizes of Europe and Mexico to Peru; a place of great Riches till plundered by those two eminent Travellers Drake and Cavendish, both Englishmen; besides those places, there is said to be 300 Towns, and as many Estancia's or Hamlets, which are inhabited by the Natives of the Country, which pay Tribute to the Spaniards. The divers Quarters of this Province are all fertil, not only in Grains,The fertility and commo∣dities of this Province. but also in Fruits, Cocheneil, Silk, Cassia; and the Earth well stored with Mines of Gold, Silver, and other Metals, and almost all the Rivers stream down sand-Gold. Here is also a kind of Almond, which they call Cacao, which they make use of instead of Mony. The Province of Tavasco de∣scribed.TAVASCO is only a Coast of an 100 leagues long, between Guaxaco and Jucatan, scarce 25 Leagues broad between the Province of Chiapa and the Sea; the Country is full of Pools and Marshes towards the Coast, Wood and Forests towards the Mountains; and the Rains being continual for 8 or 9 Months in the year, the Air is very humid; and its scituation being much under the Torrid Zone, it engenders an infinite number of Vermin, Gnats, and Insects, yet the Soil is excellent,Its fertility and commo∣dities. Its chief Co∣lony. abundant in Mayz and Cocao, which is their principal Riches. There is observable here but one Colony of the Spaniards, which they call Villa de Nuestra a Sennora de la Victoria, so called because of the Victory Cortez gained in 1519 against those of the Country, when he went to the Conquest of the Kingdom of Mexico. It was called Potonchan when it was besieged, taken and sacked by Cortez; and it is observed, this was the first City in America which defended it self, and which suffered under the Spaniards Sword. The Province of Jucatan, with its chief places de∣scribed.JƲCATAN is the last Province of the Audience of Mexico towards the East. It is a Peninsula of about 400 Leagues circuit, scituate between the Gulphs of Mexico and Honduras. The Isthmus which joyns it to the Main Land, is not above 25 or 30 Leagues over, from whence the Country continues enlarging it self from 50 or 75 Leagues breadth, and ends at Cape de Cotoche, which regards towards the East Cape St. Anthony in the Isle of Cuba, at the di∣stance of 60 and odd Leagues. The Coasts of JƲCATAN are very much cumbred with little Isles, which often prove dangerous for Ships; but covered with abundance of Sea-Fowl, which those of the Neighbouring and far distant Countries come to chase.The Isle of Cozumel. The Isle of Cozumel, to the East, hath formerly been famous for its Idol Cozumel, which all the People of the Neighbouring Continent went to adore.
And it was in this Isle, or the Continent near unto it, that Baldivius unfor∣tunately saved himself, having been Shipwreckt near Jamaica, he had taken a little Boat (like to those used by Fisher-men,The Misfor∣tune that be∣fel Baldivius here. wherein going with about 20 of his Men, he was brought hither by the Sea; but no sooner had he set foot on Land, but he and his Men were seized by the Natives; who immediately led them to the Temple of their Idols, where they presently offered up, or sacrificed and ate him and four of his Men, and the rest they reserved till ano∣ther time. Among these, Aquilar, who had seen the Ceremony, escaping with some others, fled to a Cacique, who treated him courteously for many years, du∣ring which time some died, others married in the Country. Aquilar in the end was fetched thence by Cortez, who was of no small use unto him in his Con∣quest of Mexico, because that he had learned their Tongue.The Air of Jucatan. The Air of Jucatan is hot, the Country hath scarce any Rivers, yet wants no Water, being sup∣plied every where with Wells; within the middle of the Land are to be seen quantity of Scales and Shells of Sea-fish, which hath made some believe the Country hath been overflowed.What it yield∣eth. They have scarce any of the Corn or Fruits of Europe, but some others of the Country; and quantity of wild Beasts, principally Stags and wild Bears; and among their Fowls, Peacocks. They have yet found no Gold, much less Latten; which makes it appear, that it is not true, that the Spaniards found here Crosses of Latten, there being none in all America. The Cities of Jucatan are four, Merida, Valladolid,Its Cities.Cam∣peche, and Salamancha. 1. Merida, is the Metropolis, being the Seat of the Bishop and Governour for Tavasco and Jucatan, distant from the Sea on each side 12 Leagues: The City is adorned with great and ancient Edifices of Stone, with many Figures of Men cut in the Stones; and because they were re∣sembling those which are at Merida in Spain that name was given it. 2. Valladolid, beautified with a very fair Monastery of Franciscans, and more than 40 thousand Barbarians under its Jurisdiction. 3. Campeche, sci∣tuate on the shoar of the Gulph; a fair City of about Three thousand Houses, and adorned with many stately and rich Structures, which in 1596 was sur∣prized and pillaged by the English, under the Command of Captain Parker; who carried away with him the Governour, the Riches of the City, and many Prisoners; besides, a great Ship laden with Hony, Wax, Campeche-Wood, and other rich Commodities. The Conquest of the Kingdom of Mexico was much easier to the Castilians than that of Peru; the Kingdom of Peru being Hereditary, and its Ynca's loved, and almost adored by their Subjects; the Kingdom of Mexico being Elective, and its Kings hated, if not by those of Mexico, yet by all the neighbouring Estates, and envied by those might aspire to the Royalty. This diversity was the cause that Motezuma died, and the City of Mexico taken, there was nothing more to do or fear as to that Estate. In Peru, after the death of Guascar and Atabalipa, and some other Ynca's, the Spaniards could not believe themselves safe so long as there was any remainder of the Race of these Ynca's; which made them under divers pretexts persecute, ba∣nish, and put them to death. And so much for Mexico or New Spain.
The Audience of GUADALAJARA, or NEW GALLICIA. THE Audience of GƲADALAJARA, or Kingdom of NEW GALLICIA, makes the most Occidental part of New-Spain, and contains the Provinces of Guadalajara, Xalisco, Los Zacatecas, Chiametlan, Culiacan,Its Provinces. and New-Biscany; some others add Cibola, and others likewise California, Quivira, Anian, &c. that is, the Castilians pretend to extend their Power to the farthest part of this New World. The Province of Guadalaja∣ra, and its Ci∣ties described.The Province of Guadalajara hath only two Cities or Colonies of Spani∣ards, viz. Guadalajara, and Sancta Maria de los Lagos, of which, the first is the chief of the Province, built in 1531 by Nonnez de Guzman, after he had finished his Conquest. It is the residence of the Kings Treasurers; dignified with the Courts of Judicature, the See of a Bishop; beautified with a fair Cathedral Church; a Convent of Augustine Friers, and another of Francis∣cans. It is scituate in a pleasant and fruitful Plain, and watered with divers Fountains and little Torrents not far from the River Baranja; the neighbour∣ing Mountains having furnished them with Materials for their Buildings. Santa Maria de los Lagos was built by the same Guzman, and made a place of great strength, only to hinder the Incursions of the Chichimeques, who are a barbarous and untamed sort of People, who border upon them towards the North-East; who live upon the Spoils of other people, harbouring in thick Woods and private Caves for the better obtaining their Prey; which said Town keeps them in such awe, that they dare not molest them. The Air of this Province. The Inhabi∣tants, &c.The Air of this Province is temperate and serene; except it be in their Sum∣mer, which is much troubled with Rains. The People (as generally through∣out all Gallicia) are crafty, very docil in matters of Religion, inconstant, im∣patient of labour, much given to pleasures, delight in strong Drinks; their habit for the most part is a Shirt of Cotton, over which they wear a Mantle, which they fasten about their Shoulders: They are of a good Stature, and well proportioned, little subject to sickness, nor knowing what the Plague is, they ordinarily living 100 years. The Country is rather Mountainous than Plain, well furnished with Mines of Silver, Copper, Lead, and Margasites, &c. but none of Gold,Its fertility and commodi∣tles.Iron, or Steel: The Plains tilled yield ordinarily 100 for one of Corn, and 200 for one of Mayz; they have much Pulse, many Olive-trees, whose Fruit is often spoiled by the Ants, as their Grains are by Pies. These Pies are no bigger than our Sparrows, but in such quantity that where they alight, in a little time they devour the whole Crop. Almost all the Fruits of Europe are here found in great plenty, which for goodness surpass those of Spain. Their Pastures likewise are rich, and feed abundance of Cattle. The Province of Xalisco.In the Province of XALISCO are the Cities of Compostella, the Metro∣polis of the Province, built by the said Guzman; once a Bishops See, till re∣moved to Guadalajara; built in a Plain, but so barren, that it will scarce pro∣duce food either for man or Beast, and with the disadvantage of so bad an Air, that made it to be soon left. La Purification, a small City, built also by the said Guzman, seated near the Port of Natividad on the Sea-side. And lastly Xalisco, so called from the Province; once of some account till destroyed by the said Gazman. The Provinces of Chiametlan, Culiacan, and Cinaloa de∣scribed.North-East of Guadalajara and Xalisco are the Provinces of CHIAMET∣LAN, whose chief City is St. Sebastian, seated on a River of the same name; night to which are many rich Silver Mines. The Province of CƲLIACAN, whose chief Cities are St. Michael, seated on the River of Women, built by Guzman, and Piastla seated on a River so called, about two days Journey from the Sea; well built, and of good esteem till the great damage it received from the Spaniards in their Conquest. And lastly, the Province of CINALOA,
whose chief City is St. John, an ancient Colony of Spaniards. There are every where rich Mines of Silver, plenty of Provisions, Fruits, Mayze, Pulse, and Cotton: their Inhabitants are great, strong, and warlike; and particularly in Cinaloa, where they have made the Spaniards abandon the City of St. John, who have rebuilded other-where that of St. Philip and Jacob. The Provinces of Los Zaca∣tecas and New Biscany.North of Guadalajara are the Provinces of LOS ZACATECAS, and new BISCANY. Account is made of four Colonies in Los Zacatecas: 30 Towns and 4 famous Lodges near the Mines, of which the principal are Los Zacatecas, inhabited by Spaniards, who have here a Convent of Fran∣ciscans. Avino, Sombrarino, St. Martin, and possibly St. Luke. The Cities are Xeres de Frontera, Erena, Nombro de Dios, besides that in the Isthmus of Panaman and Durango. There are no Cities spoken of in New Biscany, but only excellent Mines of Silver, at St. John, Sancta Barbara, and at Eudes, which they esteem the best, built only for the benefit of the Silver Mines, which the Spaniards enjoy. The Zacateca's want both Water and Food, except towards Durango and Nombro de Dios: New Biscany hath Cattle and Grain. All these Provinces hitherto are not only of the Audience, but likewise of the Bishoprick of Guadalajara. Above, and Northward of New Gallicia and the Audience of Guadalajara, we have quantity of People and Provinces little known: we call them in general New Mexico, because esteeming these quarters likewise under the name of Mexico, they make that part of Mexico latest known; others pass them all under the name of New Granada, and place here the City of Granada, which Herrerd makes in Cinaloa, others in Cibola, and others in the Kingdom of Mexico taken particularly: so little assurance is there of the Relations of these quar∣ters. However, here is observed divers People very different in their Lan∣guages, Manners, and Customs; some having fixed and settled Habitations, others wandring after their Flocks: among the first there are some that have many Cities, some containing in them about 30, 40, or 50 Thousand Inhabitants, and in these Cities the Houses are built of Stone several Stories high. New Mexico, taken particularly, hath 10 or 12 of these Cities,New Mexico described. whose Houses have their Chambers, Halls, Parlours, and other Conveniences, very populous; among which the City called New Mexico is the chief, distant from Old Mexico about 500 Leagues, being the residence of the Governour, where the Spani∣ards keep a Garrison, and have changed its name to St. Fogie.Province of Cibola.Cibola hath seven Cities, each of 3, 4, or 500 Families, and (with those which remain in the Field) may make likewise 8 or 10 thousand Men. All these Inhabitants are addicted to War, their Country tilled, and abounding in all Victuals. The Province of Quivira de∣scribed. Its InhabitantsQƲIVIRA hath not many Houses, nor over stored with People, and those that do inhabit here are very rude, and barbarous; the Men cover their Bodies with the Skin of an Ox ill accommodated, the Women only with their Hair, which they wear so long, that it serveth them instead of a Veil to hide their nakedness: they live almost altogether on Raw-flesh, which they de∣vour rather than eat, swallowing it without any chewing: They live in Hoords or Troops, resembling those of the Tartars; not having any certain abode, but remove from one place to another, staying where they find good Pasture for their Cattle. The Province of Anian de∣scribed.ANIAN is yet poorer than Quivira: the Spaniards have long since over-run both the one and the other, but finding nothing of worth, neglected them; but after all, there are Opinions much contrary, touching the tempe∣rature, fertility, and scituation of these two Provinces; some making them cold and barren, others temperate and good. California de∣scribed.CALIFORNIA hath a long time been esteemed to be only a Peninsula; but the Hollanders having taken on these Seas a Spanish Vessel, which had rounded it, and made the Chart of it, who saw that it was an Isle, which ex∣tends it self from South-East to North-West, and from the 23th degree of La∣titude, to beyond the 45th, lying along the West side of America. Its length is of 7 or 800 Leagues: Its breadth under the Tropick of Cancer, not above 20 or 25 Leagues; from whence it still enlarges it self unto 150 Leagues to∣wards
the 40th degree of Latitude. The Air hath been found Cold, though in a scituation which ought to render it more hot than temperate. The Coun∣try ill peopled, they fish for Pearls in Mer Vermejo, and on the East of the Coasts of California, and likewise along and on the Coasts of New Granada, or New Mexico.Mark de Niza, a Franciscan, his Relations of this place. Mark de Niza, a Franciscan, made a Voyage into these parts in 1529, and at his return recounted Marvels of what he had seen and understood; of Peo∣ple that wore about their Heads pieces of Mother of Pearl, of divers Pro∣vinces rich in Gold, of Cities and Houses well built, whose Gates were adorned with Turquoises and other Stones. That the chief City of Cibola was greater than Mexico: That the Kingdoms of Marata, Acu, and Tonteac, were like∣wise very rich and powerful.Also the de∣scription of these parts by Vasque de Cor∣nada. The Relation of this Fryar caused Mendoza, Vice-Roy of Mexico, to send Vasque de Cornada, Governour of New Gallicia, to search out the truth. Who, far from finding the Riches he hoped for, found only people naked, very poor, rude and barbarous; some Cities he found indifferently well built, but sadly furnished; assuring us that the Kingdoms of which the Fryar had made so much account of were almost all Imaginary. Tonteac being only a Lake, about which there were some few Habitations: Marata a thing invisible, and Acu a beggerly Town, in esteem amongst them, only gathered some Cotton. Possibly the Fryar said more than he had seen, that he might incite the Spani∣ards to send some Colonies hither, and have the Means to convert those Peo∣ple: And Cornada less, because he found not that present profit which he did in his Government: however it be, this contrariety, with those we have ob∣served touching the City of Granada, and the Provinces of Quivira and A∣nian, may make us see how dangerous it is to trust those that come from parts so remote and unknown, whatever specious or fair Habit they wear, or whatever good Tongue they have, or whatever protestations they make of Truth. The Audience of GUATEMALA. THE Audience of GƲATEMALA is between the Seas Del Nort, and Sud; and between divers Isthmus's and Tongues of Land, which are found in the most Southernly part of America Septentrionalis. Its Pro∣vinces are Guatemala,Its Provinces.Soconusco, Chiapa, Vera-Pax, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costarica, and Veragua. The Province of Guatemala, with its Cities, described.GƲATEMALA and SOCONƲSCO are on the Mer del Sud, Chiapa within Land; Vera-Pax and Honduras on the Mer del Nort; Casta∣ria, Nicaragua and Veragua, on both Seas. Guatemala hath 150 Leagues along the Coast, and advanceth within Land 30 or 40 Leagues. Here were built the Cities of St. Jago, of Guatemala, St. Salvador or Curcatlan, La Trinidad or Conzonate, St. Michael, and Xeres de la Frontera or Chuluteca; they are all upon, or little distant from the Sea: Guatemala is more advanced within Land, and yet the principal, being the Seat of the Bishop and Court of Audience. In 1541 this City was almost overwhelmed by a deluge of boyling Water, which descending from that Vulcan which is above and near the City, threw down, and tumbled over all that it met with, as Stones, Trees, and Buildings; where it stifled many People, and among the rest, the Widow of him who had conquered and so ill treated that Province. The City was re∣built farther to the East, and may have near 100 Houses, about 1000 Inhabi∣tants, and its Country about 25000 Indians Tributaries. A certain private Person had once a strange phancy came in his head,A strange phancy of a private Person in these parts, and the event thereof. that there was a very rich Mine of Gold in this Vulcan of Guatemala, and that he needed but to find some way to put down a Cauldron, and draw out what he could wish for, as one doth Water out of a Well; he undertook the enterprize, and caused to be made great Chains of Iron, and a great Cauldron, so strong, that he be∣lieved the fire could not damage it; he caused a way to be made to carry to
the top of the Mountain his Chains, Caularon, and Machins, which were to serve to let down and draw up his Caulron full of Gold, which he believed to coyn at the bottom of the Mountain; but he found the Fire so violent, that in less than a moment of time he had neither Chains nor Cauldron. Which so perplexed him with grief and shame to see his own folly; having not only spent all his own Estate, but the best part of his Friends; so that he would have precipitated himself into the Mountain, had he not been hindred; but in a short time he died for anger and grief. The sertility of this Pro∣vince, withits Commodities and Trade.The Country is colder than the scituation may bear; and subject to Earth∣quakes; hath excellent Balms, liquid Amber, Bezoar, Salt, Grains; is full of rich Pastures, which are well stooked with Cattle, plenty of Cotton Wool, ex∣cellent Sulphur, store of Medinal Drugs, and abundance of Fruits; among others Caao in such great plenty, that it yearly lades many Vessels, which are transported to other places. The Country is more inclining to Mountains than Plains, but well watered with Rivers. The People are pusillanimous and fearful;Its Inhabitants the Men are expert at the Bow, and the Women at the Distaff: they are more civil, and embrace Christianity more than their neighbouring Countries do, and are willing to receive Advice from the Spaniards, who are their Masters. The Province of Soconusco described.SOCONƲSCO hath only the little City of Guevetlan on the Coast, and nothing of particular or worthy to be noted in it; only it hath some Grains, feeds some Cattle, its Rivers have Fish, and its People more barbarous and rude. The Province of Chiapa de∣scribed.CHIAPA is not over fertil in Grains nor Fruits, but the Country well cloathed with lofty Trees, and some of which yield Rozin, others precious Gums, and others bear Leaves, that when they are dried into powder make a Sovereign Plaister for Sores. The Country is full of Snakes, and other ve∣nemous Creatures. Places of most note in this Province are 1. Crudad-Real, built by the Spaniards, scituate in a round Plain at the Foot of a Hill,Its chief pla∣ces. and be∣girt with Mountains resembling an Amphitheater; now the residence of a Bishop, and governed by City-Magistrates, by them called Alcaides. 2. Chia∣pa, seated in the fruitfullest Valley of the whole Country. 3. St. Bartholomews, remarkable for having near it a great Pit, or opening of the Earth, into which if any one casts a Stone, though never so small, it makes a noise so great and terrible as a clap of Thunder. 4. Casapualca, a small Town, but famous also for a Well it hath, whose Waters are observed to rise and fall according to the flowing and ebbing of the Sea. Among the Bishops of Chiapa, one was Bartholomew de las Casas, of the Order of St. Dominique,Some memo∣rable actions of Bartholomew de las Casas Bishop of Chiapa. who having seen the Cruelties with which the Spa∣niards treated the People of America, endeavoured by divers Remonstrances to hinder it for the future, and to that end went into Spain; but finding no re∣dress, wrote and printed a Treatise of their Cruelties, which was endeavoured to be supprest, but some Copies escaping, were translated and reprinted in Italian, and other Languages. There are in this Relation things that can scarce enter into the belief of man: He makes account, that in divers parts of America and its Isles, the Spaniards had put to death in his time (which was fifty years after their In∣vasion of it) 12 or 15 Millions of Persons,The Spaniards cruelty to∣wards the Na∣tives. by several cruel and unchristian Is Deaths, as by Fire, Hunger, Boiling of them, impaling them; by the H and Sword; as also in excessive Labours in the working in their Mines, in ear∣rying of heavy Burthens, like Horses, and the like Cruelties. He also saith, that they treated those that remained worse than Slaves, nay, worse than Beasts; cutting off the Ears of some, others Noses or Hands; sometimes cutting them alive into pleces and quarters to feed their Dogs, and learn them to devour these poor Americans; and if they found one of these Dogs killed, or a Spaniard knockt on the head in the Field, they would hang up a dozen of these miserable People, in honour (as they said) of the Twelve Apostles, or else put the neighbouring Country to Fire and Sword. He saith, that it was or∣dinary with them to abuse Boys, to deflour Virgins, and to ravish Women,
whom they sold afterwards for a Cheese: and oft-times a hundred Men and Women, and sometimes five hundred and more, for an Ass or a Horse. He ob∣serves, that a certain Chacique having escaped out of Hispaniola into Cuba, to shun the cruelty of the Spaniards, they becoming after Masters of Cuba, and this poor Chacique falling into their hands, they condemned him to the Fire, where being incited by a Fryar to turn Christian, that at least after this life he might be saved in Paradise; when he understood that it was a place that the Spa∣niards went unto, he would not be a Christian, nor go thither, so much he dreaded them. And he affirms, that the most part of these Murthers, Burn∣ings, and Pillages, were voluntarily done to terrifie others, and make them∣selves absolutely obeyed; which they might as well have gained by fair means and gentle usage. But let us return to what concerns our Audience. Remarkable Fountains.Near Chiapa are several Fountains, which have some singularities; as that aforesaid, which rises and salls with the flowing and ebbing of the Sea, though far from it. Another, that for three years together increases, though there be never so little Rain; and for three years after diminisheth, though there be never so much: and so continues from three years to three years. Another there is, that falls in Rainy-weather and rises in dry. And there is another that kills Birds and Beasts that drink of it; yet cures those Sick which de∣mand violent Remedies. But we should swell too large, if we should speak of all Singularities found in America. The Province of Honduras, with its chief places, de∣scribed.HONDƲRAS and NICARAGƲA are two great Provinces. Hon∣duras is more than 200 Leagues long, and near 100 broad. Nicaragua little less. Honduras communicates its name to the Gulph which lies on Mer del Nort: Its chief places are, 1. Valladolid, of near an equal distance between the two Seas, scituate in a pleasant and fruitful Valley, and on the banks of the River Chamalucon. 2. Gratias di Dios, scituate on a high ground, 30 Leagues Westward of Valladolid, and near the rich Mines of Gold of St. Piedro, and serveth for a place of defence for those that work in the Mines, against the Savages. 3. St. Juan del porto de los Cavallos, once a famous Port, but through its Ruins is uninhabited. 4. Truxillo, seated on the ascent of a little Hill betwixt two Rivers, in a rich and fruitful Soil, with the benefit of an excellent Port. 5. St. George de Olancho, seated in the Valley of Olancho, noted for the Golden Sands that the River Guayape was said to yield. The Country hath pleasant Hills,The fertility of the Pro∣vince, with its commodities. and fruitful Valleys for Grains, Fruits, and rich Pastures: It is well furnished with Rivers, hath Mines of Gold and Silver; but its greatest profit is made by Wool, which it transports to other places. The Province of Nicaragua described.NICARAGƲA hath five Colonies of Spaniards; the Country is de∣stitute of Rivers, except that part which is towards Veragua, called Costa Rica; the want whereof is supplied by a great Lake which ebbs and flows like the Sea. Upon its Banks are seated many pleasant Cities and Villages, which are inhabited by the Spaniards and Indians; a Lake well stored with Fish, and as full of Crocodiles. The Air of the Country is healthful, though hot,Its sertility in its its, Cat∣tle, Fowl, &c. the Soil fruitful and pleasant; it hath Fruits, Cows, Hogs, Sheep, Turkies, Pullain, and so many Paroquets that they are hurtful: It yieldeth not much Grain, it hath plenty of Cotton-Wool and Sugar-Canes, and towards Segovia are some Mines of Gold and Silver.Its Inhabitants Its Inhabitants are of a good stature, active, very comformable to the Spaniards as well in Behaviour as Apparel. Its chief places are,Its chief pla∣ces. 1. Leon, scituate on the aforesaid Lake in a Sandy soil, but begirt with Woods: It is the residence of the Governour, as also the Seat of a Bishop. 2. Grenada, on the same Lake, beautified with a fair Church and a strong Castle, seated in a fruitful Soil, and well stored with Sugar-Ganes, 3. Jaen, seated at the end of the said Lake, 4. Segovia the New is farther within Land, rich in Veins of Silver. 5. Realeijo, near the Mer del Sud, having the benefit of a good Port, by reason of which it is inhabited for the most part by Shipwrights, Mariners, and those that depend upon Naval Affairs.
The Province of Costarica de∣scribed.COSTARICA, and VERAGƲA, are the two most Eastern Provin∣ces of the Audience of Guatemala. In COSTARICA are the Cities of Carthage, seated between two Seas, where there are some places, which serve in for Ports: Aranjues and Nicoya are on the Mer del Sud, Castro de Austria within Land. The Province of Veragua, de∣scribed.VERAGƲA, hath towards the East the Isthmus of Panama, and was once under the Chamber of Panama; though this City be esteemed in America Meridionalis, and Veragua in the Septentrionalis: There are placed in this Province four or five Cities of Spaniards, viz. 1. La Conception, seated on the Mer del Nort, and is the Residence of the Governor. 2. La Trinidad, seated also on the said Sea. 3. Sancta Fe within Land, being the place where the Spa∣niards melt, refine, and cast their Gold into Barrs and Ingots. 4. Carlos, seated on the Mer del Sud. And 5. Parita, seated on the said Sea. The Country both of the one, and the other Province, is rude, mountainous, and little fertil, only for Mayze and Pot-herbs. In supply thereof, they have exceeding rich Mines of Gold and Silver in their Mountains, and Sand-gold in their Rivers; but there remain yet some Natives in these quarters, who still mo∣lest and annoy the Spaniards, killing and eating them when they can catch them. The Isles ANTILLES, or CAMERCANES. BEtween the two America's Septentrionalis, and Meridionalis, and before the Gulph of Mexico, are abundance of Islands of different greatness; HI∣SPANIOLA, and Cuba are the greatest; Jamaica, Boriquen, and o∣thers of the middle sort; the rest, much less. Hispaniola, Christopher Co∣lumbus the first discoverer of this Isl Its ColoHISPANIOLA, is in the middle of these Isles: near 200 Leagues from West to East; and 50 or 60 from South to North. Christopher Columbus was the first that made discovery of this Isle, in his first Voyage that the made in 1492. being conducted thither by some of the Inhabitants of Cuba. There re∣main 10 Colonies of Spaniards, of which, 1. St. Domingo (built by Bartholo∣mew, Brother to Christopher Columbus) is the chief, pleasantly seated, its houses well built, which for the most part are of Stone, its Haven is large and safe for Ships to ride in, it is enriched by the Residence of the Governour, the Court of Audience, the See of an Arch Bishop, the Chamber of Accounts, the Treasu∣ry Court; and, besides many Convents of Religious Houses, and Hospital endow∣ed with a large yearly Revenue, a place of great Trade, till the taking of Mexi∣co, and the discovery of Peru; since which time it hath much decayed, nor hath it yet recovered it self of the great loss and damage it sustained by Sir Francis Drake, in 1586. It now being Inhabited by not above 2000 Families, of which about 600 are Natural Spaniards, the rest Mestiz, Mulatts, Negroes, and Cana∣ries. Porto de la Plata holds the second place by reason of its Commerce, and is well seated on a commodious Bay. Then 3. St. Jago de los Cavallieros, for the beauty of its scituation. 4. El Cotuy for its Gold Mines. 5. Salvaleon de Yquey for its Sugars and Pastures. 6. Azua likewise for its Sugars, being a noted Ha∣ven. 7. St. Maria del puerto for its Cassia. 8. Monte Christo for its Salt. 9. La Conception de la Vega, the foundation of Christopher Columbus, for whose fake it was made an Episcopal See, which at present is united to St. Domingo; and the last of the ten Colonies is El Zeybo seated on the Sea shore, but of small ac∣count. This Isle stock∣ed by the Spaniards.So soon as the Spaniards were Masters of this Island, they caused to be brought from Spain, Grains, Fruits, and Beasts of all sorts. The Grains would not thrive in the Plains, by reason of the richness of the soil, the stalks taking away all the force of the seed; but when they found out the reason, they sowed them on hills, and there where the land was lean; so that then they yielded a great in∣crease. The Fruits became excellent; and the Beasts multiplied in such manner, that they grew wild for want of proper owners, being hunted to death by
any one, only for their skins. The Sugar Canes brought from the Canaries yielded exceeding great profit. The Country for the most part flourishing and beautiful, the Trees and Meadows being alwaies in their Summer livery: and the soyl so fertil, that in the space of sixteen or eighteen daies, herbs, and roots will come to their perfection and ripeness, but the Mines of Gold, Copper, and o∣ther Metals which remained, are no longer wrought; the Spaniards having consumed and perished in them, not only the most part of the antient Inhabi∣tants of this Country, but likewise of the Neighbouring Isles. The Isle of Cu∣ba described.The Isle of CƲBA is longer and streighter than Hispaniola, near 300 Leagues from West to East, and from South to North, only twenty five or thirty almost every where, so that in Continent, these two Isles are almost equal, their qualities are likewise in many things correspondent, as in their Grains, Cattle, and Fruits. The Air of Cuba is healthful, and its Forrests fur∣nished with the best Wood,Its Fowls. for building of Ships: It feeds store of Pullein, Pi∣geons, Tortells, Partridges, Flamengo's, Whose feathers are white when little, and of many colours when grown great. Its Rivers stream down more Gold, than those of Hispaniola: Its Ports likewise greater and more safe; but yet there are more Rocks and Banks about Cuba than Hispaniola.Its chief places described with some of their rarities. For the great∣ness of the Isle, it hath but few Cities, the chief of which are St. Jago, seat∣ed in the bottom of a capacious Bay, about two Leagues from the Sea, whose Port is esteemed one of the best of all America; being the seat of a Bishop, who holds from the Arch Bishop of St. Domingo; and beautified with a Cathe∣dral Church, and some Religious houses near the City, and from the Sierra de Cobre they fetch Copper, yet the City is much ruined, and hath little trade. Towards Baracoa, its Mountains yield Ebony and Brasile; it hath this incon∣veniency that its Port cannot receive great Vessels. The goodness of the Air the fertility of the Soil, and a pleasant Plain hath made St. Salvador the best place of the Island, where they have a great trade; though off from the Coast. Near Porto del Precipe, a Haven-Town in the North parts of the Isle, there are Fountains of Bitumen which they make use of instead of Pitch, to caulk their Ships, and the Indians for divers Medicines. The Port of Havana, having its entrance streight and deep, receives the Ocean in form of a Gulph, capable to receive a thousand Vessels, and secure them from the fury of the Sea, or Winds. The two Capes which inclose it, have their Castles to defend the entrance, and a third joyning to the City re∣gards the opening of the Port; the Ships which return from New Spain into Europe, assemble together at Havana, where they are furnished with all things necessary either for Food or War; and dispose themselves to depart by the month of September, passing by the Channel of Bahame, which carries them into the Ocean. Twenty five Leagues from Havana, towards the East, is the Port of Ma∣tanca's, that is Massacres; for that once those of the Country here slew some Spaniards.A Vast Prize taken by Pie∣ters Heyn. In 1628 Pieters Heyn, General for the West India Company, surprized the Fleet returning to Spain, and carried it in to the West India Company: It was loaden with Silver, Silk, Cocheneil, Hides, Cassonade or powder Sugar, and divers other Merchandizes all of great value: This Prize was esteemed worth near seven Millions of crowns; yet this great service was but very ill recompensed by the Governours of the said Com∣pany. Jamaica de∣scribed.JAMAICA is an Isle of a large extent being from East to West 170 miles in length, and from North to South where it is broadest about 70, being of an Oval form, and waxing narrower and narrower at both extream ends. It is seated betwixt the Tropicks in the 17 and 18 degrees of Northern Latitude,Its scituation, Extent. and beareth from off the Isle of Hispaniola Eastwards about 35 Leagues. In the midst of the Isle from East to West runs a continued ridge of lofty Mountains which are well stored with fresh Springs whence flow the many Rivers that so plentifully water the Island,Well watered. to the great benefit of the Inhabitants. The Air is observed to be more temperate than any of the Caribe Isles, and of as mild a tem∣perature as any place betwixt the Tropicks, being alwaies refreshed with cool
breezes, frequent showers, and great dews in the nights, that it may be deem∣ed Temperate, and by its continual verdure exceeding delightful.The Weather. The wea∣ther is less certain than in the Caribe Isles, the most observable wet seasons are in November and May, there being no seemable Winter, but by a little more rain and thunder in the Winter months; nor is there scarce any sensible lengthning or shortning of the Days or Nights. Hurricanes are here never known.Its fertility and commodi∣ties. This Isle in most parts (especially the North) is of a Fertil and rich soil, and liberally answers the Cultivators cost and pains for what is planted: The chief Commodities that it produceth are Sugars, which are so good that they out sell those of the Barbados 5 s. per cent; Cocao the richest Commodity of the Island. Indico, Cotton, Tobacco but indifferent, Hides, Copper, great va∣riety of Woods for Dyers, also Cedar, Brasilletto, Lignum vitae, Ebony, &c. Tortoises in exceeding great plenty, whose flesh is excellent good and nou∣rishing, but those that are troubled with the French man it is dangerous to eat; Salt, Salt-Peter, Ginger, Cod-pepper, Piemente being an excellent Aroma∣tick spice, of a curious gusto, having the mixt tast of divers Spices; Cocheneil, divers excellent Druggs, Gumms, and Balsoms, many of which are not yet known by their names. Here are greater abundance of Cattle, than in most of the English Plantations, as Horses, Cows, Hoggs, Sheep, Goats, Asnegroes Mules,Great plenty of Cattle. which came from the breed of those put into the Woods by the Spaniards when they were first Masters of the Island, which for want of Masters became wild; but since the English have had to do here they are much wasted to what they were. The Bays, Rivers, Roads and Creeks,Fish. Fowl. are well stored with excellent Fish of sundry sorts appropriate to the Indies. Likewise great store of Fowl both tame and wild, the chief of which are Ducks, Teal, Wigeon, Geese, Turkyes, Pigeons, Hens, Plovers, &c. Here are great plenty of excellent Fruits, as Oranges,Fruits.Cocar∣nuts, Pomegranates, Limes, Guavers, Mammes, Alumee-Supotas, Avocatas, Ca∣shues, Prickle-Apples, Prickle Pears, Grapes, Sower sops, Custard-Apples, Dildoes, Plantains, Pines, &c. And Herbs, Roots,Herbs and Roots. and Flowers common to England grow here very well. Here are very noxious Beasts or Insects found, those most dangerous are the Alegators,Hurtful things. some of which are fifteen and twenty foot long; here is also Manchonele which is a kind of Crab, likewise Snakes and Guianas, but not poysonous; as also Muskettoes, and Merry∣wings, a sort of stinging Flies found very troublesome to the Inhabitants. The Diseases that Strangers are most incident unto are Dropsies (occasioned by ill Dyet, Drunkenness,Diseases. and Sloathfulness) Calentures too frequently the pro∣duct of Surfeits, also Fevers, and Agues; but it is experimentally sound that if a good Dyet and moderate Exercises are used, without excess of Drinking, they may enjoy a competent measure of health; and the reason of the great mortality of the Army at their arrival, was the want of Provisions, together with an unwillingness to labouror exercise, joyned with discontent. This Island is divided into Fourteen Precincts, Divisions or Parishes,Its division in to Precincts or Parishes. many of which are well Inhabited, especially the Southern part, so far as the ridge of Mountains, which runneth in the midst, nor are its Southern parts (especially near the Sea) without Plantations, though not so thick as about St. Jago; and of late years the Island is much increased in its Inhabitants and Plantations, be∣ing likely to prove the Potentest Colony the English are Masters of in America, being able to bring into the Field upon occasion about eight or ten thousand men. This Isle abounds with goods Bays, Roads, and Har∣bours, the chief amongst which are Port, Royal formerly Cagway,Its chief places. Port Royal. seated on the extream end of that long point of Land which makes the Harbour, which is exceeding commodious for Shipping, and secured by a strong Ca∣stle, and land lock't by a point of land that runs twelve miles South-East, from the main of the Island, having the great River that runs by los Angelos and St. Jago, falling into it, where Ships do commonly water, and conveniently wood. The Harbour is two or three Leagues broad in most places, with good Anchorage, and so deep, that a Ship of one thou∣sand Tun may lay her sides to the Shoar of the point, and load and un∣load with Planks afloat, which commodiousness doth make it much resorted
unto, and as well Inhabited by the Merchants, Store-house-keepers, and other Inhabitants, this being the only noted place in the Isle for Traffick and resort, being said to contain about 12 or 1500 well built houses, which are as dear rent∣ed as if they stood in well traded streets in London; yet its scituation is very unpleasant and uncommodious, having neither Earth, Wood, or fresh water, but only made up of a hot loose sand, which renders it more unhealthful than up in the Country, and Provisions are very dear, about 12 miles up in the Land from this Town is St. Jago,St. Jago. or St. Jago de la vega, which when the Spaniards were Masters of it was large, containing about 2000 houses, which were de∣stroyed and reduced to about 500, when the English first seized the Isle, and here the Governour resideth, and where the chief Courts of Judicature are held, which makes it to be well resorted and inhabited, where they live in great pleasure, recreating themselves in their Coaches and on Horseback in the evenings in the Savana near adjoyning, as the Gentry do here in Hide-Park. The present Governour is his Excellency Charles Earl of Carslile, Vis∣count Howard of Acorpeth, Lord Dacres of Gilsland, one of the Lords of his Majesties most Honourable Privy Council, a person for prudence and noble qualifications every way beitting such a place. Six miles Southward of this Town is seated Passage at the mouth of the River,Passage. which at six miles course falleth into the Harbour of Port Royal; it contains about twenty houses on∣ly serving for the conveniency of passage from Port Royal to St. Jago. Its o∣ther places are Port Morant in the Eastern point,Port Morant. a very capacious and se∣cure Harbour, and hereabout is a Potent Colony of the English seated. Old Harbour a good Bay for Ships to ride in.Old Harbour. Port Negril.Port Negril in the extream We∣stern point, very commodious and secure to windward, in which Men of War do often ply when they look for the Spanish Ships; not far from which place was seated the old Town of Melilla, founded by Columbus. Port Antonio, seated on the North,Port Antonio. a very safe Land lock't Harbour, at the mouth of which lyeth a small Isle wholly taken up by the said Earl of Carlisle; with divers o∣ther good Bays and Harbours along the Coast. Its other chief places are Se∣villa, seated in the North part of the Isle,Sevilla. once beautified with a Collegiate Church, whose Chief bore the title of Abbot, amongst whom was Peter Mar∣tyr, who described the History of the West Indies by Decades.Mellilla. And Mellilla, seated on the North East, where Columbus mended his Ships at his return from Veragua. This Island was of considerable importance to the Spaniards, by reason that all his Plate-Fleet which comes from Carthagina, steer directly for St. Domin∣go in Hispaniola, and from thence must pass by one of the ends of this Isle to recover Havana, which is the common Rendezvous of this whole Armado, be∣fore it returns home through the Gulph of Florida; nor is there any other way, whereby to miss this Island, because he cannot in any reasonable time turn it up to the windward of Hispaniola; which though with great difficulty it might be performed, yet by this means he would lose the security of his said united Fleet, which meet at Havana, from all the parts of the Bay of Mexico, Nombre de Dios, and elsewhere, accompanying each other home. The Isle Bori∣quem, with its chief places described.BORIQƲEM, is little less either in Circuit, or Fruitfulness than Ja∣maica. St. Juan del Puerto Rico is the Residence of a Bishop, and a Gover∣nor: It hath an excellent Port, which sometimes communicates its name to the Island: El Arricibo, and Guadianilla or St. Germain, are the other Ci∣ties; all the Isle hath few Ports, it is traversed by a Chain of Mountains, which cut it from West to East; here is sound a white Gum, which they use instead of Pitch, to caulk their Ships; and instead of Tallow, to make Candles; and for want of other Medicaments, for Wounds and Sores, besides its Gold, Su∣gars, and Gayac; it hath many Salt-Marches. These four Isles are the grea∣test, and chiefest of the Antilles; the rest are numerous, and ought to be con∣sidered under the names of the Lucays, and Caribes. The Lucays are North of Cuba, and Hispaniola; of which, Lucayon is the chief, the greatest, and the most Northernly of all; Bahama gives its name to the Channel, which is be∣tween
the Isles and Florida; a Channel so rapid, that, in despite of the Winds, it carries Ships from South to North, or rather from South-West, to North-East. Guanahani is the first Land which Columbus discovered near America, and na∣med in St. Salvador, because he had been in danger to have been cast into the Sea by his own men, in the fear they had, that they should find no Land. The CARIBE ISLES. THE CARIBES or CANIBALS ISLANDS, are so called from its Native Inhabitants, who were Canibals or Men eaters, and these are a great Body of Isles forming a Demy-Circle towards America Me∣ridionalis, the chief of which are set down in the Geographical Table, and which I shall take notice of, and first with Barbados. BARBADOS, the most considerable Colony the English are Masters of amongst all the Caribe Isles.Barbados. Its scituation is in the North Latitude of 13 degrees 20 minutes; and although but of a small Circuit, not exceeding eight Leagues in length, and 5 in breadth where broadest, yet it is a Potent Colony, and able on occasion to Arm about 10000 Fighting men,Its strength. which with the natu∣ral strength of the Isle, is able to give resistance to the powerfullest Foe. It is ex∣ceeding fertil, bearing Crops all the year long,Fertility. and the trees always cloathed in their Summer livery, but the two seasons for Planting is in May and Novem∣ber, but the Sugar Canes are Planted all the year round. And here are found to grow in great plenty excellent Fruits, as Oranges both sweet and sower,Fruits.Pomgranates, Citrons, Lemmons, Limes, Macows, Grapes, Juniper Apples, Momins, Acosous, Papayers, Monbains, Icacos, Raysins, Cherries, Cocos, In∣dian Figgs, Plantins, Bonauves, Guavers, Castard Apples, prickle Pears, and Apples, Millons, both land and water, and Pine Apples, the rarest Fruit in the Indies. They have great plenty of Fish and Fowl,Fish and Cattle. common with Ja∣maica and other places in the Indies, and have also a competent stock of En∣glish Cattle, and Horses, but something dear, by reason they imploy their Grounds better than to breed upon; and most roots, herbs, and seeds, and flowers common with us in England are found to thrive, and grow very well. The Commodities that this Isle produceth are Sugars, Indico, Cotton, Wool,Commodities.Ginger, Fustick, and Logwood, but especially, Sugar, Indico, Cotton, and Ginger; lading yearly therewith 200 sail of Ships both great and small, to the great enrichment of the Inhabitants, and profit of England. This Isle lying so near the Equinoctial Line, cannot but be hot, yet not so but that travel and labour is sufferable, and that occasioned by the cool breezes of wind which ri∣seth with the Sun, and bloweth fresher as the Sun mounteth up. And the Air is found very moist, so that all Iron-tools are much subject to rust. This Isle is not over plentifully watered with Rivers, or fresh Springs, there being but one that may appropriate that name, or rather a Lake which runneth not far into the Land, notwithstanding which defect the Inhabitants have no want of water, for the Land lying low, and even, there are several Ponds, and most houses have Wells or Cisterns, which holds the rain water. And here is a River called Tuigh-River, remarkable for that on the top of the water is gathered an Oyl which is made use of to burn in Lamps.Its Trees. Amongst the Trees here growing, (which for the most part are appropriate to the rest of the Cari∣be Isles) those of most note are the Cedar, Redwood, Mastick, Locust, the Iron wood tree, also the Cassia Fistula, Coloquintida, Tamarind, Cassavie, of which is made their Bread, the Poyson tree, and the Physick Nut, also the Calibash, the Shell of whose Fruit serveth like Goards to carry liquid things in; the Mangrass tree, the Roucou, of whose Bark is made Ropes, as also Flax which being spun is imployed to several uses; the Lignum Vitae, and the Palmeto. Here are several Insects and Animals,Its Insects and Animals. as Scorpions as big as Rats, but no waies hurtful, Lizards so harmless that they frequent the hou∣ses,
and love the company of men; Land Crabs in great abundance which are good to eat. Also Muskettoes, Cockroches, and Merrywings, which are very troublesom in the night in stinging. Its Division and Towns.This Isle is severed into Eleven Precincts or Parishes, in which are four∣teen Churches and Chapels; besides many places which may not improperly be called Towns, as composed of a long and spacious street, and beautified with fair houses, and of late years the whole Isle is so taken▪up, that there is no such thing as any wast ground. Its chief Towns are 1. St. Michaels, formerly called the Bridge Town, or Indian Bridge, seated at the bottom of Carlisle Bay which is very deep, capacious, and secure, fit to give Harbour for about 500 Vessels at one time. The Town is large and long, containing several Streets, and graced with above 500 well built Houses. It is very po∣pulous, being the Residence of the Governours, the place of Judicature, and the scale of trade, where most of the Merchants and Factors in the Isle have their store-houses for the negotiation of their affairs, in the supplying the In∣habitants with such Commodities as they have occasion of, in exchange of theirs the product of the Isle. For the security of the Ships here are two strong Forts opposite to each other, with a Platform in the midst which commands the Road, all Fortified with great Guns, &c. 2. Little Bristol formerly Sprights Bay, hath a commodious Road for Ships, which is secured by two powerful Forts, and is a place well resorted unto. 3. St. James hath the con∣veniency of a good Road for Ships, which is well secured by a large Platform and Fortified Breast-works; It is a Town of a good trade, well Inhabited, and the more, as being the place where the Monthly Courts for the Precinct is kept. And 4. Charles Town, seated on Oyster Bay, well secured by two strong Forts with a Platform in the midst; this Town having the ac∣commodation of a weekly Market, and being the place where the Monthly Courts are kept for the Precinct, makes it to be well Inhabited, and frequent∣ed. This Isle is of a great strength as well by Nature as Art,Its strength. being sheltered with Rocks and Shoals, and where it is not thus defended by nature it is forti∣fied with Trenches and Rampiers, with Pallisadoes, Curtains, and Counter∣scarfs, and for its further Defence hath three Forts, one for a Magazine, and the other two for Retreats; they have also a standing Militia, consisting of two Regiments of Horse, and five of Foot; which are alwaies to be ready at beat of Drum,Its Inhabitants. or sound of Trumpet. The Inhabitants of this Isle may be rang∣ed under three sorts, viz. Masters, Christian Servants, and Negro-slaves, which are very numerous. The Masters for the most part live at the height of pleasure. The Servants after the expiration of five years are Freemen of the Isle, and employ their times according to their abilities, and capacities; and the Negro-slaves are never out of Bondage, and the Children they get are likewise perpetual Slaves. These poor creatures, although they have such extream hard usage for Dyet, Apparel, or Lodging, and are held to such hard labour, and so ill treated by their Masters or Overseers, yet are well enough contented with their conditions, and where they meet with kind Masters think nothing too much to do for them, so that it is great inhumanity and pity to wrong them. Every Sunday, (which is the only day of rest to them, and should be set apart for the Service of God) they employ either in getting of the Bark of Trees, and making of Ropes with it, which they truck away for Shirts, Drawers, or other conveniencies, or else spend the day in dancing, wrestling,Isle of St. Chri∣stophers describ∣ed. or other meriments. St. CHRISTOPHERS, so called from Christopher Columbus the first discover thereof, seated in the Latitude of 17 degrees 25 minutes. In Circuit about 75 miles; the soil is light and sandy, and very apt to produce several sorts of Fruits, Provisions, and Commodities, as Sugar, Tobacco, Cotton, Gin∣ger, &c. This Isle by reason of its several great and steep Mountains (in the midst from which spring the Rivers which plentifully water the Land, many of which are hot and sulphurous) with horrid Precipices, and thick Woods, renders it impassable through the midst. On the Sea side is a Salt pit, not far from which is a small Isthmus of Land, which reacheth within a mile and a half
of the Isle of Neivis. This Isle is very delightful, and of a most delectable Pro∣spect, for if the Eye be directed downwards from the top, it hath a prospect of curious Gardens, which gently descend to the Sea side; and in regard of the continual ascent of the Isle, the lower stage or story doth not debar the eye of the pleasant prospect of that which lyeth at a remoter distance; which is termina∣ted by those high Mountains; and that which makes the prospect the more de∣lectable in the several Plantations, are the fair houses covered with glazed Slate. This Isle is divided into four Cantons or Quarters, two of which are possessed by the English, and two by the French, which parts are not so well watered as those of the English, but better for Tillage and not so hilly. The English have two fortified places, one commanding the great Haven, and the o∣ther a descent not far from Point de sable; and the French have four strong Forts, the chief of which Commands the Haven and is called Basse Terre. And for the better security of each other, constant guard at their Forts are kept. In the parts belonging to the English, are five Churches for Divine Worship. The chief place belonging to the French is at Basse-Terre, being a Town of a good bigness, and garnished with well built houses, where the Merchants have their store-houses, and is well Inhabited, here is a large and fair Church, also a pub∣lick Hall for the Administration of Justice, a fair Hospital for sick people, and a stately Castle, which is the residence of the Governor, of a most pleasant scitua∣tion on the foot of a high Mountain not far from the Sea, having spacious Courts, delightful walks, and Gardens. Nieves describ∣ed.NIEVES, or MEVIS not far from St. Christophers as before noted; of a small extent not exceeding 18 miles in Circuit; In the midst of the Isle is a Mountain of a great height, but of an easie access, and well clothed with wood, and about this Mountain are the Plantations which reach to the Sea-shoar. Here are divers springs of fresh water, and one of a hot and Mineral quality, not far from whose Spring head are Baths made, which are much resorted unto. It is indifferent fertil, and hath store of Deer and other Game for Hunting, and is found to produce the same Commodities as the rest of the Caribe Isles. It is a well Governed Colony of the English, and its Inhabitants which are esteemed a∣bout 3 or 4000 live a good quiet and contented life, and free from want of Food, or Rayment; for Divine Worship here are three Churches, and for its security hath a Fort and a publick Store-house. This Isle (as the rest of the Caribe's) is troubled with Muscheto's, Chigos, Murigoins, and other stinging Flies, which are found troublesom to the Inhabitants. ANTEGO, an Isle about 6 or 7 Leagues in length,Antego. and as much in breadth in many places; it is seated in the Latitude of 16 deg. 11 minutes, it hath some few Springs of fresh water, but hath many Cisterns and Ponds for the preserving of Rain water; It is encompassed with Rocks which makes its access dif∣ficult and dangerous. Here are plenty of wild Fowl, and Fish, nor is there any want of tame Cattle. It is in the Possession of the English, but thinly Inhabi∣ted, not exceeding 8 or 900. St. VINCENT, seated in the Latitude of 16 deg. about 20 miles in length,St. Vincent, and 15 in breadth of a fertil soil, yielding abundance of Sugar Canes, which grow naturally without planting; It affords many safe Roads and convenient Bays for Shipping, is well watered, but the English who are Masters of it, have made as yet no great settlement. DOMINICA,Dominica. seated in the Latitude of 15•1 deg. about 12 Leagues in length, and 8 in breadth; It is very Mountainous, but hath fertil Valleys afford∣ing good Tobacco, which is the chief Commodity. It is a Colony of the English, but not considerable. MONTSERAT,Montserat. In the Latitude of 17 deg. a small Isle of about 10 miles in length, and less in breadth, very Mountainous, but interlaced with fertil Val∣leys. It is much Inhabited by the Irish, who have a Church. ANGƲILLA,Anguilla. in the Latitude of 18 deg. 21 min. about 10 Leagues in length, and 3 in breadth: It is a poor beggarly Isle, Possessed by about 2 or 300 English, but said not worth the keeping.
BARBADA,Barbada. in the Lat. 17 ½ degree, an Isle of no great extent, not ex∣ceeding 15 miles in length; of a fertil soil, yet of no account to the English who are Possessors thereof. Sancta Crux.SANCTACRƲX, Inhabited by the French, the Isle is woody and mountainous, and not well provided with fresh waters, and of no considerable note. GƲADALOƲPE,Guadaloupe. about three Leagues in length, possessed by the French, of good Anchorage in most parts of the adjoyning Sea, and of some note for its fresh water, which it furnisheth Ships with in their necessity, to finish their Voyages. GRENADO,Grenado. but a small Isle (being not above six miles in length) in form of a Cressent, the two horns being not above a mile asunder, it is possessed by the French, said to be of a fertil soil, and well clothed with Woods, and hath a commodious Haven. And now I shall be bold to say that Hispaniola, Cuba, and the Neighbouring Isles, answer to the Hesperides of the Antients. All agree that the Hesperides were 40 daies sail from the Gorgades, and the Gorgades only two from the Coast of Africa. The Isles of Cape Verde answer to the Gorgades, as we have made appear in Africa. From these Isles to those of Hispaniola, and Cuba, is at present 25 or 30 daies sail, which may well be 40 of the Antients; and more∣over there is no Isles in the Atlantick Ocean beyond these. And when the Antients place these Hesperides in one Gulph alone, as Capella doth, or in more, as Solinus doth, they seem to mean the Gulph of Mexico, which con∣tains many other lesser. And if Pliny seems to make account but of two Hes∣perides, and others of many more, Pliny understands Hispaniola and Cuba a∣lone, in regard of which the rest are little considerable; Solinus and Capella intend in general the body of these Islands. But let us proceed to America Meridionalis. AMERICA MERIDIONALIS. The degrees of Latitude, and Longitude of America Meri∣onalis.AMERICA MERIDIONALIS is the most Southern part, or Pe∣ninsula of America; which extends it self from about the 12 degree on this side of the Aequator, unto the 54 beyond it, which are 66 degrees of Lati∣tude: and from the 291, or 92, where is Porto Viejo, unto about the 350, where there is Cape St. Augustin, which are 57, or 58 degrees of Longitude. It reaches then from South to North, 1650 Leagues; from West to East, little less than 400. Its bounds on the North and East, are the Mer del Nort: towards the South the Magellanick Sea;Its bounds. And on the West, the Mer del Sud, or Pacifick Sea. Its form approaches near a Triangle, whose sides are almost equal; from Por∣to Viejo to Cape St. Augustin are 1400 Leagues; from Cape St. Augustin, to Cape Freeward in the middle of the streight of Magellan, are 1500 Leagues, and from that Cape to Porto Belo, 1600. Its scituation is for the most part un∣der the Torrid Zone, part under the Antartick temperate Zone; of that which is under the Torrid Zone, the greatest part is beyond the Aequator, the less on this side; so that the greatest part of these people have their seasons contrary to ours: The Coasts of this Country are all known more or less, the Inlands very little. America Meri∣dionalis divi∣ded into parts.AMERICA MERIDIONALIS may be divided into PERUVIANA, and BRASILIANA, subdividing Peruviana into Terra Firma, and Peru; and Brasiliana, into Brasile, and Paraguay; the first division is taken by a line which from the mouth of the Amazona, goes to seek the utmost part of Chili towards the South, and this line divides America Meridionalis into two equal parts; the one belonging almost wholly to the Castilians alone, and the other for the most part to the Portugals: These have their Vice-Roy in St. Salvador, a capital City in the Bay of All-Saints, and almost in the middle of the Coast of Brazile; the o∣ther in Lima, or Los Reyes, that is, the Kings, at present a capital City, and in the middle of the Coast of Peru.
map of Central America
A New Mapp of AMERICA MERIDIONALE Designed by Monsieur Sanson Geographer to the French King, and Rendred Into English and Illustrated by Richard Blome, by his Maiestis Especiall Command London, Printed for Ric Blome
ye Rt Hon Iames Du of Monmouth & Auckland Earle of Doncaster & Dalkeith Baron of Ashdale Tindale & Whichester &c. This Mapp is most humbly Dedicated by Ric Blome
We may yet divide the Terra Firma, into Terra Firma and Guiana; Peru into Peru and Chili; Brazil into the Coast of Brazil, and Main Land of Brazil; Paraguay into Paraguay, and the Magellanick Lands. Of this America Meridionalis, Brazil possesses all that is towards the East; Terra Firma, and Guiana, that which is towards the North; Paraguay and the Magellanick Lands, that which advanceth towards the South; and Peru and Chili are towards the West, in regard of Brazil and Paraguay.Parts posses∣sed by the Castilians. The Casti∣lians possess almost all Terra Firma, nothing at all in Guiana; they hold Peru and Chili between the Andes and Mer del Sud, scarce any thing beyond those Mountains; besides their Vice-Roy, who resides at Lima or Los Reyes, they have established in what they possess, many Archbishopricks, Bishopricks, &c. for the rule of the Church; many Audiences and Seats of Justice, for the Secular and Civil Power; and many Governments for the Militia. The Arch∣bishops and their Suffra∣gans.The Archbishops are those of Lima, in Peru de la Plata, in Los Charcas, and of St. Fe de Bogota, in the new Kingdom of Granada. The Archbishop of Lima hath for Suffragans the Bishops of Cusco, Quito, Arequipa, Truxillo, and Guamanga, all in Peru. The Archbishop de la Plata hath for Suffragans the Bishops of Baranca, or Sancta Crux in La Sierra, Cividad della Pax in Chiquiago, St. Jago del Estero in Cucuman, Buenos Ayres in Rio della Plata, Nostra Sacra del' Assumption in Paraguay, Panama in Terra Firma, or Castilla del Oro, St. Jago del Estremadura, and the Imperial in Chili. The Archbishop of Sancta Fe de Bogota in new Granada; hath for Suffragans the Bishops of Popayan, of Carthagena, and of St. Martha in their Provinces of the same name. In the Diocess of the Archbishops and Bishops are a very great number of Parishes, Chapels of Ease, Monasteries, &c. The Audiences under the Vice-Roy of Peru have formerly been those of Panama in Terra Firma, of Sancta Fe de Bogota, in the new Kingdom of Granada; of Quito and Lima in Peru, de la Plata in Los Charcaes, and de St. Jago de Estremadura in Chili: That of Panama and of Chili subsists no longer, but are reduced into Governments. Of these Governments there are here eleven, viz. Panama, Carthagena, St. Martha, Popayan, the new Kingdom of Granada, los Quixos, Passamoros, los Charcas, Tucuman, Chili, and Rio de la Plata. Peru, wherein are Lima, Quito, and Cusco, is not among these Go∣vernments, but depends immediately on the Vice-Roy. But before we leave America Meridionalis, let us speak a word or two touching that part which is towards Mer del Sud, there is found a great diver∣sity between that near this Sea and that within Land: that which is nearest the Coast is for the most part plain, and above the Plains are many Hills, or rather Mountains; after these Mountains there are other Plains and beautiful Vallies, and then Mountains almost inaccessible, which are those that bound Chili and Peru towards the East. It scarce rains in the Plains, often in the first Moun∣tains, sometimes between the two ranks of Mountains; and snows often be∣tween the two last Mountains: The Soil of the Plains of the first Mountains and of those between the two ranks of Mountains, are fruitful and pleasant; the last are only Rocks, barren, extreamly cold both in Winter and Summer, and almost always covered with Snow. And that which is observable, these Moun∣tains beginning near the Streight of Magellan make two Branches; which one in the sight of the other traverse all the length of America Meridionalis: and so they are in the same Parallel, yet of quality and temperament so different, that each Region hath its Beasts, Grains, and Fruits unlike, nay the Men transported from the one can scarcely live in the other. But let us proceed to its Parts.
TERRA-FIRMA. Terra firma, so called by Chri∣stopher Colum∣bus.UNder the name of TERRA-FIRMA taken in general, we understand that part of AMERICA MERIDIONALIS, most advanced towards the North, and which touches AMERICA SEPTENTRIONALIS by the Isthmus of Panama. This name of Terra-Firma is taken from Christopher Co∣lumbus, not having discovered any but Isles in his first and second voyage; in his third and fourth he made a good part of these Coasts, which judging to be Main Land, that name was given it. Its extent.It extends it self from the Isthmus of Panama, unto the mouth of the Ama∣zon, near 1000 Leagues; its breadth, between the Mer del Nort, and the Estates which are along the Amazon, is not above 200 or 250 Leagues, or little more. This breadth being only the quarter of the length is the cause that we have divided this Terra-Firma into two parts, of which the most Occidental, and the best for the most part belongeth to the King of Spain; the most East∣ern, and the least, is almost all in the hands of the Natives; some Europeans having only settled some Habitations on the coast, and this may be called Gui∣ana; the first is five or six hundred Leagues long, this about four hundred. The Spaniards have established in Terra-Firma, many Governments, viz. those of Panama, Carthagena, Sancta Martha, Rio de la Haches, Venezuela, and of Paria or Nueva Andalouzia, on the Sea Coast of Mer del Nort; those of Popayan, and the new Kingdom of Granada are within Land, or on the Pa∣cifique Sea. The Govern∣ment or Pro∣vince of Pana∣ma described.The Government of PANAMA, and which particularly takes the name of Terra-Firma, is between the North and South Seas, placed in the Isthmus, which joyns the two parts of America together. The Countrey is either low and miery, or mountainous and barren, and therefore very unfit to bear Corn, only some Mayze it yieldeth. Yet here is found good pasturage for Cattle, it is well watered with Rivers, some of which stream down Sand-gold. Its air is very unhealthful, by reason of the great heats and foggs it is subject unto. Its chief places.Its chief places are, 1. Panama, which takes its name from the Province, as the chief, being the residence of the Governour, honoured with a Bishops Sea, which is Suffragan to the Arch-Bishop of Lima, and the Courts of Judicature, and beautified with three fair Monasteries, as also a Colledge of Jesuites. It is seated on the Sea shore, and is a place of great resort. 2. Nombre de Dios once famous, being made the Staple of such commodities as were trucked be∣twixt Peru and Spain, which were brought hither by Sea, and so conveyed by Land to Panama, from whence they were shipped for Peru; and the like was done for those Goods sent from Peru to Spain; but by reason of the un∣healthfulness, as also lying too open to the invasions of the English or other Na∣tions, it was removed to Porto Belo, a place of great strength, built for that purpose by Philip the second, King of Spain, seated on the North Sea, distant from Panama 16 or 20 Leagues, which makes this passage have a great trade between Peru and Mexico. It was once proposed to cut this Isthmus to make a communication between the one and the other Sea, but the Pacifique Sea being found higher then Mer del Nort, this proposition vanished; that the Mer del Sud is higher then that del Nort, may be judged by the eye; the Lake of Nicaragua, the Rivers of Paria or Orinoque, of the Amazones, together with abundance of others, ha∣ving their springs near Mer del Sud, and discharging themselves into that del Nort, after a long course, which could not be but with a great declension. The Isles of Pearls.At the opening of the Gulf of Panama, are the Isles of Pearls once famous; the Pearls of Gubagua, and de la Margarita being at most not above eight or ten Carrats: there was found in these Isles from 25 to 30, both round, oval, and in pairs, all excellent; whereas among the others few were found well formed, or without spot.
Carthagena de∣scribed.CARTHAGENA is a Peninsula joyning to the firm Land by a Caus∣way of 250 Paces, all Sandy. It is a place of great strength, especially since the damage it received by Sir Francis Drake in 1585. Its Port is one of the most famous of America, where the Spanish Fleet that goes to the West Indies by Order puts in here, which makes it be of a great resort, and is become very rich: Its Houses are well built, and beautified with a Cathedral Church and 3 Monasteries. The other Cities of this Government are, St. Jago de los Ca∣valleros, of old, Tolu, worthy of note for the most Sovereign Balsom of all these parts, little Inferiour to that of Egypt. Mopoz, near the confluences of the Rivers of Martha and Magdalens, Sancta Maria, and la Conception. The Air of this Government is moist, scarce healthful, the best is near Tolu; there is brought from these quarters Gold, Long-Pepper, Dragons-Blood,Its Commodi∣ties and Trade excellent Balm, Emeralds, and Slaves. St. Martha de∣scribed, with its Fruits, Commodities, &c.SANCTA MARTHA, so called from its chief City, is a Country unfit for tillage, being Mountainous and barren, yet some they have; it yields good Fruits, and hath Gold, Saphirs, Emeralds, Jaspar, Cassidoins, Brazil-wood: and the Sea yields Pearls. The Air in the Mid-land parts, by reason of the vicinity of Mountains, which are always covered with Snow, is very cold, and on the Sea-Coasts as hot and scorching. Its chief places are,Its chief pla∣ces. 1. St. Martha, scituate on the Sea-shoar, neighboured by a convenient and safe Haven, which is defended from the fury of the Winds by an high Mountain near unto it; it is honoured with an Episcopal See, but still laments the Ruins it suffered from the English by Sir Francis Drake and Sir Anthony Shirley, in Anno 1595 and 96. 2. Teneriff, seated on the Banks of the River Magdalen. 3. Tamalameque, by the Spaniards called Villa de los Palmas. 4. Los Reyes, scituate in the Vale of Ʋpar, on the Banks of a rapid and deep River called Guatapori. 5. La Ramada or Salamanca, seated in the same Vale of Ʋpar, about which are se∣veral Veins of Brass. And, 6. Ocanna, or St. Anna, seated on the River Cesar. Among the Governments of America Meridionalis, those of Rio de la Hacha, of Venezuela, and of Paria, are of the Audience of St. Domingo in the Isle of Hispaniola, which is of America Septentrionalis, yet their scituation makes us describe them here. Rio de la Ha∣cha described, with its Com∣modities.RIO DE LA HACHA is East of St. Martha, of whose Bishoprick it depends. This Government hath only the City of Nuestra Sennora de la Nieves, or de los Remedios, and sometimes also Rio de la Hacha. It yields Gold, precious Stones, Salt, and its Soil is fertil. Venezuela de∣scribed.VENEZƲELA had its name so given, for its being built on many little Isles, and in a Lake, as Venice is. Its Air is sweet and healthful, and the Soil so fertil in all sorts of Grain and Fruits, and so well stocked with Cattle, that it is termed by other Countries a Granary, as indeed they find it so, it supplying their wants. It is well watered with Rivers; here is also wild Beasts for hunting; and in the bowels of its Earth are rich Mines of Gold and other Metals. The other Cities are Nuestra Sennora de Carvalleda, seated upon the Sea, but its Haven is very unsafe; nigh to this City there are Hills whose tops are said for height to equalize those of Teneriff. St. Jago de Leon, Valenza la Nueva, Xeres la Nueva, Segovia la Nueva, Tucuyo, and Nuestra Sennora della Pax. Segovia la Nueva is more advanced towards the Barbarian peo∣ple of any, its Soil is lean, but in recompence feeds many Cattle and Venison. The Lake of Maraycabo, near 100 Leagues circuit, is esteemed in this Pro∣vince. Paria descri∣bed.PARIA, or New Andalusia, is on the River Paria or Orinoque, and is likewise called Serpa and Comana from the name of its principal City, which they call Nueva Cordova: They fish many Pearls along this Coast, before which are the Isles of Cubago, Margarita, and the Trinity or Trinidado, for∣merly so famous for this fishing. These Isles are very barren, scarce affording sustenance for its Inhabitants, which defect is supplied from the adjacent Countries, which made the Spaniards abandon them so soon as the said Fish∣ing left them.
The Governments of POPAYAN,Popayan de∣sribed. and the New Kingdom of Granada, are towards Peru; that of Popayan is divided into two parts, the one an∣swering to the Chamber of the new Kingdom of Granada, the other to that of Quito or Peru. The Air of all Popayan is generally healthful, and very fresh by reason of the Mountains. The Land is more proper for Fruits and Pasture, than for Grains; and, as in all the neighbouring Countries, here are likewise many Mines of Gold and other Metals. The Cities of Popayan, which answer to the new Kingdom of Granada,Its Cities. are five, but have formerly been ten; Sancta Fe de Antequera, Calamanta; Arma, Sancta Anna de An∣zerma, and Cartago; all upon or near the River of Sancta Martha: the other five were Antioquia, St. Sebastian de la Plata, St. Vincent de los Payezes, Neyva, and Villa de los Angelos. The first was transported to Sancta Fe de Antequera, the others abandoned by reason of the continual Wars made upon them by the Paezes, Pixos, and Manipa's, who could not be tamed. The Cities of the Government of Popayan,Other Cities in Popayan. which answer to the Chamber of Quito, are nine. Popayan, which hath its name common with the name of the Country, seated on a pleasant River in the midst of a rich Plain, being the residence of the Governour, as also the See of a Bishop, and adorned with a Cathedral and a Monastery of Fryars. Cali, seated at the Foot of a high Mountain on the Banks of a River, and Almanguer on the sides of a plain, but barren Mountain. Timana, St. Juan de Truxillo, and Guadalajara, of Buga advance towards the East. Madrigal, otherwise Chapanchica, St. Juan de Pasto, and Agreda, or Malaga towards the West, and approaching near the Mer del Sud. Granada, with its Cities de∣scribed.The new Kingdom of GRANADA lies almost all along the River Mag∣delane, and from its Springs to the middle of its course, are found a great many Cities, as Sancta Fe de Bogata, the Metropolis of this Kingdom of Granada, the residence of the Governour, and the See of an Archbishop; a City well inhabited by Spaniards, as well as the Natives. St. Michael, de Sancta Fe, about 12 Leagues from Sancta Fe de Bogata. Tocayma, seated on the Banks of the River Pati. La Palma de los Colimas, a Town built by the Spaniards. Tunia, built on the top of a Hill, being now a place of great strength, serving for a Fortress against the Savages; it is also a wealthy Town, enjoying a good Trade. La Trinidad de los Musos, seated on a River, of some note by reason of the Veins of Chrystal, Emeralds, and Adamants, that are in its adjacent Fields. St. John de los Linos, seated in a corner full of Veins of Gold, also Velez, Ybagua, Mariquita, and Nuestra Sennora de los Remedios, and these four last are on the left hand of the River, the other seven on the right. Distant from this River, and between the Governments of Sancta Martha, and Vene∣zuela, are likewise Pampelona, rich in Mines of Gold, Cattle, and Herbs. Merida and St. Christopher: Tudela, between la Trinidad and la Palma hath ben transported to St. John de los Lianos. Gonzalo Xime∣nes, and Ferdi∣nand Cortiz, gained great Riches out of these parts.n 1536 Gonzalo Ximenes over-run a great part of this new Kingdom of Granada, and made booty of about 250000 Pezo's of Gold, of which near 200000 were exceeding pure; and besides the Gold 1800 Emeralds of divers sizes. In another Incursion made by Ferdinand Cortez into these quarters, were found five Emeralds of a vast price. They were cut into divers fashions; one into the form of a Fish, another into a Bugle or small Horn, a third into a little Bird, a fourth into a Bell, whose Clapper was a large Pearl, fashioned like a Pear, and the last into a Cup; for which alone a Genouese Lapidary prof∣fered 40000 Ducats, with hopes of gaining great profit by it. Many rich Mines of Gold, Silver, and o∣ther Metals.The Air of this Government inclines to Heat, the Valleys have Grains and Pastures, but no Wine; the Mountains have many rich Mines of Gold and other Metals; the Silver Mines of St. Agatha are rich, those de los Remedios have store of Gold, and there are 12 or 15000 Negroes which labour in them. Those of Musos near la Trinity, and those of Pampilona, St. Christopher, and Merida, are likewise of some esteem; but above all, the Mine of Emeralds near la Trinity, where there is a Rock full.
GƲIANA, taken in general, comprehends all that is found between the Rivers of Orinoque and of the Amazons; from the Mountains which are a∣bove the Lake of Parima unto the Mer del Nort. These Mountains towards the South divide it from what is above the River of Amazons: Orinoque di∣vides it from Terra-Firma, or New Andalousia, on the West, and the River of Amazons from Brazil on the East. The length of this Guiana is near 400 Leagues, the breadth 150, and in some places 200;The length and breadth of uiana. and if we would divide Guiana into Guiana and Caribane, this last would possess all the Coast, and Guiana the parts within Land. The Coast hath at divers times been fre∣quented by the Spaniards, English, Hollanders, and French, who have all en∣deavoured to establish some Colonies, what in one place, what in another, and all with design to have commerce with those within the Country, where they hope to find a new Peru: I mean the Kingdom of Manoa, or El Dorado, which they esteem very rich in Gold.Rivers in Guiana, with their Springs, Cata∣racts, length and breadth. The Essequebe. And they have observed exactly the Rivers, Gulphs, and Capes, which present themselves on this Coast. Among these Rivers the fairest and greatest are, Essequebe, Brebice, Corretine, Marru∣vine, Cayanna, the Aparuvaca or Cape Ruvaca, and the Viapoco. The Spring of the Essequebe, according to the report of its Inhabitants, is not above a days journey distant from the famous Lake of Parima, and thence takes its course for 20 days journey to the Sea, into which it discharges it self. It is interrupted by divers Cataracts, which hinders its being navigable for any considerable way, which causes the Inland Country not to be so perfectly discovered, as it might be were it otherwise.The Brebice and Corretine. The Brebice and Corretine have little less course than the Essequebe, and no fewer Cataracts; the last hath its Mouth to the Sea very large, but not deep.The Maruvine. The Marruvine is no less than 4 or 5000 Geome∣trical Paces broad at its Mouth, and the length of its course is esteemed to be 30 or 40 days journey. The English, who have mounted this River farther than any others, have observed abundance of Rivers which lose themselves in it; and say, that here is found the Sensitive Plant or Herb, which hath this natural property, to close if never so little touched; and to shut up its Flowers and fade if the least sprig be took from it, not opening its Leaves till a good while after. All these Rivers, for the most part, have their Cataracts under the same Parallel, within 4 or 5 degrees of Latitude on this side the Equator, which may make us judge that there is some ridge of Mountains, or at least a continued Eminence, which makes these Countries within Land, of a higher scituation than those Parts neighboured by the Sea.Cayanna.Cayanna hath likewise in it those Mountains which are near the Lake of Parima; and from its Spring to the Sea, is no less than 100 Leagues in a strait line, and twice as much ac∣cording to its course: It embraces an Isle where the French have endeavoured to settle a Colony, which in time may come to good effect.The ApuruvacaApuruvaca or Caperuvaca hath a longer course than Cayanna: It forms a great Lake not far from its Spring, and embraces an Island near its Mouth. When Harcourt, an Englishman, was on this River, he found many People, and those much diffe∣rent from one another. Keymish, another Englishman, who was with the worthy Sir Walter Rawleigh, who took so much pains to find out the King∣dom of Manoa, assures us, that in his time they could find no such People; which makes it appear, that these People are sometimes on one Coast, and sometimes on another. There are here found Paroquetto's, and other very rare and beautiful Birds, with pretty Apes and Monkies.The Viapoco.Viapoco hath a longer course than the Cayanna, a shorter than the Apuruvaca; and like all the others of this Coast, suffers a fall 18 or 20 Leagues from the Sea, where it disburthens it self with other Rivers into a little Gusph of 7 or 8 Leagues wide, leaving on the Right hand Cape de Condi, or d'Orange. There is found along this River Tobacco, Canes from which Sugar may be extracted, and Shrubs which yield Cotton: and amongst the Beasts they have Stags, wild Boars, tame Swine, and Beeves which have no Horns, &c. But let us speak a word or two of the temperament and quality of the Soil of these Quarters, in which there is something extraordinary.
It is true that Guiana is under,The scituation of Guiana. or very near the Aequator; that part which stretches most within Land, and the nearest to the Amazons, is under the E∣quator: from that line the Coast stretches on this side unto the 8th degree of Latitude; yet the greatest part of this Coast lies under the 4th, 5th, 6th and 7th of these degrees, which is almost in the middle of the Torrid Zone, and consequently seems to be in a Climate extreamly hot. But the Eastern-winds, which do almost continually blow upon the Coast, the Nights being equal with the Days, the large Rivers which refresh and water the Country, the great Dews which fall, the height of their Mountains, the thickness of their For∣rests, &c. yield such refreshments as renders this Country one of the most plea∣sant, and would be made (were it cultivated) one of the best and richest Coun∣tries in all America: They have two Summers and two Winters, their Sum∣mers during the Aequinoxes, and their Winters during the Solstices; and to speak truth, they have always either Spring or Autumn, their Flowers being always in their beauty, the Trees always in their verdure, and their Fruits fit to gather all the yearlong. The Air is so temperate and healthful, that those of the Country live commonly 100 or 120 years, sometimes 150, without being subject to any disease or sickness.The fertility of the Coun∣try. Provisions cost almost nothing, all sorts of Game being had for only hunting; all sorts of Fish are here very plentiful: They have several rich Commodities, as Cotton, Cotton-Thread, and Hamacks or Beds of Cotton, China-wood, green Ebony, white and red Saunders, Dyers∣stood, Brazil, Medicinal Oils, Jallop, Salsaparilla, Turbith, Gayac, Gomme∣gutte, Gum-Arabick, Gum-Eleni; a Balm excellent against the Gout, Tor∣quesses, Emeralds, Stag-skins, Tigers, Otters, and black Foxes; grains of Musk taken from Lizards, Munkeys, Apes and Tamarins, a little Beast of pleasure so beautiful and joyful that one alone hath been sold for 500 Crowns. The Americans themselves loving to play with them, and putting about their Necks collars of Pearls, and Pendants of Stones in their Ears. In the bowels of its Earth are Mines of Copper, Tin, Lead, and Iron, which are very rare in America; and to all appearance there are Mines of Gold and Silver; here is also Roch-Alum, Chrystal of the Rock, Azure, and likewise Dragons Blood, &c. That part of Guiana most advanced within Land, and which retains parti∣cularly the name of Guiana, is very little known; yet here should be the King∣dom and City of Manoa or El Dorado, of which some have formerly made such account; but not being found at present, is by most believed Imaginary. The AMAZONE. THE River AMAZONE is the greatest and swiftest, either in the one or other part of America, and it may be said the largest of both Conti∣nents: From its Springs to its disburthenings into the Sea is 8 or 900 Leagues in a strait line, and according to its course 11 or 1200; it receives, both on the Right and Left, abundance of Rivers, of which some have 100, 200, 300, others 4, 5, or 600 Leagues course. All the Amazon is inhabited by abundance of Peo∣ple,The Amazon inhabited by abundance of People. less barbarous than those of Brazil, nor yet so much civilized as those of Peru were: They eat not one another, for by their Hunting, Fishing, Fruits, Corn and Roots, they are furnished with what is needful either for Meat or Drink: they have some Idols particular to them, but pay them no adoration, contenting themselves to expose them to publick view when they enterprize any Affair.Its beginning, Springs and Mouths. The breadth of its Channel. The Amazon begins at the Foot of the Cordillier Mountains, 8 or 10 Leagues from Quito in Peru, pressing forward its streams from West to East: Its Springs and its Mouths are under or near the Aequator. The breadth of its Channel from Junta de los Rios, which is 60 and odd Leagues from its Springs unto Maranhon, is of one or two Leagues, and below Maranhon, two, three, or four, enlarging still as it approacheth the Sea, where it makes an opening of 50 or 60 Leagues between the Capes de Nort and Zaparare;
this on the Coast of Brazile, the other on the Coast of Guiana: Its depth like∣wise from Junta los Rios unto Maranhon is at least 5 or 6 Fathom, in some places 8 or 10; from Maranhon unto Rio Negro, 10, 15 or 20, and from Rio Negro to the Sea 30, 40, 50, and sometimes much more. The course of the Amazon en∣deavoured to be found out by Prancis Oril∣hant, Pedro de Orsua, and o∣thers, with the adventures & mis-fortunes, which befel them.One Francis Orilhane was the first that took any pains to know the course of this River. In 1540 he transported himself to Junta de los Rios, where he caused to be built a Vessel proper to descend this River to the Sea: In 1541 he imbarqued himself with some Souldiers, had divers encounters in the way, but about the end of August he found the Sea, after which he hasted to Spain to make this discovery known unto the King. In 1549 he returned from Spain to the Amazone, where after his spending a long time upon the great Sea, being sometimes beaten to and fro by the impetuosity of the winds which caused great storms, then retained as long by calms, which together with the loss of a great many of his men, at length he entred into its mouth; yet after all these la∣bours and miseries, he was so unhappy, that not finding the true channel to re∣mount the Amazone, he died with grief; having gained nothing for all his tra∣vel, labour and expence, but the honour that some give his name to the River, calling it Orelhane. After Francis Orelhane, the Amazone was let a∣lone for a good continuance of time. In 1560 those of Lima in Peru, tried it another way; they caused some to embark on the River of Xauxa, otherwise of Maranhon, which begins in Peru, below Guanuca, and about 150 Leagues from Lima, passes within 30 or 40 of Cusco, and by a course of 5 or 600 Leagues descends into the Amazon, which hath scarce made 300 at this meeting, yet is found the large; this voyage was likewise unhappy; for Pedro de Orsua Chief of this expedition was slain by his own men, and Lopez de Aguyre chief of the sedition, finished to descend to the Sea by the Orinoque, and land∣ed at La Trinity, where he was arrested, and chastised for his felony. In 1566 those of Cusco tried again the discovery of the Amazone by the Amarumaye, which could not succeed, there being two competitors for this expedition; who made war, fought, and weakned each other in such manner, that there remain∣ed but a few to be knockt on the head by the Chonchis: Maldonado one of the Chiefs of this expedition, together with two Fryers escaped and brought the news; after this of Maldonado no more discovery of the Amazon was attempt∣ed till 60 or 70 years after. In 1635 Jean de Palacios reattempted this design, transporting himself, with some others to Annete, to see with what means he might serve himself to make this voyage; but in 1636 he was killed, and the greatest part of his men returned; but two Friers and 5 or 6 Souldiers, put themselves into a Skiff, with a resolution to descend the River, and in the end arrived at Para, the chief Colonie of Brazile under the Crown of Portugal, where they told the news to Piedro Texeira, Captain Major of Para.Texeira happy in the discove∣ry of the course of the Amazone. Though Brazile was then in arms against the Hollanders, yet Texeira forbore not to equip 47 Barques caused to be embarqued in them 70 Portugals, with 1200 Indians, who knew how to manage Armes; and likewise 800 Boyes and Wo∣men to serve them; with these he departed in October 1637. remounted the River, and was so happy, that he finished his voyage even to Peru, left a part of his men there, where the River Chevelus falls into the Amazone; the rest he left at Junta de los Rios, except himself, with some few persons which came to Quito; where he made his report in September, 1638. The news being brought to Lima to the Count of Chinchon, Vice-Roy of Peru, he gave order to furnish them with all things necessary for their return; and that the Father Christopher de Acogne, a Jesuite, and his companion should go with them to carry the news to Spain. They parted from Peru in February 1639 and ar∣rived at Pera in December following, and soon after Father Christopher de Acogne carried the news to Spain, arriving there in 1640. and exposed his re∣lation to publick view.
These two last Voyages of Texeira mounting and descending the River, have given us a more ample and true knowledge of the Amazon than all those before him could do; and according to their report, all the Regions which are about the Amazon enjoy a temperate Air. The Eastern Winds which blow all day, the Nights equal to the Days, the annual Inundations like to those of the Nile, the great quantity of Trees and Forrests, which are upon or near the River, yield much refreshment, and keeps them from being troubled with thou∣sands of ugly Insects, which they are pestred with at Peru and Brazil. They say, that the Leaves and Fruits of the Trees, the verdure of their Herbs, and the beauty of their Flowers, gives great delight to the Inhabitants all the year long.The Country very fertil. The Country (by reason of the Inundation of the River) is very fertil in Grains, hath rich Pastures, and their Fruits, Plants and Roots are in great plenty, and may compare with any Country in all America; their Ri∣vers and Lakes are well stored with Fish, among others the Sea-Calf and Tortoise are very large and delicate. The Country is well cloathed with Woods, some Trees being 5 or 6 Fathom about, and along the River may be built as great Ships as any that swim on the Ocean. Their Ebony and Brazil is grown to an inexhaustible quantity; they have great store of Cacoa and Tobacco, plenty of Sugar-Canes, which they might easily husband, and abundance of other Commodities, without having regard to Gold, Silver, and other Metals which are found there. Abundance of different Na∣tions along the Amazon.They have abundance of different Nations upon and about the Amazon; the most part of these Nations so well peopled, and their Villages so thick, that the last House of the one may easily hear the noise made in the first House of the other. Of these People, the Homagues are esteemed for their Manufa∣ctures of Cotton-Cloth: the Corosipares for their Earthen Vessels: the Surines for their Joyners-work: the Topinamubes for their Power. The Bow and Javelin being their general and common Arms. Rivers that fall into the Amazon.Among the Ravers that fall into the Amazon, the Napo, the Agaric, the Putomaye, the Jenupape, and the Coropatube, and with some others, have their Sands mixt with Gold; below Coropatube there are divers Mines of Gold in the Mountains of Yaguare, Mines of Silver in that of Picory, and of divers Stones in that of Paragoche, and of Sulphur in many others. The Amazo∣nian Women.As for the Amazonian Women, and their Kingdom, from whence it is pre∣tended this River took its name, many accounts have been made, and divers Relations given of it to Quito, Cusco, and other places; and possibly those of the Country would have frighted the Castilians and Portugals which have been on this River. But it is no otherwise, than that the Inhabitants of the Country being in Arms, there hath sometimes been some Women so couragious, as to be in their party; but there never was a whole Country or Kingdom of these Women. And in fine, they seek them so far within the Country, that they cannot be on the Amazon: so those may turn to a Fable, as well as those which the Greeks have formerly recounted to us of such Wonders.
PERU∣VIANE where there shall be TERRA FIRMA, whose Governments or Provinces, with their chief places are those of PANAMA Panama. Nembre de dios. Darien. CARTHAGENA Cartagen. Mo Sancta Maria. la Conception. St. MARTHA St. Martha. Teneriff. Tamalameque. Los Reys. RIO de la HACHA Occanna. Rio de la Hacha. Rancheria. VENEZULA Venezula. Nos. signo. de Carvalleda. St. Jago de Leon. Nueve Xeres. Valenza la Nueve. Segovia la Neuve. Tucuyo. Truxillo. New ANDALUSIA Comana. Corduba. Maurenabi. PARIA Macureguara: Catetios. Orinaque, OARIBES Taupuramunen. Mreshego. GUIANA Macurewaraj. Manoa del dorade. POPAYAN Sancta Fee de Antiochi. Calamanta. Arma. Anzerma. Carrago. Popayan. Almangher. Timana. Truxillo. Guadalajara. St. John de Pasto. GRANADA Sancto Fee de bogata. St. Michael. Tocayma. Tunia. Trinadad. St. John de los lanos. Velez. Mariquita. PERU, with its Audiences of QUI TO with its Provinces of PERU Quito. Rio bamba. Porto Viejo. Guayaquil. Cuenca. Lox. Zamora. Yaen. St. Michael. de los QUIX∣OS, Baesa. Archidona. Avila. Sevilla del Oro. PAZAMO∣ROS, Loyola. Valadolid. St. Jago de las Montane. LIMA, whose chief places are Lima. Cusco. Arequipa. Valverde. Arnedo. Leon de Guanuco. la Parsilla. Truxillo, Miroflores. Cachapoyas. De la PLATA, whose chief places are, de la Plata. Potossi. Oropesa. Sancta Crux de la Sierra. The Country of the AMAZONS, or the people Inhabiting by the River AMAZONE, which are many, and of sundry sorts. CHILI, whose parts of Jurisdictions take their names from their chief Cities in each part, as those of Copiapo. Conception. l'Imperial. Villa Rica. Valdivia. Osorno. Caftro. St. Jago. Serena. de la Frontera. MAGELLANICK LAND St. Phillip. de la Guadero. TERRA DEL FUGO, or the ISLAND of MAGEL∣LAND,
PERU. The greatness of Peru.PERƲ is an Empire or Kingdom, so rich, and great, that all America Meridionalis, or at least the half of that America, sometimes takes the name of Peruviana, Peru, taken more precisely, extends it self, more or less, according to the diversity of Authors: It is for the most part be∣tween the Equinoctial Line, and the Tropick of Capricorn, where it hath more then 600 Leagues length; and if we add the Part of Popayan, which is on this side the Line, and which depends on the Chamber of Quito, in Peru; and that part of Tucuman, which is beyond the Tropick of Capricorn, and which depends on the Chamber de la Plata,Its length and breadth. in Peru; its length will not be much less than a 1000 Leagues. Its breadth is likewise very diverse, esteeming what the Spa∣niards more absolutely possess. Its breadth will not be above one hundred, or sometimes two or three hundred Leagues; if we add all the Estates that lie upon the Amazon, unto the Confines of Brazile, we may make account of 6 or 700 Leagues of breadth. According to some Authors, this Country is divi∣ded into three Parts, and all different from one another; which Parts are, the Hill-Countries, the Andes, and the Plains. The Hill-Countries are twenty Leagues broad,The parts of Peru are three, and all diffe∣rent from one another, as well in fertili∣ty, as other∣wise. at the narrowest; the Andes, as much; and the Plains, Ten Leagues, and something more; and each part extends it self the whole length of the Country. The Hill Countries are bare and naked; the Andes well cloathed with Woods and Forrests; and the Plains, well furnished with Rivers, together with the benefit of the Sea; yet, in many places, the earth is sandy and dry, which makes it unfit for Grains, or Fruits. In the Hill-Countries, their Summer beginneth in April, and endeth in September, during which time they have fair weather; and from September to April, which is their. Winter, it raineth: This Part is much subject to Winds, which it receiveth from the Coast, which bringeth a difference in the weather; some Winds bringing Snow, others Thunder, others Rain, and others Fair Weather; and where there fal∣leth but little Rain, it is observed to be the more Fertil in Corn and Fruits. On the Andes, it is said to rain continually; whereas, in the Plains, seldom, or ne∣ver; and their Summer beginneth in October, and endeth in April; so that when it is Summer here, it is Winter with those in the Hill-Countries; And its observed, that a man, in one daies journey, may see Summer and Winter, so that at his setting forth he may be in a manner frozen, and before night scorched with heat. Peru by the Spaniards di∣vided into three Audien∣ces, in which are several Provinces.That part of Peru, best known, and on the Mer del Sud, hath been by the Spaniards divided into three Audiences, viz, Quito, Lima, and De la Plata: That of Quito is the most Northern; that of De la Plata the most Southern; and that of Lima, in the middle; and each of these Audiences hath divers Pro∣vinces. Quito holds part of Popayan, part of the true Peru, Los Quixos, or La Canela, Pazamoros or Gualsongo, and likewise St. Juan de las Salinas. That of Lima, holds the true Peru, where there were several Provinces, which the name of Peru hath swallowed up. And the Audience De la Plata holds the Provinces of Tucuman, and De los Charcas, and these Provinces comprehend a∣boundance of other lesser ones, the knowledge of which is little necessary.
The Audience of Quito de∣scribed. Its chief Ci∣ties.The Audience of Quito is about the Equinoctial Line, and is 2 or 300 Leagues long, and large. The Quarter of Popayan, subject to this Chamber, hath the Cities of Popayan, Cali, Timana, and others, which we have already treated of, with Popayan, in Terra Firma. The Quarter of Peru, subject to Quito, hath the Cities of, 1. St. Francisco del Quito, or simply Quito; once one of the principal Cities the Ynca's of Peru, being the Regal Seat of their Kings, where they had a magnificent Palace. Its Streets are strait, broad, and well ordered, and its Houses well built; is adorned with a fair Cathedral Church, two Convents of Dominican and Franciscan Friars, as also with the Courts of Judicature: once very large, but at present, it hath not above Five hundred Houses of natural Spaniards, Two or three thousand Houses Inhabit∣ed by the Natives; and in its Territory near a hundred Villages, where the Natives also reside; since the Spaniards became Masters of Peru, they have made this a place of good strength, being well Fortified, and as well stored with Ammunition. 2. Rio Bamba, of no note, except for its ancient Pa∣lace of the Kings of Peru. 3. Cuenca, seated in a Country well stored with Mines of Gold, Silver, Brass, and Veins of Sulphur. 4. Loxa, seated in a sweet and pleasant Valley, between two Rivers, the Inhabitants are well fur∣nished with Horses and Armour, which is the chiefest part of their Wealth. 5. St. Michael de Piura, of no great account, except it be for its being the first Co∣lony which the Spaniards planted 6. Peru. in St. Jago de Guayaquil, of some note; seated near the influx of the River Guayaquill, at the bottom of an Arm of the Sea. 7. Castro de Vili, another Colony of Spaniards. 8. Porto Viejo, seated not far from the Sea-shore, but of no account, by reason of the badness of its air; its Port-Town is Mantu, nigh to which is a rich Vein of Emeralds. 9. Juan. And 10. Zamora de los Arcaides, both so called in reference to two Cities of those names in Spain; and these are the Cities, or Colonies, which the Spaniards possess in the Audience of Quito, which have been established, at divers times, and not long after the Conquest of Peru. The fertility of the Country. Mines of Gold, Silver, and other Metals.The air of the Country is sufficiently temperate, though under the Line, it is Fertil in Grains and Fruits, well stored with Cattle especially with Sheep; and also plentifully furnished both with Fish and Fowl; but the Fer∣tility of the Country is most seen about, or near Quito, and Porto Viejo; near Lona and Camora are Mines of Gold, near Cuenca, Mines of Silver, Quick∣silver, Copper and Iron: Near Porto Viejo, Mines of Emeralds, and about Guay∣aquil is found Salsaparilla. The Province de los Quixos.The Province or Country, DE LOS QƲIXOS, otherwise de la Canella, is Eastward of Quito: Its chief Cities are, 1. Baesa, built in 1559 by Giles Ramirez de Avila, Eastward of Quito about eighteen Leagues, now the Residence of the Governour. 2. Archidona, twenty Leagues, South-Eastwards of Baeza. 3. Avila, so called in reference to Rimerez de Avila; and 4. Sevilla del Oro, all Colonies of Spaiards: The Coun∣try is Mountainous, rude, and unfertil; yet produceth a Cinnamon-Tree, which pruned, the tree, bark, and leaves are Cinnamon; but the Fruit is by much the best, and most perfect. The Province of Paramoros.PAZAMOROS, South of de la Canella, hath three Cities, or Colo∣nies of Spaniards, viz. 1. St. Juan de las Salinas, or Valladolid; 2. Loy∣ola, or Cambinama; And 3. St. Jago de las Montannas: The Air of the Country is said to be healthful, the soil indifferent fruitful, and feeds many Cattle; and also abounds in Mines of Gold. Los Quixos, and Paza∣moras depend as to their Spiritual Government on the Bishop of Quito. The Audience of Lima.The Audience of LIMA, is at present most famous of all, by reason of the Cities of Lima and Cusco; this having been formerly the Metropolis of the Empire of the Ynca's, and the other being the present Residence of the Vice-Roy of Peru; and this Audience comprehends the true Peru; the chief depending Cities, besides Lima and Cusco, are, 1. Arnedo, seated in a Val∣ley among Vineyards. 2. La Santa, or la Parsilla, seated in a Valley, nigh to which are rich Mines of Silver. 3. Truxillo, scituate on the Bank of a small, but pleasant River, about two Leagues from the Sea, where it hath a large, but
unsafe Haven, and in a pleasant Valley; the Town indifferently well built and large, and beautified with four Convents of several Orders. 4. Miraflores, a∣bout 5 Leagues from the Sea, in the valley of Zanu, of some note for the abun∣dance of Sugar Ganes that grow there. 5. Cachapoyas, or St. Juan de la Frontiera, of good account in former times for furnishing the Kings of Peru with handsom women. 6. Leon du Guanuco, rich and pleasantly seated, and beautified with some Religious Houses, a Colledge of Jesuits, and in former time with a stately Palace of the Kings. 7. Areguipa scituate at the foot of a flaming Mountain, in the valley of Quilca, made happy by a flourishing soil, and temperate air. 8 Valverde seated in a valley of the same name, which yields plenty of Vines, from which they make good Wine; the Town is indifferent large, being Inhabited by about 500 Spaniards besides Natives; and beautified with a fair Church,The City Li∣ma pleasantly seated. an Hospital, and three Fryeries. The City of Lima is two Leagues long, and one broad, seated in a pleasant valley, being begirt with sweet Fields and delightful Gardens, below which is its Port Collao. The Houses in this City are well built,Its Houses, Streets, &c. its streets large, and so ordered that most of the chief take their rise from the Market-place; It is said to consist of 10000 or∣dinary Families, besides Passengers, and those that come hither for trade, which are many, by reason the riches of Peru that yearly pass through this City to go to Spain, which hath not a little encreased its wealth. The City encloses several fair Edifices and Churches,Hath many stately Edi∣fices. among which these following may not be forgotten: viz. The Palaces of the Vice-Roy and Archbishop, then the Cathe∣dral Church built after the Model of that of Sevil in Spain, and endowed with an Annual Revenue of 30000 Ducats, also the Courts of Judicature, the Colled∣ges and Monasteries; also its four Hospitals, to wit, one for the Clergy, ano∣ther for the Spaniards, a third for the Indians, and the fourth for the Wid∣dows: The air about this City is healthful, temperate, alwaies serene, and the soil the most fertil of all Peru. The City of Cusco, with its several magni∣ficent Places, and other Buildings.Among the other Cities Cusco is the chief among those of the Provinces of the Hill-Countries, and the Andes, being by much the most famous; having been the Residence of the Ynca's, or Peruvian Kings, who for the more beautifying this City ordered all their Nobility to build each of them a Palace for their Re∣sidence; at present it is of the greatest account in all this Country, as well for its beauty and greatness, as for its populousness, being said to be the habitation of about 3000 Spaniards, and 10000 Natives; besides Women and Children. Be∣sides these Palaces, It is adorned with a Cathedral, and 8 Parish Churches, four Convents of Religious Orders, a Colledge of Jesuits, a stately Temple dedicated to the Sun, also several Baths about the City, and abundance of very fair Hou∣ses, in the fields. Its scituation is betwixt two pleasant and useful Rivers; and begirt with Mountains. Its Fertility.The Country for the most part is fruitful, they have good pastures, which are well stocked with Cattle, they gather abundance of Coca, have excellent Venison, and the Country generally well furnished with Rivers, in which they take good Fish.Hath Mines of Gold and Silver. It yields many Mines of Gold and Silver about Cusco, and particularly of Gold at St. Juan del oro, at Oropesa Vermillion; and Quicksilver, between Arnedo, and Port de Guajara, and likewise at Barranca are rich salt pits. The Inhabitants of Guanuco, and of Chachapoyas, are the most civilized of Peru. There are yet every where a great number of these Indians, there be∣ing esteemed under the jurisdiction of Truxillo, 50000 Tributaries, 30000 in that of Guanuco, as many in Guamanga, 50000 in that of Arequipa, and 100000 in the jurisdiction of Cusco, &c. There are likewise others who yield no obedi∣ence to the Spaniards, among which are the Manatiens not far from Cusco, who maintain themselves in their Mountains; who often butcher and eat those Spa∣niards they can entrap. The Province de la Plata, with its Cities described.The Province DE LA PLATA, or de los Chaecas, is South of Peru, and under the Tropick of Capricorn. It is divided into two or three other lesser parts, to wit, de los Charcas, de la Sierra, and of Tucuman, This last is quite beyond the Tropick, and we will describe it with Paraguay, or Rio de
la Plata, with which it shall best agree. The two others are for the most part on this side that Tropick. The chief City is de la Plata, that is of Silver; and this City gives sometimes its name to the Province; is the Residence of an Archbishop; dignified with the seat of the Governour, the Courts of Judicature, and beautified with a fair Cathedral, besides several Religious Houses. The City is seated in a pleasant and fruitful soil. Its Houses well built, and so large, that within its walls are the habitations of 800 natural Spaniards, beside 60000 Natives Tributaries, under its Jurisdiction. Its Mines by reason of the incom∣modities of the waters, were abandoned so soon as those of Potossi were disco∣vered, which, since this discovery, from a small Village is now become a very considerable and large Town, of two Leagues Circuit, being Inhabited by a∣bout 40 or 50000 Spaniards, besides about 30000 Natives, and others, that work in the Mines. It is seated below the Mountain, which bears the same name, from whence they have their Silver. A City esteemed free because of its large and ample priviledges; the Officers for the Treasure of the Province residing here, being also much frequented by Merchants, which come hither to trade for their Silver, bringing them several Commodities in exchange that they have need of, so that I may say, it is plentifully furnished with all Commodi∣ties, as well for delight, as necessity. The other Cities are Neuestra Sennora, de la Pax, or Villanueva, Oropesa and Chicuito a City of Indians; Then San∣cta Crux de la Sierra; and in Tucuman St. Jago del Estera, Neuestra Sennora de Talavera, and St. Michael or Tucuman. This Province rich in Mines of Silver.That which is most observable in this Province are the Silver Mines, de la Plata, de Porco, and above all those of Potossi, being the most famous in the world, though yielding nothing but Silver. It is observed of this Mine, that it hath four principal veins, the first which is called the rich; was Registred the 21 of April 1545. and the others in little time after. These Enregisters are made to take notice of the time granted to those which discover the Mines, to whom they belong, defraying the charge, and paying to the King the right of a fifth part. It is said that the rich Mine had its Metal out of the Earth, in fashion of a Rock, or like a Chrest of 300 Foot long, 12 or 15 broad, and 10 or 12 deep. And that which is likewise observable, is that all these Veins are to∣wards the Sun rising, and not one towards its setting: they have now exhaust∣ed all that was the best and easiest to take away, and the Miners are descend∣ed into the Earth, some to 500, others to 10, or 1200 Degrees of depth. The Rich vein yielded the moiety of good Silver; but now scarce will Quintal of Ore yield two Ounces of pure Silver; yet some will say that the Catholick King receives for his fifth part, near two millions of Crowns yearly. Account is made of 20000 men, working in these Mines, and of 50000 Indians, which go and come to the City of Potossi, to trade. SANCTA CRƲX DE LA SIERRA, or the Holy Cross of the chief Mountain of its little Province, is East of Potossi, but inclosed with many bar∣barous Nations on the West and South; among others, the Chirigudgues, which are a sort of People not to be reduced to order, though between La Sierra and Tucuman. The Country is hot, but sometimes oppressed with cold and sharp winds; the Land hath Grains, Mayz, Wine, and feeds much Venison. The riches of the Ynca's of Peru. Their Policy. Their Forces.The Ynca Garcilasso de la Vega hath given us a very fine History of Peru, of its Ynca's or Kings, with their Riches, great Revenues, Policies, and Forces: as to their Wealth, it was shewed by the vast Treasures which the Spaniards became Masters of; all their moveables, besides Rooms full of several sorts of Images, being of Gold and Silver, together with several Rooms filled with Treasure. Their Policy was shewed in the management of their Affairs, and enlargement of their Territories, treating their Subjects kindly and lovingly; and allowing them share in the spoils of other Countries, meerly to endear them, and gain their affections; and by these, and the like means, they were much reverenced, and faithfully served by their Subjects. And lastly, as to their Forces, we may conclude them to have been great, if we look back upon their great and many victories they have gained, as also of the Civil Wars maintained between the first Spanish Chiefs that Conquered this great Empire,
though with no small pains,Its Inhabitants. expences, and loss of men. The People are said to be of a strong and healthy constitution, couragious and warlike, great Dis∣semblers, ignorant of Letters, much given to Drink; were formerly so barba∣rous, that they adored only Beasts, or those inanimate things, which they might make use of, or which they feared might hurt them; sacrificing not on∣ly Fruits and Beasts, but likewise Men and Women taken in War, and some∣times their own Children. Two rare Plants worthy of note.Among the rarities of this Country, here is a Plant, which, if put into the hands of a Sick person, will immediately discover whether he shall die or re∣cover; for, if he, at the putting it to his hand, look of a chearful countenance, then it is a sign of his recovery; but if sad, and troubled, a sure sign of death. They have another Plant, of which the North-part, regarding the Mountains, beareth its Fruits only in Summer, and the Southern-parts, towards the Sea, in the Winter season only. CHILI. Chili bounded. Its length and breadth.CHILI is between Peru, which is North of it, and the Patagons which are on its South towards the Streight of Magellan, and between Para∣gua, and the Magellanick-Land, which are on the East of it, and the Mer del Sud, which washes it on the West; its length, from North to South, extends from the 26 Degree of Latitude, unto the 46, and reaches 500 Leagues. Its breadth, from West to East, is between the 296, and 302, and sometimes 305, 306, 307 Degrees of Latitude; and sometimes likewise stretches 500 Leagues. But the Andes, bounding it almost all along the East, these Mountains in some places advance so near the Sea, that they leave it but a small breadth. Chili divided into three quarters, which are subdivided in∣to 13 Jurisdi∣ctions.Chili is divined into three Quarters, and these Quarters into thirteen Juris∣dictions; one of the three Quarters retains the name of Chili, and contains the Jurisdictions of Serena, Quillata, and St. Jago de Chili, extending it self from the River of Copiapo, unto that of Maule; where are on the Coast the Ports of Copiapo, of Guasco, of Coquimbo, where Sir Francis Drake was repulsed, and of Valpayraso, where he surprised a Vessel laden with 25000 Pezo's of Gold of Valdivia, and a great quantity of Wines. The second Quarter advances from the River of Maule unto that of Gallegos, and is called the Imperial from one of its principal Cities: The Jurisdictions of this part are those of Conception, of Ongol or de los Infantos, of the Imperial, of Villarica, of Valdivia, of Osorno, and of Chilva. The Conception, Valdivia, and Chilva, have their Ports of the same name; that of Canten serves for the Imperial: These two Quarters of Chili and the Imperial, are between the Mer del Sud and the Andes. Beyond these Mountains in the last Quarter Chicuito or Cuyo, where are the Jurisdicti∣ons of Mendoza, and St. Juan de la Frontera. All these Jurisdictions take their Names from the principal Cities; besides which they have some others: But a word or two of some of the chief Cities in Chili,Its chief Cities described. and first of Copiapo, seat∣ed in a Fertil Valley of the same name, and neighboured by a good, but small Haven. 2. Conception, seated in a capacious Bay, by which, and the Mountains which encompass it, which are well fortified, it is a place of good strength, so that it is made the Residence of the Governour, where he hath a strong Garri∣son of Spaniards. 3. L'Imperial, scituate on the Banks of the River Cauten, a place of great strength and power, esteemed one of the strongest in this Coun∣try, and is the See of a Bishop. 4. Villa Rica, 25 Leagues from the Mer del Sud, another Colony of Spaniards. 5. Valdivia, neighboured by a capa∣cious and safe Haven, as also by rich Mines of Gold; another Colony of Spani∣ards. 6. Osorno plentifully stored with Mines of Gold, but seated in a barren soil. 7. Castro, built on the Bay of Ancud, in a fruitful Island, about 50 Leagues in length, and 9 or 10 in breadth. 8. St. Jago, seated on the Banks of the Ri∣ver Topacalma, at the Mouth whereof is a noted Haven, called, Valparaiso.
and 9. Serena, scituate on the Banks of Rio de Coquimbo, not far from its influx into the Sea; a Town, though but small, yet of good strength, especial∣ly, since it is become a Colony of Spaniards; rich also in Mines of Gold. Chili very cold.Chili in their Language, signifies Cold, which in regard of the Mountains of Sierra Nevada de los Andes, are said to be extreamly cold; and where reigns a certain Wind, so sharp, and piercing, that it insensibly extinguishes the natu∣ral heat, so that people often die in a moment; and then freezes, and hardens their bodies in such manner, that they corrupt not. The Valleys and the Plains nearest the Sea, are well inhabited,Its Fertility▪ and have the Air healthful, serene, and temperate; the soil exellent, and Fertil; though not without some difference, according as it is nearer or further from the Equator. The Quarter of Chili ought to be hotter, and that of the Imperial as hot as Spain: but the vicinity of the Mountains on one side, and the other, renders it a little colder than otherwise might be expected, as to the Climate; but yet hot enough to be one of the best Parts of America. The Valley of Copiapo yields sometimes Three hundred for one; those of Guasco, and Coquimbo are held no waies inferiour to it; that of Chili is so excellent,Mines of Gold, Silver and o∣ther Metals. that it communicates its name to the Country. Above these Valleys are Mines of Silver, Quick-silver, Copper, Lead, and great plenty of Gold; both in the Ingots, and Sand. Valdivia gain∣ed great riches here.Valdivia, who was here after Almagre, and who at the beginning succeed∣ed better than his Predecessor had done, extracted a great quantity of Gold out of this Country; and caused to be wrought several Mines of Gold, so rich, that each Indian rendred him thirty or forty Ducats daily; and when he had em∣ployed but twelve or fifteen Indians in this work, they would have yielded three or four hundred Ducats a day; and in a month, about Ten thousand; and in a year, about a hundred, or  hundred and twenty thousand Ducats. This agrees with what the Ynca Garcilasso de la Vega reports in his History, saying that the Count Valdivia had for his Portion a part of Chili, and that his Subjects rendred him the yearly tribute of a hundred thousand Pezo's of Gold. But the thirst after this Metal being instiable, and Valdivia,The Avarice of Valdivia proves his ru∣in, and death. the more he re∣ceived, the more still he coveted, forced to work in these Mines those Indians, who, not accustomed to so hard a labour, nor to serve so cruel a Master, resolved to rid themselves of him, and to cast off their heavy yoke: In pursuance of which, those of Arauco, and thereabouts, began the revolt; and after divers encoun∣ters, slew and took a hundred and fifty of his Horsemen. These Arauques, with their Neighbours, assembled themselves to a Body of Twelve or thirteen thousand men; who after having been divers times beaten by Valdivia, and in all likelihood of being quite subdued; at length, an old In∣dian, who in all possibility, had before observed the order which the Spaniards held in their Battels, advised them to divide their men into many Squadrons; and shewed them how each Squadron, one after another, must assault the Spa∣niards; and that the first Squadron being broken, must rally in the tail of the last; which succeeded so well, that in the end, they so wearied the Spaniards, and their Horses; that when they began to think of a retreat, they were pre∣vented, and utterly defeated. Some say, that Valdivia being fallen into their hands, was fastened to a Tree, and his Almoner to another, so near together, that they might discourse together, and condole one anothers misfortunes. And that the Arauques, from time to time, (though contrary to their custom, to eat human flesh) did cut off gobbets of flesh from their Leggs, Thighs, and Arms, which they caused to be roasted, boyled, or broiled, according to their several Appetites, which they did eat in the sight of these poor tormented Crea∣tures, whilst they were finishing their daies in such a lingring death: Others say, that they took off the top of his skull, and poured melted Gold into his Brains, Mouth, and Ears, making afterwards a Goblet of his Head, and Trum∣pets of his Bones, &c.
The City of Valdivia ta∣ken and de∣stroyed by the Natives, with others.After the death of Valdivia, the Spaniards had great disadvantages in Chi∣li, till that Gracias de Mendoza, son to the Vice Roy of Peru, had reduced part of these people to obedience, which continued for no long season; for in 1599, these people surprized the City of Valdivia, seized on the gates and chief pla∣ces, invested every house, to the end nothing might escape their hands, set fire through all, killed and took prisoners 4 or 500 men, women and children, took the Fort, wherein were three hundred thousand Pezo's of Gold, besides which they carried away with them all the Arms, Ammunition, and Artillery. After the taking of Valdivia, the Imperial was besieged, which they stoutly defended and maintained for the space of Twelve Months, and would have done longer, were it not for the Famine and sickness that so extreamly reigned a∣mongst them, that reduced their Forces, together with the Inhabitants of the City, to about twenty men, who no longer able to defend themselves, submit∣ted to the mercy of the Arauques; So that in the end, of 13 principal Cities that were in Chili, 6 or 7 were ruined; viz, Valdivia, l' Imperial, Ongol, Chilliam, St. Crux, la Conception, and Villarica: Osorno, in time received relief: The men found in the taken Cities were knockt on the head; they permitted the ransom of women, one of whom they gave for a pair of Spurs, a pair of stirrups, or a Horses bridle; for a Sword they would give half a dozen; but this commerce was soon Prohibited by the Vice-Roy of Peru; that Arms serviceable for War might not be put into the hands of these Barba∣rians. Of those which they had got by means of this commerce, or which they gained at the taking of so many Cities, and in divers defeats of the Spaniards, they after made use, and became so dextrous, that they mounted on horse∣back, managed the Lance, Musket, Halberd, &c. and continued the War from 1599 to 1641 when the Marquess Vadez made peace with them. During this War there hapned a thing worthy of observation;A sad disaster befel a Ship of Biscay.to wit, In 1614, a Ship of Biscay bringing relief to the Spaniards that were in the Fort of Arauque, it un∣fortunately fell out that it suffered a Shipwrack on the Coast, so that the men fell all into the hands of the Arauques, who immediately slew them all, save only the Trumpeter, who being about to pass the same Fate with his Fellows, thought he would once more sound before he died, which saved his life. The reason of their last re∣volt.The reason of the last revolt of the Arauques was, that after having served the Spaniards for near 50 years, and being for the most part become Christi∣ans, the Spaniards had yet taken some of their wives and children, and sold them away into perpetual and cruel servitude, which made them not only re∣solve to cast off the Spanish yoke, but likewise to renounce Christianity. Unde the name of Arauques are comprehended the Inhabitants of the Moun∣tains, and Valleys of Arauco, Tucapel, and Puren; which are between the Conception, the Imperial and Ongol. Peace being made with these people, there rested in Chili none but the Pulches as enemies to the Spaniards: but these Pulches being beyond the Andes, they have little to do with them; and the Country is restored to a good estate, and the Cities better rebuilt. The City La Conception, and Valdivia de∣scribed.LA CONCEPTION is at present walled with walls of stone, hath a Cittadel; and because the Governour of the Province resides here, though the soil be ingrateful, the Inhabitants have so tilled, manured, and so embellished it with Gardens, that it is become one of the pleasantest abodes of Chili. Valdi∣via is scituated on an elevated ground, which with the addition of Art, is held one of the strongest in Chili. The Jurisdiction of St. Jago hath under it more than 80000 Indians, which are divided into 26 Partimiento's, or parts; that of the Imperial hath as ma∣ny; Osorno 200000, Castro del Chilve 12 or 15000 only, the other Jurisdicti∣ons more or less. The Inhabi∣tants of Chili.The Natives of Chili are for the most part 6 Foot high, well proportioned, strong, active, warlike, and cruel when they have the advantage of their ene∣mies; of a white complexion, their Garments for the most part are skins of beasts, their common Arms are Bows and Arrows.
The Fertility of the Coun∣try.The Country is subject to Earth-quakes, the soil in the midland is for the most part Mountainous, and unfruitful; towards the Sea-side, level, fertil, and well watered with Rivers, which makes it yield plenty of Wheat, Mayz, and other Graius; which, as also their Vines, were transported from Spain hither, which now are so abundantly increased that they often furnish Peru. Nor doth any Country in all America afford more Cattle than this doth, their Sheep like those of Peru, are very large;Its Commodi∣ties. they have here long Pep∣per, abundance of Honey, good Fruits and Plants, but their chiefest riches is drawn from the Gold and Silver. In the Mountains of the Andes, though very cold, are 12 or 15 Vulcans, which perpetually vomit fire: These Vulcans take their name from the Vallies where they have their rise, or from Cities or Towns there adjacent.
BRAZI∣LIANE where there shall be BRAZILE regarding the Sea, with its Governments (as they are Inhabited by the Por∣tugals) of St VINCENT Sanctos, St. Vincent. Itauchi, St. Paule. Philippe villa. RIO JANIERO St. Sebastian. Aga  Reyes. SPIRITU SANCTO — Spiritus Sancto, PORTO SEGURO Porto Seguro. Sancta Crux. LOS ISLEOS los Isleos. Camamu. BAYA de los SANCTOS St. Salvador. St. Antonio. Fapesipe. SEREGIPPE Seregippe del Rey. Olivera. FERNAMBUCO Olinda. Recif. St. Michael. Calvo. TAMARACA— Tamaraca. PARAYBA Payraba. St. Anthony. St. Katherine. RIO GRANDA de los tres Reys. Copoaba. Juaon Lostao. Natall. Brandibe. SIARA Siara. St. Jago. St. Sebastian. Cors. Soutpan. Clene Salinas. Camucipe. MARANHAN Junipara. Sancta Ann. Comma. St. Lewis. Nuestra sennora. PARA Corrupa. Estiero. Cogemine. Comata. Para. BRAZILE within Land, which is possessed with aboun∣dance of several sorts of peo∣ple, (most of which are un∣known unto us) among which are the Paries, Carayaes, Amixocories, Noneaes, Amacaxies, Apnyes, Aquigiraees, Tapiguiries, Panaguiries, Apetubaes, Tapuxenquies, Caraguatayraes, Qui∣riguiaes, Bigrorgies, Vibes, Guigraes, Jubaes, Oquigties, Pahies, Aries, Guipaes, Cuigtaies, Pirivies, Annaciugies, Laratiies, Guaracacativies, Aturavies, Aquitigpaes, Maimimyes, Caracujvyes, Mandeivies, Caraembas, Macutiies, Napares, Parapoties, Pahacuries, Cuaxraes, Nuhinvies, Taraguaigies, Pi∣raquies, Anacuyes, Tapacuvyes, Mcaraguacies, Tupioys, Cayviaries, Ja∣cuyvies, Caucujares, Jobiores, Cumpehes, Cicules, &c. PARAGUAY Or, RIO de la PLATA, whose chief Provinces and Places, are those of PARAGUAY Paraguay. Eupana. Guabiano. CHACO Chaco. Rioxa. Estero. De la PLATA Assumption. las seite Corrientas. Sancta Fee. Buenos Ayres. Penabobre. TUCOMAN St. Jago del Estero. St. Michael de Tucoman. St. Salvador. Salta. Corduba. URVAIG la Conception. St. Nicholas. St. Francis Xavier. Ibicuit. PARANA St. Ignatius, Itapoa, or the Incarnation. The holy Sacrament. Acarag. Sancta Maria. GUAYR Cuidad Real. Villa ricca. St. Paul. No. sen. de Loretto. St. Francisco Xavier. St. Joseph.
BRAZILE. BRAZILE is most commonly taken for the most Eastern part of Ame∣rica Meridionalis. In 1501 Alvarez Cabral a Portugal sailing along the Coast of Africa, in his passage to the East Indies, by a great Tem∣pest (the wind blowing Eosternly) he was driven into these parts;A Column e∣rected here by Alvarez Cabral, a Portugal, with his Ma∣sters Arms therein. where he erected and left a Column whereon were affixed the Arms of Portu∣gal, to remain to future ages, signifying that he took Possession of it for the Crown of Portugal. A little after, Americus Vesputius was expresly sent to make a more particular discovery of it, which so well succeeded that in a short time some Colonies of Portugals were here established, and the name of Ameri∣ca was given it in honour to Americus Vesputius, which name was soon after communicated to all this new Continent; but this quarter particularly took the name of Brazile, by reason of the great abundance of that wood here found more than in other places. BRAZILE, taken in its greatest extent, is one half of America Meri∣dionalis, which some call Brasiliana, but which they divide into Brazile, and Paraguay: this Brazile separated from Paraguay begins at the River of Ama∣zones, and extends it self to the Provinces of Paraguay:Brazile bound∣ed. and though that be but from the first deg. of Lat. unto the 21; yet the Coast making a great Demi-circle, hath no less than 1200 Leagues. The Mer del Nort washes it on the North, South-East, and East; Paraguay and Peru, bounds the rest towards the South and West. Great part of Brazile un∣known.The high Country is wholly unknown; and likewise part of the Coast. It hath every where abundance of Barbarous people, who make war with, and eat one another; the divers relations hitherto given us, make mention of more than 100 of these peoples,The parts best known. yet these are few in regard of those yet un∣known. The most famous, and best known, are the Margajas, Topinambous, Ovetacas, Paraibas, Petiguares, Tapouyes, Cariges, Morpions, Tobajares, &c. The Portugals have only seized on what they found most commodious on the Coast, and have from time to time placed divers Governments, which they call Capitanies. The most antient is that of Tamaraca, then of Fernambuco,The Govern∣ments or Capi∣tanies which the Portugals hold. now the most famous of all is that of the Bay of all Saints: they count Fourteen in all, which following the Coast, from the River of Amazones, towards Paraguay, are, Para, Maranhan, Giara, Rio Grande, Parayba, Tamaraca, Pernambuco, Seregippe, Baya de Todos los santos, los Isleos Porto seguro, Spiritu sancto, Rio Janiero, and St. Vincent. Chief places in the Capitany of St. Vincent described.Each Capitany hath depending on it, one or two more Colonies of Portugals. In the Capitany of SAINT VINCENT, the principal is Santos, seated at the bottom of an Arm of the Sea, distant from the Main, about three Leagues, ac∣commodated with a very good Port, capable to receive Vessels of 400 Tuns. This Town is Inhabited with about two hundred Families of Portugals, who have beautified it with a fair Church, and two Convents of Friers; and since the assault that Sir Thomas Cavendish made upon it in 1591, they have environ∣ed it with a wall, and well Fortified it with strong Bastions. The next is Saint Vincent, which hath not above one hundred houses of Portugals, but its Port little commodious. The third and fourth Cities are Itan∣chin, and Saint Paul, beyond the Mountains, and Forrest, Pernabiacaba; which are very difficult to cross, the way being cut through the trees: the Ci∣ty is seated on the Top of a little hill, and neighboured by some Mines
of Gold, found in the Mountains; a Town of about one hundred houses, and two hundred Families, beautified with a Church, two Convents, and a Colledge of Jesuits, This Capitany wants Salt, Wine, and Oyl, but in recompence they have all sorts of Fruits, and many Mines of Silver about St. Paul. The Capitany of Rio Janiero with its chief places describ∣ed, and its Commodities.The Capitany of RIO JANIERO, takes its name from its Rivers; so called, because it was entred into in the month of January. The Portugals have built the City St. Sebastian, at the mouth of the Gulph, which the River makes falling into the Sea; and Fortified it with strong Bulwarks. And more to the West, they have likewise built the City of Angra de los Reyes, and made it a strong Colony. This Capitany hath much Brazile-wood, Cottons, and all Provisions, but no Sugar. These two Capitanies, Rio Janiero and St. Vin∣cent, are on this side and beyond, or rather under the Tropick of Capricorn. The Capitany del Spiritu San∣cto, with its Ci∣ties.The Capitany DEL SPIRITƲ SANCTO, hath one of the best soils of all Brazile, well stored with Cotton-wool, but deficient in Sugars. Its River is called Parayba from a name common to three Rivers in Brazile; one is beyond St. Vincent, the second this, and the last waters the Capitany of Parayba; that which waters Spiritu Santo, is pleasant, but rapid. The City hath but two hundred and odd Families of Portugals. Its principal buildings are, a Church dedicated to St. Francis, a Colledge of Jesuits, and a Monastery of Benedictines. Porto Seguro, and its Cities.PORTO SEGƲRO belongs to the Duke of Aveiro, and hath three Colo∣nies, viz. 1. St. Amaro, or St. Omers, once of great account for making Su∣gars, where they had five Sugar Engines, for the ordering and making it, but deserted by the Portugals, for fear of the incursions of the Savages. 2. San∣cta Cruz, a Town not very large, neither with a commodious Harbour. 3. Por∣to Seguro containing not above two hundred houses, but held of some Antiqui∣ty. It is built on the top of a white cliff, which commands the Haven. The soil of this Capitany is so fertil in Grains and Fruits,Its fertility. that it furnisheth its Neigh∣bours; It hath likewise Sugar. Los Isleos with its chief places.LOS ISLEOS, belongs to Don Luco Giraldo, a Portugal; Its chief Town is seated on a small River, but neighboured by a great Lake of twelve Leagues circuit, from which this River takes its rise, and contains not above 150, or 200 Families of Portugals. It hath a long time suffered persecution, and the Colony almost lost by the Guaymures, a race of the most savage and barbarous people of Brazile, which being driven out of their own Country fell into this Praefecture, which they had utterly ruinated, had not (as a Je∣suite tells us) some of the Relicks of St. George been brought hither; which seeing, the Planters re-took courage, and bravely repulsed these Barbarians. The River which waters this City turns eight or ten Mills, or Sugar-En∣gines. Baya de los Santos describ∣ed.The Capitany del BAYA DE LOS SANTOS, took its name from the Bay or Gulph, wherein is seated St. Salvador its principal City: This Bay having its mouth to the Sea, eight or ten Leagues wide, and its depth twelve, fifteen, or twenty fathom every where, encloses many Isles, of which the most outward to the Sea is Taperico: This Bay makes likewise divers open∣ings, fifteen or twenty Leagues within Land, from whence it receives the Ri∣vers of Pitange, Ceresippe, Cachera, and others, each with their little Gulph: This Bay is memorable for the rash attempt of Peter Heyns a Dutchman,A memorable Exploit of Peter Heyns a Dutchman. Admi∣ral of a Fleet of the Ʋnited Provinces for the West India-Company, who in 1627 entred this Bay, where there were 26 sail of Spanish Ships, four of which were men of War, all lying under the Protection of the Castles and Forts; who notwithstanding the shots that he received from the Forts, Castles, and Ships, fell amongst them with such boldness, that he sunk their Vice-Admiral, and took all, or most of the rest, with a condition only of their lives. The City of St. Salvador,The City of St. Salvador is fair, and beautified with many stately Edifices. is in the most Northern part of the Gulph, seated on a little Hill, and towards the Sea; it regards its Ports made in a Demi-circle, whose two points, or extremities have each their Castle; St. Antonio towards the Sea, and Tape∣sipe towards the Bay. This City all environed with a wall, is great and popu∣lous, and dignified with the Residence of the Vice-Roy of Brazile, for the
Crown of Portugal, as also with a Bishops See, together with divers Officers. It is beautified with many Churches and Religious Houses, but above all, the Colledge of the Jesuits is magnificent. This Capitany is best peopled, and the richest of all Brazile: It hath 40 or 50 Sugar-Mills, the most of which are about this Bay; every where there is quantity of Cotton, and on the coast is found Ambergneece. Seregippe del Rey, and its Ci∣ty.The Capitany SEREGIPPE DEL REY hath only a little City, and O∣livera is that alone which gives it a degree amongst the Captains of Brazile; and here is esteemed to be some Mines of Silver. The Capitany of Fernambuck, with its Colo∣nies, and Cities described.The Capitany of FERNAMBƲCK is one of the best of all Brazile, possessed by the Albuquerques. The Portugals have here established Thirteen Colonies, among which Olinda is the chief, being a fair and pleasant City, sea∣ted near the Sea-shore, but with no commodious Haven, only its entrance is defended by a Castle which is well Fortified; Account hath been made of two thousand Families of Portugals, besides the Clergy and the slaves which were in great number, which they imployed in their Sugar-mines; and among the Portugals two hundred Families, which possessed each twenty five, thirty, forty, or fifty thousand Crusados, and more; the chiefest Ornament of this Ci∣ty is the Colledge of the Jesuits, built very rich and magnificent, and endowed with many Houses in the City, many Sugar-Engines, and much Cattle in the field; also a Collegiate Church, with six or seven others, besides Chapels, seve∣ral Monasteries, and Hospitals, &c. From the City a Tongue of Earth advan∣ces to the Sea, at the end of which is Recif, a well-peopled Town, where the Ships load and unload their Merchandises. This place is become Famous in our time, having been for many years dispu∣ted between the Portugals, and the Hollanders; but these have in the end been driven out by the other. Its Trade and Commodities.Besides the Colonies, there are abundance of Aldees for the Indians; it is ob∣served that every year there is laden from Fernambuck, 80, 90, and sometimes a hundred Ships, the most part with Sugars, and some with Brazile-wood, and that only in the space of four years, which were 1620, 21, 22, and 23, there was transported from Angola in Aethiopia, unto this Capitany 15 or 16000 slaves to work in their Sugars, and Brazile. The Fertility of its soil.The Soil is fat and fertil, the Sugar Canes coming of themselves both on the Hills and in the Valleys, and the Brazile-wood, being brought in a prodigious quantity from the Forrest Gran Mato of Brazile, 20 Leagues from Olinda. All these conveniencies, with the goodness of its pastures, makes them call this Capitany the Paradise of Brazile. But in 1630, 31, 32, the Dutch West-India Company took, and ruined Olinda,Olinda and St. Augustine ruin∣ed by the Dutch. and after it St. Augustine, and almost all the Fortresses, which the Portugals held in this Capitany: and were not driven out till within 9 or 10 years, but from time to time molested. The Capitany of Tamaraca, with its chief places describ∣ed.TAMARACA is the most antient Capitany, but the smallest of all Bra∣zile; that of Fernambuck enclosing it on one side, and Parayba on the other. Its Fertility is admirable; the Port dos Francezes is a place of no great note, but for its commodious haven, which is well defended by an impregnable Castle, which is seated on the top of an hill. The Capitany of Parayba, with its chief City.The CARAYBA of Parayba, had likewise beginning from the French in 1584, which soon after was seized by the Portugals, and its principal City Parayba was called by them, Philippine, or Neustra Seignora da Nieves; and by the Hollanders when they were Masters of it, Frederickstad: It is two or three Leagues from the Sea; there where the River Parayba falls, having two Castles on the two parts, which end it, and defend its entrances, that on the right hand is Cape Delo, where is the Fort St. Katherine, the other Cape del Nort, where is the Fort of St. Anthony. This City is walled, and is seated on the banks of the said River; at the bottom of an Arm of the Sea, not above three Leagues from the Ocean.The bounds of this Capitany. This Capitany on the North touches Rio Grande, on the South Fernambuck, enclosing that of Tamaraca, on the West: the River Parayba, dividing it into two equal parts; the Inhabitants addicting
themselves to till the fields, where they possess their Heritages, Farm-houses, and Ingenno's, which are magnificently built. These Ingenno's are the Mills which serve to bruise the Sugar Canes;Its Inhabitants addicted to Tillage, and making of Sugar. they are built along the River, where are the Fields and Closes; in which lie the Canes and some Copses from whence they fetch wood to boil the Sugar. And sometimes, these Ingenno's are so great, and so ample, that they contain besides the house of the Master which is well built, many others: either for the Portugals, which serve them, or for those Negroes and Slaves, which belong unto them; and their number amounts to 50, 60, 80, and sometimes to a hundred Families. There are a score of these In∣genno's in the Capitany of Parayba.The nature and fertility of the land. The Land is unequal being in Moun∣tains, Valleys and Plains. The Plains are for the Sugar; the Valleys for To∣bacco, Mandioche and Fruits; and the Mountains for Wood. The lands which are tilled, yield one hundred for one, their pastures feed many Flocks of Beeves, Sheep,Their Cattle and Fowls. The habitati∣ons of the Na∣tives. Goats, Hoggs, and Horses, which are strong and laborious. The Na∣tives of the Country have some Aldees, that is, Villages, built after their mode, each Village having only four, five, or six houses, but very long like Halls, where are 4, or 5, or 600, sometimes 1000, 1200, or 1500 Inhabitants; their moveables being only their Hamacao's, which are their Beds, their Bow and Arrows and some Mandioche. In each Aldee they have a Captain, which they chuse among themselves, and they give them a Portugal to see what pas∣ses: there are of these Aldees, in all the Capitanies of the Portugals, six prin∣cipal ones in that of Parayba, as many in that of Rio Janerico, three in Tama∣raca, three in Fernambuck, and so in others. The Capitany of Rio Grande described.The Capitany of RIO GRANDE, was once possessed by the French, after they had quitted R. Ganabara: and here they made alliance with the Petivares in the year 1597. Feliciano Ceca of Garovulasco, Captain of Pa∣rayba came to assault them; but without forcing them away that time; in 1601 they were quite expelled. The French had discovered an excellent Mine of Silver at Copooba, and another of Emeralds, near the Bay of Moncourou, be∣between Rio Grande, and Siara, and rich Salt-pits near the Point de Salinas. The principal Fortress that the Portugals hold here, is De los tres Reyes, or the three Kings, on the right hand of the River. The Coast of Brazile from Cape de Frio, until on this side of that of St. Au∣gustine, and so to the middle of the head of Potengi, stretches from South to North, and continually regards the East. The rest of this Capitany, and that of Siara Maranhan and Para, extend from East to West, regarding the North, and are the nearest to the Equinoctial Line. The Coast of these four last Capi∣tanies hath no less extent on the Sea, than that of all the others together, but are worth much less. The Capitany of Siara, with its Commodi∣ties.The Capitany of SIARA is among many Barbarous People, and therefore not much frequented; yet is of some trade, by reason of the Cotton, Chrystal, Precious Stones, and many sorts of Wood, which are here found. They have likewise many Canes of Sugar, which are of no use, there being no Sugar En∣gines in the Country. The Capitany of Maranhan, with its chief places.The Capitany of MARANHAN is an Isle, which, with some others, is found in a Gulph, about twenty five Leagues long, and broad. This Isle hath forty five Leagues Circuit, hath twenty seven Villages, of which Junaparan is the chief, and in each Village four, five or 600 men, so that the French made account of 10000 men in this Island. The fertility of the Coun∣try, with its Commodities.The Air serene, temperate and healthful, the Waters excellent, and which scarce ever corrupt on the Sea. The Land as fruitful as any in America, yield∣ing Brazile-wood, Saffron, Cotton, Red-dye, Lake, or Rose colour, Balm, To∣bacco, Pepper; and sometimes Ambergrease is gathered on its Coast. The Land is found proper for Sugar, and if it were tilled, would produce Grains; some say, it hath Mines of Jasper, and white and red Chrystal, which for hard∣ness surpasses the Diamonds of Alenzon: It is well watered with fresh Rivers, and pleasant Streams, well cloathed with Woods, in which are store of Fowl. The people are strong of body,Its Inhabitants, and Apparel. live in good health, commonly dying with age; the women being fruitful till eighty years of age, both Sexes go naked until
they are married, and then their apparel is only from the Wast to the Knees, which is Manufactures of Cotton, or Feather-works, in which they are very ingenious. The Country or the Isle of the Tapouies.The Tapouy Tapere, that is, the Country of the Tapouies, is another Isle, East of Maraguon, at Full-sea it is an Isle; on the Ebb only, Sands separate it from the Continent. The soll is yet better than that of Maranhan, it hath but fifteen Villages, the chief bearing the name of the Country; they are greater and bet∣ter peopled than those of Maranhan. The Country and City of Comma.West of Tapouy Tapere, and on the firm Land, Comma, a City, River, and Country of the same name, is of no small value; its fifteen or sixteen Villages are as well peopled as those of Tapouy Tapere. Between Comma, and Cayetta, which approaches Para, are divers people descending from the Toupinambous, as those of Maranhan, and Comma, descend from the Tapouyes. The French were likewise divers times possessed of the Isle of Maranhan: Ribaut was here in 1594. Ravardiere in 1612. This last chose a most com∣modious place in the Island, and built the Fort of St. Lewis; the Portugals drove them out in 1614, and built new Forts, St. Jago, and Neustra Sennora. Among the Rivers that full into the Gulph of Maranhan, Miari is the greatest, then Taboucourou. The Capitany of Para, with its Commodi∣ties.The Capitany of PARA hath a square Fort, seated on a Rock, raised four or five fadom from the neighbouring ground, and well walled, except towards the River; it hath four or five hundred Portugals, who gather in the Coun∣try Tobacco, Cotton, and Sugar. This Capitany holds beyond the Mouth of the Amazone, Corrupa, and Estiero, and among the Mouths of that River Co∣gemine. Of a temperate Air.Brazile hath an Air sweet, and temperate, though under the Torrid Zone, the daies and nights being almost equal; the freshness of the Sea, Rivers, and ordinary Dews contributing much to its wholsomness. They lie very subject to Storms, and Thunders; and if it lighten in the evening, it is without Thun∣der; if it Thunder, without Flashes. That which likewise proves the goodness of the Air, is, that their Serpents, Snakes, Toads, &c. are not venemous;Serpents, Toads, &c. not venemous here. but often serve for food to the Inhabitants: yet the soil is more proper for the pro∣duction of Fruits, Pastures, and Pulse, than the Grains, or Vines of Europe. They carry them Wine, and Flowr, Corn being subject to spoil on the Sea. The Natives use Rice and Manjoche to make their Bread.Its fertility and Commodities. They have likewise quantity of Pulse, Trees which bear excellent Fruits, Herbs, Four-footed-Beasts, Birds, and Fish in great abundance, many of which are not known to us; many sorts of Palm-trees, which yield them great Commodities: they have some Mines of Gold, but more of Silver; but the riches of Brazile is drawn from the Sugars, and the Brazile-wood, which comes from their Ara∣boutan, a mighty Tree, which bears no Fruit. They have abundance of Par∣roquetos; among their Monkeys, they have black ones, and of divers colours, the most part very pleasant. The skin of the Tapiroussou, curried, becomes so hard, that it makes Bucklers, not to be pierced by the strongest shot Arrow. The Inhabi∣tants of Brazile, and what they are addicted unto; their Customs, &c. Their Habit.The Brazilians are of a mean stature, gross headed, large shouldred, of a reddish colour, their skins tawny; they live commonly to a hundred and fifty years, and free from diseases, caring for nothing but War and Vengeance. They wander most part of their time in Hunting, Fishing, and Feasting; in which Manjoche furnishes them with Bread; Cumin-seed, with Drink; and and the Flesh of Beasts, or of their Enemies cut in gobbets, and some Fish, are their most excellent meats. The men are very cruel, forgetful of courtesies re∣ceived, and mindful of injuries. The Women are very lascivious, they are de∣livered with little or no pain, and immediately go about their affairs, and not observing the custom of a Months lying in, as is used among us. They let their hair grow long, which ordinarily hangeth over their shoulders; both Sexes go naked, especially, till Married: They are esteemed excellent Swim∣mers; and divers, being able to stay an hour together under water. They paint themselves with divers colours, all over the body, on which they leave
no hair, not so much as on their Eye-lids, but only a Crown about their Head; and fasten a Bone, which is well polished, and some little Stone, which is e∣steemed amongst them, in their upper Lip, and Cheeks. Others cut their skin in Figures, and mixing a certain tincture it never comes out. They make Bonnets, Frontlets, Ruffes, Bands, Cloaks, Girdles, Garters, and Bracelets, with Feathers of divers colours, which they work, and mix the colours toge∣ther very excellently. The Brazilians which have stayed among the Por∣tugals, are, for the most part, become Christians; the others wander without Religion. Some know∣ledge of the Sun, Moon, and Stars.There is a great diversity of Tongues among them; insomuch, that Jarric assures us, that in his time he observed sixty different ones; and though they have no Sciences, yet have they some knowledge of the course of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, giving them divers names, and calling the Eclipses nights of the Sun and Moon. The riches of Braile.All the Wood of Brazile belongs unto the King of Portugal, private per∣sons not being permitted to trade in it. Their riches come from Whale-Oyl, Confects, Conserves, Tobacco, Silver, Hides, and other. Commodities; but principally from Sugar, no Country in the World exporting so much as Bra∣zile doth. The Isle Madera hath but ten Sugar Engines, the Isle of St. Tho∣mas possibly less; but Brazile 4 or 500. The names of Mestiz, Mulates, Cariboco, Criolo, &c. Explain∣ed.As for the names of Mestiz, and Mulates, which divers times have been met with; it is to be observed, that the Portugals being long since here esta∣blished, and having from time to time caused to be transported a great many Negroes, as well Men as Women to serve them; This mixture of divers Nati∣ons, and divers colours, hath made them to distinguish their Children, and to call those who came from Father and Mother of the Europeans, Mozomo; those who came from an European and a Brazilian, Mestiz, or Mamelucco; those from an European and a Negroess, Mulates; those from a Brazilian and a Negroess, Cariboco; those from the Father and Mother of Aethiopians. Criolo. Moreover, it hath been known that an Aethiopian woman whose Hus∣band was likewise an Aethiopian, hath brought forth two Children, the one black, and the other white; and a Brazilian Woman, whose Husband was likewise a Brazilian, to bring forth two, the one white, and the other black: and oft-times blacks have whites, and whites blacks; and there are to be seen white Aethiopians, that is to say, in all the features of their face, and in their hair, all the proportions of an Aethiopian, but with skin and hair white. Before Brazile lyeth a train of low Rocks, but of a small breadth; but which continue almost all along the Coast, leaving but certain overtures by which the Rivers discharge themselves into the Sea. Ships that go or return from Brazile, pass necessarily by these overtures, or openings, which oft times proves very dangerous.
PARAGƲAY or, Rio de la Plata. THe Province of PARAGƲAY, or Rio de la Plata, (other then the Pro∣vince de la Plata in Peru) is on the River which those of the Country call Paraguay, the Spaniards Rio de la Plata, from whence it takes its name: We may comprehend under the name of Paraguay, or Rio de la Plata, all the neighbouring Provinces, and those which are on the Rivers falling into the Paraguay; and consider them in three, or in seven parts: To wit, in Para∣guay or Rio de la Plata, which may make the higher, and lower part of that which is upon the River; Into, Chaco and Tucuman, which are on the Rivers, which descend on the right hand, and into Parana, Guayr and Ʋraig, which are on the Rivers which descend on the left hand: These are towards Bra∣zile, and the Mer del Nort; the other two, towards Peru and Chili, and the two first in the middle. The River of Paraguay de∣scribed.The River of Paraguay, or de la Plata, hath its springs in the Lake of Xa∣rajes on the confines of Peru and Brazile; and descending from north to South, turns in the end to South-East, receives a great many fair and large Ri∣vers, among others; Putomayo, Vermejo, or Salado, and la Garzarone on one side, Guaxarape, Parana, and Ʋraig on the other. The Paraguay falling into the Sea makes a Gulf of fifty and odd Leagues wide, between the Capes of St. Mary and St. Anthony; and an hundred and fifty Leagues within Land is ten or twelve, and descending farther fifteen, twen∣ty or five and twenty Leagues broad; but of so little depth, and so cumbred with Rooks and Banks, that what with them, and the sudden storms which of∣ten rise from the South, sailing up it proves very dangerous. The Province of Paraguay de∣scribed.The particular Province of Paraguay, in the highest part of the River is lit∣tle known, nor have the Spaniards here any Colonies, yet it bears its name common with the River, and communicates it to all the neighbouring quarters: The People are not so barbarous as in Brazile;Its People. some addicting themselves to Husbandry, in which the men till and sow the ground, and the Women reap and gather in Harvest; others know how to make Stuffs, Vestments, spin Cotton, &c. The Province de la Plata with its Colo∣nies described.Below Paraguay is the Province dela Plata, where the Spaniards have some Colonies; viz. 1. The Assumption being the chief place in this Countrey, is well built, and very well frequented, neighboured by a great Lake, in the midst of which is a great Rock, which exalteth its head about one hundred fa∣thom above the water; this Town is said to be inhabited by three sorts of peo∣ple: viz. 1 By natural Spaniards who are Masters of it, to the number of about four hundred families. 2. Mulatoes, being those that are born of Spa∣niards and Negro's, of which there are said to be several thousands; and lastly, by Mestizo's, which are such as are begotten by the Spaniards upon the Na∣tives, and these are not in such great number: The next Town of note is Bue∣nos Ayres, seated on the ascent of a small Hill, on the Southern Bank of the River de la Plata, said to contain about two hundred families of Spaniards. It is encompassed with a Mud-Wall, but its chiefest strength is in its Castle, which is but small neither over-well provided with Ordnance and Ammuniti∣on; the other Towns are, Las Siette Corrientes, St. Fe and St. Spiritu, or Torre di Gabboto; the two last, and Buenos Ayres, are on the right side; the Assumption, and Las Corrientes, on the left, and this two hundred and fifty, or three hundred Leagues from the Sea; Buenos Ayres little less than an hun∣dred; St. Fe little more; the Assumption alone is on the Paraguay, Las Siette Corrientes where the Parana, &c. falls into the Paraguay.
The fignifica∣tion of Para∣guay, & de la Plata.This name of Paraguay is given by the Natives of the Country, and signifi∣eth a River of Feathers, either because there are here found great quantities of Birds, whose Feathers are various and of divers colours; or because those of the Country, dress and adorn themselves with those Feathers. The name de la Plata hath been given by the Spaniards, and signifieth Silver; because the first that came to them from Peru, came down this River. Chaco described with its several Inhabitants.CHACO hath its soil fat, fruitful, and enterlaced with many Rivers. It is inhabited by divers Nations, whose Idioms are very different. The Tobares have about fifty thousand souls. The Mathaguaici's thirty thousand, but not so valiant, as the Chiriguanes, a Nation much esteemed, and which will not suffer the Spaniards to inhabit amongst them; they are in continual War with the Mathaguaici's, making Slaves of as many as they can catch, which made these call the Spaniards to their aid. The Moconios and Zipatalagars have no sewer people then the Tobares, and all so valiant in War, that the Chiri∣guanes dare not assault them. There is likewise another Nation, whose Lan∣guage, as they say, scarce yields to the Latine; but the beauty of the Ore∣chons, is in the greatness of their Ears. The most part of these people are well-made, very tall, most of them being about six foot high, they are of an airy and lively spirit. Tucuman boun∣ded, and descri∣bed.TƲCƲMAN is very large, being no less then three hundred Leagues long and broad; yet it touches not the Sea on any side; la Plata bounds it on the East, Chili on the West, Peru and Chaco on the North, and the Magella∣nick Land on the South. The Air and Soil should be excellent; this Country disingaging it self from the Torrid Zone, and advancing towards the middle of the Temperate Zone; and almost all the Rivers having their courses towards the East, which brings some refreshment. And moreover they have but two seasons in the year, each of six months: the Summer from about the twenti∣eth of March, unto the twentieth of September, and the Winter, from Sep∣tember to March. The Tucumans famous.Among the People of these quarters, the Tucumans are the most famous, since they have given their name to the Province; then the Zuries, Diagui∣tes, &c. The Castilians have established here divers Colonies, that the Province de la Plata might have communication with those of Peru and Chili.St. Jago del E∣stero. St. Ja∣go del Estero formerly Varco, is in the mid-way between Buenos Ayres and 'Po∣tossi; two hundred and fifty Leagues from this, and little less from the other. This place is honoured with the seat of the Governour of the Province, as also with a Bishops See, and divers other Officers of the King. The Land is fur∣nished with Wool,Its Commodi∣ties. Cotton, Wood, with which they make and dye their Manu∣factures, Cocheneile, &c. which they carry to the nearest Capitanies of Bra∣zibe, making great profit by them. Several places of note in the way to Peru, described, with their Commo∣dities, & fertili∣ty of the Country.After St. Jago del Estero; there is likewise on the way to Peru, 1. St. Mi∣chael de Tucuman, seated at the foot of a rocky Mountain, but near a fertile Soil, both for Corn and Pasturage. 2. Nuestra Sennora de Talavera, scitu∣ate on the River Salado, in a fruitful Soil, abounding plentifully in Cotton, of which the Inhabitants make several Manufactures, in which they are so in∣dustrious, that they have gained by their Trade (to the Mines of Potossi a hundred and forty Leagues distant, and other places,) great riches. 3. Las Juntas. 4. St. Salvador. 5. Salta. 6. Corduba, on another side, and there where two great Waies meet, the one of Buenos Ayres, to Potossi by St. Jago del Estero, and the other of Sancto be and Spiritu Sancto to St. Jago del Estremadura in Chili by St. Luyz, which makes this place of some considera∣tion: Besides that the Air is temperate, and the Soil fruitful and pleasant, and which yields Grains and Fruits, it is well watred with fresh streams, in which are good Fish. In their Woods they have Fowls, much Venison and other Beasts; they have Wine, Salt, and in their Mountains appearance of some Mines of Silver. The Colony is of three hundred, others say six hundred Spaniards. Their principal trade is on Peru and Chili side. The Natives are much civilized both in habit and manners, imitating the Spaniards, from whom they are willing to receive instructions.Its Inhabitants.
The provinces of Parana, Gu∣ayr & Vraig.The Provinces of PARANA, GƲAYR and VRAIG pass under the name of Paraguay, in the relations which the Fathers Jesuits give. It says, that these Fathers having long observed that there was an innumerable company of Souls, which might be converted to Christianity; they cast them∣selves among these Barbarians, learned their tongue, drew them from the Woods, Mountains, and hidden Caves; assembled them in divers habitation; and by this means lead them to a sociable life, taught them first Tillage, and the most necessary Arts and Manufactures; then to read and write, to musick, singing and dancing, but above all instructed them in the Christian Religion, and Piety. Several good orders obser∣ved by them.These Habitations are composed of near a thousand Families; and each Fa∣mily besides the Father, Mother, and the Children; receive often some aged person, not able to work, or some Orphan. So soon as a Habitation is esta∣blished, the Fathers introduce the Government they are to follow; give them Magistrates and Officers, chosen among the most capable of their Body, de∣clare to them the polity and rules they are to observe, take care that the fields assigned to each family be tilled and sowed in due time, that their flocks be well kept; and if there happen any contest among them, what the Fathers ordain stands as a sentence without revocation. Of these Habitations; Parana hath six, St. Ignatius on the River of Tibi∣quari, Itapoa or the Incarnation, and the Holy Sacrament on the River of Parana, N. D. de Yguazu on that of Iguazu, Acaraig or la Nativita de N. D. likewise on the Parana. The Air in all these Habitations is good; the Soil fertile, they have too much Wood, little Pasturage; and near Yguazu little Fish, by reason of the Cataract. The province of Guayr, with its Colonies & Habitations de∣scribed.The Province of Guayr is under the Tropick of Capricorn, advancing it self unto Brazile. There hath been here, for a good continuance of time two or three Colonies of Castilians; Cividad Real, or Ontiveros, and sometimes Guayr, after the name of the Province. Villarica, and St. Paul, which some esteem in Brazile. The habitations for those of the Country, are Nuestra Sennora de Loretto, and St. Ignatius on the Parana; St. Francis Xavier L Incarnation, and St. Joseph on the Tibagiva; the seven Arch-Angels, and St. Paul in the Land of great Tajoba, towards Brazile. The River Pa∣rana.Below Cividad Real, there where is the separation of the two Provinces of Parama and Guayr, the River Parana makes a Cataract, as remarkable as any in the World. This River precipitating it self from a very high Rock, finds it self likewise engaged among very high Rocks for the space of fifteen or sixteen Leagues, where with a great declension it strikes against some, traverses others; divides its waters into many Branches, re-assembles them; and after having been so long in foam and froth, disingaged from these Rocks, it repasses; but in every hour of the day once only is heard, at the bottom of the River, a cer∣tain Lowing, which raiseth up the waters, but which endures but for a mo∣ment, and the River retakes its ordinary course, which is Navigable above and below the Cataract. The province of urvaig with its chief places described.The Province of Ʋrvaig is on the Sea, and between Brazile, and the Mouth of the Paraguay; it takes its name from the River of Ʋrvaig, that is, of Snails, by reason of the prodigious quantity here found. Its habitations are, La Con∣ception, there where the Ʋrvaig falls into the Paraguay; St. Nicholas, on the River Piration; St. Francis Xavier, up within Land; and likewise on the Ʋrvaig; Ibicuit, or the Visitation, on the Paraguay, and almost directly op∣posite to Buenos Ayres, on the other side. But there hath been no relation of these Parts since those of 1626, and 1627, which were Printed in 1636 in Antwerp, and in 1637 in France. If these peo∣ple have since inclined themselves to Christianity, as those Relations say they had begun to do, no doubt, but they are by this time, all or the greatest part, Christians.
The Magellanick Land, and Island. The Magella∣nick-Land bounded.SOuth of Chili, Tucaman, and Rio de la Plata, lies a great Region, and a great many of Isles, which we pass under the name of the MAGEL∣LANICKS. They make together the last, and most Southern part of America Meridionalis: washed on the East by the Mer del Nort, on the West by the Mer del Sud, or the Pacifique-Sea; on the South by the Ma∣gellanick-Sea, which may in general be extended over all the Coasts of these Magellanick-Lands and Islands. The Streight of Magellan first discovered by Magellan the Portugal.The streight of Magellan only, formerly, rendred all these Quarters fa∣mous; because that the People of Europe, and particularly the Castilians, seeking a passage other then that of the Cape of Good-Hope, to go to the Mo∣luccoes, and East-Indies; Magellan, a Portugal Gentleman, but in the name and service of the King of Castile for some discontent he had received in the payment of his wages in Portugal, was the first that found this Streight at the extremity of America Meridionalis; and who passing from Mer del Nort, unto that Del Sud, between the 21 of October, and the 27, or 28 of November; in the year 1520, gave means, not only to the Castilians, to pre∣tend the discovery of the Molucco's, by the West, against the Portugals, who boasted to have first discovered them by the East: but likewise shewed a way to make the whole circuit of the Terrestrial Globe, which certainly had never before been done. The two openings of our Streight, as well towards us, and the Mer del Nort, as on the other side, and towards the Mer del Sud, are between the 52, and 53 Degrees of Latitude, the middle descending unto the 54. And the two Capes of the first opening, are that of the Virgins, on the right hand, and on the Continent; and that of St. Severin, or of St. Espritt, on the left, and in the Magellanick Isles, or Terra del Fogo. The two Capes which end the other opening, are Cape Victory, on the right hand, and Cape Desired, on the left. The length & breadth of this Streight.The length of this Streight is near two hundred Leagues; Its breadth only two, three, six, ten Leagues, and sometimes more; incommodious for the most part, being subject to Whirl-Pools. The Waves of the Mer del Sud predominate for fifty and odd Leagues, the rest is beaten on by those of the Mer del Nort; and it is observed, that so long as the Mer del Sud predo∣minates, the Streight is lockt between very high Mountains and Rocks, al∣ways covered with Snow, and which seem to touch on the other; which makes the approach difficult on this side, and withal, the Sea is exceeding deep. The bottom of that which is beaten by the Mer del Nort, is easily found, and the Fields and Valleys, according to the Season, are very pleasant, both on the one and the other side. And moreover, here the streight much enlarges it self, and hath store of commodious Ports and Roads, not fast distant from one ano∣ther; where the waters likewise are good, and the Wood which is found in the Mountains, above the Coast, hath something of Cinamon, and being put in the fire, renders an agreeable Odour. So soon as the discovery of this Streight was known in Spain, the Castilians had a design to make themselves Masters of it; with an intent to hinder all other Nations from passing. In 1523 Dom. Gutieres Carvajal, Bishop of Plaisance, sent in the name of Charles the fifth, four Ships, to make it more particu∣larly; but this Voyage proved very unfortunate, for three of the Ships perish∣ed in the Streight, and the fourth retired (with no small hurt) to Lima. In 1526 Garsia de Loyosa was likewise here for the same intent, which proved also fatal; for the Admiral coming out of the Streight was lost, as also some at the Molucco's. In 1535 one Simon de Alcazova entred it; but the mutiny which was among his people was the cause of his loss and ill success. Dom.
Gutiers Carvajal, Bishop of Plaisance, sent other three Vessels, in 1539, of which the Admiral was lost, one returned back, and the third passed on. Some others there were which went (all of which were Castilians) some by the Coast of Spain, others by the Coast of Peru; but none could ever find a way to seize this Streight, whereby to hinder a passage to others. Sir Francis Drake in this Streight.For in 1575 Sir Francis Drake, happily passed this Streight, came into the Mer del Sud, pillaged and burned along the Coast of Chili, and Peru, quan∣tity of Spanish Vessels, and making a very rich booty, he returned into Eng∣land. This course of the English very much allarm'd Peru, and was the cause that the Vice-Roy sent Dom. Piedro Sarmiento, to take full knowledge, and make report in Spain of all the Coasts, Harbours, Anchorages, and particu∣larly of places where Forts might be built, and Colonies established in this Streight. This report made in Spain, Dom. Diego de Valdes was sent with twenty three Vessels, and twenty five hundred men. But this voyage was like∣wise unhappy; for seven or eight Ships, with about seven or eight hundred men, were lost almost in sight of Spain; also some others of his Ships, with about three or four hundred men, likewise perished during the Voyage; and Valdes returned into Spain, with seven or eight of his Ships. Sarmento with four remaining was at this Streight, built Nombre de Jesus at the beginning of the Streight, and left there a hundred and fifty men, and began farther in the Cividad del Rey Philippe: but the want of many things, and the cold, too harsh for the Spaniards, made the last work cease, and the men be brought back to the first Colony. Pedro Sermiento returning into Spain, fell into the hands of the English, near the Coast of Brazil; and on the other side, Famine, Miseries, and the Cruelties of the Inhabitants of the Streight, soon destroyed the Colony he had left. After Drake, many other English and Hollanders passed at divers times, and in divers years. Spilbergen in 1615. more happily then the rest, having taken his time in January and February, which is the Summer of these Quar∣ters, the Sun returning from Capricorne. The Streight dele Maire dis∣covered by Isa∣ac le Maire, a Hollander.But in 1617 a hundred years after Magellan, Isaac le Maire, a Hollander, having discovered another Streight incomparably more easie to pass then that of Magellan, this only is now made use of, and called the Streight Dele Maire: It is between the 55 and 55½ degrees of Septentrional Latitude. It hath throughout 10 or 12 Leagues of length and breadth; and so soon as it is passed, there is found a very great Sea, there where we have formerly believed to be a Land so great, that some would make it a third Continent under the name of Terra Australis or Terra Incognita, and Magellanica. The Inhabi∣tants of Magel∣lan, Maire, and the Magellanick Land.The Inhabitants of the Streight of Magellan, Maire, and the Magellanick Lands, are very barbarous, having very sharp and dangerous Teeth; they go almost naked, though in a Countrey very cold; they have neither Religion nor Policy; they are born white, but paint some part of their body red, and others black: And this Painting is a Band drawn straight from Head to Foot, or else cross their Body, or slooping; the rest is in its natural colour, or else sometimes varied with divers colours. They garnish their Arrows and Javelins with Fish-bones, or with Stones very sharp, of which they make their Knives; they use likewise Clubs and Slings. The Patagons a sort of peo∣ple.Amongst these People are the Patagons, a particular Nation in the Conti∣nent, which some call the Race of Toremen. If report be true, they are the greatest men, known at present in any part of the World: They are said to be no less then ten foot high, and we are assured, that the greatest men that were with Magellan, or with the English and Hollanders, that passed this Streight, reached but to their Girdle.
But it is time to leave America. The first expence made to go thither, was not of above 15 or 16000 Duckats, which were advanced by Lewis de St. An∣ge, Secretary of State, and not taken out of the Treasuries of the Kings of Castile and Arragon, who then protested they had not so much money to expend; yet notwithstanding this little hath returned them infinite riches. Christopher Co∣lumbus seised on Hispaniola, and the Neighbouring Isles a little after 1492. Americus Vesputius of Brazil in 1497. Ferdinand Cortes took Mexico in 1519. Pizzarre, Peru in 1529. So others have seised of divers parts of A∣merica, and still of those which are the best; and have brought thence so much Gold, Silver and Riches, that they have filled almost all Europe, and made those Estates, Lordships and Commodities on this side, which before were va∣lued but at Twenty pence, Twenty shillings; or Twenty thousand pounds worth, now a hundred times as much. The Spaniards have received great losses from the Eng∣lish and Dutch.But we must confess, that these discoveries, and these conquests of new Lands hath cost Spain store of men, not so much in the War as on the Sea. In 1590. a hundred Spanish Ships laden with very great riches to return to Europe, passing in company near Florida, a tempest surprized them, and cast them all away, save one, whom Linscot reports to have seen in Tercera; and this Au∣thor assures us, that at the same time divers other Tempests, or divers English Rovers took away or sunk another hundred of Spanish Ships; so that of 220 parted the year before from New Spain, St. Domingo, Havana, Cape Verde, Bra∣zil, Guiney and other places, not above 14 or 15 escaped shipwrack or the English Rovers. Likewise after, and at other times, sometimes the English, sometimes the Hollanders have not only taken abundance of Spanish Vessels on the Sea, but likewise divers places on Land, and sometimes whole Provinces and Islands. The Hollanders held not long since a good part of Brazil; the English hold at present Barbadoes, Jamaica, and some other places in the Isles and Lands a∣bout it. And all those Isles which are on this side Hispaniola, are in the hands of the English, French and Hollanders, who likewise establish divers Colonies on the Coast of Guiana; which if they subsist, those Isles are not already more troublesome Thorns to Mexico and Terra-Firma, then these Colonies in Guia∣na will be to Terra-Firma, Peru and Brazil. The Trade of America in ge∣ral.To give a small touch of the Traffick of this New World, it is observed to give imployment to many Ships of great burthen, and that of several Nations, as well Europeans, as others, by which they have gained much riches; in which, England, Spain, France, Portugal, Holland &c. have been large shar∣ers. To sum up the rich staple commodities that it produceth, as also what Commodities they receive in exchange, will not be unnecessary. Its Fruits and Commodities.First then, Its Earth yieldeth Grains, excellent Fruits, Plants, Sugar, In∣dico, Tobacco, Ginger, Long-Pepper and other Spices, Several Medicinal Drugs, Cotton, of which, as also of the Feathers of their Birds, they make excellent and curious Manufactures. In the bowels of the Earth lie hid, in abundance of Mines, Gold, Silver, Iron, Lead, Tin and Copper; there is also plenty of Quick-silver, Amber, Precious Stones, Pearls, Bezoar, Amber Greece, Gum Arabick, and several Precious Gums, Cocheneile, Saffron, Chrystal, excellent Balsom, Rozin, Salt, Honey, Wax, Rich Furs, Ox-Hides, Tallow, Whale-Oyl, Dried Fish, Pitch, Tar, Jallop, Salsaperilla, Gayac, Turbith. Several excel∣lent Woods, as Campeche, Brazil, Lignum Vita, Green Ebony, Cedar, Cypress, Firrs, and excellent Wood for building of Ships. Commodities sent them in exchange.For these and other such rich commodities they take in exchange, Beads, Necklaces, Bracelets, and the like Toys; as also Looking-Glasses, Ribbons, Needles, Pins, and all sorts of Haberdashery Ware; also Knives, Hatchets, Saws, Nails, Hammers, and other Instruments made of Iron; with several o∣ther of the like cheap Commodities.
We have thus comprised all that seemed most necessary concerning America: true it is, whole Volums might be made only touching the Nature and Propri∣ety of their Grains, Herbs, Plants, Fruits, Fowl, Beasts and Fish, which are all different from ours; yet those which have been carried from hence; have thri∣ved and multiplied exceeding well, either in one place or another: But of all our Beasts, nothing so much astonished them as our Horses; and it was near a hundred years in Peru, and other parts of America, before those People would be perswaded to mount on them. FINIS.
