V12 R222518 99833681 38159
Hugh Peters's PASSING-BELL Rung out in a LETTER To Him, from One that hath been an Accurate Observer of Hugh Peters and Oliver Cromwells Bloody Actions. Justice hath leaden feet, but Iron Hands. T. V LONDON, Printed in the First Year of his Majesties Restauration and his Kingdoms Libertie from Tyranny and Oppression. 1660.
A Letter to Mr. Hugh Peters now in the Tower. Mr. Peters, THE English proverb is now proved true, Frost and Fraud alwaies come to foul ends: The Pot goe's often to the water, but at last com's broken home. If God shall in this your day give you Grace to repent, 'tis his great mercy to your Soul that you have yet space to call on God for mercy, though your Body suffer by the hand of Justice. You are like to come to a better market, than you were like to do, except you leave drink∣ing Sack and Tobacco, whereby you endeavour to smo∣ther, and drown your conscience: O consider seriously how fatall an instrument you have been to the late King, to the State and Ministry: you will finde very few men, since the creation of the World, so deeply engaged in murder, blood, destruction of Church and State, Parlia∣ment, Priest and People, as you have been. You have made the Pulpit a Players stage, a Drum of Treason and Rebellion: You have paun'd your Soul to the Divell, and sould your self, with Ahab, ro do wickedly: you have been a bloody Traitor, and a ravening Wolf. You have murdred your King in a vizard, you have broken all laws against God and Man: you have been a shifter, jugler, and a notorious dissembler▪ No Oath, Covenant, Law, Protestation could binde you: Your principles have va∣ried more often than the Moon you have made a bankrupt of Conscience, and all Solemn Obligations to God and Man.
Surely, you cannot now, in this condition you are in, the Tower, but appear to your self, the most outlawed notorious, perfidious Traitor that ever was in this King∣dom, having wholly given up your self to your lusts of all sorts, Atheism, Murder, Adultery, Simony, Sorcery, Gluttony, and, it is to be feared, the Sin against the holy Ghost: your sins being like Absalom's incestuous and noon-day rapes: your vilenesse acted in the sight of the Sun, and before all the World, having surpassed the cun∣ning and cruelty of the most Jesuited Heads, as much as you come short of them in learning. I leave it to all the World to judge, whether your Treasons have not far surpassed the Gunpowder Treason: they but plotted secretly; but your hellish Treason you have acted openly: you by your Sorcery and Witchcraft frighted the late glorious King from Hampton-Court to the Isle of Wight; Usher'd and came before his Coach, when he was brought Prisoner to St. James's from Hurst. Castle, and slashing your whip, told some of your fellow-Traitors, that you had at length brought the King to be whipped: and not many daies after his Head was whip't off by you, and such vizzarded Divels as you are: you have been the murtherer of our Royall King, the destroy∣er of all true Religion: Guy Fauks was a very honest man compared to Hugh Peters: Cataline never conceived what you have acted: you have besmeared Church, State, and Common-wealth, with the life-blood of our King, even the best of Kings, by your Murther, Treason, Perjury, and Regal Parricide. And now behold God's judgments have overtaken you, you are taken in the Net of your own inventions, being made a by-word, scorn, and contempt of all people: You are become like Cain, afraid of all men: like Judas, curs∣ed to posterity: excommunicated by all good Christi∣ans,
as a murtherer of your Father, a King-killer; you are now in your Conscience haunted with the Ghost and Blood of that glorious King you have traiterously butch∣ered: and the exemplary vengeance of God is now fallen upon you: and all men see, and say, There is a just God in Heaven that rewardeth Traitors according to their de∣merits, leaving Hugh Peters to posterity for the bloodiest Traitor that ever History recorded. With what face of brass couldst thou deny thy name, when thou wast apprehended in Southwark, and when thou wast brought to the Lievtenant of the Tower: I am credibly in∣formed, that thou said'st thy name was Thompson, and said'st, Thou wouldst not be such a Villain as Hugh Peters for a thousand pound: Whereupon those that took thee, know∣ing how to answer so impudent a Traitor as thy self, repli∣ed, If thou wert not Hugh Peters, they would be hang'd for Hugh Peters; but, if thou wert Hugh Peters, thou shouldest be hanged for thy self. At Worcester fight, thou madest use of a Cart, instead of a Pulpit, to rail Treason against our Royall King, calling it a Sermon. Be admonished from me to study a Text for thy farewell—preachment at Tiburn: and let it be all of immethodicall nonsense, and undigested railings, justification of thy felf, and vindicating of thy baudy life and conversation, that all the Spectators may see thou art right Hugh Peters to the end, without grace, common sense and honesty; and such a dissembling Traitor, Atheist, and Villain, as no tongue or pen can utter, nor represent thy wicked basenesse, knavery, impudence, and Atheism. You have, according to your own preachment, brought your Hogs to a fair market; every man expecting by the next winde to see you drawn on a Sledg to Tiburn, your Quarters set up for Crowe's-meat on the City Gates, and
thy traiterous Head stand Sentinel on London-bridge, for the fouls of the Aire to pick out thy accursed eyes for the murther and treason against our late Lord and Sovereign King, whose wisdom, piety, faith and patience, God hath crowned with a glorious Crown of immortallity, whose memory will be ever honored in all succeeding ages, as England's most Noble Patron, and the most patient Mar∣tyr for her Lawes and Liberties. Hugh Peters! Thou usest in thy Pulpit to break Jests on thy houre-glass: let me tell thee a serious one concerning the glass of thy life: Thy sands are almost run out: the thread of thy life in a few dayes will be cut off: how can such a Shimei, who hath so traiterously slain such a King, ever hope to have peace, either in this or an∣other world, since divine vengeance suffered not any of the Murtherers of Julius Caesar, who was but an Usurper, to die any other then a violent death: neither can any of thy fellow-murtherers die in peace, but shall fall from one wickednesse to another, till eternal vengeance seize upon you all, for murthering the most royallest, and most illustrious Exemplar of Virtue and Pietie, that ever sat on a Christian Throne: the most unspotted person, the justest and wisest Prince, the most charitable Chri∣stian that ever wore a Crown. This was CHARLES the First, the Wise, the Just. This, this was the man; this the Christian King, the Saint, the Martyr, whom thou Iudas (aliàs Hugh Peters) and thy fellow-Traitors destroyed, and like Cannibals devoured. Never hath any History of humane affairs recorded any such excels of riot, superfluity of wickednes, flowing from the hearts of any men parallel to your: never any com∣bination of wickedmen was more filled with the quintes∣sence of all wickednes, which exceeds the names of l vice and infamie; or ever more deserved to be made a publick
curse, and universal execration to all mankinde; to have their persons cut off from the face of the earth, and bu∣ried with the burial of an Asse, to have their posterity as a pestilent progeny (as Raviliac in France) spewed out of the Land, their Houses plucked down and made a Jakes, their Memories blotted out from under heaven, or, if re∣membred, with perpetual scorn, cursing, and infamy, as being men, whose paths lead to the chambers of death, and their steps to the pit of hell. To conclude, I wish you, whatever becomes of your body, to repent, and earnestly to cry to God day and night, for mercie on your soul, that little time you are to stay here, and be no more. T. V. POSTSCRIPT. This is presented unto you by one that for nine hundred twen∣ty eight dayes was kept close Prisoner in the Tower, for bring∣ing up from Oxford to London 1643. his late Majesties Let∣ter for Peace, and was robbed, sequestred and plundred for do∣ing the same, of eleven thousand pounds, to his damage at this day, twenty thousand pounds. Sept. 23. 1600. T.V. FINIS.
