y212a r218123 99829745 34188
A FAITHFULL RELATION of the STATE and the LAST WORDS & DISPOSITIONS Of certain Persons whom God hath taken to him self, out of the Church reformed and separated from the world, which for∣merly was assembled at Herfort and Alte∣na, and now at present at Wiewert in Friesland. written originally in french By PETER YVON, their Pastor. At AMSTERDAM, Jacob vande Velde at the corner of the Short Niesell. Anno 1685.
THE PREFACE. ALTHOUGH God hath gi∣ven us great matter of prai∣sing & thanking him for his grace which he hath bestowed on all our Brethren and Sisters, whom we have seen to pass over to him through death, since he hath formed his Work amongst us at Herfort, untill this day; yet how∣ever it came not in our minds to collect together their last words, or to keep a particular record of heir last dispositions. True it is we did this in some measure in res∣ect of that faithfull servant of he Lord Mr. de Labadie, whom God hath made use of in a speci∣ll manner for the forming of this Work of his; and likewise after hat God had taken hence into his eavenly Kingdom, his humble ervant our worthy & most blessed ister Mrs. Anne Mary van Schur∣an. Yet we have not made hast,
to bring to light those points of e∣dification, which we have noted concerning them both, and which may be seen in the description of their lives, which, if God please, shall be put forth to the glory of his grace. If therefore we do re∣new at present the memory of those who died happily among us, it is indeed the Lord who give occasion thereunto, and sheweth how that he willeth this from us, for the edification of our neigh∣bours, and to the acknowledge∣ment and thanks for his grace an love which he hath shewed t them and us. Of four souls whom the Lor hath taken to himself out of o Assembly in the last year 1680. an in the begin of this present ye 1681., the first was our very wor∣thy Sister Mistris Huyghens. An for as much as she after a glorio and triumphant manner hath pas∣sed over into his bosom, after h
happy departure, we found our selves disposed to note certain cir∣cumstances & words which went efore it, and came most lively nto our minds, as wel for our wn comfort as for the comfort of er friends, and of divers others who in her life time did know & ove her very much. That which was written concerning it, being y little and little communicated from one to another, hath done ery much fruit, and hath edify∣d much divers upright souls into whose hands it came. And for as uch as God hath continued to omfort us after the same manner, y those whom like incorruptible lants, he hath translated from arth into heaven: we have be∣eeved that we were bound to give ome witness of the grace of God hat was upon them, and to pre∣erve some remembrance thereof, o the glory of his goodness and ove for their souls. This is that
which gave occasion to those fou descriptions which shall be found first hereafter, which being made common by the press may be read by more persons, and likewise without all doubt will be of more profit then formerly. And just after this collection was made, God doth again give us speciall matter to renew the remembrance of those blessed ones of ours who died, by the happy decease of my very worthy and beloved Bro∣ther and fellow-labourer Master Dulignon, a faithfull Pastor of this Church, after he had lived here below for near the time of fifty years. In the fifth descrip∣tion in this book certain circum∣stances of his life and death shall be seen, untill a larger and more par∣ticular information thereof shall be given in the life of Master d Labadie. By this occasion we have found our selves to be disposed to cal
to mind some of the last words and chief circumstances of our o∣ther brethren and sisters, which are gone to the Lord since the year 1672. untill the last year 1680. And seeing that the re∣membrance of that good which God hath done to them, might be for edification, so we thought that we ought not to keep it in si∣lence and forgetfulness. There∣fore the last description will shew what in their divers states hath most of all touched our hearts, and that which of some hath been noted, or hath remained most li∣vely in our thoughts. The Righteous perisheth, saith the Prophet, and no man layeth t to heart, and mercifull men are aken away, none considering hat the Righteous is taken away from the evill to come Isay. 57: 1., from that evill which is to come pon the earth. The want of observing that which God doth
is great and very common, and those that fear the Lord, must take heed thereof, and contrary∣wise must seek to elevate them selves up to God, in observing what his hand worketh and doth in his grace and divine love. If we must draw fruit out of the ho∣ly words of the living, so then we ought to do the same in a spe∣ciall manner out of the lively words of those that die in the Lord, and are taken up into his Glory. We all are going to eter∣nity, and every moment of our lives are as so many steps made to∣wards it. And so every one go∣eth thitherward by little and lit∣tle, and commeth to it common∣ly before he thought on it, or waited for it. Time is given to us for to make provision for eter∣nity; and unhappy are those who loose and neglect it, and be∣stow it not for him who will save to all eternity those who have li∣ved
for him, and have layed to heart his divine glory, JESUS is come to open heaven to us, whe∣ther it be when he came down from heaven to us, or when he ascended thither, triumphing o∣ver hell, death, and sinn. How just then is it, that all those who love him should follow him into that glorious mansion place with gladness, and in being ravished with that inexpressible joy which is proper to Christians? We shall see some amplifications hereof, out of which faithfull souls will without doubt take matter of praysing and glorifying him who worketh such things in his Saints. Furthermore we do not think hat any who have any know∣edge of Church-history and the holy Scriptures, will think it trange that we give to one an o∣her the names of Brethren and Sisters, as may frequently be seen n this book. Otherwise one
should not remember that it was the name wherewith the old Isra∣ell called one an other, accor∣ding to the intention and words of the Lord. A man then like∣wise would have forgotten the command of Christ which he gave to all those that are his, namely to regard each other as children of one and the self same Father that is God; and have lit∣tle knowledge of the stile of the Apostles when they speake of Christians, or write unto them The heathens as we may see in Tertullian and Minutius Felix, did admire at it that the Saints did give to each others such names, and that the faithfull men called even their wives Sisters, accor∣ding to the language of the Apos∣tle Paul. But we need only to read what these two Authors write concerning it, the one in his apologetick or answer for the Christians, and the other in his
Octavius, as also Justinus and Athenagoras in their defenses, nd Clemens Alexandrinus in his Stromates, for to be convinced hat it is the language of the Christians, and to see what great nd visiable grounds they have to ive each other this name.
THE LIFE & DEATH Of divers SERVANTS OF GOD. Some of the last words and senses of Mrs. Huyghens, our worthy Sister, being deceased at Wiewert in Frieslant the 30. of January in the year 1680▪ WE need not to speak any thing whereby to make known this Servant of God, because she is suf∣ficiently known in these provinces. Though she might have had in the world all that is commonly sought there in, yet she hath despised it even from her youth. In these ti∣mes wherein corruptions are very extream, she was one of the first of her condition, who durst make open pro∣fession of godliness, treading under her feet the vanitys and false advan∣tages of the world. She did for a long while seek after that which God in a speciall manner caused her to finde in
the last years of her age. Her patience in her sufferings and pains hath been notable long ago: especially in the 27. year of her age, when there was necessity to cut a canker out of her breast, wherewith the Lord had visi∣ted her for her triall, & to be glorified in her, causing her to suffer as she did. The wicked world seeing her strength and courage, which in this case did appear, and being neither willing nor able to give honor to God and Je∣sus Christ, would rather say that the woman at Gorcum, who did cut her, had bewitched her, then to acknow∣ledge the support and help, which God's Grace in this necessity had af∣forded unto her. The inward trials of her soul, for a long time, have been greater then the trials of her body. At soon as she had spoken with that ser∣vant of God Mr. Labadie in the year 1666. when we came into these pro∣vinces, she found her heart inwardly joint with that grace, which God had laid in the heart of his instru∣ment. And she felt lively in her minde, that it was the same thing that
so long she had sought for: which caused her to say with great joy to di∣vers of her friends, I have found a Man of God. She followed God at his call, and nothing was able to keep her back in his way. Yet however, it hath cost her much to be throughly purged: but she hath allways found, especial∣ly in the last years of her life, how good and faithfull God hath been to her in all his dealings with her, and in all those wayes which he hath taken with her soul. He hath imployed her, since we came in Friesland, to doe much good to divers, both in respect of soul and body. One soul amongst others, whom God would urn to himself by her means, in a very evident and extraordinary man∣ner, did serve to confirm that she was indeed an instrument in the hand of God, to doe the works of his love nd grace. The 6. of January 160. she was in∣lined to go and walk in the orcherd, lthoug she was hardly able to goe o far, being already not very well to as. From thence she did cast her eyes
upon our churchyard, which she could see from that place, with this impres∣sion that the Lord would shortly cause her body to be brought thither. And God even at that time not giving her much sense of his grace, she remained in some sadness before him. Being sat down and a beam of the sun shining on her face through the trees, she felt a lively impression that God would yet cause his glorious face to shine upon her; and withall perceiving that ont beam of God, being more lively and clearer then that of the sun, did touch her heart and soul, and gave her the sense that after her departure out of the world God would certainly cause her to enter into his glory, to be allwayes with him. In this sickness, which did conti∣nue some time, before she kept her bed, she had a deep impression, that God would speedily take her out of the world. And though she found her self burdened with many diseases, which pressed her on all sides, yet she said allwayes that her whole heart was disposed to leave her self
to God, and not to use many reme∣dys, entreating that we would but commit her to the Lord, and his divine hand, in which she found all her rest. And this she spake with such an affection which penetrated her heart, and did put her above her self and all her weaknesses. The counsel of God, said she, must needs be fulsilled: It is his will that I should suffer, sometimes after one manner, and sometimes after another. Leae me to the Lord. Her last weaknesses did conti∣nue some monthes. They tooke their beginning with great paines in her loins, and with a fit of the gravell: to which she was much sub∣ject. Afterwards she began to vo∣mite very much, not being well able to retain that which she took for her sustainance. She looked upon this inconvenience as was that of an other person amongst us, which was not thereby remarkably weakened. But for her it was very incommodi∣ous, especially at night time, for then she suffered much, and passed the same many times without closing
As long as she could she remained upon her leggs, having kept her bed wholly but a few dayes. But she should have done it sooner, if lo∣ve had not powerfully suppor∣ted her, and made her to forget her self and her uneasiness, to help her brothers and sisters. This for∣getting & denying of her self hath been very evident & special. Some monthes since the Lord in his provi∣dence applying her a new to help the sick among his children, she said that she felt as the last outgoings of her haert to God, to bestow the remainder of her strength with love on him and those that are his. We did many times admire, how she did at day time go and come with so much zeal & strength, when she had past the nigt before so ill & with so much unease. But we saw that we must leave her to God & his Spirit, and to his love which did press her to doe for his children what she did. She could hardly be perswaded that we should consult with the Doctor, one of our friends, and yet less that he should come to visit her: But at
last she consented to it, giving way to our hearty desires, and to the af∣fecttions of our tenderness and love, which did move us, if it was possi∣ble and pleasing to God, to give her some help or ease. The Doctor was much comforted, and glad in God, when he visited her, and found her soul in that frame, in which it was, though he saw very well, that little help could be given to her bo∣dy. She had a great hunger & thirst to the word of God, & did cherish her self up oftentimes, that she might hear speaking of him in the assembly of his children: for this was her great joy & comfort. A few dayes before her dissolution she was yet in the assembly, & found her self thereby as wholly refreshed, comforted & lifted up to God. Two dayes before her death, as we came out of the assembly, & I told her that one point was handled which did much agree with her state, and that all of us were touched very much there with, the children of the Lord with a
tender acknowledgement calling to mind the works of her love, she an∣swered in deep humility: Alas what have I done for them! I have received more demonstrations of their love in two dayes, then I have given them all the dayes of my life. But if God should again restore me, ô with what heart & love & joy would I serve them! In the same day in the morning by time she had a great desire to speak with me, & to tell me That the Lord did confirm my words to her heart, that he did more & more draw near to her, that he shewed himself to her soul, that he came & was come; and though he was not altogether near at hand, that yet he gave, in beholding of him, to en∣joy his rest, to feel his peace, & to give her self wholly into his hands. From that time also we saw in her a new enlargement of spiritual life, divine strength & pure joy in God & CHRIST her Saviour. And e∣ven to her last breaht, she gave spe∣ciall cause of comfort, holy joy & blessing of God, to all those which
have seen and heard her. For as much as by all what was given to her, she got no ease, & that even the best things and that which did allwayes help her before, did seem now to be become quite contra∣ry to her; she rejoyced in the Lord of∣tentimes, because he had taken away from her all creature help, that so he might take away from her all stay & support which at any time she might have placed in them, and she said many times with a great impression: No more creatures, I need the Creator. On the same day, she did entreat those who were about her bed, that they should sing the 42 psalm. Like as the hart doth breath & bray The well springs to obtain, So doeth my soul desire allway With the Lord to remain &c. whereby she was so much moved, that she did even melt in teares & in tenderness of heart & love for God, for whom she groaned without ceasing. A little after, my Brother Du∣lignon, who by reason of his great
indisposition had not yet been out of his chamber, coming to visit her, though it was bad weather, and the cold something sharp, she was so very sensible of it, that she could not suffi∣ciently express it, saying she was un∣worthy of all the love that, was she∣wen to her, which however, as she said, she could not resist; adding there unto, that what was told her by my worthy Brother, did pull up her heart to God, to make her speedily to fly up to him. That which most constantly and tenderly did affect her heart, was that she had not sufficiently glorified the goodness and mercy of the Lord, which she found to be so great and ex∣cellent: That, said she, goeth through my heart. And lifting up her soul to God, she added: I doe sink, I doe sink in thy bottomless gulfe, O my God. O my Fa∣ther, art thou so good to such a sinner, that thou doest pardon me all my sins, my many∣fold sins, my infinite sins! And turning her self a little to our sister van de P. she said: My beloved sister, O how great a grace! I would very willingly go to the house of my Father, however I have deserved
that he should say, Stay there thou naughty child, stay yet longer in the world. The night which was between sunday and monday, our sister van de P. with an other watching by her, they saw that she had great pains and suffered mo∣re then ordinarily, especially by the generall convulsions of her sin∣news, through all her body; but she endured it with so much patience and acknowledgement of the help which was given to her, that they could not but be touched therewith, and be sensible of it Pray the Lord for me, said she. And as soon as she was something eased, she instantly desired that they would be pleased to take some rest, it being a trouble to her that they did it not. On sunday evening our sister van de P. relating to her, that I found my self to be thus employed before God a∣bout her and her state, that I had scar∣ce any thing else in my heart and houghts, and that I felt, that God was good to her, and would in a speciall manner be so: She answered, Lord what doest thou not let
me hear, who am so unworthy! My God, thou art willing even to overburden me with thy goodness! The Lord giving me more opportunity to come un∣to her, then to my dear Brother Du∣lignon, she accepted all whatso∣ever I said unto her, with so much tenderness and thankfullness, for the love and care which God ma∣de us to have for her, that she was wholly taken up therewith. On the one side her deep humility was the cause that she felt her self to be unworthy of so many visits; but on the other side her desire to it was so great, and her joy for it so lively and powerfull, that she could not keep it in. My Brother Dulignon telling her, Beloved Sister, you shall die in such manner as we our selves would desire to die: her heart was lively touched thereby, and with great affection going out to the Lord. On monday at noon whilst we were at dinner, she entreated again our sister van de P. to sing the first vers of the 42. Psalm. And after
she had sung it in French, and sung it over again in Dutch, our sister Huyghens did sing it with her with such fullness of heart and loud∣ness of voice, that we could heare it below; and one should not say then, that her end was so near by. Afterwards our sister van de P. sung to her these three verses out of one of our songs. O come, and let us give all glory to the Lord, Who is the Lamb of God; praise him with one accord. Who in his mercys great, and goodness infinite, Unto his wedding feast him self us doth invite; Who gives to us his grace, great bounty in his love. Who can then choose but fly with wings to him above, Where when we shall arrive nothing shall wanting be, Where when our soules shall come, we shall all fullness see. O, come therefore, come godly Bridegroom, come: Come, Lord, unto thy glorious kingdom.
Exalted be on earth thy kingdom dear. The like say he which ever this doth hear. Come speedily, ô Lord, we the adore: Yea come, ô Lord, again we thee implore. O joyfull word, Yea I come speedily, Aglorious word, a word most lovely. Amen, Lord come, and make no more delay According to thy truth our hearts doe say, So saith thy Spirit, Lord: so by thy grace. Thy Spouse: O Jesus, let us see thy face. Wherewith all she joyned herself in a speciall manner, & desired that the same might be repeated to her again, by reason of that speciall sa∣vour which she had therein. Being oftentimes visited by divert of the children of the Lord, she said when they were gone: O how lovely doth the Lord make them! A brother seeing her to suffer, and being thereby moved very much, did say: Worthy sister, I pray to God that it may be his will to lessen your pains. I am tenderly moved to see you suf∣fer so much; But I cannot bemoa∣ne you, because I see you by the means here of to draw near to the Lord, & to your full delivrance. Which thoughts she embraced with
joy and speciall pleasure. Our Sister van de P. having said unto her, We doe beleeve in∣deed that the Lord will take you to himself, but we hope that he will give us yet first more opportunity, to shew to you the love which the Lord hath given to us for you; She said on the moonday evening: Wel my sister, I now may very well go: for I have certainly received sufficient proofs of your love. And where as they were talking, who were to watch the night of the day after, she asserted: There need no care for that, there will be no need of it. And withall she asked, Are not they to wash to morrow? ô I hope that the Lord Jesus will wholly wash my soul to morrow. And the next day, which was the day she died, she said, having respect to these two things, Have not I told it to you? She was as ravished, when she thought thereon, that she should be with∣out sin, and wholly made white in the blood of JESUS CHRIST, & throug the full effusion of his Spirit upon her: O, said she, not to sin any
more, not to be able to sin any more, what great happiness is that! The night which was between monday & tuesday, our sister van S. watching with our sister C. who did usually take care of the sick with Mrs. Huyghens, she shewed much thank∣fullness to God, because he did some∣thingh asswage her paines, although her anguishes were yet great; and she received with much tenderness & humility that service which was done to her, saying: Behold, how much service doe I want? It is good that men doe something enter into the state of the sick; one should sometimes think that they have no need of so many things. She did not think on her self but with relation to others, and through that sense which charity did give to her. This made her in a speci∣all manner to say to our brother D. taking him by the hand: My bro∣ther, many have asked me whether I had any thing to say to them, & I had nothing: but I will tell you: For as much as at present
you are to have the speciall care for the sick, that you doe wholly & with great application give you self thereunto. O how much have you hel∣ped me, said she more then once to our Sister van S. If you had not been so strong as to raise me up oftentimes, I had failed in my anguishings. What a faith∣full help have you been to me. On Tuesday morning she found herself wholly faint in all her limbs, and to be taken with a sleep which did nothing but make her more hea∣vy. Whereupon she said very sen∣sibly, Now God will give some change. The Doctor being come some time afterwards, & finding her to be so weak, that many remedys were not to be given unto her any more, she was very glad, seeing that God did make her by degrees draw nearer & nearer to her end, and that no help was to be exspected any more from the creatures, being not to live any longer here below. O how doe I re∣joyce, said she, that the opinion of the Doctor is not contrary to mine! About an hour after dinner out
sister Y. saying to her: My worthy sister, God hath made you to passe through many trialls, and now long ago: Yes, said she, the Lord hath tried me indeed; but however, he hath been allwayes with me. Yet she was even then in great an∣guish, in which she found her self af∣ter she had slumbred a little while. And when she felt death to ap∣proach, she said, Shall I no more see our beloved Brethren, our worthy Pastors? (We were just gone down with the Doctor.) This then was told us, & coming presently to her, we found her in great faintness, and we lif∣ted up our selves to God (as we fre∣quently did,) offering up unto him for an oblation this worthy soul, & giving her over in the hands of the Lord JESUS, her great & faith∣full Shepherd. She was at that time in unusuall anguishments, which caused such great & suddain changes in her, that one could cleerly see, that she has∣tened much towards her end, and that likely it would not be long, befo∣re
she should attaine to it. It see∣med sometimes, as if she should be gone in those faint fits, but she came to her self againe. The first word that she said, speaking to the Do∣ctor, was: O Sir, how good is it to live & die among the chil∣dren of God! How much help and support doth one receive from them! ô how great a good is it! And for as much as I said unto her, My worthy sister, we cannot help you, nor give you any ease; she did answere with great feeling of heart: Yea indeed you can help me, and you doe help me. But the mind & heart, where with she did speak this & so many other things, are not well to be expressed. The Doctor, which had a speci∣all love to our house, said to her, that it would have been a great greef to him, if he had not been with her that day, and that having had parti∣cular acquaintance with her, she should have gone to the Lord, with∣out having seen her in that comforta∣ble state wherein he saw her. And be∣cause,
cause, as he added, even as Salomon saith, it is better to goe into the house of mourning, then into the house of feasting, for there is the end of all flesh, and the living doth lay it to heart: she thereupon an∣swered with a laughing mouth and joyfull heart: A house of mour∣ning? No Sir, this is no house of mourning; it is a house of laughter, and a house of joy. Doe not you behold the heart of my dear brethe∣ren and sisters? Doe not you see how joyfull they are? and how they thank God for the grace which he sheweth unto me? And though by reason of my weakness they doe not now sing out aloud, O they will doe it hereafter, as soon as I shall have passed over to the Lord. And turning her self towards us, she proceeded on to say: Is it not true, worthy brethren and sisters, that you doe rejoyce, and that you will praise the Lord for my delive∣rance? O doe it, doe it, I pray you, as soon as I shall be gone to my God. And applying her self in a
speciall manner to our sister van de P. she said: Will not you doe it my dear sister? Will not you praise the Lord? I pray, doe it. The Doctor being willing to make her to take something, she said divers times, I have no need any more, I have no need of a cordiall, desiring to acquaint them that she had her cordial in her heart. And one telling her that it was but a little of the spirit of lemons, she replyed, Doe not speak to me of any more spirits. And when thereupon I said unto her, My si∣ster, you are dead unto the creatures, you must have the holy Ghost for your cordiall; she said divers times: Yea my worthy Brother, yea it is he, and he alone, whom I doe want. We saw her indeed dead unto the exspectation of any reme∣dys, and it troubled her to hear us speak of it; not by reason of any naturall contrariety, for she had none in the least against the most lothsome things before her sickness, when the Lord would have it to be: but because her heart and mind was so
much taken up with God, that she could not so much as think on that which is here below. And likewise we found that all things did her hurt, and the Doctor said, that he saw that nothing was more fit for her then the wine spunge, which from time to ti∣me during her sickness we were wont to give unto her, to strengthen her. Her anguishments being again grown very great, I did present her befo∣re the Lord, praying unto him for the continuance of the assistance of his divine grace & power to his servant, that was suffering before his eyes and at his feet. Where upon falling in a great faintness, she laid her self down upon her pillow, saying: I loose my self in God for ever. A little after my Brother Dulignon saying unto her, Well my worthy Sister, the Lord will come, and will speedily come; she encouraged her self to tell him: Yea my worthy brother, yea indeed he com∣eth. Which she repeated three or four times, with so much tenderness of heart, that we clearly saw that her heart was wholly penetrated, and
burning with love towards the Lord Jesus. Afterwards she fell into a little sleep, which did continue for about the space of a quarter of an hour. And for as much as we did see con∣tinually, that she did allwayes come out of those slumbrings with great an∣guish, we therefore did admire to see her coming out of this, so full of life and spirituall strength, by which it did evidently appear, that the Lord was come yet nearer unto her, and that the sense of his lovely presence had, as it were, even wholly refreshed and renewed her. Being indeed full thereof, she could not keep her self from crying out with a loud voyce and speciall strength: O how good is the Lord! O how good is he! My God, art thou so good to me! My God, my Father, could I at any time conceive it? O how great is God! Let every one loose him self in him, and in his goodness; Yea let every one loose him self in him, and give him self wholly o∣ver unto Him. But it would not be possible to relate all the words and ex∣pressions, where with her heart and
mouth, for the time of more then half an hour did overflow, with such a lifting up of her minde to God, and union of her heart with Jesus Christ, that all those that did hear and see her, were holily taken up with it, not being able to doe any thing else but thank God from the bottom of their hearts, for this plentifull effusion of his Spirit and Grace, of his light and love, wherewith he had so much filled up this vessell, that it did run over in such a pure, affectio∣nate and loving manner. And for as much as we were come round about her bed, to see her to finish her cours and triumph, she looked round a∣bout her upon every one of us with great pleasure, and praised God that she found her self to be compassed a∣bout with such a number of Gods children: These are, said she to the Doctor, my worthy Bretheren and Sisters. O how lovely are they! Indeed, the love which God had given to her for all his children, is not to be expressed. Afterwards because we saw that her mouth began to grow something
dry, and we asked her if she would not drink, she answered, No, but I go to drink, I go to drink the waters of life: there will be quenching and refreshment. And turning her self about to our sister van de P., she said: Did not I tell you that to day I should be washed in that great lavour of the blood of Jesus? And this shall be. I drown my self, said she, in that Sea, yea in that great Sea. And we saw that her heart and soul did even flote away in love to God, sinking in the bottomless ocean of his mercy and of the blood of Christ her Saviour. She spoke with an inexpressable sense of the beauty, glory, and loveli∣ness of the Lord Jesus: oftentimes re∣peating these words, O what is he not! Having kept silence some time, she said, I go to embrace him in the name of you all. And turning her self un∣to me, she said: tell it, I pray you, to our two brethren which are absent, that I am going to embrace the Lord Jesus in their name & tho name of you all. Worthy brethren & sisters, said she, with a speciall affection, and a very great impression, Fear not death, it is not
bitter: no it is sweet, it is sweet & good. Be not afraid of it, it is very well to be born. The bitterness of death is past; adding unto it who was it that said so? But I speak it in an other sens. And when I answe∣red her, He who spake those words, thought that he should not die, but you say them, seeing death coming on & embracing it: I, said she, so it is that I mean. She said, Fear not to go to God: Doe not you heare it, brethren and sisters? It is good to loose our selves in him: then we are truely save. O how doe I feel it and have experience of it! I did not think that death was so sweet. And shortly after: I die every minute, and yet I live still. God worketh no miracles to free us from the cross. I must suffer, God will have it to be so, and I likewise. How sad and terrible a thing would it be to me, said she, if God now should be terrible to my soul: Death would be untolerable to me. Being in great anguish and grow∣ng
faint, she said In what great an∣guish am I! But it is only accor∣ding to the body, it is only from without, within there is room. She said to the two brethren H. with great sense: How good is the Lord, hat he hath brought you in his house, in the idst of his children. Taking by the hand our sister C. who had employed her self with her bout medicins and the sick, as well within the house as without, she said nto her: You will loose nothing, I doe surely trust that God will provide in all things. He will shew that he hath no need of this iustrument, which till now he hath been pleased to make use of. Have the same confidence. The Doctor with great affection king his leaf of her, and telling her hat she should proceed to fight the od fight, and that she should re∣ive the crown of life; she answered ith gladness of mind, and a great otion of heart: Sir, I have no need to ght, the Lord Jesus hath vanquished & rcome all.
Turning her self to our sister V. she said: You must loose your self more in the Lord. Our safety is in that loss. There is no other way but this. Our sisters van S. having received a letter from Mrs. Verbrugge, which was sealed with black sealing-wax, and having opened it in the steed of our sister Huyghens who could not doe it, they told me the contents thereof. I there upon going to our worthy sister, said unto her, I bring you good tidings, your cousin Arnoldina is gone before you to hea∣ven; there you will find her: for she is deceased, after that she had re∣ceived divers great proofs of gods grace: she said O is it true, my wor∣thy Brother, is that sweet child even gone before me? The Lord be praised for it, the Lord hath done accor∣ding as I felt. The Lord hath made me to feel it. And she added to it: "Did not I tell you so, my sister turning her self to our sister van S.  whom she had spoken this. Again having slumbred a little, after
she had expressed many most inward and stirring affections when she awa∣kened, she said: Thus to die even sleeping what an easy death is that. After she was fallen into faintness, and was come to her self again, she said: I am not alwayes the like in an∣guish. And I having told her a little before, that the Lord JESUS would lead her through the shadow of death, she did answer me: Jea in∣deed, it is but a shadow of death, that I am passing through. Between six & seven a clock, she said looking on our Sister vande P., which supported her: My beloved Sister, must I yet dye in your arms? She had said unto her before with great affection: The Lord is come, He is come. And afterwards she repea∣ted, being full of joy: To be so near, to be so near to God, what happiness is that! I go now to enjoy an other life. Our sister vande P. saying that the Doctor had said, that a bout sven a clock some alteration would be seen, which he understood of death; and she adding thereunto after her
meaning, that it would be after one manner or an other: She answered: Loving Sister, tell me not of an other manner, being as I am now so near by the Lord. My heart being full of the sense of Gods goodness, which did so plentifully effuse it self upon her, and I telling her: Did not I tell you, from the Lord, that he would thus deal with you; She an∣swered: Yes my worthy Brother, it is because you did better know Him then I. And while as at divers times she had shewen much zeal for the souls of her Friends, and a fervent desire that God through his grace might be glorified in them, I therefore asked her a few hours before her death, if she did desire that I should write any thing in particular to her sister Mrs. Verbrugge, and to Mr. Huyghen her Brother. And she answered me: Nothing but that I leave them to the Lord, that I have committed them unto him, and that in love I doe tenderly salute them. And asking her yet, shall not I doe the same to Madam van O. She
answered, Should not you? you knows how much I have allwayes loved her with her worthy Sisters. Our Sister Magdalene, whose happy decease shall likewise be found here, telling her two monthes before her end, that she did as yet feel some fear, when she beheld death; she said to her chearfully: You must come & see me die, for I shall not live long any more; and then you will have no more fear for death. Even as in her life-time she had a great zeal for the elect of God, and the establishment & enlargement of the kingdom of JESUS CHRIST in their soules, which was the cheef matter of her desires & prayers: so likewise she did in a speciall manner enlarge them in her last hour. Not by any motion of her own, or any thing that would as prevent the Lord by doing that which he did not, or more then he did or found good to doe: For in this thing she had recei∣ved much light from the Lord, and she humbled herself before him for
that mixtur of her own work in times past, with that which should have been only the Lords work but her heart went forh with much tenderness to God for his Elect, that are in so much danger in the midst of the world. And she did shew that she was especially sensible, whether it was of the state of those on whom God by his Grace had truely wrought, and that did yet remain compassed about with great darkness and wants, or whether it was for the state of those elect who had not yet heard of Christ. It is not to be ex∣pressed how tenderly sensible she was there of. She said that she would pray to the Lord Jesus for the conversion of the poor Indians, for whom she had a very speciall zeal, being contented, she said, if God should give her life and did make some of us to go there, to be one of the first, notwithstan∣ding her weakness, sickliness, and years. Oftentimes in the sense of her infir∣mity she said very meekly: J beseech
you, pray unto the Lord for me, for I am sure I have need of his grace and strength to endure my pains. Some time before she died, she said to me in much humility: My worthy Brother, I have not desired pardon of you for all the pains which I have gi∣ven to you. And I answering her, the Lord JESUS hath forgiven and attoned all, she replyed, This I had likewise thought. A little before her death she did desire to have some beere for refresh∣ment, refusing the rinnish wine which was presented unto her, and which she could not well endure in her sickness. A little after she said, Let me now stretch out my self, for it is done, it is done. Whereupon she fell in∣to a softsleep which was the very sleep of death, for she deceased in the Lord half a quarter of an hour after, with a very great rest, peace & tran∣quillity. On this manner hath this soul so much beloved by God & his Chil∣dren, happily finished her course. She was, to say indeed, not very
sick, but only the two last dayes of her life, for before that, there was as much likelyhood that God would restore her again, as that he would take her out of this world to him∣self. God gave her to the very last such a great presence of spirit; such a lively memory, such a solidity of judgement, so holy & couragious a confidence, and so perfect a know∣ledge of all whatsoever her heart did love in God, that one might clearly see, that there was in her an other life then that of the body, which did support, inaminate and more enliven her, then at any time before. She is now with God, and resteth in his bosom from her labour. She is blessed being dead in the Lord, his Grace having prevented her, his Glory having received her, and the works of her love which God gave her to doe, having followed her. She looked little on them in her life∣time, but yet less in her death. And God who is good & faithfull to those that belong to him, hath crow∣ned in her with his Glory the gifts
of his Grace, which in Christ he had imparted unto her. The Lord JESUS be for evermore praised for the accomplishment of his work in her, and to him be given the honour & glory, by all those who shall read this writing, the which we make common by aiming thereat & wish∣ing for it, by the sense of his Spirit, and his divine love. The last words and dispositions of Hille∣tje, the daughter of our Brother Hans Simons. GOd hath been pleased to give us a new argument of his mercy & grace over this his flock, by taking a∣way, in his unspeakable love, a lamb from the midst of the same to him∣self. It was the daughter of our bro∣ther Hans Simons our carpenter, whom God was pleased to visite with a pining sickness, and great pains, especially at her latter end. But withall he did give her such an ami∣able patience, perfect resignation of her self to his will, and tender & inward desire to go to him & to die,
that she might be able in heaven fully to glorify him, that we have cause to praise him with all our heart for all what he hath done about this good child to the end. Some time before she came to keep her bed, reading in the Scripture, she ligh∣ted on the History of Hagar & her child, on whom the Lord had com∣passion in the wilderness, whereas otherwise it must have perished with thirst; and the person with whom she did work, asking her what she had read, and what therein had touched her heart, she answered thereupon sensibly: I doe admire to see that God doth hearken to the voice & weeping of a child, and hath compassion thereon. Being asked some time be∣fore her death, whether she did be∣leeve that God by this sickness would take her to himself, she answered; Yes I beleeve he will; however I hope it of his goodnesse. And being yet asked wherefore she was so desirous there∣of, she said: To be freed from sin. She added to it, "All that I desire of God, is that he may be pleased
throughly to purge me, I hope God in his mercy will come unto me, and take me to himself, I am so glad that I may suffer, to go to God! O how great a good is that! I feel, said she, that God is with me, and causeth me to feel his peace: and I pray to him that he may be with me to the end, al∣though I am very much unworthy of it. One time among the rest having desired to speak unto me, she said that she had felt God would have her to tell me, That she was very sorry, because she had been so little penitent for her sins; but that she did feel, she must re∣main to the end in the Spirit of repentance, for to go in that state to God. I likewise beleeve, said she, that God in his mercy will forgive me my sins for JESUS CHRIST his Sons sake, whose Grace I doe need so much. Pray to God, saith she at another time to those that were round about her, that even to the end I may keep my self before him, in the Spirit
of repentance. Before this, my heart came with much a doe to prayer, but now at present it goeth as of it self to the Lord & without the least labor. Being as∣ked, if God should leave it to her choice, whether she would live or die, what she would rather choose, she answered with much sensibleness: I doe very much wish to go to God; I am afraid of this life, and I love death rather, because I hope that God by the means thereof will ful∣ly unite me with himself. When she was in very great anguish, and she was told, that likely the Lord would speedily come, then she cryed out, from the bottom of her heart, O were I so happy! Being told of JESUS CHRIST, how that he was the only Redeemer of our souls, and that there was no other Name given under heaven, through which we could be saved: then she answered: O I feel it so, these words doe lively move me. O how beautifull is he! How good is the Lord JESUS, said she with much tenderness. Be∣ing
asked whether she could thus leave her Father, she answered affectio∣nately, O yes; giving proofe that she did rejoice very much, that she might go to an other & a better Fa∣ther, then he whom God had given her here, although in his love. Be∣ing further-more asked, what her mind was when she was in such an∣guish, and whether she was not sor∣ry that she must suffer so much: O no, said she, when such anguish∣ments come, then I think by my self, Presently, presently it will be ended, and I shall go to the Lord; and the joy which I feel for this, doth so strengthen me, that me thinks that it doth yet keep me here. I doe not fear death, said she with a merry countenance, for I hope that afterwards I shall not sin any more against the Lord. But I must yet suffer more; I have not deserved to die such a soft death. But yet she died a little while after, after that she had divers times cryed out: God wil be my Redeemer: Jesus is my Saviour. And so she died in
his arms dying the death of the Righ∣teous, to whom God doth give Grace, and whom he receiveth into his Glory. This is the first child, which being come to knowledge, God took from the midst of us; and he was pleased to give us comfort there of in his love, shewing how he had blessed that care which we have had for her soul, of which she like∣wise was very sensible, giving thanks with much love to those who had more particularly instructed her: even as also she hath testified to her Friends, when she spoke with them or wrote to them. The last words and dispositions of heart of our most worthy Sister Dulignon, deceased in the Lord at Wiewert in Friesland the 28. December 1680. GOd having given this soul from her childhood some feelings & taste of his Spirit, this in some measu∣re kept her back from seeking the va∣nitys & pleasures of this world, and did give her some inclination to that which she did not yet know. Hee
eldest Sister Vincentia vander Haar being the first of the three sisters, who found her self pressed to seek the Lord, in denying the world; she, who was the second, did feel some∣thing in her heart, which did secretly draw her off from what she saw, & did not suffer her to be contented with that, wherewith the common sort of those who are called pious (with whom all three of them began to converse) did in their judgement to easily content themselves. She came purposely in Zealand with her eldest sister, to hear Master de abadie there: and God afterwards n his providence ordering it, that hey did heare us oftentimes in the Hague, so he gave them at the first uch an inclination & compliance with what he caused them to hear & ee, that they were of the first, whom in that place did perceive that ESUS CHRIST must be follo∣wed wholly in an other & more live∣y & earnest manner. Particularly our worthy & most appy Sister, to whom God had
given a speciall grace of simplicity & holy innocency, having felt the blessing of God upon that which he caused her to hear to the good of her soul, & Gods providence keeping us then at Amsterdam, after that he had drawn us out of Zealand, she felt a great inclination to come thither; and having obtained leave to come from her Mother, she took part with that good & grace which God did there shew to us. The Lord then came very much to her, and caused himself to be felt very sensibly in her heart. With that impression of grace which she had there recei∣ved, she returned again for a time to the Hague, where the Lord JE∣SUS caused himself to be felt very inwardly present with her soul, and made himself known to her after an unusuall manner: which did en∣flame her with new love towards him, and gave her such an affection to his amiable & holy person, that she afterwards did never loose the same. The Lord afterwards by his speci∣all providence having brought us t
Herfort in Westphalia, she came there with some others, of whom God was pleased to compose our assembly; and he hath given her generally that grace, all the time that he hath left her amongst us, to be there and live as a true member of this body of JESUS CHRIST, which he had in a speci∣all manner purchased & sanctified to himself. Her grace did appear sometimes more & sometimes lesse, but we have allwayes perceived in her a ground of innocency, simpli∣city & purity, which was for great comfort, and which appearing mo∣re from time to time, did in a speciall manner enlarge & shew it self in the last time & years of her life. For the most part of the time that we were in Friesland, she was visi∣ted with a great & long continuing weakness; but she bare the same with a wonderfull strength & cou∣rage of minde, and hath given us great matter of thanking God for the assistance & support of his Spirit & grace.
An ague joyning with her ordina∣ry weakness, at seven monthes end she was delivered of her last child; God in a speciall manner strengthe∣ning her by his Spirit, and the love of his will and wayes concerning her. Afterwards by the continuation of her fits of the ague she did grow much weaker, although sometimes it see∣med as if she did something recover. During all this time she did in a spe∣ciall manner comfort and edify us. And I can say, that as oftentimes as I talked with her, which was fre∣quently, I never went away from her without thanking God, for the enlargement and encrease of his grace in her, having thought oftentimes, after that I had divers times presented her before the Lord in prayer, that what the Lord did in her soul, was a great argument that he caused her to draw near to eternity, and that likely he would not tarry long before he was to take her into his glory, for as much as he did set forth the work of his grace in her in such a visible and unusuall manner.
Nine dayes before her death, find∣ing her self to be a little better, she took courage to write to her worthy husband my brother Dulignon at the Hague, desiring to give him that comfort, and to answere that sweet and tender love, which he did shew to her by his letters, which she did alwayes receive with deep humility. These are some of the words of her letter: Your great love maketh me to be wholly ashamed. I who am un∣worthy to be compared with you, what have I suffered, or what doe I suffer in comparison of you? If I did not committ you and your sufferings to the Lord, my heart would be wounded through with smart: but God is specially good to me therein, that he taketh away from me all encombrances for what matter soever it be. The which I perceive to be as a gift of his good hand, unto which I have offered, and yet doe offer my self up, both for time and for eterni∣ty, in life and death. You may hold your self assured, that I doe
not desire the help and comfort of my sisters, although their pre∣sence would be acceptable to me, for the least help which they can shew to you, is more to me then all my comfort. Though you are a far of, yet methinks some∣times that my arms reach you, but it is in faith. The Lord grant that it may be once in deed, if it be his good will. The thursday before her happy decease, she said to that sister who did help her to rise: I hope this will be the last time, that I shall have need to have my bed to be made: to morrow is my ague day, ô if the Lord would send me such a good ague, as that it might take me away, and might make me to go to him, how joyfull would it be to me, and how happy would I be! Being afterwards to take some∣thing, she said as with greef, what must I yet feed this body, which I would so willingly put of? A cer∣tain sister coming to visit her, she said: Thus we shall go to the Lord
the one before & the other after. Wait with patience for deliveran∣ce from him. There is but little time between both. The one a little sooner, and the other a little later, but thus we shall all go un∣to him. On fryday the ague came sooner & stronger then it did before. In she evening she had a faint fit, whilest they did make her head-pil∣ows. But she came again to her∣elf, taking a little wine, and said withall with a joyfull countenance:  I thought that the happy minute  was come, I knew not whether I  would tell it you. Wherefore? sked that sister: Because I was a∣fraid, said she, that you would give me something to keep me here. Having spoken with her that day wo or three times, I went to see her gain, and found her in that hope at God would soon come to her. t night about three a clock, that fter which commonly helped her, eing with her with one more be∣des, and telling her, because she
found her so weak: Well my sister, the Lord is coming: so she looked upon her with a joyfull countenance and said, Is it true? Doe you see me to be much changed? And withall she loo∣ked upon her hands & fingers, th seemed to her allready to be grow blue: which did increase her hope, that her dissolution did draw near, and that she should soon be with the Lord, to remain for ever with him, I love you all heartily, said she to all those that stood round about her, and I can say, that since the time that I have known God, I have in truth not loved the world, no those that did love the world, whatsoever they were; and that my heart did not go forth, but unto those that feared & served God▪ The world & flesh & blood have been nothing to me, in compari∣son of Gods children. When they did shew to her he little child, she said: My child, my life is gone over into you. God hath placed you in my steed, hope that you will be better then
The Lord JESUS blesse you. And the day after speaking to her other child Benjamin, she said, My child I go to the Lord, love him & fear him. He hath caused you to be born among his children, you will not have so many occa∣sions, as I have had to displease him. I have not educated you for my self, but for the Lord, that you may better serve him then I. I aimed at nothing else but that, and all that I wish for you is, that you may live for God & for his glory. On that Saturday, which was the day of her happy dissolution, she had great anguish of heart, which made her at the first to complain: for otherwise all the time of her sick∣ness, and during her manifold pains & fits of the ague, the least com∣plaint was not heard at all, suffe∣ring with such patience & quietness of mind, which sufficiently mani∣fested the presence of God in her soul, and her inward union & complacency with him.
The same day in the morning she said to us: God makes me for an exam∣ple of his mercy, how unprofitable a ser∣vant I have been in his house. This she said with speciall relation to this that she had been sickly for diven years, and not been able to commu∣nicate, to the help & service of the other children of the Lord, that which her love did put in her, and made her wish to be able to doe. Hereunto she added: What cause then have you all, to hope on his mercy! Though I am, said she, unworthy of that grace, to keep my self at the feet of JESUS, yet he gives me a full witness that I am his, and that he will never cast me away. She said, Notwithstanding my unfaithfullness, and though I have not lived for his glory, as I ought to have done, yet he is so good to me now. He sealeth unto me the pardon of my sins, and he will now at present take me to himself. O how good is he! How mercifull & gracious is he!
Turning her self to me, she did entreat me, that I would write to my worthy Brother Dulignon, That she did go with so great joy to the Lord: This, said she, will comfort him in the state wherein the Lord keepeth him. She ad∣ed more-over: I pray, doe not write unto him, when God shall have taken me to himself, that I am dead, but that I live. For I shall live more then ever be∣fore, living to the Lord, who is our life. She asked me then, whether her soul should likewise en∣oy that good, as to see the glori∣ied body of the Lord JESUS, be∣ore she should behold it with the yes of her body after the resurrecti∣on? And it being told her, yes, ou shall, as well as the Angels, which have no bodys; so was she hereupon wholly taken up with oly joy, and added thereunto: O how happy a thing will it be, that we shall be able to draw near to his holy person! And for as much as she suffered much
by reason of the anguish of her heart they gave to her a little Besor for her ease, but she would hardly take it, saying: That will serve for an other one, as for me I go to God, and whether it be with more or less anguish, is it not all one? That doth not deserve the Besor. She had said before to some one: Let none tell the child, that his mother is dead, but that she is a life in God, that she is with the Lord Jesus in heaven. I know not, said she, this word Death seems to be so strange in this case, me thinks ti doth not expresse the thing very well: for to go to the Lord, is indeed not to die. No, I shall not be dead. She likewise h at said to that per¦son, Tell my sisters Vincentia & Mary, when you shall see them, that I pray to God with all my heart, that he be pleased to blesse them, and though they have not been here, that there hath been no∣thing wanting to me; the love of God & of his children having plen∣tifully provided in all things. She said to us from time to time, Doe you think that the Lord will speedily
come? And I having answered her, that yet that very day she was to go to God, she cryed out for joy, O what good & glad message doe you bring me! And telling her furthermore, that there would be no night for her any more, she protested that this was her only wish, and that she desired no more. And afterwards turning her self a∣bout to us, she said: I can say that I wish to all of you with all my heart the same good, and that you were all in the same state as I be. And answering her that such wishes are not usually made, but that indeed it was the greatest which she could wish to us, because there was no greater good then that good whereunto God did call her, then she said: I have of∣tentimes thought that if we should take a voyage to sea, and the Lord should then by shipwrack take us all to himself, that it would be a great comfort that we might thus all go together to him. She said, One may be very well assu∣red, that death hath nothing terrible for
the children of God. And furthermore she said, From my youth God hath made himself sensible to my soul, though I did not then know him, and my heart was yet blind: But thereby he did hinder me from being able to take my delight in the world & what is in the world: and as soon as I had found the pure Spirit of the Lord in his Servants, I said by my self: This is it which thou hast sought for, and by this thou must keep thy self. I can wel say it (went she forth with a feeling which was very lively & pure) for God hath done it, and it is not but for his glory: that when the Lord JESUS made him self known to my soul, the world from that time forth did vanish away from my eyes, and since it hath re∣mained alwayes vanished. And I could not comprehend, how that souls, which have felt JESUS, could afterwards love any thing else but JESUS. About noon one of our sisters ask∣ing
her, whether she would not make use of some broth of veal, or something else, so she answered with joy of heart, That I had told her that there would be no more night for her, and that she could very well subsist so long without using any thing; adding there∣unto, that when she had taken any thing, thereby her anguish was more encreased. About the same time, when they had shut her courtains, these words were heard to come out of her bosom: O God, thou canst doe all things; might it please thee to shorten the time! having no other desire but to be hastily with the Lord. Her anguishes were oftentimes ve∣ry great, so that they did hinder her for some time to speak & to say any thing: but afterwards she came out of them again with new strength and vigour, and with a renewing of her joy, because she looked upon that continuall falling again into those fits of anguish, as so many steps which she made towards the Lord
JESUS her Saviour, the beloved of her heart & the eternall Bridegroom of her soul. In the afternoon being come again to see her, and asking her how she found herself: I waite, said she, for the Lord: blessed is that servant, which waiteth for his Lord, he will not be surpri∣sed. At another time being in great anguish, she said to me: The Lord, my worthy Brother, will have us to wait upon him, is it not true? One must wait till his minute be come, it is the greatest we can expect. O how ready is the Lord JESUS, said she to some sisters who came to see her, to receive sinners, which are sorry, that they have noth been sufficiently for him, when they doe take their refuge to his divine merits, and doe trust their soules into his hands. And speaking to some of our brethren, she said, Be faithfull to the Lord JESUS, my brethren; walk before his face, take but away what may hinder him from having communion with your soules, and you will find that
he is wholy ready to cause himslf to be felt on your heart. To be able to say unto the Lord, my God, I desire none but thee in heaven & on earth, what wilt thou have me to doe, that gives a great strength, and maketh men to walk with heads lifted up. I have found that many times by his Grace. When I said unto her, is it not a great good to have served such a good Master? she answered me: One doth not repent, but only that one hath not sufficiently served him. Benjamin again coming before her bed, she said to him: My child, I can say nothing else to you, but what I have allready said. Fear the Lord alwayes, and be very obe∣dient to those that instruct you, then you will come to live for ever with your Mother in heaven. She said to a certaine sister, who for tenderness of heart did weep see∣ing her: One must not weep, one must rejoyce, and praise the Lord. Doe not you see, how much cause
he gives thereunto? and speaking to that sister who takes care for the little children, she said, God blesse you, my worthy sister, with the little ones, take care of them, and that according to the Lord. I having told her at noon, Well my worthy Sister, now is the day half past, she answered, Are you then yet of the same opinion, my worthy Brother? Doe you beleeve yet that even this day I shall go to my Redeemer and my God? And at evening going to supper, I asked her, because she seemed to have gotten a little strength again, whether she was not willing to take some∣thing? And she answered with sad∣ness: Must I yet eat, what sad tidings! I made in my self an other reckoning: yet if God please I will try it. And our Brother who hath the care of the sick, having told her before that she had gotten a little more strength, she gave him this answer: Doe you likewise bring had ti∣dings: you have told me that I was so near to my end. She had before that thanked him, and that Sister that
helps him, with much tenderness for their love, and for so many argu∣ments as she had received thereof, especially in her sickness. After meal coming to see her again, and finding her in greater anguish, she said, as she had done at other times, that her hope did encrease. And speaking of my worthy Brother her husband, whose state had ap∣peared as near to eternity as was that of hers, she said, That she expected to see him in heaven, and never to be sepa∣rated from him again. After that we had again presen∣ted her before the Lord as a sacrifice, according to the feeling which he gave me, that it might please him to hear the great & ardent affection of his child and faithfull handmaid, who alone went out to him, she did yet bosom out these words: I would say with my mother, as she said at the end of her life, I can no more. And turning herself towards me, she said: I have never yet been in such an anguish, my wor∣thy brother. To which I answered that she did put me in mind of our wor∣thy
thy Sister Huyghens, who likewise told me the same a little before her end, but that God took her to him∣self half an hour after. This did cause her such joy, that her counte∣nance thereby was changed. A little after she yeelded up her spirit, the joy remaining imprinted in her face & eyes, which I did shut unto her, praising God for that unspea∣kable happiness, unto which he had received this soul, who was so beloved & dear to CHRIST & his children. I can say to the glory of God, that I doe not beleeve, that one can easily i∣magine in any a greater, a more per∣fect, and a more permanent longing for death, then what we have seen in her; a fuller assurance of going to eternal happiness, a more perfect un∣setlement from all what she left in the world; more forgetfulness and holy contempt of her self; and more innocent simplicity in the outgoings of her heart to God & to JESUS her Lord & Saviour, who having pre∣vented & accompanied her with his
Grace, was pleased to give her to partake of his eternall Glory, after he had lived here on earth the time of 31 years. The last words and dispositions of our most happy sister Magdalene Henry, which decensed in the Lord February 1. in the year 1681. with some of the most remarkable circumstances of her life. SHe was born at Metz of parents of the Romish Religion. Her father, which was a Chirurgent, and a man well to passe, dying when she was but three years old, eft her in the hands of her mother, which was very worldly, and who desiring to bring her up according to the world, did oftentimes beat her n her youth, because she would ear no locks & ruffles. Even from hat time she was against all those va∣itys, and felt an aversness from he pride of her mother, who did specially exceed therein. God at hat time drawing her heart lively.
unto him, gave unto her a generall desire, that she might be able to know him, and to serve him in truth. Oftentimes when she went to the masse & vesper, and there prayed to God, she felt in her heart, that that manner of worshipping God was not acceptable unto him: and having once heard some body speaking of the holy Scriptures, which she might not read, she felt a great & inward desire, to seek out such people which might be able to teach her, in what manner God would be worshipped. Even from that time she resolved, after that she had pondered all things well, and was a long while in her heart urged thereunto, to betake her self upon her journey, without knowing where to go; hoping that God would guide her, and let her find that which she felt was her duty to seek. Then she spoke with a mes∣senger, which went a foot from Metz to Frankfort, being then 19. years & a half old, desiring him that he would take her with him, though
she knew no body there, and like∣wise did not at all understand the German tongue. The messenger not being willing to take her with him, except her mother would give con∣sent thereunto, so her mother con∣sented, being weary of the continu∣all opposition of her daughter against her worldly mindedness. Her Guar∣dian, which was not unwilling to keep her goods in his hands, was likewise well contented that she should go where it pleased her. So that the messenger took upon him to take her with him, God fitting all things thereunto according to her wish. She thought indeed at first, to get into her hands the goods which by her father did belong unto her, and could likewise have done it, ac∣cording to the laws of the country, if she had stayed there but 6 monthes longer, that is till the age of twenty years: but this was to her impos∣sible, for when she did pray most unto the Lord, that he would make his will known to her concerning this point, so she felt her self to be
constrained very much to depart, being greatly afraid that she might happen to die in these 6 monthes; without yet knowing what the Lord required of her soul, that she would rather leave all there, and follow the inclination of her heart, which she did perceive was from God. Which likewise she did, and that without ever lookink back after what she had left in the hands of her Friends, and whereof she hath not enjoyed the least thing. Thus she went away from Metz towards Francfort with this messen∣ger, and likewise another man and his wife, who also went to that place. In the way she found an un∣speakable joy, because that she saw herself to be out of Metz, and in freedom to be able to seek the Lord, untill she had found him. The way did not seem to her to be long, and god preserved her in a speciall man∣ner in the same. Being come to Francfort, she was recommended to the Countesse of Hanau, which ha∣ving understood that she sought to be
instructed in the reformed Religion, did direct her to a very good Lady of Cassel, wife of the Marshall Hax∣hausen, which did receive her with a heart so full of love, that she could not have expected or desired more, though she had been her own mother. God had some short time before po∣werfully touched and changed the heart of that young Lady, so that she went earnestly about to change the train of her worldly life, which she had led. She changed her house as into a church, in which she caused God to be served with all her power, and did rejoyce that she could like∣wise receive there & help this stran∣ger, who did earnestly seek God. And seeing that Magdalene, though he did seek to be instructed in the ruth, yet would not make confessi∣on of the reformed Religion, except he was fully convinced in her con∣science, that God did require such from her, she did deal with our sister with great tenderness & speciall cir∣umspection: not willing that she hould be disturbed in or urged to
any thing, yet giving her all occasi∣on that she might be instructed. Wherein our sister did see the tender & fatherly providence of God to∣wards her. The conversation & ac∣quaintance of this Lady, and espe∣cially her decease, which was very edifying, did very much confirme her in that hope which she had, to find the truth in the reformed Reli∣gion. But afterwards she was kept back for some time to receive the same, by reason of the bad example of those with whom she did fre∣quently converse, and especially by that of a Candidate in Divinity, which concerned him self with the instruction of others in the house, but was himself so profane, as to make a scoff & laughing-stock of the words of the holy Scripture; and yet be∣sides by the evill example of the French Minister of Cassell, which being invited to dinner to the place where she dwelt, that he might have opportunity to speak with her, du∣ring dinner did nothing else but speak of meat & drink, of good wine,
and meat well prepared, & that after a very fleshly & offensive manner. Now when she was in great straight, to know what she should doe, praying to God night and day, and turning, as it was, into a skel∣leton by sorrow, and with a great desire which did even consume her away, to know the right way which leadeth to God: So one day when she kept her self in prayer before Him, she got this impression, that she must not be taken up with those wic∣ked ones which professe the reformed Religion, but that the Religion in it self, or the truth which therein was professed, in opposition to the papa∣cy, was truly according to Gods heart. And for as much as she was oftentimes disquieted, thinking whether she had not done amis in leaving her mo∣ther, and the fifth commandement coming often in her mind; then was her heart touched lively by the Lord, when she was before him in prayer, and it was as if this word was said to her by JESUS CHRIST, Will you for my sake not deny your mother? Which
at the first was very greevous for her to doe, but yet from that time it be∣came easy to her by the strength of him who had applyed to her that word and command. All this made her to resolve to give her self over to all whatsoever the Lord should re∣quire of her; and after she had prayed to him with many teras, that he would not suffer her, to take upon her the profession of the protestant doctrine, for any respect of men which should gladly see it, and that he would hinder that no such thing might be mixed therewith, so she found her self fully resolved thereun∣to, and she made her confession be∣fore a German minister, whose lan∣guage she had then learned, and whom she hought to fear God more then others. So God brought her to the knowledge of the truth & of the sound doctrine. But her heart seek∣ing a life which in some measure might agree therewith, and having alwayes wished to be with people that did serve God in truth, she was inclined to go for Holland, to see
if God would fullfill her desire. But coming there, she was very sad to find the contrary in the first house, where however she stayed three years, and there the Mistris of the house requiring that she should say something contrary to the truth, she answered with great affection, that she would rather die the most con∣temptible death, then to wound her conscience thereby. Yet neverthe∣less the little help she had, & the evill example she saw there were partly the cause that her soul went by degrees far off from the Lord, and that she found her self in a very sad condition. Thus having in this & other occasion displeased her Mis∣tris, she went away from her, and was recommended to Madam of Sommelsdyck to educate a son of her daughter Madam of Ossenbergh, in which she did performe her duty with love, and instructing him she did withall herself encrease in know∣ledge. Afterwards she came in ser∣vice with the daghter of her Lady, and did in the end remain with Mis∣tris
of Sommelsdyck our Sister, whose heart at that time the Lord had touched, with three others of her sisters, and who gave her per∣fect means to serve God, when from time to time the Lord made us to come in the Hague, and also stay theresome time. In the year 1670 she went with her Mistris to Ryn∣bergh, and I afterwards by Gods Providence going into Germany, & stopping a few dayes at the afore mentioned place with Madam of Ossenbergh, she was there freed from that sad state & condition, in which her soul had been for divers years, and wherein she had suffered very much within, and likewise had sinned very much in her spirit a∣gainst the Lord: which was to her as painfull as death. That which she had heard about the state of Job, gave her light & strength, and did revive her hope again, which she in her temptation & conflicts had lost very much. And likewise the Lord JESUS made himself one time very sensible to her heart, and gave her a
great impression of the mystery of his crosse, which remained lively with her for a long time. God having brought us at Herfort, she came likewise there, and because she did know by long experience, that with all those affections which God had given her, she was but little dead to her self, she said in the way, that she found her self as if she was carried to the slaughter. And in that place likewise she was much beset by Gods truth & his Spirit, untill she was through his grace & love con∣quered quite after an other manner unto him. The Lord did commu∣nicate himself to her very sensibly from time to time, and in a speciall manner at Sonderen near Herfort. But because her self-love did very much mix it self with that grace which she did receive, God hath now & then exercised her by inward ryalls, and by divers temptations & desertions, wherein she hath been to suffer, and constrained of∣en times to loose her self in the hands of God, whether it was at Altena,
or here in Friesland. But the Lord hath been indeed good to her in all her way, and after that he had made her to submit unto him, she was in her last sickness (which did continue long, and having begun with a third day ague, was changed into a dayly ague, and at the last into a dropsy) a great comfort to us, by reason of that soft, humble, and patient dis∣position, whereby she was given over to God, and wherein he gran∣ted her to bear the same alwayes, and that through the speciall enlarge∣ment of his grace upon her. When this sickness began to take its course, she felt lively in her heart, that God did call her to suffering and to much suffering; but she said withall, as she had done at more times, that God did give her a love to suffering, and that she for the love of Jesus her Saviour did bertily embrace that part of his crosse which it should please him to give her. And all that time that she hath kept her bed, she hath made it evident, that this love was inward & true, and that she did a fresh receive this grace from
the Lord, not only in sense, but in truth. She likewise felt what God did in her was such, that she could not doubt but if he should res∣tore her again, she would live and be wholly after an other manner for him, then till that time she had done. And in the beginning her ague fits coming first against night she gave thanks to God that he granted her to be able to doe something at day time, to serve him and his Children. A certain morning, when the night before she had been very bad,  being come to visit her, and desi∣ring her to put me in mind again of he most speciall circumstances of er former life, which she did with much presence of spirit, and a very ively feeling of that grace which God had bestowed upon her; giving me there by means to note concer∣ning her former conversation, what hus far I have done. God in this sickness hath touched er heart very lively about her for∣er sins, but for as much as he hum∣bled her before him for her corrup∣tions,
and caused her in uprightness, to take her refuge to his grace, and to the blood of Jesus Christ her Saviour: so we saw the same so evidently to vanish away, that we could not but be sensibly moved thereby. We can say that right the contrary to what was most naturall and proper to her, did appear always in her, and that the grace of Jesus Christ did cause it self to be well seenand felt in her in this last and happy time, in which he was pleased to take her to himself. She said, I many times think when I lie in my hot fit, and am so thirsty, with∣out daring however to drink much, O, when I shall come to the Lord, how shall I drink, O how shall I drink, how shall I quench my thirst! Once coming to visit her, she de∣sired very sensibly that I should par∣don her, and likewise my worthy Brother, for all the pains which she had given to us in the guidance of he soul. She did likewise entreat with all her heart all those that were in th house of the Lord, that they would
pardon her the faults which from time to time she had committed a∣gainst them, and those defects which n such occasions might have ap∣peared; earnestly entreating me that  should tell them of it in her name. One of our sisters afterwards com∣ng to her, she said to her: Although t present I be withered and dry, and ave but little feeling, yet however I e feel that it would greeve me if I was yet  stay longer in this life. I have always een very desirous after the comforts and seelings of God, but now I leave my self to e Lord, and am fully contented to die in hat state of barrennes. My Lord Jesus, said she furthermore, is come to seek is lost sheep, and be giveth me hope that he will bring me into his eternall Sheepfold. Which being confirmed to her by his sister, she lifted up her eyes to eaven, and said with much sense nd tears: Is is possible my Lord that ou wilt doe for me that great good, for e whoam such a great sinner! God gave her after that a wonder∣full quietness of heart, so that she aid unto me with much love and
thankfullness: I have nothing  fight against, the Lord Jesus hath overcome all. She added hereun∣to, I had never beleeved, that the Lord would give me such great  peace, and so discharge me from all things. I have, said she, before hung fas to my children, but now no more,  leave them by the grace of the Lord wholly into his hands, and in those of his Children. I had a speciall love for the eldest, because some∣times I saw some beam of the Lord in him: and I hope likewise tha the Lord will shew mercy and grace to him. Some dayes afterwards she said to me, that if God pleased she should y live here longer, she must be resolved to it  but that she could well say that it should no be without sensible mortification. And furthermore she said, sighing to th Lord from the ground of her heart  O when will it be that my God will come  when will he approach to take me to him∣self! And telling her that she short should have no need of our brothe
who taketh care of the sick, she ans∣wered with a joyfull mind: I have ftentimes wished that the time might come, that he might have no more occa∣sion to take pains about me, and I would heartily thank him for all what he hath done for me in love, and I am willing to doe it, ven from this time; hoping that we should tell her, that there was no∣thing for her to use for the recovery of her health, and that there was no∣thing to be expected but her happy departure. Telling her that being to go to the Lord, she should say unto him with all her heart that word of Ste∣hen the first martyr, which I had lways much loved: Lord Jesus re∣eive my spirit: she answered very af∣ectionately, O that blessed and very ovely word! and she did repeat it with  great savour, and with a lively nd very tender sense. Some one at that time coming to ifit her, she said unto him, My eart is at rest. I know not what else to y, I rest in the Lord. He knows that  am weak, and he is strong for me. And
he afterwards telling her, that God was very good to her, and that he did all things well: O, said she taking up the word, O he doeth all things so well, he maketh all things so well that one can not wish them to be better. An other person who also was there saying unto her as she went away; the Lord strengthen you my sister she answered, Alas what should I be, if he did it not! The Lord being willing to take her speedily to himself, and withou the presence of many, did find i good some days before whilest w were in the Assembly, to make h so weak, that she thought she should then die, as there was also much like∣lyhood of it. That sister which wa with her, and lykewise her husband our Brother, were at that time much comforted, to see her in the state wherein she was. She said diver times, My good Jesus, my belove. Lord, will you come to take me to thy self? My Jesus will you be so good to me  that even this day thou wilt make me  come unto thee? And telling her
You doe wish very much to go to the Lord Jesus? she answered with all her heart, O yes, my dear Sis∣ter, this is all my good, ô did he but come, that good Lord. O how specially good hath God been to me, that he hath brought me to his Work among his Children! Could we dare to pretend to that good which there he hath shewen to us? O how good is God! O how good hath he been unto me: But I have not felt it sufficiently. Where upon she did in uprightness humble her self for her sins, being ashamed before God and his Children, with much lively feeling and humility of heart. She said, I have oftentime shewen a spirit which was hardly to be contented in respect of that good God, and who hath been so good to me. O how much cause have our worthy Brethren had to tell me of that! Furthermore she said, looking upon her corruption: I have a thousand and thousand times admired at that great mercy of my God, who was willing to
shew mercy to such a creature as I am, and I have with my self often∣times said before him, Lord is it possible, that you should have re∣ceived such an evill creature! She added to it, I condemn all my sins, and doe humble my self before the Lord for them, and I pray to God and his Children to forgive them all. A little while after being much moved she said: My good Jesus, wilt thou be so mercifull to me, that at present thou wilt fully wash me clean in thy Blood? ô how great is that grace! how unworthy am I of it! Come my Lord Jesus, draw me quickly unto thee, My Lord Jesus, I desire none but thee. That sister which talked with her, asked if she desired any thing of her, and she answered, I have nothing upon my heart, except if you be pleased to have a little eye, parti∣cularly upon the children, when God shall have taken me to himself. This I entreat of you simply, as she proceeded, because I find my self inclined thereunto, and not
because of the least incumbrance which I have thereunto: no I have none by the Grace of God, no more then if I had no children, nor anything in the world. When we go to God, then we must set all things a side. God and the soul, and no more. Likewise I can tell you with an upright heart, that the only desire which I have, is to go to my God & to JESUS my Saviour. And yet proceeding on she said: Though I am very unworthy, yet he cau∣seth me to feel his holy rest, and leads me to him without care That sister saying to her, Then you doe depart in rest, and you shall enter as with full sail into the blessed haven of glory, into the bosom of the living God? so the answered: Yes, JESUS CHRIST my good Lord reacheth the hand to me. He will draw me, and give me the happiness to arrive there I doubt not on it, I trust on JESUS my Lord. After that she had been silent some time, she began to pray & to groan after the coming of God and JESUS
Christ to her, and turning her face she said: My worthy sister, pray fervently that my God may come, and that his good Spirit may sup∣port me to the end. Death is a way which is something narrow, pray to the Lord Jesus, that he may lead me through it. And a little after waxing fain, she further said, I beleeve that I shall thus soft∣ly go away. One of our sisters being then come to her bed, and talking with her about the happiness of those who die in the hands and love of Christ, she said to her very sensibly: I have earnestly entreated the Lord Jesus, that he would come, and he hath answered me. He cometh, and is come. And lifting up her arms, and clapping them to∣gether, she went on, yea me thinketh I doe already embrace the Lord Jesus. Yet then she was in great distress, and endured much by reason of a generall convulsion of her sinews. And this sister, telling her, that she suffered much, but that it was the way which we must passe to come to the Lord.
Jesus she answered with a laughing mouth, which expressed the great contentment of her heart: O that is nothing at all, I doe much rejoyce at it: for all this bringeth me nearer to Jesus. Likewise from the beginning of this sickness she had a great impressi∣on that God would take her to him∣self by the way of suffering: O said she, suffering is so good to me, I have so much need of it; me thinketh, if an other of Gods children did suffer my pains, the same would bear them wholly after an other manner; yet however I must acknowledge, that the Lord Jesus hath given me something of his patience. For he indeed it is, (as she went on with an unspeakable tenderness towards the Lord Jesus Christ) it is he alone who giveth it to me, I know that of my se I am nothing else but impatience and rebellion. God a little while after gave us that comfort as to see her all together, and to bless him for that state where∣in he kept her. We came then to
her, because it did seem that even yet on that day she was to passe over to the eternall mansion of our hea∣venly Father. And she, being cheri∣shed and comforted to see us rounda∣bout her, cried out praising God: O noble company which thou givest unto me my God at this my departure! O could I take you all with me, said she to us! O what great good is it, to have served the Lord from the heart! O how doe I love you! going on speaking to the Lord Jesus, Thou art my good Lord and my Saviour. All whatsoever the Lord made me to say, whether speaking to her, or praying and presenting her before the Lord, had a lively entrance into her heart, and it kept her as in a holy extasy of spirit, so that we were all lively touched therewith, praising and glorifying God, for powring for I his grace upon her, Telling her ten: my beloved sister indeed you go unto the Lord with all your heart, and there is nothing that kee∣peth you here. Not a thread, said she, with such a lively feeling, as that even the sound of her voice
could sufficiently witness that she spoke from the inward bottom of her heart. We telling her that one of our sisters, who with the rest could not come unto her, because she was sick, did expect shortly to see her in hea∣ven, hoping that God likewise in a short time would take her out of the world, so she answerd very sensib∣ly, and being wholly penetrated with that great happiness which is in dying in the Lord: God grant her that grace. Tail her that I wish it to her with all my heart. However God found it good to de∣ferre her deliverance as yet, and to give her some ease. And against night seeing she complained that she slum∣bered much, and one told her, that she should but rest because her work was done, Christ having done it for her, and was come himself to d it in her, then she answered, O if that were not, I should not be so quier. The same person having desired to watch with her for the night, thin∣king that likely it would be the last, so she said to her, awakening after
she had taken a little rest, O my wor∣thy sister, I am afraid that you will be de∣ceived, and that I shall not yet go to hea∣ven. Besides God would yet exercise her with suffering, and some days after, being in great anguish by rea∣son of the water which did even choake her heart, then she said, I can say as did David, the waters an come unto my soul. Being very much taken up with that good which God had done to her by that aide & conduct which he had given unto her in his Church, she then said withmuch sensibleness of heart to a sister, O what great cause have we to be faithfull to God! Her pains and distress growing ve∣ry great, and God giving her a lively feeling, that she must bear the same wit more patience, so she passed one night in some anguishes of heart be∣fore his Face, confessing her sins, and feeling her self unworthy to be received into his grace. But God so ordering it that I did speak to her in the morning, she then lifted up her
self again, and strengthening her self and giving her self a fresh over to God, she spoke with great affecti∣on, I will embrace all the words of the Lord, And waite for him in a patient and humble spirit: pray to the Lord, I beseech you, that he may be pleased to make me truly humble. The next night God did again ve∣ry sensibly draw near to her, and did fill her with so much joy, that she could not containe the same nor expresse it, My God doth come, she cryed out. My God what doe not I owe to thee, I wait on thee, and will always wait on thee. And although she had been very weak yet however she went to sing with a loud voice the 31 psalm, O Lord I put my trust in thee, and some words of the song of Mary on the feet of JesusIn a cer∣tain Book of ours called Holy Songs.. And that sis∣ter which watched with her saying to her, the Lord will soon cause you to sing the new Song of Jesus our King, she answered with fullness of heart, Yea I shall sing it with all the de∣sire of my soul, and I shall satisfy my self threwith.
She hath somtimes had a great fear for death, which caused her indeed much trouble; but one of us asking her if she had not now lost the fear of death, so she answered yes I have, and so perfectly that not so much as the shdow thereof remained. It is God who hath done it, I could never deliver my self from it. But the Lord hath done it in a moment. I am his creature, I give my selfo∣ver into his hands. At last God would deliver her, according to her great desire. It was on a saturday before noon, the first of February, that he came so unex∣pected to take her to himself, that scarce any should have known it, if the good dispensation of God had not ordered it so that then I was with her. She did for two or three days seem to be much better then formerly. I had spoken with her on fry day, the day before her death, and admonish∣ed her of somthing which God requi∣red of her, which she did receive with a humble heart, and a great af∣fection, and did practice it with
great faithfulness. In the morning finding her self better, and the Lord seeming to be willing to lengthen her sufferings, she then prepared her self to bear them with new strength and love. But it was within few hours af∣ter that God came to end it. His Spirit moving me to go to visit her before meal, so I found her in great an∣guish, and after that I caused som∣thing to be given to her for her re∣freshment, and she had spoken to me some words with much heart and love, and assuring me she was dy∣ing, so I presented her to the Lord Jesus Christ, after that I had with some words strengthened her▪ This being done she slept in the Lord soft∣ly, yeelding her spirit in the arms of her husband which supported her, and in the presence of divers brethe∣ren and sisters, who then were come unto her. Thus God hath finished her cours, giving us infinite matter for to thank and praise him for the nercy which he hath shewed to this his handmaid, and for that eternall good which he hath communicated
unto her in his blessed bosom, whereunto he hath received her for ever. She was then come to the 40. year of her age. The generall dispositions and last feelings of Mr. Dulignon, faithfull Pastor of this Church. MASTER Dulignon, my very worthy Brother and faithfull fellow-labourer in the work of the Lord, was born at Marvegeols in the Province of Languedock of a father who loved him in a speciall manner, & spared nothing for his education, whether it was with him self, or at Angouleme where he made him to be∣gin his studys, or at Saumur where he did continue the same, or in his journeys for Holland and England, from whence he came again to Paris, where he remained about two years. Beginning there to get an aversness to the world and train thereof, then he felt some inclination to the study of divinity, as being fit to draw him of from all affections to this age, and
to cause him to turn his thoughts to∣wards heaven. Mr. Drelincourt, who had him in love and estimation did shew himself to be very glad for his resolution, conceiving great hopes that it would tend to the good of Gods Church, if he gave himself to the building up of it. And his fa∣ther gave willingly his consent there∣unto, though he had formerly other thoughts concerning this worthy son. All this made him resolve to go to Geneva, where he thought to find more help to the end which be pro∣pounded to himself, and had then yet but a weak aim to it. As soon as he was come there, and had heard Mr. de Labadie, his heart was as captiva∣ted by the speciall and unusuall mat∣ters which he found in that Man of God. And even from that time he took his resolution to put himself un∣der his oversight. And going to vi∣sit him he desired that he might dwell in his family: and so he came to his house, notwithstanding the other re∣commendations, which he had to other persons and Ministres at Gene∣va.
Even as the Lord had then all∣ready brought me to that place, and I dwelled with Mr. de Labadie, whom I have known and loved from my youth at Montauban, so my worthy Brother and I felt then first a tender and mutuall friendship to arise in our hearts, which the grace of God did sanctify, and in success of time did make so firm and perfect as might be seen, and which through his mercy shall never end. The customs of the world being very deeply rooted in the heart of my worthy Brother, they therefore were not so suddainly rooted out: but after divers great fits, he at the last gave him self wholly up unto the Lord, and yeelded him self upright∣ly into his hands, denying himself with all his heart. Then we could first love one the other truly. And then likewise God made us one heart and one soul, through his Spirit and love. Divers of our friends had with us gotten a tast in the truth of Christian life, which Mr. de La∣badie did set forth with an admirable
force and with a light and purity which was fit to inlighten others, and to touch their heart, but they were not faithfull, and coming a∣gain to them selves did return to the accustomed train of the world. But God, who in his goodness from my childhood had given me a lively im∣pression of his service, and did much encrease the same whilst I was at Ge∣neva, gave me that great comfort to be able to go to him in the compa∣ny of this faithfull friend in whom he did work in such a powerfull manner, and whom he did joyne together with me very nearly and intimately with his faithfull servant Mr. de La∣badie. We did so spend together the two last years of our staying at Geneva, that our heart with reason, was much touched therewith, as often as we since that time have thought on it. The Lord was very good to us, and did vouchsafe to communicate him self so to our sou∣les, that we owe him eternall thank for his mercy and grace. M. de Labadie having done to∣wards
the reformation of Geneva during seven years time, all what his zeal and the extraordinary grace of God wherewith he was indowed did put him in mind, and to which it had set him on; and seeing how little reall fruit he gathered for the Lord, although great alterations did happen from time to time, and he was followed by a great concourse of people, and was much regarded, and heard with much applaus; so he resolved to accept of the call which he had to go to Middelborgh, which was sent to him without any parti∣cular expectation, although long before we had firmly beleeved and expected, that the Lord should draw us out of Geneva, by the ways which him self should prepare thereunto. He then opening this way, we all three perfectly felt, (after we had oftentimes consulted the Lord in prayer) that it came from him, and that it would be the way, whereby he would give us means that we might come to doe his work in these united Provinces. We
were in hopes that we should be able there to produce more true and essen∣tiall fruits, then at Geneva, a city which giving it self the name of Je∣rusalem, was truly like to her in this, that she did wonderfully pre∣sume upon the outward privileges which it had received from the Lord, and did hold her self much contented with a worship of God, very like unto that whereby formerly Jerusa∣lem thought to be able to satisfy him. As for the rest she did much harden her self against the word that the Lord caused to be offered to her, greeving very much the spirit of that faithfull servant of God, which did wholly burne with zeale for the wel∣fare and reparation of the Church, which he found in all places to be much decayed and deformed. Mr. Dulignon my very worthy and blessed brother, being with me fully resolved to accompany this Man of God in all the ways which it should please the Lord to take with him, and being more then ever in∣clined, to dedicate our selves to the
building up of the Kingdom of Go and to the help and salvation of h Elect, so we were fully determine to go with him. But for as much a on the one side it was very hard fo Mr. de Labadie to get out of Geneva because the people would not l him go, and without doubt woul have hindered him, if they ha known the time of his departure. An on the other side he would have ru great danger if the Savoyers, whic did spy out his passage, and others o the Romish Religion, had gotte knowledge thereof; therefore we we forced to stay till the providence o God it self should offer to us som convenient opportunity. Even  also it happened. And after such  manner that we with reason di admire at it, and were togethe freed from all danger. A Colony o Waldenses or inhabitants of the Val¦ly of Premont, being persecute for the truth, were resolved to g over to Germersem in the Paltz▪ near by Hydelbergh, and we just at that time to passe through Ge∣neva
and Switzerland, which like∣wise was the way which we were to pass through. Mr. de Labadie having acquainted the chief of them the thoughts which we had to joyne our selves with them, and in their compa∣ny, but unknown, to go to the Paltz, so this was received by him with great joy, as who long ago had known the reputation of Mr. de Labadie, and had much love for him after that he had heard him to preach at Orange and Geneva. The only difficulty which occurred, was that having no letpass but only for eighty persons, so we should have given occasion by the encrease of the number, in popish places, which we were to pass, to make an examination which might have discovered us. But God him self took order therewith, even at that time when they were to depart, n as much as three of the eighty per∣sons were suddainly taken sick; and being necessitated to stay at Geneva, they left their three places open, which we supplied: so that the nom∣ber of the persons which was menti∣oned
in the letpass did remain intire. Having then changed our cloths, Mr. de Labadie, Mr. Dulignon, and I, with the break of day we went out of Geneva, and came to the vessell of these good people, who did wait for us at the lake Leman about half an hour going from Geneva. We were there received with great love, although we were at the first un∣known to the most of the persons; but in time as they came to know that they had Mr. de Labadie in their company, they then were very glad for it. But they kept it always very secret. We went through divers dan∣gers in our passage through the Swit∣sers cantons contrey which are of the Romish Religion, especially at Phi∣lipsburgh and at Brisack; but the Lord delivered us out of all, and himself gave us opportunity to make a Church of our vessell, and to be able therein to preach his word mor∣nings and evenings and more times of the day. Those good people shewed themselves especially glad that they had us with them, and they did wis
much that they might have my Bro∣ther or me to continue with them to have a Pastor after their own heart. But God called us elswhere. We then at the last came into these Provinces with Mr. Menuret, whom we had known and Gods pro∣vidence caused us to meet at Heidel∣bergh. Being come to Utrecht where we were received with great affection, by Mr. Voetius, Mrs. Van Schur∣man, and all her friends: then Mr. de Labadie did presently protest that he was resolved to have a warr with the world in his assembly at Middle∣burgh, preparing himself either to drive it out of the same, or else to be driven out of it by them. Being come there we found that assembly n a miserable and deplorable state; nd those that most feared God, lon∣ing and waiting for the coming of Mr. de Labadie, for to take order a∣out divers horrible misrules which were found as well in the heads  members, so he took it present∣y to hand with faithfulness and
zeal, and the Lord gave us all a large field to labour in, both in publick and in particular for the welfare of souls and for the reformation of that poor Church, which the world had almost swallowed up. But all those which would not hear any thing to be spoken of the reformation of life joyning together, and being afterwards assisted by the wallish Synod, wherewith we had often∣times to do, and the last time a∣bout the business of Mr. Wolzo∣gen, so we had not a little to suf∣fer in those 4. years time whilst we were in that place. In the mean while the Lord employed my worthy Brother in many things, as well in Holland as at Utrecht, and even here in Friesland. And he made use of him for the good of his Work, and for the edification of many souls, whether at Rotterdam where he was much beloved by Mr. de Rochefort, and where having preached the word of the Lord for some time, the whole consistory in the occasion gave an authentick witness in his favour;
or in a speciall manner at the Hague, where he stayed frequently a long time, the Lord there blessing sin∣gularly his word and conversation, even as also in other places, and ac∣companying it with the assistance of his grace, for the instruction and the help of many. God after∣wards having brought us to Ams∣terdam, and after divers great trials calling us also to Herfort, then he went to speak to the Lady the Prin∣cess Elizabeth, to try her dispositi∣ons, in which she shewed herself to be confirmed in a speciall manner after she had seen and spoken with our Brother, making it known to many what great satisfaction she had in that which she found in this ser∣vant of God. When we were come to Herfort, then the Lord enlarged his grace and Spirit more and more in my worthy Brother, and did use him to his service, whether it was in that place or whether it was again in Hol∣land or at Altena by Hamborrow, where he did afterwards gather us all together, and did continue to powr
out his blessing upon our souls and assembly. When in that place the Lord had taken to himself his faith∣full servant Mr. de Labadie, then I and my worthy Brother felt our selves as newly united again, and very narrowly bound, having never had the least difference between us in the guidance of Gods work amongst us. He came here in Friesland to vew the place before we came over, and having stayed afterwards at Altena with a part of our assembly, so he followed us some time after for our mutuall comfort. And so it was here where first appeared that evill with which the Lord visited him, to the glory of his Name and to mani∣fest his grace in a speciall manner, at the end of his life. Having a very moist head, he was much incommodated by many sharp defluctions, which formerly whilst we were yet at Middleburgh, did use to fall upon his eyes even so farr as that he was like to loose his sight thereby; and afterwards divers times upon his heart: which did of∣tentimes
cause suddain faintness. And it seems that those humors ha∣ving changed their cours, did fall upon his chinne and there did form an evill, which divers did beleeve to be a sort of canker, but which at the end was found to be otherwise. He was therefore fain to suffer much pain; whether because of the evill it self, or by the very painfull cures which were used about it. The first was at Amsterdam, under the o∣versight of Doctor Helvetius, who dealt with him in much affection & love, at the house of our worthy Bro∣ther Mr. Bardewisch, which was very glad to have him to stay with him as long as his cure should re∣quire it. When they were come to an inscisi∣on to begin the curing of his evill, which was done by Corrosives, he suffered all with very great patience, and at that time he did write to me di∣vers things that were very moving, of which I make no difficulty here to re∣late some extracts of them. Thus he uttered him self about his state
Jannuary the 14. 1679. If the Lord was not my strength, I should soon faile, but he doth not withdraw his goodness from me. He will continue the same to me, if it be his good pleasure, to all what∣soever his will shall be concer∣ning me in this my particular state. The hand of the Lord is nothing at all hard, but contrarily is very soft towards me, and truly it is the hand of such a father as our God is. He keepeth me by his grace prepa∣red to all his divine will, and whatsoever he shall will, I hope of his infinite love, he will grant me to will the same with him, and to love it with all my heart. He hath shewed me very reall argu∣ments of his love, and as I did say but yesterday, I feel that I am a sinner whom he Loveth. In his letter of the 17. are found these words: It is a very reall comfort to be given up unto the will of the Lord, and in all things to depend on him. How lovely is that way, to leave one self wholly unto him!
how necessary and comfortable! if souls oftentimes did know better what is to be found therein, they would not find so much trouble to go in it. But self-love blindeth men, and maketh them most miserable that suffer them selves to be posses∣sed therewith. On the 20. he wrote to me these words: That part which love maketh you to take in that which concerneth me, giveth me speciall matter to praise and thank the Lord, and I pray to him to grant me that I may glorify him, for all his goodness towards me, the remaining part of my life, in ex∣pectation of the eternall praise and love which I wish to give him, e∣ven as he is infinitely worthy there of. The Lord maketh me from day to day to feel his soft hand, but I doe very well find that I must no less depend on his liberty, then at that time when this evill is most sensible to me. He can if he thin∣keth it fit, yet again visit me with it, and he might send me also a geater and more reall. He hath
all power over me, who have deser∣ved nothing but his wrath. On the 26. he did write with much ten∣derness of heart, and with an impres∣sion of humility, wherewith his heart was so full and so much pene∣trated: I am in some measure asha∣med, my worthy Brother, that for such a small inconvenience, you doe all partake so much in that which I suffer. That tenderness moveth me much; but I feel before the Lord, that it passeth above what my condition is and requireth in his presence, yet for as much as it pleaseth him to give that heart, I therefore like and accept with love and thankfulness the demonstrati∣on thereof. This very thing is a fruit and issue of his goodness to∣wards me through his Children: and I thank him for it, even as I feel very well that I am thankfull to them for it, and especially to my worthy Brother, who doth de∣monstrate the same so much to me. It is true till this time the Lord hath been pleased to keep me from
time to time in some suffering, and perhaps his way will be to let me pass through more of the same. It is also true that his hand, who hath prepared all this for me doth support and strengthen me by much goodness, causing me to love his way, and to have a will to glorify him therein. But surely, my worthy Brother, I am very sen∣sible before him that all things are very imperfect, & very farr of from that which I owe him and he re∣quireth from me. I am satisfied through his long-suffering and mercy in all my imperfections, especially because they are to me a particular cause to humble my self under him. But he will have us to know well by experience that all our sufficiency is from him, and that without him we can do nothing. he is not only the cause and support of all the good which is in us, but he is also the perfection thereof. He will be all this in me & all whatsoever more is necessary according to his plea∣sure,
in all whatsoever he shall re∣quire to the eternall glory of his Name. The 28. I received from him a letter out of which I shall relate these following words which did shew that his cure was to continue, as also it did; My disposition is not so well as it hath been for some days since, because my pains have encreased my feavers, and have taken away much of the rest which formerly I had, the Lord will lessen the one and give the other as it shall please him. There is nothing to be said about any thing that he doth, he be blessed for it for evermore. The cure of my accident is like to continue, if the Lord of his good∣ness doth not shorten it. For as much as our sister M. doth write to you hereof, I will say no more concerning it. I take part with the suffering of our sister Y. And I wish that I may be able to shew it more particularly. But God, who is not only our supply but also our truth in all things, will also supply that want of the demon∣stration
of my heart which I wish I could do to her. I entreat her that she love his Dominion. He will not have us to bear the name of his sub∣jects in vain. He is our Lord and our King: We will call him so, and we do well for he is so. And that he cometh to us in all such manner as he doth is to make us to have experience as well of the truth as of the loving-kindness of this his Dominion over us. The 4. of Fe∣bruary he wrote unto me concerning his state with these words: what concerneth my condition I know not what to write unto you, but I feel very well that my cure, if God will be pleased to give it me, must come from him. Those that labour about it do it with affec∣tion, but the blessing must only come from him, without which nothing can be done. They have hitherto made use of corrosives, which have caused pain to me; but the hand of the Lord, which is likewise the hand of our Father, hath supported me. What concer∣neth
the future, I believe it must be much left to him, and as for me I well perceive, that it is his will that I must remain always in a totall resignation of my self to him: and that portion is much to be beloved. He is my God and likewise will be my good Father to all eternity according to his good pleasure. This is enough to me. I am satisfied with all whatsoever his will shall be concer∣ning me, if it pleaseth him all∣ways to continue to me that spirit and heart, as I hope this of his infi∣nite mercy. He did write unto me the 7. of the same month: It pleaseth the Lord in small things to instruct me much, whether it be in respect of him self and of his wonderfull help, or in respect of my self, to cause me to have experience how greatly and continually I have need of the Spirit of God without exception of any. But how tender is his love! How powerfull is his strength! How lovely is his faith∣fullness! How confirming is his
presence, and all his ways sutable to his wisdom and love, especially when it pleaseth him to let our souls see somthing of that wisdom, wherein he bestoweth all things on those that are his, yea even to the least thing. I do receive my les∣sons, my worthy Brother, in lit∣tle, even as the great Belevers and men of God have received theirs in greater ways, and in occasions which were proportioned to the great measure of grace, and ac∣cording to the speciall purposes of the Lord concerning them. I do however wish that in a speciall manner I may praise him the re∣mayning part of my life and for ever, for that which his mercy vouchsafeth to do in me, to in∣struct me more concerning my self and him. The same accidents which God sendeth to the world and to his own, must certainly be looked upon intirely with an other eye in the one then in the other; and even as in the dispensing of them he hath quite differing aims,
so likewise we must use & receive them otherwise as men commonly do; the Lord having no other aim in his designes about those that are his, but to do them more good, and to make them more ac∣ceptable to him that he may have more his divine pleasure in them. On the 14. he uttered this truth in one of his letters: I have some∣times been touched herewith, that as the Lord hath caused us lively to feel, that as it was his will we should see nothing but him in the way of loving-kindness & light, wherein he hath caused us to walk a long time; he would likewise teach us, not to see nor will any thing but him in the way of any suffering he doth send to us. And indeed he is no less in this last as in the former. Yea he causeth many times such a true & pure joy to be found therein, that all other con∣tentment can not be compared therewith. On the 21. He did write to me these following words, Our state is reasonably well by the
goodness of the Lord, and he hath shewed the same to me in par∣ticular very much, having suppor∣ted me during those pains, which thus farr have been necessary for the curing of my evill, and streng∣thening me when they are but a little less, and not bringing upon me such heavy feavers which by their continuance according to their ordinairy course would quick∣ly have brought me down. But it is the loving-kindness of this good Physitian & Father, whom I must acknowledge, and for which I must thank him. What concerns my accident in particular, they took of a crust yesterday, which was made by the corrosive, and seeing it was very thick, they think that it is gone pretty deep towards the bottom of the evill. The Lord who doth direct & dispose all things according to his mind & good pleasure, will put an end to it, when it shall please him, if his divine will be so. He maketh us to love his will, which causeth
our separation according to the bo∣dy to continue longer, then hath been thought, but I hope he will give so much the more comfort, when his good hand will cause all meet together again. I recom∣mend the condition of our sick to his love, and I pray to him that through the same he may bless them in all what he sendeth unto them. Likewise the state of the souls of all the brethren and sis∣ters, whether those that are nearer by or further of, toucheth me sen∣sibly, and I pray Likewise to the author of that great mercy which i shewed to our souls, that he will encrease the same to them, and con∣firm them therein, and make them faithfull to the same, and to grant them to walk worthily of the same before him. That pure Spirit is very little to be found, and happy is he who hath a little true oil in his lamp. O what  great gift is that! and how much are we bound to dispise all things for it, yea also to deny our selves
that we may purely possess the same. I pray to the Lord with all my heart, that he may be plea∣sed to let this sense go into the ground of my heart, and as into the marrow of every one of those whom his love will give to us, even as also of those whom his love hath already given to us. There are indeed few lamps, which burn in the presence of God, or which be in state to burn throug the good & pure Spirit, and if the Lord in some measure doth grant us that benefit, what doe not we owe to this love? I doe greet with much tenderness all the Church of the Lord which he hath formed amongst us, and as many he calleth thereunto, and those who do endeavour to please him, and to serve him in truth. And although I do not name them by name, yet they are not therefore less present to me in my spirit, and the condition of each of them doth nothing the less go to my heart. After this cure had continued long, and my worthy
Brother had suffered very much by the continuall application of corrosi∣ves, so it pleased the Lord to close the wound which his hand had made, as he did write unto me Aprill the in these words: From this day throug the goodness of the Lord, they began to put a little ledden plate upon the wound, as being closed up. I have no more pain on it, and it seemeth that the Lord will end all things through his goodness. He grant me of his in∣finite mercy that I may live wholly a new life to his glory, and to the glory of Jesus Christ his beloved Son, my Saviour & King to all eternity, He had divers times an inclinati∣on on to write a common letter to those whom the Lord in his love hath joy∣ned to us, and in his House doth keep gathered under his oversight, giving us hope that he will fully u∣nite them with this his House and Body. And his incommodity not having hitherto permitted him to do it, so he did it the 15. of
of the same month. And because the affections which he uttereth therein and the exhortations which he maketh, are very pure and edi∣fying, it hath there fore seemed good to me here to relate them, as they are expressed in the letter fol∣lowing. My beloved brethren and sis∣ters, I have oftentimes had a mind to write unto you, to give you some speciall witness of that holy love which God hath laid in our hearts for your souls, but the Lord ha∣ving hindered it sometimes by the disease wherewith he hath been pleased to visit me, I therefore have thought that his Spirit provi∣deth in all things through himself in those who have received him, and that he also hath granted you a∣boundantly to be led and helped in the way of the Lord which he hath made to you, by my worthy Bro∣ther your faithfull pastor. So I have thus farr contented my self as to let you know with how much tenderness I am mindfull of you,
and to pray the Lord that it may please him to continue his mercy to you, and to multiply that preci∣ous grace which he sheweth to you together with us, that is in truth and only to seek his divine Face. And I hope that he hath not rejec∣ted that prayer which in my weak∣ness I was inclined to make for your souls. He is good, and taketh pleasure in the least groan which his Spirit formeth in us to his glory. I likewise have desired to admonish you in his love that you should wholly and for all things trust on him, we are but to pray for his grace that the spirit of his glory may ina∣nimate us and lead us in all things. And should he deny us that which his Spirit and love maketh us to de∣sire for his own sake? That can not be: for he is unchangeably faith∣full to the Love which he hath for himself, and for all that which thereof he powreth out into our hearts, to make us to draw near to him. Make account above all things of that good to know him so
as he causeth himself to be known to you. For there is great dark∣ness upon the earth, and perhap the same will grow yet more hea∣vy; God in his just judgement fin∣ding it good that his truth should still keep it self much hidden, whe∣ther it be by reason of mens hard∣ness or by reason of error. My belo∣ved it is very seldom that one shall hear a word of pure truth, and if one cometh to heare any it is common∣ly weakly and little in the spirit. Let this go lively into your hearts, even as it ought to touch us all holi∣ly and to make us fear. Truly the Lord is good to our souls, and we have great matter to humble our selves before him, and to be ashamed he vouchsafing to give us to partake of the pure grace of his beloved Son, and to place us in the holy ways of his pure and true service. Let the greatness and purity of the calling whereof you are made partakers, pull you yet more out of your selves, and exalt you above all thinghs, It is from God, and it
must joyne us with him. It is a∣bove nature, and it must put us a∣bove nature, whether it be within us, or without us. It is spirin all, and consequently it mus make us to live after the spirit▪ and make us to deny all what i flesh. We ought to lay this mor to heart, that it renewing us in tha purity whereof it maketh an im∣pression, it may more draw al our hearts and minds out of the∣selves, and may make them mor to live of him who is the Autho thereof. Be not weary to walk is those ways which the Lord Jesu Christ hath troden out and conse∣crated to you by his blood. They lead you to the eternall commu∣nion with God: and insteed o being afrighted from them, rene yourselves rather oftentimes i that Spirit which causeth us to wall therein. We have many time more cause to be ashamed becaus we have almost done nothing as i fit, then to think that we have walked & runned well. The Lor
Jesus went with great steps to the cross to die for us, and how slow∣ly do we go to the place where we shall find life! Let us blush & be ashamed for it, even as it is fit, & renewing our strength in him, in whom we can do all things, let us goe anew and walk in the pre∣sence of God, of Jesus Christ, and of his Spirit, in the ways of his love and his service. Allthough now for some time I have not had the comfort of seeing your faces, yet however, I have some times felt, beholding you in the Spirit, that the Lord hath been well plea∣sed with you, and that he would multiply his grace and mercy to you from day to day. But belo∣ved brethren and sisters, must not we seek the same in a spirit wholly new? And will we be wearied to love the same, and to walk there by? The Spirit which maketh them to be found every day so lovely is a new Spirit given to that end, and he like∣wise worketh new things in those that have received him. I pray you
beloved be not cast down about any thing, that you may not grow faint in the way which the Lord hath made to us: for he will streng∣then us unto all things through the holy Spirit of his strength: and if through his love for him, we are indeed willing to be strong, the weakest shall have so much given to him that neither the flesh, nor the world, nor the hell shall be able to overcome him. Be faithfull to suffer your selves to be humbled and broken, through the Spirit of truth and purity which the Lord causeth you to feel, and through which he speaketh unto you, and presseth you with love. There is no life of Christ in us but so far as we are dead to our sel∣ves; and his Spirit doth not purely enlarge it self but after that our own Spirit is denied and bro∣ken. The more we resist God, so much the more labour we shall have: for who hath resisted him and had peace; We therefore ex∣hort you Brethren and Sisters, and
we beseech you, yea urge you in that lovely name of the Lord Jesus, before whom every knee in heaven and in earth must bow it self, that you suffer his Spirit to destroy in you all whatsoever is against him, that so he may have full power in you and over you, and may pos∣sess and lead you as his beloved Children. Have not you already felt many times that his Kingdom is infinitely soft and sweet, and is not exalted, but upon the overthrow of the kingdom of sin, of pride, and of self-love? Let this spirituall experience & foretast of the King∣dom of God (which is neither meat nor drink, and doth not consist in words, nor in thoughts nor fee∣lings, but in spirit; being no∣thing but truth, righteousness, & peace and joy in the Holy Ghost) exalt you as yet more above your selves, and all what you have known according to men, accor∣ding to the flesh, and according to your former conversation; and let it make you to approach unto, yea
inwardly to be united for ever with the Father and his children through Jesus Christ, who is the way to this Kingdom, and the King there of. God hath shewen that he hath loved us, and this love hath ap∣peared in many things which he hath done about his Work amongst us in generall, and about every soul in particular who hath been faithfull to him. Let not there∣fore any one distrust of him not of his love, and suffer himself to be surprised either by his own spi∣rit, or by the spirit of the world, or of the tempter, having known Him that is true, and likewise re∣ceived much assurance of that faith∣full witness, whose witness allone must be a thousand times more to us, then all whatsoever the world or the spirit of temptation may b able to say. If we did think le on our selves and more on God▪ giving our selves fully over to hi & to his Spirit, to work his pu work, we should not have s many troubles. It is true we mu
endure some to be purged out & to be strengthened, but they would be much less, especially for some, who to often & to much are tur∣ned again to themselves. But this bad returning to ones self must have an end, together with the life of the old man; and indeed it is fit yea and time, that we should deny all what is of our own, and go out of our selves, and to go into Christ, and suffer him to possess, and to lead us. I pray in the tender love of the Lord, those whom his Spirit doth upbraid particularly of this sinfull retur∣ning to themselves, that they may in truth humble themselves before him; and without being cast down after an humane manner, or to keep themselves up with their own thoughts, imaginations, tempta∣tions or also with their own cor∣ruptions otherwise as is conveni∣ent, that they suffer them selves to be purged out in good earnest, and denying themselves to go anew to him again, who allone must possess
them. The truth doth not wea∣ken those who with all their heart will live to God. Contrarily it doth strengthen them, and it is to them a Spirit of life and holy strength. Love the same all of you, I beseech you, for the truth i wholly lovely, when one hath the right heart to love it. I greet you all beloved in the Lord, and by name. Although here I do not put down the names, yet however I name you in my spirit, and I pray to God affectionately, that he may be pleased to multiply his true love to you, and renew to you the inclination to his holy service, and to make you faithfull & fit for to glorify him in Spirit and in Truth. Be you of his true wor∣shippers, and let him be your God & Saviour, both now & for ever∣more. His blessing be upon you, and the Spirit of peace, of purity, and grace, which is given to all those that love him, rest in your hearts, and possess the same in all things. This I wish to you my
well-beloved, in love & feeling. I think with tenderness on the chil∣dren, and I exhort them earnest∣ly to walk in the fear of the Lord, and according to his divine will, as being separated from the world by a speciall Providence, and cal∣led for to obey & serve him, by such a goodness of God which in these dayes is very rare. About the same time he had like∣wise written a letter to one of our sisters which found her self inclined to write to him what she felt con∣cerning his suffering, and what part that all his sheep had always taken there in. And because that which there upon he expresseth is very much tending to edification, I will therefore joine it to that which we have already seen and related of him. He then did write to her in these words: The bands of God and of his Spirit are glorious bands, and even as they doe unite us in him, who can never be enough known nor loved, so likewise they have somthing which can not well
be expressed nor comprehended, le them ty us yet more straight toge∣ther, in binding us fast unto him the Author and the End thereof. Our communion with him, and with those that are his, in him, is the work of his almighty and e∣ternall love. Let us then look upon the same as that which is more then common, and so farr as it is given to us to enjoy that great good, let us with all our hearts blesse and love him who giveth it to us. I have great cause to thank him for his goodness and patience towards me, and I have no less cause to humble my self under his divine hand, and to learn to be more obe∣dient unto him, and to be more compliable with all whatsoever his will shall be concerning me. His ways about those that are his, ( being dispensed through an infinite love) are instructing, and I feel somtimes that I must come more in∣structed and more humble out of that way wherein he hath been pleased to hold me some time; and
I trust to him, that as he doth no thing in vain about those to whom he hath given a heart which seeketh in truth to please him, that he will not deny me that grace, to be able in some measure to answere the sense which I have thereof. My former disease hath been accompanied with much sweetness, and I can hardly see any other thing therein. You likewise, and others with me have found how good it is to be and to re∣main under his hand, when it plea∣seth him to keep us under it; let our little experience teach us more that obedience which we owe him, & let it make us to draw nearer to him, seeing he vouchsafeth to come to us in so much love, then even when he cometh to us to make us to suffer any thing. If that which seemeth to be a severity is such a great good, what is not his goodness and friend∣ship it self, when he is pleased in some measure to shew the same ac∣cording to what they are? Though you, as likewise our worthy sisters have not written to me but by my
worthy Brother, I have not there∣fore any thing less felt the tender∣ness of your hearts, and the portion which you take in my state. And although there had been nothing written at all to me of that which the Lord hath caused his Children to feel about me, I would have comforted my self with the sense of their love. Those good hearts and that good Spirit, which the Lord giveth to those that are his, are to much inclined to feel all what is of the communion of those who are united in God and in Christ, then that they should fail in the dutys of love which do ob∣lige them. And I am likewise sen∣sible, that even as they with ten∣derness of heart have taken part in that which hath been allotted un∣to me, so likewise that I have had part, and still have in all what ever the Lord hath done about them, and doth continue to do in his goodness and presence; now he seemeth to cause my return unto you to ap∣proach, so I do very well find the
sensible attraction of that holy fel∣lowship which he hath made be∣tween our hearts in him. The Lord at that time having re∣stored my very Worthy Brother, gave him opportunity to go to Rotterdam, and to the Hague, and to Utrecht to satisfy the desire of divers; after which in his faith∣full Providence, he brought him a∣gain to us, to our mutuall and spe∣ciall comfort. Even as he did very tenderly love his sheep, so likewise was he tenderly beloved by them, and he feeling a speciall love towards me, so I felt likewise such a great full and inward agreement of heart with him, that I can not ex∣press the same, even as this is known to God, and hath appeared before his Children amongst us. So that we thanked the Lord together for that mutuall consolation which he gave to us, and which did very sensibly ele∣vate us to him. His zeal for Gods glory and the salvation of souls was greater and more lively then ever, and he applyed himself with much
feeling of heart to the making of our great Catechism or Christian instruction, which came out in print a few days before the Lord took him out of this world into his eternall glory. He ap∣plyed him wholly anew to the cure of his worthy flock, edifying them by word, example and guidance, and together with me providing for them all necessary help, which his wor∣king love did incline him without ceasing to afford them. But before the sommer was wholly past, we saw his evill to grow again, by the falling down of the same humors, and it did encrease even so much, that it was judged to be absolutely ne∣cessary to come to a totall extirpati∣on. We endeavoured to have an ex∣perienced Chirurgent to come from the Hague, which had shewed love to us, but the providence of God not permitting him to come, so it was the desire of my Worthy Brother, after he had taken counsell about it with our Doctor (who hath shewed to him even to his end a very tender and unusuall affection) that one of our
rethren who for some time before xercised himself in Chyrurgery, nd whose hand the Lord hath blessed  divers occasions, should do the peration. The pains which my ery worthy Brother did suffer in his cutting of his evill were not com∣on, for the evill having spread it lf very frr, and more then out∣ardly did appear, so they were con∣rained to take away a great part of is chin, yea even to come more en once to it, which, seeing it was one in the quick flesh, did cause ex∣eam pains. But surely the grace of he Lord, and the strength of his pirit did in that occasion appear so owerfully in him, that even those ery hearts that are least sensible ei∣her of love or pain, might have en moved thereby. He suffered ll without moving of himself, with  patience which could not proceed ut from the extraordinary assistance f Jesus Christ our Lord. We saw en in him a lively image of his oly suffering, and of that heart ith which he hath suffered before
the eyes of God his Father. My worthy Brother had an incli∣nation, before he was cut, to speak with divers of us: which he did with so much light and presence of Spi∣rit, with so much purity of heart, that every one did even melt into tears, and in a speciall manner was drawn up to the Lord Christ wh was pleased to shew himself to us as suffering in his faithfull Servant, He gave a glorious testimony of th good ways of the Lord, of whose in∣finite goodness he could not suffici∣ently boast, even in this his way with him. Afterwards he sat down in the chaire, whereon he was to suffer, with as much quietness o mind, as if he went to sit at the tabl to meat, and with such valour, which apparently could not proceed bu from God and the power of his love The Doctor which was present whe the work was in doing, was move therewith and especially edified  even as we likewise who had ver great cause to thank the Lord for th faithfull assistance of his grace to∣wards
him, as likewise for the assis∣tance which he gave to our brother who wrought in the cure, and who therein behaved himself to the great satisfaction of the Doctor. After that the evill was cut out, my Worthy Brother not being in state for to speake, would yet in the midst even of his greatest and most lively pain utter out some words to tell us, That the Lord was good and very good: that we should thank him, and more then he himself; and that we should pray to the Lord, if he did put it into our hearts, that in his mercy he would take him to himself. A few days after we found the wound to be yet in a very slight state, and that much of the evill was yet re∣maining. For even as it was not closed up in its skin so it had spread it self much abroad, and was gone a great deale further as one could well beleeve, or judge from without. Yet the wound which was made was very deep; the pains which our worthy Brother must therefore suffer have been very sensible & of long
continuance; his weakness was great, and the hope of taking the evill quite away by cutting or other∣wise was but little. All this made us to conclude, that we were to cut no more, the Patient being in no condition to suffer it; although on the other side we likewise saw that unless the Lord should extend his helping hand in an extraordinary manner, we should in a short time be deprived of our worthy Brother, after he should have endured yet much pain. The Doctor was sen∣sibly greeved for it & was wounded in his heart: but the Lord, who gave us more then ever to take our refuge unto him, did support our hearts by Faith, and by the hope which he gave to us upon his almighty hand. When I said unto my very worthy Brother what we judged of his state, he said, Every will of God is good; and not being able to speake more by rea∣son of his wound, so he caused them to give him a writing table, on which he did write these words: By the Grace of God, I wish not to
live here below, but I am very willing to go to him, and give my self over to his mercy from whom I expect all. But now I should be able to say nothing else, but that the power of God is able to restore all things, and I feel some joy in my mind that I do as more fall into his divine hands. A little after he added these words, I should nor be willing to neglect any thing which the providence of God doth offer to me, for it is the token of his will and of his work; but God doing all things as he doth, that is as I think, to make me to loose and find my self more in him. Perhaps he will likewise have me more to see the end of humane power, to shew us what he is to us in his love when it pleaseth him. Our Sister Huyghens speaking to him of his apparent death, so he said, We will follow the Lamb whethersoever it fll lead us. Believe you that he will take me to himself, ô bless him, bless him for it. He said to some other body, with feeling of heart, and in a spirit
of humility whereof he was common∣ly very full, I am weak, and strong: weak in myself, and strong in God; and more then I can say. The two next insuing days the wounds did grow worse and worse, so that all appea∣rance of healing did by degrees more and more vanish away. But the Lord did put into the heart of our brother that had him in cure, to ap∣ply to him a certain oile, which might do no hurt to the wound but much good, if it should please God to give his blessing to it. This re∣medy did in few days so much con∣sume the evill, and almost without pain, or it did rather so vanish away, by the powerfull and efficacious will of the Lord, that there was no∣thing more seen of it, and the wound was put into so good a state, as one might wish. The Lord would thus shew us what he is able to do when it pleaseth him; and that when he doth not the things, it is not because they are to hard or not to be done, but be∣cause it is not his time or well plea∣sing to him.
When my worthy Brother did run the greatest danger, then one of our brethren had expressed in a song the state and dispositions of our heart in relation to him, and likewise those of the heart of our beloved patient, even as that may be seen in our spirituall songs in french, in page 178. And for as much as di∣vers of us went to visit him in the evening, talking one with an other before his bed of the ways of the Lord towards his Children, and articularly towards us, so I cau∣ed to be read that song, which was very much stirring up, and fit to make us to lift up our hearts to the Lord. Whereby our worthy Bro∣ther took occasion to utter to us di∣vers of his feelings, which were so ender, pure, and full of humi∣ity, love, and thankfullness to∣wards God, for the love towards him which he had given to his Chil∣dren, that we can not think on t, without having our hearts to be ively moved therewith. I telling im among others, that the Lord
caused us to feel and to express that which his Spirit had wrought in truth, and that he would give us an example of suffering, so he said with a tender and deep sense of his heart, which did wring tears out of ours as well as out of his eyes: The love of God and of his Children make me ashamed. The good which hath been is from the Lord. He hath supported me, and dealt with me according to his mercy; but there hath been also much de∣fect and mixture of my own with∣it. God hath thought on a poor earth-worm. He hath heard the groanings of his Children. All, must be much asscribed to that Spi∣rit which the Lord hath given to his Church. Telling him yet that the Lord had done good to us all, in that way which he had hel about him, that he had taught us much, and that there is no more but an appearance of evill in all what∣soever he doth about those that are his, all that which is essentiall there∣in being nothing else but good, so
he answered us with a heart which was wholly taken up with the love of the Lord. That he did wish with all his heart that God would continue to him all the days of his life the lively impression of that which he had done to him, all∣though he should live yet two or three times longer then he had. The Lord (said he) hath done me much good. I would not for all what is in the world, but I had re∣ceived, the good which the Lord in that way hath done to me. The wound by Gods blessing visi∣bly running together, was at the last closed up by the last hand which he himself did put to it, so that my worthy Brother was thereby not so much as hindred in his speech, and had again the means to be able by his words to edify the House of the Lord, even as he had done so much by his manyfold sufferings, and by the heart which therein he shewed, to the glory of his Grace who gave it him. If I should tell you all what∣soever about this great matter the
Lord hath made us to feel, those which have not seen that which we have seen, would think that I do make it greater: but I can tell in truth, that the remembrance thereof doth never come to our minds, but we feel our hearts to be enflamed with love to God & to the cross of his Son, which a fresh he was pleased to make so loving & precious, by the experience thereof which he hath given to us in his faithfull Servant. I have found among his papers a writing, which I do believe he made a little after that the Lord had perfectly healed him. And for as much as it is very fit to make us to see, what were his feelings at that time, as likewise the grace wherewith the Lord had filled his heart, I therefore found good to joyne it to this, for the edi∣fication of all those that shall read it, and who must be very unsensible of that which the Lord worketh in those that are his, if their hearts are not touched therewith. He then therein doth utter himself. Great God, whose goodness is a
bottomless depth, which one can neither fathom out, nor sufficient∣ly praise, open my heart in songs of praise, and grant me that there may flow out of it even streams of blessing and thanksgi∣ving, for the good which accor∣ding to thy pleasure thou doest to me. I was come even to the grave, the bonds of death had compassed me. An old & deadly evill, a gnauwing venum did eat away my flesh. I might have been numbred up among the dead, and nothing was able to deliver me from it. Divers means, yea even the art of men did seem to be unprofitable. All was come as to the last end & extremity without appearance of restauration, when it pleased thee Lord almighty, to come to my help, and through thy self to do that which none but thou couldest do. Thou wast indeed willing to use thy creatures, and to employ their hands, which thy grace sanctifi∣eth;
but thou hast done this only for to cover thine there by a little. In this thy help which thou hast done, thou wast willing to shew thy self and to hide thy self. To shew thy self in doing that which none but thou couldest do. And to hide thy self, by covering the presence of thy wholsom hand, with that of thy Children as with an acceptable cloud, Thou hast given them light and knowledge, thou hast strengthe∣ned them, thou hast led them, and put them to this work, thou hast taken them as instruments between thy divine fingers, and hast done what in thy goodness thou woul∣dest do. Thou hast also caused the love and the trust which thy Children have to come as to the end, that their love towards thee and e∣ven their love towards me, all∣though wholly unworthy, might burst out more in its holy flame. It pleased thee to give them love, and to kindle their hearts with a∣divine
zeal to pray to thee, and to entreat thee for me for that which thy compassion would grant to them. They did call, and were heard, they did pray, and thou didst grant their desires. Thy name be blessed therefore for evermore. O how beautifull are thy works ô my God! how pure is thy gouvern∣ment, and how easy are thy ways, how lovely and worthy of thee, my God! I find it in some mea∣sure, and my soul is full of the sense thereof to declare it, and to give thee glory for it. But it is not only in this thing that thy goodness doth give me this lesson. it is already a long while ago that thou hast been pleased, my God, to teach me this by ex∣perience, and I ought now to be a master therein, whereat I am yet a child and an ignorant schollar, af∣ter all that which thou hast done to form me, and to make me wise and knowing in the wonderfull know∣ledge of thy ways. The works of thy mercy, thy
deliverance according to soul and body, thy help, thy support, thy assistance & the glorious works of thy divine power towards me, ô Lord, they are even as without number. I do not find any day or hour in my life, in which I may not see some proof of thy goodness, yea many proofs together. Thou, my God, hast kept me from my birth. Thine eyes did look upon me when I was yet in my mothers womb. Thy fingers have formed me there. Thou hast wrought me together, composed me, animated & kept me. That imperfect thing hath from tha time been under thy care. This un∣shapen lump of flesh & blood, this vessell of earth & mudde although it be compacted together in a hea of sinn, hath been an object of thy wonderfull care. How oftentimes hast thou no kept me from death even from my childhood? I have been compasse about therewith for divers year and it wanted little but I had bee
a prey to it, by reason of the con∣tinuall pinings and sickliness, in which I have spent my childhood, but thou wast willing to spare me, because thou haddest laid up for me that costly good to know thee, and Jesus thy Sonn, my Saviour & King. I should then have pe∣rished, both in soul & body; but thou hast preserved this temporall life to me, to give me part of that eternall life. Thou hast sustained this body and my weak nature, to make me to arise in spirit & to live again in Grace. Out of how many dangers hath not thy hand ridd' me in success of times, O my God! what long∣suffering hast thou not shewed me, in bearing with me that am so sin∣full & so guilty! What mercy, that I have not been a thousand times consurned! But thou hast done this, O Lord, because thou wouldest make thy grace & long∣ suffering to abound, where guilt and sin did abound. My sins have been very great, and thy
mercys have been infinite. O noble love, O glorious good∣ness and wonderfull long suffering how shall I praise thee! How shall I utter any thing of that which I feel, although my feeling is as nothing to the thing it self, which is infinite, as thou thy self, ô God, art infinite. Furthermore, Lord, thou hast done good to me, and an infinite good, for the evills which I have done against thee without number. Thou hast pursued me with loving-kindness, when I did most of all flee from thee in my wickedness. Thou hast necessitated me to accept of thy Grace, thou hast forced me to go into thy royal house, and to take part of the wedding feast of thy welbeloved, thou hast pulled o from me my old garments of sin & fillthiness, and thou hast clothed me with a costly garment, for  eat with them that are the guests o thy good pleasure. The number of these benefits & the greatness of Grace maketh
to stand astonished, and if thou by thy efficacious working didst not assure me of the truth thereof, their excellency would have caused me to bring them into question. What goodness and kindness hast not thou caused me to feel, how unfaithfull and imperfect soever I did yet remain! What help and as∣sistance, ô my God, have not I found in all my need and agonys! All things have risen up against my soul to destroy it, but thou hast pre∣served & ridd' it. O God of my salvation, how oftentimes hath thy hand suppor∣ted me, when I was come to the uttermost extremity! The bot∣tomless pit hath even opened some∣times it self to devoure me, the most dreadfull terrors have fallen upon me. The violence of hell is come to run against my poor soul, their crafts have been employed in many and divers manners for to ensnare it. And who hath ridd' them away, but thou, ô my God, through thy faithfull and untired love!
If thou haddest not been who thou art, ô my God, infinitely doing good, I had been destroyed without remedy. O how great are thy mercys, ô my God, which thou shewest to∣wards those whom thou lovest! O how great & noble is thy love! it is not limited but by it self, even as it doth not end but in it self. If that which is good was to have come from me, I had never done it, nor desired it. If so be that perseverance was to have come from my faithfullness I had peri∣shed a thousand times, and if my preservation had not been but of my self, I should not have been any thing else but an object of thy wrath, and a subject of destructi∣on. But ô my God, glory, honour, and love be given unto thee for evermore, because thou doest make that thy Elect are not what they are, either in Grace or in Glory, but by thy grace and gift, and because that thou in thy free
but all mighty love doest fullfill in them, that which thou wilt have them to be before thy pre∣sence. O high mercy, ô wonderfull love who can comprehend thee! Thy thoughts towards us are won∣derfull. Thy mercys are invalua∣ble. The works of thy Spirit are incomprehensible: and what thou doest lay up for those that are thine & doest faithfully fullfill in them, is to be praised for ever. Let me therefore praise thee for it, ô my God, the days of my life. Let me without ceasing declare what thou art and what thou doest for and in them that are thine. I am ô my God, as in a speciall manner thy miserable one, and that patient for whose healing thou doest take care through thine infinite forbearance. I commit many faults and thou doest pardon them. I am in a cer∣tain sense as a riddle to my self, seeing how oftentimes I do sin, &
yet how much there is pardoned to me, and how much I am loved. O my God, let thy great love here after shew it self more, in making me such as I ought to be. If I have been a servant of whom much is endured, make me to be an obe∣dient & faithfull Child. Lord thou givest me plentifull matter to praise thee, let me then praise thee without ceasing. My God my desire is that even when I am asleep, my bones, my flesh, and soul may praise thee & be only employed about thee: thou doest compass her about with so much goodness, thou doest protect her from so much evill, thou workest in her so much good, that I have need, ô my God an eternity, to praise thee for it. I hope I shall fullfill my great defects, when the eternity of thy Grace shall have enriched my po∣verty, and shall have placed me above all my miserys. Then thy goodness shall fill up, not only
my vessell, but even also the empti∣ness of this life. I shall then say to all Angels & Archangels what thou hast done to my soul. I will tell it to thy whole numberless fa∣mily. I will shew them thy grace, and declare thy benefits to them, shewing them the wounds of which thou hast cured my soul. But a∣bove all I will go to thee, my God and to thee ô Jesus my Preserver, according to the impetuous drift which the eternall and perfect grace of thy love will give to me, and I shall lay down before thy feet, not only the crown of thy pure bounty, but even my whole being. I will adore thee, and annihilate my self, I shall flow away & sink in thy love, and in the Spirit of thy praise. This doth at present this faithfull soul, with all her desire and love, with all her desire and love, and according to the tender & affecti∣onate promises which she hath done to her God thereof, even as we see in this writing which is much edifi∣ing, and very fit to make known the
inward part of this most humble soul and faithfull Servant of Jesus Christ. Furthermore these following words have been found among his papers, which shew what then did particular∣ly touch his heart: I do lively feel in my heart that the expression of the humility, meekness, po∣verty, and the suffering of our Lord Jesus Christ, must be as the way in which I must walk, and the path in which I must runn the remainder of my life. The Lord who giveth to me this feeling, which I love and will close up in my heart, will by his divine fin∣ger engrave it therein, not only to continue to me the remembrance thereof, but by his Grace to be faithfull to it, if he will keep me yet sometime in this life. After that the all-powerfull and all-good hand of our heavenly Father had thus even as miraculously restored him, so he spoke to all his sheep in such a pure and heart stirring manner in the Assembly, that it did suffici∣ently appear that there was come even
as a new life in his soul, and that the love of God and of his glory, of Christ and of his Kingdom, of the Church and all his Elect did more then ever burn in his heart, and cau∣sed there more lively and more hea∣venly flames to arise. He like∣wise did by letters to many shew the sense of thankfulness, wherewith he did a new bind himself to God and to his service, at the same time when he by an inward and upright humili∣ty did count himself unworthy to be again employed thereto by Gods Spi∣rit and his holy Providence. Of all those letters which he did write about this, and whereof we could find co∣pys I shall relate but two, which shew the spirit wherewith he was wholly possessed. The one was to Mr. Bardewisch and his wife who, ac∣cording to the tender love which they had for him, did greatly partake with him in his state, and in the danger wherein he had been: And the other to my mother in which he utte∣reth divers moving and pure feelings, which without doubt will be desired
to be seen. The first was of the 23. of February of the year 1680 last past in these words. My worthy Brother and my wor∣thy Sister, you have been sad and comforted for me, God having been pleased to make you partakers with me in all whatsoever it hath pleased him to send to me, and it is fit that I should shew you how that I have not been unsensible of your love, and that whilst I thank you in his love, I doe likewise invite you to praise him with me. It would be little if we should but partake of that which mutually doth concern us, if we did not yet more narrowly partake in giving thanks for the same to him, who sending to those that are his all things for good, will also be praised and thanked for the same by them all. I am to small and to weak, to be able to acknowledge as is fit the least of his benefits, which he hath shewed to me in this his last visitation; but however I will praise him for it by his grace al the days of my life. And join your
selves to me, if you please, to pay to him with me this holy duty. It is indeed best for those to whom God hath manifested himself in his grace, to depart out of this life as changing house, for to be with Christ, who is given to them for a Saviour and Head, but in the order of those benefits, which he be∣stoweth upon those that are his in this warfare, he is willing that we should thankfully acknowledge all the help which he giveth in those divers states wherein it pleaseth him to place us: especially when they are accompanied with the de∣monstrations of his love, to make himself sensible to our souls, and to cause even all what he hath sent to us, to turn to such a great good as is that of our greater sanctification and communion with Christ. I hope of his mercy that he will cause me to draw some such fruit out of all that which is past. I doe ex∣pect all from that love which I have oftentimes found and felt to be infi∣nite; and likewise I am very wil∣ling
to witness it, that giving ouselves over to this divine love, more then at any time, which in all things without exception of any watcheth over us, we likewise all may experi∣mentally know that it is high, deep, and truly infinite. He by hi Grace hath granted me to be prepa∣red to go to him for ever, to long for him as for my God to whom I have consecrated my self; but he hath yet been pleased to deferr the accomplishment of his mercy to my soul, and yet would make me to find that the same was very great in all what he hath done for me. But what shall I say? In all what he doth, whether he doth it or doth it not, he is always good, and knoweth how to make himself to be felt and found that he is infinitely lovely. Praise him with me for this my worthy brother and sister, and for as much as you likewise in your own persons have tryed his faithfull care for you, let us all say one with an other in a lively sense of what he is, that his loving-kind∣ness
is great, and continueth for e∣ver. His holy Name be blessed for all things. Let Jesus be very much beloved, and praised by the souls of us all; and that good Spirit of God, which hath vouch∣safed to take us under his conduct, and who doth strengthen us, com∣fort us, and raiseth us up again, and causeth us to rejoyce in that steadfast hope that once we shall see him, he also be blessed and adored for evermore. It hath pleased the Lord wholly to close up that which was remaining of my wound, so that nothing else is re∣maining, but that I faithfully thank him for all what he hath done, and that I keep my self busy in his love, to make that holy use which I ought to make of that life which he hath as newly given to me again. But he will also grant me this grace, besides all those others that I have need of, that I may ful∣fill the offering of my self which I have made to him for ever. It is good to live for him, and yet bet∣ter
to die in him, to enjoy with him his eternall life. Our worthy Sister Huyghens hath made us clearly to see, that which his Spirit giveth us to beleeve. We doe like∣wise taste it, and have triall of it, so much as the Lord pleaseth to give us; but she hath caused us at leisure to see that grace which God bestoweth upon those that are his, and to heare, taste, and feel it. And he doth undoubtedly give us such appearances of his faithfull and mighty love, that our hearts may enlarge themselves in him, and that by a more full yeelding of our selves over into his hands, he may more possess us. Worthy Brother and Sister, let him there∣fore more then before at any time be our King and only Possessor. Let us live to him, and not live but for him, through Jesus Christ our Lord. The letter which he did write to France to my mother is nothing less edifying: and for as much as the Lord for divers years in his love hath
xcercised her with great pains of the gout, which causeth to her much suf∣fering, and keepeth her for the most part as bound to her chair or bedd, o he gives her witness of the good∣ness of the way of suffering and of he cross which God layeth upon his Children: and uttering to her what e hath found thereof in those that are his, he encourageth her to conti∣nue to suffer before God in the Spi∣rit & love of Christ, which doth de∣light himself in his suffering mem∣bers on earth. These are the words of his letter. God at present gi∣ves me an opportunity which obli∣geth me, Mistris and much ho∣noured Sister, to give you thanks for the remembrance which you have had of me, and the share which you have taken in that state in which it hath pleased him to place me, and now by his good hand to help me again out of it. He was willing to cause me to feel his Divine goodness, in that way which he hath kept about me: and what have I to say, when he is wil∣ling
to cause a sinner to taste th sweetness of his love who is as littl worthy of the chastisement of hi love, as the consolation thereof His hand hath for a little while cas me down, and it doth likewis raise me up again, and in such  manner as that his almighty lov can be discerned therein. H him self hath so softly and lovely supported me, that I must prais him for it for evermore, and neve think on it without powring forth tears of love and thankfulness. H likewise was pleased to streng then me through his great love▪ which he hath powred forth into the hearts of his Children in this hi Church, and into those of divers o∣thers, who not being there accor∣ding to the body, yet have thei hearts much there, amongst whic I see you to be one, my much be loved Sister, and I thank you th you was pleased to be mindfull  me. The Lord hath made use  your Sonn, my worthy & faithfu Brother, to give you knowledg
of my state, but I receive the testi∣mony of your love as descending yet from a higher originall, then from that sensible mean which hath given occasion thereunto. I look upon it as coming from him who is Love it self, and he who whilst he maketh himself to be loved for himself sake, doth also incline the hearts of those whom he posses∣seth to all those that are in his love. Now he hath loved us in his infinite mercy, and he maketh me to love him through his love, and to desire to love him more, yea with all that wherewith I shall at any time be able to love him. This then is enough for to kindle in our hearts an holy fire which never shall be quenched. In this sense I consider your love, and thank you for the same in him who gives to the see∣lings of affections & thankfullness which come from his Spirit all their praise and worth. I have long kept as hidden in my heart, divers feelings of love and holy esteem of that grace which God hath besto∣wed
upon you. But he makes m to publish or at the least to disco∣ver, that which in some measure hath been as covered: for which I thank him, being heartily glad with a holy gladness that I have occasion to tell you before you death or before mine, that I am sensible of the work of his Grace in you with much tenderness and that it is so dear and acceptabl to me as if it was of mine own mo∣ther: I would hereof give you up∣right tokens, if the Lord would be pleased to give me there unto op∣portunity. He hath made you to be one of his beloved Children▪ and besides, mother of a sonn whom in his grace he hath given to me to be my elder Brother, although ac∣cording to nature I am older the he. And the benefit which therein the Lord hath done to me is so pre∣cious, that I put it amongst the most speciall ones, wherewith hi mercy hath favoured me. Like∣wise I can tell you that he is more worthy to me then I can ex-press,
and his love is to me more then the love of all others. The Lord did cause that as soon as we saw and knew one the other, that we did love one the other so, as that we have left all former friendship. But the grace of God, and his cal∣ling towards us, his counsell and holy service, hath since united our hearts in such a manner, that nei∣ther death nor any other thing shall ever be able to violate this union: contrarily it shall encrease, so much as we shall make progress to∣wards him, wo is the great and e∣ternall foundation of the love of his Saints. As to what remaineth Mrs. I can not forbear to tell you that I am sensible of that state wherein the Lord hath been plea∣sed to put you, he hath taught me by some experience to be sensible of the trials of those whom he doth somwhat particularly visit; and I pray to him in the same sense of my heart, which I have had some∣times upon my sick bed that he will give you ease & strength. He will
undoubtedly do it, and you will have experience of it, and find it to the glory of his Name, feeling more then ever that it is good to relye upon the Lord, and upon his faithfullness; which never fai∣les when there is occasion for it▪ He doth not visit you (as you know very well & his good Spirit hath taugt you) but that he may make you more conformable to him▪ And is it not a great good, to carry some lineaments of God, who was crucified for the love which he hath had for some of his creatures? You are of the number of those for whom he gave his soul, and spil his blood. He will marke you herewith by that suffering which he sends to you, that by his own token you may not only be ac∣knowledged for one of his, bu that also his love may yet more ap∣pear upon you. Rejoice therefore▪ Mistris and my very worthy Sis∣ter, in this love, with which no∣thing is to be compared. God will exalt you to the cross of Christ
but afterwards he will cause you to climme up to himself, and esta∣blish you in his House in his joy & eternall Glory. Our warfare will not continue long, and we see by Faith not only the end of our race, but we see him also who stands at the end, and who is all our joy. He hath his delight to see us to walk in his ways inanimated with his love. Our warfare is not concea∣led from him. He seeth & feels it himself more then we, and his bo∣som is opened to receive us for ever therein. I wish you from hence∣forth the divine sweetness and strength thereof, praying to him, with my whole heart, that he may perfect in you the works of his Grace to the eternall glory of his Sonn. The Lord having thus comforted s the second time, by granting us gain his faithfull Servant, & thereby iving us such speciall matter to ejoyce for his goodness, & to praise is might and his love that doth all hings well; did find good for the
third time to put us in the sam triall, by which at the last it ple∣sed him to take to himself th humble, patient and complying soul whom he by so many way had prepared to go and behold him in the blessed day of eternity and glo∣ry. Although we had cause to be∣leeve, that his evill was perfectly c∣red, yet however it ceased not to ap∣pear again, by the falling down  the self same sharp humors which h caused the first. Which a new obl∣ged us to offer up our selves and ou worthy Brother, into the soveraig hands of our God, who made it mo apparent to us that there was but li∣tle means to cure this evill by ou∣ward remedys or by cutting and co∣rosifs. And because at that time the acquainted us, that there were tw persons at Amsterdam, which coul cure the very canker it self by ano∣ther way, we did beleeve, after tha we had taken some assurance ther∣of, that it might not be amis tha our Brother should go to Amster∣dam, before the evill should com∣further
to see if the Lord would be pleased thereby to prevent those sad consequences, which this disease at the last might produce. My wor∣thy Brother having speciall inclinati∣on thereunto, went again to Ams∣terdam, lodging with the same friends of ours, which received him with a new tenderness of heart, and have shewed him a very faithfull and tenderly affected love. Being there, after that he had heard some Doctors about his state, he was inclined to try the remedys of a person which promised that thereby he would go to the very ground and root of the evill, and hoped to take it quite away. In the beginning there seemed to be some expectation of it the sore affording matter, and see∣ming to take the course of ordinary wounds. But the cure continuing and our worthy Brother suffering, and growing weak by the torments, we had new cause to offer him up to God, that he should do with him according to his adorable pleasure, perceiving well, that if the Lord
should not give some change, he would come to leave us at the last, either by the encrease of the evill, or else by his weakness which such remedys might cause. He knowing how tenderly affected we were with the Lords trying of him, and fearing that it might go to near to our hearts▪ he wrote to me these words with strength of spirit and heart, whe yet he was very bad: I pray yo my worthy Brother, and with you all our Brethren and Sisters, tha you will not be cast down becaus of my condition: and even as I a lively affected with this that you hearts keep themselves continuall before the Lord for my sake, so pray you likewise that you prai and thank him in the joy of h good Spirit, who is able to give  a thousand reasons to glorify him. About the same time he wrote a le∣ter to one of our sisters, who then w at Utrecht, these words: You wis my very worthy Sister, as you  testify in your letter, that t Lord may keep me longer yet
this life. But do you think that I can be to you yet a help and comfort in any thing? If it be so, then I wish it with you: for if it pleaseth God; I am willing to do for his Elect and Children all what he shall inable me to do for them; but if not, what should we else wish but to go out of this world, that we may be with him? let us look upon the things as they are, and so as the light of his divine word doth shew them to us, and then let us judge whether there is any thing reall but this, which must make us to love life. I had some lively feeling yesterday that it is a very lovely thing to prepare one self to go unto God, and that the word whereby a soul may speak to it self on this occasion, is very comfortable, saying with herself, The time approacheth come, let us arise, let us go unto him who hath loved us from all eternity, and who hath also granted us to love him for ever, and to give our lves wholly unto him. God in his will and good pleasure, must be
our All here on earth, and in him∣self our All eternally above. The Spirit, which he hath given to us worthy Sister, as likewise to his o∣ther Children in all ages, tellet us this, and maketh us so to feel i in the innermost parts of our hearts, although one doth not all ways receive sensibly the vertu thereof. The person at Amsterdam wh had my worthy Brother in hand and who had pretended that h would work with no other remedy but inward, to drive the evill, a he said, to the outward parts, di afterwards beleeve that he wa bound to cut of the excrescencys, see¦ing that it continued to long ear it fe away of it self. Which together wit the use of sharp corrosives did cau to my worthy Brother very sensibl smart, and likewise took much  way the hope that this man shoul bring it to a perfect cure. Likewi the Lord did evidently shew that b would not use his service to this end Persons that have an affection for us
and who shewed themselves to be ve∣ry sensible of the state of our worthy Brother, spake to us of a french Chy∣rurgent, in the Hague, which was re∣nowned for having a great secret to cure such kind of maladys. I did write concerning it to my Brother o acquaint him of what was pro∣pounded to us: and he receiving at the same time letters in which he was ve∣ry urgently desired to put himself in∣to the hands of that Chyrurgent. We began to give heed to it, although as my worthy Brother did write to me, e had trouble to pass through so ma∣ny hands. But there was then no more to be expected from him who had him in care, whose remedys were the appa∣rent  cause of so many very painfull accidents after which followed great weakness, and a cough which conti∣nued with him untill the Lord did deliver him from all suffering, and translated him into his Kingdom. Being in this state he wrote to me with much feeling: My soul doth praise the Lord, and my heart doth
adore him in all things with love and reverence. He is great and is good. I give my self to him and to his eternall good-pleasure. My present condition seemeth to be ve∣ry farr from any ecovery, for my strength is almost spent. My bo∣dy is as broken, and my accidential in a state much wors then before for it hath been growing downwar for some time. But the Lord is a the end of all, and above all, and hi holy will shall be my strength▪ my life and my All for evermore After that he further witnessed thi disposition in which his soul was with these words: I will tell you m worthy Brother, that the Lord a present giveth me but this one sens and mind, which is to leave my sel wholly to him, to follow him i that which he shall require of me whether in suffering or in dying and in that manner as he shall thin fit: and that in this sens I have only to follow that which he shall she to be his pleasure. Me thinketh b hath done all things thus farr t
bring me to this mind, and to make me to rest therein. And he granteth me likewise so to do by his grace; and if it pleased him to do somthing more, even as I will neither limite his goodness nor his power therein, this would be som∣thing extraordinary and above the expectation which at present he gi∣veth me. For as much as his evill did visibly grow worse, and no time was to be lost if he was yet to pass over into o∣ther hands, so the French Chyrurgent, whereof I have spoken, came to him the second time to see him at Amster∣dam, and having given more con∣tentment then at first, so my worthy Brother consented to the importunate entreaty which was made to him, that he should put himself under his cure; and the frost coming in, and not suffering a longer delay he went in a barge to the Hague, there to ex∣pect what should be the Lords last will about him. My worthy Bro∣ther did then write unto me: If this is the way by which the Lord
will lead me to death, it will like∣wise be the way to go to him for whom I long: and I am very sen∣sible through his grace that this would be the full measure of his mercy towards me, and the ac∣complishment of the desires which the Lord through his good Spirit hath put in the bottom of my heart. Fare well my very worthy Brother whom I do embrace with my whole heart, and with you all our wor∣thy Brethren and Sisters, and the called of the Lord, to whom I wish all blessing and increase of grace, even as likewise all the children, whom I do all embrace in this Spirit without exception. The Lord made us then in a spe∣ciall manner to humble our selves before him filling us with that sense which was expressed in the words of Christ in the garden Gethse∣mane: Father, if it be possible let this cup pass by: if not thy will be done: a∣bout which we did discours the se∣cond time when we were assembled, submitting our selves with the heart
to what his hand should find good to do with our worthy Brother, whom we gave up to him, and put him anew into his hands. Hereupon as weak as he was he wrote to me these words: Having understood that the Lord hath inclined your hearts to humble your selves be∣fore him for my sake, who am a fit subject for it, so I have felt almost the same of that which God hath caused you to experience about his grace and divine presence: and following the steps of the same Spi∣rit I find my self in a reall and more then ordinary disposition, to lay my self down with his Church, and in some measure more then she at his divine feet. Both the words concerning which you have spoken, have touched me very much, & the last words of the Lord Jesus, are some times those whereby my heart goeth to God his Father and to him. The Lord who by his H. Spirit hath moved your hearts thus to hum∣ble your selves, will also be pleased with the smell of your prayers for
his Sons sake. I pray to him and thank him with all my heart, that whilst he keepeth me in a very simple frame, and as one of his creatures, which such as it is hath gi∣ven it self over into his hands. He giveth me a very reall sense of his presence, and I can not but expect all things from his infinite good∣ness, whatsoever it shall please him to do. A little while after I did write unto him that his wife our worthy Sister was in extraordinary weakness, whom the Lord with him did cause to draw near to her dissolu∣tion, even as we have seen in that writing which containeth her last words and dispositions, and about this he wrote to me these words: I had not expected that which you have written to me concerning the weakness of my Sister. It hath ve∣ry sensibly touched my heart. But the Lord having made me to behold it in him, it gave me presently to adore him, and to give all over to him in that spirit which the knowledge and love of him doe re∣quire
of us. And in that as in ma∣ny other things, he hath made me to find, that through his grace to∣wards us he is indeed all to us; and that in the ground we are nothing, nor will any thing, but in and for him. I know not whether he hath fullfilled his will whereof he hath given much likely hood. If it hath pleased him so to do it is without giving me as yet any particular feeling thereof. yet I do not stay there. And through his goodness I do adore, praise, and thank him, that his mercy towards his daughter and handmaid should be accomplished, to his glory and our common con∣solation, and in the good savour of the grace of the Lord Jesus. I have loved her, and yet do love her if she be yet a mongst us, with a love more tender and worthy of God then I ever did before. But if God of his infinite love hath made her to put of all remainders of mortality and imperfection, taking her to him self, then I feel that I love her whol∣with
with an other love, and such as a∣greeth with that state wherein she should be. In the mean while, un∣till we understand more particular∣ly the way of God towards her, we shall endeavour to continue in the spirit of compliance, adoration, and embracing of every will of God both towards her and towards us all. In the following letter I ac∣quainted my worthy Brother that God in his love had taken her to him self, with so much edification & com∣fort as the Lord did it. And he wrote unto me the affections of his heart in these words: I have properly nothing to do but to praise and thank God, about that which he hath been pleased to do in my wor∣thy wife, whom he was pleased to take to him self. So much as his Spirit and providence hath made me to be near related to her, so much doth the same Spirit oblige me through his grace towards her to praise him, to acknowledge his work, to comply with it, and to love it with all my heart. and I
likewise thank the same good and faithfull Spirit, that it may please him to work this in me. The work of God is good and beautifull, and I see nothing in it but what must make it all the remaining part of my life precious, lovely and com∣fortable. The Lord hath enlarged the ground of his Spirit in his hand∣maid, at the least in some measure. For I know and feel even as God many times by his Spirit hath made me to see, that there were yet ma∣ny other propertys of his grace and strength wholly lovely in her, ac∣cording as he giveth them particu∣larly to certain simple and inno∣cent souls. But he hath caused his mercy towards her, and the divine fruitfullness and vertue which is in those who have well received his Spirit, to appeare so much, that I have nothing but to praise the Lord for what be hath done. He doth not suffer me to have an other mind about it, and although there is something sensible which transient∣ly doth present it self to me, upon
the remembrance that she is n more with us according to the flesh yet the truth, and even that sen according to the Spirit, and of th state wherein the Lord hath ta∣ken her away, as likewise of tha wherein he hath put her, do truly swallow up all. And by th grace of the Lord I love it with a my heart, that I can not see her n possess her but in him. The goo favour which it pleased her heaven∣ly Bride-groom to powre for coming to take her to him, an which hath spread forth it self on a your hearts, and will remain the as long as her memory shall be pr∣sent with us, this is yet a specia matter of joy to me. She was n for making much noice about a thing. All was as shut up in her si∣plicity, innocency, and p faith. But God had pleasure  cause the spikenard and sweet sm∣ling spices that were hidden in  soul, to give some savour. N∣ther do I wonder at it, that  your hearts have been tender
wards her, for God had given her a love to his work and Church a∣mongst us, which was something speciall, and had a respect to the holy Body of Jesus, to the which I did oftentimes perceive that she had a singular and holy inclination. I can not forbear to acknowledge, yea and witness the lively sense which I have of the love which you, and divers brethren and sisters in a speciall manner, and the whole Church in generall have shewed to her. In an other letter he did yet a∣gain utter to me what in success of time did touch him about this matter, in these words: I continue by the goodness of the Lord to feel the great good which he hath done to his handmaid and daughter, and whereof it hath pleased him to cause something to issue down upon us, but especially upon me: which ob∣ligeth me all my life-time to praise and thank him as in a speciall sense of the spirit. The good things and benefits of God are not transitory or fading away, even as those of
the world which are othing but vanity & changeableness, where∣as those that are his do remain as him self remaineth. And although the sense thereof is not always one and the same, yet their truth is so reall and efficacious, that they do never present themselves to the soul, who is wont to feel them, without leaving in her always a lively and divine impression. I hope that the Lord will make my worthy Sister always in some sort present to me, according to this holy truth in his grace and glory. I leave her gladly and heartily in the bosom of her true and eternall Bride-groom in which she resteth, possessing him and being possessed of him. It is enough to me, if the Lord shall be pleased, that I may be able to behold him in her by his Spirit, from time to time, and her in him, according to that un∣speakable unity, which maketh them perfect, in one. The good∣ness of God towards her is likewise a speciall reason to me for to ac∣knowledge
his faithfulness, and how one hath but to wait upon him and to leave one self to him, to try his infinite favour. What concer∣neth the little one, which he was pleased to preserve and at present maketh it weaker, that I do likewise offer up to his infinite mercy, and to Jesus Christ, who hath said that they should bring little children to him. All is his and for him; why should we be willing to keep one moment that which he sheweth to be willing to take? His holy will be done in all things. Before she pas∣sed over into the eternall bosom of e Lord, my worthy Brother had ritten to her divers and very edify∣ng letters, and which were full of a ery tender and pure love. In one e uttereth his heart about her in these words: Your consolation goeth to my heart, and with as much tenderness as you can desire. I am very sensible of your hearty love. And the Lord maketh me to answere it with the like or perhaps with a greater love. I beseech you
that you always doe heartily rest o the Lord, who is good and friend∣ly to us, and who through his grea love hath powred out of his lov with his Spirit into our hearts. Bu you know that this love is neithe weak nor encumbred, and as i cometh from God, cleaveth t him, and leadeth to him, so  maketh us to rely on him, an to trust him with all things. D it therefore, I pray you, in respect  me, as of all other things. As fo me, I am sometimes so lively to∣ched therewith, that I say with m self, the Lord leaveth us but o holy care, which is to amend o faults and to praise him for his ho goodness. I pray him that he ma be pleased to make you faithfu to his holy and tender love.  much busy with him, admire h goodness and faithfull care, prai him for it in your heart, be dilige to please him, put your self ofte times in his presence, do that  which he calleth you; and you w find that he will fill you with
goodness. And because she took very sensibly part with him in his state, he wrote to her some time be∣fore: I pray you let us keep our spirits and hearts united with the Lord and his will. Let us suffer him to rule: for his Kingdom is nothing but righteousness and love. Let ufeel & acknowledge it before him, and pray him, that he will but grant that we may glorify him. He will do every thing well both with you and the little one, for he takes care for all things. We have but to leave all things to him, and to loose our selves in his hands with love. These were the affections therewith those holy souls were full before their happy decease, which hath united them again in God to all eternity. The Lord afterwards gi∣ving our worthy Brother some ease in respect of his sore and smart, and leading our Sister Magdalene (whose last words have been seen already) to her end, he wrote to me very sen∣sibly, and with the spirit of deep humility which was so proper to him:
When I do receive any ease from the Lord, I feel that I owe it as to the continuall groans and prayer of his Children, whom he doth vouchsafe to hear. And so you may beleeve, that all what his Spi∣rit doth work in them in respect o me, is for my speciall comfort, and gives me matter to praise and thank him, that he hath powred out into your and their hearts such a tender, continuall and strong love towards me. His love through his good∣ness doth not withdraw it self from me, and he gives me more then e∣ver a desire, that if it be his will that being delivered from all re∣mainders of imperfection and sinn, I may speedily go and give him the honour and glory which I owe him. But we must wait on him, and suf∣fer him to fullfill his holy Coun∣sell, according to which all thing that relate to us in this life will end. He bindes and looseth us according to his good pleasure. He is tha Lord and Master who is wholly good and Allmighty; and I am hi
poor and low creature, and I will say, that I am as that Asses colt which our Lord did use in his glori∣ous inrode into Jerusalem. That which you write concerning our Sister Magdalene is very stirring and comfortable, and I doubt not but it is to you a speciall matter of joy and holy comfort. The Lord perhaps will take divers of his Chil∣dren to himself. O what great good is that for them and for us! All is prepared for nothing else but him. All must wait for him, and truly our joy must be that he taketh then this, then an other, without having any thing to encumber our selves with. Greet her heartily my worthy Brother, and according to that spirit in which two persons, who do go from the same ground to one and the same end, and to which they both must come, can greet one the other. The Lord Jesus, who hath always been so good to her, although she hath not always sufficiently ac∣knowledged it, bless her; and fil∣ling her with the Spirit of his grace
grant that from the heart she ma extend her self to his glory. Whe the Lord in his love had taken thi Sister to himself, then he wrote t me about it, and with respect to ou brother her husband, that whic touched his heart, Feeling; my ve∣ry worthy Brother, a little strengt to write, I was not willing to defer it. The comfort to be able in som measure to answere your love an that of the whole Church, doth g to near to my heart, then that  should neglect it. The work o grace and of glory, which th Lord hath accomplished in ou blessed Sister Magdalene, hat touched us much, but especiall me, as who by his goodness do now something near by feel wha great good it is to approach near to him, never to be separated from him any more. God seemeth to be wil∣ling to comfort us all, causing u to feel that such a good is as above all good, and that our souls must rejoyce at it, and in the spirit must meet him, as through a new
attraction of love. I do thus feel it something, and doubt not but that the Lord doth give almost the same feeling especially to our worthy brother J. S., being accustomed in a speciall manner to possess the place of al whatsoever he taketh away from those of whom he see∣meth to take away any thing. I desire you to greet him in my be∣half, and to embrace him hearti∣ly, praying the Lord that he will bless the chlidren with a new bles∣sing. Concerning the state of my wor∣hy Brother in respect of his greef, aving had sufficient proofs of the re∣edys of the french Chyrurgent, and aving suffered much of him, he ound himself obliged to be dischar∣ed from him; seeing by experience hat their effect did not answere his ords or promises. And Doctor Helvetius, who had directed the irst cure of his malady, dwelling ot farr from the Hague, was desired o take the care thereof again with the Chyrurgent Bekestein. Both have
done it to the end with much ∣fection and speciall application, ∣ving a tender feeling of his state a manyfold sufferings. About t same time he thus wrote to me co∣cerning his state: My worthy Br∣ther, it is a great comfort to  that I can yet from time to ti write a word to you. My wea∣ness doth not suffer me to do th which my heart and hand wou gladly do, and we must leave th little comfort, even as all other to him allone who governeth a disposeth all things, even to t least, so as it seemeth him goo The state in which it pleaseth hi to leave me, doth yet continue  in that hope, to which there is al much likelyhood, that he hath ∣pened to me the way, whereby  shall go to him. His name be ble∣sed for it for evermore. It is tr that some times I yet hope, even  I do much wish, that his hand wi yet bring me amongst you, an grant me there to finish my lif and to perfect the offering of m
self which I make to him, and of the rest of my days, and of my e∣ternity. But I leave this to him, as all other things. In an other let∣ter he wrote to me in these words: What concerneth me, my worthy Brother, it pleaseth my good Fa∣ther and Lord to keep me always as in his air, depending on his will and being ready to the same. And for as much as it pleaseth him thus to support me by his good Spirit, I praise and thank him for the state wherein he keepeth me, which cau∣sing me to continue in him to be ready for his will, doth cause me to tast very much the sweetness of his love. I am sometimes a lit∣tle better, and sometimes again worse according to the body, but always very weak, and de∣caying as to the outward, yet my strength not wholly failing me.  ometimes I admire at my self.  greef through the goodness of God doth not grow, his hand put∣ting bounds to it, to keep it in, without healing of it. So that at the
same time when I yeeld my self to the Lord to go to him from this place, if it be his will; it is also my great desire to give up my ghost in the communion of his Children and amongst you; and sometimes he giveth some hopes that he will do it. Therefore we thought that if our Brother van D. after the frost should be able to come over to help us, that should be pleasing to me. But if you should have need of him there, or that it might continue to long, or that he should put himself in any danger in coming over,  should not desire that the House o the Lord should be disappointed o the help of his love. And because as I was especially o this opinion that we should not see our worthy Brother any more in thi life, I found my self disposed to signi∣fy to him the dispositions of my hear and of those of my worthy Brethren and Sisters concerning him. Which I did in my letter whereof I will her relate a part, My very worthy an beloved Brother, it seemeth to me▪
that God calleth and presseth us to bid you as the last fare-well, and to signify what we should say to you, if we stood about your bed, and you were compassed about with all his Children, where with he hath intimately united you. We do it then, my worthy Brother, in case we may not have that holy com∣fort, as to see you again in this life. You go to our God and to your God. You pass over to the bosom of our common Father. You approach to the dwelling-place of his glory, and you will shortly see Jesus glorified. Go, my worthy Brother, follow the Lamb which leadeth you to him, and who having brought you to him, will for ever keep you with him. We follow you in Spirit with heart and affection, The eja∣culations of our love do accompa∣ny you; and even as we do very lively feel your departure, so like∣wise we thank our great Redeemer for the redemption which he will give you from all what you might
yet endure. We do likewise very sensibly take part of that unspea∣kable happiness to which Jesus ou faithfull Saviour shall for ever re∣ceive you. He hath loved you▪ He hath given you to love him, and he will crowne his love in you▪ He is our God, our King, and ou All. Let him eternally rule over us. Let him fill us, possess us, and do with us according to his Divine pleasure. You shall behold the King in his glory. You shall be∣hold him in the great day of his tri∣umph, and seeing him you shall be satisfyed with all good. All your pains shall cease with him, and you shall do nothing but praise and thank him with all his Saints, whom he hath received into his happiness, for his unspeakable grace, and for the glory where in he shall have placed you in that happy eternity. I tell you the heart of all our very worthy Bre∣thren and Sisters: but I tell you, my very worthy Brother, especi∣ally mine. God, who hath made
us one in him by such an inward & narrow bond, will keep us for e∣ver united together in his eternall love, and according to his good pleasure will grant us once that we shall rest together in his bosom. I embrace you, & leave & give you to him, who is and will be to you and us all what ever he shall will or do. For all what he doth it is good, and glorious to his name, & whole∣some and saving to his Children. When I had written this letter to him, and one of our Sisters, who was with him at the Hague, telling him the same evening when he recei∣ved it, you could very well go to the Lord my worthy Brother, without coming again to his House: he ans∣wered her: This could be; and if the Lord doth it tell my worthy Brethren and Sisters, that I do go to God with all my heart, that I do remain lively convinced of those truths which he hath caused us to profess to his glory, and that I do die contented in the state and place wherein I am, although I have not
the comfort of seeing them. I shall die contented, being near by a Moses, and yet being not able to enter. God having given him a great love for his Children and sheep, where∣of he had made him a Shepherd, he wished very simply that he migh give up his ghost in the midst of us, if it was the will of our heavenly Fa∣ther. And likewise on the other side seeing that there was no perfect cure to be expected, he wished that he might have ended here the last mo∣ment of his transitory life. He him∣self had some times this hope, as he wrote, when the Lord at the last o∣pened the water and seemed to give means for his transportation. But it was not but only to bring over his body without life, and separated from his soul, which did rest with Christ Jesus in the happy bosom of his glory, before his body was brought here to rest, in the place where those of the other Children of the Lord were laid: which he inno∣cently did signify to be his desire,
whilst likewise he left it fully to the Lord to do there with as he should think fit, and to his Children to do what God should put in their hearts, and according as his holy Providence should permit. The Lord having already caused him to give a great and manyfold witness of his grace and the goodness of his ways towards him, he found good at the end, and whilst my worthy Brother was at the Hague, for the most part to keep him in a state of silence or speaking little, ha∣ving gotten a dry cough, and which was very incommodious to him as soon as he spoke, constraining him as wholly to gather himself together within himself before God, and to consume himself in silence and sim∣plicity of heart as a lamb upon Gods altar, or as a burning lamp which did breath out all her strength up∣ward, to God and to Jesus his King and Saviour. Which did not hinder but that from time to time he con∣strained himself to utter, as there was opportunity, that which he felt of
God, of his love, and of his holy Mysterys Which, once he said, were so lively and purely printed upon his heart by the Spirit of Jesus Christ, as if they were there writ∣ten in great and very legible letters. He added there to, I knew before the same truths by education, and afterwards by study; but all what God doth not imprint by his Spirit is instable, and may be overturned witha shadow. Upon an other occasion he said, Humili∣ty is a very essentiall grace; it is better then all raptures of the senses. He said to one who came to visit him in his great weakness, Our breath indeed is between our lips, and it is the Lord truly that keepeth it there. This person speaking to him of the study of Divi∣nity in respect of the office of preach∣ing, he said unto him very sensibly: There is need of a speciall grace, and afterwards of a calling from God, and then yet God must sup∣port under such a burden. For the decay of the Church is much come
from thence that men without the Spirit, and those which have not been called thereunto of the Lord, have been brought upon the pulpit. He added to it, It is certain if one doth well consider what this holy office doth require, and God not giving speciall measures of his Spi∣rit, that in steed of addicting one∣self thereunto, one should rather go and dwell in a wood or a wilder∣ness, even as divers holy men have formerly done. And there upon he told him something which he had known and practised by his own ex∣perience, untill the Lord had obli∣ged him to follow and to serve him in the work of the ministery, which he had laid upon him for his Kingdom and for his glory. That day he spoke something more then ordinarily, but he found him self much wearied in the eve∣ning, being taken with a generall cold and much weakness. And as they would give him something for his refreshment and to pass the night the better, he said: Must one do
so much for a body that is already half dead, and that which I shal lay down so speedily? A little af¦ter it seemed as if he was taken with some sleep, but the cough coming upon him and continuing for two hours, did hinder him from slee¦ping. Yet afterwards being aske how he found himself, he said, Ver well, with a joyfull mind and heart contentment, yeelding him self a¦gain to the arms of the Lord, and ex∣pecting from him the rest which h should be pleased to give him the re¦maining part of the night. And th Lord gave him such rest, that h found himself in the morning to b much refreshed. The next evening composing him¦self to rest, the cough hindered him from sleeping, even as it did ordina¦rily; and for as much as they woul stay with him to help him in what h might have need of, he refused it say¦ing: The Lord and I allone, that goet always best. The more one will do t worse it goeth. Yet he coughed tha night very much, almost withou
sleeping any thing; and because they were something troubled that he had been left allone, he answered sensi∣bly: The Lord being present is not that enough? The Saturday having wearied him self much,The 15. of Fbru. he likewise slept little at night. But he wondered that he found himself not to be more faint for it. Yet finding himself weaker after that he was risen, he said with quietness of mind and inward con∣tentment of heart: It will not continue long. These days will shew what the issue will be. And when they did confirm it to him, he shewed himself to re∣joyce much at it, saying: O what a good thing is it to see that the Lord is near by? He can come at all hours, and I do also expect him at all times. On the Sunday he desired that they should write to Mr. Bardewisch and his wife,The 16. to entreat them that they should be pleased to come to see him for the last time, if it could be done without great inconvenience. Fur∣thermore he did with much affection admonish a person who was with him
To be very faithfull to the Spirit which the Lord had begun to give to her, well to die to herself, to live more then ever in the pre∣sence of God, and to give herself as anew again to Jesus Christ and his Work: and further recommending her to write to me the feeling of her heart. Our Sisters van der Haer asking him whether he had not any thing in particular to tell them, he answered them: I leave you in the hand of God and of his Spirit. You know that it is much our course to leave and recommend souls to God. His Spirit will lead you, and in his time teach you all things. Referr your selves to him, and he will do all things well. Give your∣selves more then before to God and his Work, and take my worthy Brother for your Father. The Lord will take care for his Work. He hath no need of me, and he will encrease his grace in others to the enlargement of his Kingdom & glory. Let us leave God to do it, for he will do all well. The same evening his Cousin coming to visit
him, and shewing himself to be sad to see him in that state, he said to him, It is the state in which the Lord putteth me, to cause me to draw near to him. Likewise I do embrace the same with love. Our life indeed here is transitory, and it is ry just that we should bestow it wholly for him and for his glory. Whereupon he took leave of divers as making him self ready to go from time to eternity, and from the world to God to whom his heart went forth without ceasing. The next day Doctor Helvetius being come to visit him,The 17. he found him very weak, so that he said per∣haps the Lord will shortly make that great change. Whereunto our wor∣thy Brother did answere, That it was to him very acceptable news: and fur∣thermore talked much with him of that contentment which the Lord gave him, seeing his end to be so near by; for the rest thanking him for his affection and care and exhor∣ting him to live the remainder of his days for the Lord. After which he wished to him the blessing of God up∣on his person & his family. In the e∣vening
our worthy brother Mr. Bar dewisch and his wife being com from Amsterdam, their presenc was such a great joy to him, that h seemed as to receive a new life and new strength, because his affection to them was very tender, even a likewise theirs towards him had been very reall and effectuall. On Tuesday morning he was bet∣ter,The 18. and asking what kind of wethe it was, when he heard that it conti∣nued to thowe, and that the Zouth∣sea was already open, so he informed him self if there was any means, i the Lord should give him more strength, to bring him to Amsterdam that he might go from thence to Fries∣land if God thought it fit. And be∣ing told that there was, the way from the Hague to Amsterdam being grown very soft by reason of the snow, he rejoyced thereat saying, tha he had yet courage to betake him∣self upon the journy if the Lord would, although, said he, I have referred all this to him. I thought not but to remove out of this life;
and should the Lord yet be willing to give me that comfort to see my worthy Brethren and Sisters, which in truth would be one of the greatest to me, which I should be able to desire here below? If then the Lord is thus purposed we must fit our selves accordingly, yea and make some hast. The Doctor and Chyrurgent found it not unadvised, saying contrarily that the complying with a harmless desire of a sick person many times could cause great alterati∣on for good. Against noon it seemed as if he had gotten more strength and even to eate with some appetite The Doctor likewise then took his last leave of him, and our worthy Bro∣ther exhorted him again very affecti∣onately that he should live for God and his glory, wishing heartily to him the blessing of the Lord. The Ldy of Ouwerkerk, who had so continually shewed towards him her tender and carefull love being come to visit him, and the black more that serveth her, asking how it was with him, he let him come in to ask him,
whether he had not felt any thing of God in his heart. On which the black more answering, that for some years since he was become a Christi∣an, then said he unto him: This is not the thing that I ask you, for if you do not deny the affections of the world & love the Lord Jesus in truth, all your profession of being a Christian will not help you. And it is not Baptism in water that saveth us, nor the profession that maketh a Christian. Those whom God maketh such, he giveth them a heart which in the ground seeketh nothing else but him, and that loveth not the things of this world: and this is it where∣of I ask if you have felt any thing. Further earnestly admonishing him to pray the Lord that he might be pleased to give him that precious grace. In the evening being much tired he said: "This is a day of much weary somness, I can not much more. Also it was nine at clock before he could betake himself to rest. After supper
all but in their passing by having ta∣ken their leave of him, not to trouble him any more, he remained till mid∣night sitting up to his bed coughing continually, without being able to put down his head, but he began again to cough more then ordinarily. And for as much as that continued long, & as they saw that he could not be in a condition the next day to go for Am∣sterdam if it continued so, he said di∣vers times with great heart stirring motion. Let the Lord doe what ever he will, it shall be well. Afterwards ha∣ving desired that every one should take their rest, then he laid himself down in simplicity of heart in the rms of God and of his Fatherly bo∣om, and fell a sleep. But the person hat remained about his bed, heard speedily that his sleep was not ordi∣ary but very heavy, where upon one of our Sisters van der Haer arose to ook after him, who found his face much altered; and yet having wa∣ed him, our worthy Brother said nto her, That he found him self reaso∣ably well. I find my self, said he, stron∣ger
then yesterday: so he was left to slee again. But seeing it was as before,  was thought not without reason tha this might likely cause some change Then our worthy Sisters both bein come to him they found his hands t be cold, & sweat to lay upon his face  and withall they saw, as soon as the spoke to him, that he was filled wit the sense of the Lords coming near t him, whereby he cried out as bein transported with an unspeakable joy  O good & most lovely Jesu, art thou so ne to me, what love, O my Lord, O eterna love, what goodness doest thou not shew to m What infinite mercy doest thou not shew  me, O my God, that thou comest so speedi to my soul to receive & take it into thy bosom O beloved eternity! In this going out  his heart & spirit he spoke yet dive other the like words, which are no remembred, as also many other which upon divers occasions he hat uttered with great affection of hear These last in a speciall mann could not be all remembred becau they were employed to give hi what necessary help they could, i
this unexpected and extraordinary weakness. One of our Sisters van der Haer telling him, well my Bro∣ther you go to our God, and to Jesus Christ our Redeemer, who cometh to take you to himself; he answered with an excellent stirring motion of heart and mind: O what an infinit happiness! And speaking to her, he sked, whether she had given notice of his te, and understanding that she had done it he was well satisfied, and co∣ming again to him who possessed his heart, and who did wholly take him to himself, he said with a holy joy, and as in a spirituall exultation: O chat love, lovely Jesu! What a wonder∣full love is it not, that he vouchsafeth to take sinners to himself? Being asked whether he was not in anguish, he answered, Not in the least; and our Sisters entreating him to tell them whether he found not any particular unease, he answered, No, but I feel a power of weakness which ceaseth upon m and leadeth me to God. They desired him to take a little cordiall, which was at hand. But he had trouble to
take it, desiring to have taken a little beer: But our Sisters telling him that perhaps he would be something strengthened thereby, and be able the better to speak to them he consen∣ted to it and took it with simplicity. But because his arm being already grown stiff, he brought his hand higher then his mouth, and had need to have it to be directed. Having ta∣ken that which was desired, and be∣ing asked whether he yet knew the persons, he answered no. But his heart going out always to Jesus the beloved of his soul, his tongue had yet strength enough to bosom out these words: O infinite goodness! O e∣ternall happiness! O what love is it, that Jesus draweth near to us, and at the last receiveth us into his glory! Not being able to proceed, by reason of his weakness that overwhelmed him, and which did cause him to draw near to his full deliverance, and one of our Sisters telling him, that a ravish∣ment of love besides a power of weak∣ness did take him away to God, he then nodded with his head that it was
so, and inforcing himself, he spoke yet these words, Let the Lord do. Where upon stretching himself out, he fell a sleep a little while after, in the arms of the Lord sleeping the sleep of the righteous, entering into that eternall rest which God hath prepared for his favourites, and from that time enjoying that eternall and unchangeable joy, where with the Lord Jesus hath decreed in his unspeakable love to fill all his faith∣full servants. And in this simple and pure manner and so full of fee∣ling he is gone to God, and into his most blessed and happy bosom: he hath given up his soul to him, in the spirit of this tender and thankfull love; and in that impression of this unspeakable and glorious joy, which is proper to the Children of God and those who go to behold the face of their Father, hath he left the world and all what is here be∣low, to be fully and eternally uni∣ted with God and Jesus Christ his Lord and Saviour. I have not purposed to give notice
of those graces which God had com∣municated to our very worthy an blessed Brother, otherwise then on∣ly by propounding that which I hav related concerning him in this de∣scription; and I beleeve that thos who shall read it in simplicity, wil there by in some measure perceive what spirit it was where with Go had indowed him, and sufficiently see that light which God had powre out into his soul, the purity whe with he had filled his heart, th strength and patience which he hat shewed so much in all his torments his constant love to the will of God and how he embraced and receive the same in all what happened, hi intimate union with Christ Jesus his tender love for souls, his faith fulness always to bring them again t God, his perfect resignation of tha which with the most ground and th most innocency he did love, th deep humility which was so very ∣minent in him, even to the end; th joy where with he is passed throug the vally of the shadow of death unt
e eternall day of glory, and lastly e simplicity of spirit and heart, herein he hath finished the last time f his transitory life on earth. God ad before that caused all those other aces and vertues, which were gifts f his precious love to his soul, uch to appear in him; but in the d he would shew them all in a spe∣all manner under this property of a vine simplicity, which is so pure, ssentiall, and lovely, and so un∣own to humane vertue and spirit, hich is nothing else but formall cir∣mstanciall and custom, even then hen he is most naked and empty of be truth of the matter. Likewise all ose, that do well belong unto the ord and who at all times are not ly prepared to go to him, but ikewise do above all things long for , these have not so much need to repare them selves for this last hour,  is thought, that which is the ful∣filling of all their wish and longing nd which they have so many times e∣ven as prevented by a lively faith and upright love. Therefore it was that Ja∣cob
and the other Patriarks, Dav and other Saints, although they liv under an administration which h much of terrour and fear in it, a especially Stephen and the fir Christians, did look upon death  it came with so much peace and joy and embraced it with so much simpl city of heart. They fell asleep in ∣lence, and without making mu noice, in the arms of God and of J∣sus their Saviour, even as this mo happy soul hath done, who said so∣time before her passage to eternity that she found her self as a sheet of p∣per flying in Gods air, and th was ready to turn it self whitherso∣ver the Lord would upon the lea puff of his wind, whether it was  live or whether to die or to chang place, leaving it self with joy to h Divine pleasure, to move it an drive it before his eyes as he shoul find it good. The good pleasure  the Lord was to translate him for eve into his rest, leaving to us a specia example of Christian suffering and  lively instruction how we must carr∣all
all sorts of crosses and torments. And yet this was as hidden from this hum∣ble and pure soul: so that a certain person coming to visit him, and who seemed to be touched with that Spirit in which she saw him suffering, saying to him one time, you are in∣deed to us an example of suffering, he answered her very affectionately indeed an imperfect example. Take that of Jesus Christ which is perfect. The Lord had bestowed upon my worthy Brother a very speciall grace for the helping of souls, and to lead them in his true ways, which he knew by a lively and speciall experi∣ence. And this was that which made him when he spoke of them to speak thereof with so much heart, with so much light, and with so much live∣liness, as that it made the truth to enter into the ground of hearts and souls. He was very good and tender about them, and withall he was very faithfull to them, and did proceed to work, as there was need, with a great strength and steadfastness of spirit. His zeall for their true good did burn
him inwardly and he took so trul part with every ones state, that i was seen indeed that he suffered wit them that suffered, did humble him∣self with sinners, and did rejoyc with those whom God did comfort joyning himself heartily with every one to help him to bear his burden th better. I will say no more of it, and  do not say even this little, but only for such as have not known him: fo those which have conversed with hi have no need of it; and the impressio which they have of that which th Lord hath laid in this vessell, is indee much greater then that which I hav here said to the glory of God, shal be able to give to those others.
ADVISE. HAving thus farr related the last words and Dispositions of such of us, who are happily decea∣sed, of whom we have kept more particular remembrance; we shall now say something yet concer∣ning those whom God before them hath taken to himself, although many times we have but little to pro∣duce about them, because then we did not consider the publick use which might be received there by, yet however that which we shall say concerning these, shall be as certain and faithfull as that which we have re∣lated concerning those others to the glory of God & the good of his Elect. The life which God hath caused these faithfull souls to live, of whom we shall now speak, could not other∣wise but be crowned with a lovely & blessed death, which was for them onely that great step which thus they have made to the true life, which they enjoy with Jesus Christ for ever and ever.
The state and last Dispositions of certain per∣sons whom God hath taken into his rest sin∣ce the year 1672. untill the year 1680 THe first person whom God wa∣ple ased from amongst us to deli∣ver perfectly,Deceased in the year 1672. in the month of Fe∣bruary. was our Sister Margare Cornelis Kruick of Gorcum, who for∣merly served with Master Teling, and dwelled with him in all the exercisi of piety, which he performed in hi house. The first inclination which she got to the work of the Lord among u was when she dwelled at Rotterdam, with people who did hear with great savour the trueths of a Christian life, by us propounded; and because she gave them some trouble, by tying her self after a humane manner to di∣vers things in which men frequently do make godliness to consist, al∣though it doth not consist therein, they desired me to talk with her about it. Which I did according as I saw that her state did require: where by she got so much light, and was tou∣hed
so lively that she from that time ook a course which was quite other wisezealous, upright and essentiall. And feeling what it was to worship and to adore God in spirit and truth, he was much bent and inclined unto those means which God made use of to inlighten her and to touch her heart. She was more faithfull then her Master and Mistris, and went before them in the way of the Lord, who themselves took pain to keep her at Rotterdam when God cal∣led us to Herfort, and she found her self inwardly pressed to come there. God made use of one person, who disposed her Mistris so as to let her go; who shortly after him self was to her a hinderance & temptation besides others. But nothing was able to move her, nor to disturb her. She said, The whole world shall not be able to hold me. I find not only feet to go thither, but also wings to fly. Now being come to Herfort God did work so visibly and powerfully in her soul, that the work of Christ did quickly manifest it self in her, so that in testimony
thereof in a little time we acknowled∣ged her for a member of his Church a∣mongst us. Her zeal made her unti∣red in the service of God, and of his Children. Nothing was painfull to her. Nothing was to much to her; and that was seen in her which once a holy man said concerning pure love, That she doth not know what painfulness & heaviness is, that she can not endure the name thereof, and will not have a man to speak of it. Her readiness to e∣very will of God was very speciall. Sometimes in such occasions which were some trials, she said: every will of the Lord is good, and there is no diffe∣rence. She did frequently enjoy a great peaceableness of mind, and an unspeakable truly heavenly joy. The Lord disposed it so that she was one of the first amongst us who was to make a journy for Holland. And for as much as at that time the world and evill men were as enraged against that work which God through his grace did form amongst us, therefore on that side we had not a little to suf∣fer, as also of many who being helt
for pious and good, were possessed with a blind and bitter zeal against that which they knew not, or even would not know. But God streng∣thened her in a speciall manner, and made her to stand fast against all. Her friends would not suffer her to dispose of her goods, which she per∣ceiving, suffered them to keep the same without looking any more after them: and so she returned to the place where her heart was, and where God in such aspeciall manner had caused her to be∣hold his glory, as she did write in a letter to one of her friends. And because afterwards she went with great paces forward to wards the mark of her heavenly calling, it was told her in one of our examinations, that the Lord prepared her for to enjoy much communion with him: which God did quickly afterwards fulfill, translating her into his heavenly Kingdom. She was taken with a ve∣ry burning hot fever, when we were yet at Herfort, which took her away in few days. She did suffer with much love, and referring of her self
to the will and pleasure of God. It is the Lords will, said she, and likewise mine. And perceiving that the Lord drew near, then she said with great joy: I am passing over unto life; should not I then rejoyce? She had much in her heart and mouth the words of one of our songs,In a book called Holy Songs p. 90. in which the soul spea∣keth to God thus: O thou who art my dearest Love, It is my whole desire, On thee to place my heart above, Allone with love intire. The sense of her sins which God had given to her, whether they were those which she had committed in the ways of the world, or in the ways of those that are ordinarily devout, was oftentimes very lively present with her. But her trust in Christ Je∣sus, and her burning love towards him consumed all. And in this dis∣position she went over to him, being about 24. years old, that she might for ever be united with him. In the month of Aprill.The second person whom God through his grace hath taken up into his glory, was our Brother Laurence
Autein, born at Paris in France, but who lived for the most part at Middleburgh in Sealand. He was a book-binder by his trade, and from his youth he had endeavoured to serve God in some uprightness of heart. One of our Brethren by the Provi∣dence of the Lord coming to his shop and speaking with him, his heart was touched there by, and feeling himself drawn to give him self wholly over to the Lord, we therefore a little while after at his earnest request took him into our house, being assured in himself that there he should find great helps and means to live unto God, in that faithfulness which his Spirit requireth and his word prescribeth to us. His naturall disposition was something disadvantagious to him and did give him oftentimes trouble. But the Lord granting to him much faithfulness of heart, and a lively ha∣tred against that which is evill, with an inward desire that in all things he might please God, yet not withstan∣ding he continued steadfast unto the end in his way, and was always a
comfort to us. He loved the Chil∣dren of God with a tender love, and was very faithfull, and gave strictly heed to all what was committed unto him, being carefull of that which was of the Lord truly through his love. And for as much as he was as yet to stay at Amsterdam, with two of our Brethren, when we went for Herfort, he afterwards received the comfort to come to us and to enjoy communion with this body of Christ, whereof his grace had made him a true member: but a wasting and pi∣ning ague, which turned into a con∣sumption, did not long afterwards take him out of this world. And be∣cause the most of us were to dwell at Zonderen, being a contry-house near by Herfort, he was desirous to be brought thither, not withstan∣ding his weakness: and being come thither he was very glad that he might die in the midst and as it were in the arms of those with whom God had made him one heart and one soul both for time and eternity. And likewise God did soon hear his desire, and de∣livering
him from all his sufferings he translated him eternally into his hap∣py rest. The third person, whom God took from the midst of us to him whilst we were yet at Zonderen, was our Bro∣ther Samuell Spikershoff, of middle∣burgh, a Baker by his trade, he had been as yet a little while amongst us, when the Lord took him away: yet this happened not untill he had done his work in him in a very visible and speciall manner. Our brother D. his brother in law, having spoken with him divers times, at middle-burgh of the work of the Lord among us, he felt thereunto such an inward inclination, that he could not stay so long till his Brother in law was to de∣part, who likewise was about to come over with his houshold to us. God also by the effect did shew that his time was short, seeing he took him to himself before his sister and brother in law were come to us. As for him the zeal which he shewed to come thither, and the joy which he felt at his departure were not to be ut∣tered.
Day and night he was full of this desire, and the hope which he had that God would cause himself to be found of him in the midst of his Children, and to communicate him self to him, by those speciall means which in his love he gave amongst them, this did even transport him be∣yond himself, and out of all other things. On this subject he did often times sing with a lively feeling of heart the words of David Psalm 27. My heart would faint but that in me,I had sain∣ted, if I ha not be ee∣ved that I schould see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. This hope is fixed fast: The Lord Gods good grace shall I see, In life that aye shall last. God did hear the desire of his soul, and in his good Providence did bring him to Herfort, where presently he came to his heart to do his work there in, to the great comfort of us all. The inclination which he had to that which God did amongst us, had already begun to draw of his heart from the world, and from himself. But when he did see and hear nearby that whereof the Lord had given him so much impression
whilst he was afarr of, then he felt quite an other thing in his soul. Be∣sides although he did not live long a∣mongst us, yet the Lord even some time before his death gave witness that he was in a frame to be admitted into the number of members of his Church amongst us; and we were just ready to acknowledge him for such, when he was suddainly taken sick, and shortly afterwards he died of that sickness. But what could not then be done according to the or∣dinary manner, and expresly in the assembly of the Church, this was fully testified unto him in his sick∣ness. In which God did perfect our comfort, and did very compleatly enlarge the work of his grace and mer∣cy in him. And because before his sickness divers things were to be done, he therefore did betake him self to all whatsoever the Providence of God did lay before him, with such a love and courage of mind, being supported by his zeal towards God, that we could not choose but be very much touched with it, and moved
to give thanks to God for that heart where with he inabled him to do all things, and for that holy forgetful∣ness of himself which did most mani∣festly appear in his whole conversati∣on. When some times we shewed some admiration at his great readiness to take upon him, and to do all whatsoever did occurr, he said with a great deal of simplicity and humili∣ty: I would willingly be as Samuell, & be able to say with him in all things, speak Lord for thy servant heareth. We going for Zonderen, he remained some while with certain others at Herfort, for somthing which he had yet to do there. And although this did not happen without some deniall of him∣self, yet however it was with his ac∣customed embracing of the will of the Lord, which he followed in all things with great love. But when he came to us in the contrey, whereon the one side he found him self dischar∣ged from the conversation with the people of this world, with whom he had to do in the city, and on the o∣ther side where he could as it were
breathe in the pure and free air of the house of God, he said with much fee∣ling, it is as if I was no more on earth. Neither was he there long, for pre∣sently being taken sick in a short time he passed over to heaven. Apply∣ing him self sometimes to the Lord Jesus we heard him uttering these words, my Father, teach me thy wayes and finding himself at the point of going to him, he was then as wholly transported with that joy unspeaka∣ble and full of glory, whereof the A∣postle Peter speaketh to the Faithfull. He had a great and truly Christian love to the Children and servants of the Lord in common; but he shewed to have a very speciall and tender af∣fection for that great and faithfull ser∣vant of God Mr. de Labadie as be∣ing the speciall instrument, where by his spirit was pleased to do so much good both to him and us. We never heard him complain in his sick∣ness. His heart was alwayes well at peace: it praised and blessed God without ceasing. The holy and in∣ward joy of his mind did appear in
his face, and gave to him as it were a heavenly countenance, and it did im∣print somthing that was divine in all those who saw him and spoke with him: seeing he had many visits, not only because he loved it much, but because one could never go away from him but with comfort and joy for the grace which God did bestow upon him. One bringing some thing to him for his refreshment, he took it with acknowledgement and humility, speaking these words, Blessed are the mercifull for they shall obtain mercy. Having need to be kopped, and he who kopped him, not being well experienced there in, he caused him much pain; but he suffered it with a laughing mouth and speciall patience. And when he saw that the happy instant was even come, that he should depart this world, and pass over to God, he asked if his brother in law was not yet come, and having understood that he was not come, he spoke with great assurance of faith, then I shall see him here after, for in my fathers house are many mansions. Being
full of the glory of Christ, he would some times cry out with love and gladness, Jesus is King. He shall rule, and his Children shall see it and rule with him. Being asked whether he was not contented with what God did, and would do to him, he answered ea with all my heart. And seing he was just at his end, we presented him again before the Lord in prayer, and saw him to join with a right godly zeal in what was spoken to God. He died in prayer, although at the beginning he himself uncovered his head with the others shewing his reverence for God. Thus this most blessed soul fell asleep in his arms. The Lord having taken to him self at Altena by Hamborrow Mr. de La∣badie, whom indeed he had given to us for a Father, in that comfortable manner as shall be seen elsewhere; our Sister Elizabeth Sluiters was the fifth person amongst us,In the year 1674 in the month of Oc∣tober. whom God took up into his full rest. She ha∣ving been a long time estranged from the true and lively knowledge of God, was touched by the Spirit of
God at Wesell being the place of he birth. And after she had felt a grea smart for her former life, and an o∣verwhelming of her heart by reason of the weight of her sins, she also in some measure had tasted the sweetnes and loveliness of grace, God causing her some times very lively to feel his presence. Yet for as much as thi did not continue long, and she found afterwards trouble with her self, and that she was burdened with the bur∣den of the world, and of her own corruptions, she was glad to hear that which God did amongst us at Amster∣dam. Coming there and finding that which her heart did seek, she could not leave it, but went with us to Herfort: from whence she went some time afterwards to Wesell, be∣ing full of joy because of that great grace which God had bestowed upon her in bringing her in the midst of his Children. She quickly returned a∣gain with full approbation of her pa∣rents to consecrate her self to God more then ever before, and to addict her self to his service. Some time af∣terwards
God came to her soul in so∣me speciall manner and communica∣ted him self to her in love, so as that it continued with her for the most part till the time of her death. This made her commonly to be of such a quiet heart, and so joyfull of spirit, so full of the praise of God, as that we could say that it was continually in her mouth, and lastly very thankfull for those great and good things which Christ Jesus is come to obtain for his people. When we were come to Alte∣na, she advanced so much in light, in pureness of heart, in spirituall discre∣tion, in forgetting and loosing of her self, and in love of God and of Jesus Christ our Lord, that we saw her as wholly to flowe away in him and to burn with his divine flame. Before she was taken sick, she was much in∣clined to walk upon our Church∣yard, there seeking and often times finding him whom her heart loved, & lifting upher soul to him from that place, which she considered as that which should be the place in which her body was to be kept. God purely
& allone took her to him self, & did as it were snatch her from her self. She said some times, One single sight of our selves, or care for our selves doth some times cause Gods face to be hidden from us. It is a partition-wall between God and our souls. Some of us admiring to see her to be so simple and without care, there upon she said: I can not trouble my self about what is to come. This I leave and trust to my God, and to Jesus my Lord. for the present time I am only busy with one only thing, and this thing is God. And me thinketh that this one thing is enough, as the Lord Jesus hath said. She found her self to be much drawn up to God, by the means of that song, beginning thus, O Divine Possessour of my soul &c.Holy Songs p. 250. in which is de∣scribed a very pure and divine state of the soul. She sung like wise with great affection an other, in which are found these words. O perfect All!Ibid. p. 4.O fulness of all bless! O highest good, and supreame happiness! O thou my God, how full must I needs be, when in my heart, I have obtained thee! She had furthermore a great inclinati∣on
to one of our Decades in the 3. exercise, in which there is set forth a generall lifting up of the mind to the Holy Trinity; and she was penetra∣ted with a lively sense when she did sing out those pure expressions, as likewise the words of our Holy Po∣ems, which begin thus; O adorable God, inflame my heart with love, To see thy Face with Joy, cause me to long for thee. Thee to embrace allone, lift up my soul above, That having thee O God, J satisfied be. Which words did often times very much stirr her heart, and did so draw her up to God, that her soul like that of David did somtimes faint in the outgoings of her heart to him who drew it, and who caused it to burn and to faint with love in his presence. She used to say somtimes, If one could one would willingly powr out the grace which God hath shewed to us, into the souls of our neighbours. But Jesus him self must powr it out that in truth it may be
his work. She said on some occasion, How can any one resist the will of God, after that it is once known? What is to be said when God declareth that he will have a thing to be done by us? We have to do no more but to love to do that lovely will of his. And further she said, It is God who chooseth and maketh our way for us. He is master of our heart and his Spirit worketh there in according to his good pleasure. She had a very lively and pure impression of the work which God had formed amongst us, and she could not sufficiently express her thankfulness, that he was plea∣sed to grant her som share there in. God being willing to take her to him∣self, sent her a kinde of con∣sumption, or a pining and very painfull sickness; and seeing the same did continue long, therefore the remainders of her corrupted nature, which were yet in her, and which God would mortify & take away before he took her into his glory, by the means thereof had occasion to enlarge it self. So that in some cases not having been faithfull enough to the Spirit of pati∣nce
and purity, which the Lord ad caused her to feel so very much, e therefore found our selves necessi∣ted earnestly in faithfulness and ove to propound this to her. Which e received with so much faith and ompliance, that from that time we aw her a fresh to go in the Spirit of a ively and earnest repentance, which from day to day made her more ac∣ceptable to God, and more precious o his whole House. She said, I am somed before the face of the Lord. O how ath he caused the truth to be told to me!  find my self there by as wholly again in∣ightened, and so disburdened that it is as f an infinite burden was taken away from my heart. O what great sinner am I! She said with great tenderness, My God if thou shouldest mark iniquitys, O Lord who shall stand? But there is for∣giveness with thee that thou mayest be fea∣red. The 86. Psalm, Bow down thine eare O Lord &c. was then likewise oftentimes in her mouth and in her heart. Even as She always hath had a speciall impression of the greatness of Christ his suffering, so likewise
then she was in a speciall man there with affected, heartily takin her refuge to the same, and being  wholly and throughly penetrate with it. She could then have bee contented to suffer, not only as  Christian, and as the image  Christ, but as a penitent sinner whose portion is humility and smar She said, I would yet very willingly suff more, with great tenderness, findin that this was so much due to he▪ Therefore she thought that she wa not yet to die, not beleeving that he full redemption was so near by, and that her suffering was so near to a end. But the Lord causing us to se that her dissolution drew near, there upon we declared to her this good message, which she received in faith, from that time not doubting but God would speedily take her to him self. Likewise there was seen instantly a pure and lively joy to spread it self all over her, with a fervent longing that she might speedily go unto Jesus her Lord and Saviour. It appeared to her as if heaven was opened already.
The day of eternity, where there should be no night any more, did ravish her away. The joy which there she was to have, in singing with∣out ceasing to the praise and glory of Jesus Christ, transported her. She did entreat that the Song concerning the happy death of the faithfull might be sung unto her, that which is found in our Holy Songs, joyning herself there with very much, and thereby elevating herself up to God, and to Christ her King and Redee∣mer, with much faith and affection. We asking her what she would repay unto him in demonstration of her thanks, for all the good that she had received from him? Hereupon she an∣swered me with a joyfull countenance and with much appearance of the spi∣rit, An eternall love. And when she could speak no more and yet under∣stood what we said unto her, she did shew forth even unto her last breath, that she had such a lively and lovely impression thereof that we could not but rejoyce there at, and praise God for that visible and unusuall enlarge∣ment
of his life in her. In this state she yeelded up her soul into the hands of God, leaving after her amongst us the good savour of Christ our Lord. She passed over unto him after she had lived here below about 23 years. In the year 1675. in the month of September.The sixt person which died amongst us was our sister Sarah Moot, who ha∣ving spoken with some of our sisters in the Hague did find her self to be so drawn to the work of the Lord among us, that she could not resist that attrac∣tion, but must follow it though she lo∣ved her parents very much, and was likewise loved very much by them. Certain persons sought to make her to change her resolution, but by their tal∣king she was the more confirmed, that amongst us she should find those help  which she felt that she needed, for to be made known to her self, & to serve God in spirit and in truth. She came then to us whilst we were at Altena; & I speaking with her she said to me, that she was come for no other end but because she hoped to find God a∣mongst us, and in the best and purest manner to be lead to him, being assu∣red,
said she, that amongst us the pure doctrine was taught, and beleeving that the true self-deniall was there more pressed & better practiced then elsewhere, & if she found not that, she would then go and seek it elsewhere. I loving her openheartedness, and ha∣ving received her into the house, to ee what God would work in her, he gave us comfort not long after by what he did in her. At the first she was something resolute in manners & fashion, and naturally bold: but this did quickly alter. And she felt that God had made her perfectly to find that which she had sought for. Since that first time till her death she never looked back to the world, which once she had left, neither hought she on any other thing, be∣ing filled by degrees more and more with the sense of thankfulness for that grace which God had shewed to her not withstanding her nothingness, cor∣ption and unworthiness: for thus she spoke of her self. I had indeed much ed, said she, to be humbled, for I was a grt sinner, and God hath brought me to
his House to let me see it. Once the Lor convincing her that the work of grac was not yet done in her, even as sh had to soon beleeved. She was s much moved therewith, that it ca not be sufficiently expressed, spea¦king with much feeling: Is it not  dreadfull thing not to be a true Christian  and consequently as yet to be alienated from God and his true communion? To have bee so long his enemy, is not this a thing t shake and tremble at it? Her parent seeing that she continued with us  doubted not but that she had foun there that which her soul had so muc sought after; being assured, as they afterwards said, that nothing els was able to keep her. God by hi grace gave her a spirit of very grea simplicity. Her love to repentanc and mortification of her self did visi¦bly extend it self in her. She knew not how she should sufficiently ac¦knowledge the goodness of God▪ that he gave her means to wor in that which was good, and fo the Children of the Lord, when before she was forced to work in
vain things for the world. Her obe∣dience to God and to all what was told her from him, was a speciall comfort. Her modest, earnest and contented silence did edifie much. Her patience in pains and torments was very great. Her love for the Lord Jesus Christ, and her readiness and willingness for those that are his, did never say it is enough: which I say without making it greater. And yet it seemed to her a little before her death, that she did almost nothing to testifie her love to God and to his Children. Her self love being to her a great burden, because God gave her a lively feeling of it, she groaned continually to be delivered thereof, in what manner and by what way it should please the Lord to do it. All these vertues and graces did appear in a speciall manner when God had brought us to Friesland, & some time before he took her to himself, which happened about the 36. year of her ge. The inclination which then she felt to go to God through death, was very speciall, but she durst not
hope that so great a good was so nea at hand to her. She was but a littl while sick, and could not endur that we should come to help and serv her in what she wanted, beleeving e¦ven almost to her end that she wa strong enoug to help her self. No when she saw that God did certainly call her to him self, she said wit great acknowledgement, The Lor answereth that sense which he him self dot give. And not being able to contain her joy she sung how weaks oever sh was, the words of the 119 Psalm, O God, which art my part and lot, m comfort and my stay: &c. Afterward she said, Now I do indeed beleeve tha I am going to God. Her soul ther seemed as to be swallowed up, loo∣sing all by his remembrance and in his presence. The Lord drawing yet nearer, she was then taken with a spirit of holy exultation, and sin∣ging for gladness: I shall follow the Lamb, said she, where soever it shall go, that Lamb which hath spilt his blood to purge my soul therein. And spaking to some one, she said, He is near by,
is he not? When we had offered her up to the Lord, she desired that we would do so much as to sing the Song of Jesus Lamb and King,In our Ho∣ly Songs. and yet an other, of the blessed death of the Children of God. And although she did tremble for weakness, yet she made them to give her the book, to sing with us, and sung yet keeping her spectacles upon her nose, with a strength of mind which farr exceeded the weakness of her body. At the end she said I can see no more; and a little while after she gave up the ghost, being full of the love of the Lord Jesus, for whom she had a speciall tenderness. In the year 1676. in the month of Maie.Our Sister Susanna Spykershoff, the wife of our brother Dankers, did fol∣low her some time after. She came to us at Zunderen with her husband, lea∣ving Middleburgh the place of her birth & habitation without any diffi∣culty, & all her acquaintance, shewing a great zeal to follow and seek God, to the place unto which she felt him to draw their hearts. The trialls and dangers which they suffered were common to both of them; as also
the grace which God in his love had shewed to them both. Likewise were they at Altena both of them re∣ceived for members of this body of Christ, and she gave to us much comfort, both by her common con∣versation, and by the purging out and renewing of her, which God from time to time wrought in her. She loved her husband very tenderly; but when God did call him to an o∣ther place to the service of his Work & Children, she embraced therein his will with much love: which in her was in a speciall manner edifying, see∣ing that before when she yet lived in the world, she was wont to be much encumbred, when he was from home for to do their own affaires. God ha∣ving visited her with great pains of the gravell & stone, whether at Bremen, whilst a part of our Assembly was there, or afterwards at Altena & here in Friesland, she hath been a speciall edification to his House by her coura∣gious mind and patience, which was animated with the love of Jesus Christ. From whom she drew vertue
and strength to suffer to his glory and worthily of him. She passed over to the Lord some days after she was deli∣vered of her last Child. God being willing to try us by the danger where in we saw her when she was delive∣red, and the little appearance there was that she could be helped therein, yet however she was not there at asto∣nished, but contrarily she herself did encourage that person who served her, referring all things fully to the Lord, even as she left and trusted herself to him. She said, The Lord is with us, that is enough, all things go well. She looked upon death with great quietness, and testified, that she never had found more rest and contentment as then. And for as much as she suffered great and exces∣sive pains in her loins, which made her sometimes to lament something; she could not forbear to say, that it was not for any thing but the body, but, she said, That God was very good to her soul. Sometimes she said, That she was not able to express the love which she had for the Children of God: and yet
we saw that she left them with joy, to go to their Father, who likewise was become hers in Christ. Being scars able to speak any more, yet she gave notice with what tenderness she took part in the conversion of a soul whereof she was told, in whom the grace of God had appeared in a speci∣all manner: and a little after she yeel∣ded up her spirit into the arms of the Lord, to rest therein for ever. The years of her age were 33. After her followed our Sister Ca∣tharin Rooland.In the year 1678. in the month of Aprill. She having lived a very bad life in the world, did part∣ly by Gods Providence, and partly by the motion of his Spirit come to us at Amsterdam; yet being very cor∣rupted. Whilst she was there, God touched her heart, inlightened and humbled her, and laid in her some seeds of his grace which from time to time did lively shew themselves, but also oftentimes were suppressed, darkned and assaulted by her corrup∣tion, and by a certain irregularity which was proper to her nature, and to which she had formerly given full
liberty. The Lord at Herfort ha∣ving shewed something in her which was very pure and essentiall, she was there received for a member, after which returning again to her self, she was to us much sorrow, and did a long time exercise the long-suffering of the Lord; but at the last God was pleased to give us much comfort of her before he took her away. When he visited her with sickness, she told us, That she did believe that she should soon die, and that for some time she had a great impression in her heart that she should not live long any more, wishing herself, said she, that she might die, in hopes that God would then come more to her, and cause her more to feel his grace and mercy. She was very full of this mind, and of this hope, when God came to her to do in her as it was a miracle of his grace & power. It was after that she had been sick for some weeks, that the Lord did work very lively in her, and made her from time to time to utter divers words which did lively shew what he did in her heart. The evening before she died, whilst we were at ta∣ble,
she prayed though being withe∣red & dry, saying: My God leave me not I pray thee. Do not surprise me in my own spirit, nor in my sins. If thou shouldest forsake me satan should prevail over me, that enemy of my soul, who hath laid so many snares for me, and hath so much sought to bring me to ruin. He is an insati∣ably greedy one. He can not endure that one only soul shall serve God her Creatour, though there are so many that serve him. Indeed, said she, I am a miserable one in all res∣pects? and yet what violence hath he not used to have me? I have horribly suffered of him; but indeed it hath been by my own corruption. She cryedout, Lord, I have such a hard heart, I can not hum∣ble my self, I can not alter my self. If thou shouldest leave me I should grow impa∣tient and froward. And a little after she said, I am not worthy to lay here up∣on a bed, I would fain lay upon the earth and die there. O how am I ashamed to see my self laying upon a bed, whereas the Lord Jesus, the Son of David and the Son of God, did die upon a cross. My God, give me a little of thy Sprit, in these my last hours: in these last hours,
my God, be thou pleased to be gracious and mercifull unto me. Having with much humility entreated, that we should pray for her, and the Lord after∣wards being much drawn near to her soul, she said with much affection of her heart at night between two and three the clock, that her soul was is wholly illuminated, that the Lord was come to her, that he had opened her heart, that he had taken away the fear of death from her, which she two days before the last coming of the Lord to her, had felt. To which she added, The Lord hath heard the prayers of his Children for me. what a great mercy, what an unconceivable goodness, O my Gouvernour! O how well hath God done all things! I have sinned, I have sinned: forgive, forgive, O my God, cry∣ed she, with Manasse. At an other time she said, I feel that self love would willingly be in heaven, but it will never be able to come into it; nothing can come into it but by the pure love and the only infi∣nite mercy of God, revealed unto
us in Christ Jesus. I have former∣ly, said she, fallen into the water: God might have suffered me to be drowned therein; but he was not willing to surprise me in my igno∣rance, & in my sins. He hath kept me alife till this time. O how good is God, that he doth not close my mouth, but yet suffereth me that I may move my tongue to praise his mercy. The Lord hath kept me by him and his Work as with force, by the power of his truth, and help of his faithfull Servants. If I was now in the world, deprived of those means which the Lord giveth me here, how miserable indeed would be my state! It is by an in∣finite mercy that God hath kept me at his Work. What should not I have been if I had been left to my self! Being sensible that she had oftentimes greeved the pure Spirit of God in his Children, she said, I am unworthy to speak any more to any one: I have deserved that I should be left to lay as a beast. I have been a prater in the House of
the Lord. If God should restore me again to health, I ought to be the first that should keep silence, and the last to speak, and my voice ought not to be heard in his House. I must not speak but to ashame and condemn my self. Those whom God hath well purged, it fits them to speak: and not such a sinner as I am. My Brother Dulignon coming to her in the morning, she said presently that she was unworthy to see him, & ashamed that he came to her. She said, I am unworthy that a sancti∣fied soul, a soul that liveth to God and serveth him, should speak with me, or that I should have the happiness to speak with it. I de∣serve to die, without having any to speak with me. I have given so much trouble, let none take any more for me. If God suffereth yet one word more to be spoken to me, that is nothing but meer mercy. We calling her with the name of sister, she answered me: I am unworthy to be so called, I dare not call you brother. She declared that she had great greef, be∣cause
in her sickness she had not given more edification, and shewed that she had taken to much care about her body, She said, that her state was to her as a mystery: that she knew not what to say of it, feeling both sin and mercy. Gods mercy is infinite, it is infinite, cryed she; my sins also are as infinitely great, which she repeated more then once. And afterwards she said, I am a creature an evill doer, and God is that Creatour that doeth good. O what great a grace is the grace of repentance! O if it plea∣sed God to give me yet some time, that I might humble my self before his Children, and justifie him! When they would give her a little wine, she said, I deserve to be drenched with my corruption, and am not worthy to enjoy a drop of water. when I spoke to her of praying to God that it might please him to receive her into his Di∣vine hands: she answered, At his feet, for it is yet to great a grace that God endureth me at his feet, and sayeth not to me, depart
hence. She said, I would willingly kreep into the dust at the feet of the creatures, to shew how much I wish to cast myself down at the feet of the Creatour. Men call themselves com∣monly Christians, but what great a matter is that indeed! My Brother Dulignon a little while after coming to her again, she said You come yet again to me, I am unworthy of it? but I love it much, feeling the good which it doth to my soul. I have gi∣ven you both much trouble, but God will be your eternall reward. You have told me the truth in all things. The Lord hath now put me in a state to be as a bowle, which he rowleth where he will. I know now what that word meaneth which I have heard sometimes. She had said before That which the Lord doth in me, is that he enableth me to go to him, to give my self over to his freedom, & to throw my self down at his feet, untill he himself shall thrust me a∣way, if he in his adorable justice shall think it fit, as a thing that is not worthy to be touched with his
hands. God will always be found just in his doing. One might per∣ceive the anointing of the Spirit even so farr as in her very words. She en∣treated every one to pardon her all wherein she had done amiss to them. She said, God cometh to purge his House and to cleanse it of such an unfaithfull one as I be. My body being weak, I can not speak much to you. To which she ad∣ded to one whom she exhorted to purge herself throughly and to be faithfull to the Lord; But I speak to you as being before God, and going to ap∣pear before him. The Lord hath received me for a member of his Church, but I have not answered this grace. Likewise up∣on an other occasion she said, O how great a good is it to be able to do something in the House of the Lord, although it were on∣ly to gather some wood! She was flexi∣ble and brokenhearted, making re∣sistance in nothing, and as a Child in all things what was told her, or desired of her. At the last she fell a sleep (being about 43 years old) soft∣ly, but with great humility in God, as a guilty soul, which casteth her∣self
down at the feet of her judge, to hear her sentence to be given, feeling herself worthy of his judgement, & yet taking great refuge to his mercy, and the blood of Christ Jesus her great Redeemer. She said, Two sorts of souls go to God: penitent; and those that love: but I will be one of the first. Her countenance had something spe∣ciall after her death, & her soul went out so peaceably and quietly with the last words of the prayer, wherewith we presented her before God, that it was hardly perceived. Our worthy & blessed Sister Mrs. Schurman being passed over into Gods bosom, as will be seen in her life; thereupon our very worthy Sis∣ter Mrs. van der Haer,In the year 1678. in the month of July. whose three daughters with her were members of this body of Christ, and whom we looked upon as a Mother, was hap∣pily delivered by death from all re∣mainders of weakness. In the life of Mr. van der Haer her husband, e∣ven then she had but little inclination to the common cours of the world, which was oftentimes burdensom to
her. After his decease she gave her Children liberty to do according to their heart in what concerned the worship of God. She received us in her house at the Hague with much love and civility, though then as yet she had but little lively feeling & im∣pression of that which God worketh in those that are his. She came to vi∣sit us at Amsterdam; at such a time when it pleased God to bring us into many trials. And yet then it was that the Lord began to give her a taste of his Spirit, giving her such an im∣pression of his pure truth, that she was not sufficiently able to express it, and whereof the remainders a lit∣tle while after were again powerfully stirred up and made lively. Two of her daughters with her approbation being come to us at Herfort, she came with the third, thinking after some time to return with them together; but she was so happy that God himself kept her there, and revealed himself in his grace and love to her heart. The Lord Jesus wrought so lively in her, that we saw in truth a soul as
was that of Nicodemus to be regene∣rated and born again, which she like∣wise wanted much. She found her∣self then to be so inwardly and from the bottom of her heart united with this Church of Jesus Christ, whereof God made her a member, that she could not leave the same a∣gain: and the sense of thankfulness for the grace which God bestowed up∣on her in her last days, was so lively and tender in her, that we took of∣ten times pleasure to hear with what tast and fulness of heart she spoke thereof. She said, what a goodness is it that God hath so received me when I sought him not but lived wholly to my self! Some times she said, What a grace is it that God hath not cast of my weak and maimed members, but will yet use them for his service. Likewise she did be∣stow them to all whereunto she was fit, with such a zeal and love for God and his Children, that many times it hath very lively touched our hearts. She never refused any thing that was brought to her to do, and e∣very one brought it willingly to her,
because her great inclination to keep herself employed for the Lord and his Children was known. She was very tenderly sensible of that good which she did dayly receive from the Lord, and she had such a love for the Lord Jesus his Kingdom and his glory, that one might see as it was a new life come into her, when she did but speak of it. Although she was of a very great age, yet she followed the Lord in his Work untill the end with an admirable courage of mind. She came with us from Altena into Fries∣land, having otherwise never past o∣ver the sea. And from hence she went for Holland, not withstanding her weakness, to take order about her business, and likewise being very willing to bear witness of that which God had done in her and caused her to find among his Children. After that she had taken order about all things according to the will of God she returned again, although they were willing to keep her at the Hague. After that she did wholly fix and center herself upon God, lea∣ding
a very Christian simple and ho∣ly life before his Face. I have many times been much comforted, seeing the light which was powred forth in her soul, and the faithfulness in which she walked through the Spirit before God and the face of Jesus Christ. Her peace and the content∣ment of her heart did agree with the goodness of God towards her. She said, God hath called me at the last hour, and is it not a great goodness that it pleaseth him to give me the same reward, which those shall receive that have laboured the whole day. O said she, what cause have I to thank Tetje (so she called her eldest daughter) that she hath so faithfully helped me to come out of the world! Could I ever think that God had laid up such a great good for me, who have spent my self in the cours of the world? O (said she speaking to her daughters) how hap∣py are you that you are called even in your youth, by the Lord to his service. Seeing the love of the Children of God, who did behave themselves
towards her as to their mother, she said with affection of heart, O how doth not God give a hundred fold, even in this life, when one hath lost all in his hands! God hath made me to loose my three children in him, but he hath gi∣ven them to me again, and beside them yet so many others. Who would have beleeved, said she, that God should be so mercifull e∣ven to those that sought him not? He causeth my sins to pass by be∣fore me, as if I were to see all in hast, for my time is short. She having found some adherence to a child of her daughter, she was after∣wards wary that she might not suffer her heart to be taken up with an o∣ther, after that God had taken the first out of the world. She was very loose of her goods, and her neglect & forgetfulness of all what she had for∣merly were unusuall. When God laid any diseases and pains upon her she bare them with a speciall strength yea and with such a silence, that we were afterwards astonished to see
what she had suffered, without making any mention of it. God having gran∣ted a little while before her happy de∣cease, that we did vew the state of our souls (as we do the same from time to time, whether it be to praise him for his grace, or to stirr our selves up to greater faithfulness,) & divers admonitions in the assembly having been given to her, she did re∣ceive them with so much humility, love and earnestness, that we were in a speciall manner comforted and edi∣fied with her inward attention before God, and with the renewing of his grace, which wrought the same in her. Likewise after that she said, that now she had no more to do, and was ready to depart from hence, if God should call her. When God came to take to himself our worthy Sister Schur∣man, she said unto her with joy, I will soon follow you, worthy sister. E∣ven as likewise happened, for the Lord did not stay long to call her to him self. She shewed in her sickness, which took her away in few days, that she had a great feeling of her sins,
which did humble her before God & his Children. She likewise shewed a great confidence on Christ her Re∣deemer, and a great love to go and behold his Face; and she was as much assured that he should here on earth re∣establish all things as if she saw it with her eyes. Some times she said, Children, I love you all very much, but when the Lord Jesus shall call me, O how glad shall I be to leave you! She prepa∣red her self to suffer more; but God came to end her torments speedily, taking her to himself in a very easy manner, and to the great comfort of his Children. She said two days be∣fore her death, that she did consider her∣self as the sacrifice upon the altar, which expected the fire from heaven to consume it. And the morning before she went to God one of her daughters being wil∣ling to give her something for her re∣freshment, she said Give me no more, for it is fit that I should suffer some thing before I come to my end. Some one telling her there upon, your suffering will not continue long, for I hope that be∣fore night doth come, you will be in
the day of eternity, she gave this an∣swer, What, to enjoy it so soon! I have not yet suffered enough, Should I suffer no more? I had not thought that. And so she went as with open eyes to God in the 69 year of her age, looking on dths coming with joy and groaning after it, and melting in tears of love, in the consideration of that great and eternall Good, which she was going to possesse. Here with was she whol∣ly full and penetrated, and we never spoke thereof, but we were comfor∣ted, and felt the anointing of the spi∣rit in her with joy. She loved the Lord Jesus heartily. She had a great inclination to his cross, and she was as transported, when she thought on his sovereign Dominion, which now she doth contemplate, and enjoy to all eternity. The last person whereof we shall speak in this last description,In the sam year in the month of Sep∣tember. is Hester Teunis of Utrecht. This person had been very grosly and much affected to the world, cove∣tous and very fast on all things. Be∣cause she found but little help in the
ordinary means which she had, say∣ing often times that she did wholly want some thing else, and came to speak with a person, who had been with us at Amsterdam, and commu∣nicating to her that which she had there received, she felt her heart to be touched in a speciall manner there∣with. Having had opportunity af∣terwards to speak with two of our Sis∣ters at Utrecht, she resolved to come to us, to see if God would shew to her mercy and grace, and make her by his Spirit an other creature. And so she came and continued with us untill God in his love hath taken her away from us. A little while after she came to us, her heart was so live∣ly touched with those truths which she heard, and got such light about her state, that she never afterwards lost the impression thereof. Yet she had much to fight against and to con∣quer, before she could truely give herself over to the Lord. Her cor∣ruptions were strong and deeply roo∣ted, but the hand of God was yet stronger to root them out. His truth
was as a hammer, which did beat to peeces her hard heart, his grace did mollify it, and his love did finally conquer it, and formed it into an o∣ther heart. God made her loose of flesh and blood, of the world, and of the earth, of her self and of her most inward corruptions. He gave her a hatred against her self, and such a love for his truth and Chil∣dren, who made the same known to her, and whom she saw to live accor∣ding to it, that she could not resist the same. She was so much ashamed because of the goodness of God, who had brought her into his house, not withstanding her having been so no∣toriously earthly minded, and she was so taken up with the long suffe∣ring of his Spirit, who had so long endured her there, that she could not sufficiently express it. Likewise when she went amongst persons of the world, and she was told that we did not bear with souls, but were to severe, she did always propound herself for an example, to shew the great forbearance which God in this
his House did cause to be exercised, towards those who in some upright∣ness will die to themselves and the world. She did love to be discove∣red to herself, and did shew a great acknowledgement thereof when in faithfulness we did help her therein. God from time to time gave her very purelight. She found herself to be sometimes much affected with his Divine presence, and to be there∣by delivered from her temptations, or her own humane thoughts. She did as it were drink in the truth and the good word of God, when she heard it in the assemblys. Her heart, said she, did continually say Amen to all what she heard. The Lord tried her soul sometime before she died, in a speciall manner humbling her before his presence, and causing her inward∣ly to feel a bitter smart for her sins which she had committed against him. She was especially sorry asha∣med and greeved for those sins where by she had made herself guilty about the Work of the Lord by her own judgement, and was more sensible
of this then she could tell. In her last sickness which she got after that she had helped our sister V. with much love, she said with acknowledge∣ment, God hath taken away all my care, which kept her in great rest be∣fore the Lord, who keeping her busy with his Goodness, made her to loose the thoughts and even the sense of her suffering. She took it in love, and in the spirit of true repentance, say∣ing, that repentance was not so soon en∣ded, and that she had great need to continue there in to the end. I feel, said she, within such a rest and peace that I can not express it. She cryed out, what good∣ness, what power, that God hath made such a rebellious creature obedient unto him! She received with much humility the service which was done to her: and thanked the Lord Jesus for that he had brought her to this his Sheep∣fold, and that likewise he took her to himself from the midst of his Chil∣dren. And so she fell asleep, even as we have all cause to beleeve, in his arms and bosom. FINIS.
THE TABLE Of those whose generall State and last Dis∣positions and words are related in this Book. Mrs. Huyghens. 1 Hilletje Hanses. 35 Mrs. Dulignon. 40 Magdalene Henry. 61 Mr. Dulignon. 90 Margaret Cornelis Kruick. 220 Laurence Autein. 224 Samuell Spikershoff. 227 Elizabeth Sluiters. 233 Sarah Moot. 242 Susanna Spykershoff. 247 Catharine Rooland. 250 Mrs. van der Haer. 259 Hester Teunis. 267 The End of the Table.
Errours to be corrected. Pag. 3: lin. 3, 4. read a Man of God. p. 5: l. 28. r. closing her eyes. p 8: l. 19. r. gave her. l. 26. r. breath. p. 11: l. 25. r. thoughts. p. 13. l. 21. r. but. p. 14: l. 2. r. who. l. 3. r. thee. p. 52: l. 14. r. i l. 17. r. had. l. 21. r. he may be. p. 57: l. 1. r. himself. p. 68: l. 20. r. thought. p. 81: l. 2. for thereunto r. about that. p. 82: l. 9. r. faint. p. 105: l. 28. r. greater. p. 145: l. 22. r. whereas. p. 150: l. 1. r. whom. p. 179: l. 28. r. wholly. p. 187: l. 9. r. us. p. 209: l. 4. or to. r. in. p. 240: l. 1. r. manner. In the margine. Pag. 227: lin. 4. read In the same month.
