t2885 08259071 41253
A TRUE RELATION OF A LATE BARBAROUS ASSAULT Committed upon Robert Pye Esq One of His Majesties Justices of the Peace for the County of HEREFORD. Who Died thereof 30 JAN. 1680. BY John Bodnam Esq A Notorious Papist: Whom he went about to apprehend, for Refusing to Obey the ORDERS of the QƲARTER SESSIONS; Whereby he was Summoned to take the OATHS of ALLEGEANCE, &c. As it was Certified, &c. LONDON: Printed by THO. JAMES. M.DC.LXXXI.
A True RELATION Of a Late Barbarous ASSAULT Committed upon ROBERT PYEEsq WHether it be Folly or Madness for the Papists to give such bloody Experiments of their Cruelty, is a thing which one would think might be easily determin'd among Christians. And yet they have their witty as well as their crafty Defenders of all their Villanies. Certainly at length Men will take the Measure of Hercules by his Foot, and guess at their Sanguine Designs of General Massacres, by their Violent Out∣rages upon particular persons. One would think that it were an Article of the Roman Catholick Faith to murther Protestant Justices of the Peace. Ever since the Discovery of the Plot, they have been committing some Villany or other. They began with Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey; the next Object of their revenge was Mr. Arnold, and now we are to give you the Relation of another Exploit no less wicked then either; God, as we have great Reason to believe, still hard∣ning their hearts, to open the eyes of those that blindly defend their Cause, and labour to extenuate their Crimes. Since the Discovery of the late Plot, it is well known what care has been taken to give orders to several Justices of the Peace in their several Stations to watch the Designs and Proceedings of the Papists, and to take care of the Publick Tranquillity in their several Counties. In Pursuance of which Orders several Warrants were granted at the Quarter-Sessions for the County of Hereford against one John Bodnam of Brunguin in the said County Esq as being known to be an obstinate and violent Papist, and one that still refused to take the Oaths which the Law required, or to Obey any Warrant either of any single Justice of the Peace, or joyntly Sign'd at the Sessions, but keep∣ing close in his House as his Garrison, defended himself against the Constables, and their Assistants, some of whom he hath shot and wounded. This Mr. Rod∣nam living near to a Place called the Meene, the Mansion-House of Robert Pye Esq one of his Majesties Justices of the Peace for the same County, an Eminent and Worthy Protestant, and a Gentleman of great Honour and Value in his Country, and now to be lamented with an equal sorrow to that which bewaild the fall of Sir Edmond-bury Godsrey, so like to his; the said Mr. Pye, could not but think it a Scandal to the Government, and a great neglect of his Duty, in regard of his Office, that so notorious a Papist should live as it were under his Nose, so openly refractory, and in a rebellious defiance of the Law. For which reason he gave out a Warrant for his Apprehension, which the Con∣stable being afraid to Execute alone, he therefore sent some of his own ser∣vants to Aid and Assist him. But Mr. Bodnam, keeping his doors fast, defended himself so well, or rather so ill, that the Constable and his Assistance were for∣ced to retire and leave him, for the safety of their lives, then which a Tore, or an Out-law could have done no more.
Sometime after this, that is to say, on the 12th of January last, it was Mr. Pyes misfortune to spye his unruly Neighbour Bodnam, walking in his own grounds; whereupon, having at the same time an Order of Sessi∣ons for the said Mr. Bodnam's Apprehension about him, and bethinking with himself, that his Oath and the Duty of his Place, in Honour o∣blig'd him to apprehend an Offender who had so often offended; he went to him, and commanded him to surrender himself as a Prisoner to the Law. Mr. Bodnam, having a Hedg-Bill in his hand, replied according to the usu∣al Language of his Popish Litany, (Dam me) Stand off, or I'll cleave you down. The Justice made answer, Mr. Bodnam, You know I am too much a Man to sear you. For it seems he had formerly hand to hand taken him Prisoner, and let him go upon his parole, which he afterwards perfidi∣ously and dishonourably broke; and for his justification sent him word, That no Faith was to be kept with Hereticks. Mr. Pye, having therefore given him to understand, as before, that he did not fear him, told him further in these words, I came not now as a single person to fight you, but as a Magistrate, according to Law, to apprehend you; and therefore I require you to surrender your self peaceably: Which Mr. Bodnam refusing to do, Mr. Pye bravely and vigorously press'd in upon him, which this same Papistical Butcher perceiving, stepp'd back, and in good earnest let sly at his head with his Hedg-Bill (no bad Argument for the truth of the Black Bills prepared for the Papists in Ireland) and having stunn'd the valiant Magistrate with the first, with the second blow sell'd him to the ground; presently company coming in prevented the immediate Murther of the Gentleman and seized upon the Criminal Bodnam. The Wound∣ed Mr. Pye recovered his Senses sometime after, but it was only to in∣crease his Pain: For after he had continued ill about Eighteen days in a lingring condition, upon the 30th of January last he departed this lifer, the Sacrifice of Papistical Disobedience and Rebellion, not only to the unspeakable Grief of his Family and Relations, but of all who had the Honour to be acquainted with him. Nor is he less lamented by all the true Protestants as well in the same, as in the Adjacent Counties. 'Tis true the Murtherer will be doubtsess hang'd; but here is the severity of the Exchange, We have lost an Industrious and Valiant Magistrate; the Papists only a loose base Butcherly Villain. This is now the Second Prank that has been play'd in Hereford shire, or by men of that County, the worst of Contagions, should it from thence spread any farther. Here are fair warnings and fair discoveries of the very bottoms of the Papists hearts, but they cost too dear. Here is a petty Kingdom, that is to say, a whole Family, put into a fatal Confusion at two blows, to shew their Designs were real against, the Great Master of the Universal Family of the Nation. And these are the barbarous Effects of Popish Zeal, from which Good Lord deliver us. Now 'tis a hundred to one, but that as soon as this same Caitiff shall be hang'd, the Papists will deny that ever there were any such Persons as Mr. Pye or Bodnam, and perhaps that there is any such County of Hereford. But such Blots in their Scutcheons as these, will not be so easily wiped away. But they will find the English Inquisition after Blood, to be as resplute as their own Spanish Inquisition after Heresy; and therefore his Holyness would do well to admonish his Creatures to proceed with less passion, and to be more Submissive to the Commands and Orders of their Temporal Princes. FINIS.
