6906.5 99899148 150578
The Discourse betweene A Souldier and his Loue. Shewing that she did beare a faithfull minde, For Land nor Sea could make her stay behinde. To the tune of Ʋpon a Summer time. Souldier. MY dearest deare adue, since that I néeds must goe My Fortunes to pursue against some Foraine Foe. Being that it is o, I pray thée patient be, And doe not kilt thy Coat, to goe along with me. Pegge. Alas my dearest heart, if that thou leaue me here, Death kills me with his dart, as plainly may appeare. For sorrow griefe and smart, will quickly make me dye, Therefore Ile kilt my Coat, and goe along with thée. Souldier. Ouer the dangerous Seas, Whereto I must repaire, Will bréed thée some disease, and change thy colour faire. Therefore my Loue forbeare, and well aduised bée, And doe not kilt thy Coat to goe along with mée. Pegge. Theres nothing can withstand, a willing settled minde There neither Sea nor Land shall make me stay behind. I thinke I were vnkind, to leaue thy company: Nay I will kilt my Coat and goe along with thée. Souldier. Swéet-heart let me perswade, that thou wilt stay at home, And marke what shall be said as all to passe will come. When we haue past the Seas, and come vnto the Land, Against our Enemies, in Armour we must stand. Pegge. Well I for one will stand, Whilst that my life doth last, And fight with heart and hand, till dangers are ore past. And then I will releiue thée in extremity, Therefore Ie kilt my Coat, and goe along with thee.
The second part to same tune. Souldier. TO lye in open fields, in time of Frost and Snow, Without or house or shields, where bitter blasts doe blow. It will thy body change, my deare I tell to thée: Then doe not kilt thy Coat, to goe along with me. Pegge. Swéet-heart I doe suppose, all that you say is true, I am as sure a choce, as I appeare to you. I thinke I were vnkind to leaue thy company. Therefore Ile kilt my Coat and goe along with thée. Souldier. It is a dangerous thing, my sweet, my faire, my deare, To heare the Cannons ring, like thunder in the ayre. The sword, the Pike, the Speare, the dreadfull enemie: Will much affright thy Coat to goe along with me. Pegge. I Will lay all aside, what euer may befall, Whatsoeuer doth betide Ile verture life and all. The matter were but small, though for thy sake I dye, Therefore Ill kilt my Coat, and goe along with thée. Souldier. My griefes would still abound, if I should see thée want, Thy cries would still resound, and make my heart to pant. Swée-heart let not thy mind, be bent vnto the sea, Nor doe not kilt thy Coat to goe along with me. Pegge. Why, doe thou not despaire, nor trouble so thy mind: Howsoeuer I doe fare Ile take it as I find. and I will thée comfort in middest of thy woe: Then doe not say no more, but yéeld that I may goe. Souldier. Then welcome with my heart séeing thou wilt goe with me Thou playest as kinde apart as did Penelope, Thou comfortst all my woes, Ile haue thy company: Therefore loue kilt thy Coat and goe along with me. No Turtle to her mate, could euer be more true, For she with fortunes fate, all dangers did pursue She ventures lore and life, most like a louer true: God send me such a wife, and so kind hearts adue. Printed at London for F. Coules.
