e247_5 99865913 118168
Christs most faithfull Servants, who doe onely ayme at the glory of Christ, and Hi Majesties happinesse. He also prayed, That God would give Him most reall, sollid, and sound Humiliation for His own, and His Peoples most fearefull, raging, and Cry∣ing sinnes, their idolatry, Superstition, Profanesse, and Blasphemies: That the Lord would humble Him for His over-long favouring and honouring of the Enemies of Jesus Christ, that he would let him see and know what manner of persons are about him and to discerne his Friends from his Foes, all true hearted Nehemiahs, from al treacherous Tobiaths and Sanballats; all well affected Mordecaies, from all those proud insulting. Hamans, who onely seek the utter extirpation, and rooting out of al the people of God, and of his precious Truth out of all his Kingdomes. That he would remove farre from him all Ahabs, false Prophets, and overpowerfull and malicious Doegs, with all ambitious and prating Diotrephesses,against the Lords most blessed People and Truth: together with all time serving Sycophants, all wicked, cursed, pro∣fane Atheisticall and Popish affected persons; and worldly wise Achitophels, with all Apostaticall Demasses, that for the love of this present world forsake the Truth, and the Cause of the deare Saints of God, which is Gods own cause; that hereby his Throne may be established in righteonsnesse: and in the utter confusion of the cursed and per∣nitious Councels of these Enemies, his Crowne might flourish upon his own, and the heads of his posterity. Also for the Queene he prayed, That God would bring her to the knowledge of Christ, and give her a sincere love and affection unto the Truth, with all his holy Or∣dinances; to grant her an understanding and a tractable heart to all the wayes of God, and to let her know that all the wayes of Antichrist are wayes of death; that shee being throughly acquainted with all the hellish, and abhorred practises of Popery, may utterly detest and forsake the same. He prayed also, for the Religious, holy heavenly and happy education of their Roy∣all Issue, and especially of the Prince his Highnesse. And because whom the Lord blesseth should be blessed, and whom he curseth should be cursed, he desired The God of all blessing, with all the blessings both of heaven and earth, to blesse that most learned, wise, and Religious Assembly, the high Court of Parliament, his Maje∣sties great, brave, and worthiest Councel in that most renowned Kingdom of England, in which Kingdome the Lord had bin, and it was his prayer and his hope that he still might be worshipped in great power, and purity, even in the beauties of holynesse, not∣withstanding all the cursed conspiracies and practises of all the enemies of Reforma∣tion there. He also earnestly prayed, That the Lord should blesse all those that blessed them and that he would curse those that curse them; to be a friend to those that are friends to them, and an enemy to those that are their enemies; and that he would smite through the loynes of all them that rise up against them, and of those that hate them that they arise not againe. He also prayed very affectionately and zealously, that the Lord would blesse all
their Armies, both by Sea and Land; all their Officers and Commanders in Chiefe, especially the Right Honourable, Gods faithfull Servant, Robert Earle of Essex, Lord Generall of their Forces, with all subordinate Officers imployed in that service, for the glory of God, the felicity of his Majesty and tranquility of the Kingdome. He prayed, That God would fight his own Battle and maintaine his cause against that cursed, deceitfull, and Trayterous profession and practise of bloody and hypocriticall Roman Catholiks, risen up in Armes in deare England, and distressed Ireland, to ex∣terminate the truth, and sincere professors of the glorious Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. Oh that God would divide these cursed enemies in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel, and give glorious victory to his Servants, in either Kingdome, and render to all their implacable enemies a recompence answerable to the worke of their hands, and give them sorrow of heart. The curse of the Lord be upon them, even to the utter de∣struction of all such who do not belong to the Lords election of grace: and if still the Sword of the Lord would not be quiet, he desired that God would give it a charge to de∣stroy his enemies the adverse party, those uncircumcised Philistims, Atheists and Pa∣pists, that have banded together, and would not have Iesus Christ to raigne over them, who refuse to bee guided by the Statutes of his Kingdome, and desire not the knowledge of his holy wayes. This was the summe of that part of his prayer which occasioned exception: besides divers exceptions which were taken at his Sermon, which I forbeare to mention. We are wayting for the Kings answer unto our Commissioners, and accor∣dingly you shall see the resolutions of this Kingdome raised, for most of our Gentry & Comminalty, are firm unto the Parliament of England, but amonst our Court Parasites, both Nobles & Gentry, there is nothing but unsoundnes in them, and treacherie to be expected from them: your Court Malignants there have such influence into ours here, that had not the divine providence prevented it, wee had ere now beene imbroyled in the same sufferings: but I hope God will breake their bands, and burst their cords asunder; not our bands (whom you call Malignants) can affect, although it tends unto the ru∣ine of their owne, as well as of your Kingdom; they will attempt it, at what price soever: upon Thursday last, being 16. February The Earle Mon Rose and Lord Oglseby, were proclaimed Traytors to God, their King, and Coun∣trey, with the beat of a Drumme, and the sound of a Trumpet here in our Ci∣tie of Edenburgh, Because that contrary to there Covenant (to the breach of the peace of both Kingdomes they) stole out of Scotland to Newcastle an hundred and twenty horse & men, to assist the King against the Parliament. There be two bookes in Print, the one is called Plaine English, the other a New Plea for the Parliament, which have done much good in this Kingdome: But we heare that you are about a Treaty, which is much wondred at, that
contrary to former expresses it should now be concluded, and upon such dis∣advantages as we heare of, and as you wil find the pardoning of Delinquents to be unto you: such a peace wil lay a foundation of future misery unto your Kingdome, and end in a more bloody war: so their treaties intend onely their owne ends. The Spaniard ever gained more by their Treaties, than by their Swords; & by their Counsels King Charles is too much acted, as all the World can witnesse, and his Popish Army make no little boast thereof. And if both Armies were disbanded (which we believe the Catholiques wil never yeild unto, although the King should grant unto adisbanding, (this cause concer∣ning them so much) are you not in statu quo prius? nay worse? can that be cor∣dially forgiven, which will never be forgotten? Is it not a Court principle to wait a fit oportunity of revenge? sed Manum de tabula, your body is more corrupt and diseased than ours: and if those Reliques left in our Stare, are so active now in wickednesse, how much more operative and stirring wil the humors be in yours, when all power in their hands? Wee had thought our Lenity unto Delinquents here, would have beene monitory unto you there, who have beene eye witnesses of our distractions and divisions, the ef∣fects whereof are now seene in Englands and Irelands extremities. But Oh po∣populi ad servitudinem praeparati! as said Tyberius. This we say, for we pray for your Parliament, that if Moabs wiles doe not destroy them, Balaams curse shall never hurt him: If they keepe close to God, he wil preserve them from both, but if they disert him, and forsake their first love, love to his truth, and love to Justice, he wil forsake them: And then vvoe unto them, the Lord grant that you never tast the bitter fruits of a back-sliding Parliament, and of the Trea∣sons and Treacheries of any of the members thereof, who for their own ends care not to betray God, his truth and people, to make a sale of their deare Country, friends and whatsoever is precious, with which onely they are made Feoffes in trust: Oh that your eyes may never see it, nor my eares may never heare it. We heare it for a secret, yet as certain News, and it came from some per∣sons about the King, that His Majesty hath vow'd and sworn to pawne His Crowne, for the Prelates Miter: that he wil beare out the Catholicks in this their unnaturall Rebellion, upon which they are so bold as to say, That if the King deserts them, and disbands his Forces, ere he accomplish his ends propounded to them in raising this Army, he is never to be trusted by God or man. We heare the Queene is landed, and hath brought over besides great store of Armes, much money, the benevolence of the Catholickes beyond Sea, for the maintenance of this War, yet our secret intelligence is, that shee hath In∣structions (and we heare also from whom) to mediate for a peace (and wee know for what ends, and with what reservations) but wee wish your Parlia∣ment
the wisdom of God, of Angels, and of men, in this houre of temptation. We heare also that your Lords that went to the King, and those Cōmons has went alōg with thē, have sucked in much of the corruptiōs of the court at Oxford, which since hath produced bad effects in the Parl. House, to the great iscouragmēt of the best affected Citizens of London, upon whose shoulders a great part of the burden of this war hath laid: we look upon it as a sad o∣men: & fear that things have been onely carryed as politickly & not so piously as was pretended hitherto: the report is, that the feare of a Reformation sur∣prizeth the spirits of your licentious Nobles, who had rather lose the power nd purity of the Gospell, then their Court Minions, their pride their State, nd their book of Common Prayer. Wee desire and hope better things: but here is a whispering as if their affection to some about the King, related and ngaged to them hath made them so cold (not to speak so broad as others do) in this cause all along, and therefore so little hath bin done by them; or by those imployed for them, and yet much must not be expected from these Lords any longer, now they see the termes upon which the truth must bee purchased: but were you of their counsell, I would tell them one of Solomons Proverbs, that he that layeth up deceit with him, and covereth his hatred therewith, his wickednesse shall be discovered to the whole World, or one of Gamaliels politicks, that if this work be of man, it shall come to nought, but if it be of God, they cannot overthrow it, least they be found fighters against God, Faelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. There is a History of the Sweathens, who when their No∣bles in compliance with their Soveraigne went about to betray their liber∣ties, the people (whom God and nature hath invested with all power primi∣tive, it being onely in the hands of others derivative as men intrusted there∣with by them, and go accountable to them) they unwilling to be inthralled and brought into servitude, rose up for the vindication of their just priviled∣ges, and apprehended their Nobles, and put them to death as Traytors to their State, God in justce will suffer dishonour to staine the glory of such who have no regard unto his honour. We heare that you do much wonder that we in all this time have afford∣ed you no assistance, both States being imbarqued in one & the same cause: you shal see what we wil do shortly, but when you consider what jealou∣sies there were of us in your State before, who durst not trust us with the spoil of our Enemies, the Papists (which was all the satisfaction was desired in con∣sideration of our vast expences occasioned by them, or had prevented all those miseries that have now invaded you, besides the losse of much bloud which hath been spilt and moneyes spènt but secundae cogitationes are ever the best) you thought we came to inrich our selves, and to impoverish you, and had we not obtained our ends we had never departed in peace, how much more shal
we bee suspected now, the same principles of jealousie stil remaining in you and your meanes of resistance being lesse powerful through your own divi∣sions: if these surmises were removed in your parts generally, and prejudice by that meanes, were tooke off our Spirits: you should sinde us not comtem∣plative but active, to afford you all Fraternall assistance; but you will say these jealousies were never fostered in the hearts of the best affected; but of the Malignants of the Kingdome. I wish it had been so: but beloved you shall finde this no obstacle in your spirits, doe you remain fixed in your Resoluti∣ons, and you shall see a speedy issue of our determinations upon the returne of our Commissioners; But judge with your selves if this had beene reasona∣ble, nay if it would not have beene prejudiciall to you, much more to us, that an Armie should have beene raised by us, to be so suddenly disbanded ere the end pretended had beene effected: your inconstancie and uncertaintie ama∣zeth us, but let your premisses, and principles onely be established, & thence you shall see answerable conclusions deducted according, answerable to your expectatiōs, to your desires. Today it is resolved that you wil treat in no place but in Parliament, to morrow you wil in any place appointed: (which wee judge not onely to be dishonourable but a breach, but a losse of the trust pri∣viledge of Parliament.) To day it is declared that you wil no more Petition His Majesty, to morrow you wil: (whereas we hold Declarations to be more suteable to the Soveraignty of so supreme a Court, whose power is coordinate with Princes, then Petitions. To day it is protested that you take up Arms to bring Delinquents to Judiciall tryall, and to condigne pu∣nishment: to morrow it is determined otherwise, they shall be pardoned. To day it is ordered, that the ships be sequestred for the service of the King∣dome, the Forts and strong holds secured and maintained for the security of the Kingdome from evill insurrections, and forreigne invasions, that they be intrusted in the hands of such as the Kingdom may conside in; to morrow it is disputeable, whether for peace sake, and upon condition of disbanding all may not be left to the disposition of the King. These former Votes either were the reason of the Kingdome or not, if the Reason, then the cause still remaining, the ebuity of the reason continues in force: and so the same care is yet to be had that was formerly, if not, why djd you at all take Arms? how can it be justified before God and man? upon whose heads shall all that innocent blood lie, that hath hitherto beene shed? Hinc illae Lachrymae? Wee are astonished that so wise a Parliament should be deluded by the Sophistry of a Jesuited faction, about the Court and in the Kingdom, whose Counsels have beene deepe to contrive the ruine of Parliament and Kingdome, and hath swept away the honour of many of their Members who were in the head, & at the first session thereof Gold, but in the feete are clay: Let Englands Par∣liament,
beware of Neutrality, for there is no halting before God; the Land hath already smarted for compliance with men of Antichristian spirits, & if now they heare not the rod, the next stroke wil reach unto the soule: our earnest prayer is that they may wisely distinguish betweene Christs and An∣tichrists, in this their day may understand the things of their peace; for the quarrel is whether Jesus shal be King or no. O that England may never seek the death of crowned King Jesus! may never cōply with dying Antichrist, against whom in speciall is all Christs quarrel in this last age of the World. Our soules desire is that your Parliament abate nothing of their profest zeale, and resolved integrity, least they utterly lose the heart of God, the prayers of his people, and to procure to themselves a curse, a blot of ignominy through∣out all Kingdomes (whose eyes are fixed upon them) as shall never be wiped out from generation to generation. Oh that the God of Wisdome would lead you into all wisdome, for it is not in man to direct his way! if he ratifies a peace who can procure trouble? Remove the cause, & the effect wil cease: supplant the root, and the fruits wil vvither and die; lop the branches onely, and your distractions vvil sprout forth again with great increase, to the utter undoing of future Generations, if Gods mercie prevent it not by withering. Blessed is he that hath a seeing eye, a hearing eare, an understanding heart to attend to Counsel ere repentance comes in too late. Oh let not selfe ends, security, distrust of divine Providence and power, prove all your hopes a∣bortive, and lose you the Crowne, the recompence of so many moneths and yeares travell both from God & man! Oh let not feare, nor favour, ingage∣ments, or prejudice forest all your Judgements, or divert your intentions frō the rule of Gods Word, or that Protestation so solemnly sworne before God, and the whole World, least your iniquities pursue you, and your hypocrisie and Apostacie doe finde you out! You have begun well, and who doe let you that you should not finish the work in the purest Reformation? he that hath an eare let him heare. Heare me in this your day that God may heare you in his Even, in the great Judgement day. FINIS.
