A3253 E668_5 99866049 118309
ANOTHER BLOUDY FIGHT AT SEA Upon the Coast of Cornwal, on Sunday the 13. of this instant June; between the Par∣liaments Fleet commanded by Sir George Ays∣cue; and the French and Dutch Navies, commanded by the Lord Admiral Chastilon. With the particulars of the fight; the man∣ner of the Engagement; the great loss on both sides; and the number or ships sunk and taken. Also, the advance of Van-Trump towards the North; and Fifty of the Parliaments Men of War gone after to fight him: With the sink∣ing of Captain Taylor; and the number of English ships taken by Captain Bradshaw. London, Printed for George Horton, 1652.
Another bloudy Fight at Sea between the English, French, and Dutch, upon the Coast of Cornwal, on Sunday the 13th of this instant June, 1652. With the particulars of the Fight, the manner of the Engagement, and great execution done on both sides. SIR, ON the Twelfth of this instant June, 1652. there hapned another great and bloudy Fight within three Leagues of this place, between the Parliaments ships, under the immediate conduct and command of Sir George Ayscue; and the French and Dutch Fleet comman∣ded by Vice-Admiral Chastillon: the manner thus: Sir George Ayscue having received advertisements of about 30 Sayl of ships, that were coasting the
Western channel, resolved forthwith to weigh an∣chor and make after them: in order whereunto, he hosted sayl from Plymouth Bay on the eleventh in∣stant and, having a fair gale of wind, about six of the clock the next day in the afternoon, made a dis∣covery of a great Fleet neer Pendennis Peer: where∣upon he sent forth the Eagle Frigat, to demand what they were, and from whence bound; who answer'd, That they were to give an account to none, but the Lord Admiral Vantrump, from whom they had re∣ceived both their Commission, Power, and Instru∣ctions: Then they were commanded to strike sail; but peremptorily refused to yield obedience there∣unto, saying, That they were resolved rather to die, then be guilty of violating the least point of honor: Whereupon Sir George gave them a salute with one broad side; which was answer'd: Then he fitted his ship for the second broad side, and fired on him, but was again answer'd by the Admiral, who bore up his Helm, and stood before the wind: whereupon ano∣ther of the Parliaments ships coming up to him, pre∣sented him with two broad sides, & laid him aboard the star-board; which the enemy perceiving, blew up the Upper-Decks; so that the English were en∣forced to desert her, with some loss: But upon Sir Georges tacking about the third time, he presented
them with a Volley of threescore Guns, which did great execution, both above Decks, and between wind and water; for soon after she sunk, and about one hundred men were drowned. The sight whereof caused great astonishment to the French and Dutch; who, by reason of the neer approach of the night, declined engagement; till the next morning about five of the clock, where an exceeding sharp dispute happened, and continued for the space of seven hours, which was performed with great gallantry on both sides; till at last, after many hundreds of shot, it pleased the Divine Power of Heaven to crown the English with Victory, and to vanquish their Enemies: for, of these thirty sayl, not seven got off from being exceedingly rent and torn; five were taken, and three sunk; but not with∣out some loss: there being five (at present) mis∣sing. The Enemy was at least three to one; yet so gallant a Resolution do the English retain, that they dare attempt to fight upon any disadvantage. We hear that Captain Bradshaw (the great Py∣rat) doth much annoy the English upon the Irish Seas, and that he hath lately taken four or five Ves∣sels, and chased some others into Port-Patrick. Ma∣ny other Pyrates there are, who do exceedingly in∣fest those parts. Michael Mount 17. June, 1652.
From the Downs we have received in∣telligence, That the Hollander is very busie upon the North Seas, in catching of Her∣rings; and Van-Trump hath sent a great Fleet to them to secure and convoy them: Whereupon, General Blake having notice thereof, immediatly gave instructions to Major Bourn, to hasten after with fifty sail, so that if they meet, a great engagement is expected. Great are the preparation of both States for the defence of both Nations, notwith∣standing the present Treaty between the Parliament and the Lord Embassadors; & divers ships (by express command from the Councel) are ordered to expedite out of the River to the Downs, and those that want provisions, and other necessaries, are sud∣denly to be supplied from other shipping. Yet notwithstanding, a happy Reconcilia∣tion is much desired, and a firm peace and u∣nion
setled: For effecting whereof, the sum of one hundred thousand pounds are prof∣fered to the Parliament of England by the States of Holland, in reference to their Li∣berties, Freedom, and Fishing. But 'tis gi∣ven out, that the Parliament demands for future security, the rendition of Brill, flush∣ing, and certain other Garison Towns, for the placing in of English Garisons, and pre∣venting of future differences. We hear that upon some further action between the English and the Hollander, that Captain Taylors ship is sunk, together with the great James; the truth whereof, I dare not affirm, conjecturing it to be onely a Rumor: Many of the Dutch-men are ex∣ceedingly inclining to peace and unity; but on the contrary part, others there are, who thirst after bloud: but whether such as may or shall foment this division, do not act the policy of the Wolf in the fable, that perswa∣ded
the sheep to give over their Mastives? Or, if Venice may not unproperly be cal∣led the signet on Neptunes right hand: and whether England and the Netherlands be∣ing in a straight Confederacy, may not be stiled his two arms. Again, whether your Maiden-Towns, as you call them, may not long enjoy that Title under the allyance of England, who hath many as rich and beau∣tiful Harbors, as of France, that cannot just∣ly brag of the like plenty, or conveniency for scituation? But for this, as all good things else, let glory, honour, and praise be given to God. The Report concerning the James being sunk, is fabulous: And the Tyger (commanded by Captain Peacock) being for some time mis∣sing, is with safety come up to the Fleet; and hath brought in three Dutch Prizes. FINIS.
