B6396A R230922 99896590 170746
A DISCOURSE OF Consumptions: With their Cure by a New Method, By T. Byfield, M. D. LONDON, Printed for Randal Taylor, near Stationers-Hall. MDCLXXXV.
THE PREFACE A Book without a Preface, is like a House without an Entry, in Complement therefore to ancient Custom, I prefix the one to the other, being too apt to com∣ply with the presidents or precepts of old dictators. I was a painful drudge for above ten years in the old method of Physick, and am almost asham'd to mention how I spent time in col∣lecting (as I thought for future benefit) the choicest of their Wares; insomuch that I can furnish my Patients for a year or two with Waste-Paper. For I thought it a sin to en∣quire into the abilities of our Fore-fathers. But my life not terminating with those stu∣dies, nor so much as an itch of knowledge cur'd by their old methods; I have pass'd the last eight or ten years of my life in perusing the
improvements of latter Times, and in redu∣cing to practice what of 'em I could convenient∣ly, still aiming at more. For, I think, great Improvements may be made, especially in the Practick part of our Profession; and consequently our Art rendred much more serviceable, and all this with very great case, if Physicians wou'd each apply them∣selves more particularly to the Study and Practice of some one Disease, and select and refine appropriate Remedies: For then they cou'd not but arrive to a higher pitch of knowledge in one thing than so many; and so avoid the reproach of being aliquid in omnibus & nihil in singulis. 'Tis observa∣ble, that when Persons have thus imploy'd themselves, they have been more fortunate than others. Dr. Turbervil has done more to the Eyes than others could perform. Dr. Chamberlain is more Skilful in the De∣livery of Women than others, and so I could instance in-several. Not but that most Phy∣sicians are as great Masters in Anatomy, and as general Scholars as these worthy Persons;
(I hope I may say it without offence) but they have apply'd themselves more to the Study and Practice of what they particularly profess, and so cannot but Excel. 'Tis not to be sup∣pos'd, that any Person can retain the Names, much less the Knowledge of those innumerable Diseases, Authors have been pleas'd to assign to humane Body: How then can he be furnish't with apt and proper Methods for 'em all? I know 'tis an easie thing to ap∣point a R. and leave it to it's chance. But I appeal to every Intelligent Person whether these my proposals, (without enu∣merating a thousand Reasons, or comparing with the variety of Merchants and other em∣ploys) are not Considerable; at least so as to Excuse me for undertaking a particular Distemper to exercise my Industry upon. And if this is allow'd, I am only then to excuse my Self for pitching on the Disease of Con∣sumptions. First, I account my Self oblig'd to under∣take something of difficulty, that it may be seen I propose not Ease, but Labour: And
to endeavour to satisfie the World that no Disease need strike so sure a stroak as Death, but may be dealt with by the Rules of Art, and brought under: and that tho' many Di∣seases look Tyrannizing, yet great relief may be given by the improvement of Medi∣cine. For I hardly think but God has ap∣pointed suitable Remedies to most Maladies: Only has left it to the Study of Man to search 'em out and apply 'em. But I have yet greater Reason to under∣take this Distemper, for it being the Disease of my own Constitution; I have for several Years made it my extraordinary Study: And besides my own improvements, I have by Communication had the help of others, particularly of a late Undertaker. The knowledge of whose Method and Medi∣cines cost me too dear: But I'll spare his Name, for that I was not fairly dealt with. I am not in the following Discourse at a compleat or Methodical account of my work: tho' I am pretty well furnish'd for both; having wrought hard in my Laboratory to perfect
Medicines; and been at some pains to order their dispensation, not Empirically, but Ratio∣nally, and depending on solid Rules of Theory, But I'le not here prevent my self; nor in the shape of a Pamphlet describe any Lineaments of my new Design, hoping to re∣serve its discovery intirely to my self, till I shall have adorn'd it with some Select Obser∣vations, &c. Necessary to qualify it for a general View. And 'tis fit to confine this Portal to some proportion, considering the Do∣micil to which it is an Inroad. From my House in New-street, by Fetter-Lane, near the Five Bells.
A DISCOURSE OF CONSUMPTIONS, &c. BEing about to Treat of an old Case in a new Way, I shall desert all Ancient Writers, and their unaccountable Labyrinths of perplext Terms of Art; and tell my Design in plain English. For I ffect not Words, but Sense; not hard Names for Diseases, but their Cure. I have for some Years last past undertaken the Cure of Consumptions, by a New Method of Refin'd Medicines, and with such encouragement from success, that I'm embolden'd to give only this short account publickly. Partly by way of Tryal, the better to usher in my Select new Praxis of this Disease, together with an agreeable Theory, that I may reconcile both to the good opinion of Ingenious Persons. And because Prudence bespeaks my present secrecy, for that I have expended not only Labour and Time, but Stock too in carrying on Operations
in my Laboratory, for perfecting this work, I must therefore beg Favour that Charity may begin and reside a little at Home. Consumptions have been always accounted, tho' an Easie, yet sure way to the Shades below or Regions above. Physicians therefore generally chuse an Air for such, or rather advise 'em thereby to withdraw from Men and Business, to attend their Melan∣choly departure. But my present Design is to give such an account or Consumptions, as may demonstrate 'em not only capable of being pre∣vented, but Cur'd too, (if not too late attempted) as well as other Distempers; without lying under an Indispensable Fate as soon as ever the Disease is apprehended to be such. The word Phthisis (a  deficio, Corrumpo) or Tabes in Latin, signifies in general the Extenuation and Leanness of the Body, from whatsoever Cause. But by many Physicians of late 'tis taken for that decay of Flesh which is caus'd by an inward Fret of Blood, or slow Feaver that Exulcerates and Cor∣rupts the Lungs. Some will have it to be purely an Exulceration of the Lungs, others will have it to be an Ex∣ulceration of the Lungs from a sharp Croding hu∣mour, stirring up a Cough from a slow Hectick Feaver, by which is discharged purulent, viscous, foul spitting, that extenuate and consume the whole Body. Consumptions, by the Ancient Followers of Hippo∣crates, have been thought the Diseases of the Lungs
only, because they are apt to be Tainted in those Distempers, and soon shew themselves disaffected. But 'tis with them as with the other Viscera, accord∣ing to their different uses assign'd 'em by Nature. They may by an Intemperies, obstruction by a charge of sharp Serum from an ill Crasis of Blood, Stag∣nating of Humours, or the like, contract those ill Juices which ulcerate, and so make a decay of that part. And these Ulcerous Humours thus depos'd by the Blood, for want of due discharge, soon pu∣trisy and taint the Mass of Blood again by a Reci∣procal injury. But that general Phthisis, or Con∣sumption, here treated of, has its Original Cause from Deprav'd Vitiated Blood, which begets an universal Atrophy, wasting and Leanness (even to the drought of a Skeleton with some) with which 'tis always accompanied. And the Blood thus Cor∣rupt converts the Chyle into ill Juices, performing but imperfect Sanguification; so the whole Mass becomes degenerate and devested of its true Lamp of Life, and due proportion of its active Principle, whence arise many Distempers too tedious here to Recount, which not timely regarded terminate in Consumptions. And the Lungs soon receive damage from foul Blood by reason of the Laxness and Sponginess of the Parenchyma, or substance of 'em, which is very prone to Exulcerations; for the Blood passing so quick from the heart (where 'tis Invigorated with new Heat an rment) through the Lungs, does to their Pipes cast off its Scorbutick Lympha, and thin inflamable Choller, &c. Which
stuffing the Brouchia design'd for Respiration, are there by the Intemperies, and Heat of the Lungs, and frequent Returns of Air by inspiration, Incrassa∣ted, and become Vious; and this foul Matter thus cast off into those Organs, design'd for Respi∣ration, frequently Irritates the Lungs to raise an Expulsion of it, which we call Coughing. And if by this violent Motion it cannot be thus discharg'd, but the adhesion is too close, and not Ripen'd for it, by glibbing with Medicine the Ductus's of the Windpipe, then long continuing on these parts (it being devested of the active living Principles, Balsom of Life, and repeated Circulations) renders it Pu∣trid and a Nautious Load, and very apt to Taint and Ulcerate the pure Substance of the Lungs, by their Natural Texture inclinable to such decay. And when once the Blood has thus found a dis∣charge upon the Lungs, it continues as it passes by in its Circulation, to throw off its sharp Scoru∣tick Serum, and all that Spume or Froath which Ferment raises, and such Matter is apt to adhere wherever it meets with a Simlar Mass; and thus is maintain'd a supply of Pus, or Corrupt Spittings, cast forth in such quantities by Emaciated Consump∣tive Bodies. Now this foul Stuff thus extravas'd breathes forth through the Aerial conveyances, causing this Preternatural discharge, which if not soon dam'd up, and the offensive matter made by Art to find the Etories, or Sinks, design'd by Nature for the expulsion of its Fe (as by the Urinary and Transpiring ducts, &c.) the conse∣quences
are usually direful. And here it may not be amiss to Rectifie the mistake of some that think the Lungs, and other Organs of Breathing, are a Na∣tural Pump to discharge incrassated Pituita, or Flegm by, when as this Motion is accidental and preternatural; and they with the Diaphragm are the Instruments of Respiration; and the Trachea with its Ramisications serve for the Intromitting and destributing of Air into the Lungs, that part may be conveyed through the whole Mass of Blood to impregnate it with new Vitality, which adds as great Nutriment to the Blood, as the grosser Inga of Meat and Drink; and if the latter were but as temperately dispens'd by us, as the former is by Nature assign'd us, there might be a longer Con∣servation of Health and Life than we find there generally is: For 'tis easie to demonstrate that old saying, Plures gula quam gladio occiduntur. And now I might very well take occasion to discourse of the Nature and variety of Airs, and the Skilful Suiting of 'em to different Constitutions. For the Air being continually impregnated with new Exhalations, which are grosse er the Earth or Water, from which they ascend, and close to which we constantly dwell; but more attenuated, purg'd and refin'd, the higher they mount, there cannot but be observed a great deal of useful varie∣ty. Now these Exhalations are the Pabulum, and recruit to Airs, from which they refresh themlves, and return their Lymphatick useless parts on us again in showers of Rain, and such gross Bodies,
which though an Excrement to them are Compara∣tively fine to us, and rendered useful: Even as the Pan∣creas, or Sweet-bread is accounted a choice Morsel, and of daily Food, though indeed but a Collection of fine Excrements from the Juice of Nerves; when as that of the Gall from Blood, a courser Mass is of no such use, &c. But to return, the diffe∣rent Soils and Waters, Scituation of Places, as to Woods, Position of Hills or Plains, for the freer intercourse of benign Gales of Air, afford great variety. Therefore rightly to assign to several Nice, Crasie or Distemper'd Bodies, Airs exactly agreeable to their tender Constitutions or present In∣dispositions, especially if apt to be Consumptive, is a piece of Skill not so trivial and easily perform'd as is by many imagin'd. But of this and other useful Experiments relating hereto I design a particular Tract, I will therefore at present consine my Self to the Limits of those few hours that are allotted for this Lecture. But since I remember it, I can't but take notice of one of the Royal-Society in a Le∣cture to 'em, wherein he censures 'em; for spend∣ing time in Wg and Examining Airs, and the like, telling 'em he's for Improvements more gross, as in Carpentry and other Handy-crafts, and so wou'd have 'em change their Philosophy, and Erect some useful Superstructure on the more substantial Atoms of Timber, Brick and Mortar, &c. And so one A∣tom i Beam, another a Brick, another a Gobbet of Iron, &c. and by the Artificial Coincidence of these Corpus's, some useful production may be pre∣sented
to the World, as a House, a Cart, &c. Now whether he does wittily abuse 'em for their slow Progress in Aereal Experiments, or is truly of the opinion that time so spent is really lost; and that any thing lesser than his Atoms are only Phantastick notions and imaginary representations, I'll not de∣termine. But to return, if from an undue Crasis of Blood arises this Insinuating Disease, or from the unequal mixture of its parts; I mean not hereby that there shou'd be temper amentum ad pon∣dus, but that ad Justi∣iam maintani'd. where∣by either too great a Charge of He∣terogeneous matter over-powers the active Principles of Life; or by reason of a considerable decay of either of 'em, the other two shou'd prey upon that which is declining, then the frequent Collision of the two act Principles without any, or a very slow intervention of a Third, both extinguish what remains of that Dying, and blow up each other, which wou'd convenire in tertio: And so the Mass of Blood becomes wholly corrupt. For being de∣vested of a due proportion of these living Principles (which a just Crasis wou'd have preserv'd) Natures own Juices Corrupt within themselves, and they are left at length void of all Nutritious parts. But Artificial allays may be despenst, that will subdue the too much exalted parts, and such a recruit of Similar particles to those deprest as will recover a Renovation of them, and the other parts of the Blood by cleansing its Mass, and restoring it to a due proportion and Fervour.
By various mixtures Nature does produce all the varieties in the Material World. For from the different mixture of Particles arise those manifold results with which our Senses are gratify'd, as the Objects of Sight, Smell, Taste, &c. The whole Doctrine of Accretion, Maturation and Corruption, arises from the various Mixtures of these active Principles, with a due proportion of Lympha in Fluid Bodies; and the same principles with an adcequate propor∣tion of Calx or Terre part in solid Bodies. For when any Mass is Illustrated by the repeated Circulations of its Living Principles, so that all the Meatus's are rarefiy'd to their utmost extension, then just before the more nimble particles do Dissilire, or leap out, we term that Body in its full Maturity; and if we wou'd preserve it in that consis we cut off all force from it: I mean dam up all passages for ad∣ditional Matter, as in gathering Ripe Fruits; for shou'd either supply from its old Roots the cherish∣ing Air, or prolifick Sun be continued, it's Meatus's being so fully distended, the Vivifying principles wou'd soon be gone, and engaged in the Texture of other Bodies, and when once they begin to pass (like a flock of Sheep) none will stay, but the Mass shrinks and withers, and becomes putrid: Now the due preservation of these benign particles in their adequate proportion, we may properly call the Health of this or that Body, whether Ani∣mate or Inanimate, and the disproportion of 'em, their Diseases or decay; and as the disproportion is more or less, so is their decay, and consequently
the peril of that Body. And as in the Accre∣tion of various Bodies, whether this or that Prin∣ciple does praepollere, or excel, so we denote it a majori; and say it is this or that, or has this or that Smell, Taste, &c. So in declention of Bo∣dies there's as great variety, and the defect of these or those benign Principles we term such or such Disease, or I think we might more pro∣perly than to assign 'em their Names from the Scituation of the parts of the Body, on which Nature throws off her Faeces. Since then Consumptions proceed from an Effer∣vency, or Fret of Blood, whereby its Crasis is so wakened, that it makes a discharge of its Serosi∣ties, thin Choler, and sometimes Nutritious juice on the pure Substance of the Lungs, which hot, sharp, roding Humour, Exulcerates 'em and stirs up a Cough with purulent foul Spittings; 'tis a ve∣ry large Theme to discourse of, and beyond my present bounds. I'le only therefore add these ob∣vious Causes of this disease, Where Persons don't force themselves on this untimely d lamen∣table Exit, it often happens, if not Hereditary, through an ill formation of the Body, especially the Thorax, which predispose to a Phthisick, to some by Catching Cold, and hindering a due Transpiration, which inverts the course of Na∣ture, and make her discharge that Serum on the Lungs, which stirring up a Cough, and that neg∣lected, easily slips the Party into a Consumption; and because they did at first Cough without a
Consumption, they fancy they do so still, and per∣ceive not the Silent Gradations of this insinua∣ting Disease, though they frequently complain their Cough grows worse, till other amazing Symptoms stare them in the Face, and some will hardly believe the danger they are in yet, because of the Intermission of this Disease▪ though this is accounted a Concomitant Symptom. And being thus willing to deceive themselves, they look on Robust Persons, who do weather out a Cough it may be a whole Winter, and pro∣posing them for Examples, Ruin their tenderer Constitutions in the mean while. Some get this Disease by Infection, which has been frequently observed from the Marriage of a Consumptive Body, that has decay'd▪ its well constituted Companion, and liv'd many Years beyond all probability on its Ruins. Very Lean and Old Bodies have large hungry Pores, which Magnetically attract all that's Nu∣tritive about 'em. The witherings of Age are often Sup with the plumpness of young Bo∣dies, to their great danger; which is obvious: and that makes Ancient Persons seldom refuse young Bed-fellows when they can contrive it, finding the benefit from sufficient Recruits: And I'm of the opinion that there's no better way of Rejuvenescence to old Folks, than close Lodgment with Sleek, Plump, young Bodies. I have my self Cur'd some young Persons en∣danger'd by a Consumption, only by removing
'em from their old Bed-fellows; and I remember one Crafty Old Woman I serv'd so, who neither recover'd the loss, nor forgave the wrong while I knew her. The Scurvey, when arriv'd to any height, as to beget Feaverish intermissions of the Blood, which I call a Scorbutick Feaver, and is nicely to be distinguisht from an incipient Consumption, does often terminate in this Disease. The Constant use of Wines, Spirits or Drams, and other Strong Liquors, though in small quantities at a time, are very injurious to young Persons whose Blood is too apt to Fire and enkindle into Fea∣vers. The early Marriages, much more the Exorbitant use of Venus, which is usually committed in Heats of Drink, cousequently without government, are destroyers of Nature, and preambulary to this Disease. But foul Leaps in Venery soon lea∣ven hot Blood, and by unskilful usage often prove destructive. I cou'd name many Diseases that tend to this end; and shew how Agues eat out the Heart of the Blood, by their frequent Paroxisms before Persons are aware of it. There are many Distempers the Ladies are more particularly apt to be damag'd▪ which I won't here mention, that often lead to this Fatal Disease: But I shall sum up all only in men∣tioning that excessive grief, melancholly, several Chronick Diseases, and any ill habit of Body long
suffer'd, do all frequently terminate in this wasting and ruinating Distemper: And I cou'd here par∣ticularize a Volume, did I think it necessary to publish my Scrutiny into the Doctrine of Con∣sumptions. It may suffice at present to give no∣tice of the danger many Persons are in, who perceive little or none, and it may be no body else about 'em; how needful 'tis therefore to watch against, and Correct little disorders is plain. And we have as much reason to forewarn People hereof, (if we mean 'em well) as Divines have to caution 'em against little Sins; and strictly to observe and regard the first instances of change from Goodness; for as a little ill habit of Body is nicely to be distinguish'd from an ordinary good Temper, so deprav'dness of mind, through the custom of little sins only, sizes so exactly with the common Genius of the World, that it seems like none at all to many Persons; nevertheless both Body and Soul are in the grea danger hereby. But as to Phy∣sick only, 'tis obvious among our selves how plump and blith those Persons seem, who by care at select times, for prevention cast forth those Dregs which Nature has amass'd: And if she be any ways tainted therewith, by Specificks and apprriate Medecines, restore a pristin e∣qual mixture of Principles; and so preserve a Youthful gay Com lexion and sound Constitu∣tion, (Natures best Paint) notwithstanding the Revolution of many Years. When as the care∣less
or impoverish'd Persons lye under the de∣cays and filth of many Distempers; which though not always Fatal, yet afflict 'em with Cutaneous nasty Diseases, as Scurvey, Itch, Boils, Leprosie, &c. But you never see Wealthy or careful Persons thus afflicted: 'tis fit therefore for Persons to have recourse to the Learned in Physick, (if Health and Life be valuable) to take sometime a true estimate of their present Constitutions, especially if doubtful in any respect: Hereby many Dis∣eases are prevented, and those Sordes amass'd in the Body for Discharge (which are the Fewel of most Distempers) are timely expell'd, so that no imminent danger can ensue. By our preventive Method for Consumptions, many that have just begun to decline and waste in their Flesh, seiz'd on by this depopulating Disease, have had a Renovation of all the juices of their Bodies: By sweetning their Blood, plump∣ing their Flesh, and removing all bad Symp∣toms; for though Persons are naturally inclin'd to Consumptions, yet by the use of this our pre∣ventive Method, or some such like, together with the Addition of their own care in wholsome rules for Life, they may both avoid this Dis∣ease, and protract their Lives to great length. And I know not why as great Relief to Sickly discompos'd Bodies may not be expected from Phy∣sick, as our common recruits to nature from Food, were but the former as seasonably and suitably apply'd as this latter: For I doubt not but the
Wise Creator suffers all things in this World to perform their Natural Energy and Force, that right Measures may be taken by Rational Creatures, Lords of the Creation, in Refining, Using and dispensing Natures Rarities: And from that equal Provision made for Diseas'd as well as healthy Bodies in the great variety of Plants, Minerals, and living Creatures, we may observe the Providence of God in ordering means to re∣store Health that's decaying, as well as to main∣tain it in Vigour: Nay the curious Texture of the particles of Plants and Minerals in their E∣metick, Cathartick, Sudorifick, Diuretick, &c. qua∣lities, shews in part the Delicacy, Difficulty and Excellency of a Physicians Skill. Now if these things necessary for Life, may be well us'd or misapply'd, they are the wisest Persons who by the conduct of their Reasons so proportion 'em to their Appetites, that there may be neither Defect on the one hand, nor Excess on the other: But because this exact performance to some is a burthensome nicety, and a Methodical Life to others is worse than Death, such may at least commit this piece of prudence, as at some sea∣sonable times to enquire into their Constitutions; and if they have indulg'd too much in Meat, Drink, or other Pleasures, procure such early help as may easily exterminate the seeds of many Diseases, and thus prevent tedious and hazardous Fits of Sickness: But I chiefly design to perswade Persons
timely to prevent or amend the tendency of their Bodies to Consumptions, which by Coughs, wasting of their Flesh, dryness and heats in the Palms of their hands, and Soles of their Feet, by flushing in the Face, Night-sweats, &c. are to be dis∣covered. And here I must note that those tedi∣ous tickling Coughs that usually attend Consump∣tions are often miken for ordinary Defluxions of Rheum or a slight Catarh; for though a Cough may be without a Consumption, yet a Consumption is rarely without a Cough. And 'tis a piece of Curiosity and Skill in our profession to discern what Coughs do presage a deep Consumption, and what are to be dealt with in a common Method, and the defect of this early Scrutiny has ruin'd thousands by irrecoverable Consumptions, which might have been prevented. But the de∣ceitful beginnings of this Distemper are such, that few will be convinc'd they are in Consumptions, till the Disease has almost eaten out their vital Strength, and with purulent viscous tough Flegm well nigh Strangled 'em. And since I have been mentioning some of the most obvious Symptoms from whence we take our Measures to deal with this Disease, I must recite one thing more as necessary, though I had rather pass it by because f the Scandal abuse has brought upon it: And that is the discovery of Consumptions at their be∣ginning in a great measure by Ʋrine, of which I shall say but little at present, though it gives us a great insight to the present Constitution of
the Body. For by the Examen I make of it demonstrates more the growings of this Disease than any one single Symptom besides. I must confess the abuse of Urines by ignorant Fellows, who only shaking the Urinal can tell whether it be Mans or Womans, if the fatter, whether with Child or not, or like to be; and in short, make it a Speculum Matri and can discern in it pains in the Back, Head-aches, indispositions at Stomach, with foulness there, and such like, all very Silly, is enough to disgust Persons from carrying their Urines, and Physicians from re∣ceiving 'em: Therefore were it not absolutely necessary to our business, I shou'd not desire Per∣sons to save and send their Urines: But we must not forego those advantages that can be taken (since all are little enough) for the discovery of lurking Distempers. And we chuse rather to observe Urines in the beginnings of this Disease, than when it has made a setled decay of the Body. Urines rightly examin'd, give as true an account of the Constitution of the Blood, as the Wax does the impression of the Seal: But we must have the Urine that's made the latter part of the Night, where 'tis discharg'd more than once, for by repea∣ted Circulations of the Serum with the Mass of Blood, and its longer digestion, it does so imb a proportion of all its parts, that it gives a great insight to our understanding; a further reason why we chuse only to have the Morning Ʋrine I rought us, and that made whilst in Bed, is be∣cause
'tis not accelerated through the veins, either by the exercise of the Body, or the supply of ptulent matter, nor multiply'd by checking the pores: but has a longer time to lye in the Body, and receive a greater tincture and impressi∣on from the juices with which it commixes, and the parts though which it passes. And we do not desire the Ʋrine made after a large Evening Drinking; but that after a very temperate com∣posure to rest. Now if any shall contrive to put tricks upon us by falsifying their Urine, 'twill be only from such as want not our Skill at present, and the Damage will be theirs. 'Tis satis∣faction to propose the best ways of discovering the Enemies of Health and Life in order to their Subduction. Here I thought to have discourst of the refining of Medicine, and shewn how a Reformation therein wou'd very well agree with the new improvements of our late Theory; and to say something of Noble and Generous Menstru∣ums, requisite to the preparation of clean and useful Physick; and so to have thrown off Nic. Culpep∣pers R. to them who desire to know no better. But lest hereby I displease any, I'll pass it by at present; and only add that my peculiar Me∣decines are refin'd to Elixirs, Samechs, Tinctures, Balsomes, Magisteries, Extracts, Alkalis', besides my Febrifuge, and great Arcanum for the Lungs, &c. All which are so penetrating, deobstruating, Restorative, Healing, Appropriate and clean in their Operation, that my Method thereby is
rendered not only beneficial but delightful. When as the old way by Sugar-plums, Licks and slops, Oyls and Syrups, &c. with the use of Liniments for extream Unction, Overcharge, Nauseate, Glut, Surfeit and foul the Body, and so of them∣selves create Diseases. Now I hope none will be so injurious, as to censure my Labour in these Experiments; nor take amiss the destribution of a few Medicines to the Poor, who can neither see the Physician, nor be gainful to the Apothecary: I hope such Charity will rather excite in others the like, than Envy. If those of Learning wou'd somtimes be content to be fee'd with prayers and good wishes, 'twou'd encourage the Poor to come or send to 'em, and prevent the growing numbers of Im∣postors and cheats in Physick, for now adays, Fingit se medium quisqui Idiota, profanus Judaeus, Monachus, histrio, rasor, anus. Be Persons never so poor, yet I find 'em willing to Live long, though always such, and as desirous of recovery from Sickness, as though they had store laid up for longer Life. To conde∣scend therefore to the mean Abilities of lower Persons is no Symptom of illiteracy or want: Neither it is prudent or just to suppress any useful discovery, especially if the not making our Ta∣lent two at least is an unexcusable Crime.
Now the Philosophers Stone it self will neither Transmute nor Heal, kept lockt in a Chest. No more will my Method and Medicines so much as open one Pipe of the Lungs, if not known and us'd, much less cure a Consumption. FINIS.
