C2149 E121_40 99871645 124057
ARTICLES or DEMANDS made By the KINGS most Excellent Majestie to the Gentry and Commonalty of the County of SALOP. on Saturday the 8. of October. 1642. With an exact Answer to every particular therein presented to His Majesty at Shrewesbury the same day, by the high Sheriffe of the said County. Wherein is exactly manifested, How active the malignant party of this Kingdome are to incense the King against the Parliament, and to engage him in a destructive warre against his Subjects. C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE English royal blazon, surmounted by a crown LONDON, Printed for HENRY HYTTON, Oob. 12. 1642.
ARTICLES OR DEMANDS, Made by the Kings most Excel∣lent Maiesty, to the Gentry and Commonalty of the County of Salop. on Saturdty, Oct. 8. HIs Majesty beeing at∣tended by Mr. Murry, Endimion Porter and many other Courtiers came into a Cham∣paine Field on the East side of our town where the Gentry and Commonalty of the County were assembled, by his Majesties com∣mand, where beeing come, and a generall silence throughout the Field, every one being with ex∣pectation, longing to heare what they were sum∣moned thither for, After a great and long preparation, Endimion Porter with a loud voyce, began to read these ensuing Articles, or Demands.
Bt before he began, he distributed eere two hundred copies, by which meanes I get this which I have sent you, 1. That His Majesty having ingaged himselfe in a warre against the disturbers of the Peace of the Kingdome, who under the name and authori∣ty of a Parliament have to the advercement of their own particular ends actually leavied a war against him and all other his Loving subjects that dissent from their Places, their only aimes being to alter the Frame of government both in the Church and State, and to introduce an arbitrary and tyrannicall government into this Kingdome, for the prevention of which His Majesty having by the assistance of his good Protestant subjects raised an Army to suppresse the said insurrections Rebellion, in the mainte∣nance of which Army his Majesty hath spent, all that is in his power to command, either by his owne power, or the assistance of his friends, even to his Lands and goods, his Revenue being detained from him, and all meanes of further subsisting denied him, wherefore he is inforced to Appeale to his loving Subjects and to desire their ayd in this so great a designe, it seeming but a reasonable demand that they that share in the benefit should likewise beare some of the burthen, his Majesties desire being to main∣taine and defend the true Protestant Religion, the knowne Lawes of the Land, the just Privi∣ledges of Parliament, and the lawfull Liberty of the Subject.
Likewise to suppresse Papistry, Sects and Schismer, which have lately crept into the Church, and almost buried the Religion and Peace of the Kingdome in Anare by and confu∣sion, Brounists, Seperatrsts, and Anabaptists, be∣ing the onely Protestants, and the true Prote∣stants in their opinion Church-papists, or fa∣vourers of the Church of Rome, if the main∣tainers of this cause can want assistance, if these sort of People can prevaile more with you then your King, in the defence of so just a cause, then doubtlesse our just God hath blinded your eyes, and in just vengance suffers you to runne hood∣winckt to your owne confusion, but his Maje∣sty hopes better things from you, not doubting of your assistance, onely this is to give the mea∣nest of his Subjects satisfaction, (who have all this while been misled) of the iustnesse of his proceedings, and to manifest unto you how neer your owne peace and the maintenance of this cause is allied, so that one cannot fall without the other, these things his Majesty leaves to your consideration till the afternoone, expect∣ing a loyall returne of your Affections, assuring you in the Honour of a King, that the least mite offered for the advancement of this cause, shall not fall to the ground, not be forgotten, but shall be registred in his Maiesties princely and royall thoughts, as the greatest token of loyal∣ty, being expressed in a time of so great neces∣sity and trouble.
This being performed, his Majesty was con∣ducted out of the Field with shouts and accla∣mations made by his owne followers, and some of the Ignorant country people, who were de∣luded with the specious pretence of Mr Porters, but one thing I observed by his Majesty, (not∣withstanding those shouts and prayers which were made by those that followed him) his Majestie seemed mighty discontent, not shew∣ing the least symptome of joy, from whence I inferre, that what was done at that time, he was wonne to, by the perswasion of Porter and others about him, and not by any voluntary Act of his owne. His Majesty having left the field, our chiefe Gentlemen of the Countie, with our Free∣holders and other men of esteeme, met together at the George where after a generall and free de∣bate, of what we had heard and observed, we with a generall consent drew up this ensuing Answer. That whereas the Parliament now sitting were called together by His Majesty legally, and that every member of the same was chosen by the gene∣rall consent of each Countie of the Kingdome, be∣ing men knowen to he Religious, Wise and well Reputed, and whereas their actions from the be∣ginning to this day and (how ever censured by those that seeke their destructions,) have tenned to the advancement of His Majesties Honour the establishment of the true Protestant Religion, with the Lawes of the Kingdome, which before the
beginning of this Parliament, were almost ruin'd. Bishops having introduced Popery into the Church. The Iudges having corrupted the Lawes, neither can we forget the heavy taxes which we suffered by reason of Projectors and Monopolizers, the maine chiefest of which, are actors and contrivers of this warre, from whom we can expect no good neither to your Maiesty, nor our selves. And whereas your Majesty hath been pleased to stile your Parliament Traytors, and that Ar∣my which they have been forced to raise for the defence of your Majesty, and to maintaine the Religion and Lawes of the Kingdome, a Rebel∣lion, wee are forced to declare, that we are bound in conscience to God, in loyalty to your Majesty, and in tender care of our owne peace, to joyne with your Parliament, for the defence of your Majesty, and maintenance of the afore∣said causes, with many others, (namely) to de∣fend our Wives and daughters from rapine, our Houses from Firing, and our Goods from be∣ing made a prey to theeves and desperate Cava∣leers, which have destin'd all to ruin and destruc∣tion. As touching our assistance, If your Majesty shall please to put your trust in us, and to yeeld your selfe into the hands of such a guard as wee shall rayse, of the cheife Gentlemen and Free holders of our County, we will for your Roy∣all support, willingly expend our Estates, and venture our lives against all apparent Enemies of your Majesties, but for us to weaken our selves to
strengthen those that would heereafter glory in our overthrow, neither Law not Reason can compell us, neither can we any way condiscend to any such matter. Thus humbly beseeching your Majesty, in the name of Almighty God, as you tender the pre∣servation of the true Religion, as you respect your owne safety, or the welfare of your Royall of spring, to abandon those evill Councelours, and banish all Delinquents from your protec∣tion, so shall your Majesty be secure, and wee your loyall Subjects will guard you with ho∣nour to your Parliament. This beeing delivered to his Majesty, every man went to his habitation, since which time we have heard nothing, onely many Gentlemen in Authority have been tempted by great pro∣mises to assist them, but all to no purpose. FINIS.
