C2318 E458_17 99872107 162100
A GRACIOUS ANSVVER FROM THE KING FOR A TREATY with the Parliament at Newport in the Isle of Wight. And His Majesties Desires or Conditions for entring into the said Treaty. ALSO, The Heads of severall Letters intercepted comming out, of Scotland, and Commission given for raising of money for the Scots in the Kingdome of ENGLAND. WITH An exact Relation of advance and motion of the Scots Army, and the Encounters between them and the Forces commanded by Major Generall Lam∣bert, and Lieut. Gen. Cromwell. LONDON: Printed by B. A. Anno Dom. 1648.
An exact Relation of late actions and motions of the Scots Army in the North, as also those forces under the command of Major Generall Lambert, and Lieute∣nant Generall Cromwell. York August 9. THe great care and activity of Maj. Gen. Lambert in interposing the Scots, and hindering their march Southwards, ap∣peares by the continuall well ordering of his parties abroad and stopping the passes, but especially by his endeavour to impead their march to Broug, which hee did by casting up of Ditches, making of trenches, and making holes, in their passage, if they come on, he is resolved to fight them, three Counties into which they have come have suffered with a witnesse, and they confesse they look't for no other when once they came amongst them, and if those in the South found cause to complaine of an Army the best Disciplined of any in Christendome
surely they will prevent any other from comming amongst them, indeed the Counties through which the Scots Army have passed are so harrowed, that they must enlarge their quarters, and for that purpose are advanced to Kendall, and we have intelligence that Sir Marmaduke Langdale intends to get up into Lan∣cashire, Lieutenant Generall Cromwell was at Don∣caster last night, wee hope to joyne within two dayes and be five thousand horse and Dragoones and seven thousand Foot: more newe is come that some of the Scots have plundred neere Preston the Maj. Gen. takes speciall care to preserve that County of Lancaster as much as possible they can, having already given good assistance to this Army and are now generally putting themselves in a posture o Defence from 16 to 60 to which purpose warrants are issued forth into e∣very hundred, and sch as appeare not, are to be pro∣ceeded against; we hope that Yorke shire and those Counties will follow this example and provide for their own safety, the Citty of York is setled in a good Condition, and the Militia there have published a De∣claration. In the name and power of God-Almighty to awa∣ken and stir up all true hearted Englishmen to joyne as one man for the beating back of the Scots and con∣federate Papists, who have invaded England, who have already wasted part of Cumberland and Westmer∣land, and stript Men Women and Children. The In∣habitants of York Covenant as followeth. The Engagement of the Citizens of York. I.A.B. Do hereby as in the presence of God faith∣fully ingage my selfe, that I will not by my person,
Contribution, Intelligence or any other way, assist a∣ny forces raised or to be raised, or any whatsoever shall be imployed against the present Government, peace and safety of this City, but that I wil to the ut∣most of my power and ability, upon all occasions aid and assist this Authority now established, in the pre∣servation and defence of this City, when I shalbe thereunto required, and do further promise, that I will freely and fully discover to the Lord Mayor of this City, or some by him appointed, any design of force or treachery, or any other mischiefe intended against this City, and the present Government of the same, so farre as comes to my knowledge. And to this In∣gagement I subscribe my name. Signed by the Inhabitants of York, August 2. 1648. Some of the Scots forces are returned backe into their own Country well laden with gueds, they have somewhat to do at home, and then to returne againe and bring more wives and bearnes into England, three and twenty prisoners most of which were men of note in tempest escaped out of Newcastle and Tin∣mouth most of them are said to be gone to Barwick, and Carlisle to seek for places of command. Westmin. Aug. 12. Certain letters were intercepted by Major G. Lam∣bert found about Mr. Aliburton, who was imployed to carry a letter to the King, from the Committee of E∣states at Edenburgh, which letters were sent up to the
House of Commons, and upon opening thereof, it appe∣red that part of them were written in Characters, and did import matter of great concernment: So the Com∣mons made choice of a Committee to read them, find out the meaning, and report it to the House. One of these letters was directed to the Countess of Carlisle. Recommending the trust and faithfulnesse of the Bearer to the Design, signifying further, that D. Hammilton was entred the Kingdom of Eng∣land with an Army, and carryed with him a De∣claration, of which a Copy was also sent to her Honour. They intimate a desire of excuse in the pening, for that it was drawn up in lesse then 48. houres, but say the matter should be maintained, saying, all things went on prosperously according to their minds, and the desires and invitations of their friends in England. The Letter was subscribed in characters, which were understood to be the Lord Callender or Lau∣derdail. Another letter was directed to another noble per∣son of this Kingdom, expressing the good service was like to be performed by 32. which by the cha∣racters signified the Earl of Holland, with ano∣ther paper, which was desired to be sent to the L. Jermin.
Other letters signified, that the Bearer, meaning Mr. Aliburton, could truly inform of the state of all things in present action, and to whom anything might be safely communicated, that were not fit to be written, for fear of intercepting, &c. assuring, that this Gentleman the Bearer, had commission to levy and receive Monies for the service of the Army of that Kingdom, and was a person of ex∣traordinary trust, &c. subscribed in Characters, CALENDER. This M: Aliburton had lately a pass from the House to go upon his publike employment to the King at the Isle of Wight, is returned back again to London, and the Commons desire the concur∣rence of the Lords, that he may not be trusted to stay here for that it appears that he is imployed as a private Agent to raise Money on the English Nation, for those that have invaded this King∣dom in an hostile manner, and had other secret business here.
This day Sir Peter Killegrew (who attended the Commissioners, to his Maj. in the Isle of Wight) re∣turned to the Parliament and brought letters from the said Commissiioners, on their journey backe, his Maj. hath given a gracious answer to the votes of Parlia∣ment for a treaty, which its thought the Earl of Mid∣dlesex and the other Commis. will be with here this night, or early on Munday, That which is chiefly ob∣serveable in that message, is, that his Majesty is very well pleased with the Vote so his Majesty to treat with honour, freedom, and safety, and is pleased to condescend to treat with hi Parliament for setling the peace of the Kingdom in the Isle of Wight, and makes choice of Newport, being the chiefe town in that Isle, for holding the said Treaty: there was a report that his Majesty, in his message bringing to the House by the Commissioners, he propounds, that Commissioners from Scotland may be invited to joyn in the said trea∣ty; this is only by way of report, within a day or two you will have the certainty thereof: So that for any more then that the King doth consent to treat at New∣port, must for the present be left to further Relations. FINIS.
