C2771 E316_24 99873353 125821
The severall COPIES OF THE Kings LETTERS, and MESSAGES, SENT TO THE PARLIAMENT: FIRST, About a Treatie by Commissioners, and then Personally by Himselfe: With the PARLIAMENTS severall Answers thereunto, and some Observations thereupon.. WITH, The COPY of a PAPER under the Lord Inchiquins hand, concerning the Popes Nuntio now in Ireland, and his proceedings thereabout the Bill of Bargain and Sale of that KINGDOME. These Letters from the King to the Parliament, and their An∣swers to His Majesty, With the Observations thereupon, are Printed and Published according to Order. London, Printed for Jane Coe, 1646.
Per maximam amicitiam, maxima fallendi copia, Salust. Jug. IT was one of his policies, out of whose acti∣ons sprang many of the Florentine Axiomes; to give most assurance of his faith & friend∣ship to those men, whom he first meant to deceive, and dispoile of their Estates: those therefore, that upon such trust, disarm them∣selves, and put their swords into the others hands, and guilty (through their foolish credulity) of their own proper ruine, & all that then can be done, is to lament, & say (when it is too late) this was perfidiousness in them, & madnesse in us: and therfore wise men know, pacem & conditones abnebant diserimen ac dedecus ostentanos, & fidem in libidine victor, Tacit, hist. 3. When Ʋalentinois had no other probable way to sur∣prize the Dukedome of Vrbine, he comes to the Confines of Peugia and treaets with Guidobald, the present Duke, pretending to joyne with him against the common Enemy: A truce was made between them, Ʋaleninois enters, secures his Artillery, and disaim the Duke, and forces the souldiers to assist him against Oagly, a town of the Dutch, takes that, and in short space after all the rest of the State: except only the forces of St. Leo. and Majuolo, the poore Duke with his nephew the Provost of Rome, being forced to flee the Country, in Peasants attire.
Againe, after Valentinous had effected this exployt, he sets upon Camerin: makes Iulio, Davarano, Lord there of believe, that he ill yeeld to some good composition with him,  comes to him to treat of the accord, during the treaty, he with his two Sonnes, and the whole Towne is supprised; this done he present∣ly strangleth the Father, and the Children, and tyrannies over the Souldiers and Inhabitants, The Parliament desire peace as earnestly, and really, as their soules can lay out for it, but (in actions of warr especially) Cit venit pereulam cum contemnitur. And therefore the Parliament must looke before them, lest uey stumble, and behind them, least they be overtaken, and on either side, which way soever it cometh we never was in greater Perill, then when by treaties we have been flattered to eare it least, wherefore upon a parley, or over∣ture we must not be secure, but stand upon our guards (if we ex∣pect safety) as in times of greatest defyance; least we suffer like Fa∣britiô Colonua, who treating with Count Gaiazz, the  in Capua, upon expectation of a present accord;  and slack guard upon the walls, which they without  opportunity of being greedy of the spoyle; gaue a odaine ∣rious assault, carried the place, socked it, and tooke thse ∣ners which scaped massacre. Many plots have been invented against this City and Kingdo, & they never tooke more then in times of treaty, and to  them now, the Parliament can do no lesse then keepe the Enemy out of our quarters, especially those who playd so foule before, least we suffer like Pazzi, the Flowrentive Commissary, who though he had a faire Itum, that divers principall men in the City had secretly conspired with Vitellozza, to betray Arazzo, wh he then was; yet would not believe that the hearts of so many, as should be able to affect it, could be poysoned with so pestilent a venum of treason, he perswades himselfe that the Authority of the name publike, would supply his neede in what he wanted and so by suffering those Malignans to remaine, and not wisly provi∣ding to keepe them downe; they comply with Vitellzza: and i tumult rise in Armes rescue the Captives out of prison, secure Pazzi and his Officers, and set open the gates to Vitellozza; who thereby becomes compleate Conquerors of Arezz, to whom the
souldiers become prisoners, the Inhabitants slaves, and their e∣states plundered. These examples, and many more which might be alleged may give us to understand the danger of treating with an Enemy, or suffering them to remaine in our quarters. And whereas his Majestie offers to treate himselfe in person with the Parliament, names a militia; and nominates other perti∣culars, and makes many plausible expressions: they looke into his actions to see if they be congruent, as in things we have, so in those we do, each hath his proper tryall, to prove the excellency thereof in his kinde, timà institutiò experentià, gould by the ast, the Diamant by his hardnesse, Pearle by his water: so the best dis∣coverours of mens minds are their actions, the best director of actions is Councell, and the experience, the Parliament: therefore observe by what Councell his Majesty is led, and by lamentable experience finde. 1. That thereby much innocent blood hath been shed by those who have command, and Commission from his Majesty, by which authority ye tooke up Armes, and remaine in an hostile way against the Parliament, many Irish Rebells have been brought into this Kingdome? as Grady, divers of the Butlers, Col∣lonel Oeale, that brake out of the Towne; and many hundreds more received into his Maj. Army; and forces, and Garisons kept against the Parliament in severall places of the Kingdome. 2. The like also hath been and still is done in Scotland, many I∣rish Rebells and other frraaigne forces, and notorious Papists are in Armes against the Parliament of Scotland, Montre Mag∣ell and others, Margues Hnley a notorious Ppist, severall times Irish have been transported thither. 3. Had the Parliament had the command of Dublin; and other parts kept against them by the Marques of Od, and others by authority from the King, and the English sent thither not called back; nor reliefe sent to those that stayd been kept from them; Ire∣land might have been reduced before this, but now the Lord Har∣bert of Ragland that Popish insendiary is gone over thither from the King, to receive a great command, and a nuntio from the Pope, about trading for Ireland arrived, as you may see by this follow∣ing paper, subscribed by the Lord Inthiquins one hand; a Gentle∣man of Heroyke worth, one that deserves much honour; for his well managing of the affaires of that Kingdome within his limits
A Copy of the Lord Inchiquin Paper, con∣ning the proceedings of the Popes  with the Rebels in Ireland. SIR, THere is lately an old Serp (a Limb of the  under his Holiness , cals himself the  of the A∣postolique Sea to the confederate Catholique (and is by  ∣led Arch-Bishop and Pry of Jerman) arrived in  ∣ed to keep life and vigor in the  Rebellion  to ingage the people of the  the Pope His repute for safety (which must ever  the  his ) , that the miserable  people fall down and worship  wayes, and settle themselv  their adoration  he comes within  of  and thought,  are naturally blind, very  beg his benediction,  ever  so  sight of him: He hath brought with him (as is said)  D∣kets in Gold, and Arme for 10000, Horse and Foot,  for the relief of the Irish, and  of the Wre,  and they agree upon the Bill of Bargain and Sale of this Kingdom. It is , that his arrivall may advantage more their prejudice our oceedings; for that the Irish re thereby so  with prid and arrogancie, as that they stand in higher  then ever with the Marquesses ouching a Peace, which  confidently hope will never be ffected. I have not any thing at present that may  your  trouble And therefore I take leave, and remain Your affectionate Friend, INCVIN.
Now for these, and other reasons, it is not thought convenient to treat at all, not that it cannot possibly conduce  ce, and that for these Reasons: I. If his Majesty should come thus to London, he should put himself into the capacity of an Enemy, which might much amaze the minds of the people, to see his Majesty in such a condition amongst us. II. When the people should hear, that after those few dayes of his Majesties being here, He would return again and leave Us they would be so impatient, as that they would be hardly quelled, but with great insurrections, and much discontents. III. Except there be some assurance that his Majesty will con∣cre with Them, it is of great disadvantage to the Parliament, to admit of a Personall Treaty, with his Majesty. IV. To grant his Majesty (once cong hither) leave to returne again in an Hostile way against the Parliament, after a few dayes Treaty was to make things far worse, and the Kingdome further from a capacity of Peace, then now it is with us. Since the Kings last Letter, there came to our hands a Paper from a person of quality, which is thought fit to be here inserted. KIND SIR: IT is thought the King had rather he at Guild Hall, then at West∣minster Hall, had rather be a  thn an Englishman, a  he will  what you will, and where  him  to passe his designes; the  and will not sacrifice the publike to have their debts assured, our Brethren know him too well to trust to wh she  and  of will in them to us, they helped us at a need and will never dishonour their Nation by a misdeed, the Presbiterians  so  to have their way Iure Divi  of their Iudgement, upon any complyance of the Kings, I must professe my selfe to be a Presbite∣rian, but not ridged, yet I thinke that Independents may fight for us,  principles, to lay downe their  Authority whatsoever they should be there unto required, the Kingdome hath found them trusty, faithfull and valiant, in the performance of that trust, they will discharge a good conscience, and therefore can the more cheerfully bear any aspersion. Dat. Ian. 3. 1645.
The Parliament have debated about the sending of Proposition to the King, and have agreed upon such Propositions, as they con∣ceive to bee the onely meanes for the preparing a sale and well∣grounded Peace, and that for these Reasons; I. The Kings Signing of those Bills, give satisfaction and secu∣rity to both the Kingdomes; That His Majesties coming hither is for Peace, and the good of His People, in giving His Royall assent to what the Parliament of England and Scotland, for that purpose, present unto His Majesty. II. His Majesty will hereby make the strongest Union between the two Kingdomes of England and Scotland that can be, which is already made by a Covenant with the God of Heaven, by the Parliament and the People, and wants nothing but His Majesties assent. III. Religion will hereby be setled, all Popery and Superst∣on utterly cast out, the Church Reformed, and pure Religion ∣blished. IV. His Majesty may come then to His Parliament with joy, and be received of His People with love and meeknesse, and have the glory, to be accompted by His People (as is acknowledged by His Parliament) to be a principall Instrument in so good a Work. V. His Majesty may have a reall and sincere Parliament to ad∣vise with for the safety of His Person, State, and Kingdomes, and such as will be firme to His Majesty, for the good of Himselfe and Posterity, Church, and People, and settle the Kingdome in  Posture, as will keepe Us under safe and well grounded Peace. Wee hope His Majesty will hearken to His Parliament. Confuter ille fit tibi vir quisapit, —Sapient i enm . Here followeth the Copies of the King severall Messa∣ges, and Letters, and the Parliaments Answers there∣unto.
The Kings Majesties first, essage, or Letter to the Parliament, sent from Sir Thomas Glemham by a Trumpet, about a Treaty by Commissioners. CHARLES R. HIs Majesty being ill deeply sensible of the continuati∣on of this bloody and unnaturall warre, cannot thinke himself discharged of the  to God, and the affe∣ction and regard he hath to the preseation of his People, without the constant application of his cahest endeavours to nd some expedient for the speedy ending of these unappy , if it may be, Doth therefo desire, that a  of Richmnd,  the Earle  , Iohn , and  Erseires, and their Attedants, with Coa∣ches, Horss, and other accommodations for their jour∣ney to Westminst uring the stay there, and eturne  whom His Majesty intends to  th  assembled in the Parlament of ing and at Westminster, and the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, furnished with such Proposions as His Majesty is conside will be he foundation of a happy and well grounded Decemb. 5 164 Given at the Court at Oxford. For the Speaker of the House of  pro tempore. The Parliaments Answer to the Kings first Letter, sent by a Truper to Sir Thomas Glemham Governour of Oxford. SIR, WE have recved  Letter of the . of this instant De∣cember, with His Majesties hand closed, and have sent back your  by command of both Houses, who will with all
convenient speed return an Answer to his Majesty: and rest For Sir Your loving friends, Governour of Oxford. Grey of Werk, Speaker of the House of Peers pro tempore. William Lenthall, Speaker of the House of Commons. The Kings Maiesties second Message to the Parliament, in ∣secution of the . CHARLES R. HIs Majesty cannot but extremely wodee, that after so many expressions on your part, of a deep and  sense of the miseries of this afflicted Kingdome, and of the dangers incident to his  the  of this unnatuall war, your many great and so  stations, that the raising of those Armies hath been only for the necessary defence of Gods true Religion, His Majesties honour, safety and property, the peace,  and security of his People, you should  a safe Conduct  the per∣sons mentioned in his Majesties Message of the  this in∣stant December, which are to be sent unto you with Proposi∣tions for a well-grounded peace, a thing so far from  been denied at any time by his Majesty,  desired the same, that he believes hath been seldome (if ever) practised among the most  and professed enemies, much lesse from Subjects to their King: But his Majesty is re∣solved, that no discouragment  ever shall make him falle of his part, in doing his  put an end to these calamities, which if not in time prevented, must prove the ruine of this unhappy Nation: and therefore  once againe desire, that  for those persons  in his former Message, and doth
therefore consure you, as you will answer to almighty God in that day when he shall make inquisition for all the bloud that hath and may be spilt in this unaturall Warre, as you tender the preservation and establishment of the true Religion, by all the bonds of duty and allegiance to your King, or compas∣sion to your bleeding and unhappy Countrey, and of charity to your selves, that you dispose your selves to a true sense, and imploy your hearts, and all your faculties, in a most serious endeavour, together with his Majesty, to set a speedy end to these wasting divisions, and then he shall not doubt but that God will yet againe give a blessing of peace to this now di∣stracted Nation. Given at Oxford the 15. of December. 1645. For the Speaker of the House of Peeres pro . The Parliaments compleat Answer to both his Majesties former Let∣ters, which was sent by Sir Peter Killegrew. May it please your Majestie; THe Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of England as Wstminster, have received your Letters of the fifth and fifteenth of this  December; and having, together with the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, taken the same into their serious consideration, d humbly returns this Answer. They have in all their actions manifested to your Majestie and the world, their sincere and earnest desires, that a safe & well-groinded peace might be setled in your three Kingdomes, and for the obtaining so great a blessing, shall ever pray to God, and use their utmost endeavours, and beseech your Majestie to beleeve, that their not sending a more speedy answer, hath not proceeded from any intention to retard the ane of put∣ting an end to these present calamities by a happi peace, but hath  o∣casioned by the considerations and debates necessari in a  of so great importance, wherein both Kingdomes are so much concerned. As to your Majesties desire of a safe  for the ing hither of the Duke of Richmond, the Earle of Southampton, John Ashburnham,
and , with  happie and  They  been made  under the preence of peace, and  ∣ved  cannot give way to a safe conduct, ∣ding to your  desire: But both Houses of the Parliament of England, having now under their consideration Protions, and  for the setling of a safe and well , which are   to the  of the King  of Scotlnd, dore∣solve after  Kingmes, to prsens  all . the 25 Decem 1655. Gray of Wark Speaker of the House of Peeres pro tempore. William Lenthall Speaker of the House of Commons. The Kings Majesties third Lester being the first Messiage  Treatie with the Parliment. CHARLES R. NOtwithstanding the strange and unexpected delayes which can be presidented by no former times to his Majesties two former Messa∣ges, his Majestie will lay aside all expostulations,  serving to loose , then to contribute  remedie to the evills which  the present do afflick this distrected Kingdom; therefore without ∣ther preamble, his Majestie thinks it most necessarie to send these ∣positions thi way, which he intended to do by the persons mentioned in his former Message, though he well knowes the great disadvantage which overtures of this kind have by the want of being accompanied by well istructed Messengers. His Majestie conceiving that the former Treaties have bither to pro∣ved, ineffectuall, chiefly for want of power in those persons that ∣ted, as likewise because those from whom their power  derived (not possibly having the particular informations of evere severall de∣bate) could not give so cleare a judgement as was requisite in so im∣portant a businesse; it therefore His Majestie may have the ingagement of the two Houses of Parliament at Westminster, the Commissiones of the Parliament of Sentland, the Mayor, Aldermen, Common-Councell, and Militia of London, of the chiefe  of  Thomas Fairfax his Army, and also of those in the Scots Army for
his Majesties safe and free coming and abod in London, or Westmin∣ster, with such of his servants now attending him, and their follow∣ers, not exceeding in all the number of 300 for the space of 40. daies, and after the said time for his free and safe repaire to any of his Garri∣sons of Oxford, Worcester, or Newark, which his Majestie shall no∣minate at any time before his going from London or Westminster; His Majestie propounds, to have a personall Treaty with the two Houses of Parliament at Westminster, and the Commissioners of the Parliment of Scotland upon all matters which may conduce to the re∣storing of peace, and happinesse, to these miserable distracted King∣doms, and to begin with the three heads which were treated on at Vx∣bridge, and for the better clearing of his Majesties earnest and sincer intentions of putting an end to these unnturall distractions, knowing that point of security may prove the greatest obstacle to this most bles∣sed worke. His Majestie therefore declates, that he is willing to com∣mit the great trust of the Militia of this Kingdome for such , and with such powers  are exprest in the paper, delivered by his Majesties Commissioners at Vxbridge, the 6. of Februarie last, to these persons following, viz. the Lord Privy See, Duke of Richmond, Maquisse of Hartford, Marquisse of Dorchester, Earl of Dorset Lord Chamberin, the Ear of Norhumberland, the Earle of Essex, Earle of Southamp∣ton, Earle of Pembroke, Earle of Salisbury, Earle of Manchester, Earle of Warwick, Earle of Denbigh, Earle of Chichester, the Lord Say. Lord Seymour. Lord Lucas, Lord ppington, Mr. Denzill Holl, Mr. Pierpoy, M. Henry Bellssis, M. Richard Spencer, Sir Thomas Fairfa, M. John Ashburnham, Sir Grvase Cliston, Sir H. Vane jun. M. Robert Wallo, Mr. Thomas Chickley, Mr. Oliver Cromwell, and Mr. Philip Skippon; supposing that these are persons against whom there can be to just exceptions: But it this do not satisfie, then his Majestie off s to name the on halfe, and leaves the other to the election of the two Houses of Parliament at Westminster, with the powers of limitation before mentioned. Thus his Majestie cals God and the world to wit∣nesse of his sincere intentions and reall endeavours, for the composing and fetting of these miserable distractions, which he doubts not (but by the blessing of God) will soone be put to an happie conclusion, i this his Majesti offer be accepted; otherwayes he leaves all the world to judge, who are the contrivers of this unnaturall war. And therefore he once more conjures you, by all the bonds of dutie which you owe
God and your King, to have so gret a compassion on the  misrable estate of your Countrey, that you joyn your most  heartie endeavours with his Majesty, to put a happie and  to these present miseries. Given at the Court of Oxford Decemb. 26. 1645. For the Speaker of the House of Peeres, pro empore, to be comm∣cated to the two Houses of Parliament at Westminster, and the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland. The Kings Majesties fourth message in prosecution of the  personall Treatie with the Parliament,  by Sir P. Killegrew. CHARLES R. ALthough the message sent by Sir Peter Killegraw may justly   answer, yet his Majestie layes that aside,  proper for  present endevours, leaving all the world  his propasitions for a persinall Treatie, or the flat  of a safe  for persons to begin a Treatie, be greater signes of a reall  peace, and shall now only sist upon his former message of the  of  December: That upon his repair to Westoninfter, be  not but  joyn his davours with his Houses of Parliament, as to give just  ction, not only concerning the bufinesse of Ireland,  also  of away for the payment of the publike des, as well to the  the Citie of London, as others; and as already   for setling of the Militia, so he shall carefully  particulars, that none shall have cause  for  whereby just jealousies may arise to hinder the  ; and certainly, this propsition of a persionall  have entred into his Majesties thoughts, if  had not , to  to all the world, that the publike good and  of   is far deaner to him, them the respect of any particular  wherefore none can ppose this motion, without a  that he particularly enies his Majestie should be  Author  blessed a work, beides the declaring himselfa a direct Opposer of  pie peace of thse Nations. To  will not   and specious  brought  publike test, and those  reall sense, and  the miseries  their bleading Countrey, let them spedily and  his Majesties proposition for his personal  at West∣ster,
which (by the blessing of God) will undoubtedly to these now distra∣cted Kingdomes, restore the happinesse of a long ish for and lasting . Given at the Court at Oxford, the nine and twentieth day of December, 1645. For the Speaker of the House of Pees prtempore, to be communicated to the two Houses of Parliment at Westminster, and the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland. The Parliaments complete Answer to His Majesties two laft Letters. May it please your Majesty: VVE your humble and loyall Subjects of both Kingdomes have re∣ceived your Letters of the 26. and 29. of December last, unto which we humbly returne this Answer That there hath been no de∣by on our parts, but what was necessarie in  businesse of so great  consequence, as is exprest in our formet Letter to your  Conceming the personall Treatie desired by your Majestie, there ∣ing been so much innocenbloud of your good Subjects shed in this , by your Majesties Commands and Commissions,  brought over into both Kingdomes, and indevours to bring over more, both of them, as also Forces from forraigne parts, your Maje∣stie being in Armes in these parts, and the Prince in the head of an Ar∣my in the West, divers townes made Garrisons, and kept in hostility by your Majestie, against the Parliament of England; there being al∣so forces in Scotland, against that Parliament and Kingdome, by your Majesties Commission, the wrre in Ireland o mented and prolonged by your Majestie, wheeby the three Kingdomes are brought neare to ter ruine, and destruction. We conceive, that untill satisfaction and secutitie be first given to both your Kingdomes, your Majesties com∣ing hither cannot be convenient, not by us assented unto, neither can we apprehend it a means conducing to peace, that your Majesty should come to your Parliament for a few daies, with anie thoughts of lea∣ving it, especially with intentions of returning to hostility against it; and we do obferve, that your Majestie desires the inggement, not
onely of your Parliaments, but of the Lord Mayor,  mon Counsell, and Militia, of the City of London, the  ders of Sir Tho. Fair faxe's Army, and those of the Scots Army, which is against the Priviledges and Honours of the Parliaments,  being joyned with them, who are subject and subordinate to  authority. That which your Majestie (against the freedome of the Parlia∣ments) inforces in both your Letters, with many carnest expressions,  if in no other way, then that propounded by your Majestie, the peace of your Kingdoms could be established, your Majestie may please to remember, that in our last Letter we did declare, that Propositions from both Kingdomes were speedily to be sent to  Majestie, which we conceive to be the onely way for the attaining a happie and well-grounded peace, and your Majesties assent unto those Propositions will be an effectuall meanes for giving satisfaction and  your Kingdome, will assure a firm  between the two Kingdome much desired by each for other, as for themselves) and, settle Region, and secure the peace of the Kingdom of Scotland, whereof  so much as mentioned in your  Letter. And n proceeding according to those just and,  for the putting an end to the bleeding calamities of these Nations,  Majestie may have the glorie to be a principall instrument in so   and we (however mis-interpreted) shall approve  God and the World to be reall and sincere in seeking a safe and  peace. FINIS.
